









THE STORY
OF
THE LIEU MISSION.


PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND COMPANY
EDINBURGH AND LONDON


THE STORY
OF
THE LIEU MISSION
BY THE
REV. S. M'TARLANE
MISSIONARY OF THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY
LONDON
JAMES NISBET & CO., 21 BERNERS STREET
MDCCCLXXIII




PREFACE.
The Story of tlie Lifu Mission was not originally in-
tended for publication. The greater part of it was written
in verse, expressly for friends in Manchester, during the
leisure hours of the few months that we were prohibited
from teaching and preaching to the Lifuans. When
allowed to continue our work, we had neither the time
nor the inclination to write verses. Our friends, who
were probably more interested in the story than charmed
by the poetry, expressed a strong desire to have the
account in prose; and with no other object than to gratify
that wish, and perhaps contribute a few papers to some
periodical, we undertook the somewhat prosy work of
writing u The Story of the Lifu Mission.”
We have simply gone back in thought and lived our
fourteen years of missionary life over again. The Lifu
Mission has a thrilling history, furnishing material for
a large volume; but our object has been not to try how
long we can make our story, but rather in how few words
we can fully and clearly relate it.
Writing is not our forte. We would rather be doing
the work than writing about it; but having been urged


by those who have seen the manuscript since our arrival
in England, and in whose judgment we have perfect
confidence, to complete and publish it, we offer it to
the public, hoping that it may tend to prevent the
recurrence of such proceedings on the part of Govern-
ment officials as those which disgraced the French flag
at Lifu, and also that it may encourage and stimulate
those who are in sympathy with the great work—the
truest of all reforms— evangelising the world.\
Alexandra Eoad, Bedford,
April 21, 1873.


CONTENTS.
CHAP. PAGE
I. LIFU—ITS SITUATION, PHYSICAL FEATURES, AND INHABITANTS, 1
IX, SUPERSTITION, TRADITIONS, AND SOCIAL STATE, . , 13
111. INTRODUCTION OP CHRISTIANITY —PAO, THE FIRST MISSIONARY
»—EARLY STRUGGLES, . ... .24
IV. SPREAD OF THE GOSPEL UNDER PAO—IMPORTANT CONCESSIONS
—NEW TEACHERS, ..... 35
V, FURTHER EVANGELICAL TRIUMPHS ARRIVAL OP ROMAN
CATHOLIC PRIESTS, . .... 48
VI. A TOUR AMONG SOUTH SEA MISSIONS —ROMANCE AND REALITY, 63
VII. THE NATIVE CHURCH IN LIFU —DEATH OF PAO —MAY MEETINGS, 76
VIII. FORMATION OF CHURCHES—BUILDING OPERATIONS—NATIVE
STUPIDITY, . . . . . .86
IX. THE MISSIONARY HIS CRITICS ENCOURAGEMENTS AND
TRIALS, ....... 98
X. ESTABLISHMENT OF LAWS —THE PRIESTS AND THE MISSION-
ARIES—COLLISION, . . . . .112
XI. LANDING OF FRENCH TROOPS —EXULTATION AND MACHINA-
TIONS OF THE PRIESTS, . . . . ,124
XII. FURTHER INTERFERENCE AND INCREASE OF TROUBLE, , 141
XIII. ATTACK ON THE MISSION—ARRESTMENT OF THE WORK—A
PAPIST CHIEF, . _ 153
XIV. PEACE RESTORED—ARRIVAL OF THE “DAY SPRING”—THE
WORK RESUMED, . . . . . .168
XV. THE GOVERNOR BAFFLED —HIS POLICY —HARDSHIPS OP THE
NATIVES, ....... 180


CHAP. PAGE
XVI. MEMORIAL TO THE EMPEROR, AND HIS REPLY —CONCILIATORY
MEASURES —DELAYS, . . . . .195
XVII. SUMMARY OF RESULTS TO ALL PARTIES, . . . 209
XVIII. MISTAKES —NATIVE DISLIKE OF THE FRENCH —HULA’S CASE, . 220
XIX, THE GOVERNOR’S DECISIONS —POLICY AND TREATMENT OF
• THE MISSION, . . . . . . 236
XX. UVEA AS A MISSION-FIELD —THE PRIESTS AND TEACHERS—
MISSIONARY ORDERED OFF, .... 250
XXI, MR ELLA PERMITTED TO OFFICIATE HIS TROUBLES
CRUELTIES, ...... 261
XXII. ARRIVAL OF A COMMISSION —BULA’S CASE, . . . 275
XXIII. PHYSICAL FEATURES —NATIVE CHARACTER —MARE AS A MIS-
SION FIELD, ...... 283
XXIV. THE PRIESTS AT MARE —AGGRESSIONS —THEIR POLICY, AND
ITS FAILURE, ...... 295
XXV. MARE—UNJUST DIVISION OF THE ISLAND —CRUELTY TO THE
NATIVES—THEIR EYES OPENED, .... 308
XXVI. COMMISSION OF INQUIRY —WITHDRAWAL OF THE TROOPS—
LESSONS, ....... 324
XXVII. MISSION EXTENSIONS —NEW GUINEA AS A FIELD —DIFFI-
CULTIES, ....... 343
JOURNAL OF A MISSIONARY VOYAGE TO NEW GUINEA, . 355


THE STORY
OF
THE LIEU MISSION.
I.
SITUATION AND DISCOVERY OF LIFU—GEOLOGICAL FEATURES-PHYSICAL
FEATIRES-WELLS-BARRENNESS OF THE ISLAND-DIVISION OF THE
ISLAND-DEPOPULATION, CAUSES OF-MODE OF LIFE OF THE INHABI-
TANTS LANGUAGE-MANNERS AND CUSTOMS-NATIVE WARS-FEAST-
ING AND DANCING—SIWELEWEL- SINGERS-MEN SINGERS-PREACHING
CHRIST TO THEM.
Lifu is the largest and most populous island of a small
archipelago, about sixty miles to the east of New
Caledonia, called the Loyalty Group. The Islands
which compose this group are Lifu, Mare, Uvea,
Toka, and four islets between Lifu and Mare, two
of which are inhabited. The highest point of these
islands not exceeding about two hundred and fifty
feet, will sufficiently explain why Captain Cook sailed
along the eastern coast of New Caledonia without dis-
covering them. They were not known until about 1803;
and M. Dumont d’Urville was the first to make a hydro-
graphic chart of the group.
It is not my intention here to enter upon the question
of coral formations. Elaborate descriptions of coral
A


islands are easily procured. I may just say that coral
islands may be divided into three classes. 1. Volcanic
islands, which are mountainous. 2. Crystal islands,
which sometimes rise to an elevation of 500 feet, and
often exhibit precipitous cliffs, and contain extensive
caverns. 3. True coral islands , or atolls, which consist
merely of a narrow reef of coral surrounding a central
lagoon, and very often of a narrow reef—perhaps half a
mile in breadth—clothed with luxuriant vegetation,
bordered by a narrow beach of snowy whiteness, and
forming an arc, the convexity of which is towards the
prevailing wind, whilst a straight line of reef, not gene-
rally rising above the reach of the tide, forms the chord
of the arc.
Lifu and such islands as Mangaia and Savage Island
belong to the second class of islands, comparatively few
in number, which are composed of coral rocks, more or
less modified by the action of air, water, and other
agents. These islands do not exhibit the picturesque
beauty of the first class, nor the soft and gentle loveli-
ness of the third, which has received the enthusiastic
praise of all voyagers in the South Seas; still they are
beautiful in their own peculiar way.
Geologically speaking, Lifu is evidently young. At
first it was entirely under water, then composed of reefs
inclosing a vast lake, and ultimately uplifted, by the
convulsions of nature, from the bosom of the sea. From
different parts of the coast it appears that these up-
heavings have occurred at four distinct periods; and
from the numerous fossil shells that may be found em


bedded in the rocks about six feet above high water
mark, many of which retain a part of their colour, and
nearly all of the same kind to be found living round the
coast, it is evident that the last upheaval must have been
of a recent date.
After the first uplift, Lifu would no doubt be like what
Uvea is now, with its interior lagoon and islets.
Lifu is about fifty miles in length and twenty-five in
breadth. The surface is rocky, with here and there
patches of cultivable land, where the natives make their
plantations. There are several large caverns throughout
the island containing good fresh water on a level with
the sea, which rises and falls with the tide. This led
me to suppose that water might be found on any part of
the island, a supposition that has proved correct. Hav-
ing tried the experiment near our house, we were
rewarded by finding water at the depth of seventy feet
(our elevation above the sea) oozing through the sides of
the well, and by digging two or three feet below low
water mark we have a constant supply of good water.
The natives have dug wells at many of the inland vil-
lages, and in every case have found water at the level of
the sea. As you approach the sea-coast the water be-
comes brackish. Three or four wells have been sunk by
foreigners at different distances from the beach, varying
from fifty to five hundred yards; they have found the
water differing in degrees of brackishness in proportion
to the distance from the sea.
There is no probability that Lifu will ever become of
much commercial importance. Colonisation is out of


the question, as there is not an acre of land on the island
upon which a plough can he used. The thin coating of
soil that covers parts of the rocky surface of the island
will supply the natives with an abundance of the natural
productions usually found upon coral islands, viz., yams,
taro, bananas, cocoanuts, sweet potatoes, sugar-cane, &c.,
so that they need never be in want of food; but it will
not yield sufficient to allow the exportation of native
produce to become very great. Cotton appears to be the
only foreign plant from which the natives are likely to
derive much benefit. The climate is very favourable to
its growth, and the natives are beginning to appreciate
its value.
Lifu is divided into fifty-five villages, containing an
aggregate population of about seven thousand, six thou-
sand of whom are Protestants, the remainder Roman
Catholics. The population is, like that of nearly all the
islands in the Pacific, on the decrease. This phenomenon
of depopulation is observed wherever the European comes
into contact with the black. It is not only that their
lives, religion, and political institutions are changed,
but they become subject to European diseases and epi-
demics without possessing European remedies; and they
have not the stamina of Europeans to withstand disease.
Their mode of life is very simple and primitive. Each
family has its own plot of land, which is hereditary.
The bush is cleared by the axe and by fire, the ground
dug by a pointed stick. They have now generally an
abundance of food, although they say that, in the days
of heathenism, it was very scarce. Strictly speaking,


there are no poor people. It is very easy to obtain a
house and food, and their wants are, as yet, but few.
The islands in the South Seas have been divided by
philologists and ethnologists into two groups—Polynesia
and Melanesia—as the natives are supposed to be two
distinct races—the Malay and the Negrillo—and to
speak dialects of two distinct 'languages. Lifu belongs
to Melanesia, which is the name given to the islands of
the south-west Pacific Ocean, including the Loyalty,
New Hebrides, Banks’ Santa Cruz, and Solomon Archi-
pelagoes, and reaching onwards to the west and north-
west, so as to include New Guinea. The dialects spoken
by these natives diverge so far from each other that
each dialect forms almost a separate study.
It is not so, however, in Polynesia. The Sandwich
Islanders, New Zealanders, Tahitians, Barotongars,
Samoans, and the the natives of the Kingsmill Group,
in a very short time are able to converse together. A
native of any one Polynesian island would almost im-
mediately recognise in the dialect spoken in any other
Polynesian island a dialect similar to his own. Yet
notwithstanding this affinity in Polynesian dialects, and
divergence in the Melanesian, it is supposed by some
that both can be traced to one common type.
Bishop Patteson—who was not less distinguished as
an accomplished linguist than as a devoted missionary—
probably knew more about the languages of the South
Sea islanders than any other man. He visited about one
bundled of the islands, spent many years amongst the
natives, was most assiduous in studying their language,


manners, and customs, and could, I am told, express
himself with tolerable accuracy and fluency in about
twenty different dialects. He therefore may be con-
sidered an authority on the subject; and he says, speak-
ing of the Polynesian and Melanesian languages, that
“a comparison of dialects already acquired discovers,
indeed, affinities in the vocabularies to some extent, and
in the general structure of the dialect to a great extent,
and it is quite certain that one type of language prevails
throughout the whole Pacific.”
With reference to the manners and customs of the
natives I may remark that just as all the dialects appear
to be parts of a common language, so all the manners
and customs and superstitions of the natives may be found
to refer to a common system underlying the whole. Can-
nibalism, war, feasting, and dancing, and polygamy are
general. On Lifu the natives were exceedingly fond of
human flesh. The chiefs were despotic and ordered their
subjects to be clubbed and cooked at their pleasure. I
have heard the natives speak of a time of severe famine
when those men who had the greatest number of wives
and children were considered to have the most food.
Famines, no doubt, arose at times from natural causes,
but most frequently from desolating wars, when planta-
tions were destroyed. Sometimes the famine-makers
were ordered to cause a famine in order that the male
population might live for awhile on human flesh. The
dead were often exhumed to be cooked and eaten: and
sometimes when a native was dying with plenty of flesh
on his bones, some of those standing by would be rejoic


ing at the prospect of a feast, and arranging to steal the
body. There seems to have been amongst the Lifuans
the most extraordinary propensity for human flesh, and
an utter disregard of human life : the latter is still but
too evident.
War amongst the heathen is very frequent, but their
wars are by no means so serious and fatal as those
amongst civilised nations. They are not sufficiently
advanced in civilisation yet to understand the art of
killing by thousands; with them there is great prepara-
tion, great skirmishing, great noise, but few lives are lost.
After two or three days, fighting, when hunger urges them
back to their homes, it will be found that there are two
killed and five wounded on one side, and one killed and
three wounded on the other, so the latter are considered
victorious. These wars are nearly always about women.
I remember the first that took place after my arrival on
Lifu. From the report and from a letter hastily written
by the French priest I thought that, before I could get
to the spot (ten miles off), the combatants would be
in the condition of the Kilkenny cats. I soon found,
however, that, whatever they might have suffered or lost
in the struggle, they had not lost their legs, nor yet the
ability to use them. Both armies had decamped, each
claiming the victory, four men being left behind severely
wounded by tomahawks, two from each side. This is a
fair specimen of wars among the natives.
For feasting and dancing, the natives of the South
Seas are equal to those of France. Indeed, some of the
Lifu Chiefs who have seen European dancing in Few


Caledonia told me, upon their return, that they con-
sidered their heathen dances much superior, a because,
said one, “ with us all dance together, whereas with
you the majority stand still.” u But,” I said, u did
you not see how graceful the movements of the French
were compared with your barbarous jig?” “ Oh! no,”
he said, “ that is just what we dislike, you should move
quicker and move together if you want a good dance.”
Thus we see that tastes differ, ’tis not the dancing or
feasting that I object to so much as to what follows.
In order to give some idea of these feasts and dances,
I will relate an account of the last dress hall on Lifu, at
which I was present by special invitation from the king
of half of the island, who was then virtually a
heathen although nominally a Roman Catholic. It was
a great feast. The singing and dancing were to be the
best the island could produce. I went. The parade
was about nine miles inland, a beautiful plain about
seven hundred yards long and one hundred and fifty
broad, covered with grass, and surrounded by a few large
shady trees and low bush. When I arrived preparations
were being made for the feast; some were dressing and
painting for the dance ; the singers were away in the
bush practising for their performance. I was received
kindly by the king, who politely performed the part of a
host. He conducted me to his house, gave me some sugar-
cane and then led me round the numerous and immense
piles of yams, allotting me my portion as his guest.
I took my position under one of the large shady trees.
A great number of spectators were present from all


parts of the island, who stood round the parade. The
centre was cleared, and all eyes were directed toward
the farthest end of the plain. There was a kind of
breathless expectation when out rushed two men from
the hush and ran toward us with all their might. They
had each a spear and looked terribly excited. Their faces
were painted black as ebony, and their eyes looked as
though they would leap from their sockets. They ran
about forty yards, then stopped suddenly and shook their
spears at us, and threw grass and dirt into the air in the
most defiant manner; they then ran back, but before they
got to their places two others rushed out and went through
the same gesticulations. This was continued until the
company drew near, which during the whole time were
slowly approaching. On they came slowly and orderly,
each with some food in his or her hand, and singing as
they advanced. When they arrived at the centre of the
plain, they formed a circle, and continued walking round,
circle within circle, until all had come up and were mov-
ing round. They then laid the food in a heap and retired.
The heralds soon appeared. This body is composed of
young, strong, active men who can run and manoeuvre
well. On this occasion they were conducting a square
of natives about ten deep, closely packed. The outside
lines of the square were composed of the tallest men,
who were not painted nor in any way decorated ; they
kept so closely together, and moved so slowly as to make
it impossible to see their centre. The heralds, as before,
ran out by twos, calling out the names of their fathers
and chiefs. When the square was opposite where we sat


they stood still for a few minutes, then two or three of
the heralds standing at a distance ran towards them
furiously, apparently in a state of the greatest excite-
ment, when they came close to the centre of the front
line, they raised their clubs as if to cleave the skulls of
those before them, upon which the front line suddenly
parted in the centre and a scene burst upon our view
which I shall never forget. It was so remarkable, so
unexpected, and so Sudden, and it was accompanied by a
shout of admiration from the spectators which resounded
far and wide. There stood a square of women about ten
deep, their faces painted jet black and shining as though
they had been French polished, their persons decorated
with flowers, shells, and ornaments; each held in her
hand a kind of bouquet made from a fibrous root, snowy
white : and there they stood like statues, erect and still,
in lines perfectly straight. The only perceptible motion
was that of the fore-finger, by constantly moving which
they kept the fibres of their bouquets perpetually trem-
bling. When the applause had ceased among the spec-
tators a female voice was heard from the midst of the
square. At first it was very low, but it warbled higher
and higher until it reached the highest pitch, when all
the others suddenly joined in, and as suddenly stopped
again. This was continued for a little while, when all
at once the back lines commenced stamping with one
foot, and the front line fell off in a dance, which consisted
in a number of movements and turnings not at all
remarkable for their gracefulness. The stamping quick-
ened and strengthened until the ground shook beneath


us. Numbers from the crowd threw presents of native
property to the dancers, and when the singing and
stamping had become very loud and quick, and the
dancers had wrought themselves up to a state of great
excitement, the whole was suddenly brought to a close
by a great shout. The singing then commenced as
before, then the stamping, then the second line came
forward as dancers, and so they continued for about an
hour, after which all retired.
After a short interval the heralds appeared again
announcing the approach of a second body. These were
surrounded by tall men like the others, who parted as
before, revealing a square of men sitting, each with a
small drum in his hand. Singing commenced as with
the women, all joining in the chorus. After a short
time they commenced beating with their drums, upon
which the fore line broke off in a dance; it was much
like that of the women and terminated in a similar way.
It was now near sunset. The company formed them-
selves into dancing parties of about fifty in each group,
and commenced the common native dance: this I knew
was likely to last through the night, accompanied by all
kinds of wickedness. I had nine miles to walk and felt
that it was time to turn homewards, but I had not said
anything for my Master , and that I must do before leaving.
So I rose from my seat, went into the middle of the play-
ground, and raised my arm beckoning for silence. Some
of the dancing parties near immediately stopped, the
others seemed determined to go on, but I called to them
and my call was taken up by the spectators who urged


them to stop and listen. I waited until they had as-
sembled. It was a curious congregation. I told them that
as their guest I had listened and looked on patiently and
now I had something to say to them, and I hoped that
they would give me a patient hearing, which they did.
They stood, spears and clubs in hand, and listened atten-
tively whilst I preached the gospel to them, speaking of
a nobler warfare and a purer enjoyment. But my speech
did not appear to make a very deep impression, they re-
turned to their dancing, and before we left the ground
they were fighting. I saw one poor fellow carried in
rendered senseless by a blow from a club over the eye,
and the party who had done it assembled at one end of
the playground awaiting his friends to fight. I tried to
prevent war and left, having to walk home by torchlight.
That was the last heathen feast on Lifu ; a number of
the natives having embraced Christianity the remainder
were never strong enough to get up a similar feast.


II.
SORCERY-CURSING-INDIFFERENCE ABOUT DEATH-MEDICINES-HOUSES—
CANOES—RELIGION-TRADITIONS-THE ORIGIN OF YAMS-LABOUR
AND DEATH-THE FLOOD-THE "IJA” OR SCAFFOLDING-THE ORIGIN
OF NEW CALEDONIA, MARE, AND UVEA-ULAULETI AND HIS BRETHREN
—GOVERNMENT.
The natives of Lifu constantly practised sorcery, having
a strong belief in its power. The death of a chief, although
he had lived a hundred years, was always attributed to
the sorcery of some person, and when dead they would
stuff his eyes, ears, nostrils, and mouth full of leaves
from a certain tree, that the person whom they declared
had caused his death might die. The person in question,
upon hearing that sorcery was being practised upon him,
would collect his friends and make war upon the sus-
pected village. They had great faith in and dread of
cursing. To be cursed by a parent or chief was regarded as
the greatest calamity. It was, in their estimation, certain
death, and the person so cursed was regarded as a doomed
man. If he did not die for forty years after they would
still say that death was the effect of the curse ; and yet
there was, and, indeed, is still, a remarkable indifference
about death. They speak of it and bid each other good-bye
as if going on a short journey. Many when sick have
their coffins made, that they may examine them before


they die to see if they are properly cut. Their coffins are
merely trunks of trees scooped out. Sometimes a native
recovers after his coffin is made, upon which he suspends
it from the roof of his hut until required. A few years
ago there was a man not far from my station who, sup-
posing that he was about to die, had his coffin made, that
he might see his future resting-place. The coffin was
made and laid beside him, and he pronounced it good.
Afterwards, however, he recovered, but instead of sus-
pending it to the roof of his hut he fixed to it an out-
rigger and used it as a small fishing-canoe.
Their pharmacopoeia is very simple. For all ordinary
ailments sea-water is the remedy, and of that they drink
a prodigious quantity. In order to make them vomit
after drinking it, they use the bark of a certain tree.
Covering it over with leaves, they tie it up, and with this
they lave the water into their mouths until they have
swallowed nearly a bucketful (they declare that they
can take two bucketsful!). Then like distended leeches
they lie or roll on the grass or sand until they vomit,
after which they say they are well and feel strong,
although it sometimes proves fatal. For all pains and
bruises they cut with a piece of a glass bottle. A man
with a pain in his head would never suppose that it arose
from the state of his stomach. He must cut his head at
the very place where he feels the pain. They lance for
the most trivial things. About two years ago, a native
on the south side of Wide Bay, had a pain in his neck,
was applying the usual remedy, cut his throat, and died.
If their children get the least knock they must be lanced.


I have known a child to fall, or rather roll off, a board
only raised three inches from the ground, on which
account the parents felt that they must lance it.
The native houses on Lifu are much superior to those
on the New Hebrides Islands. When we arrived they
built them very low, without windows, and only one small
door.. Now, however, they are much higher, neater, and
better, having two doors, two windows, and two rooms.
They are built by placing posts firmily in the ground
about six feet apart; to these the wall-plate is tied, and
between these smaller sticks are erected, and to these,
again, others about, the thickness of one’s finger, are
put on horizontally and so close together that they al-
most touch each other. All are bound by strong native
vines. The bark is peeled from all the wood, and even
from the vines, and they are fastened together very neatly
and with great regularity. Two long, forked posts are
placed deeply in the ground, upon which the ridge pole
is put and firmly secured by vines : the rafters are then
raised, and sticks placed across them as below : the whole
is covered with long grass or the leaves of the sugar-cane,
put on as country houses are thatched in England. Some-
times on the lower part mats are put between the sticks
and the grass. And thus a house is built of which many
a European would be glad. The floor is covered, first
with plaited cocoanut leaves then with well-made mats;
the latter are also used for sheets and blankets. Around
the house there is a fence formed of large, high posts
standing on their ends, and close together: this is
to inclose a space in which they sit round a fire to


talk and eat, preserved from the winds and from obser-
vation.
Their canoes are of an inferior kind. The small ones
are simply the trunks of trees scooped out and sharpened
at both ends, with an outrigger tied on with native cord
made from cocoanut fibre. The larger ones have a plank
sewn to each end by native cord, whilst the largest are
made by attaching two together, laying boards across,
and building a small house on the top of all. These
are lumbering, dangerous things ; being tied together by
native string they are neither very secure nor durable:
the string rots, and often when out in a high sea the
whole thing falls to pieces, leaving the natives to sink
or swim. A case of this kind happened not long ago
on the coast, when thirteen person were drowned.
As to their religion I think that it has been too gene-
rally and too hastily taken for granted that these natives
worship idols. It may be found that they are no more
worshippers of idols than Roman Catholics. They gene-
rally look to some spirit beyond the image or stone
before which they bow. On Lifu the natives had no
idea of any God or devil, heaven or hell. Their religion
or superstitious feelings were in connection with the
departed spirits of their fathers, which they believed to
be always near them. They thought that when the body
died the spirit still continued to roam about Lifu.
Their sacred objects were stones, finger and toe nails,
human hair, human bones, and human teeth. These
were given to them by their fathers before death.
Almost every man had his sacred object; each had its


separate charm, and would only answer that purpose.
Some were for making yams grow, others taro, others
again bananas. Some were for causing rain, others
wind, fine weather, according as the donor had indicated.
In war they would take these sacred objects with them
to render them invulnerable. They believed that the
spirits of their fathers were ever near them, and would
often call to them for help. They supposed that they
visited them in the night, and exhorted them, and told
them where they had left things that were lost. Their
religion was truly of the earth, earthy.
Many of the Lifuan traditions bear a striking re-
semblance to the records of sacred history. I will give
a few examples. There is one which very much re-
sembles the scripture account of the introduction of sin
and death into the world.
The natives have no idea of the origin of the first
man; they only know that his name was Walelimeme;
that he had a wife and sons, and that he lived in peace
amidst plenty. At that time there was not any sickness
or death, and it was not necessary to work in plantations,
because the food grew spontaneously and in abundance.
It appears that the sons of old Walelimeme had the
power of changing themselves into birds, beasts, and
reptiles at pleasure. On one occasion the eldest son, in
the form of a rat, went on an exploring expedition,
boring his way through the earth until he came to the
residence of an old man, the chief of the lower regions.
This old chief lived upon yams, of which there were not
any at that time on Lifu. The Lifuan observed that the
B


old man kept the yams for himself, and offered him
other food; he asked to taste the yams, hut was told that
they were for the old chief alone, and that to take them
would cost him his life. The son of Walelimeme,
however, did not believe this, and watching his oppor-
tunity picked up a yam, and made for the surface of the
earth again. On his way he tasted the yam and found
it very good; on his arrival at home, he called one of his
brothers and told him all: this brother tasted the yam
and expressed his delight at the discovery of such
excellent food. They then went to their father, who with
the whole family tasted and were all equally pleased at
the new discovery. It was then arranged that all the
sons should go in a body and steal a quantity of yams
from the old chief below and plant them on Lifu, in
order that they too might live on this superior food.
They did so, but were discovered before they could get
away. The old chief was angry with them, and told
them that as they had taken his yams, he would hence-
forth live upon human flesh. Death should reign on
Lifu in order to supply him with food. It was then that
people began to die, as the Lifuans supposed, to supply
the old chief with human flesh in exchange for his yams;
and to this day, some of the old men believe that there
are more deaths when there is a good yam harvest, the
old chief requiring the bodies of men in proportion to
the quantity of yams that they obtain. It was then
that labour commenced, for having begun planting yams
they found it necessary to cultivate every other article of
food : nothing would grow spontaneously as before, but


weeds. Thus yams, their principal and much-liked food
were introduced, but with them came labour and death.
It is not unlikely that the fact (according to tradition)
of the old chief living on human flesh may have created
a desire in them to taste this food also.
They have a tradition substantially the same as the
scripture account of the flood. It is that an old man
named Nol (the name resembles Noah) made a canoe in-
land ; the natives laughed at him for making it so far
from the sea, declaring that they would not help him to
drag it to the coast; but he told them that it would not
be necessary, for the sea would come to it. When it was
finished the rain fell in torrents and flooded the island,
drowning everybody. Nol’s canoe was lifted by the
waters and borne along by a current; it struck a high
rock which was still out of the water, and split it in two.
(These two rocks are still pointed out by the natives ;
they form the heads of a fine bay on the north side of
the Island.) The water then rushed into the sea and
left Lifu u high and dry. This tradition may have
reference to the time when Lifu, after the first lift 5 was a
lagoon island like what the island of Uvea is now. If
so, it shows that this island has been inhabited for a very
long time.
They also speak of a time when their forefathers
assembled at a place near my station to build, or rather
erect a scaffolding which should reach to the clouds.
They had no idea of works in stone, hence their u tower
of Babel” was raised by tying stick to stick with native
vines. They laboured on undaunted by the sad conse


quences of the discovery and stealing of yams under-
ground ; perhaps they anticipated a more agreeable issue
to their explorations in the heavens. But alas! for
human expectations ; before the top touched the clouds,
the ground-posts became rotten, and the whole affair
came down with a crash. Even this catastrophe does
not appear to have crushed their spirit of enterprise:
they still endeavoured to know something of the
“ beyond.” Another tradition states that a noted old
warrior ascended a high rock with a long fishing-line
and large hook. He threw out his line to the west and
hauled up the island of Uvea, the supposed direction of
his line having ever since been the route to that island,
and canoes generally start from the point where he is
said to have stood, although sometimes they have to go
many miles out of their true course to get to it. The
old fellow threw his line out to the south and drew up
New Caledonia. He then threw out his line again to
the east and hauled up Mare. He tried northward, but
his line broke; so that they knew nothing of the
existence of the New Hebrides group, until made known
to them by foreigners. One mode of cursing was 11 may
your canoe drift to thq north where there are no
islands !”
They have also a tradition resembling the story of
Joseph and his brethren. It is, that an old man had a
number of sons, and that he loved the youngest much
more than the others, which caused great jealousy, leading
them to hate their youngest brother, and ultimately to
seek his destruction. They all agreed to make a large


hole in which to cultivate an immense yam : into this
the younger brother was tumbled whilst at work, and
covered in with soil, and the yam planted on the top of
him. When harvest time came they went to dig out
this large yam, when, to their astonishment, they found
him clinging to the end of it, crying out, “ Take care of
this yam for my father.” They then resolved to drown
him ; so they put him into a fishing basket, weighted it,
and lowered him down to the bottom of the sea. A
month afterwards they went to take up the basket to
get the fish, whenlo, and behold, he was hanging to the
bottom of it crying, “ Take care of these fish for my
father,” so that he, like many things disliked in the
world, was allowed to live because he could not be
killed.
These traditions had their weight in leading the
people to embrace Christianity. When the teachers
arrived, they listened to the story of the fall, and said,
u Yes, this is no doubt true, it is very much like what
our fathers told us. They eat the forbidden yam, and
death came among us, and we had all to work to pro-
vide food. Noah’s ark was Nol’s canoe: and the
Tower of Babel was the ancient “ ija ” or scaffolding.
The account of the creation was simply the act of their
venerable fisherman who drew the islands from the sea.
t
And they saw in the beloved Joseph the petted
u Ulauleti” who could not be destroyed.
As to the government of these people: upon most
of the islands in Western Polynesia there appears to be
very little government of any kind ; everybody does very


much as he likes. The chiefs are insignificant, and have
little power. On Lifn it was different. The whole
island was under two great chiefs, and these were
despotic, absolutely so : they could order a person to be
killed whenever they pleased without assigning any
reason. At the introduction of Christianity this was
of immense service; for having secured the favour of the
king, you were not only safe, but the gospel became
popular, and multitudes attended the services who
would not have dared to be present, if the king had
expressed his disapprobation. In the New Hebrides you
may have a chief favourable without gaining any of his
subjects; frequently, indeed, his subjects dictate to him
the course that he is to adopt. Now, wherever a mis-
sionary goes, he endeavours to improve the government
of the island. Christianity brings reform. The natives
know nothing of good government; they have to be
initiated and trained like children. It is therefore per-
fectly natural that for a while they will go to the mission-
ary in cases of difficulty, so that say what we may, the
faithful missionary is really a kind of chief-justice for a
time. Hence it has been said that missionaries usurp
power, interfere with politics, &c.; why, even if a mis-
sionary did act as a kind of king over the natives, is it,
I ask, a very great calamity for these poor ignorant
natives to be governed by an intelligent, Christian
gentleman ? Is it a vice or a virtue to interfere with the
politics of such a people by giving them advice ?No
one is more anxious than the Christian missionary to
see the natives able to manage their own affairs, and he


is constantly striving to lead them to this. To he u king
of the cannibal islands” is a kind of honour which a
missionary does not covet; hut he does feel it to he
his duty to seek in every way to elevate the natives
amongst whom he labours; he not only preaches the
gospel to them, hut tries to improve their laws, their
houses, their roads, their canoes, and everything con-
nected with their temporal and spiritual welfare.
From these facts respecting the condition of the
inhabitants before the introduction of Christianity, it
will appear that whilst there was little to excite the
cupidity of a great nation, there was much to move the
hearts of Christian people. The barbarous life of the
natives, their heartless cruelties, their constant wars,
their appalling misery, and their utter ignorance of
spiritual things and spiritual hopes, formed a touching
appeal to philanthropic men. How that appeal was
responded to, and with what success, I will now proceed
to relate.


III.
THE STATE OF LIEU WHEN CHRISTIONITY WAS ABOUT TO BE INTRODUCED —
PAO THE APOSTLE OF LIFU-HE LEAVES MARE IN A CANOE FOR LIFU
—“ENEMUS”—BECOMES THE KING'S FREIEN D-THE KING'S ENGLISH
“ENEMU”—WHY BULA PROTECTED PAO—PAO AT THE WAR-BULA AND
HIS MINISTERS BECOME “NOMINAL” CHRISTIANS —PAO IN DANGER—
ARRIVAL OF OTHER TEACHERS-FIRST CONVERTS-IMPOETANCE OF
LIFU —STRUGGLE BETWEEN DARKNESS AND LIGHT —PAO'S ESCAPE —
EXTRACT FROM THE REPORT OF THE DEPUTATION.
Thirty years ago, Lifu was as it had been for ages. Its
rugged surface, raised about two hundred and fifty feet
above the level of the sea ; the long breakers leaping up
its steep, craggy sides; its forests of stately pines, and
groves of feathery cocoanut-trees gently swayed by the
steady trade-wind; its inhabitants shrouded in heathen
darkness, revelling in all the horrors of cannibalism,
wallowing in the moral filth of a debasing idolatry, and
groaning beneath the atrocities of a cruel despotism;—
the hour of her deliverance was at hand. The shrieks
of female victims resounding through the cocoanut groves
and yam plantations were to give place to the songs of
praise. The time wasted in martial exercises and actual
combat was to be spent in the acquisition of religious
and secular knowledge. Families and tribes constantly
at war with each other were to live together in peace,
harmony, and love. A mighty reformation was about


to take place ; but, as on the eve of the great reformation
which transformed the face of Europe, u in no direction
could be seen the powerful hand that was to be the
instrument of God.” There were able and learned men
in the field before Luther appeared, men of high position
and extraordinary ability. u Who possessed greater wis-
dom than Frederick, greater learning than Reuchlin,
greater talents than Erasmus, more wit and energy than
Hiitten, more valour than Sickengen, or were more
virtuous than Cronberg?” And yet it was not from
Frederick, or Reuchlin, or Erasmus, or Hiitten, • or
Sickingen that the world was to receive such a boon.
God’s way is, to effect the greatest results by the smallest
means. His distinguished servants are generally selected
from the same class whence He took the apostles. The
reformer Zwingle emerged from an Alpine shepherd’s
hut; Melancthon, the theologian of the Reformation,
from an armourer’s shop ; and Luther from the cottage
of a poor miner. The apostle of Lifu was not a Euro-
pean missionary, with all the advantages of education,
position, and the means of making presents to the
chiefs; he was not even a regularly educated native
teacher from one of our seminaries, but a young, un-
married native of Raratonga, of humble position, who
had been several voyages in a whaler, in which he had,
doubtless, acquired a good deal of his shrewdness and
tact. After his last voyage he began to think seriously
about the concerns of his soul, became a member
of the church, and offered his services as a pioneer
teacher to the heathen. Twelve months had not elapsed


from the time that Pao entered the institution of Rara-
tonga ere he was among the heathen of Western Poly-
nesia. Lifu was the island to which he was appointed,
although it was considered advisable for him to spend
some time with the teachers on the neighbouring island
of Mare, where he was left by his spiritual father —that
model missionary—Mr Buzacott, in 1842. Pao, who
proved himself to be a man of indomitable perseverence,
dauntless courage, strong common sense, and real prac-
tical piety, although not a man of much learning, could
not remain long at Mare without attempting to prosecute
his mission on Lifu. It was not in the mission vessel
that he proceeded thither, accompanied by missionaries
and formally introduced to the people, while the chiefs
were laid under obligation by promises and presents to
protect him. He went in a native canoe, accompanied
by some of the teachers from Mare, with his Raratongan
bible and a few clothes tied in a bundle and stowed away
in the end of his small craft, spread his mat sail to a
gentle breeze one fine morning, and made for Lifu.
What must have been his feelings as he sat in the stern
of that little canoe, with his long paddle guiding her as
she sped over the crested waves ! And when he sighted
the island, what peculiar emotions must have struggled
in his breast! how he would grasp more firmly the steer-
ing paddle, and eagerly watch the island as it appeared to
rise inch by inch to view! And as they neared the island,
and began to discern the houses or huts, then the natives,
and, approaching the reef, saw them assembled on the
beach all armed, his feelings may be better imagined


than described. He did not, however, as we missionaries
generally do, haul down his sail and paddle about out-
side the reef, waiting for some canoe to come off to get
information; he dashed over it and sailed right on to
the beach, and placed himself at once in the hands of
the natives.
On Lifu, as on many other islands, it is customary to
select from amongst strangers single special friends,
with whom they are connected by mutual good offices.
These we called enemus. An u enerau ” feels himself
bound to provide food and lodging for his friend when
he visits him, and will assist him in any way he can
when he needs it; and in return expects the same good
treatment when occasion offers. It is a kind of free-
masonry amongst the natives. Pao was fortunate
enough to be selected by the old king Bula as his
“enemu.” He thus, at once, had not only his life
insured, but became a popular man.
Although, however, the Lifuans were quite willing to
receive him as the “ enemu ” of the king, neither they
nor his royal friend were at all disposed to receive him
as a religious teacher. He had, however, obtained an
entrance —a very important step.
Pao soon found that he was not the only foreign
<{ enemu ”of the king, and that his brother “ enemu ”
was an Englishman! Although from a Christian land,
and a much more intelligent man, he was likely to prove
a great hindrance to his work. The Rev. A. W. Murray,
in his “ Missions in Western Polynesia,” writes of this
man. “It was the writer’s lot to meet this man on his


visit to the island in 1845, and a more appalling and
humiliating instance of reckless depravity is hardly on
record than this case furnishes. Perhaps the most
awful feature was the absence of any proper sense of the
fearful condition into which he had sunk. He came on
board the John Williams among the natives, apparently
as destitute of shame as they; and talked with indifference,
possibly feigned, of his state and conduct, expressing
himself to the effect that the course of life he was lead-
ing—that of a savage and cannibal —was as good as any
other. And this young man—“ Cannibal Charley,” as
he was called by the traders visiting the island—had had
the advantages of a Christian education, and was the
son, we believe, of highly respectable parents. What
was the end of the wretched man we are not aware.”
11 Cannibal Charley ” had left Lifu before we arrived in
’59. He seemed to have no wish to remain with the
natives after they had embraced Christianity. I am
told that he died amongst the Fijians. I have heard a
good deal about his doings on Lifu.
Pao found a powerful friend in Bula. The polytheism
of Lifu readily disposed the old king to add Pao’s God
to his list. On Lifu, as at Pome and Athens, there was
no scarcity of gods ; and that Pao should claim for his
the superiority was to old Bula no matter of surprise,
for many of his subjects claimed for theirs the like dis-
tinction ; and, moreover, Pao had nothing to show but
his Baratongan bible, which was not, in their estima-
tion, near so much like a god as some of theirs. They
listened, however, with profound interest to all that Pao


had to say about the power and love of u Jehova,” and
came to the conclusion that it would be a good thing to
have such a God on their side in their wars, as, accord-
ing to Pao’s account, nobody could withstand Him ; they
supposed that He could be prevailed upon, like their
gods, to pour out His blessings upon them, and His
wrath upon their enemies.
Lifu was divided into two districts, each governed by
a principal chief or king, under whom were a number of
petty chiefs. These two districts were constantly at
war with each other, so that an opportunity was soon
afforded of testing the power of Pao’s God. I have not
been able to ascertain whether Pao was forced to accom-
pany them in their wars, there is a strong probability
that such was the case ; it is a well known fact, how-
ever, that he did accompany them in the early stage of
the mission, but only in his capacity of Christian teacher.
In order to accomplish his object, he not only went with
the natives to battle, but also to fish, to plant, and to
play. He did not build a neat little house, and there
study the language, and inquire about the habits of the
people, and get two or three around him to try and
make them comprehend the mysteries of the alphabet
and the multiplication table. He had no house of his
own, he lived with the king and his party; they eat
together and slept together; they went to work together
and returned to play together; they went to battle
together, and went to pray together; and thus Pao
had many opportunities of preaching Christ, both
with his lips and by his conduct: he was in a posi


tion to watch his opportunity of saying a “ word in
season.”
Happily, Bula’s party were victorious in the first war
at which Pao was present, so the old king and his
ministers resolved to adopt the new religion, hut merely
as a means of furthering their wicked ends. Pao and
his god were to he kept exclusively for themselves, and
used against their enemies ; yet they were unwilling to
place themselves under any of the restraints required hy
the gospel; they continued their wars, practised poly-
gamy, and often retired from evening prayer, to another
house, to eat human flesh unknown to Pao. Such was
the state of affairs when old Bula became blind; this
was regarded hy the natives as a great calamity. They
believed that some person or persons had caused it hy
their incantations. Their consciences told them that
they had played the hypocrite with Pao, and they
naturally looked upon this as a punishment from his
God ; they determined, therefore, to put him to death.
Five men were selected to perform the bloody deed,
from one of whom I received the story. Pao was
mending his canoe on the beach, so they arranged to
surround him, enter into a conversation with him, and
then, upon a given signal, to tomahawk him. They
approached, encircled him, conversed with him, gave the
signal, but no hand was raised against him. One of
their number has assured me that they felt as if their
arms were paralysed. Thus was this diminutive, talk-
ative, energetic teacher preserved to accomplish a noble
work on Lifu.


About this time other teachers arrived to assist Pao,
but they do not appear to have taken a very active part
in the evangelisation of the island ; little is heard of
them, whilst the name of Pao is a household word in
every village on Lifu. The first real converts on Lifu
appear to have been a party of Tongans, the fathers of
whom, a few generations ago, drifted thither in a canoe.
The teachers found little difficulty in conversing with
these men in their own language, and doubtless this fact,
as well as their common Malayan origin, and probably the
news of the introduction of Christianity to the home of
their forefathers, led them to cast in their lot with these
humble missionaries and pioneers of civilisation. Two
of these Tongans became devoted helpers in the pioneer
work on Lifu and Uvea, and ultimately three of them
were educated and regularly appointed as teachers, one
of whom still occupies an important station on Lifu.
Some natives from Amelemet, a village near Mu, the
residence of the king, joined the little band of Tongans,
and thus the nucleus of the present flourishing Lifu
mission was formed. Considering the importance of
this island in the Loyalty group, from the fact of its
being the largest and from its central position, and of
its language being spoken by very many of the natives
both on Mare and Uvea, also by those along the eastern
coast of New Caledonia. It is natural to suppose that
there would be a terrible struggle between the u powers
of darkness” and the “new light” ere the latter was
allowed, peacefully, to “ possess the land. ” Such was
the case. A storm was gathering that was to burst over


the devoted Pao and his little company of converts.
His royal protector died, and died a heathen and a
cannibal, although he was ever solicitous for the safety
and welfare of his Baratongan u enemu. ” A protracted
war broke out about Bula’s successor, and a ravaging epi-
demic swept over the island. The teachers were blamed
as the cause, and were obliged to escape to Mare.
Again Pao was in his canoe, guiding it over the same
course that he had taken five years before, no doubt
contrasting his feelings now with his emotions then.
His hopes had been partially realised; he had been
permitted to preach Christ, and to collect a few fol-
lowers ; but these had been scattered, and he had been
driven from the island; he hoped, however, that he
would soon be able to return and prosecute his work.
The following extract from the report of the deputation,
Messrs Turner and Nisbet, who visited the island in
1848, shows the critical state in which they found the
mission and in which it had been for a length of time.
u The teachers left at Lifu we found at Mare. Owino-
O
to a war which scattered the tribes among whom they
laboured, they fled to Mare about twelve months ago.
Up to the time they left, schools and services on the
Sabbath were kept up and attended. They wait at Mare
for a favourable issue of the war, when they will return.
The blind chief Bula is dead. He died, we fear a
heathen : yet he evinced a pleasing concern on his death-
bed for the safety and protection of the teachers after
his death. There are rival claims for the chieftainship;
and these have led to and prolong the war.


“ Many of the people, including some of the chiefs of
Lifu, were cut off by an epidemic, towards the end of
1846. As it broke out soon after the arrival of new
teachers, they were blamed as having brought it. Many
were determined to kill them, but some were raised up
to defend them. ‘ Kill them, ’ said their enemies, ‘ and
there will be an end to the sickness !’ 1 Ko,’ was the
reply, ‘we are dead men if we do; their God will avenge
their death.’ ‘ Then banish them from the island/ said
they. 4 That will also expose us to the divine judg-
ments,’ their friends replied. 4 Let them alone, they
have come among us for good, and not for evil! ’ A chief
from the Isle of Pines, who was there at the time, was
then consulted. ‘ Spare the teachers, ’ said he ; ‘we on
our island foolishly killed our teachers, thinking it would
remove disease; but after their death their god punished
us, and disease and death raged among us more than
ever. Spare them, lest it be the same here.’ While
this heathen council was being held, the teachers were
assembled in their own house, spending the day in prayer
and preparation for their end. They thought that day
was to be their last. They cast themselves on the arms
of Him who has said, I Lo lam with you alway;’ and
He delivered them from death. The chiefs Bula and
Ngazohni were on this occasion mainly instrumental in
saving them. But soon after this Bula died ; and then
again they were in great peril. It is a custom, on the
death of a chief, to impute his death to human agency;
and on these occasions the friends, like so many avengers
of blood, are up in arms, and rest not until they have


spread desolation and death somewhere in the land.
Malice at such times is at work, pointing out some
parties as having caused the death through their incan-
tations. When Bula died the cry was again raised,
< Kill the teachers V Ngazohni was firm on their side,
and told the people that they must kill him first. Some
talked of killing him to get at the teachers; another
party, however, was blamed, and revenge sought that
night in the blood of a family of eight individuals in
another part of the island.”


IV.
CIVEL WAR-PAO RETURNS TO LIEU-SPREAD OF THE GOSPEL-THE TEACHERS
REQUESTED TO RETURN-THEIR RECEPTION-THEIR WORK-PAO A
MIDEL TEACHER-INTRODUCTION OF THE GOSPEL TO WET AN IN-
FLUENTIAL PRIEST EMBRACES CHRISTIANITY-PAO VISITS WET-HIS
VISOT TP THE KING-HANEKA BECOMES A CENTRE OF LIGHT AND IN-
FLUENCE —CHURCH BUILDING-EXTRACT FROM REPORT OF THE DEPU-
TATION-THE TIME FOR MISSIONARIES TO STEP IN-THE OPENING OF
THE NEW CHURCH-WANT OF TEACHERS-MAL-TREATMENT OF PAO BY
THE HEATHEN-ARRIVAL OF TEACHERS-PAO SETTLES AT WET.
The gospel seed had been sown on Lifu, and had
taken root in the heart of a few, among whom were men
of considerable influence. But the plant was young and
tender. And the strife and contention that followed the
death of Bula was a very ungenial soil for its growth;
it is not a matter of surprise, therefore, that it drooped
before the withering blast of war. Ngazohni, the
staunch friend of the teachers (although still a savage
and a cannibal), charged two of the old heathen priests
with having caused the death of Bula for protecting the
teachers, and proclaimed war against them and all their
associates. The extensive connections of these priests,
as well as those of Ngazohni, embroiled the whole of
Losi (the eastern half of the island) in a civil war. The
contest was more protracted than sanguinary, and ended
in the defeat and escape of the aggressors. Ngazohni,
with the two young sons of Bula who were his successors


to the cheftainship, fled to Galea, a village in Wide
Bay opposite Chepenehe; and the land had rest. No
person was appointed to succeed Bnla, as all regarded
his sons as the rightful successors.
During the war, Pao and some of the teachers, accom-
panied by a few influential natives from Mare, visited
Lifu. They were received by the people generally with
marked displeasure, by the majority with hostile
demonstrations, and owed their safety, no doubt, to the
influence of their Mare friends. By a few, however, they
were welcomed with joy: these were their Tongan
friends, and a few of the Amelewet people. The natives
of this village had taken an active part in the recent
war, and regarded the defeat of the king’s party as a
judgment upon them for their hypocrisy ; and this view
of the case became prevalent. The strong party feeling
that prevailed, led the teachers to decide to return to
Mare for a time, as their presence might lead to further
hostilities. They, therefore, put to sea again and reached
that island in safety.
Never does the faithful labourer sow in vain the gos-
pel seed; he may not be permitted to see the fruit of his
toil, but that there will be fruit he need never for a
moment doubt. The seed may lie dormant under the
repressing influence of a dreary winter, but the vitality
is there, and the coming spring will develop the hidden
life. Our work is, to surround the walls of idolatry, and
blow the gospel trumpet before these hoary systems of
iniquity. God will do the rest. Pao’s trumpet had
given no uncertain sound on Lifu ; the blasts had been


long and loud, and had echoed through every village on
the island; now he was to retire till God threw down the
walls that stood between him and his work. The change
that took place in the minds of Pao’s enemies was
remarkable alike in its suddenness and completeness.
They felt the truth of what he had said about their
desolating wars; they heard with interest the glowing
account of the transformation effected on Mare by the
gospel; they were losing confidence in their gods, and
becoming more and more afraid of “ Jehova.” And the
little band that Pao had left behind were zealous in
disseminating as much of the truth as they knew; so
that, a few months after the teachers left Lifu, messen-
gers arrived at Mare, earnestly begging them to return,
and assuring them that those who had formerly been
their enemies were ready to receive them with open
arms. We may conceive how Pao’s spirit was stirred
within him when he received this news. He was too
impulsive to brook delay, and had few preparations to
make. His canoe was soon launched, his mat sail again
unfurled, and the little fleet were flying before a trade
wind toward the scene of his labours. There were un-
mistakable demonstrations of joy when they landed on
the beach. The native mode of expressing gratitude is
by presenting food, and of this the teachers received a
prodigious quantity. They found that the wall had,
indeed, fallen down flat, and that all they had to do was
to go straight before them and take the city. They
consequently threw themselves into their work with an
ardour and heartiness befitting the circumstances.


Temporary buildings were erected in which regular ser-
vices were conducted, and these were numerously at-
tended. Schools were also established; and very soon some
of the natives, to the astonishment of their friends, could
name any letter in Pao’s Bible. Many from distant vil-
lages came to see and hear for themselves, and returned
converts to the new religion, with the alphabet written
on a piece of paper and pasted on a board, a treasure of
which they were unmistakably p>roud. Pao was, what
all pioneer teachers and missionaries should be, more
like a blazing comet than a fixed star. He passed from
village to village, in the early stage of the mission, with
astonishing rapidity and frequency, preaching Christ
and burning and breaking the gods of his followers.
The heathen would stand by on these occasions, expect-
ing, like the natives of Melita, to see him fall down
dead, and the result led them to doubt the power of
their gods.
The time had now arrived for the gospel to be preached
on the western side of the island, the Wet district, over
which Ukenezo was king. I have already remarked that
these two districts were constantly at war with each
other; their gods were respectively invoked to destroy
one another ; and this state of perpetual enmity was, as
it is on most islands, a very serious obstacle to the
spread of Christianity. Ukenezo was by no means dis-
posed to embrace the religion of his great enemy Bula,
although many of his subjects were. He, too, had heard
of the “power of Jehova;” and, like many others,
seemed far more impressed by this attribute than by


the tale of His love in the gift of His Son. They felt
that the latter might he mythical, but that there was
no mistaking the former ; they considered that they had
had indisputable evidence of the superiority of Pao’s
God over any they possessed. But then He was the
God of their enemies. Had Pao landed on their side of
the island he would doubtless have been received by
Ukenezo as he had been by Bula; but, coming as the
friend and teacher of his enemies, he not only looked
upon him as one of them, but as the chief cause of his
defeat in their late wars; and declared that he would
club and cook him whenever he got the opportunity.
One of the most influential of the heathen priests, or
sacred men , in the Wet district received a message from
a brother priest in the Lssi district informing him that
they were all going to embrace the new religion, and
urging him to adopt the same course. This priest, who
had already heard much in favour of Christianity,
declared his readiness to receive the teacher and place
himself under his instruction. He was the first in the
Wet district who became a Christian; he is now the
oldest man on the island, and has for many years been
a faithful deacon of one of the churches. Pao now
made known his intention to visit the other half of the
island; many spoke strongly against his doing so lest he
should be killed by their enemies ; others who began to
comprehend better the design of the gospel were anxious
that the Wet people should embrace it, and thus end
their wars; all, however, agreed that if he went he
should be well escorted. In vain did Pao assure


them that his God would protect him as He had done
before ; they seemed to think that neither he nor his
God knew the character of their enemies half so well as
they did. The result was that a number of them armed
accompanied Pao to the village of the heathen priest to
whom I have referred. Haneka heard all they had to
say, declared himself a Christian, and delivered up his
gods to Pao. He then accompanied them to the king,
who hearing of their approach, and fearing an attack,
had two parties placed in ambush near his residence for
his protection. Although no disturbance took place, the
interview was too martial and Mohammedan-like to be
productive of much real good. The king declared him-
self satisfied with the gods of his fathers, and openly
avowed his intention to live and die a heathen. Pao
returned to prosecute his work amongst the villages of
Losi, leaving Haneka as a centre of light and influence
in Wet. The former was certainly not very great, still,
it was bright. He had heard the simple story of Christ’s
love; how we may be saved from sin and misery, and
obtain eternal life, and this information he was anxious
to communicate to his friends. He had an energetic,
influential son about thirty years of age, who became a
means of communication between his father and the
teacher. This man was most indefatigable; he seems, by
his frequent intercourse with Pao, to have imbibed his
spirit. He became really the evangelist of Wet, carry-
ing Pao’s messages from village to village, and running-
off to him with every hard question or case of difficulty.
Numbers flocked to old Haneka at his home to learn


about the new religion; and wherever his son Tubaisi
went they gathered around him to hear, and became
converts. Soon Pao had adherents in almost every
village in Wet. He felt that the time had arrived to
erect more substantial buildings. So preparations were
made for the construction of a substantial church at the
first-formed and principal station, Amelewet. All the
converts, from every part of the island, willingly assisted
to erect a “ house for their God,” each man bringing
stones according to the number of his family. I have
often heard them talk and laugh about those u times
of ignorance.” It is unnecessary to refer to the usual
surprise of natives when they are first introduced to the
mysteries of the lime-pit, carpenter’s shop, &c. An
extract from the report of the Reverends A. W. Murray
and J. P. Sunderland, who visited the island during the
erection of this church, will show in what state they found
things at that period of the mission’s history, 1852 :
“ At this island we found the most cheering indica-
tions that this for so many years unproductive field has
at length begun to yield its increase. The external
appearance of the natives was proof sufficient that a
great change had taken place. But other and more
decisive evidence soon met us. A large substantial
stone building, 100 feet long by 40 feet wide, was the
most prominent object at the mission station. It would
not be easy to describe the feelings of grateful surprise
with which we surveyed this interesting object. The
walls are about nine or ten feet high, and three feet
thick. It has a good pulpit and reading-desk, doors,


and Venetian windows, and it is being furnished with
seats. It had been only four months in hand at the
time of our visit. Probably in another month it will be
completed. The boards which have been used about it
were sawn by the natives on the island of Mare, which
is fully thirty miles distant, and brought from thence
in canoes. A foreigner who resides on the island kindly
lent them a pit saw, but would not have it brought to
Lifu. There are only two teachers on the island, the
one a Raratongan, the other a Samoan; so that the
great body of the work has been done by the natives.
The dwelling-house of the teachers is quite in keeping
with the chapel. It is a comfortable plastered house,
enclosed, and having a neat gate and gravel walk in
front, which gives it quite a civilised appearance. When
the group to which this island belongs was last visited,
it had been abandoned on account of the war which had
broken out. It is only about two years since the teachers
returned; and during that short space the change which
has taken place has been effected. The great body of
the people have embraced Christianity. Heathenism,
including war, cannibalism &c,, has been abandoned.
Polygamy, one of the most difficult things to get a people
to abandon, has been in many cases discontinued.
Probably as many as 150 have abandoned this evil.
There is a select class, which numbers 300, the members
of which are pledged to outward conformity to the re-
quirements of Christianity. The teachers say that the
large chapel is filled every Sabbath. It is quite likely
that there is a congregation of 600 or 700. The people


are rapidly availing themselves of what few facilities
they possess for learning to read; a number can read
fluently, and multitudes are learning. The teachers are
obliged to employ some of the most advanced in teaching
their countrjunen, and even in conducting religious
services. The desires of the people for teachers and
missionaries are so great that it is quite painful to hear
them expressed while one has not the means of meeting
them. When an intelligent young chief was making
inquiries as to the probability of their soon getting a
missionary, it was replied that they would get one some
day. ‘ Say not some day ! ’ he replied ; 1 I do not like to
hear that word some day! Why not say to-day ? Why
not one of you stay ? ’ ”
This was| unquestionably the period when mission-
aries'should have stepped in to carry on the glorious
work so successfully commenced by the indefatigable
Pao. Native teachers, although the best pioneers, are
not competent to lead their converts beyond a certain
point, simply because they themselves are generally but
very imperfectly educated. Having arrived at that
point, unless the missionary steps in to carry on the
work, there is frequently a marked retrogression. False
moves are made which excite jealousy and hostility
amongst the chiefs. Selfishness and covetousness are,
unhappily, too often distinguishing characteristics among
our teachers, and these become painfully and danger-
ously manifest upon the arrival and settlement of
foreigners at their stations. The presence of a judicious
missionary prevents the former, and checks the latter;


the teachers are kept at their proper places and legiti-
mate work, and always apply to the missionary in cases
of difficulty. I have referred to a strong party-feeling
that existed in Lifu, and which increased as the gospel
spread ; this might have been allayed by the conciliatory
course which a missionary would doubtless have adopted,
whereas it was fanned by the imprudence of the teachers
and their converts, grew into a settled and determined
hostility, and ended in one party sending for priests to
oppose the other.
The completion of Pao’s coral church was the signal
for a great feast; his adherents collected yams, pigs,
fish, bananas, &c., in abundance, and with a willing
heart. The day for the opening was fixed, and thousands
assembled from every part of the island. The Christians
made what show they could wdth the few articles of
clothing which they possessed, and the heathen came
decorated and painted in their uniform. The church
was the object of general admiration. It is now occupied
by my colleague, the Rev. J. Sleigh, and is still in good
condition. The natives were amazed to see pieces of
coral piled one upon another, and held together like a
solid block ; and their wonder only increased when they
were told that they were held together by the ashes of
burnt coral mixed with sand and water. At the open-
ing of this church a very good impression was made
upon the heathen in favour of Christianity. In their
speeches the natives dwelt upon the folly of their former
customs, and the temporal and spiritual advantages
connected with the new religion, and urged their friends


to join them. The result was that many renounced
idolatry, brought their gods to Pao, and placed them-
selves under his instruction. The work was now
becoming too great for Pao; there were converts in
almost every village throughout the island, all of whom
desired to be taught. His fellow teacher with whom he
landed had apostatised, and was removed by the deputa-
tion, who promised to send help as soon as possible.
Pao, in the meantime, made the best use of the material
which he had at his disposal. He selected the most
suitable amongst the converts, and sent them about the
island as evangelists, he remaining at the principal
station to instruct those around him, and superintend
the whole mission, making occasional tours round the
island. On these journeys he was sometimes roughly
handled by the heathen who opposed the gospel. He has
been cuffed about and kicked, and had his clothes torn
from his back. At my own station the natives waylaid
him by a large cavern, into which they had arranged to
throw him; but when he approached and began shaking
hands with them, no one had the courage to carry out
their plan. This mal-treatment of Pao led the Christian
party to determine that he should be escorted in his
journeys; and although the good man remonstrated, they
persisted. The heathen party were at that time more
numerous than Pao’s converts; but they were divided,
and, moreover, afraid of the famed God of the new re-
ligion. Ukenezo and his satellites continued to oppose
the gospel as the religion of his enemies, and threatened
any of his subjects who should embrace it. Not with


standing this threat, however, the natives of the Wet
district, in great numbers, joined the Christian party.
The mission was reinforced about this time by a few
Samoan and Raratongan teachers. New stations were
formed, and more attention given to the important work
of public instruction. It now became a question with Pao
where to settle : all wanted him, and the natives of the
two districts were very near coming to blows on the sub-
ject. He settled the question by building his house on
an open copse near the sea-coast which divided the two
districts, and which, from time immemorial, had been
used as a battle-field where both parties met. No cocoa-
nut-tree, nor indeed food of any kind, was ever allowed
to grow there : it was, in fact, a regular “ Aceldama.”
The idea of establishing a village at We was quite amus-
ing to the heathen party; even Pao’s followers looked
upon the undertaking as a hopeless one, and endeavoured
to dissuade him from it. Soon, however, a neat little
cottage stood by the roadside on that dreary plain. So
extraordinary a phenomenon was the subject of general
conversation and astonishment, and there were few who
believed that it would be allowed to remain. It certainly
did not remain alone very long. Natives from the ex-
tremity of both districts gathered around Pao; houses
were erected, groves of cocoanut-trees planted, and ere
long it became the talk of the island that bananas were
to be seen growing on the roadside at We, and even
bunches of ripe ones were allowed to remain on the trees.
It was customary on Lifu for chiefs to plunder at pleasure
the plantations of their subjects, and grant to their


guests the same privilege : this led the natives to keep
the whereabouts of their gardens as secret as possible.
Hence their surprise to see ripe bananas on the roadside ;
they had not seen anything like it before, and it was to
them a palpable telling fact in favour of Christianity.
We soon became a populous, flourishing village. The
ancient battle-field was turned into gardens ; a lath and
plaster church was erected in its centre, and thus a
pleasing illustration afforded of the fulfilment of Isaiah’s
prophecy—“ They shall beat their swords into plough-
shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn
war any more.” “ The wilderness and the solitary place
shall be glad for them ; and the desert shall rejoice and
blossom as the rose.”


V.
INFLUENCE OF THE GOSPEL UPON THEIR MODE OF LIFE—WAINYA AND HIS
PEOPLE JOIN THE CHRISTIAN PARTY—THE HEATHEN IN COUNCIL—THE
HEATHEN ORATOR SILENCED—EXTRACT FROM THE REPORT OF DEPUTA-
TION—WANT OF MISSIONARIES—MISSION OF THE CHURCH—BISHOPS
SELWYN AND PATTESON—ARRIVAL OF ROMAN CATHOLIC PRIESTS—
TEACHERS’ FEARS AT THE ARRIVAL OF THE PRIESTS—MOTIVES WHICH
LEAD THE ISLANDERS TO EMBRACE THE GOSPEL—UKENEZO ASSEMBLES
THE CHIEFS—EFFORTS OF THE PRIESTS TO PROSELYTISE—PRIEST
SETTLES AT GAICA.
Christianity on Lifu was no longer an empty form, it
now became a distinguished reformer. Bulahad received
the teachers, hoping that their God would assist him in
his wars ; now he found that the new religion had not so
much to do with his enemies as with himself and his
people; that its object was to save, not to destroy; so
they yielded themselves to its benign influence, and
became noted for their self-denial. It is a significant
fact that the word for religion in the Lifu language
means literally self-denial. The natives no doubt felt
that to give up their wars, cannibal feasts, and especially
their wives, and conform themselves to the requirements
of the gospel, required the active exercise of this virtue.
The stations at which the teachers were located soon
began to assume the appearance of quiet Christian
villages. Traders calling, found that they could not any


longer obtain pigs and sandal-wood for beads and pieces
of boop-iron; clothing and other useful articles were
called for, and in this case the demand created the
supply.
The Christians were now to receive a very important
addition to their number. The young chief at Chepenehe,
Wide Bay (the station which I have occupied for fourteen
years), was the most influential in the Wet district. He
was next to the King Ukenezo, and was married to his
sister. The king was very anxious that the young chief
Wainya should remain a heathen, and assist him in
opposing the gospel, for he saw in the spread of Chris-
tianity the death of despotism. Wainya had, from
respect to his superior, professed attachment to the gods
of their fathers whilst most of his subjects embraced
Christianity; he now, however, publicly declared him-
self a believer in Christ and a follower of Pao, and sent
a messenger to the king informing him of the step which
he had taken, and urging him to do likewise. Ukenezo
was enraged against Wainya for having joined those
whom he regarded as his enemies, and threatened to
depose him. All his subjects, however, who had em-
braced the gospel, rallied round Wainya, and declared
that if he was attacked by the heathen they would defend
him. Ukenezo and the heathen party were now a decided
minority, and they felt that to attack Wainya would
only be disastrous to themselves. A general consultation
took place. Some advised joining the Christians, but
Ukenezo sternly opposed this, and in a spirited speech
denounced Pao and his converts, also the new religion
D


which robbed them of their wives, and feasts, and
plunder, imposing a mode of life which he declared to
be utterly repugnant to his feelings. He considered
that to embrace Christianity would be receiving his faith
from his subjects, whereas they, in his opinion, ought to
get theirs from him ; and this he determined they should
do if possible. He reminded them of what they had
heard about the Roman Catholic priests on New Cale-
donia and the Isle of Pines, how that those who opposed
them were generally punished by the soldiers, and he
thought that they would gladly take up a case like
theirs; it was therefore resolved to send for the priests,
who, they hoped, would get soldiers to punish the Wet
natives for having embraced the gospel against the will
of the king. Of this resolution they have bitterly
repented a thousand times when it was too late. One
of the old heathen orators, who made himself con-
spicuous at this gathering, and afterwards went about
the island using all the powers of his eloquence to
oppose the gospel, was suddenly silenced by an ulcer
growing upon his tongue , the offending member. This
circumstance, as may readily be supposed, produced a
wonderful effect upon the natives in favour of the gospel.
No one doubted that it was a judgment upon him, and
many embraced Christianity in consequence.
An extract from the report of the deputation that
visited Lifu about the time of which I am writing may
be interesting. Their visit was in June, 1857—two
years before my arrival. They reported as follows :
“ We reached this island on the 26th June. We


stood in for Amelewet, the station of Tui and Kakorua.
The house of Kakorua stands on the opposite side of the
bay to that on which Tui resides, at a place called Mu.
But the people of Amelewet and Mu assemble in the
same chapel. Kakorua had gone to another station; but
Tui and Isaaka, of Thubenata, came off to the vessel in
a canoe; and we were glad to learn that the mission
continued to progress. The vessel stood off and on
whilst we went ashore with the teachers’ supplies. As
we approached the shore, we saw the natives in great
numbers coming along the beach towards Tui’s house ;
most of them were more or less clothed, and they were
delighted to see us. After the teachers’ supplies were
put ashore, we had a meeting with the people, in a large
stone chapel at Amelewet. The chapel is 114 feet by
38; and the walls are three feet thick. The chapel is
all seated, and has a respectable pulpit and reading
desk, and holds a thousand people j it is tilled every
sabbath. As the people could not all be informed of
our meeting, only two-thirds of the chapel were occupied.
We spoke to the people in the Samoan language, which
Tui interpreted. We encouraged them to hope for
missionaries. In doing so, did we do right ?
“ Isaaka, who came from Thubenata to meet us at
this station, has only been a month on the island. His
place is some miles distant from Amelewet; and a
chapel is there in course of building. The services are
at present well attended, in a large house where the
chiefs hold their assemblies. We had here an interview
with the principal chief of half of the island. He and


his friends pressed us very hard for missionaries. The
people here are in a delightful state. What a pity we
had no missionaries for them ! Amelewet would make
a good missionary station.
“After bidding the people farewell, we returned to
the vessel, impressed with a deep sense of the responsi-
bility under which the directors of the London Mission-
ary Society have brought themselves to supply their
spiritual wants. On Saturday morning, the 27th, we
reached the great bay on the south side of the island,
the south point of which is called Graicha, and the north
point Ngara. We came to anchor on the north side of
the hay, near Chepenehe, the place where the teacher
Apolo resides. Wainya, the chief of the place, and
Apolo were soon on board. Wainya is a fine-looking
young man, and he speaks a little English. ‘Me want
missionary ’ was one of his first sentences. He was very
respectably dressed, and he conducted himself in a very
gentlemanly manner.
“ The information communicated to us by Apolo was
of a nature no less encouraging than that communicated
by Tui, the teacher of Amelewet. Nearly the whole of
the population have turned from heathenism, and greatly
desire missionaries. We arranged with Apolo to have
the ordinance of the Lord’s supper ashore on the follow-
ing Sabbath, and he engaged to inform the other
teachers.
“ On Sabbath morning, the 28th, we all went ashore,
accompanied by the captain and the first officer of the
John Williams and as many of the ship’s company


as could leave the vessel, and the Mare and Raratongan
teachers. We were welcomed on shore by a large crowd
of natives who were waiting to receive us. Men, women,
and children crowded around us, that they might welcome
us with a cordial shake of the hand. This process was
gone through all the way up to the teachers’ house,
which stands on an eminence near the chapel, command-
ing a beautiful view of the large bay. After our arrival
at the teachers’ house the native bell was rung to
summon the people to the house of God. Thither we
proceeded and found a large congregation assembled.
The chapel is large, and, if crowded, will hold a thousand
people. There were about 700 inside, and their might
have been another hundred crowded around the doors
and windows outside; many of these belonged to the
few remaining heathen. Tui preached in the native
language from John i, 6, 7. The congregation listened
with intense interest to his sermon, and at its close they
sung with all their might, in their native tongue, to the
praise of Him who died to redeem a lost world. The
melody was well fitted to make angels weep for joy. At
the close of the service, Mr Harbutt baptised the wife of
Apolo, and a child of another of the teachers. The
former was not a member of the church when she left
Samoa, and that day for the first time she sat down at
the table of the Lord. We conversed with her and were
satisfied with her conversation. She was also well
recommended by all the teachers on the island. After
the ordinance of baptism was administered, there
assembled around the table of the Lord members of the


family of Christbelongingtoeightdifferentnations,name-
]y, Britain, Sweden, Samoa, Mare, Savage Island, Rara-
tonga, Tonga, and Aneitenm. Addresses were delivered
to the communicants in English, Samoan, and Aneiteu-
mese. The Lifu congregation looked on with wondering
interest. No church has yet been formed among the
natives, hut the meaning of the service was explained to
them by one of the teachers. After the service was
over we dined at the teachers’ house, and then returned
to the John Williams , where Mr Inglis preached in the
evening from Psalm cxxxii. This closed the public
services of one of the most delightful Sabbaths we ever
spent on earth. But ours was not unmixed joy, for it
was sad to think that the John Williams had come to
visit a people so desirous to have missionaries to put the
word of God into their hands, and to tell them more
about Jesus, and not one to leave with them!
u On Monday morning, the teachers came on board.
We filled the jolly boat with their supplies from England,
Samoa, and the Hervey Islands, and then went ashore
with them, whilst Captain Williams surveyed the large
beautiful bay. We had notice given us that the people
at Wet, belonging to the chief Ukenezo, on the other
side of the island, where Sepetaio is stationed, and also
the people at Apolo’s station, were going to bring a
present of yams for the vessel, so we were not surprised
to see a large assembly on the beach ready to receive us
and welcome us ashore. Shortly after we reached the
teachers’ house the people of Wet approached, walking
in regular procession, and each carrying a yam or fish.


They marched first in single file, and formed a circle
round the teachers’ hand, lessening the interior space as
they gathered in, until they were four or five men deep ;
they laid down their yams and fish in order, which made
a large heap. They then retired and made room for the
approach of the people of Chepenehe where we were.
These came with their fish and yams in the same regular
order, and laid them down in another great heap. They
made no speech, as is the custom on such an occasion in
Samoa, hut quietly retired, and sat down a short
distance off. Mr Harbutt addressed them in the
Samoan language; his address was interpreted by
Apolo, and the people listened to it with great interest.
We pledged ourselves to do all we could to get them a
missionary and a printer, to translate and print for them
the word of G-od, that they might read in their own
language those great truths the teachers have been
telling them for the last ten years. There were present,
we thought, no less than a thousand people, among whom
were some of the remaining heathen. The latter are
very easily known from the Christian population.
u The teachers say that the people are very kind to
them, giving them food in abundance, of which there is
no scarcity on the island, and helping then). to build
their dwelling houses and chapels. When we arrived
the teachers were living at six stations, at some of these
there were two teachers ; but they all agreed to live for
the future each at a separate station, and as there are
nine teachers on the island, there will be henceforth
nine separate stations, which will occupy fully the whole


*Bl and. They had not taken a census of the population,
tut they say the inhabitants are much more numerous
than they are on Mare. What is wanted for Lifu now
is missionaries and a printing press. The teachers
candidly say they can make no further progress until
they get the word of God to put into the hands of the
people; and this they never can get till missionaries
come and dwell among them, master the language, and
translate it into the Lifu tongue. When that day will
come is known only to Him who knows the end from the
beginning. But the responsibility which rests upon
those who sent them teachers to send them missionaries
is very great. It was delightful to witness the conduct
of the people on the Sabbath. Hot one of them, either
Christian or heathen, visited the vessel on that day.
This people used formerly to worship the nail of a man’s
toe, or a finger nail, or a tuft of human hair put into
a basket, and also stones of a peculiar shape; and so
fond were they of eating human flesh, that they would
go at night and steal a corpse from its last resting-place,
and cook and eat it. How great the change through
which they have passed ! War has ceased on the island,
and cannibalism is seldom heard of. A few years ago
they all went in a state of nudity; now there are very
few who do not wear some kind of clothing, and many
of them are very respectably dressed. Let us hope the
printing press will be at work here before long.”
It will be seen from the above extract that the
deputation found the natives of Lifu in that interesting
O
state in which I have described them, and that the


mission had reached a stage when to leave it longer
without a more effective agency was to expose it to
imminent peril. Had missionaries arrived, even at this
period, Ukenezo and his party might have been con-
ciliated, and the establishment and spread of Popery on
the island rendered improbable, if not a hopeless task.
The Directors of the London Missionary Society, how-
ever, can only apportion to the best of their judgment
the resources placed at their disposal by the churches;
and that, no doubt, they conscientiously do. It is the
Church of Christ that is responsible; to it our Lord has
committed the conversion of the world, and eminently
qualified it to accomplish its mission. It is not that
there is a lack of wealth, time, talents, or opportunities ;
these the church possesses in a high degree. It is the
disposition to use them in the cause of Christ that is
wanting. Yet notwithstanding the suitable men and
means at the disposal of the church, not only are
multitudes left to groan beneath the most debasing
idolatry, cruelty, poverty, and ignorance; but fields
white unto harvest are left exposed without a reaper.
The natives of Lifu had, for years, been led by the
different deputations that visited the island, to expect
missionaries; they had now been disappointed so often
that they began to be discouraged, and to feel as if they
were being deceived or trifled with.
Those indefatigable, and truly apostolic missionaries,
Bishops Selwyn and Patteson, called annually at the
western side of Lifu, treating the natives with their
accustomed kindness, taking some to New Zealand for


instruction, and on two occasions Bishop Patteson spent
the winter months with his native schoolboys on Lifu,
New Zealand being two cold. He translated the Gospel
of Mark into the Lifu dialect, and had a few copies
printed in New Zealand, which he distributed amongst
the natives. These visits only led the natives to be the
more anxious to have missionaries of their own. They
would gladly have kept the bishop amongst them, but
he had too much of the real missionary spirit to allow
him to settle on any island. He rendered good service
to the Lifu mission, being here when the priests arrived;
he gave the natives suitable advice, and doubtless pre-
vented much evil.
After the heathen council to which I have referred, it
was arranged that the uncle of Ukenezo should go to the
Isle of Pines to endeavour to obtain a Homan Catholic
priest for Lifu. They were led to abandon this plan,
however, by the arrival of a letter from Uvea, in which
the chief, Pasil, urged Ukenezo to embrace the u religion
of the French priests,” as he had done. Neither Uken-
ezo nor any of his party could read, so the letter was
taken to one of our teachers to be read to them. A
messenger was sent to Uvea to tell Pasil that they were
quite ready to receive the priests; and shortly after this he
arrived in a Government vessel with two priests for Lifu.
The arrival of this vessel created, in the minds of Pao
and his colleagues, considerable fear and anxiety. They
had heard of the doings of the French at Tahiti, and
shuddered at the thought of their taking Lifu. They
regarded the priests and the government as one, the


former being pioneers of tbe latter; and certainly the
proceedings of the authorities at Tahiti, and also at New
Caledonia and the Isle of Pines, would naturally lead
them to this conclusion. Ukenezo and his party has-
tened from their village (ten miles inland) to welcome
the priests. A temporary dwelling was very soon erected,
around the interior of which the reverend gentlemen
exposed their pictures, images, medals and crosses. The
natives gazed in astonishment and admiration, regarding
them as the charms by which their enemies were to be
destroyed.
To suppose that the natives of the South Sea islands,
when they first receive teachers or missionaries, do so
from a religious feeling is, I am persuaded, quite a
mistake. They are generally actuated by inferior
motives in professing their willingness to receive and
protect the messengers of the cross. It is not their
religion that they want so much as their fish-hooks,
knives, tomahawks, &c.; and the enemies of the tribe
with whom the teacher lives will often (as at Lifu) re-
ceive teachers of a different persuasion, and the greater
the difference the better. What can be expected from
barbarous tribes that are constantly at war with each
other, and accustomed to invoke their gods to destroy
their enemies! Let the Christian teacher once get a
footing among them; then, if he be faithful, the gospel,
which is the power of God unto salvation, will soon
enlighten their understandings, and lead them to follow
its precepts from very different motives from those which
led them to embrace it.


A few days after the arrival of the priests, Ukenezo
assembled all the chiefs in his district, showed them the
box of goods which the priests had given to him, and
told them that if they pi mele (loved life) they had
better embrace his religion and share the property,
assuring them that further disobedience on this point
would now be attended with the most fatal consequences.
Wainya rose and spoke for the chiefs who had received
the teachers. He said that they had already a religion,
whose power they had seen, and whose precepts they
were beginning to comprehend and follow; they did not
want the hmi isi (fighting religion) of the priests, of
which they had heard so much from Hew Caledonia and
the Isle of Pines; they were not afraid of the priests,
nor of the soldiers whom they might bring; they were
prepared and determined to stand by the teachers and
wait for their missionaries, and, if need be, xome akote
(endure suffering) on account of their faith. Many of
the heathen stood aloof, having no desire to join one party,
and afraid to join the other; they saw that a contest
was contemplated, and desired to remain neutral for a
time.
The priests did not leave the work of proselytising to
Ukenezo. Every effort was made to win over Wainya
and the people of Chepenehe ; first by bribes, which the
natives compared with the bait on a fish-hook ; then by
threats of a man-of-war (a favourite threat of the priests
after my arrival), which were weakened by Wainya
going on board the next French vessel that arrived and
being kindly treated; then by annoyances. The priest


got a house built at Chepenehe close to the church,
although he had not a single convert at that village,
and during the hour of service kept natives beating his
gong. But all was of no avail; to this day there is not
a single native of Chepenehe professing Roman Catholi-
cism, although the long threatened man-of-war has
been there with troops, and notwithstanding all that the
poor people have suffered.
On the opposite side of the bay they were more suc-
cessful. The Gaica tribe had shown a most determined
opposition to the Gospel; they had frequently maltreated
Pao, and the chief had banished from his district those
of his subjects who had embraced Christianity. He,
however, had recently died, and the natives naturally
considered his death as a judgment. His son and suc-
cessor was only a boy about nine or ten years of age, so
the lad’s mother became regent, allowed one of the
priests to settle near her house, and ultimately, with her
son, professed the Roman Catholic faith, in which she
died. Many of the Gaica natives followed their chief,
but most of them joined the Protestants.
The priests were now both established, one in the Wet
district and the other at Gaica. They knew that the
natives feared the French and that their lives were not
in much danger; so the poor people were subjected to
all kinds of bribery, stratagems, threats, and annoyances;
and unhappily they had not yet the promised English
missionaries to direct and protect them. Many of Pao’s
converts, from family and political considerations, became
Roman Catholics. Both our teachers and people were


becoming disheartened; they had long asked for and
expected missionaries to carry on the work so success-
fully begun; and every visit of the John Williams
increased their disappointment, and weakened their
faith in the veracity of missionaries. They were not
destined to be disappointed much longer, however.
Urgent appeals from the Samoan mission led the direc-
tors to request us to proceed at once to Lifu, although
we were preparing for another field of labour. So that
whilst Ukeuezo was welcoming the priests to his native
land, we were arranging to leave ours; and whilst the
Christian party were sad and dispirited at their arrival,
our friends were in grief at our departure. It is true
that the priests were a year before us in person, but as
they are centuries behind us in principle , we had not
much to fear. Let truth and error struggle together :
the former must prevail.


VI
HOME INDEAS OF MISSIONARY LEFE- LAST NIGHT IN LONDON-ON BOARD-
THHITI-SAMOA-NEW HEBRIDES-ERROMANGA- LOYALTY GROUP-
RETURN OF THE FOUR KIDNAPPED NATIVES-OUR HOME-TRUE AND
FALSE MERIT-BARTER-LANGUAGE-MANUAL LABOUR- MEDICINE
CHEST-WHAT A MISSIONARY MUST BE.
Befoee we left home, my ideas of missionary life were,
what I suppose most people’s are, rather vague and
sentimental. I saw the missionary and his wife standing
on the deck of the vessel that was hearing them from
their native land, their home, and their friends, and, with
moistened eyes, taking a last look at their country. I
saw the white, neat mission house sparkling amidst
cocoanut and banana trees, and the missionary under
their shade with the bible on his knee, surrounded by a
number of interesting, inquiring natives. I saw different
tribes assembled around the preacher, all anxious to hear
the words of life; and as he dwelt upon the love of
Christ and the magnitude of their transgressions, I saw
the tears of penitence flow, and heard the broken accents
of humble, earnest prayer for forgiveness and guidance
from heaven. All this was a beautiful picture in my
mind; but alas ! for our day dreams and sentimentality!
The stern realities of missionary life have borne but little
resemblance to the poetical picture of my youthful
imagination.


Amongst the trials, difficulties, and dangers of fourteen
years of eventful missionary life, that dreary last night
in London still stands out prominently in our thoughts.
Our ship was to sail from Gravesend on the following
morning; and as we regarded the vessel as a very un-
suitable place for parting scenes, we had said farewell to
the last of our friends ; they left London that evening,
and then we felt that we were alone. Happy homes
and loving relatives and friends were behind; and
before, all was dark and unknown. We had not formed
the acquaintance of our fellow-passengers; had not any
friends in Australia; and were strangers to the mission-
aries in the South Seas. We did not doubt that we
should be warmly received by the brethren, and find
Christian friends in the colonies; it was the indescribable
feeling of loneliness that came over us at the thought of
having seen the last of our friends in England, and
being utter strangers to those with whom we were about
to associate. We walked the streets of that great city,
threading our way amidst the multitude, feeling, as many
have done before and since, that we were alone in a
crowd, had homes, but were homeless, had friends, but
were friendless.
We soon found that there was nothing very poetical in
the first few days of a voyage. To gaze with tearful eye
upon the distant landscape, around which cluster so many
happy associations may be all very well from a stage
coach or railway carriage but it is quite another thing
from the deck of a vessel in a high sea—at least such was
our experience, and judging from what we heard


than saw, we supposed that it was that of others also.
We found agreeable passengers on hoard, however, and
had a pleasant voyage of seventy-four days to Melbourne.
A stay of six weeks in the colonies gave us an insight
into colonial life. After which we sailed, in the John
Williams , down the beautiful harbour of Port Jackson,
and made for the scene of our labours. Happily we went
round by Tahiti, and so had an opportunity of visiting
nearly all the mission stations of the London Missionary
Society in the South Seas; this is of very great importance
to a young missionary : he sees the work at different
stations in different stages of progression, converses
with the missionaries about their various modes of working-
their districts ; and is thus able to form his plans with
facility, and enter upon his work with advantage.
So much having been said and written about the
natural beauty of the South Sea Islands, we were all of
course on the qui vive as we approached Tahiti. We
sighted and sailed half round the island with a most
agreeable light breeze, which seemed to carry us com-
pletely beyond the influence of Old Neptune, and place
us beneath the shade of Apollo. The spirit of the Muses
descended, so the ladies fell to sketching, and the
gentlemen to writing verses. But poetry aside—for
Manchester men are more practical than poetical—the
finest scenery in Tahiti (the gem of the South Sea Islands)
is not to be compared with landscapes in Great Britain,
much less with those on the Continent. I have not seen
the scenery of Loch Lomond and Loch Katrine equalled
on any of the islands of the South Seas. We were kindly
E


entertained by Mr Howe, who at that time was pro-
hibited by the French authorities from ministering to his
people. We were obliged to get special permission from
the governor before we could see Queen Pomare, and then
were only allowed an interview in the presence of a
government officer. We were requested by Mr Howe to
guard our words in conducting the English service, as
he had been threatened by the governor on account of
one of the missionaries, on a previous voyage of the John
Williams , having prayed publicly for the persecuted
Tahitians. I could not but feel that Mr Howe’s position
was a very painful and difficult one. How little did I
then think that I was destined to occupy a similar one
at Lifu.
We were greatly interested in all that we saw at the
different mission stations on our way down to the Loyalty
group, especially at Samoa, where we remained for a few
weeks. The natives of that group are certainly the most
French in their manners, the most Italian in their
language, and the most English in their religion and
liberality, of any that we have met. That field is well
adapted to be the centre of the Society’s operations in
the South Seas. Leaving the Navigator’s group, we
sailed westward, and were soon amongst the naked painted
savages of the New Hebrides. The contrast was painful,
indeed, appalling. Amongst the eastern islands we had
been welcomed by neatly-dressed natives with smiling
faces; had visited their happy homes and well-attended
schools ; had met them at the house of God, and sat with
them around the Lord’s table, and had seen the un


mistakable evidences of progress on every side. But
here we were met (where it was prudent to land) hy
natives most disgusting in appearance, and equally im-
pudent in manner. Their impudence, however, has
doubtless been acquired by their intercourse with sandal-
wooders and abandoned sailors, for it is not a natural
feature in native character; they are generally rather
afraid and retiring. We found their huts to be small,
dirty, miserable habitations ; their wives complete slaves,
and horribly maltreated. We remained two nights
ashore at Erromanga with the martyrs Mr and Mrs
Gordon. The hill on which their house stood overlooked
a lovely valley, and I shall never forget standing at the
door on that charming night. The moon had come forth
“ like a fair shepherdess with her full flock of stars,” and
was casting her pale silvery rays upon the deep still
waters of the ocean. The mountains stood around in
stately grandeur, rearing their silent peaks towards the
stars, as if anxious to get above and beyond the scenes
of cruelty and blood that were being enacted at their
base. The murmuring stream, along whose banks the
lamented Williams had run for dear life, was winding
its course along the valley below. We were talking of
Erromanga’s sad history and dark future, when we were
startled by the cries of a female proceeding from some
huts near the river; we listened, and shuddered as her
shrieks rolled along the valley, and echoed among the
hills. Mr Gordon informed us that it was “ a man beat-
ing his wife with a club, a very common occurrence.”
M hat a blessing the gospel is ! Had the Erromangans


like the Eastern Islanders, been living beneath its
shade, instead of hearing those horrible shrieks, we
should have listened to the songs of evening praise
warbling from the different huts. But alas for poor
Erromanga ! notwithstanding the earnest efforts of the
devoted missionaries who have laboured and are still
labouring there, she appears about as dark now as she
was then. The injuries which she has inflicted upon
Europeans are but as the merest dust in the balance
compared with the wrongs which she has suffered at their
hands; and now she says, “ You have abused our wives
and our daughters; you have murdered our sons and
our husbands before our eyes, and taken others away as
slaves; you have brought diseases that have decimated
the population; you have plundered our plantations, and
robbed us of our sandal-wood; and when we have stood
up in self-defence, you have brought your men-of-war to
desolate our villages. A missionary is poor compensation
for all these outrages. We don’t want the religion of
such a people. We will have nothing to do with you.
Begone ! we swear vengeance against every white man ! ”
Is not this a very natural feeling ? Can we wonder at
the difficulty of missionary work, and the little success
attending earnest effort in the New Hebrides group ?
The wonder is, that the natives don’t attack every vessel
that visits their islands, and murder every white man in
their power.
From the New Hebrides we proceeded to the Loyalty
group, in which there were but two missionaries, and
they located on Mare. These brethren gave us a


most hearty welcome; they were delighted to see
missionaries for Lifu at last. One of them accompanied
us to Lifu, and introduced us to the people. The
physical features of the island, and the character of the
inhabitants, I have already described. It was arranged
at Mare that my colleague should take the station at
Mu, the weather side of the island; and I that
at Chepenehe, Wide Bay. Seldom have missionaries
entered upon their work under such favourable
circumstances. The natives assembled from every part
of the island to welcome us, and with a willing heart
carried up our goods from the boat, and re-thatched the
teachers’ lath and plaster cottage, which was given up
to us.
The delight of the natives was considerably increased
by the return of four Lifu young men that we picked up
at Baratonga. Dr Turner, who accompanied us as a
deputation from Samoa, writes of these natives :
“ The four natives of Lifu, to whom I have already
referred as being on board our vessel, now rejoiced to
find themselves on their native shores. There is a tale
connected with these four young men which makes us
ashamed of our country. They say that they were decoyed
from their island by a sandal-wood vessel from Sydney,
upwards of three years ago. They had gone on board to
sell some things, were battened down in the hold, and
let up on deck next day, when their island was all but
out of sight. They were nearly a year on Espiritu Santo,
cutting and cleaning sandal-wood, and were then taken
to the Island of Ascension, and sold for pigs, yams, and


firewood. They were rated according to age, &c., and
fetched from two to five pigs, and a proportionable quantity
of yams and firewood for each man. There were ten of
them in all. After a time six managed to run away, and
escaped to Hong Kong, where five of them died. The re-
maining four might still havebeen in slavery on Ascension,
but for the kind help of the American missionaries there,
together with Captain Thompson, of the whaling ship China.
The captain bought off two of them, and the other two
were redeemed partly by their own earnings and partly
by the missionary. They were then taken to Honolulu.
The Rev. S. C. Damon and others kindly attended to
them at that place, until another generous American
captain took them to Raratonga, there to await the
arrival of the John Williams. One of them speaks
English well. Mr Williams, the British consul at
Samoa, has taken down the depositions of the young
men, and will report all to the proper quarter. In the
course of our voyage, we have traced the name of the
Sydney vessel, and also that of her captain and super-
cargo. The Lifu people had long given up these four
young men as dead; and their restoration was no small
addition to the joy occasioned by the arrival of the
missionaries. Two of them are of high rank in the bay
where we anchored, and it was affecting to see how the
people clung to them, listening to their tale, and follow-
ing them wherever they went.”
By the evening of the first day all our goods were
landed, and cups and saucers were rattling, and the tea-
pot steaming upon an article of native manufacture,


winch was dignified by the name of u table,” at the head
of which sat my energetic little wife, feeling that, at last,
she was at home. Nearly a year had elapsed since we
left England, and although w T e had met with many kind
friends, yet we always felt that we were dependent; now,
however, we were independent in the double sense. We
sat round this piece of native mechanism (I might
almost call it an automaton , it moved and spoke so easily!)
on boxes : and on this, our first day of actual house-
keeping and missionary life, we had the pleasure of
entertaining Dr Turner, Captain Williams, and Mr
Jones, as guests, and we all thoroughly enjoyed that
evening meal.
On the following morning our friends left us in the
John Williams. I had thought that this would be a very
trying time, but it was nothing of the kind. We were
surrounded by hundreds of noisy natives, some of whom
were busily engaged thatching our house, and there was
neither time nor inclination for sentimentalism. Our
little cottage soon began to look like home. By the taste
and activity of Mrs M‘Farlane, packing cases were soon
dressed, and transformed into handsome looking pieces
of furniture. The windows, although the admiration of
the natives, who had not any in their houses, were such
that we could not keep out the wind and rain without
shutting out the light also. Although, after heavy rains,
the water was ankle deep in our house, and during the
hurricane months we had to prop it up, yet it was a
much better one than we expected to find, and superior
to most of those occupied by missionaries, upon their


arrival in the field. We have never been troubled with
.
the feeling that because we are missionaries we ought to
deny ourselves of easily-acquired conveniences and com-
forts ; indeed, it has always been our endeavour to have
things as neat, clean, and convenient as possible: trying
to raise the natives to us, rather than descend to them.
The Roman Catholic priests generally live in miserable
houses, remarkable only for their filth and disorder;
and their persons are often disgustingly dirty. Roman
Catholic settlers have told me that they are perfectly
ashamed of them; and French officers have expressed
a hope that I would not judge of their priesthood by their
missionaries in the Loyalty group. This they call
“ merit ” and “ self-sacrifice.” I call it a sin, a shame,
and a disgrace; and if I were their bishop, I would make
these u apostolical missionaries ” drink, and smoke,
and sleep less than they do, and get better houses over
their heads, and so set the natives a better example.
The following is a significant fact. One of the store-
keepers in New Caledonia, who supplies the priests with
their provisions and barter goods, told me that during
the three years he had been there, the priests had ordered
all sorts of goods, but never any soap. He made the
same statement about their converts.
We had now fairly entered upon our work. The
natives poured in from the surrounding villages, but I
soon found that they had come—not as you see them
sometimes represented in pictures, neatly dressed, with
modest step and book in hand, to be instructed in the
Scriptures—but with pigs, yams, fowls, mats, cocoanuts,


&c., for barter. They bad a missionary now, and they
seemed to think that he ought to buy all they brought.
They saw that I had a goodly number of boxes, for I had
been unwisely advised to take with me a large supply
of trade for barter, which I now see might, in other
circumstances, have cost me my life. Bartering was a
new thing to me: I would rather have had to do with the
£ s. d., than with fish-hooks and cottons, hatchets
and knives, shirts and calicoes. In my day dreams of
missionary life, this sort of work had no place : how-
ever, I went at it: I knew that we must have some pork
to eat, and something to feed pigs with. We must have
mats for the floor; we must also have servants, and food
for them: and over all, and most expensive of all, the
natives knew that I was a “ new hand,” and inexperienced,
and took the advantage. I bought, and bought, and
bought, but finding that some of the things were moving
in a circle, and having no inclination to pay half-a-dozen
times for the same article, I was obliged to close the
market, at the expense of my popularity.
I felt greatly embarrassed at not being able to speak
to the people in their own language, although the
difficulty was considerably lessened by a number of the
young men being able to speak broken English. I felt
that, especially amongst a people like this, language is
power , so I bent my energies to the acquisition of the
Lifti dialect. In less than four months I commenced
reading my sermons, and about three months afterwards
began to preach them. No doubt I made some very
ludicrous mistakes, but I begged the natives to correct


me in every case. It would, in my opinion, have been
a greater mistake to have remained silent until I supposed
that I could speak pretty correctly. There is nothing like
dashing at it at once. The natives are pleased to see
and hear you make an attempt to speak to them in their
own tongue. If they laugh you laugh, and try to find
out your error and correct it. My experience has been
that it is better to get sentences than disconnected
words.
I soon found that there was a good deal of manual
labour about a mission station which devolves (for a
while at least), upon the missionary, not from the
unwillingness of the natives so much, as from their
inability. A church, schoolroom, dwelling-house, and
outhouses have to be built, and you not only have to lay
the corner stones, but nearly all the others, if you want
them straight. You have to superintend the making of
lime, and the sawing of wood; to sharpen the saws and
mark the logs; I had with me a small portable forge
and a chest of carpenter’s tools. My friends in Man-
chester made me a most sensible present upon my leav-
ing England ; it consisted of a tool chest and a medicine
chest, both of which are invaluable in the South Seas ;
although I confess, that I found the former much more
valuable than the latter, which was a chest of homoeo-
pathic medicines. I had also a case of the more
substantial kind with me, but not being much of a
doctor, and knowing that there were “ great guns ”on
both sides, I thought that I might as well practice one
“opathy” as the other. I therefore read u Sharp’s


tracts on homoeopathy ” and studied Laurie. The theory
seemed sensible and sound, so I commenced the practice :
but the natives had no faith in it, and unfortunately the
results were not calculated to inspire much faith in its
power to heal; so that I was obliged to administer other
medicines, the effects of which were evident to the most
faithless.
A missionary in the South Seas has not only to be
preacher, but doctor, mechanic, and indeed “ Jack of
all trades.” The natives can only do what they are
taught. When anything requires to be done, you must
know how to do it, or it remains undone. To draw a
plan of your church, school, and dwelling-house, you
must be an architect; to build and repair them, you
must be mason and carpenter. When a pane of glass
is broken, you must turn glazier. When the table
knives or your wife’s scissors require sharpening, you
must turn scissor-grinder. To mend your chairs, you
must be a cabinet-maker. To repair your boat, you must
be boat-builder; to manage it in rough weather among
those islands, you must be a seaman. To shoe your
horse, you must be a blacksmith; and to manage him
over island roads, you must be a rider. To bear with
the natives, requires an inexhaustible stock of patience ;
and to succeed amongst them, more than ordinary
perseverance and discretion. So that more is required
to make a good missionary than the mere ability to
translate and expound the Scriptures.


YII.
THE CHIEF’S ENCLOSURES—THE TEMPORARY CHAPEL—THE CONGREGATION
—THE NEW CHURCH— TOUR ROUND THE ISLAND—WHAT WAS DONE AND
YET TO BE DONE—SHOEING THE HORSE—NATIVE REMARKS ABOUT THE
HORSE—TEACHERS—PAO’S WILL AND DEATH—MAY MEETINGS—
DIVIDING THE FOOD, AND AMUSEMENTS.
The church at Chepenehe having been blown down in a
hurricane about the beginning of the year, we found the
natives assembling for worship in a native house in the
chief’s enclosure. The enclosure itself was a novelty,
and must have cost the natives many months unusually
hard work. It was about three hundred yards long by
one hundred broad. The fence consisted of immense
logs of hard wood, short logs with forked heads being
first placed firmly in the ground at short distances from
each other; upon these, logs were laid horizontally,
against which logs ten feet high were reared on their
ends, standing close together. A second or third row
of smaller logs closed up every aperture, so that it was
impossible even to see inside from without. Within
this enclosure there was quite a small village: here the
chief and the leading families resided; it was the “ West
End ” of Chepenehe, but alas for the aristocracy of
Lifu! they had nothing to distinguish them but these
rough logs around their dwellings ; yet of these they


THE CHURCH AT CHEPENCHE OCCUPIED BY THE SOLDIERS.




were mightily proud; it was a sign of power, small chiefs
being unable to get such fences constructed for want of
men.
The house which the chief had given up for religious
worship (pvo tein .), was a low, dark, dirty hovel, not
half large enough for the congregation; it was near
the fence, had but one small door, and no windows.
Some of the thatch had been pulled off at the back
to let the light in. On the first Sabbath of our
actual missionary life, we met the people in this place,
or I should rather say, at this place, for although the
house was thoroughly packed, it was also surrounded by
natives, chiefly dirty, degraded looking women, with
noisy children hanging about them. We had two chairs
taken down, and sat near the door ; but it seemed almost
impossible to get a breath of air, indeed the arrange-
ments appear to have been made to keep the air out;
and not knowing the language, the service appeared to
us very long.
It was a most amusing congregation. Some of them
had procured European garments from traders, it looked as
if a few suits had been divided amongst them ; a native,
just opposite where we sat, had on a pair of spectacles ;
he was looking intently, with the most hypocritical face,
upon a small hymn book which was turned upside down.
(The teachers had got a dozen hymns printed in which
there was neither sense nor metre.) The natives sang
with all their might, but I don’t think that the “melody
was well fitted to make angels weep for joy.” For their
singing at that time was evidently an attempt to make


the most discordant sounds—the more discordant the
better the music, in their estimation. Most of them
opened their mouths and shouted as loud as they could,
keeping their tongues wagging to give variety, and
stopping suddenly to draw breath. They listened as
attentively to the sermon as could be expected, consider-
ing the intense heat; we all came out as from a vapour
bath, and it was laughable to see the variety of dress,
native and European, the most ludicrous of which was
a fellow strutting along with an old hat and dress coat
without any trousers. All had, of course, their girdle
of calico or leaves, which is amongst them the badge of
Christianity. The word in the Lifu dialect for embrac-
ing the gospel, is that used for tying on this girdle; to
return to heathenism is to untie it.
I told the teacher that it would have been better had
he erected a temporary place of worship whilst the new
church was being built, but as the walls were finished,
he need not do so now; we could have service in the
enclosure, under the cocoanut-trees, in fine weather until
the new building was ready. This was not long, for the
natives worked with a will, and very soon it was roofed
and seated, and a platform and reading desk constructed.
The walls were far from being straight, but they were
solid, and we were all glad to have such a comfortable
substantial place in which to assemble for worship. At
the opening there was a great feast, at which all the
teachers and several thousand natives were present,
and all seemed thoroughly to enjoy themselves.
When we had been about six weeks on the island, I


determined to make a tour round it, in order to see the
different localities, become acquainted with the natives,
and by being alone with them for a short time, to
acquire, more rapidly and correctly, an idea of their
language. I found that the roads in the interior were
very bad, but saw that they could, with comparatively
little labour, be made into good routes, the island being
flat, and the coral easily broken with hammers. The
natives were living in about one hundred and fifty
hamlets, assembling for public worship at different
centres where teachers were located. Their houses were
low, with but one aperture, through which you w T ere
obliged to go on hands and knees to enter. Some of
them were beginning to construct better dwellings near
the churches. The natives assembled, in great numbers,
at the different stations at which we had arranged to
spend the night, bringing plenty of food as a token of
welcome. We spent our evenings squatting on mats
around a large fire in the enclosure (a much more com-
fortable place than inside the house, which is generally
full of smoke), conversing as best we could in broken
English. It is highly amusing to hear these natives
carrying on a conversation with a vocabulary of about
forty words.
One could not but feel what a great and good work
had been done, and what a great work was yet to be
done, among this people. Throughout the island I found
them peaceable, hospitable, regular in their attendance
at church and school, and manifesting a strong desire to
be instructed. The number of professed heathen was


comparatively small, as also the number of those who
attended the services of the Roman Catholic priests.
Idolatry and cannibalism were becoming things of the
past. Polygamy had received its death-blow; and
heathen customs and practices were gradually sinking
into oblivion. Places over which the bush had grown,
and which could scarcely be distinguished from the wild
waste around, were pointed out to me as the sites of
large houses in which they used to meet to consult about
their wars; others were still standing, having been
turned into village chapels. There was still much to be
done, however. The natives were little more than
nominally Christian ; morally, socially, and spiritually,
they were very low; they required to be instructed, and
their habits, houses, roads, &c., improved. It was a
comfort to feel that, at last, they were on the path of
human progress : that the murderous war-whoop was
hushed into silence, and the men who formerly hastened
to kill, cook, and eat their fellows, were now peaceful,
compassionate, and in their right mind. It was desirable
now to create a healthful public opinion against all kinds
of vice; to make the principles and precepts of Chris-
tianity universally respected, the law of every man’s
actions, and work them into the texture of Lifu society;
and to accomplish this we felt how desirable it was that
they should possess, in their own tongue, portions of the
Sacred Scriptures as soon as possible.
It was very evident to me, after my one hundred and
forty miles’ tour, that a horse would be a most useful
animal in Lifu, so I determined to get one from Samoa.


A new difficulty presented itself, however, upon its
arrival. The roads being bad, it must be shod, but I
had not any horse-shoes ; yet I thought that perhaps I
might be able to make such as would do until I got them
from Sydney. I got a piece of an old packing case,
placed the horse’s foot upon it, and drew a line round
the hoof; to this line I bent two pieces of iron, and
punched holes in them (intending to put shoes on the
fore feet only), but the difficulty was to fasten them on;
having failed to do so with common nails, and failed
also in my attempt to make nails (for however easy it
may appear to a looker on, a nail is a difficult thing to
make), I was obliged to put them on with screws ! We
have now, I am happy to say, a native servant who has
learnt both to shoe the horse and us too. The remarks
made by the natives about the horse were amusing-.
They called it a large dog, evidently regarding it as a
very superior one, for they addressed it in chiefs
language. An old man stated, not very long ago, that
he had been feeding his dog for a long time, hoping that
it would grow as large as the missionary’s, but he feared
that it would never be big enough to carry him, and
asked, quite innocently for an explanation. We have
the dual pronoun in the Lifu language, and when the
natives meet the missionary on horseback they use it,
asking where are you two going. The missionaries have
lately introduced donkeys to the island of Mare, and
wffien met by natives on these “ Jerusalem ponies” they
are accosted with the usual, where axe you two going f
Having acquired a little of the language, I commenced
r


as early as possible, tbe more active and important
duties of a missionary. I soon found tbat it was not
only undesirable, but impossible to carry out our different
forms of church government in the mission field; and
although a thorough “ Independent,” I soon found
myself virtually a bishop, in charge of a large diocese.
I established a weekly class with the teachers, to give
them the outline of a sermon for the Sabbath morning,
and to hear and correct the one which they had prepared
for the evening. Also to hear an account of their work
at their stations ; give advice in cases of difficulty;
explain passages of Scripture which they did not under-
stand, and for united prayer, exhortation, and conver-
sation about their people and their work generally.
Amongst the teachers there were two or three really
good, earnest, able men; but I must say that the
majority were lazy, selfish, ignorant, and proud. It
must not be supposed that all native teachers are like
Pao; he was a distinguished exception. Not that he
was a man of much education, for he could neither read
nor write very well; but he was evidently a man of
extraordinary piety, energy, and faith. Not only was
he the apostle of Lifu, but he also sought on two
occasions to plant the gospel on New Caledonia, having
jrone thither with some Lifu men in a canoe. Pao’s
O
work was to be simply that of a pioneer; he was not
qualified for the steady, systematic duties of a settled
teacher. About a year after our arrival he became con-
fined to his bed, and, after a lingering illness, died,
loved and lamented by the population generally. Some


time before his death he expressed a strong desire to
make his will in my presence. He had a wife and two
little daughters; one of the latter he disinherited alto-
gether because she had not been attentive to him during
his illness, preferring the play-ground to the sick-
chamber. I remonstrated, but he remained firm. He
then charged me to see that the following distribution
was made of his property. To a friend in Aitutaki
he bequeathed an old black cloth coat, the best he had.
To a native at Raratonga he left a carpenter’s brace and
bits. To another friend of the same island he left a large
auger. He bequeathed to his wife her own box, contain-
ing two dresses, a bonnet, and a piece of calico! To the
younger daughter he left the most valuable part of his
property—a few carpenter’s tools, all of which were
specified; also what clothes remained after he had been
buried in a suit. He desired me to see that his wife and
children went to Raratonga by the John Williams.
Thus passed away the apostle of Lifu; more like an
apostle, in some respects, than many of us. What a
contrast between his usefulness and will, and those of
many professing Christians I would that we looked at
things more in the light of eternity.
The natives had heard of the May meetings at Mare,
and looked forward with great interest to such gatherings
at Lifu. We arranged to have two, one in the Losi, and
the other in the Wet district. I determined also to
examine the scholars and distribute prizes at the same
time, hoping thereby to stimulate the natives generallv
in the acquisition of knowledge. Great preparations


were made. A suitable place, about a quarter of a mile
from the village, was cleared, and a platform erected
under a large tree. Large quantities of food were
collected and piled in heaps, crowned with baked pigs,
fowls, and fish, pierced through with long sticks and
placed in the most grotesque manner. Mrs M‘Farlane
and the teachers’ wives made a number of gay banners
from pieces of fancy print; upon a few white ones I
painted mottoes and texts of scripture; these were carried
by the delighted natives, who formed at the church, and
walked in procession to the place of rendezvous, each
Sabbath school teacher at the head of his and her scholars
we had commenced regular Manchester Sabbath schools.
Many of the Roman Catholics and heathen were
present, to whom spirited and pointed appeals were
made by the speakers. The natives gave such as they
had, and their contributions amounted, from both
districts, to £l3, 17s 7£d in cash, and 2145 native mats,
bags, &c. After the first year they contributed cocoanut
fibre, cocoanut oil, and cash; and their contributions
increased annually until the arrival of the French, who
prohibited them from giving donations to the London
Missionary Society. After the meeting was over the
food was divided, which is a rather exciting and amusing
time. I soon learnt that the success of a meeting
amongst the natives did not depend so much upon the
speeches as on the amount of food. The natives had
evidently brought'mouths as well as ears ; and I fancy
they made better use of the former than the latter.
In dividing out the food on all public gatherings


nobody is forgotten ; there is a pile for each village,
although there may be only one person from a village
present. There is a portion for foreigners, one for
Roman Catholics, another for the heathen (as long as
there were any). It would be considered an insult to
any that were omitted. When all is divided, one man
is appointed to stand near each pile of food, calling out
the name of the village for which it is intended, im-
mediately after which there is a scramble. Half a dozen
men stand round, armed with cudgels to prevent natives
from other villages taking the food which does not
belong to them ; yet although they use their sticks pretty
freely, there is a good deal of pilfering goes on, much to
the amusement of the crowd of spectators. After the
food has been distributed, all is noise, merriment and
confusion for a time. Some may be seen capering about
with immense yams, the size of which they are diminish-
ing as quickly as possible; another will have a leg of
pork; others will be carving a fowl in the most primitive
and expedite manner; whilst fish, on the end of sticks,
may be seen moving as rapidly in the air as ever they
did in their natural element. The food having all dis-
appeared, we spend the remainder of the day in innocent
games. Fire-works, and sometimes as balloon, close
the proceedings of a happy day.


VIII.
FORMING A CHURCH—TERMS OF CHURCH FELLOWSHIP—STRONG DESIRE OF
THE NATIVES TO JOIN THE CHURCH—OUR SUPPOSITIONS NOT THE
STANDARD—EIGHT CHURCHES FORMED—THE ELEMENTS USED—EX-
PECTING THE “JOHN WILLIAMS ”—CHANGES WHICH HAD TAKEN PLACE
—ARRIVAL OF THE SHIP—EXCITEMENT AND CONFUSION—BUILDING
OUR DWELLING-HOUSE—MAKING THE LIME—SITE OF HOUSE—MODE
OF BUILDING—PAPER-HANGING—FIRE PLACE—SEMINARY COMMENCED
—STUPIDITY OF THE NATIVES—WHAT A PIONEER TEACHER SHOULD
BE.
The time had now arrived for the formation of a
church on Lifu. There was no lack of material, such as
it was ; some two thousand natives were anxious to join
the “ekalesia,” but we felt that comparatively few of
them were suitable persons. The admission of natives
to church fellowship has always been, with me, a diffi-
cult question. Repentance, which ought to characterise
all who desire to be called and treated as the children of
God in Christ Jesus, is not, I am sorry to say, a very
prominent feature in a South Sea Islander; indeed
instances of real love to God, and deep penitence on
account of sin, and a desire to live for His glory , are,
alas, very rare. They appear to be sorry for sin, only
so far as it affects themselves ; they are afraid of offending
God, lest His wrath should descend upon their heads;
theirs is pre-eminently a religion more of fear than of
love. This I find to be the experience of other mission


aries also, with whom I have conversed on the subject.
’Tis not fair to give merely a one-sided view of native
character. There can be no question about their being
prodigious Bible-readers, church-goers, and psalm-
singers ; but then it is just as true that many of these
worthy characters are notorious liars, profound hypo-
crites, and not a bit too honest. Yet why should we be
surprised at this ? it is not peculiar to the natives of the
South Sea Islands. How few of us reach that pinnacle
of Godliness—loving God because He loves us, and
serving Him because we love Him. Religion is with too
many a thing of pure expediency.
What should be the terms of admission to church
fellowship ? Upon this question there exists a variety of
opinion in the South Seas as well as in England. Total
abstinence from smoking is a sine qua non with some
missionaries, whilst others will admit upon a simple
profession of faith in Christ, there being no objection
against the person’s moral conduct. Now, lam inclined
to agree with the latter, although my experience has
been that in this, as in most things, we may go to
extremes. However desirable it may be to save the
natives from the habit of smoking, which they carry to
such excess, we have no warrant for making it a matter
of church discipline ; besides the natives themselves
know that many ministers and good men in the Colonies
smoke. On the other hand, I have found natives so
anxious to be admitted to the church, that in order to
accomplish their object, they would profess faith in
Christ, or in anybody, or anything else; although there


was evidently no change of heart. The question with
them is “ what shall I do to be admitted to the
church ? ” They seem to think that they are all right
if they can get there. They will come, for many miles,
week after week to converse with the missionary, with
a desire, not so much to be instructed, as to fulfil what
they regard as a necessary preliminary. They will ask
what they are to give up, and what they are to do. You
give them a small catechism prepared expressly for them,
and they will work at it most assiduously until they have
committed the whole to memory, and then they will
answer the questions with parrot-like formality. Cross-
question them, and they are silent. You ask them if
they believe in God as the only true God; and if they
believe that He sent His Son Jesus Christ to save
sinners, and you receive a surprised and perplexed look ;
it is like asking them if they think you a liar. You ask
them if they love God ; oh yes, they say, there’s no love
like mine. Do you pray to Him? yes, three times a
day. What do you say ? Oh Jesus, pity me, and receive
me,into Thy church. But do you try to please Jesus?
yes ! Do you never break any of His laws ? never. Then
you try to show them what sinners they are, and how
penitent they should be, and ask them if they never
feel sorry on account of their sins. Yes, some of them
will answer; I can scarcely sleep at night for thinking
and crying about my sins ! They will make any sacrifice
to be admitted to the church; would, no doubt, go
round the island on “ all fours ” if required; and all this
notwithstanding our earnest endeavours to enlighten


tlieir dark minds on the subject. What is to be done ?
Some say, “ Don’t admit anyone of whose change of
heart you are not fully convinced. ” In that case the
terms of admission would not have reference to them so
much as to our feelings respecting them. If a native
is anxious to become a member of the church, and
answers my questions satisfactorily, and is recommended
by the teacher and deacons; I have no hesitancy about
proposing him or her to the church, and if ultimately
admitted by their unanimous vote, they are entitled to
my confidence; I don’t see that my suppositions have
anything to do with the matter, I may be mistaken.
The state of things which I have described is only to be
found, of course, in the early stages of a Mission, and is
a disorder for which education is the best remedy.
We formed eight churches on Lifu, consisting of about
thirty members each, which we visit in rotation, and
which have gone on increasing until they now contain—
notwithstanding the trials to which they have been ex-
posed—an aggregate of about two thousand five hundred
members. The question of foreign bread and wine being
used at the ordinance was introduced at our annual
meeting, and feeling the tendency of the natives to
regard the sacrament with superstitious feelings, and the
desirability of keeping it as simple and primitive as
possible, and also of using elements that might be
easily procured by the natives themselves, we determined
to use the bread and wine of the country , viz., the beautiful
white yams for which the Loyalty group is celebrated,
and cocoanut milk; which is much more scriptural, in


my opinion, than water coloured with a little wine, and
brownish bread made from the dregs of the missionary’s
flour cask, which he has had for perhaps two years. The
object of a missionary should be to establish Christianity
in such a way that the natives may find elements within
themselves for its sustentation and advancement. The
natives upon most of the South Sea Islands will always
find it difficult to obtain bread and wine ; why, then,
should they be taught that these are necessary to com-
memorate the death of our Lord, and led to seek them
amongst —in many cases —abandoned sailors ?It is
impossible to think that Christ would have done this,
and as He would, no doubt, have used the bread and
wine of the country, why should not we ?
We no w began to look for the return of the John Williams ;
she had been absent nearly two years, having made her
voyage to England ; and that time had appeared to us to
pass away very rapidly and pleasantly. Not being accus-
tomed to housekeeping, we had miscalculated our stores,
and for a month or two before the arrival of the mission
ship we were out of European provisions. But it is no
great hardship to have nothing to eat but pork, fowls,
turkeys, yams, taro, and young cocoanuts,the last of which
are meat and drink’in themselves. Many changes had
taken place since the John Williams left us. Flowers were
now blooming in front of our little cottage, and a rosy-
cheeked, curly-headed little fellow was playing on the
green sward. We had dispensed with some of our legless
tables, and subsituted others, which, whatever might be
said about the workmanship, evidently belonged to the


genus table. We had also sofas fresh from the hands of
the upholsterer, or rather upholsteress; and as the
cabinetmaker’s work was entirely covered in, they passed
off, of course, as first-class articles. We had also a book-
case, and a wardrobe, which were more useful than
ornamental. Our new church was completed, and we
were beginning to feel at home in the language, in which
we had got a primer and small hymn book printed; so
that we looked forward to the return of the John Williams
with a great deal of interest, and the more so as she was
coming from our friends in England.
The arrival of the Mission ship amongst us is not un-
like that of the mail in a new colony. There are first
the pleasures of anticipation, the anxiety, speculation,
preparation, &c. The missionary and his wife venture
all sorts of opinions about family, religious and political
matters, and as the time approaches these little dis-
quisitions become frequent and animated, until the vessel
arrives with her precious cargo of missionaries, letters,
and supplies. The keen eye of a native can distinguish
a sail at an incredible distance. Often, when to us, the
horizon has appeared perfectly clear, there has arisen
from the natives a deafening cry of, “ sail oh! ” Three
masts lead to the conclusion that it must be the John
Williams , and all becomes excitement. The very time
that you want your servants, they are not to be found.
A host of little domestic misfortunes are sure to happen-
The calf gets loose, and milks the cow before the boy
arrives, which upsets the arrangements of the culinary
department. When all is ready for the oven, it is


discovered that the hoy has not yet got his fire-wood!
then the girl leaves the frying-pan on the fire, and runs
down to the beach to meet the boat. And so the con-
fusion goes on. After the excitement of the day comes
the not less excitement of the night, which is devoted to
reading letters, when all have retired; but the news re-
ceived sometimes throws a terrible gloom over the
proceedings of the following day, and the vessel leaves
us lamenting the death of some dear relative or friend.
After the departure of the John Williams , I determined
to commence the building of our new house. The little
cottage in which we were living was not a bad summer
house, but in rainy weather it was not only exceedingly
disagreeable, but positively dangerous. Having seen at
some mission stations, a number of out-houses, incom-
modious and difficult to be kept in repair; I thought that
it would be an improvement to have dwelling-house, class-
room, store-room, kitchen, and bath-room, all under one
roof; which I now find was a mistake, especially with
reference to the class-room ; this, for several reasons,
should always be a separate building. The first thing to
be done was to prepare the lime, and as all the natives
turned out, forty pits were made in two or three days. The
natives had been taught by the Eastern teachers to make
lime by digging large holes, filling up with logs of wood,
and then heaping pieces of coral on the top. It appeared
to me that there was a good deal of waste, both of labour
and wood, by this plan, as much of the under wood was
burnt away before the coral was even heated; so that
afterwards, and ever since, we have adopted a nmch better


way, by using small pieces of coral, and by placing the
wood and stones in layers, which yields much more lime
with the same quantity of wood. The house in which we
were living was built half way up an incline that rose
gradually from the beach to the height of about seventy
feet, and was consequently very much exposed in heavy
rains ; we determined, therefore, to have our new house
on the top of this incline. It was about one hundred
yards in the bush, and two hundred from the beach, and
in the middle of the village, yet as that was near the
beach, it was sufficiently above it to be private and quiet.
I proceeded thither with a few natives, axe in hand, to
mark the site. Having climbed a tree to get our hearings ,
we marked a number of trees around the place to be
cleared, leaving a semicircle of low bush in front. The
natives were mightily amused and puzzled when they saw
the foundation marked out, and many of them tried to
trace the, to them, interminable windings of the string.
I was not less amused and perplexed, however, at their
mode of working: each village trying to get their portion
done before the other, and in their hurry using the
mortar before it was half mixed: or even using pure
lime, rather than wait for the sand. It was impossible
to attend to all: whilst superintending one party, another
would have builtup two or three feet all askew. The house
being in the form of a T> there ought to have been
many angles, but there were not any! these had to be
made afterwards with a hammer and lime. The difficulty
was to get the masonry to stand until dry. Portions of
the house fell many times, and several times after the


natives had given it, what they considered, the finishing
stroke. It is now, however, a substantial, commodious,
and even a handsome dwelling; boarded throughout, two
feet from the ground, and most of the rooms papered!
We found this was the easiest, cheapest, and prettiest
way of finishing our rooms. It would have been too much
labour to make the walls anything like straight and
smooth with plaster; whereas by putting on a cheap
paper, which only stuck to the prominent parts of the
wall (real paper -hanging), we had elegant rooms at once.
I was led to practise another bit of ocular deception,
with reference to a fire-place which I made some years
ago. Finding the evenings rather cold during several
months in the year, I turned a window into a fire-place,
building up a chimney behind the house; but alas, it
smoked very much, making the wall (not one of the
papered ones) over the fire-place quite black; so I painted
an arch with black paint, which took in rather more than
the fire-place, and which has been admired by our
friends as a decided improvement! However much the
chimney may now smoke, it does not injure the wall,
and as we have not any ceiling, it easily ascends, and
there are plenty of outlets. Many an evening we have
sat by our log-fire, thoroughly enjoying our roasted yam,
and talking of the more elegant hearths in England, and
wishing that those who sat round them were as happy as
ourselves. Would that we were all more deeply impressed
with the fact, that happiness does not consist so much in
what we have , as in what we are.
Feeling that the future strength and usefulness of the


mission depended upon the development of its inherent
power, we resolved to establish a seminary at Lifu for
the training of native teachers to provide pastors for the
churches at home, and pioneer teachers for the surround-
ing heathen islands. Having communicated our views
to the Directors of the London Missionary Society, and
received from them the assurance of their satisfaction at
the proposal, also of their readiness to meet the necessary
expenses connected with such an institution, it was
arranged that it should be established at Chepenehe.
We had numerous applicants, recommended by the
teachers, from every part of the island, from whom we
selected about twenty of the most intelligent. With
these we had a special meeting, and spoke to them faith-
fully about the work to which they were looking forward,
reminding them of the dangers, and perhaps cruel death
to which they might be exposed, and called upon to en-
dure. They said, in reply, that they had thought of all
these things, and were prepared for them ; that their
desire was to become pioneer teachers of the gospel to
heathen lands, if they lived, they lived; if they died,
they died, “Eahune a nue hune kd koi Jem” —We leave
ourselves entirely in the hands of Jesus. There were
certainly some fine young fellows amongst them, who
have made excellent teachers. A few were obliged to
return to their homes from want of capacity, and one
was expelled for immoral conduct.
The tutor of a seminary in a new mission in the South
Seas is in no enviable position. There is plenty of
materia] to work upon, but to mould and fashion it into


any reasonable shape, is a task that calls for the exer-
cise of a great amount of patience and perseverance.
The stupidity of the natives would try the patience of a
Job ; indeed it has sometimes been a question, whether
even that distinguished patriarch could have maintained
the equilibrium of his temper in the professor’s chair of
such a place as a South Sea Seminary! Yet what can we
expect ? The natives are the merest babes in knowledge.
Why should not the multiplication table be as perplexing
to them, as a difficult problem in Euclid to an English
student ? There is this encouragement, however, they are
anxious to learn, and this commendable desire covers a
multitude of faults. Their mistakes are often the most
ludicrous ; although you may feel angry and inclined to
be stern at the injury and destruction of things, yet it
is impossible to refrain from laughing. For instance, a
missionary’s wife on a neighbouring island sent a native
to clean the stove. The native had no idea of putting
black stuff on to clean it, and when the lady in question
went, sometime afterwards, she found it white-washed!
A pioneer native teacher in the South Seas must be
taught, not only how to use his pen, but also how to use
a builder’s trowel, and a carpenter’s plane ; however
proficient he may be in the former, he will find that
ignorance of the latter is a great hinderance to his use-
fulness among the heathen. I have seen this exemplified
in the teacher’s from the Eastern Islands, some of whom
have been very unpopular with the natives, notwith-
standing their ability to shine in vulgar fractions;
whilst others of humbler, but more useful accomplish


merits have been objects of wonder and admiration.
What does a heathen care for the mysteries of arith-
metic compared with a knowledge of the useful arts?
Men who can build houses, and make canoes and boxes,
are the most likely to succeed in establishing a new
mission, if, of course, they possess a little scriptural
knowledge, and are men of earnest active piety.


IX.
OBJECTIONS AGAINST CHRISTIAN MISSIONS—A MISSIONARY’S OBJECT—A
WRITER’S TESTIMONY—WHAT HAS BEEN ACCOMPLISHED IN EASTERN
POLYNESIA—SOCIAL IMPROVEMENTS—INCENTIVES TO PROGRESS—AT-
TEMPTS TO IMPROVE THEIR CANOES—BOAT-BUILDING—EXPORTS—THE
PRIESTS AS TRADERS—TRADING PROHIBITED BY THE DIRECTORS OF THE
L. M. S.—IMITATING EUROPEANS—NATIVE LOVE OF DRESS—REMARKS
OF A TANNESE—THEIR FEELINGS RESPECTING CHRISTIANITY—OUR LIVES
IN DANGER—MISSIONARY TRIALS AND DIFFICULTIES—DANGEROUS
VOYAGE IN AN OPEN BOAT.
It is sometimes objected to Christian missions that they
do not civilise thepeople among whom they are established;
that they are directed to the inculcation of religious
truths, and the wants of the soul, to the utter neglect of
mental culture, industrious habits, useful arts, and all
temporal improvement. Others (especially the French)
are fond of insinuating that, though the missionaries are
professedly the agents of a voluntary and purely religious
association, established for the purpose of diffusing the
knowledge of the Christian religion, they are virtually the
agents of the British Government, which is thus covertly
extending the political and commercial influence of Eng-
land. Whilst, amongst our own countrymen, a prejudice
exists against missionaries of a diametrically opposite
character. They are represented as “ dangerous individuals,
whose influence saps the foundations of public tranquillity,
whose movements require to be narrowly watched, and
discouraged rather than favoured by the governments


under which they labour, and whose efforts tend rather
to the injury than advantage of society.” Amidst
such conflicting and contradictory opinions as these the
faithful missionary toils on, labouring to promote both
the temporal and spiritual welfare of his people. His
desire is to see civilisation and evangelisation going
hand in hand, like brother and sister.
A gentleman, who is well acquainted with South Sea
missions, writes as follows :
“ The conduct of the missionaries in the South Seas
towards the native authorities, and towards the repre-
sentatives of their own government, from the adjacent
colony as well as from home, shows, as their conduct in
other parts of the world has invariably shown, the utter
groundlessness of the prejudices that exist against
them i while the extent to which their labours have
encouraged the commerce of their country, afforded
security to the mariner among tribes formerly the most
hostile and ferocious, and the extent to which the civili-
sation which has followed their exertions has created a
demand for the manufactures of their native country,
entitle them to a place amongst its sincerest friends, and
will in all unprejudiced minds ensure for them approval
and respect.”
The missions in Eastern Polynesia show that while
the communication of religious truth, and the welfare of
the soul, have been primary objects, the missionaries
have laboured, with remarkable success, to advance the
people in civilisation. They have favoured the develop-
ment of the human mind, called into existence a litera


ture where before the use of letters was unknown, and
diffused the blessings of liberty where savage despotism
alone reigned. They have introduced a knowledge of
the mechanical arts, opened new avenues for commerce,
and guaranteed security to the merchant and the seaman
engaged in its pursuit; they have aided the progress of
science, and enlarged the field of discovery; whilst the
natives have been raised to the exercise of benevolent
affections, and the practice of virtue in the present life,
as well as directed to seek the glory and blessedness of,
that which is to come.
We were anxious to introduce habits of industry
among the people of Lifu, and being fully sensible that
indolence was the fruitful source of many of their vices,
and of the impossibility of their becoming either virtuous
or happy without more occupation than the mere cravings
of animal nature required, we used all our influence to
lead them to improve their dwellings, roads, canoes, &c.,
and to commence the cultivation of cotton, for which
the soil and climate are well adapted. Instead of the
numerous insignificant hamlets in which the natives
were scattered about the island, we advised them to build
respectable villages at the localities where the teachers
were settled, and to dig wells ; also to erect substantial,
commodious chapels. We particularly desired each
family to have a house of their own, with at least two
separate apartments. Formerly, several families lived
together in one house, in which there was not a single
partition; young and old, married and single, being all
huddled together.


We intended to make tlie village of Chepenehe a model
for the others, and to encourage and stimulate the
natives we promised that the young men in the institu-
tion should make doors and windows for all lath and
plaster houses built of a certain size, and also superintend
the plastering of the floors. The roads were also im-
proved ; so that we can now travel on horseback between
the two mission stations—a distance of fifty miles—
easily in a day. By the kindness of friends in Adelaide
we were enabled to lend the natives hammers, pick-
axes, and shovels for digging their wells, building their
houses and chapels, and improving their roads.
I have made several ineffectual attempts to lead the
natives of Lifu to alter and improve their mode of con-
structing their canoes; they are, as I have described, of
a very inferior kind. Two of the native teachers under
my care had to cross the bay nearly every week, a distance
of ten miles. They had on several occasions to swim half
the distance with the canoe, or on the paddle; or to push
the canoe before them, which was full of water, and over
which the seas were breaking, rendering it impossible to
bale it out. One of the teacher's party, on one occasion,
had been drowned. These facts induced me to attempt
with the help of the students, to construct a canoe upon
some better plan. Among the improvements in the first
that we made, it was propelled by two wheel paddles, in
velocipede style, which could be easily taken out when
there was a favourable wind, and the sail set. The
natives, although full of its praises at first, soon showed
their preference for their own paddles; to work the


lever required a little more muscular power th.au they
were disposed to bestow upon it; so that as a steamless
steamer it was never of much real use. The next we
made was a light flat-bottomed boat with moveable out-
rigger, which was very useful for many years; but, like
the canoe with paddles, they could not imitate it. The
former was too complicated for the natives, and the latter
required that the planks should be well jointed, a piece
of work which it was very difficult for natives to execute.
Having now served an apprenticeship ! we determined
to commence building a regular boat during the hours
for manual labour in the institution —which are, three
hours a day out of three days in the week. The keel
was soon laid, and the stem and stern posts fixed.
Ordinary boat-builders would have had three moulds ;we
extraordinary ones had only one! and the planks were
too independent to follow even that; owing to some bad
start at the keel, they soon left the mould and pursued a
course of their own! When finished it was nearly as
broad as it was long, and yet not proportionality steady
by any means. It was, however, so remarkable a boat
that the captain of the Day spring said that he had never
seen one like it! he might have added, with the utmost
confidence, that he never would. That boat, however,
although not the most suitable for a regatta, was a very
serviceable little craft on a mission station. Tim natives
found her much safer than their canoes, and much more
easily managed. Sometimes, in visiting the out-stations
round the coast, we were caught in bad weather, and the
waves would, now and then, leap -over the sides of the


boat; but what of that ? there was plenty of room for
both them and us, and it only gave the baler a little
work. Some of the natives wished to take a trip to Uvea
in her; but it does not follow from this that it would
have been safe to attempt such a voyage, for although
the islands are not within sight of each other, the natives
have ventured from one to the other on small rafts.
Having ascertained that there was a market in Sydney
for cocoa-nut fibre, and seeing that an abundance of that
article could be prepared on Lifu, we urged the natives
to produce and export it. So great was the quantity sent
to the Colonies, from the Loyalty group, and other
islands in Eastern Polynesia, that the market soon
became over-stocked, and the price lowered to such a
degree, that no encouragement was offered to the natives
to continue its production. Cotton, cocoa-nut oil, pigs,
and poultry, became and remain the staple exports of
Lifu. The cultivation of cotton is greatly increasing
every year; the year before I left Lifu, the exportation
amounted to twenty tons. The priests are the chief
buyers; they can afford to give more than the other traders,
and yet make large profits, so they get nearly all the
cotton and oil. On Uvea, where a large quantity of oil
is made, they are known,"and spoken of by foreigners, as
the u oily fathers.” On Lifu they have, for some time,
refused to purchase the cotton of the Protestants, unless
they become Homan Catholics ! They doubtless expected
that the benefits of a good market would prove a strong
and successful bait; but although the Protestants are
anxious to take their cotton to the person who will give


them the most for it, be he Roman Catholic or Protestant,
priest or layman, they are also determined (as they
have abundantly proved since the arrival of the French)
to maintain their religious principles and modes of
worship; so that the priests have not yet made a single
cotton convert. Many of the natives now take their
cotton to the traders; hut most of them still manage,
through their Roman Catholic relatives and friends, to
sell it to the priests, who certainly give the best price,
and are in this way, at least, a benefit to the island,
although at the expense of the priesthood and the traders.
I have often felt it to be a matter of extreme satisfaction
that I am connected with a society that strictly prohibits
its missionaries from engaging in any commercial pur-
suits. None can violate this rule without seriously
injuring their reputation, and impairing their usefulness.
Let the trader attend to his trading, and the missionary
to his teaching.
The natives, in their transitional state, are very fond
of imitating Europeans, which, as a general rule, is a
very good feature in their character, although, in some
cases, it leads to disasters through stupid mistakes. For
instance, the heathen on Mare, seeing that the mis-
sionaries’ children were healthy and strong, asked the
servants how they were brought up. They were informed
of the peculiarities of European training from the
time of birth, and seemed to catch at the idea of the new-
born infant being washed in warm instead of cold water;
accordingly, it was determined that the next baby should
be treated in thorough European style; many of the old


people, as usual, protesting that European customs
might be very good for Europeans, but that they would
not suit them. The new generation, however, prevailed,
considering themselves wiser than their fathers; so the
father prepared the hot water for the new arrival. He
seemed to think that the hotter the better, and the poor
little thing was put into water nearly at the boiling
point, and as a natural and sad consequence, was scalded
to death. The natives then abandoned the idea of
European training, feeling with the old people that their
children could not endure it.
The natives soon begin to develop a strong liking for
European dress, which they carry to a degree, at once
absurd and ludicrous. It has often appeared to me that
we are in a somewhat anomalous position, when intro-
ducing Christianity to an island; and in our eagerness
to see the natives advance in civilisation, we urge them to
a course of conduct that we have afterwards to denounce.
Hot only do they become avaricious, but the clothes they
wear, and the mode and time of wearing them, are posi-
tively injurious to health. A simple girdle of leaves or
calico is much more suitable for natives generally in a
tropical climate than European clothing; a white shirt
with a fathom of white calico for an iza or girdle, is a dress
suit, or rather is the most suitable dress suit; for the
natives have an idea that they are not dressed until they
have their black coat and shoes.
The unsuitableness of the style of dress adopted by
some of the Christian natives is observed even by the
heathen. I remember being struck with this some years


ago when visiting Tanna in company with some of the
missionaries of the New Hebrides group. We were urging
the natives to receive a missionary, and they were giving
us their reasons for not wishing one. The conversation
was carried on in broken English, many of the natives
being able thus to express themselves from frequent inter-
course with foreigners. “ You see,” said one knowing
fellow, u no good missionary stop Tanna. Suppose
missionary stop here, by and by he speak, ‘Very good,
all Tanna man make a work.’ You see that no good :
Tanna man he no too much like work. By-and-bye
missionary speak, ‘No good woman make a work : very
good, all man he only get one woman.’ You see Tanna
man no like that; he speak, ‘ Very good plenty woman :
very good woman make all work.’ Tanna man no
save work ” —does not know how to work — u he too much
lazy ;he too much gentleman ! ” The speaker was a tall,
fine-looking, well-built fellow: naked, but painted and
decorated in the highest fashion of the land ; no doubt he
was a prominent character in the Tannese u Swell Mob.”
His quick eye caught one of our party —a little, unpre-
possessing, milk and water sort of fellow —dressed, or
rather disguised, in what appeared to be the cast-off clothes
of some jolly old farmer. “ You see,” he continued,
“ suppose missionary stop here, he tell all man, i Very
good, get a clothes.’ That no good; very good, white man get
a clothes; very good, black man make a paint. Suppose
black fellow get a clothes he no look well: you look this
fellow, he no look well! ” He pointed to our little friend
as he said this, and it was impossible for us to retain our


gravity, the contrast was so ridiculously striking. The
Tanna man then threw his massive club proudly over his
broad shoulder, and strutted away, indignant, no doubt,
that we foreigners should try to put such absurd and
debasing ideas into their heads.
They profess to be utterly ignorant and indifferent
about the future, and in no way enamoured with the re-
quirements of Christianity in the present life; they very
much prefer their wild lawless liberty to the restraints
imposed by the gospel. The civilisation of which we
speak appears to them to be both binding and degrading.
They are quite satisfied with the gods which they have,
and are determined to live as their fathers lived, and die
as they died. Having had a good deal of intercourse with
foreigners during the last thirty years (chiefly sandal-
wooders), and being thoroughly conversant with the in-
justice and cruelty which these men have perpetrated upon
the defenceless natives, they are by no means disposed
to embrace the white man’s religion; it does not appear to
them to be any improvement upon their own. How can
we be surprised at all thi’s ?
Our lives, on that occasion, were in considerable danger
from a party of Tannese who had determined to kill, at
least, one of the missionaries, in order to lead us to
abandon the idea of locating one there. We found that
these fellows had actually been on the point of firing
upon us from three different places, but were deterred from
fear of shooting some of their friends who were standing
with us. Having got this unpleasant piece of informa-
tion from a native of our party who was watching them,


we thought it prudent to move quietly towards the boats,
and only felt safe when clear otf. On a subsequent
voyage the natives were prevailed upon to allow a mis-
sionary to settle amongst them, who has been labouring
there ever since.
In missionary work, as in other enterprises, there are,
of course, risks and difficulties to be encountered, and
these do not arise from the hostility of the natives only,
nor yet simply from the diseases peculiar to the country,
but also from visiting out-stations and neighbouring
islands in open boats. I have myself often been caught
in very bad weather, and on two occasions have been
nearly lost between the islands.
Perhaps an account of one of these may be interesting,
and give the reader some idea of the dangers connected
with boating amongst those islands. We had been
waiting at the weather side of Lifu for a favourable wind
to cross over to Mare, and as it veered round to the west,
the boat was launched, and we started. I was simply
a passenger. It was the chief’s boat; he and fifteen others
were going to Mare with a cargo of mats to barter with
their neighbours on that island. They had made what
they considered every preparation for the voyage. For
many miles we smiled at our good fortune. We had a
splendid breeze and a smooth sea, and Lifu soon began
to look hazy in the distance. But before we sighted
Mare the natives began to look serious; the wind was
increasing, the sea was rapidly rising, the clouds were
blackening, and our little craft was flying over the waves
at a fearful rate. Spare ropes were employed to secure


the masts; everything was stowed away snugly; we
shortened sail, and anxiously watched the progress of the
storm. Soon the crested waves were rising behind and
threatening to roll over us; now and then one leapt in as
it rolled along the side of the boat, as if to prepare us for
what was coming. A native was kept constantly baling
the boat, and as the water began to come in pretty freely,
I asked a question which I found should have been asked
before we started —“ Where is the bucket?” They had
not brought one. “ How many balers have you?”
Only the one in use! Then they began, as usual, to
blame each other for not taking (as the missionary does
in his boat) a bucket and a few calabashes; and I learnt
a lesson about never trusting to natives to prepare for a
sea voyage.
We were occasionally shipping seas which saturated
the native mats, alarmingly increasing the weight of our
cargo. I proposed to lighten the boat, but no one spoke.
I reminded them of our danger, and of the value of our
lives compared with a few mats, and requested the lead-
ing man amongst them to show the example by throwing
his mats overboard first. This man was one of the
chief’s advisers, a great talker, and a would-be great
man. He was ready enough to take the lead in most
things, although not in this; he had probably reckoned
what he should get for his mats, and determined what
he should do with it, and so clung to the chance of
getting to Mare, mats and all.
Our conversation w r as interrupted by a scream from
the chief Bula, and in a moment a tremendous w r ave


swept right over the boat, causing it to tremble from
stem to stern, drenching us, and half filling it with water.
For afew seconds we seemed paralysed. u Jd tim! ” I cried
to the fellow who ought to have been baling, and to our
dismay he replied, “ The baler is gone.” The wave had
taken it away. There we were, with the boat half full
of water, without either bucket or calabash. 44 Throw every
mat overboard instantly,” I said, and moved towards
them; but they preferred to lighten the boat by jumping
overboard themselves, and in an instant a dozen of them
were in the sea, some holding on to a rope, others to the
side of the boat. Even at such a time I felt inclined to
smile at the reluctance of those fellows to part with their
mats. Four of us who had hats used them with a will
to bale the water out of the boat. Fortunately for us we
rose on the waves; had such another swept over us just
then, we must have gone down.
After reducing the water a good deal, the natives got
into the boat again, we spread a little sail to the wind,
and proceeded on our voyage, during the remainder of
which we managed to keep the water down with our hats.
As we drew near to Mare the natives assembled on the
cliffs ; they did not expect to see a vessel, much less an
open boat, approach on such a day. They swam to the
reef to render assistance if necessary whilst entering the
small boat passage, and we divested ourselves of some of
our garments, and prepared for swimming. We did not
feel the force of the wind so much whilst running before
it, but when we turned to enter the passage, the wind
blew the sail to ribbons. A crowd of natives plunged


into the surf, seized our boat, and drew it into the placid
little bay. It was an immense relief to see and hear the
raging sea behind us.
A missionary’s greatest joys and sorrows, however,
(from without) may be traced to the family circle.
What trial so great as being called upon to watch the
wasting form of a lovely and beloved child, having
exhausted your little stock of medical knowledge in
vain, and no doctor near? or be obliged (as a mis-
sionary on a neighbouring island was) to watch over the
grave of a beloved wife and only child, lest the natives
should steal the bodies to cook and eat them, no earthly
friend being near him. Missionaries, above all others,
should be men of sterling piety and strong faith. Being
far away from intelligent Christian society, and all those
stimulants and encouragements which ministers enjoy
at home, they should live near to God: upon this really
depends their happiness and success.


X.
ESTABLISHMENT OF LAWS—UKENIZO OBJECTS—THE PRIEST’S CODE—POLICY
OF THE PRIESTS—HARBOUR DUES—ERRORS NATURAL AT THE COM-
MENCEMENT—LAWS OPPOSED BY WHITE MEN—CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH
LED TO ARRIVAL OF THE FRENCH SOLDIERS—THE CAUSE THAT LED THE
FRENCH TO TAHITI THE SAME AS THAT WHICH LED THEM TO LIFU
THE IMPORTANCE OF MISSIONARIES OF DIFFERENT CREEDS HAVING
DISTINCT FIELDS OF LABOUR—TACTICS OF THE PRIESTS—THREATS
-THE PRIESTS ADOPT ANOTHER PLAN—PROTESTANTS’ LOVE FOR THE
SCRIPTURES—CHAPEL-BUILDING BY THE PRIESTS—REASONING OF THE
PRIESTS.
The time had now arrived for the establishment of a
code of laws on Lifu. Although the influence of the
gospel had become sufficiently prevalent to render the
application of club law a very rare thing, it was not so
universal as to prevent crime. There were on Lifu, as
on other islands, a great number who were influenced in
their profession of Christianity merely by example, so
that no sooner had the powerful excitement produced by
the transition from one state of society to another
subsided, than they returned to the evil habits in which,
from their infancy, they had been trained. The chiefs
very naturally asked our advice, and we felt as Mr
Williams did, “ that there was a necessity laid upon us
to act in these affairs; and while we gave them clearly
to understand that our objects were purely of a spiritual


character, we were convinced that under existing circum-
stances, it was as much a duty to direct them in the
formation of a code of laws, as it was to instruct them
in the principles of Christianity itself: for in thus acting,
we were simply advising them to apply those principles
to social life, and to substitute them for the ferocity and
revenge by which all classes had been previously in-
fluenced.”
A few simple laws were drawn up, and Young Bula
assembled all the chiefs and people in the Losi district,
before whom they were published. Officers were appointed
in the different villages to investigate minor offences and
impose suitable fines or punishment, whilst the supreme
court was held at Mu, the residence of the young King
Bula. Ukenizo, the king of the western half of the
island, objected to the establishment of laws in his district.
He, and a number of his followers, although nominally
Roman Catholics, were virtually heathens —advocates of
club-law —and very unwilling to be placed under the
restraints of a code that regarded fighting, stealing, and
adultery as crimes. The under chiefs, however, deter-
mined that if Ukenizo would not establish them, they
themselves would do so in their respective villages, and
this led the priest to draw up a code for the king, which
he succeeded in persuading him to accept. Seeing that
the natives were determined to have laws; and feeling,
no doubt, that the administration of them would be a
new power in the hands of Ukenizo, and secure a degree
of prominence for the Roman Catholics, the priest entered
heartily into the project. He called upon us with his
H


proposed code, over which we had a little friendly
discussion, and after a few alterations and additions
they were submitted to the king and the people for their
approval and adoption. A day was fixed for their
publication, at which both the priest and myself were
present. The priest, acting for the king, read the laws
to the assembled crowd; they were unanimously adopted,
and officers appointed as in the Losi district.
I have mentioned the part which the priest took in the
establishment of the laws in the Wet district, because
although he appeared anxious to take a conspicuous part
in this project when he supposed that it would he for
the advantage of Roman Catholicism on the island, he
was nevertheless, at a subsequent period, and for the
same reason, equally anxious to make it appear to the
governor of New Caledonia that the laws had emanated
from us. It was a matter of comparative indifference to
us from whom they emanated, so long as they were
established, and we were neither afraid, nor ashamed to
acknowledge to His Excellency a few years afterwards the
part which we had taken in their formation in the absence
of an administration, seeing that the French had not at
that time, taken formal possession of the Loyalty group.
An administration was a new thing to the natives,
so that we were not surprised to find them at times,
more vigorous than just in enforcing their five laws, or
rather their own ideas, for their little code became ludi-
crously elastic sometimes. For instance, an observant
native who had been to Sydney in a trading vessel, noticed
that ships there had to pay harbour dues ; so that when


he returned and was appointed policeman at a bay twenty-
five miles from the king’s residence, he did not forget
this fact, and upon the arrival of a small schooner from
the coast of New Caledonia, he demanded harbour dues
from the captain ! It was in vain that he told the natives
that they had not done anything to improve the harbour;
in vain did he storm and threaten; the policeman said
to him, “ You see, Lifu man got a law now; Lifu all
same Sydney; all ship go Sydney give money for chief,
suppose he no pay him, policeman take him quick ; very
good, you make all same here : suppose you no give one
piece calico, me take your boat.” And sure enough he
did take it, and delayed the captain two days until a
message was sent to Bula, who sent an order to give up
the boat at once, and not to interfere with vessels, as
there was no law on that point. The captain reported
the matter to the Governor at New Caledonia.
It was perfectly natural that such mistakes should he
made at first by such a people. The officers, however,
soon became acquainted with their duties, and performed
them with a very commendable degree of fidelity and
impartiality. The population generally rejoiced in the
security of their plantations and property, and in the
great diminution of crime. The white men who visited,
and the few who were living on Lifu, were by no means
disposed to submit to any native laws whatever; this
class of men, who live with the natives on the uncivilised
islands in the South Seas, desire what they call liberty,
i.e., to go about with revolvers in their belts and do as
they please; which may be liberty to them, but often


subjects others to the vilest oppression. The natives
having, on one occasion, tied one of these men to a cocoa-
nut tree for a few hours, the others saw that they must
either respect the laws or leave the island.
I will now proceed to relate the circumstances which
led to the arrival of the soldiers, and the reign of the
bayonet on Lifu. It will be evident from what has
already been said that Christianity and civilisation were
making the most encouraging progress on the island.
The whole machinery for the moral, social, and spiritual
advancement of the people had been set in successful
operation, and we were viewing with delight and thank-
fulness the transformation that was taking place. Not
so, however, the priests, nor yet the French Government
at New Caledonia. The former saw only the spread of
heresy; and the latter, only the spread of English
influence, so that both were prepared to combine against
us. The London Missionary Society’s mission had been
established on the island, and nearly the whole of the
population christianised before the priests made their
appearance, or even before the French took possession of
New Caledonia. But it is a remarkable fact that where
British power or British enterprise have opened a path,
there comes the missionary of Borne, to plant his spiritual
and mental tyranny ; and we know with what sentiments
the French Government regard our colonial influence. “No
one,” writes Wylie, “ can have forgotten the massacre at
Cochin-China in the spring of 1847, where the Jesuit
missionaries, mounted upon the French ships of war,
dealt out grape-shot to the inhabitants. Nor is the sad


story of Tahiti forgotten, or ever will. The Jesuits
found it a paradise, physically and morally, with a
Christianity blossoming there as pure and lovely, perhaps,
as ever blossomed on earth. They dethroned its queen
and ravaged the isle with fire and sword, because the
inhabitants refused to embrace an idolatry as foul as that
from which they had been rescued. Popery is as much
the wolf as ever. To see its real dispositions we must
not look at it in Europe : we must track it as it prowls
along on the frontier of the heathen world.” 1
As the calamity which fell so heavily upon the poor,
defenceless Tahitians originated in the envy and intoler-
ance of popery, which' could behold, in the astonishing
change that took place among that once heathen and
barbarous people, only the work of heretics, to be mourned
over, counteracted, and destroyed; so may the like
calamity which has befallen the Loyalty group be traced
to a similar cause. “ Our hearts are distressed,” wrote
one of the priests, “in approaching Tahiti. The in-
habitants of this isle groan under the yoke of heresy: *
and, ‘‘the august Mary,” adds another, “whom the
Church calls the destructress of all heresies; knows well
how to annihilate that at Tahiti. 2 What is there that a
Jesuit will not do to promote the interests of his Church ?
Mr Ellis, in writing of the events at Tahiti, says : “ These
1 “ There exists a papal coin in their [the Jesuits,] honour, as ‘ domini
canes ’ —the noble hounds of heretics. The device is, a dog with a lighted
torch in his mouth, traversing a globe : the motto, —‘ What will I, if it be
already kindled ? ” —“ The Jesuits as they were and are ” —Buller : (Intro-
duction).
2 Annales, No 56, p, 234.


events show further, that so potent is the spell by which
Popery controls its adherents and supporters, that laws
the most needful and salutary, rights the most sacred,
justice the most unquestionable, truth the most clear,
and the claims of humanity in its most affecting and
requiring circumstances are alike disregarded, when the
aims of Popery, or the interest of its adherents can be
promoted thereby. These and other lessons, though
painful, are valuable, and to the Protestant Churches of
both hemispheres they will not have been given in
vain.”
It is to be profoundly regretted, that whilst there are
hundreds of islands in the South Seas still shrouded in
heathen darkness, the missionaries of different societies
propagating different forms of the Christian faith,
should come into collision, and thus perplex the natives,
and impede the good work already begun. It would
surely be more in accordance with the spirit of Christ-
ianity, if those who are anxious to promote it would
proceed to islands where the name of Jesus has not been
heard, rather than settle down amongst a people
professing to be His followers, and being instructed in
His precepts ; such a course can be pleasing only to the
Devil who is the author of confusion and conflict.
Upon the arrival of the priests at Lifu, they commenced,
as usual, by announcing that the teachers who had pro-
ceeded them were false, and that they were the true
messengers of God ; that the natives were all on the
road to perdition, and that there was no hope of salva-
tion for them unless they renounced the faith in which


they had been instructed, and placed themselves under
the guidance of the priests. These declarations were
not peculiar to those days, they are still reiterated,
frequently and solemnly, to the Protestants of Lifu; but
happily they are as ineffectual as they are false.
When the priests found that the natives were not, in
any way, disposed to give credence to their statements
and comply with their wishes, they altered their tactics ;
from suasion and bribery they proceeded to threats. A
man-of-war became the bugbear with which they tried
to scare the natives. Ukenizo demanded that all his
subjects should embrace Roman Catholicism; Bula’s
subjects had embraced the religion of their chief, why
should not his do likewise ? This desire of the king’s was
no new intimation to the people; so the demand being
received with the usual indifference, all the under chiefs
were charged, by the priests, with insubordination to
their chief, and complained of to the Governor at New
Caledonia. It was reported that Wainya, the chief of
Chepenehe, would be taken prisoner by the captain of
the first French ship of war that called at the island;
he, however, was the first on board when one arrived.
The captain being a warm-hearted, liberal-minded man
of science, as well as a man of war, treated Wainya
with marked respect, and told the natives that the
priests had no right to threaten them with a ship-of-
war ; that they were at perfect liberty to embrace the
Roman Catholic religion or not as they pleased, and
advised them to live peaceably, and seek to advance in
civilisation. He told me that he had frequently heard


of the priests using such means to intimidate the natives
in order to gain converts, and assured me that they had
no authority for so doing, and would, by such a course,
incur the severe displeasure of the French Government.
The visit of this honourable gentleman, in the u Bonite”
was accompanied by the most beneficial results upon the
minds of the Protestants; they saw that Wainya had not
only not been taken prisoner, but that he had been
kindly treated by the captain. The priests, finding that
the threat of a man-of-war only excited the laughter of
the natives, determined to try another plan. They had
dwelt upon the differences between Protestantism and
Popery. Now they began to speak of the points of
similitude, maintaining that, whilst the two forms of
faith were much alike in many respects, Roman Catho-
licism was the easier and safer way to heaven. “ They,”
said a priest, speaking of the missionaries to a Protestant
native, (f require you to observe religiously the whole of
the Sabbath; we only ask you to observe a part of it.
They forbid the continuation of a number of your heathen
games; our religion does not restrain you from such
things. They cannot forgive you when you have sinned;
but all who confess to us, we can assure them that they
are pardoned.” This sort of reasoning secured for them
a number of unprincipled • fellows, who were ashamed to
remain nominal heathens any longer, yet unwilling to
abandon their evil habits ; but it proved utterly power-
less with those who had already embraced the gospel.
The Protestants having received portions of the Scriptures
in their own dialect, held in undisguised contempt the


medals that were suspended from the necks of the Roman
Catholics. ei What can those hits of iron tell you ?”
they would say to their friends —“ they are speechless
and useless: our books are our guides, and they tell us
much that warms our hearts. You are like a vessel
without a compass; the priest blows you where he likes.”
All that the priests could say in favour of images, pictures,
crosses, &c., was lost upon the Protestants; they told
him that it was like giving inferior food to "his people
whilst he kept the yams for himself. The priests were
more successful in chapel-building than proselytising.
In the Protestant villages, side by side with ours, rose
small Roman Catholic chapels, often where they had not
half-a-dozen converts, and at some places, where they
had not one; these were occupied periodically by the
priest and a few of his followers. To see the natives
flocking past his door to what he regarded as heretical
temples, must have been, to him, a deplorable spectacle.
Believing that there is no salvation out of his church,
and baffled in his attempts to get the natives into it, he
and his confreres , no doubt, reasoned as follows :
u These natives are stubbornly and superstitiously
attached to their heretical opinions; for years we have
laboured in vain to enlighten and convert them. What
is to be done ? We must not leave them to perish in
their heresy. Yet there is no hope for them unless they
are brought into the Church. All means are allowable
for so laudable an end ; into the Church they must go :
if they won’t be drawn by love , then they must be driven
by force. Stern means were employed by our forefathers


for the salvation of heretics, and often many have been
saved by persecuting a few. The difficulty will be to
prevail upon the Governor of New Caledonia to take up
our cause ; he will probably say that we have no right to
use force in religious matters ; this heresy is spreading
so fast amongst our own people that they are even allow-
ing His Holiness the Pope to be quietly robbed of his
temporal power. We know that the Governor is jealous
of English colonial influence, and especially desirous that
the language and customs of France shall predominate
in this group ; we must, therefore, represent the English
missionaries as acting more like the agents of the
British Government than those of a purely religious
society, and the natives as being completely under the
influence of the missionaries, by whom they have been
Anglicised. By this course we may lead the Governor to
establish a military station on Lifu, whilst we assure the
natives that the soldiers are coming to punish them for
not embracing the Roman Catholic religion in accordance
with the wish of their King Ukenizo. Thus, whilst the
Governor is fighting against English influence, and
endeavouring to Frenchify the natives—which we hear he
is determined to do—he will, in reality, be forcing them
into our Holy Catholic Church.”
That the priests did reason thus, is, by no means, a
matter of pure speculation. I judge that they did so
from what actually took place ; from my interviews with
them on former occasions when they freely expressed
sentiments much like the above; and from statements
made to myself by the Governor of New Caledonia, some


time after the occupation of the island. It is well known,
however, that the priests wrote a letter to the Govern-
ment at Xew Caledonia which was taken hy Weneme-
cingo, the brother of T Ukenizo, purporting to he
Ukenizo’s letter —although he declares that he did not
know its contents —requesting the Governor to send
soldiers to punish his disobedient subjects. We can
only judge of the contents of that letter from the events
that took place a few weeks after its delivery.


XI
THE MORNING ON WHICH THE STEAMER ARRIVED—TROUBLES SELDOM COME
SINGLY—LANDING OF THE SOLDIERS—RECEPTION OF THE NATIVES BY
THE COMMANDER—OUR VISIT TO THE CAMP—JOY OF THE PAPISTS AT
THE ARRIVAL OF THE SOLDIERS—JACK’S APPOINTMENT—HOW HE
BECOMES A FAVOURITE—THE FIRST INTERFERENCE WITH OUR WORK
SCHOOLS CLOSED AND CIRCULATION OF BOOKS PROHIBITED—FIRING
UPON AN ENGLISH VESSEL—EXCITEMENT OF THE NATIVES
INDEPENDENCE OF THE COMMANDER—COMMANDER PREPARES TO BE
ATTACKED—HIS LETTER AND OUR INTERVIEW—THE COMMANDER A
DUPE OF THE PRIESTS—THE PRIESTS THE CAUSE OF THE DISTURBANCES
—CONSPIRACY—THE PLOT—CLAIMING THE LOYALTY GROUP AS DE-
PENDENCIES ON NEW CALEDONIA—COPY OF LETTER TO THE GOVERNOR.
On a fine Sabbath morning, early in May 1864, I was
standing upon the verandah of our house in Wide Bay,
gazing upon a natural scene of surpassing loveliness.
The church bell was ringing for the morning prayer-
meeting held at six o’clock, and the natives were answer-
ing its call from every part of the village. The sun
shone out brightly, dressing nature in its “ coat of many
colours,” and the sea, from the beach to the horizon,
appeared like a sheet of glass. It was one of those mild,
still, golden mornings among the most charming in the
year. As I stood inhaling the freshness and soothed by
the peace of that memorable morning, watching the
natives threading their way through the cocoanut groves;
listening to the monotonous, yet soul-stirring peals of
the Sabbath bell, and thinking, with thankfulness, of


the mighty change that had taken place on Lifu, my
attention was arrested by the appearance on the horizon
of what seemed to be “ a little cloud rising out of the
sea, like a man’s hand.” As it rose higher, and grew
larger and blacker, I had reason to fear that it was the
long threatened man-of-war, a supposition that proved
to be correct. Unlike the little cloud seen from the
top of Carmel, which foretold an approaching blessing,
and filled the spectators with gladness, this phenomenon
was like the approach of a pall to be thrown over the
land and liberties of the defenceless natives, who stood in
groups on the beach, watbhing the steamer, as it rose like
a spectre, from the sea. They knew that Ukenizo and
the priests had sent a letter to the Governor of New Cale-
donia, requesting the location of soldiers at Lifu; they
knew also that on New Caledonia and the Isle of Pines
those chiefs who had opposed the priests were generally
considered and treated as disloyal subjects, some being
shot, and others being sent as prisoners to Tahiti;
there was, therefore, just cause for anxiety, and even
dread, at the prospect of the occupation of Lifu by the
French. There were many heavy hearts on that lovely
morning, as the vessel came ploughing into the bay, and
anchored opposite the priest’s house—about a mile and
a half from Chepenehe. The captain and officers pro-
ceeded at once to select a suitable place for the camp.
Having visited the Protestant village whilst we were en-
gaged in the morning service, they decided to establish
themselves at Lnu, a small village about half a mile
from Chepenehe.


Our troubles seldom come singly. Whilst the hand
of despotism was laying its iron grasp upon the land and
liberties of the peaceful Lifuans, the inexorable
messenger of death had entered our happy home, and
set his seal upon our youngest child. Anxious to avail
ourselves of the medical skill within our reach, I went
on board the steamer on Sabbath evening, to solicit the
attendance of the doctor. I was kindly received by the
captain, who appeared anxious to assure me that he was
not, in any way, connected with the expedition, further
than having received sealed instructions to land the
soldiers at Lifu. I expressed a hope that nothing would
arise to disturb the public tranquillity, or impede the
moral and social advancement of the natives, to which
his only and dubious reply, was a shrug of the shoulders.
The doctor at once consented to accompany me home,
and do what he could for the child. She died, however,
whilst he was on his way back to the ship.
Whilst the arms and baggage of the soldiers were
being landed on the following day, and the natives were
running to and fro, perplexed and excited, we were calmly
committing the remains of our dear little girl to the
grave, in the sure and certain hope of a glorious resurrec-
tion. Her young spirit entered upon a state of pure and
endless bliss, just as the natives were being forced into
new political relations, and subjected to a system, which
has justly merited the epithet, “ lawless tyranny.”
The population of Chepenehe, headed by their chief
Wainya, resolved to take the earliest opportunity of
showing their peaceful intentions by presenting them


selves at the camp, and acknowledging the authority of
their new rulers, against whom they knew it was useless
to strive; they accordingly, on the afternoon of the same
day that the soldiers landed, proceeded to Enu, dressed
in their best attire, each taking a yam; arriving near
the camp they formed in procession, and marched to the
commander s tent, before which they placed the yams
in a heap, and then sat down in a semicircle opposite
the tent door. The captain of the vessel and the com-
mander of the troops appeared, upon which the chief
rose, stated the object of their visit, and presented the
token of their submission. This was a tine opportunity
for the authorities to make a good impression upon the
minds of the natives, had they felt so disposed; they had
but to receive them kindly, express their gratification
at the progress which they had already made in civilisa-
tion, and their willingness to assist them in future;
assure them, in turn, of their peaceful intentions, and
of the determination of the-government not to interfere
with their established forms of worship. Since the sequel
proves, however, that these were evidently not their in-
tentions, we must at least commend their sincerity in
not a\ owing them. I suppose they felt that glory and
honour were not to be obtained by these peaceful methods.
Be that as it may, the commander received the present
of the natives with the utmost indifference, spoke to them
sternly, ordering them to doff their Sunday attire, and
commence at once to erect houses for his men. One of
the young men having asked him the usual question,
u JSfemene la tkupen ” (what will our wages be?) he


became very angry, and told them that those who dis-
obeyed his orders would be put in irons. The natives
perceived what they had to expect, and returned to their
homes with sorrowful hearts.
My colleague, Mr Sleigh, who occupies the station on
the opposite side of the island, being then visiting us, he
and I paid a formal visit to the commander on the second
day. We were somewhat surprised when introduced to a
young officer, of about twenty-four or twenty-five years
of age, as The Commander of the Loyalty Islands !We
soon perceived from his appearance and manner that he
was deeply impressed with the dignity of his position;
but as he proceeded to inform us that he had conceived
the idea of burning down the village of Chepenehe to
make an impression upon the natives, and teach them
a lesson on prompt obedience, as they had not returned
to build his houses, saying that the natives had learnt to
to obey on New Caledonia, and they must be taught
that lesson here, we could not but regret that so
responsible a position was not filled by an officer whose
prudence was greater than his ambition, and whose love
of justice exceeded his thirst for military glory. I did
not conceal from him the light in which I viewed his
policy, assuring him that such a rash, severe, unprovoked,
and unjust course of procedure would probably be attended
with consequences as fatal as the step was impolitic.
I explained to him that the natives could not reasonably
be expected to return before the following day, as they
had first to go inland to their plantations for food, and
then to a considerable distance for grass suitable for thatch.


He did not make any reference to the object of the expedi-
tion, nor yet to onr position in the group. He returned
our visit on the following day.
The steamer remained a week, to assist with her guns
and men should the commander require them; after
which, finding that the natives were disposed to be peace-
ful and obedient, the captain returned to Hew Caledonia.
Before he left, the soldiers were all comfortably lodged in
houses erected by the natives, and coral was being burnt
for the construction of a lath-and-plaster cottage for the
commander.
Ukenizo and the Roman Catholics were rejoicing at
the arrival of the soldiers, whom they regarded and re-
presented as their enemus (friends), come at their request
to punish the disobedient and obstinate Protestants.
Hie native selected by Ukenizo to remain with the
soldiers as a medium of communication between the
commander and the natives, was one of the four whom
we brought with us from Raratonga in 1859, of whom I
have already spoken. “ Jack ” (his name) was the chief
speaker. I remember, at Raratonga, when Mr Gill asked
them (the Lifu men) at evening prayers why Jesus
Christ came from heaven, Jack instantly replied, “To
die for all kanacka man, sir.’ Mr Gill gave him a very
good character for the time that they had been there, and
hoped that Jack would, as he promised, Show his grati-
tude to those who had saved him from slavery by becom-
ing a consistent and humble follower of Him who came
to die for all kanacka man.” Jack professed to have
gieat influence over his uncle Ukenizo, and was very
i


angry when he heard that he had embraced Roman
Catholicism, declaring that when he arrived at Lifu he
would soon lead his uncle to see his folly and become a
Protestant. He had not been long returned, however,
when he took to himself five or six wives, and very soon
became a notorious scoundrel. I may here say that the
other three turned out well. One died a few years ago,
and the other two are now active members of the church.
Jack soon became a favourite at the camp: he pos-
sessed the qualifications which, it became evident, are in-
dispensable in those whom the officers and soldiers delight
to honour. Nominally a Roman Catholic, although really
a vile, religionless tyrant, he professed the Creed and
followed the practice of his superiors. The intelligent
and pious were looked upon as Anglicised , and treated as
disloyal subjects. To obtain concubines for the officers
and revile the missionaries was, and is still, considered
the best sign of loyalty ; hence the paucity of loyal sub-
jects on Lifu. Jack, however, is more hypocritical than
loyal: his dread of the kalaboose, combined with his
fondness for wine and tobacco, lead him to say or do any-
thing that will please the authorities; but then he is as
ready to serve others when it is to his advantage.
We were permitted to continue our labours as usual
for about three weeks. During this period the natives
had peacefully obeyed every order of the commander, and
shown a disposition to at least submit quietly to an
authority against which it would have been folly to
rebel. He must have perceived, however, during those
three weeks, that the natives were firmly attached to their


adopted forms of faith; and that although they had
offered no resistance to the planting of the French flag,
nor yet to his demand for labour without remuneration,
it might be otherwise were he to interfere with what they
regarded with an almost superstitious reverence. The
commander had already manifested an unmistakable
impetuous desire for military action, hoping, no doubt,
thereby to gain distinction and honour; and he appears to
have arrived at a similiar conclusion to the Babylonian
princes with reference to Daniel: “We shall not find
any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against
him concerning the law of his God.” Such an occasion
presented itself at the time of which I write. An English
trading vessel arrived with two cases of books printed in
the native dialect, sent on by Mr Creagh from Mare,
where our printing-press for the group is established.
The captain being ignorant of the occupation of the island
by the French, and unaccustomed to show his flag whilst
coming into the bay, was surprised to receive a volley
from the soldiers as he sailed past the village where the
camp was situated, on his way to the anchorage. The
commander had not a cannon, and so had recourse to
his muskets, which were perfectly harmless at the distance.
This brave stripling talked to the captain about taking
his vessel the next time he came in without showing his
flag! Two days afterwards I received an official letter
from the commander strictly forbidding the distribution
of all books in the native language, and demanding the
immediate cessation of all public instruction ; stating that
I had not received permission from the Government to


conduct schools and distribute books amongst the natives!
and that permission could only be obtained from the
governor of New Caledonia, who would require me to
conform to the decree published in the Moniteur in Oct.
1863. This decree, of which I was ignorant, not only
requires those conducting schools amongst the natives
to teach the French language, but to make it the sole
medium of communication in the schools. The dialects of
the natives were to be abolished! The priests on New Cale-
donia closed their schools rather than conform to such a
law. I replied on the same day in a brief note, informing
the commander that I had closed the. Institution and sent
messengers to the teachers telling them to close their
schools, and reminding him that the schools which he
had closed had been in operation more than twenty years ;
stating also that we had not received any intimation that
those in the Loyalty group were expected to conform to
laws emanating from New Caledonia.
The natives were very indignant when they heard of
this new order of the commander. The news spread
through the island with astonishing rapidity, and on the
following day several hundreds of natives had arrived
from other villages in a very excited state. This can
scarcely be wondered at. The cold freezing hand of
despotism and Popery had laid its iron grasp upon what
the natives esteemed highly and held dearly. The
Institution, whence they hoped to receive teachers and
pastors, was closed. The Bible, the enemy of darkness,
despotism, and Popery, their solace and guide, was
forbidden them. And schools, in which they had hoped


that their children would be rendered intelligent, useful,
and happy, were prohibited ; and not only so, but we
were informed by the doctor that the governor was
determined to enforce the observance of the Sabbath at
Lifu as in France, as our mode of observing that day
was hateful to all Frenchmen.
A month had not elapsed since the arrival of these
twenty-five soldiers, yet their impetuous commander had
done more to excite the hostility of the natives than a
more prudent and peaceful man would have done in six
months with twice the number of men; for it cannot
be supposed that the governor had ordered him, in addition
to taking possession of the island and compelling the
natives to work without remuneration, to close all the
schools and prohibit the circulation of books within a
month after his arrival: this was presuming rather too
much upon the peaceful disposition of the natives.
He had doubtless received orders to accomplish what he
had done, but he was rather impatient to execute them,
unless he really sought to excite the natives to
resistance.
Hearing that a number of natives were assembled at
Chepenehe, many of whom were armed, the commander
prepared for an attack upon the French camp, which he
had reason to fear. The natives were certainly enraged
and using menacing language, and I had some difficulty
in prevailing upon them to abandon their intention of,
as they said, sweeping the soldiers into the sea, and
return to their homes, which they did, however, without
going near the camp. On the same day I received a


letter from the commander requiring me (!) to disperse
the natives assembled at Chepenehe, stating that he
would hold me responsible for disturbing the public
peace ! I answered this letter in person: told him that
as a minister of the gospel of peace I should always
endeavour to prevent a collision between the soldiers and
the natives, but that he must not suppose that he could
hold me responsible for the consequences of his own acts;
that it was easier to inflame the passions of the natives
than pacify them; and that his untimely and despotic
order forbidding the distribution of the two cases of books
which the natives had long been anxiously waiting for,
and the decree closing their schools, was quite sufficient
to account for the assembling of the natives and their
hostile attitude at Chepenehe. He spoke of the Protes-
tants as being disloyal and rebellious, and no doubt
wrote in strong terms to the governor against them,
which is evident from the course which his Excellency
pursued. This may find a sufficient explanation in the
fact that the commander was afterwards regarded by his
fellow-officers as the dupe of the priests, with whom he
had been in close communication when at Lifu. His
comrade, when commander of the Loyalty islands at a
subsequent period, assured me of this; and the governor
himself told me that he regarded the priests as the
instigators of the whole affair. I know that the priests
have been unwearied in their efforts to lead the authorities
to the conclusion that the natives, to be loyal, must
be Roman Catholic; it is not our differences of faith,
therefore, that lead us to regard them as one of the causes


of the disturbances in the Loyalty group. They may
be conscientious in the use of the means which they
employ to destroy Protestantism both in the Loyalty
group and throughout the world, but surely their
pretended “ zeal for the Church ” will not cover and
atone for the atrocities of the priesthood before a
righteous God. At Tahiti they solicited and obtained
the aid of the French Government to establish themselves
on the island, whereas in the Loyalty group they were
allowed to intrude and prosecute their labours unmolested
upon ground which the London Missionary Society had
occupied since 1841. They were permitted to erect
churches side by side with ours, and proselytise wherever
they could. Why could they not rest satisfied with an
open field and no favour , and prove the verity of the well-
known proverb, Magna est veritas , et prcemlehit, by over-
coming Protestant error by the force of Popish truth ?
From the centre to the circumference of the Roman
Catholic world may be seen the same spirit of dependence
upon the secular power. Christ says to His followers ?
u Without me ye can do nothing.” Popery says to the
secular power, “ Without you we can do nothing.” French
bayonets are not only required at Rome, but even on the
small islands of the South Seas the priests cannot get
on w ithout them.
During the interval between the commander’s despatch
to Hew Caledonia and the governor’s arrival at Lifu,
there arose a very dangerous conspiracy, which, had it
been executed, must have proved terribly
both to the handful of soldiers at Enu, and ultimately


to the natives, who would have been mown down by the
infuriated French. I had told the natives when assem-
bled at Chepenehe, that the best thing they could do
was quietly to await the arrival of the governor from
New Caledonia, who, I felt sure, would allow me to
reopen the Institution and the schools, and also give
permission to circulate the portions of the New Testament
which had just come from Mare; this led them to return
peaceably to their homes, and until the arrival of the
governor there was perfect tranquillity throughout the
island.
It appears that the soldiers appointed to guard the
camp at night were in the habit of getting natives of
the village of Enu, with whom they were friendly, to
take their places whilst they went to sleep; these natives
were subjects of Wainya, chief of Chepenehe. One
night we were aroused by a gentle tap at our bedroom
window; but as this is no very unusual thing, we were
not surprised. Upon opening the door I found one of
the young the village trembling with excite-
ment ; he informed me that the chief and a number of
picked men were going down to the camp to kill all the
soldiers ! “ Going down to be killed, you mean,” I said.
But as he entered hurriedly into particulars, I became
alarmed, perceiving that it was a more serious affair than
I had at first thought, and fearing that I might not be
able to prevail upon them to abandon their perilous
project. The soldiers, it appears, were all asleep, and
the camp was in the hands of their friends, the native
guards, who had sent a message to their chief at


Chepenehe, telling him that now was the time to rid
the island of their oppressors. It seems that the subject
had been talked over before by the principal men of the
village, and they had determined that when a favourable
opportunity presented itself, they would massacre the
soldiers already here, and endeavour to prevent the
landing of any more. Not a soul knew anything of
their intentions besides those concerned in the plot, and
they had resolved not to let me know lest I should
dissuade them from it. One of them had been down to
the camp ; he saw that all were asleep, that their arms
could easily be obtained, and that a few men for each
house was all that was required. Each man had his
position assigned to him, and at a given signal they
were simultaneously to fall upon the occupants of each
house. They were armed and on their way to the camp
when this young man persuaded the others to allow him
to inform me, and bid me good-bye, feeling, as he said,
that he might not see me again. I told him how glad I
was that he had come, yet how distressed I was to hear
of their folly and madness. I endeavoured as briefly as
possible to make him comprehend the probable conse-
quences of their rashness, showing him that no good
could possibly come out of so sanguinary an expedition,
but that it must be attended with immeasurable evil
whether they were successful or not. At first he assured
me that their decision was irrevocable; but when he began
to see that they themselves must inevitably suffer, and
be the means of plunging the island into the horrors of
a devastating war, he ran off and joined his party, who


were waiting for him a little beyond the village. After
a little consultation, all quietly returned to their homes,
and went early to their plantations next morning, as if
nothing had occurred during the night. Although
everything appeared to favour their purpose, I am too
well acquainted with the bungling of natives to suppose
that they could have accomplished it. The soldiers
would doubtless have awoke before they were disabled
by the tomahawks of the natives, and even in that
struggle I fear the latter would have suffered most; but
one shudders to think of the terrible retribution from the
hands of the French, judging from their treatment of
the natives on New Caledonia.
During my interview with the commander at Enu,
he maintained that the Loyalty group were dependencies
on New Caledonia, and had consequently become French
territory when they took possession of that island ; thus
preparing the way for attacking the legality of our
position, seeing that we had not obtained permits of
residence from the French authorities. I said, that whilst
we regarded the Isle of Pines and the small islands near
New Caledonia as its legitimate dependencies, we were
not aware that the Loyalty group could be considered
as such, seeing that they were physically, geographically,
philologically, and politically distinct, and that the
authorities at New Caledonia had not until now informed
us that they so regarded them. Being anxious, however,
to avoid complications with the Government at New
Caledonia, I drew up and forwarded to his Excellency
the governor the following letter :


Chepenehe, Wide Bat, Lieu,
May 31«<, 1864.
To his Excellency the Governor of New Caledonia
and Dependencies.
Sir, —The following is a letter of explanation relative to our
position in these islands, which it appears desirable to lay before
your Excellency, as we regret to learn that we have unintention-
ally incurred the displeasure of your Government by prosecuting
our evangelistic labours on this group of islands without having
obtained your permission. Before calling in question our loyalty,
or the purity of our motives, we wish you to understand distinctly
the circumstances of the case.
We are the agents of the London Missionary Society, which
commenced the work of evangelisation and civilisation on this
group of islands in 1841. [Teachers were placed on New Caledonia
at the same time.] At a subsequent period the French Government
took possession of “ New Caledonia and its dependencies.” But
as the work of the London Missionary Society had proceeded
steadily and uninterruptedly in the Loyalty group, we upon our
arrival unhesitatingly proceeded to carry on the work, not appre-
hending any obstacles from your Government, as no formal
possession had been taken of these islands, nor yet had a represen-
tative of your Government been located or your laws made public
here.
On the 2d inst, the French flag was planted upon this island
and a representative of your Government located here, to whom we
immediately presented ourselves, acknowledging his authority.
The first act of interference with the operations of the London
Missionary Society occurred on the 25th inst. On that day the
commandant sent to the Protestant missionary (myself) at Wide
Bay an official letter requiring the immediate cessation of all public
instruction, and strictly forbidding the distribution of all books in
the native language, intimating the serious consequences of
disobedience. This order was immediately complied with, as we
daily anticipated the opportunity of laying our case before your
Excellency.
It is to us a source of profound regret that the government of
this group should have been commenced by placing restrictions
upon those agencies to which these natives are so greatly indebted
for their present improved condition, and which have rendered life


and property secure throughout the island. The natives are
quite reconciled to surrender their land without a struggle, and
have evinced their willingness even to labour for the Government
without remuneration \ but, like other nations, they cleave with
surprising tenacity to their established forms of faith and worship.
They have been taught to set a high value upon instruction and
the sacred (Scriptures \ therefore, to close the native seminar}'',
whence they hope to receive teachers and pastors—also all public
schools, inwhich they have been accustomed to receive moral,
religious, and secular instruction—and to prohibit the circulation
of all books in the native language, is a course of procedure which
they regard as a blow aimed directly at their dearest and long-
cherished interests ; consequently we fear that this act, if carried
out, will ultimately lead to deeds of cruelty and blood. Such a
result would be deeply to be deplored, and lamented by none more
than ourselves ; yet we confide in the honour, wisdom, moderation,
and benevolence of your Government to secure the secular, moral,
and religious advancement of these natives, and to allow the agents
of the London Missionary Society to continue their labours in
their respective spheres.
Leceive, Monsieur, the expression of my distinguished regards,
S. M'FARLANE.


XII.
UNWORTHINESS OF THE OBJECT OF THE EXPEDITION—INTERVIEW WITH THE
GOVERNOR LETTER TO THE COMMANDER ASKING FOR A PERMIT OF
RESIDENCE TRANSLATION OF A LETTER FROM THE GOVERNMENT AT
NEW CALEDONIA DEFINING OUR POSITION—VILLAGE INSPECTED BY THE
COLONIAL SECRETARY—THREATENS A NATIVE TEACHER—LNTERVIEW
WITH THE CHIEF, WAINYA.—REPORT CIRCULATED THAT THE VILLAGE
OF CHEPENEHE WAS TO BE BURNT—ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
SOLDIERS LANDED ON THE OPPOSITE SIDE OF THE ISLAND—THE GOVER-
NOR AND SOLDIERS AT CHEPENEHE—THE VILLAGE PLUNDERED—
UNTIMELY REJOICING OP THE NATIVES—MORE RUMOURS.
On the 21st of June 1864 two steamers appeared at
the south head of Wide Bay. Had they been in quest
of the Peruvian slavers, who were at that time depopulat-
ing islands and leaving fatherless children, husbandless
wives, and desolate homes in the South Seas, their
object would have been commendable; but, alas! they
were not coming to un slave but enslave the weak and
defenceless natives. Had the Loyalty group presented
any of those features of prospective commercial impor-
tance wdiich usually lead civilised nations to seize the
territories of the barbarous, the attempt to develop the
resources of the islands would have mitigated the
injustice of their seizure. With a view to colonisation,
however, the Loyalty group is utterly valueless. A
scientific French gentleman, employed by the Govern-
ment to explore the islands, writes, after describing the


physical character of the islands, “ La France doit sas-
similer et non coloniser les iles loyalty.” What they hope
to gain by the assimilation of the natives it is hard to
say. Even should they succeed in destroying “ English
influence,” and propagating that of the French, which
is their avowed aim, surely there is a strange contrast
between the meanness of the object and the severity of
the means employed to accomplish it. What glory will it
add to France, or what addition would it have been to the
happiness of the Emperor Napoleon, to know that a few
thousands of semi-barbarous natives had been taught to
utter, on his fete-day, the (to them) meaningless cry,
u Yive I’Empereur I” ? And what advantage will it be to
the nation to have annexed to New Caledonia three small
coral islands that can only be a burden and an expense
to the Government? ’Tis enough for the Christian
missionary that souls are there, but governments gener-
ally look for something more material.
The tricolor floating from the foremast of one of the
steamers informed us that the governor was on board,
whither I proceeded as soon as it came to anchor. I was
received by his Excellency in his official dress, in the
presence of the colonial secretary (his bosom friend and
able associate in the government of the colony), his
private secretary, and an interpreter, with the accustomed
formality. I was asked to state the object of my visit.
I replied that I had come to present myself to the
superior authority of the colony on his arrival at Lifu,
and to ask if he had received a letter which I had recently
forwarded to him. He said that it had not arrived when


lie left Noumea, and desired me to give him an idea of
its contents, wliicli I did. He then asked me how I
considered the Loyalty group politically distinct from
New Caledonia. Because, I replied, the chiefs of New
Caledonia have never exercised authority here, nor yet
have the French since their occupation of that island
until the 2d of last month, and the natives have a
political system of their own. Yes, he said ; but who led
them to form their present political system? Where did
their small code of laws—of which he had a copy—
originate ? I told him that I had no desire to conceal
the fact that we missionaries had advised the natives in
this matter, and that in the absence of an administration
we felt it to be our duty to promote so desirable an object.
Did I not know, he continued, that we were on French
territory, and that we had no right here without a per-
mit of residence ? I maintained, what has been already
stated, that we were merely carrying on a work which
the agents of the London Missionary Society had com-
menced more than twenty years ago; that a group of
islands physically, geographically, philologically, and
politically distinct from another can scarcely be called
their dependencies ; that we could not be justly charged
with violating their laws, because there can be no
disobedience to a command which is not known, and
laws are not supposed to be known in a colony until they
are published there: consequently, as the French flag
had not been planted on the group more than a month,
nor any French laws made known at Lifu, we did not
consider it our duty to ask from the Government of New


Caledonia a permit of residence. I reminded his
Excellency that since the 2d of the previous month I
had promptly obeyed the commands issued by the
representative of his Government located at Enu. He
then asked me in what light I regarded the occasional
visits of French Government vessels. I answered, in the
same light as I regarded those from Hew South Wales—
as the friendly visits of a powerful neighbour. Was I
not aware that in 1858 a Government vessel from Hew
Caledonia had landed two priests and two head of cattle
for the chief of Wet? I said that I was, but that we
had not been taught to recognise either priests or cattle
as representatives of the French Government. He said
that it was useless arguing the point; the islands had
become French territory when they took possession of
Hew Caledonia, and that I had not edified him much by
my attempts to prove them otherwise. I begged to re-
mind him that my object was not to endeavour to prove
that the islands were not until the 2d of the previous
month French territory, so much as to assign reasons
for our not regarding them as such, and seeking per-
mission from Hew Caledonia to carry on our evangelistic
labours in the group. He then proceeded to find fault
with the English appearance of everything around him.
The natives spoke the English language; imitated the
English flag in their canoes; preferred dresses of the
national colour; and even this book (producing a common
penny memorandum-book) in which their laws are written
has red covers! It was with difficulty that I retained
my’gravity at the enumeration of such grave offences !


I merely said, that I hoped his Excellency did not attach
much importance to such trivial matters; that they were
easily accounted for apart from the influence of the
English missionaries, considering the frequent intercourse
of the natives with English vessels, and their occasional
visits to the Australian colonies; that we had not
attempted to teach the English language on Lifu, feeling
that, in the present state of the natives, we could convey
more information through the medium of their own; and
that they had a preference for red simply because it was
a gay colour. He next complained of the natives using
the disrespectful term “ Wewe ” to designate the French',
whilst other Europeans were called foreigners, I replied
that the use of the term was not peculiar to the Loyalty
group; nor did the natives, as far as I knew, intend it
as a disrespectful term. It was certainly the name
generally applied to Frenchmen, but had arisen, I sup-
posed, fiom their frequent use of oui , out , in conversation.
I was then told that if I wished to remain on the island,
I had better make my position legal as soon as possible,
by applying to the commander of the group for a permit
of residence, and purchasing land. I returned home and
at once wrote the following letter;—
Chepenehe, Lieu, June 21 st, 1864.
To the Commandant op the Loyalty Islands.
Sir,— The Government of New Caledonia Laving taken possession
of this island, and located you here as its representative, whose laws
and regulations I desire to observe, I now ask the permission of
your Government—
1. To allow me to continue my residence upon this island, relying
upon the honour of your Government to protect myself my
family, and my property. ’ J
K


£>. To have secured to me the piece of land which I purchased
from the chief, Wainya, of Chepenehe, for the sum of fifty-six
dollars ; also the bouses which I have had erected thereon.
3. To be allowed to continue my labours as a missionary of the
Protestant religion, by preaching, conducting schools in the
native language, and instructing the natives to the extent of
my ability in a knowledge of the useful arts.
I merely ask permission to be allowed to pursue a course which
has not only raised the natives of this island to their present im-
proved condition, but which is highly calculated to render them
loyal, peaceful, intelligent, and happy.
I remain, Sir, yours most sincerely,
S. M‘FARLANE.
The commander, in acknowledging the receipt of the
above, informed me that his Excellency the governor
would consider the demands of my letter in council at
New Caledonia. Perhaps I had better here insert the
reply which I received about six weeks afterwards, as it
defines our position. The following is a translation :
New Caledonia and Dependencies,
Colonial Office, No. 296.
Port-de-Fbance, July 15 th, 1864.
g lß> —The commander of the post at Lifu having transmitted to
his Excellency the governor your letter of the 29th of last month,
I have the honour to be deputed to answer the demands which you
there make, and for distinctness I will/ollow the order of numeration,
1. Authorisation to continue to reside on Lifu, relying upon the
honour of our Government to protect you, also your family and
your property.
Being the subject of a friendly nation, you can continue to reside
on Lifu ; but, as you say in your letter, you will be submitted to
colonial laws, rules, and regulations ; also to our tribunals in case of
any infraction of the rules which determine the conduct of citizens,
and which must be observed throughout New Caledonia and its
dependencies. Upon this condition your family will be protected
like the families of the French.


2. To he assured of the land which you have bought from the chief,
Wainya, of Chepenehe, for the sum of fifty-six dollars , also of the
houses which you have had constructed thereon.
According to the terms of the declaration of January 20th, 1855
published also in the journals of New South Wales, the acquisition
of land by gift, sold, or exchanged on the part of the natives, is not
valid; but you can become definite proprietor of the land which you
occupy by purchasing it from the administration. The price of
a hectare in the Loyalty group cannot be less than twenty-five francs.
The limit of the land must be thirty-one metres from the sea-coast.
3. To continue your labours as missionary of the Protestant religion ,
by preaching, conducting schools in the native language, and in-
structing the natives in a knowledge of the useful arts.
You are interdicted from acting as a missionary of the Protestant
religion until the arrival of the decision of the Metropolitan Govern-
ment, to which the governor has written on the subject. No religious
mission can exist in the French colonies without the express
authorisation of his Majesty the Emperor; and, moreover, none
but French subjects are allowed to exercise religious functions.
About the conducting of a school or schools, the primary instruc-
tion is fixed in New Caledonia and its dependencies by an order of
the 15th Oct. 1863, to which every person opening a school must
conform. Now, one of the prescriptions of this order absolutely
excludes the native dialects from the course of instruction, whilst
the study of the French language occupies the first place.
The Colonial Government is not less desirous than others to
facilitate the moral and intellectual amelioration of the natives, but
it must, first of all, take the necessary measures for the natives to
receive a national education, which alone can render them loyal
peaceful, intelligent, and happy. ’
In consequence of the answers.'developed above, if you lawfully
acquire the land which you occupy, a carte of residence will be
accorded to you; but the fact of your being an English subject
ought to give you the assurance that the Authorisation to exercise
the functions of a minister of religion will not be granted to you.
Yet you can be allowed to open a school when you have fulfilled the
conditions of the order of the 15th Oct. last.
. Receive > Monsieur, the assurance of my distinguished considera-
tlons - (Signed) A. Mathieu.
On the second day after the governor’s arrival we


were visited by the colonial secretary and two officers,
who requested me to show them every part of the village.
I did so, beginning with the Institution buildings on the
mission premises. They appeared interested in the
workshop, where they saw carpenters’ benches, turning-
lathe, and forge; also clothes-chests, stools, &c., made
by the natives which were exchanged for yams and
other kinds of food, and so nearly made the Institution
self-supporting. In the village I noticed that they
observed particularly the position of the public roads,
inquiring anxiously if they were narrow inland; if the
natives were numerous about Chepenehe; what sort of
weapons they had been accustomed to use in their wars ;
if they had any muskets and powder, &c. &c. These
questions raised my suspicions about the object they had
in view. As we were returning we met one of the
Raratongan teachers. (Upon the arrival of the steamers,
all the native teachers very naturally, but very foolishly,
came to Chepenehe.) The colonial secretary, who had
been many years at Tahiti, asked him, in the language
of that people, if he were a native teacher; being
answered in the affirmative, he shook his finger and
head at him in a very peculiarly significant manner.
I learnt afterwards that he supposed the native teachers
had brought evil reports of the French from the eastern
islands. We called at the chief’s, who had recently
removed into his new house —a lath-and-plaster building,
erected on a stone foundation raised about four feet
from the ground; boarded throughout, glass folding-
doors opening upon a spacious verandah that encircles


the house ; furnished with an English bedstead, table,
sofa, chairs, and even pictures, which of course gave it
quite a European appearance, although not more
English, perhaps, than French. The fact that Wainya’s
father-in-law was an English, or rather an Irish
carpenter, will sufficiently account for the superiority of
his house. The carpenter’s daughter had been brought
up among the islands, and having seen little of
European society, was elated at the idea of becoming
the wife of so distinguished a chief. Her father thought
that it would be advantageous to him to have such a
son-in-law, and so readily consented to the union. One
of the officers, who was accustomed to the broken
English of the natives, asked Wainya, rather sharply,
“ What for you no go see governor ?” to which he replied,
il Because me too much afraid.” u What for you afraid ? ’’
he demanded. “ You see,” said Wainya, “ plenty man
belong Ukenizo speak me. Suppose me go board ship,
me no come shore again ; governor make me fast.” Had
Wainya had the courage of his brother, the former
chief, who died two years before, he would not have
hesitated to meet the governor or anybody else. I told
the officers that reports were circulated by the Roman
Catholics highly calculated to arouse the suspicions and
fears of the Protestants. Ukenizo was on board when
they returned. In the evening he stated confidently to
some of the Chepenehe natives, that he had heard on
board that the soldiers were going on the following day
to burn down their village, and kill all who refused
to become Roman Catholics! However absurd this


appeared to us, it was implicitly believed by the natives.
In vain I assured them that the French would not
injure them without a sufficient cause; the excitement
increased. I then wrote to the commander at Enu,
informing him that the natives had given credence to
certain reports about the intention of the governor to
burn their village on the following day, and earnestly
solicited a note from which I might assure them of the
peaceful intentions of the French. The native returned
without a reply, and this was an evil omen in the
estimation of the natives, who forthwith determined to
secrete their boxes, and hide themselves in the bush.
One of the steamers left that evening: it went out at
the south head of the bay, as if going to New Caledonia ;
but we found afterwards that it went round to the north
side of the island, and landed one hundred and twenty
soldiers, who at once commenced their march towards
Chepenehe, to which place the steamer returned. On
the following morning about one hundred and fifty
soldiers —a number of whom were disciplinaires —were
landed at Chepenehe. All armed, and headed by the
governor and his staff, they marched through the village,
two large field-pieces being drawn after them. Before
such an array of arms and fighting men the natives very
naturally retired and hid themselves in the bush close by;
this, however, the governor considered a hostile act, for
which they were made to suffer severely on the following
day. Arriving at an open space at the head of the village,
the soldiers formed a circle around the governor and his
staff, whilst his Excellency declared the island to be


French ; forbade the natives to give subscriptions to the
London Missionary Society, or to take any food to the
missionary unless they were paid for it, or to go to him
for advice. They were to regard the commander as their
king, and go to him in all cases of difficulty. Having
made these proclamations, the soldiers proceeded to
plunder the village, entering every house and destroying
what property was left behind; cutting up the women’s
bonnets with their pocket-knives, smashing boxes, wash-
tubs, bottles, even hand-saws, indeed everything that
came in their way. Coming to the native teacher’s house
(a Raratongan), they found him sitting on his box to pro-
tect his clothes ; he was ejected, however, at the point of
the bayonet, and all he had taken before his eyes. About
thirty Roman Catholics accompanied the soldiers, and
were as active as they in plundering. The work of
pillage being completed, all returned to the boats; the
two field-pieces again went rumbling through the village,
followed by a case of ammunition. When all had em-
barked, and were safely off, the natives, who had seen all
although themselves unseen, poured out from their
hiding-places shouting for joy, supposing that the crisis
was over, and that now they were safe. From the boats
they could easily be seen and heard, and doubtless this
circumstance led the governor to decide upon the course
which ,he pursued on the following morning. The
natives soon became convinced that their rejoicing was
premature. The soldiers were not leaving the island,
but only the village, to which they could easily return.
Had the natives taken my advice, they would have


quietly awaited the arrival of the governor at the village,
and thus, perhaps, have averted the impending evil;
they were under the impression, however, that the
governor wished to take their chief,, and they were
determined not to give him up. Under the circum-
stances, we cannot wonder at their decision. It is to be
deplored that the governor did not take a more peaceful
method of seeking an interview with the natives ; but in
that case he would not have made an (i impression,”
which a subsequent commander assured me it was
necessary to do when commencing to govern the blacks.
Do not missionaries also make an “ impression ” ?
During the following night the Roman Catholic friends
and relatives of some of the people of Chepenehe arrived
from the camp at Enu, where they professed to have
learnt that it was decided to attack and burn the village
of Chepenehe early next morning. Again there was
excitement, and preparation to leave. On this occasion
the natives decided to go to inland stations, and there
remain until the soldiers had left the island. They
believed that their village would be burnt, and so with
sorrowful hearts reluctantly left their homes.


XIII.
THE ATTACK ON THE VILLAGE BY THE FRENCH—CHURCH DOORS BURST OPEN
DURING SERVICE BY THE SOLDIERS—CONGREGATION MADE PRISONERS—
NATIVES FIRED UPON BY THE SOLDIERS—A SOLDIER SHOT BY A NATIVE—
COLLISION OF THE NATIVES AND SOLDIERS INLAND—WORK OF DEVASTA-
TION CARRIED ON—TEACHERS PUT IN IRONS—NATIVES PUT TO THE
BAYONET IN CHURCH—THE PRESENCE OF ENGLISH MISSIONARIES MERELY
TOLERATED AS ENGLISH RESIDENTS—LIFU PLACED IN A STATE OF SIEGE
—OUR HOUSE SURROUNDED BY SOLDIERS AND SEARCHED—SERVANTS
PUT IN IRONS—PROPERTY OP THE L. M. S. BURNED—VILLAGE BURNED—
CHURCH TURNED INTO A BARRACK—BURNING OF INLAND VILLAGES—
SICK MANCLUBBED TO DEATH BY THE R. C. NATIVES—TEACHERS’ WIVES
AND FEMALE SERVANTS TAKEN ON BOARD THE STEAMER—THE MISSION-
HOUSE TO BE TURNED INTO A FORT—DREARY NIGHTS, DEATH AND DESO-
LATION—THE WORK ARRESTED—MISUNDERSTANDING—LETTER TO THE
GOVERNOR—LNTERVIEW WITH THE GOVERNOR—A JESUITICAL TRANS-
LATION OF A LETTER—THE OLD QUESTION OF ENGLISH INFLUENCE—
THE PRIEST’S INTERVIEW WITH THE TEACHERS—THE PROTESTANT
CHIEF DEPOSED AND A R. C. SET UP IN HIS PLACE.
“ The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered
Zoar,” his place of refuge. Alas for the poor natives
of Chepeuehe on that fatal Friday morning! They did
not expect an early visit from the French. So the sun
arose and beheld them still lingering about their homes.
We are accustomed to hold one of our weekday services
at sunrise on Friday morning. I hesitated on that day
about having the bell rung, considering the unsettled
state of the natives. Feeling, however, that the wisest
course would be to continue my labours as usual until


interrupted, and seeing that the teachers and their wives
were assembled at Chepenehe, and that probably some of
the natives would join us, the bell was rung, and we as-
sembled. The congregation numbered about fifty, the
proportion of male and female being about equal. We
were engaged in the first prayer, which was being offered
by the veteran Tui, the oldest teacher on the island, when
the church doors were burst open and a company of
soldiers rushed in. I heard the trampling of their feet
and the clanking of their arms, but did not raise my
head nor open my eyes. Tui made but a momentary
pause, then proceeded calmly, though with a tremulous
voice, with his prayer. Hearing them ascending the
aisle and approaching the reading-desk, I expected every
moment to feel a hand upon my shoulder; our attitude
and composure, however, proved to be the most power-
ful form of resistance, for by this alone they were checked
and repulsed. When Tni concluded his prayer a few
minutes afterwards, I found that the soldiers had retired,
and were guarding the doors and windows, around which
a little forest of bayonets were glittering in the morning
sun. We calmly proceeded with the service. I gave out
a hymn, which we sung : I then read portions of God’s
Word, and concluded with prayer. It was difficult, and
perhaps not very profitable, to continue a service amidst
the chattering of the soldiers. We had driven them out
of the church by our silence, now they appeared deter-
mined to overcome us by their talk. While concluding
the service we were startled by the report of muskets in
the village and the hallooing of natives, which plainly




THE CHURCH AND VILLAGE ATTACKED BY THE FRENCH
DURING DIVINE WORSHIP.


indicated that some of the latter had been fallen upon
before they could get away. I proposed to our little
congregation to lead the way, that I might learn the
intentions of those guarding the church. I was not
interrupted, but was the only one allowed to pass—the
congregation were kept prisoners. There being no officer
in sight, and knowing that it was useless to ask any ex-
planation from the soldiers, I proceeded at once to see
how matters were at home. On my way thither I heard
the natives shouting “ Iluwa! huwa! ” (To the bush!
to the bush!) and every now and then the report of a
musket. We found afterwards that, as we suspected, a
number of natives who were lingering behind had been
fallen upon by the soldiers as they were leaving the
village, and four of them were shot besides a good many
being wounded. The soldiers that attacked the village
of Chepenehe were divided into two parties. One came
along the sea-coast until near the village, then crept
stealthily to the back of the mission premises, jumped over
the fence, ran down our garden, out at the front gate,
and into the church, which was close by. Finding that
there were but few natives there, a few were left to guard
the doors and windows, and the rest rushed up the village,
where they found the natives of whom I have spoken.
The other company were led by “Jack ” from the camp
at Enu by a circuitous course, which brought them into
the public road that leads from Chepenehe inland at a
point about a mile beyond the village. The natives
attacked from the sea-coast must run along this road; and
the object of the expedition led by Jack was doubtless


to meet them, in which case the poor creatures would
have found themselves between two companies of soldiers,
which would certainly have given the French the oppor-
tunity of making an u impression ” upon them. Happily,
however, they were too late : the natives had passed this
point before they came up, and were on their way to in-
land stations. Three young men lurked behind; they
had been to Sydney and on board ships many years, and
so were more u Anglicised ” than their brethren. These
young fellows had, according to their own story, secreted
themselves in the bush near the village with a loaded
gun after their friends had left, and were watching their
opportunity to shoot some Frenchman. When the soldiers
led by Jack passed near them, they fired, and shot one
of them dead on the spot. Although the soldiers im-
mediately poured a volley into the bush, not a native
was seen or heard, and “ Bob ” with his two friends got
safely away. That was the first and only white man
that has ever been killed on Lifu (although the natives
will have it that the French are red , not white). Those
who had fled inland had not proceeded very far before
they met the one hundred and twenty soldiers that had
been landed by the steamer on the north side of the
island. As soon as they saw them they sd( up a shout
for vengeance, and, heedless of consequences, fell upon
them with their clubs and tomahawks (they had not any
muskets with them). This, of course, was folly and mad-
ness ; but they were no doubt furious with indignation
and rage at the conduct of the soldiers at Chepenehe.
Fortunately for them there was a line of rock close by,


to which they very soon found it convenient to fly for
refuge from the firing of the French. Had the soldiers
followed them, very many must have been killed, but they
seemed as anxious to get away as the natives. There
were eight or nine soldiers severely wounded with spears
and tomahawks: the natives had five more killed and
many wounded.
There were now again three hundred soldiers assembled
at Chepenehe; these were divided into three companies,
two of them being sent inland to pursue the natives,
whilst the other remained to complete the work of
devastation at Chepenehe. Those who went to the in-
land villages were all under the command of young
officers, who evidently regarded plundering and burning
villages and shooting natives fine sport. Those who re-
mained at Chepenehe entered the church, bound the
Samoan and Karatongan teachers, and sent them on
hoard the steamer, where they were put in irons, their
wives being allowed to come and stay with us. The
Lifu natives were dragged out and tied up to cocoanut-
trees. A woman having crept under one of the seats
for safety, was pierced six times with a bayonet, suppos-
ing, as they said, that she was a man. An old grey-
headed man, one of the deacons of the church at Chepenehe,
had a bayonet thrust into his side, and a gash in his fore-
head, having had his head knocked violently against the
cocoanut-tree to which he was being tied. From our
verandah I saw the soldiers belabouring an old man (a
member of the church) about the head whilst others were
fastening him to the tree.


When the governor arrived he sent for me to meet him
at the garden gate, and there informed me that I was
prohibited from acting in any public capacity in the
Loyalty group, that I was not to go beyond the fence
that surrounded our house or the sentinel would shoot
me, and that my presence was merely tolerated as an
Englishman. I was astounded at such extraordinary
proceedings, and feeling sure that there was some mis-
take, desired the interpreter to ask for an explanation ;
but he assured me, as the governor walked away, that
it was utterly useless attempting to obtain anything of
the kind just then, his Excellency being in a passion.
A messenger was sent for Mr Sleigh, who upon his arrival
received similar orders from the governor, so we were
both confined to the mission premises. In the course of
the morning a hundred armed soldiers were marched up
the garden, headed by the colonial secretary and the
commander of the troops. Having encircled our house,
the secretary read to me a declaration placing the island
in a state of siege; it commenced in the following
terms: —
u Considerant que, sous le couvert de la religion pro-
testante, des etrangers ont cherche a denationaliser la
population des lies Loyalty,” &c. &c. (considering that
under the covert of the Protestant religion strangers
have sought to denationalise the population of the Loyalty
islands, &c.) Of course I protested against the terms
of the declaration, and also against the unmerited treat-
ment that we were receiving. With us it was a ques-
tion of religion , not nationality . The natives had been


Christianised by English labour and English liberality ;
they had had many years’ intercourse with English
vessels, whereas they seldom saw a French ship: if,
therefore, they had imbibed English ideas, and spoke a
little of the English language, it was only what might
be expected, and did not arise from any attempt of ours
to spread English influence. The colonial secretary
stated, however, that from their point of view it was a
political question, and not one of religious philanthropy.
The commander said that the governor, supposing
that natives were secreted in my house, had sent him
to search it. I told him that he was at perfect liberty
to do so, although from the unceremonious manner in
which the soldiers surrounded the house, breaking down
a fence that stood in their way, it was evident that,
whatever I might have said, he would have carried out
his object. As I walked with him through the house, it
was easy to perceive that he was ashamed of his task.
A few hours afterwards, the young commander from
Euu crossed the mission premises with a few soldiers;
he searched the Institution houses. One of our servant
boys seeing the soldiers, ran from the cook-house to the
verandah where we were standing. A soldier caught
sight of him, and instantly raised his musket, when I
cried, “ Hold ! hold! that boy is our servant.” The lad
rushed into the house, the soldier impudently observing
that we had no servants. The commander ordered rde
to call our servants to the verandah. Having assembled
them, he took the two boys, leaving the girls and the
teachers’ wives to remain with us. All the native


prisoners were sent on board one of the steamers, and
placed in irons with the eastern teachers. Soldiers
were located on and around our premises to prevent any
communication. In a native house not a stone’s-throw
from ours we had stored the cocoanut-fibre given by the
natives as an annual contribution to the London Mission-
ary Society, valuing about £4O. We saw the governor
and two or three officers enter the house, where they re-
mained for some time. Soon after their departure the
house was in flames, two soldiers being on guard until
the building and the fibre were reduced to ashes. Our
dwelling-house having a thatch roof, was of course in
imminent danger. The remainder of the day was devoted
to burning the village. Hour after hour we watched
with sorrowful hearts house after house enveloped in
flames. Only two of the lath-and-plaster houses were
spared—Wainya’s, and one belonging to an under-chief—
which were shortly afterwards occupied by the com-
mander and the lieutenant. Here was the lamentable
end of what we had begun to make our model village !
We had been wont to look along that cocoanut grove,
and see the houses of four hundred peaceful and happy
natives, the smoke from which curled up amidst the
beautiful green feathery tops of the trees; imagine our
feelings as we now beheld nothing but the black trunks
of the trees, with their drooping brown leaves, and saw
the church turned into a barrack, and thought of the
natives pursued inland by the soldiers. In the evening,
instead of the usual gong beaten for family worship, and
the evening song of praise, we heard the soldiers’ bugle


and the songs of revelry in the camp. Ichabod was
written over both church and village. The pulpit was
tiansformed into a bedroom for the commander. One
of the large pews was used as a kitchen. The seats were
taken out and used as firewood. A large table was placed
in the centre, around which the officers met to eat, drink,
and smoke. One end of the building was devoted to their
baggage, and the other was used as a sleeping apart-
ment.
On the Monday the soldiers returned from the inland
villages. The natives having set watches, were aware of
their approach, and managed to hide themselves in the
bush before their arrival. These marauders burnt their
villages, destroyed plantations, entered some of the
chapels and demolished the pulpits, and destroyed cocoa-
nut fibre belonging to the London Missionary Society to
the amount of £3O, besides that at Chepenehe. At one
of the villages, the natives, having barely time to escape,
were unable to carry with them a sick man who was far
gone in consumption; this poor fellow was barbarously
clubbed to death by the Roman Catholic natives, who
accompanied the soldiers. These natives evidently
thought that the French had come to assist them to sub-
due the Protestants, and transform them into humble
Roman Catholics. They (as well as the Protestants) looked
at the matter from a religious point of view, and entered
heartily into the work of plunder. It was a real harvest-
time for them. They knew the holes and caverns where
the Protestants were likely to hide their goods, and
thence they took their clothes, tools, fishing-nets, &c.,
L


leaving only broken boxes. These vagabonds even
entered the mission premises, broke into the Institution
houses, and carried off a good deal of property belonging
to the students. My boat-sails were also stolen, and the
boat half-filled with water and used by the soldiers
as a wash-tub. I wrote to the commander about these
things, but did not get any redress, nor even a reply
to my note.
Fearing an attack from the natives, the soldiers were
again marched up to our house, which they surrounded
as before. All the females were now taken away. For
three days and three nights our house had been the
refuge of the wives of the eastern teachers, and also of
those females who had worshipped with us on that fatal
Friday morning. There was great weeping and lamen-
tation among this little company, who were in great
distress about their husbands, with whom they desired to
suffer. They were not sorry, therefore, when the soldiers
came to take them away, feeling that they were at least
going to their husbands. Judge of their grief when
they found themselves on board one steamer and their
husbands on the other. They were alone and helpless ;
no one to protect them from the insults of the rude
immoral men around them. The colonial secretary, who
headed the soldiers, informed me that if they were
attacked by the natives, they would use our house as a
fort, and fire from the windows! las an Englishman
protested against their entering my house for such a
purpose. As an English resident I claimed the protection
of the French flag. This was appealing to the French


to be protected from the French I distinguishing between
the whole and the part. As for the natives attacking
them, there was not much fear of that, they were only
too glad to get out of their way. We were now left
alone, exposed to “stray shots,” like that which
terminated the life of a brother-missionary at Tahiti
whilst walking on the verandah of his house. I wrote
a polite note to the governor stating our position, and
begging him to allow two of the servant boys to return
to get firewood and water, also a girl as nurse, which he
granted. The nights were terribly dreary. The mono-
tonous cry of the guards, every half-hour passed from
one to another, and the howling of dogs prowling about
the rums of the village seeking their homes and masters
reminded us painfully of the death and desolation that
reigned around us, whilst the future was dark and
discouraging. The whole machinery which we had o- 0 t
into working order for the social and spiritual elevation
of the people was suddenly stopped. The natives had
learnt the simple and glorious truths of our holy religion,
which had led them to abandon idolatry and cannibalism.'
Polygamy was also becoming a thing of the past. The
churches contained an aggregate of about fifteen hundred
members. There were about two thousand young people
m our schools, and about as many in the inquirers' classes
who,were seeking admission to the Church. Considerable
improvements had been made in native dwellings, public
roads, 4c. Yet we were called to witness the peaceful
homes of these comparatively enlightened people burnt,


their property stolen and destroyed, their long-cherished
and sacred interests trampled upon, and that by a nation
professing to be in the very van of civilisation. I felt
sure that there must be some misunderstanding.
Misrepresentation had evidently been doing its work, so
I determined to write to the governor, who had not yet
left. Having stated the purely benevolent design of our
mission, and assured him that it had no political object
whatever, X expressed a hope that his Excellency would
not be guided by unfounded reports. On the following
day I received a reply requesting me to present myself
on board the steamer. I proceeded thither at the hour
specified, and found the same persons assembled that I
had met on a former occasion. The governor said that
he wished to prove the value of the declaration made in
my letter to him the day before. He then produced a
letter, and asked me if I knew it. I immediately recog-
nised it as one that I had sent to a Raratongan teacher
about eighteen months before. This teacher was in
charge of one of the largest and most important stations
on the island, situated at the extremity of my district,
about twenty miles from Ghepenehe. The priest went
there and ordered the natives, who are, and were then,
all Protestants, to build him a house. The teacher
wrote to me for advice, and the letter in the hands of
the governor was my answer, which the priest had ob-
tained from the teacher. I therein stated that the piiest
had no right to order them to build a house, being neither
their chief nor their religious instructor, and that the


natives were quite justified in demanding payment for
such work. I concluded by saying, The dei angeice ho
(don’t listen to him, or pay no attention to his words).
The governor read the priest’s translation, asking me if
it was correct. When he came to the above sentence,
I found that the singular number was changed into the
plural, and the governor had the idea that I was speaking
of the French generally. Having corrected this error,
and stated the case to his Excellency, he threw down the
translation, saying something in an undertone to the
colonial secretary, and from that moment became more
affable. He entered again, however, upon the old
question. He had heard, he said, that the chiefs in the
group were about to present a petition to her Majesty
the Queen of England, requesting her to take the Loyalty
group under her protection. I assured him that it was
the first that we had heard of such a proposition, and
that it could not have emanated from the English mis-
sionaries, who well knew that such a petition would be
utterly useless. He had heard that the term u Peretania”
(the native name for Great Britain) was applied to my
premises by the natives, who only appeared to know
France as the land of the u WewesT We had not, I
replied, taught the natives to call the mission premises by
that name. It was true that they did so, just as they called
the teacher’s enclosure Samoa , and as they would probably
call Enu France. I hoped his Excellency did not attach
much importance to these trivial matters. He concluded
the interview by informing me that my demand for a


permit of residence would be taken into consideration in
council at Port-de-France, after which a reply would be
forwarded to me. The male prisoners were on board the
steamer that I visited, and during my stay the teachers
were allowed on deck. Before leaving I went to them
and spoke a few words of comfort. One of the priests
visited them on board, and asked them what about their
religion now. They answered that they were trusting in
God. Do you expect God to stretch out His arm to take
off your irons? he asked, sneeringly. Better for them,
he said, to abandon such a religion, and embrace the
true one with him.
The governor now prepared to leave. Wainya, the
chief of Chepenehe, was deposed, and Jack appointed in
his place. Peace was proclaimed, and messengers sent
to the natives in the bush, ordering them to return to
their respective places and rebuild their houses. The
chiefs were to proceed to Chepenehe to meet the com-
mander, and receive their instructions. (I found after-
wards that these messages were not delivered to the
natives.) Having thus “made an impression,” and, as
the governor doubtless supposed, cleared the way for the
Frenchifying of the people, his Excellency left for Hew
Caledonia, leaving the steamer containing the female
prisoners at the disposal of the commander. Their
husbands were released, but strictly charged not to leave
Chepenehe. Their wives were set at liberty two days
afterwards. What the governor thought, on his way
back to Hew Caledonia, of the result of his expedition


to Lifu, it is hard to say. A little reflection must have
convinced him that burning villages and shooting natives
was not the best way of destroying English influence,
and causing themselves to be respected, esteemed, and
loved; it was, on the contrary, not only disgraceful and
wicked, but a stupid, suicidal policy.


XIV.
A SABBATH IN THE BUSH—THE NIGHT MESSENGER—UKENIZO’S MIS-
TAKEN IDEAS ABOUT THE OBJECT OF THE FRENCH—CONSULTATION
OF THE NATIVES—CONSOLATION—WARM HEARTS IN COLD BODIES—
THE SECOND MESSENGER—LNTERVIEW WITH THE COMMANDER—THE
ALTERED APPEARANCE OF THE CHURCH—COMMANDER’S FAVOURABLE
REPLT—RETURN OF THE NATIVES TO THEIR VILLAGES—ARRIVAL OF
THE “DAY SPRING”—COMMUNICATION PROHIBITED—THE CAPTAIN
ORDERED NOT TO LEAVE THE MISSIONARY FOR UVEA—THE “DAY
SPRING” AMONGST THE BREAKERS—PRAYER AND EFFORT—THE COM-
MANDER’S INTERVIEW WITH THE CHIEFS—NEW COMMANDER—EFFORTS
OF THE PRIESTS TO PROSELYTISE—HOW THE SPIRITUAL WANTS OF THE
NATIVES WERE PROVIDED FOR—TEACHERS SELECTED BY THE PEOPLE TO
CARRY ON THE WORK—THE SHIP TRIMMED TO SUIT THE GALE.
Four days and four nights the natives—men, women,
and children—remained in the bush, exposed to the in-
clemency of the weather; afraid at times even to make
a fire, lest their whereabouts should be discovered.
They spent a Sabbath there, but how different from
those they had been accustomed to spend in their quiet
villages! They assembled in small groups, and the
leading men amongst them conducted the services, the
young men keeping watch at a distance. Whilst these
bush assemblies were thus engaged, their villages were
being plundered and burnt, and their churches desecrated,
by the soldiers and Roman Catholic natives.
Notwithstanding the guards placed around our pre


mises, we were startled by a gentle tapping at the study
door about ten o’clock on the third night after the
burning of the village. Having partially opened the
door, I found one of the students on all fours, whispering,
“How are you? w r e are all safe.” I let him in by a
back door, the camp being opposite Our house, and had
a little conversation with him. He had been standing
behind a tree near the mission premises for several
hours, seeking an opportunity to pass the guards.
Regarding the soldiers as being under the direction and
control of Ukenizo, they had sent presents to him; and
by representatives, humbled themselves to him, begging
him to have pity upon them, and allow them to return
to their villages. Ukenizo pretended (and perhaps at
that time seriously thought so) that he could continue
or bring the war to a close whenever he pleased; that
the soldiers were, as he termed it, his subjects, carrying
out his will. He answered the messengers, that nothing
less would satisfy him than his subjects embracing his
religion. Their only hope, he said, was in their becoming
Roman Catholics. The priest also urged them to
abandon a religion which, he said, would cost them
shame and suffering here, and eternal death hereafter.
The messengers returned, and the little companies were
assembled on two high rocks, their towers of strength in
their heathen wars; a communication was kept up be-
tween the two parties, and scouts were on the lookout
day and night. They unanimously resolved to die rather
than abandon the religion which they had embraced, and
this was a messenger to inform us of their resolution,


and beseech us not to leave them. They had heard that
we were silenced, and that their teachers were ordered to
leave the island by the first opportunity.
The governor had ordered me not only to keep to my
house, but not to have any communication with the
natives. Here was a poor fellow who had risked
his life to pay us a visit, and his object was a purely
religious one. "Was I wrong in disregarding the injunc-
tion of the governor, and having an interview with this
native ? I did not think so. I told him to inform our
people that we had no intention of leaving them; that
although we were prohibited from acting in our public
capacity, we should still be in their midst, and conse-
quently have many opportunities of directing and com-
forting them ; and that most likely we should be allowed
to prosecute our labours again after communications had
been received from the Home Government. I reminded
him of the words of our Lord which led us to expect
annoyances and persecutions if we were faithful, and
desired him to urge his brethren to steadfastness and
prayer —the former would result from the latter. If they
put their trust in God, He would never leave them,
whatever might become of us, nor would He leave them
shepherdless. The poor fellow’s eyes glistened, and his
black face beamed with delight as he rose to leave, saying
his friends would be pleased to hear what I had said, and
that my words had warmed his heart. Poor creatures !
it was some comfort to be able to warm their hearts, for
their bodies must have been cold enough on those bleak
rocks exposed to the coldest nights in the year.


Two nights after, another messenger came about the
same hour. He said that they had again sent presents
to conciliate Ukenizo, and be allowed to return to their
villages, and that he had returned the same answer as
before. They were cold and hungry, he said, and some
of the weaker ones were beginning to talk about com-
plying with Ukenizo’s wish—a few had already left them
and joined the Roman Catholic party. What were they
to do ? The governor had just left, and before his de-
parture had, I understood, ordered the natives to return
to and rebuild their villages, and the chiefs to present
themselves to the commander; yet they were all in the
bush, under the impression that the only condition upon
which they would be allowed to emerge from their retreat
was their renouncing their faith and joining the Roman
Catholics. I endeavoured to explain to the messenger
that they would be governed henceforth not by Ukenizo,
but by the commander, and that liberty of worship was
a law of France which the latter must observe ; he could
take no part in imposing such a condition upon them,
and he was the only one they had now to fear. I
determined to see the commander myself, and let the
messenger take the result of our interview to his anxious
brethren. My wife’s fears were excited for my safety.
I had been charged not to leave our house on pain of
being shot, and there was a sentinel on guard opposite
our gate. I felt, however, that the risk was small
compared with the good that was likely to be accomplished
by such an interview; so I took a light, that I might see
and be seen, and proceeded towards the camp, leaving


those behind anxiously watching on the verandah. At
the garden gate the sentinel accosted me with the usual
“ Qui vive? ” I told him that I wished to see the com-
mander, and was directed to the church. How strange
and altered everything appeared ! There were rows of
tents in front of the church. Camp-fires burnt here and
there, and cast their lurid glare upon the walls of the
building; around these sat the soldiers, who (French-like)
appeared to be all speaking at once. The logs which had
formed the chief s enclosure were erected around the church,
forming a kind of fort; and the French flag could just
be seen through the darkness waving from the belfry.
The change in the interior of the church was even more
striking. Most of the seats had disappeared. Casks,
cases, and bags were heaped up at one end; two tables,
a few benches, and hammocks were at the other. The
commander and the doctor were standing near the door;
the former, seeing me, went hastily into the pulpit and
put on his official coat. I was received kindly, and after
stating the object of my visit, was requested to assure
the natives that they had nothing more to fear, and urge
them to return to their villages. The officer then in
command was an agreeable elderly gentleman; he as-
assured me that it was his firm determination to maintain
strict discipline amongst his troops, and that the persons
and property of Europeans would be respected. I
thanked him, and left. The messenger went away not
less delighted than the former one. No sooner had he
informed his friends of my interview with the commander
than they dispersed to their desolate homes. A large


house or two was first erected at each village, in order to
provide shelter for all; after which each family con-
structed their dwelling at leisure. The natives of
Chepenehe, however, erected temporary buildings on
their plantations, five miles from their late village, the
site of which was reserved for the camp and Europeans.
The villagers were to clear the hush behind the camp,
and erect a new village there. This was a new and
rather unpleasant idea to the natives, who had always
been accustomed to build their houses under the shadow
of the cocoanut-trees. They felt no inclination, however,
to live so near the soldiers, and such proximity was in-
deed a very undesirable thing ; so the village of Chepen-
ehe remained for a time deserted by the natives.
The mission vessel Day Spring arrived about a
week after the village had been destroyed. It was her
first visit, she having just come out from Nova Scotia.
We had arranged to have our annual meeting at
Chepenehe, and there were many important matters to
be discussed connected with our work. Mr and Mrs Ella
were on board, on their way to occupy the long-neglected
island of Uvea. The brethren Creagh and Jones from
Mare were also there ; and five of the missionaries from
the Presbyterian mission in the New Hebrides had come
to consult with us about the movements of the new ship,
the extension of our operations, &c. So that we anticipated
a delightful change from our late troubles, and rejoiced
in the prospect of deep sympathy and fraternal advice.
Judge of our disappointment when we were informed
that we could have no communication with the ship, and


that none hut the captain would be allowed to land. The
brethren from Mare, being missionaries of the group,
came off in a boat, but were not allowed to land. The
vessel being anchored opposite our house, we had the
mortification of seeing our friends, and even distinguish-
ing them by the aid of the glass, without being able to
commune with them. A petition was prepared, signed
by all the missionaries, and sent to the commander, but
without effect. Knowing that the French pride them-
selves upon their gallantry, I felt that there was a chance
for Mrs M‘Farlane, although none for myself, so I wrote
a polite note requesting permission for my wife to
accompany the captain on board. This was accorded, but
in such a manner that left me no hope that I should be
allowed to go for her. The captain was ordered not to
leave Mr and Mrs Ella at Uvea, or in any island in the
group, and told to leave as soon as possible. Mr Ella
had a right, in common with other Europeans, to land
at Uvea in his private capacity as English resident, and
for this he at once demanded a permit of residence. The
commander, however, said that he must refer the case to
the governor, so Mr and Mrs Ella were obliged to return,
and remain for a time on one of the islands of the New
Hebrides group. Our goods were landed, and the captain
intended leaving early next morning. During the night,
however, a strong wind arose blowing right into the bay;
it increased to a gale towards morning. At daylight we
were alarmed to see the Bay Spring amongst the
breakers. She had dragged both of her anchors, but
had not touched. She was rolling fearfully, and momen


tarily expected to be dashed on a rock. The French
steamer was there with her steam up, but did not offer
the least assistance. I went down to the camp and
asked if nothing could be done. One of the officers told
me that they were preparing ropes to save the passengers
and crew, but that there was no hope of the vessel being
saved. Prayer and effort, however, were united on
board. The crew were active sending down the yards,
&c., whilst the missionaries continued in prayer to
Him who said “ Peace, be still.” The wind ceased.
A little longer, and the beautiful Day Spring must
have been a complete wreck. A light breeze sprang up
from the land; sail was set, and she was taken by her
able commander out of her dangerous position, stern
first, to the admiration of all. At one time there was a
strong probability that we should, after all, meet the
brethren. We were delighted, however, under the cir-
cumstances, to see them depart.
A few days after the natives had returned to their
villages, the chiefs presented themselves at the camp
with fear and trembling. The commander said little
to them about the past, but he was imperious and un-
mistakable in referring to the future. They were not
to go to the missionary for advice, but to the commander,
whom they were to regard as their chief. They were not
to bring us any food, or do any work on the mission
premises unless they were paid for it. They were also
forbidden to make contributions to the Missionary
Society. They were to live peaceably with the soldiers ;
endeavour to acquire the French language, and regard


themselves as Frenchmen. With reference to religion,
they might do as they pleased ; there was perfect liberty
of worship. The commander desired the two principal
chiefs, Bula and Ukenizo, with a few of the under-chiefs,
to proceed to New Caledonia in the steamer, which was
about to leave, to be present at the games on the
Emperor’s fete-day. Ukenizo was afraid to trust him-
self in the hands of his friends, and so sent his uncle.
Bula and a few of the under-chiefs went, and were kindly
treated. The commander of the troops and most of the
soldiers also left by the same opportunity.
The Loyalty group was now left in charge of an officer
whom the governor had brought over with him for that
purpose—one who had been several years at Tahiti just
after the French settled there, and was consequently
cognisant of, if he had not taken an active part in, the
various attempts made on that island to destroy English
influence. Doubtless he was considered the most capable
amongst the governor’s staff to grapple with the difficulties
which presented themselves to the French in the Loyalty
group. He was known to be disposed to play into the
hands of the priests ; and although the governor was no
friend of theirs, yet he seems to have regarded the con-
version of the natives to the national religion as the most
feasible way of Frenchifying them. The priests spoke
of the new commander as a good Catholic, and evidently
entertained bright visions of the religious reformation
that would be accomplished during his reign. They had
been unwearied in their efforts to proselytise among the
Protestants since the day that the village of Chepenehe


had been attacked, and the teachers and missionaries
silenced —telling the natives that Protestantism in the
Loyalty group was now at an end; that their missionaries
would not be allowed to resume their labours in the
group, and that they, being French subjects, would be
obliged to embrace the French religion. They tried
every fair and foul expedient to induce Bula to abandon
his faith, but in vain ; he assured them that he had no
desire to possess the power and position which they told
him he would obtain by professing himself a Roman
Catholic, and that he was prepared to suffer, if called
to do so, on account of his faith. Several Roman
Catholic natives were going about the island with
bundles of crosses and medals, telling the Protestants
that those who refused to accept them would be sent as
prisoners to Tahiti, that the steamer had gone to fetch
a number of dogs to pursue those who betook themselves
to the bush, and would be back again in a fortnight to
take all who persisted in professing the hmi Peretania
(English religion). Of course, Ido not pretend that
they were authorised by the priests to make such state-
ments ; I simply state the fact that they were made, and
believed by the majority of the natives, who were greatly
distressed, although determined to remain faithful.
The adaptation of congregational principles to provide
for the spiritual wants of a large community on such
emergencies, was illustrated on that occasion. The
Samoan and Raratongan teachers, with their families,
were all assembled at Chepenehe under the strict
surveillance of the commander, who would not even
M


allow them to leave the village. We were not allowed
to officiate in any public capacity, though that did not
prevent us from rendering valuable service to the mission
as “ private English residents.” The natives of two or
more villages were not allowed to assemble for public
worship as they had been accustomed to do, they
were ordered to remain at their respective places, yet
were told that they might worship as they pleased.
From the first, the authorities have openly declared
that the natives are at perfect liberty in matters of
religion, they may adopt whatever creed they think
best, or remain in their heathen state, Tis no conse-
quence to them. These are their words, but “ actions
speak louder than words,” and the sequel will prove
that in a variety of ways the authorities have sought
(from political motives, no doubt) to change the reli-
gion of the natives of the Loyalty group. They probably
thought that under these circumstances Protestantism
would die a natural death. They removed what they
considered the props, and expected the whole structure
to fall; no doubt such would have been the result had
it been our building, but the severe trials to which the
natives had already been exposed proved to be of God;
it was built on the Eock, so that when “the rain descended,
and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon
that house, it fell not.”
The Institution had been closed, and the students,
twenty-three in number, had returned to their homes.
They had been preparing to go abroad as evangelists to
the heathen islands, but we soon found that God had


been preparing them for an emergency at home, where
there was now a multitude of shepherdless sheep. They
were chosen as temporary teachers by the natives of the
principal villages; at others, deacons, or the most intelli-
gent amongst the church members, were selected by the
people, until every village throughout the island had its
teacher, and formed a little community, neither too
humble nor too small to be noticed and blessed by the
Great Head of the Universal Church. We claimed our
rights as English residents, and were allowed, in com-
mon with other Europeans, to move about the island at
pleasure ; so that we had the opportunity of visiting our
people at their homes, although we dared not address
them in public assemblies. The clouds now began to
disperse. Our little bark had been struck by a violent
squall, which had astonished, terrified, and confused the
natives. Some thought that we must be carried away
by the strength of the wind and the violence of the
waves; but she soon recovered from the shock, and again
appeared from the mist, still on her course, with other
masts and sails, which although smaller and weaker than
the former, were nevertheless such as the fury of the
gale would permit.


XV.
MAKING ROMAN CATHOLICS—HOW TO RENDER THE “BLACKS”
OBEDIENT AND LOVING—THE COMMANDER BAFFLED BY THE
APPLICATION OF CONGREGATIONAL PRINCIPLES—STATE CONTROL
WITHOUT STATE PAY—A ROMAN CATHOLIC SUBJECT OP BULA’S
MADE AN INDEPENDENT CHIEF—POLICY OF THE COMMANDER—
WENEGENT’S CASE—ALARM! THE SOLDIERS IN ARMS—TREATMENT
OF THE EASTERN TEACHERS—AWAITING THE ANSWER OF THE
IMPERIAL GOVERNMENT—NATIVES PUNISHED FOR TEACHING EACH
OTHER TO WRITE—APPROPRIATION OF THE CHURCH BELL AND
INTERFERENCE WITH PERSONAL LIBERTY.
The governor, on his return to New Caledonia, whilst
conversing with the Director of the Roman Catholic
missions in the South Seas on the subject of the
expedition to Lifu, remarked jocosely, that he had been
making a good many Roman Catholics for them. No
doubt both the authorities and the priests expected that
a great diminution in the number of the Protestants
would result from the measures which they had adopted,
and that having silenced their missionaries and teachers,
and prohibited the circulation of the Scriptures and other
books, and closed all the schools, Protestantism, or rather,
what one regarded as English influence and the other as
heresy , would die a natural death. They evidently did
not calculate upon our being permitted by the Imperial
Government to resume our labours; this is manifest from
a passage in the letter which I received from the


colonial secretary defining our position. “ The fact of
your being an English subject ought to give you the
assurance that the authorisation to exercise the functions
of a minister of religion will not be granted to you.”
We may therefore judge of their surprise and chagrin
when they beheld the little communities rallying round
the new teachers, with as much respect and affection as
they had shown to their former ones. Their dread of the
commander had not inspired any disposition to abandon
the faith in which they had been instructed; it had
only increased the anti-French feeling which the
authorities were seeking to destroy. It is strange that so
enlightened a people should manifest such ignorance of
human nature as to suppose that severe measures were
the most likely to facilitate the accomplishment of their
object; yet the captain of the French man-of-war
stated, as his conviction, that the best course to adopt
with the “ Blacks,” in order to make them obey and love
you, is to flog them as you would a dog; they will then,
he said, come like that animal, and lie at your feet. I
am inclined to think that kindness is more effectual than
the rod in winning the affections, even of the canine
tribe. We shall see what effect their severity has had
upon the natives of the Loyalty group.
It soon became evident to the commander and his
satellites that Congregationalism offered serious ob-
stacles to the accomplishment of their designs; it gave
the people too much power in religious matters, and
fostered vitality under circumstances where a State Church
would have languished and died. He would fain have


established a State Church, hut that required money, and
the Government at New Caledonia had not any to spare,
and probably expected to accomplish their object without
it; so he introduced a system of State control without
State pay ! —a very convenient sort of State Church for
a poor and despotic Government. A proclamation was
issued, stating that the people were not allowed to select
their pastors, that they must be appointed by the principal
chiefs, and that any native found officiating who had not
been thus appointed, would be imprisoned. The two
principal chiefs were Bula and Ukenizo. Simultaneously
with the above proclamation, however, was one announc-
ing that Zeula (a subject of Bula’s, though chief of a
powerful tribe, numbering about a thousand, at the ex-
tremity of his district) was henceforth to be an indepen-
dent chief. He was then a lad about twelve years of age,
with whom one of the priests resided, and in whose
hands he was a mere tool. Bula confirmed the appoint-
ment of the teachers selected by the people throughout
his district, but Ukenizo and Zeula appointed others,
many of whom could not even read the Scriptures, and all
most unsuitable persons, not even members of the church
or of the seekers’ class. The poor fellows were greatly an-
noyed and ashamed; in the pulpits they lamented their
being called to a work for which they felt themselves so
unfit, and informed the people that they could not
preach, yet were forced to retain their nominal position.
I had an interview with the commander on the subject
of their appointment, and expostulated with him on the
unreasonableness and injustice of such proceedings. He


professed to be ignorant of the kind of men appointed
by the chiefs; yet although I informed him of their
character, and urged him to appoint teachers himself
rather than leave it to such ignorant unprincipled na-
tives, who made no secret of their attempt to abuse the
Protestants and destroy Protestantism, he, nevertheless,
sanctioned the appointment made by the chiefs.
The policy of the commander from the first was
unmistakable. In seeking to destroy the influence of
the English missionaries, he did not say, as Ukenizo
did, that the natives must either embrace the Roman
Catholic religion or be punished by the Government, but
he made his acts utter the sentiment with cruel emphasis.
Chiefs, teachers, and the leading Protestants were
deposed, degraded, and punished, whilst the Roman
Catholics —especially those who had recently left our
ranks—were placed in positions of importance, invited
to dine with him at the camp, and allowed to do with
impunity the very same thing for which the Protestants
were imprisoned. Attempts were made to give import-
ance and prominence to the Roman Catholic religion. A
company of soldiers were sent to be present at the open-
ing of a village church eight miles distant, in which they
performed their royal evolutions, much to the wonder
and amusement of the natives. The commander went
to the same place to be present at the baptism of Ukenizo’s
son, for whom he became godfather. He also went with
a company of soldiers a distance of twelve miles, to be
present at the burial of a Roman Catholic chief, who
was interred with military honours; the commander


remarking to Bula that his death would not be noticed
by the Government, an intimation which the chief was
rather pleased than otherwise to receive, for the natives
regarded the firing into the grave with a considerable
degree of superstitious fear and suspicion. The com-
mander asked the French storekeeper at Chepenehe if he
knew what had become of Mr M l Farlane > s head man—
the chief of the village ? “ No,” was the reply. “Why,”
said he, “ he is sawing logs for me for six biscuits per
week !” Small as the wages may appear, it was never-
theless six biscuits per week more than the other natives
received. Another Protestant chief, who was a deacon
of the church, and who had made himself conspicuous
during the time that the natives were secreted in the
bush, by exhorting them to steadfastness, was also kept
at the camp sawing timber for the Government.
It was not long after the teachers had been deposed
by the Roman Catholic chiefs when the commander
determined upon an act which caused considerable ex-
citement throughout the island, and which maybe justly
characterised as extremely rash, unjust, and cruel. It
will be remembered that the indefatigable pioneer teacher
Pao ultimately settled at We, the ancient battle-field,
and there established a large station, composed of natives
from the different tribes. The people of We had unani-
mously elected Wenegent as their teacher. This young
man had been in the Institution for several years, and
was a subject of Bula’s, who had confirmed his appoint-
ment. After the boy Zeula had been created an indepen-
dent chief, he proceeded with a few followers to We,


where some of his Protestant subjects resided, and in-
formed the teacher that he had orders from the com-
mander to depose him and appoint another in his place.
Wenegent said that he had been chosen by the people as
their teacher; that his election had been confirmed by
Bula, and sanctioned by the commander; that he was
a subject of Bula’s, and labouring in his district, and
that he did not believe the commander had sent him,
adding, u Tha tro kb ni a dei nyipa ”(I will not listen to
you). Zeulareturned to the priest, who immediately wrote
a letter to the commander. Wenegent was sent for and
placed in irons, charged with saying that he would neither
obey the commander nor Zeula. He was alleged to have
said, u Tha tro kb ni a dei nyipo ” —nyipo being the dual
number of nyipa. Thus, by changing a single vowel, the
teacher was charged with rebellion ; and the island being
in a state of siege, placed full power in the hands of the
commander, who determined to use it with severity in
subduing the Protestants. The poor man was sentenced
to be shot; a day was fixed, and the chiefs throughout
the island were ordered to assemble at Chepenehe to
witness his execution. I was astounded when the com-
mander informed me of his intention, and of course
pleaded hard for the poor fellow’s life. He considered,
however, that the natives generally were disobedient
and rebellious ; that on their arrival they had treated
them with too much lenity, (!) and that it was necessary
to make an example of Wenegent, in order to lead others
to tremble and obey. The teacher was a worthy man,
had a young wife and two children. I appealed to the


commander as a husband, a father, and also as a man
appointed to execute justice. I spoke seriously of the
innocent blood that he was about to shed, reminding him
of the “judgment to come,” and, happily, not without
effect; the sentence was commuted to twelve months' im-
prisonment ; during that period he had to work at the
camp, his friends supplying him with food. The native
appointed to take his place at We was an elderly, igno-
rant, stupid man, who had but a short time before em-
braced Christianity. Of course he knew very little
about the gospel, of which he had been wickedly made
a preacher, and could neither read nor write; but his
ignorance was evidently his qualification. Most of the
natives of the place used to assemble in small groups and
conduct services among themselves after they returned
from church, attending which was a mere form with
which they complied through fear of the kalaboose.
An event occurred about the time of which lam writ-
ing, the circumstances of which I may relate, as affording
a specimen of the groundless suspicions entertained by
the French authorities, who, conscious that they were
trampling upon the sacred rights of the innocent and
defenceless, were in constant dread of conspiracies and
retaliation. It was one of those calm, clear, starlight
nights, so peculiar to and enjoyable in the tropical
climates. Mrs M‘Farlane and I paced the verandah
of our house, where we have walked hundreds of miles,
for it is our usual place of daily promenade. We were
contrasting the happy past with the painful present, and
speculating upon the dark future. The bugle had called


the soldiers within the camp. The stars cast their feeble
flickering rays upon the still waters of the hay, and
appeared to look down with sorrow upon the ruins of
the deserted village. The tall cocoanut-trees, which had
survived the conflagration, reared their proud heads
toward heaven, and stood in stately grandeur amidst
the desolation, as if imploring a just God to pity and
protect the oppressed. The whales were floating listlessly
upon the surface of the hay, and lashing its peaceful
waters with their huge fins, the noise of which came
booming over the bay through the stillness of the night
like the report of cannon. It was the hour when we
were wont to hear the song of evening praise ascending
from the various huts throughout the village, but a
silence reigned like that of the tombs, only broken at
intervals by the shouts of revelry proceeding from the
camp. We turned from the melancholy scene, and
entered the study. About an hour afterwards we were
startled by the trampling of feet and the clanking of
arms, followed by a heavy step on the verandah, then a
rap at the study door, upon opening which, I found a
corporal accompanied by half-a-dozen soldiers all armed.
I was informed that the commander wished to see me at
the camp, so I immediately proceeded thither, wondering
what could have happened, and leaving my wife in per-
plexity and fear. To my astonishment, I found the
soldiers on parade receiving a supply of ammunition,
officers passing rapidly to and fro, and all the usual
preparations for action being hurriedly accomplished.
I entered what had recently been the village church, and


found the commander looking very grave. He asked me
if I was not aware of a contemplated attack upon the
camp by the Protestants. I said that I was not only
ignorant of such a movement, but that I felt sure the
natives had no such idea; they well knew that such an
attempt would prove most disastrous to themselves. He
said that he had heard the report of guns, and had seen
many torches along the coast about two miles from the
camp, and that they felt sure that the natives, according
to their custom, were seeking revenge. I instantly per-
ceived the ground of their fears, and, unable to retain
my gravity, said, “ Why, you are in arms against the
whales ! they may be often heard lashing the water with
their fins about this season of the year, and torches may
be seen almost every night, as there are generally
some natives out fishing.” Whether he doubted my
veracity, or was ashamed to own their suspicions, I
know not; he persisted, however, in his assertion, and
ordered all the soldiers to remain under arms during the
night. He did not return to his house (the chief’s), but
remained wdth them and doubled the watch. I left,
having obtained a promise from him that he would
simply act on the defensive.
At half-past twelve o’clock the outpost descried a
party of natives rapidly approaching the camp with
torches. The soldiers seized their muskets and flew to
their posts. The officers drew their swords and awaited
the attack. They could not be deceived this time, they
heard human voices and saw human forms. On came
the natives running and shouting as they generally do


when carrying a burden. Perhaps the commander would
have fired; hut, remembering his promise, he remained on
the defensive. The natives drew near, gave the watch-
word, and passing through an avenue of bayonets into
the midst of the camp, laid down about two hundred-
weight of fresh meat, which the priest had sent as a
present to the commander, having killed a bullock at a
village eight miles distant. So the anxiety, labour, and
watching of the night were brought to a close by an
agreeable and harmless attack upon roast-beef —a happy
issue of their troubles which none of them had expected.
The maltreatment which the eastern teachers received
did not terminate at the close of their confinement on
board the steamers. There, although in irons, they
received regular rations; but after the steamers left they
were kept prisoners at large in the desolate village of
Chepenehe, strictly prohibited from visiting inland vil-
lages and plantations, yet no provision made for their
wants by the commander. As they, with their families,
numbered forty-one persons, it was no easy matter to
find food for them all. Flour, arrow-root, rice, and
biscuit soon disappeared. The natives from their former
stations often brought them food (secretly, for inter-
course was prohibited), but far from sufficient to supply
their wants. They frequently begged the commander to
allow them to go inland, but he refused. I wrote to
him, and also had an interview with him on the subject;
but he was inexorable, saying that the teachers were re-
tained at Chepenehe by superior orders, and placed under
his strict surveillance , and that they were not in any way


dependent upon me. This was a rather extraordinary
assertion to make, seeing that they and their families
were almost entirely depending on ns for food—a
fact of which he was well aware; but the letter was
written, no doubt, for his superiors, although addressed
to me. I determined, however, to see upon whom he
considered they were dependent; so having explained to
them the circumstances of the case, I sent them to the
commander to say that, in accordance with his letter to
me, I left them to his care, by whom they were retained
at the village, and told them to ask for food, or liberty
to go and seek it. They did so, but without obtaining
either the one or the other. They repeated their request
ten times, and then, as a last resource, endeavoured to
move him by a letter, in which they asked him why he still
prohibited them from going to their plantations; what evil
bad they done; were they to die of hunger, &c. They said
that they were willing to work for food, that their children
were crying for it, but they had not any to give, and
begged him to have compassion upon them. He did not,
however, answer their letter, which they had all signed,
feeling, no doubt, that the missionary would see that
they did not suffer much from hunger. The wife of one
of the teachers having, unknown to the commander, gone
to an inland village to get some food, the husband was
put in prison. The commander employed one of them
to make five wash-tubs, promising to give him food as
payment. The teacher made and delivered them, but
nothing was said about the payment. Five days after-
wards the teacher went to remind the commander of his


promise, and was put in prison for a night for daring to
go to him on such an errand. When the commander
found that the wives of three of the teachers were con-
fined to their beds, and one of them dangerously ill (she
died shortly afterwards), he told their husbands that
they might return to their former stations, alleging that
he did not want any of them to die at Chepenehe. The
teachers, however, did not wish to be separated from their
friends at such a time; having been together so long,
they determined to remain where they were until the
arrival of the mission vessel, which was soon to take
them to their homes. The French complain that they are
generally disliked throughout the islands, and appear to
regard Englishmen in general and missionaries in parti-
cular as the cause of this anti-French feeling : it would
surely be more rational to seek the cause nearer home.
It is not difficult to conceive the kind of report which the
eastern teachers would give upon their arrival at their
respective islands ; nor is it probable that natives from
New Caledonia or the Loyalty group will say much in
favour of their rulers to the neighbouring islanders ; and
this is no doubt one, most likely the principal, reason
why the natives were not allowed to go beyond the group
except as sailors in French vessels.
The time now drew near when the governor expected
to receive the views of the Imperial Government upon
his expedition to Lifu. Six months had passed since
the disgraceful attack upon the persons and property
of the peaceful people. Most of the wounded had re-
covered; but the bones of the slain were scattered in


the bush, and occasionally found on the public roads,
their bodies having been devoured by dogs during the
flight of their friends. The commander had not made
any secret of his policy, supposing that what the
governor had done would be confirmed in Paris. He
had striven to give prominence to Roman Catholicism ;
favouring its adherents; making a tour through the
island in company with one of the priests, and review-
ing the soldiers on the Emperor’s fete-day between two of
them. Such proceedings as these, and others of a similar
kind which I have already mentioned, naturally led the
natives to identify the priests with the soldiers, and to
speak of Roman Catholicism as a hmi ne isi (fighting
religion). On one occasion the commander found, on
his way to the priests, five natives in a hut by the
roadside, one of whom was trying to teach the others
to write. He entered the hut, asked to see their slates;
but instead of a pat on the shoulder, and a few words
of encouragement, he spoke angrily to them, told them
that they had no right to be thus engaged, seeing that all
the schools had been closed, and ordered them to meet
him on his return to the camp. They did so, and were
confined three days in prison. This circumstance,
however, only led the young men generally to greater
perseverance in their attempts to acquire this useful art;
but they took care in future not to meet in such con-
spicuous places.
Not only had the commander shown his partiality in
the way that I have described, but he even went so far
as to interfere with our personal liberty, and appropriate


mission property; in this, however, he was not sustained
by his superiors. Having prevented Mr Creagh and
family from proceeding to Sydney in the mission vessel,
that gentleman appealed to the governor, who blamed
the commander, and informed Mr Creagh that he was
at liberty to go where he liked, inviting him to proceed
to Sydney via New Caledonia, which he did at a cost
of £SO. Mr Creagh desired the Government to pay this
sum, seeing that it had been incurred by obeying their
orders : for had the commander allowed him to proceed
in the mission vessel, for which every preparation had
been made, no expense would have been occasioned;
whereas the commander distinctly stated in his letter to
Mr Creagh, that if he left the island he would not be
allowed to return. Not obtaining any satisfaction from
the governor, Mr Creagh wrote to the authorities in
Paris, who immediately ordered the governor to pay to
him the above sum.
The commander also prevented me from visiting
tlvea in the mission vessel, which was going to that
island. He had previously prohibited me from going
to Mare, saying that I might visit Uvea. Lifu was no
longer in a state of siege, and other Europeans were
allowed to pass to and fro among the islands, so I
desired an explanation upon this invasion of my rights
as a British subject. The church bell was appropriated
by the commander, and tolled every half-hour, like a
ship’s bell, to indicate the time; and this not only in
our hearing, but at our garden gate, notwithstanding
my efforts to obtain and devote it to the legitimate
N


object for which my friends had sent it. Whilst cor-
responding with the governor upon these uncalled-for
and unjustifiable acts of the commander, the mail
arrived with the instructions of the Imperial Government
relative to the English Protestant mission in the Loyalty
group, which not only secured to us our personal liberty
and mission property, but also liberty of worship, and
so rendered any further correspondence upon the above
subject unnecessary.


XVI.
INDIGNATION WHEN THE NEWS REACHED THE COLONIES AND ENGLAND—
MEMORIAL TO THE EMPEROR—THE EMPEROR’S REPLY—THE PUBLIC
PACIFIED—LETTER FROM THE GOVERNOR—MY REPLY—DELIGHT OF
THE NATIVES UPON THE ARRIVAL OF THE EMPEROR’S DECISION—COPY
OF OATH TO BE TAKEN BY THE PROTESTANT MINISTERS AT LIFU AND
MARE—MY REPLY—LETTERS ABOUT THE OPENING OF THE SEMINARY
AND DISTRIBUTION OF BOOKS—DIFFERENCES OF OPINION ABOUT
LIBERTY OF WORSHIP—INVITATION TO VISIT THE GOVERNOR—CON-
CILIATORY MEASURES—DELAY IN RESTORING THE CHURCH AND BELL—
THE GOVERNMENT SCHOOL—LETTER ABOUT THE REOPENING OF THE
SEMINARY AND THE FREE CIRCULATION OF THE BIBLE.
There was a general burst of indignation in the
Australian colonies when they heard of M. Guillain’s
expedition to Lifu; and in the newspapers, especially
the Sydney Morning Herald , he was severely castigated
in several “leaders,” not only for the Lifu business, but
also for his harsh and despotic administration at New
Caledonia. Meetings were held in the different colonies,
and the Home Government petitioned to locate a consul
at New Caledonia. This feeling was not confined to
Englishmen alone. A letter appeared in the above
journal from a French gentleman, stating that, in
common with Englishmen, his feelings, and he believed
those of his fellow-countrymen generally, had been
outraged by the recent proceedings of the governor of
New Caledonia. It will be remembered how promptly


and warmly the English press took up the question, the
Times leading the way; and how that a memorial was
addressed to the Emperor of the French signed by
noblemen and gentlemen of high official position. The
following is a copy of that document, with the reply of
his Majesty the Emperor :
To his Imperial Majesty Napoleon 111., Emperor of
the French.
London, January 13,1865.
May it please your Majesty, —We, the undersigned, with feel-
ings of profound respect, beg to request your Majesty’s obliging
and considerate attention to the accompanying statement of
Protestant missionary operations in the Loyalty islands, South
Pacific, and the suppression of these labours by M. Guillain,
governor of New Caledonia, in the month of June 1864.
Your Majesty needs not to be informed that the benevolent and
religious classes of our countrymen have long been engaged in
Christian and philanthropic efforts, with a view to extend the
blessings of civilisation and true religion among the heathen tribes
and nations ; and we confidently assure your Majesty that the
deepest sympathies of the several Protestant missionary associa-
tions of Britain have been intensely excited by the painful facts
narrated in the statement which we have now the honour to sub-
mit.
Many of the most successful efforts made by English Protestant
missionaries have been accomplished among the debased and savage
islanders of the South Pacific ; and of this fact the past and pre-
sent condition of the islands of the Loyalty group supplies abundant
evidence. Twenty years since, before Christian teachers visited
those islands, murder and cannibalism were the common practices
of the natives ; and the lives of strangers who ventured upon their
shores were often sacrificed and their bodies consumed. But now
these horrid practices are of rare occurrence, and the character and
habits of thousands of the people present a transformation over
which the Christian philanthropist must sincerely rejoice.
We cannot, therefore, entertain a doubt that your Majesty will
share in our deep regret that labours so highly beneficial should be
prohibited or restrained, and that the disinterested and self-denying


men by whom they have been accomplished should be deprived of
the pleasure of continuing their works of mercy for the further
improvement of the islanders.
We are able confidently to assure your Majesty that the reasons
assigned by the governor of New Caledonia for the oppressive
measures he adopted are mistaken and unfounded. The English
missionaries were accused of denationalising the native Christians
of Lifu by teaching them the English rather than the French
language; whereas there was, probably, not a single native who
understood a word of English, the missionaries having learnt the
language of the people in order to give them instruction in the
only way in which it was practicable. The representation, also, that
the missionaries had encouraged the islanders to resist the French
authority was equally unfounded, as the governor of New Caledonia
had never claimed any authority in Lifu up to the period when these
hostile proceedings were adopted.
We are glad to know that the measures of M. Guillain were
adopted on his own responsibility, and they require your Majesty’s
sanction to give them force and perpetuity; because we feel con-
vinced, from your Majesty’s well-known attachment to the great
principles of social justice and religious freedom, that these oppres-
sive restrictions will be revoked, and that the English missionaries will
be allowed as heretofore to carry on their peaceful and beneficial
labours, and, together with the native Protestant Christians, to
enjoy without restriction the ministrations and ordinances of Chris-
tianity.
We beg to assure your Majesty that such an enlightened and
generous exercise of your Imperial prerogative will be gratefully
appreciated by all classes of our countrymen, and by none more
highly than the friends of Christian missions whom we have the
pleasure to represent.
With every sentiment of profound respect, we have the honour
to be, your Majesty’s most faithful Servants,
Shaftesbury.
Chichester.
A. C. London.
Arthur P. Stanley, Dean of Westminster.
Warren S. Hale, Lord Mayor,
Thomas Dakin, Sheriff of London and Middlesex.
Robert Besley, Sheriff of London.
James Abbiss, Alderman.
James Clarke Lawrence, Alderman.


D. 11. Stone, Alderman.
Thomas Cave, Ex-Sheriff of London and Middlesex.
A. Kinnaird, Treasurer of the London Missionary Society.
S. Morton Peto, Treasurer of the Baptist Missionary Society.
Arthur Tidman, Secretary to the London Missionary Society.
Henry Venn, Secretary to the Church Missionary Society.
Edward B. Underhill, Secretary to the Baptist Missionary
Society.
William B. Boyce, Secretary to the Wesleyan Missionary
Society.
The following is the Emperor’s reply to the above
memorial:—
Aux Tuileries, le 24 Janvier 1865.
Messieurs, J’ai regu les reclamations que vous m’avez ad-
dressees relativement aux dispositions recemment prises dans les
isles de Loyalty par le gouverneur de la Nouvelle Caledonie. Je
sais 6crire au Commandant Guillain pour blamer toute mesure qui
mettrait une entrave au libre exercice de votre ministere dans ces
contrees lointaines. Je suis assure que loin de susciter des difficulty
aux representans de I’autorite Frangais, la mission Protestante,
comme la mission Catholique, I’aideront 4 repandre chez les indigenes
de I’archipel les bienfaits du Christianisme et de la civilisation,
Recevez, Messieurs, I’assurance de mes sentimens distingues.
NAPOLEAN.
Translation.
Tuileries, 24i th January 1865.
Gentlemen, —I have received the memorial which you addressed
to me relative to the measures recently taken in the Loyalty islands
by the governor of New Caledonia. lam writing to Commandant
Guillain to censure any measure which would impose a restraint
upon the free exercise of your ministry in those distant lands. I
feel assured that, far from raising any difficulties in the way of the
representatives of French authority, the Protestant mission, as well
as the Catholic, will seek to diffuse among the natives of the
archipelago the benefits of Christianity and civilisation.
Receive, gentlemen, the assurance of my distinguished considera-
tion.
NAPOLEON.


The Christian public received with gratitude and
complete satisfaction the above announcement by the
Emperor of the French of sentiments so liberal and
just, feeling assured, no doubt, that they would be
carried out with integrity by the authorities in New
Caledonia and the Loyalty group. They were, in con-
sequence, agreeably pacified, whilst the governor pro-
ceeded to put his own construction upon the Emperor’s
letter, restoring us as little as possible of the liberty of
action which we formerly enjoyed, and surrounding us
by a network of rules and regulations, which not only
prevented us from extending our mission, but also
seriously impeded the moral and intellectual advance-
ment of the native Christians.
After the arrival of the January mail, I received a
communication from the governor, of which the follow-
ing is a translation :
New Caledonia and Dependencies,
Secretariat of the Governor,
No. 20.
Port-de-France, January 15, 1865.
Sir, — I have just received from his Excellency the Minister of the
Marine and the Colonies the instructions which I asked from him
relative to the English Protestant ministers at Lifu and Mare after
my visit to those islands.
• I have, in consequence, the honour to make known to you, in
the name of the Emperor’s Government, that you may rely upon
the protection of France, and that if you open schools and obtain
land, as you have desired, you must comply with the general rules
of our possessions. The first of these authorisations will be accorded
to you when you fulfil the conditions desired by the rule of the 15th
October 1863 upon public instruction. As to the second, you
already possess it, seeing that the property which you occupy has
been secured to you since October 21, 1864.


I should inform you that you will not in any way be hindered
at Lifu in the exercise of your religious ministry so long as it does
not result in anything contrary to our authority.
In sending you this communication, which not only expresses
the intentions of his Majesty’s Government, but also my own
sentiments about liberty of worship and the intellectual advance-
ment of the populations committed to my care, Ido not think it
unnecessary to remind you, sir, that the religious is entirely distinct
from the political, and that you must scrupulously abstain from all
interference with the judicious affairs and administration of the
colony, conforming yourself, moreover, as all other residents, to the
rules, regulations, and decisions of the Local Government.
Receive, Sir, the assurance of my highest considerations,
The Governor of New Caledonia and Dependencies.
(Signed) Guillain.
The following is my reply to the above:—
To the Governor op New Caledonia and Dependencies.
Chepenehe, Lipu, January 30th, 1865.
Sir, —I have the honour of having received your letter of the
15th inst., communicating the determinations of his Majesty’s the
Emperor’s Government with respect to liberty of worship, and re-
joice to find them the expression of your own sentiments upon so
important a subject.
Allow me to assure your Excellency that I will adhere most
scrupulously to the distinction between the religious and the
political, and strive to the utmost of my ability to promote the
intellectual advancement of your subjects upon this island, being
now, happily, relieved from giving advice upon some subjects
which I may have considered to be my duty in the absence of an
administration.
I humbly yet earnestly request your Excellency to be guided by
facts, and not reports, with reference to the moral and intellectual
condition of the population of this island; and I trust that the future
will prove that this people can be good Protestants and faithful
French subjects, also that English ministers can exercise the
functions of their office in a French colony without Anglicising the
population.
I remain, Sir, with sentiments of profound respect, your faithful
Servant,
S. M'FARLANE.


I was at Mr Sleigh’s station, fifty miles off, when the
governor’s letter arrived —it was forwarded by the com-
mandant—and upon its reception we at once rang the
church bell to collect the people in order to communicate to
them the joyful news. The natives were delighted to see
and hear us again in our official capacity ; for six months
we had been obliged to sit and listen to them, not always,
I fear, with profit. All were heartily glad to receive the
news, and to join in thanksgiving and praise to the
Giver of all good and the Controller of all events.
After the service, which we held in the morning, I rode
home, where I arrived about six o’clock the same
evening. On the following day I had an interview with
the commandant, when he handed me a copy of an oath
that we were required to take. The following is a
translation:—
I swear and promise to God upon the Sacred Scriptures
obedience to the Colonial Government, I promise also not to have
any intelligence, or hold any league, either within or without, or
assist in any council which may be contrary to the established
order ; and if in my church or elsewhere I learn that anything is
being concocted prejudicial to the colony, I will make it known to
the Government.
To be taken between the hands of the commandant of the
Loyalty islands by each Protestant minister before resuming bis
functions.
The Commandant of the Loyalty Islands.
(Signed) E. D. Treve.
The following is my reply:—
To the Commandant of the Loyalty Islands.
Chepenehe, January 31s#, 1865.
Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of a copy of
an oath which you desire me to take, promising—
-Ist, Obedience to the Colonial Government.


2d, Not to co-operate with any person or persons in any
measure which is contrary to the established order of the
colony.
3d, To render certain services to the Colonial Government.
You will pardon me, sir, in informing you that I regard this form
as utterly superfluous, having already complied with the first, and
the fact of my being an ordained Christian minister supplies a
sufficient guarantee for the second and third.
Although the spirit of the oath is in perfect harmony with my
own sentiments, yet I object to the form, as it implies a want of con-
fidence, and also because I am not, and have no desire to be, in
any way connected with the Government of this colony, or that of
any other country. I wish neither to receive State pay nor to become
a Government agent. I ask only to be protected in the prosecu-
tion of my evangelistic labours; my letter from his Excellency the
governor assures me of that protection, and I rely upon the honour
of his Government. I, in return, assure your Government that I
will ever strive to maintain peace and order among the natives of
this colony, and exert my influence to make them loyal and
intelligent French subjects. An oath in either case is unnecessary-
“ Actions speak louder than jwordsConsequently I refer to my
conduct during recent events as a proof of my desire to act in
accordance with the spirit of the oath which you have sent to me.
I remain, Sir, &c.
S. M'FARLANE.
We had reason to consider it probable that we should
be asked to receive Government pay, so I took the above
early opportunity of expressing our sentiments upon the
subject, informing the commandant, when we next met,
that, from principle, we had no desire to have any
official connection with the Government, and that the
sacredness of a minister’s promise could not be very
much augmented by an oath, for he who was base
enough to break the former would not scruple to violate
the latter. The commandant referred the matter to the
governor, who considered my letter sufficient.
With my reply to the governor’s letter I sent two other


communications —one asking permission to put in
circulation four small works in the Lifu language which
had been printed at Mare, and two of which the ex-
commandant of the Loyalty islands had forbidden to
be circulated, copies of which I forwarded to his
Excellency ; the other asking to be allowed to reopen
the native seminary for the training of native pastors and
pioneer teachers, also the day-schools at the different
stations where teachers are located, by whom they would
be conducted as before, under my superintendence.
We in our simplicity supposed, that having received
the instructions of the Imperial Government relative to
the Protestant mission in the Loyalty group, the governor
would be disposed to allow us to resume our former
labours; in this, however, we were grievously disap-
pointed. We soon perceived that “ liberty of worship, ’’
like all other kinds of liberty, admits of a variety of
meanings, according to the dispositions of the mind. To
those who presented the memorial to the Emperor, and
to whom his Majesty addressed his reply, u liberty of
worship ” meant one thing; to M. Guillain, the reputed
severe captain of a man-of-war, to whom the Government
of New Caledonia was for a time committed, it meant
quite another. His Excellency, in answer to my com-
munications, intimated to me, through the commandant,
that they gave rise to questions which could not be very
well explained in a correspondence, and that he would
like to speak with me about them viva voce , offering me
a passage to New Caledonia in a Government steamer,
adding that he thought such an interview would be for


the good of the cause which I represented in the Loyalty
group. As my chief concern was to promote this cause,
I did not hesitate about accepting the invitation, although
it would have been more gratifying to receive written
replies to my letters granting the desired liberty of action
in our work. To one demand only had the governor
acceded—.viz., to be allowed to put in circulation the
books mentioned above, stating that it would be necessary
in future to obtain like permission for each book, a copy
of which must be sent for their inspection.
From what we already knew of the governor, we had
reason to fear that he was little disposed to allow us to
reopen our village schools and the Institution, and that
he would only be led to do so from a pressure being
brought to bear upon him from without; this pressure he
now began to feel in his instructions from the Home
Government, which appears to have led him to alter his
tactics. In his dealing with us he had hitherto been
exceedingly arbitrary, but the consequences of his con-
duct had recoiled most completely upon himself. His
superior and inferior officers alike publicly blamed his
conduct at Lifu ; and the journals and periodicals, from
the Times downwards, were even more severe. He now
had recourse to conciliatory measures, by which he hoped
to silence us without removing the restrictions by which
we were fettered in our work ; but u John Bull ” prefers
substantial u roast-beef and plum-pudding ” to bonbons
and jujubes.* Kindness and hospitality are very good
* Although, by the way, history reminds us that although he is generally
conqueror in the field, he is often conquered in drawing up treaties,
especially by the French.


things, but poor substitutes for the “ liberty of worship ”
and impartiality of administration which we were seeking.
I was kindly received by the governor at New Caledonia,
and had the honour of being his guest for three weeks.
He is a very agreeable fatherly old gentleman in private ;
divested of a little of his mannerism, he would pass for a
u fine old English gentleman.” He would not allow me,
however, to conduct an English service with the Protest-
ant residents at Port-de-France, nor did he accord to me
the desired permission to reopen the Institution and the
schools; so that upon my return to Lifu I did not feel that
the result of my visit was very satisfactory. The church
was still occupied by the soldiers, and the church bell
still used for the camp, whilst I was obliged to call the
natives together for worship with a wooden gong, and
assemble them in a native house. The houses in which
the soldiers were living had been constructed by the
natives in three days, so that the commandant might
easily have removed the camp and restored the church
to us a week after the instructions from the Imperial
Government arrived, had he felt so disposed; this, how-
ever, was not done until six months afterwards, and only
then after my strong remonstrance to the governor on
the subject.
The object of the Government appears to be to give
the natives what they term a national education. Where-
ever a military post is established, there a Government
school is commenced, and a soldier appointed as school-
master. This was the case at Lifu, but still no reason
why all our village schools should be closed throughout


the island, even supposing the Government school to
be all we could desire, which, alas ! is very far from being
the case—indeed it is scarcely anything we could wish.
The boys, by their constant intercourse with the soldiers,
and by the scarcity of food, which the natives have to
provide, learn the filthiest vices, and become proverbial
thieves. But even, I say, supposing the school to be all
that we could desire, what are the sixty boys forced
into it from the three islands compared with their
population of 15,000 ? The natives are now obliged to
teach each other as best they can, and in this they suc-
ceed to a very remarkable degree. Most of the young
people can read and write pretty well. Sabbath schools
are not prohibited, and we make the best of this valuable
Institution.
Feeling the importance of having a well-educated
native ministry, and liberty to circulate freely the
Scriptures in the native dialect, and being unable to
obtain from the governor either by letter or by personal
interviews (he often took the latter mode of answering
my letters) the liberty in our operations which the
Emperor’s letter led us to expect, I drew up and
forwarded to his Excellency the following letter, which
he doubtless perceived was intended to bring matters to
an issue:—
To his Excellency the Governor of New Caledonia and
Dependencies.
Chepenehe, Lieu, April 28, 1866.
S lßj _ All who are acquainted with our principles as Protestants are
aware of the importance which we attach to a well-educated 'ministry ?
and the free circulation of the Bible in the vernacular tongue (as light


and Protestantism go hand in hand). Any attempt to suppress the
one or restrict the other would be considered as a direct blow at
Protestantism by the entire Protestant world.
We rejoice, however, to find from the following letters, copies
of which I have now before me, that the Government of your dis-
tinguished country has no intention to offer the least opposition to
the work of Protestant missionaries, the most prominent, essentia],
and arduous of which is to translate the Scriptures and train native
pastors.
The letter of his Majesty the Emperor addressed to the memo-
rialists of the different missionary societies of England, indicates
that his Majesty will condemn any measure which might impede the
free exercise of our ministry in these seas.
The French Minister for Foreign Affairs assured her Majesty’s
Ambassador at Paris, that so far from there being any desire on the
• part of the Imperial Government to discourage the labours of Protestant
missionaries in the Loyalty group, there was every disposition to foster
and protect them.
The French Minister of Marine and the Colonies, in a com-
munication addressed to the Rev. William Tyler, acknowledging a
letter which that gentleman had addressed to the Emperor, says,
that the Protestant missionaries have but to make the demand to open
schools in conformity with the usual regulations, and the authorisation
will be immediately accorded.
The above communications are in perfect harmony with the one
which I had the honour to receive from your Excellency in January
1865.
The announcement of sentiments so truly enlightened and just
by such distinguished personages has naturally led us to expect
that freedom and security which it appears the Emperor intends to
grant, and which is all that we desire, but which, as I stated
verbally to your Excellency during your recent visit to Lifu, we
have not yet realised. It is the consideration of these sentiments,
however, which now leads me to repeat my request to be allowed to
reopen the native seminary, which was closed on the 24th May 1864
by the order of Captain Bourgey, ex-commandant of the Loyalty
islands. Also my request to be permitted to circulate amongst the
natives the different portions of the Bible in the Lifu language,
without comment , as they arrive from the press. The well-known
contents of the Bible, and the equally well-known integrity
of Protestant missionaries in translating it into a foreign
tongue, is surely a sufficient guarantee, without the unnecessary


delay occasioned by transmitting a copy of each portion to Port-de-
France, and waiting until you procure a translation before you
decide whether it shall be placed in the hands of the natives or not.
Copies of any other books in the native language will first be sub-
mitted to the approval of the Colonial Government, according to
request, before being circulated amongst the natives.
We hope that your Excellency will render any appeal to the
Home Government on our part unnecessary, by generously and
justly according the solicited permission, which will simply be per-
mitting a work which the Emperor says shall not he impeded, and
which the Minister of Foreign Affairs says there is a disposition to
foster and protect, and which the Minister of Marine and the Colonies
says shall be accorded immediately upon application.
The reopening of the native seminary, which will be expressly
for adults, will not in any way interfere with the Government school,
which is expressly for boys.
With sentiments of profound respect, I remain, Sir, your
faithful Servant,
S. M'FARLANE.
In answer to the above communication, we received
permission to circulate amongst the natives the different
portions of the Bible as they were translated and printed
without first submitting a copy to the inspection of the
Government; also permission to reopen the native
seminary, after some preliminary correspondence about
the programme of instruction. This was a step in the
right direction which both we and our people thoroughly
appreciated, and for which we thanked God and took
courage.


XVII.
A GLANCE AT SOME OF THE RESULTS OF THE FRENCH OCCUPATION OF THE
GROUP—WHAT HAVE THE INSTIGATORS GAINED?—THE OBJECT OF THE
PRIESTS—THE NATIVES CONFIRMED IN THE TRUTH AND POWER OF THE
GOSPEL—OTHER INSTIGATORS—WHAT THE GOVERNMENT GAINED—
THE RESULT TO THE NATIVES—WHAT BECAME OF UKENIZO—RELIGION
ENFORCED, RESULT—SUICIDAL POLICY—PROTESTANTISM STRENGTH-
ENED.
Haying now arrived at a point where we had recovered
as much of our liberty of action as we could reasonably
expect to obtain from the French, let us pause and look
round upon some of the results of the French occupation
of the Loyalty group. Seeing that the governor was
publicly blamed for the measures which he had adopted
during his expedition to Lifu, it was thought by some
that the natives and the London Missionary Society
would receive some redress—the former having had their
relatives shot, their villages burnt, their plantations
destroyed, and many of their boxes with their contents
stolen; and property of the latter having been taken or
destroyed to the value of about £2OO. No redress, how-
ever, was made—indeed none was sought by the London
Missionary Society, the directors being satisfied with the
liberal announcement of the Emperor with reference to
their mission in the group. The natives appealed in vain
to the commandant about the restoration of their canoes,
o


fishing-nets, clothing, &c., which were in the hands of
the Roman Catholics. It was evident to all that what
the Protestants obtained was forced from the Colonial
Government by foreign interference.
First, then, What had the priests gained by the arrival
of the soldiers ? When at New Caledonia, the governor
told me distinctly that the priests were the instigators of
the whole affair. I have in my possession a letter sent
to me by one of the priests residing on Lifu (a most
ungentlemanly Jesuitical epistle, full of all kinds of
abusive language and threats on account of my sending
the young men from the Institution to preach the gospel
to the heathen in the district where he is located, a dis-
trict which has always contained more Protestants than
Roman Catholics), in which he informs me that he has
wuitten about me to Port-de-France, and will write again
by the first opportunity. It is also well known that his
colleague called the Roman Catholic chief Ukenizo into
his house and gave him a sealed letter for the Government
at New Caledonia, saying, “ This is your letter to the
governor, requesting him to send soldiers to Lifu to punish
the heretics who have so long disobeyed and annoyed you.”
The chief took the letter, and sent it by the first oppor-
tunity by the person next to him in authority (one of
the few really devoted Roman Catholics amongst the
natives of Lifu), very soon after which the soldiers ar-
rived.
What object had the priests in view? The history of
Popery in any country where it has been able to influence
the State will furnish an answer. They had tried in


vain to draw the natives into the arras of the “ Mother
Church,” so they sought the means to drive them there.
Strange that Popery does not learn from history that
the tendency of persecution has generally been to benefit
the cause persecuted. Lifu has been no exception to
this rule. Popery lost, and Protestantism gained. The
true character of each appeared in striking contrast; and
just as light looks brighter when contrasted with dark-
ness, and truth clearer when opposed to error, so Chris-
tianity, in its simplicity and purity, appears more divine
and reasonable when placed side by side with its dazzling
caricature, Popery. The eyes of the natives were opened;
they saw the power that threatened to destroy Pro-
testantism obliged to recognise and protect it. They
had seen it, like Lazarus, dead and buried, as far as the
State was concerned. For a few months the Protestants
had mourned over the grave of their missionaries,
teachers, schools, books, and the ordinances of religion.
They were told that there was no hope of their recovery,
and urged to regard the priests as their spiritual guides.
Jesus came; the time had arrived for the manifestation
of His power. Lazarus was called forth. The missionaries
were re-established in their offices, to be recognised and
protected by the Government; the ordinances of religion
were restored, and nearly the whole of the machinery for
the temporal and spiritual welfare of the people was
again set in motion. The natives stood by astonished
and delighted at this remarkable and sudden change,
recognising, like the Jews at the grave of Lazarus, the
power of God. The Homan Catholics were bewildered,


the priests having positively affirmed that the English
missionaries would not be permitted to resume their
labours in the Loyalty group, and that Protestantism
had received its deathblow. The result led them to
look with suspicion on their spiritual fathers, whom they
had sought in order to overthrow and abolish the religion
of their enemies. It is not difficult to conceive what the
feelings of the priests were as they beheld their schemes
frustrated, their hopes dashed, their veracity questioned
by their followers, their cause weakened, and that which
they hated and sought to extinguish rising again with
its former strength. In their blind impetuosity they
had thrown fuel on the fire which they desired to ex-
tinguish.
Other instigators of the expedition to Lifu belong to
a class of abandoned characters who “ vegetate ”on the
islands of the South Seas, distinguished by their lounge
ing, lazy, immoral, cruel habits, quite a disgrace to their
country. (I am happy to be able to say, however, that
I know several very worthy exceptions.) These men
hate everything that places upon them the least restraint;
they like to prowl about the islands and do just as they
please, referring all difficulties to the revolver stuck in
their belt, which is their constant companion. One of
these “ gentlemen” arrived at Lifu from the Southern
States of America, where he had been a u slave-driver.”
He very soon found that the Lifuans were by no means
prepared to submit to his u discipline ” as quietly as the
slaves of South America had done. As might be ex-
pected, he very soon got into difficulties with them, and


they very unceremoniously tied him to a cocoanut-tree
for half an hour. (In nearly all such cases the missionary
gets the blame, as though natives, after ten or twenty
years’ instruction, with an established code of laws, were
not capable of acting in such matters themselves. I
knew nothing of the above affair until a native told me
that W —ms had been tied to a cocoanut-tree by the
native policemen. He would have remained there much
longer had I not advised the natives to release him.)
He had probably never received such treatment at the
hands of “ niggers ” before, and was consequently greatly
enraged and indignant. Being unable to use the whip
out of a tender regard for himself, he resolved to see
what he could do through the Government at Hew
Caledonia. Others of his sort joined him; but as he
was considered the best scholar, and withal a man of
“ position,” the task of drawing up a complaint was
assigned to him. This paper arriving at the Govern-
ment office about the same time as the priest’s letter, to
which I have referred, helped, no doubt, to lead his
Excellency to decide upon the expedition. These men,
however, like the priests, defeated their own object by
urging the occupation of Lifu by the French. They
hated the restraints under which they were placed by
native laws; but no sooner were these abolished than
they found themselves pressed on all sides by innumer-
able “ rules and regulations,” which led most of them
to leave the island.
Let us now see what the Government has gained by
the occupation of the group. What did they seek ?An


officer of the expedition assured me that they came to
keep the English out and to make the islands French.
The idea of keeping the English out of the barren rocks
that compose the Loyalty group is quite a farce. Our
valuable colonies show that John Bull is a little more
ambitious in his selections of territory, and can well
afford to allow his chivalrous neighbour the undisturbed
possession of such islands, nuggets being more attrac-
tive to him than blocks of coral. But suppose they gain
their object, where will be the advantage? Is it an
honour to be able to count islands like those among
the possessions of the French? Is there much “glory”
to be gained in subduing a simple, inoffensive, unarmed
people ? Can it be a matter of very great importance to
the French that the “ British appearance ” of those islands
should be changed, and the French language spoken by
the natives ? Can the colour of the rags which the natives
attach to the masts of their canoes affect the French
Government ? Or would it have added much to the happi-
ness of his Majesty the Emperor Napoleon to know that
a few semi-civilised natives have been led to cry “ Vive
I’Empereur ! ” ? The end in no way justified the means,
yet there is no prospect of the end being accomplished.
The French are feared by the natives, not loved; they
have not yet displayed any of those qualities towards
the natives calculated to excite their respect and love.
Both Roman Catholics and Protestants now regard
them as their oppressors. Censured by the public and
disclaimed by the Emperor, within and without the
conduct of the Colonial Government was disapproved.


There has been, and continues to be, considerable outlay
without any income, or the prospect of any, except a few
pounds from Europeans for land and timber.
But what about the natives —how have they fared?
Alas ! those who could spare least have lost most. The
weakest have to bear the heaviest burdens. In addition
to the loss of life and property which I have already
mentioned, the natives were forced to work in gangs by
turns at the camp without any remuneration or even
food. Many of them reside at a distance of fifty miles
from the camp, requiring two days to go and two to
return, and having to remain a week at work, so that
they were obliged to carry a good quantity of food with
them. Not only so, but every village was required to
take a weekly supply of food for the boys in the Govern-
ment school. A corporal stood over the natives whilst
at work with a stick, which he sometimes used pretty
freely, but not always with impunity. Now and then he
mistook his man, and got his blows returned with
interest; the native knowing that he would be imprisoned,
did not spare him on such occasions. All natives that
work for the Government at Noumea are paid and fed,
why should not those who work at the camp at Lifu be
similarly treated? When the natives saw that the
French were obliged to respect the persons and property
of foreigners, they sighed and said, “ You have somebody
who cares for you; but nobody cares for us, we are black.”
Theirs is certainly a hard case. The enormity of some
crimes has often appeared greatly modified by its being
known that the perpetrator had committed them in order


to execute a benevolent object; but wbat can be said in
favour of tbe oppression of the natives in the Loyalty-
group ? What object can the French have in view that
will in any way compensate or justify the course they
have pursued ? It cannot be a political or a commercial
one, for the islands are valueless. Philanthropy would
surely have led them to leave the island in the hands
of Christian missionaries, to whom 15,000 souls is a
sufficiently powerful attraction. I can see no object but
that assigned by one of the officers, ‘‘ Glory! glory!
what does a Frenchman live for but glory ?” No-
body 7", I am sure, will envy them the (i glory ” which
they have acquired. This is not the only instance where
rushing to “ glory ” leads to shame.
Let us now turn to Ukenizo, who had vigorously opposed
the introduction of Christianity amongst his people, and
sent for the Roman Catholic priest to impede its progress
and secure the punishment of his disobedient subjects.
In his case, as in many others who have opposed the
truth, the consequences of his conduct recoiled most
completely upon himself. The French had not been
long at Lifu before Ukenizo and his satellites became
painfully conscious of having made a grievous and
suicidal mistake. In their simplicity they supposed that
having sent for help , the soldiers would be at their beck,
and to a considerable extent under their control I Like
our forefathers, however, they found to their infinite
disgust that the helpers became masters and oppressors,
by whom they were treated as servants and slaves.
The priests, ever ready to avail themselves of the civil


power, and finding in the commandant a man after their
own heart, determined to force Ukenizo and his court
to abandon their heathen practices and conform to the
requirements of their adopted religion. They were
accordingly informed that their harems must he broken
up, that they were each to select one of their wives to
whom they were to he married, and that Ukenizo was to
prepare for baptism! They had evidently not antici-
pated such orders, and had invited the French for a very
different purpose; they knew, however, that it was use-
less to resist, so they reluctantly complied. As might
he expected, the seijol, or breaking up of the harems,
was merely nominal. Ukenizo’s uncle—who was the
chief of Wetre de facto , Ukenizo being guided by his
counsel—was the first who openly recalled his wives, for
which he was put in prison and in irons. His party was
greatly enraged at this indignity, and declared they
would become Protestants. Ukenizo now became as
afixious to get rid of his assistants as he had been
to obtain them, and endeavoured to prevail upon the
Protestants to join him in an attempt to kill or drive
them from the island; the Protestants, however, knew
well that such an attempt must prove disastrous to them-
selves, consequently they wisely declined the honour of
again being brought into such close contact with his
guests. Hone were found willing to join him ; discarded
by the priests and the majority of the Roman Catholics,
he was ultimately taken by the commandant and sent
in irons to New Caledonia for attempting to excite re-
bellion. He was allowed to return after a time, but no


longer to be regarded as chief. He still lives in retire-
ment, and often expresses his deep regret at having
invited either priests or soldiers to Lifu.
Protestantism and English influence, the two objects
of attack respectively by the priests and Government,
so far from being destroyed or even weakened, appeared
to gain fresh vigour from the efforts made to suppress
them. It became evident to the natives that the gospel
in its purity and simplicity, as they had been taught it
from the Bible, was not only “ the power of God unto
salvation,” but also a power upon earth which influenced
the highest in authority on behalf of the most abject and
helpless; this led them to cling with greater tenacity to
the faith in which they had been instructed. On the
other hand, the authorities had succeeded in exciting their
fears; but with their fears grew their hatred, for they
saw that they were most unjustly oppressed. The treat-
ment which they received was little calculated to inspire
respect or confidence—both of which might have been
easily gained—it produced fear and secured obedience ;
but it also increased their respect for and attachment to
the English, for whom they had manifested such culpable
predilections.
We found that the Protestant churches, at the period
of which I am writing, instead of being broken up or
weakened, were in fact in a healthier and more pros-
perous condition than they were before the arrival of the
French, although no thanks to those concerned in the
expedition. True, we were still prohibited from re-
instating their former teachers or reopening their


schools; yet the work had received an impetus in other
respects which compensated for this. And had there been
no further interferences with our work, we should have
had no just cause of further complaint; but, unhappily,
their restless anxiety to effect a transformation which
must be the work of years, urged those sent to command
the Loyalty group to adopt the most unjust, arbitrary,
and contemptible measures in order to destiny our in-
fluence with the natives and impede our work. I will
now proceed to give a brief account of some of these
acts.


XVIII.
OPPOSITION WHERE THERE SHOULD HAVE BEEN COMMENDATION—SHOULD
DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE NATION AND THE INDIVIDUAL—NATIONALITY
—DISITERESTED MOTIVES—CAUSE OF THE NATIVE DISLIKE TO THE
FRENCH—ANTI-FRENCH FEELING ON NEW CALEDONIA—SUSPICIONS AND
SEVERITY—PERSONAL ANNOYANCES—NATIVE TEACHERS AND OFFICE-
BEARERS MARKED MEN—THE GREAT MISTAKE OF THE FRENCH IN THE
LOYALTY GROUP FROM THE COMMENCEMENT—THE TREATMENT OF PRO-
TESTANT CHIEFS—BULA’S CASE—ENTERS THE SEMINARY—ORDERED TO
LEAVE—FREQUENTLY CALLED TO THE CAMP—COMMANDANT SENDS FOR
THE PEOPLE OUT OF CHURCH—BULA IMPRISONED—PRIEST’S CHARGE
AGAINST BULA—BULA SENT TO NEW CALEDONIA IN IRONS—TREATED
KINDLY BY THE RESIDENTS—BULA’S VISIT TO THE ISLE OF PINES—
RUMOURS UPON HIS RETURN—GREAT CHANGE IN THE COMMANDANT'S
CONDUCT TO BULA—CONSULTATION—FURTHER HINTS—CRUELTY TO
PRISONERS—ATTEMPTS TO COME INTO COLLISION WITH THE NATIVES—
THE SKIRMISH AT NAEU.
Strange that we should have to date the interruption of
our evangelistic labours from the period of the arrival of
the French! The occupation of the Loyalty group by a
nation that claims to be in the very van of civilisation,
and prides itself upon granting liberty of worship to all
throughout its dominions, ought rather to be an auspicious
event in the history of our mission, and secure for us the
commendation and support of the authorities ;as the
diffusion of our principles amongst the natives, so far
from forming a formidable obstacle to the professed de-
signs of their Government, is eminently calculated to


facilitate their accomplishment. We must be careful,
however, to distinguish between the acts of a great,
enlightened, and liberal people, and those of a few de-
spotic officers to whom the command of a colony has
been entrusted. We should also remember that although
O
the Roman Catholic priests are allowed to prosecute
their work, and their efforts to proselytise are often
openly facilitated, that this does not arise from any pre-
ference of the authorities either for their persons or
principles, both of which I find to be generally in bad
repute. It is to be attributed solely to their nationality .
Our presence is offensive in the Loyalty group simply
because we are English , and are therefore supposed
to Anglicise the natives, over whom we are known to
possess great influence. A little reflection, however,
would surely lead them to a very different conclusion.
We are the voluntary agents of a benevolent society,
living far away from those dear to us, and from civilised
life, on low coral islands, without the possibility of pern
sonal aggrandisement, striving to spread abroad the
moral, social, and spiritual blessings of our common
Christianity, which we believe to be the best and quickest
way of securing life and property, and making the natives
loyal, intelligent, peaceful, and happy. From their own
account, our efforts have been attended with remarkable
success. It must be evident to all that we seek the good
of the natives. Now, it certainly would not be promoting
their welfare to u Anglicise ” them, for the u Anglicised ”
have been painfully and frequently reminded that they
are not those whom the authorities delight to honour.


The true friends of the natives (which I trust we are)
will seek rather to reconcile them to their position, occa-
sioned by the occupation of the islands by the French.
That the natives dislike and distrust their rulers is a
notorious fact, yet one that is easily accounted for, con-
sidering the treatment which they have received at their
hands; but to charge us with the natural consequences
of their administration is a manifest injustice. They
proceed to Lifu (where the French flag has scarcely
ever been seen before, and where the natives have had
intercourse with English ships and resident traders for
more than twenty years), seize their land, burn their
houses, destroy their property, shoot some of the natives
and imprison others, force them to work without giving
them food or pay, drive their teachers from the island,
silence their missionaries, close their schools, prohibit
the distribution of books, make themselves vile in the
eyes of all by their gross and disgusting immorality, and
then complain that they are not respected! Are the
natives to love bullets, bayonets, galleys, and prisons ?
Is it to be wondered at that they regard us as their
benefactors and the French as their oppressors ? The
feeling is as strong on New Caledonia, where there are
no English missionaries. Englishmen, lam told by
the traders, are perfectly safe throughout the island.
The English language is the best passport amongst the
natives, so that it cannot be English missionaries who
have “ Anglicised” the population. Yet upon this sup-
position our peaceful labours have been invaded; and
when the noble sentiments publicly expressed by his


Majesty the Emperor gained for us liberty to preach
the gospel again to our people, we were surrounded by
a network of rules and regulations which precludes the
possibility of extending our mission, or even carrying it
on efficiently amongst our own people. We were sub-
jected to a variety of annoyances and hindrances: our
motives were impugned ; our native teachers imprisoned
and driven from their posts unjustly; our people, per-
secuted, imprisoned, heavily fined, and even flogged
with a horse-whip for the most trivial offences, and all
our operations placed under the most contemptible sur-
veillance. I will give a few illustrations, which it would
be easy to multiply, from the numerous instances sup-
plied by a six years’ mal-administration of the Loyalty
group.
It would appear that at one time they entertained the
hope of driving us away by annoying us personally and
treating our converts with severity. If I took my family
to a neighbouring village upon one of their birthdays,
a soldier was sent to stand by during our stay. If I
got a log of wood cut on my premises, a soldier was sent
to see where it came from, and required to be shown
the stump of the tree to be assured that it had not been
stolen. At one of my out-stations the natives were told
by the commandant himself not to assist in hauling
my boat on the beach, although there was so high a
surf on that without their assistance not only the
boat but our lives were in danger. Native dances were
revived by the commandant, who was often present, and
sometimes remained through the whole night with the


natives; and the place selected for these noisy nocturnal
nuisances was right opposite our house. Orders were
given to demolish our bathing-house because it was
erected on Government ground! although it was situated
in an unfrequented nook three miles from the camp. If
the natives brought us a present of yams, they were
required to do the same for the commandant. If they
thatched our house, they had extra work given them at the
camp. The native teachers, young men in the seminary,
deacons, Sabbath-school teachers, and Church members
were all marked men, who often saw the interior of the
prison without knowing why they were placed there,
for there was no such thing as trial. They were sent for
from their villages, and upon their arrival at the camp
conducted to prison without ever seeing the commandant,
being informed through the grating of the small aperture
in the prison wall by some of their friends of the charges
brought against them. The commandant told me that
he could regard these men in no other light than as the
component parts of a political organisation on the
island! so that, in his efforts to obstruct and even
destroy our work, he professed to be actuated by a con-
scientious patriotic feeling. A better knowledge of us
would have modified his opinions, and led him to adopt
a very different course of procedure. Their great mistake
from the first, which led to so much cruelty and injustice,
consisted in their regarding Lifu as Anglicised
instead of Christianised. Had they looked upon the
community as one emerging from heathenism under the
guidance of English Protestant leaders, they would have


understood the natives better. Had they looked upon
us more as Christian philanthropists than as “ political
agents of the English Government sent out to extend
British influence,” they would have understood us better.
Had they commenced their work of nationalising the
population by treating them more as an ignorant family
than a rebellious camp , they would have succeeded
better ; but this was not their plan. They evidently
tried to break their spirit by harsh treatment. Pro-
fessedly allowing liberty of worship, they plainly taught
the natives by their acts, that to draw near to the
English missionary was sure to draw down upon them-
selves the disapproval and vengeance of the Govern-
ment.
As an illustration of the treatment which Protestant
chiefs received, I will instance the case of the young
and amiable Bula which was ultimately brought before
a Commission of Inquiry, appointed by the Imperial
Government to investigate the persecution of Protes-
tants in the Loyalty group.
Bula is the son of old blind Bula, who received and
protected the native teacher Pao and his associates. He
is the most powerful chief in the Loyalty group, his
territory including the greater part of Lifu, the islands
of Toka, and the small islands between Lifu and Mare ;
and his subjects numbering over four thousand. He
was a mere boy when Christianity began to be a power
in Lifu; and, attaching himself to the teachers, and sub-
sequently to the missionaries, he grew up under its
benign influence to be an intelligent, amiable, earnest
p


Christian. His great desire was to become a pioneer
teacher to some heathen land. In vain did we try to
show him that he might probably serve his God better
by remaining in his own country, where he had great
influence. He said that he had no desire to rule as a
king, he wished to work for God as a teacher, he had
been on a cruise with Bishop Patteson amongst the
heathen islands, and was anxious to take to them that
gospel which had done so much for his own land. Two
years after his application, he was admitted into the
Institution (having appointed his brother to the chief-
dom), where he was prosecuting his studies when the
French arrived at Lifu and closed our schools. Upon the
reopening of the seminary he returned with the other stu-
dents, no doubt more anxious than ever to go abroad. The
commandant, however, persisted in regarding him as head
chief of the Lssi district, and on two occasions he was
taken from the Institution and imprisoned on account
of there being a deficiency in the number of Losi men to
work at the camp. He made several applications, both
by letter and in person, to the governor and the com-
mandant, to be allowed to carry out his desire of becom-
ing a pioneer teacher; and although he was informed by
the latter, in the presence of the chiefs, that he would
be permitted to do so, which led him to continue his
studies, he was still held responsible for whatever hap-
pened in his district, and ultimately ordered to leave the
seminary and return to his home. Then commenced a
systematic course of shameful severity. He was seldom
allowed to remain a few weeks together at his home.


Had the distance been five miles instead of fifty, he
could not have been called to appear before the com-
mandant more frequently; and as he walked along that
stony, dreary road, and met those who informed him of
the escape of a Losi lad from the school at the camp, or
the lack of labourers from his district, or the neglect of
some of his people to take the usual tax of pigs, yams,
fowls, and cotton, his heart would sink within him
through fear of the “ Kalaboose,” in the smallest cell of
which he was often lodged for a week or ten days for
such crimes. On one occasion (while he was still a
student in the seminary), the commandant made a tour
through the island. He arrived at Mu on a Sabbath
afternoon during the hour of worship, and was received
by Bula’s brother and some of the leading men. He
angrily demanded why the natives were not assembled
to receive him, and was told that they were at church
(English influence and English notions again!) He
sent a messenger to the church to tell the natives that
they were to meet him at once. The native durst not
disobey, yet he knew better than to make such an
announcement in church during the service, so he went
quietly up the pulpit stairs and whispered the message
to the Rev. J. Sleigh, leaving him to deliver it or not
as he pleased. That gentleman, knowing that the com-
mandant would spend a day or two at Mu, did not con-
sider the case so urgent as to require the immediate
dismissal of the congregation. The consequence was,
that the commandant forthwith wrote a note to the
officer in charge at the camp (fifty miles off), upon the


reception of which. Bula was sent for out of class and
conducted to prison without any explanation whatever,
where he remained in irons for ten days. No one
appeared to doubt the object of these incarcerations :
indeed the priests and their followers repeatedly told
Bula and the other Protestant chiefs that they must
expect such treatment until they became Roman Catho-
lics; that theirs was the “ chiefs religion,” and that if
they did not embrace it, they would be put down and
others appointed in their place. Bula told one of the
priests that his (Bula’s) religion did not lead them to
expect distinction but persecution , which they were pre-
pared to endure.
Hitherto Bula had been imprisoned for the alleged
faults of his subjects, now a charge was brought against
himself. The priest lodged a formal complaint against
him at the camp for having, he said, forbidden one of
his subjects to marry a Roman Catholic! This, the
commandant affirmed, was a grave affair a direct
interference with personal liberty and freedom of wor-
ship, which required him to make an example of the
offender in order to prevent the recurrence of the offence.
Bula was accordingly placed in prison and in irons, and
upon the arrival of a Government vessel, was sent on
board, chained to a worthless fellow who had been
guilty of stealing from one of the stores. His wife was
ordered to accompany him. After they left Lifu, Bula s
irons were taken off, and he was treated kindly. At
Noumea he was kept prisoner at large for twelve months,
being required to attend the Government school in order


to acquire tlie French language. There being no Pro-
testant church in New Caledonia, this scheme was per-
haps intended not only to remove Bula from “ English
influence,” but to place him near the influence of pro-
selytising priests. Amongst the European residents,
however, there were some who gave Bula good advice,
which encouraged him to hold fast the profession of his
faith. By all, French as well as English and German,
he was treated kindly. Upon his return to Lifu he
found that the commandant’s feelings towards him had
not changed. He was accustomed, during his visits to
Chepenehe, to lodge on the mission premises with the
young men when not in prison; and when there we
supplied him with food. He was now, however, for-
bidden to stay either there or in the village, and was
required to lodge near the camp with the chief “ Jack,”
whom they had appointed in Wainya’s stead, and whose
house was a perfect brothel, and we were not allowed any
longer to supply him with food when in prison. Poor
Bula !we felt deeply for him, and trembled for him too,
for his Protestantism was severely put to the test. Al-
though the commandant reiterated the orders of the Em-
peror, that there was to be liberty of worship in the Loyalty
group, yet it was not difficult to read the lesson which his
acts were evidently intended to teach. For instance,
although Bula was so frequently required at the camp, he
found no difficulty in obtaining permission to pay a four
months’ visit to the Isle of Pines, where all the natives
are Roman Catholic. For ages there has been friendly
communication between the natives of that island and


the people of Lifu, although their visits of late years
have been few and far between. Their forefathers found
it easier to cross sixty miles of sea in canoes, than the
present generation do to overcome their religious pre-
judices. Bula was destined to have his faith further
tried. In seeking to escape one enemy he rushed into
the arms of another. In Lifu he had often been in
prison, but his mind was free and his faith firm. On
the Isle of Pines, however, he found a prison of a worse
kind, where the Scriptures are proscribed, and the mind
enslaved, and much of the religious services locked up
in an unknown tongue. The priests and leading men
of the island appeared to feel that their special mission
was to convert Bula, and they set about their work with
a will, giving the poor fellow no peace from the day of
his arrival until the day of his departure, which would
have been at a much earlier period had they not with-
held one of the canoes, without which the whole party
could not return, until Bula promised to consult with his
people on his return to Lifu, about becoming Roman
Catholics. One of the Isle of Pines’ chiefs was appointed
to accompany them to be present at the consultation.
Upon their arrival at Lifu, it soon became rumoured
amongst the Roman Catholics that Bula was about to
embrace their religion. One of the priests wrote to him
congratulating him upon his having become a Roman
Catholic ! and the other wrote to say that he would
visit him in a few days at Mu. A fortnight before the
consultation took place the commandant made a tour
round the island, and remained three weeks at the resid


ence of Bula, towards whom his conduct was completely
changed. He made him presents, spoke kindly to him,
associated with him, and promised to send a few soldiers to
build a stone house for him, two of whom arrived and com-
menced the foundation during his visit (nothing more
has yet been done to it). It was scarcely possible to mis-
conceive the object of such conduct at such a time. Mr
Sleigh and I were busily engaged on the revision of the
New Testament when the meeting of the principal men
in Bula’s district took place. We did not even know
about it until after it was over —a sure sign that our people
did not regard it in any serious light. Bula stated that
he had promised, when at the Isle of Pines, to call them
together upon his return, and ask them if they would
become Homan Catholics. Here was the chief, let them
give him their answer. An old man rose—a deacon of
the church at Mu—and said, “ Our answer to all who
ask us to change our religion is, that we shall hold fast
the one we have embraced until death.” The chief,
after finding that the old man had expressed the senti-
ment of all, returned to the Isle of Pines, saying that he
would not visit Lifu any more.
Whilst referring to Bula’s case, I may mention that
of another chief, one of Ukenizo’s principal men —who
abandoned the Roman Catholics and joined the Pro-
testants, five years after the arrival of the French. As
a Roman Catholic he had never been in prison, but he
had not been a Protestant a month when he was
imprisoned, and he assured me that he had no idea of
the cause except that he had become Protestant. He


and another Roman Catholic chief had each taken their
usual quantity of cotton and yams to the camp ; the
one was allowed to return to his home, whilst the other
was put in prison.
Not only were the natives committed to prison for
trivial and imaginar}'- offences, hut they were often cruelly
treated as prisoners—indeed there was sometimes dis-
played a wanton disregard for human life. For instance,
on one occasion, a few natives who considered that they
were unjustly imprisoned, managed to make their escape;
others of the same tribe, who were at work near the camp
when they saw their friends running away, native like,
ran too. The soldiers were ordered to pursue them
immediately, who, seizing their guns and bayonets, com-
menced to chase with the glee of the worst class of slave
owners. Those from the prison escaped, but one un-
fortunate and innocent man, who left his work and fled
along the road, was pursued by a soldier, who happened
to be a better runner than himself, and when overtaken
was run through with a bayonet and fell dead. The
soldier pretends that he was simply acting on the
defensive, although the native had not any weapon either
to attack or defend himself with. The murderer—for,
under the circumstances, it was nothing less than a
brutal murder —stated that, the native turned round and
took up a stone to throw at him! which explanation
appeared to satisfy the commandant, for the man did not
receive any punishment whatever. I may just mention
that this was the soldier sent by the commandant to
be present at our picnic on Mrs M‘Farlane’s birthday.


There was a manifest desire on the part of the com-
mandant to come into collision with the natives again.
I have heard him regret that a greater number were not
killed when they first arrived, and state as his opinion
that it would be necessary to burn some of their
villages, and kill more natives, in order to make them
obedient and respectful. Not only were they made to
work at the camp without receiving either food or pay,
but the Protestants were fined—besides the tax of yams,
cotton, and pigs which all had to pay—imprisoned, their
pigs, turkeys, and fowls shot by the commandant and
soldiers when they visited the villages, their wives and
daughters insulted —even the daughter of one of the
eastern teachers, and the widow of another, were seized
by the commandant —and thus in a variety of ways they
appeared to be trying to drive the natives to rebellion.
Their eagerness for combat may be illustrated by the
following incident: —
At a village thirty-five miles from the camp, two
young men quarreled and came to blows. Natives, like
Irishmen, fight generally with sticks. Other youths,
the friends of each, became involved; and a regular
skirmish took place, which might have terminated seri-
ously, had not the older men hastened to the spot and
put an end to the strife. We did not hear of it at
Chepenehe until two days afterwards. The commandant,
instead of sending for the culprits, or even the chief of
the village, prepared to proceed thither himself. I had
an interview with him before he left, and endeavoured to
dissuade him from going, assuring him that I had


definite information from the teacher there, and that the
affair was nothing serious. (The chief gave the com-
mandant as a reason why he did not immediately inform
him of the disturbance, that he did not consider it of
sufficient importance.) He, however, professed to think
otherwise, and started off with forty armed soldiers,
telling me that if the natives fled from the village he
should burn it down and fire upon any of them he could
find. To fly to the bush upon the approach of the
soldiers was just the very thing the natives were likely
to do, and what I felt anxious, if possible, to prevent.
No native was allowed to pass the soldiers on the road,
but I succeeded in sending a young man by a bye-path,
who arrived at the village before the soldiers, and pre-
vailed upon the natives to await quietly the arrival of
the commandant. They became excited and expressed
their fears, but ultimately consented; so that, when the
soldiers arrived, they found the natives all dressed and
sitting on the grass at the entrance of the village, with
a large pile of yams near them for a present to the
commandant. To open fire upon this peaceful assembly
was out of the question, and to destroy their village was
equally so; yet to have walked thirty-five miles (and the
most of it during the night), carrying their heavy arms,
with the prospect of having to retrace their steps with-
out either sport or glory , must have been exceedingly
annoying. It was a very suitable punishment for that
which they intended to inflict. After taking their
revenge upon the fowls and pigs, they bound about
twenty natives in couples, and marched them to the


camp. The fact of the guilty and the innocent being
alike taken prisoners may have arisen from the want of
a good interpreter. One of the young men happened to
have something suspended from his neck that resembled
the medals worn by the Roman Catholics; the com-
mandant, upon seeing it, immediately ordered him to be
released. The native did not think it worth while cor-
recting his mistake. One of the prisoners, through fear
and confinement, died. These instances will serve as an
illustration of the sort of treatment which the Protestants
received at that time.


XIX.
MISTAKEN IDEAS OF THE FRENCH—GOVERNOR’S DECISIONS—EXTRACT FROM
A LETTER TO THE REV. J. JEFFRIES OF ADELAIDE—OPPOSITION TO
ENGLISH DISSENTERS—GOVERNOR’S DECISIONS—PERSECUTIONS AT
UVEA—SUICIDAL POLICY OF THE GOVERNMENT—VISIT TO NUMEA—
INTERVIEW WITH THE GOVERNOR—COPY OF LETTER TO THE GOVERNOR
ABOUT OUR GENERAL WORK—SOLICITING PERMISSION TO SEND PIONEER
TEACHERS—ASKING PERMISSION TO ERECT CHURCHES—THE TEACHER
TEPESO’S REMOVAL FROM HIS STATION BY THE COMMANDANT—LAWSUIT
PROSECUTED BY THE COMMANDANT—LETTER OF EXPLANATION TO THE
GOVERNMENT.
It would be tedious and useless to enumerate tlie
various ways in which we were annoyed and opposed in
our work with the extravagant views which the autho-
rities, at that time, entertained respecting us. It was
natural that they should seek to destroy our influence
over the natives, and, if possible, secure our departure
from the islands. They evidently supposed that, by
sending away the eastern teachers, to whom the natives
were much attached, and who were under our control,
they would thus be removing the cause and medium of
our influence. When their mistake became apparent,
and they saw the places of those worthy men filled
by Lifu natives from the seminary, who were well
received by their friends, other measures were adopted.
The governor issued a number of “decisions,” which were


placarded in the village. From them we learnt that no
chief would he allowed to become a teacher. (This was
because there was a young chief amongst the students.)
That no native could exercise the functions of teacher
without the sanction of the commandant. (This had
special reference to the teachers labouring on Mare and
Uvea.) That no teacher would be allowed to exercise the
functions of his office, except on the island to which he
belonged. (This was because we had Lifu teachers
labouring on Uvea who were immediately sent home.)
That natives were forbidden to leave the group. (This was
because more than half the number of the students were
preparing for foreign work.) And that no churches could
be built without the express permission of the governor;
also that all churches in the Loyalty group were to be
henceforth regarded as Government property. By this
order, three village churches which were being built of
coral, were arrested, and although frequent applications
were made to be allowed to proceed with the work, per-
mission was not granted until four years afterwards,
when the Imperial Commission of Inquiry was sent to
Lifu to investigate our grievances. An idea of our
position and prospects may be derived from the fol-
lowing letter, which I wrote to a friend about that
time:—
You will perceive from the enclosed copies, and from what I
have to communicate, that the position and prospects of our mission
are somewhat altered, and are beginning to assume a rather serious
aspect. I have already intimated to you that although the spirit of
his Majesty the Emperor’s letter has not been complied with, yet
that we had acquired a greater degree of liberty than we dared to


anticipate, and hoped that a better acquaintance with us, and the
objects which we have in view, would ultimately inspire greater con-
fidence on the part of the Government, and lead them to accord the
liberty guaranteed in the Emperor’s letter. This, however, I appre-
hend, is becoming a lamentable improbability.
However disposed the Government may be to “ protect and
encourage” Protestant missionaries, such as they desire in this
group, ’tis evident that English Dissenters are not those whom they
delight to honour. Our anti-State Church principles are too strong,
and our love of independency too great for them. They interfere ;
we protest. They offer support ; we decline. We say, “ Let us
alone.” This is too much for them ; it produces a painful shock upon
their legislative nerves. This overwhelming propensity to legislate
upon everything, renders them utterly incapable of granting that
liberty which we justly claim, and which we have been led to ex-
pect. They grant “ liberty of worship but here, as in most matters
of dispute, the terms are not defined ; they mean one thing to them,
and another to us. They have doubtless already granted what they
consider liberty of worship. And although they have closed our
schools, forbidden the construction or repairing of village chapels,
and are now commencing to abolish native agency and otherwise to
interfere with our work, they probably do not consider that they are
interfering with liberty of worship.
The enclosed decisions of the Governor may, at first sight, appear
tolerably reasonable ; but we who are on the spot have no difficulty
in perceiving to what they plainly tend. A native teacher or pastor
cannot now be located without the sanction of the commandant. It
does not appear from this that there is any difficulty in obtaining
that sanction. Upon interrogating the commandant, however, I find
that obtaining his sanction depends—
-Ist. Upon his estimate of the teacher’s character.
2nd. Upon his opinion as to the desirability or not of locating a
teacher at the place proposed.
3rd. Upon the will of the chief.
When it is remembered that the commandant makes no secret of
his desire and intention to put down all native teachers, you will
easily perceive what degree of probability there is of our obtaining
his sanction to their location. Even supposing that he offers no
obstacle, it is not likely that a Roman Catholic chief, who is under
the thumb of the priests, will say that he wants one of our teachers,


or even give his consent to his location. The difficulty is consi-
derably heightened when we find a tendency to nominate Roman
Catholic natives as chiefs over Protestant villages ; as at this village,
for instance, where there are four hundred and fifty Protestants and
not one Roman Catholic, yet a Papist—a notorious scoundrel—is
appointed chief, and Ae, forsooth, is to decide in a question that we
all feel should be left to the people themselves.
These decisions, I fear, will be the cause of serious disturbance
on Mare and Uvea, for which islands they may be chiefly intended.
The teachers there have not been nominated with the sanction of
the commandant as at Lifu. The missionaries at Mare have not
yet been interrupted in their work. At Uvea, where half the popu-
lation are Roman Catholic, and the whole island placed under chiefs
of that persuasion, the priests have stirred up the worst passions of
their followers, and the vilest persecutions of the Protestants
has been the consequence. They have been driven from their
chapels by an armed mob of Papists, headed by a French priest,
who, upon their ejection, immediately occupied the pulpit,
from which he addressed his faithful followers. Some of their
religious edifices have been pulled down, and the materials cast into
the sea. Teachers have been maltreated in the prosecution of
their legitimate labours, and Protestant natives have been murder-
ously attacked, and seriously wounded, opposite the priest’s door :
their plantations have been destroyed, and their property seized.
The Rev, S. Ella and his wife have been insulted, and their property
stolen and destroyed. These ignorant, misguided people have even
rushed in upon Mr Ella, while administering the Sacrament, nearly
upset the communion table, dragged out the teachers, and laid violent
hands upon Mr Ella himself. ‘Tis exceedingly painful to receive,
from time to time, as we have done, the accounts of these unjust
and disgraceful proceedings, and yet to see that no attempt is made
by the authorities either to protect the innocent or punish the
guilty. Mr Ella has written frequently detailing these persecutions,
and I have had several interviews with the commandant and the
governor on the subject. They profess to have written to the chiefs
blaming them, and threatening them with imprisonment, although
the chiefs, who receive their communications through the priests,
boast that they are actuated by the commandant’s orders. The
chief perpetrator of these outrages has recently been over here
visiting a friendly chief. The commandant, who, instead of punishing


him, ordered the Protestants of this village to make a feast for him
and his people, and sent him back with the enclosed “ decisions,”
and instructions to send all the Lifu teachers from Uvea immediately.
The authorities here, in their eagerness to destroy “English
influence,” blindly pursue a most suicidal course, and then charge
the natural consequences of this policy to our influence and that of
the teachers. An honest investigation into the proceedings of the
commandant, would leave no cause for surprise at the manifest
anti-French feeling which exists amongst all the natives of these
islands.
To say that the Government here is adverse to the progress of the
natives in civilisation, would be, I believe, to pronounce an unjust
libel upon their intentions. They appear anxious to make some
effort to elevate the natives, just as they endeavour to colonise; but
their modus operandi renders them as incapable for the one as the
other. Our Lord’s rebuke to the Pharisees with reference to the
kingdom of heaven is somewhat applicable to the Government
here concerning the civilisation and general progress of these
natives, “Ye neither go in yourselves, nor suffer them that are
entering to go in.”
On Board the Day Spring ,
New Caledonia.
The Bay Spring anchored here on the 15th inst. By the pilot-
boat I announced, in a brief note to the governor, our arrival,
requesting an audience, and desiring his Excellency to state a
convenient time for that purpose. On the day of our arrival, Mr
Jones and I proceeded to the colonial secretary, with whom we
had a short interview, and in whose hands I placed my letter to the
governor, of which the enclosed is a copy, also the list of teachers.
On the 16th I received a letter from the colonial secretary,
intimating that the governor would accord the desired audience
to-day (17th) at twelve o’clock. We have just returned from an
interview of three hours, an account of which I will briefly relate.
We were kindly received by the governor and colonial secretary.
His Excellency spent the whole of the time commenting upon my
letter to himself, endeavouring to show that the liberty we ask is not
in accordance with the laws of France. I assured him that we had
no desire to violate French law, and that we only expected the same
liberty as Dissenters in France. He reminded us that French law re


quired every minister, Catholic or Protestant, to be a Frenchman. I
told him that the Emperor and his ministers had recognised the
London Missionary Society’s mission in the Loyalty group, although
they knew that we are all Englishmen. He said that his instructions
were from the Minister of the Marine and the Colonies, and that
they qualified the Emperor’s letter ; and that instead of according
us more liberty, he should be obliged to curtail what he had already
granted. Hence you will perceive that your petition to the
Emperor and his Majesty’s favourable reply are little regarded by
the Colonial Government. The governor informed us that he
understood the Emperor’s reply to your memorial to mean no more
than that we may preach the gospel to those who profess Protestantism
in the Loyalty group. For this it is necessary to assemble the
natives. AVhere are we to do this 1 We are not allowed to erect
religious edifices without the express permission of the Govern-
ment, yet when we ask for this we get no reply. If we assemble
the natives in a building of our own, we are reminded that we are
subjecting ourselves to fines and imprisonment. Nearly two years
ago I asked for permission to erect and repair some village chapels,
but I have not yet received an answer, although I have repeatedly
asked for it. The Government is to decide (in their own time)
where teachers and chapels are wanted, and we have no reason to
expect that they will grant a very liberal supply. We are strictly
forbidden to labour amongst the heathen or Roman Catholics. We
are not allowed to send pioneer teachers from this group to the
surrounding heathen islands ; our labours are restricted to those
here who are professedly Protestant, and even amongst them we
experience serious impediments in our work. Such is “ liberty of
worship,” according to the French.
I told the governor that we are simply the agents of a religious
community ; that that community, having been assured by the
Government at Paris that we should be allowed the free exercise of
our ministry, naturally expects that such liberty will be accorded by
the Colonial Government. This not being the case, obliges us to lay
before his Excellency such a letter as I have drawn up and request
a written reply. He has promised to send an answer to the
commandant at Lifu. He expresses his regret that a multiplicity of
engagements prevented him from giving us more time. Mr Jones
had several things to lay before him, but he would not enter upon
Q


them. With reference to recommencing our mission on New
Caledonia, his Excellency said that he had received orders from
France to prevent it, I asked him how he could reconcile that with
a law that he had read to us a few minutes before, which stated that
Protestants were entitled to the same rights and privileges as
Roman Catholics, to which he simply replied, “ C’est mon affaire
Several other questions were answered in a similar way.
The interview, on the whole, was most unsatisfactory, as I
apprehend [the answer to our letters will be ; but we have the
satisfaction of feeling that we have done our duty. We must now
go on with our work, as far as we may be allowed, and trust in God.
A change in Government (which is likely soon to take place) may
lead to a more desirable state of things.
The following is a copy of the letter which I laid
before the governor. The promised reply never came.
I took upon myself the responsibility of addressing this
communication to his Excellency, knowing that it would
be useless writing to him as a body, he having already
informed us that he would not receive any such addresses
or petitions:—
To ms Excellency the Governor of New Caledonia and
Dependencies.
Chepenehe, Life, June 1, 1867.
Sir, —Considering that perfect liberty of worship has been accorded
to the Protestants of these islands by the Government of France ;
Considering that his Majesty the Emperor has recognised, in
terms of approval and confidence, the London Missionary Society’s
mission in this group, and has graciously guaranteed that its agents
shall not be impeded in their legitimate labours ;
Considering that our mode of operations in this group is the
same as that adopted throughout the world where agents of the
Loudon Missionary Society exist;
Considering that the native teachers in this group are the
recognised agents of the London Missionary Society, by which they
are educated and supported;


And considering that, notwithstanding the noble sentiments
publicly expressed by the Emperor and the ministers of his
Government with reference to the free exercise of our ministry in
these islands, our labours for the evangelisation of the native
populations have been and continue to be seriously impeded ;
I, in the name of the Society which I have the honour to repre-
sent here, respectfully solicit for myself and my brethren in this
group—
1. To be allowed the free exercise of our ministry (where no law
of France is infringed) according to the modus operandi of the
London Missionary Society.
2. Similar liberty for the native teachers who are the agents of
the London Missionary Society placed under our care.
3. The right, in common with other missionaries of our Society,
to place, remove, or depose teachers wherever and whenever it
appears to us desirable.
4. The liberty to erect and repair religious edifices at the different
stations where teachers are located.
5. The liberty to send educated natives from this group as
pioneer teachers to the surrounding heathen islands.
We sincerely hope that your Excellency will, in accordance with
the spirit of his Majesty the Emperor’s letter, dated January 24,
1865, and addressed to the representatives of the different mis-
sionary societies of England, remove all impediments to the free
and honourable exercise of our functions in these islands as agents
of the London Missionary Society.
With sentiments of profound respect, I remain, Sir, your faithful
servant,
S. M'FARLANE.
Having waited for more than a year for a reply to the
above, I modified our requests in the two following letters,
which, I fully anticipated, would secure a favourable
answer; but they were treated with the same indifference
as the above :
To ms Excellency the Governor op New Caledonia and
Dependencies.
Chepenehe, Lieu, Oct. 5, 1868.
Sir, —Seeing that the Protestant seminary at this village was
established with a view to train native teachers for this and the


adjacent heathen islands, and that your Excellency graciously allowed
it to be reopened in June 1866, it having been closed in May 1864
by the order of the commandant of the Loyalty Islands ;
Seeing that, according to your decisions, no native can lawfully
leave this group, and that several students in the seminary are
anxious to proceed as pioneer teachers to some of the numerous
heathen islands in the New Hebrides group ;
Seeing that the only prospect of these islanders receiving the
blessings of civilisation is from the enterprise of Christian philan-
thropists; and considering that the French are in the van of civilisa-
tion, and distinguished for their efforts to promote the welfare of
nations, and may consequently be expected to facilitate our endea-
vours to ameliorate the condition of the savages around us ;
I have the honour to solicit permission from your Excellency to
be allowed to send annually from this island two or three native
pioneer teachers to labour on the islands of the New Hebrides
group.
With sentiments of profound respect, I remain, Sir, your obedient
C T\f C b' i nr a
servant,
S. M'FARLANE.
To his Excellency the Governor of New Caledonia and
Dependencies.
Chepenehe, Lifu, October 5, 1868.
Sir, —Seeing that the native teachers under my care have been
appointed to their respective stations with the sanction of the com-
mandant of the Loyalty Islands ;
Seeing that the appointment of a teacher to conduct religious wor-
ship necessitates the existence of a chapel in which to assemble for
that purpose ;
Seeing that churches cannot be constructed without the authori-
sation of the local authorities, and that so far back as November 3,
1 865, I have, in a communication to the commandant, solicited per-
mission to erect chapels at five villages where teachers are located,
and frequently repeated my request verbally since that date, and
that no permission has yet been accorded ;
And seeing that the grass houses in which the natives assemble for
religious worship are in a very dilapidated and disgraceful condition ;
I have the honour to request your Excellency to permit the erection
forthwith of such edifices for religious worship at the above villages as
the present state of civilisation of the natives will enable them to
construct.
S. M'FARLANE.
With sentiments, &c. &c.


The treatment to which some of our teachers were
subjected after the “ decisions ” of the governor may be
seen from the following letter. Neither of these teachers
referred to had any charge brought against them except
that they were supposed to entertain a dislike for the
French !
The Commandant of the Loyalty Islands.
Chepenehe, April 26, 1860.
Sir, — I had the honour to receive yesterday your letter dated
March 25, No. 26, in which you inform me that “Monsieur le
gouverneur n’approuve pas la nomination de Tepesseu & Cue, et que
ce teacher devra sans delai reprendre son poste a Chepenehe.”
Seeing that Tepesseu has been an acknowledged teacher for nearly
five years, and by his intelligence, energy, and devotedness during
that period has come to be regarded as the best teacher on Lifu ;
Seeing that he was appointed to Dropen, where the natives of
Chepenehe took refuge after their village was burnt and occupied by
the soldiers in ’64 ; that since their return to this village a teacher
is no longer necessary, and that, in accordance with the unanimous
and earnest wish of the entire population at One, also with your
knowledge and sanction, he was located at that village about three
months ago;
Seeing that the inhabitants of Cue are unwilling to give up
their teacher, and that those of Chepenehe do not require one, and
that to remove him by force would tend to excite and perpetuate
amongst the natives the very feelings that you desire to allay ;
And seeing that the repeated interference with the peaceful labours
of our teachers, as well as the prohibition to erect village chapels
and send pioneer teachers to the neighbouring heathen islands, is
entirely at variance with the spirit of his Majesty the Emperor’s
letter, with the liberty accorded to Protestants in France, and also
with that granted to Roman Catholic teachers on this island, who ?
in proportion to the population, are more in number than the Pro-
testant teachers, and however they may be designated by the
priests, exercise the same functions ;
I have the honour to inform you that I cannot recall Tepesseu
and replace him at this village ; and although I cannot prevent
you from sending soldiers to bind and conduct him to prison


like a felon, as you did to another teacher on a former occasion
whose only crime was being a teacher, yet I can and do protest,
and shall be under the painful necessity of referring the whole
affair to the appreciation of his Excellency the Minister of the
Marine and the Colonies at Paris.
I remain, Sir, yours with profound respect,
S. M'FARLANE.
From the following extract of a letter of explanation
which I addressed to the governor upon a matter of
litigation which the commandant had commenced against
me, it will appear that, so far from attempting to paralyse
their efforts to nationalise the natives, we endeavoured
to disabuse their minds of the unjust and injurious senti-
ments which they entertained respecting us by seeking
to facilitate the accomplishment of their designs. On
two occasions the commandant, in the name of the
Government, entered upon a lawsuit against me ; but in
both cases my letters of explanation were deemed suffi-
cient by the governor and attorney-general, who refused
to allow the cases to proceed. One was with reference to
the registration of the birth of a son, which the com-
mandant supposed I had neglected, although I had, as
in a former case, announced the event in a letter which
he returned unopened. The other was about cattle,
two or three of which we keep solely for domestic pur-
poses. The commandant learned from a native woman
that her plantation had been injured by cattle, and sent
her husband to demand from me one pound in cash !
No person had seen my cattle there; and although those
of a French resident had been observed near the said


plantation the day before the damage was discovered,
and although I was the only one out of ten Europeans who
kept cattle on private property and within an enclosure,
yet I was the only one summoned for damages done by
cattle to native plantations. I felt that as the cattle had
broken down the fence on a former occasion, they might
have done so on this ; and as it was possible, though not
probable, that the damage had been done by our cattle,
I offered to pay in kind for the loss sustained, or give
two dollars. (I had ascertained that the damage was. not
great. A European assured me that there was not a
dollar’s worth of food spoiled.) I was anxious to have
the affair amicably settled ; but as the commandant
seemed as anxious that the case should be brought before
the Court in Noumea, I allowed it to proceed, and wrote
the governor on the subject. Having explained the
circumstances of the case to his Excellency, I proceeded
as follows :
The real cause of offence is evidently the influence which I
possess over the native population of this island; yet I am at a loss
to conjecture how I can better atone for this crime than by exerting
that influence, acquired in the exercise of my legitimate functions,
for the welfare of this people. Of course gentlemen may and do
differ in their opinion about the means most calculated to promote
the welfare of a community ; yet this difference is quite compatible
with an exhibition of the most friendly feeling, since both seek a
common end.
In vain do I seek in my conduct for a cause which has the least
tendency to render me susceptible of being charged with opposing
your Government. You desired to establish a Government school
here. I used my influence to prevail upon Protestant parents to
send their children, and for a considerable time sent my three
servant boys in order to inspire confidence in the natives.


You desired the natives to return and rebuild this village. In
order to expedite this, I have been at the trouble and expense of
erecting a much larger building than we require for a class room, to
be used as a church until the new one is completed, and this has
had the desired effect.
You desire the natives to be acquainted with your language. I
teach French in the seminary, and am introducing French numerals
in all our public services, I have given French Testaments to the
Protestant boys in the Government school who can read a little, in
order to encourage them, and have promised to each a handsome
Bible in the French language when they are able to read it.
You desire improvements in the native dwellings and public
roads, I excite the natives to accomplish this, and assist them by
lending them tools, &c. With what success let the present condi-
tion of the island indicate. There are over 6000 Protestants on the
island. These were scattered throughout the island in innumerable
hamlets. We have sought to arrange them in twenty villages, built
after a plan, each to have a well in the centre and the village church
at one end. Several of these are completed. The natives have dug
wells and found water, and were erecting their religious edifices
when the commandant arrested them in your name, the order being
borne in triumph to the different villages by Roman Catholic
natives, much to the discouragement of those who were completing
an arrangement admired and applauded by all. The commandant
says that your Excellency objects to so many teachers. Are twenty
teachers too many for a population of more than 6000 ?Is it not
better to have twenty respectable villages than innumerable insig-
nificant hamlets, which will indeed necessitate the appointment of
an undesirable number of teachers ?
Let these efforts, sir, be placed alongside with the acts of the
•pmmandant, and the startling difference will at once be recognised
between the exercise of legitimate influence and the operation of
what may perhaps with some justice be termed “ lawless tyranny.”
In a conversation with the commandant about a year ago, he told
me distinctly that so great was the influence of the priests with the
Government in Paris, that an officer must abandon the hope of pro-
motion who undertook to oppose them, and that very few young
officers would do this. Perhaps I may find in this an explanation
of his recent conduct. Under these circumstances, however, I have
no hope of enjoying that interchange of friendly feelings between
those in authority and ourselves which your Excellency so earnestly


recommended. By the priests we are regarded as ■ heretics and
enemies ; and it appears that the officers who are sent here to com-
mand cannot be liberal and friendly toward us, as that would incur
the opposition of the priests. We must therefore stand alone in the
consciousness of our integrity, hoping to enjoy your confi-
dence.


XX.
EVENTS WHICH LED TO THE APPOINTMENT OF THE IMPERIAL COMMISSION OF
INQUIRY—PHYSICAL FEATURES OF UVEA—INTRODUCTION OF THE
GOSPEL—DIVISION OF THE ISLAND BY THE PRIESTS AND TEACHERS—
DESIRE FOR ENGLISH MISSIONARIES—APOLO’S APPOINTMENT TO
UVEA—MY FIRST VISIT TO UVEA—SEIZURE OF THE “PATE”—A
PROTESTANT CHURCH CLOSED BY THE PRIEST—MAL-TREATMENT
OF TEACHERS—INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIEST—ARRIVAL OF THE
“BONITE," AND LIBERALITY OF THE CAPTAIN—VISIT OF THE REV. J.
JONES TO UVEA—APPOINTMENT OF A MISSIONARY FOR UVEA—ORDERED
OFF BY THE FRENCH—CONDUCT OF THE PRIESTS UPON NEWS OF THE
ARRIVAL OF SOLDIERS AT LIFU.
We have now arrived at an epoch in the history of
the Loyalty Islands Mission which was happily the
beginning of a much better state of things. We had
evidently been misrepresented and misapprehended, and
consequently and our converts treated with
injustice and severity. In vain we appealed to the
Colonial Government at New Caledonia against the
injustice and partiality of the commandant at Lifu,
whose one great object seemed to be to secure promotion,
and who acknowledged that there was little hope of this
if he opposed the priests. We could not obtain that
liberty of action in our evangelistic work which the
Emperor had led us to expect. We could not obtain
(not redress , for we did not ask that, although we were
entitled to it) any cessation of the unjust imprisonment


THE PROTESTANT CHURCH AT UVEA.




of Protestants by the authorities at Lifu, and of the
persecution of Protestants on Uvea by the Roman
Catholics. So we wrote to the directors of our society
requesting them to make an appeal to the Imperial
Government at Paris. Several memorials had to be
addressed both to our Government and that at Paris
before the latter ordered the governor of New Caledonia
to appoint a Commission of Inquiry to investigate the
complaints which we made. As this commission had
special reference to the persecutions on Uvea, I will
here give a brief account of those outrages.
Uvea, like Lifu, is of coral formation, and forms the
east side of a group of about twenty low islets, connected
to each other and to Uvea by reefs, except where there
are openings leading to the lagoon. The principal
island is a long curved strip of land, thirty miles in
length, three miles wide in some places, and about 150
feet high. The next in size is separated from it by a
narrow strait, and is about twelve miles in length. The
rest are small islets forming a circular lagoon of about
twenty miles in diameter, with regular soundings which
decrease gradually towards the land. It is one of the
loveliest coraline groups in the South Seas. From its
large placid lagoon the natives obtain an abundant
supply of fish, whilst the numerous reefs and islets
supply a great quantity and variety of shells which are
eagerly sought by traders and visitors. There are two
distinct tribes on the island—one occupies the northern
and southern districts, the other the central one. The
forefathers of the former tribe are said to have been


drifted thither in canoes a few generations back from
the original Uvea or Wallis Island. Their language
bears a striking resemblance to the Samoan, whilst
that of the latter tribe is more like those dialects spoken
in the New Hebrides group. The whole population of
the islands is supposed not to exceed 2500.
The gospel was introduced by natives of Mare, who
were sent as pioneer teachers in 1856. The French
priests arrived in 1857, and, as usual, declared those
who preceded them to be false teachers, and themselves
the true messengers of God. By bribes and threats they
succeeded in prevailing upon a number of those who had
embraced Protestantism to become Roman Catholics;
and having settled amongst the enemies of the tribe
that had received our teachers, the differences assumed
a political as well as a religious character. In order to
secure the accomplishment of their designs, the priests
arranged with our teachers that they should confine
themselves to one district whilst they did the same in
the other. Our teachers believing, in their simplicity,
that the priests had no other design than that expressed
—viz., to promote peace —readily consented, and devoted
themselves to the southern district alone. The majority
of the two tribes embraced the doctrines of their respec-
tive teachers, and the island naturally became divided
into Catholic and Protestant. When, however, the
priests considered that they had acquired sufficient in-
fluence to prevent the introduction of Protestantism to
the northern part of the island, they proceeded to erect
chapels alongside the Protestant places of worship on


the southern side. In vain our teachers charged them
with breach of faith; the work of proselytising was com-
menced and carried on with vigour and not without
success.
The Protestants and their teachers now became more
anxious than ever to get an English missionary to reside
amongst them, and the deputations that visited the
island urged the directors to appoint a missionary for
Uvea as early as possible. This, however, could not be
done, owing to the pressing claims of other parts of the
mission-field. We therefore, the missionaries of Lifu and
Mare, arranged to visit Uvea in turn, and remain a few
weeks with the people. I being the nearest to the island,
was requested by the brethren to consider Uvea a part of
my district until the arrival of a missionary from England;
and the teachers were instructed to proceed, in a canoe,
to Lifu for advice in cases of difficulty. Being unable
to obtain a missionary, the principal chief, Whenege*
and a number of his people came over to Lifu to ask for
Apolo, a Samoan teacher, the best in my district; and
feeling that he would be of greater service at Uvea than
Lifu, I complied with their request, and prevailed upon
the natives of the village where he laboured to give him
up to the Uveans, who had no missionary.
It was in September 1860 that I paid my first visit to
Uvea. I went across in my boat to locate Apolo as
teacher at Fazaue, the village where Whenege resided.
Whenege is the principal chief on the southern part of
the island. I found that the priest had not only built
chapels in the Protestant villages, but had taken up his


residence at Fazaue, near Whenege’s house, and that he
was threatening the Protestants with a French man-of-
war. He had succeeded in getting around him a few
followers, men of the baser sort, whom he supplied
liberally with grog and tobacco. On the Sabbath
preceding my arrival he had taken the “pate ”(a small
hand-gong used as a bell, and beaten from one end of
the village to the other to assemble the people for "wor-
ship) from the lad who was beating it as he passed his
door, telling him that he hated the sound, and threaten-
ing him if he repeated the oifence. The day after my
arrival being Sabbath, I sent the boy to sound the gong
as usual. The priest, as on the previous Sabbath, rushed
out of his house as the lad was passing, and seized the
pate. I of course went immediately and asked for
an explanation. He told me that it annoyed him ; that
he hated the sound, knowing our religion to be false.
I reminded him that he had the remedy in his own hands—
he could remove to another place; that he was at perfect
liberty to ring his bell, and must allow our people to do
the same. He then said that the boy crossed his pre-
mises beating the gong, which I acknowledged he had
no right to do, and asked where his boundary line was,
and if the boy did not keep to the public road. I found
that the native had not deviated from the path, but that
the priest considered his boundary to extend across the
public road down to the sea ! At another village I found
the Protestant church closed, and the priest’s tabu set
on it in the shape of a stick with a piece of dirty calico
fastened to it, which I pulled down, and told those who


built and owned the church not to be afraid of his tabus ,
but to assemble as formerly in the building for public
worship.
At another Protestant village I found a number of
refugees from the northern district. The chief of Oinyat
(Owa) and a number of his people had embraced Pro-
testantism, and sent to the southern district for our
teachers to visit and instruct them. A Raratongan and
a Mare teacher went, but they were waylaid by the
Roman Catholics and beaten, and their books and clothes
destroyed. The Papists then mustered, about six hundred
in number, attacked the village of Oinyat, pulled down
the chapel and cast the materials into the sea, and
burnt the village. The poor old chief and a child who
lay sick in one of the houses unable to escape were
burnt to death. All who had declared themselves Pro-
testants were driven from the district and their planta-
tions confiscated, and were obliged to remain refugees
in the southern district, where I found them, till 1867.
They assured me that the priest had supplied ammunition
for the destruction of the village, and named five indi-
viduals who were known to have each received from him
a canister of powder,
I determined to visit the priest in the northern district,
and learn if possible from his own lips his views on
religious liberty. We met in the lagoon, and I invited
him into my boat and returned. We were three or four
hours on the passage, and so had plenty of time to
discuss matters in general and the persecution of Pro-
testants in his district in particular. He made po


attempt to conceal his hatred towards Protestantism ;
spoke of us as incorrigible heretics, and said that his
conscience would not permit him to allow any Protestant
teachers to enter his district, or even to remain on the
island, if he could prevent it. He appeared to me to be
just such a character as those of whom we read in Spanish
inquisitions, one who would probably be selected to
manage an infernal machine. He had the impudence
to ask me in my own boat what right we had to go
about as missionaries teaching false doctrine, and re-
minded me of what he considered would be the con-
sequences. I confess that I felt more amused and
instructed than annoyed at the man’s impertinence.
He was evidently in earnest; and when you see a person
in earnest, even although in error, you feel a sort of
respect for him, and more inclined to pity than to blame.
He informed me that he daily expected a French man-
of-war, and that he intended to lodge a complaint with
the captain against our teachers, and urge him to make
two of them prisoners; he charged them with disturbing
the public peace by going into the northern district.
Just as we were about to part on the beach a vessel hove
in sight. “ Here,” I said, “is probably your expected
man-of-war; we will refer the matter to the captain.” It
proved to be the French transport Bonite , which had
called at Lifu. The captain was, happily, a very liberal
gentleman; he was, indeed, a man of science as well as
war. He patiently heard our complaints, and, much to
the annoyance of the priests, decided in favour of religious
liberty, refusing to punish our native teachers, and


blaming the priests for creating amongst the natives a
dislike, if not hatred, of the French, by causing them to
expect and dread a French man-of-war. He assured me
that the priests had no authority for using these threats,
and that they had already incurred the displeasure of the
governor of Hew Caledonia by so doing. The captain
having assembled the chiefs, and given them some good
advice, he left, expressing the hope that perfect liberty
of worship would not be interfered with. The priests, as
may be supposed, were far from satisfied with the visit
of their countryman, and in a very short time succeeded
in effacing from the minds of their followers the impres-
sions which the captain had made in favour of religious
liberty, telling them that they would write to the governor
at Hew Caledonia, who would send a captain that under-
stood his business better ! Having visited the Protestant
and heathen villages, and a westerly wind springing up, I
returned to Lifu, having spent three weeks on the island.
Whenege and the natives appeared delighted to have
Apolo settled amongst them ; and although he was my
right-hand man, I also was pleased with the arrange-
ment, feeling that he would be of more use at Uvea thau
at Lifu.
In 1863 the Rev. J. Jones of Mare visited Uvea, and
remained several weeks on the island. He found the
work steadily advancing, and with it the opposition of
the priests, with whom, like myself, he had a most
unsatisfactory interview. The natives were increasingly
anxious to get a missionary; and in answer to our ear-
nest appeal the directors appointed the Rev. Mr Irving,
K


■who died in Sydney on his way to the field. The time,
however, had come for the Uveans to obtain the desire
of their heart, a missionary, although Mr Irving was not
the man intended by Providence. The Rev. S. Elia
having been obliged to leave Samoa on account of Mrs
Ella’s health, and being anxious to continue in the
mission-field, and thinking that the climate in the
Loyalty group would probably suit Mrs Ella’s health,
promptly consented (when urged by one of his brethren,
the Rev. W. Gill of Mangaia) to take Mr Irving’s place.
He was one of those on board the Day Spring when she
called at Lifu a fortnight after the village of Chepenehe
had been burnt down by the French. As I have already
stated, no person except the captain was allowed to
land, and Mr Ella was informed that he must abandon
the idea of settling on Uvea as a missionary. Before
the Day Spring left he wrote to the commandant, as an
Englishman, soliciting a permit of residence. After
remaining three months in the New Hebrides group, he
returned in December 1864, and settled on Uvea as
English resident , awaiting the decision of the Imperial
Government with reference to the restrictions under
which we were placed by the governor of New Cale-
donia. It is from him chiefly that I have received the
following account of the persecutions on Uvea.
As soon as the news reached Uvea of the arrival of
the soldiers at Lifu, and of the seizure and desecration of
the church at Chepenehe, the priest, in imitation of that
act, immediately assembled his followers and proceeded
to take possession of the Protestant churches. At


Fazaue a Protestant teacher (a Raratongan) and his
people were returning from church when they were
assailed by an armed mob headed by the priest. The
teacher was seized by a native, who raised his hatchet
over his head, saying that he would kill him if he con-
tinued his work. They marched to Banut, where they
found the congregation still assembled in the church.
The priest and a few of his party entered. He ordered the
teacher (a Samoan) to leave the pulpit, informing him
that he had come to conduct the Roman Catholic worship
there; that the Protestant (‘‘heretic”) religion was for-
bidden, and that the people must all become “ Catholics.”
They then proceeded to Whakaio and Lekin, and took
possession of the churches at those villages. They also
seized a small church at Nimaha, near Banut. Some
time before these events occurred, Drumai, the chief of
a Protestant village, became a Roman Catholic, and told
Bumele, the chief of the adjoining village, to take the
Protestant church to his own land. It was accordingly
pulled to pieces, the walls demolished, and then recon-
structed at Bumele’s village. This did not satisfy the
priest; he won over Bumele’s son, and told him that he
had better seize the church and use it as a Roman
Catholic chapel, lest the soldiers should come and take
it as they had done at Lifu! So Bumele and his people
were turned out of their place of worship again, which
was used by the three or four people who had joined the
priest at that village as a Roman Catholic chapel. At
one of the villages where the Protestants refused to give
up their church, the Roman Catholics assembled on a


Sabbath near the church during the hour of service, and
fired upon the congregation to drive them out. After
they had cleared the church they seized the teacher, and
threatened to kill him if he continued to hold services
there. The teachers, in imitation of what had been done
at Lifu, were all ordered to assemble on the mission
premises at Fazaue, and were strictly forbidden to
instruct the people, or hold any services with them what-
ever. The Protestants were told that if they wished to
assemble for worship, they must choose between Roman
Catholic chapels and the bush ; all Protestant assemblies
must be in the bush —a five-mile act! This was the
state of things when Mr Ella arrived in December 1864,
and in this condition they remained until April of the
following year, when he was allowed to officiate as the
Protestant missionary of Uvea.


XXI.
MR ELLA OBTAINS PERMISSION TO OFFICIATE AS MISSIONARY—OUR INTER-
VIEW WITH THE PEOPLE—ATTEMPT TO RECOVER THE CHURCHES THE
PROTESTANTS ATTACKED WHILE AT WORSHIP— MR ELLA APPEALS TO
THE COMMANDANT—NO REDRESS—GOVERNOR’S VISIT TO UVEA—PLACES
THE ISLAND UNDER CATHOLIC CHIEFS—CONFIRMS THE SEIZURE OF THE
CHURCHES—OWA’S CASE—OWA GOES TO OCCUPY HIS LAND—IS MUR-
DEROUSLY ATTACKED—OWA IS CALLED TO A CONFERENCE WITH THE
PRIESTS—PERSECUTION OF NATIVE TEACHERS—LIFU TEACHERS
LOCATED AND ATTACKED—THE BRUTAL TREATMENT OF KERISIANO—
CASES OF INDIVIDUAL PERSECUTION—MR ELLA ATTACKED—THE COM-
MUNION SERVICE INTERRUPTED—MR ELLA’S FRUITLESS APPEALS TO
THE AUTHORITIES—WABALU’S VISIT TO LIFU, AND RECEPTION BY
THE COMMANDANT—THE LESSON WHICH THE COMMANDANT’S CONDUCT
WAS CALCULATED TO TEACH.
It was during my visit to Government House in ’65, to
which I have referred, that his Excellency placed in my
hands written permission for Mr Ella to commence his
missionary labours on Uvea. Upon my return to Lifu,
I proceeded at once in my boat to Uvea, to convey to my
missionary brother the joyful news. We assembled the
people and communicated to them the welcome informa-
tion, which was received by the Protestants with great
delight. Mr Ella was now in a position to speak and
make himself heard on behalf of his persecuted people.
He sought, forthwith, to recover the Protestant churches
seized by the Roman Catholics. It was evident to the
natives that Protestantism was allowed by the Govern


ment, by the fact of Mr Ella’s being permitted to labour
there as Protestant missionary, and as a natural conse-
quence they inferred that the churches should be restored
to those who built them. We had an interview with
Wabalu, the chief of Fazaue, and other Roman Catholics;
he told us that he could not say anything in the matter,
the priest being absent. At Whakaio and Lekin the
Roman Catholics told Mr Ella that taking the churches
was not their act, and readily consented to the Protest-
ants reoccupying them. The chief at Nimaha volun-
tarily surrendered the chapel which he had taken. When
these facts were made known to the priest, he became
enraged, and sent messengers to the above villages
exhorting his followers to retain the buildings, and on
no account let them pass again into the hands of the
“ heretics.” Mr Ella advised his people to avoid any
rupture, but to use all quiet means to occupy their
chapels, and if they were prevented he would apply to
the governor at New Caledonia. At Whakaio the people
took possession of their church, and were at worship when
a mob of Roman Catholics entered, stopped the service,
and commenced dragging the natives out. The old
chief was greatly abused, told that he was worshipping
the devil; then called a devil, a heretic, a pig, and other
equally polite names. At Lekin the Roman Catholics
held possession of the church, telling the Protestants to
worship at one end of it whilst they occupied the other !
Mr Ella referred the matter to the commandant at
Lifu, which was the commencement of a long and fruit-
less correspondence between him and the authorities on


the subject of the persecutions of Protestants on Uvea.
Those outrages might have been prevented, and liberty
of worship and public tranquillity secured at Uvea as at
Lifu, had the commandant felt disposed to act justly
towards the Protestants, or had he, at least, determined
so to act; for whatever his feelings were on the subject,
his worldly prospects (judging from his own statements)
led him to play into the hands of the priests. Instead
of replying to Mr Ella’s communication by declaring
that there was to be perfect liberty of worship, and that
the religious edifices were to be used for the purposes for
which they were constructed, and that Roman Catholics
and Protestants were to live in peace as French subjects,
equally esteemed and equally amenable to French law,
—instead of writing in this strain, which would have been
in accordance with the spirit of the Emperor’s letter, he
evaded the question by referring to the governor, and
thus encouraged the priests and their followers to con-
tinue their persecutions.
The governor visited the Loyalty group in June; and
whilst at Uvea, Mr Ella requested him to order the Pro-
testant churches to be returned to the Protestants. His
Excellency had a long interview with the priests, and
ordered the natives to be assembled from every part of
the island. On the following day there was a general
meeting in the open air, at which were present the
governor and his statf, all the chiefs and most of the
people, one of the French priests and Mr Ella. The hopes
of the Protestants were raised. Although they were not
anxious to obtain redress for the injuries they had sus


tained, yet they hoped that at that meeting the governor
would take the opportunity not only of publicly restoring
to them their churches, but of expressing in unmistak-
able language his disapproval of the course which the
Roman Catholics had pursued, and sternly forbidding a
continuation of the persecutions and annoyances; also of
clearly making known to the assembled crowd that the
Protestants were allowed by French law the same
privileges as Roman Catholics. He would, of course,
have incurred the displeasure and opposition of the priests
by an enunciation of such sentiments; but surely an
officer in his position ought not to deviate from a just,
straightforward, and honourable course from such con-
siderations. From whatever motives he acted, he com-
pletely disappointed the expectations of Mr Ella and the
Protestants. He divided the island into three portions,
over which he appointed three Roman Catholic chiefs.
All the chiefs were formerly independent; and although
some were more powerful than others, yet all maintained
and gloried in their independence. To set up one over
another, and especially one of a different faith, was con-
sequently a proceeding that was likely to have a serious
issue, unless there was a power on the island to enforce
it. The governor’s idea, doubtless, was to simplify the
government of the island, by creating- three responsible
persons to whom he could look in cases of difficulty.
Still it would appear reasonable that one of these, 'at
least, should be a Protestant. The Protestants mani-
fested great dissatisfaction at this announcement, but
were silenced.


Mr Ella then requested the governor to give his deci-
sion about the churches seized by the Roman Catholics.
The chiefs of the villages where the churches had been
taken, being Roman Catholics, claimed the buildings
because they were erected on their land ! The governor,
after several attempts to avoid any decision, at last said,
“ You can take back the chapel here [Fazaue] for four
months, in which time you will be able to build another,
when you will leave this as Government property, which
no one can pretend to claim. The other little places will
remain in the hands of the Catholics for their use, but
are Government property.” Mr Ella protested against
this unjust decision, but was reminded by his Excellency
that all public buildings were Government property, and
as such he could dispose of them as he pleased. With
reference to former seizures and spoliation, Mr Ella was
told that he had no right to interfere, as the acts were
committed before he arrived.
The chief Owa then asked the governor to authorise
his return, with his subjects, to his village at Oinyat,
from which they had been driven by the Roman Catholics,
who would not allow them to return unless they adopted
their faith. His Excellency was informed of the attack
upon the teachers, the burning of the village, and the
fate of the old chief who perished in its ruins. The
Roman Catholics did not deny the facts, they simply
stated, as a reason for their conduct, that they had
determined to keep “ heretics ” out of their district.
The governor decided that the refugees should return
to their lands. Baihit, the Roman Catholic chief, at


once openly declared that he would not allow them,
when the governor commanded him to listen to and obey
his commands. No further reference was made to the past.
His Excellency abruptly broke up the conference and
proceeded to his ship, leaving the Protestants disappointed
and heavy-hearted, whilst the Roman Catholics were
exulting at the issue. Nothing had been done with
reference to the past, and more power had been given
to them, which would enable them the better to carry
out their plans in future. As might have been expected,
the persecutions of the Protestants became more frequent
and severe than before.
On the following month Owa and his people went to
occupy their lands, some Whadila men accompanying
them to assist in building their houses and making plan-
tations. When they arrived opposite the priest’s house,
a mob of armed Roman Catholics rushed out (of the
house and premises) upon them, and seriously wounded
five of the party. The Protestants were all unarmed,
and fled back to the village where they had been refugees
for more than two years. The transport Caledonienne
called at Uvea a few months afterwards, and the captain,
taking the two priests as interpreters, pretended to
inquire into the matter. He acquitted Baihit and his
murderous party, and threatened to take prisoner the
chief of Whadila (a Protestant) for accompanying the
people of Oinyat, as the governor’s permit applied only
to Owa and his subjects ! Such proceedings only tended,
of course, to encourage the Roman Catholics. The
priests were not slow to turn this connivance of the


authorities to account, and the result was open, syste-
matic persecution. I shall presently give a few speci-
mens of the kind of treatment to which the Protestants
were subjected, in the meantime let us follow the case
of the refugees. Several months after the Caledonienne
had been to Uvea, the commandant at Lifu resolved
to visit the island. He also made inquiries into Owa’s
case in the presence of the priests and people, and pro-
nounced Baihit and the priests guilty, declaring that the
former should cease to be chief. Months passed over,
and nothing further was done, Baihit remaining chief
and continuing his persecutions as before. Mr Ella
plied the commandant with letters on the subject; and
a year afterwards the latter wrote to Owa telling him
that he had better make another attempt to occupy his
land, but that he should go alone this time, and not
with a Protestant suite ! He did so, but was met by an
armed party of Roman Catholics and driven back again.
Six months more passed and nothing was done. Baihit
visited Lifu in company with the priests; was well
received by the commandant, although he had said
when at Uvea that Baihit was no longer to be chief.
After this interview the commandant wrote to Owa,
saying that Baihit declared that he had never op-
posed his return !! ! and therefore he was at liberty to
reoccupy his lands whenever he pleased. He could not,
however, have a Protestant teacher for his people unless
Baihit permitted it! Owa was called to a conference with
the two priests, who told him that he might return to
his lands, but that he and his people must not expect


any peace unless they became Roman Catholics. They
were on this occasion allowed to return to their village
(or rather the site of their former village) without moles-
tation ; but the very day after their arrival, Baihit called
upon the Protestant women to come and carry stones
and sand to make a road in his village. The men com-
plained of this, as Owa had never been a chief under
Baihit, and as they had their own houses and plantations
to attend to. For these complaints some of the men
were tied up. Baihit forbade any one taking them food,
and would not allow them to hold any religious services.
They were thus annoyed for some days, and then left to
go to Lifu to see the commandant. When Owa appeared
before the commandant, the latter abused him for not
obeying Baihit— i.e., not becoming a “ Catholic”—and
sent him back again without any orders. Owa and his
people settled down again at Whadila as refugees, feel-
ing that there was nothing left for them but patient
endurance and hope for Divine assistance. The priest
had a chapel erected upon Owa’s land, also a small house
for himself, and thus matters continued until the arrival
of the Imperial commission of inquiry.
The native teachers came in for their full share in the
persecutions on Uvea. These worthy men, the real pioneers
of Christianity and civilisation in the South Seas—were
marked objects of priestly rage and malignancy. These
holy fathers (or, as they have not been inaptly termed,
on account of their extensive trade in cocoanut oil,
“oily fathers”) not only abused them whenever they
had an opportunity, but also stirred up their blind


followers to molest and ill-treat them as much as
possible. The two teachers who were going to Oinyat
to hold services were assailed by a mob of Roman
Catholics, who tore up their books and their clothes,
and having beaten them, sent them back almost naked.
When the governor silenced the teachers on Mare and
Lifu, the priests did the same at Uvea. Subsequently
Mr Ella obtained permission to reinstate the teachers
from Mare, and send for others to Lifu, seeing they
were French subjects. The eastern teachers were
obliged to return to their homes. As soon as the Lifu
teachers were located at their stations on Uvea, they were
assailed by the Roman Catholics. At one village where
the chief was a Roman Catholic, though nearly the
whole of his people were Protestants, they attempted to
drag the teacher from the place. Shortly after, he was
still more violently assaulted. On the occasion of the
opening of a Roman Catholic church at Fazaue, he was
charged with having advised his people not to take any
part in the ceremony, nor yet to contribute to the feast :
for this offence he was dragged from his house at mid-
night by his hair; beaten along the road to Fazaue;
bound and imprisoned in the old Protestant church till
morning, when a cross was prepared, to which he was
tied, and exposed to the ridicule of the Roman Catholics
assembled from all parts of the island to the feast of the
“ Consecration,” the priest setting them the example by
entering the old chapel smoking his pipe, and laughing
at and ridiculing the crucified teacher.
The teacher at Lekin was repeatedly insulted and


threatened by the Roman Catholics on account of his
steady perseverance in his work, the chief declaring that
he would “ cut his throat ” if he remained there. Beinjr
engaged in rebuilding the village chapel destroyed by
the Roman Catholics, and in order, we suppose, to stop
the work, Kerisiano, the teacher, was seized at mid-
night, dragged from his bed, bound hands and feet, and
carried like a pig to a canoe waiting for him, and taken
over to Lifu—not directly to the commandant, but to
the priest who resides near my station. After I had
an interview with the teacher at Chepenehe, and learnt
the brutal manner in which he had been brought over to
Lifu unknown to Mr Ella, I informed the commandant
of the circumstances of the case, but nothing was done.
Mr Ella addressed a number of communications, both to
the commandant and to the governor, on the subject of
these outrages; the only reply he received was an order
of the governor suspending all the teachers, and requir-
ing them to return immediately to Mare and Lifu.
Natives of one island were not allowed to act as teachers
on another. This order was placed in the hands of their
persecutors the Roman Catholic chiefs, who were merely
the agents of the priests, and the teachers were sent,
away with abuse and indignity, without the least notice
having been taken of the outrages committed upon them.
There were many cases of individual persecution, from
which I select a few. Bumele, chief of Whakaio, was
one of the first who received the gospel on Uvea, and
one of the greatest sufferers from the persecutions.
Even his own son was estranged from him, and led to


persecute him. Not only was his chapel taken from
him and his people, hut, on pretext of having cooked a
sacred fish, his village was burnt down by the Roman
Catholics. On one occasion he was bound in a brutal
manner, so that he could neither lie down nor stand for
twenty-four hours. He was an old man, and had a
diseased arm, on which account his sufferings were more
severe during this day’s torture. His tormentors stood
near him during the greater part of the day, and when
he besought them to give him a little water, he was
answered by laughter and jeers. When released at
the end of the twenty-four hours, he was seriously ill.
Even when he died, the malevolence of his persecutors
followed him to the grave, into which one of them fired,
saying that he would 11 send his soul to hell ” !
The most usual form of persecution was that of bind-
ing with ropes and confining to a hovel. Several were
thus bound for joining the Protestants, and others
draggedtothechiefs premises, where they were compelled
to labour until they recanted and returned to the holy
communion of the Catholic and Apostolic Church ! A
boy who attended the Sabbath school was beaten for this
offence by his chief till he fainted. Persisting in going,
he was again seized, bound with cords, and taken to
a deep hole into which dead bodies were formerly thrown,
and threatened to be cast in unless he promised never to
attend the heretic school and chapel again. A girl about
eight years of age was similarly treated for the same
reason ; and the widow of a Roman Catholic having re-
turned to her family (who were Protestants) after the


death of her husband, was removed, and condemned to
labour in the plantations of the Catholic chief.
Mr Ella himself did not escape in the general per-
secution. We may easily imagine how acutely both he
and his devoted wife felt the pain of witnessing the
sufferings of their poor people without being able to
render assistance. It was a great relief to Mrs Ella
when she was permitted to send a little food to the
prisoners, but this privilege was not always granted at
Uvea any more than at Lifu. Not only was Mr Ella
insulted and his property stolen, but he was personally
and openly attacked whilst engaged in his missionary
duties. On one occasion, during the administration of
the Lord’s Supper, the Roman Catholics rushed into the
church, and proceeded to drag the people out. Violent
hands were laid upon Mr Ella himself, and the com-
munion-table nearly upset. This disgraceful affray was
accompanied by great excitement, from which Mrs Ella
suffered for some time afterwards. The cause assigned was
that the Protestants were holding a Sabbath school, and
that all schools hadbeenclosedby theorder of thegovernor.
On another occasion Mr Ella and his boat’s crew were
attacked near the priest’s house whilst on their way to
Oinyat. The cause assigned was that no heretics were
permitted to visit that part of the island. It would be
easily to prolong the list of persecutions and annoyances,
but these will suffice to indicate the sort of treatment to
which the Protestants were subjected. Mr Ella deter-
mined to keep the local Government fully informed of
all that happened, that they might_not be able to plead


ignorance should it become necessary to appeal to the
Imperial Government; his full and frequent communi-
cations, however, were often not even acknowledged. It
was very painful for us to receive from time to time
accounts of the proceedings at Uvea, and to see that no
effort was made either to protect the innocent or punish
the guilty. I often had interviews with the comman-
dant upon the reception of letters from Uvea, and spoke
strongly of the disgrace and injustice of allowing such
a state of things to continue. On such occasions he
would readily admit that the Protestants were treated
with great injustice and severity, but professed to be
unable to control the chiefs at Uvea, who, he said, were
the dupes of the priests. He stated that he had written
forbidding such acts, and threatening the chiefs if they
were continued, although the chiefs declared that the
contrary was the truth ; and I am inclined to think they
are right, for the commandant’s acts tended to verify
their words more than his own. It was not long after
this interview—(during w'hich he had expressed great in-
dignation at Wabalu’s treatment of the Protestants at
Fazaue, regretting that he had no means of getting these
refractory chiefs into his power, and blaming the go-
vernor for not sending him a vessel that he might pro-
ceed to Uvea and bring them over to prison by force) —
that Wabalu came over to Lifu in a canoe to visit
a friendly chief. How, I thought, if the commandant
is sincere in his professed anxiety to bring about
a better state of things at Uvea, he has an oppor-
tunity of making known his will by his conduct to
s


this man. Judge of my surprise when the Protestants
were ordered, to make a feast for this persecutor of their
friends at Uvea. He was well received by the comman-
dant, dined with him, and was retained by him three days
at Chepenehe, waiting for the feast that was prepared
especially for him and his followers. We thought that it
was likely he would escape imprisonment, notwithstand-
ing what the commandant had said to me about him,
but we were not prepared for such, u demonstration of
favour as this. The natives learned the lesson which it
was evidently intended to teach, and returned to Uvea
to the work of persecution with renewed energy. Feel-
ing that there was no hope of redress from the local
authorities —who had already attempted to get rid of
English missionaries, and were evidently conniving
at these outrages upon the Protestants, thinking pro-
bably by this means of systematic annoyance to lead us
to abandon our work —Mr Ella appealed to the London
Missionary Society, urging them to endeavour to move
the Imperial Government at Paris on behalf of the
Christians of Uvea. After several memorials, direct
and through our Government, to his Majesty the Em-
peror, an order was sent to New Caledonia appointing a
Commission of Inquiry to investigate our grievances.


XXII.
ARRIVAL OF THE COMMISSION—BULA’S CASE—MAL-ADMINISTRATION—PRO-
HIBITION TO ERECT CHAPELS—LETTER TO THE COMMISSION—PROBABLE
CONSEQUENCES—BULA AND THE COMMISSION—INJUSTICE OF THE COM-
MANDANT BEING ON THE COMMISSION—THE COMMISSION AT UVEA—
RESULS.
On the 24th September 1869, a French steamer arrived
at Chepenehe with the commission on board. At ten
o’clock the same night I received a letter from the
president of the commission, informing me of their
appointment and object, and requesting me to meet them
on the following day at the office of the commandant.
Having carefully thought over and arranged the subjects
to be brought before the commission, I proceeded at the
hour specified to the place of rendezvous. The com-
mission was composed of the judge and a lawyer from
Noumea, the commandant of the Loyalty islands and
an interpreter. The president proceeded to inform me
that the chief Bula had not been imprisoned on account
of his faith, as I had represented, but for disobedience
and bad conduct! He produced a list of Bula’s crimes
which he had received from the commandant, which he
read and commented upon. From this list it appeared
that Bula had been imprisoned for remaining at the
Institution (of which he was a student when the French
took possession of the Loyalty group, with a view of


becoming an evangelist to some beatlien island, accord-
ing to his earnest desire) instead of returning to his
people. His having been imprisoned a fortnight here,
and sent to New Caledonia in irons, where he was kept
a prisoner at large for about a year, was on account of
his having, it is said, tried to prevent one of his subjects
from marrying a Homan Catholic, of which the priest
had made a complaint. Other imprisonments were said
to have been on account of there not being a sufficient
number of his men at work at the camp at different
times. Leaving the president to judge between the
alleged crimes and the punishment inflicted, I simply
asked if he supposed that Bula had been allowed to
defend himself against these charges. He replied that
he had no reason to doubt it; that the French did not
punish without a cause or without trial. I answered
that it was not a question of what French law is, nor
of how it is administered in French courts, but of the
administration in this group, where there is no court;
and that to proceed upon the supposition that the com-
mandant had acted justly was begging the question. I
assured him that Bula and many other natives have been
and continue to be imprisoned not only without trial,
but without knowing the cause, except that assigned by
Roman Catholics—viz., that they are Protestants. They
have been sent for and conducted to prison without even
seeing the commandant. The judge, however, said (in
the presence of the commandant) that he could not
conceive it possible for a French officer to act so
unjustly!


When I proceeded to bring other questions before the
commission, the judge informed me that they were not
included in their instructions, and referred me to the
commandant. I told him that since 1865 I had repeat-
edly made written and verbal applications for permission
to build five village churches of coral in place of the
present grass houses at villages where there were
recognised teachers located, and also to be allowed to
send pioneer teachers from the Loyalty group to heathen
islands, but had not yet received a reply. He simply
told me to repeat my request, and closed the proceedings.
Returning home and thinking over the interview, I could
not but feel that it was far from satisfactory; and consider-
ing that the inquiry had been instituted by the order of the
Imperial Government from the pressure brought to bear
upon it by our own, and believing that the commission
appeared more anxious to justify the acts of the com-
mandant (he himself being one of the number), and pacify
our Government and the friends of our society, than to
investigate and remove the real causes of complaint, I
resolved to place before them a written declaration from
which they could not escape. After mature consideration
it assumed the following form :
To ms Worship the Chief Justice, President of the Commission
NOW ASSEMBLED AT THIS VILLAGE.
Chepenehe, September 27, 1869.
Sir, —With reference to our interview on Saturday, and the object
of your visit to this group, I have the honour to submit the follow-
ing considerations :
1. As we do not complain of French laws relative to liberty of
worship, nor of the merited punishment of Protestants, nor yet


simply of the persecution of Protestants by Roman Catholics, but
of a palpable mal-administration in this group, it is begging the
question to proceed upon the assumption that the commandant has
acted justly, because had he thus acted, the principal cause of our
appeal would not have existed.
2. We maintain that the administration of this group has been
unjust, oppressive, and partial ; also that the commandant, in his
reports to the governor, has made flagrant mis-statements. It has
been unjust, by inflicting severe punishment for trivial offences, and
by imprisonments without trial or even assigning a cause. It has been
oppressive, by forcing the chiefs to keep a gang of natives constantly
at work at the camp without giving them either food or remunera-
tion, by imposing heavy fines, and by incarceration and flogging, by
which some have been killed, and which have led several hundreds
to escape from the island.* Its.partiality has been manifested and
felt in a variety of ways too palpable to be mistaken ; and the mis-
statements of the commandant are evident by comparing his reports
with easily-ascertained facts.
3. We regard as the cause of the disturbances in this group—lst,
The priests, who, anxious to make converts, urge their followers to
acts of violence and persecution. 2nd, The authorities, who, anxious
to destroy what they term English influence, and supposing that the
*lf your worship will examine the natives who are now in prison (all
of whom are Protestants), you will be able to judge for yourself. You
will there find three boys with lacerated backs, who, because they ate a
piece of the commandant’s bread whilst carrying it along the road, were
severely flogged with a horse-whip, and imprisoned with hard labour. We
hear that they have to be confined for three months. The commandant,
supposing that some of his wine had been drunk at the same time, and
that the bottle had been filled up with w'ater, caused all the natives to be
assembled who had carried it at different stages for a distance of forty
miles, and as he could not discover the supposed culprit, flogged them all
round. You will easily find ocular evidence of this.
You will find there also a gang of natives from an inland village, who,
because they complained of the severity of the native acting as chief, and
unanimously desired the commandant to appoint their real chief in
his stead, are imprisoned with hard labour. The native teacher at the
same village is also subjected to the same punishment because, it is said,
he did not use his influence to reconcile them to the chief appointed
by the commandant. They have now been incarcerated for thirteen days.
prisoners here do not receive any food from the commandant, and
their friends, who have to provide for them, often live at a distance of
forty or fifty miles.


natives would be more loyal in politics if Roman Catholic in religion,
connive at the outrages in question. ’Tis well known that both on
Uvea and Mare the priests have given their followers arms and
ammunition to be used against the Protestants, and it is equally
well known that the authorities have neither protected the innocent
nor punished the guilty.
4. In laying these considerations before your worship, I hope that
you will do me the justice to consider that I am not actuated by any
feelings of disrespect towards the authorities, but simply by an
earnest desire to obtain for these natives that justice which it is your
prerogative to dispense, and which is necessary to promote the peace
and welfare of the native population of this group.
I remain, Sir, with sentiments of profound respect, your obedient
Servant,
S. M'FARLANE.
These were grave charges against the authorities, and
I was not ignorant of the danger to which I exposed
myself by addressing such a communication to the com-
mission, being a resident in the colony. Yet I felt
happy in the consciousness of my integrity and the
justness of my cause, and was prepared to substantiate
every sentence, and add much more of the same kind if
necessary ; and my interest in the welfare of the natives
and sympathy with them in their trials led me to deter-
mine to secure what appeared to be a good, and perhaps
the only, opportunity of bringing these matters before
the proper authorities, trusting that steps would be
taken to prevent the recurrence of such things, and
lead to a more just and liberal administration in the
Loyalty group. The president acknowledged the recep-
tion of my letter, but stated that as it contained charges
against the commandant, who was a member of the
commission, he could take no action in the matter. He
assured me that upon his arrival at Noumea he would
lay it before the governor, and that is all I heard of it.


It is highly probable that it led to an investigation into
the administration of the commandant, and it is equally
probable that they were convinced of the truth of my
statements, otherwise I should not have been allowed
with impunity to bring such grave charges against the
government in any official capacity.
Bula and the ex-teachers from Uvea were sent for to
appear before the commissioners, who in the meantime
went to Uvea. Bula and the chief <l Jack” had only
left Chepenehe a few days before, aaid had just arrived
at Mu, fifty miles off. They had obtained permission
from the commandant to visit their friends at the Isle
of Pines, and were preparing to start when the letter
arrived. It was written by a native lad in the Govern-
ment school, and done in so unintelligible a manner that
Bula supposed it to be simply a demand for ten men to
work on board the steamer. The commandant intended
it to be both an order for ten natives, and also for his
and Jack’s return to Chepenehe. I saw the letter my-
self afterwards, and it was by no means clear that Bula
and Jack were required to accompany the men to
Chepenehe. The men were sent off immediately, and
upon their arrival five soldiers were despatched to con-
duct the two chiefs to Chepenehe. Bula was put in his
usual place—the inner prison (Jack was not punished,
as he could not read) —where he remained until the com-
mission returned from Uvea ten days afterwards. Bula,
being naturally timid, was not likely after this lesson
to speak out boldly of the commandant’s injustice and
severity before his face —he knew too well what the con


sequence would be after the departure of the commission.
I have not heard what statements he made, but I know
enough of native character to feel assured that, although
he would probably speak the truth, yet he would not
speak the whole truth under such circumstances. Indeed,
if the Government had been anxious to obtain a full
and fair account of our grievances, why did they appoint
the commandant a member of the commission, see-
ing that many natives were to be examined (over
whom he was despotic) about matters in which he was
implicated? The judge and his brother lawyer are, we
are assured upon good authority, distinguished for their
liberal sentiments and just decisions; and from my
subsequent intimate acquaintance with the latter, I am
persuaded that they were honourable and searching in
their investigations, although sadly embarrassed by the
presence of the commandant—so much so, that on a
subsequent occasion, when the same commission was
appointed for Mare, the commandant’s name was struck
out, much to his annoyance.
At Uvea the commission found plenty of work. They
were three days in receiving the depositions of Mr Ella.
They then noted those of the priests, and concluded by
a prolonged examination of natives. The whole proces-
verbal was sent to Paris, and the decision was never
made public, although it was pretty evident what that
decision was from the revolution that followed about
six months afterwards. Both of the priests were
removed from Uvea to Uew Caledonia, and two others
sent in their place. The commandant at Lifu was


recalled, and his place filled by a liberal, impartial
gentleman—a civilian; and the governor was required
to appear in Paris, whence he did not return. Shortly
after his arrival there, another governor was appointed
to New Caledonia.
Before referring to the improved condition of the
Loyalty Islands Mission under the administration of the
new governor, M. de la Richerie, I must go back a
little, to record events that transpired at Mare between
the visit of the commission to Lifu and Uvea and the
arrival of the decision from Paris. Mare, although the
first to receive the gospel, was the last in the group to
suffer from French interference with our work, hence
its position in my narrative.


XXIII.
PHYSICAL FEATURES—CANNIBALISM—MASSACRES—SANDAL-WOOD DISCO-
VERED—FORCE OF CHARACTER OF THE NATIVES—A CANOE DRIFTED TO
MARE FROM THE FRIENDLY ISLANDS—MR MURRAY’S VISIT TO MARE—
REPORT OF THE LANDING OF TEACHERS—GREAT REFORMATIONS FROM
LITTLE EVENTS—THE EPIDEMIC AND ITS RESULTS—DEATH OF JIEUE
—BRIGHTER PROSPECTS OF THE MISSION—EXTRACT FROM REPORT OF
DEPUTATION—WANT OF MISSIONARIES—APPOINTMENT OF MESSRS
CREAGH AND JONES—THE SETTLEMENT OF THE MISSIONARIES—HOUSES
GIVEN UP FOR THEM—STATE OP THE MISSION—MR JONES SETTLES AT
LOTA—DETERMINED OPPOSITION OF THE HEATHEN—HEATHEN CHIEF
VISITS THE ISLE OF PINES—THE RESULT—FRUITLESS ATTEMPTS TO RE-
COMMENCE OUR MISSION ON NEW CALEDONIA—INCONSISTENCY OF THE
GOVERNMENT.
Mare lies to the south-east of the other islands of the
group. It is about eighty miles in circumference, with
physical characteristics resembling those of Lifu. To
describe the one, is to say nearly all that can be said
about the other. The natives were formerly fierce and
treacherous cannibals. They cut off a boat’s crew of six
men belonging to the brig Martha of Sydney in 1841.
In 1843 they attempted to capture the Brigand of China.
They attached her at daylight and were beaten off, but
she had seventeen of her crew killed in the engagement.
Towards the end of that year they attacked and captured
a vessel named the Sisters belonging to Sydney, and
murdered the whole of her crew; and in 1851 captured
the cutter Lucy Anne, and massacred her crew also. These


massacres, however, were committed in connection with
the sandal-wood trade, and will doubtless find an ex-
planation in the following paragraph from the Rev. A.
W. Murray’s “Missions in Western Polynesia.” The
writer had visited Mare and located teachers there a
few months before sandal-wood was discovered on the
island, and from his intimate connection with Western
Polynesia, is well qualified to speak upon that villanous
and bloody traffic :
“ Shortly after our visit to the island it was noised
abroad that sandal-wood was to he found on it. Parties
in search of that article flocked to it, and after a short
time a series of deeds commenced which, happily, had
few parallels in any single island of the Pacific.”
Although there is a striking resemblance not only
between the physical features of Mare and Lifu, but also
between the language and manners and customs of the
inhabitants, yet the natives of the former island are dis-
tinguished in Western Polynesia for their energy and
force of character. They are bold and daring. Captains
of vessels and planters prefer them to those of other
islands for sailorsand native overseers on cottonand sugar
plantations. They are, lam told, a terror to the Tannese
(more than a hundred of whom, all armed, have been put
to flight by a few Mare-men), and other natives on some
of the heathen islands in the New Hebrides group. This
force of character which made them fiercer cannibals,
now makes those who have embraced the gospel more
active Christians than their neighbours. We should
naturally suppose that it would be a difficult matter to




NATIVES OF LIFU- PAPUANS.


introduce Christianity among such a people. No doubt
it would have been if God had not, in a peculiar
manner, prepared the way.
In 1834 a party of eight natives of Niuataputapu, one
of the Friendly Islands, left their homes in a canoe for
a neighbouring island. Before they reached their des-
tination they encountered bad weather, were driven out
of their course, and lost at sea. They drifted to Mare, a
distance of more than a thousand miles, and were saved
by and became the friends of the powerful chief Jeiue.
Although they were heathens, and became associated
with the natives of Mare in their wars and heathen prac-
tices, yet they were not entirely ignorant of the true
God. They had heard of the arrival of missionaries at
Tonga and Samoa who declared that Jehovah was the
true God, but they do not appear to have known much
more on the subject. In 1841 the Bev. A. W. Murray
proceeded in the missionary brig Camden to Western
Polynesia with native teachers, to endeavour to com-
mence missionary operations on New Caledonia and the
Loyalty group. They arrived at the small island of
Toka, which they mistook for Mare, so little being
known of the group at that time. After having inter-
course with the natives, they left for Mare, where they
arrived next morning. We must let Mr Murray give
his own account of their reception ;
We lay off the island [he writes] the whole forenoon, anxiously
looking out for canoes, or something on shore that might indicate the
presence of human beings. At length, tired with waiting, and almost
despairing as to the accomplishment of our object, a boat was
lowered, and Captain Morgan and myself went in close to the shore.


Still nothing hopeful appeared. A rugged, repulsive-looking coast
stretched away before us, as far as we could see, without any trace
of human beings. We pulled slowly along the coast, eagerly looking
out for something that might encourage hope.
At length a canoe [was descried at a distance making towards
us, which filled us with joy. We felt as if our object was gained.
We were soon within hail; and how were we surprised and
delighted to be accosted with the following language, “ I know the
true God ! ” Who could this be in this land of darkness who knew
the true God, and who could speak a language intelligible to us ?
The mystery was soon solved. Our new friend turned out to be a
native of N iuataputapu, one of the Tonga or Friendly Islands, who
with seven others had lost their way at sea, and had been by a
merciful Providence brought to Mare. Taufa and his companions
had been on the island for about seven years. Thus he was just
the man we wanted—an interpreter provided to our hand. We had
lowered our boat at a venture, and pulled in to the part of the
island that we happened to be off" but had we been at any other
part of the coast, we should in all probability have been able to
Accomplish nothing. Thus we were led in a way that we knew not.
Ihus had we, as we have so often had since, to mark the hand of
God in our Polynesian missions.
To a guide thus marvellously provided for us we did not hesitate
to give ourselves up ; and we were led by him to a place named
Eoche, in the bay of Waeko, which has ever since been occupied as
one of our mission-stations. Here we found Jeiue, the principal
chief of one side of the island. He did not usually reside here,
but was on a visit at that time ; and this also was an important
providential coincidence, as he was the only man on the side of the
island where Taufa lived, and had influence, with whom the teachers
could be left.
The chief and one or two attendants went with us on board?
and Taufa and the teachers designed for the island slept on shore.
All was satisfactorily arranged with the chief and his attendants ;
the teachers were much pleased with all they saw on shore, and the
important step taken which has led to all the subsequent changes
which have transpired on the Loyalty Islands. What mighty
consequences are suspended on incidents in themselves trifling and
apparently fortuitous!
Who would notice an acorn tossed about in a rough
sea? Yet it may drift on to some barren island, become


a mighty oak, nay, a mighty forest, and ultimately
invaluable beds of coal awaiting the invention of steam !
How little did Taufa and his companions think, as they
were driven away from their native land by a contrary
wind, that the God of whom they had but just heard
was sending them to Mare to await the arrival of the
missionary ship, which was to follow when they had
acquired the language of the people, and gained a little
influence amongst them, in order that they might protect
the pioneers of the gospel! The party from the Camden
do not appear to have been aware that the natives had
arranged to kill them all and take the boat, although
such (an old native of Mare has assured me) was the
case; and from which they were deterred, no doubt, by
Taufa being in the boat, whose presence and influence
led not only to their lives being spared, but to the
teachers being received as the friends of old Jeiue.
The teachers had not been on Mare long when an
epidemic swept over the island, from which many natives
died. They, as is usual under such circumstances, were
blamed as the cause, and it was determined that they
should not live. Jeiue ordered one of his old priests to
kill them by his incantations. Old Joni proceeded the
following night to the teachers’ house, at the back of
which he performed his incantations whilst the teachers
were at prayers. He repeated the operation several
times without effect, after which it was decided to
despatch them with the club, seeing their gods had no
power over them. From this cruel death they were
saved by the powerful arm of Naisilin, who succeeded


Jeiue in the chiefdom, and became the friend and pro-
tector of the teachers. After the attempt had been
made to kill the teachers, the incantations of the priests
became powerless npon their enemies, who in several
successive battles were victorious. Jeiue and his subjects
were greatly afraid, and at a council held at the village
meeting-house on the subject of their disasters, it was
the unanimous opinion that the God of the teachers was
angry with them for not embracing their religion.
Consequently they publicly resolved to become converts
to the new faith. As the leading men had come to this
decision, the others were of course obliged to follow their
example, although for years they were merely Christians
by name.
After the death of old Jeiue (who died a virtual heathen,
although he attended the services and professed Chris-
tianity) the prospects of the mission brightened.
Haisilin became chief, and an energetic reformer.
Very soon the 'whole tribe placed themselves under the
instruction of the teachers, professing to have embraced
Christianity. Most of them were doubtless actuated
more by fear of their chief than by any desire to change
their religion, or habits and customs. It was, however,
from whatever motive, a move in the right direction.
Old Jeiue being at heart a heathen, encouraged the con-
tinuance of heathen practices amongst his people,
although they all professed to have embraced the religion
of the teachers. When Haisilin came into power, he
assembled his tribe and publicly announced his deter-
mination to become a consistent Christian. He


denounced their inconsistencies as the cause of their
sufferings from diseases and disasters, and ordered
forthwith the destruction of the gods. Christianity at
once became popular. Churches and schoolhouses were
erected and well filled by regular and attentive hearers,
and improvements were made in their persons and
dwellings. The following extract from the report of the
Revs. A. W. Murray and J. P. Sunderland, who visited
the island in 1852, will give an idea of the progress
made :
We went on shore at the very spot where eleven years before we
landed the teachers. What a change since then ! Instead of a rude,
disorderly rabble of naked savages, we found a company of people—
about six or seven hundred—all seated in a circle, all more or less
clothed, all quiet, mild, and kind. We proceeded to the chapel.
The scene there, and the emotions to which it gave rise, baffle
description. The chapel is 72 feet long and 24 broad. It was
densely crowded with evidently deeply interested worshippers.
There is a Sabbath school at noon, attended by about 200, who
apply themselves to learning to read with the utmost vigour.
Another general service is held in the afternoon. There are 31 good
readers, 200 members of a select Bible-class, and 51 candidates for
baptism and the Lord’s Supper. Hitherto there have been two teachers
at this station—Fili and Mika, both Samoans, Fili was taken sud-
denly ill, and died a few days before our arrival, so that now there
is only one. Fili died as it becomes a Christian to die. The poor
people made great lamentation over him, and appeared as if they
could hardly part with his widow and children. The state of things
at Guahma, our other station on this island, is rather in advance of
what it is here. Guahma is the principal station. It is the centre
whence the astonishing movement now in progress took its rise.
There is a chapel there 120 feet by 30, which the teachers say is
filled every Sabbath. There are 60 good readers at the station, and
the people, old and young, are striving to learn. A large number at
both stations have abandoned polygamy and other works of dark-
ness. The Sabbath is universally observed throughout the Chris-
tian district. There are upwards of 70 candidates for baptism and
Church membership, and altogether a most marvellous change has
T


taken place. The change began about three years ago. There is
reason to believe, however, that it was silently going on for some
time before ; but its external development was prevented by Jeiue,
the old chief, who received and protected the teachers, but who
was nevertheless decidedly unfriendly to Christianity. After his
death, his sons, who were well disposed, encouraged the people to
embrace Christianity, themselves leading the way.
The teachers, as might be expected, very soon led the
people to a limit beyond which they were unable to ad-
vance. They had done all. they could—prepared the
way for a more effective agency—and unless European
missionaries stepped in to carry on this glorious work,
reaction and retrogression might be expected. In 1853
the Rev. A. W. Murray of Samoa wrote a series of papers
upon the claims of Western Polynesia upon the Chris-
tians of Australia, which were published in the Sydney.
Morning Herald , and which led to the occupation of
Mare by English missionaries. The church assembling
at Pitt Street, Sydney, under the pastoral care of the
late Rev. Dr Ross, engaged to support two missionaries
if the directors of the London Missionary Society would
procure and send them to labour in Western Polynesia.
In answer to this proposal, the Revs. S. M. Creagh and
J. Jones were appointed to Mare, where they arrived
towards the end of October 1854, accompanied by Messrs
Hardie and Sunderland of the Samoan Mission. Mr
Bardie, in his report of the introduction of the brethren
to their sphere of labour, writes :
Very soon a large number eagerly assembled in the space before
the house erected for the missionaries. We then asked them if
they still held the desire, repeatedly expressed, for missionaries to
come and live among them 1 whether it was their wish that Messrs
Jones and Creagh should do so ? and if they did, whether they


would protect them and their wives, treat them kindly and attend
to their instructions? To all these questions the chiefs promptly
answered in the affirmative. We then told them, that in case of
political differences or of war breaking out, the missionaries could
take no part ; that their aim would be to promote peace and friend-
ship among all parties, and to labour for the present welfare and
everlasting happiness of all.
All being thus satisfactorily arranged, the next thing was to
get houses as temporary residences for our newly-arrived friends,
and Mr and Mrs Sunderland, who were appointed to remain with
them for the time to assist them in commencing their labours. As
there were three families to be accommodated, we wished to know
what houses they might have, and were told they might have any
they liked. We soon fixed on three convenient plastered cottages,
which their owners gave up most cheerfully. Having thus got the
way fully prepared for the landing of our friends and their property,
we returned to the vessel, which was soon brought to anchor about
two miles from the settlement. Early in the afternoon of the 25th
October, the landing of the goods and the cattle was completed, and
our dear friends took up their residence at this most interesting
station. Seldom or ever has it been the lot of missionaries to com-
mence their labours under circumstances so favourable, among a
people so prepared to receive them, and to benefit by their instruc-
tions. ... At Netche, the station at which the missionaries
now are, and throughout the district of Guahma, the whole popula-
tion, with the exception of the very aged and the very young, can
read, and about forty can write. About one hundred persons are
candidates for gospel ordinances, and there is every reason to hope
that the missionaries will soon have the happiness of forming a Chris-
tian Church. Each of the chiefs has put away all his wives except
one; twelve plastered houses have been built; and since last voyage,
in place of a large plastered chapel, which a storm had blown down
a strong stone chapel has been built, 80 feet long by 50 feet wide,
which is filled to overflowing every Sabbath with attentive hearers.
Such were the circumstances under which the brethren
Creagh and Jones commenced their missionary labours
in Mare. Mr Creagh took charge of the station at
Netche, and Mr Jones went round to Lota, in the bay of
Waeko, a distance of about fifteen miles. One-third of


the island was nominally Christian; the other two-thirds
were fiercely and determinedly savage and cannibal. The
Christian party were several times challenged to fight as
of old, but refused, and asked the heathen to join them
in receiving the gospel; this their enemies declared
they would never do, and threatened to kill any who
should dare to carry such a message from them into
their district. The missionaries saw the magnitude
and difficulty of the work before them, and bent their
energies to it. The language was soon acquired;
schools conducted upon improved plans; a boarding-
school established at each station, and the printing-
press at work.
It is unnecessary to detail the gradual progress of this
new and better order of things. Whilst, however, the
missionaries were delighted and encouraged by witness-
ing the advance of the work among the Guahma tribe,
they were disappointed and grieved at the continued
opposition of the heathen, whom they sought in vain to
win over to the gospel. The teachers whom they sent
were often maltreated; on one occasion one of them
was killed and eaten. The missionaries themselves
visited them, and were always allowed to return unhurt
and unheeded. The heathen did not appear to object so
much to embracing the gospel as to being reconciled to
their enemies, or at least succumbing to them, which
they supposed they would be doing by receiving the
gospel from them or their missionaries. They regarded
Christianity as the religion of their enemies, and appeared
to want something else for themselves if they abandoned


the religion of their fathers. Hence their readiness, as
at Lifu, to receive the Roman Catholic priests. After
many years, however, some of the tribes yielded, and
allowed teachers to settle among them. One of the
heathen chiefs went to the Isle of Pines to visit his
friends; he remained there a year or two, then returned
a full-fledged Roman Catholic with medals and crosses,
and two native teachers appointed by the priests to
instruct his people in the “ true faith,” with a message
from the “ oily fathers ” that they were about to follow !
Unfortunately for the “Propaganda,” however, this chief
happened to be one of the least influential on the island.
He had but few subjects and very little territory, so that
the heathen felt no disposition to adopt his religion.
For many years we had been endeavouring to recom-
mence our mission on Hew Caledonia. In 1861 I had
an interview with the governor on the subject (being
deputed by my brethren), but he gave us no hope that
we should be allowed to labour there. At a subsequent
period Mr Jones had an interview with that officer’s
successor, who distinctly stated that he had orders from
his superior in Paris to prevent the establishment of an
English Protestant mission in Hew Caledonia; he thought
that perhaps the Imperial Government would have no
objection to the French Protestants commencing a
mission there. As the Government professed to allow
us the same liberty as Roman Catholics, and as the
priests were likely to commence a mission on Mare, I
asked the commandant, one day in conversation, upon
what principle they refused to allow us to labour on Hew


Caledonia. He assured me that they did not act from
principle at all in the matter, hut from expediency. I
was desirable, he said, to endeavour to keep Catholic
and Protestant natives apart. Then, I said, the priests
should not be allowed to go to Mare. If they obtain
permission from the Government to go there, where
there are not a dozen people who want them, and where
we have been labouring more than twenty years, and
have about four thousand converts, surely we ought to
be allowed to labour on New Caledonia, where we had a
mission before the French took the island, and where
there are several tribes anxiously waiting for us. He
acknowledged that, according to the liberty granted to us
by the Emperor, we had as much right to go to New
Caledonia as the priests had to go to Mare; but that,
according to French law, we had no right even in the
Loyalty group, being Englishmen.


XXIV.
AKRIVAL OF THE PRIESTS AT MARE—ENTERING INTO OTHER MEN’S LABOURS—
THE OCCASION OF QUARREL WITH THE PROTESTANTS—COMMENCEMENT OF
HOSTILITIES BY THE ROMAN CATHOLICS—THE AGGRESSORS ENCOURAGED
BY THE CONNIVANCE OF THE AUTHORITIES—MR CREAGH’S LETTER TO
THE COMMANDANT—MR CREAGH’S VISIT TO THE PRIESTS AND THE
HEATHEN—POLICY OF THE PRIESTS—THE FISHING EXPEDITION DE-
CIDED UPON—ATTACK BY HEATHEN—WANAKAM SENDS FOR RELIEF—
THE GUAHMAITES ATTACKED—THE ASSAILANTS REINFORCED—THE
RETREAT—THE BATTLE WITH “ BAPTISED” WEAPONS—HEATHEN
ABANDON THE ROMAN CATHOLICS—CHAGRIN OF THE PRIESTS AT THE
FAILURE OF THEIR SCHEMES—THEY PLAY THEIR LAST CARD—THE
COMMANDANT ATTEMPTS TO CROSS TO MARE—THE PRIEST FIRES
UPON NAISILIN—THE SURRENDER—NAISILIN VISITS LIEU—HIS IM-
PRISONMENT.
Notwithstanding the pretended anxiety of the Govern-
ment to keep the Catholic and Protestant natives apart
in order to prevent quarrels, they gave permission to the
priests to proceed to Mare for the purpose of establish-
ing a mission there. Nor could they be ignorant of the
character of one of the u holy fathers ” who settled on
Mare, seeing that a short time before they had called
him to appear before the civil court at Noumea, on a
charge of having excited the natives of his district on
New Caledonia to attack the European settlers, seven of
whom were massacred in the night, and had banished
him from his station in consequence. This was scarcely
the sort of man to promote peace on Mare. He landed,


accompanied by a young French priest and a number of
natives from the Isle of Pines, and endeavoured at once,
by a liberal distribution of tobacco, &c., to ingratiate
himself with the enemies of the Christian party. This
was a policy truly worthy of the father of their system.
Considering the boasted self-sacrifice of the Roman
Catholic missionaries, and the zeal which they manifest
in trying to make proselytes among Protestants, and on
islands where Protestant missionaries have preceded
them, we might expect to find them the bravest and
best of pioneers, and to see the cross erected on almost
every island in the South Seas. The fact is, however,
that there is only one island in the whole Pacific to
which they have introduced Christianity. In every
other case they have followed Protestant teachers, and
even then have appeared to feel insecure (Frenchman-
like) until they are under the wing of the soldiers. This
is really lamentable, when we consider the great num-
ber of islands still shrouded in heathen darkness.
There is plenty of room in the heathen world, and even
in the South Seas, for every section of the Church with-
out interfering with the labours of each other, and
sowing the seeds of discord amongst the natives, and
widening breaches which the introduction of Christianity
ought to heal.
The priests very soon found an occasion of quarrel
with the Protestants. They took up their residence
with the chief, who had been to the Isle of Pines, but
were very dissatisfied with the situation. It was an
inland village, and difficult of access from the sea-coast.


Having learnt that the people formerly occupied a beau-
tifully-situated village by the sea-side, at the extremity
of Naisilin’s territory, from which they had been driven
in war, and .which was now occupied by a party who
paid tribute to Naisilin, and who had recently embraced
Christianity, a teacher being then located at the village,
they urged the chief to claim the land from which his
fathers had been driven, assuring him that in case of
difficulty the French soldiers would come to his assist-
ance. The heathen chiefs, who were enemies of Naisilin,
were also assured by the priest that if they embraced the
11 French religion,” the authorities would make them
great chiefs ! They had heard a good deal about the
doings of the commandant at Lifu, which tended to cor-
roborate the statements of the priests on this point.
The heathen, seeing, as they thought, an opportunity of
being revenged upon their old enemies, were disposed to
unite in any attack upon the Christians.
After this feeling had fermented for a while, the
Koman Catholics declared the land in question to be
theirs, and burnt down the Protestant chapel that was
erected upon it, telling the people that if Haisilin came
there again to fish (it was his favourite fishing-ground)
they would kill him, and all who accompanied him.
Haisilin was not the man to be frightened by their
threats, or allow his enemies to rob him of his territory
and rights with impunity; but he was now a Christian,
and having embraced the gospel of peace, he felt con-
strained to seek a more peaceable way of settling their
differences than by war. He consequently proceeded to


Lifu to state his grievances to the commandant (he was
the only Mare chief who went to see the commandant at
Lifu, although all were required to do so on the Em-
peror’s fete-day). The commandant promised to visit
Mare at once and arrange their difficulties ; hut months
passed, and although several good opportunities pre-
sented themselves, he made no attempt to get across.
The heathen party, seeing that no notice was taken of
the aggressors, became hold and insulting, sent messages
to the Christians challenging them to fight, and daring
them to go and fish on the contested ground. They also
drove away the teachers who had been located with some
of the petty chiefs in their districts. The Guahma
people were greatly enraged at these repeated attacks
and insults of the heathen tribes. Two of their teachers
had been killed and eaten; their plantations had been
plundered; their chapel burnt down; their teachers
driven away from those who were anxious to retain them;
and a part of their territory seized. Many were for war.
Let us accept the challenge of these insolent pagans,
they said. Let us show them that we are neither
“cowards” nor “women.” Let us, at least, go to our
fishing-ground, and see if they will fulfil their threats.
Mr Creagh had great difficulty in preventing them from
carrying out the last-named proposition, the chief
having consented. At last he prevailed upon them to
postpone the fishing expedition until he wrote himself
to the commandant at Lifu, explaining how matters
stood, and urging him to visit Mare as soon as possible,
as war was imminent. He informed the commandant


of the burning of the chapel, the expulsion of the
teacher, and the seizure of the land. His letter arrived
soon after the Commission of Inquiry had been to Lifu
and Uvea, and was not even acknowledged by the com-
mandant, who was doubtless greatly annoyed that we
had succeeded in getting a commission appointed to
inquire into his administration. Naisilin visited the
governor at Noumea, but got no redress. Months passed
away, and there being no hope of a visit from the com-
mandant, Mr Creagh made a tour round the heathen
district (Mr Jones was then in England), had interviews
with the people and the priest, and tried to bring the
former to reason and terms. But it was evident that all
were influenced and actuated by the priests, or rather
the priest who had been banished from the north end of
New Caledonia. By this “holy father” he was treated
in a very unholy and unapostolic manner. He refused
to allow the native to take water from his well for Mr
Creagh’s horse ; and when Mr Creagh called upon him,
he abused him as a “heretic,” and asked him angrily
what right he had to go among the heathen teaching
lies and leading people to perdition; told him that he
was “ a bad man,” &c. Mr Creagh saw there was no
use in trying to reason with such a man, and left the
place.
The priests were presuming too much upon the
forbearance of the Guahmaites, or miscalculating their
force against the Homan Catholics and heathen united.
By stirring up these old war feelings, and ranging two-
thirds of the island against the tribe of Naisilin, they


hoped, doubtless, to crush the Guahmaites, and establish
themselves as the peres of the conquerors. Naisilin,
however, was not a man to be trifled with. If the
priests supposed that they could treat him as the Pro-
testant chiefs on Uvea had been treated, they had
greatly mistaken their man. There being no prospect
of a visit from the commandant, a day was fixed for
the postponed fishing expedition. The Guahma tribe
were anxious to avoid war, but they were not prepared
to allow their enemies quietly to take possession of their
lands, and persecute their people; they had heard of the
persecutions on Uvea, and were determined to maintain
their rights. The fishing party were absent three or
four days, so that the heathen tribes had an opportunity
of carrying out their threats; they made no attack,
however, so the Guahmaites returned in peace, giving
most of the fish they had caught to a small tribe that
accompanied them, who were allies of theirs. This
tribe was waylaid by the heathen and narrowly escaped
being butchered ; fortunately the enemy was seen, and
aIL fled to the bush and secreted themselves. The
heathen, finding their prey had escaped, went on to the
village, which they burnt. They then proceeded to
another Protestant village, where they committed depre-
dations upon the plantations, houses, and chapel, but
did not burn them. On the following day they went to
kill and eat the cattle of Naisilin’s ally, but found it
more difficult to kill a bull than a man, so the cattle
escaped.
Wanakam (the ally of Naisilin, who was, with his


people, confined to the bnsh) sent by sea to Naisilin to
inform him of their perilous position, and seek relief.
The old chief at once assembled his subjects, and pro-
ceeded to the place indicated, to relieve the refugees.
They were seen by the heathen, who were in high glee
at the prospect of killing all the Guahmaites. The
houses haying been burnt down, Naisilin and his
people were obliged to spend the night in the open air.
The heathen had arranged to commence the attack early
next morning, and, accordingly, at daybreak the
Guahmaites were assailed. They were attacked from the
right and left by a numerous force. Naisilin had given
orders that they were not to fight unless compelled in
their efforts to save the refugees; even when attacked,
his orders were, “ Defend yourselves, but press on.”
When, however, several of his subjects were wounded,
he ordered a halt, and an attack upon the enemy, which
they very soon routed. This victory was attributed to
two of the Guahma natives, who fired upon their
assailants, causing the whole army to take to their heels,
although the shots were perfectly harmless, the men
having forgotten to put in the balls !
The Guahmaites pressed on to the relief of their
friends, and the retreating heathen party, meeting their
allies, returned with them to renew the attack. The
heathen and Roman Catholic tribes being now united,
were much more numerous than the Christian party, and
doubtless counted upon an easy victory. Naisilin’s army
did not consist of more than three or four hundred men,
but they were men in whose ability and bravery he had


perfect confidence. They would follow and obey their
brave old leader, who was, indeed, a host in himself.
The heathen, although more numerous, were less coura-
geous ; and having no good leader, each man followed his
own plan, which appeared to be, to get home as quickly as
possible {after one of their number had been killed).
Their legs were of infinitely more service to them than
their arms ! Several were wounded on both sides before
this man was killed, which decided the battle in favour
of the Guahmaites. The conquerors were now u flushed
with success,” and u determined to secure a permanent
peace,” so they pursued their enemies, most of whom
had taken refuge on their 11 git ” —a fine natural fortress.
The priests managed, however, to rally them once more,
and inspire them with a little courage. The u holy
father” gave them his own gun, sprinkled all their
weapons with u holy water ” and pronounced them
invincible ! jSTaisilin and his little army came upon them
close to the Roman Catholic chapel, where they had a
terrible encounter. The Papists and heathen fought
bravely near the priest’s house; but notwithstanding
their u baptised ” weapons, fourteen of their number
were killed, and they were driven back to their fortress.
Two of their villages were then destroyed, except the
dwelling of the priests and their two chapels, which
were not injured; although the Roman Catholics had
burnt the Protestant chapel some time before. The
Guahmaites then returned, leaving one dead on the
field —the only man they lost—who was cooked and
eaten by the heathen in the evening.


The result of this battle led the heathen to aban-
don the Roman Catholics. The spell was broken. The
“ baptising” of the arms was fatal to the interests of
the priests. The heathen declared they would have no-
thing to do with a religion so ii powerless,” and prepared
to huthe (give property, acknowledging themselves con-
quered) to Naisilin, This is not only customary, but
consideied by the natives a necessary guarantee of peace
on the part of the conquered, if presented; and on the
part of the conquerors, if accepted. Netche was very soon
swarmed with the heathen tribes, who came down, one
after another, to huthe , and according to custom, could
not return to their lands until taken back by the victors.
Instead of receiving the harsh treatment usually experi-
enced by prisoners of war among the heathen, they were
kindly entertained, Mr Creagh contributing not u the
fatted calf, but a fatted ox, which the heathen pro-
nounced to be nearly as good as human flesh !
TV e may easily conceive the chagrin of the priests at
the course which events had taken. In their “ zeal for
the Church, they had brought about a war, the conse-
quence of which had recoiled most completely ujDon
themselves. They intended to humble Naisilin and
exalt the Roman Catholic and heathen chiefs, to prevent
the heathen from joining the Protestants by bringing
the latter into disrepute as a conquered tribe, and to
lead them into the arms of the “ mother Church,” to
which they would attribute their victories. The result
was, however, quite the reverse. Naisilin was now, in
the eyes of the natives, a great man. The ceremonies of


the 11 holy Catholic Church ” were regarded as useless as
their native ineffectual charms ; and the number of Pro-
testants was greatly augmented by several heathen tribes
embracing Christianity.
The priests had yet, however, one more card to play,
that was to get the soldiers over to their assistance.
They had hoped to accomplish their object by uniting
the Roman Catholics and heathen against the Protes-
tants ; but that scheme had been a miserable failure.
They now left their homes, urged their followers not to
yield to Naisilin, assuring them that the commandant
would soon be over with soldiers to assist them, and
repaired with all their party to the git (the natural for-
tress), having sent three men in a canoe with a letter to
the commandant at Lifu, informing him that the Pro-
testants had commenced a war of extirpation against the
Catholics; that they had “ massacred” seventeen natives,
burnt villages, and destroyed plantations; that they,
with the remainder of their followers, were refugees on
a high rock, besieged by the Protestants, their houses
plundered, and their lives in imminent danger ! ! I They
claimed protection as Frenchmen, and implored the com-
mandant to come to their relief without delay.
Upon the receipt of this letter the commandant imme-
diately made an effort to cross over to Mare with ten
soldiers in an open boat. They were out two days and a
night, but were obliged to return, the wind being unfavour-
able and the sea too high. He therefore took the oppor-
tunity of a trader going to New Caledonia to acquaint
the governor with the state of affairs at Mare, and ask


for a vessel in which to visit the island. In the mean-
time Naisilin had given the chief of the Roman Catholic
tribe so many days in which to surrender, and present
himself, like the others, at Netche. As the time had
expired, he proceeded with his army to the fortress, and
demanded that they should surrender. The priest fired
several times at Naisilin from the top of the rock, but
missed him, one ball going through the French flag close
by him—a flag given to him when at Lifu' by the com-
mandant. The natives were for peace, and had even
collected the property to be taken to Naisilin as a huthe;
but the priests prevailed upon them to hold out, assuring
them that soldiers would soon arrive from Lifu. Whilst
the arrangements were being made for peace, the priest
kept firing upon the Guahmaites from above, but he
only succeeded in shooting one man, and that not
fatally—the ball went through his arm. What sort of
a heart must that be that allows its owner to fire not in
self-defence, but deliberately at a fellow-creature with
intent to kill!
To take the fortress by storm would have been a very
difficult and sanguinary task, requiring more “pluck”
than natives usually possess; and there appears to have
been no disposition to starve them out, which might
easily have been done. Naisilin gave them, according
to their desire, another week to consider the matter, not
knowing that they had sent off a canoe in the night to
seek help from the soldiers at Lifu. Five days passed,
and no help came to the priests; their followers then
resolved, notwithstanding their remonstrances, to leave
u


the fortress, and proceed to Netche with the required
acknowledgment to Haisilin. They did so, leaving the
priests to return to their homes, and informed Naisilin
that they were ready to become Protestants if he desired
— i'Q % , if he ordered them. Naisilin replied, that in
reference to religion they were at perfect liberty to do
as they pleased.
All the tribes had now acknowledged Naisilin as con-
queror. He was, in fact, King of Mare, and this state
of things had been brought about by the suicidal policy
of the priests. The conquered acknowledged to Naisilin,
and afterwards to the commission, that the priests were
the instigators of the whole. All promised for the
future to live in peace, whether as Roman Catholics,
heathens, or Protestants. So Naisilin having, as he
considered, rendered good service to the French authori-
ties, prepared to visit the commandant at Lifii, and
inform him of what had transpired. The priest, how-
ever, had crossed before him, and prepared the com-
mandant for his reception, so that when he arrived he
was put in prison.
The Mare-men who accompanied Naisilin were as-
tounded, and exceedingly indignant at this dastardly
act of the commandant. The Lifu natives were less
surprised, whilst the foreign residents —French included
—said it was a shame. The old chief had gone to Lifu
in a small boat; walked across the island (a distance of
fifty miles) to Chepenehe, where he washed and dressed
himself; then bearing a French flag, and followed by
his suite, they marched past the bottom of our garden


to the office of the commandant, to report how they had
been attacked, and with what success they had defended
themselves and restored peace throughout the island.
To be thrust into prison without any trial under these
circumstances, and kept there for six weeks, was cruelly
unjust.


XXV.
THE COMMANDANT VISITS MAKE—CHIEFS SENT OVER TO LIFU—UNJUST
AND CRUEL DIVISION OF THE ISLAND—SEIZURE OF NAISILIN’S LETTERS—
INTERVIEW WITH MR CREAGH—EXTRACT FROM MR CREAGH’S
LETTEE, THE STATE IN WHICH THE COMMANDANT LEAVES MARE—
THE COMMANDANT’S INTERVIEW WITH THE CAPTIVES AT LIFU—TREAT-
MENT OF NAISILIN’S SON AND HEIR—" THE REIGN OF TERROR AN
ATTACK UPON THE PEACEFUL NATIVES—A NATIVE STABBED BY THE
CORPORAL—NATIVES ATTACKED WHILST AT WORSHIP IN THE VILLAGE
CHAPEL—THE NATIVES IN A BAD CASE—THE APPOINTMENT OF A COM-
MISSION OF INQUIRY—DELIGHT OF THE PROTESTANTS AT THE ARRIVAL
OF THE COMMISSION—HOW TO GAIN THE ESTEEM OF THE NATIVES—
THE CHARGES OF THE PRIEST AGAINST MR CREAGH—M. RAT SUC-
CEEDED BY THE LIEUTENANT PROM LIFU—THE EYES OF THE NATIVES
ARE OPENED—THEY LEAVE THE PRIESTS’ PARTY TO JOIN THE PRO-
TESTANTS—STRATAGEM OF THE PRIESTS TO GAIN CONVERTS.
In reply to the letter of the commandant informing the
governor of the disturbances on Mare, a small vessel
was sent over to Lifu, and placed at his service, that he
might visit that island, and, after careful investigation,
make an official report upon the recent war. Leaving
Xaisilin closely confined in the inner prison, he took
fifteen soldiers, provisions, ammunition, irons for
prisoners, &c., and sailed for Mare. Arriving there, he
took up his residence at the teacher’s house, on Mr
Jones’ premises (this teacher had charge of the station
while Mr Jones was in England), and sent for the chiefs


of the various tribes. The natives were surprised to see
him without Naisilin, and began to suspect that all was
not right. In answer to their questions, the commandant
told them that their chief was staying at his house, and
that he had a servant to wait upon him! There was
truth in this, although it was evidently intended to
mislead. The commandant doubtless regarded the prison
as his house, and there was a native appointed to attend
to Naisilin, but his business was not so much to cook his
food as to provide it; yet when it was known that we
were supplying him daily from our table, it was pro-
hibited as being too good for him. The man was ordered
to get such native food as he could, and cook it himself.
When the chiefs were assembled, they were at once
conveyed to the vessel and sent over to Lifu; but were
not, like Naisilin, imprisoned, although they acknow-
ledged to the commandant that they had commenced the
war. Those who had accompanied Naisilin to Lifu were
kept prisoners at large at Chepenehe, yet these Roman
Catholics and heathen chiefs were not placed under any
surveillance whatever, they went wherever they pleased.
It did not require much effort on the part of the priests
and their followers to show these men who were the
favoured party, and what they might expect if they
became Protestants. Two of their number who had
decided in favour of Protestantism when they were at
Mare, now declared themselves Roman Catholics;
and all were persuaded to reside at the Roman Catholic
village, ten miles from Chepenehe.
At Mare the commandant had interviews with the


priest, the people, and with Mr Creagh. He took from
Haisilin’s sons the native property which had been given
by the conquered chiefs to their father, promising that
he would hand it over to the chiefs when he got to Lifu.
He made a new division of the island, pronouncing the
disputed land to be the property of the Roman Catholics ;
and even other land, containing some of the plantations
of the Protestants , was included in the portions given to
the Roman Catholic tribe. This was like taking the
bread out of the mouths of the Protestants and giving
it to their enemies. A son of Naisilin’s, who was acting
as chief during the old man’s absence’ with the com-
mandant’s consent, remonstrated against this injustice,
for which he was put down and another relative
appointed in his stead. The young man was even more
decided than the other; he told the commandant plainly
that they would not submit to such a division of the
land, that after he left they would punish the first man
that dared to take a yam from their plantations.
The commandant went to Haisilin’s house, searched
his boxes and took all his letters. A messenger was
sent at once to the priest on the opposite side of the
island, who returned three days afterwards, and im-
mediately after his arrival the letters were returned.
Upon examination it was found that two were missing—
copies of letters of Naisilin to the commandant. The
old chief’s daughter-in-law (an intelligent native woman
who speaks and writes English well) wrote to the com-
mandant a polite note, reminding him that he had omitted
to return two of the letters which he had taken, and


requesting him to give them to the hearer of her letter.
The native returned, however, without either the letters
or a reply. This was a pretty thing for a French officer to
do, and especially one holding the position that he did !
I could, however, refer to other acts of his of an infinitely
more disgraceful character, but I will not defile these
pages by narrating them.
In his letter to Mr Creagh, requiring him to appear at
his temporary residence to give evidence upon the subject
of his visit to Mare, the commandant charged that gentle-
man with being the cause of the war ! Mr Creagh, who
is an uncommonly quiet, judicious man—almost a Quaker
in his sentiments on war —felt greatly annoyed at this
gross libel upon his character, and required the com-
mandant either to prove or retract his injurious charge,
knowing that it must have been made from the misrepre-
sentations of the priests. The commandant, however,
did neither ; he was unable to do the one, and not honour-
able enough to do the other. When taking Mr Creagh’s
evidence, he refused to receive that part which had refer-
ence to the causes of the war, saying that he had heard
that from others; but Mr Creagh insisted upon his taking
his evidence complete or not at all. The following is an
extract from a letter which I received from Mr Creagh
upon the proceedings of the commandant at Mare :
I have no hesitancy in giving it as my conviction that the com-
mandant has acted throughout with the greatest partiality, I have
formed this opinion not hastily, but with great reluctance. I have
tried to believe that he wished to act justly, but I am compelled to
say, with great regret, that I cannot see any evidence of impartiality
He seems to take in everything that the priest tells him, and to act


upon it. Many have been made prisoners, but some of them could
not tell you, after being liberated, what they were detained for.
Having been three weeks at Mare, the commandant
prepared to leave. For six days he had been the guest
of that villanous old priest who had been expelled Hew
Caledonia, and who was unquestionably the instigator
of the disturbances at Mare. The commandant was no
doubt a firm believer in the priest’s theory, that the
natives, in order to be French, must be Roman Catholic.
There appeared to be little hope for Haisilin and the
Protestants except from above. Everything was turned
against them. They were humbled, and the Papists
exalted. They were imprisoned, and the Papists petted.
Their land, and even their food, was taken and given to
the Papists. Haisilin was represented as being a usurper
and a very ambitious man, and the Guahmaites as a
factious tribe; whilst the Papists were the poor persecuted
sheep against whom a war of extirpation had been
commenced! It was considered necessary for the
“ public tranquillity ” (!) to leave a corporal and eight
soldiers with the priest— i.e ., a body of armed men
backed by the authorities, who were to enforce the
arrangements made by the commandant for disturbing
the public tranquillity. Both the priest and the com-
mandant knew very well that, after the soldiers left
neither the Roman Catholics nor the heathen would
think of taking either the land or the yams of the Pro-
testants —all would remain quietly at their own place;
but they knew also that “Protestantism” and “English
influence ” would be supreme, and that, they were


determined, should not be the case. Corporal Rat, who
was left in charge, appeared to understand what was
required from him; he saw the course which the
commandant had steered, and knew full well that
promotion lay in that direction. Right or wrong is
seldom a question with such men.
A few days after the commandant’s return to Lifu, the
Mare chiefs were assembled and their evidence taken.
Naisilin was released from prison, but not allowed to
leave Chepenehe. His health failed, and no wonder. He
had been closely confined for six weeks —not allowed to
bathe or to take any exercise, except one day that he was
permitted to go to the hospital, the doctor having pro-
nounced it necessary; on the following day he was
conducted back to his cell. Being an old man accustomed
to fresh air and sea-bathing, the wonder is that he did
not suffer more from his confinement. The Roman
Catholic and heathen chiefs were set at liberty. Naisilin
was detained until the commandant received the
governor’s instructions respecting him. The soldiers
proved to be Job’s comforters to the old man, assuring
him that his head would be placed under the guillotine
at Noumea, others telling him that he would be tran-
sported to Tahiti. I have no doubt that the commandant
fully intended that Naisilin should not see Mare again.
His son and heir was taken to Lifu amongst the prisoners,
and ordered by the commandant to send for his wife and
remain at the Government school for six months, in order
to learn the French language. The young chief, how-
ever, had received a letter from his wife, containing such


an account of the commandant’s conduct whilst at Mare
as made him exceedingly indignant, and firmly resolved
not to send for her. He knew that to give publicity to
his wrongs would be sure to bring down upon his
defenceless head the vengeance of the commandant, so he
simply told him, that being a married man with a family,
he would not consent to become a scholar amongst the
boys in the Government school. The commandant
ordered him to be put in prison, and kept there
until he did consent. His father, old Naisilin,
although only relieved from prison the day before, was
determined to go back to his cell with his son; and it
required several soldiers to pull him away from the
prison door when they were immuring his son. After a
few days Jeweiie consented to attend the school, but did
not send for his wife.
At Mare the reign of the Rat was a cc reign of terror.”
He was an ignorant man, and apparently led by the
priest, and the latter knew how to use such a tool.
The chiefs were all at Lifu. The commandant by his
proceedings at Mare, and his conduct to Naisilin at
Lifu, had taught the natives a lesson which it was not
difficult to comprehend ; the priest saw his opportunity
and embraced it. If numbers are an evidence of success,
then the priests were successful; for many who had
declared themselves Protestants (and were still Pro-
testants at heart, as the sequel proves) took the medal.
The commandant’s name was used freely in these efforts
to proselytise, and M. Rat was always ready to give
efficacy to the admonitions of the “ holy father.”


Teachers were imprisoned* and impeded in their work;
while the Protestant natives were made to feel the rigour
of his rule in a variety of ways. Not only were many
of them tied up, they knew not why, hut the following
cases appeared to indicate a disposition to drive the
natives to open rebellion.
One of the Protestant chiefs (the chief of the tribe
that Naisilin saved), while at Lifu, wrote to his tribe
telling them to give the Guahmaites a lot of yams from
their plantations, lest they should be suffering from
want, having lately had to feed so many of the heathen.
A day was fixed upon which all the Guahma people were
invited to meet Wanakam’s tribe at their plantations.
All went, and remained there several days feasting on
the yams, and digging others to bring away with them.
The corporal heard of their being in the neighbourhood,
and probably through the exaggeration of the priest and
his followers, construed their presence into a declaration
of war, although when he arrived he must have seen
that it was impossible that such were their intentions,
as all their women and even little girls were with them.
However, he made his appearance with his soldiers
just as the people were preparing to leave, ordered the
Guahma people away, and told Wanakam’s tribe to
take all the yams to the il Titi ” —the Roman Catholic
tribe!
At the same time and place an old man of Guahma
* For instance, one teacher was a prisoner for ten days with his
legs fastened crosswise, and one of the rights, in addition to his legs
being fastened, his hands were tied behind his back with a cord!


was made prisoner without any reason being assigned.
Upon another man asking the cause, the corporal
savagely replied by thrusting his bayonet into the poor
man’s side immediately below the ribs on the right
side. The poor fellow fell, lost a great quantity of
blood, and was carried away by his friends. The wonder
is, that the people did not there and then despatch all
the soldiers. It must have been a great effort on their
part to restrain their rage. They knew that their chiefs
were hostages at Lifu, hence their forbearance. The
soldiers sent for all the Papists, and carried away the
yams.
On another occasion, the inhabitants of Wabawo were
attacked by a heathen tribe, under the direction of Cor-
poral Rat, while they were in church quietly engaged in
the morning service. Of course they were quite unpre-
pared for such a surprise. The enemy came armed
with clubs and spears, both of which were freely used.
Nine were made prisoners and taken away to be incar-
cerated, amongst whom was the teacher of the place.
The reason assigned for this attack was, that the people
had not regarded the division, which the commandant
had unjustly made, of their lands—a cruel and arbitrary
division. They had dared to take the produce of their
own plantations. What were they to eat ? Had they
been allowed to take the produce of their land for that
year, it would not have been so bad. Theirs was cer-
tainly a hard case. Had the corporal gone with the
soldiers, the people would have submitted more readily.
It was a very hazardous step to employ the former


enemies of the people to make this attack. Had he in-
tended to excite the people to take up arms, he could
scarcely have chosen a better plan. If any one had been
killed, the Rat would certainly have been responsible.
There was a fight at the place, the heathen using clubs
and spears, and the Wabawo natives throwing stones —
the only weapons they had. Had the people not been
prevented by the teacher, they would have got their arms,
and there would have been a regular battle.
What were the natives to do ? They were in a bad case,
and who was to undertake for them. They sent over to
Lifu to inform the commandant of the proceedings of
Corporal Rat; but, of course, no notice was taken
of their complaints. They knew that it would be
useless to resist; they could not contend with French
soldiers whose name was legion. Mr Creagh had
written on their behalf to the governor; but their
only hope was from above. He who heard the groanings
of the children of Israel in Egypt, and witnessed their
sufferings, and delivered them, would, they hoped,
vindicate the cause of the poor and distressed on Mare.
The prospect was certainly not very bright. When the
natives considered what the administration at Lifu had
been, and what the authorities had permitted at Uvea,
they had no reason to expect any change for the better
at Mare. A commission of inquiry, however, had been
to those islands, and however anxious the governor
might be to destroy “ English influence,” he doubtless
felt that he could not, dare not, permit the continuation
of such severity, injustice, and misrepresentation.


The answer to the commandant’s report was the ap-
pointment of a commission, consisting of two judges, a
lawyer, and an interpreter, to investigate into the events
giving rise to and connected with the late war at Mare.
The commandant did not conceal from the commission,
from which he was this time excluded, his disappoint-
ment and chagrin at their arrival. It was impossible
for him not to perceive that the governor had not con-
fidence in his reports, and that there was a probability
of all that he had done at Mare being changed, and
himself dishonoured. Happily, the days of his lawless
tyranny in the Loyalty group were numbered. The
answer to the report of the Imperial Commission was on
its way from Paris, which, with his disgraceful proceed-
ings at Mare, led to his return to France, just after war
had been declared against Germany; where he doubtless
found that the natives of Germany were more difficult
to imprison and subdue than those of the Loyalty group.
Naisilin and the Protestants were delighted to hear
that another investigation was to be made into the
Mare affair. Instead of being taken to Noumea, and to
the guillotine, as the soldiers told him he would be, he
and all his party, including his son, returned to Mare
with the commission. These gentlemen made a search-
ing inquiry into the cause of the war, and completely
exonerated Naisilin. The principal Roman Catholic
chief, upon whom the others threw the blame of origi-
nating the war, ultimately declared to the commission
that he had been instigated by the priest. This, however,
could not be proved , and the priest of course denied it;


but the value of his denial may be estimated from the
fact (which I have upon the most reliable authority) that
before the commission terminated their investigations,
they openly charged him with wilful lies , and left his
residence in disgust! The commission went thoroughly
into the history of Mare. One of their number told me
afterwards that he understood the history of Mare better
than that of his own country. The land taken by the
commandant from the Protestants was restored, and
justice was dispensed to all.
This was the true way to gain the esteem of the natives.
The commandant, in a letter to Mr Creagh, complained
that the people made no secret of their hatred towards
the French. What else could he expect, considering his
treatment of them ? Had he, like the commission,
made an honest investigation into their grievances, and
shown them that he was anxious to do what was right
and just, they would have appreciated his efforts, and
obeyed him willingly. Imperiousness, severity, injustice,
and partiality, do not beget love ; it is a tender plant,
and requires a much different soil. The command-
ant was sent to the Loyalty group to Frenchify the
natives, yet he acted as if he had been sent to cause
them to hate the French. He only made hypocrites,
whilst the commission made true converts. The latter
were Liberals, and civilians ; the former was a Conser-
vative, and an overbearing Imperialist. Whatever the
natives may think of French soldiers , they have a very
exalted opinion of the impartiality and justice of French
lawyers. They saw, and thoroughly appreciated, the


efforts of the commission to arrive at the truth, and
witnessed afterwards the effects of their decisions.
Before the commission left Mare, Mr Creagh was
called to hear some of the charges brought against him
by the priest, such as the following: That he had
been preaching that the end of all things was to take
place in 1869, and urging Naisilin to subdue the heathen
and the Papists, that they might become Protestants
before the end! That a plot had been formed by the
Guahma people to send the priests away in one of the
“ slave vessels,” that from the time of the war until the
arrival of the commandant, they (the priests) were
watched by a “ zealous Protestant,” whose visits ceased
after that period. They were to be taken away, the
priest said, by one of the captains, and when fairly out
at sea, they were, he supposed, to be u pitched over-
board ”! No vessel arrived, hence the plot was not
executed. The inference was that Mr Creagh was the
author. That Mr Creagh had manifested a stoical in-
difference to human misery when the conquered tribes
were assembled at Guahma ; that he made a speech to
the captives in which he told them he had nothing to
give them but an ox, and that the natives blushed for
shame ! (Rather an unusual thing for natives to do,
especially from such a cause.) That Mr Creagh taught
his teachers the use of the musket, &c. The commission
attached no importance to these foolish statements,
many of which, they said, had been refuted by the priest’s
own party. It was their evidence, indeed, that was most
damaging to the priests.


The lieutenant at Lifu (an educated man) was ap-
pointed, with a few additional soldiers, to take command
at Mare, in place of the ignorant corporal, who, we
heard, lost his stripes, on account of his misrule at Mare,
and became simply a Rat! The place chosen for the
military post was a village about five miles from Mr
Creagh’s station, there being pretty good anchorage for
vessels there. Upon the arrival of the lieutenant, who
accompanied the Commission, it was noised abroad
among the priest s party that a man-of-war had come
with soldiers to help them. They immediately left their
homes to join the soldiers, and on their way to the camp
commenced their work of destruction, by destroying the
plantations of the Protestants in their way. Judge of
their surprise when they discovered what kind of soldiers
had arrived. The Commission and the lieutenant visited
the plantations that had been destroyed, and afterwards
imprisoned the chief of the party.
The proceedings of the Commission opened the eyes
of the heathen; they began to doubt the veracity of the
priests, and to abandon the idea of soldiers coming to
help them. They had been told that Uaisilin would be
punished, and would probably never again return to
Mare ; instead of which he was not only exonerated, but
frequently asked to dine with the lieutenant. Those who
had formerly declared themselves Protestants, returned.
The heathen were talking about following their example,
and even the Roman Catholic tribe were shaky. It was
evident to the priests that there was little hope of their
x


making many converts at Mare, and that the prospect
was daily darkening. What were they to do ? How
were they to get these rebels into the u mother Church ? ”
This was doubtless, to them, a serious question, and
stratagem came to their relief. The new Governor
arrived with instructions respecting the Loyalty group,
and announced his intention to withdraw the soldiers,
hoping that the Protestant ministers and Roman
Catholic priests would endeavour to maintain tran-
quillity in the group. The priests at Mare managed to
excite the fears of those who had been engaged in the
late war, by circulating a report that Naisilin would
massacre the whole of them after the soldiers left. They
wrote to the governor informing him of the evil inten-
tions of the Protestants, imploring him not to take the
soldiers away, or remove them (the priests) and their
poor sheep to the Isle of Pines, where all the natives are
Roman Catholics. A government vessel was sent across,
and the priests succeeded in getting over nine hundred
men, women, and children to leave the island by this
stratagem. The poor deluded creatures are still at the
Isle of Pines, pining for their homes, no doubt, but
having no opportunity of returning. Very likely when
their education is completed, they will be allowed to re-
turn to Mare to propagate the faith amongst their
countrymen. Thus the priests left Mare. Their game
there was soon played out; or, which is perhaps nearer
the mark, we may regard the removing of the natives
simply as a move in the game, which is to be played out


at some future time. Those Jesuits are as deep as the
sea, and like that element are sometimes smooth and
placid, whilst at others they are wild and destructive.
Since their departure from Mare the natives have lived
in peace and unity.


XXVI.
RESULT OF THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY—THE COMMANDANT RECALLED—
THE NEW GOVERNOR—CAPTAIN VOLLET’S VISIT TO THE GROUP—
OPENING OF THE NEW CHURCH—CAPTAIN YOLLET’S SPEECH—EVEN-
ING PARTY—OPENING SERVICES—DEPARTURE OF THE SOLDIERS—THE
OCCUPATION OF THE LOYALTY GROUP A MISTAKE—EFFECT OF THE
DEPARTURE OF THE SOLDIERS UPON THE ROMAN CATHOLICS—THE
PAPISTS CONFOUNDED AND ASHAMED—USEFUL LESSONS LEARNT FROM
THE FRENCH—PROGRESS OF THE NATIVES—BOOKS TRANSLATED—
NATIVE AGENCY ; ITS EFFICIENCY—A YOUNG MISSIONARY APT TO
MAKE MISTAKES—NATIVE AGENCY MORE EASILY OBTAINED, AND MORE
ECONOMICAL—DIFFICULTY OF GETTING AT THE HEATHEN—POETICAL
IDEAS OF MISSIONARY WORK—MISTAKEN MODE OF PROCEDURE—WHAT
IS REQUIRED FOR THE EVANGELISATION OF THE ISLANDS—WHAT A
MISSIONARY SHOULD BE—MISSIONARIES SHOULD ONLY DO WHAT NA-
TIVES CAN’T DO—AN EDUCATED NATIVE MINISTRY THE WANT OF THE
SOUTH SEA MISSION—A COLLEGE FOR THE SOCIETY’S SOUTH SEA MIS-
SIONS—OBJECTIONS.
The decision at which the Government arrived from the
report of the Imperial Commission of Inquiry that
visited Lifu and Uvea, was not communicated to us, nor
in any way made public, hut it is not difficult to form a
pretty correct idea of what that decision was from the
reformation that took place about six months after the
report had been sent to France. There had been politi-
cal despotism in New Caledonia, and religious despotism
in the Loyalty group, the latter especially on Uvea.
The governor was recalled, as were the priests ; but it
was easier to find in France a suitable successor to the


former, than to obtain, from amongst the priests on
New Caledonia, pious, peaceful, and liberal-minded
men to succeed the latter. The Imperial Government
could select , but the Bishop of New Caledonia had but
few to choose from, and those few were men of one
mind; he could only make an exchange, and one that
has not proved of much benefit to the colony, as the
following extract from a letter of Mr Ella’s will prove.
It appeared in the English Independent on the 13th of
last month (February 1873) :
At the close of 1871, I was compelled to leave Uvea through
severe indisposition. Another missionary was expected to supply
my place during my absence ; but his arrival was unavoidably
delayed. In the interval, taking advantage of the absence of the
English missionary, a barbarous attempt was made to massacre the
Protestants of the principal district, or to coerce them to yield to
the demands of the Papists, and abandon their religion. The Papists
were assembled from all parts of the island last April, under the
pretence of attending a saint’s festival. Suddenly, at night, they
fell upon the Protestant settlement near the house of the priest.
Four men were murdered whilst engaged in their evening prayers,
four more were killed whilst fishing, and several others were killed
and wounded the next day, while attempting to defend their homes.
The Protestants then fled to the bush for shelter. They were sur-
rounded there, and threatened to be exterminated unless they
yielded and became Papists. Their villages were burned and their
plantations and stock of provisions destroyed. In two other villages
the men were dragged out of their houses by the Papists; tomahawks,
clubs, and spears were brandished over their heads, and they were
threatened with instant death if they did not give up their religion
and their books, and unite in the worship of the Virgin.
Mr Sleigh, one of the missionaries on the neighbouring island of
Lifu, reached Uvea ten days after these sad events, and exerted
himself to deliver the persecuted natives out of the hands of their
oppressors. The Papist chief would not permit the missionary to
see the refugees, and forbade Protestant worship in the district.
Mr Sleigh wrote immediately to the Governor of New Caledonia, de-
tailing the events, and requesting the exercise of his authority to


restore religious liberty. His letter, and a lengthy statement from
one of the Eomish priests on Uvea to his superior on New Cale-
donia, were published in the Moniteur de la Nouvelle Galedonie, a
government organ. In the latter, vague reasons for the massacre
were assigned, utterly at variance with the facts of the case. It
was also stated in the same paper that a tribunal had been appointed
to inquire into the massacre. Up to the end of October, six months
after these horrid proceedings, nothing had been done by the
Government in the matter, and the “ Tribunal ” exists only on paper.
Thus left at liberty to carry out their designs, the Romish priests
and their blind tools were encouraged and strengthened in their
proceedings, and the persecuted Protestants were being forced into
the Romish Church. Seven hundred had yielded, and their books
were seized and delivered to the priests. From their place of refuge,
some of the poor people wrote in May, that starvation stared them
in the face on the one hand, and on the other, threats of extermin-
ation, unless they became Romanists. Well might they cry, “ Help,
Lord, for vain is the help of man.”
At the close of August the missionary expected arrived, and he
has taken up his abode on Uvea, to watch over the shattered Pro-
testant church. His last communication was dated the 29th of
October. No inquiry had then been made by the Government, and
the Popish party were still pursuing their determined policy to
overthrow the Protestant mission.. A message was sent that month
to the Protestant chief, requiring him to abandon his religion, and
bring over his people to the “ Catholic church.” On his refusing,
he was commanded to resign his chieftainship to a Papist, and his
life was threatened. The Papists were again making active pre-
parations to attack the two remaining Protestant districts. The
missionaries sought to deliver the Protestants, and, as the only re-
source left, recommended emigration to the island of Lifu, The
persecuted people gladly consented to abandon their homes and
lands that they might retain ‘‘liberty to worship God,” but the
Romish chief prevented this step. The directors of our society
are prepared to bring the case of the Uvean mission before Her
Majesty’s Government, and we hope that, in response, a more ear-
nest effort will be made by the present French Government to stop
these persecutions than that attempted four years since ; and that
religious liberty will be secured for those distant lands under French
rule.
The officer who was appointed to exercise the func


tions of governor until tlie arrival of M. Guillain’s suc-
cessor, recalled the commandant from Lifu and sent
us, in his stead, a civilian, one of the members of the
Commission of Inquiry, a married man, and a thorough
Republican. This gentleman commenced his work in
the right way —by treating the natives kindly. Had he
been the first commandant of the Loyalty group, instead
of the fifth, it might have saved the natives from suffer-
ing, and the French from disgrace.
After M. G-uillain arrived in Paris, M. de la Richerie
was appointed his successor. This gentleman had for-
merly been governor at Tahite, and had shown some
kindness to the Rev. Mr Howe, the English missionary
there. Upon his arrival in Hew Caledonia, he commis-
sioned Captain Yollet, of the Gazelle , to visit the
Loyalty group, and be the bearer of a circular to the
English missionaries and French priests, in which he
intimated his intention, as early as convenient, to re-
move the soldiers from the group, and expressed a hope
that the missionaries, Protestant and Catholic, would
exert themselves to promote peace and harmony among
the natives.
Captain Yollet, a Protestant, arrived just as we were
about to open our new church, which the soldiers had
assisted the natives to build in lieu of the one taken by
them upon their arrival. Former commandants had
delayed the completion of this building, and withheld
it, notwithstanding my efforts to get it out of their
hands, finished or unfinished. The new commandant
decided to hand it over to the Protestants at once, leav


ing us to fit up the interior when and how we pleased.
The necessary preparations were made, and a day ap-
pointed for the ceremony. Several thousand natives
assembled from every part of the island, who were sump-
tuously provided for by those of the village where the
church is erected. The opening services commenced on
a Friday morning, at eleven o’clock. The chair was
occupied by Captain Yollet (delegate of the governor).
On the platform were, A. Le Baucher, Esq., Command-
ant of the Loyalty Islands; Lieutenant Chapelet, late
Commandant of the military post at Mare; Dr Marie;
Captain Bordereaux, appointed resident judge in the
Loyalty group, to succeed M. Le Boucher; the Revs.
S. M. Creagh, J. Sleigh, J. Whitmee, and myself. After
singing a hymn, reading the Scriptures, and prayer,
Captain Yollet rose and formally handed over the church
to the Protestants of Lifu. His speech, as well as that
of the commandant, was most encouraging to the Pro-
testants. He congratulated them upon their progress
in civilisation, and the acquisition of so beautiful a
church, and stated, in most unequivocal terms, that per-
fect liberty of worship was granted by the government.
He commended them for their peaceful and obedient
conduct during his residence on Lifu, and both recog-
nised, in flattering terms, the success of our efforts to
instruct and improve the natives. We had an evening
party in the schoolroom, which was tastefully decorated
with foliage and flowers, to which we invited the French
gentlemen, also Mesdames Le Boucher, Marie, and Casey.
All appeared delighted, and Captain Yollet again, in a


short speech, expressed his gratification and agreeable
surprise at the proofs he had that day witnessed of the
progress of civilisation on Lifu, and asked the natives
what they would have been had not missionaries and
their wives come to live amongst them. Mr Whitmee
gave an interesting account of a heathen island that he
had witnessed, and some of the natives made very good
speeches. On Saturday afternoon, there was a general
prayer-meeting, and address by Mr Sleigh, and, on the
Sabbath, we commenced our regular services. I preached
in the morning, from John iv. 24 : “ God is a Spirit,
and they that worship Him, must worship Him in Spirit
and in truth.” In the afternoon, we had a united com-
munion, at which about a thousand church members
were present. It was a grand sight, remembering what
these people were a short time ago. In the evening,
each of the missionaries gave a short and suitable
address, and thus ended a series of most interesting ser-
vices, the benefit of which, let us hope, will long be felt.
The new church is a plain, substantial building, 120 feet
by 60, with Gothic windows, and a kind of semi-Grecian
front. Having been built by professional men amongst
the soldiers, it is, of course, a much superior edifice to
the generality of churches in the South Seas.
A few days after the opening of the new church the
Gazelle left, taking away officers, soldiers, and all
that pertained to the military post, leaving only M.
Bordereaux, “ Resident,” and his servant. When they
came to the island they seized and appropriated the old
church : when they left it, they gave us the new one.


Upon their arrival they charged ns with denationalising
the natives; upon their departure they commended us
for our successful efforts to civilise and elevate them.
What had they accomplished ? What was the result of
their six years’ occupation of the group ? Had they suc-
ceded in destroying English influence, and Frenchifying
the natives ? It could not hut be evident, even to them,
that their mission to the Loyalty group was a mistake
and a failure. The natives were no longer taxed or
interfered with in any way by the “ Resident.” The
Government school was broken up, and the Government
buildings were left to go to ruin—a monument of French
oppression. Our schools were quietly resumed, and the
half-built chapels completed, and our work carried on
much as if the French had never been there. The
soldiers were removed from the Loyalty group soon after
the news arrived of the defeat and imprisonment of
Napoleon 111., they may be located there again when the
French have recovered a little from the effects of their
intended march to Berlin! Going to Berlin, like des-
troying “ English influence ” in the Loyalty group, is
easier to talk about than to accomplish ; although, in
the latter case, the obstacles may not have appeared very
great. The natives were but few and defenceless, and,
as they thought, easily influenced. One blow was con-
sidered sufficient, and that was executed with character-
istic impetuosity and cruelty. But although natives
were shot, schools closed, the circulation of books pro-
hibited (except in the French language !) native teachers
banished, and missionaries silenced, still the object was


fur from being accomplished. Lifu “ bristled with forts ”
as difficult to get at as those in Germany.
Whilst the Lifuans were rejoicing at the departure of
the soldiers from their island home, the Italians were
similarly engaged at Rome, and at both places the effect
was the same—the props were removed, so the building
fell. Two important chiefs and a number of their people
abandoned the priests and became Protestants; one of
these was the great chief Zeula, in whose district one of
the priests resided. Most of his subjects were already
Protestants, and to their influence the priest attributed
the change in the chiefs views. This u holy father ”
stormed and threatened in vain; he went to the u Resi-
dent,” but was told that he had no authority to interfere
in such matters, and doubtless returned disgusted with
such indifference on the part of the civil power. As
there appeared to be some probability that Zeula’s
Catholic subjects would follow his example, the priest
proposed to them to leave the island as the Roman
Catholics on Mare had done ; they assured him, however,
that they would never comply with such a request, and
told him that if he desired to leave Lifa, he must go
alone.
The Papists were confounded and ashamed at the
course which events had taken. They had been led to
believe that the Protestant religion would be destroyed,
and all the natives forced to embrace that of the State,
instead of which they saw the Protestants increasing in
number and influence; they saw them respected, and a
church built for them, and heard them publicly com*


mended by the authorities. In addition to all this, they
heard of France being humbled by a Protestant power ;
of the Pope’s downfall, and of the spread of Protestant
principles in Spain and Italy. These things shook their
confidence in the priests, and led most of them to feel,
and many of them publicly to confess, that the Pro-
testants were in the right. They looked to Ukenizo,
professing to be guided by him, and he professed to be
afraid to abandon the priests, having brought them to
the island. Popery, however, is not likely to make
much head-way at Lifu. Nearly all the Papists there
are Protestants at heart.
Although the natives suffered much from the occupa-
tion of their islands by the French, they nevertheless
learned a few useful lessons. Just as the Romans,
during their sojourn in England, taught our forefathers
how to make roads, build houses, make laws, &c., so did
the French in the Loyalty group, only they went a
different way about it, and so instead of making them-
selves (like the Romans) respected, and their departure
felt to be a public loss, they led the natives to hate
them, and rejoice at their leaving. The presence of a
French “ Resident,” invested with powers from the civil
court to adjust any differences that may arise amongst
the natives, is a good thing for the Loyalty group. The
natives and chiefs, left to themselves, might quarrel;
now they have an intelligent authority to whom they
can appeal. Let us hope that this improved state of
things may not be superseded by the re-establishment
of military rule in the group. Under the benign influ


ence of Christianity, and the paternal rule of the
“ Resident,” the population will doubtless make steady
progress in civilisation. Very considerable progress has
already been made. In Lifu there are over two thou-
sand church members. The majority of the Protestant
population can read and write a little—the young folks,
of course, are further advanced. The following books
have been translated and prepared in the Lifu dialect:
a school-book, a catechism, two hymn-books—contain-
ing 132 hymns—a geography, a Bible companion, and
the whole of the New Testament and Psalms, the revised
edition of which is now being printed in England. Im-
provements have been made in public roads, native
dwellings, &c. Wells have been dug at almost every
village. A desire for European cotton goods, cooking
utensils, and tools, has been excited, and the demand
has created the supply,—for which several stores are
established on the island. The annual export of cotton
is increasing every year,—last year it was about 20 tons,
besides oil, pigs, fowls, and yams. The churches sup-
port their own teachers, and contain a band of earnest
men who are anxious to proceed to heathen lands as
pioneer evangelists. I will conclude my narrative of
the Lifu Mission with a few words respecting the value
of this kind of agency in the work of extending the
gospel among the heathen in the South Seas.
Let us accord to native agency that prominent place
which it has justly merited; indeed, in the estimation
of most missionaries, it is the key to the evangelisation
of those islands. Had not this kind of agency been


largely employed by the London Missionary Society,
the boundary of her present extended and prosperous
missions in those seas would doubtless have been
exceedingly limited. I have no hesitation in stating,
as an indisputable fact, in the South Sea Islands, good
native teachers make better pioneer evangelists than
European missionaries. The gap between the debased
savage and the polished European is too great.. A young
missionary settling among a heathen tribe is apt to
make very grave mistakes, and unintentionally to injure
the cause which he desires to promote; and let him not
suppose that any amount of piety, intelligence, or zeal—
or all combined —will preserve him from falling into
such errors. There are many things, especially in the
mission field, which can only be learnt by experience.
A native is, of course, better acquainted with the habits,
manners, and customs of natives than we are. He can
squat with them in their huts, and unfold to them at
appropriate times the love of Jesus, who came to dwell
among men, and suffer pain and death that we might
enjoy life eternal; or go to fish with them in their
canoes, and talk to them about some of the apostles
being fishermen, and how that Jesus sent them to catch
men ; or eat with them at their ordinary meals, and tell
them about the bread of life, and the future state where
there will be no cooking and eating; or work with them
in their plantations, and speak to them about “ a sower
who went forth to sow,” and the plantations (vineyard)
of Jesus; so that a native teacher has more opportuni-
ties of publishing to the savage the glad tidings of


salvation than a missionary who now and then pays a
formal visit to a heathen tribe.
The fact that native agency is more easily obtained
than European, should be a consideration in our attempt
to evangelise the numerous islands in the Pacific.
Wherever we have missions established and churches
formed, there are plenty of young and suitable men
willing to offer themselves for this pioneer work; and
moreover, native agency is much more economical. A
native teacher only costs ten pounds a year; that moderate
sum keeps him like a gentleman amongst his own people.
So that good native teachers, for pioneer work or heathen
islands, are more efficient, more easily obtained , and
more economical.
The difficulty with a heathen and a savage people is to
get at them. There are few natives, I presume, who
embrace Christianity on account of its intrinsic value;
they are generally impelled by not the most commend-
able motives. A fish-hook is often more effective than
a sermon. Some good people in England form pleasant
pictures, and have poetical ideas of missionary life in
the South Seas. They see the missionary standing on
the beach of a heathen island, with a black coat on his
back and a Bible in hand, from which he is pointing to
heaven, and by gestures endeavouring to make them
acquainted with the object of his visit. Now, to my
certain knowledge, a more correct picture would be a
missionary standing on the beach in dripping garments ,
without any coat at all , he having taken it off to swim
over the surf, and holding in his hand a few beads and


fish-hooks; or a missionary on the beach sitting on a
stone, with his shoe and stocking off, and the natives
gathering round him to examine his white foot and his
clothes; or, no less a personage than a Lord Bishop
of the “ Establishment,” standing on the beach, sur-
rounded by savages, with his back to a rock, and a pair
of steelyards in his hand, weighing out yams incessantly
for three hours, and by fair dealing, ingratiating himself
with the natives. This is how we manage to get at the
natives, and having got their ear we preach the gospel
to them. But here, again, we have to he careful, or we
drive them from us. It is a great mistake to commence
by attacking all that is dear to a native. He loves his
feast, his night-dance, his wives, his kava, and his pipe;
and if you proceeded to consign him to hell for his
attachment to these, the probability is that he will seek
an opportunity of sending you to heaven with his toma-
hawk. Some missionaries are very apt, by their
demeanour and intercourse with the natives, to make
religion appear a very gloomy and undesirable thing.
How, the better way would be to represent it in its most
attractive form, and show the natives that it yields
the greatest amount of happiness even on earth, and by
discoursing upon the magnitude of God’s love, seek to
interest them in the story of the Cross. When they
begin to love God they will try to please Him. As with
matter so with mind, it will yield more readily to
attraction than impulsion; the heathen may he drawn,
hut they won’t he driven.
There are still hundreds of islands in the South Sea


shrouded in heathen darkness, islands of all sizes, from
less than a mile to twelve hundred miles in length. The
work of evangelising them must be arduous, slow, and
expensive without an efficient native agency. Mission-
aries cannot be obtained to occupy every point, it would
be wrong to attempt such a thing. All that is necessary
is that a missionary be located at a certain point, sur-
rounded by a good staff of native teachers from the older
missions; that he possess a good boat and horse, with a
disposition to make good use of them; he may then
work a large station efficiently. But if he confines him-
self to one place without these helps, and happens to be
one who, although he may shine brilliantly in his study,
is no better than a rush-light in the village, and is only
seen beyond it once or twice a year, and then flickering
so indistinctly for about half-an-hour that the heathen
around him remain in darkness and idolatry. A mis-
sionary on a heathen island should be more like a blazing
comet than a fixed star; his orbit, the island on which he
lives; his light should be brilliant and his movements
rapid, or he will not succeed. We all know something
of our own feebleness, and of the importance of prayer
for our people ; but God has taught us very distinctly that
prayer and effort must be combined; the former without
the latter is superstition, and the latter without the
former is idolatry. We must not expect to convert the
heathen by remaining in our studies praying for them,
acquiring their language, and translating books. We
must mingle with them, sympathise with them, and by
acts of kindness and consistency endeavour to entwine
Y


ourselves about their affections. We may then hope to
do them good, and more reasonably expect that God will
hear our prayers on their behalf.
(i Never do yourself what a native can do ” is a good
maxim. The adoption of this principle would give mis-
sionaries much more time to devote to their legitimate
labours, and render missions more prosperous and less
expensive. There is always plenty for a missionary to
do that a native can’t do, and to such work he should
turn his attention. Why should a young missionary
spend his time, and ruin his constitution building houses
and churches, and teaching a few natives the A B C of
Christianity, whilst by settling upon an island where
teachers have preceded him and opened up the way, he
may train a staff of agents who will go forth and accom-
plish twenty times more than he could reasonably expect
to do ? The taking of Jericho would have been more
difficult had God simply made a breach in the wall for
the Israelites, but the conquest was easy and rapid
because “ every man went straight before him.” God is
removing the walls that surround heathendom, and re-
quires His people, in His name, to “ go in and possess
the land.” Let us then endeavour to encompass it.
This is not a very difficult matter with reference to the
South Sea Islands. Twenty teacher splanted round an
island are much more likely to succeed than a missionary
located at one point. In the latter case the natives at
a distance have generally vague, extravagant, and un-
favourable ideas of the object of his mission, and exert
a pernicious influence over those with whom he resides ;


whereas, in the former, the natives throughout the island
are being simultaneously instructed in the same truths,
and so misapprehension and consequent opposition is
not likely to take place. Pioneer teachers should be
frequently visited by a missionary; they thus not only
obtain advice and support, but also acquire influence
amongst their people.
How are the numerous heathen islands in the South
Seas to be evangelised, and the missions already estab-
lished to be carried on with efficiency and economy?
We answer, by an educated native ministry. Owing to
the great disparity between the European missionary and
the natives, in their savage, or even semi-civilised state,
educated natives are better adapted, both for pioneer
teachers and native pastors. The missionary’s time is
most profitably employed in training and supervising
such men, and translating and preparing books for the
natives. Devoted young men may be obtained from the
older missions, capable of being trained to occupy respon-
sible positions with fidelity and success. Indeed, it
would often, from their social position, be a positive
pleasure to these men to commence and carry on the
work at stations, and under circumstances where a Euro-
pean missionary would not only be in greater danger,
but would have to exercise an extraordinary degree of
self-denial and patience.
In order to secure a higher type of education amongst
the native pastors, and increase their influence and use-
fulness, the more intelligent of the students should be


taught the English language; also removed, during the
term of their education, from their homes and native
influences, and placed near civilised life. The time has
come for the establishment of a college for the Society’s
South Sea missions, where the cleverest of the young
men in the various institutions might receive a superior
education, qualifying them for ordination as native
pastors and missionaries. A tropical part of Queens-
land, where island food can be produced, appears to be
the most suitable locality for such an establishment.
Several important ends would be accomplished by having
a South Sea Mission College there. The future operations
of the Society amongst the heathen in the South Seas
will, undoubtedly, be on New Guinea and the numerous
islands in its vicinity; for this extensive, important, and
deeply interesting mission, it will be necessary to have,
in some healthy and convenient locality, a school and
sanatorium. Such an establishment connected with the
college for the older missions, near civilised life, would
have many advantages, and would be highly calculated
to secure the objects in view. Natives from the New
Guinea mission would see what Christianity had done
for their black brethren on other islands, and all would
participate in the civilising and elevating effects of their
proximity to civilised life. Great good might also be
done to the South Sea islanders who are working in
Queensland. There is a probability that the colonists
there, like those of New Caledonia, will continue to seek
and obtain (to some extent) South Sea Island labour.


Under these circumstances, it would be well to have a
missionary in Queensland, to whom the natives, heathen
as well as Christian —might look as their friend and
guide. The gospel might thus be introduced by natives
themselves, to some islands where missionaries cannot
gain admittance; so that such an establishment in such
a locality would be a college for the older missions, which
would send forth a superior class of native pastors, ren-
dering fewer European missionaries necessary. It would
be school and sanatorium for the New Guinea missions,
and also a centre of light for the South Sea islanders in
Queensland. Thus the efficiency, economy, and sta-
bility of our South Sea missions would be promoted.
But it is objected that the native teachers, if thus
trained and ordained, would be too conceited, and that
the unordained would not recognise their superiority.
Surely it is not education, but the want of it that makes
them conceited. If, after spending four or five years in
a college near civilised life, their less talented brethren
could not, or would not (upon their return), recognise
their superiority, that would only prove their ignorance
and conceit. It is said again that such an institution
should not be near civilised life; that the influence of
the white population in Queensland would be very bane-
ful upon the natives. Surely it is desirable that they
should see other specimens of European civilisation than
those that settle among them on the islands. Let them
see what Christianity has done for us, what it is doing
for some, and what the want of it is doing for others.


There is no unmixed good here. They will undoubtedly
learn much that it would be better for them not to know,
but the advantages to be derived from such a course
appear greatly to preponderate. They will find that all
whitemen are not devils; and white men will find that
all Christian natives are not saints.


XXVII.
EXTENSION OF THE MISSION CONSIDERED—DECISION OF THE DIRECTORS—
SEEKING INFORMATION ABOUT NEW GUINEA—DARNLEY ISLAND—THE
“JOHN KNOX ”—SYMPATHY AND SELF-SACRIFICE OF THE NATIVES FOR
THE NEW GUINEA MISSION—PROSPECT OF LOSING THEIR MISSIONARY
—ARRIVAL OF MR MURRAY FROM SAMOA—ENLARGEMENT OF THE
PLANS—WRECK OF THE “EMMA PATERSON”—THE SCHOONER “SUR-
PRISE ”—VALEDICTORY SERVICES—NATIVE ORATORY—EKOT’S SPEECH
—THE CONTRAST—EETURN VOYAGE—THE INTRODUCTION OF CHRIS-
TIANITY TO NEW GUINEA AN IMPORTANT EPOCH IN THE HISTORY OF
THE SOCIETY—SHOULD LOOK THE DIFFICULTIES FAIRLY IN THE FACE—
DIFFICULTY IN GETTING AT THE NATIVES—DANGEROUS NAVIGATION—
SICKLY CLIMATE—SAVAGE PEOPLE—NUMEROUS SMALL TRIBES—MUST
ADOPT A NEW PLAN—A SMALL MISSION INDISPENSABLE—DECISION OF
THE DIRECTORS ABOUT THE KIND OF VESSEL—HOW WE SHOULD COM-
MENCE—CAPE YORK.
Being at the western extremity of our South Sea mission,
with material at hand for preparing a good native
agency, the subject of occupying new ground was
seriously and frequently discussed. The question was,
in what direction to extend. To the north are the
New Hebrides and Solomon Islands, where the Presby-
terians and Episcopalians are at work with two mission
vessels and a good staff of missionaries. To the south
is the large island of New Caledonia, which, from its
proximity, would be a fine field for native teachers from
the Loyalty group, but the French will not allow us to
establish a mission there. So we turned our eyes west


ward, feeling that the time had arrived to commence the
evangelisation of New Guinea. As the London Mission-
ary Society has in the South Seas a large native agency
composed of both the Papuan and Malay races (the two
races that inhabit New Guinea), and as it is the only
mission which has no adequate outlet for its pioneers, it
appears evident that it is called upon to undertake this
great work.
It was our intention to commence the mission with
the Samoan and Raratongan teachers ejected by the
French from the Loyalty group when they took posses-
sion of those islands in 1864, but difficulties arose which
led us to abandon for a time the project. In 1867
the whole question was deliberately and prayerfully dis-
cussed at our annual committee meeting, and as Mr
Jones was about to proceed to England to edit the Mare
New Testament, he was deputed to bring the subject
before the directors of our society, the result of which
was that I received a letter from the Foreign Secretary,
stating that the directors were contemplating and
maturing plans for the establishment of a mission on
New Guinea, and desired me to consider that field as
my future sphere of missionary labour, requesting me
in the meantime to obtain all the information possible
that might be of any use.
At once we began to look to New Guinea as our future
home, and to seek from whalers, and those engaged in
the trepang and pearl shell-fisheries, information about
the island and its inhabitants. Their statements, how-
ever, were so contradictory that nothing appeared reliable


but the reports of the various expeditions that have sur-
veyed the coast, and these generally represent the
natives as a fierce and treacherous race, with whom they
appear seldom to have had friendly intercourse, and on
whose shores they never appear to have landed. Under
these circumstances we thought that it would be desirable
to begin so extensive a mission by making a prospective
voyage, and so personally obtaining such information as
would enable the directors to form definite plans for
entering at once upon this noble enterprise with as much
safety and as little expense as possible. Accordingly,
at our annual meeting in 1870, I was appointed by the
brethren to make a prospective voyage to New Guinea
before proceeding to England, so that upon my arrival
in the old country I might be in a position to lay before
the directors such information as would enable them to
mature their plans.
From all that we could learn, it appeared that Darnley
Island would be a very suitable place on which to
commence our mission. It has a central position in
Torres Straits, and is frequently visited by natives from
New Guinea. We had been recommended to this island
by several captains who were well acquainted with
Torres Straits ; and finding that the master and owner
of the John Knox had resided on the island for
several months, and ingratiated himself with the
natives, and that he was disposed to return and
establish a pearl-shell fishing station on the island, I
arranged to accompany him with two Lifu teachers and
their wives to be left on the island, that the natives


might become acquainted with their benevolent object
during my absence in England.
The John Knox is a tine little cutter about eleven tons
burden. She was built for our Presbyterian brethren of
the New Hebrides mission, and rendered them good
service until superseded by the Day Spring , a much
larger vessel being required for their extended and
growing mission. Being a good sea-boat, there was no
danger at that time of the year, although there would
be a little discomfort in making a voyage in her of
sixteen hundred miles. In Torres Straits, and about the
coast of New Guinea, the John Knox would even be
safer than a vessel of 100 tons, on account of the reefs,
shoals, and mud-banks, many of which are not marked
on any chart, and some parts of the coast being yet
unsurveyed. Our plan was to go direct from Lifu to
Harnley Island; make arrangements for the location of
the teachers; visit some of the small islands near the
coast of New Guinea, and in Torres Straits, in order to
be able to fix upon the most suitable place for the head-
quarters of the mission, and then the John Knox was
to beat up the coast of Australia, inside the great barrier-
reef to Cleveland Bay, where I could get a steamer to
Sydney. The whole expedition would only have cost
about £6O.
The natives became very much interested in our
contemplated mission to New Guinea, and many of them
were anxious to become pioneer teachers, but were
prevented from leaving the group by a law made by the
late governor. In order to obtain permission for the two


that we intended taking with us, I went to New
Caledonia and had an interview with the newly-arrived
governor, M. de la Eicherie, who expressed his interest
in missionary work, and his sorrow that natives should
have been prohibited from leaving the Loyalty group to
engage in such an enterprise, stating that they were at
perfect liberty to go where they liked in future. There
was great joy throughout the islands in the group when
this welcome news was received. The twenty-four young
men in the Institution under my care volunteered for the
work. All the native teachers became anxious to leave
their stations and go to New Guinea. Many young men
came forward from the different villages as candidates
for the seminary, with a view to preparing themselves
for pioneering work on this interesting island. All was
excitement and enthusiasm. New Guinea, or rather
u Papua,” became the subject of conversation, sermons,
addresses, and prayers. The two selected to accompany
me in the John Knox were envied, lectured, and feasted
wherever they went.
Although the Lifuans were highly delighted at the
prospect of a mission being established on New Guinea,
and the prominent part they were likely to take in it,
yet they were very unwilling to give up their missionary
for this new field. Some were even rebellious, and de-
termined to keep us by force. This was perfectly natural.
We had been with them for more than thirteen years,
and were, as they said, their “first love.” We had
carried on a successful paper war with the French for
their religious liberty. The children around us had


grown up into young men and young women, and felt
that they were losing their “parents.” The thought of
leaving them was to us a great trial and sacrifice. It
was like beginning missionary work again. We had
gone to Lifu and settled amongst the natives when they
were ignorant, degraded, and dirty. We had cleared
the bush and built a dwelling-house, also a stone chapel
and school room, and were looking forward to years of
usefulness and happiness amidst our peaceful and grow-
ingly intelligent people. The prospect of going through
the whole thing again contains no poetry for us—we
know it all. ’Tis clearly a question of duty. So impor-
tant and dangerous a mission as that to the savage
treacherous tribes of New Guinea must be commenced
by men of some experience, so that two or three mis-
sionaries should leave their stations to be filled by
others. Having been requested by the directors of our
society to form one of the number to be appointed to
the New Guinea mission, I readily consented, feeling
that pioneering is really the truest 'and noblest mis-
sionary work. The natives gradually became reconciled
to our leaving. My excellent brother, Mr Creagh of
Mare, was appointed to my station, so that the Lifu
natives were rather gainers than losers by the change.
Before we started on our interesting voyage, the Rev.
A. W. Murray, of the Samoan mission, arrived at Lifu,
seeking a change of climate on account of Mrs Murray’s
health. Being a missionary of great experience in
locating pioneer teachers, and not liking to take the
whole responsibility of so important a voyage upon my


self, I desired him to accompany me, and was pleased to
find that he readily consented. This led to the enlarge-
ment of our plans. We decided upon taking more
teachers, engaging a larger vessel, and commencing, if
possible, the mission on the mainland at once. A
meeting was called, at which we obtained the sanction
of the brethren. I proceeded to New Caledonia to pro-
cure a suitable vessel. The Emma Paterson , a schooner
of sixty tons, was chartered, hut unfortunately was
wrecked on the coast of New Caledonia on her way to
the Loyalty group. The crew abandoned her, leaving
the captain alone on the wreck, and taking with them
a good supply of provisions and spirits , declared their
intention of going to the newly-discovered gold-field at
the north end of New Caledonia. They have not been
seen since. A boat was found on the coast about ten
days after they had left the wreck, which was half full
of water, containing a human hand and foot, which is
supposed to be the remnant of the crew of the Emma
Paterson.
We had been daily and anxiously looking and long-
ing for her arrival. Eight pioneer evangelists had been
selected from the numerous volunteers—four tried
teachers and four students from the seminary; their
supplies were prepared and packed; the valedictory
services had been held; good-bye had been said to friends
at a distance; and all was ready for a start, when the
startling intelligence reached us that our vessel was on
a reef at New Caledonia. Happily the Surprise , a
vessel of ninety tons, was then at Lifu, and open to


charter. The captain had been several times to Torres
Straits on fishing expeditions, and so was well acquainted
with the place, hence he was the very man we wanted
for the intricate navigation of those parts. We engaged
the vessel, but could not leave at once, as the captain
had to call at the New Hebrides ; he promised to return
in three weeks and commence the New Guinea voyage.
Some account of the valedictory services may be
interesting to the reader, showing the kind of addresses
delivered by the natives, some of which are exceedingly
appropriate, pointed, and powerful. Special meetings
were held at the native villages of the teachers set apart
for the new mission, where the friends of each gave them
parting gifts and counsel. Then came the united
valedictory service at Chepenehe, at which natives from
almost every part of the island were present. It was
a very interesting and memorable meeting. Atea—the
oldest native teacher, and one of the first to embrace
Christianity on Lifu —was appointed to address his
brethren about to leave for New Guinea, on behalf of the
teachers; and Ekot —the senior student —on behalf of
the students. The former spoke earnestly, feelingly,
and wisely, reminding them of the difficulties, dangers,
and discouragements which they would probably have to
encounter; but called to their minds the triumphs of
the gospel amongst themselves, and urged them to
believing prayer and persevering effort. He was a
native orator, and so became very excited in public
speaking. On this occasion, I remember, he was
unusually eloquent. He expressed his desire to become


a pioneer teacher himself; said that his will was strono-
and his mind young, “but,” and here he stretched out
his withered arm, “ my body ” he said tremblingly, “is
old. I have nearly finished my course; you young men
must do the work, and we will assist you by our prayers.”
Ekot’s address, although not delivered with so much
energy, was equally powerful. He called their attention
to whaling, with which the natives are familiar, as it
takes place annually at the bay in which Chepenehe is
situated. He reminded them how much depended upon
the first boat; the skill, and strength, and courage
requisite for harpooning; the importance and difficulty
of “ fastening ” well; and the consequences of mistake
or mismanagement. He drew a vivid picture of a
securely-harpooned whale towing the boat round the
bay; the blowing and struggling to get loose ; the boat
ploughing through the sea, with the water rising above the
gunwale ; the flying spray ; the other boats in pursuit;
the spearing ; and the cloud of blood, showing that the
whale has been mortally wounded. Then the arrival of
the other boats one after another, which are fastened
together, and assist in towing the whale to the ship.
The natives were intensely interested; it was a life
picture of that with which they were all familiar, and
there was profound silence when the speaker paused,
turned towards the pioneer teachers, and said solemnly,
“ You are going to New Guinea. You are the first boat.
Take care to ‘fasten’ well. We shall follow you, and
hope to assist in killing and towing in. But mark!
the consequences of any mismanagement on your part


may be very serious. You may only wound and irri-
tate the whale, and drive it away ; it may not return
for another year, perhaps never.” He then explained
what he meant by 11 fastening ” and mismanagement,
and exhorted them to be consistent, devoted, faithful,
and prayerful teachers, that God might guide, protect,
and bless them in their work.
The eight teachers to be consecrated to foreign mis-
sionary work, the crowded and well-dressed assembly,
the spacious and substantial stone church, the animated
speakers, and the attentive hearers presented a thrilling
scene. Not many years before, they had worshipped in
a house near the one in which they were assembled,
made of poles, strings, and grass; they had but few
articles of European clothing amongst them, and were a
sad, yet interesting, and in some respects very ludi-
crous sight. Now they were met together to send forth
missionaries from among their own race to other and
distant heathen lands. What but the gospel could
have produced such an astonishing change in thirteen
years ?
In due time the Surprise returned from the New
Hebrides, and we started upon our interesting voyage to
New Guinea, followed by the prayers and sympathies of
the community, and especially of the dear ones left at
home. The following is an abstract of the account of
our voyage which we sent to the Directors of the London
Missionary Society:—






JOURNAL OF A MISSIONARY VOYAGE
TO
NEW GUINEA.
Under arrangements sanctioned by the Directors of the London
Missionary Society, towards the close of 1870 the missionaries
in the Loyalty Islands commenced preparations for the com-
mencement of a mission in New Guinea. In that mission
both the Directors and the missionaries took the deepest
interest. But it was felt on every hand that the scheme was
one of unusual importance : that it might possibly be attended
with great danger; that once begun it ought to be carried
through ; and that if successfully established, it might, under
God’s blessing, become eventually the largest mission carried
on by the Society in the Pacific. Eight native evangelists
were selected with care from among our teachers, four from
Mare and four from Lifu. A suitable vessel, the Surprise,
commanded by a most competent man, Captain Paget, was
engaged for the voyage. In a farewell meeting, held in Lifu
on Sunday, April 23rd, the evangelists and their expedition
were specially commended to the care of God by their native
brethren ; and on Tuesday the 30th, the little party, which
included the wives of the teachers and four children, embarked
and set sail on our long and fondly-anticipated voyage. The
good hand of God had plainly been upon us in all the pre-
parations we had made; our way had been made clear; we
joyfully set forth in His work, trusting to His guidance and
care; and it will be seen that our expectations were abundantly
realised.
We caught the first glimpse of New Guinea on Thursday
the 29th of June. A thick haze hung over the land, so that


for some time only the mountain tops were visible. We gazed
with intense interest as we neared the great land, one object
after another appearing, till we found ourselves in view of the
barrier reef, about two miles from the shore. We made the
land near Keppel Point, in latitude 10° IT S. and longitude
148° E., and ran along the coast all the way to Hood Point,
keeping as close into the reef as we could with safety. We
saw a number of natives fishing, some in canoes, and others
on the reef, as we passed along.
Hood’s Bay and the Point which forms its western extremity
have a very striking and interesting appearance. The bay is
about six miles wide and four deep. At the east point there
is a lagoon, a remarkable-looking place, called Hood’s Lagoon.
Many natives were seen at the sides of the lagoon, and they,
and also those in canoes and on the reefs, appeared to be
making signals for us to land. As, however, no canoe came
off to us, we did not consider it advisable to attempt to hold
intercourse circumstanced as we then were, but rather to pass
on towards Darnley Island, at which we hoped to obtain in-
terpreters and other facilities for the accomplishment of our
object.
It occurred to us that some place in or near this bay would
be very suitable for a mission-station. The western point,
named Hood’s Point, on which there is a village, and which
runs out a considerable distance into the sea, would probably
be a healthy spot. Night overtook us as we were off this
point, so there was no further inducement to keep near the
land. Hence we stood out to sea and proceeded on our course.
The part of the island we made, and to which the above
remarks refer, is on the south-east side of the great Eastern
Peninsula mentioned by Lieutenant Chester, and the mountain
peaks we saw were part of the great central ridge which forms
the backbone of the peninsula.
NEW GUINEA.
New Guinea, so called by the early Dutch navigators from a
fancied resemblance of its inhabitants to those of the coast of


Guinea in Africa, is, with the exception of Australia and Borneo,
the largest island on our globe. It lies in the Australian
Archipelago, and is about fourteen hundred miles in extreme
length, or nearly double that of Borneo. It is bounded on the
south by Torres Straits; west by the Moluccas Sea ; and on the
north and north-east by the Pacific Ocean. The most striking
geographical feature of the great Eastern Peninsula consists in
a backbone of lofty mountains, apparently extending through-
out its length, with peaks far surpassing those of Australia, the
loftiest being more than thirteen thousand feet above the sea
level. It is called the Stanley Range.
There are three remarkable table-topped mountains near the
centre of the island, estimated to be quite twenty thousand feet
in elevation, whose summits appear to be covered with snow,
and are visible for a considerable distance. The greatest breadth
of the island is over three hundred miles in longitude, 141°
E., and its least breadth twenty miles at the head of Geelvink
Bay and the Gulf of M £ Clure.
New Guinea was discovered in 1511 by the Portuguese
commanders D’Abreu and Serram, and was first visited in
1615. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the
northern coasts were frequently visited by Dutch and English
navigators, and in 1774 an English officer, Captain Forrest,
in the service of the H.E.1.C., who was to search for spice-
producing districts, resided for some months at Port Davy,
on the north-east coast, and maintained constant friendly inter-
course with the natives.
Until the year 1828 there is no record of Europeans having
established friendly relations with the natives of the south-west
coast. Indeed the names given by the early Dutch voyagers to
the two principal rivers, Moordenaar or Murderer, and Dood-
slaager or Slaughter, prove their intercourse to have been any-
thing but friendly. Captain Cook, who visited the south-west
coast in the Endeavour in 1770, was the sole authority re-
specting the natives till 1828.
The choicest gifts of a bountiful Providence have been
bestowed on this great land. Its shores are covered with groves


of cocoanuts; and it produces in abundance the banana, sago,
betel, figs, oranges, lemons, and other tropical fruits. The
interior abounds with valuable timber, as ironwood, ebony,
canary-wood, and also with valuable spices and fragrant bark.
Its forests, rivalling those of South America and Ceylon in
luxuriance, afford shelter to multitudes of beautiful birds, among
which are crown pigeons, black cockatoos, parrots, lories, and
birds of Paradise. The sea that washes its shores supplies an
almost inexhaustible mine of wealth in the shape of trepang,
pearls, tortoise-shell, &c. To this catalogue it is said gold
may be added.
The name Papua, according to Mr Chester, is derived from
the Malay word puna, woolly; and by this name the coast
tribes are designated. According to the same authority the
population of New Guinea and the adjacent islands is estimated
at 880,000. But this, of course, is a mere guess. Considering
the immense extent of the island, and the fact that the parts
with which we are acquainted seem pretty thickly populated,
it is probable that the above estimate is much too low. But
many years must pass before any reliable estimate of the actual
number can be made.
ARRIVAL AT DARNLEY ISLAND.
We sighted Darnley Island about mid-day on Saturday,
July the Ist, and got to anchor towards evening. No natives,
however, made their appearance. As we afterwards found, they
all live on the opposite side of the island to that on which is
the anchorage. At length one man was seen on the shore. A
boat was at once lowered, and we pulled in to the beach. Our
new acquaintance looked repulsive enough. Bight glad were
we, however, to make friends with him. We got him to come
into the boat and accompany us to the ship without difficulty,
though he manifested at first a little tremor. He understood
a little English, and with the converse we were able to hold
with him by words and signs, and giving him food and a small
present, we soon had his full confidence. We sent him on
shore again in the boat, with an urgent request to come on the


following morning accompanied by the chief or chiefs, and as
many others as possible. On the following day, which was
Sabbath, there was no lack of visitors. Having heard that
there were white men on the island in charge of a fishing-
station, belonging to some parties in Sydney, the captain
started early in the morning for the opposite side of the island.
In the meanwhile a number of natives appeared on the heights
near the anchorage, intimating by signs and shouting their wish
to get on board. They have only a few large canoes among
them, which they get from the mainland of New Guinea, and
these are kept on the opposite side of the island, so that they
had no means of getting to the ship.
After a while the captain returned with a white man and a
number of natives, among whom was Amani, the principal
chief, and another man of importance. The boat was then
sent for those on shore, and most of them were soon on board ;
among the rest was our friend of the evening before, whose
name is Dabat, and whom found to be one of the principal
men of the island.
A service in the Lifu language was conducted on board, at
which our visitors were present; in all probability it was the
first act of worship to the true God that they had ever wit-
nessed. In the afternoon we went on shore and had a formal
conference with the chiefs and people, through the medium of
broken English. We informed them of the nature of our
business, and asked them whether they wished a teacher to
live among them, whether they would treat him kindly, and
so on. To all our inquiries satisfactory replies were given,
and all passed off in the most encouraging manner. Our way
had been prepared, by the news that we were coming having
preceded us, and no adverse influence had as yet been brought
to bear upon the natives.
On the following day, Monday, July 3d, we took the teacher
and his wife and property on shore, anticipating for them a
cordial and joyful welcome. In this, however, we were dis-
appointed, Evil counsellors had been at work during our
absence, and had so influenced the principal chief and others,


that it was with difficulty we succeeded in getting their consent
to the teacher remaining. Amani and the interpreter got out
of the waj r , and a considerable time passed before they could
be induced to come and meet us. Dabat, our first friend,
remained staunch ; but as the other chiefs and the bulk of the
people appeared ignorant and doubtful with reference to our
object, we proposed a compromise which united all, viz., that
the teacher should remain for twelve months, or till the next
deputation visit the island, and then his continuance shall be
at the option of the people. We knew that if he could only
be allowed to remain, he would, with the help and blessing
of God, work his way among the people, and gain their
confidence and affection. The present we had designed for the
three chiefs was received by Dabat, he engaging to stand by
the teacher, and the bulk of the people evidently approving.
An incident occurred while these arrangements were in pro-
gress, which is worthy of being recorded as an illustration of
the spirit in which our teachers have come forth on their great
enterprise. The teachers spent a night on shore, and were in
company with parties belonging to the fishing establishment,
natives of different islands from the eastward. Among other
subjects talked of, was the projected mission to Murray Island,
to which the said establishment is about to be moved. On
that account those belonging to it seemed specially intent on
intimidating the teachers, and convincing them that the idea
of commencing a mission on that island was perfectly hope-
less. “ There are alligators there,” said they; “ and snakes,
and centipedes.” “Hold,” said Tepeso; “are there men
there 1 ” “Oh yes,” was the reply, “ there are men ; but they
are such dreadful savages that it is no use your thinking of
living among them.” “That will do,” responded Tepeso,
“ Wherever there are men, missionaries are bound to
go ! ” A noble reply, worthy of a disciple of Him who com-
mands His followers to “ Go into all the world, and preach
the gospel to every creature.”
Darnley Island, or Erub, as the natives call it, lies in
lat. 9° 35' S., and long. 143° 50' E. It is small, not more


than seven or eight miles in circumference. Some parts of the
island look pretty; but all around the coast it is rough, and
shows nothing particularly attractive. It is poorly watered,
and there is no safe harbour; but safe anchorage can be found
on the north side during the south-east trades. Huge boulders
lie scattered all round the coast, and great piles of sandstone
appear in some parts. The highest elevation is 580 feet.
Every part of the interior of the island, as well as along the
coast, is clothed Avith vegetation, and the usual tropical fruits
are found. The natives are a poor, down-trodden looking race.
WARRIOR ISLAND.
We sailed from Darnley Island on Wednesday, July sth.
We had hoped to obtain interpreters there for the mainland,
and at one time it seemed as if our hopes would be realised ;
as we found several natives of New Guinea, who Avere on a
visit to their friends, and who expressed their Avillingness to
return to their homes with us. Ere Ave left, however, mis-
representation had done its work, so that in addition to the
difficulty Are had in leaving the teachers on the island, the
natives of New Guinea refused to go Avith us. This led us to
determine to go to Warrior Island, which is distant from
Darnley about fifty miles, and which we reached about two p.m.
on the day Ave sailed.
Our calling at Warrior Island led to results of the utmost
moment; that island will have an important place in the his-
tory of the Ncav Guinea Mission for all time to come. We
found there Captain Banner, the manager of a shelling station
on the island, who received us kindly, and rendered us valuable
aid in carrying out the object of our voyage. He informed us
of islands which he felt sure would suit our purpose. All
around the islands to which we were recommended and the
adjacent coast are unsurveyed, and it Avas considered unadvis-
able to attempt to reach them in the ship. This difficulty was
met by Captain Banner, who, with great kindness, placed a
large open boat at our service, with a man to manage it, and a
native of Warrior Island as interpreter.


Our falling in with the man -who had charge of the boat is
a thing to be specially noted. It was one of those wonderful
providential arrangements which we have often had to mark
in connection with our evangelistic efforts throughout Poly-
nesia. In all probability there is not another man who could
have rendered us the service which this man did, and yet he
was just put into our hands without any seeking or planning
of ours. A few particulars of his history will interest, and
serve to show how he is fitted to render us such important aid.
He gives his full name as Joseph John, but he goes by the
name of Joe. He is a native of Nukualofa, an island of the
Tongan group, the Friendly Islands of Cook. He has been
away from his native land for thirty years or more, and during
that time he has made an extensive acquaintance with both the
civilised and the heathen world. At the time of the Crimean
war he was in an English man-of-war, and for nearly six years
he was connected with the British Navy. He resided in London
for a time; and he has been to Sydney again and again. He
has a very extensive island experience,—especially is he well
acquainted with the islands of Torres Straits and the Papuan
Gulf, and his acquaintance extends, moreover, to many parts of
the coast of the mainland of New Guinea. Among the islands
and on the coast he is better known and has greater influence
than any other living man ; and, withal, he is shrewd, sensible,
and observant, and being himself an islander, and belonging
to a group into which Christianity was introduced a number of
years before he left his home, his sympathies are strongly with
the native races, and with us in our desires to evangelise them;
and he is able to deal with them in a manner which few, if
any white man, could do. The reader does not now need to
be informed that Joe was the right man in the right place in
our expedition.
VISIT TO TAUAN.
All the arrangements were completed on the day we reached
Warrior Island, and on the following day, Thursday, July 6th,
we started on our important errand. We had no white man


with us. Joe was in charge, and our crew consisted of natives
of Lifu and Uvea. We took with us four teachers and their
wives, Kerisiano, Waunaea, Josaia, and Simone. The weather
was unfavourable, wet and unsettled ; but we had a fair wind,
and a run of seven hours brought us to the island to which we
were bound, Tauan, a name which will be memorable in the
annals of the New Guinea Mission. We went into the
anchorage, which is good and safe, and remained in the boat
while Joe and the interpreter went on shore to see the chief
and people, and inform them of our arrival, and of the object
of our visit.
Joe had been frequently at the island, and had made friends
with all belonging to it. With the chief he had exchanged
names, according to a custom common on many islands ; the
name of the chief is Nudai, and by that name he will continue
to be known, notwithstanding the exchange made with Joe.
Still the transaction forms a connecting link, a bond of friend-
ship between our Tongan friend and his Papuan worker. Joe
found that most of the people were from home; they had gone
to the adjacent island of Saibai. The chief, however, and some
of the principal people were at home, and that was enough for
our purpose. Joe soon returned to the beach, and called to us
that all was right; so we hastened on shore and received a
most cheering welcome. After we had explained, as fully and
clearly as we were able, the object of our visit and our wishes,
the chief expressed his satisfaction and desire that the teachers
should remain on his land, and, pointing across a little stream-
let that was running by to a rising ground, he announced that
that and the land beyond were at the service of the teachers on
which to build and plant to as great an extent as they pleased.
We made the chief a present, with which he seemed much
pleased, and so passed our first transaction on the island of
Tauan.
We spent some time in looking about the neighbourhood
till night drew on, and brought us back to the house which the
chief had given up to the teachers. It was his own house, the
best in the village, and a very tolerable place, considering the


state of the people; but the ground floor, to which we and
our large party had to confine ourselves till sleeping-time came,
was small; the property of the teachers had all been hud-
dled into it; and we had no light but what could be produced
by a fire kindled on the floor. So we were in and out, and
out and in, according as it rained or otherwise. Cooking was
done outside, and we had a bit of food beneath a tree. The
night was dark and cheerless; but what were these little
discomforts in comparison with w T hat had that evening been
achieved ?
At the hour of evening prayer we had all the natives toge-
ther, that they might witness an act of worship to the true
(xod; the first act of the kind, no doubt, that had ever been
performed on their dark shore. The native service over, and
a little conversation which followed, we withdrew, and outside
the house, under the canopy of heaven, and with the great dark
land of New Guinea before us and close at hand, we sang,
“ Jesus shall reign where’er the sun,” &c., poured out our
hearts in fervent prayer and thanksgiving, and talked of the
spread of His blessed reign, and the far-reaching consequences
of the step we had been privileged to take on that ever-
memorable evening.
The house in which we spent the night had an upper storey,
a sort of loft, in which we slept. The houses generally—both
on the island and on the mainland—have an upper storey
which is used for a sleeping place. The design is, doubtless,
to get out of the reach of alligators and snakes. The house
in which we slept had bamboo joists, and the flooring was of
cocoanut slabs, and though it was perhaps pretty strong, it
felt shaky, and one was fain to move about cautiously lest it
should give way, to the inconvenience of the occupants of the
house both above and below. The bamboo grows to a great
size, both on the islands and on the mainland, and is used for
a great variety of purposes, among which are fencing, house
building, and even the construction of bridges on the mainland.
There was not much sleeping in our case on the night in
question, and early on the following morning (Friday, July 7th)


we were astir, and off for the neighbouring island of Saibai.
This was the island specially mentioned and recommended to
us by Captain Banner ; but Joe did right in taking us first to
Tauan, as it has the invaluable advantage over the other of
being free from fever and ague, and is not less convenient for
the mainland. Both were about equally near to the land,
being separated from it by a narrow channel from three to six
miles in breadth.
VISIT TO SAIBAI.
Saibai is about four miles distant from Tauan. Nudai, the
chief, went with us in our boat ; the people followed in two
canoes. In an hour we reached the part of the island to which
we were bound, and drew up in a fine safe anchorage in front
of a considerable village. A large number of people—men,
women, and children—crowded the beach and gave us a most
friendly reception. The sight of the chief from Tauan, with
our friend Joe, was enough to inspire confidence. The chief
figured in a red merino shirt, the only article of dress he wore,
and doubtless he felt himself a man of no small importance as
he moved about and related the marvellous doings of the
strangers on the previous evening.
We were led by the hand from the beach amid the noisy
but friendly clamour of the crowd, to whom we were evidently
objects of great wonder. We were reminded of the astonish-
ment which was excited by the appearance of Mungo Park, in
Central Africa, when searching for the sources of the Mger.
Everything about us occasioned wonder, but especially our
white skin. It was not enough that our hands and faces were
exposed to view, we had to bare our breasts, and turn up our
trousers, as if the natives were in doubt whether we really
were all white. Besides, exposure to the sun and the weather
had made our hands and faces about as dark as those of Joe.
Hence it was only by seeing other parts that they got a correct
impression. Party after party came, led by some officious
youth who had already had his curiosity gratified, to see the
wonderful white skins. By and by they were diverted from


ourselves to the umbrella which one of us carried. The putting
this up and down, and the use of it, excited great wonder and
admiration; and a watch was regarded with a high degree of
astonishment not unmixed with awe.
When the excitement had somewhat subsided, the object of
our visit was explained to the chiefs and people, and by them
warmly approved. The names of the chiefs of Saibai are
Sauai and Maiak. Sauai, we were told, is a brother of Nudai,
the chief of Tauan. He was away on a fishing excursion, so
we did not see him; but our present was received by Maiak,
in the presence of all the people, and we were assured that
the absence of the other would not affect the engagement into
which we entered. And this is altogether likely, especially as
the absent chief is brother to Nudai.
APPEARANCE OF THE PEOPLE.
We were much pleased with the appearance of the people
of these islands. They are greatly superior to the natives of
Darnley and Warrior Islands. They are genuine Papuans,
very dark coloured, and their hair slightly curled, but not
woolly. They are tall and well-proportioned, and many of
them have very good features. Many are as much as five feet
ten inches in height, some perhaps more, and muscular in pro-
portion ; and they have not the cowed, down-trodden appear-
ance of the Darnley Islanders : on the contrary, there is an air
of freedom and independence about them which leads one to
regard them as a manly and independent race. Poor fellows !
it is to be hoped that the withering and deteriorating in-
fluence of intercourse with a certain class of foreigners will not
reduce them to a level with other tribes to which they are now
superior.
They do not wear any clothing, and but few ornaments, nor
do they seem to use paint, as do the natives of the New
Hebrides and many other dark races. The ornaments they
wear are armlets, pieces of pearl-shell polished and formed into
a crescent shape, and worn on the breast suspended from the
neck, and a kind of beads with which they adorn their ears.


The mode of decorating the ear is of a character not met with
among the islands to the eastward. The lobe of the ear is
perforated when young, and gradually distended. That is
common among all the natives of Western Polynesia; but the
singular part here is that when the distension is complete, the
lobe is cut, and a weight is attached till it becomes elongated
about an inch and a half; it is then pierced at intervals of
about an eighth of an inch, and the series of holes is carried
all round the rim of the ear, and in each hole a bit of red
string is inserted, at each end of which a white bead is placed.
This decoration must cost severe and protracted pain. It is
not anything like universal; but we had a good specimen of it
in one of the young men who accompanied us from Warrior
Island to Tauan and Saibai. The armlets are very inferior
things : they are a sort of wicker-work; they extend from
about the elbow to the wrist.
The Avomen looked debased—very much inferior to the men.
Polygamy, we were sorry, though not surprised to find, is
largely practised ; the chief of Tauan has twelve wives, and his
brother, the chief of Saibai, ten. Their position seems very
much that of servants ; perhaps slaves would be a more appro-
priate designation. They do the drudgery and hard work,
while the men live at their ease, and work or not as they
please. They wear a girdle of leaves.
While Joe Avas engaged in purchasing provisions for the ship,
Ave walked about examining the different objects that met our
view, and surveying, as far as opportunity allowed, the fine
island. Twice messengers were sent after us to call us back
from places to which we were about to go, for Avhat reason we
could not ascertain. But it was evident that there Avas some
strong reason in the minds of the natives, as they called us
back in a very decided though friendly manner. Probably
some sacred object or enclosure Avas in danger of being pro-
faned by us.
About noon we took our departure. The women had gone
to get food, and it was arranged that a large party should cross
to Tauan on the following day, to see the teachers and take


them a present. We had a very rough passage back to the
ship. The distance is not great, about thirty miles ; but it is
a dead beat, and much of the time we had a rough head sea
and a strong adverse tide. We left Saibai at noon on Friday,
and did not reach the Surprise till about sunset on Saturday,
thirty hours being occupied in making thirty miles. So ended
this important expedition. Our hopes had been exceeded.
God had done for us great things, and we felt a satisfaction
which words can but feebly express. The great object of our
voyage was accomplished. The foundation of the New Guinea
Mission was laid.
DESCRIPTION OF THE TWO ISLANDS.
But we must now return and say something a little more
definite about the islands that are likely to occupy so import-
ant a position in the evangelisation of New Guinea. Of course
we saw but little of them ourselves, and so are unable to give
a very satisfactory account. They lie on the west side of the
Great Bight, or Gulf of Papua, about lat. 9° 30' and long.
142° 40'.
Tauan is a small, rocky, mountainous island. It has one
high central mountain, which appears to reach an elevation of
1500 to 2000 feet. From this mountain the land slopes gra-
dually down to the sea. The island looks wild and rugged for
so low a latitude, very unlike islands in similar latitudes in
Eastern and Central Polynesia. Immense blocks of stone are
strewed about in wild confusion, and present all manner of
fantastic shapes. Some look like grave-stones; others like
mounds erected over graves, and others like pillars, forming
doorways and arches. Some of the blocks are of immense
size, and must have been thrown into their present positions
by tremendous convulsions. In some cases, one block is placed
upon the top of another, forming a sort of cope-stone, and
appearing as nicely poised and balanced as if it had been done
by human hands.
The part of the island where the teachers are located is a
snug, quiet nook, with good, safe anchorage, and a sandy


beach. There are two or three small streams in the neigh-
bourhood, and there is a fair proportion of low land, all of
which may, no doubt, be turned to good account; and the
most important thing of all is that the island is healthy, and
so fitted to be an available asylum at all times from' the
adjacent coast, and the neighbouring island, where fever and
ague prevail. The stated population is very small ; but there
seems to be constant intercourse between it and Saibai, the
population of which appears large. The circumference of the
island may be about ten or twelve miles.
Saibai is totally different in character to Tauan; marvel-
lously so, considering that the islands are not more than four
miles apart. It is a low, swampy island, and fertile in the
highest degree. No part of it seems to be more than about
eighty feet above the level of the sea. A large part of one
side is covered with mangroves; and behind the village, where
we met the people, there is a very extensive fresh-water
swamp, which looks as if it might generate any amount of
malaria; still, as already mentioned, the natives look remark-
ably well.
The swamp appeared like irrigated plantations, and no
doubt parts of it are under cultivation. The natives were
moving about it in little skiffs, and beautiful wild ducks with
snow-white plumage were seen enjoying themselves, evidently
in no fear of being molested. On the further side this great
swamp is protected from the incursions of the sea by a natural
rampart, somewhat like the elevations that surround Mare
and Lifu, and other islands of Eastern and Western Polynesia.
As regards productiveness, Saibai is evidently quite a garden ;
and this is a matter of considerable importance in view of the
comparative sterility of Tauan. It is probably from thirty to
forty miles in circumference.
The two islands, as already remarked, are about equally
distant from the mainland, and with the natives on the coast,
not only in their immediate neighbourhood but for many miles
beyond, they have close relations. Hence, getting a footing
among them is really equivalent to obtaining a hold upon the
2 A


mainland ; whilst over that it has the invaluable advantage of
securing a safe retreat in case of loss of health. With the pre-
vailing winds, whether blowing from the east or the west, the
channel can be crossed at any time in an hour, either from the
one side or the other, there being a fair wind both ways. And
on the coast is a large population, among whom we doubt not
the light will soon spread, scattering the darkness of untold
ages, and introducing an era, the characteristics of which will
be, “ Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good will
to men,” Alas ! what labours, struggles, and conflicts must
intervene before the full realisation and development of our
scheme; but the result is sure, for the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it. He will sustain His servants under all, and enable
them to triumph over all.
Our understanding with the teachers is that two of them,
Kerisiano and Waunaea, consider themselves as specially ap-
pointed to the mainland, and that the other two regard the
islands as their more immediate sphere.
The country on the mainland presents a level flat, as far as
the eye can reach, except one hill of no great elevation. The
whole is an unknown land, unexplored and unvisited by white
men, and so it will probably remain for years to come, as
other parts of New Guinea present greater attractions to those
who may resort to it for scientific or commercial purposes.
VISIT TO CAPE YORK.
On Monday the 10th of July we sailed from Warrior
Island at nine A.M., and stood for Cape York, the northern
point of Australia, which we reached on the evening of Tues-
day the 11th. Cape York is only sixty miles from Warrior
Island. Our object in calling at Cape York was to see Mr
Jardine, agent of the Queensland Government, and Lieutenant
Chester, ex-police magistrate, who reside there, and also to
take in water for the return voyage. We thought it important
to see Mr Jardine on account of his official position, and Mr
Chester on account of the warm interest he takes in the native
races, and the frequent cruises he makes among the islands.


We wished to acquaint them with what we had done and
intended doing in the way of landing teachers; to enlist their
sympathies in our object; bespeak attention and succour for
the teachers should danger or difficulty arise; and get from
them any information that may be useful in our future opera-
tions. r
We at length reached Somerset, where these gentlemen
reside. As we opened up the bay, Port Albany, at the head
ot which is the Government settlement, we were much struck
with the beauty of the scene. The house in which Messrs
Jardme and Chester reside stands upon high ground, some
two hundred feet or more above the sea level. It is covered
with an iron roof, has spacious verandahs, and looks exceed-
ingly neat; and with the various other houses by which it is
surrounded, and which compose the settlement, it presents
altogether an imposing sight.
Mr Jardine met us at the landing-place and gave us a most
friendly reception, and we spent, in company with him and
Mr Chester, two or three pleasant and profitable hours, giving
and receiving information mutually interesting. Mr Jardine
authorised us to instruct our teachers that, in the event of
danger or difficulty arising, they have only to apply to him,
and he will render them all the assistance in his power. Thus
they will always have an available retreat at Somerset should
they have occasion to seek it: and Mr Chester will visit them,
and give them countenance and encouragement when he makes
his rounds among the islands. He has promised to visit
Darnley Island shortly, and take the teacher appointed to
Murray Island to his destination, should he find him still on
Darnley. Mr Chester is well known on Murray Island; hence
his accompanying the teacher is likely to be of much service.
On the whole we were much gratified by our visit to these
gentlemen. We saw only two Englishmen who appeared to
be residents at Somerset, in addition to Messrs Jardine and
Chester, and the mother of the former. All the other persons
connected with the establishment appear to be natives of
Australia, with a few from some of the islands to the eastward.


Several native troopers figure about the establishment in a uni-
form which gives them something of an imposing appearance.
They are paid £3 per month, which we were glad to find they
have it not in their power to spend in intoxicating drinks.
All about Cape York is a fine healthy country; the fever
and ague said to be prevalent on New Guinea are unknown,
as are° also other diseases incident to tropical climates; and
for so low a latitude it is wonderfully cool at this season of
the year. But this is true of all the places we have visited
throughout the Straits and the Papuan Gulf. The south-
easterly trade winds, which blow almost constantly for half
the year, keep the temperature cool; and we were told that
during the other part of the year, when westerly and north-
westerly winds prevail, the heat is not very oppressive.
While on our way to and from Somerset certain curious-
looking objects attracted our attention on the slopes of the
hills, the nature of which we could not conjecture, and we had
not an opportunity of examining them. They were of a drab
colour, and bore some resemblance to tombstones, but some of
them terminated in two, three, or more spiral turrets. The
mystery was solved on our second visit to Tauan, where the
same strange objects again arrested our attention; they were
found to be ants’ nests! Some of them were twelve feet in
height, and as many round.
return to tauan.
We sailed from Cape York on Friday, July 15th. Having
brought up at Rennel Island, we found a letter from Josaia,
informing us that he and Simone had left the island under
circumstances which led them to suppose that their lives were
in danger. We at once hastened to Warrior Island, where we
found 'them; and then with two boats ran down to Tauan.
One of these boats we had purchased for the use of the teachers
and we proposed to leave it at Tauan. On rounding the point
of the island, we descried them on the beach. Fervent grati-
tude to God filled our hearts, and corresponding expressions
escaped from our lips. We hastened on shore, and spent the


day with our faithful teachers and their wives, experiencing a
satisfaction which words can but feebly express.
We found all right: no change whatever, except in the right
direction, had taken place in the feelings or conduct of the
people towards the teachers. What then had led to the strange
proceedings of those who had deserted their post and fled, and
whose conduct had occasioned us such an amount of trouble
and anxiety ? The following is the explanation. Soon after
the teachers were landed, it must' have been the next day, or
at latest the second day, a small vessel, the , belonging to
Sydney, commanded by Captain , engaged in shelling or
fishing, touched at the island. The said vessel anchored abreast
of the settlement where the teachers are located ; and the cap-
tain and his mate, and a number of his people, went to the
plantations of the natives and helped themselves to sweet pota-
toes, bananas, cocoa-nuts, &c. The natives were almost all
absent at the time on the neighbouring island of Saibai, and
when they returned, and found that their plantations had been
plundered, they were of course excited, and a hostile demon-
stration was the consequence. All the teachers were alarmed,
and thought themselves in danger. This seems clear from the
fact, that the two who remained retired by turns to commit
themselves by prayer to the Divine protection. But when the
question of flight was raised, one of them, Waunaea, said he
would not leave; the natives had done nothing to them, and
he was determined to remain. Upon this, Kerisiano announced
that he would stay with Waunaea ; and the other two being
inclined to leave, they told them to go, and they would remain
and await the issue.
And what are the mighty inducements that lead men, priding
themselves on possessing a white skin, and calling themselves
Christians, to be guilty of conduct so mean and contemptible?
In the present case some two boats’-loads or so of vegetables
were obtained, which might have been purchased for trifles of
the value of a few shillings. Really one wonders that men will
stoop to conduct so exceedingly paltry. We left a paper with
the teachers, certifying who and what they are, commending


them to the kind attention of visitors, and expressing deep
regret on account of the lawless conduct of certain parties at
this island and elsewhere, making special reference to the case
which had just occurred, and expressing an earnest hope that
there will be no repetition of such doings in future. And here
we may remark, as a warning to those who are implicated in
the practice animadverted upon, that unless they are discon-
tinued, we shall be constrained to expose the perpetrators. We
are in a position to do that to a considerable extent now, and
as light spreads, concealment will be more and more difficult.
We went, led by a native, and saw for ourselves the plundered
plantations of Tauan, and not a little grieved and ashamed did
we feel, to think that men of our own colour, and speaking our
own tongue, should have been the perpetrators of such a con-
temptible deed.
The teachers and the people of Tauan were delighted at our
return. We had much important intercourse with them, and
left them in circumstances mutually satisfactory to them and
to ourselves. We succeeded at Warrior Island in engaging a
Do O
native of that place to remain with them for a month as an
interpreter. He had been to Sydney, and has a considerable
acquaintance with the English language, and bears a good char-
acter ; moreover, he is a man of some consequence on his own
island, and this will not be lost at Tauan. When his month
there is up, another native of Warrior Island will take his
place at Tauan in a similar capacity, who is also fitted to be of
much use to the teachers. They have, beside, the boat which
we purchased, so that they can move about at any time as
occasion may require.
VISIT TO THE MAINLAND, KATAU.
We left Tauan at two A.M. on Monday, July 17th. We
were given to understand by our friend Joe that in returning
to Warrior Island we might, without loss of time, stand along
the coast of the mainland ; and have intercourse with the
people of Katau, a populous village which he had visited, and
with whose chief and people he had formed an acquaintance.


Everything turned out as Joe had represented, and we were
very thankful that we acted upon his advice.
In the channel between Saibai and the mainland, and for
some distance beyond, we had very light winds. Hence our
progress was slow for the first four or five hours, and though
the place to which we were bound is only about twenty miles
from Tauan, we did not reach it till near noon. For hours
we were moving slowly along the coast of the great land, our
progress being retarded by an adverse tide. We had a good
opportunity of observing every object as we passed. There is
little variety; the land is low all along; we passed only one
little hill. A mangrove swamp extends for many miles, ter-
minating at the district to which we were bound. Beyond
that are groves of cocoa-nuts, and beyond these are intermin-
able forests, stretching away into the interior.
As we drew near our destination a fine river opened out to
view. The weather was unfavourable, wet, and unsettled ;
hence the river and the district, with their surroundings, did not
show to advantage. Nevertheless, we looked upon them with
intense interest. We made our way some distance up the
river, and dropped anchor opposite the settlement of Katau.
We can hardly hazard an opinion as to the breadth of the
river. The current did not seem very broad, but the space
covered by fresh water must have been a full mile. Its course
is distinctly marked for a considerable distance into the sea.
Joe informed us that it has two mouths, about four miles
apart, the second of which we could not see. Between it and
us was an island, near which we anchored. The island looks
very interesting, and adds much to the picturesque beauty of
the scene. The river must pour down an immense body of
water, especially when flooded. The sea was discoloured for
miles on the day of our visit. A native of Warrior Island,
who was with us, told us that the river extends a long way
into the interior, and that large numbers of people are found
on its banks.
At our first approach the natives looked shy and distrustful.
Six or seven appeared, and watched us cautiously as we drew


near; and it was not till Joe and the young man from Warrior
Island were recognised, that we got their confidence. From
the appearance of those who showed themselves we felt assured
that we had nothing to fear; so we moved our boat as near
the shore as we could get, in order to enable the natives to
reach us. As soon as we had done this they waded in to the
boat, and we were soon warm friends. Among those who came
out to us was Maiuo, the chief, a friend of Joe, and another
man of importance. Confidence soon spread, and large num-
bers appeared on the beach. The women and children, and
the old people, kept out of the way; still all were unarmed,
and we could readily see that no danger was to be appre-
hended. We found, after landing, that the natives had hung
green boughs in front of their houses, when they saw us at a
distance, as an indication of their desire for friendly inter-
course. One of the principal men who came to the boat had
a basket slung over his shoulder, containing three or four
heads of cooked taro. These he offered, thinking probably
that we were hungry, and being desirous of showing himself
friendly.
INTERCOURSE WITH THE NATIVES.
After some delay in the boat we went on shore, and had
the high gratification of setting foot on the mainland of New
Guinea, and holding intercourse with its people on their own
soil. And interesting enough was that intercourse. Few of
those we met had seen a white man before. Lieutenant
Chester and Captain Banner visited this place during the course
of last year: but they landed armed, and the consequence
was that the natives fled into the bush, except some twenty or
thirty. In our case there was perfect confidence. The men
crowded around us to have their curiosity gratified, and the
women peered at us from the upper storeys of their houses.
By the way, the houses are very remarkable. One which we
saw, and measured, was over a hundred feet long ; yet that was
a small one comparatively, as the following extract from Lieu-
tenant Chester’s journal proves : —“ Some of these houses were


upwards of three hundred feet in length, and appeared like
immense tunnels when viewed inside.”
As at Saibai, the umbrellas were objects of special interest;
so much so, that we could not resist the temptation to leave
them with the people. One was given to the chief, and the
other to another man of importance, and the demonstrations
that followed the small gift were amusing indeed. One grand
difficulty, however, soon checked their joy ; the umbrellas were
opened and could not be shut again; although we had re-
peatedly opened and shut them amid roars of applause. At
length one fortunate fellow discovered the secret, and was
rewarded by the loud acclamations of the bystanders.
We found the people here very much like those of Saibai
and Tauan, so that what has been said of the one will apply
to the other. They are a mild, inoffensive-looking race, and
they are industrious, if we judge from the abundance of food
which they seem to possess. When they were given to under-
stand that a little trading would be done, taro, bananas, and
cocoa-nuts were soon forthcoming; and in a short time Joe
and Mr Ormiston, the mate of our vessel, had bought as much
as we could conveniently carry away.
We made it our special business, of course, to try and give
to the chief and people some idea of our object in Ausiting
them and their neighbours. We told them of the teachers we
had left at Tauan and Darnley Island, and of our visit to
Saibai, striving to convey some notion of the benefits which
will accrue from the presence and labours of teachers. The
chief declared his approval, and his wish to have teachers to
live with him; he said he would go to Tauan, and see those
left there, and that he would receive and provide for them
whenever they might visit his land. Thus we have got one
open door on the mainland of New Guinea ; and who can tell
the mighty results to which that may lead 1 There are some
600 or 700 people connected with the village we visited; there
is another settlement a little further up the river on the same
side; and there is doubtless a large population on the banks
of the river, stetching away into the great unknown interior.


With only one request of the chief we were unable to
comply. Having entered into a friendly compact with us, h e
wanted us to help him to fight a tribe on the opposite side of
the river, who are hostile to him. Quite a natural idea for him
to wish to turn his new friends to account in that way. We
hope, ere a great while, to show him a more excellent way,—
namely, by changing enemies to friends. Let teachers get a
footing among both parties, and their ancient feuds are likely
soon to be forgotten, and peace and good-will to be established
in their room.
The river on whose banks these people reside has neither
name nor place on any chart. It, and its surroundings, and
all on as far as Saibai and Tauan, and we know not how much
further beyond, are unexplored. In the meanwhile, till a better
name can be found, we may call it the Katau River.
RETURN TO DARNLEY ISLAND.
About two p.m. we took our leave of our new acquaint-
ances, leaving them evidently much gratified with our visit, as
assuredly we were with the intercourse we had had with them.
We had a rough, disagreeable passage back to Warrior Island,
but all ended Avell, We reached the Surprise about noon on
Tuesday, the 18th July.
We left Warrior Island on Wednesday, July 10th, feeling
deeply grateful to our friend Captain Banner, and to Captain
Bedford also, of the James Merriman, connected with the same
establishment, who had manifested the kindest interest in our
operations and sympathy with us in our difficulties. Our
course was again directed towards Darnley Island. We brought
up for the night at Rennel Island, and on the following morn-
ing again made sail. We had a hard day’s beating, and got to
anchor early on Friday morning, July 21st.
We had the satisfaction of finding all going on well with the
teachers. A number of the people had attached themselves to
them, and these and others had assisted them to put up a neat
little cottage. Thus at this early stage of the mission they are


comfortably boused, and their circumstances altogether are full
of encouragement. We were unable to get to sea on Saturday,
on account of ship’s business, so we spent the Sabbath at the
island. We went round to the settlement where the teachers
are stationed, and had service with them. The occasion was
deeply interesting. In addition to the teachers and their
families, and a number of natives from the Loyalty Islands, we
had quite a company of natives assembled ; about eighty, old
and young. They were, of course, mere spectators; still it was
pleasing to see them, as it showed interest and friendly feeling.
About thirty of them had managed to get a little clothing;
very scanty in most cases, yet interesting to see. About that
number have decidedly attached themselves to the teachers,
and show them great kindness. Our first acquaintance, Dabat,
continues their staunch friend; and on the whole their pro-
spects are very encouraging,
Mataika, who it will be remembered is appointed to Murray
Island, and was left here only temporarily, will proceed to his
destination as soon as a suitable opportunity offers; which is
likely to be in about six weeks or two months from the time
of our visit. Soon after the service, we bade the teachers and
others on shore adieu, and returned to the ship; and early on
Monday morning, July 24th, we weighed anchor, and set sail
on our return voyage,
VOYAGE OF, THE “ JOHN KNOX.” MR THORNGREN.
Great interest attaches to our having made a second visit to
Darnley Island, from the fact of our having fallen in there with
the John Knox. After the idea of attempting the commence-
ment of the mission in her was abandoned, and the employment
of a larger vessel determined upon, it was arranged that she
should still proceed with us, as part of our expedition, and that
she and Mr Thorngren should render us such assistance as
might be practicable. Mr Thorngren had resided for some
time on Darnley Island, and so had experience which it was


hoped would turn to valuable account. And now he had made
up his mind to return to his former home, and settle there. It
was hoped, moreover, that his presence there with his handy
little vessel might be of much service to us in the early years
of the New Guinea Mission.
The John Knox is a fine little cutter, but she is only eleven
tons burden. Mr Thorngren set out on his adventurous voyage
from New Caledonia with sixteen souls on board, some of them
women and children, and all of them, with a single exception,
natives of the Loyalty Islands. Had he made a direct course,
he would have had to traverse fifteen or sixteen hundred miles of
ocean. Some of the passengers were to have gone in our vessel.
Hoping to fall in with us at the south-east end of New Guinea,
he made for the Louisiades, but was carried by contrary winds
to the Solomon Archipelago, which he mistook for the Louisi-
ades. Then New Britain was mistaken for New Guinea; and
Mr Thorngren stood along the coast till the appearance of the
land convinced him that he was on the wrong side of New
Guinea. By continuing his course westward, his convictions
were confirmed, and he had to make the best of his way back
against a head-wind.
On his way he spent twenty-one days among the islands of
the D’Entrecasteaux group. He met with very kind treatment
from the natives, and gathered valuable information which will
be of use to us in our prospective operations.
One very important point seems clear from his account—viz.,
that the natives of that large group, and most probably those
of the adjacent coast, belong to the Malay race. The colour
of their skin, their straight but slightly curled hair, and words
in their language unmistakably Malayan, the high position
occupied by the women, their mode of dress, tattooing, carving
of canoes, &c., all go to identify them with the Malay tribes,
who people the islands of Eastern and Central Polynesia, The
group consists of four or five very large islands, and a great
number of small ones. All the more considerable islands
are inhabited. They are separated by narrow channels, and


would form a fine field for missionary labour; just the field
for teachers from Eastern and Central Polynesia. The large
islands are very lofty; some of them appearing to reach an
elevation of from 5000 to 7000 feet.
Various curiosities obtained by Mr Thorngren show that
the people have quite a taste for carving, an additional proof
of their Malayan origin. They have indifferent houses and
poor war-weapons, their skill and taste being chiefly seen in
the construction and decoration of their canoes. After leaving
this interesting group Mr Thorngren fell in with a fishing-party
from, he supposes, an island called Bonvouloir, lying off the
north-east end of New Guinea. The party consisted of twenty
persons in two canoes; they and Mr Thorngren and his people
spent a day together, during which the two companies seem to
have formed quite a friendship. When they came to part, the
savages embraced the white men with all affection, as if they
had been old and intimate friends. How different from the
kind of intercourse which so often takes place between civilised
and uncivilised men when they first come into contact! Of
course Mr Thorngren was entirely in the power of the natives
at the different places at which he anchored. At any moment
they might have surrounded him and his small party, and
overpowered them; yet no disposition was shown to take
advantage of their circumstances, a satisfactory proof of the
peaceful and friendly character of these people, and a presump-
tive proof that among barbarous, as well as civilised men, the
rule will generally hold, that men are to us what we are
to them. “He that would have friends must show himself
friendly,” and he who does this will generally meet with an
appropriate response.
As far as Mr Thorngren could judge, the people from the
small island spoke the same language as those of the large
group. After parting with these people, Mr Thorngren made
his way round the east cape of New Guinea, and thence to
Darnley Island, where he terminated his adventurous and
eventful voyage on the 19th July, fifty-nine days from the
time of his leaving New Caledonia. It was a great relief to us


to find that the party had reached their destination in safety,
as we had serious fears lest some disaster should have befallen
them.
REDSCAR BAY ON THE MAINLAND.
After leaving Darnley Island, on Monday, July 24th, we
stood over towards the coast of the mainland of New Guinea;
hoping, by so doing, to fall in with slants, if not with fair
winds, to enable us to make our way to the east. On Tuesday
the high land was sighted; but we had very light winds for
the next twenty-four hours. On Friday, the 28th, we stood
close in to land, and had a good view of Yule Island and the
country adjacent. We were near enough to see the natives on
shore, but none of them showed any disposition to come off
to us.
Yule Island is about four miles in length, and one in breadth.
It is 534 feet in height, and with the exception of a few grass
patches, it is covered with apparently large timber. It lies in
front of a very extensive opening in the coast, which is sup-
posed to be the mouth of a large river. The adjacent coast is
unsurveyed. The island looks as if it might prove a Tauan
for this part of the mainland, when we may be able to extend
our operations thus far along the coast. These small islands
lying close to the mainland are likely to be of great service in
carrying on the evangelisation of New Guinea, as they are
almost certainly free from the diseases that are said to prevail
on the low land along the coast. Yule Island is in latitude
8° M S., and longitude 146° 30 E.
Rough w T eather came on just as we were leaving this part
of the island, and for the next four or five days we made no
progress. On Wednesday, the 2nd of August, we made the
land again, very little to windward of where we were on the
Thursday preceding. The south-east trades in these parts
seem to blow very strongly all the time at this season of the
year. For three days of the above interval we had strong
head-winds and a very high sea, while it was quite fine over-
head ; the sun shining by day and the moon by night. Thus


it is a very formidable undertaking indeed to get to windward.
On the afternoon of Thursday, August 3rd, we were abreast
of Redscar Bay, and on the following day, about noon, we
anchored near the east point of the bay, close to a remarkable
headland named Redscar Head. The name Redscar was given
to this point and the bay on account of the reddish colour of
the cliffs. We were able to turn our stay in Redscar Bay to
valuable account.
The natives were at first exceedingly shy. They showed no
disposition to come near the ship; and had no advance been
made on our part we should doubtless have left without hold-
ing intercourse with them. But on Saturday morning a boat
was sent to the shore, and after a while returned with a man
and a boy. They were from a canoe which the boat had met.
No natives were found where it landed, though we had seen a
number about the place the day before; they were evidently
distrustful, and so were inclined to keep out of our way. By
bestowing little presents upon the man and the boy, and send-
ing them back to the shore to display their gifts, and tell the
wonderful tale of what they had seen, we gained our end;
there was no more difficulty in getting intercourse on shore.
The most important thing connected with our visit to this
place is, that we have ascertained that this part of the coast is
peopled by the Malay race. This confirms the impression we
got in passing Hood’s Bay, seventy-five miles further to the
eastward, from the view we had of the natives there : and now
we may almost certainly conclude that the whole coast of the
Eastern Peninsula, on the south side, from Redscar Bay and
possibly from Yule Island, is peopled by the same race. Very
probably, judging from the information obtained from Mr
Thorngren, the same is true of the north side. It is not
unlikely that the dark race may be found in the interior.
We have ascertained another important point by calling
here, viz., that there is no difficulty in having friendly inter-
course with the light-coloured races on Papua any more than
with the dark. In the case of both we have now tested the
thing, and we have seen no trace of that invincible ferocity and


treachery which have hitherto been regarded as their promi-
nent characteristics. That they have been guilty of deeds of
shocking cruelty and barbarism is beyond dispute. But we
suspect that if all the circumstances were known, it would
generally be found that there have been misunderstandings;
or that a wrong policy has been adopted by the visitors; or
that in some cases these have been guilty of deeds which fully
account for the excesses committed by the natives. In deal-
ing with a barbarous people everything, in all ordinary cir-
cumstances, depends upon the manner in which that inter-
course is conducted. Among the natives of Eedscar Bay only
a single weapon of war was seen by parties who went on shore
and moved freely about among them; this was a stone club
carried by the chief of the party.
The people of this neighbourhood are a fine race. “ They
are of a light copper colour, and have handsome features and
good expression. Painting the face or body does not seem
to be practised here; but the men are usually tatooed on
the breast, cheeks, forehead, and arms. It is much fainter
and less profuse than among the women, every visible part of
whose skin is generally marked with a great variety of pat-
terns. The women wear a petticoat of shreds of the pandanus
leaf, reaching to the knee, and the men a narrow piece of cloth
secured by a string round the waist.” 1 What the men wear
is the maro, or malo, known all over the islands of Eastern and
Central Polynesia, and worn by some whole groups, as the
Marquesans, in their heathen state. Thus it forms one among
the many links that connect them with the light-coloured races
on New Guinea.
We have seen no place on New Guinea equal in beauty and
grandeur to Eedscar Bay and its surroundings. The bay is
twenty-three miles in breadth and seven in depth. From
Eedscar Head, which forms the eastern extremity, to the Manoa
Eiver, five miles distant, the coast is covered with mangroves,
and for some distance inland is is probably uninhabited, and
* Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake, in 1845-6.


unfit for cultivation. The river must either be very large, or
the conjecture we have met with must be correct, that there
is another large river further to the west, as an immense body
of fresh water is discharged into the sea. The fresh water
line is visible for miles, and the stream is about two miles in
breadth. For fifteen miles inland, and thirty-five miles north-
west and south-east, the country is low, but it is not a dead
flat. There are several hills from the eastern Head onward
towards the west; and there is a small mountain range near
the west side, which reaches an elevation of 770 feet. Inland
at the distance of forty miles is the great Stanley Range, which
terminates the view. It is very lofty at this part,—over 13,000
feet, —and looks very grand. At early morn, when the weather
is fine, the scene is enchanting. The clear, blue outline of the
distant mountains towering far above the clouds; their sides
and the hills and valleys at their base, skirted and partially
covered with snow-white drapery ; with the rich and beautiful
country which stretches out to view on every hand, form a
picture of indescribable beauty and grandeur. So far as we
could ascertain, the people appeared to have their settlement
near the river, and there probably will be the place for a
station when we may be able to commence a mission at this
inviting place.
We sailed on Monday, August 7th, and, with our visit to
this place, our intercourse with New Guinea, for the present,
came to an end.
CONCLUSION.
The London Missionary Society, under whose auspices this
field has been opened up, will doubtless endeavour to prosecute
with vigour the great enterprise of its evangelisation. That
Society having a native agency at its disposal such as no other
Society (so far as we know) possesses, is in a peculiarly favour-
able position for undertaking it.
The extensive territory examined by us is peopled by two
distinct races: the dark race having much in common with
the tribes found on most of the islands of Western Polynesia;
2 B


and a light-coloured race, evidently having a common origin
with the natives of Eastern and Central Polynesia. It so hap-
pens that the London Missionary Society has just the kind of
agency needed for the evangelisation of these two races. In
the Loyalty Islands it has what is needed for the dark race;
and for those of Malay origin it has the Tahitian Mission, the
Hervey Island Mission, the Niue Mission, and the Samoan
Mission ; each of which is in a position to furnish its quota of
labourers for the great undertaking, who are just the kind of
labourers needed.
We commend the infant Mission to the watchful care of the
great Master, and pray that in a very large measure His bless-
ing may rest upon its great future. To Him who hath so
graciously prospered our way, and permitted us to realise the
desire of our hearts, to Him be glory, honour, dominion, and
praise, now and ever. Amen.
A. W. MURRAY.
S. M‘FARLANE.


Instead of being absent from Lifu two, or, at most,
three months, as we anticipated, we were over five
months. Strong winds and currents prevented our pro-
gress, in consequence of which we ran short of provi-
sions. The native crew were reduced to one cocoanut
each per day, and we to a little dry biscuit and coffee,
and we all had fish when we could catch them! At
Lifu they had begun to entertain grave doubts about
our safety, which was perfectly natural, considering the
dangerous navigation and the savage character of the
natives at New Guinea. Great was the joy, therefore,
on our return, and equally great was our gratitude to
Almighty God for His goodness to us, and to those we
had left behind. About three months afterwards we left
for England, in order to edit the New Testament and
Psalms in the Lifu language, and to make definite
arrangements with the Directors of our Society for
carrying on the work on New Guinea.
The introduction of Christianity to the millions of New
Guinea forms a very important epoch, not only in the
history of our operations in the South Seas, but also in
that of the London Missionary Society. It is the largest,
most interesting, and most valuable island upon which
our Society has established a mission; and now that the
work is fairly commenced, and approved, and publicly
sanctioned by the Board of Directors, we stand pledged
and committed to maintain it efficient; the practical
question is, how can that be most economically done.
Whilst exercising unwavering faith in the ultimate
triumph of the gospel on New Guinea, we shall best


expedite so desirable an end by looking the difficulties
before us fairly in the face at the beginning, and arrang-
ing our plans accordingly.
In the first place, we have to encounter difficulties in
getting at the natives. Navigation in Torres Straits is
considered the most intricate and dangerous in the
world. The coast of New Guinea, where we have esta-
blished our mission, has not been surveyed, and the river
on whose banks we landed is unknown. We have to
encounter sunken rocks and reefs, sand and mud banks,
currents and calms, and we must be prepared to do it.
In the second place, we have to face a sickly climate,
where it has been proved that to remain on the coast for
a single night means to be laid up for three months with
fever and ague, which happened to seventeen natives
engaged in the pearl shell fishery, who spent a night
near the Fly river.
In the third place, we have to meet a savage, treach-
erous, blood-thirsty people, who have made cannibal
feasts of many a shipwrecked crew ; who pent up the
360 Chinese passengers of the St Paul that was lost
on their shores, clubbing and cooking three or four every
morning until only four remained.
And in the fourth place, our difficulties are immensely
increased, compared with an island like Madagascar,
by having to do with a people who are divided into
numerous small tribes, speaking various languages, and
governed by despotic chiefs.
Now in order to meet these difficulties it is clear that
we must adopt some other plan than that which we have


hitherto been pursuing in the South Seas. To go in the
John Williams , and locate teachers on New Guinea, to
be left unyisited till her return voyage, twelve months
afterwards, would be simply inhuman. A new station
on such an island should be visited within a month after
it has been established. So that two things are essential
—missionaries must be on the spot, and they must have
the means of paying frequent visits to the teachers, in
order to direct, protect, and if necessary remove them.
A small mission vessel is indispensable for the New
Guinea mission, and considering the dangerous naviga-
tion on the coast, and the necessity of getting up the
rivers and on to the highlands as soon as possible, it is
highly desirable that the vessel should have steam power.
To the many advantages of a small steamer for our work
may be added that of economy, for a sailing vessel would
have to be large and powerful, in order to be able to
beat to windward outside the barrier reef of New Guinea,
whereas a small steamer can thread its way inside the
reef more rapidly and more safely; and should the
natives, at any place, show hostile demonstrations, we
can steam quietly away and try somewhere else.
The Directors of our Society (many of whom are
practical men in these matters) have decided that a small
steamer is necessary for the efficient working of the New
Guinea Mission, and during my late visit to Scotland,
Miss Baxter of Dundee very generously offered to pro-
vide such a vessel, for which purpose she handed to the
Directors the sum of £2OOO. Doubtless, other friends,
anxious to identify themselves with the opening up of New


Guinea,, will provide the annual cost of its maintenance,
which will be about four or five hundred pounds.
The Mission requires a vessel) and a vessel requires
safe anchorage at headquarters. Considering the
difficulties to be encountered, it is clear that we should
begin by settling on healthy localties near the mainland,
and by constant communication form the acquaintance
of the natives. We should form our headquarters at
some point where we can plant our feet firmly without a
fear of exciting the cupidity of the natives, and having
the station broken up, a point that will be suitable for a
sanatorium for our Mission; where we can establish a
school for natives from the mainland; which may also be
a place of refuge in case of necessity; and where there is
a good harbour, and plenty of fresh water. During our
visit we looked out for such a place, and found it at
Cape York, the most northern point of Australia. It is
only eighty miles from New Guinea, and there are
numerous islands between where teachers may and should
be located. We found a number of unoccupied houses
which had been erected by the marines who were located
there some time ago by the Queensland Government, and
these have very kindly been placed at our disposal.
Let Cape York be the depot of our New Guinea
Mission, at least for a time, and with the voyage of the
John Williams so arranged that she may call there on her
way to Sydney, bringing teachers and supplies, and
giving us as much of her time as can be spared, in order
to visit parts of the coast that cannot be safely reached
in our small steamer, we may, with a little rearranging


of the forces that we already possess, he able to carry on
this new,and very interesting and very important mission,
without any very great extra expenditure of the Society’s
funds.
The whole thing seems feasible, yet we must not be too
sanguine, but rather prepared for difficulties and disasters.
We are taking up our position before a mighty fortress,
whose grim walls frown upon us, and to storm it will
require all the piety, courage, skill, and patience that we
can command. Let us wisely take every precaution, and
go steadily to work, planting ourselves as securely as
possible, and retaining every inch of ground we gain,
until that great island is transformed into smiling fields
and peaceful happy villages. If sustained by the
sympathies and prayers of the Churches at home, and
guided, protected, and prospered by the great Head of
the Church, we shall then see the gospel, which on Lifu
triumphed over the vices of heathenism, the stratagems
of Popery, and the kulaboose of French, the triumph also
over every obstacle that presents itself on New Guinea.


After reading a paper to the Board of Directors of the
London Missionary Society, on the subject of the New
Guinea Mission, in December 1872, at which there was a
large gathering of Directors, and five of my missionary
brethren from the South Seas, and after the case had
been considered on several occasions, and committees
had reported on various details, the following resolutions
were adopted:—
1. That Cape York be made, for the present, the headquarters of
the New Guinea Mission.
2. That not less than three English missionaries be appointed as
the first missionary staff labouring on and around the coasts
of that island.
3. That, in the judgment of the Directors, the circumstances under
which the New Guinea Mission is established render it neces-
sary that a small steam vessel shall be placed at the command
of the Mission for local service.
4. That as Miss Baxter of Dundee has kindly offered to present
such a vessel to the Mission, the Directors cordially accept her
offer, and that the vessel be built in Dundee.
5. That, in their judgment, the vessel should be about fifty feet
long, and of forty tons register.
6. That the Directors take upon themselves the annual charge of
the vessel, which will probably not be less than £5OO a-year:
thus making the New Guinea Mission a total extra charge to
the Society of about £lOOO a-year beyond the present outlay
of the South Sea Mission.
THE END.








