

The River Question
A Letter
From the Acting Premier (HON. J. H. GORDON)
To the Premier of Victoria (HON. W. H. IRVINE)
13th FEBRUARY, 1903
ADELAIDE
J. L. BONYTHON & Co., "THE ADVERTISER " OFFICE, WAYMOUTH ST.
1903


!&-
From The Advertiser, Monday, February 16,1903.]
The River Question.
A letter from the Acting-Premier of
South Australia (Hon. J. H. Gordon), to
the Premier of Victoria (Hon. W. H. Ir-
vine): —
Premier's Office, Adelaide,
February 13, 1903.
Sir —I have the honor to acknowledge re-
ceipt of your letter of the 28th ult., re-
plying to the letter from this Government
of December 23 last, in which exception
was taken to the report of the commis-
sioners appointed to consider the inter-
State river question. In reply, I beg with
much respect to submit the following ob-
servations: —
I.
The logical termini of-your argument ap-
pear to be the following propositions:—
(a) That before Federation it would have been
lawful for the upper riparian States to
have impounded all the waters of the River
Murray, leaving its bed dry in South Aus-
tralia; and not only destroying the naviga-
bility of the river, but ruining the large
number of towns and settlements upon its
banks.
(b) That, notwithstanding the Common-
wealth Constitution, this may still be law-
fully done if the upper riparian States re-,
quire the water for conservation and irri-
gation.
I shall deal with these sweeping proposi-
tions in the order in which I have placed
them.
You support proposition "a" by reason-
ing analogically from the position in law
of independent nations towards each other.
You say:—
No riparian rights exist as between independent
nations unless created by treaty; similarly
there are no riparian rights as between self-
governing dependencies of the Crown unless
granted and defined by the supreme legis-
lation which has created them dependencies
and has conferred autonomy upon them. It
can hardly be contended that any such
rights were created expressly or by implica-
tion in the respective constitutions of New
South Wales, Victoria, or South Australia.
As to this I respectfully submit —(1) that
the analogy has no holding ground; (2) that
riparian rights between the colonies did not
require to be created by their constitu-
tions, as they already existed under the
common law; and (3) that the conclusions
you have arrived at are therefore fundamen-
tally bad in law.


No true analogy exists between the
relative position of independent na-
tions towards each other, and that
of the dependencies of Great Britain to-
wards each other. As between independent
nations there is 110 authority having power
to define their respective rights, and to en-
force that definition. No matter how grave
the injustice may be which one nation in-
flicts upon another the injured nation can
appeal to no common tribunal having au-
thority to redress its wrongs, actual or
threatened. It can appeal only to war—
"that last and most formidable sanction
which maintains the law of nations." The
Australian States were (and are) in a very
different position. They are not sovereign-
ties, wholly independent of each other.
They are "parts of a larger political com-
munity, subject alike to the Crown, and in
the last resort to the Imperial Govern-
ment." Your opinion that South Australia
has no riparian rights in the Upper Mur-
ray or its affluents, and that the self-
governing States of Australia have absolute
authority over all streams flowing across
their country into another State, as if they
were independent States, is based, I respect-
fully submit, upon a misconception of the
powers vested in the Legislatures of the
States concerned.
I agree with the opinion which Professor
•J. W. Salmond expressed before the Com-
mission (page 208 of evidence), when he
said:—
I believe that even before Federation there was
an inter-State riparian law in force between
the colonies; that is to say, that even by
legislation the different States had no power
so to interfere with the rivers as to do
material injury to other States. Any such
legislation would, I believe, have been ultra
vires and unconstitutional.
This view is supported by Mr. Justice
Clarke in his "Studies on Australian Con-
stitutional Law."
The Kiver Darling was discovered by
Sturt in 1826 and the Murray in 1830. At
that time both these rivers and their afflu-
ents were within the territorial limits of
New South Wales. South Australia was
founded in ' December, 1836, and became
possessed of the Lower Murray. In 1851
Victoria was separated from New South
Wales, and one bank of the Murray form-
ed part of its northern boundary, and
several important affluents were within the
limits of the new colony. In the mean-
time there had been considerable alienation
of land along the banks of the South Aus-
tralian reaches of the river. Since 1853
the Murray and the Darling have been navi-
gated rivers. In this state of facts there
are, I submit, two rights in the riparian
South Australian proprietors (including the
Crown) of the land on the Lower Murray—
(l) riparian rights strictly so called, and
(2) rights of navigation.
The waters of a river or run-
ning stream do not belong to the
proprietor of the land on either bank
or of the bed. He is only entitled to the
ordinary use of the water for domestic pur-
poses and for his cattle. He may divert


the water for irrigation, but he has no
right to interrupt the regular flow of the
stream if he thereby interferes with the
lawful use of the Waters by other proprie-
tors, and inflicts upon them a sensible in-
jury. That is merely the common law of
England, which colonists carry with them.
(Milner v. Gilmour, 12 Moore P.C.C., 131
—an appeal from Canada.)
There is no authority for the argument
that this right does not exist with respect
to streams flowing through the colonies
or States. Clearly the South Australian set-
tlers, and the Queen, as owner of unalienat-
ed land, had these riparian rights with re-
spect to the Murray and its affluents. It
is unarguable that the political separation
of South Australia and of Victoria from
New South Wales deprived the owners of
land on the Murray of any of their riparian
rights. There is not a word in the various
statutes having that effect (Hall's Inter-
national Law, 1890, Ed. 103). These rights
are clearly enforceable independently of the
Commonwealth Act or of the creation of
the High Court. In some of the States,
including Victoria, provision is made for
proceeding against the Government; and
the old remedy by petition of right still
exists. Actions also can be brought and
injunctions obtained against the actual
wrongdoers in the Victorian Courts, with
the right of appeal in a proper case to the
Privy Council.
With regard to the right of navigation
that right has been recognised from the
earliest times, even in the Roman law, It
Avas restated by Grotius and other jurists
in the seventeenth century. Undoubtedly
some confusion has arisen in consequence
of the difficulty of enforcing rights in the
courts of a foreign country. This diffi-
culty, however, disappears when the dispute
arises between States under English or
American jurisdiction.
Even if, for the sake of argument, it be
conceded that as regards diversions of water
authorised by the Parliament of a State no
remedy which could be enforced in the
Law Courts existed for damage done to an-
other State or to its residents, 1 contend
that an effective safeguard against such
legislative wrongs existed (and, indeed, still
exists), in the final control of the Imperial
Government. Underlying all grants of au-
tonomy by Great Britain to its dependen-
cies, in addition to the jurisdiction of his
Majesty's Courts, is the condition —a con-
dition which has all the force of a declared
principle of law—that they will observe to-
wards each other the law of nations. No
grant of self-government has ever yet been
given by Great Britain which excluded the
reserve power to maintain these rights of
comity, and thus preserve internal peace
among the dependencies of the Empire. The
Royal instructions to colonial Governors ex-
pressly require them to reserve all Bills
whereby the rights and property of the
King's subjects not residing in the State
may be prejudiced (see Royal Commission,
paragraph 7, sub-section 5). It is incon-
ceivable that the Royal Assent would ever
be given to a statute which would allow


one colony to do another such a gross in-
justice us would follow a full exercise ot
the rights which you assert the tipper ripa-
rian States had (and which you say they
still have) to drain the Murray River dry
above the South Australian border.
The Murray has been recognised by Im-
perial legislation as a navigable river for
nearly half a century (see 18 and 19 Vict.,
cap. 54), and it has always been the main
inland waterway of Australia. Both Govern-
ment and people in South Australia have,
ever since the foundation of the State, re-
lied upon this great water system as being
the inalienable heritage of Australia. Many
towns, villages, and settlements have been
established upon its banks, and immense
sums of money have been expended by the
State in railways thereto, and in other pub-
lic works, in reliance upon its permanence
as a highway from the sea to the interior.
To destroy the river in South Australia
would be to destroy a very large portion of
the industrial and commercial life of the
State. Were the States distinct sovereign-
ties it would undoubtedly occasion war if
one of them endeavored to drain the Mur-
ray into its own territory, and thus cause
widespread ruin over the territory of its
neighbors; and it is not too much to say
that such an action would receive and
merit the execration of civilised mankind. It
cannot, I venture to assert, be doubted
that, if the claim which you put forward
were attempted to be enforced by any,
colony against a sister dependency of Great
Britain, an appeal to the Imperial Power
would prevent the lvrong. it would be
idle, as 1 humbly believe, to set up in sup-
port of such a violation of comity, analo-
gical reasoning from the exclusive riparian
rights of independent sovereignties, or
subtle arguments of territorial law.
I think I may at this stage fairly point
out, by way of illustration, that if there
is any substance in the argument which
you found upon territorial rights, Victoria
has no more right than South Australia to
the waters of the Murray, which are de-
clared by the Imperial Act (18 and 19
Vict., chap. 54) to be within the territory,
of New South Wales. I am sure that you
will join me in the belief that, if upon the
ground of territorial right New South Wales
had attempted to take all the water of the
Murray, an appeal by Victoria to the Im-
perial Power would have been successful in
preventing the wrong.
1 have previously stated what I be-
lieve to be the rights of private
citizens of the States. Being all
equally subject to the common law of Eng-
land, they are, and always have been, in
a very different position towards each other
to that which the citizens of independent
nations occupy towards each other.
For these reasons I respectfully submit:—
1. That there is no real ground for your
opinion that the position of the colonies
towards each other as regards riparian
rights is analogous to that of independent
nations.
2. That there were before Federation, and
are now, general riparian laws between the
States, both as regards States and private


citizens _in their respective spheres. T
include in the term "laws" the fundamental
policy of Great Britain that her dependen-
cies shall observe ordinary comity between
themselves.
111.
I shall now deal with that part of your
argument which contends that since the
union South Australia is in help-
less position as regards riparian rights as
you believe her to nave been in before the
union, and that it would be no violation
of the constitution if an upper riparian
State, requiring the water for conservation
or irrigation, were to drain the Murray dry
before it reached South Australia. To
maintain this proposition you have logi-
cally been obliged to go to the length of
denying the right of the Commonwealth, as
against requirements for irrigation and con-
servation, to control the use of the waters
of navigable rivers to the extent of pre-
serving the navigability. I am quite unable
to agree with this conclusion. Yout
opinion that section 98 of the constitution
confers a mere minor regulative power over
traffic, such, 1 conceive you to mean, as to
make "rules of the road," regulate lights,
and impose tonnage restrictions: is not only
opposed to a great body of constitutional
authority, but, if correct, removes what
has been generally believed to be —in con-
junction with section 51-I—a pillar of the
constitution. 1 believe the larger and gene-
rally accepted view is the sound one,
namely, that the combined effect of this
section and section 51-1 is to give the Com-
monwealth authority, not only to prescribe
rules of traffic upon navigable rivers, but,
so far as may be necessary to maintain
navigation, to control the use of the waters
themselves.
I am unable therefore to agree with your
opinion that because a State may destroy
a railway situate within its own borders, it
may also destroy a river which runs
through more than one State. Apart from
the special power which the constitution
preserves to the States over their railways,
that proposition ignores the essential diffe-
rence between the two things. To put an
illustrative case —If the Government of
Victoria bad steamers running on the River
Murray from Overland Corner to Victoria
carrying public freight, thev could legally
destroy them; but they could not legally de-
stroy the river upon which they floated,
which is a natural channel of inter-State
commerce.
If your narrow view of the meaning of
section 98 is correct, the Commonwealth not
only does not possess a power which it was
intended to confer upon it by the makers
of the constitution, but it is short of an
authority which has generally been con-
sidered essential to the fair and successful
working of the Federal scheme.
For these reasons 1 submit, with great
l-espect, that the attenuated meaning which
you give to this part of the constitution is
unsound. This Government claims:—
1. That it is of the essence of the constitution
that the Commonwealth has the power and
the correlative duty to maintain the naviga-
bility of rivers running through cotermmus
States within the Commonwealth.


2. That the Murray is such a river. .
3. That to destroy it, as you claim the right
to do, would be a gross violation of the
constitution.
. Much difference of opinion exists as to
ine meaning of section 100 of the constitu-
tion, Upon which your argument chiefly pro-
ceeds, and which provides that: —
The Commonwealth shall not, by any law or
regulation of trade or commerce, abridge the
rights of a State, or of the residents therein,
to the reasonable use of the waters of rivers
for conservation or irrigation.
Your view, which I respectfully submit is
radically unsound, is that the words "rea-
sonable use" are simply referable to the
necessities of the State or of the person de-
siring to use the water. You say that—
If the reasonable necessities of conservation and
irrigation demand it, the waters of all rivers
may be used to any extent for this purpose,
notwithstanding that the rivers may thus be
rendered non-navigable.
and, notwithstanding, I may add, for your
proposition must go so far, that the ripa-
rian States lower down the stream may
thereby be deprived of every drop of the
water of the rivers.
I hope to be able to show that this sec-
tion cannot be made to bear the strain of
the meaning you place upon it.
With all humility, I am unable to under-
stand the difficulty which some constitu-
tional authorities have experienced in con-
struing this section. The section seems to
me, to use a familiar saying, to be like
"chips in porridge," doing neither good nor
harm. It is simply declaratory of what I
believe to be an obvious principle. A law
of the Commonwealth, which, in the ab-
sence of express power to do so, sought
to abridge the right of any State or of the
residents of any State, to the reasonable
use for any purpose of any natural ele-
ment within the State would be unconstitu-
tional.
The section, in my opinion, creates no
new rights. It does not, as your argument
claims, make that a "reasonable use" which
was an "unreasonable use" before the union.
It simply declares that existing rights to
"reasonable use" of the waters are preserv-
ed.
It is said by some authorities that this
section is in. conflict with the navigation
power. I believe that view to be mistaken.
The section deals with two kinds of rights
which shall not be "abridged":—
A. The right of States to a reasonable use of
the waters of rivers for conservation and irri-
gation.
B. The right of the residents of any State to
the reasonable use of the waters of rivers
for conservation and irrigation.
The phrases "reasonable use" and "un-
reasonable use," as applied to the waters of
a river, have perfectly well-known legal
meanings, and, according to established
canons of construction, they must be given
those meanings in all statutes, unless there
is something in the context to the con-
trary. Put shortly, that is a "reasonable
use" which does not inflict substantial
damage upon other riparian proprietors;


nrid that is an "unreasonable use" which
does inflict such an injury. There is no
warrant whatever, as I respectfully submit,
for the new meaning given by you to the
phrase, "reasonable use." It is true that
we have it here applied, probably for the
Krst time in legal history, to the use of
water as between riparian States; but the
expression in the section governs the use
of the water by both States and individuals,
and there is no principle on which a diffe-
rent meaning should be given to it, as ap-
plied to the rights of States, than, by a long
series of decisions, has been given to it as
applied to the rights of private citizens.
On the contrary; for, as Sir J. 11. Symon
said during the convention debate on the
river question:.—
The principles of justice governing riparian dis-
putes between individual States are exactly
of the same nature and character as the
principles of justice governing riparian dis-
putes between private individuals.
The view I take of section 100 is streng-
thened if it is considered from what I as-
sume to be common ground, namely, that
the • section, ex vi termini, excludes any
right to "unreasonable use." As to States,
it would always have been, as I have ven-
tured to submit, an "unreasonable use" of
the waters of a navigable river running
through co-terminous States, for one of those
States to destroy its navigability; therefore
to prevent its doing so now is no abridg-
ment of any right it ever possessed. The
navigation power goes no further than to
preserve navigability. There is, therefore,
no conflict between the operation of these
two parts of the constitution. The conclu-
sion upon this is that the exercise of the
navigation power to maintain rivers navi-
gable, abridges no right which any State
ever possessed.
As to residents of any State, it
would equally always have been an "un-
reasonable use" for the resident of a State
so to use the waters of a river as to de-
stroy its navigability. Therefore, the exer-
cise of the navigation power abridges no
right which they ever possessed. The limit
of the navigation power and the limit
of the right of user under the constitution,
have therefore the same terminus.
I am aware that this contention may be
met by the argument that section 100
creates new rights of user:—
A. Tn the States.
B. In the residents therein.
But, with due submission, I am unable to
agree. The argument must go the length
of asserting, not only that the section
creates new rights, but that it gives power
to inflict actual wrongs upon the rights and
property of the King's subjects in other
States than that in which the alleged new
rights are exercised. No lawyer would as-
sert that before the union a private citi-
zen in Victoria had the right so to use the
water of the Murray as not only to destroy
its navigability, but to damage the property
of other riparian owners in South Australia.
It is contended by the argument I now an-
ticipate that section 100 confers a right to
do all these things. Very clear words and


very clear legislative intention arc required
to support any such extraordinary construc-
tion.
"It ia an established rule that every statute ia
to be so interpreted and applied as far as
its language admits as not to be inconsis-
tent with the comity of nations or with the
established rules of international law. If,
therefore, it designs to effectuate any such
object it must express its intention with
irresistible clearness to induce a court to
believe that the Legislature entertained it,
for if any other construction is possible it
would be adopted in order to avoid imput-
ing such an intention to the Legislature. All
general terms must be narrowed in con-
struction to avoid it."
("Maxwell on Statutes," page 173.)
A fortiori, the same irresistible clearness
of expression is required in a statute to
support the contention that it is destruc-
tive of the rights and property of the
King's subjects.
Upon these principles the courts will
anxiously look for an interpretation
of this section, Avhich is harmonious
with justice and with existing law, before
they launch such an engine of destruction
as the section is if your opinion as to its
meaning is correct. Such an interpretation
—in harmony with justice and with exist-
ing law—l humbly believe is to be found in
the observations which I have the honor to
state herein for your consideration.
I venture with submission to point out to
you that you are mistaken in supposing that
the maintenance of navigation necessarily
involves the waste of millions of tons of
water which yearly flow into the ocean ;
and which should be utilised to "enrich
vast acres." The desire of this Govern-
ment is that not a drop of water should be
wasted.
The situation is not narrowed to the dan-
gerous alternatives you suggest. It has been
demonstrated by scientific authority that
the river affords every natural facility for
locking, and that when this is done naviga-
tion will be secured without the waste of
any of the water which is so valuable to
all the States. Which I ask is the juster
proposition—that in order to fertilise their
own lands the upper riparian States should
devastate South Australia, or that they
should join in adopting such measures to re-
gulate the flow of this great water system,
as will enable all the riparian States to con-
tinue to enjoy in harmony the benefits
which it confers? Let the spirit of natural
comity, which should find its highest ex-
pression among the sister States of the
Commonwealth, supply the answer. I en-
tertain the profound belief that the solvent
principle of justice which has ever prevailed
in British communities will reduce our pre-
sent difficulties to nought, and that no part
of the Commonwealth shall suffer wrong.
Believe me that if in the natural solicitude
which so great an issue compels, I have too
strenuously urged the case for this State,
T have done so in no spirit of antagonism to
this great principle.—l have the honor to
be, sir, vour obedient servant,
J. H. GORDOX.


"** .v^s.
7
*• •
3 1508 00549844 4
■■
