

1 .
.
I ' . li .
' |a| :->; * -■>* ** ■ .
K>v -
.t
. T tc- ■■ „
A * .* c y
c/y A . * ’
t*s>~ - .TTT ~'"
(Colonial JKuseum anti (Scologiral SutiKf Dtp<j£^-rnr
STUDIES IN BIOLOGY
NEW ZEALAND STUDENTS.
No. 1
THE SHEPHERD’S-PURSE (CAPSELLA BURSA-PASTORIS).
F. ,W. HUTTON,
PROFESSOR OF BIOLOGY, CANTERBURY COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY OF NEW ZEALAND.
NEW ZEALAND:
AUTHORITY : G. DIDSBURY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WELLINGTON.
1881.


.
!
'
■
■
*
■


(Colonial fHusetim anti (Sealogfcal Snrbeg department.
STUDIES IN BIOLOGY
NEW ZEALAND STUDENTS.
No. 1.
THE SHEPHERD’S-PDRSE (CAPSELLA BURSA-PASTORIS).
F. W. HUTTON,
PROFESSOR OF BIOLOGY, CANTKEBTJRY COLLEGE, UNIVEESITY OF NEW ZEALAND.
NEW ZEALAND:
AUTHORITY : G. DIDSBtTRY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WELLINGTON.
1881.




DISSECTION OF A PLANT.
CAPSELLA RURSA-PASTORIS (THE SHEPHERD’S-PURSE).
I. GENERAL EXTERNAL CHARACTERS.
Take a fresh specimen of the above plant which has been pulled up
by the root. Notice—
a. A primary axis, consisting of a white underground part or root,
hearing rootlets, and a green aerial part or stem, hearing leaves, and
ending in a peduncle devoid of leaves hut bearing flowers or fruit.
b. Secondary axes or branches, arising from the axils of the leaves
of the primary axis, and repeating the characters of the primary stem.
c. Tertiary axes, often present, arising from the axils of the
leaves of the branches, and repeating their characters.
The secondary or tertiary axes may be much longer than the
primary axis, but can be recognized by the leaf at their base.
d. The adult inflorescence is a raceme, the flowers being borne on
pedicels which spring from the central peduncle. In the young in-
florescence the peduncle is much abbreviated, causing the inflorescence
to be corymbose. There arc no bracts.
11. THE STEM.
1. External Characters. Green, more or less cylindrical;
divided into nodes, where the leaves and branches come off, and inter-
nodes, or portions between the nodes.
2. Internal Structure.
A. Transverse Section.*
a. Take a wine-cork and make a median longitudinal cut for
three-quarters of its length. Cut off a small piece, about a third of
an inch, from an internode of the plant, and place it in the slit of
the cork, so that the axis of the piece of stem and the axis of the
cork are parallel. Tie up the ends of the cork with a thread a little
* The student must remember that there is considerable difference between old and
young growing stems.


below the end, or hold the ends together with an elastic hand. With
a razor cut off the projecting end of the stem and a slight shaving of
cork, and moisten the cut end of the stem with water.
b. Make a thin transverse section of the stem in the following
manner: Take the cork in the left hand and the razor in the right;
lay the razor flat on the cork, press it lightly with the thumb of the
right hand, and make a slow drawing cut toward you and to the
right, slicing off a thin section of cork and stem. If the section is
too thick you have pressed too hard on the razor; if it is torn the
razor is not sufficiently sharp, or the cut has been made without
sufficient drawing movement.
c. Remove the section from the razor with a fine camel-hair
brush, and put it into a drop of water on a glass slide. Examine
uncovered with a compound microscope and the inch objective. If
the section is not sufficiently thin, others must be made until you are
satisfied. If the section contains air-bubbles, it is because you did
not put enough water on to the cut end of the stem before making
the section. Air-bubbles may be removed—(l) by putting the slide
under the receiver of an air-pump and exhausting it; (2) by putting
the section into alcohol; or (3) by heating the section in water.
d. When you are satisfied with a section, put on a thin cover-
glass, and examine it first with the inch objective and then with the
quarter. Notice the following points :
The pith (Eig. 1, p) . Occupies the centre;
made up of large round thin-walled
cells, nearly empty. Observe the inter-
cellular spaces.
The fibro-vascular bundles (Fig. 1, f v).
Form an interrupted ring round the
pith. They are wedge-shaped, the
apex of the wedge pointing inward.
They are separated by prolongations
Fig. 1. p, pith • fv, fibro-vas-
cular bundles; r, medullary-
ray ; b, bark; tv, interfas-
cicular wood.
from the pith—the medullary rays (Fig. 1, r). The cells are
much smaller than those of the pith, and many of them have
very thick walls, which look white. The large openings are
vessels.
The bundle-sheath (Fig. 2, sh ). A single row of large flattened
thin-walled cells, completely surrounding the wood.
The bark or cortical parenchyma (Fig. 1, b) . Several rows of
rounded cells, not so large as'the pith cells, surrounding the
bundle-sheath. They contain chlorophyll grains, and often
split asunder when the section is being made.


nr f
The epidermis (Fig. 2, e) . The single row of thick-walled
round cells forming the external layer. It occasionally
rises into prominences of two or more cells deep, hearing a
hair.
e. Take off the cover-glass and add a drop of magenta solution*
to the water; leave the section in it for half a minute; drain off the
superfluous coloured water into a tumbler; wash the section with
clean water and a brush; put on the cover-glass, and examine again
with the quarter objective.
The pith (Fig. 2, p). The cell-
walls are very slightly stained,
unless the magenta has been
too strong.
The vascular bundles (Fig. 2). The
inner half of the bundles is
not much stained. The large
openings are vessels. Across
the centre is a curved band,
convex inward, of deeply-
stained cells, which is con-
tinuous with a band of
deeply-stained cells stretch-
ing from bundle to bundle.
Fig. 2. p, pith; sp, spiral vessels; At, dotted
ducts; wf, wood-fibres ; cb, cambium; eh,
bundle-sheath; b, bast; c p, cortical pa-
renchyma ; e, epidermis.
These cells are thick-walled, and are wood-fibres (Fig. 2, wf;
and Fig. 1, w). In the bundles among the wood-fibres are
some larger openings : these are vessels. Outside the wood
is an unstained layer of very thin-walled cells : this is the
cambium (Fig, 2, cb) . Outside the cambium lie one or several
deeply-stained cells : these are liber cells, or hast (Fig. 2, b).
Notice that cambium cells sometimes exist between the vas-
cular bundles, and they always have liber cells outside them.
This is the interfascicular cambium. In quite young stems
the cambium forms a continuous ring.
The bundle-sheath (Fig. 2, sh) is not much changed.
The bark (Fig. 2, c p) . Not much changed.
The epidermis (Fig. 2, e) . Strongly stained. The outer wall is
thicker than the inner.
/. Take off the cover-glass again, and put a drop of the iodine
solution on to the section. Let it remain two or three minutes, and
then wash, cover, and examine again.
# See Appendix to Huxley and Martin’s Elementary Biology.


The pith. Tlie cell-contents are shrunk and yellowish, and con-
tain a few dark-blue grains of starch.
The vascular bundles. The w'ood-fihres and sometimes the hast
are changed to orange, but the cell-walls of the vessels re-
main crimson. The cambium is unaltered; neither it nor
any part of the vascular bundles contains starch. (In
old stems near the root the cambium thickens and contains
starch.)
The bundle-sheath and bark. These are crowded with grains of
starch, coloured dark-blue by the action of the iodine.
The epidermis retains its crimson colour.
g. Take another section, put it on a glass slide, and add a drop of
ammoniacal solution of carmine, rather strong. Let it remain for
five minutes, and then add a drop of glacial acetic acid; let it remain
for a minute; wash; add a drop of saturated solution of picric acid;
wait half a minute; wash, and mount in clean water. Examine with
the inch, and then with the quarter.
The pith. The contents of most of the cells are coloured pink;
those without protoplasm are uncoloured.
The vascular bundles. The wood-fibres are greenish yellow, as
also is the bast; but most have pink contents. The vessels
are empty. The cell-walls of the cambium arc unaltered, hut
the contents are pink.
The bundle-sheath and bark. The cell-contents are coloured pink,
hut the green of the chlorophyll remains in some.
The epidermis. Cell-walls not coloured ; cell-contents pink.
B, Longitudinal Section.
a. Cut off from the plant part of an internode and node with
branch, and trim off the branch to form a convenient handle. Hold
the portion of stem by the branch, and slice down the stem longitu-
dinally until nearly half has been removed. Place it in the slit in
the cork, letting the branch be firmly held, and tie up as before, and
cut the stem to a level with the cork.
b. Make a thin longitudinal section in the manner described in
A, b. The cut should he made along the axis of the stem, and not
across it. The thumb should be firmly pressed on the razor at start-
ing until it has cut into the stem; the pressure should then he
diminished, and the razor brought out before reaching the end of the
stem. By this means the end of the section will be very thin. Do
not try to make the sections too long. The smaller they are, generally
the thinner they will he.
c. Remove the section with a brush to another glass slide as


before, and examine. It must be remembered that a longitudinal
section may or may not pass through a vascular bundle. If the sec-
tion has not been taken near the middle of the stem it will be
more or less tangential —that is, will pass through several vascular
bundles in the direction of their shortest diameter, and not radially
through any one of them. Without care this may lead to great
mistakes.
d. Having obtained a sufficiently thin section passing radially
through a vascular bundle, examine with the quarter objective.
Observe —
The pith (Fig. 3, p). The cells are rectangular, longer than
broad.
The vascular bundle (Fig. 3, /), On the inner side are several
rows of spiral vessels (Fig. 3, s), succeeded by thick wood-
fibres (Fig. 3, wf) and dotted ducts (Fig. 3, d) . The wood-
i i jw i i ilb 1 I
3 *v}p M ch M sh ci
Fig. 3. p, pith; s, spiral vessels; d, dotted ducts; tv p, wood parenchyma; tv f, wood
fibres; cb, cambium; If, bast fibres; sh, bundle-sheath ;c p, cortical parenchyma; e,
epidermis; p, pith;./", flbro-vascular bundle; c, cortex; W, wood; B, bark.
fibres gradually taper to the end and overlap each other.
The cambium (Fig. 3, cb) has a translucent, milky appear-
ance; the cells are long and thin-walled. Outside may be a
single layer of bast (Fig. 3, b /), if the section has passed
through it.
The bundle-sheath (Fig. 3, sh). Formed of large clear cells, con-
taining a few chlorophyll grains.
The bark (Fig. 3, c p). Several rows of rectangular cells, consider-
ably smaller than the cells of the pith, and coloured green by
numerous chlorophyll grains.
The epidermis (Fig, 3, e). A single layer of clear long cells, not
so well seen as in the transverse section.
e. Take off the cover-glass, and stain the section with magenta and
iodine. Compare it with the transverse section similarly stained.


C. Oblique Section.
a. Take another portion of the stem, and make an oblique section
through it in the way pointed out in A, a, only placing the stem in
the cork in a slanting position.
b. Stain with magenta and iodine, and examine. Notice that the
spiral vessels are only in the unstained apex of the bundles, and that
there are none among the wood-fibres.
D. Longitudinal Section of Node.
a. Take a portion of stem in the hand, and with the razor make a
tolerably thin longitudinal section from the centre of a node, cutting
both the stem and the branch.
b. Place the section on a slide with water, and cover. Examine
with a simple microscope or a low power. Notice the vascular bundle
passing into the leaf, and others into the branch in the axil of the
leaf.
E. Arrangement of Vascular Bundles in the Stem.
a. Cut several fragments of stem, about an inch long, each con-
taining an internode, and boil them for several minutes in dilute nitric
acid and water. Pour off the acid, and rinse well with water.
b. Put one of the fragments in a watch-glass and cover with water.
With a brush and bent needle gently remove the bark, using a simple
microscope while doing so. Split open the stem, and scrape off the
pith with a bent needle. Remove to a slide with water, and examine
with a low power.
c. Observe that the bundles are not parallel, but split up and run
into one another, at very acute angles. Notice the bundles going
into the branch, and compare with the longitudinal section of the
node (D).
F. Histological Constituents.
a. Place a portion of the bark and epidermis removed in E, b, on
a glass slide in a drop of water. Hold one end down with the
rounded part of a bent needle, and gently remove the bark from the
epidermis with a camel-hair brush.
b. Put on a cover-glass, and examine with a quarter objective.
Notice the cortical parenchyma of the bark. The cells are rectangular,
generally more than twice as long as broad, arranged in regular lines.
The protoplasm, with the contained chlorophyll grains, is contracted
by the nitric acid.
c. The epidermis. The cells are long and polygonal, with but little
cell-contents. Notice the two lipped stomata. Notice the hairs.
They are of two kinds ; (1) long and pointed, non-articulated; and


(3) four or five radiate stars, lying on the epidermis—these are
“ stellate hairs.”
d. Cut off a portion of one or more vascular bundles from the
preparation E, c. Place it on a slide in a drop of water, and tease it
well out with needles. Notice the large cells of the pith, distinguished
from those of the cortical parenchyma by their larger size, and by the
small quantity of cell-contents. The spiral vessels, the spiral fibre
often unrolled. The dotted ducts. The long, thick-walled, pointed
wood-fibres. And the very long, and waved bast-fibres. The bast-fibres
are much less numerous than the wood-fibres; they should be looked
for near the cortical parenchyma, and not near the dotted and spiral
vessels. They are much longer than the wood-fibres, and not straight.
e. Notice the contracted cell-contents in all the cells, including the
bast- and wood-fibres. The vessels are quite empty.
111. THE ROOT.
1. External Characters. —White, cylindrical, tapering, with
numerous rootlets. No leaves nor buds.
a. Cut off some of the finer rootlets, rinse in water, and lay on a
glass slide. Put on a cover-glass and examine with the inch. Notice
the very delicate root-hairs, by which the plant obtains nourishment.
They are unicellular. Examine the ends of all the rootlets. Some
will be found not broken. Observe the swollen root-cap. It is not so
transparent as the root, and there are no root-hairs upon it. The
upper termination of the cap is not well marked.
3. Internal Structure.
A. Transverse Section.
a. Make a transverse section as in 11., 3, A, and examine with the
inch and with the quarter objectives. Notice —
The central cylinder (Eig. 4, c). A cylindrical
mass of woody fibres containing a large
number of vessels arranged in an irregular
radiating manner. There is no pith.
The pericambium. A layer of delicate thin-
walled cells surrounding the central
cylinder.
The cortical parenchyma. Outside the peri-
Fig. 4. o, outer zone of
cortical parenchyma;
i, inner zone of cortical
parenchyma; c, central
cylinder.
cambium. It can be divided into two parts :
Inner zone (Eig. 4, i) . The cells are thick-walled, and get
larger as they recede from the centre. Notice the inter-
cellular passages.


Outer zone (Fig. 4>, o). Much narrower than the last;
the cells are very large on the inner layer, but rapidly
diminish in size outward. There are no intercellular pas-
sages. There is no epidermis.
b. Stain with magenta and iodine. The wood-cells of the central
cylinder are deeply stained, except those in the centre. The cells of
the cortical parenchyma are slightly stained, as also are their contents ;
hut the pericambium is unstained. In young roots starch is scattered
in the cortical parenchyma, but in old roots, near the stem, it occurs
in definite concentric rings in the inner zone of the cortical paren-
chyma.
c. Stain with carmine and picric acid. The cell-walls of the
cortical parenchyma and of the central cylinder are coloured yellow,
except those quite in the centre. The pericambium and the whole of
the cell-contents of the other parts are coloured pink.
B. Longitudinal Section.
a. Make a longitudinal section of an old root. Stain with magenta
and iodine. Examine with quarter objective.
The central cylinder. The vessels previously seen are dotted ducts.
There are no spiral vessels. The wood-fibres are short, and
the walls are not parallel ; very different from the wood-fibres
of the stem.
The cortical parenchyma. The inner zone is composed of elongated
cells, alternate layers of which contain starch. The outer
zone consists of short cells, the inner rows rounded, the Outer
rows flattened.
b. Make a longitudinal section through a rootlet, branching off
from the root. Notice that the central cylinder sends a branch into
the rootlet.
C. Passage of Boot into Stem.
a. Cut off the stem a little above, and the root a little below, their
junction. Make several longitudinal sections, tolerably thin, holding
the piece in the hand, through the point of junction.
b. Examine these sections with a low power, or with a simple
microscope. Notice the ring of vascular bundles of the stem drawing
together to form the central cylinder of the root, and filling up the
space occupied by the pith in the stem.
c. Notice the bark of the stem swelling out to form the cortical
parenchyma of the root. Trace one into the other,


IV. THE LEAF.
1. External Characters.
a. Notice the difference between the upper and lower leaves on the
stem. In the lower leaves the blade is so much reduced at the base
as to give the appearance o£ the leaf being supported on a flat petiole ,
and the margins are more or less deeply cut. In the upper leaves the
blade is amplexicaul, and the margin is but slightly cut, or entire.
Great variation exists among the leaves.
2. Internal Structure.
A. The Venation.
a. Take a leaf that has lain twenty-four hours in strong spirit to
dissolve out the chlorophyll, and warm it for a short time in a dilute
solution of potash to dissolve out the cell-contents. Wash, and
examine in water, between two slides, with a low power.
h. Notice the irregularity of the branching and distribution of the
veins. The anastomoses of the veins are also quite irregular. Notice
that the veins do not run out to the margin of the leaf, but form
a closed circle a short distance inside the margin. Notice the
irregularity of the veins in the pseudo-petiole of a radical leaf ; and
notice that three bundles traverse it from its origin.
c. Observe the hairs. They are of two kinds, simple and stellate.
Both are found on both surfaces of the leaf, but there are no stellate
hairs on the mid-rib on the upper surface, although there are on the
lower surface.
B. The Epidermis.
a. Place a leaf across the forefinger of the left hand, upper surface
downward, and hold it down with the thumb and middle finger of that
hand. With the razor make a very slight, transverse, sloping incision
into the substance of the leaf, but not through it. Seize the edge of
the cut with a pair of forceps and tear it gently down, stripping the
epidermis from the parenchyma of the leaf.
h. Mount in water, and examine with the quarter objective.
Notice the waved outline of the epidermal cells. The stomata and the
hairs. Notice the guard-cells of the stomata.
c. Take another leaf and proceed as before, only placing the lower
surface downward, so as to strip off the upper surface. Notice the
cells ; they are more simple in outline than on the under surface, while
those on the mid-rib are rectangular. The stomata, like those on the
under surface. The hairs.


C. Transverse Section,
a. Take a piece of carrot root, make a longitudinal slit in it, into
which put a fragment of a leaf, and proceed to make a section as
directed in 11., 2, A. Carrot is used for soft substances which are
too delicate to be squeezed between cork. In cutting the sections
less pressure must be put upon the razor.
b. Remove the section to a glass slide, and examine in water.
Observe—
The epidermis . On both sides of the leaf. Near the centre that on
the upper surface is thicker than that on the lower, but near
the margins they are much alike (the upper surface can be
distinguished from the lower by the position of the mid-rib).
The parenchyma. The cells are full of chlorophyll grains. It is
divided into two portions; the upper consists of a single layer
of cells which are longer than broad, and placed regularly
perpendicular to the surface— palisade cells, but which do not
extend over the mid-rib. These palisade cells are not so well
marked in Capsella as in most plants. The lower portion
consists of round cells irregularly distributed, and is full of
large intercellular spaces. It is called the spongy tissue.
The hairs. If the section exhibits a hair, examine its shape and
insertion on the epidermis. The stellate hairs are sessile.
The stomata. Observe where the section goes through a stoma.
The openings are level with the surface. In very thin parts
of the section (generally the end) notice that the stomata of
the under surface open into the intercellular spaces of the
parenchyma, and those of the upper surface have a narrow
passage left through the rows of palisade cells.
The mid-rib. Examine the vascular bundle. A dark series of
vessels surrounded with light-coloured, thick-walled wood-
fibres. Notice the shape. Examine the sections of veins in
the blade.
c. Tease out a portion of mid-rib from a specimen boiled in
nitric acid (11., E) . Examine the spiral vessels. There are no dotted
ducts.
V. THE FLOWER
1. External Characters.
a. Inflorescence. A terminal raceme; the upper portion is
corymbose, owing to the internodes not having attained their full
length.
Bracts. None,


K
Calyx; composed o£ four sepals, with long hairs ; green, the tip
and margins sometimes white.
Corolla ; composed of four petals, white, regular, alternating with
the sepals.
Stamens (Fig, 5, s) . Six : two shorter opposite
the two lateral petals; four longer with
their anthers opposite the four petals.
Pistil (Fig. 5, p) . With a simple stigma, on a
short style.
b. Pull to pieces, with needles, under a micro-
scope, some buds just opening.
The sepals and petals are quite free.
Fig. 5. p, pistil; s,
stamen; g, gland; c,
pedicel.
The four longer stamens are inserted in pairs opposite the anterior
and posterior sepals; their appearance therefore as opposite the petals
is incorrect.
The ovary is compressed; its long diameter lateral.
Notice the four small yellowish glands (Fig. 5, g ) on the recep-
tacle, between the insertions of the stamens.
c. Examine a bud for zestivation.
d. Take another bud and cut it longitudinally through the
middle, cutting from the pedicel (Fig. 5, c) outward.
Notice the insertion of the petals and stamens: they are
hypogynous.
2. Perianth
a. The sepals. Place one in a drop of water on a slide, and
examine the venation. Three veins enter it as in the leaf, but the
branching is less. Examine with the quarter objective. Notice the
stomata, and the Wrinkled cell-wall of the marginal cells.
Place a sepal in a drop of water on a glass slide, and, under a
simple microscope, cut thin transverse sections with a scalpel. The
best form of scalpel is the common one with a convex edge. Place
this close to the leaf, and cut by rolling along the convex edge
of the scalpel; it must not be drawn. Make several sections,
cover, and examine with the quarter. Some will be found on their
edge.
Notice the rough epidermis, enclosing a chlorophyll layer in the
middle; but at the margin the epidermis of each surface comes in
contact. Notice the rough hairs.
b. The petals. Go through the same processes with a petal. The
air must be got rid of by dipping in spirit. Notice the shape, the
acute point of insertion through which only a single vascular bundle


passes. Notice the radiately striated papilla on each cell. No
stomata.
Examine the papillae in transverse sections; they are conical
3. The Stamens.
a. The anthers. Take a small piece, about half-inch cube, of
paraffin {see Appendix to Huxley and Martin’s Elementary Biology);*
melt a small portion of one surface by means of a hot wire-nail, and
into it, while melted, place a young bud of the plant, taking care that
the axis of the hud is nearly perpendicular to the surface of the
paraffin. Wet both sides of the razor with spirit, and proceed to
make sections through the hud as before directed, using plenty of
spirit.
b. Remove the sections on to a glass slide, and examine. Some
sections of anthers will he found. Notice the four loculi united in
pairs to form the two lobes, with the connective between them.
Notice the pollen in the loculi.
The septa dividing the loculi are absorbed during growth, so that
the anther becomes two-celled; but it is difficult to make sections of
mature anthers.
c. The filament. Detach a filament, and examine with the quarter.
Notice the spiral vessel passing through it.
d. The pollen. Take some pollen on the point of a needle, place
it in a drop of water on a slide, and examine with the quarter objective.
Examine some in oil of cloves, and note the different effect of the two
fluids.
4. The Pistil.
a. Remove the perianth and stamens from an opened flower;
imbed the pistil in paraffin with the stigma downward {see V., 3, «),
and make thin sections of the ovary and style, the last section con-
taining the stigma. Remove to glass slides, and examine the style.
It is not hollow, but the central tissue is looser than the exterior.
b. Take the section containing the stigma , and press it lightly with
the handle of a needle on the cover-glass. Notice the radiating pear-
shaped secreting cells, and the pollen-grains, many attached by their
pollen-tubes. Notice that the stigma has no epidermis.
c. Take another ovary, imbed it in paraffin, and make longitudinal
sections through it. Notice that the stigma is without epidermis.
The vascular bundles in the style coming from the ovary. The
* Equal parts of bees-wax and olive oil melted together, and run into paper moulds,
make a very good mixture, as also do three of spermaceti to one of castor oil.


ovules attached by the funiculus to the placentas. The placentas are
parietal.
Notice the pollen-grains on the stigma; some may show pollen-
tubes.
d. Take the thin transverse sections of the ovary (4, a). Notice
that it is divided into two cells by a septum. Notice that this septum
is double at each end, although single in the middle. Notice that the
walls of the ovary are composed of a chlorophyll layer lined by a
colourless epidermis on both sides. Notice the vascular bundles at
the dorsal and ventral sutures.
VI. THE FRUIT.
1. The Ovule.
a. Take a young unopened bud; remove the ovary, and open it in
a drop of water on a glass slide. Examine the ovules ; notice the
projecting nucleus , with the thick coats growing up round it. In very
young ovules, in which the nucleus projects very much, it is possible
to make out the two coats, primine and secundine. Notice that the
very young ovules are nearly straight on the funiculus , but that older
ones are inclined; and by the time the coats have grown over the
nucleus, and so formed the micropyle , the ovule is at right angles to
the funiculus.
b. Take another bud just ready to open, and examine it in
the same way. The ovule is now bent round so that the micro-
pyle is in close proximity to the chalaza ; it is therefore now
campylotropous ,
Notice the vascular bundle traversing the funiculus. Carefully
focus up and down with the quarter objective, and notice the large
curved cell occupying most of the interior of the ovule ; it is the
embryo sac.
c. Take a capsule from which the perianth has fallen, remove
some of the ovules from the placenta, and put them in a drop of
water on a glass slide; put on a cover-glass and examine with a low
power. Observe the alteration in shape. Press the cover-glass with
the handle of a needle, or with the finger covered by a handkerchief,
and give it at the same time a slight lateral movement. Examine
again with the low power. If successful, some of the ovules will have
burst, and in them a club-shaped mass of cells may be seen, either
free or projecting from the ovule. This is the embryo (Fig. 6). Try
to clear it by gentle movements of the cover-glass, and examine with
the quarter objective. The thickened end of two, four, or more cells
(according to age) is the embryo (Fig. 6, e) ; the single row of cells,


end to end; is the suspensor (Figs. 6 and 7, s), or pro-embryo. In an
The inner nucleus of tissue, the
plerome (Fig. 7, P), from which
the fibro-vascular bundles and
pith originate; and between
them the periblem (Fig. 7, p),
Fig. 6. e, embryo; 8,
suspensor.
which is the primordial cortex
The student should also try to open the
micropyle end of the ovule with a needle, and
older stage the spherical embryo throws out two
lateral protuberances; which form the cotyledons
(Fig. 7; c).
d. In the older embryos notice the continuous
outer layer of cells; the dermatogen (Fig. 7, d), which
is the primordial epidermis.
then gently press out the embryo. The em- Fi 7 . c> cotyledong . dt
bryos may be rendered transparent by placing p^eromT; : I‘ bu^bmm!
them in a dilute solution of potash, to dissolve
out the cell-contents, and then transferring them to glycerine and
water. If they are too transparent a dilute solution of alum will
make the cell-walls distinct.
To observe the development of ovules, the placentas should be
stripped from the ovule, put into a weak solution of sugar, and kept
in the dark.
2. The Seed.
a. Examine as an opaque object with the inch objective. Notice
the honeycombed testa, and the hilum.
b. Take a seed which is still green, and remove the testa by means
of needles under the simple microscope. Examine the embryo. It
fills the whole of the interior of the seed, consequently neither endo-
sperm nor perisperm exists. Notice the pointed radicle folded back
against the cotyledons, and lying in the same line with them. Extract
other embryos out of the testa, and notice that the radicle points to
the micropyle, and the cotyledons to the hilum.
c. Imbed a seed in paraffin, and make a thin longitudinal section
in the plane passing through the radicle and cotyledons. This is not
easy, and requires some practice, both to place the seed properly and
to cut the section. Notice the difference in structure between the
radicle and the cotyledons, the cells of the radicle being larger and
arranged in rows. Notice the small pale plumule projecting between
the cotyledons.


v i
d. Stain -with iodine. There is no starch, and consequently no
endosperm nor perisperm.
e. Imbed another seed in paraffin, and make transverse sections.
Examine as before.
/. Take a piece of the testa and examine with the quarter. Notice
the short projecting tubes, arising from the centres of the external
cells.
3. The Capsule.
a. Examine the shape, and mode of dehiscence when old.
b. Make thin transverse sections between pieces of carrot. Ex-
amine with the quarter, and notice the thick epidermis on the inside
of the capsule-wall. The vascular bundles at the ends, dorsal sutures;
and those forming the placentas, ventral sutures. Notice that the
dissepiment separating the two cells is double near the outside, but
single in the middle. Notice how the funiculi come off from each
side of the placenta, which is therefore double.
c. Stain with iodine. Notice that the testa of the young seed is
full of starch.
YII. GROWTH.
1. The Growing-Point.
Take a young inflorescence, strip off all the larger flower-buds,
imbed in paraffin, and make thin longitudinal sections parallel to the
axis. Place them on glass slides, and examine : one will probably be
found showing the growing-point, or punctum
vegetationis (Fig. 8, g ). Notice that it is
composed of a mass of minute equal-sized
cells (primary meristem ) in which no distinct
apical cell can be recognized. The vas-
cular bundles (Fig. 8, v b) commence lower
down.
2. Origin of Pedicels.
Notice that the young pedicels (Fig. 8, b )
grow out laterally from below the apex (;mono-
podial branching ), and that no new ones are
formed except just below the apex; conse-
Fig. 8. a, anthers ; h, young
pedicel; g, growing-point 3 vh,
vascular bundles.
quently the further a pedicel is from the apex the older it is
This is called aa'opetal succession.


3. Development of Flowers.
To follow the development of a flower fully is very difficult, but
the student may notice, in those sections which have passed through
very young buds, that the whorls of the perianth grow first, then the
stamens, and lastly the pistil. He will also notice the proportion-
ately large size of the anthers (Fig. 8, a), owing to their very rapid
growth.
Authority: Geoege Didsbuet, Goyernment Printer, Wellington.




f
