

THE
OILMAN.
No. I.
A
SERIES OF LETTERS
TO A FEW FRIENDS,
UNVEILING THE DEFECTS AND SUGGESTING
IMPROVEMENTS
IN THE
LONDON OIL TRADE.
BY
THOMAS BLYTH.
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR.
31st. JULY, 1835.




PREFATORY ADDRESS
TO MY
READERS IN GENERAL.
The title-page of a book does not in general
convey a sufficiently exact notion of its aim ; I
shall, therefore, present you with a more com-
plete bill of fare before you sit down, to which
I shall add a hearty welcome.
If this work should be found dull and insipid,
a little allowance must be made for the difficulty
of rendering any mercantile matter pleasurable
to the reader, but I shall endeavour to keep his
attention alive : if I fail, let him spare me the
mortification of seeing his samples wrapped in
this paper by putting it at once into the fire.
Having seen the London Oil Trade fall into
partial decay, I am desirous of sustaining its ex
c nsive interests; and in the general sunshine of its
prosperity, if a reflected beam should fall on me,
there are some amongst you who would consider


my participation as no diminution of their own
enjoyment: the maxim of “ live and let live”
might sound vulgar to an aristocratic ear at Al-
mack’s, but it is full of noble feeling.
The title of these letters may serve to express
the wide field of action which will occupy
my consideration, and the humility with which
the various business will be performed.
Having been fairly chosen, duly elected, and
properly appointed, to the Protectorship of the
London Oil Trade; by my own unequivocal,
unanimous, and unbiassed consent,without having
recourse to any base and beastly bribery and cor-
ruption, which too frequently disgraces the career
of such people as members of parliament, I
shall endeavour to discharge the important duties
of my exalted station with that perfect faithful-
ness, disinterestedness, and impartiality, which
will show my high sense of the honour that has
been conferred, and my gratitude for the great
trust and cofidence which has been reposed in
me. My title to the office of Protector is founded
on the broadest basis of legitimate right which
mostly begins with the consent of the autocrat,
and ends with that of the people. This will be
clear to any one who will take the trouble of
tracing the various monarchies that have existed
in the world, up to their dark and distant sources ;
from the days of Herodotus, Thucydides, Zeno-
phon, Plutarch, Tacitus, and Livy, down to those


of Hume and Smollett. The Greek, Roman, and
English historians will all furnish precedents.
“ The Oilman” will appear as occasion may re-
quire; No. 11. may come forth in less than a week,
or it may be delayed for more than a month ; when
any important interest may be threatened with a
compromise, I can produce one in a single night,
and have it ready for circulation on ’Change. I
shall never exceed three months. In the progress
of the work it will contain an Autobiographical
Sketch, comprehending only that part of my life
which has been devoted to commercial pursuits;
but as commerce has led me over a large portion
of the habitable globe, that subject alone may
occupy an octavo volume; to which, at the
particular request of an influential house, my
Portrait, by a first-rate artist, will be affixed. I
shall have an opportunity of unfolding to you at
length the circumstances that caused my emigra-
tion, w'hich a mistaken but chivalrous notion of
honour and delicacy on my part, as well as a
desire to conceal a little youthful folly, have
hitherto enveloped in mystery. I have spared
the feelings of others at the expense of my own.
As it may be many months before I shall publish
the narrative entire, I will explain the broad out-
line to those who did not witness one of the
most shameless persecutions that has ever dis-
graced the annals of our courts of law. The
ignorance which it implies, the impudence which


it evinces, and the crime that it involves, will,
perhaps, afford a useful lesson to those who may
in future be intrusted with the administration
of justice. The short facts are these. About
eighteen years ago, (I must go back so far to
shew exactly how it happened,) I met a young-
lady at a dinner party who attracted my attention:
“ She was a form of life and light,
That seen became a part of sight.”
As she sat next to me, I had soon discovered that
her departure from the metropolis was fixed for
that very night, the entertainment being a fare-
well visit of her numerous acquaintances; she
was to leave London by the mail, in company
with some old curmudgeon who was to conduct
her to the family estate on the borders of Scot-
land. I offered to join the escort to the place
from whence the coach started, and took an
opportunity to hint at the possibility of my being
in the north at no remote period, having, as I
pretended, some very important business in that
neighbourhood which would soon require my
personal attention. I was very soon provided
with letters of introduction to some families in
an adjacent town, and off I set on a journey of
three hundred and fifty miles. I was very well
received, and in a very short time my intended
happiness was the theme of universal gossip; of
course it was reported that a rich cockney had


come down to marry the beautiful and accom-
plished Miss ; she was in the bloom of
her youth, and perhaps her first blush was that
which accompanied the declaration that I had
not come in vain; when I remember that moment,
I cannot help acquiescing in the sentiment of
some writer who says, “ Give me but the white
and happy hours that to my lot belong ; then
take the useless thousands more, and add them
to some coward’s life.” At the expiration of
about a month, as a mere matter of form, the
lady’s friends wished to know the precise amount
of my property ? Courteous reader ! that was the
first moment in my life that it had ever occurred
to my mind that I had never had any. I was soon
informed that the family could not consent until
my prospects might be more favourable ; a posi-
tive denial would at once have settled the matter,
for we were too near to Gretna Green to stand
much nonsense. To relieve the old lady's mind
from any such apprehension, I determined to go
on a tour of the northern lakes. There I acci-
dentally met Mr. Southey; there resided Words-
worth ; there dwelt that distinguished chemist
and philosopher, the learned and lamented Bishop
of Llandaff. From the top of the highest moun-
tain I could still catch a glance of the fairy-land
that I had left; my mind could travel over the
mountains and streams; the wild woods and deep
glens were passed in a moment, and I was again


seated, in imagination, by the side of my fair en-
chantress.
I should perhaps have wandered amongst the
northern waters until now, had I not been cau-
tioned by my purse to make a speedy retreat.
Just at that period, Lord Linthorne had hoisted
his flag at Austin Friars, and I enlisted under his
banner. He was not exactly a lord in his own
right, but he was at least the lord of lady some-
body, widow of a knight at Poole, whose name I
cannot remember. I taught him the little which he
knew about the oil trade ; and having established
him, I soon proceeded to establish myself, but I
found that I had set up in opposition to the pro-
tege of a certain illustrious house ; the kindness
of his patrons knew no bounds, they did not want
to do me any injury, but in the sincerity of their
friendship for him they forgot that the sacrifice
of my interest was rather too fervent a demon-
stration of their regard for his. My accidental
acquaintance with a few literary men had intro-
duced me to some intercourse with people of the
highest rank and fortune, which led to my being
a little involved in debt. In the first year I had
the pleasure of discharging those obligations,
and having a small but expensive domestic esta-
blishment, I was not enabled to save one farthing,
the balance at my banker’s being money which
business, with some remote connexions, from
time to time deposited in my hands. I had never


once by any chance speculated on my own ac-
count. Ido not arrogate to myself any particular
merit for that, as I frankly confess that I never
had the means.
It had been reported in the North that I was
likely to do very well, and the mother of my
intended bride sent a letter under cover, enclosed
to the care of a very pretty girl , the orphan
daughter of a clergyman ; she had lately come to
London to learn millinery with some eminent
“ Marchande de modes,” near Bond-street. I
recollected having been introduced to the young
lady at the house of the more divine beauty to
whom I have alluded, it being situated in the
very village where her father had been curate,
and at that time being consulted about her being
sent to London, I strongly objected to the poor
girl being sent to such a place as this—
“ London, the needy villain’s home,
The common sink of Paris and of Rome.”
Well ! in spite of my earnest advice she had
been sent, and to secure the faithful delivery of a
letter—that is, to prevent its falling into the hands
of my mother, she was entrusted with the honour
of presenting it to me in person; that renewed
my acquaintance with her, and within a few
days she again appeared at my counting-house.
What! another letter ? No ! The people to whom
she had been sent were rude ; her gentle spirit


had been ruffled, and she sought my advice,
determined not to stay in London, and ashamed
to return to the North. Well, the counting-house
was not a fit place for the discussion of such a
delicate question, so we adjourned to my suburban
chateau. It could not be decided !—week after
week passed away, and I began to see that my
knight-errantry had placed me in the situation of
guardian to a damsel who had no estate, no
means but mine. At that time I conducted specu-
lations for several who considered my com-
mission as a full equivalent for having filled
their pockets; and, in an evil hour, it occurred
to me that if I could make a good speculation in
oil for my fair ward, one lucky hit might at once
relieve me from the incumbrance, and make her
independent of the world. I had long had a
good opinion of the common oils, which were at
the moment well bolstered up by the broad shoul-
ders of a strong-backed acquaintance near the
north side of old London Bridge. I mentioned
the project to my beautiful principal, who smiled
assent, and in a few hours she was the actual
holder of about half a cargo, with the privilege
of clearing it ten tuns at a time, payment on
delivery. Her name was of course concealed
from the world, but it appeared in all my books.
Amongst other people, when the advance took
place, I sold one ten tuns to Mr. Flockton, a very
creditable turpentine and varnish maker at Horse


lydown. He bought it by a sample which I
gave him from my pocket ; his nephew, by his
order, received the oil in the regular way ; and the
same day, or the day after, it had been received
and overdrawn, they applied to me to take it
back, as “ the bulk did not appear to be so clear as
the sample .” It was southern oil, which the
weather had a little chilled. I do not believe
that the honest.turpentine and varnish maker had
conspired with his nephew to get off the bargain,
in consequence of a sudden fall, during the prompt,
of £3 per tun; but I think it was attributable to
his having bought an article in which he had not
been much accustomed to deal, and his honest
ignorance of the quality led him to demur.
Being quite sure that my claim was just, I in-
sisted on the fulfilment of the contract, and my
solicitor having applied in vain for the name of
his attorney, I arrested him, in the hope of
proving to a jury the justice of the transaction.
He was soon informed that he had no claim by the
usual process of law, and, consequently, he paid
the debt. It was stipulated that the name of my
principal should be concealed ; but Mr. Flockton
was advised to demand the name in violation of
our private agreement. If I had been speculating
for myself, how easily could I have given a fic-
titious name, and so set the question at rest. I
refused to give any ; he applied to the court of
aldermen to enforce the name being given up,


and they sent me a summons to appear with the
name in about ten days , I having all that time
to make up a sham case if I had been so disposed.
A correspondent of mine at an outport, who, I
believe, failed in trade, and died soon afterwards,
having heard of it, actually came up to London
to offer his services. Had I produced him as my
seller, what could the court of aldermen or Mr.
Flockton have done to cast a doubt on the truth
of his assertion, which I am sorry to say that he
offered to make on oath ? I had determined to
use no subterfuge. All brokers give a bond for
£SOO, obliging themselves to disclose the name
of a buyer or seller on its being demanded ; but
I had stipulated to withhold it, and still refused
to give the name. The aldermen threatened to
put the bond in force against me, and then I was
weak enough—fool enough—to give the name,
because two sureties, besides myself, were an-
swerable for the bond. In a conflict between a
man’s interest and his honour, he often errs. I
requested the young lady to go to Appleby, in
Westmoreland, so that in giving the real name
with that address, her family might not know to
whom it alluded if the facts became public. It
was an artless plot of mine to save the feelings of
a respectable family, who are now too distant to
hear of the disclosure; in company with an old
lady my principal went to Appleby, and just re-
mained there until I had given my answer to the


aldermen. They were affronted at my indignant
and spirited remonstrance, and in their anger
they employed the city solicitor to sue me for a
supposed violation of the broker’s bond ; he sent
some tool of law to Westmoreland, who found,
on inquiry of the tax-gatherer, that no person of
the name I had given, was then living there, ex-
cept an old female servant, who was brought up
to London, at my expense, to prove that she had
given me no orders to buy oil, nor had ever seen
me in her life. I was in Yorkshire when the
trial came on, and my pocket was picked of about
a thousand pounds on a charge which must have
appeared ridiculous to any man but a felon or a
fool, who would not or could not perceive its
absurdity; one of the greatest lawyers in En-
gland declared that “ the bond might be used to
fleece a man of uncompromising honour on some
informality he might commit in error, and dis-
dain to cover by any artifice; but that any un-
principled broker, who meant to violate its obli-
gations by dealing on his own account, would
naturally be provided with a sham seller or
buyer, whose name would appear in all his tricky
contracts in defiance of any human law.”
The court of aldermen were all strangers to
me, except two or three that I had occasionally
met at parties, therefore it cannot be supposed
that they had any intention to defraud me by
such a disgusting, revolting, and iniquitous pro


ceeding; the fact is they were imposed on. I was
told that one of the aldermen had been a candi-
date for some office ; I think for the representa-
tion of the city in parliament ; and while he was
canvassing on the Royal-Exchange, the brokers
hissed him, and, disgraceful as it may appear,
one of them did actually spit in his face! That
alderman, it was supposed, was glad to have an
opportunity of revenging himself on the brokers,
as a body, by a private injury to one in particular,
and it was, perhaps, on account of his known
hatred to the brokers, that Mr. Flockton was
advised to apply to him to assist in the revenge
of an insult, which he considered the arrest to
be, however just the claim on which it was
founded. His complaint was swallowed with a
greedy ear by the spit-smothered magistrate,
who, instead of endeavouring to soothe the ex-
cited passion of the varnish-manufacturer, at
once agreed that the best course he could pursue
was to petition the court of aldermen to sue me
on the bond ! The man who advised that was a
member of that court where he appeared as my
accuser , as counsel for my antagonist, and as one
of the judges! Well! the rest of the aldermen
could not be sufficiently omniscient to be aware
of the facts which I had concealed from the
whole world, and without any bad feeling on
their part, they consented to the wealth and in-
fluence of the corporation being employed to


crush me. The city solicitor was directed to
proceed, and I was robbed and ruined to gratify
the private pique of a dastardly ruffian! why
did he not revenge the indignity of a broker
spitting in his mouth on the man who did it?
A man who is capable of sacrificing his duty for
any selfish gratification,—who sees nothing in the
wide world but his own interest, is properly
marked by Sir Walter Scott.
“ The wretch, concentred all in self,
Despite of honours, power, and pelf,
Living, shall forfeit fair renown,
And doubly dying shall go down
To the vile dust from whence he sprung,
Unwept, unhonour’d, and unsung.”
At first I could not help admiring the trick
which had been played off against me, but I find
the fellow had not the merit of being the author
of the ingenious rascality, for one of the same
kind is related in “ Gil Bias,” which no doubt
suggested the knavery to the party who recom-
mended it to the honest manufacturer of turpen-
tine and varnish, who would no more have
thought of doing it than his quondam friend,
old Dan Hawkins, to whom I had the pleasure
of selling some oil a short time ago, notwith-
standing his having been a witness in favour of
the city claim on the occasion. The story told
by Le Sage is this. “ Gil Bias was valet to a


gentleman at Cadiz, who happened in anger to
box his ears, which indignity he mentioned to a
vulgar footman out of place, declaring his inten-
tion of leaving his master’s service the next day,
just on the eve of his embarkation for Naples;
his friend, with an air of affected pity and indig-
nation, thus summed up the evidence and gave
his judgment on the case. ‘ You will be disho-
noured as long as you live, if you put up with
such paltry redress as that of leaving his service;
you ought to have satisfaction proportioned to
the insult; you say, ‘ that your master struck
you in the face, that his portmanteaus, with his
dollars and apparel, are all packed for his jour-
ney let you and I set off with his money and
his clothes, that will be an atonement worthy of
your offended honour.” My readers cannot fail
to perceive the close analogy which this case
bears to the revenge by which my family was
minus a thousand pounds.
I was one day, about that time, passing
through Walbrook, when a person, who was
going into some counting-house, was pointed
out to me as a scoundrel who had been suspected
of pandering to the excited feelings of the re-
spectable varnish-maker at Horselydown, I saw
the same fellow somewhere in Kent, about
eighteen miles from London; he appeared to be a
withered, lean, and wrinkled wretch, and the
spite of an eunuch seemed to mingle with the


sharper-like expression of his countenance. I
am told he is still living. The wrath of heaven
seems to slumber on the culprit’s fate ; he stands
tottering on the extreme verge of human exist-
ence, without the consolation of reflecting on
one manly action, and when in hell
“ The common damn’d will shun his company.”
Oh ! could I imitate the imperishable satire of
Juvenal, the bitter irony of Rousseau, or with
thy deathless wit, immortal Brougham, could I
but brand him on the brow, and hold him in the
sun “ for Scorn to point his slow unmoving
finger at!” Lend me thy lightning, O eternal
heaven ! while I transfix this brainless, heartless
mummy this kindless, prayerless abortion of
humanity, whose days are fewer than his sins. I
shall some day dress him in iambics.—When the
stone that may bear his epitaph shall have crum-
bled into dust, —when the soil above his grave
shall be worn away by the feet of time, —when
the impalpable powder of his bones shall be
blanched in the sun and scattered in the wind, —
his name shall live in the execration of distant
ages, detested and abhorred, till language be no
more.
Proudly conscious of his own integrity, here-
after let no man wantonly defy the power of
bloated wealth and impenetrable stupidity to do
him an injustice ; for such is the imperfection of
B


human law, that the most untainted honour
affords no security. A traitor, too spiritless to
expend one farthing of his own in the gratifica-
tion of his morbid appetite for evil, is bold and
blasphemous, confident and courageous with the
property of others; and impotent as the wretch
may seem, the wealth and influence of such a cor-
poration as that of this vast commercial city can-
not be employed without danger against any
individual, though the stupendous machinery be
set in motion by a worn and worthless bag of
guts. The ruin of my prospects by such inglo-
rious means can only be compared to the fate of
one of Bonaparte’s generals, who, having fought
unwounded in every field that employed the
arms of his imperial master for twenty years,
was at last killed by the bite of a mad puppy
dog; or it may be likened to the misfortune of
an officer, who, having led a forlorn hope through
showers of shot to the entire possession of an
important fortress, at the moment of planting the
British flag, lo ! he was smothered by the floor
of an old privy giving way! You all saw my
property plundered and my business destroyed,
the outrage being committed under the flag of a
court of law. The greater part of you came
forward in a manly manner and signed a memo-
rial, declaring your high estimation of my charac-
ter as a man of business and as a gentleman ; but
I am constrained to acknowledge that one house


stood neutral. Let it humble the pride of human
nature to know that man cannot be perfect; his
virtues all tend to some opposite vice : in this
instance, one of the most honourable men con-
nected with our trade, impelled by his fraternal
friendship for Linthorne, without the least desire
to do me harm, —at the very moment of my strug-
gle with the felon force that was marshalled
against me, —an individual who had once done a
deed that the biographer of the Cmsars might
have recorded or Homer might have sung,—was
weak enough to give his tacit consent to my
being defrauded of a thousand pounds in cash,
and of a business which might have produced
about twenty thousand pounds more ; by throw-
ing the great city influence of his firm into the
hands of my enemies. I was placed in a situa-
tion which has never yet been properly described
by any English writer within the immediate
range of my memory. Ido not like any'quota-
tion that smells of the lamp, but I cannot help
giving the words of a sublime dramatist.
Quand on a tout perdu,
Et il ne reste que desespoir,
La vie est une reproche,
La mort est un devoir. — Voltaire.
But I was above giving way to any such senti-
ment. Such is nly respect for that indivi-
B 2


dual, that, deeply as I have suffered, I cannot
help joining in our national anthem—
“ Long live noble Ralph, long life to the king.”
I am incapable of hatred towards an enemy.
Hatred is the passion of slaves ; it always implies
fear. It is written that “we should forgive our
enemiesbut as it is not written that we should
forgive our friends, I forgive them not. A friend
can offend me but once! If any one should feel
inclined to censure the conduct of Mr. Flockton,
let him take into consideration the feelings of a
decent tradesman, on whose commercial credit
the stigma of an arrest is cast. Those whose
respectability does not exactly depend on money,
might not feel so deeply such an affront; but I
leave it to your impartial judgment, if a gentle-
man, of the very first respectability, on being
arrested for a just debt, would not feel the indig-
nity as acutely as the honest turpentine and var-
nish maker. lam therefore bound to defend his
character.


THE OILMAN,
ETC. ETC.
To the Colonists of Sydney, engaged in the Southern
Whale Fishery.
Gentlemen, —Situated as you are at a
distance of nearly half the world’s circumference,
I shall from time to time have the pleasure of
addressing you, as I hear that my first pamphlet
has been transmitted to be reprinted for circu-
lation amongst you. I cannot contemplate your
present commercial situation without some degree
of envy: the wealth of the East appears to be
within your grasp; and connected as you are
with a nation renowned in arts and arms, pro-
tected by its valour, instructed by its example,
and improved by its literature; with a climate
which unites all agricultural advantages, with
harbours courting the commerce of the world,


you are now put in possession of one of the
best sources of national wealth. The great
sperm fishery is for ever yours; and you, who
possess the best branch of Australian commerce,
may in time be the most distinguished indivi-
duals of your interesting colony. Your de-
scendants may at a later period become the
legislators of an independent state, that may
divide with the future republics of North
America the consideration of the world—when
the last crown in Europe shall have been melted
down to pay for the protection of the last throne.
That you dwell amongst thieves is no disgrace,
for Rome—imperial Rome !—was first colonised
by a band of ruffians who had been banished
by the neighbouring nations.
I hope that my friends who may be disposed
to settle amongst you, for the purpose of par-
ticipating in the produce of the circumjacent
seas, may be met with that kindly feeling which
now animates me in the address which I have
the honour of directing to you. As your opera-
tions will be now extended, I beg to caution
you against the folly of expecting too much
encouragement in this market. Be assured that
the price of sperm oil cannot remain so high
as that which is quoted at the date of this
letter ; but you may rely on the increased con-
sumption of the article for some years. The
demand will keep pace with your greatest exer


tions. In order that your oil may be received
here on equal terms with our own, you must
take especial care to send the finest quality,—
that is, light in weight, pale in colour, and
well spermed; that object is easily and readily
gained. Let the ship-owners engaged in the
fishery form a club; let two premiums, one of
£SOO and one of £250, be awarded to those two
captains who may bring home the largest quan-
tity of well manufactured oil and head-matter,
calculating the proportion which the quantity
caught bears to the tonnage and the time em-
ployed. I wish to caution my friends who buy
sperm oil in the course of trade at Sydney
against the possibility of deception in the
quality, which exposes merchants and brokers
here to many unpleasant disputes. Those who
can depend on their palate for a knowledge
of this article should taste the spermaceti at
the bottom of the casks, which is sure to be
tainted if one gallon of any common oil be
mixed with it, for the greater specific gravity
of common oils occasions them to descend.
But those who are not conversant with the taste
and smell of oil may weigh a fair proportion
taken from every cask in the parcel they intend
to purchase, and that mixture being filtered
through flannel and exposed to a temperature
of about 60 degrees Fahrenheit, will weigh
about 8 lbs. llf ozs,; if it be found to weigh


more than 8f lbs., its manufacture is not perfect,
or its purity is subject to a doubt. Let there
be no mixture of the body oil with the head-
matter. In buying oil at Sydney, you must
beware that the time of its arrival in England
varies its value about £2 per tun, between the
coldest and warmest seasons. The absorption
of caloric, or the matter of heat, in the dog-
days, swells the oil about three per cent, more
than it does in a hard frost, thus varying about
one half per cent., per month, in the advance
from one season to another; its value, therefore,
is undulating in that proportion.
To the London Ship-Owners engaged in the
Southern Whale Fishery.
In my pamphlet on “ the decline of the
London Oil Trade,” I suggested the propriety
of a company being formed to associate the
interests and exertions of the oil-merchants and
the ship-owners. I have now to inform you
that the former consider that they have no
interest in common with you, since they can
accomplish all the advantages that such a com-
pany could offer to them by opening a private
establishment at Liverpool, by which they would


avoid all the concomitant evils that operate as
a discount on the best exertions of public asso-
ciations. Any company formed amongst your-
selves must be so limited in its extent that it
would take the character of a firm of merchants
rather than that of a chartered body. The old
turnpike-road of trade is too much worn; a
man may walk for a week without treading on
a sixpence: we must strike out a new path.
The question is not now if it shall be done?
but who shall do it? You cannot stand still !
you must go forward, or fall back to make
room for others; the time for consideration is
past. Lord Chesterfield, who was a shrewd
observer of human nature, says, “ There is
more in the manner than in the matter of every
thing.” Do nothing- too little or too late.
There are some people who always observe a
medium; but it will not do to jump half way
over a ditch. If you mean to do any thing,
do not wait until the field be occupied by new
and needy adventurers, allured by your apathy,
to reap in the field of your fathers. In less
than eighteen months, more than three quarters
of a million of new capital will sail out of
Sydney in quest of sperm oil; the facilities are
daily increased. Money, which could not be
had under 15 or 20 per cent, interest, will soon
be obtained at 7 per cent. In consequence of
a chartered bank being ready for immediate


action, the parties are on the eve of embarkation.
Formerly the settlers depended on a few rich
merchants, who lent money on most usurious
terms. The blood of business will begin to
circulate with pulsations wholly new. Vast as
I described the advantages enjoyed by the
colonists over our fishermen, I had yet to learn
that their immense gains might still be improved
by a little more economy in fitting their ships.
I think at least 10 per cent, might be saved,
if the business were conducted with the same
mercantile precision which distinguishes our
London ship-owners. You must not suppose
that all those who are engaged in fitting ships
at Sydney are enlightened merchants, like their
representatives in London; there may be half a
dozen in about twenty-five.
Now comes the rub. Who is to go there
to organize and direct the operations of a fishing
establishment? I am very poor; but the Oil
Trade is not rich enough to buy my services for
such a mission.
Some author, speaking of New South Wales,
says that “ the trees are without fruit, the flowers
without fragrance, and the birds without song.”
I shall say nothing of the scarcity of women, for
the Emigration Committee means to send an abun-
dance of them. What say the gay and gifted
chevaliers of Great St, Helen’s to such a place as
that?—Sacrebleu !—Let them remain with us, or,


in preference to Australia, I should advise them
to carry their wealth to one of those favoured
climes of the East, “ where all above is sunshine,
and all beneath is flowers.”
“ Where the virgins are sweet as the roses they twine,
And all, save the spirit of man, is divine.”
, Then who shall go ? whom can we spare ? Per-
haps some one who is already too rich to be
happy, whose mind reflects iniquities which he is
too busy to repent; some one whose only chance
of respectability consists in the reputation of
wealth that has been wrung from the hard indus-
try of defrauded sailors—such men, on their
arrival at Sydney, might make the same boast
which is said to have been uttered by the liberated
convicts, in an address at the opening of the
theatre :
“ True patriots we, for, be it understood,
We left our country for our country’s good.”
No! let not such a wretch pollute the infant
Anglo-Rome. Let half a dozen respectableJirms
be formed, with resources sufficient to defy all
competition on the part of strangers; let them
cultivate a good understanding with those respect-
able houses now engaged in the same pursuit, and
let them not trench on the interests of the London
correspondents of those houses, as it might be
prejudicial to both parties; the best business has


some disgusting points, therefore we should
make it as pleasurable as possible, by the obser-
vance of liberality towards our immediate neigh-
bours.
Dreary as New South Wales may have ap-
peared to the author of my quotation, I think
that the appearance of all places depends mainly
on the imagination of the traveller, which, like
coloured glass, gives its own hue to all the sur-
rounding scenery : if that writer’s mind was ste-
rile, dark, and desolate, why should he slander
the gardens and meadows of Australia? A greater
writer, speaking of the power of the human fancy
over the cold and dull realities of life, thus eulo-
gises the beneficence of the Deity from whom it
is derived :
■ “ Not content
With every fruit of life to nourish man,
By kind illusions of the wandering sense,
He makes all nature beauty to the eye
Or music to the ear.”
Dr. Darwin.
If it were not for imagination, which enables
one man to enjoy the property of another more
than the real owner, the present distribution of
human possessions would argue injustice. I recol-
lect observing, in a letter to a young scion of the
reigning family, of whom I entertain a very high
opinion, that “providence allows all sorts of fools
and knaves to gain money , the amount of which is


left to chance; but the enjoyment of it (to a single
farthing) is regulated by the merit of the acci-
dental proprietor .” I often reflect on that fact,
when I happen to pass through a rich man’s park.
I feel an enjoyment of it,
“ Beyond the lordly owner’s narrow claim.”
The title-deeds and the dirt are his, but the
breeze of health that trembles through the trees,
the fragrance of the wild flower, the music of the
birds, and the blue sky above them, all are mine!
TO THE TRADE.
Common Oils.
These oils have ceased to be worthy of specu-
lation in England, because the energy of British
capital has no control over them; there was a
time when one of you could dictate to listening
Europe the prices for a month ; but that powerful
voice is hushed to sleep, and perhaps it may
never be heard again. Ten or twenty tuns at a
public sale, with as much more by private con-
tract, will now satisfy a buyer, to whom a few
cargoes, more or less, was once no object.
The quantity of seal oil is rather above the


average of late years. At present I can say
nothing in its favour. This is the moment when
cargoes arrive that must be sold, be the price
what it may ; they are sometimes the property of
people who, knowing nothing of the market, will
not speculate on the chance of an advance; and
the respectable merchants to whom they are con-
signed know their business too well not to follow
the instructions which accompany a bill of lading.
There is a prospect of an abundant seed crop, and
the fineness of the weather throughout the conti-
nent may have been extended to the theatre of
the oil fishery at Davis’ Straits, therefore it is
probable that we may have an abundant supply
from thence. The price, though very low, may
still be lower. I should not be at all astonished
to see pale seal oil disposed of at public sale for
£23 per tun ; but those who expect that the de-
pression will continue, had better beware of
making any prospective contracts in the hopes of
buying low, for such is the singular dearth of all
common oils throughout Europe, that I will venture
to say the demand will require an abundant sup-
ply from the north, as well as a good seed crop.
The declining prices will soon anticipate those
events, and if white seal oil should descend to
£23, I should not be at all surprised to see an
advance at the very moment of a good Davis’
Straits fishery being declared. After long-con-
tinued dry weather, the first heavy showers may


for a moment lie on the surface of the earth, but
they are swallowed up in the next instant. That
is the situation of Europe at this moment; the
common oils of all kinds are exhausted to a de-
gree which has not been known for upwards of
twenty years. In order to investigate this sub-
ject properly, and to bring it more directly and
more clearly to your apprehension, I must take
the liberty of drying up the sea which separates
our island from continental Europe. Just imagine
for one moment that we all inhabit one vast terri-
tory, for the navigation is so short and so cheap,
that, as regards oil, we all mess together. The
transportation of a parcel of oil, from Liverpool
to London, by sea, would often require for its
delivery double the time and expense that would
land it at the medium distance to which oil is
generally sent for the supply of our foreign
neighbours. Let it be supposed that we had
8000 tuns of seal oil this year, and that we shall
have 10,000 tuns of oil from Davis’ Straits, which
is more than the usual average of both fisheries,
with a good crop of seed.
Now, in order to ascertain the effect of all
this on the various markets, let us first place
all those markets in their usual situation at the
time the new produce arrives. What is that situa-
tion? In every metropolis, in every considerable
town, in the hands of all importers, dealers, shops
and manufactories consuming the article, a certain


quantity was to be found, amounting in general
to five or six months’ consumption; often has
this surplus quantity, remaining over, like a nest-
egg, from one year to another, been still more
considerable. Well, then, let us spread the
new rape-seed in the shape of oil, or seed, the
new Davis’ Straits oil and the new seal oil, with
what Southern we may find : let us spread half
of all these over the vast field of their con-
sumption, That will only place Europe in its
usual situation at the period of the new importa-
tions and the harvest of the seed. Well! what
will you have left? You will have 4000 tuns
of seal oil and 5000 tuns of Davis’ Straits oil,
with only half the usual seed crop. Now
suppose that we had the usual quantity of oil
left unconsumed, and only half a seed crop had
made its appearance in conjunction with such
a failure in both fisheries, that the amount was
4000 seal and 5000 Davis’ Straits, would not
the certain consequence be the same ? Take this
simile in explanation. Here are two men; one
is poor because he never had sufficient for his
support, and the other is poor because he has
spent his fortune. Their view of their own circum-
stances is very different, but their resources are
exactly the same: it is the situation that alters the
appearance, but it cannot modify the fact. Come
what may! I tell you that Europe cannot be over-
stocked with common oils for the next ten months.


But let us not reckon without our host. Sup-
pose that the vaunted seed crop should not
be well gathered in; suppose that the Davis’
Straits fishery should be a partial failure;
suppose that there should be a speculation in
tallow, or let only one of these things happen,
what will be the consequence ? Why, common
oils must go up; but let no man count on the
London trade doing any good, for it is not worth
their while to dirty their fingers with them. They
have speculated in cod oil year after year, for
twenty years, on a mistaken principle, the thing
not having been worth any man’s notice during
the whole period. I have taken some pains to
find out the foundation of those speculations,
and it appears that they have always bought
when the price teas low. As a general rule I say
buy when the price is low ; but cod oil is an
exception. Its peculiarity is this: the legitimate
consumption does not increase or diminish with
the price. A pair of boots sold for £2:10 will
consume precisely the same quantity of that oil,
and so will the shoes of a cow-driver, let the
cost of the quantity have been two farthings or
three farthings, for that much it seldom varies.
Whenever cod oil has been very low, it was
because the leather trade was nearly idle, or that
the common oils were depressed ; in either case
it was not a good speculation. The only thing
c


that can recommend cod oil is the smallness of
the quantity on hand. This year we have had
a stock evidently too small for the regular con-
sumption, but it has been so divided as to prevent
the possibility of an advance; whereas, if any
one spirited individual had taken it up two months
ago, I would have undertaken to make you all
pay £35 per tun for every gallon that you
required for your trade, and with a certain de-
gree of polite acknowledgement into the bargain.
I could have checkmated the whole trade by a
single move, in a single day. You had better
take care that you are not bothered yet with this
article, for you are not quite out of the wood.
It has been remarked, by the fishermen, that the
cod fish have had a disease in the liver for two
years past, which has occasioned the present
scarcity of oil; and if they have not taken a
little calomel or Abernethy’s blue pill, I think
the leather people will have to pay pretty hand-
somely for the oil they may want, as well as those
barbers who make their bears’ grease of the cod
dregs. The quantity of southern oil will not
be very great; but in the winter it will not
attract the least attention. Its proportion to
other oils will always be more regular than that
of any other; the fishery of, what is technically
called, the Black whale which produces it, is too
remote, and the price will always be too small


to threaten the extermination war which is car-
ried on against the aristocracy of its genus, the
sperm whale.
Allowances.
The ever-to-be-lamented Oliver Gammon and
Joe Bell, if they were to come to life, would have
to learn their business over again as regards this
branch. I find that some of the coopers can
make a difference of £1 per tun in a parcel of
cod oil in the searching alone; to prevent mis-
takes I shall give the brokers a hint of the cause.
When the searching-irons are dipped into a cask ;
in drawing them out the cooper used to be care-
ful never to lift the lower end any higher than
just sufficient to bring the instrument to a hori-
zontal position, for, if he does, the foot, in a
rather fluid state, will pass in some degree
through one or two more of the chambers —“ six
inches, says the cooper,” instead of four. Now
the extra two inches being considerably more
than all the real allowance, in consequence of its
being calculated on a wider part of the cask, it
is a fraud on the owner of the oil not intended
by any party concerned, but simply attributable
to the ignorant system which has been pursued.
c 2


When an oil-merchant buys a quantity of cod
oil of me, he expects that I shall give the usual
allowance, and Ido not deceive him; for as I find
that an imperial allowance has been brought
about as well as an imperial gauge, I feel obliged
to submit to the current practice of the trade—
I give the same allowances as others. But I
mean to alter this system very shortly, by a pro-
position to increase the nominal allowance on
all Newfoundland oils, that is three-fifths of the
foot may be given as allowance, but it shall be
measured with scrupulous exactness. By the
new method, the same quantity will be given, but
the allowance will be fairly awarded -to every
buyer of the oil ; whereas now, one man sends
a cunning fellovy to claim just twice as much as
will satisfy another.
To the Ladies.
What ladies? Why, the ladies who have
expressed their disapprobation at what they call
my “ very uncourtly rudeness and total want of
gallantry and feeling” in speaking of the two
peeresses in my first pamphlet. Now, as I care
more about the good opinion of the sex than I
do for all the oilmen that have existed since the


flood, I shall enter into a serious and public de-
fence of my conduct.
I am ready to acknowledge that Woman is a
sort of human heaven; and wherever she has
crossed my path, she hath received my homage.
In the polished circles of our English gentry, at
the courts of France and Spain, in the trackless
valleys and romantic wilds of the Araucano In-
dians, where money was never seen and where
vice was never heard ; in all countries I have
found her still the same:—whatever is good or
fair, innocent or holy, indicates her presence
and sings her praise in our enchanted ears.
Formed in the prodigality of nature, her mind
is more beautiful than her person ; she is the
connecting- link between all we wish on earth
and all we hope in heaven. I should think that
in hell there are no women, for damnation would
not be complete without their absence. Maho-
met has very properly decorated his heaven with
that which constitutes our sublimest notion of
purity and excellence: he has awarded to each
of the faithful thirty-nine virgins of eternal
youth and unfading beauty, who shall be clothed
in robes of silk and dwell in palaces of marble.
There is encouragement to bear the ills of life!
there is an incitement to the loftiest virtue ! Per-
haps some of you would like to go on a visit to
those realms of bliss. I cannot say that I admire
such a seraglio—l cannot divide my heart and


mind with a score or two of angels—my eyes be-
come dazzled by a whole constellation. I shrink
from the licentiousness of what is called a general
lover; there is something idolatrous in the greedy
sensuality of the bard of Newstead Abbey; there
is something in the writings of that libidinous
lord which is sufficient to cast a shade on the
greatest minstrel that ever sung “ in hall or
bower.” I cannot read wdthout profound indig-
nation the selfish sentiment which is expressed
in the following lines—
“ I wish all women had one rosy mouth,
That I might kiss them all from north to south.”
Byron.
Oh! fie, my Lord! When that poem came
before me, I could not help noting my displeasure
on the very margin of the book, which had been
borrowed of a friend. I wished to place the
intemperance of the noble poet in strong con-
trast with my own moderation.
Had I the choice from farthest east to west.
Give me but six and Byron all the rest.
Blyth.
It is a very hard case that I should be accused
of disrespect towards the sex —that I should be
condemned unheard, without an opportunity of
confronting the charge with triumphant refuta-
tion. I can bring forward a deputation of ladies


who will vouch for my loyalty, but as many of
them do not speak English, they must be heard
by their respective interpreters, like the witnesses
in favour of Queen Caroline.
Gentle ladies, adieu! I hope that I may never
again be called upon to address you from the
pages of the Oilman.
CHARLES NICHOLS,
The Oil Cooper.
The world appears to me to be divided into
parties of business and pleasure; the various
groups are formed by the approximation of their
sentiments or the similarity of their pursuits.
The Oil Trade, my friends, is perhaps rather
vulgar, but one of our fraternity in West Smith-
field proves that it may be followed by a polished
gentleman. He can shew us how to associate
refinement with opulence ; and the greatest suc-
cess in trade, with the grace and the sheen of
good breeding and good nature. The grass has
long grown above the heads of more than half
of those who led the land (as reapers call those
who go on first) when I began business, and as
a few years more may tumble half of us who
now remain into our graves, I strongly recom-
mend to you not to let any one of our motley
group fall into entire decay.


You all recollect Charles Nichols, the oil-
cooper, and you must have observed his absence
from his post on ’Change. On that little spot,
west of the statue, we used to be stationed in the
precise order of the solar system. The Regent
was the sun and centre, diffusing light to all
around. “ The Trade” were the planets revolv-
ing about him, and the brokers were the satel-
lites revolving about them, with the coopers, like
fixed stars on the verge of our horizon. Where
are Deacon, Dix, and Nichols? We want a few
coopers of the canvas-jacket-school. I think our
system is not complete without those knights of
the searching-irons and oyster-shell. I find that
Nichols is in a little difficulty; but all he owes
is only about a hundred pounds. I have seen
many plans proposed for assisting people in mis-
fortune. I shall mention one which seems to me
preferable to all the suggestions of philosophers
who have wasted so many reams of paper and
such rivers of ink on this inexhaustible subject.
The method that I shall portray to you is a
perfect beau ideal of delicate benevolence. It
is described by Dr. Adam Clarke, a worthy
Wesleyan raethodist.
In travelling from Ballycastle to Coleraine
one day to preach, Dr. Clarke stopped at a
hamlet called Moss-side, to feed his horse.
While the horse was eating, he thus relates his
employment:—


“ As there was no stable in the place, we fed
the horses in the street. Curiosity led me to
step into one of the cabins—it was a small one,
where I saw nine persons, chiefly young women,
spinning, and one reeling the produce of their
labour. There was a bed in the place, in which
a young lad lay of about fourteen years of age,
who had received a hurt in his ankle several
weeks before, and w 7 as still confined to bed. On
asking them if they all belonged to one family, I
was answered, * No.’ One who spoke for the
rest, said, ‘ We are only neighbours of this poor
woman: her son has got a hurt several weeks
ago, by which he has been rendered unable to
work : our neighbour being distressed, and get-
ting behind-hand, (that is, incapable of maintain-
ing herself and family,) we have agreed to give
her a day’s work.’ They were all spinning as
hard as they could, in order to make the most
possible profit for the poor family, by their day’s
work. There was not one of the nine, who did
not herself appear to be in the most abject po-
verty, and they now conjoined their labours to
relieve one who was only more miserable than
themselves. This was the finest specimen of
philanthropy I had ever seen ! ”
Is it not a pity that such people should live
beyond the pale of civilization ? The poor be-
nighted creatures belong to those herds of
savages of whom we read without emotion, that


so many dozen have been mowed down or shot
by the military employed by our Church-of-
England clergy to enforce the payment of their
tithes. If they were to abstain from such pri-
vately vulgar acts of charity, as that above de-
scribed, they would perhaps be able to pay their
tithes in a proper manner, and our learned and
enlightened clergy might then continue to drink
their Laflte, Chateau Margeaux, Burgundy, and
Champagne; whereas now I fear that many are
reduced to the necessity of whetting their reve-
rend whistles with nothing better than port. I
think the church is in danger. Shall we send
our bishops to convert those Irish boors, or shall
we send them there to learn such lessons of
practical Christianity as Cam and Isis have
never heard; which cast a shade on all systems
of ethics. I say that, in that Irish cabin, Seneca
himself might go to school. When we read in a
newspaper that such an one Esq. has paid twenty
guineas to be made a governor for life of some
blind or lunatic asylum; and when that esquire
thinks that he need do no more good, no daily
duty to his fellow- creatures, “ verily, I say unto
you, he hath his reward.” Call you that charity?
No, my friends; the spirit of true piety disdains
the blazonry of public prints Such empiric
Christianity may deceive man, but it cannot de-
ceive his divine author. Some part of what the
world calls religion is a blasphemous libel on


the character of God, for which the knaves who
invented it, and the fools who follow it, may
have to answer.
Shall we follow the sublime example of the
Irish peasants for the benefit of Charles Nichols?
Shall we give him a day’s work to make him
independent of the world ? No ! the world would
laugh !—let it laugh and be damned ! I for one
am ready ! I scorn at once its friendship and its
frown!—lt is said that some prince, being asked
the cause of a little melancholy, replied that
“ he had lost a day,” for in all that day he had
not been able to do any good. Good God ! how
many days have we lost! Well! Since the Irish
system is too lofty, too philosophic, and refined
for us, let us content ourselves with giving our
old acquaintance Charles Nichols a proportion
of our favours, and let the Small sum he wants
be at once cheerfully subscribed as a loan, which
I think he will be proud to repay out of the
profits of an improved business, to which he has
solemnly promised the most unremitting and
faithful attention. In a very few years, when
some of you may be past doing good or evil,
you may congratulate yourselves on having
gained a day in having done the good which I
now point out. I do not know the address of
Charles Nichols, but he is always to be heard of
at Davis’s Wharf, Tooley-street. I will provide
it for any importer who may wish to employ


him. He is certainly one of the first judges of
oil in this country, and with attention to his
business, he may long continue to be an acquisi-
tion to the trade. On such a subject I cannot
say more, and I hope that truth will not require
that I should say less.
PLANS
Suggested to protect the London Oil Trade.
Two companies have been proposed to accom-
plish this important object The first was a
company of merchants combining the interests
of the ship-owners and the oil-merchants, but
the latter, finding themselves less interested in
such a project than the former, begged to decline
the honour of being sent to Botany Bay on that
or any other errand. Then it was proposed that
a firm of brokers might achieve all that was
desirable for both parties without any risk to
themselves or others, but that scheme has been
for a time abandoned, as it was supposed that
the brokers would be diverted from their al-
legiance.
“ Order is Heaven’s first law, and that confessed,
Some are, and must be, greater than the rest,
More rich, more wise.”
Pope.


Well! it was supposed that the illustrious oil-
house which has always been “ greater than the
rest ” would cease to enjoy that power which it
has exercised for above half a century; that the
influence would then be divided amongst the
great monied firms without distinction; that the
formality of offering a cargo at the court of
William-street before it could be presented to
any other buyer would be entirely and for ever
dispensed with. It was supposed that our
limited monarchy under such an administration
would become a republic, where one man’s ready
money would be thought as good as that of
another. The very proposition of such a firm
of brokers was looked on as high treason; a
charge was brought against me of tampering
with the fidelity of the most devoted and dutiful
servants of the crown, for Avhich I was in some
danger of being committed to the Tower as a
fierce and dangerous democrat.
Notwithstanding that imputation on my cha-
racter, I boldly assert that his Majesty has not
in all his wide dominions, from Oxford-street to
Limehouse-hole, a more faithful subject than
myself. The History of Grease cannot furnish
an example of more devoted loyalty. But lam
no flatterer; the trade has flourished under the
present form of government, then why should I
wish for any change. I hope to see the august
house which now sways the sceptre of the realms


of Grease long continue to reign over us. The
t! Prospectus of a Firm of Brokers” which
brought on my devoted head their royal displea-
sure I beg now to lay before my fellow subjects,
that I may no longer be suspected of any poli-
tical intrigue.
PROSPECTUS.
Messrs. and Company, Brokers and Agents
in Oil, Russia Produce, and general Merchandise, Shipping
Insurance, &c.
LONDON BRANCH.
Conducted by
A. Sperm Oil and Head-matter—Auctioneer and Trea-
surer.
B. Common Oils and Whalebone —lnspector of all con-
tracts before delivery.
C. Seed Oils, Seed, Cake, Tallow, Turpentine, Pitch,
Tar, Hemp, &c.
D. Olive Oil, Drugs, Wool from Sydney, and miscel-
laneous merchandise.
E. Shipping department, chartering, freighting, insu-
rance, &c., foreign and domestic correspondence.
F. Assistant to A, B, C, D, E, in any heavy press of
business, not requiring the whole strength of the
house; this partner brings in £lO,OOO, to be al-
lowed 6 per cent interest.


LIVERPOOL BRANCH.
G. Will carry on all the business comprehended in the
five subdivisions of the London house, with one
clerk and a few apprentices.
SYDNEY BRANCH.
I. This gentleman will sell Oil and other produce of
New South Wales, amongst the owners on the
spot, buy on commission, through orders from
London, and advance money on Oil intended for
immediate sale, on arrival; the advance will be a
hill at six weeks sight, so as to allow time to sell
the Oil.
Three Agents, viz.— Hull, Italy, and Hamburg,
for purchase and sale of common Whale and Olive
Oils.
In all eight partners, three agents, and four clerks!
coopers, apprentices, porters, &c.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.
Ist. —When I reappeared on the Oil Market, I determined
not to ask the shipowners for their business, until I
might be able to take a respectable share of the trade
at once; by that means I have avoided opposition,
which now cannot shew its teeth. Up to this time, I
have occupied myself rather in extensive preparations
of the fallow land, than in reaping any petty harvest;
but I am now ready to go to work, and, in the most
friendly manner, I shall dispute every inch of
ground, which the flattering assurances of support
that I have received, will enable me to secure.


2d. —That such an association must succeed is evident, as it
will enable any person amongst the dealers to be absent
from the market without the slightest prejudice to his
interest; for such a body could always buy better than
individuals. Speculators could find an immediate
market for any amount of property, and it would be
10s. per tun in favour of any old house, to have the
whole strength of such a body retained in its favour.
3d.—Their integrity and solvency would be past all question.
4th.—ln point of talent it will comprehend the most able men,
selected from the old and new brokers ; men bred to
business —whose attention nothing can escape ; whose
information nothing can deceive; whose vigilance and
observation will never sleep.
sth.—lts support and its resources will enable the firm to take
a liberal and generous line of conduct as regards single
brokers, as the vast foreign transactions will prevent
any desire to scrape the London business too clean.
I find that a broker’s business is almost always increased,
as regards any one article, by dealing in many more ;
thus, if he take the trouble to observe, he will find that
the opportunity for making a sale of sperm oil on any
particular occasion, was introduced by an actual sale or
treaty about some other article. And so on as regards
other things, and business is lost in the exact “ vice
versa” of this:—Suppose that I have the almost ex-
clusive business of any particular house in sperm oil, I
find that the moment of their withholding their sperm
oil orders from me, has been some occasion of a treaty
with some other broker for linseed or olive oil.
Where six persons are operating together, it is calculated
that they can do as much as 36 individuals not acting
in concert, because each person can give as much as-
sistance to any other, as if he had nothing to do him


self: the same interview with any buyer answers for all
purposes ; a single individual cannot be everywhere at
once, and the very circumstance of going about some-
thing which may not be accomplished, often prevents
him from doing what might have been achieved. Where
a body of men unite, their exertions are multiplied in
such a business: thus, the assistance which B lends to A
will double A’s power without diminishing the exertions
of B, which are doubled by the assistance afforded by A.
To make the matter clear I will shew it in letters and
figures, thus : A added to B added to C, &c. —
S P ermoil A+B+C+D+E+F I th ™ ° e f qu t^ o e . f ; | 6
Common do., &c. B+C+D+E+F+A 6
Seed ditto, Sac.,, 6
Olive ditto, &c.. D+E+F+A+B+C 0
Shipping, &c. .. E+F+A+B+C+D 6
General business F+A+B+C+D+E 6
Six men employed thus can do the work of 30
The foregoing is the scheme which was re-
commended to me, and the observations which I
subjoined at the time; but there is one part to
which I strongly objected, and that is, the Sydney
branch. I feared that it might injure the interest
of my friends here, who import oil from the
colony, and therefore I am opposed to that part
of the plan. With or without such an association,
unless I am very much deceived by those who
have canvassed for me, and by the personal assu-
rances of buyers and sellers, I am secure of a
larger portion of the sperm oil trade, than that of
any individual broker of the present day. Allow
D


me to present my friends, the other B.’s, with a
pinch of that!—They won’t take it!—very well!
I shall shut the box and put it in my pocket.
But seriously I protest against the absurd notion
that such a firm would at all tend to diminish the
patronage of my friends at Blackfriars, and I
hope they will believe me when I say that I en-
tertain the greatest respect for them ; and if any
broker thinks that he is more friendly disposed
to their interest than I am, perhaps he may be
mistaken ; my prejudice in their favour is not
founded on any private hopes or fears, but on
certain facts which have come to my knowledge,
which their delicacy has concealed from the
public ear: what think you of their having-
given away about £IO,OOO, to satisfy a mere
point of honour, without the slightest legal claim.
I cannot spare space in my present number to
relate the story, but it will appear when the press
of business-matter has a little subsided. lam
bound to acknowledge that they are the first
general oil merchants in the world ! I say gene-
ral oil-merchants, because there are places, as
London, for instance, where they yield to others,
and the dominion of sperm oil is irrevocably
fixed at Newington Butts. L. and B. have
gained it in competition with the united efforts,
tact, talent, and resources of the “ old trade,”
who were banded against them. If I feel pleased
with their triumph, it is no unfriendly disposition


towards the old nobility; but I cannot help ad-
miring the moderation with which the Newing-
ton people seem to exercise their power. The
young gentlemen of the oil trade may learn from
them how to be rich without pride, and from me
how to be proud without riches ; they are,
amongst the dealers in sperm oil, what Epgland
is in the scale of nations. Insulated and remote
as they are, by their moral energy they give tone
to the councils of all the rest. On the great
continent of Thames-street, Portugal, the ancient
ally of England, is aptly represented by Paul’s
Wharf. These potentates seem to have entered
into an alliance offensive and defensive, an alli-
ance that can meet the world in arms. Although
the heroes at Newington could do without any
assistance, yet I am glad to see them allied with
a good hearty fellow, whose exertions have al-
ways been favourable to his colleagues. An
anecdote is told of him, which I shall relate, in
order to ascertain its correctness, for which I
cannot , vouch. “On his paternal estate,” it is
said that “ two Hills were situated, one on each
side of the house. They had never attracted
much notice, until he took it into his head to
have them made into mountains; but now the
old family mansion is barely visible between
them. Such is their stupendous height that
their green tops are almost unapproachable by
man. But although the sides are very steep, the


summit of each is a perfect flat. About forty
years ago an attempt at cultivation was made,
but it failed in consequence of the extreme shal-
lowness of the soil. They will continue to at-
tract the admiration of all amateurs of the pic-
turesque ; but they are wholly inapplicable to
any purpose of utility.”
Whenever I meet with any of the soi-disant
great, I am reminded of the following lines,
which may serve as a moral to the foregoing
fable.
“ Were I as tall to reach the pole.
Or grasp the ocean with my span,
I must be measured by my soul;
The mind’s the standard of the man.”
Now, admitting that my friends in William
Street are to be considered the head of the trade,
are no other houses entitled to any consideration ?
When I speak of the oil trade as a body, 1 do
not mean to insinuate that the great house at
Blackfriars ever wanted the support of any indivi-
dual to accomplish any object they might have in
view; their talent and their resources have always
been sufficient. The secret of their diplomacy
was this : they agreed to an alliance with half-a-
dozen houses, for the purpose of having the pa-
tronage of six houses instead of one in their hands,
whose business they gave to the brokers, who,
perhaps, never failed to shew their gratitude
when a pocket order might put it in their power.


I never once offered a cargo to poor old Raggett,
without being aware that he must ask leave be-
fore it could be bought. I admit that Messrs.
Enderby and another or two always had autho-
rity. But the Court never did abuse the autho-
rity with which they were invested ; the brokers,
into whose nostrils they have breathed the breath
of commercial life, have been most respectable
and efficient functionaries. I will undertake to
say, that if the other houses had shared in the
power of such appointments, they could not have
produced a more honourable set of men than
those to whom I allude. I will defy any person
to give more universal satisfaction, in the very
difficult duties of a broker, than their relation
and their prime minister have done. I cannot
say much about the mercantile efficiency of Lin-
thorne ; but he always reflected some degree of
credit on his friends and patrons, from the cir-
cumstance of his being a man of rank. He was
certainly the only man of quality that has ap-
peared as an oil broker. But taking it for granted
that the distinguished firm at William Street are
entitled to take the lead in trade matters, are Grace-
church Street and St. John Street, the Borough
and Whitechapel, to be counted as nothing? Will
you give no voice to the wealthy spermaceti
refiners ?
“ Whose mystic art can strike the flakey dirt,
And turn it into gold.”


Start not, ye chemists! it turns white at first,
“pallidus ira,” at the action of the fire; chastely,
beautifully white as the flower of the orange tree;
then, in a month, yellow as its fruit. In passing
through their books it may deposit a little dross,
but the working of a mine is a fool to this; for
the ore itself, which is obtained with more trou-
ble, cannot be melted down with more certain
gain.
In passing my opinion on the gigantic influence
of our great oil chiefs, I could not help ex-
pressing the same sentiments which animated
my breast at the time when the Reform Bill was
threatened with opposition on the part of the
House of Lords, who were humbly petitioned by
the whole people not to stop its progress. I wrote
a, short poem on the subject, from which I will
endeavour to give you a stanza from memory,
as the manuscript is now in the possession of
Lord Brougham.
“ Proud millions bend the knee
To a few poor trembling lords,
And pray they may be free;
But how ill the fact accords
With the common sense of men that our land
Should be doomed to bend her knees
To so few such men as these,
That, whenever she may please,
She can disband.”
Blyth.


There being an appeal in some instances from
the “ fiat” of a king to the original majesty of
the people, I determined, as a “ dernier ressort,”
to lay the matter of the proposed broker-firm
before ray fellow-subjects; and those who ap-
prove of the measure will oblige me by naming
any respectable person capable of taking any
particular branch, that he may stand as a can-'
didate in case of its being determined to accom-
plish the object in view. I can tell you that,
unless some means are taken to save the London
Oil Trade, it will very soon slip through our
fingers. The ship-owners may bargain with the
colonists to sell their whaling stores ; the oil-
merchants may dispose of their cisterns, pumps,
cans, and bags to their Liverpool neighbours ;
and the brokers may give away their desks and
stools to any person who may think it worth
while to accept such stock in trade. Something
must be done; and the grand point will be to
conduct the revolution without moneyshed (if
I may use the word). So poor is my opinion
of the trade, that I have pretty well determined
to bring up all my sons to anything in preference.
If to be rich means to have the power of
gratifying all our wants, I, having very few
wants, am perhaps as rich as most of you; but,
independent as I am of all parties, I shall
patiently seek to advance the general interests


of the trade. I shall court with humility the
kindness of my friends, and as for my enemies,
they are very few; I beg leave to address them
in the words of the immortal Milton,
“ My voice, 0 peers of hell, is still for open war.”
Ship-owners, oil-merchants, brokers, and coopers,
I am, yours, very faithfully,
THOMAS BLYTH, JUN.
marchant, printer, ingram-coort, fen church-street.
