

THE
Land-Grant Bill
OF 1892,
AND
LAND-GRANT RAILWAYS.
BY A QUEENSLANDER.
BRISBANE:
PRINTED BY A. J. ROSS & CO., 26 QUEEN STREET.
1892.


THE
Land-Grant Bill
OF 1892,
AND
LAND-GRANT RAILWAYS.
BY A QUEENSLANDER.
BRISBANE:
PRINTED BY A. J. ROSS & CO.. 26 QUEEN STREET.
1892


INDEX.
Preface .... ... .... .... 1
General Remarks .... .... .... 2
Conditions Suggested in the Interest of the State §
The Bill Generally ... .... .... 7
The Bill in Detail and Comments on the Glauses 11
Safeguards Omitted Contained in Other Acts .... 36
A Gonsise History of Land-Grant Projects and
Bills
1. —ln Queensland .... ... 41
2. —ln the Other Colonies .... 44
Why American Land-Grant Eaihvays succeeded 51


THE LAND-GRANT BILL OF 1892,
AND
LAND-GRANT RAILWAYS.
PREFACE.
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith is, and always has been, an enthusiast
about Land-Grant Eailways. Like most enthusiasts, we have
proof that he thoroughly believes in his hobby, and feels sure
that Land-Grant Railways, on almost any terms, will increase the
prosperity of the Colony; he never hesitated in advocating
Railway construction by Land-Grants, subsidies or payments.
Like all enthusiasts, he requires a brake put on to prevent grave
errors and future trouble, which can and may arise through
bad legislation, permitted to secure a temporary relief in a time
of depression.
■Sir Samuel Griffith was looked upon as the brake, but at
one time he blocked the wheels of the stage-coach from pro-
gressing at all, instead of putting on the brake ; now he has
gone over to the enemy, and proposes to tdke away the only
brake we had in previous legislation, by allowing syndicates
and Ministers (under his Bill) to make agreements dealing with
millions of acres of land at any price they may arrange, for
railways by unspecified routes, and without any limit as to
cost (so far as Parliament is concerned), without requiring
the approval of Parliament to the agreements.
This position of affairs has caused me to give the question
careful consideration, and to try, however imperfectly, to place
before members and the public the real nature of the proposed
Land-Grant Railway Bill of 1892 ; to point out the omission of
many important provisions required toprotectthe public interests;
and to point out what we have to guard against from the expe-
rience of our Colony and of other colonies and countries in
connection with the Land-Grant Railway system.
If the trouble I have taken does not help to cause the
amendments I hope to see made in the present Bill, I feel sure
it will be of use in future, when Parliament will assert the
right to approve or reject agreements between Land-Grant
Syndicates and Ministers, or to Ministers who, if the Bill
passes, will have the responsibility of making agreements with
Syndicates.
CHAS. POWERS.


GENERAL REMARKS IN EXPLANATION.
The Land-Grant Railway Bill of 1892 is one certain to affect
our Colony, “ for better or for worse,” to a far greater extent
-than any bill proposed in the present Parliament, and yet it has
not been subjected to any criticism worth mentioning in the
Brisbane or Country Press. This is not because the proposal
is not a fair subject for criticism, or because the Bill, as drawn,
protects the interest of the general public. The want of
criticism can, I think, be attributed to two causes : I.—ln Bris-
bane, those controlling the Press support the present Queen-street
Ministry, and almost any proposal from the Government is
accepted, and criticism or opposition is generally looked upon
as the outcome of anarchy, communism, or at least of socialism.
■(The opposition candidate at Bulimba had indignantly to deny
any sympathy with anarchy or communism. He was directly
•charged with advocating both, and yet all he advocated Sir
Samuel Griffith worked ’ hard for until the Coalition
Government was formed). 2.—ln the country, criticism has, I
Tear, been disarmed by the Jalse telegrams appearing in the
■Country Press, as sent from Brisbane, stating that any contract
made by the Government under the Bill approved of
by Parliament before it Is binding.
Tins is not so: the contract need not be approved of by
Parliament, but jTT is binding if not disapproved of by address
within 14 days—a very different thing ; and this address, the
Government, Who make the contract, and who have the control
■of the.business paper, will take care is not passed within the
14 days.
This attempt to take control out of the hands of the re-
presentatives of the people will be referred to later on, but the
importance of making it absolutely necessary to get the
approval of Parliament will be best seen after some of the pro-
visions are referred to and explained and attention drawn to the
many serious omissions from the Bill.
The Transcontinental Railway Agreement of 1883 (Kim-
ber’s) was denounced by the gentleman who brings forward this
Bill in no measured terms ; but “ the devil you know is better
than the devil you don’t know.” We did know what the Syn-
dicate were to get under that agreement, and it had to be ap-
proved of by Parliament; under this Bill an infinitely worse agree-
ment can be made, and it can be forced on the country because it
need not be approved of hv Parliament. 48,000 acre blocks with
five-mile frontages could be granted under the'Transcontinental
agreement; blocks of 64,000 acres each with frontages


to the railway can be granted under this Bill. Under that?
agreement 10,000 acres per TQile were to be given : under
this, 40,000 acres per mile can he given.
Further comparisons will be made later on.
The principle provisions of the present Bill will also be
referred to and commented upon, for we must take this Bill as
a general one, under which rajlwaysjmay be made in any part
ot the Colony where Drown landsare available,, and int Fat
light it should be For that reason no definite price
can be fixed on the lands to be granted, and no area can he fixed
per mile, but that only,makes it the more necessary to insist
on the right of Parliament to approve of the contracts before
they are binding.
References are made later on to the sections in the Queens*
land Land-Grant Act of 1880, and to the sections in the New
Zealand Land-Grant Act of 1881, bearing on the matters dealt
with in. the Bill. Persual of those Acts will show how well the
interests of the people have been preserved in comparison
with the Bill now before the House.
This will be better seen by reference to the list of
omissions (from this Bill), of provisions contained in the Acts
mentioned, to protect the interests of the public. (See chapter
“ Safeguards Omitted.”
References are also made, when the Bill in detail is dealt
with, to Hansard of 1880, when the Land-Grant Railway Act of
1880 was fairly discussed and passed, so that the arguments
for and against the provisions of that Act can be at once re-
ferred to.
A short statement of what has already been attempted in
this Colony and done elsewhere, under the Land-Grant system,
will be given later on. With the experience we have had, and
the experience of the other Colonies and of other countries, an
Act should be framed to at least protect us from the worst evils
that are connected with the system, when we try whether
Land-Grant railways will develop the Colony—and the far
West in particular—in the way enthusiasts predict.
The one objection, and only one, to fixing conditions isr
Syndicates want-a good thing to induce them to build a line ;
we won’t build ourselves, or cannot if we would. Better
be without the lines than let them be constructed without fair
protection to public interest, present and future, and especially
if the agreements are to be so one-sided, that Syndicates and
Ministers fear an adverse vote if Parliament has to approve of
them before they can be binding on the country.
The adjournment for eight weeks gave ample time to allow
the public to form some idea of the measure it is intended this
moribund Parliament should pass, but the Press is almost
silent, and I fear the constituencies will not have time to realize


the evil effect some of the provisions of the Bill will have on
the country before the House meets and passes it, prepared,
as I believe the members are, to pass almost any legislation in
the present panic likely in any way to counteract the depression
caused by the previous mismanagement, overborrowing, and
bad legislation of the past.
I do not propose to deal with three objections that can of
course be raised to the measure namely:
1. That both leaders are pledged to the country against
Hand-Grant Railways : Because they treat such pledges with
indifference, and indeed argued on the Polynesian Bill that it
would be cowardly not to pass a measure they believed would
be for the benefit of the Colony, without submitting it to the
country, although distinctly pledged against it at their election.
This is a new political moral code that will cause untold
mischief in the future, and the example, I fear, will be adopted
later on in an unexpected and unpleasant way for those who
now approve of the breaking of a man’s pledge to his constit-
uents and his country. A man who pledges himself to his
constituents on any question must accept the position of a
delegate or a traitor. Or,
2. That the constituences have declared emphatically
against Land-Grant Railways : Because such a declaration the
majority in the present House do not think fatal (by reason of
altered circumstances, forsooth), judging by the last and present
session. Or,
3. That all Land-Grant Railways are opposed to the best
interests of the people : Because the members of the present
Parliament are prepared to pass a Bill authorising the con-
struction of Land-Grant Railways. Members have, at present,
cither to submit to the Government continuing to sell land in
large areas to the highest bidder, absentees or residents,
syndicates or millionaires, for cash, or give the land, if we can,
on reasonable terms for railways to aid settlement. We have,
however, a very good chance of parting with large areas of land
for useless railways under Land-Grant Railway contracts,
and also of checking settlement and mining for many years to
come, under such a Bill as the present one.
I believe the State should make and work all the railways,
but I propose to deal with the Bill, believing that the present
time the Colony would, if polled, approve of a proposal to build
a line or lines of railway by payments in grants of land, instead
of cash, subject to reasonable conditions and safeguards.


I would suggest that the following
Conditions ob Limits should be contained in any General Act
AUTHORISING PROVISIONAL AGREEMENTS TO BE MADE FOR THE
Construction of Railways under the Land-Grant System.
1. —The agreements between the Syndicate and the Ministry
should be approved of by Parliament before they are binding on
the Country.
2. —Parliament should approve of the route of the railway.
B.—The guage of the railway should be 3ft. Gin. to allow
Government plant to run on it, and the line should be as
good as the present Government lines.
4. —Parliament should know what lands are to be given to
the Syndicate for building the railway, and be asked to approve of
the grants.
5. —Parliament should know and approve of the value at
which the Syndicate would get the lands.
6. —The country should not have to pay twice for the
railway.
*7T—Plans of the permanent survey of the railway, showing
the route, stations, roads closed, roads altered, crossings, water-
courses diverted, &c., should be submitted to Parliament for
approval. (Plans of all Government lines have to be approved
of).
8. —The right to mines and minerals and the right to work
them on payment of surface value damage should be reserved in
the grants to the Syndicate.
9. —Main travelling stock routes throughout the colony
should be preserved with grazing rights half a mile each side of the
road, at present allowed through the indefeasable leases of
squatters, now called pastoralists.
10. —The Country should own alternate blocks in the town-
ships—along the line—and at the ports (if any).
11. —Parliament should fix a maximum cost for all railways,
so far as the subsidy is concerned, and know and approve of the
estimated cost in land of each railway before consenting to any
agreement.
12. —The Country should not be liable to be forced to buy
the railway by a cash payment in addition to the grants of land.
18. —Parliament should decide what portion of the line the
Syndicate would be compelled to make before any grant was
issued to the Syndicate.
14.—A1l wages of and claims against the Syndi-
cate Company for compensation money for resumptions, should be
paid before any land is granted in payment of the railway.


15. —The railways should be constructed by persons of
European descent, and not by Indian CoolieSj Chinamen, or any
other colored labour. '
16. —The lands to be granted to the Syndicate should not be
specially exempted from taxation for many years.
17. —The lands retained by the Crown should not be locked
up for a number of years to enable the Syndicate to part with
theirs without competition, and thus force any settlement there
may be on to the Syndicate lands.
18. —The Lands-Grant Railways should be connected with
Government lines; that is, to be extensions, ngt new_ lines
to compete with .Government lines, and to form new ports,
requiring unlimited Government expenditure later on to make
them available for the Syndicate.
19. —Some limit should be placed on the amount to be paid
to the Syndicate if by any chance a contract is set aside by
Parliament.
20. —Lands of the Syndicate used for pastoral purposes or
unoccupied should be let to any settler who is prepared to use
them for agriculture or dairying, for any term not exceeding seven
years, at a rent and on conditions to be agreed upon or fixed by the
Land Board in case of a disagreement. (If the British Parliament
make Irish landlords let land at rents lower than they ask, why
cannot we in this colony interfere with freedom of contract and
make Land Grant Syndicate landlords let their lands at reason-
able rentals ? One Darling Downs experience should suffice).
21. —Ministers, Members of Parliament, Railway Com-
missioners, Members of Land Board and their wives and families,
and trustees for them, should be debarred by the Act from being
directly or indirectly interested in any Syndicate agreeing with a
Ministry to build a line of railway on the Land-Grant princi-
ple— *
In the Bill before the House none of these twenty-one conditions
arc provided for.
If it is intended that all Syndicates are to be subject to these
general principles, why not let them know r it by the Act now
before the House. These conditions do not limit the area of land
required to encourage the Syndicates to build the lines, or at-
tempt to fix a price on the lands to be given to them, because
• Observer , 23rd May, 1892 :—Mr. Edgar, a Liberal Member of the
Dominion House of Commons, intends to bring forward a proposal to
impeach Sir A. P. Caron, the Postmaster-General. He charges him with
haring received for election purposes sums of money from subsidies granted
by Parliament to different railways in Quebec, and in one case, that of the
Lake St. John’s Rai.way, Mr. Edgar states that Sir A. P. Caron was a
member, of the construction company, which received a liberal subsidy
from the Dominion Government. Sir A. P. Caron says he is prepared to meet
the charges, and that he has an effective reply.
6


this must depend on the position and quality of the lands, but
the conditions mentioned should certainly be set out in any
general Act authorising any Ministry to arrange for construc-
tion of railways under the Land- Grant System.
If any railway Syndicate require a waiver of any of these
conditions let it be done by a special Act, as in New Zealand
and Tasmania.
THE BIEL GENERALLY.
I believe many persons will be interested in knowing what
the provisions of the present Bill are; how the system would
be likely to affect their particular districts, and whether the Bill
would assist at all to secure the construction of railways so
long asked for by the people of the different agricultural dis-
tricts. It may be as well stated here that under the Bill no
railway can be made except when Crown Lands are available
for the Syndicate adjacent to the line. This bars all railway
construction in settled agricultural districts by land grants,
and even if this Bill passes in the present shape these extensions
will have to be made by Government loans. This is not alto-
gether to be regretted —if this Bill passes.
I find the Bill appears to have been taken from a New
Zealand Act passed in 1881 (after the reign of Vogelism brought
that colony to as low state as our colony has been brought
by following a similar policy), and from the Queensland Rail-
way Companies Preliminary Act of 1880, since repealed ; but I
also find that the scissors have been used to cut out nearly all
the clauses in those Acts for the protection of the people, while
the interests of the Syndicate have been more than reasonably
preserved.
This statement is a strong one, but I intend to prove it by
referring to the number of the clauses in Queensland and New
Zealand Acts, opposite each of the clauses I refer to in this
Bill, and then to enumerate at the end omissions of some of
the clauses contained in both those Acts, which clauses to my
mind should be included in the interests of the people. A
7


comparison of the clauses of this Bill with the old Queensland
Act, and the New Zealand Act will prove conclusively that
the present Bill is the worst part of the old Queensland and
New Zealand Acts, except from a Syndicate’s point of view.
Another extraordinary fact about the Bill is that no report
to Parliament is to be submitted from the Railway Commis-
sioners or the Land Board about the proposals received from any
Syndicate.
No report is required for the use of the Minister or the
Governor-in-Council from the Land Board or Railway Commis-
sioners, and yet the Ministry have to select the land, lot by lot,
and adopt the route chosen by the Syndicate for the railway.
Parliament should provide not only that the Minister should
be required to obtain reports from the Land Board, the Railway
Commissioners, and the Land Commissioners for the districts through
which the line is to pass, but also that these reports shall be sub-
mitted with the contract to Parliament, for the Syndicates will
only look to their own interests, and may mislead the Minister,
if they don’t bribe him ; the more persons who act as a check
on such attempts, the better for the Minister and the country.
The Bill will enable Syndicates to build railways between
any two places. Parliament declares a line should be built, or
any section of that line, but by any route of the Syndicate
decide upon with the consent of the Ministry (but not with the
approval of Parliament).
Parliament is not to be placed in the position of even
knowing what blocks of land the Syndicate are to get, the
land is not to be surveyed until after Parliament has had four-
teen days to look at the contract, and the blocks of land
to be given are really decided upon after the line is constructed,
Syndicate and Minister selecting alternately. The Syndicate
to have the first choice in the way explained later on, and the
blocks need not be alternate blocks as in the Transcontinental
Railway proposal.
Along the route, selected by the Syndicate, and approved of
by the Ministry, the Government will reserve an area of land
equal in value to at least twice the estimated cost of the line.
No maximum is put as to the cost of a line. (New Zealand
fixes £SOOO per mile as the maximum).
The Syndicate is to get in land at least the cost of the line*
and in some cases twice the cost. (New Zealand Act of 1881
allows a maximum of 30 per cent only, or 6s. for every £ spent).
No minimum value is fixed for the land, which will be
valued at the market price (?) by the Ministry. What the
market price of land, unsaleable at present is, it will be hard to
say, but some Ministers would value it at about 2s. 6d. per
acre.


Lands are to be reserved, and the Minister and the Syndicate
enter into a contract by which the Syndicate, if they build the
railway, are to get certain lands not defined, except that they must
be somewhere in the area reserved by the Government.
If the line is to be the property of the Government when con-
structed, lands are to be granted of a value not exceeding the cost.
If the Government retain the right to buy the line, after 10
years, lands of a value not exceeding the cost of the line are to
be granted when it is constructed, and the railway is to be
paid for again in cash; or remain the property of the Syndicate
although paid for in the land by the State.
If the Syndicate say they intend to keep the railway for any
fixed period, not exceeding 50 years, they get anything the
Minister fixes up to twice the cost of the line (Sec. 7) in land at
market value, and the line becomes the property of the country
after the Company have had fifty years’ use of it (if they require
it for that time). Two-thirds of the cost may be given in land
as soon as the line is made, equal to £1 6s. Bd. for every £
spent, and the third of the lands are locked up (because liable
to forfeiture) in fifty years’ leases, pending compliance with
conditions about working the line.
When the line is finished, or any section of it, the Syndicate
and the Minister sit down and divide the lands reserved along
the route. The Syndicate takes first choice of a block in the re-
served area, then the Minister takes one for the Crown, and so on
(alternately choosing, but not necessarily in alternate blocks),
until the cost of the railway, or the £2 per £ as the case may
be, has been selected by the Syndicate. Under conditions (No.
1, clause 24) Syndicate and Minister have a second turn at the
lands selected by the Syndicate to decide which of the blocks
the Minister will retain for 50 years to secure the working
of the line. It is intended I suppose to let the
Syndicate take two blocks, and the Minister one alternately, in
this second shuffle of land in small blocks of 64,000 acres each.
In nine cases out of ten, the Syndicate will get the best of it;
and what a chance for some of our Canadian friends to come
over and induce future Ministers to select the land that the
Syndicate do not want.
This selection of land having been carried out, say for the
first section, it appears the Syndicate can discontinue the line,
and hold both the land and the section, and if the good land is
in the first section, and bad land further on, it is fairly certain
they wont go on, and just as certain pressure will be brought to
bear on the Government to continue the railway, letting the in-
termediate section be held by a Syndicate, possibly for 50 years.
9


Mines and minerals are not preserved to the State, and the
Syndicate can therefore secure and lock up the valuable
mining lands within from 15 to 100 miles of the proposed Land-
Grant Railway Lines.
To show that this is a fair statement of what the Bill
really is, I would now refer to the principal provisions in
detail, and it will be apparent to all that the earnest desire of
the Government—to induce capitalists to come here to build
Land-Grant Railways--has caused them to approve of a measure
that is principally in the interests of the Syndicate, and
one apparently expressly drawn to avoid giving Parliament
information, and to avoid the necessity of getting the approval
of Parliament to any contract with any Land-Grant Syndicate
for fear it would be opposed; but such a course necessarily opens
way for gross frauds, similar to to those that have been perpe-
trated elsewhere in connection with Land-Grant Railways.
The history of Canada, from the time Sir John Mac
Donald’s Ministry was thrown out of office in November, 1873
(because some of the members of the Federal Ministry had been
bribed by Land-Grant Syndicates), up to the present day, when
prosecution for bribery by Land-Grant Syndicates of men in
high places in Canada are now proceeding, shows us conclusively
'we cannot be too careful in guarding future Ministers from possi-
bility of being bribed or even suspected.
By our Act we are leaving every evenue open for Jnibery,
In “Canada,” by Stewart, junior, page 236, we find the
following:—
“The head and front of their offending (Sir John Mac
Donald’s Ministry), was their acceptance of money from the
hands of a man who was a Government contractor.
On page 187: One thing was quite clear. Several members
of the Government had accepted large sums of money from a
public contractor, and had used this money in corrupting the
constituencies of Canada,” &c.
10


THE BILL IN DETAIL.
All important Clauses referred to I propose to give as
printed, so that no one can be misled by any error in my reading
of them.
•n.z.i. q.4i. Clause 1. —The Title of the Bill.
H. 1085.
vz 2. Clause 2. — Note “Crown Lands” in the Act of
Q. i. 1880 was declared not to include lands situated within
k. loss, limits of any proclaimed gold-field. “ The construc-
tion ”by this Bill includes “maintenance and working. ” This
would appear to make the country liable by agreeing to pay for
the cost of construction of any railway, to pay also for “ working and
maintenance. ” A very indefinite and unlimited liability,
especially as the “ Railway ” includes the engines, plant, rolling
stock, etc.
Clause 3. —Land Subsidy for Railway Construction, —When-
o'z'&'s ever le construction of a line of railway between specified
H. 108 s! termini, with or without the definition of a specified route, has
been approved by a resolution" of both Houses of Parliament,
the Minister, with the sanction of the Governor-in-Council, and subject to
the conditions prescribed by this Act, may make a contract with a Company
for the construction of such railway.
This does not say that Parliament must first approve of the
construction of a line by Land-Grant Subsidies, between two
specified places, but presuming it is so meant, the route need not
he specified by Parliament.
This is the first serious, innovation. Parliament need not
specify the route of a railway to be paid for by the State, but the
Syndicate who are to make it, and be paid for it, are to be
allowed really to fix the route with the consent of the Ministry.
' ‘ ‘ Unspecified routes. ’ ’ —This was deemed unconstitutional when
the great stonewalling of 1889 was carried on under the leadership
of Sir Samuel Griffith against the £1,000,000 Loan for Rail-
ways, and continued after the Ministry declared the termini of
the different lines, but could not specify the route, because the
surveys had not been made.
One great objection to the Transcontinental proposal was
that the route of the Syndicate missed all the Government town-
ships and centres of population. This w r as, of course, to cause
the inland towns to be formed on the Syndicate Railway. Such an
open attempt should make the Government insist on fixing the route,
and in submitting the specified route with the plans and speci-
fications in every case to Parliament (as in the old Queensland Act).
* N.Z. means The New Zealand Act of 1881.
Q. „ The Queensland Preliminary Act of 1880.
H. „ The Queensland Hansard of 1880.


There can be no doubt that the Government should
Survey the line. The Syndicate will yo for a large area of land, and
the pick of the lands, therefore the longer the line, so long as it
secures the best land, the better for the Syndicate, and the worse for the
country.
N z Clause 4.-—The contract may provide for the construction
Q.2 3.21&34- of a railway on any of the following conditions: 1—On the
H.lbsi, 1105, condition that the railway shall be and remain the property
& 1155. 0 f the Company for a fixed period not exceeding fifty years,
and shall then become the property of the Crown ; 2—On the condition that
the railway shall become the property of the Crown as soon as it constructed;
3.—On the condition that the railway shall be and remain the property of
the Company subject to a right of purchase by the Crown within a time,
and upon terms to be defined by the contract.
Clauses 7, 22, and 24 should be read with this clause.
To those of us who consider ;
1 — That the State should hold the railways :
2 — That they should be paid for once only ; and
8—That the State will be forced into buying the Syndicate
Railways in any case ;
condition number 2 is the only one that should be considered
at all.
The objections to numbers 1 and 3 can be best shown in
the comments on clauses 7 and 24, dealing with the payments
in land to be made under the different conditions referred to in
this clause, and the mode of dealing with such lands when the
lines or sections are constructed.
Clause 5.—The contract (between the Syndicate and the
CjT*2X Minister) may provide that the Company shall receive by way
H. 1105. of payment a subsidy for the construction of the railway grants
in fee simple of Crown Lands, of a value to be specified in the
contract.
This is another innovation enabling the Minister to enter
into a contract to give undefined lands, of a total fixed value,
but without fixing the separate values of the different blocks,
because no one knows exactly where they will be, or the value at
the time the contract is signed, or when the contract is formally
laid upon the table of the House.
Clause 6.—When the Governor in Council thinks it
See N.z. 94. d es i ra ble that a railway should be constructed, and that Crown
Xands should he granted by way of subsidy for its construction, he may, by
proclamation, reserve and set apart for the purpose of the subsidy a
sufficient area of Crown Lands adjacent to the line of the proposed railway
to provide for the land so to be granted, and also to provide for the alternate
•choice directed by this Act. If practicable the reservation shall be of lands
on both sides of the line of the proposed railway, and as nearly as may be
in equal areas on each side, but if there is not any land, or if there is not
sufficient land of a suitable character on either side, the whole may be
reserved on one side.
12


It should be when Parliament (not the Governor-in-Council)
thinks it desirable that Crown Lands should be granted by way
of subsidy for the construction of any line the reservation should
be made.
The clause mentions lands adjacent to the line, but this
reservation will necessarily include all lands within a very long
■distance of the line. Take, for example, the proposed Transcon-
tinental Eailway Line. Valuing the lands at 2s. 6d. per acre,
and the cost £5,000 per mile, this would allow 40,000 acres per
mile. The lands, therefore, to be reserved under this clause
would be at least twice 40,000 acres per mile, namely, 80,000
acres, one block being for the Syndicate, and one for the Govern-
ment ; the Syndicate taking two miles of land for each mile of
line constructed. Then, since 040 acres is a square mile, the
lands (80,000 acres per mile), if reserved on one side only (as pro-
vided in the clause) would include all lands within 125 miles on
that side, or within 250 miles if on condition No. 1, where twice
the cost is allowed ; the Syndicates taking 125 miles deep—how-
ever great the frontage—in, blocks separated every ten miles.
If both sides of the line are reserved, the lands G2J miles each
side, (or 125 miles each side under condition No. 1,) would have
to be reserved. Ten miles frontage by 125 miles deep will give the
Syndicate 800,000 acres of land. The fact of the line running
through a Pastoral Leasehold for miles, and therefore through
lands, not available, would surely make the reservation even
deeper to allow the area to be made up when they reached avail-
able Crown Lands.
It may be stated that 2s. 6d. per acre is an absurdly low
value to place on any lands; but reference to previous debates
will show that it is not. In the discussion on the Transcontin-
ental Eailway Bill, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith insisted that 10,000
acres per mile could only be looked upon as a subsidy ; that the
lands were not worth anything like 10s. an acre. Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith said ; “ I put it to yourself, sir, taking the offer made
by Mr. Tyson (ss. an acre for the pick of 1,000,000 acres),
is not that land grossly over-estimated when it is put down at
half-a-crown an acre.”— Hansard p. 72 of ’B3. It was also pointed
out that the Syndicate valued a great portion of the lands at six-
pence per acre. Sir Samuel Griffith, in discussing the Warrego
Eailway Bill, spoke of the lands along that line, taking them
as worth ss. an acre (p. 858). Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, in the
■debate on the Warrego Eailway Bill in 1882, insisted that the
value of a great portion of the lands between Charleville and the
Terminus was not worth 2s. 6d. per acre (p. 852).
Taking the route of the last proposed Transcontinental
Eailway, and marking off even 50 miles on each side of that
line in 64,000 acre blocks, will show whether it will not greatly
13


interfere with the future development of mining, agricultural, and
pastoral pursuits.
Evenat Ss.anacre, under clause 7, condition No. 1 (twice the cost),
800 miles of a Transcontinental Line, costing £SOOO a mile, will
mean 32,000,000 acres for the Syndicate; under condition No. 2,
16,000,000 acres ; under condition No. 3, 16,000,000 acres, and
£4,000,000. At 2s. 6d. per acre, these areas have to be simply
doubled .
Clause 7.—The area of land that may be granted to a
fee NZ Act. company by way of subsidy for the construction of a railway
102, shall be determined a? follows : —The value of the land
fixed per raile
H. UOS. * the Governor-in-Council, and shall be estimated at the fair
market value of the land immediately before the making of
the contract and without regard to any prospective value that may be given
to the land by reason of the construction of the proposed railway. The
value of the land that may be granted to the company shall be proportional
to the actual cost of construction of the Railway and shall not exceed the
proportions following : —(1) If the railway is to become the property of the
Crown at the expiration of a fixed period, a sum equal to twice the cost of
construction; (2) If tbe railway is to become the property of the Crown as
soon as it is constructed, or if the railway is to remain the property of the
company subject to a right of purchase by the Crown, a sum equal to
the cost of construction. For the purposes of this section the
maximum cost of construction shall be fixed and defined by the contract
between the Minister and [the company, and the company shall not be
entitled to any larger subsidy if the cost so fixed and defined is in fact
exceeded.
This leaves it in the hands of the Ministry, apparently with-
out the necessity of any report from the Land Board or land com-
missioner for the district, to part with the lands to the Syndicate
at any price they arrange, and Parliament should certainly be
allowed to fix a maximum value.
Some Ministers, and many other people besides Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith, value land let at present low rentals for grazing at
from 2s. to 2s. 6d. per acre, and the Syndicate may be relied
upon to get just as many acres as they can out of the Ministry.
At 2s. Gd. per acre every mile of land grant-railway costing
£SOOO a mile can cost the country:—
Under condition No. 1, 80,000 acres a mile
„ „ No. 2, 40,000 acres a mile
~ ~ No. 8, 40,000 acres a mile and the cost in cash
afterwards in addition.
This area would be reduced by any increase on 2s. Gd. per acre.
The hated Transcontinental Line fixed a maximum area of 10,000
acres per mile. In the Midland Railway Act 1884, the New
Zealand Parliament fixed a maximum of 10s. per acre (sec. 8).
If the railway is constructed on the first condition, the
the Syndicate may be allowed (however short the period fixed;/
14


land of a value equal to twice the cost of construction. It must
be borne in mind that construction includes maintenance and work-
ing": see interpretation clauses This maintenance and working
will assume great proportions when the cost of the line is being
ascertained.
If constructed on conditions No 2 or 3 the Syndicate receive
land of a value equal to the cost of construction. (Clauses 22, 23,
and 24, should be read with this clause).
The maximum cost of the line is to be fixed by the contract,
but, of course, the Syndicate will be on the safe side in fixing
this. Parliament should fix some maximum, for any contract can
be forced on the country by any Ministry.
These conditions want explanation :
I.—lt appears strange that a company who may keep
their railway for fifty years after it is constructed, should get twice
the area of land a company will get, who hands over the line as
soon as it constructed. This is more extraordinary, after looking
at clause 24, where we find it provided that they can get two-thirds
of their land granted as soon as the line is constructed, equal
to £1 6s. Bd. for every £ spent; the balance, one-third leased
for fifty years, subject to forfeiture if the line is not worked.
It therefore appears, that
hnder condition No. 1.
A company, if they say, they will work their line for any period
agreed upon, not exceeding 50 years, can be allowed twice the
cost of the line in land, and obtain two-thirds of the area as
soon as it is constructed, equal to £1 6s. Bd. for every £ spent;
the balance available, if they find it worth there while to work
the line for the time fixed.
Under Condition No. 2,
If a company agrees to hand the line over as soon as it is
constructed, they will only get £1 worth of land for every £
spent. It will only be human nature to say they propose to
work it (under condition No. 1), and thus get the £1 6s. Bd. for
every £ spent, instead of £1 for £l.
Under Condition No. 3.
A company can arrange to get the full cost paid in land, and
require payment again of the full cost in cash, before handing
over the line.
Max O’Rell, in Sydney, referred to John Bull’s plan of
settling new countries. He started with the Bible, and in a
short time the black man had the Bible, and John Bull had the
land. In our case, under condition No. 3, John Bull starts with
15


the railway, gets the land, and keeps the railway too; although
we have the pleasure of paying the full cost of it in land.
Would it not be fairer to make condition No. 1 (if it has to be
agreed to) 80s. for every £ spent ; 10s. for every £ spent
paid in land, as soon as the line is constructed; the
balance £ for every £ spent to be forfeited if the line is aband-
oned, and thus proved useless to the country.
Condition No. 2.—To stand as proposed. On payment in
land ; the line to belong to the state. Condition No. 8 (if
approved of). —To pay 10s. in land for every £ spent, and to
pay for the railway, the value at the time of purchase, taking into
consideration depreciation of plant, permanent way, &c., and
without allowing anything for the goodwill.
g ri v, Clause 8. —This important clause reads ;
N.Z. 96. When a contract has become binding under this Act.
Q2l H 1105 lands reserved for the purpose of the subsidy for the
railway constructed under ihe contract shall be f"rthwith
surveyed, and divided into convenient blocks separated by
roads, and, as nearly as may be of equal value. Such blocks-
shall i e rectangular, except in cases in which it is desirable
in order to secure natural boundaries to make them of another
shape, but where the shape is so varied, a block shill not
have a greater frontage to a watercourse than one-half of its
N.Z. 97. depth. No block shall have a greater frontage to the rail-
one mile, way than ten miles, and the fiontage of a block to the railway
Q. 21. 5 miles, shall not exceed its depth. The total frontage to the rail-
N.Z. 97. Q- 21. way 0 f the land granted to the Company shall in no case
exceed one-half of the frontage on either side.
This clause means, that, after the contract has been form-
ally placed on the table of the House for 14 days to be looked
at, the survey can be started to enable the Syndicate to get the
lands, to be given as a subsidy, and the Minister can allow them
to survey it in blocks 10 miles frontage, without a road, and 10
miles deep; that is, in square blocks of G 4,000 acres each.
Is the survey to be done by the Syndicate at the cost of
the country or by the Government ? In New Zealand, the
Syndicate pay half the cost. (See Secs. 11 & 12, N.Z. Act.)
The Government should make the survey to see that blocks of
equal value are marked of, and that necessary reservation of water,
timber, townships, roads, crossings, stockroutes, dr., are made.
For example—The blocks can have up to 10 miles frontage
to the line. Thus, if a Syndicate continued the Gayndah-Mary-
borough, line Biggenden to Eidsvold under this Bill—say the
line cost £SOOO a mile—the blocks, if the land was valued at 10s.
an acre, would have to be more than 15 miles deep on each side of
the line —so that an agreement could be submitted and forced on
the country allowing the Syndicate to choose blocks taking in 10-
16


miles frontage to the line by more than 15 miles deep (one at the
back of the other), so that for every 10 miles they built they would
obtain at least 100,000 acres; if under condition No. 1, they
could receive 200,000 acres for every ten miles ; if under condition
No. 8, they could receive the 100,000 acres for every 100 miles,
and then get the value of the railway in cash; and such a
line could be built with black or Chinese labour or Indian coolies,
and the permanent way could be of steel sleepers imported duty
free into the best timber country in the colony. Thus, under
clause 22 the Syndicate could secure as first choice the Wetheron
Agricultural Lands in one block of 04,000 acres, the lands
surrounding the Paradise Gold Field and the balance of the
Degilbo Agricultural Lands being already locked up in a squatter’s
lease. No block within 150 miles of the East Coast of Queensland,
should exceed 640 acres.
Clause 9.—This clause actually makes the company, before
starting the construction, to satisfy the Governor-in-Council
that the members have paid up a sum equal to £IOO a mile in-
tended to be constructed, and that they have a subscribed capital
to be paid up equal to £IOOO for every mile. The liability of the
members who have so subscribed can of course be determined at
any time; and what protection have the men employed on the
construction for their wages or the owners of land for their re-
sumption money with such a small portion of the necessary capital
subscribed ? (In New Zealand the company may be called upon
to give security for both these matters. The old Queensland Act
also provided for this). Such a company may be safe in getting
a contract signed so as to use it for the purpose of selling it to
another company, because such a one sided position as condition
No. 1 allows the Syndicate to hold, should be a saleable com-
modity ; but they cannot possibly carry on and complete a line
with such a small capital. It is to be hoped companies with
such an absurd sum paid up, and such a small sum subscribed,
will not be allowed to speculate by starting railways the State
will have to complete, and after some of the sections have been
completed and paid for in land, in the way referred to previously,
it may turn out there are unsatisfied claims for wages of work-
men. The history of the Kaikiu Valley Railway Company in
New Zealand should be sufficiently glaring to cause the Govern-
ment to refuse to allow companies to start Railways with in-
sufficient capital.
NZ 6 Clause 10. —Railway works partially made by the
Government may be included in contracts and handed
over to a company to be completed by them. Does this mean
uncompleted lines or uncompleted sections only ? Part of the
clause enables the Government to authorise the company to re-
17


■claim lands from the sea, and to issue deeds of grant for the lands
so reclaimed.
This innovation does not look as if the Act was only intended to
enable the country to get lines in the far west made, and is up-
setting the practice so long established of reserving all frontages
to tidal waters for the State. Possibly it may be required to en-
able a Syndicate to make the line from Eockhampton to Port
Alma, from Xonuanton to the Eed Bluff, or from Cloncurry to
Point Parker; but the sea coast and all frontage to tidal waters
should be guarded and retained for the people. Leases ought to
.suffice.
Nz 8 Clause 11. —Eequires the company, before the
q. 5. contract is signed, to transmit to the Governor in
K. 1090. o ounc ii a pi ail 0 f the railway showing yenerally its line
and direction, and documents necessary to explain the plan, and
a certified estimate of the cost of the railway and its equipment.
This I fear will only mean a flying survey, which need not be ad-
hered to unless the Act places some limit, as to the deviation to be
allowed, and the estimate the company is not bound by, unless
the cost exceeds the estimate, which is very unlikely under the
circumstances. The area of the land to be reserved will be based
•on the estimated cost, so the Syndicate will not under-estimate the
probable cost—(no maximum cost is fixed as in the New Zealand
Act). The permanent survey and plan of the route is not to be
fixed until after the contract is signed (Sec. 17), but the only plan
the House can possibly know of is a plan required under Section
,11 and the Minister is not even bound to submit that to Parliament.
Nz Clause 12.—The Minister may require the Company
to give full information about the proposed work, the
ability of the Company to carry it out, the capital and liabilities
of the Company, the plant and rolling stock available, the time
when it is proposed to commence, and finish it, and such further
particulars as he thinks necessary.
This is a good clause if the word may is altered to shall and
if the Minister is required to give the information obtained on
these points to Parliament when the contract is laid on the table
of the House, together with reports from the Eailway Commis-
sioners and the Land Board on the proposed railway and the
lands through which it is proposed to construct the line.
nz 10 Clause 18.—Formal notice of the particulars of any
contract entered into with a Company must be given in
the Gazette sufficient to enable the nature of the contract to be
understood. •
Surely if any notice is given at all it should be published in
the papers circulating in the district through which it is proposed
to make the railway by giving grants of large areas throughout
the district, but as the people are powerless, and their represen


tatives in Parliament too, to alter the contract or stop it, the-
matter of notice is not of much importance.
Clause 14.—The following is a copy of this
Q. a,' 35,38 extraordinary clause as it appears on the T»ill:
A copy of every contract made under this Act shall be laid
1120 & 1154. before both Houses of Parliament during th - Session in which
it is made, or if it is no?, made during a Session, then during-
the next Session after the making of the contract, and shall lie upon the
table of each House for fourteen consecutive days on which the House meets
for the despatch of business during the same Session. If during such period
of fourteen days either House adopts an Address to the Governor disapproving
of the contract, the contract shall be annulled. But if neither House adopts
such an Address during that period, the contract shall become binding and
have full effect. Until the expiration of such period of fourteen days the-
contract shall be deemed to be a provisional contract only.
In England plans of proposed railways, works, etc., have to
be lodged in November if a Bill is to be introduced in the follow-
ing Session to authorise their construction. The Board of Trade
report on the plans, proposals, etc., to Parliament.
In New South Wales a committee of members report on
railways proposed to be built by the. Government.
Why should not we insist on a report from a committee of
say five members before being required to consider or approve of
any Syndicate’s offer.
The English of this clause means, that if a Government
make a contract with the Syndicate, they do not intend Parlia-
ment to have any say in it, either to approve or disapprove of it.
This is another innovation that it is to be hoped will not be sup-
ported in a Queensland Parliament. That no address can be passed
by the Assembly disapproving of any contract, is apparent to every
one who has had any Parliamentary experience. The Government
control the business paper, and allow, during part of a session,
from 4 to 6 o’clock on Thursday afternoon for private business and
Eriiday afternoon and evening. Towards the end of last session
Friday was taken by the Government, leaving only 2 hours in
the week for private businiss. Recognising this position of
affairs, the impossibility of passing an address within 14 days
adverse to a Government contract is evident. The Government
will not bring on a motion to disapprove of their own contract, so
some private member must give notice of his intention to move
such amotion on a private member’s day, and the odds are against
his chance of getting the paper clear for the first Thursday or
Friday after the contract is laid before the House. If everything
favours him he may be entirely shut out of his day by some en-
thusiastic supporter of the contract moving the adjornment of
the House, and, of course unintentionally, taking up the whole
time available for private business. If no member will do it in
this glaring way, members will address the House for just
19


so long as it is necessary to prevent any division on private
members’ days during the 14 days. The suyar debate of
1889 prodded this beyond aryument. Twelve members prevented
a division for months and continued to “educate the pxddic"
on the question until they felt the question was thoroughly
thrashed out. It may be said that this is presuming / the Govern-
ment will not ‘five the necessary time to /jet to a division. This is so.
If the Government wished for any expression, or even intended to
allow it, they, controlling the husines as they do, could simply
force it to a division within a week. Nothing could stop the
Government from getting an expression of opinion within a
week. Half a dozen members could, I believe, prevent any motion
brought on by a private member disapproving of the contract,
passing within 14 days. The idea of dispensing with the ap-
proval of Parliament to contracts dealing with thousands of
acres of land and the construction of railways that must eventually
be worked by the State is an autocratic attempt by the Govern-
ment to rule the country irrespective of the wishes even of the
elected representatives of the people in Parliament.
It may be said that any Government who forced a contract
on the country against the wishes of the majority of the
representatives would not remain in power; possibly not, but the
agreement would be binding on the country all the same,and the
Ministry may be another coalition one, sacrificing principles or
pocketing them for expediency, or may have only a few months
to run before facing the country. So far it is only by Ministries
about to leave office Land-Grant proposals have been submitted to
Parliament. A Ministry discredited in the House and the country
could under this Bill force the country to be bound to a most
iniquitous contract in the way I have described.
Unfortunately our old leaders have lately decided that
neither leaders nor Members are bound to their pledges or
promises. A political breach of faith used to be considered dis-
honourable. As it is not in Queensland (or rather by the leaders
in the present Parliament), we are going the right way to introduce
corruption. As soon as a man is indifferent to his pledges he
cannot be trusted politically,
The Courier, in an Article on this Bill, on the 24th April,
admits this clause (14) must be altered, and that Parliament
must ratify the contract, but if the Government insist on the
clause as it is, I fear it will pass in the present House, where the
late Opposition are now independent supporters of the Govern-
ment because the Premier has thrown aside his principles and
policy, and adopted the policy and principles of Sir Thomas
Mcll wraith.
20


This clause may be put in to allow the Members to wrangle
over it; then to agree ■to alter it, and get the Bill passed with
its other serious defects.
Sir Samuel Griffith, on the objection to such clause in 1880,
was very clear. The Government (Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s)
proposed to allow thirty days in which to disapprove of the
agreement. Sir Samuel now proposes 14 days (less than half).
In 1880 he said (Hansard 1883, p. 915 j: “ Then he came to the
clause which provided that every agreement of this kind should
be laid upon the table of the Legislative Assembly, and unless
sooner ratified or disapproved of by a resolution of such Assembly,
such agreement shall be deemed to have been ratified,
and shall be binding upon all the parties thereto after the ex-
piration of thirty days from the date on which it was laid on the
table of the Legislative Assembly as aforesaid.” This was
decidedly unconstitutional. The Premier probably thought that it
was necessary that the Government should have enormous
powers of this kind, but personal government was not the genius
of the constitution of the colony. No doubt the Premier chafed
at the restraints of Parliament; no doubt he would rather do
without those restraints, and probably his opinion was that the
country would get on much better without the Assembly, and that
he himself could better carry on the affairs of the country than
they were being carried on under the present system. But the
honourable gentleman would not be always Premier ; and the
people of the colony were not by any means unanimous in thinking
that personal government was for the best interests of the country.
He (Mr. Griffith) was satisfied that if any scheme of this kind
was for the good of the colony, Parliament would be always glad
to pass it; but he hoped that whatever the composition of the
Parliament might be they would always scrutinise very closely
any such agreement as this, and he trusted that they would not
be too wise or think themselves too learned to refrain from
taking lessons from what occurred in other countries. A cor-
poration of this kind would have enormous power, and, of course,
might carry on its operations entirely in the interests of the
colony; but in all probability it would be like other corporations,
and carry on its operations entirely in its own interests and
irrespective of the good of the colony. Such a corporation, then,
should be bound down by the firmest claims to do only what
Was in the interest of the colony. A corporation of this descrip-
tion, with a monopoly of communication as it would have, would
be able to do an enormous amount of mischief. He had shown
that the scheme required very careful scrutiny, and that in the
Bill sufficient consideration did not appear to be given to the
dangers which were imminent—in fact the Bill seemed to have
21


been drawn rather to meet the views of one particular set of
negotiators.”
These last words sum up the present Bill very well, for most of
the safeguards inserted in the Bill of 1880, under which the Transcon-
tinental agreement was suhmtited to Parliament, have been omitted,
in this Bill introduced by Sir Samuel Griffith. Reference to page
80 of Hansard of 1883 shows that at that time Sir Samuel Griffith
still believed that it was unconstitutional to deprive Parliament
of the right of approving of agreements between Syndicates and
Ministries before they became binding.
Clause 15. —Provided that, before a copy of the contract has
Q jjg 13 ' been so laid before Parliament, the Governor-in-Council may by
H. 1120. Order in Council authorise the Company—(l) To make the
necessary surveys for the Railway, and for that purpose to enter'
upon any Public or private lands along the line of the intended Railway; and
(2) To take all other necessary preliminary steps for the future construction
of the Railway. When an Order in Council is made under this section, a
Company which avails itself of the Order shall have the same rights and
powers, and be subject to the same liabilities so far as regards the exercise
of the powers so conferred, as if the contract had become binding.
The Syndicate should be required to give security for damage
before proceeding with the survey as provided in the old Queens-
jand Act and in New Zealand.
nz i 4 Clause 1G. —Provides that if a contract is annulled,
an almost impossible event for the reasons given, the
Company “ shall receive from the Grown a sum equal to the
amount reasonably expended by it in and about the conduct of
the necessary surveys and examination of the route of the pro-
posed Railway.” Another case of “ heads I win, tails you lose,”
for the Syndicate.
Clause 17. —When a Company has entered into a contract
N-Z ’ 17 ‘ under this Act, it shall cause the middle line and direction of the
Railway to be set forth on a plan and described in a book of reference,
showing the lands required to be taken, and the names of the owners and
occupiers of the lands so far as they can be ascertained. The plan shall be
made on a scale of not more than ten chains to an inch, and shall show the
limits of deviation, which must not exceed five hundred yards on either
side of the line, and the levels at which it will pass through, over, or under,
the several lands, streets, roads, and places enumerated in the plan and
book of reference.
This appears to be the first time the plan of the permanent
survey has to be produced. After the contract is made, and after
it has become binding on the country, the lands the Company
intend to take from private owners will be known, too late for
Parliament, the Ministry, or the owners to interfere.
22


Clauses 18,19, 20 and 21 fairly provide for notice
being given to the owners, deposit of copies of the
plan and books of reference in public places open for
inspection, etc., but too late for any possibility of objection or
interference.
Clause 22 is an important one as follows :
N.Z. 9?. When a contract has been made under this Act for the con-
Q- 6 - struction of a Railway, or for the construction and working of a
Railway, and for the granting of land by way of subsidy for such construction
or construction and working, if the Minister is satisfied that the whole line
of Railway has been well and faithfully constructed under the provisions of
this Act, and in accordance with the contract and the plans and specifications
forming part thereof, and that the same is fit and complete for public traffic,
the Company shall be entitled to select from the land reserved and set apart
for the purpose of the subsidy for that Railway the land to be granted to
the Company under the contract. If the Ministeris satisfied that anysectionof
the Railway which can be usefully worked for public traffic has been con-
structed, and is oomqlete and fit for public traffic, the Governor-in-Council
may allow the Company to select from that part of the land so reserved and
set apart through or along which the completed section passes an area pro-
portionate to the total area of land to be granted to the Company under the
contract for the construction of the entire line.
Surely this clause should provide that the Commissioner for
Railways or the Engineer for Railways should be required to
inspect and report to the Minister before the line is considered
complete and fit for traffic. “ That the line has been faithfully
constructed of sound materials, and is equal in regard to strength
and durability to the railways heretofore constructed by the
Government.” Also, “ That before any Grant is made proof
shall be given—(l) That all wages have been paid by the Com-
pany ; (2) That all other claims against the Company have been
paid ; (8) That no Mortgagee has any claim on the Railway or
plant,” etc., for it appears Crown Grants for the land on which
the line is to be built are to be issued. (Clause 27.)
When the line, or any section, is built under conditions No.
2 or 3, the lands to be given as a subsidy are granted as soon as
the line or the section is complete and fit for traffic, and if it is a
section only the Minister must be satisfied that it “can be usefully
worked for public traffic.”
Then as to the power of a Minister to take over any section,
from one mile to 500 miles—this will certainly enable a Company
to work a swindle by building the line so far as -the good land
goes, and receiving the land adjacent in larger areas than would
have been allowed for a short time only, and retaining a section of
a line for 50 years, which line will most likely be completed by
the State, in course of time, to the benefit of the Syndicate
holding the section.
23


It may be said the Minister would not take over the section,
but with such a clause a Syndicate could fairly claim it if it
could be usefully worked for public traffic, and if complete and fit
for public traffic.
The objectionable part of the sub-section is that Parliament
proposes a line should be built, say from Point Parker to Clon-
curry. The Minister can defeat this by allowing the Syndicate
to secure Point Parker, and run a section or sections of it just
as far as they please. (In the old Queensland Act the section
had to be at least 50 miles.)
What I contend is, that Parliament should know, and
approve of, the minimum distance the Company must construct
before they receive any deeds of Grant.
Clause 23 reads as follows :
The selection of the land to be granted to the company
(N.Z. 99 a a 100) shall be made by way of alternate choice by the company and
Q. 21 [2] the Minister. The company shall first choose one of the
blocks surveyed as herein before provided out of the lands re-
served and set apart for the purpose of the subsidy for the railway. Upon the
choice of a block by the company, and before the choice of another block by the
company, the Minister or some person appointed by him for the purpose,
shall choose a block equal in value to that cnosen by the company, or as near
thereto as possible, which block shall be retained by the Crown; and so on
until the company has selected the total area to be granted to it.
Imagine an ordinary individual appointed by a Minister to
select these blocks, or even an ordinary Minister, and the odds are
ten to one the contractor gets the best blocks. Far better to
survey blocks of equal size and frontage and let Government and
Syndicate take them alternately, as in the old Queensland Act
subsection 2of section 21). Also let each take alternate blocks
in the port, and in each town along the line, the Government to
retain all frontages to tidal waters. This grant of alternate
blocks would be a very different thing to an alternate choice;
better still, let Parliament know what lands the Crown will
retain, and what the Syndicate will receive before the contract
can bind the country. (See West Australian Act, 1884.)
But to return to the selection : What will the State get out
of this business if an ordinary individual, or an ordinary Minister,
sits down to select these blocks alternately with a contractor like
Greavy of Canadian fame, who bought Premiers, Secretaries and
Treasurers lately ; or with men like Sir Hugh Allen, who bribed
Members and Ministers years ago ; even Sir John MacDonald’s
Ministry being thrown out of office because some of them had
received moneys from the Syndicate, they could not show they
gave any consideration for, beyond pushing their Land-Grant
Railway proposals through the Federal Parliament.
24


These additional openings for bribery and distrust can be
closed by letting Parliament know exactly where the line will be
built, and exactly what land the Syndicate will get, and
allowing Parliament to say yes or no to each contract.
Clause 24. When the contract is subject to the condition
Q. 21. that the railway shall become the property of the Crown at the-
H. 1155 expiration of a fixed period, the following further provisions rhall
have effect: —(1) Upon the completion of the railway or a section
of the railway, as hereinbefore provided, the company shall be entitled to
receive grants of a part only of t lie whole area of the land to be granted to
it, but shall be entitled nevertheless to select immediately the whole of the-
blocks so to be granted. The proportion to be granted immediately shall be
such as is prescribed by the contract, but shall not exceed two-thirds of the
whole area; (2) The blocks t o be granted immediately shall be selected by
the company out of the whole number of blocks selected by it, the Minister,
or other person appointed by the G-overnor-in-Council as aforesaid, being-
entitled to choose blocks to be retained and leased as next hereinafter
provided in alternation with the company’s choice of the blocks to be-
granted immediately ; (3) Leases of the remainder of the company’s blocks
shall be granted to it for the remainder of the fixed period aforesaid at a
peppercorn rent, subject to the condition that if the company fails to
complete the railway, or if any time during the term of the lease the
company makes any default which entitles the Crown to take possession of
the railway under this Act, the lease shall be forfeited and the laud shall
revert to the Crown; and so that the waiver of a forfeiture for any default shall
not operate to prevent the enforcement of a forfeiture for any subsequent
default of the same kind ; (4) If, at the expiration of the fixed period afore-
said, no such default has been made, the lands comprised in the leases shall
be granted to the company in fee-simple.
This means that if the Syndicate say they intend to keep and
work the liailway for a term agreed upon, not exceeding fifty years,
as soon as the line is constructed they can select the area they
are to get not exceeding twice the cost, and Crown grants of
blocks not exceeding two-thirds of the area of land they are to
receive are issued at once; equal (if twice the cost is allowed as
provided by the clause) to £1 6s. Bd. for every pound they spend,
and leases are to be issued for fifty years of the balance of the
land equal to 13s. 4d. for every £1 spent. The Syndicate can,
of course, refuse to comply with the provisions of the Act after
the deeds are issued, and let the country take the line and the
leased land. (The old Queensland Act—section 34—only gave
half the land, and the clause is altogether a fairer one to the
State.) The lands granted to the Company would not be forfeited
in such a case, and they could afford to lose the one-third of
twice the cost. If they work the Eailway the leases lock up the
lands for fifty years, because no person could feel safe in making
an agreement with a Company who would forfeit if they did not
work the Eailway; one-third of twice the cost of a Transconti-
nental line at £5,000 a mile would mean, if the line is 800 miles
long, at 2s. 6d. an acre, about 20,000,000 acres, or at ss. an acre
25


10,000,000 acres, to be locked up in this way; besides 40,000,000
acres or (20,000,000 acres according to the Ministry’s valuation,
of the land) for which they would obtain deeds of grant.
The Syndicates will most likely say they intend to work it
for fifty years, and get the £1 6s. Bd. in land instead of the £l.
If it turns out a good line they will run it, and keep the country
out of it, and get deeds for the other 18s. 4d. value in land in
place of leases. If bad, they will hold the land (£1 6s. Bd. for
every £1), and let the country run the Railway and improve their
lands. (In the New Zealand Act of 1881 the maximum subsidy
is 6s. in land for every £1 spent, not £2 per £1 spent.)
The idea is, of course, to encourage companies by a bonus
to keep and work bad lines , but they won’t do so. The Syndicate
will feel satisfied the Government (after paying more than the
cost in land) will run it and improve the value of the lands
secured by the Syndicate.
This condition (No. 1) is certainly the one that Syndicates
will believe in, because—
1— The fixed period may be anything from Ito 50 years—a
matter of agreement between the Syndicate and the Government.
2 Whatever the period they propose to hold the line for,
they get a larger area of land than if they agree to hand it over
when constructed, or agree to sell it back to the Government.
(Conditions Nos. 2 and 3.)
3 They can get up to two-thirds of the land, equal to £1
6s. Bd., instead of £l, as soon as the line is completed.
4 They can run the line, and if it is a good thing they may
retain it for 50 years and get the additional land too.
5 -If it is not good enough they can in most cases worry
the Government through the people into taking it off their hands
■without forfeiting the lands, and possibly into paying for the
Railway too. The land to be lost, if valued at ss. an acre, on
800 miles of Transcontinental Line, would be about 10,000,000
acres. This would be worth fighting for, and would allow room
for bribery if it is found to be possible.
6 At the worst they can give up the line as soon as they
receive the £1 6s. Bd. in land for every £1 spent.
7No provision is made as to purchase price if the State
are forced to buy, or desire to buy, even at the end of say 40 years.
The old Queensland Act provided for this contingency even
where they had to hand it over at the end of 21 years.
This condition No 1 is for the Syndicate as clear a case of
■“ Hoads I win, tails you lose,” as ever any Syndicate dreamt of.
Clause 25. When any land of which the company is
Q. il {sub. sec. entitled to a grant under this Act is in the lawful occupation
fl and 6). of any person as a tenant or licensee of the Crown, the
H. 1110. company shall, before receiving the grant thereof, be
required by the Minister either to pay to the owner for
26


the time being the value of the improvements, if any, upon it, to
be determined in the manner provided by the Acts under which
the land is held, or to select instead of such block an area of available
Crown land of equal value within the lands reserved and set apart for the
purpose of the railway.
Does this only apply to occupation licenses and the depas-
turing rights of pastoral lessees of unresumed portions of runs ?
Will it not apply to all pastoral tenants holding under any
Act except the Act of 1884 ?
Will it not apply to persons working under miners’ rights
or other mining licenses ?
No provision is made for the position of the Minister and the
country if the area not under lease is not available in the reserved
area (Q. 21 [6]). Can this be extended for 200 miles if necessary
to get sufficient Crown Lands for the Syndicate—should there not
be a limit ?
How is it intended to deal with the country, where for miles
the pastoralists hold leases ? If the lands can only be taken from
unresumed portions of runs blocks must go back from 50 to 200
miles on each side to make up the area necessary where it is
available. And what provision for stock travelling roads will be
provided if the Syndicate take blocks of freeholds, (even if
separated every 10 miles by roads) for 100 miles on either side
of the line ?
Present indefeasible leases allow stock to travel. Land
grants are effectual bars to such a proceeding, and roads a few
chains wide will not meet the difficulty.
„„ „ ... Clause 2G reads :
SeeN.Z.lO4.
I?' nil. 1- —Except as hereinbefore provided, Crown grants shall
be issued for the blocks to which the Company is entitled as
soon [as conveniently may be after the selection thereof. 2.—Every Crown
grant issued under this Act shall contain a power to the G-overnor in Council,
at any time within ten years from the issue of the grant, to take and lay off
for roads or streets through any land comprised in the grant, or to take for
State schools, or to take for both purposes, such part of the land not exceed-
ing one-hundredth part of the whole as the Governor in Council may think
fit. 3.—A1l other provisions of any Act for the time being in force and
generally applicable to grants of land from the Crown shall extend and
apply to grants made under this Act.
Dealing with the first part of the section :
These Crown grants must in fairness to tenants be subject
to existing tenancies and rights from the Crown.
As to the secoiul part of the section ;
Provision should be made that the amount to be paid for
lands so resumed by the State for public purposes should not be
paid for, or at least should not exceed the valuation put on the
lands at the time the contract for the railway was made, and £5
27


per centum per annum on such cost, and the then value of im-
provements, if any, on the lands so resumed. (The old Queens-
land Act dealt properly with this matter. Sec. 21, Sub-sec. 1).
As to the third part of the section :
This should be extended to at least reserve the rights to
mines and minerals and the right to work for gold and minerals
on payment of damage to surface value.
The capital clause inserted in the New Zealand Act (Sec.
104) in the interests of the State should replace this miserable
clause.
The Government say they propose to bring in a Bill to
allow mining on private property, so they appear to approve of
the principle. If so, why not apply it to these grants to the
Syndicate now we are dealing with them ?
This Land-grant Bill will pass before the Mining on Private
Property Bill has any chance of passing—because this system is
expected to save the wealthy from the necessity to pay taxes—
and the grants of land to Syndicates ivill be issued before that Act is
likely to pass a nominee Upper House.
It took twenty years to get such a measure through both
Houses in Victoria, because of vested interests, and the attempt
never succeeded so long as they had a Nominee, and therefore
irresponsible Upper House.
If we have to fight against Land-grant Syndicates’ interests,
I fear we will want a long time to, get it through even the
House of Eepresentatives, and that we will have to do, if these
deeds are issued without the reservation of all mines, minerals,
and the right of working them on paying damage done to sur-
face values.
To get a good Mining on Private Property Bill through both
Houses after this Bill passes is out of the question for years to
•come.
To issue the deeds subject to the provisions of any Act for
the time being in force, and generally applicable to grants of land
from the Crown (as provided by this Act), means for the time
being in force at the time the grants are issued, and at present that
means that the Syndicates will own all mines and minerals, and
that although the gold does not pass to them, no provision is
.made for the power to get at it. The landholder can act the dog
in the manger so far as gold is concerned, for we have no power
to resume for mining, and no power to mine on private property,
and miners trespassing on freeholds even in search of minerals
can be “ prosecuted as the law directs.”
English Syndicates may be trusted to get the largest pos-
sible royalty if they allow mining at all. The latest paragraph
in local papers on this point is instructive:—
28


A British ironmaster recently informed the London Daily News that, in
hisownfurnaces, the royalty of 6s. atonpiadon ironstone amounted to £15,000
a year, the whole of which went to the landlords, while the men who raised
the stone only earned £7500 a year wages in all.
If the lands are granted, without the reservation of mines
and minerals, and a right to work them on payment of a surface
damage as now proposed, then mining in the Wide Bay and
Burnett district will, if the Gayndah line is continued by a
Land-grant subsidy, receive a serious blow. Impounding of
stock by the Syndicate otf their freeholds of 64,000 acres each will
in itself be a check on mining and settlement, and particularly
on prospecting for gold and minerals. Squatters’ leases can be
•dealt with, freeholders can prosecute trespassers and impound.
n z 46 aad Clause 27 wants careful study and a deal of
ios. explanation. It reads :
In addition to the grants of land by way of subsidy for construction, the
company shall be entitled to a grant of any Crown land on which the
line is laid and the Crown land on either, side not exceeding a
total width of one chain, and also to grants of such sites for railway
stations, stores, and other buildings connected with or used by the railway,
.as are reasonably necessary for the purposes of the company and are provided
for by the contract. 1
Why should persons who build lines for the State for payment
in land get a deed for the land the railway is on any more than if
they were paid for it in money ?
As the railway is to become the property of the State, why
should the Syndicate ever get more than a lease of the land the
line is built on ?
In the case of a railway constructed giving the Crown the
right of purchase a deed should not be issued until the Crown
waives the right to purchase—simply a lease. A lease for 50
years would also meet condition No. 1. Leases only are now
granted to Syndicates in Tasmania.
Will it not be possible for mortgagees to give trouble if
these deeds are issued to the Railway Syndicates, for our Real
Property Act does not recognise trusts at all, or encumbrances
not registered on the deeds.
n.z. lor. Clause 28. — Regulations for the management of
the railway, the levying of tolls, and the general
working of the traffic on it, are to be approved of by
the Govemor-in-Council.
N z 110 Clause 29 provides that the Governor in Council
H Q idoo ma y rev * se an( l reduce the tolls presented by any
Regulations, but unless with the consent of the Com-
pany the tolls shall not be reduced below the following scale :
Two pence per mile for each passenger.
29


Six pence per mile for each ton of goods. (The old
Queensland Act allowed the Government to force a reduction
of 4d. per ton).
This clause is not likely to he any impediment to the opera-
tions of the Syndicate ; it will only help them to force the
State to buy the line, because of the high minimum of rates
allowed.
The Company, if they work the railways at all to make
them pay, are likely to try and induce, traffic by wanting to carry
at reasonable rates, and the power the Government want to
keep, so long as we keep our Commissioners and their high
rates is to prevent a company from securing the whole West-
ern trade for their port in the Gulf, to the detriment of Brisbane,
Rockhampton and Townsville, by carrying at the rates railway
companies carry goods elsewhere than in Queensland.
N z 107 Clause 30. —The line is to be open to the public
q. 10. k. 1690. so long as the regulations are to be compiled with.
Clause 81. —The marginal note says: “mails to
rn'ioob. wried free, but in this clause Members of both
Houses are also to bealloiccd free passes over all Syndicate
Eaihcays.
This first step in bribery, it is to be hoped, will be resented,
and it is to be hoped Members of Parliament, present and future,
will not be under any such compliment to any Land Grant
Syndicate'.
The railway pass is given to Members of Parliament to
enable them to further the interests of the colony by examining
without additional expense the country they are elected to
benefit by their legislation.
If they are to legislate for the benefit of the Syndicate,
by all means grant them a pass, but while they have free passes
over the Syndicate Railways, they are under a compliment they
cannot ignore.
They may also feel sure that whatever terms the Syndicate
get they will try and use Members in Parliament to get more
favorable terms. Experience in Tasmania, New Zealand, and
Western Australia already shows this conclusively.
I admit that all Land-Grant Syndicates should give a life
pass to all Members of the present Parliament who would pass
such a Bill as the present one, but I argue against these passes
in the hope that the House will not agree to it without great
alterations.
Clause 82. —Company to enjoy liabilities and
H. 1090. privileges of common carriers.
N.Z. 107. Clause 33. —Ihe Company shall cause trains to be regularly
Q. 22. run at such intervals and at such minimum rate of speed as
H. lilt. s ] la n be stipulated in the contract.
30


Only imagine the Minister and the Syndicate fixing in the
contract the intervals the trains are to be run at for the next
fifty years.
This is only put in to attempt to prevent the Company from
forcing the hand of the Government to buy the line, by running
the trains so as to compel the people to bring pressure on
the Government to buy, but the clause may be treated as
useless. If the Syndicate want to make the Government take
the line, or buy the line, they will do so by running past im-
portant stations, closing stations, not providing trucks, etc.,
etc., etc.
Clause 84 will also be found to be just as impossible to
work. It reads : —
Clause 34.—The Company shall not make or give any undue
H. 1120 or unreasonable preference or advantage to or in favour of any
particular person or any particular description of traffic, or sub-
ject any particular person or any particular description of traffic to any undue
or unreasonable disadvantage in any respect whatsoever. The provisions of
this section may be enforced by the Supreme Court, upou the application of
any person aggrieved, by the issue of an injunction or other process,
according to the practice of the said court.
The idea is a capital one to allow a settler who is not
receiving fair play at the hands of a Syndicate, because he is
politically opposed to the managing body or otherwise objection-
able, to rush to the Supreme Court, because his goods do not
get to market properly, etc., etc. It would be “ out of the frying-
pan into the fire.”' He might think of the District Court, but
if wise would leave that alone, because the Company could take
his goods out by mistake at the wrong station, over-carry them,
quite unintentionally, of course, etc., etc. If he went to law
and succeeded, his success would be so great that he would
have to move to some place where the lines were not in the
hands of a Syndicate.
nz H 2 ana ns Clauses 35, 36 and 37.—These deal with the
q.' so, si, and 82.' running powers, Syndicate over Government Rail-
H ' 1120 ‘ ways, and Government over Syndicate Railways.
Here is an admission that we have Commissioners, and appa-
rently that we intend to keep them, for they are allowed to
arrange this matter ; but their opinions are not required under
the Act about the route, or the estimated cost of the Railway,
the great reason for their appointment originally. However,
if they cannot succeed in this small matter of. arranging with
the Syndicate terms about running on their respective lines, a
Judge of the Supreme Court refers it to Arbitrators, who
decide everything but the question of costs. This he determines,
presumably because Arbitrators may not value the services of
lawyer and counsel so highly as a Judge, and may value their
own services too highly.


Better far fix the Arbitrators’ fees and Counsels’ in such a
matter as this at a maximum of £lO 10s. a day ; and it will help
to prevent the necessity for arbitration, and settle the dispute-
quickly if the Chief Commissioner and the Chairman of the
Syndicate cannot do so.
I presume it would be too democratic to say that the-
Syndicate should he obliged to accept the terms the Govemor-in-
Council decided as fair in the event of a dispute. This would
not be sufficiently in the interests of the Syndicate, who could,
by frequent disputes and references, force the Government to-
buy the Bailway to get rid of them after they secure the land
and find it does not pay to run the Railway—that is, does not
pay interest on capital expended and management. (The New
Zealand Act, clauses 112 and 113, are much preferable to these-
clauses )
Clause 38. —This important clause wants careful study
It reads ;
If the contract provides that the railway shall be the-
N.Z. 114 property of the company subject to a right of purchase by the
Hi 1116 Crown, then at any time after the expiration of ten years from
the final completetion of the i ailway, the Crown may purchase
the railway, with the rolling stock and all the appurtenances thereof
but not including the land granted to the company by way of subsidy
for its construction, at the fair and reasonable value of the railway upon a
basis of valuation to be specified in the contract.
The Company, it is remembered, under condition 2 get the-
full value of the cost of the line in land as soon as it is completed.
Then, after 10 years (under this clause) the Government,
if they want the line, allow the Syndicate to keep all the landa
which covered the cost of the Railway, and they pay again for
the Railway in cash, and for all the rolling stock and appur-
tenances upon a basis of a valuation not stated as the then value,,
but upon a basis specified in the original contract of at least twelve
years previously, and one which Parliament is practically refused
the right to say yes or no to. (The New Zealand Act will be
found very different from this, and the old Queensland Act also
is preferable).
NZ lu Clause 39 provides for the appointment of
Q. v, arbitrators if the sum payable to the Syndicate can-
not be agreed upon. The Minister appoints one and
the Company another. They appoint an umpire, and their de-
cision shall be final. Sir Samuel Griffith on this point in
Hansard, 1883, page 86, is worth reading.
In this more important question the Judge of the Supreme
Court is not called upon to do anything, and the question of
costs of the arbitration—a really serious one in such a case —is-
left apparently to the sweet will of the arbitrators.
32


N.Z.U4 Clauses 40 and 41 provide for the steps to be-
or <j. 28 and taken if the Company refuses to appoint an arbitrator,,
29, H. 1120 or j£ £jj e ar^itra tor neglects to act.
To Clause 41 is added the following provision :
Provided that until Parliament has appropriated money for
N. Z.Act 119 such purpose any agreement, made or proceedings taken by the
Qovernor-in-Council for the purchase of a railway constructed
under this Act shall not he binding on the Crown, except so far as regards
any obligation to pay the costs of an arbitration.
This is a wise precaution, because Parliament, however-
anxious it may be to buy, and will be I feel sure, may not bo
well enough off to pay twice over for a railway—once in cash and
once in land —and especially on the basis of a valuation speci-
fied at least twelve years before.
nz 123 121 Clause 42 enables the Government to take
125. Q. 23. possession of a railway after one month’s notice, if it
be proved to the satisfaction of the Governor-in-
Council that the Company — :
(1) Has failed for a period of one month to work the traffic on the railway
pursuant to the regulations in that behalf • or (2) Is insolvent, or neglects
or fails to meet its lawful obligations to the officers or servants employed
upon the line, or to any other creditor of the company; or (3) Has failed,,
after traffic has been interdicted by the Minister by reason of the line
being unsafe for traffic, to render it fit for traffic within a reasonable time in
that behalf.
Under this clause the Syndicate will quickly let the
Government take the railway if they don’t want to work it,
because no failure, except the failure to build the line, makes,
them lose the grants of land they are to receive for the line, or
any section of it, in terms of the contract.
The Bill is silent on the effect of neglect by the Company
to proceed with the work reasonably expeditiously, or for
breach of agreement. The contract may fix penalties.
Possession should be possible by the Government in such a
case, as it is in New Zealand,
q 24. Clause 48. — 1 f the railway is abandoned for
Hilll 6. three months it becomes the property of the Crown.
55 Clause 44 provides penalties forrefusing to give
a'liie. up possession of the railway if demanded.
Clause 45. Every railway which becomes the property of the
and 127 Crown, or of which the charge is assumed by the Commissioners
under the provisions of this Act, shall be and become subject to
all laws, bye-laws, and regulations in force at the time of such acquisition
or assumption in respect of railways the property of the Crown or the
Government of Queensland.


Clause 46 deals with the [powers of a Company for the
purpose of the construction and working of a railway to be con-
structed under the Act.
n.z.126. Clause 47. —Railways to he constructed must
Q. la be commenced and completed under penalties to be
specified in the contract (to be seen but not approved
by Parliament); and the railways are to be managed subject to
the laws in force for the time being relating to railways.
N.z. 26. Clause 48. —The Company may take and use and
Q. 14. occupy any Crown Lands on the route necessary for
the proper construction and working of the line, the
erection of stations, &o.
Clause 49. —This is an important clause, and
h’io97 P ut presumably to prevent pastoral lessees select-
ing, for preemptive blocks, lands they see must be
obtained for the railway.
q 17 Clause 50 deals with the resumption of lands
from private owners.
n.z. 42. Clause 51.—The Company may, free of cost, for
H*nob le P ur P ose °f constructing the railway enter at all
times upon any Crown lands, and cut and remove
timber and quarry, and remove stone, gravel, and other material.
n.z. nil. Clause 52.—-Imported iron sleepers, rails, and fast-
en'n o s required for a Syndicate Railway shall be
admitted free of duty.
This will not help on the timber and iron industry, but may
encourage English Syndicates to come here with railways ready
made—cheap and nasty—to be left on the hands of the country
as soon as the land grants are obtainable.
n.z. nil. Clause 53.—Materials, plant, and stock required
n Q ho°i ky the Company in the construction of the railway
shall be carried on Government Railways at a cost
not exceeding 2d. per ton per mile.
Tart n.z. 48. Clause 54.—The Minister may inspect the railway
Q. 7. during construction or after, and interdict traffic when
jj 1000 ( u t
the line is unsafe, until the Government Engineer certi-
fies it is safe and fit for traffic.
Clause 55 reads :
A company which has constructed a railway under tb : s
See N.Z. 122 Act may, with the sanction of the Governor-in-Council, sell,
lease, assign, or part with the railway or any part thereof.
Every purchaser of a railway shall have the same rights and shall be subject
to the same liabilities and obligations under this Act, including the obligation


to sell to the Crown, as the company from which he purchased. If it is
found that any land taken under this Act is not required for the
N.Z. SI purposes of the railway, the company may, with the sanction of the
Minister, sell it by public auction, or lease it for any period not
exceeding twenty-one years.
What about mortgages from the Company ? The power
to mortgage should be limited, and the rights of mortgagees
to interfere with any railway to be paid for in land before paying
wages, if any due to employees, and compensation to private
owners of land should be restrained. (See New Zealand Act,
where provision is fully and fairly made.)
No clause is inserted preventing a Company from selling
or assigning the benefit of a contract made with a Minister as
soon as it is binding. Syndicates will most likely be floated
to buy these contracts, unless such a sale would render the con-
tract void.
nz 129 Clause 56 exempts from stamp duty contracts
between a Minister and a Syndicate.
This is a strange exemption, when we find the present
Government insisting on stamp duty when returning contractors
their own deposits with unsuccessful tenders.
n z iso. Clause 57 gives power to remove trees dangerous
‘to the railway, but the damage caused by the removal
must be paid.
n.z. 131. Clause 58 provides penalties for trespasses.
nz 22 Clause 59 provides a method for giving and
serving notices required by the Act, to be given to any
person.
nz 128 Clause 60 provides that the Act shall not be
deemed to give further powers to a Company than
those for which it is incorporated.
The usual saving clause preventing any claim against the
Government for constructing a railway that might be deemed
to interfere with any Syndicate Eailway is omitted.


SAFEGUARDS OMITTED CONTAINED IN OTHER ACTS.
The omission of many clauses, necessary for the protection
•of the interests of the State, I enumerate with the hope that
many of them will be inserted in the present Bill before
at becomes law.
Take, first of all, the Queensland Bill of 1880, which was
considered by Sir Samuel Griffith in 1884 such a danger to the
-State that it had to bo repealed shortly after the new Parliament
met. This Bill was so bad that argument in its favour was
deemed by him impossible after the verdict of the general election
—and yet it contained the following safeguards ; •
Clause 2.—The agreement with the Syndicate was only
■a provisional one.
Clause 38.—The Minister, after making the Provisional
agreement, had to prepare and bring before Parliament a Bill to
give statutory authority thereto. (Omitted from the 1892 Bill).
Clause 40.—Nothing in the Act or in any agreement or
order was to abridge the right of Parliament to abrogate, alter, or
vary any provision or condition of such agreement or order in
such manner as seems fit and proper or necessary for the pro-
tection of public interests.” (Omitted from the 1892 Bill.)
Clause 5. —The plans and sections of the Eailway were to
be approved by Parliament, and the Railway was to be equal
in strength and durability to the Government Railways. (Omit-
ted from the 1892 Bill.)
Clause 9.—Tolls could be reduced to fourpence per mile per
ton of goods. (Sixpence in the 1892 Bill.)
Clause 15.—Contractors should not employ at any place
distant more than 200 miles from the Gulf of Carpentaria any
Asiatic or African not of European descent ; penalty £1 per
day for each person. (Omitted from the 1892 Bill.)
Section 21.—Sections taken over were to be at least 50 miles
long, and constructed according to plans and sections approved
by Parliament. (Omitted from the 1892 Bill.)
Sub-scction I.—No block was to have more than five miles
frontage to the-lino. 2.—Blocks were to be alternate—Syndicate
-and State. 4. Resumptions for roads and railways, &c., allowed
within 10 years to be without compensation, except value of
improvements, lands in exchange to be given elsewhere for area
taken.
I.—By the 1892 Bill blocks can have 10 miles’ frontage.
■2.— ~ ~ blocks need not be alternate.
4. ~ ~ resumption for railways omitted, and the
question of compensation is not decided.
36


Section 26.—After five years the Government could pur-
chase the Railway and rolling stock at a fair and reasonable
value—if impossible to fix the value, it was to be decided by
arbitrators. (By the 1892 Bill the purchase is to be 10 years
after, and the value on the basis fixed on the contract 12 years
previously.)
Section 84.—An agreement could provide that the Railway, the
plant, stock, buildings,&c., should, at the end of 25 years, become
the property of the State. In such a case half the blocks only
were to be granted. The balance was to be leased for 25 years
to the Company, and forfeited if default made in completing or
working the line. If the line was bought before the 25 years,
the value was to be taken simply as value for the balance of the
unexpired term of the 25 years. (The Act of 1892 allows fifty
years and gives two-thirds of the land instead of half. The possibil-
ity of purchase is not provided for at all).
Section 37.—Contractors could be required to give security for
all damage to owners of land by surveys, &c., and otherwise to per-
form and abide by the provisions of the Act in respect of the ayree-
ment. (Omitted from the 1892 Bill.)
If an Act with these provisions in could be called dangerous
what word would appropriately describe the present Bill intro-
duced by Sir Samuel Griffith ?
Taking the New Zealand Act of 1881 we find it contains the
following safeguards:—
Section 5.—A1l Land-grant Railway Lines must connect
with some Government Line. (Omitted from the Bill of 1892).
Sections II and 12. —Security may be required for the com-
pletion of the line by the Company ; and (2) For payment of
compensation money to private owners. Special power is also
given to directors to mortgage the capital and property of the
Company to provide for same. (Omitted from the Bill of 1892).
Sections 23 to 25.—Notice must be given to owners before
entering for surveys, and damage done to be paid for. (Omitted
from the Bill of 1892.)
Sections 26 to 28. —Contain provisions requiring lands to be
fenced, so as to protect stock and to prevent trespass before existing
fences are removed by the Syndicate for the railway. Houses,
gardens, and vineyards, &0., not to be entered without consent.
(Omitted from the Bill of 1892.)
Section 35.—Fixes the guage of the Railway so as to pre-
vent paying for a line useless to the State. (Omitted.)
Sections 87 and 38.—Alterations of roads are to be made with-
out detriment to the public or the owners, and plans of the pro-
posed alterations to be submitted to the owners. (Omitted from
the Bill of 1892.)
37


Section 43. —Deviations are allowed, but no land not shown in
the plan approved of can be resumed without the owner’s consent,
(Omitted from the Bill of 1892.)
Section 47. —Syndicates are required to proceed at once with
construction, and to continue same. (Omitted from Bill of 1892.)*
Sections 52 to 67. —Define and limit the power of
mortgage, &c., and provide :
1. That mortgages shall be subject to the right of purchase
by the Crown and other Crown rights.
2. That interest on loans shall not exceed £6 per centum
per annum.
3. That no mortgagee or creditor shall have any claim to be
paid out of the public revenue. (Omitted from the Bill
of 1892.)
Sections 77 to 93. —Empower the Syndicate after vote of
owners to rate all lands within 15 miles of the line to pay interest
on the mortgages, &c. (Very properly omitted in the Bill of 1892.)
Section 96. —Limits frontage of blocks to the Railway to one
mile. (Ten miles allowed in the 1892 Bill.) Also requires the
Company to pay half the cost of survey of the blocks. (Omitted
from the 1892 Bill.)
Section 101. —Allows alternate blocks of land in the neigh-
bourhood benefitted by the construction of the line to be taken if
no land adjoining: the line is available. (Omitted from the Bill
of 1892).
Section 102.—The value of the lands are to be ascertained by
the Surveyor-General and some person appointed by the Com-
pany. If they cannot agree, arbitrators decide. (The ministry
fix the value without necessity for reports from Land Board or
Surveyor-General by the Bill of 1892.)
Section 104. —This most valuable clause will not allow
Syndicates in New Zealand to prevent valuable mineral lands
being opened up, and protects the rights of the State to mines
and minerals and the right to work them.
The following is a copy of the conditions :
“ Crown grants shall be issued for the blocks or sections
to which the Company may be entitled as soon as conven-
iently may be after the selection thereof in accordance with
this Act.
* The Bill (Sec. 47) provides that the contract to be shown to Parlia-
ment shall specify penalties for not completing and constructing the railway
within specified times, but these provisions may be treated with contempt in
an agreement that would not be approved of by Parliament, and must there-
fore be shuffled through.


1— If any land comprised in any such grant shall at any
time be found to contain coal, then the Company shall
pay to Her Majesty, in respect of every ton of coal
raised or gotten thereout, a royalty or sum not exceed-
ing a maximum sum to be specified in the grant.
2 If any such land shall be found to contain yold or silver
such land shall be subject in all respects to the provisions
of The Resumption of Land for Mining Purposes Act,
1878, but the value of the gold or silver in or on such
land shall not be taken into account in ascertaining
.or allowing compensation to the company. Every
Crown grant issued under this Act shall contain the
necessary reservation to yive effect to the provisions, and shall
also contain a power to the Governor on behalf of
the Crown at any time within five years from the issue
of the grant to take and layoff for roads or streets through
. any land comprised therein such part of such land not
exceeding five per centum as the Governor may think
fit. All other provisions of any Act for the time being
in force and generally applicable to grants of land from
the Crown shall extend and apply to grants under this
Act.”
Comparison will show that clause 28 in the Bill of 1892
omits the best portion of this clause.
Section 106. —This important clause fixes a maximum of
£5OOO as the cost of any line of railway so far as the land subsidy
is concerned (omitted from the Bill of 1892) ; and fixes a
maximum subsidy of 6s. in land for every £1 spent by the Railway
Syndicate. (The Bill of 1892 fixes a maximum of 40s. for every
20s. spent.)
Section 108 empowers the Ministry to reduce tolls and
rates if the company appears to the Governor to he earniny more than
£7 per centum char profit to such a sum as will allow a clear
profit of £7 per centum only. (Omitted from the Bill of 1892.)
Sections 115 to 117 define a method for fixing the purchase
money to be paid for any railway built on the land-grant principle.
Section 115 provides that the purchase money to be paid for
a railway under the power to purchase shall not include the
value of lands given for the use of the line of railway stations,
&c., “ but the company shall require in respect of such land, and
be entitled to the fair value of all improvements made by them on
such lands.
Section 117. —No compensation is to be paid for goodwill.
Section 116.—Mortgagees, if any, are to join in the con-
veyance, assignment, and transfer on payment of the purchase
money.
39


Section 117. —The arbitrators fwhen fixing the value), are
also to take into consideration the depreciation in the permanent
way, plant, rolling stock, buildings, and other works of the
railway, including therein any onerous or burdensome provisions
respecting the use of the railway, or the works thereof, to any
easements, rights, or privileges in connection therewith. (Omit-
ted from the Bill of 1892.)
Sections 123 to 125 provide that 1.—In the event of any un-
reasonable or inexcusable delay by the company in the pro-
secution of the works connected with any railways, etc.; 2.
If the company shall in the opinion of the Governor commit
or suffer a wilful breach of any contract made under the Act;
the Government may after any such default complete the line
and conduct the traffic and charge the company with all outlay
and expenditure. (Omitted from the Bill of 1892.)
It may be mentioned here that when the Midland Railway
Syndicate of New Zealand desired to build a railway assisted by
land-grants they obtained concessions not allowed under the Act
from Parliament under the Act of 1884, namely : —1. The
royalty on coal in any land granted was waived but all other
viimnij rights were preserved, —2. They were allow’ed 10s. in land
for every pound spent instead of Gs. per £1. On the other hand
Parliament insisted on further safeguards, namely : — 1. No lands
known as gold workings icould be deemed Crown lands under the Act
(to prevent alienation of these lands to any syndicate.)—2. Cer-
tain known coal lands were reserved from land-grant selection
by any syndicate.—3. The minimum value of Crown lands was
fixed at 10s. per acre.—4. The total maximum cost of the rail-
way (so far as the subsidy was concerned) was fixed by the Act,
and in that way the State knew exactly the maximum area of
land the company could get.—5. The land had to be allocated by
the Assembly.
In Western Australia the Acts of 1884 and 1888 show :—1.
That the terms and conditions for the construction, management,
and working were agreed to by Parliament.—2. That the lands
to be granted were mentioned in the contract.—3. That the pro-
posed line of railway was defined exactly by the Act of 1888.
40


FORMER LAND-GRANT RAILWAY PROJECTS AND BILLS IN
QUEENSLAND.
1861. —In 1861 The Moreton Bay Tramways Act was
passed —Fixing the number of acres to be granted per mile ;
prescribing the value of the land at not less than £1 per acre;
and limiting the cost per mile of the line so far as the grants of
land were concerned.
1872. —The Eailway Act of 1872 enabled the Government
for the time being, to receive proposals from persons prepared to
build railways ; but such proposals were to he submitted to Parliament
for approval, with plans, Sc.
1874. —The proposal of Collier and Co., in September, 1874,
was the first stop, beyond discussion, towards the construction
of a Transcontinental Eailway Line under the Land-
Grant system. The proposal (explained to the House in Hansard
1875, page 152) was for the construction of Line from Dalby to
the Gulf of Carpentaria, but did not result in any definite agree-
ment to submit to Parliament.
1876.—1 n 1875theHon.H. E.King (then Secretary for Public
Works) introduced a Bill to authorise the construction of a line
from Dalby via Eoma to the Gulf of Carpentaria, The Bill was
called —
“The Continental Eaihcay Bill,” and by it lands in the West
were to be sold by the Crown; the proceeds to be placed to a
separate account and used for the purpose of paying for this great
work.
The Bill passed its second reading by 23 to 9 (page 282) and
the Government saw it through Committee. Then it appears to
have vanished.
1876. —The Eailway Eeserves Bill passed the Assembly in
1876 but did not pass the Council. The lands in the Eailway
Eeserves along proposed routes were to be sold to pay for the
railways.
1877. —The Eailway Eeserves Bill passed both Houses in
1877, and under it sales of land were made. The proceeds were
afterwards paid into General Eevenue, the Act of 1877 to the
contrary being ignored.
1879. —ln 1879 The Burrum Eailway (Land-Grant) Bill was
introduced by Mr. Cooper, read a first time, and then submitted
to a Committee. The Committee were not satisfied with the
evidence given, and the Bill was not proceeded with that session.
1880. —The Burrum Eailway (Land-Grant) Bill was intro-
duced by the Government in 1880.
41


It proposed to authorise the construction of a line from
the Burrurn coal fields to a point on the Gyrnpie line near
Maryborough (about 1G miles).
It was expected to cost £50,000.
The promoters asked for 25,000 acres of land. The line to
be their property, subject to the right of the Government to buy
at a valuation later on.
The Bill passed its second reading, but the committal could
not be proceeded with because, by the discussion, doubts were
raised about the Syndicate, its position and its aims, which doubts
could not be removed by the promoters.
No one can now doubt but that Messrs. Morehead and others,
who stopped this Land-Grant Bill, did good to the country; and
that it would not have been well for the State to have had this
portion of the main line, between Adelaide and Bundaberg, in the
hands of a Syndicate.
We have therefore to congratulate ourselves on the failure
of the first Land-Grant Railway Bill, and it was only by requiring
the Bill to pass a second reading, and through committee, that
this proposal would or could have been blocked.
1880. —ln 1880 Parliament almost unanimously approved of
the proposal to construct railways by Land-Grant subsidies, and
the Railway Companies Preliminary Act of 1880 became law.
Under the Bill agreements could be made with Syndicates ;
but a Bill had to be passed approving of each agreement made before
it became binding on the country.
1881. —ln 1881 Messrs. Gresley Lukin and others made a
proposal to build a line from Charleville to the Borders of New
South Wales (explained in Hansard 1882, page 847); this offer
was not accepted.
1882. —ln 1882 the Warrego Railway Bill {Hansard 846) was
introduced by the Government, asking Parliament to adopt an
agreement accepting a proposal from Messrs. Bligh and Shaw to
build a line on the Land-Grant system, from a point between
Mitchell and Charleville, through the Warrego Country, towards
the Border, about 250 miles ; under it the contractors were to
get:
Ten thousand acres of Crown lands ;
In alternate blocks;
For every mile of railway constructed ;
Each block to have a frontage to the railway of ten miles ;
Lands to be granted about two million five hundred thousand
acres.
This Bill passed its second reading; the division showing
Ayes 27, Noes 25 ( Hansard page 946); but was withdrawn after
being worried for one day in Committee.
42


The proposal was not acceptable to Parliament, and the
Government did not force the agreement on the country,
because they could not.
1882. —ln 1882 the terms of the Transcontinental railway
agreement were agreed to between the Government and
the Syndicate, and made public.
1883. —ln 1883 the Bill asking the House to approve of the
Transcontinental scheme was submitted to Parliament by the
Mcllwraith Government, and was thrown out on the second
reading, the division showing 1G votes for and 27 votes against
the Bill ( Hansard 147).
The obnoxious clauses favouring the Syndicate caused the
defeat of the Bill on the second reading. It was in the opinion
of the members too bad to consider capable of amendment, and yet
we can have a very much worse agreement forced on the country
under the Bill of 1892. To show what has to be faced in these
proposals it may be mentioned that the Syndicate wanted,
amongst other concessions, etc.
I—All1 —All lands granted were to be free from all taxation for some
years.
2. —Large areas of agricultural lands on the Batavia Eiver
were to be granted instead of inferior land near the line in the
Gulf country.
3. —The Syndicate could, in addition to the grant of 10,000
acres of land per mile, force the country to buy the line by payment
in cash if the Syndicate wished to give it up.
4. —Government lands were not be offered for sale for ten
years (because it might interfere with sales by the Syndicate).
5. —The Syndicate had the right to secure all 'Western
traffic possible to Point Parker (Gulf of Carpenteria), such port
and township to be the Syndicate’s property.
1884. —ln 1884 the Land-Grant Kailway Act of 1880 was
repealed by a Bill introduced by Sir Samuel Griffith, the
division showing 2G votes for and 14 votes against. Reference to
the debate will show that it w T as considered unnecessary to
advance any arguments to show' why it should be repealed, the
members on the Government side declaring that the country had
emphatically declared against all Land-Grant Railways, and the
Opposition declaring that the country had only declared against
the Transcontinental agreement. Sir Samuel Griffith stated
that if he had been beguiled by Sir Thomas Mcllwraith—which
he denied—when he helped to pass the Act of 1880, since that
time he had had further time for consideration and knew more
about it fsee Hansard —page 80). Most people think that,
w hatever was done in 1880, since 1890 Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
has beguiled the hon. gentleman into setting to work as fast as
he can to undo all previous legislation and pledges, and to erect a
43


complete bar against the possibilty of carrying out any of his old
principles. The fact is, the master mind in the Cabinet has
prevailed, that is the only beguilement that has taken place.
1884. —In 1884 the Urangan Railway Act was introduced
to authorise a Syndicate to construct a line from the Burrum Coal
Field to Urangan, near Pialba, a subsidy of 1,000 acres of proved
coal land to be granted to the Syndicate. The line to be about
22 miles long. £2OOO was deposited as a guarantee of the lona
tides of the Syndicate. This bogus proposal prevented the Pialba
line from being included in the Ten Million Loan, and in 1889, five
years after, the Syndicate brought political influence to bear on
Opposition and Ministerial members so successfully that they
secured a return of £2OOO. The proposal resulted in the loss of
the line to the district, but the Syndicate speculated with the
concession, and when they could not make money on it, they let
it go, and got back their deposit, in my opinion simply because
they had friends on the Ministerial and on the Opposition sides of
the House. Many proposals will possibly be made if the Act is
passed. Many districts will be fooled by false hopes because of
them, for Syndicates with a £IOO per mile paid-up capital can
speculate with concessions, but they can’t construct railways
unless they get an unfair concession that is marketable at once in
the money-lending world.
1888. —In 1888 at the last general election the question was
again raised. Sir Thomas Mcllwraith (as a candidate for North
Brisbane and leader of the Opposition against Sir Samuel Griffith)
said he believed in Land-Grant Railways, but would not introduce
them before the question was submitted to the electors. To
emphazise this promise, and presumably to secure his election, he
signed just before the polling the following pledges and dis-
tributed them far and wide
“ Gentlemen—With a view of showing you the absurdity of the state-
ments made by my opponents, I now pledge myself to the following if I am
returned to power :
“ Not to allow the introduction of Coolie or other colored labour.
“Not to allow the introduction of Chinese.
“ Not to pay the survey fees of the Transcontinental Railway Syndicate.
“ Not to introduce or support a Transcontinental Railway Bill or
scheme.
“ I am, Gentlemen, your obedient servant,
THOMAS McILWRAITH.”
1890.—Sir Samuel Griffith, in 1890, when publishing his
address as Premier of the Coalition Ministry, said that an “ honor-
able Coalition ’’ did not necessitate any sacrifice of principles, etc.
1892.—Sir Samuel Griffith introduces a Bill to authorise
Ministers and Syndicates to make agreements about Land-Grant
Railways, which agreements could bind the country without being
approved of by Parliament.
44


NEW ZEALAND.
Turning from our own failures to get a fair proposal to some
of the New Zealand experiences since the Act of 1881 was passed
we find very little ground for expecting great things from Land
Grant Companies.
In 1882, the year after the Act passed, the first proposal
I can find was made by The Kailm Valley Railway Syndicate.
In July, 1882, the proposal was made by the Syndicate.
On the 21st August, 1882, a contract was made with the
Government.
On the 28th of August, 1882, a bond for £IO,OOO was given
as security for the due performance of the conditions of the
contract and compliance with the provisions of the Act.
Nearly 3 years after, viz., on the 13th March, 1885, they
had actually constructed more than half-a-mile of railway,
namely 41 chains.
In the same year, 1885, the Syndicate commenced the usual
proceedings of Land Grant Syndicates by calling upon the
Government for concessions or to guarantee their debentures to
the extent o t £50,000 at 4J% interest for a short line under 20
miles. That is, the Government were to guarantee repayment of
a Syndicate Loan to build the line as well as give them grants of
land. At this time they had only spent £10,049, but very little
of it on actual railway work.
Without following the Syndicate through all its works and
pressure on members and Ministers we find as might be expected,
an Act in 1891, authorising the purchase of The Kaihu Valley
Railway by the State.
Looking at the discussion on the Bill we find the following
remarks by Mr. McArthur explain how the line came to be
purchased. Mr. McArthur in 1891, in the New Zealand Parlia-
ment, said:—“ It cannot be within the knowledge of a number of
honourable gentlemen how that railway came into possession of
the Government. ... A Royal Commission were unanim-
ous in condemning the idea of the Government working it with a
view to getting a profit out of it. . . . Under The District
Railways Purchasing Act passed by the Ministry of which the
Premier was a member, a loan of £50,000 was authorised which
enabled the promoters of the railway to complete the line, and the
Government had a mortgage over the railway. A large block of
land was given to enable the promoters to complete the railway.
That had gone into the hands of the mortgagee. The railway
itself had fallen into the hands of the Government for the
£ 50,000. The railway will not pay to work under any circum-
stances whatever unless, as I have said, the owners of the kauri
bring the timber down over the line.”
Coming to the more important Midland Land Grant Railway
Company, we note that in 1884 the Syndicate obtained an Act
45


on their own account so as to secure concessions greater than
those allowed by the Act of 1881. These have been referred to
briefly on page 40, and amounted to: I—Waiver of royalty on
coal obtained from lands granted. 2 —An increase of the
subsidy in land from 6s. on every pound spent to 10s. per pound.
1884. —Further safeguards were at the same time made to
protect public interests omitted in the original Act of 1881.
1886. —The Syndicate were again at Parliament in 1886 for
further concessions, and another Act was passed to enable them;
I—To1 —To make such a deviation between Lyell and Nelson as the
Government and the Syndicate might agree to; 2—To get
lands not possible by the original contract. But Parliament
insisted on the lands being taken from certain areas defined by
the Act of 1886.
The alterations they succeded in obtaining this
time were principally: I—As to the mode of selection of
the lands. 2—That if the Government exercised the right of
purchasing the line the cost would have to include interest on
cost during construction part at 5% and the balance at 4%, the
total amount to be added to the price of the railway not to exceed
£IOO,OOO. 6—The Syndicate to have running powers over the
Government lines to the ports of Lyttleton, Nelson and Greymouth.
4—The time for expending £150,000 to be extended to the 31st
of July, 1887. s—The5 —The deposit of £SOOO to be paid as soon as
they executed an assignment of their concession to a new
Syndicate. It should be mentioned (1) that Parliament only
agreed to these modifications and additions after a report of a
Select Committee from the Members of the House of ilepresen-
tatives recommended them ; and (2) that a copy of the
agreement itself and the additions, etc, form schedules to the Act
of 1886. Parliament being therefore fully advised and approving
of the terms and conditions of the contract and of the proposed
alterations.
1887. —ln 1887 Parliament was again asked to assist the
Syndicate, and at last they secured for the Ministry the right to
allocate the lands without further reference to the Assembly.
■ln 1887 a further extension of time for spending the first
£loo,ooo was extended to the 31st December, 1888.
1888'.—In 1888 the Ministry were pressed and consented to
allow the Syndicate to alter the plans of the line.
1889. —In 1889, five years after the Act passed, a new
agreement was made with a new Syndicate, but not before they
had induced the Ministry to consent to allow the Agent-General
for the Colony to be a trustee for the debenture holders.
All the concessions possible having been wrung out of the
Ministry the Syndicate arranged for a loan in London on
debentures. The time finally fixed for completing the line has
not yet arrived.
46


The history of these two projects shows that Syndicates may
be trusted to get the best agreement possible in their own
interests, and that they will bring all the influence possible to
bear on Ministers and Members to get the agreement, how-
ever reasonable, made more favourable to the Syndicate as oppor-
tunity offers.
Other lines have been constructed in New Zealand, amount-
ing in all to nearly 90 miles judging by the Australian Year-Book
of 1892. Some have already been offered for sale to the Govern-
ment, and it is apparent the Syndicate Railways in New Zealand
have not caused the people to look with favour on Land-Grant
Railway projects.
Tasmania.
Railway No. 1.
Private railways have not been a success in Tasmania (I mean
to the country), and after the experience and trouble Parliament
has had with Railway Syndicates it is not to be wondered at
that the only railways encouraged now are State railways, or
railways on leased lands.
The first Act was in 18G5, authorising the construction of
the Launceston and Western Railway. Parliament then passed
Act No. 2 in 18G6 about the same railway;
Act No. 3 in 18G7 ;
Act No. 4 in 18G8 ;
Act No. 5 in 18G9 ;
Act No. 6 in 1871.
Six Acts in seven years prove fairly persistent demands by the
Syndicate on Parliament. Act No. 7 was passed in 1872, em-
powering the Government, to take the railway over temporarily
and carry it on. Act No. 8 was passed in 1878 to vest the rail-
ways in the Government but on condition that although the
State was to take it over, and work it at their own risk and
expense, any moneys obtained beyond £27,000 ]>er annum nett profits
were to be paid over to the Syndicate. (No term I believe defined to
end this one-sided agreement).
Railway No. 2.
In 18G9, an Act was passed to authorise a Syndicate to
build a line from Hobart to Launceston. The very next year,
1870. an Act was passed by which the Government were author-
ised to guarantee £5 per centum per annum for 30 years on any
sum not exceeding £G50,000 to any person or company building
the line. Sums to be paid under the guarantee to be paid out of
the profits (if any), but all profits subject to repayment of above
to go to the Syndicate.
1872. —Parliament w T as again approached in 1872, and the
Syndicate secured a portion of the Queen’s Domain Reserve on
lease.
47


1880. —Another Act was passed in 1880 to let the Syndicate
secure other Government lands in Hobart and Launceston.
1882.—An Act was passed to authorise the settlement of
disputes between the Government and the Syndicate for interest
that they considered the Government should have paid. They
claimed £28,258 10s. 2d. and £2,125. They obtained
£14,654 Os. lOd. and £2,125.
1884.—Another Act was passed in 1884, authorising the
Government to pay £5OO to the Syndicate to satisfy a claim they
made on a right they held to import certain goods free of Cus-
toms duties.
For some time the different Governments tried hard
to get rid of the Syndicate, and buy the railway, but exor-
bitant claims prevented any arrangement.
1890. —After considerable haggling about the value (the
Company refusing to sell at the price the Government thought
reasonable), an Act was passed in August, 1890, authorising
the Government to purchase the line of railway known as the
Tasmanian Main Line Railway (Hobart to Launceston), at any time
before June, 1891, for a sum not exceeding £1,106,500.
This railway was built because the Government guaranteed
interest on £650,000 for 80 years, but the State was forced to
buy because they had to build branch lines into a Syndicate main
line, and this would not work there, and it will not do so here
either.
Clause 8 declared: “Any such purchase shall constitute
and be a final and complete settlement of all matters in dispute
between the colony and the said Company.”
liailway No. 3.
1868. —ln 1868 an Act was passed to authorise the construc-
tion of the Mersey and Doleraine Tramway.
1869. —The following year an Act was passed to amend the
original Act and to vest certain lands in the Syndicate.
1882.—1 n 1882 an Act was passed anthorising the purchase
of the tramway by the State at a cost not to exceed £6,000.
Tasmania has therefore purchased these three private rail-
ways.
The Emu Bay and Mount Bischoff Railway is, I believe, the
only important line in Tasmania completed now in the hands of
a private Company ; as soon as it suits the Syndicate the State
will have to buy this.
Railways now Constructed by Leases of Land.
1891. —The unfortunate and dearly-bought experience Tas-
mania has had with Railway Syndicates has caused the Govern-
ment to adopt a new plan of allowing private companies to
construct railways and tramways.


The Government lease the one chain necessary for building
the line for from 21 to 80 years ; they enact stringent clauses
providing for the forfeiture of the lease, and, when the lease
expires, the railway, without the necessity of any transfer, becomes
the property of the Crown. No land-grant and no subsidy.
When the line reverts to the Crown the Company are paid
“ the actual cost of construction (exclusive of any promoters’
expenses) and one-fifth in addition,” less than £1 per cent, on a
twenty-one years’ lease and the then value of the equipment,
plant, etc. The accounts for construction cost have to be audited
by the Government as the work proceeds. The line is to be in
good repair and condition, or the Government can make it good
and deduct the cost out of the actual cost of construction to be
paid to the Company.
Private lines on these terms have been authorised in 1890
and in 1891 in Tasmania.
Western Australia.
In Western Australia an Act was passed in 1884, authoris-
ing on conditions agreed to by Parliament the construction of a line
from Beverly to Albany on the Land-Grant System.
The lands to be given were defined in the contract, ratified by
an Act.
In 1888 another Act was passed authorising the transfer of
the contract from the Hordern Syndicate to the Western Australian
Land Company, Limited, and by the Act the line of the proposed
railway was defined exactly.
In Western Australia the private lines consist of
1. —Hordern’s (West Australian Co.) Great Southern Line ex-
tension—referred to above.
2. —Waddington’s (Midland Co.) Midland Eailway
B.—McNeil & Co.’s Line to Port Rockingham—BB miles.
4. —The West Australian Timber Co.’s Line to Sockville—lB miles.
5. —The Ballarat Timber Co.’s Line—l 4 miles.
The Companies received ;
With No. 1, Land Grants of acres per mile.
~ No. 2, Land Grants of 12,000 acres per mile.
~ No. 5, A Grant allowing timber to be cut on a block of land
20 miles long by 10 miles wide.
Victoria.
In Victoria the only private railway—from St. Hilda to Mel-
bourne —had to be bought at a very high price from the Syndi-
cate who were unwisely allowed to build this line.
49


THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA.
The Land-Grant Railway system has not been a success in
any of the colonies, but in America we iire assured Land-Grant
Railways have been the real cause of the speedy development of
the States beyond all chance of settlement for years by railways
constructed by any Government.
The three great lines in America have been made by Land-
Grant Railway companies, and to opponents to the system it was
pointed out in 1883 that all railway lines in England, and most
of the lines in America, are in the hands of private companies,
and that the people are not pressing for State control of the lines.
That the freights and fares on these Land-Grant Railway
lines in America are more reasonable than on any other line in
the world we know, but the great evil of aggregation of large
estates has been prevented by the land grants being only of blocks
of G4O acres each. (Here we propose to allow blocks of 64,000
acres each.;
Many of these Syndicate lines have been subsidised by large
Government money votes as well as by land-grants of millions
of acres.
For the best side of American land-grant railways see the
speeches of Sir Thomas MTI wraith and of the late John
Maerossan in (1883) Hansard, pages 66 and 100.
For the other side see the speeches of Sir Samuel Griffith
and Messrs. Groom and Ferguson in (1883) Hansard, pages 79,
117, and 123.
50


WHY AMERICAN LAND-GRANT RAILWAYS SUCCEEDED—AND HOW ?
Land-Grant Eailways, with 640 acres in alternate blocks,
maybe a success when railways with blocks of 64,000 acres
would be disastrous to the colony. If we want our lines to cause
settlement, as they did in America, we must do as the Americans
do—fight against all big blocks.
Sir Samuel Griffith pointed out the difference very clearly
in 1882 ( Hansard , page 856). He said :
“The hon. gentleman told us that the advancement of
America was to a very great extent owing to the land-grant
system, which he said encouraged the settlement of the
country to an enormous extent. I can quite believe it; and if
the circumstances of the colony were the same I believe the
objections lam now urging would not apply. But how different
is the system in force there from what is proposed here ? In
America the land is sold in blocks of only one square mile in
extent. It is not in America a question of making a railway
through a country in the hands of pastoral tenants, and suit-
able for pastoral purposes only ; but making a railway through
agricultural lands for the purpose of settling the people who are
waiting to be settled somewhere. In order to make any use of that
land,, the contractors must sell it in small areas, and not in
large ones. That is the essential difference between the two
schemes. ”•
Mr. Groom in 1880 (see Hansard, page 1109), said, he had
not yet spoken upon the Bill. He was free to confess that he
had very little sympathy with the measure. In reading it over
he found that one/of the most important elements of the
American system w&s omitted. When large grants were allowed
to Companies in America, it was part of the agreement that
they should introduce a certain number of immigrants, and
settle them on the land. There was nothing of the kind in
this Bill. In 1878, he had had occasion to quote an extract
from the New York Tribune, an accepted authority. He found
in a leader of that journal these remarkable words, which he
thought would bear repetition :
“ The system of giving grants of land to railroad Companies and other
speculating corporations is recognised as a monstrous device of corruption
and dishonesty. The grants already reached a total of 215,000,000 acres,
but an attempt is being made to recover a large portion of this area.
Nearly all the Companies have failed in the conditions upon which the
gifts were made. The grants to only five roads have been fully adjusted;
51


the grants to only four of the remainder have been declared forfeit; and,
of the 215,000,000 acres conditionally appropriated to the subsidy roads,
only one-lifth part had been certified and patented to them, and that fifth
was more than they earned. The Commissioner of the Lands Office has
published a list of twenty Companies whose grants and extensions of
grants have now expired. Some of them ran out 11 or 12 years ago ; more
than half of them have never built a mile of road, although in some
instances they have actually rece ved patents for large amounts of the land to
which they had no just title. It appears to have been popularly supposed
that, when these grants run out, the title to the land reverted to the
Government without further process. A decision of the Supreme Court,
however, established the important rule that the grants, notwithstanding
the limitations contained in them, remain valid until the declaration of
forfeiture is enforced by proper legislative or judicial proceedings.
There are consequently defunct, or bankrupt, or unsuccessful, or fraudulent
railway Companies which still hold the title of millions of acres of subsidy
lands that they had not earned, and have no prospect or intention of
eirning. Mr. Joyce, of Vermont, has introduced in the House a joint
resolution for the recovery of these forfeited lands (with due protection to
bond fide purchasers), and their appropriation to the use of actual settlers,
or to purposes of education.”
Surely we should learn something from the experience of
others, and, as far as possible, by any Bill authorising Land-
Grant Railways, protect the colony from the losses and troubles
that other colonies and countries have had to contend with,
because the desire to secure railway construction by private
companies made legislators indifferent to the evils careless legis-
lation would heap on future Parliaments and the people.
A. J. Ross & Co., Printers, 26 Queen Street, Brisbane.
52


NOTES.
1. —The area of the Colony is 427,833,080 acres.
2. —The total area of land sold from 1843 to 1892
{including lands selected liable to purchase) amounts to 12,521,728
acres. The 10,576,208 acres actually alienated realized
£6,748,405 12s.
3. —The lands held under Pastoral Lease amount to
280,000,000 acres, let for a rental of £812,780195. 4d. per annum.
4. —Roughly speaking, the lands west of Grey’s Range—•
Winton, Hughenden and Herberton (about half the Colony) are
not yet divided under the Land Act of 1884, and can be
divided between Syndicates and the Minister in 64,000-acre blocks.
5. —All the resumed halves of runs are available under the
Bill for Land-Grant Syndicate Reservations.
ERRATA.
In paragraph 3, page 13, “ 1,000,000 acres" should read
“ 4.000,000 acres."
In the last paragraph but one, page 14—“ No. 8 —40,000
acres a mile and the cost," should read “ No. 3 —40,000 acres a
wile and the fair and reasonable value on a basis specified in the
contract.”
In the same paragraph “ maximum ” should read “ mini-
in um value,”
53


REFERENCES TO “HANSARD” DEBATES
ON
LAND-GRANT PROPOSALS & BILLS.
Pages.
1875. Collier and Co.’s Offer — Hansard, 1875 .. 152
1875. The Continental Railway Bill of 1875 .. •• [IIS 243 358 375
1876. The Railway Reserves Bill ~ .. ~ 712 769 866 1158
1877. The Railway Reserves Bill 47 last 809
1879. The Burrum Railway (Land-Grant) Bill .. 1623
1880. The Burrum Railway (Land-Grant) Bill .. 599 792 1217 1412
( 802 845 913 941
1880. The Railway Companies Preliminary Act < 976 1081 1102 1152
(.1165 1473
1881. Mr. Lukin’s Proposal for a Line from Charle-
ville to the Borders of New South Wales 847
1882. The Warrego Railway Bill—to adopt Shaw)
and Blyth’s proposal to construct a Line) g ,g 87 »
from a point between Mitchell and Charle- J-
ville through the Warrego Country towards
the Border .. .. ~ ..
1883. The Transcontinental Railway Bill .. .. 61 91 117
1884. The Repeal of the (Land-Grant) Preliminary
Act of 1880 38 42 61 81
1884. The Urangan Railway Act of 1884 —From the \ 883 986 1185 1244
Burrum Coal Field to the Coast .. .. J 1344 1359 1791 1866
The speeches best worth reading in favour of the Land-Grant System
are those of:—
1— Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, p. 845, 1880 ; 846 in 1882; and 66 in 1883.
2 Thelate John Macrossan, p. 924,1880; 861 in 1882 ; „ 100 in 1883.
The best against Land-Grant Railways are those of :
1— Sir Samuel Griffith, p. 913,1880; 853 in 1882 : and 79 in 1883.
2 Mr. Groom, p. 1108,1880; 882 in 1882 ; „ 117 in 1883.
3 The late Mr. Fraser, p. 113,1343.
4 Mr. John Ferguson, p. 123,1883.


Brisbane:
A. J. Eoss & Co., Printers, 2G
Queen Street.


Brisbane:
A. J. Koss A Co., Printers,
(j)gErH Street.
