

jiiiiiiiiuniiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiimiiiiieiiiii^
&/ I
- ~ mjL. -
I BY SARAH MUSGRAVE
E Copyright.
5 All Rights Reserved S 3
'iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiimmiiiiiimimiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiß




THE
WAYBACK
BY SARAH MUSGRAVE
I
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
The Cumberland Argus
Church and Macquarie Sts., Parramatta


Dedicated to
STEEL CALDWELL, Esq
Eurabba Station, Young.


MRS. SARAH MUSGRAVB




PREFACE.
At the latter end of my 95th birthday, I have suc-
ceeded in relating most of the incidents of my life that
have seemed to me worth printing, and I have set them
down here for the love of retailing them, and also that
many great names of early pioneers may be preserved to
coming generations.
I will be 96 years old on May 4, 1926, and my memory
is clear as to many of the incidents herein related back
as far as ninety-two years ago.
As far as possible, I have drawn on my own memory,
but, where necessary, I have consulted reliable records,
and feel satisfied that no facts have been misrepresented.
SARAH MUSGRAYE.




CHAPTER 1
Year by year the Outback of Australia moved far-
ther and farther out. And, now, romance that for a long
time was associated with the poetic figure, “West of
Sunset,” has been lost. The trains, the telephone, and
the wireless have gathered up the distances of Australia
and placed them, as it were, in a central position that we
may reach without the necessity of laborious travelling.
At one time the outback of Australia was very close
to Sydney; gradually this outback moved on before the
march of surveyors, squatters, and teamsters, till our
poets found it retreating from Hay and Bourke, and,
finally, lost it out beyond the Sun. Now it has gone for-
ever, and the West is no longer a secret bush to man.
The outback is no more; bullocks yoked to waggons, the
coaches of Cobb and Co., the diggings, those, too, have
gone. The bushrangers have had their day, and all that
remains of them are the records that writers have put
into books, and the memories of a few pioneers who are
still with us. The blacks are now in the remnant stage
of existence, and, unless the Government changes its
present stupid policy of unsympathetic guardianship, this
native race must soon completely die out.
If it can be said that the outback of Australia ever
had a location, the distinction of possessing it one hun-
dred years ago belongs to Young.
In 1812 i, Mr. James White, his brother—Thomas:—
and wife, a friend named Mackenzie, and another man
came from England to Sydney. Thomas White, with his
wife, went to Yan Dieman’s Land as a horse dealer, but
the three others took up land, under a free grant, on the
Hawkesbury River, where they started farming. White’s
two partners grew tired of their pioneer undertaking, and
White bought them out. He carried on single-handed for
some time, and got his farm well stocked with cattle,
horses, and pigs, and he had a fine crop of vegetables.
Then a big flood came. This was a new experience for
Mr. White, and he watched with amazement the water
spreading from the river across his farm. In a short
time the stock was floating about at the mercy of the
flood, and White was perched on top of a stack of hay
5


The farm was washed out of existence; at least, every-
thing movable was swilled away, and White, on his stack
of hay, was carried down the stream. For an hour or
two the stack was kept by the current in deep water,
and then it was washed on to land. White jumped off,
and walked to Sydney through the bush.
James White did not return to his farm, but, instead,
established himself in Sydney as the proprietor of a
slaughter house. He bought land in King Street. On this
land he built a house, and at both sides and at the back
he had stone walls built, thus achieving the distinction of*
being the first man in Sydney to cause a dwelling so to
be isolated. Close to the residence he built a slaughter
house. This had a frontage to George Street, and was
close to King Street. Although White did not himself
do the slaughtering, and although he made a lot of money
from the business of which he was the principal, the car-
case butchering industry did not appeal to him. He dis-
liked town life, too, and longed for the unknown outback
that was somewhere beyond the straggling bush of Syd-
ney; so, in 1826, he took up a station property near what
is now known as Young.
The taking up of a station in those days was a simple
enough matter, after one had reached a desirable place
on which to squat, providing, of course, one got a pass-
port from the blacks, and escaped the many dangers
that travellers met in the unknown bush.
The only legal formality to be gone through was to
notify the Government that one had squatted and pay a
sum of ten pounds a year for the privilege of continuing
to squat.
When Mr. White set out to find a station for him-
self, he followed close on Surveyor-General Mitchell’s
tracks. He started out alone with his saddle horse and
one pack-horse to carry provisions ; and two hundred and
sixty miles from Sydney he came upon a spot that he
considered would be an ideal place whereon to build a
station homestead. He decided to camp there for the time
being, and the fire he lit to boil his billy attracted the at-
tention of a blackfellow, the chief of the Lachlan tribe.
At first the chief disputed with Mr. White the posses-
sion of the land, but, under the influence of many gifts
from Mr. White’s stores, the black chief became friendly,
and allowed the embryo squatter to remain, guaranteeing
6


him immunity of attack from the tribe. The spot Mr.
White had settled on was, so he learned from the chief,
Burrowmunditroy. Mr. White named the chief Cobborn
Jackie, and crowned him king of his tribe.
Mr. White then returned to Sydney, and there made
with the authorities arrangements that allowed him to
take up a station of any considerable extent, but, for con-
venience sake, estimated at one hundred square miles.
He paid his first year’s rent of ten pounds, and then pur-
chased stock and stores, and engaged a number of men
for station work. The stock consisted of cattle sheep,
pigs, and horses. The stores he loaded on two bullock
drays, and, with the assistance of his staff, he reached
Burrowmunditroy safely, after an absence of ten months.
Although a track had been cut by Mitchell, much scrub
had grown up, and, to get the drays through, Mr. White’s
men had to clear away the bush at places during the
journey,
Cobborn Jackie was there to meet Mr. White on his
return, and, among all the possessions of the new squat-
ter, none was to Jackie so important as a solid brass
plate, the permanent emblem of Jackie’s office as the king
of the tribe. The plate was crescent-shaped, and had at-
tached to it a long, fine brass chain for the neck.
The plate, which is still as good as new, has on it
the following inscription; “Cobborn Jackey, Chief of
Burrowmunditroy. ’ ’
The crowning of Jackie, while it endeared Mr. White
to the tribe and secured him against attack, or even op-
position, had a rather tiresome consequence. The blacks
felt that their gratitude could be expressed only by a
corroboree of the most ceremonial kind, and this they ar-
ranged at once. The first session lasted all night. This
turned out to be a mere introduction of what was to fol-
low, for the corroboree lasted ten days, with Mr. White
and his men as the audience. Jackie’s thanks being in
this way offered, and by Mr. White accepted, the question
of establishing the station demanded some attention. Jac-
kie’s appreciation, however, did not end with the
eorroboreee, and he told Mr. White that he knew
of a better place whereon to establish the home-
stead. This was on Sandy Creek, a deep run-
ning stream five miles further south. An in-
vestigation was made, this being done by travel-
ling through thick bush on foot. Mr, White saw at once


that Jackie’s advice was good, so he unhesitatingly adopted
it, and a spot was there and then selected for the home-
stead. This place was known to the blacks as Burran-
gong, and this name was given to Mr. White’s new sta-
tion. So far everything had gone smoothly enough, but
Mr. White was not yet established on his holding. His
stocks, teams, and men were still at Burrowmunditroy,
and to get them to Burrangong was a problem. There
was no road between the two places—not even a track —
but Mr. White was a man of resource, and, when he re-
turned to Burrowmunditroy, he told his foreman that
he had decided to squat at Burrangong, Sandy Creek, and
instructed him to set the men to work to chop a road
through the bush. This was done, and, when the chosen
place was reached, a homestead, dairy, men’s quarters,
and other outhouses were built. In this way was started
the first-station in what was then the outback of New
South Wales.
The squatters to follow James White come in this
order:—
Hazleton and McGee (Marengo), 1827; sold to Scar
in 1841, and Scar sold to Broughton in 1855.
John Trott (Stoney Creek), 1827; sold to Mulholland
1842, and moved to The Billabong—now called Marsden,
James Roberts (Currawong), 1830. After Mr. Ro-
berts died, the station was sold, and the owner is now
Cam Roberts.
McKay (Wallenbeen), 1830.
J. Cummings, with his sons Michael and Dennis
(Combanning), 1830.
Dan Dacey and O'Brien (Stockinbingal), 1830.
Edward Ryan (Galong), 1830. Ryan died on the sta-
tion, and the property (which was willed to the Roman
Catholic Church) went to the church when the last of
Ryan’s family died.
John Harris (Callangan), 1830.
Captain Grant (Douglas), 1830.
Chapman (Callabash), 1830.
John Wood (Brundah), 1833.
Gibson brothers (Bogabogalong), 1833. They also
took up Crackable, near Bland, in the same year.
Major-General Steward (The Gap), 1833; sold to Mr.
Chew in 1860.
Myles (Crowther), 1835; sold to Major-General Stew-
-8


ard, of Mount Pleasant, Bathurst, 1845. Later sold to
Mr. Pring.
Henry Owen (Bombaldra), 1835; sold to Redfern
Watt many years later.
John and Philip Croker (Burrowmunditroy), 1840.
Marsh and Wise (Demonderell), 1840.
Guerry de Lauret (Weddin Mountains) 1840; sold
to William Charles Wentworth in 1843. Wentworth sub-
divided in the same year, and sold one portion of the
station to Thomas Burrett and another to John Nolan. A
third lot he sold to Miles Murphy, late of Binalong. Mur-
phy sold to Patrick O’Meally, and John Daley bought
out both Burrett and Nolan. Nolan took up the Yellow
Water Holes on the Bland, and Burrett bought the ad-
joining station, Euroka, which had been formed by
Thomas Swanket.


CHAPTER 2,
Soon after his start at Burrangong, Mr. White sent
to England for his brother—John. This brother, with
his wife, arrived at Burrangong in James White
had had a pise house built for them to live in, and this
became their home. John White did not go to the sta-
tion immediately on arriving in Sydney, but, having
brought with him from London a quantity of drapery and
fancy goods, he opened a shop in Pitt Street, Sydney, and
sold the goods before going to Burrangong. His idea in
bringing these goods to Australia was to secure himself
against a possible shortage of money in case the position
on the station did not suit his tastes. It was, at best, a
severe jolt for a London draper to break up his home in
that great city to come to a practically unknown country,
as Australia was at that time.
In Sydney, John White renewed his acquaintance
with Henry Parkes (afterwards Sir Henry), whom he
had known in London. To John White, Parkes was plain
Harry, and this plain Harry, poetic and all as he was, was
navvying on the Sydney roads.
White approached Parkes, and said to him:
“Harry, you can’t do that work; throw down your
pick and shovel, and come with me. I’ll start you in
business.”
Parkes was set up with a basket full of haberdashery
and toys. These goods he sold from door to door. His
stock-in-trade consisted of hairpins, pins, ribbons, but-
tons, hooks-and-eyes, dolls, and other articles of house-
hold utility or ornament. It was a successful undertak-
ing for Parkes, and, in a short time, he was in a financial
position to open a shop for himself.
When John White had disposed of his stock, he, with
his wife, went to Burrangong, and entered into active
partnership with his brother, James. As a general sta-
tion hand, John was not a success; for one thing, he
could not learn to ride, but his unsuitability for station
work did not render him useless as an assistant to his
brother, for he was an expert gardener; and if there was
one thing more than another wanted on Burrangong
10


it was a gardener. 'So John was allotted the duty of
supplying the station with vegetables. To his vegetable
garden he added a horticultural plot, and there, in the
outback wilderness of Australia, he made to grow beau-
tiful flowers as a set-off to the eternal potato and cab-
bage. One fruit tree (a peach) planted by him was bear-
ing fruit abundantly when it was sixty years old. He
also was a great help to his brother as manager when
James had to go to Sydney with produce and to get more*
stock for the station.
James White had never married, so his brother’s wife
was invested with the duties of housekeeper at Burran-
gong. This had a civilising and comforting effect on the
station life; and Mrs. White at the same time achieved
the distinction of being the first white woman to go to
that district.
In 1830 I was born, in the little pise house, and Mr.
and Mrs. John White were my parents, and Mr. James
White my uncle. Here, my mother achieved another dis-
tinction, and I achieved one also; for I was the first white
person born at Burrangong.
When I was a little more than six months of age,
my mother and father took me to Sydney in a bullock
dray. Suddenly, one day, my parents made up their
minds to go back to Burrangong, and the return journey
was started also in a bullock dray. The roads were in a
very bad condition, and, owing to the dray being bogged
in many places, much time was lost. My parents were
forced to put up at Mr. Bray’s station at Crookwell. The
Brays were friends of theirs, and they were warmly wel-
comed. In a few days, a daughter was born, and my mo-
ther and father stayed three months at the Brays’ sta-
tion. Altogether, it took twelve months for us to get from
Sydney to Burrangong.
When I remember that my mother was a London girl,
I think she must have been very brave to face these con-
ditions, for the hardships were many. That journey back
from Sydney was full of terror for this young mother
who was so soon to have another child. Camping on the
roads in the rain, night after night for months, they had
the fear all the time of not reaching a house in time. And
there was no white woman, and no doctor that could be
called to help. Even on the station at Burrangong my
mother, for nearly three years, did not know what it was
11


to see a white woman’s face or to hear a white woman’s
voice. Till she came to the station she had not even
learned to cook, and the knowledge that she gained of
this art had to be imparted to her by the men employed
by my uncle. So I might say, with justifiable pride, that
she did nobly.
My father brought the first feather mattresses to
Australia, and these he took with him to Burrangong;
but he did not live long to enjoy the comfort of such
luxuries in the Australian bush.
When I was four years of age, my mother went on
a visit to Marengo Station, twenty miles from Burran-
gong. She had been driven there in a gig. This trip was
made possible through the visit of an aunt to Burran-
gong, and I and my little sister, Eliza, were left in the
care of this aunt. She was the wife of my Uncle Thomas,
who went to Van Dieman’s Land as a horse dealer. He
was killed while leading a horse home from the sale
yards. Foolishly, he had tied the halter of the newly-
acquired horse around his own waist, and, on horseback,
in this fashion, he led the horse he had just bought. The
new horse pulled my uncle out of the saddle, and when
he was found, he was dead. His own saddle horse went
home; but the other, being tethered to the man’s body,
was obliged to remain where the accident had happened.
When found, my uncle’s body still had the halter tied to
it, and the horse was grazing alongside.
Of the three children, Thomas and a girl came with
my aunt to live at Burrangong, but James, a boy of six-
teen years, remained on his father’s farm. All three were
born in Van Dieman’s Land. And of Thomas I shall have
something to say further along.
When the time came for my mother to return, it was
arranged that my father should go to Marengo and bring
her back, and I remember him, when he was ready to
start, coming into the room and saying to my uncle, “Jim,
take care of my children till I see them again.”
As I have said, he was not able to ride, so he set off
on foot to walk to Marengo through the bush. His inten-
tion was to come back with my mother in the gig, but
he got off the track and was lost, and died within five
miles of where Young is now. There was no water at
that spot, and, when his body was found nine days later
12


by a boy who was looking for bullocks: it had been torn
to pieces by wild dogs. The parcel he was carrying and
his pistol were found hanging in a sapling, where he had
put them before dying. The finding of his body was quite
an accident, and we all thought that he had reached Ma-
rengo. A watch and some silver that had been in his
pockets were found on the ground near the skeleton.
My mother returned from Marengo at once, and two
months later went to Gunning, where she stayed for a
few months until a son (George) was born. While my
mother was at Gunning, my uncle went to Marengo and
engaged a shepherd. This shepherd was sent to Burran-
gong to take charge of a flock of sheep, and he set off
along the track my father should have followed when he
was going to Marengo to bring my mother home. The
shepherd got off the track and was lost, too. He, how-
ever, was an expert bushman, and succeeded in reaching
the homestead after being lost for six days. When he
staggered up to the house, he was very weak, and re-
quired careful nursing to save his life. He had with him
two sheep dogs, and on the blood of these dogs he had
kept himself alive. This he managed by cutting pieces
off the tails and drinking the blood. His method was to
cut off an inch of each tail at a time and drink what
blood he could get from the fresh cut. The two dogs,
tailless and exhausted, limped faithfully behind him to
the station.
Shortly after this event, a hut keeper (shepherd’s
cook and assistant) was lost going back from Burrangong
to his hut at Lambing Flat. Eight days later he was
found, he having had the good sense to remain with
some hoppled horses which, fortunately, he had come
across, eighteen miles out of his course. The owner of the
horses found him while looking for the horses. Still an-
other man was lost about this time. His name was Wil-
liam Phillips, and he was the tutor of us children at Bur-
rangong. How he came to lose himself is a strange story.
I remember a visitor coming to our station at long inter-
vals. He lived sixty miles from Burrangong, and used to
walk the distance in a day. Mr. Phillips thought it would
be a friendly act to return one of these visits, so, one
day, he set out on the long walk. Wlien he did not re-
turn to the station at the time given, all the men of Bur-
rangong turned out to look for him. He was almost dead
13


when found nine days after leaving the station.
My uncle, as a result of my father being lost, cut a
road from Burrangong to Marengo. This was done by
blazing the trees in a perfectly straight line, and the bush
surveyor employed for this work was the faithful Oob-
born Jackie of Burrowmunditroy. Jackie had by this
time acquired a second kingdom, being crowned by my
uncle as chief of Burrangong, Jackie was wonderful in
the art of straight lines, and the many roads that he
helped to make for my uncle, as well as the roads marked
out by other blacks for other squatters, formed, later on,
parts of the main road.


CHAPTER 3
After finishing the road from Burrangong to Maren-
go, my uncle went to Sydney with the wool teamsters.
It was a regular thing for him to do this trip once a year.
Always a kind-hearted man, he used to pity the convicts
working on the road, and, at Liverpool, it was his custom
to change gold into silver, and from The Junction (now
Granville), he would throw coins to the convict road-
workers all the way to Sydney. His yearly visits were
looked fonvard to with great pleasure by the convicts,
and my uncle was somewhat of a hero in their eyes. At
this time my mother returned from Gunning, but was
not long home when the bushrangers stuck up the station.
My aunty was away, and Mrs. Terrible Billy, wife of Mr.
Terrible Billy, was in charge as housekeeper. I did not
know their names, and they were always Mr. and Mrs.
Terrible Billy to us on the station. The name “Terrible”
was not used in any derogoratory sense, but as a compli-
ment, meaning that they were terrors for always doing
the right thing, and terrors to work.
It was early afternoon in the year 1835 that the
bushrangers came, and, just before they got to the home-
stead, I had wandered away a little distance. The gins
warned me of the approach of the bushrangers by call-
ing out “Croppy come up”, and they scampered for their
lives through the bush, while I ran back home. Two bush-
rangers came galloping behind me, and I went as fast as
my four-year-old legs could carry me. I broke the news
to my mother and Mrs. Terrible Billy, and when the bush-
rangers arrived at the house, they announced themselves
as Bcotchie and Whitton. These two men were notorious,
and were the terror of the district. They took us all out-
side and put us in a row. One of the bushrangers kept
guard over us with a loaded gun, while the other ran-
sacked the house and gathered up anything of value to
them. There were four of us children, including Mrs. Ter-
rible Billy’s two children and my sister, Eliza, who was
eighteen months younger than myself, as well as my mo-
ther, the housekeeper, and the servant, bailed up; and us
children were crying as hard as we could. The outlaw
keeping guard gave me and Eliza 21b. of bull’s-eye lollies
and we stopped crying at once.
IS


The bushranger who was doing the ransacking inside
got the surprise of his life when he came upon 200 black
gins hiding in the loft of a very large house. They
screamed as in one voice, and scampered about as if they
were mad. The bushranger drove them outside, and they
took to the bush and hid themselves. The two outlaws
then broke into the men’s huts, and robbed them.
After this they said that they wanted to shoot my
uncle because he had threatened to kill them. There
were twelve portholes in the side of our house, which
had been placed there for observation purposes, and the
house was full of firearms and bayonets. They took what
firearms they wanted, and the rest, as well as the bay-
onets, they smashed up before our eyes. They then se-
cured a sixty-gallon hog’s-head of rum, which was kept
for the workmen, and, getting about thirty dishes from
the dairy, they poured the rum into them. Their next
move was to call the workmen (forty in number) from
the paddocks, and, handing each one a large spoon, made
them all ladle out the rum and drink it. This was to
make them drunk and helpless.
The bushrangers went away, swearing to get even
on Mr. Roberts, of Currawong Station, twenty miles
away. They reached the station that afternoon, and shot
five of the seven occupants, killing two of them. All the
rest of the men and Mr. Roberts were away at the time,
but they declared that they would kill him because of the
threat that he was said to have circulated that he would
bring the outlaws to book.
When my uncle returned, he went to Binalong, and
joined the Commissioner of Police to search for the bush-
rangers, but, failing to find them, he gave up the task and
returned to Burrangong.
Those two bushrangers continued to terrorise the
district, and one night Mr. Graham, who took Terrible
Billy’s place as overseer on the station (Mr. and Mrs.
Terrible Billy having left), returned from Goulburn, and
told a thrilling story of how Scotchie and Whitton had
stuck up twenty-two men near Goulburn. He ridiculed
the idea that twenty-two men should allow two bush-
rangers to stick them up and rob them. He boasted of
what he would do if he were one of twenty-two held up
in such a manner, but was dumbfounded when at that
moment Whitton put his head in the doorway, and asked
16


for a tally of the men in the kitchen. Graham admitted
that there were forty-one present, Whitton then walked
into the kitchen alone, and commanded the whole forty-
one men to turn their faces to the fire. This they did, and
remained there under threat that if one of them moved
he would be shot dead. Whitton kept guard over them,
and, calling Scotchie in, told him to rob the house. One
man saved his money by putting it in a hollow log that
was burning on the fire ,and my uncle saved his by wrap-
ping it up in the table cloth while setting the table to
to get the bushrangers some tea.
After that, Scotchie and Whitton went to the Fish
River to settle with a man named Fry, but Fry had his
hut barricaded, and, through a crack in the slabs, shot
Scotchie dead, and wounded Whitton, who was captured,
and executed in Goulburn. His last wish was made to the
Rev. John Cartwright, a Church of England minister, to
the effect that, after the execution, that gentleman should
visit all the places where the two bushrangers had rob-
bed and murdered, and hold prayers.
Strange to say that the bushrangers, who had vowed
to kill my uncle, were, when they found him home, more
friendly towards him than towards any of the others.
It was never discovered, really, who these two bushran-
gers were, but it is surmised that they broke from Sur-
veyor-General Oxley’s party in 1821, and that, when they
deserted, they took to the bush. At his trial in Goulburn,
Whitton gave his name as Thomas Whitton, but as for
Scotchie, his identity is still a mystery. The hiding place
of these two bushrangers was in the Weddin Mountains,
twenty miles from Burrangong. They lived there in a
cave, but the bush was so thick that every attempt to
find them had failed. It is interesting to note that the
name “Weddin” is a corruption of “wooden”, this lat-
ter name being given to the range because of its particu-
larly dense timbered state.
Mr. Cartwright kept his word to visit the stations
that had been stuck up by Scotchie and Whitton.
At Burrangong he stayed for three weeks, and, while
there, he christened me, with my uncle’s permission. My
mother being away (she was then visiting “Briney” Gro-
gan’s station on the Burrowa River), was not able to tell
the minister that she had had me christened in Sydney
when I was less than a year old. Fortunately, both
17


christenings were in the same faith (Church of England).
As far as I know, neither christening, nor both together,
did me any harm, perhaps they did me a lot of good, for
I have had, in many respects, a most happy life, and all
the time good health.
My mother re-married in 1837, two-and-a-half years
after my father’s death. Her second husband was Mr.
George Groves, owner of Mulyan Station, near Yass.
Shortly after the marriage, she and her husband went to
Victoria to live, and there Mr. Groves took up a large
station near Rushworth. He named his property Gobirip.


CHAPTER 4
My earliest recollections of the blacks is that they
were fat and robust, and they were noted for the shape-
liness of their legs and arms, but their degeneration fol-
lowed rapidly upon the change from native habits. But
they were always honest, and I never heard of one eve*
stealing a thing. Cobborn Jackie was the Good Samaritan
of his race, who lived for peace. In those early days,
many people owed their lives to his influence over the
savage spirit of his kinsmen. Cobborn Jackie had a per-
sonality that led him to the head of his tribe, and he was,
by general assent, its ruler; but, when he was crowned
by my uncle, he was looked up to with even greater
respect. It was very unusual that the blacks would at-
tempt to commit crimes while the king was present,
though on one or two occasions the rule was broken, but
not without Jackie offering his protest.
The blacks in those days were more afraid of fire-
arms than of anything else. They respected Cobborn
Jackie because of his innate greatness, as far as they un-
derstood it, but they feared firearms as much as they
feared the “debbil-debbil”. It was the knowledge that
firearms were kept at Burrangong that deterred many a
murderous raid. The blacks used sometimes to associate
guns with the “debbil-debbil”, and some held the opinion,
associated with shooting, that Satan had really visited
their camps to spit death fire at them. They knew no
God, but were always careful not to displease the devil.
They would hide their crimes as much as they could, and
when they committed murder they would cover the face
of the victim from the prying eyes of the interfering
“debbil-debbil”, who was ever trying to sheet the blame
home to the culprit.
On one occasion, when my uncle was away, one thou-
sand blacks came to the station and pitched their camp
close to the homestead. They behaved themselves reason-
ably well, except that they would not hunt for food, but
made the station provide it. Tea, sugar, tobacco, flour,
as well as meat and other articles were supplied to them
for some time, and the blacks seemed content to stay for
ever. I expected my uncle home shortly, so I advised the
19


blacks to break camp as quickly as they could, but they
refused to leave. When Mr. White returned, he decided
to try a scheme of his own for getting rid of the blacks.
He went into the camp and shot two of their dogs dead.
Instantly every black appeared to become raving mad.
They all screamed; and, racing round in a circle, gathered
up the dead and the live dogs, and rushed off into the
bush with them, calling out in wild shrieks: “Debbil-deb-
bil come up; debbil-debbil, come up!” The live dogs
howled as insanely as the blacks. The blacks, in their
great hurry to get away, left behind them a sick gin with
her baby, and a number of spears and boomerangs. The
deserted gin and her child were taken to the homestead,
and were given a place to live in. For some time the gin
entertained fears concerning the death of the dogs, and
was in dread of her life that the devil was lurking in
every corner of the home; but, in a short while, after her
timidness had passed off, she became very useful in the
house, and remained there until her baby was sixteen
years old.
It was always my uncle’s custom to bring presents
for the blacks when he returned from his yearly trips.
Usually these presents took the form of knives, toma-
hawks, clay pipes, tobacco, chalk, and red and yellow
ochre. In addition they would give tea, sugar, and
flour, but to have one thousand blacks imposing upon his
generosity in his absence was too much for him.
A trip or two after my uncle had shot the two dogs,
we were one night shaken to our foundations with fear.
The men had returned from the harvest field after
their day’s work, and were washing themselves in the
creek at the back of the homestead, while my uncle, in the
soft light shed by the setting sun, was reading a Sunday
newspaper, six weeks old', which he had brought to the
station. A black mass of humanity, preceded by a series
of the most hideous noises that could possibly be imag-
ined surged over the crest of a little hill half a mile away
to the west. The mass bore down on the station, weaving
madly a formidable assortment of war implements, and
yelling with savage lust. This was an anxious time for
Mr. White. There was murder in every syllable of the
noise that reached his ears. The station men (forty-one
in number), rushed up from the creek, picking up sticks
and stones on their w r ay. Mr. White secured all the fire-
-20


arms he had in the house, and, with his army of workmen,
put his back to the wall of the house and awaited the
onslaught. I peeped through a small porthole in the wall,
and trembled at the prospect of an uneven battle. The
mass came on at a swinging gait, and revealed itself as
fifteen hundred naked blacks with Cobborn Jackie as the
general. The faces, limbs, and bodies of the blacks were
marked in varying lines of red and yellow clay, and every
unit of this strange army carried a boomerang, spear, and
waddy.
The howling of the blacks was incessant, and they
were alarmingly war-like. My uncle had his men under
control, and he refused to allow them to shoot because
of the presence of Cobborn Jackie. Jackie’s reputation
was a unique one, and he was trusted by Mr, White, even
in the face of this apparently hostile demonstration.
When within fifty yards of the homestead, the blacks
halted and instantly squatted on the ground, beating it
with their waddles, and broke into wild song.
Jackie had united in peace the Murrumbidgee and the
Lachlan tribes, and had marched the blacks one hundred
miles from the Snowy River—to forgive Mr. White for
shooting the dogs belonging to the former tribe. Cobborn
Jackie informed my uncle of the great conquest, and told
him that an all-night corroboree was to be held in his
honor. Protests against the ceremony being held were
useless, and my uncle was made to understand that his
presence as the guest of the evening was absolutely im-
perative.
The blacks had brought with them a number of dead
wallabies, kangaroo rats, paddy melons, ’possums, and
birds. These were cooked for the evening meal in rude
ovens made in the ground. Holes were dug out into which
coals and hot ashes were raked from a big fire that had
been made close by. The animals were put intact into
the holes, and more hot ashes were raked in on top of
them, the holes afterwards being filled up with bushes
and dirt. By this process, the animals cooked quickly,
and, when taken out, they were skinned, opened up,
cleaned, and then eaten.
After the meal, the blacks gathered up bushes and
dead limbs of trees which they stacked on the fire, mak-
ing a huge blaze that lit up the surrounding darkness
until the whole gathering was conspicuous in the light.
21


Shortly after eight o’clock, my uncle was escorted from
his house, and was given a place of honour on a some-
what uncomfortable log beside the king. Then the cor-
roboree started. The blacks danced to beaten time and
sang strange songs in their native language. The dances
were numerous and distinctly varied, and were in them-
selves interesting enough to entertain any audience, but
to my uncle, who had to see the ceremony through until
four o’clock in the morning, the ever-changing columns
of crudely-painted figures breaking away and returning
to the main mass of actors, the entertainment was highly
aggravating. The corroboree, however, was only a pre-
lude to the main object of the visit, as my uncle found
out, to his great consternation, when, after an early
breakfast, he was compelled to sit in state and accept
from each black his assurance of forgiveness. This occu-
pied the greater part of the day, and before it was over,
my uncle had cause to regret that he had not killed all
the blacks instead of only two of the dogs.
Some good, however, came of the visit, for, after the
ceremony was over, Cobborn Jackie took a team of blacks
into the bush, and they stripped for Mr. White five or
six hundred sheets of bark for roofing purposes.
Each year after that, a number of blacks used to ga-
ther at the homestead for their presents when my uncle
returned from Sydney. In return for these gifts, they
always stripped a quantity of bark and helped the teams*-
ters to cart it in.
Previously tribal feuds had been responsible for
many murders among the blacks, and when the Murrum-
bidgee and Lachlan blacks had met at any time, war be-
tween the two tribes always resulted, and they killed
each other until one side gave in. The method of fight-
ing w r as for the armies to face one another at a short
distance and to throw spears and boomerangs until the
battle was declared closed. Each side would then bury
its dead, after which the tribes would return to their
respective camping grounds. During one of these battles,
which was fought on The Bland, two blacks on the Mur-
rumbidgee side were killed by the one spear, wdiich passed
through both of them. One also had his head taken off
by a boomerang. This was the last fight between the
Lachlan and Murrumbidgee blacks.
The Lachlan and Murrumbidgee blacks were always
at enmity with the Namoi blacks.
22


In 1837, with. Cobborn Jackie at the head of the
Lachlan-Murrumbidgee tribes, a fierce battle was fought
against the Namoi blacks. Jackie, a young aborigine em-
ployed by my uncle, was wounded in the side just near
the waist-line with a long, jagged spear. The spear did
not go right through the body, but seemed to be lodged
in the stomach. To remove the spear, Jackie’s comrades
in arms pushed it through till the jagged end came out
on the other side, and then they sawed off the long end
and pulled the point till the shortened spear came out.
First aid was applied by plugging the sides with clay
mud, and then, on a sheet of bark as an improvised stret-
cher, Cobborn Jackie and other warriors carried the
wounded black from Namoi to Burrangong, a distance of
three hundred miles. When the stretcher-bearers reached
the station, Jackie was still alive, but weak and help-
less. My uncle gave Jackie and his attendants a hut for
their own use, but the blacks were not at home in this
place, so they built for themselves two mia mias, one for
the men and one for the two gins. Only those who were
charged with the care of Jackie remained on the sta-
tion; the others went back to their regular camps. Cob-
born Jackie was in charge of the nursing staff, and saw
to the morning and evening meal for the sick man, but
it was my special privilege to take him his dinner each
day. He was never able to stand up, but lived for six
months, and I found him dead one day when I took him
his midday meal.
When the two gins heard that Jackie had died, they
at once became frantic. They screamed and tore at their
hair; and then, following out a custom of the tribe to
demonstrate grief, seized their tomahawks and chopped
criss-crosses in their own heads until their faces were
streaming in blood. Wiping the blinding blood out of
their eyes, the sorrowing gins each took a large burning
stick from the fire and rubbed them up and down their
bare legs from the knee to the hip, until the flesh was
actually roasted on the surface. The embered stick was
drawn rapidly over the leg until the stick blackened, and
then a fresh stick was secured from the fire, and the pro-
cess was continued, voluntarily, until the flesh became raw
on the legs of both gins. The smell of burning flesh was
sickening, and the screams of the gins could be heard
for a long distance. The flesh being sufficiently burned,
the gins threw the sticks back into the fire, and then,
as t >


with their bare nails, they tore furrows in the tiesh of
both legs until the blood oozed out.
All the time, I pleaded with the gins to stop tortur-
ing themselves, but I could not make myself heard above
their agonised screams. Cobborn Jackie, who, with the
other black men, was away hunting for ’possums for the
night meal, heard the screams of the gins, and he and his
mates raced with the speed of madmen back to the home-
stead. Cobborn Jackie made the gins cease their tor-
turing of themselves, so then they made a puddle of mud,
and plastered their wounds up with it. The terrible pains
that the gins suffered caused them to cry for days, and
it took them twelve months to recover from the injuries.
The blackfellows unconcernedly tied up the dead man
with old rope and kurrajong bark, bending his arms by
the side and drawing the knees up to the chin, with feet
resting down, much after the fashion that a turkey is
trussed. The corpse was then ready for burial, and a
hole having been dug, the body was placed in it and cov-
ered over with earth.
This was an unusual burial, because of the fact that
no infant’s remains were interred with the body. A strict
custom of the tribe to which the dead black belonged was
never to bury the body of a young child unless with a
grown male. In the event of an infant dying, the mother
was forced to carry the remains about in a dilly bag
until oic of the tribesmen died, when the bodies of: both
would be buried in one grave. One gin in the vicinity
of Burrangcng carried the remains of her child for three
and a half years before an opportunity for burial pre-
sented itself.
When King Congo of Wallenbeen died, he had the
honor of being buried with four babies. The idea of this
custom was, according to the crude belief of the blacks,
to ensure sufficient protection for the child in the grave.
No deodoriser of any sort was used in connection with
the dead child, and the discomfort of the mother and
those who came into contact with her may, or may not,
well be imagined.
King Congo’s death came about in a strange manner.
A year after Jackie’s death, about fifty blacks from the
Murrumbidgee came to Burrangong and camped near the
homestead for some time. Congo, who had been crowned
by Mr. McKay, of Wallenbeen Station, and given a plate
24


like Cobborn Jackie’s, was with the fifty blacks. While
at Burrangong he became ill, and was not able to return
to Wallenbeen, which was his home. To a nine-year-old
girl, the novelty of having a sick king on the station
was highly entertaining, and it intrigued me to see this
old king in a mia mia, propped up in a sitting position,
and held by two gins while a black medicine man squirted
mouthful after mouthful of water in his royal face. The
squirting of the water was repeated five or six times;
then Congo coughed, and spat out a live lizard. The
medicine man took the lizard by the tail, and went behind
a bower which he had fixed up. He brought more water,
and this, too, he squirted in Congo’s face. The miracle
that followed this second series of water-squirting was
no less astonishing than the first, for this time Congo
coughed up a wood-adder. A few minutes after that he
died.
White the king’s body was being lowered into the
grave, I was present; and the gins came alongside and
put down the bags containing the remains of four babies
who had died during the past year.
This incident was, to me, very amusing ; but I sup-
pose it had, for those concerned, a rather serious com-
plexion.
I am reminded of an experience in 1843 that had
othing of humour in it.
A mob of blacks travelling from the Namoi came to
Calangan Station (owned by Mr. John Harris), and, dur-
ing the night, raided a camp of Murrumbidgee blacks,
comprising seven men, two women, and a half-caste
child (two years of age). The seven men were murdered,
and the women and child were taken to Namoi. Next
morning, station-hands discovered the dead men, but,
of course, did not know how they had been killed until
fourteen months later, when the gin (Mary), with her
aalf-caste child (Kitty) and another baby, came to Bur-
:angong Station. Mary was almost exhausted. She told
is of the murder, and said she had escaped from the Na-
noi tribe. The second baby had been born at Namoi.
We nursed her at Burrangong till she was strong enough
;o go to Demonderell Station to the father of her child-
•en. Kitty is still living at Young and receives the Old-
ige Pension; but the younger sister, I fancy, is dead.
The second gin never escaped from Namoi.
25


When the old gin’s story reached Binalong, some
blacks from there belonging to the Murrumbidgee tribe
went to Namoi with a black policeman (“Commissioner’’
Bobby) at their head to take a reprisal on the Namoi
blacks for the murder. The expedition was unsuccessful
for Bobby, as the Namoi blacks had heard of the plans,
and had gone into hiding.
“Commissioner” Bobby was greatly disappointed at
the failure of his self-imposed mission, and felt that he
would not be able to justify his absence. Commissioner
Beckham, of Binalong, was the police officer to whom
Bobby was responsible for his actions, and Bobby felt
that if he could bring back a few right hands, hacked
from the dead Namoi blacks, great would be glory show-
ered on him by Commissioner Beckham. But he was en-
tirely without any token to prove the mighty lesson he
had administered to those savages who had raided peace-
ful natives and killed them while asleep in camp.
On his way back to Binalong, and when within
twenty miles of Burrangong, at a station called Bombal-
dra (owned by Mr, Redfern Watt), Bobby saw a black
man (a station stockman) in a tree. He saw at once a
chance of giving effect, in part at least, to his vicious
desire. “Come on,” he said to his company, which num-
bered about twenty, “I promised the Commissioner to
bring the right hand of every black I killed. Here is one
up the tree, and we must kill him, for I must have a hand.”
The others protested, but Bobby, dressed in his police
uniform and aided by the mysterious authority of his
rank, coerced them into doing his bidding. The man in
the tree cried piteously, and begged for his life, but
Bobby was relentless, and the spears flew into the air at
his command. It took half an hour to kill the man, and
when he fell to the ground he was studded wdth spears.
Those who had not helped actively in the murder were
each obliged to drive a spear into the body. Still supreme-
ly in command, Bobby ordered his men to cut up the
black, and, this done, he took for himself the right hand.
This he tied in a neck-handkerchief, and looped the
bundle on the end of his spear. Each of the other blacks
was made to carry his souvenir in the same manner.
Next morning, about ten o’clock, Bobby, without his
uniform, and quite naked, arrived at Burrangong with his
companions, who, also, were without clothes. I was alone
26


with my sister at the time, and she, being afraid of the
blacks, hid herself. Bobby ordered me to get him break-
fast. “Grill me some chops, and lay the table same as
you" would for any gentleman.” he commanded. I did
not know Bobby out of his uniform, and, fearing that my
life would be in danger if I refused his demand, Icooked
breakfast for him, and served it according to his instruc-
tions. Bobby put his bundle on the table while he had
his breakfast, and it is a good thing for me that I did not
know what the bundle contained. When he had finished
eating, his twenty followers came in, and Bobby ordered
breakfast for them. At that moment, Cobborn Jackie,
who had not been to the station for twelve months, came
into the house on a visit. He recognised Bobby, and
saved me the trouble of cooking breakfast for the twenty
others. I. however, cut down a sheep and shared it among
them. They went away at once, and, later, Cobborn Jac-
kie told me what I have related above in regard to killing
the unfortunate black man in the tree.
Bobby returned to Binalong and made a peace of-
fering of the black man’s hand to Commissioner Beck-
ham. but, be it said to the credit of Beckham, he dismissed
Bobby on the spot, and ordered him to leave the neigh-
borhood.
While I am on the subject of blacks, I would to
refer, in passing, to the peculiar custom of sex-initiation
practiced by the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee tribes. When
the ceremony was about to take place, the young men of
marriagable age would be taken away to a secret place
in the bush, in charge of a number of specially selected
old men. Elaborate preparations would be made for this
most sacred ritual, and only those actually concerned with
the ceremony were allowed to know where the initiation
ground was situated. A ring like a circus ring would be
formed in the bush, and all the youths would stand side
by side in the ring, while, one at a time, they would be
held by two old men, while a third, with a stone and a
tomahawk would knock out a tooth from the front upper
jaw. This done, the young men would be kept in the
bush for six moons with five or six old men to look after
them. Then they would be brought back to the tribe and
allowed to marry.
This initiation ground was never discovered until
John Regan (of whom I will have much to say) came
£7


across it during one of his exploring expeditions in search
of cattle runs. The custom ceased then, as it was con-
sidered by the blacks that the ground had been dese-
crated.
The place where these initiation services took place
is now the township of Wyalong.


CHAPTER 5
The question of food was a pressing one in my uncle’s
early life at Burrangong, and it was necessary to grow
wheat for bread for the household, and oats and barley
for the horses. The ploughing for these crops was done
with a single-furrow plough, and the harrowing with an
all-wooden harrow. The sowing, of course, was done by
hand, and the crops were reaped with reaping hooks.
The threshing was a tedious and a laborious work. At
first the loose wheat stalks were put in bags which were
tied up and beaten with sticks, but this method was too
slow altogether. So my uncle brought an expert flail-
man from Sydney, and he, by working all the year round,
was able to thresh out sufficient wheat for flour and suf-
ficient oats and barley for the stock. The wheat grain
was sent to Goulburn to be ground into flour, until my
uncle secured two steel hand-mills from America. It
took two years to get these out. One could be worked by
one man, but the other required two men. The grain was
threshed on an earthen floor, and then hand-picked over
and sieved and washed to clean it before it was ground.
After being ground, the flour was sieved to separate it
from the bran. It was the duty of one man to grind the
flour for the homestead, and the workmen had to grind
each Saturday enough flour to last their huts for a week.
Having acquired an enormous quantity of stock—
horses, sheep, and cattle, my uncle wanted more land;
and, in 1837, sent his overseer, Mr. Graham, to seek out
an area on the Murray. A bullock dray was provisioned
and Graham, deciding to take his wife with him, accom-
modated her in the dray. Other members of the party
were George Kirby, who was on the station for colonial
experience; John Reynolds, a half-caste boy from Parra-
matta (a labourer on the station), and a black boy named
Bobandie, from the Lachlan tribe. All the members of
the party, bar Mrs. Graham, went on horseback, and they
took with them one thousand head of store cattle, which
they intended to fatten on the new station. Suitable land
was found on the Murray, so the party squatted there,
and called the station Mitta Mitta. (This is now a big
29


town, and bears the name given by Graham to the sta-
tion.)
A homestead with outhouses and yards was built, and
everything went along smoothly enough for eight or nine
months; then, one day at noon, a mob of wild blacks ad-
vanced on the homestead. All the station people except
the black boy, Bobandie, were in the house, and before he
could: scramble inside, Graham and his party shut and bar-
ricaded the door. The blacks picked up Bobandie, and
took him to the river a few yards away, where they killed
him in sight of the house, while the self-imprisoned peo-
ple watched through cracks in the wall, fearful that they
themselves would next be murdered. They were well
armed, and could have shot the blacks. One shot would
have been sufficient to send the whole mob scattering into
the forest, but not one of them thought fit to put up a
fight for the boy’s life. The screams of the boy for help
were terrible, but unanswered. The blacks cooked the
unfortunate Bobandie, ate him (this, too, in view of Gra-
ham and his party), and then went quietly on their way.
Next day, Graham packed up the bullock dray, and
all returned to Burrangong, leaving the cattle behind.
This meant that Graham had made a gift to the murder-
ous blacks of one thousand head of fat cattle, which were
easy targets for the spearsmen.
We at Burrangong knew nothing of the affair till the
party returned.
Mr. Kirby, who was a monied man, was so disgusted
with bush life that he returned to Sydney without more
delay than was absolutely necessary. He then started the
undertaking business which is SO' well known in Sydney
to-day. Graham, on the other hand, was not at all will-
ing to leave the bush. He prevailed on my uncle to give
him a start in getting together a station for himself. Mr,
White let him keep the bullock team that was used on the
Mitta Mitta trip, and gave him provisions to help him on
an expedition, which he proposed to make to the Lachlan.
Graham and his wife went, and Graham was joined by
Mr. Thomas Croaker, brother of John and Philip Croak-
er, of Burromunditroy Station. They took up land on the
Lachlan Road, now called Forbes, and named their sta-
tion The Pinnacle.
But Graham was, it seems, fated to be troubled by
the blacks. Just as the building of the house and the
30


stock yards was finished, a mob of blacks came along and
made a camp. They demanded food, which Graham sup-
plied; but not in quantities large enough to satisfy the
greed of the blacks. Graham had no wish to be mean,
but he had to be careful that his stores were not consumed
gluttonously, and so depleted as to place the station peo-
ple in danger of starving. The blacks, always improvi-
dent, could not sympathise with such a precaution, and,
after accepting with somewhat bad grace the meagre
doles of food for two or thre'e days, they formed them-
selves into a court to pronounce judgment on Graham.
The verdict, as far as the black men were concerned, was
unanimous. Graham and his party were to be murdered
that night, and the food to be taken by the mob for a
grand feast. About an hour before the appointed time for
the murders, a gin stole away from the camp, and, in
broken English, acquainted the household of the plans.
She —good, kindly soul —had a scheme which would save
the lives of the new squatters. If Mrs. Graham would
take all the food in the house and lay it before the chief
in camp, the gin felt sure that the white people would
not be molested. Mrs. Graham did as the gin advised.
She carried all the food to the blacks, and offered it to
them as a gift of goodwill, and they accepted it with
great rejoicing. That night, Graham, his wife, and Croak-
er, packed up their belongings on the bullock dray, and,
before morning were on their way back to Burrangong,
thirty miles off.
Later on, The Pinnacle was taken up by a man named
Trollop, and he changed the name to Mortree. Trollop
developed the place into a large cattle station.
My uncle did not welcome Graham back; he had, as
a matter of fact, had quite enough of him, so Graham
went to manage Crowther Station for Mr. Myels. Gra-
ham held his position for a time, but the fever to have a
station of his own was still strong with him, and he could
not settle down at Crowther.
His next expedition was in 1843, with Mr. Steward,
a son of Major-General Steward, of Mount Pleasant Sta-
tion, Bathurst. William Gardiner, manager of The Gap
Station, also owned by Major-General Steward, joined the
party, and they took with them a black boy as a guide.
Mrs. Graham stayed at Myles’s station.
The party reached the Merool country near what is
now Wyalong, but they had no water, and were all
31


thirsty. They kept going, in the hope that they would
find water in Merool Creek. Misfortune, however, was
with them, as it seemed always to be when Graham was
one of the party. The did not find water, and Steward
was the first to collapse. His tongue was parched and
swollen so much that articulation for him was almost im-
possible, but he managed to say: “Go on, save your own
lives; I am done.”
It was a heroic sacrifice and they left him there to
die—the first white person to die outback. The others
staggered on till they reached Morangorell Station. They
were in a dying condition, but Mrs. McGregor (wife of
the owner of Morangorell) managed, by careful nursing,
to save their lives.
The body of young Steward was never found.
Graham remained on at Morangorell, and went into
partnership with McGregor. Mrs. Graham joined her
husband; Gardiner went back to The Gap Station, and the
black boy returned to the Murrumbidgee tribe, and was
never heard of again.
All went well with Graham and McGregor for about
fourteen months, when they quarrelled and dissolved
partnership. Mrs. Graham went to Yass to live while
Graham took his cattle from Morangorell to Melbourne.
He sold them there, and he and his wife went home to
the North of Ireland, where they spent the rest of their
lives.
Of the McGregor family, one of the daughters, Julia,
is still at Morangorell, as the postmistress.
In my early days, postal communication was not
what it is now, but was of the most promiscuous charac-
ter, and the posting of a letter quite a difficult undertak-
ing. The nearest post office was at Burrowa, and that was
fifty miles away. Letters for posting had to be given to
anyone who happened to be going to a town where there
was a post office. One never expected to receive a reply
to a letter in less than three months. This method was
so unsatisfactory that the squatters instituted a mail ser-
vice for their own convenience, and maintained it for
about ten years, when the Government started an official
service. The cost of running the squatters’ mail service
was, in the main, borne by Mr. Caldwell and Mr. McGre-
gor.


To our owe State of New South Wales belongs the
honour and prestige of being the first country in the
world to conceive the idea, and of introducing the me-
thod of prepayment of letters, by means of a stamp. In
the year 1838, the Government issued envelopes stamped
with an embossed impression of the seal of the colony.
These were sold at the G.P.0., Sydney, at one penny half-
penny each, or one shilling and threepence per dozen, and
were carried and delivered just as at present. They were
in use for about twelve years, and are now very scarce
and valuable. Two years later (1840) Great Britain in-
troduced the adhesive stamp which we use to-day; these
were issued in sheets, and had to be separated with scis-
sors—perforated edges were added some ten years later,
and this method of separation has never been improved
upon.
When one considers the vast commercial and social
utility of the postage stamp, it will be recognised that it
is no small honour for New South Wales to possess.
One of my first recollections was the yarding of emus.
The method was for stockmen to drive the birds into a
yard, where they would be killed. The skins were pre-
served and used for mats, and the oil taken from the
bodies used as an embrocation for rheumatism.


CHAPTER 6
In 1843 when I was a girl of thirteen years news
reached Burrangong that a gold rush had broken out in
California. From most of the stations the workmen
cleared out with the greatest possible haste. All ex-
pected to make great fortunes and to be independent of
the squatters. So stripped of labour were the stations
and so difficult was it to get men, that the wool clip could
not be sent to Sydney. It was impossible to get drivers
for the bullock drays or to get men for any kind of station
or farm work. On Marengo Station the women and
children, assisted by Mr. 'Scar, tried to harvest the wheat,
but the task was beyond them, and the record crop of the
period went to waste. On all stations the stock were
neglected, as the squatters, unaided, were not able to give
the attention necessary to the welfare of their flocks. As
for the wool clip the carting of that had to stand over for
a year, till after the next shearing, and then extra drays
were put on to take both clips to Sydney.
On Burrangong the stock also was neglected, but not
to such an extent as on other stations, for I was able to
take the place of one man as a shepherd. It was winter
time when I started this work, and though the weather was
cold it was fine, and I had a good horse to ride; so for me
it was not an unpleasant experience. All through spring
the weather kept dry but in the early summer the rain
came in torrents, and continued for weeks. Soaked by
the rain the ground became sodden; horses and cattle
were bogged all over the station, and from then on it was
not possible for me to ride my horse while shepherding.
All my work I had then to do on foot. Ours was not the
only station to suffer in this way, for the rain was general
all over the southern part of New South Wales. Our
main water supply was the Burrangong creek, which was
a very deep creek, and this was flooded, and the water
over-ran all the low ground of the station; but, except for
some stock that was drowned, no great damage was done.
These rains culminated in the great Gundagai flood, the
most disastrous in New South Wales up to that time.
34


One morning in February, 1844, the valley of the Mur-
rumbidgee was converted into an inland sea, and the
town was inundated. Farms were swept out of exist-
ence, many lives were lost, and stock drowned. It has
frequently been said that the whole town was washed
away, and that all the people were drowned; but these
statements are not accurate. For, although the town
was destroyed, and all the stock on the lowlands were
drowned, some people saved their lives by escaping to
the hills.
The flood did much more damage at Wagga, which at
that time was the next town on the river. The flood
raced down with such speed that it took the townspeople
by surprise, and drowned all of the ninety-one inhabitants
except two; and one of those was away at Yass, on busi-
ness. He was the Wagga publican (known as Long
Tom). The other person whose life was saved was a
girl.
When the flood came down the people climbed up trees
and on to house roofs, and this girl, and her lover, climbed
a tree, but the water for a time seemed 1 to rise almost as
quickly as they climbed. By the time they reached the
highest limb all the other people had been washed from
their places of retreat, and most of them had been
drowned. Those two l saw their friends and relatives
struggling in the turgent flood, and the man himself, feel-
ing his strength giving out, knew that he too would soon
be numbered amongst the dead. Relentlessly, the rising
water came up the tree, but not with the same speed as
at first; still nearer and nearer it rose to the lovers, and
the man felt exhaustion overtaking him.
“I’ll be drowned,” he said to his sweetheart “but
I’ll save you if I can.” He then took off his belt and
with it strapped her to the limb. His strength at last
exhausted, he fell helplessly into the swirling waters, and
was washed away. More slowly rose the w r ater now' and
the young woman, almost perished with the cold, but pre-
vented from falling by the strap, hardly cared how quick
it came, for the end surely was inevitable, and all but
herself was lost. But the flood did not reach her. It
subsided and her life was saved. She was the one white
person, of those in Wagga at the time, to survive the ter-
-35


rible flood:, but the blacks, by reason of the fact that they
were camped beyond the town and had more warning,
were able to save themselves by escaping to the moun-
tains. The blacks, too, knew what to expect when they
heard the roaring of the flood in the distance; when they
heard the logs and fallen timber being smashed against
the trees; even without waiting to see the river swell.
But the white people were not so well acquainted with
the habits of floods, and did not realise their danger till
they were beyond hope of saving themselves.
The bodies of the flood victims were never found.
A new town was built on higher ground on the other
side of the river, and this being the second town of
Wagga, the name was doubled and became Wagga
Wagga.
Years after some skulls and other human bones were
found by workmen while excavating for building pur-
poses. It has been said they were the remains of mur-
dered people, but it is more than likely that they were
those of people drowned in the flood.
Fifteen years, or more, after the flood, skeletons of
beasts could be seen in the forks of tall trees.
In passing, I would like to mention that eleven years
later (18<;2), Gundagai once more was partly destroyed
by flood, and many lives were lost. On this occasion no
damage was done to the town of Wagga Wagga, because
the high land on which the new town had been built was
out of reach of the flood. Mr. Osborne, of Bluegong
Station, on the south side of Wagga Wagga, lost a lot of
stock in the flood; and Mr. Taylor, a big squatter on the
north side, also suffered considerable loss; but beyond
these two cases there was no damage.
The Californian gold rush referred to above did not
turn out well for the station hands, and of the fifteen
men who w*ent from Burrangong all came back poorer
than they left, except one. He made a little money, and
started horse dealing in the district.
The return of these men was a blessing to my uncle,
for he had had a hard time in carrying on without suffi-
cient help. Added to his difficulties at Burrangong, he
36


had another station, Spring Creek, which also was short-
handed. On these two stations he had eight sheep runs
with huts for the shepherds. The first of these runs was
Jerry bung, within three miles of Burromunditroy and
the hut was built on Buller Creek. The second run was
at Rocky Hole, and the third on Marengo Road, both also
on Buller Creek. The fourth station was on Macken-
nery’s Creek; the fifth, Lambing Flat; the sixth, Skillion
Hut, main creek (now called Sandy Creek). Cudgell
Creek (near Green Gully) was the seventh, and Glass’s
Waterhole the eighth. This list, of course, does not take
into account the Mitta Mitta Station deserted by Graham.
All these runs were selected because of the good water
supplies, and on each run was a spring with a continuous
flow of water. The springs are now unknown? because
the ground has been so trampled down that the water
has been prevented from coming to the surface. Still,
at all these places abundant water could be released for
use in drought time.
The main reason for my uncle establishing all those
runs was to save bringing the sheep long distances at
night, for in those days the sheep had to be yarded to
prevent them being eaten by wild dogs. At each run
stockmen had their flocks to shepherd, and they had
actually to camp beside the sheep to protect them from
the wild dogs.


CHAPTER 7
For the time being I shall leave Burrangong and talk
about the Bland, a very large area of sheep and cattle
country, known in my day as The Levels. This latter
name was given it by Surveyor-General Major Mitchell
because the country was a plain.
The first person to take up a station property on the
Bland was Mr. Glass, a bachelor. That was in year 1834,
but the name Bland did not then exist at The Levels.
It came into being a year later (1835) when Mrs. Harriet
Regan, the first white woman to go into that district,
took up a station on The Levels, and, for a time, it was
known as Bergongagell, a name given it by the blacks,
but later she called it The Bland, after a Doctor Bland,
who lived in Sydney, and who was Mrs. Regan’s medical
adviser. Her station homestead was five miles from the
house of Mr. Glass. Then came Mr. Oakes (Back Creek)
in the same year; the fourth squatter was Mr. Myles
(Morangorell), 1836. This property he sold to Mr. Don-
ald McGregor in 1843.
Other pioneers on The Bland were: —
John Bray (late of Crookwell, near Goulburn), Nar-
raburrah; 1836.
Horatio Roberts and Wade (late of Crookwell), Car-
rumbee; 1836. They sold to John Shourd and John Mason
in 1840.
Abel Buck, Bland Creek; 1838,
In the same year, John Levitt took up a station near
Grogan? and sold it to Frederick Chisholm in 1851.
Thomas Swanket, Euroka; 1839. He carried on the
station till 1853, and then sold to Thomas Burrett, of
Wentworth Falls.
In 1839, John Nolan, having sold his Wentworth
Falls Station to John Daley, took up The Yellow Water
Holes, adjoining Swanket’s land. Nolan’s grandchild-
ren and great-grandchildren are still living there.
38


Moses Beard', Bland Creek (opposite to Abel Buck’s);
1840.
John Cartwright, New Station (now called Barmed-
man)> 1841. Cartwright did' not live on the station, but
lived at the Narrow Way, between Burrowa and Goulburn.
He placed William Wass on New Station as manager.
John Trott, Billabong; 1842. Trott sold to James
Marsden, 1852. Tom Marshall (commonly called Tom the
Dustman), and Tom Beatty were the principal station
hands. When Cartwright died in 1853, his wife, to wind
up the estate, sold the station by auction at Binalong.
The purchaser was Mr. McNicol.
Steel Caldwell, Moonbucca; 1847. Mr. Caldwell was
the last of the pioneers, and the property which he took
up is still in the hands of the family.
It was a calamity in the Regan family that caused
Mrs. Regan to take up a station on The Levels. Her
husband) Mr, William Regan, had a station (Grabben
Gullen) near Goulburn more than one hundred years ago.
He started a dairy farm on his station, and the produce
he sold in Sydney. A big business was to be done in those
days in butter, bacon, and cheese, and these products
were carted to Sydney in bullock drays. Mr. Regan Kad
succeeded well, and he intended to sell nut his station
near Goulburn and to take up a larger station on The
Levels. But before finally deciding on making the change,
he went to Van Dieman’s Land to visit a brother. Re-
turning to Sydney he caught a cold, which turned to
pneumonia, and, after reaching home, he died. Mrs. Re-
gan then carried out her husband’s plans, and herself
took up the station, which she named The Bland, the
native name of which, as I have said, was Bergongagell,
and means bird. She had never seen the property, and
was guided in her undertaking by the Reverend Cart-
wright, Mr. Glass, and Mr. James White. Mrs. Regan took
all her servants, implements, stock, and furniture, but
her six children she left in Goulburn, At first, temporary
buildings wmre put up, and all the things necessary to
starting the station were done under Mrs. Regan’s di-
rections.
About five years later, her three sons (John, William,
and Denis) came to help their mother run the station,
39


but the three daughters remained in Goulburn,
Mrs. Regan herself managed the station, and each
year sent three bullock-dray loads of produce to Sydney
for sale. This produce consisted of butter, cheese, and
bacon. In addition to these dairy goods, fat cattle were
taken to the Homebush sale yards each trip. Mrs. Re-
gan always travelled on horseback with the teams, and
she, like the teamsters, camped on the road at night.
After the cattle and produce had been sold the drays
were loaded back with station requirements. But Mrs.
Regan did not travel with them on the return journeys.
She always rode ahead and stayed a few days with her
daughters in Goulburn, and reached her station months
before the teams. For nine years Mrs. Regan success-
fully conducted her station and dairy in this manner,
then she died, at an early age, in 1844, The station was
sold after her death to Mr. Walton, a rich publican of
Burrowa. The three Regan boys were allowed to live on
the station, and to keep their stock on the run. Even-
tually they were all three appointed joint managers of
the Bland Station.
During Mrs. Regan’s life time, a black came to The
Bland for the first time. He was Curraburrama Jimmy.
For some reason he lost his temper with William Regan,
and threatened to kill him, or, at least, William thought
so, but how the black man made himself understood,
since he could not speak a word of English, none of us
knew. Still, there was some evidence to support Wil-
liam’s theory, for, as soon as William got inside and
slammed the door shut, Curraburrama Jimmy struck the
door hard with a nulla nulla. But, as a set-off against
William’s theory, the black went away immediately. A
strange fellow was old Curraburrama Jimmy. It was his
habit to go round the stations, begging food and clothes,
and with all his lack of English, he had no trouble in
making himself understood when he wanted food or
clothes. He lived all his life travelling between Moran-
gorell, Curraburrama, and Burrangong Stations, his per-
manent camp being at Morangorell. He was a command-
ing and awesome character, domineering in his attitude,
and eloquent in his silence. There was not a man or wo-
man who was not scared of him. Although he called
only at the three stations, his circuit was extensive. The
40


distance between Morangorell and Burrangong was forty
miles, and between Morangorell and Curraburrama, five;
both in opposite directions. So that when he went to
Burrangong) he would have a forty miles tramp back
before starting on his five miles walk to Curraburrama,
or a walk of about ninety miles before finally coming to
rest at his own camp. But, to Jimmy, these were pleasant
excursions for food and clothing. He never lacked com-
pany, either, for he would always take with him one or
two gins, and the little party would camp within sight
of the homestead. Then Jimmy would go to the home-
stead and fossick out the food. What he fancied of this
he would touch with a long, thin stick, which he always
carried with him, and the gift would be granted by a
move of the head. If Jimmy saw any clothes about that
took his fancy, these, too, he would touch, and they would
instantly become his. No one ever tried the experiment
of refusing Jimmy what he asked, so Jimmy had no mur-
ders to answer for. Having secured all he wanted at a
station, Jimmy would return to his camp, and send one
or both of his gins to carry the things to him. He was
too much of an aristocrat to carry them himself. His
permanent camp at Morangorell being close to the home-
stead, he was able to -watch what was going on, and, when
the washing was hung out, he would stroll over and
touch the clothes that took his fancy. These were always
given to the gin when Jimmy sent for them. Mrs. Mac-
gregor, after a time, would not hang good clothes outside,
but dried them in the house.
One Sunday, Curraburrama Jimmy showed off his
authority in the presence of a number of visitors to
Morangorell. Several squatters and bankers had come
to the station for the week-end. They had just sat down
to dinner, and Mr. MacGregor was about to start carv-
ing when in walked Jimmy, and, reaching over the shoul-
der of one of the bankers with his long stick, touched the
Sunday joint on a tender spot. Mrs. MacGregor instantly
nodded to Jimmy, and put the joint aside till the gin
should come for it. Such was the authority of this black
man that the Morangorell household went without its
hot joint that Sunday.
Jimmy, on the diet supplied by the three squatters,
lived to be more than one hundred years old. He died
at Morangorell, and was buried on the station. His death
41


was the happiest event in the lives of the stations; even
the gins were pleased, for Jimmy had been very cruel to
them.
Ten years after Jimmy’s death, Mr, MacGregor’s
sons, John and James, were riding over the run, and came
across Jimmy’s grave. Securing a shovel, they dug out
the grave, but all that was left of Jimmy was the skull
and a thighbone. The teeth in the skull were perfect,
except for a slight wearing away of the four teeth that
had for so many years held his pipe. The skull and the
thigh-bone are still in the possession of Mr. John Mac-
Gregor, at Geelong, Victoria,
Reference to Curraburrama Jimmy brings to mind a
happening at Curraburrama Station in Mr. Glass’s early
days.
An elderly black man with three gins (one of the
gins had a half-caste child twelve months old), came to
the station, and made a camp there. The black man
honored the squatter by adopting his name, and called
himself Billy Glass. He had a knowledge of English,
having, in all probability, been taught by the father of
the half-caste child.
One morning he came to the homestead, and, point-
ing to a large cooking pot, said to Mr. Glass, “I wantum
loan that pfeller.”
“What for?” asked Mr, Glass.
“To raakum soup,” Billy replied.
“What meat have you got to make soup with?”
“ ’Possum,” Billy assured him.
Air. Glass lent the pot, and Billy had his soup—but
it was not made from ’possum.
Next day, the mother of the half-caste child brought
back the pot, and told Mr. Glass that Billy had killed the
child, cooked it, and eaten it all himself.
Mr. Glass forced Billy to leave the station, and he
went to Cuwra, where he lived the rest of his life.
Soon after this event, Mr. Glass went to Scotland,
and, while there, sold Curaburrama to a Mr. Campbell.
Twelve months later, Campbell sold the station to my
42


uncle, who used it as a cattle run. He also built a dairy,
and this dairy he gave to James Robertson for his own
use, in return for his work in helping to look after the
stock. A man named Smith was sent to manage the sta-
tion, and Robertson co-operated in controlling the stock.
One day, in the early forties, Smith, with other stockmen,
was engaged in rounding up cattle on the plain when his
horse fell with him. His foot stuck in the stirrup, and
he, dragged by the galloping horse, was killed. He was
the first man to die on that station.
The first man to die on The Bland was Joseph Whit-
taker, manager for Mr. Myles, of Morangorell Station,
in 1842.
Within twenty or thirty miles of The Bland was the
Billabong Station, owned by John Trott. This station was
pointed out to Mr. Trott in 1842 by a black, who adopted
Mr. Trott’s name, and became known as Jackie Trott,
and his gin as Mrs. Trott. Mr. Trott’s wife offered no
objection to this. It was the custom for a black to take
the squatter’s name. Jackie was a faithful servant, and
remained with Mr. Trott until the station was sold in
1854 to Mr. Marsden. The new owner of Billabong gave
the station his own name, and thus it changed from Billa-
bong to Marsden. The township of Marsden is built
where the homestead of the station used to stand.
The first two white people to die on Billabong were
women. The first was the dairyman’s wife, and she died
from natural causes, in the early forties. The second
death was a tragic one, and occurred after the name of
the station had been changed to Marsden. The wife of
a laborer on the station was cooking at an open fire out-
side when her clothes caught alight. The men tried to
save her by wrapping sheep-skins around her, but all
their efforts failed, and she was burnt to death.
The first race meeting on The Bland was held at the
end of 1854. The course was an improvised one on a piece
of land between The Bland Station and Bland Creek Sta-
tion, and the horses were the best of the stock-horses
used by the squatters and the stockmen. There were no
expenses, and the entrance fees of each race were divided
among the winners.
Mr. Massey, of Gundaroo, near Yass, was the first
man to travel sheep through The Bland, and when at Mc-
-43


Gregor’s Station (Morangorell), lie gave Mrs. McGregor
a pet lamb. It grew up, and became the mother of sev-
eral lots of twins. Other travellers subsequently left
lambs at Morangorell, and, in time, Mrs. McGregor ac-
quired a flock of one hundred and fifty pet sheep. Mr.
Steel Caldwell (Moonbucca), when he saw those pets, pro-
nounced The Bland a suitable place for sheep grazing,
and he was the first man to stock up and to go in for
breeding on a large scale. Following his example, other
squatters went in for sheep, and The Bland soon came to
be recognised as good sheep country.


CHAPTER 8.
Anyone who has lived through a drought in the bush
knows what a heartbreaking experience it is. To see stock
dying for want of food and water; to see one’s savings
of a life-time being consumed in a long fight to keep one’s
sheep and cattle alive, while the brassy sky refuses to
give up one drop of rain, is enough to try the courage of
the strongest man. Even to-day, when all possible pro-
visions have been made against drought; when trains are
available to move stock to grass and water; when science
is at hand to help the squatter and the farmer; to-day a
drought has terrors that only the bushman knows. But
seventy years ago or more, when the squatter had to de-
pend on nature unassisted for the success of his life’s
work, drought wms a cruel and relentless foe. Though
droughts were then not as frequent as they are now, they
did add considerably to the hardships of the pioneers,
and when a drought did come it came with a violence that
turned most certainly the greatest success into failure;
and the squatter who fought it persistently put his own
life in danger.
The severest drought that I remember came to The
Bland in 1849, and lasted till the beginning of 1852. The
creeks were all the squatters had to depend on for water
for their stock, and so good was this supply that it last-
ed for twelve months. When the water in the creeks gave
out, there was still plenty of grass, but feed without
water was next to useless. The squatters on The Bland
looked to the Lachlan River (the nearest point of which
was thirty miles away) for water, but this, too, had
gone dry; and the squatters of the river country, in com-
mon with The Bland squatters, had to desert their hold-
ing. In this large belt of country there were no springs
to supplement the surface water, and the nearest spring
(discovered later) was at Curraburrama; so, to sink for
water was useless. One by one the squatters went, but
not till their own lives w r ere in danger, and their stock
had died of thirst. A haunting memory of this drought
is that of the way the stock died. Gradually the water
45


lessened at each drinking place until only a puddle re-
mained. At each puddle the cattle gathered, and, in
their fight to get the water, trampled one another to death.
At last the creeks were full of dead and rotting beasts.
What a scene of desolation it was! Only a few saddle
horses remained, and these had been watered at the house-
hold tanks till they, too, gave out, and then the squatters
and their families rode away, taking with them the last
drops of water from their tanks, and trusting in Provi-
dence for the next day’s supply. Superimposed on these
scenes of misery were flocks of ravenous black crows,
gorging on the dead animals and making hideous noises
at their feasts. These crows themselves seemed to be the
brand of death, and, while they grew fat on the warm
flesh and blood of the barely dead cattle, other birds died
in thousands, and dropped like berries from withered
trees.
The only squatter to remain behind w r as Abel Buck,
of Bland Creek, thirteen miles from Curraburrama. His
creek was the last to dry up, and he believed that the
coming of the rain could not much longer be delayed.
But it did not come, and when the last of his water was
all used he had not even a horse left to ride, and the last
of his cattle were dying. He started to walk to Burran-
gong to seek relief, and, on his wmy, called at the Curra-
burrama homestead in search of water to drink. There was
none, and the house was locked up and deserted. Fol-
lowing the creek along in hope of finding even a mouth-
ful of water, he noticed a damp spot in the face of the
bank. Imagine the speed with which this desperate man
broke into the house to get a shovel and pick to dig into
the wet soil, for the indications were certainly most pro-
mising for a spring. After digging for a few minutes,
Buck was rewarded by being wet to the skin
with a gush of crystal-like water. He had tapped
a spring, and a little more digging gave him a
copious and continuous supply. He then made
a channel, and diverted the water into a large hole
in the bed of the creek. He managed to get a few of his
famished cattle to the w r ater and fixing himself up in
the Curraburrama homestead to hold a siege against the
drought, he tended the cattle and tried to save their
lives. There was plenty of food in the house, for the
squatters everywhere had big supplies always on hand,
46


and in the whole of the drought area they had simply
locked up their houses and gone away, leaving food and
everything else behind.
For six months Abel Buck held out with little diffi-
culty, and those of the cattle that had survived were in
fairly good condition. During this time he had supple-
mented his food supply with wild ducks and kangaroos
that came to drink at his spring. Then the grass gave
out, and the cattle died of starvation. The ducks, kan-
garoos, wallabies, and other bush animals either migrated
or died for want of food, and Buck was reduced to liv-
ing on flour, tea, and sugar. For another six months he
held out, and that period was probably the worst. The
indescribable heat baked and cracked the ground, scorch-
ed the trees, and by day and night invaded the house. Hot
winds and dust storms plagued him till his eyes and lips
were sore, but, like a man trapped in an inferno, he set
his teeth to accept his fate.
Then came the rain. It fell in torrents, and filled the
broken earth and turned it into mud; it overran the
creeks, and where a week before all was dust and violent
heat, now all the land was sodden with the rain. But,
fortunately, there w r as no flood.
The squatters who had left Abel Buck behind had
long since given up all hope of ever seeing him again,
and they dreaded going back to find his bones.
The first to return were the three young Regans.
They brought cattle with them to re-stock The Bland,
and when they came in sight of the Curraburrama home-
stead they were astonished to see smoke coming out of
the chimney, but more astonished still were they when
Abel Buck came out of the house to greet them. Instead
of going on to The Bland at once, the Regans stayed all
night indulging their joy of being with Abel Buck in the
flesh.
All the squatters returned eventually, and brought
with them stocks for their stations.
The squatters who suffered by the drought were: —
BLAND.
James White, Myles, Glass, Swanket, Bray, Beard,
Cartwright, Roberts, Wade, Trott, Caldwell, Gibson, Bur-
-47


rett, Nolan, Wood, the Began brothers, and the sisters
Oakes.
LACHLAN.
Strickland Higgins, Collett, Alec, Law, Rosthorn,
Major West, Twaddle and Thompson, and Brown.
During the drought I was, of course, at Burrangong
with my uncle. There only the fringe of the drought
touched us, and the water did not give out, but the run-
ning supplies did. My uncle and his men managed to
provide for the stock by digging wells in the creek, and
thus tapping spring sources. By the time the drought
ended, they had dug wells at short intervals from Bur-
rangong to Chainy Ponds, a distance of twelve miles.
Other wells of a similar nature were also dug in Spring
Creek. The water thus tapped was hauled up in buckets,
and poured into troughs for the stock.
I might here indulge a little truth about myself* and
say that my uncle found me very useful at this time. I
and Jane Robertson (a girl friend) worked at the station,
drawing water from out of the homestead well, and run-
ning it into troughs for the sheep. Commencing at dajr-
light, we would work until ten o ’clock at night, and, by
this diligent labor, we kept the sheep supplied for twelve
months. Then the drought broke. I look back on that
twelve months of work well done, and I realise what love
I had for my uncle. It was this love for him that kept
up my strength and my spirits. He was to me, and to all
who knew him, a noble man; and, when I say noble, the
word to me embraces all virtues, and particularly that
virtue which I know as fairness, and which, in him, was
such a conspicuous feature of his make up. To see this
man in trouble was to be impelled to run to his assistance;
so, w r ith great pride and happiness, I manned the windlass
for my shift, wdiile Jane attended to the bucket. Then
we changed jobs, and both together kept the water flow-
ing for ten hours a day for all that long, dry year. My
joy at doing this I put into song, and we sang and talked
all day, and not once did we get angry. My sister, Eliza,
was also a great help, for, although she was eighteen
months younger than I, she took charge of the house, and
supervised the cooking and other household work.
"What love 1 showed my uncle then, as also when I
shepherded his sheep, he truly deserved, and deserved it
tenfold; for what I was at that time, a happy, healthy
48


girl, I owed to him. His great kindness to me as my guar-
dian, and his scrupulous honesty in all his dealings, his
tact in difficulties, his heroism, and his gentleness with
the natives together form in my mind a monument that
is a faithful tribute to his life.
49


CHAPTER 9
When the rain came at Burrangong, I was relieved
of my work, and I went to The Bland Station, at the in-
vitation of Mrs. Perfect, the housekeeper. She was a
widow, and her son, who was overseer of the station, had
recently died. Mrs, Perfect was very lonely and wanted
company, so I went to see her as an honored guest, bent
on the high office of comforter. How far I succeeded I
do not know, for circumstances intervened, and stamped
out, I think, one sorrow with another.
John, William, and Denis Regan were managing the
station at the time of young Perfect’s death, and, on
their applying to Mr. Walton (the owner, who lived at
Burrowa) for an overseer, he sent in Perfect’s place a
Mr. Carr. Mr. Carr was in delicate health, and it was
thought that a change to The Bland might benefit him.
Soon after I reached The Bland (early in 1852), heavy
rain came and flooded the Lachlan River, which over-
flowed into Lake Cowal and backed up on to the plains.
The flood spread over the station; and, in a few days,
reached the foundations of the homestead. Mr. Carr was
very ill, and was quickly growing worse. The water rose,
and came into the house; and the immediate question
was, how to save our lives? John and William Regan
were away, and Denis took charge of the situation. A
sandhill not far from the house seemed to be the only
hope, but Mr. Carr protested that, if he were removed
to there, it would be the death of him. Denis agreed with
this perfectly reasonable view, and tried to devise some
other scheme for placing Mr. Carr beyond reach of the
flood. He thought of the loft above the kitchen, and this
he furnished as best he could to accommodate Mr. Carr,
his wife, and their four young children. A fire-place was
fixed up by filling a large pot three parts full of earth,
and hanging it to the ridge of the roof by two bullock-
chains. A good supply of food was put in the loft, and
the Carr family was helped up to livt? there till the flood
should subside. Then Denis Regan and a man servant
rushed off to the sand hill near the stock yard and quick-
-50


ly built two bark mia mias. The two men waded back
to the house and took Mrs. Perfect and myself to the hill
to occupy one of the mia mias, while they occupied the
other. We had taken plenty of food with us, but, as the
rain was pouring down, we could not light a fire —hot
meals were, therefore, off the menu. There was no room
for complaint, however, even though the mia mias leaked,
for wm were at least safe from drowning. We were not
50 sure of the safety of the Carrs, for, from our little hill,
we could see the water still rising about the homestead,
and I feared that those unfortunate people in the loft
would be trapped by the flood.
“It’s got some distance to go before it reaches the
•ft,” Denis assured me; “It’s not much more than five
;et up to the walls now, and the rain has cleared off.”
This was six days after we had moved into the mia
lias. On the seventh day, the water started to shrink
town, and then to fall quickly. By late afternoon, Denis
ind the servant were able to' wade over to the house and
nquire after the Carrs. They had suffered terribly, and
ffr. Carr was much worse. The smoke from the fire, which
lad to be kept going most of the time, had nearly suffo-
cated them, and Mrs. Carr was cramped and sore, for, in
he loft, she had hardly sufficient room to stand up
traight. To add to her plight, one of her children, who
yas only fourteen months old, had become ill. Denis and'
lis servant next day shovelled the mud out of the house,
ind we took up possession again, and the Carr family got
town from the loft. A week afterward, the baby took
onvulsions and died, and eight days later Mr. Carr died
-f consumption. When this news reached Mrs. Carr’s fa-
her, he came from Coulburn and took his daughter and
er two children to Burrowa.
During this flood there was almost a fatality at Mr.
Caldwell’s station, Moonbucca, Bland Creek. The station
ras flooded, and at the time only a man servant (Peter
Woods) and Mr. Caldwell’s daughters, Elizabeth and
and his son Steel, were at home; Mr. and Mrs.
Caldwell both being away in Bathurst with other mem-
bers of the family. The flood waters came into the
:ouse, and when Woods and the children tried to escape
hey found that they were surrounded by water. To
emain in the house meant to run a very serious risk and
51


to escape seemed impossible. There was, however, one
chance, and that was to wade out into the running water
and attempt to reach Berlabala Station (now called Peach
Tree), ten miles away. Peter Woods tied the five-year-
old Steel Caldwell to his back, and arranged Agnes (two
years old) in a similar manner on the back of her sister
Elizabeth. Elizabeth linked her arm through the arm
of Peter Woods for support, and in this fashion the
heroic two with the precious lives a-back set off through
the flood, keeping as well as possible to the high ground)
and, after an exhausting journey reached Berlabala
Creek,
Alec. McGregor, brother of Donald McGregor, owne:
of Morangorell Station, had escaped on horseback fron
Morangorell, and had ridden to Berlabala Station. IT
saw the brave little band of refugees from Moonbuccj
attemtping to cross the flooded Berlabala Creek, and hi
warned them back. Then he obtained food from tin
homestead, and, tying it to his head, swam the creek am
took the party to high land, where he tended them for j
day and a night till the creek was low enough to b
crossed. In this way did the party reach BerlabaL
Station homestead.
Mr. Donald McGregor and his wife and family weri
at the time on a visit to their parents at Goulburn, am
Mr. Alec. McGregor had been left in charge of th(
station.
A w r eek later the party was able to return to
Caldwell’s homestead.
After the flood, Denis Regan and his men went t<
John Cartwright’s New Station to muster the stock. A 1
the squatters arranged a general muster, and the steel
was to be brought to the Bland for drafting. This wa
necessary, because the flood had driven the cattle in al
directions for shelter, but it was not a big job, becaus
the squatters had just begun to re-stock after th
drought.
During Denis Regan’s absence Mrs. Perfect and
were left alone at The Bland, and on our first day alor
Mrs. Perfect, at eleven o’clock in the morning, went f(
a walk, for the purpose, I supposed, of seeking solituc
in which to mourn the loss of her son. Shortly after si
52


ad gone out I heard the yabber of unfamiliar voices out-
ide. Never had I heard such sounds, and I knew that
hat they were not made by aborigines. The doors of
he house were shut and I looked through an open win-
ow and four men, all dressed alike and with their
hirts hanging over loose baggy trousers. They were
ot white men; and they did not speak English. I be-
anie frightened, for I had never seen such men, and I
pened both the back and the front doors to give me an
llernative way of escape should I be attacked; although
le futlity of such a precaution is, of course, now quite
bvious. At the time, though, it did seem to have possi-
ilities, and comforted me a little. The men walked in
nd sat on a form and I being anxious not to fall from
kvour with them, placed food on the table and put the
ettle on to boil and made tea as quickly as I could. The
>ur men ate the meal in silence and did not in any way
y to communicate with me till they had finished and
ad again seated themselves on the form. In the kitchen
ere some Chinese mats on the floor, and on a table some
irthenware Chinese milk dishes. The men pointed to
iese and then to their own breasts, and until that
oment I did not know that my visitors were Chinamen.
had never before seen a Chinaman, and could not have
ascribed his appearance or color. As far as I knew
iere was not such a person in the whole of Australia.
The Chinamen went away quietly, following a beaten
ack towards Curraburrama, presumably making their
ay to Victoria. Mrs. Perfect came back shortly aftel
ey had gone, and from my description of the men she,
o, concluded that they were Chinamen.
Later we heard that four Chinamen had been en>
yed on Mr. Icely’s station near Mud-gee, and that they
1 killed the overseer. When Mr. Icely missed his over-
r he questioned the Chinese, and they, becoming pan-
ky, sneaked away in the night. They were those four
inamen I had entertained. Some months later the
nains of the overseer were found buried in the sheep
•d.
John Regan about this time left The Bland and went
t-back to explore the country. His idea was to acquire
owledge that would be useful for people intending to
ie up stations out-back.
53


After the mustering Denis Regan proposed marriag
to me, and we were married at Yass in July, 1852. Yas
was the nearest church, and it was seventy miles fron
Burrangong and one hundred and twenty miles from Thi
Bland. We rode to church on horseback and returnee
to The Bland by the same means. My husband con
tinued in his position as joint manager with his brothel
William, and I took over the management of the house
but my beginning was not auspicious; for, strange to say
although I had been born and reared in the bush, I hac
never learned to cook. It was not then possible to get i
house servant, and I found myself being taught by m}
husband to do the domestic duties of the home. He was
a good cook and housekeeper, and I an apt pupil, so i 1
not long before I was able to carry on without his
guidance.
Mrs. Perfect had gone to housekeep for Moses Bearc
so I was the only white woman on the station, and whe]
my husband, his brother, and the station men were awa;
mustering or on other station work, I was entirely alon
in the house. Two months after my marriage all th<
men were obliged to go away for a few days, and the firs
night I was alone Moses Beard, unannounced, put hi
head in at the window and nearly frightened the life on
of me.
“Are you here by yourself?’’ he asked.
“Yes,” I replied.
“Well, I wouldn’t stay here alone day or night,” h
said.
“Why wouldn’t you?” I asked him.
“Why? Well, just look at the graveyard,” and h
went, leaving me to think over his remarks.
There was a graveyard close to the house, and in i
were buried the remains of Mr. Carr and of other peoph
who had died on the station, but I had not entertainec
any fear about it before. The next night, however whei
I found that I had forgotten to carry the household’watei
from the creek before dark, I must confess I felt a little
seared when passing the graves in the dark, even thougl
I had only about one hundred yards to go for the water.
54


On another occasion Mr. Regan and the other men
.ad to go on a long journey to bring cattle back on to
he run. This was a necessary proceeding, for there
fere no fences in those days, and cattle would stray for
undreds of miles if left to themselves long enough. This
ime my sister Eliza rode over from Burrangong to keep
ie company. It was winter time and we were both
itting by the fire talking. The door, which was closed
ut unfastened, was seen by us both to be gradually
pening. Eliza shivered like a leaf, and I waited for
ventualities with no easy mind. We saw, as the door
pened wider, a pair of shining eyes peering in at us, and
hen in walked a naked black man.
‘‘Where Billy Denny?” he demanded, referring to
iy husband.
In a flash I replied, “Sh-h-h! Been working hard;
eep-um now—you go away.”
“Baecy, baccy,” he said, requesting tobacco.
“Go away,” I advised him; “and in the morning
illy Denny will be up and give you plenty baccy.”
He went away, but we didn’t sleep at all that night.
When my husband returned I told him of our experi-
mce, and he said, “Oh, that was Billy Gooralong; he’s
rut of his mind.”
Eighteen months after my marriage, Eliza married
William Regan, and he became manager of Bland Creek
Ration (close to The Bland), Abel Buck having been
lought out by James Chisholm, late of Kippalo Station;
tear Goulburn. Chisholm also had bought out Moses
leard. The Bland homested served for both the Bland
tid Bland Creek Stations, and William Regan and his
ife shared the house with us.


CHAPTER 10,
In 1853 Thomas White and James White, my uncle
nephews and my cousins, took up a licensed station o
Narraburra. They named the station Little Narraburr
and later sold it to John McKenzie, well known in th
butchering business at Young.
Horatio Beckham took up a portion of Curraburra:
Station, also in 1853, and called it Terungerly.
The winter of 1854 was very wet, and the wool tearr
returning from Sydney were frequently bogged, and th
journey there and back took twelve months to complete,
On Mundooramen Station, near Carcoar, lived th
owner, Mr. Icely, and it was his teams that brought th
blankets which were a gift to the blacks on Queen :
Birthday of each year. That year, owing to the we
season, the blankets were late arriving, and when th
Murumbidgee and Lachlan blacks applied for them the
were told by Mr. Icely that there were none for distribi
tion. On their way back the Murrumbidgee black
called at The Bland and told us about the blanket shor
nge. Th e blacks, though disappointed, were
humoured about it, and made up a song at Mr. Icely ;
expense, and which they sang to us. The chorus ran :
Wallen tumble down,
Wheel-barrow brokit;
Mr, Icely very poor,
Baal gibbit blanket.
They would finish the song in their own language
and then laugh heartily.
The following year Cobborn Jackie decided to guar(
against another lean time, and planned to get tw<
blankets. He went to Burrowa and early in the morning
got the blanket to which he was lawfully entitled; thii
he gave to his gin. Then, at his top speed, he travellec
across country to Yass, and, reaching the police statioi
late in the afternoon, got another blanket. He oftei
joked about his trick, and told us that one blanket wasn’
enough for himself and his gin.
56


For six years we lived at The Bland, then my hus-
band was appointed manager of Burrangong. This took
ne back to the station where I was born. William Regan
Ren became sole manager of The Bland. My uncle was
'ailing in health, due to old age (but what his age was
ve did not know, for he would never tell us), and he felt
he need of a trustworthy manager to take his place.
Chat my husband satisfied my uncle’s highest expecta-
lion I need not affirm.
But before actively taking up the management of
urangong my husband took me to Victoria to see my
other. This was my second trip, for a little time pre-
ously Mr. Regan and I and my sister and her husband
1 paid our first visit to my mother’s station. On this
icond trip Mr. Regan took all his fat cattle from The
land, and Thomas White, who had cattle that he wanted
• sell, came with us, the two men arranging to share the
avelling expenses of the cattle.
My mother, whom I have said, married Mr. Groves,
t Yass, but he had died on his station at Gobirip, near
ushworth, Victoria, and she, with the assistance of her
m, was carrying on the station. We set off in a large
iree-horse covered-in dray with ten spare horses as
lange teams, and 200 head of fat cattle. I had my two
oung children with me, and our staff consisted of a
arse girl, a man servant, and a black boy. We travelled
aite comfortably till we came to a large plain in Vic-
>ria, which took a day and a half to cross. I had to go
ithout food all this time, because there was not a stick
[ wood to light a fire with, and the tea-water, boiled
ith dry cow dung, was so tainted that I could not drink
Fortunately we had plenty of fresh water in the
;gs, but water in the bush, where one always has a good
•petite, is not a satisfying diet.
At the Goulburn River crossing (Victoria) the punt
kd been sunk, and the cattle had to be crossed down the
Iver. Only one bullock was lost, but of the ten spare
)rses, seven were drowned. The dray, with its team of
aree horses, was taken across the river on a pontoon of
asks.
I stayed with my mother for a month, and then
aimed with my husband to Burrangong, where he took
57


up his position as manager. On our way back I saw
famous Golden Horseshoes.
Mr. Cameron a storekeeper at the Woolshed, New 1
Dorado (the first Member of the Victorian Legislatr
Assembly returned for the Ovens), rode into Beechwort
Victoria, on a horse called Castor (belonging to M
Brown, of Wagga, who was in Beechworth at the time
shod with golden shoes. The weight of each shoe w;
seven ounces four pennyweights. The shoes were on ti
horse three days, in the year 1856.
The horse belonged to Mr. Brown and the shoes 1
Cameron. Cameron borrowed the horse from Brow
while Brown was in Victoria on business, and had it she
with the golden shoes. Brown purchased the shoes fro:
Cameron, and then took them off the horse. He carrie
the shoes in his valise and rode back to Wagga. In tl
meantime a man named Moxham, employed by Brow:
made bets with the townspeople that Brown would ric
into Wagga on a horse shod with golden shoes. Tl
bets were readily taken up, and Moxham stood to wi
a lot of money. Brown pulled up at a quiet place in tl
bush about a mile from Wagga and a blacksmith, sent oi
by Moxham, met Brown and put the golden shoes bac
on the horse. Brown rode in triumphantly, and Moxha:
collected his bets. When we were passing throng
Wagga we had dinner with Mrs. Brown, and she dre'
our attention to the shoes hanging on the wall, and tol
us the story related above. The Browns, I learned, wei
the most popular family in Wagga.
Soon after returning to Burrangong news reached i
of a terrible tragedy. In 1859 many buildings we:
being erected on Marengo, and the station was fast b
coming a township. Two men, Angel and MacNamin
had the contract to supply shingles to the buildei
Clarke, whose hatred of Angel he had often e:
pressed, set out one day for the shingle-getter
camp, about fourteen miles away, and within fr
or six miles of Young, in the Stringy Bai
Ranges. He took with him a bottle of poisoned gin, an
pretending to be sorry for his previously expressed fee
58


gs of ill will, asked Angel to forgive him. Angel
adly did so, and drank of the poisoned gin to their new
iendship. MacNaminy also drank of the gin, but
arke did not. This raised the suspicions of the two
m, and Clarke argued the matter with them till the
ison overcame their strength. Then he told them
lat he had done, and completed the double murder with
broad axe that was used by the shinglers.
When Angel and MacNaminy failed to come to
irengo for two weeks, and since it was their custom to
and each week-end at their homes, a search party went
the camp to see if they were ill. Their charred bodies
;re found in a heap of partly burnt shingles. Clarke
is at once thought to be guilty of the crime, and the
lice went to Angel’s house and arrested him there.
Goulburn Gaol, where he was tried, he admitted the
irders and told the Court all the incidents related
ove. He was hanged in Goulburn in 1860.
Before Mr. Regan went to Burrangong my uncle had
,d all his sheep, and had stocked up his runs with cattle
d horses. There was a tremendous number of young
rses on the station, but the older horses had become
ld, and some had gone off as far as Wagga, These
r husband arranged to bring back to the station. To
p these horses when they should be driven in, yards
i living quarters for the stockmen, were built at Lamb-
* Flat. The name comes from the fact that this par-
ularly sheltered flat was used by the ewes at lambing
le.
After the first batch of horses had been brought to
3 yards at Lambing Flat, Mr. Regan saw in the ground
tere the earth had been broken up by the horses’ hoofs
glistening piece of metal which he thought was gold,
i; and his cook, a man named Alexander, then began
Inspecting on a little creek close by, and almost at its
lotion with the main creek. Their prospecting imple-
;nts consisted of a shovel, a pick, and the lid of a billy
!i, and while one dug for the gold the other washed the
;*t. Almost immediately they struck gold. This was
March, 1860, and, the news of the discovery travelling


quickly, a rush set in, and did not abate till the end-
-1861. By that time there were thirty thousand mine
settled on Lambing Flat, which had been proclaimed
diggings.
I am not here concerned with the growth and t
decay of this field, for history has already told these fac
I shall, however, mention that when wooden buildin
replaced some of the tents, the timber and the bark f
these buildings was taken from my uncle’s station, ai
they became the nucleus of the township of Young, f
Young is built on the spot where my husband discover!
the gold.
It would be impossible to estimate the loss this go'
rush meant to my uncle, and I will not attempt to do s
for as it did not worry him, and as he was quite content
lose much of his station property and stock that the go'
might be secured for the State, it would ill become me •
complain. Let me say it to his credit that he refused '
ask for any compensation from the Government, ar
again to his credit, and to the credit of my husband, th;
neither of them took out a miner’s right, nor dug for go 3
after the discovery. They were friendly with all tl
diggers, and did what they could to help them.
The first accident on the goldfield occurred to M
Lynch, wife of the lock-up keeper at Binalong. Constal
Lynch had died, and his wife went to the diggings w;
her belongings in a dray. In crossing Burrangong Ore
she was jolted off the load, and falling, broke her thig]
The first death on the diggings was that of Mi
Thomas West. She and her husband came to Lambn
Flat and made a camp at Ohainy Ponds Creek. Foolish
they had made the camp in the bed of the creek, whi«
was dry. One fine day, without any warning at a
flood waters rushed down the creek and filled it to tl
banks. Mrs. West saw the water coming, and hurried
she moved some of her belongings out of the eree
Returning for more, she was caught by the rushing wat
and carried away. Mr. West was out on the digginj
at the time, and when he returned to the camp he w
mystified at the flooded state of the creek, for, as I ha''
said, it was a fine day, and there had not been any ra
in the locality for months. But the flood had bee
caused by a thunderstorm higher up the creek. Tl
60


ody of Mrs. West was found several days later, about a
aile away where she had died, with her arms around a
ree. Debris had covered all but her hair.
The next death was that of a child named Brown,
ae parents, with a family of children, came to Lambing
[at in 1861, and as soon as they reached camp rain fell,
aey put up a calico house in a hurry, but the calico let
e rain through, and in covering over the beds to keep
em dry, the child was smothered.
61


CHAPTER 11
I have said that early in 1852 John Regan commence
exploring the back country for station property. In
few years he caused much country to be opened up, anc
incidentally, shifted the location of the out-back froi
Young to what is now Wyalong. Mr. John Wood, o
Brundah, in 1858, asked John Regan to take him to a goo<
position out-back where he could establish a station fo
his brother Joseph. Mr, Wood and Mr. Regan togethe
set off in search of land. After passing Billabong (nuv
called Marsden), they got on to a creek that ran throng]
unexplored land. They were the first white people t
put foot on this land; and, to celebrate the event, eampei
for the night on the creek. Their horses they hobble*
and left to feed on the abundant grass. It was an un
known thing to carry feed for horses in those days, fo;
grass was plentiful and adequately supplied the needs o
horses or other travelling stock. It is a strange thing tha
when there is unlimited good feed growing in the bush
stock will wander for miles, tasting here and there as the}
go, and never staying for long in one spot. The horsei
of those two men proved no exception to the rule; anc
next morning Mr. Regan and Mr. Wood had great diffi
culty in finding their horses, which had travelled al
night, and it was late in the day when they were fount
in the scrub. Then the two explorers were puzzled as
to the direction of their camp. They had changed then
course so many times in hunting for the horses that the}
could not determine which way to proceed on the returr
journey. Leaving much to chance, they took the direc-
tion that seemed most likely to be the right one; then
losing faith in that direction, they tried another, and
another. In this way they searched about till nearly
dark, when, by good luck, they came upon the creek and
followed it till they reached the camp. John Wood
mildly retaliated by naming the creek Humbug Creek,
This simply registered expression, endorsed by John
Regan, to show the feelings of the two men toward the
creek that had so long eluded them has been immortal-
-62


3d, for Humbug Creek it is to-day, and it is so known in
,e Lands Department.
Wood, however, was impressed with the locality, and
.ecided to take it up as a station for his brother, and
/hen he returned to Brundah sent Mr. Walsh (an over-
eer) to take possession of the land and hold it till Joseph
Vhod was able to enter into occupation. Walsh went
nto partnership with Wood, and they called the station
lerrengreen, and stocked it with cattle and horses. It
pas at that time the farthest out-back station in the south-
west of New South Wales,
When Thomas White returned from Victoria he went
lack to his station (Little Narraburra), but in 1859 he
.nd his elder brother, James White, took up a squat-
ng area explored by John Regan on the Humbug Creek,
[homas having sold out Little Narraburra. They named
heir station Ballangama.
Another squatter to avail himself of land explored
ty John Regan on Humbug Creek was Mr. Woodhouse
Hiawatha). Then came Thomas and Abraham Wood,
[hey were brothers, and both young men, who had been
smployed by my uncle at Burrangong, but desiring to
lave a station for themselves they took their mother and
: ather and their five brothers, and four sisters, on Mr.
legan’s advice, to Humbug Creek, where they took up
i splendid station property, and did well. Their station
vas named Wallandry,
The next land to be explored by John Regan was
fhe Merool, now known as Wyalong. The first man on
fhe Merool’was an American negro named Sims (known
is Black Sims). He took up his station in 1859, and
tvas in possession for tw'o years before another squatter
?ame to" the district. Sims employed three a
uarried couple, and a white boy. By all who knew him
ae was regarded as a gentleman, but one day he took it
into his head to steal some cattle from neighbouring sta-
tions. The stolen cattle, together with some of his own,
tie drove to Victoria, intending to sell them in the Mel-
bourne markets. He was, however, apprehended at the
border because of the suspicion raised by the numerous
Battle brands. In the absence of satisfactory proof as
to how he came by the cattle, Sims w r as taken under
arrest to Yass. There he was tried on a charge of cattle
63


stealing, and, being proved guilty, was sentenced to ten
years’ imprisonment. His station, which he had named
Coonaparra, reverted to the Crown. Soon after Sims
was arrested, the married woman servant, with her two-
year-old child, went for a walk into the bush, and neither
of them was heard of again. It is supposed that they
both perished in the bush.
In 1861 William Marshall took up a large area anr
called it Buddigower. And in the same year George
Harman took up Quondarry. Moses Beard (late of The
Bland;, also in the same year, acquired land en The
Merool and he called the station Merool Creek. Ther
came Samuel Pawsey (Mandamah), followed by Hamil-
ton Hume (Mandamah West), nephew of the great Ex-
plorer Hume.
All those stations came into existence through the
efforts of John Regan. He was a man who hated to have
a boss, and after he left The Bland he never allowed him-
self to be employed by any man. It was that spiril
which turned his mind to exploring, and when he had
discovered land suitable for squatting purposes he sold
the knowledge at fair valuation. In that way he
made a living for himself and caused the back country
to be turned to profitable use. He explored and opened
up thousands of square miles of country that was pre-
viously unknown to white men. He was noted for his
biavery, as his mother was for hers. Imagine Mrs. Regan
going into the unknown bush on The Levels, and there,
with her three young sons, pioneering a station; and to
make it a success, going with the bullock drays to Sydney
with her produce! Imagine her in that wild country
ploughing, digging, rearing cattle, horses, and pigs, and
engaging in fearless riding after wild beasts! Imagine,
if you can, what those undertakings must have meant
nearly one hundred years ago; then know that she was
John Regan’s mother.
Is it any wonder that this son of hers selected foi
himself the most arduous occupation that it was possibh
for him to find? On his exploring expeditions he always
went alone, and with only his pack horse stocked witl
supplies, and his saddle horse to ride. He took no guid<
with him; and depended for direction on the sun, moon
and stars. Remember that he always went into country
64


that had never before known a white man; into thickly
timbered country through which there were no tracks.
He had to endure the hardships of sleeping out in wet
weather, and every day he ran the risk of being lost.
But the work he did is represented by the wealth that
was, in those early days, won from at least a thousand
square miles of fertile land, well watered, and admirably
suited to the grazing of stock and the cultivation of
crops.
I am proud that John Regan was my brother-in-law,
and proud also to remember that his brothers were in
character as noble as he.
The mention of the young Regans has brought me
from the back country to nearer home. That reminds
me that I have said nothing about how the squatters
managed to protect their money. It was not a simple
matter in those days, because banking arrangements did
not favour speedy transactions. It was safer to bank
your money in Sydney, but handier to keep it in the
house. To take your money to Sydney was to run the
risk of being stuck up and robbed, and to leave it in the
house was also to run the risk of having it stolen. But
once in the bank the money was safe, though not readily
accessible; whereas, if you kept it at home it was always
at hand for use when any transaction involving cash pay-
ment was undertaken.
The difficulty of banking, however , was removed
when, in 1861, the first bank was opened in Young. It
was the Bank of New South Wales, and Mr.Tlobb was its
manager.
The first business houses opened in Young township
were:—-
Hotel: The Great Eastern, erected by John Allen, of
Stoney Creek Station,
Chemist Shop: Robert and John Armstrong,
Boot and Shore Store: John Hunter.
General Store: John Murphy. Mr. Bigg opened up
general store about the same time.


Hairdressing Saloon: Mr, Reus.
The first solicitors were Mr. Manby and Mr.
Prendergrass.
The first Police Magistrate was Mr. Pearce, and the
first Gold Commissioner, Mr. Shadford,
Dr. Temple was the first physician, and he also was
the first J.P.
The famous New South Wales Land Act (Free Selec-
tion), introduced by John Robertson (later Sir John),
was passed in October, 1861, and came into operation on
January Ist, 1862.
The Act put an end to large stations, for it pre-
vented any squatter from holding more than sixteen
thousand acres. The squatters, naturally, did not wel-
come with open arms the free selectors who came and
took up large portions of their runs, but as this has long
been a sore point, I shall say no more about it.
In 1860 Mr. William Regan left The Bland and took
up the management of Curraburrama Station for my
ancle.


CHAPTER 12
In the same year as the gold discovery at Lambing
Flat, the first bushrangers appeared on The Bland.
Francis Gardiner and two gold-diggers discussed an easy
way of making money. This was to arm themselves
and stick up the homes of squatters and steal the money.
The three men went to Forbes, and after raiding several
homesteads without success, they stuck up Alec. Law’s
station and stole a good deal of money and two horses.
Then they returned to their starting point, Tipperary
Gully, Lambing Flat. But the police had been informed
of the robbery, and were on the tracks of the bush-
rangers. To avoid arrest Gardiner and his men went on
to The Bland, where they were able to hide in the thick
bush, and so keep out of the way of the police. They
could not, however, avoid making the squatters curious,
and when they had called at the same stations several
times to purchase food the squatters began to ask who
the men could be.
Three strange men had called regularly at Mc-
Gregor’s station store for a fortnight, and when Mc-
Gregor heard that other squatters had been visited in the
same way curiosity grew to suspicion. The squatters
consulted, and decided to watch the men. One day a
stockman named John Cameron (Curraburrama) fol-
lowed one of the strangers to a camp in the bush between
Curraburrama and Euroka. When this was reported to
the squatters they decided upon a plan: that one stock-
man from each station should form a party to go to the
camp and ask the strangers what their business was.
Five stockmen, with the stockman Cameron, mus-
tered at McGregor’s for the adventure. There should
have been another man in the party, but roll call re-
vealed that William Regan (Curraburrama) was absent.
The other stations represented were: Bland, Morangorell,
Moonbucca, and Narraburra. William Regan’s wife had
prevented him from going. Regan was as good as his
67


promise, and that promise was fortified by his keen desire
to be in the adventure; but what man can plan with
safety where a woman may have the last say?
Regan had his saddle horse tied up at his kitchen
door, and was about to ride off when he found that he
had left his spurs in the house. He went inside to get
them, and his wife, without consulting judgment, but
seizing opportunity as she found it, slipped off the bridle
and saddle and whipped the horse so smartly that it gal-
loped away. She then quickly hid the saddle and bridle,
and when Mr. Regan came out ready to ride to the
appointed place, he found the horse gone and his wife
braced up to meet the storm. Passion conquered words
in him, and all he could do was to stare madly at the wife
who had exercised her high prerogative.
“Yes, I did it,” she assured him, breaking the tense
silence. “Now, look here William, one man has already
gone from this station! Do you think it a fair thing to
leave me and the four children here without pro-
tection?”
He didn't, and that ended the episode.
So, without William Regan, the little band set off to
interview the men in camp. But when the strangers saw
the stockmen they mounted their horses (which were
ready saddled) and galloped away. The five men gave
chase, and after a long gallop overtook the runaways.
Cameron worked one of them into timbered country and
jambed the galloping horse against a tree and pulled
the horseman out of the saddle. Having thus captured
the man, and having him at his mercy, Cameron prepared
to take him back to the station.
“What’s your name?” asked the captive.
“Cameron,” the stockman replied.
“Oh, that’s strange; my name’s Cameron, too,” said
the stranger.
It occurred to Cameron that these men must be the
Forbes bushrangers.
68


Another stockman jammed another of the strangers
against a tree, in the same way as Cameron had jammed
his man, but, whereas the first caught was not hurt, the
second was severely injured. The third man escaped,
The two captured men, after having their hands tied,
were placed on their horses and led a distance of five or
six miles to Balabala Station, then occupied by a Mr.
Symonds. At the station four of the five stockmen
stayed with the two captured men, while the fifth rode to
Young (twenty miles away) for the police. Trooper
Baxter and another rode back with the stockmen to Bala-
bala, and both police officers pronounced the men to be
bushrangers. It was twenty-four hours from the time
the stockmen set out for the strangers’ camp till they
were relieved by the police.
Baxter placed the men under arrest, and said that
they would have to be taken to Young. He borrowed a
cart and horse from Mr. Symonds for the injured man,
and the other was put on horseback. On the way to
Young the police called at Burrangong Station, reaching
there at noon. The prisoner Cameron was taken to the
kitchen to have his meal with the police, but the prisoner
in the cart was too badly hurt to be moved, I did what
I could for him and saw that he was given proper nour-
ishment. My uncle was past the age for taking much
interest in these unexpected visitors, so my husband
acted as host in the kitchen, and I stayed by the cart
with the sick man.
He was communicative, and, I believe, told me the
truth. After I had made him as comfortable as I could,
and he had taken food, I asked him his name.
He replied, “My name is Goodwin.”
I said to him: “What a foolish man you have been;
it is thought that you are one of the men who stuck up
Alec. Law at Forbes.”
“Yes,”he said, “it was a foolish thing, and I’m very
sorry for what we’ve done. We took the advice of the
third man, who has got away. I hope he will be able to
get right away, and I think he will, because he is on a
very fast mare, and he’s got all the money,”
“How came you to take such a step?” I asked him.
69


“Well,” he replied, “we were advised by our mate.
He said we had nothing to do but go to Forbes and stick
up all the squatters there, as they were very rich, and
kept all their money in the house. Then we would soon
be rich ourselves, and have enough money to leave the
colony. It makes it very awkward for me, and I’m very
sorry, because I’ve got a wife and child on Tipperary
Gully.”
After lunch the police took their prisoners on to
Young, where they were formally charged with the
Forbes robbery. Goodwin was put in the prison hos-
pital, and while he was being medically treated the trial
of the two men was postponed. When Goodwin was
well enough to appear in Court, both men were tried for
robbery under arms, and being found guilty were each
sentenced to ten years at Cockatoo Island.
The third man has now to be accounted for, and his
unmasking came about in a peculiar manner.
The first race meeting on Lambing Flat was pro-
moted by the diggers, assisted by a publican named Sells,
who had an hotel on Spring Creek. The course was on
a piece of land which is now the heart of Young. The
railway station, Zouch Street, and the Great Eastern
Hotel now occupy most of the old course. My husband
and I, with our three children, were at the races, and the
first race of the day nearly provided a tragedy, Jimmy
Cain’s horse bolted off the course and galloped straight
towards where I was standing, and I escaped certain
death by backing out of its way, gathering up my three
children at the same time. Cain was able to get his
horse back on the course, and, after all, he won the
race.
There was great excitement after the victory, and
one man showed a specially keen interest in the winner.
“Who’s the owner of that mare?” he shouted.
Mrs. Sells replied: “I own her.”
The man tried hard to get Mrs. Sells to part with it,
but she refused his most tempting offers,
70


That night the mare was stolen from its stable, and
Mrs. Sells never saw it again.
All this happened before the three men were chased
by the stockmen. The man who got away was Gardiner,
and it was the mare he had stolen from Mrs. Sells that
had outpaced his pursuers.
Mrs. Sells is still alive, and lives close to my place at
Auburn.
71


CHAPTER 13
Gardiner was quiet for about six months after that
memorable chase, and it was thought that he had left the
colony, but he turned up again in the same locality. His
first attempt at robbery after his re-appearance was at
Mr, John Eastlake’s store, at Spring Creek. Gardiner,
with two men, believed to be Gilbert and O’Meally, went
to the store, and, finding Mr. Eastlake behind the counter
(he was standing near his gold-scales), Gardiner covered
him with a pistol and demanded gold. Eastlake bobbed
under the counter, either to get a fire-arm or to seek
shelter, and Gardiner fired. The bullet went through
the gold-scales and into a door, without doing any harm,
but the bushrangers cleared off without waiting to see the
result of the shot.
Gardiner and his gang thought Eastlake was a good
mark, as he was known to be a big buyer of gold, and
why the gang didn’t carry its demands further is a mys-
tery. It is, however, very doubtful whether they would
have secured much wealth, even had they taken the ex-
treme measure of killing Mr. Eastlake and then ran-
sacking his store, for Mr. Eastlake did not keep much
cash in the place. His store takings he used for the
purchase of gold, and the gold he hid in a most ingeni-
ous way. He had fashioned a cavity in each hub of his
cart wheels, and in these cavities he planted the gold, as
much as five hundred pound's worth at a time. Mr,
Eastlake is still alive, and his home is at Young.
In quick succession there were a few minor robberies
committed by the gang, Mr. Body, who had a flour
mill at Tumut, was making his way to Forbes, and when
near The Pinnacle (owned by Mr. Trollope), now called
Mortree Station, Gardiner and his gang stuck him up and
took his horse, saddle, and bridle, his watch and money,
and left him standing in the road.
The gang then went to Pring’s Station (Crowther),
and held up the servants. Mr. Pring and family were
absent at the time, and the bushrangers made merry till
the earlv hours of the morning. They drank all the
78


brandy in the house, and one played the piano while the
others danced. Crowthcr was fifteen miles from
Burrangong.
The next sticking up took place at Mr. Croaker’s
Burrowmunditroy. Mr. and Mrs. Croaker were placed
under guard, and a visitor, Thomas Richards, of Goul-
burn, was told not to move, under pain of death. The
bushrangers arrived on horseback at night, and they
brought with them a dray drawn by two horses. This
dray they loaded with groceries, cooked food, and cloth-
ing. This done, O’Meally said to Richards :
“You look very quiet and silent; turn out your
pockets!'’
Richards did so, and out tumbled twenty-seven
pounds in notes.
In the meantime Mrs. Croaker was forced to prepare
a meal for the bushrangers, and to play the piano while
they ate. The bushrangers themselves contributed to
the musical programme; one played selections on his con-
certina, and one gave a song and dance.
These were the only squatters stuck up by Gardiner
in the neighborhood of Burrangong, and no one was stuck
up or robbed on The Bland. Generally speaking the
bushrangers were content to steal only horses from the
squatters, and these were stolen from Burrangong,
Cowra, Carcoar, and Forbes.
Then came the Eugowra Gold-Escort Robbery.
Great quantities of gold were being secured from the
alluvial workings at Forbes, and Cobb and Co.'s coaches
were doing a big business on the run from Forbes to
Penrith. The bushrangers got wind of the fact that
thousands of ounces of gold were being consigned to Syd-
ney by coach, and they planned a hold-up.
On June 15th, 1862, Policeman James Condell,
Andrew Moran, and William Haviland, and mail-driver
John Fagan, were stopped on the Gates Road at the
Eugowra Rocks by Gardiner and seven or eight of his
73


gang, when travelling towards Sydney with the Govern-
ment escort. The bushrangers fired a volley, and then
made u rush at the coach, and took the rifles of the police,
the gold, amounting to 5509 ounces, much of which be-
longed to the Oriental Banking Company, and bank notes
to the value of £7490. They also took the leaders out of
the coach to serve as pack-horses, but only used one; and
breaking open the boxes of gold, packed them on the mail
horses; they divided the gold and notes afterwards into
eight shares, five of the men taking theirs, while the other
three shares (viz., Gardiner’s, Charters’s, and Fordyce’s)
remained on the pack-horses, which knocked up at the
foot of the Weddin Mountains, and before the bush-
rangers could remove the gold it fell into the hands of
the police, under Sergeant Saunderson, who had given
chase, and succeeded in recovering 1239 ounces of gold;
subsequently, when Manns was arrested, 200 ounces and
£135 in notes were found 1 on him.
The names of the bushrangers engaged in this rob-
bery were: —Frank Gardiner, alias Frank Christie, John
Gilbert, Daniel Charters (afterwards turned informer),
John Bow, Alexander Fordyce, Henry Manns, Benjamin
Hall, and John O’Meally.
After the Escort robbery the gang was joined by a
man named Burke. The gang went to Mr. Keightley’s
station. The squatter held the bushrangers at bay. He
had two pistols, and as he discharged one, Mrs. Keightley
reloaded it. Thus a continuous fire was kept up until
Mr. Keightley shot Burke dead. The bushrangers then
overpowered Mr. Keightley, and held him ransom for
£5OO.
Gardiner said to Mr. Keightley: “You’ve shot our
mate, and you’ll pay us £5OO for it; and we’ll keep you
prisoner till we get the money. If you don’t pay up
we’ll kill you.”
You have already seen what a brave woman Mrs.
Keightley was; and she was able again to come to her
husband’s help. She saddled up a fast horse and gal-
loped to Bathurst, and. the banks being closed, borrowed
£5OO from her father. Back she galloped with the money,
paid it to Gardiner, and secured the release of her
husband.


After this affair Gardiner deserted his gang and went
to Queensland to make himself safe from the police.
Gilbert and Hall then jointly became heads of the
gang. Davies and McGuiness joined under the now
leaders, but McGuiness did not last long. The gang
went out-back, as far as Marsden, to escape the police.
Near Marsden Station the gang came upon a black’s
camp, and McGuiness jokingly pretended to steal the
half-caste wife of Pilot, one of the black men. The bush-
ranger told Pilot that they had come to take his wife
away. Pilot protested firmly, and said he would not let
her go. To give the joke the appearance of reality, Mc-
Guiness got off his horse, saying “I will take her,” and
catching hold of the woman, pretended to lift her into the
saddle, but Pilot shot him dead on the instant.
So overcome with terror was Pilot when he realised
what he had done that he cleared out with his wife to the
Wyalong Ranges, and there he lived in hiding for three
years. The Government, being anxious to compliment
Pilot on his ridding the colony of one of the gang, sent
black trackers to tell him that he would not be punished,
and that he could go free with the blessing of the
authorities. But Pilot wouldn’t believe the trackers, and
even had he been inclined to take their assurance, he cer-
tainly would not trust the gang, which, he felt sure,
would take a reprisal on him if he came out of hiding.
He remained in the ranges till the gang was cleared up.
The black trackers were, perhaps, the best friends
the bushrangers had, for they would keep the bushrangers
well posted with the movements of the police, and lead the
troopers astray. As a result of this intrigue, a number
of the trackers were dismissed, and they became a further
menace to efficient working of the troopers. Billy Dargan
and Jackie Watson were the only two trackers who
proved themselves faithful, and they were marked by the
traitors. Jackie Watson was attacked by his dismissed
trackers, who had raided one of the stations and secured
firearms, and was shot so badly in the right arm that it
had to be amputated.


CHAPTER 14
On April 29, 1863, I was overtaken by the greatest
calamity of my life. Nine months prior to this my hus-
band met with an accident while rounding up wild
horses; for the nine months, though not crippled, he
suffered intense agony, and then he died, at the age of
twenty-nine. We had four children.
My uncle, too, was greatly shocked by the death of
my husband, but he was very much in his decline, and
did not realise the calamity that had befallen the station
in losing so capable a manager, but he felt the loss as a
terrible reminder that death on a lonely station is more
unfriendly than anywhere else. To him it was death,
and that only, and perhaps he felt that, since it had
visited the house, it might there and then add one more
tragedy to the day. Perhaps he felt that; I don’t know:
for my part I was stunned, till Time came to my rescue
and helped me to rise above my grief. How the station
got on I do not know —but somehow or other the stock-
men pulled along, and the free selectors helped by taking
up all but the sixteen thousand acres to which my uncle
was entitled at Burrangong and sixteen thousands on
Spring Creek, thus reducing the work on the stations.
Some months after Mr. Regan’s death, Gilbert, whom
I had known as a stock-rider for Mr. Mulholland, of
Stoney Creek Station, near Marengo, rode to Burrangong
to see me. He dismounted at the front door, and, un-
doing one end of the bridle rein, he walked into the
house, holding the rein so as to be sure of his horse. He
was armed with guns and pistols. Then I noticed that
John O’Meally was with Gilbert, and he, too, was holding
the extended bridle rein of his horse.
My uncle, whose old age had brought deafness to
him, was sitting by the tire, and he was very nervous
when he saw Gilbert and O’Meally.
Gilbert addressed me in a friendly manner: “Well,
Mrs. Regan,” he said, “how are you?”
76 ' - -


“I’m very well, thank you, Gilbert,” I replied.
Then he saw my uncle trembling by the fire. The
old man is looking old and very timid,” he remarked.
I admitted the truth of this.
Gilbert then said that he had come to see if I would
undertake to keep lots of cooked food ready for the bush-
rangers anytime they might call for it.
“No, Gilbert,” I said. “I really could not have any-
thing to do with you or the other bushrangers, either by
supplying food or doing anything else. If I helped you I
should lose the respect of all our neighbours, for, you
know, the bushrangers and the squatters are sworn
enemies.”
He became thoughtful, and I said to him: “What in
the world made you take up bushranging? Couldn’t you
make a living without pursuing such a terrible course?”
“No,” he said. “We are in it now, and we can’t
get out of it. I tried to break away from Gardiner by
dressing myself in woman’s clothes and putting my hair
up in a net; and I got away to New Zealand.”
‘Why didn’t you stay there?” I asked him, “instead
of coming back to your old haunts.”
“Because,” he said, “they would not give me a
chance; I intended to settle down and go straight, but I
was suspected in New Zealand, and I had to clear back
and seek safety by again joining Gardiner. But I didn’t
like him; nor did I like the bushranging game, so once
more I ran the risk of escaping from him. It was a pretty
dangerous thing to do, for Gardiner would have shown
me no mercy had he suspected my intention to desert him.
I beat him, though, and got to Queensland.”
This simple recital touched me, and I felt it was a
pity that this lad, who might have been a useful work-
man, should have been in such a plight. I encouraged him
to tell his story.
“In Queensland,” he continued, “I came across a
farmer who lived alone, and he gave me a job as a plough-
man, and I thought I was all right.”
77


“One day we were in the field, and a man came along
and he talked to my master. The stranger cast an eye
upon me, and then turned away quickly, as if he hadn’t
noticed me. After they had been talking for awhile my
master said to me; ‘This man and I are going up to the
hut to have a cup of tea; come along, Johnny, and join
us.’ ”
“I said, ‘no thanks, master; I’ll stop and look after
the horses.’ ”
‘I had my own opinion about the man, so I waited
till they got inside the hut, and then I cut for my life,
and a pretty hard time I had getting back. I was days
without food, and when I got to Pring’s Station (twenty
miles from Burrangong) I was in rags, my boots just
hanging to my feet; but I met a pal there and he very
soon supplied me with a new suit of clothes, horse, saddle,
bridle, and plenty of food; and then again, for the last
time, with Gardiner.”
“How did you make your peace with Gardiner?” I
asked him.
“Oh, I had to invent excuses, but that was easy
enough, because it’s each man for himself when one gets
cut off from the gang.”
“Well,” I said, “can’t you do the same thing again?
Can’t you clear out as if you’d been cut off from your
camp, and not go back to Gardiner? Why not get away
now and lead a different life? You are young; you have
health and strength, and you could reform, couldn’t
you?”
I fired the questions at him with all the earnestness
of a simple bush woman who believed that here was a
great work for her to do.
“No,” he replied almost pathetically; “there is no
chance; there is nothing for me now, only to lose my
head. I have told you how I have tried, and you can see
that I haven’t a chance.”
Before I could reply, he said: “When I turned out
first I took your horse Jackie.”
“How did you get my horse?” I asked sharply.
78


“He was brought to me,” said Gilbert, “and I
mounted him on the station and rode away to join Gar-
diner, Jackie was a great horse, and saved my life
many times.”
(I didn’t know till then that my horse had been
away from home. He must have come straight back as
soon as he got away from Gilbert.)
O’Meally did not say a word, although I had known
him from babyhood. He looked a pathetic figure stand-
ing there, and I felt sorry for him and for Gilbert. I
made one more effort to turn Jthem from their evil ways;
I knew they were both Roman Catholics.
“Why don’t you two see your priest?” I asked.
Gilbert replied that he had seen his priest, who was
unable to do anything for him.
I then advised them to give themselves up to the
police, rather than go on in a career of crime.
O’Meally put his two hands to his face and cried and
sobbed bitterly, and said “Oh, my sister, my sister, my
sister! ’ ’
Gilbert then took O’Meally by the arm and led him
outside, and both men rode away.
A man passing by saw Gilbert and O’Meally going
into the station, and he ran all the way up the creek to
the police camp ten miles way, and reported the matter.
Next morning Inspector Singleton, with eleven troopers,
came to Burrangong to gather what information he could
about the outlaws.
It was a life and death matter for the station people
if the bushrangers found out that the police had been
given information, so I was careful to speak to the in-
spector alone, and to request him not to remain longer
than was necessary.
No good came of the visit, however, and a few days
later the inspector sent a trooper along to the station to
gather news and to. report developments. On reaching
the homestead he made himself comfortable on the couch.
All the men were away in the harvest field, and I, on
going outside, saw three horsemen riding towards the
79


house. I recognised two of them as Gilbert and
O’Meally, and informed the trooper of the fact. That
officer became scared, and asked where the workmen and
the firearms were. I replied that the men were out of
reach, and that there were no firearms left; Scotchie and
Whitton had broken them long ago. I, however, advised
him to use his own rifle or pistol. The trooper would not
accept the advice and remained inside, while I locked all
the doors. The bushrangers rode up to the homestead,
and evidently thinking that everybody was absent, gave
their horses a drink and rode away, while I watched them
through a crack in the slabs, and the trooper slunk into
a corner of the house.
Burrangong Station was a specially favoured retreat
for the bushrangers, because of its seclusion and the fine
supply of horses that were kept in the paddocks. Gar-
diner and his gang made their headquarters on the run,
and from there they operated, using the horses as freely
as if they owned them.
Of the bushrangers concerned in the Escort robbery,
three only were brought to trial for that crime—John
Bow, Alexander Fordyce, and Henry Mann. The sen-
tence on Fordyce was commuted to imprisonment for life.
The reason for the reprieve was that Fordyce had not
fired a shot, and therefore he was held less guilty than
his companions of the intent to murder.
John Bow secured his reprieve because of his good
character up to the time of the robbery, and also because
of his youth (twenty years of age) at the time of the rob-
bery. Two of the three having had their sentences of
death commuted to life imprisonment, hope was cherished
by relatives and friends that Henry Mann might also be
spared his life, especially as it was held that the degree
of crime in Mann’s case was no greater than in the case
of John Bow. The Governor, however, refused to exer-
cise his prerogative, notwithstanding that one of the peti-
tions presented to him had ten thousand signatures
attached, and Mann was delivered to the executioner.
Mann had no chance of a reprieve from the begin-
ning, because the judge, in passing the death sentence on
him, had accused him of perjury committed for the pur-
pose of securing the escape of Bow and Fordyce; and the
80


judge had expressed great resentment at Mann’s attempt
to discredit the testimony of the informer (Charters).
Gilbert, Hall, and O’Meally were shot dead after com-
mitting other bushranging crimes; and Gardiner was sub-
sequently arrested and tried and sentenced to thirty-two
years, the first two in irons. Gardiner was released after
serving ten years, and was deported (it is believed) to
China, but he soon turned up in San Francisco, where he
w T ent into business as a saloon keeper.
On the night that Gilbert was shot at Binalong he
rode Harkaway, a valued saddle horse stolen from Bur-
rangong Station.
I firmly believe that there would have been no bush-
rangers but for Gardiner.


CHAPTER 15.
One year and eleven months after Mr. Regan’s death
I re-married, on March 16, 1865, my husband being Mr.
Thomas Musgrave. I still remained at my uncle’s sta-
tion, and my husband lived with me there, and, having
selected land on the opposite side of the creek at Burran-
gong, built on his selection a big house and named it Mus-
grave House.
Six months later, September 5, 1865, my uncle died
from a chill caught on his way back from Young, whence
he had been driven by Mr, Musgrave to transact some
important business. He was three weeks on his death-
bed, and when he realised that the end was imminent he
sent to Young for Mr. Maearthur (postmaster) to draw
up a will. In this will Mr. Maearthur was appointed a
trustee, the other trustees being William Regan and Ed-
ward Taylor. Unfortunately Mr. Maearthur died sud-
denly soon after my uncle’s death.
My uncle left his two stations, Burrangong (which
included Spring Creek and Curraburrama), to the care
of the trustees, and Edward Taylor took the management
of Burrangong and William Regan remained on Curra-
burrama. These stations were conducted by the trus-
tees for eleven years, until my daughter Sarah Regan
came of age.
Curraburrama succeeded splendidly, but Burran-
gong did not, and there was nothing from the latter sta-
tion for the heirs. Mr. William Regan bought Curra-
burrama for £27,000 cash in 1875, and this, added to the
profits he had made, went to my children and my sister’s
children as beneficiaries under my uncle’s will.
Mr. Musgrave sold Musgrave House to a Mr, Hooper,
who sold it to Mr. Robinson, and a new name (Quamby)
was given to the house. The property was recently sold
to the military authorities, and is now a soldiers’ settle-
ment.
I had a most extraordinary experience while living
in this house. One day ,in 1871, two men came to Bur-


rangong and camped to have lunch. Prom my dining-
room window I could see the two men fixing up the camp
fire to boil the billy. They had only one horse between
them, a “red roan.” When they had finished their
lunch one of the men rode over to my house and bought
some rations for the road; and I learned from him that
one of their horses had died on the road. That night
the two men camped by the road at a water hole four
miles from Musgrave House, I learned that the man who
bought the provisions was a drover, known as Billy the
Drover, and that the other man was a wealthy cattle
buyer. The cattle buyer had a lot of money with him,
and he had engaged Billy the Drover to take charge of a
mob of cattle he intended buying.
Eight or nine days after the drover had bought the
rations from me a boy named Bowden found a partly-
burned body of a man at the camp where the drover and
the cattle buyer had camped after leaving Burrangong.
The body was that of the cattle buyer, and in the skull
was a hole caused by a bullet. No one knew who killed
the man, but it was believed that Billy the Drover had
shot him while he slept and then had stolen his money.
The saddle belonging to the horse that had died was
found in a hole close by, but the red-roan horse and Billy
the Drover were missing. The boy reported the affair
to the police at Young, and they made inquiries as to who
had used the cross-country road through Burrangong to
the camping ground where the body was found. Strange
to say, I had forgotten about the two men going through,
and when the police asked me if I had seen any travellers,
I thoughtlessly said I had not. The police were unable
to get any assistance to help them solve the mystery, and
there seemed no chance of the murderer ever being
found.
One summer day, at noon, about five months after
the murder, I was looking through the window of my
dining-room, and I saw what I thought to be the man on
the red-roan horse; the man who had bought the pro-
visions from me. I lost sight of him immediately, and
forgot all about the incident. A week later, however, 1
saw the man standing beside me in the dining-room, close
to the window, and at the same hour that I had seen his
vision on horseback, which was the hour he had ridden
83


to my house for the food. Involuntarily, I jumped and
screamed. Mr. Musgrave and my children ran into the
room to inquire why I had behaved so strangely. I told
them what had happened, and they all put it down to
imagination.
Those two experiences did not worry me, and I had
forgotten all about them till a week later the vision agaui
appeared; this time in circumstances not associated with
the usual time end place.
Mr. Musgrave and I were asleep in bed, and ray child
Wallace, aged four weeks, was asleep on my arm. It
was midnight, as nearly as I could tell, when I was awak-
ened by the room being flooded with light; and beside
me covered up in bed with his head on my pillow, was
Billy the Drover. At least that was my impression, for
as clearly as possible I saw a vision of him lying asleep
in my bed. I screamed and jumped out of bed with the
baby in my arms. At the same moment the room became
dark, and, Mr. Musgrave, waking up, asked me what had
happened. I told him, but not till that moment did it
strike me that Billy the Drover had murdered the cattle
buyer. This conviction being forced on me, I insisted
that Mr. Musgrave light the lamp and then ride to Young
(ten miles) for the police.
“What good can the police do?” he asked.
“I want to make a statement,” I said. “It has just
struck me that I have seen a vision of the murderer three
times, and I cannot rest till I have reported it to th£
police.”
Mr. Musgrave did not want to go, but I insisted, and
said that if he would not go there and then, I would. He
could not resist this threat, and, as I had not yet been
out of doors since the birth of the baby, my husband could
not think of my riding to Young in the middle of the
night; so he went.
Constable Cotter returned with my husband. He
did not laugh at my story, but gave it full credence. For
two years the police searched for Billy the Drover, and
then found him at Adelaide.
When he was brought to Young, I was given a
secluded place in the Court from where I could see him.
84


He was without doubt the image of the man I had seen
in the visions, and though he had aged and gone grey, I
could have identified him as the man who bought the
rations from me; but I am thankful that I was not asked
to give evidence at the trial.
It was proved beyond any doubt that Billy the Drover
had murdered his employer, and he was sentenced 1 at
Goulburn to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
The apparition never appeared to me again
Mr. Musgrave died in Sydney on October 7, 1885, at
the age of 49.
Of the two marriages there were eight children, and
I reared seven. A baby boy died when he was eight
months old. Three of my children are still living—two
sons and one daughter. The daughter is Mrs. Harriett
Jones, wife of the late William Jones, surveyor for the
Dubbo district, who was killed by being thrown out of a
sulky at Calli Station, near Gilgandra. Mrs. Jones is
living at “Boori,” Auburn Road, Parramatta. Denis
James Regan lives at Auburn, and Wallace William Mus-
grave lives with me at “Burrangong,” Stubb Street,
North Auburn.
lam just reminded of a snake story. In 1889 a
snake made a home in Mr. John Causer’s farm house,
Therdungara, near Greenbank Station. It lived there
for three years, but its nest could not be found. Every
day during this period Mrs. Causer, who was a great col-
lector of knic-knacks, missed ornaments from her side-
board. She blamed her child for taking them, and when
I visited the house Mrs. Causer told me that she sus-
pected her child. I reasoned with her, and said that if
the child had been taking the things regularly she would
be able to trace some of them. One day Mrs. Causer and
her child were away from home, and when Mr. Causer
returned to the house he saw a snake sunning itself at the
back door. He unsaddled his horse and threw the saddle
at the snake. The snake ran into the kitchen and dis-
appeared in a hole in the hearth. Mr. Causer moved the
hearthstone and killed the snake. All the missing orna-
ments were in the nest, nicely arranged in a circle. Mrs.
Causer is still living at Young.
85


CHAPTER 16.
This chapter brings me very close to the end of my
book, and in it I shall deal, as far as room will allow, with
the numerous incidents that have been left out of their
places in the previous chapters, and with a few incidents
that rightly belong to the end of the book. A little while
ago I referred to a snake that had domesticated itself.
Allow me now to talk about a snake that was, in some
measure, domesticated by a baby girl.
Little Sarah, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Burrett
(Wentworth Falls Station), when four years old, had for
some time a pet snake. Every day Sarah would go to a
favourite rock to eat her bread and milk. Her habit was
to sit on a rock and tap it with her spoon till the snake
would come out of its hole, then Sarah would share her
food with it, letting the snake eat out of her spoon. Mr.
Burrett wondered why Sarah was so fond of the rock, so
one day he watched her and saw her feeding the snake.
He killed it instantly. Sarah lived to be eighty years
old.
Of the stations I have referred to, many have grown
into large townships, such as Young.
I would now like to mention a few details of some
other stations that have become well-known towns. First
I shall take Grenfell, which is thirty miles from Burran-
gong, and which is built on the old Brundah Station,
owned by Mr. John Wood. Mr. Wood took up Brun-
dah much in the same way as my uncle took up Burran-
gong; that is, when seeking for land he followed the ad-
vice of a black fellow, who afterwards rejoiced in the
name of Pollard. I place Mr. Wood, as a pioneer, on
a level with my uncle; the two of them had an equal share
in taming the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee blacks. The
district in which Mr. Wood settled was known generally
as the Weddin district, after the Weddin Mountains. John
Wood, W. R. Watt, and Gibson Brothers, attracted by
the richness of the district, took up large tracts for pas-
toral and grazing purposes. Mr. Wood, who, by the
way, was born at Pauley’s Hotel (the famous “Wool-
-86


pack”) at Parramatta, set out in search of grazing coun-
try, and at Waugoola, now Woodstock, became on
friendly terms with a camp of aborigines. He was directed
to splendid land thirty-five miles away, which ultimately
was given the name of Brundah, one of the best-known
properties in the Grenfell district. Mr. Wood was the first
man in the district to grow wheat.
For twenty-five years there were not many changes
in the district, except that a few pastoralists came, such
as John Nowland, the Burrett family, 'Steel Caldwell,
John Dent, Major West, Mrs, Feeney, and A. Trollope.
Then the gold era began, for in 1866 reef gold was
discovered on Wood’s Brundah pastoral lease by Con.
O’Brien, a shepherd employed by Mr. Wood. A rush
quickly set in, and within four months there were twenty-
five thousand people in the district. Alluvial gold was
subsequently found. Prosperous times continued, and
at one time there were thirteen batteries at work day
and night. The quest for gold became intensified, and
discoveries were made at several other places in the dis-
trict. The original O’Brien reef yielded more than four
hundred thousand pounds worth of gold, and the total
value of gold won in the district is estimated at
£1,550,000. About 1870 the alluvial became scarce, the
reefs began to pinch out, and gradually the industry
slackened. Remains of the old workings are still there
as silent reminders of the old and boisterous days.
The diggers were so attached to Gold Commissioner
Grenfell that they named the town after him. He did
not live long to enjoy the distinction, for a few months
after the discovery he was travelling to Dubbo, when
Gardiner and his gang tried to stick up the coach in which
Grenfell was a passenger. Grenfell exchanged shots
with the bushrangers, who were driven off, but not till
Grenfell had been shot in the thigh, Grenfell died in
Dubbo twenty hours after the shooting, on December
1, 1866.
Down near the south-west corner of the field is a
willow tree, and it was in close proximity to this spot
that Henry Lawson was born on June 17, 1867. Lawson
retained recollections of his birthplace, and a few years
before his death he wrote:—


“You were born at Grenfell,
And you can’t get over that.”
Mr. Wood and his wife lived for many years on the
station, and brought up a large family. Late in life Mr.
Wood came to Sydney, and he died at Haberfield one
month short of one hundred years of age. I saw him
just before his death, and, although he was confined to
his bed, he was able to read without glasses.
Among the first lucky diggers and business men of
Grenfell were:—Messrs. Con. O’Brien (discoverer of
gold), Pateman, Ingrey Brothers, Gravenmaker, Charles
Nelson, and John Stokes.
Forbes took its name from Francis Forbes, the first
Chief Justice of New South Wales (appointed in Janu-
ary, 1823), but the name was not applied to the town
till the gold discovery in 1861. The gold was discovered
on Mr. Twaddle’s station by a digger known as German
Harry. At that time there was, of course, no township,
and the place was simply a huge cattle run, known gen-
erally as the Lachlan River. The land was shared by
the squatters named below;—
Messrs. Strickland, Higgins, Collett, Miller, Bird,
Law, Jones, Rosthorn, Thomson and Brown, Major West,
Morris, Suttor, Sir Anthony Trollope, Messrs. ‘Gibson,
Specks, Hamilton, Twaddle.
Ben Hall, O’Meally, and McGuiness are buried in the
Forbes cemetery.
In 1821, the native-born explorers, Hamilton Hume
and John Kennedy Hume, in company with G. Barber and
W. H. Broughton, discovered Yass plains. When I first
knew T ass it was considered to be in the same area as
Burrowa, but now so many towns are in this locality that
\ ass and Burrowa are not only separated into districts
of their own, but intervening districts separate the
two.
The first squatters in the Yass-Burrowa locality
were:—Messrs. Barber. O’Brien, Bernard, Hardy, Toose,
Hume, Broughton, Howell, Cassells, Broom, * Massey,
Campbell, Ryan, Harris, Wellman, Cockrane, and Captain
Grant.


The first storekeeper at Yass (1841) was James Laid-
low, and the first solicitor Thomas Allman. Burrowa
had for its first storekeeper a man named Walton.
As far as the country to which I have referred is con-
cerned, the first surveyors were: George W. Evans, dis-
coverer of the Lachlan; then followed the two Australian
youths, H. and J. K. Hume, who, after discovering Ber-
rima and Bong Bong in 1814, opened up the Yass and
Goulburn Plains and the country adjacent.
John Oxley, Surveyor-General of New South Wales,
was the first surveyor on The Bland (1817). He camped
for a considerable time near the Weddin Mountains and
started to explore The Bland Creek, He got as far as
Euroka and was blocked there by water. Thinking he
had discovered an inland sea and that no further pro-
gress -was possible by land, he marked his name into a
tree that was growing by the edge of the water. That
tree, bearing the historic name and marking the historic
occasion, stood for many years, till one sad day an un-
imaginative free selector chopped it down and burned it.
Oxley returned to his camp at the Weddin Moun-
tains and made an observation of the plains. As far as
he could see there -was no land; but before him lay an
immense sheet of water, submerging The Bland plains.
Oxley was convinced that he had discovered an inland
sea. It was, however, the backwater of the flooded
Lachlan River which, overflowing from Lake Cowal, on
the Billabong (now called Marsden), had filled The Bland
Creek and spread across the plains It was such a flood
no doubt, as the one I experienced on the memorable
occasion when I visited Mrs. Perfect at Bland Station.
Major (later Sir Thomas) Mitchell, the next Sur-
veyor-General of New South Wales, in 1826 set out fur-
ther to explore the back country. He got as far as to
where The Bland road now joins Curraburrama and Bland
Stations, and he camped in a belt of timber half way
between these two stations at a place now called Major’s
Point. He. like Oxley, was forced to turn back because
of an overflow Lachlan flood, and because he believed that
he had come upon the inland sea.
Coborn Jackie, whom I introduced early in my
book, came to his last days at Forbes. As near an we
89


could estimate lie was 110 years of age when he died, and
his death was the result of an injury caused by falling
into a cellar at Young. My daughter Harriett (whose
first husband, Arthur Johnson, licensed surveyor for
Forbes district, was still alive) was living at Forbes, and
on hearing of Jackie’s trouble went to the blacks’ camp at
Grolan Plains and comforted him in his last hours. He
was an old man when I knew him in 1836, but he did not
die till 1874.
Thomas White, who, with his brother James, squat-
tered on Humbug Creek (Ballagama), sold out in 1870,
and a few years later selected on Burrangong Creek,
where he devoted himself to sheep and wheat. Eight
years later he retired and lived in Young till he died at
the age of 104, on July 20, 1920. His brother James died
of an illness at 70 years of age in 1889,
My mother (Eliza Groves), who had been living with
me from 1855, having left her Victorian station to her
son, died at the age of eighty-five. On the advice of the
doctor I had taken her to Windsor for the good of her
health, but thirteen months later, in 1889, the end came.
On her headstone in the Windsor cemetery her age is
given as 72, but her correct age was 85.
Mr. William Regan, my sister’s husband, died at
1 oung in 1890 at the age of fifty-eight years, and his
brother John died also at Young, and in the same year,
aged sixty-two. My sister is still alive, living at Bar-
medman, comfortably well off, and enjoying good health.
Her eldest son, William, has extensive station property in
the Barmedman district, and his sons and daughters are
comfortably settled on station property in the same
district.
The following were the first deaths on stations Bland,
Burrangong, and Merool:—
Burrangong: An old servant of Mr. White’s, named
Charlie.
Bland; Mrs. Regan.
Curraburrama: John Knight (manager).
The Billabong: Wife of the dairy manager,
Humbug Creek: Mrs. Woodhouse (of “Woodhouse
Lea.”)


Cimimbi: Mason, a child two years old (drowned).
Cartwright’s New Station (now Barmedman):
Thomas Beatty, an old servant.
Little Narraburra: A horsebreaker known as Jimmie
Ducks.
Euroka: Mrs. Burrett.
Gap (near Marengo): Kizia Gardiner, niece of mine
and sister of Thomas White, who died at Young, at 104.
Marengo : John Flinders, stock manager.
Currawong: Those who were shot by Scotchie and
Whitton.


CHAPTER 17.
In conclusion, I must say a few words in admiration
of the pioneers of New South Wales. All the squatters
I have mentioned were men of the highest possible in-
tegrity, and, combined with this quality, was a strong
determination to carry out their self-imposed task of
civilising the bush. In this they succeeded well, as also
did they succeed in humanising the natives, who at first
were savage, cannibalistic, and cruel in their sense of
humour. The hardships that the early squatters had to
endure, as a natural condition of their pioneering work,
was added to by the ever-present danger of wild blacks
turning hostile, and later of attack by bushrangers. The
two greatest enemies of the pioneers were dingoes and
snakes, and until the bush was cleared not one moment
of the squatter’s life could have been considered safe.
To-day bushmen are experienced in their work, but
seventy to one hundred years ago the men who went into
the interior knew next to nothing of the science of bush
work, and while clearing and preparing land they had to
experiment with methods of their own, and had to learn
the necessity of conserving food and water and of hus-
banding stock. When we realise these things, and re-
member that roads had to be chopped out of the bush as
the teamsters went their way, we will have some idea of
the difference between pioneering and the taking up of a
station or farm to-day. Only the stoutest heart would
have faced the life of a squatter in the early part of last
century, and only strength of character could have seen
it through.
The men of these high qualities had to look to their
wives to be equally endowed with the pioneering spirit,
and that the man found the woman so endowed is proved
by the records of their lives. While I cannot say enough
in praise of the men who blazed the tracks through New
South Wales and who laid the foundation of our proud
and happy State, I hope that my readers will remember
the heroic sacrifice of the pioneering women. Their
homes were as comfortable as it was possible to make
92


them with rough timber and bark, still the hard work
associated with housekeeping in those days, when
domestics were unknown and labour-saving instruments
unthought of, was colossal. Even matches had not been
invented, and the lighting of fires was done with flint and
steel, until 1850, when matches were to be had at one
shilling and sixpence a small box. Hundreds of women
of the early days should be immortalised for their noble
devotion and sacrifice, but I cannot refer to them all; a
few of the outstanding examples of those women I must,
however, allow myself the privilege of mentioning here.
They are: Mrs. Regan, Bland; Mrs. McGregor, Moran-
gorell; Mrs. Levitt, Grogan; Mrs. Trott, Billabong; Mrs.
Caldwell, Moonbucca; all of The Bland. Three names I
would like specially to mention on the Lachlan are: Mrs.
Strickland, Mrs. Twaddle, and Mrs. Higgins. In addi-
tion to being heroic pioneers, these women were noted
for their open-hearted generosity: they were the friends
of the traveller, the sick, and the poor; and they always
kept stocks of medicine, food, and clothing ready for
every emergency.
I have mentioned Mrs. Caldwell last among the
women of The Bland. That is because the Caldwells
were last of the pioneers. Mr. Caldwell was a heaven-
sent blessing to the squatters: he had a genius for invent-
ing simple methods of dealing with station work. His
Moonbucca Station was a model of simple methods. The
gates he invented, the arrangements for catching and
holding water in tanks, the schemes for drafting and
branding stock, for taming and breaking-in horses, for
cultivating and harvesting, for loading and unloading
waggons, for clearing and burning off, for shearing, and
a hundred and one other schemes were all new to the
other squatters. Every improvement that Mr. Caldwell
instituted on his station was copied by the squatters who
were fortunate enough to learn of them. Whenever Mr.
Caldwell visited a neighbour he suggested some useful
idea of improving on old methods, and these suggestions
were always availed of. Mr. Caldwell truly revolution-
ised station work, and made life out-back much more
bearable and work easier and far more profitable.
Mr. Steel Caldwell, of Eurabba, who is referred to in
connection with the Bland flood, is a son of the man who
93


did so much for the squatters and for New South Wales.
Another descendant, a daughter, Jane, who lived on Wan-
terbadgery and later at Young, died recently. She
married Mr. James Beveridge (now dead), late of Wan-
terbadgery Station. He, too, was a heroic bushman, and
once distinguished himself by capturing a bushranger. At
the time, Mr. Beveridge was owner of Wanterbadgery
Station. One day he rode across to Mundarlo, a one
hotel bush township, about three miles away across the
Murrumbidgee River from Wanterbadgery homestead.
When he reached the hotel the landlord, Mr. Murdock
McKenzie, informed him that the bushranger Piesley was
there. From a room at the back of the building Mr,
Beveridge saw Piesley in the yard, and suggested making
an effort to arrest him at once.
Mr. McKenzie thought that would be too dangerous.
“Well,” said Mr. Beveridge, “I’ll ride to Tarcutta
for the police.
Tarcutta was twelve miles away, and Mr. Beveridge
found that the police were out looking for the bush-
ranger, so he secured both a revolver and handcuffs, and
rode back to Mundarlo to arrest Piesley.
When Mr. Beveridge returned Piesley was sitting on
a form between the table and the wall, having his din-
ner; and when he had finished, rode leisurely, and was
making for the door when Mr. Beveridge, a big, power-
fully-built man, flung himself at the bushranger and
threw him heavily to the floor. Piesley was completely
taken off his guard, and before he could struggle free,
Mr. McKenzie, who had been in hiding outside, entered
and levelled the revolver at Piesley, then Mr. Beveridge
slipped the handcuffs on the bushranger, and McKenzie
brought some rope, and tied Piesley up and left him
secured for the night. Next morning they took him in
a cart to Gundagai, and handed him over to the police.
Piesley was hanged on March 13, 1862.
I have been asked how it was possible to develop the
out-back of New South Wales without trains to carry the
produce. I can only reply that the men who opened up
the interior of Australia let no obstacles stand in their
way, and I think that what they accomplished stands as
proof of what I have said that the fathers and mothers
84


of our race were the staunchest people of the nineteenth
century.
From such stock have the great Australian people
come.
Speaking of trains, I am reminded of a funny inci-
dent. It had relation to the first excursion train to
leave Young. Great was the excitement of the crowd of
people that had gathered on the platform, and when the
train drew in a mad rush was made for the carriages.
Mr. Campbell, the station master, shouted, “Ladies first!”
when the ladies had got in there was not standing room,
and many gentlemen were left standing on the platform.
They protested to the station master, and said that since
they had paid their fares, he would have to find them
travelling accommodation somehow.
“Well, gentlemen,” replied Mr. Campbell, “the only
thing I can do is to hook on some cattle trucks.” Four
such trucks were coupled to the train, and their holding
capacity was just sufficient to accomodate the men.
Mr, Archibald, a well-known store manager of
Young, who had come to the station to see some friends
off, seized the humour of the situation, and with a piece
of chalk he wrote on each truck the words, “Prize bulls,”
in very large letters. As the train moved out the people
on the platform laughed and cheered and clapped their
hands, while the men packed in the cattle trucks moo-ed
and moo-ed like orphan calves.
I speak now with so many years’ later knowledge of
our peaceful early days, with subjects of conversation the
centre of our interest and the mainspring of our existence
—prosperous or otherwise—and it was natural that all
that concerned them should concern me. lam inclined to
live in the days that are past. Perhaps it is only
natural, because the happiest of my recollections are of
the long ago.
Of course I had my sorrows and my troubles. They
are memories which Ido not put aside now. The sting
has been extracted from the sorrow, and the quiet hours
hold no dread as we ponder over the past. One thing I
do not grizzle and mourn over lost youth. I have had a
long and good run for my money.
FINIS.






