

Anger A, me Lean
THE RAG
A SOUVENIR
OF
THE VOYAGE OF THE
T. S. S. Esperance Bay
FROM
London to Brisbane
BEGUN ON
December 31st, 1924.
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.
CEYLON OBSERVER PRESS


THE RAG
A Souvenir of the Voyage of the T. S. S. Esperance Bay
FROM LONDON TO BRISBANE
BEGUN ON DECEMBER 31st, 1924-
PASSENGERS’ COMMITTEE.
President: Mb. N■ McKENZIE
Vice-President: - Ms, J. HENRY
Hon• Secretary : Mr. S. C. RATCLIFF
Hon. Auditor: - THE PURSER
Members : Mesdames Epps, Fishman* Ireland and Nicholls ;
the Misses Jones, McLean* Rice and Watkins; the Rev-
Father English, Petty Officers Barnard and Salvage, R.A.N.;
Messrs. Barclay, Daniel, Harris, King, McWiggan, Nicholls,
Power, Russell, Shanks [Shepherd, Teague, A. Todd, Webb
and Winn.
Director of Music: - Mr. SHEPHERD
Hon- Dental Surgeons: - Mr. BOYTON AND
Mr. RATCLIFF
M. C for Dances .- - P. O. SALVAGE, R. A. N
Editor of the Eag : - F. A- TODD


Editorial.
OF RAGS.
There are rags and rags. There are those relics of former glories
that we wear on board when we wish to be in fashion. There are the
glad rags with which we shall astonish the natives when we come
ashore. There are such riotous rags as those in which we indulged
in our Arcadian days before we became Bishops and K. C.’s and
sweep-promoters. There is the rag, commonly associated with tag and
bobtail, which is a name for those who are not superior persons
like ourselves. There are those rags, falsely called music, which make
night hideous on the after hatch, and for the prime inventor of which,
we earnestly hope and verily believe, a special inferno is being made
ready. There are the rags from which paper is made, and there are
the rags printed on paper. Finally, and above all, there is this Rag,
dignified with a capital R, a notable member of the last-named class.
That this Rag exists, is undeniable: have you not even paid a
bob for it? Why it exists is another question, and Modesty, the
inseparable companion of True Genius (we are good at capitals),
forbids us to return the obvious answer. But apart from the natural
desire of our fellow passengers to obtain, at the ridiculously low
price of one shilling, specimens of the work of those eminent men
of letters who constitute the Editorial Committee, and of those
others, hardly less eminent, whom the blandishments of the said
committee have induced to contribute, the Rag has been called into
being by the wish of passengers to have a record both of a memorable
voyage and of the men and women, members of their Committee and
Sub-Committees, who have worked so unselfishly for their entertain-
ment. We thank all these sincerely, and wish them, as the reward
of their merit, a still happier voyage, over the Jasper Sea to the
New Jerusalem, whereon, as they 101 l at peace in their golden deck-
chairs (provided free), their eyes will be gladdened by angels of an
even brighter radiance than those who grace this ship, and their
ears be charmed by the strains of the celestial choir, while about
them on the deck sport cherubim not of the kind that “continually
do cry.”
As the mouthpiece of the seven hundred and forty-three passen-
gers, we also offer heartfelt thank to Captain MacKenzie and his
officers and crew for the fine seamanship and unremitting devotion
to duty which brought us safely through four dreadful days of
tempest
Since the Rag had to be printed at Colombo, our record of the
voyage is necessarily incomplete; but we have been fortunate in
securing the services of a staff of prophets whose intelligent anticipa-
ticns will, we feel sure, be found miraculously accurate.


List of Officers.
J- Y Jinks,
R. A. McGregor
G. F. Clinch
B. S. Connolly
C. P. Nickolls (Act.)
W. Me N. Spiers
S. C. Eaton
S- Mumford
A. J. P. Chapman
H. E. Young
B. Rose
N. Parker
A. Morgan
J. R. McKenzie
H. N• Jacks
W. O. Watt
J. E- O’Sullivan
L. Mackenzie
R, Hardie
W. C. Wise
J. J. Devine
J. W. Smith
W. A. E. Harrow
D. Forbes
L. J. Gutteridge
J. Kean
J. A. Pearce
Chief Officer
2nd Officer
3rd Officer
4th Officer
sth Officer
Purser
Asst. Purser
Purser’s Clerk
Surgeon
Wireless Operator
2nd do do
3rd do do
Chief Engineer
2nd do
3rd do
4th do
sth do
6th do
7 th do
Bth do
9th do
Deck do
Chief Refrig. Engineer
2nd do do
Electrician
Boilermaker
Chief Steward
R. MACKENZIE, — Commander.


From London to Colombo.
(The Editors ask the Second Officer, Mr. McGregor, to accept
their very hearty thanks for the following authoritative account
of our voyage).
The vessel left London for Australia on January3lst, 1924.
stong S._ W. gales, accompanied by very high seas and heavy rain-
storms, were experienced all the way from the Thames to the
approaches to the Straits of Gibraltar. The duration of the storm
was exceptionally long, lasting approximately four days, and wire-
less news received from the Air Ministry stated that this was the
worst storm experienced in and around Great Britain since 1893.
Great damage was done on land, and cross-channel air and steamship
services were suspended.
The vessel passed Gibraltar at 2.25 a.m. on Tuesday, January
6th, and fine weather was experienced for ‘ the next two days while
she was running along the Spanish coast and across to the N.
African coast, light variable winds prevailing with a smooth sea.
On Jan. Bth at 4 a.m. a strong N. wind set in with a rough beam
sea, which continued for about 200 miles past Malta except for a
a few hours of good weather while under the shelter of Sicily. There-
after good weather was experienced till Port Said was reached at
4 p.m. on Jan. 11th.
The ship left Port Said on Jan. 11th at 9.15 p.m. and entered
the Suez Canal at 9.38 p.m. El Kantara was passed at 1 a.m. on
Jan. 12th, and Ismailia, half-way through the Canal, at 4 a.m.
The vessel cleared the Canal at 9.55 a.m. after an exceptionally
quick passage of 13h. 17min. for the 87 miles.
Fine weather was experienced throughout the journey down
the Red Sea, and the average temperature of 72 deg. was gratefully
cool compared with the 103 deg. occasionally recorded in June and
July. Pcrim Island was passed on Thursday, Jan. 15th, at 7 p.m.
and Aden on the 16th at 2.17 a.m. Fine weather prevailed through
the Gulf of Aden, and the vessel passed along the north coass cl
Socotra Island between 10 a.m. and 5 p.m. on Jan. 17th, the land
however, being practically obscured by thick haze.
Medium to fresh N. E. monsoon weather with a rough beam
sta, prevailed from Socotra to Minikoi Island (Laccadives), and the
latter was passed at 11.30 p.m. on Jan. 20th. After this light
N. E. winds were experienced, with smooth sea, during the final
part of the voyage to Colombo, where the vessel picked up the pilot
at 4 a.m. on Jan. 22nd, 1925. The time occupied by the passage from
Suez to Colombo, a distance of 3,416 miles, was 9 days, 13 hours.


Our Grub.
Bellow-passengers, read this and biusni There are about 740
of us, and we consume daily on the average:
1500 lbs. of meat; 250 lbs. of fish; 700 lbs. of flour 112 lbs.
of butter; 100 lbs. of jam; 1000 eggs; 5 gallons of pickles;
8 cwt. of potatoes; 550 lbs. of vegetables and salads; 10
cases of fresh fruit; 56 lbs. of dried fruit 30 gallons of milk;
26 qts. of limojuice; 160 lbs. of sugar; 25 lbs. of tea; 56 lbs.
of cereals.
Our shame has been revealed by the Chief Steward, to whom
we are nevertheless very grateful.
The Ship’s Engines,
We are indebted to the Chief Engineer, Mr. Morgan, for the
following information.
The “Esperance Bay” was built by W. Beardmore & Co. of
Clasgow, and left London for her first voyage on August 28th, 1922.
Her main engines consist of twin-screw, double reduction, three-
stage impulse and reaction, geared turbines of Parson’s make. The
turbines have 55,000 blades. The gear wheels are machined to an
accuracy of thousandths of an inch. The high-speed wheels revolve
at a rate of 3,600 revolutions per minute, and are geared down to
about 90 revolutions of main shafting and propeller. These wheels
weigh from 23 cwt. up to 20 tons which is the weight of the main
wheels.
There are 73 miles of pipe lines in the ship. There are five
boilers, namely three of 120 tone each and two of 60 tons each. The
boilers are oil-fired —incidentally a boon to passergers, who escape the
horrors of coaling. The ship’s general speed is 15 knots on a con-
sumption of about 80 tons of oil fuel per day. The boilers can be
airanged, at 24 hour’s notice, to burn coal, of which 140 tons a day
would be consumed for the same speed. The galleys are also supplied
with oil from the engine-room, and all cooking done by oil-fuel.
Two C.O. 2 refrigerating machines are installed. These are
among the biggest of their kind afloat, and each is capable of dealing
with 10,000 tons of refrigerated cargo, the full capacity of the ship.
For the rapid handling of cargo *herc are 23 winches.


Pont Said and the Canal
On Sunday 11th. Jan. 1925, there occurred an event which made
the East quiver with joy. T. S. S. “Esperance Bay” glided through
its gate, Port Said. We ourselves had not yet set foot upon this
hallowed spot. Yet we removed not our shoes from off our feet. Too
many of our fellow passengers were standing on them. Having at
last shaken off for a space the dust of our floating home, we walked
down staircase with a self-conscious hope that we looked like a pilot,
had an argument with the Policeman, which ended amicably, and
entrusted ourselves with some misgivings to a frail-looking boat in
charge of a villainous-looking boatman. For a few minutes we were
reminded forcibly of the Bay, but fixed our attention on the pedlars
the rival traffic and the coaling of our fellow ships.
We approached the landing stage. While we were yet a little
way off, our boatman shipped his oars and, with all the deliberation,
enthusiasm and eloquence of a Hyde Park orator endeavoured to
enlist our sympathies in his present financial depression, ceasing
only when we threatened (hoping he would not understand) to cast
him overboard.
The key note of Port Said of course is importunity. First a
Dragoman was left lamenting upon the Quay still seeking whom he
might devour. After him came seven other Devils worse than the
first. Do we say seven? Seventy and seven would represent but a
very small fraction of a very vulgar whole.
At length we hewed our way to one of Port Said’s oases, the
house of Simon Arzt, a shop of no mean calibre. Then once again
we faced the barrage of swarthy swindlers. Refusing to buy
picture postcards (dinkum or of whatever nationality) Turkish
delight, beads, jewellery and we know not what products of
we hastened to refreshment. Now thoroughly infected
by the first fascination of the East we uttered our “Imshi’s” and
“Yalla’s” with growing confidence and ever-failing effect. Apparent-
ly they had often heard these words before.
Coffee out of doors made us resemble the jam which attracts
wasps on one of those sunny English days that we used to hear
about. A conjuring entertainment (Galli, Galli, Galli,) cost only a
few shillings, though when the chicken came from our money pocket
we had our doubts. All went well however. Kicking away the boot-
boys between the sips of coffee, we felt very happy and much
refreshed.
An inspection of some of the less populous parts of this village
filled the time until dinner, when, at the Eastern Exchange, we
made our hearts glad with the meat and wines of Palestine (at least
so they said). What are these white things folded on the table?
Serviettes. What is this vegetable? Green Peas. Thus did we
learn how far we had travelled from the path of civilization.
Another visit to Simon Arzt, another ticket, another boat,
another argument with the boatmen (there being two this time, we
had to give something) and another sight of our fair ship.


We wish we could tell more of the pastimes of our companions
in this hamlet. But they are strangely reticent. We cannot,
however, omit mention of that worthy son of New Zealand who
made a faithful friend of Charlie, an Egyptian, visited in his
company various shops and taverns and in one of the latter, having
exchanged hats, taught him a Maori “War Dance” to the great
delight of all concerned. Yet someone once said “East is East etc.”
The sailing notice said 9 p.m., and that time found all ready
and all on board. We glided away promptly past the Customs
House into the Canal. The lights of Port Said began to recede in
the distance, the first station was approached, and then began a
night which was fit sequel to the day. Sitting upon the deck hour
after hour we passed through the desert, on either side the sand
resembling snow under the moon, here and there a dredger, now a
few degenerate looking palms, natives beside a fire, the military
station at Kantara with its little Church and its little spire—all
are so many mere incidents, trivial perhaps, yet stamped indelibly
on the mind.
A few hours sleep refreshed us so that we could enjoy the later
stages of the canal. Suez and, above all, Port Tewfig passed upon
the Starboard side. In the distance were the horrid mountains, in
the foreground oases, and once a train of camels.
Two days, these, of crowded interest, enjoyed to the full by all
the newcomers, and, perhaps, even if they confess it not, by those
who have passed this way before.
Ode.
Winner of tha Prize for the Handsomest man over thirty
0 Salvage, handsomest of men
Whose years exceed one score and ten,
V.'hai were your feelings, Salvage, when
You won the prize P
Were they of pleasure sans alloy ?
Did manly bosom throb with joy
When you were judged a bouncing boy
By maiden eyes?
Or did you haply feel a gush
Of blood to cheek, a mantling blush,
To think of how the girls would rush
Such paragon,
You who have ne’er sung “Chase me, girls,”
Who ne’er have felt the charm of curls,
But as your friends have chosen pearls
With trousers on?
O glory of die R.A.N.,
Whose grace is as the grace of ten,
O Salvage, suffer this poor pen
To hymn your praise.
Oh ■ what would we ourselves not give.
Sweet Salvage, R.A.N., to live
Adorned by so superb a chiv
For all our days?


The Fancy Dress Ball
To Fellow-passengers on T S t S' Esperance Bay
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
Many dances and parties have been given during the voyage. Be-
low are suggestions for the Fancy Dress Ball which is to take place
on the Sumteenth.
The most suitable opening for a Ball would be the arrival of
the last man down, creeping in quietly to the strain on the fiddles of
the Stewards’ Orchestra. The rattling of the life-boat with loud flap-
ping of fins by those already seated. Soon afterwards cowls painted
blue and white could be whirled and turned by the crew to that
bree'y air sung to the Engineers—
“ Fiddley fiddley hi diddle hiddley,
What ho the fiddley, letting off steam.”
A pathetic sight which will prevent the spirits from being carried
away and thereby obviate the necessity of wiping many glasses will
be a. deck-hand lashing a buoy, followed by a siren in a little rigging
who will help to make the evening a screaming success.
All eyes will then turn to the brave and striking spectacle of a
fireman throwing out sparks, and after him a ghost with dead-eyes
upward turned Then a heavy-swell playing pitch-an-toss with a dirty
knight and several sweeps.
A sporting element will then be introduced by a shooting star with
white ducks and a brace of shakes. Thrilling indeed the pirate w'th
dagger-knees half-an-eye and a Purser’s smile, shouting,
“ All a-taunto
You avaunt-o:
See you after dark.
On the rocking docking bridge.”
A comedian will appear in a bowsprit cap with a-peek fore and
aft on his cat’shead, hand in hand with a sweet young thing that
knows the ropes well enough to emulate a skipper.
At 10-30 p.m. the entertainment will close with the well-known
duet:
“ Time, gentlemen, please, gents.
All gents off the deck.”
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
I. Thankyou.
LINES FOUND ON THE PROMENADE DECK.
It was the s.s. “ Esperance ’*
That sailed the wintry sea,
And the skipper’d shipped a
To bear him company.


Shrill were the notes the piper squoze
From his squeaker till dawn of day,
And the bosun turned white
As through the night
He heard the skipper say;
“ You ain’t goin’ to play no more, my lad,
No, pos-i-tive-ly not!
You ain’t goin’ to blow no more, no more,
No, ah-so-lute-ly not!
Our president.
“ Who is it straightens troubles out
And calms all savage frenzy?
’Tis no-one else, there is no doubt,
But good old Neil McKenzie.”
Thus writes the ship’s poet of our popular Welfare Officer and
President. And the authorities at Australia House are to be con-
gratulated on their selection of so excellent a representative to see
to tire well-being of 195 new-comers to Australia, a land which ho
praises as “ the land of sunshine, opportunity and prosperity. To
the heavy burden of his official duties he added the Presidency of the
Passengers’ Entertainments Committee, and carried out the duties of
this further office to the great satisfaction and advantage of all on
board.
Born in Australia, and knowing Australia in all its aspects,
Mr. McKenzie has given lectures on the Commonwealth which have
been of great interest and value to all who have attended them. He
acknowledges gratefully the help given to him in the performance of
this task by other Australians who, having “ made good,” are return-
ing from holiday tiips to the land of their birth or adoption. All the
new-comers on board, he is convinced, are of types which the Common-
wealth will be glad to welcome. May we add that we entirely agree
•jvith him?
Mock Trial.
On the night of 13th January, 1925,_ W. McMnrchie appeared in
Court charged with “ attempted banatry in that he did walk upon the
promenade deck of the good ship “Esperance Bay” carrying an in-
fernal machine under his arm—to wit, a bagpipes; and that he
did play thereon, thereby causing great danger to the lives
and reasons of 700 passengers and the ship.”
Mr. Barnard for the prosecution succeeded very fully in proving
that his witnesses, in being called, had mistaken the position of the
Bar at which their presence was required—feome of tjiem swearing
that they had seen music proceeding from an instrument which t'-e
prosecution were endeavouring to prove could not produce music at all.
The Defence was insanity—after the efforts of the prosecut'on
there was no need for the Defending Counsel to speak as they had
thoroughly proved the insanity of the prisoner for him,


A very regrettable example of excess of judicial zeal occurred to-
wards the close of the case. The jury having refused to return a
verdict (of course, it was a mixed jury) the judg growing wild,
ordered that not only his associate, but also tahe prisoner in the dock
should be sworn in as special constables to assist the court-usher in
removing the jury from the court.
The prisoner was shortly after heard celebrating his release in an
extra-special burst or so-called music.
Debate.
An extremely interesting Debate was held on the Stir of January.
The storm being now over, passengers felt free to exercise their
mental vigour at each other’s expense.
Mr. Andrew Shanks proposed “ That men should wear beards.”
His very able speech was followed by a torrent of wit from Mr. S.
Ratcliff. Mr. A. Todd followed in support of the motion and Mr.
Boyton against.
In the open Debate a number of interesting and able speeches
were delivered, particularly by Miss Law and P. 0. Barnard, R.A.N.
The voting was sufficiently close for the President, Mr. MacKenzie
to declare the motion drawn, and thus ended an evening very much
enjoyed by all passengers present.
THE BURIED CABLE.
OR
DIRTY WORK AT THE CROSS ROADS.
A Farce in One Act - Played on Jannaryi 29th 1925,
Characters (In the order of their appearance)
Major Blood-Buster-field (Town Major of Omlette-sur-le-
Tapis) Mr. A. Todd
Acting Lance Corporal Schneider (Billet-Warden)
P. 0. Salvage, R. A. N.
Captain Algernon Pitzroy of Yavasour (Camp Commandant
95th Division) Mr. Y. E. T. Russell.
Elsa von Schnitzelhrimer (A German spy)
Miss C. Brunnenhausen
♦
Benzoline Blood-Busterfield (the Town Major’s Daughter)
Miss B. Law.
Lieut, Ernest Gawkrouger (Divisional Salvage Officer)
M* C. G. Paradine.
Major Slcoth (A.P. M. of the Oorpe) Mr, E, 0, De Satge,


All those who contributed in any way to the production of this
play merit the highest compliments. ' The unsparing kindness of the
Chief Officer and the Chief Steward, and the willing work of men of
tht ship’s company enabled the properties to reach a standard very
commendable under the circumstances. Mr. Guthridge, in charge of
the lighting, surpassed even himself.
Every endeavour was made to secure the greatest possible seating
accommodation, and to ensure the best possible acoustics.
Of the players Miss Law, the heroine was—well—heroic, and
Miss B as villainess played her part to perfection. Mr. Rus-
sell, the hero, did his best, and Mi Salvage was as fine a villain as
we have seen. The minor parts were well cast, and in them Mr. Para-
dise and Mr. De Satge, both of well-known American fame, did all
that was expected of them. The only really weak member was Major
Blood-Busterfield (Mr. A. Todd) whose expert knowledge of the play
induced him, on several occasions, to attempt to play all seven parts
at once. Mr. Crolty (noises oft) made the most of his responsible role.
The players wish to thank their audience and all passengers who,
in whatever way, gave their generous help. Special mention must be
accorded to Messrs. Johnston and Nicholls who, between them, typed
out the whole play.
(Signed) BLOOD-BUSTERFIELD,
Major i/c Omlette-sur-le-Tapis,
January 21st, 1925.
Baby Show.
On the afternoon of Tuesday, the 20th January, the after hatch
on the Promenade Deck presented a delightful spectacle. Charming
babes, obviously deriving their charm from the mothers who accom-
panied, assembled in good numbers and presented the judges with
that most difficult of task, the distinction between excellency and ex-
cellence.
This perhaps it was that induced our very good friend the Ship’s
Doctor to warn fond mothers that award would not necessarily go
to the most pretty or the fattest baby on the boat.
The competitors themselves ; no doubt appreciating the gravity of
the occasion surpassed even their usual good behaviour.
Prizes were awarded as under in three classes;
(a) Under One Year.—Special Prizes—Yvonne Gunnery, Raymond
Draper.
(b) Over One and under Two Years.—Special Prizes—lrene
Mackie, Jean Guthrie. Prizes—John Cresswell, Margaret
Grainger, George Hastings, Mina Jensen, Tommy Torren.
(c) Over Two and under Three Years.—Special Prizes—Girvan
Todd, Jack Pritchard, Boye Jensen, Mary Nicholls. Prizes
—lan Hannah, Cortis Healy, Vera Mason, Desmord Ken-
nedy, Mary Peace, John Benshaw and Edgar Thomson.
The judges, Mrs. Ellis, Mrs. Epps, Mrs. Green and Dr. Chapman,
deserve our hearty thanks not only for their kind donation of Special
Prizes, but also for so successfully accompishing so difficult a task.
We would also congratulate the mothers of prize-winners, and
bestow our benediction on the prize-winners themselves. May they
continue as they have begun!


Boxing was continued throughout the programme without a hitch;
for this special praise is merited by Mr. Jackson w|io, taking the
boxers under his ample wing, had each pair ready to enter in time for
their contest.
The 9st. 61b, Competition was won by Mr. Hancock who was far
too good fo>- Mr, Fanshawe in the Final. The winner is a somewhat
prancing youth, who should make good in the future.
The ibst. 61bs. Competition was also won by the favourite, Mr.
Higham who defeated his opponent, Mr. Richardson, in the first round
of the final. Mr. Richardson was, perhaps, unlucky in only just fail-
ing to rise to the count of ten.
The Grand Heavy-weight contest between Mr, Heard and Mr. Hor-
rox was won by the former in the second round, which was just a
repetition of most Heavy-weight Contest.
In a special six rounds contest, Young Todd and Battler Law put
up the best show of the evening, the competitors going the full dis-
tance in a hard fight. The Battler, who rightly deserves his name,
won on points. His methods are somewhat unorthodox, but he has
the spirit, which is everything.
"By kind permission of the Captain, two Exhibition Bouts were
staged. These served to show' what remarkably good talent there is
in the ship’s company, Les Southey and Tommy Reynolds in parti-
cular being well above the average standard.
Altogether the spectators fully enjoyed what was one of the best
entertainments since the ship loft London. This is supported by the
the collection taken to enlarge the prizes, the total being £2 2s.
We must certainly congratulate Mr. B. Salvage, who proved quite
a “Snowy Baker” in the way in which the whole affair was promoted
and carried out from start to finish.
B. SALVAGE.
Coming Events.
MONDAY, JAN. 26TH.
Australia Day Celebrations, to commemorate the arrival in
Australia of the first settlers under Captain Phillip. The
programme will include;
Morning at 10.—Children’s Sports.
~ ~ 10.—Address by Mr. H. D. Anderson to ex-
service men and new-comers.
~ ~ 10-46.—Address by Mr. Barclay.
Afternoon at 2.—Adults’ Sports.
Evening at 6.—Children’s Concert.
~ ~ 7-30.—A Short Talk about Australia, by Pro-
fessor F. A. Todd, followed by a
Special Concert under the direction
of members of the A.I.F. and
N.Z.E.F.
All entries for the Sports will be free. It is possible that there
will be also a Lantern Lecture on Australia.
TUESDAY, JAN 27TH.
Children’s Fancy Dress Party. Presentation of Prizes by Cap-
tain R. MacKenzie. Children’s Tea given by the “ Esper-
anoo Bay.” ' r


Results of Sports.
Deck Quoits, IST COMPETITION.
(a) Men’s Singles ; (1) Mr. Tonkin (2) Mr. Robertson.
(b) Ladies’ Singles; (2) Miss Beetson (2) Miss Thistleton
Deck Billiards, Ist Competition.
(a) Men’s Singles ; Mr. A, Todd
(b) Ladies’ Singles; Miss Lansdowne.
Handsome and Ugly Men's Competition (106 ENTRIES).
(a) Over 30 years —
Handsomest man: P. O. Salvage, R. A. N.
Ugliest man: Mr. Green.
(b) Under 30 years —
Handsomest man : Mr. Polton,
Ugliest man: Mr. Gedge.
Deck Quoits, 2nd Competition—
Men’s Singles: (1) Mr. Short (2) Mr. Baker,
Other Sports were in progress at the time of going to
Press.


Children’s Amusements.
The grown-ups have not forgotten the 110 or 120 children on
board, but on the contrary have organised for them special concerts
and sports of all kinds which the youngsters have enjoyed immensely.
In the sports, prizes have been won by the following :
Oirls: —P. Blenkinsopp, J, Peace. M. Dickson, D. Miles. P.
Chambers R. Johns, M. Newnham, B. Wallace, D. Townsend,
G. Steel, B. Barclay J. Wallace, J. Johns, H. Rake, J. Barclay,
P. Oresswell, D. Oresswell, J. Cresswell, Q. Teaque, B. Garlick,
L. Lewis. F. Rake, V. Slinger.
Boys: —E. Smith, G. Tanner, J. Kerr, K. Tarren, P. Tuck,
J. Tanner, A. Twiddle, W. Salmon, G. Hunter, J. Twiddle, R.
Gilmour, J. Lane, J. Wallace, A. Denson, L, Burdett, W, Wray.
Special prizes for children under six: Florrie Rake, Peggy
Cresswell, Rupert Spencer.
Consolation prizes for children under six : Don Spencer, Ray
Newnham. Rupert Spencer, Phiilip Cooper.
Concerts and Dances.
It the numerous concerts and dances which have been held
since we ran out of the great storm are not here reported in detail,
the reason is merely lack of space. The Editors know that they will
have the approval of all their fellow-passengers in offering to those
who have provided these enjoyable entertainments, and especially to
Mr. Shepherd, Mr. McKenna, and the other musicians, the most_ cor-
dial of thanks. We even include in our general benediction the pipers
who provided such spirited music for the Scotch dance on the night of
January 19th.
Boxing.
A rather interesting Boxing programme was held, during the run
from Port Said to Colombo, on Thursday, January 16th, by kind per-
mission of the Captain.
The fighting started at 7-30 in the evening, which wag perfect for
the occasion.
The officials during the evening were:
Referee.—Mr. Crotty.
Timekeeper.—Mr. A. Todd.
H. C.—P. O. Salvage, R.A.N.
Judges.—Messrs, Power, Hampshire, Shanks and Ratcliff.
Credit is due to them for their successful work.


WEDNESDAY, JAN. 28TH.
Auction Sale for the British Seamen’s Hospital Fund.
THURSDAY, JAN. 29TH.
7- —A One-Act Play, “The Buried Cable” (see report pub-
lished on another page.)
8- —Grand Farewell "Concert.
FRIDAY, JAN. 30TH.
Fancy Dress Carnival and Ball, on the Promenade Deck, from
7-30 to 11 p.m., under the Chairmanship of Captain B.
MacKenzie.
Two prizes each will be awarded for the following: (a) Most
original dress made on the ship; (b) Most original dress
brought on board; (c) Prettiest dress made on the ship;
(d) Prettiest dress brought on board. There will also be
“Spot Prizes” for ladies and gentlemen, and “ Booby
Prizes” for the most ridiculous ladies’ and gentlemen’s
costumes respectively. The music will be provided by
Mr. McKenna (piano) and Mr. Shepherd (violin). Mr.
Salvage will serve as M.C.
Answers to Correspondents.
NON-SCOTCH.—You are quite right: “plus-fours” are designed to
show off the beauty of shanks.
ANXIOUS QUEENSLANDER. —The Chief Steward replies in the affir-
mative, asserting that he has no bananas.
ALARMED.—We learn that the crackling sound which is heard aft
on B. deck at. 10-30 p.m. is due not to fire but to the crepi-
tation of oscuiatory valedictions.
MARY.—If you want a little lamb you should speak nicely to the Chef.
Who can doubt that that forbidding mien is but a mask for
extreme susceptibility?
TENTH MUSE.—We have submitted your poem to the Butcher, who
assures us that he could chop better verse out of a dictionary
with a meat axe. We published it as a warning to others;
A damsel was horribly seasick
In spite or all manner of pheesic.
She said “it is rum ”
That my poor little turn
Should never become analgesic.
OUR CO-EDITORS.—SureIy you don’t need to be told that analgesic
means painless 1
LIMERICK—The most appropriate rhymes to Russell are hustle and
bustle. Thank you.
SCOTSMAN.—It is perhaps not generally known that the bagpipes
are of African origin. The name is derived from two Zulu
words, ba-gpi “ cat-howls ” and pes “ blast.”


PERCY BYSSHE.—Having been brought up to respect discipline and
and the laws of libel, we positively refuse to publish the
verses.
“ A sportsman is Captain MacKenzie,
But puts us all into a frenzy:
When inspection is near
We tremble with fear,
For the eye of a lynx has MacKenzie ”
which you have had the temerity to send to us.
ALL CONTRIBUTORS.—Thank you very much.
