

355.00994
H984D


MR. BINNS.
List of volumes presented to the
Library by Lady Hutton, widow of the
late Lieut. General Sir Mward
Hutton, Commander of the Blew South Wales
Military Forces in 1896-98, Commander
of the Commonwealth Empire Forces,
1901-1903.
1. History of the Soudan Expedition
...1885.
2. HUTTON, t>ir Edward:- The defense
and defensive power of Austtalia.
3. HUTTON, bir Edward:- Papers and
Speeches.
4. Operations of General Hutton 1 s
Force, South Campaign 190G
5. South African Campaign, 1900.
Gen.Hutton 1 s letters to his wife.
6. Newspaper cuttings from English and
Australian newspapers. 6 volumes.


MR. BINNS.
THE
DEFENCE AND
DEFENSIVE POWER
OF AUSTRALIA
By
Major-General Sir Edward Hutton,
K.C.M.G., C.B.
(Commanding the Military Forces of the
Commonwealth)
MELBOURNE
ANGUS & ROBERTSON, 205 SWANSTON ST.
Price One Shilling


THE
DEFENCE AND
DEFENSIVE POWER
OF AUSTRALIA
By
Major-General Sir Edward Hutton,
K.C.M.G., C.B.
(Commanding the Military Forces of the
Commonwealth)
MELBOURNE
ANGUS & ROBERTSON, 205 SWANSTON ST.
Price One Shilling


PREFACE.
It has been suggested that the following Papers (given
originally in the form of lectures) should be collected and
re-published, so that in some measure at least the thoughts
therein contained may serve to place before the people of
Australia some of the great principles governing defence.
I have, therefore, accepted the suggestion and now
dedicate the little volume to my comrades of the Common-
wealth Forces of Australia, in whose hands is now placed
the responsibility for the defence of Australia, and of those
Australian interests upon which the future of this Continent
must so largely depend.
EDWARD T. H. HUTTON.
“ The Grange,”
Melbourne, May Ist, 1902.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.— page.
Tactical and Strategical Power of Mounted
Troops in War. (Being a Paper read in
New South Wales, 28th August, 1894) ... 7
CHAPTER ll.
Our Comrades of Greater Britain. (Being a
Paper read at Aldershot, November 24th,
1896) ... ... ... ... 25
CHAPTER lII.
Some Retrospective Deductions upon the Ger-
man and French Manoeuvres of 1897.
(Being a Paper read at Aldershot, December
7th, 1897) ... ... ... ... 51
CHAPTER IV.—
A Co-Operative System for the Defence of
the Empire. (Being a Paper read before the
Royal Colonial Institute, April 19th, 1898) ... 85




CHAPTER I.
The Tactical and Strategical Power of Mounted
Troops in War.
A Paper read at the United Service Institution of
New South Wales, Aug. 28th, 1894.
Lives of great men all remind us
We may make our lives sublime,
And departing leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of Time.
Longfellow.
Tiie importance of mounted troops in war has been a somewhat
varying quantity. In very ancient times the power of mounted
troops, governed, as it necessarily was, by the primitive arms of
the men and imperfect equipment of the horses, was comparatively
small. In the Middle Ages, however, the armour of the knights
and the improved equipment of the horses made the chivalry of
Europe an overwhelming factor in battle. Gradually, however,
an improvement in the weapons of the infantry took place, and
an increase in their relative power followed. Thus, in the battles
of Frederick the Great the cavalry bore a proportion of one-fourth,
and even one-third, to that of the whole armies engaged. Later,
in the Napoleonic wars, when the improvement of infantry firearms


and the introduction of the bayonet increased the effectiveness
of infantry, and the cavalry bore a proportion of one-eighth and
one-tenth to that of the whole force. This proportion has been
maintained until the present day, and, developed beyond all
former precedent as infantry fire power has been in the last few
years, the acknowledged proportion of cavalry to the other arms
has still remained unchanged. There has even arisen a school of
distinguished men, among whom may be included the present
German Emperor, who affirm that, in spite of the rapidity and
low trajectory of modern infantry rifle fire, the power of cavalry
in the field of battle remains as great as, and even greater than,
in the early days of the present century. It is incontestable that
the power of mounted troops in recent wars has proved itself of
as great, and even greater, effect than ever before—though perhaps
in a form less attractive, less understood, than when—
Ascending squadrons come.
Yet more ! yet more ! —how far array’d
They file from out the hawthorn shade,
And sweep so gallant by :
With all their banners bravely spread,
And all their armour flashing high.
— Marmion.
The Tactical Power of Mounted Troops.
When the great area over wdiich modern battles must extend,
the vast range of fire, the accuracy and deadly nature of modern
fire power, are considered, it follows that rapidity of movement
and the power of covering distances at a rapid pace by the
advanced bodies of troops becomes a necessity. Of what avail
will slow-moving infantry scouts be when opposed to a long range
and powerful artillery 1 What commander will dare to develop
an attack against an enemy whose presence at three miles
distance, unmarked by smoke and unannounced by “ cannon’s
deadly roar,” is only revealed by the shower of bullets fired at
long range, and by well-directed shrapnel-fire 1 It will obviously


be necessary to push forward mounted men, who, by their rapid
manoeuvres and far-reaching flank movements, can give intelli-
gence and compel the enemy to display his strength and make
evident his position. The preliminaries, therefore of every
battle, of every skirmish, must be left to mounted troops.
It should be always borne in mind that, in modern battles,
infantry once committed to an attack cannot be withdrawn except
by undue loss of life, and loss of some initial energy, and even of
morale. Thus, therefore, for the primary duties of reconnoitring,
scouting, and covering an advance, for which all mounted troops
exist, or have existed in past and recent times, their value is
now even more evident than it ever was before. It is also a
curious fact that a modern military school of thought ascribes
more tactical importance than ever before to its effect upon
infantry and upon artillery when shattered or shaken by the
deadly character of modern fire, or when taken by surprise. It
is argued, and I think with reason, that in modern battle the
effect of a superior infantry or artillery fire will be so great and
so demoralising that the victims will become an easy prey to an
impetuous, well-timed charge of well-led cavalry. Personally I
am inclined to this view, and so also are many, who, like myself
have taken part in recent wars in Africa and in Asia with
savage tribes—tribes who, emboldened by fanaticism or a wild
natural courage, have advanced in spite of shot and shell, and
have reached, ay ! and have even broken British squares. This
has been well commemorated in homely soldier’s language by
Rudyard Kipling :
So ’ere’s to you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, at your ’ome in the
Soudan ;
You’re a pore benighted ’eathen, but a first-class
lighting man ;
And ’ere’s to you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, with your ’ayrick
’ead of ’air;
You big, black boundin’ beggar—for you broke a
British square.
Yet the moral effect of a charge of natives, no matter how brave,
is small indeed compared to the stern thunder and reality of a


compact, well-led charge of cavalry, preceded, as it would be, by
a covering tire of artillery.
The importance, then, of mounted troops upon a modern field
of battle may be accepted, and I will, with your indulgence,
proceed to show how cavalry tactics may be modernised and
simplified, so that, while satisfying the existing conditions of war
"they may be easily applied, and may be with facility learnt by
British troops from whatever branch of our race they may come.
The important elements of success must be—
(a) Simplicity.
( b) Rapidity.
(c) Conformity to modern conditions of opposing fire
power.
To gain these ends the cavalry formation in double rank must,
in the writer’s opinion, be at once abandoned.
The last edition of British “ Cavalry Drill,” Part 111., with an
instinct of emancipation from old tradition, indicates that “move-
ments should occasionally be practised in single rank, not only
because that formation may often have to be employed on service,
but also, etc.”—Cavalry Drill, 1891, page 303. The paragraph
is undoubtedly the precursor of the next great change in our
cavalry tactics ; but as it took nearly twenty-five years of con-
troversy to adopt, at last, that primary condition of administrative
efficiency the “squadron system,” —so possibly it may take
another ten years to similarly adopt the single-rank formation.
It is the double rank which complicates and breaks the temper
and the patience of every learner of cavalry drill. It is the
double rank which necessitates half the complicated manoeuvres
in the drill-book—movements which none but regular cavalry,
trained men on trained horses, can ever hope to master with
effect. It is the cavalry system of double rank which necessitates
the continuance of those old-fashioned movements long abandoned
by the infantry for maintaining the relative position of the front
and rear ranks.


“ Cavalry,” wrote the Duke of 'Wellington, in 1803, “ is essen-
tially an offensive arm whose use depends upon its activity,
combined with its steadiness and good order. I think that the
second rank of cavalry at the usual distance of close order does
not increase the activity of the cavalry. The rear rank of the
cavalry does not strengthen the front rank, as the centre and
rear ranks do the front rank of the infantry. The rear rank of
the cavalry can augment the activity, or even the means of attack
of the front rank, only by a movement or disorder
The second rank at a distance sufficiently great to avoid being
involved in the confusion of the attack of the front rank, whether
successful or otherwise, could aid in the attack, or, if necessary,
cover the retreat of the attacking party, and thus augment the
steadiness and good order of the cavalry as a body ; while by the
absence of all impediments from the closeness of the rear rank
the activity of the front rank would be increased
The one-rank system .... would render the use of cavalry
in an army much more general than it is at present.”
“ As to the rank entire system,” wrote General Sir Hussey
Vivian, of Waterloo fame, who afterwards became Lord Vivian
“ I am by no means certain that it would not always be a good
thing if, on advancing to an attack, or standing in line, the rear
ranks were to form a reserve at a distance The fact
is, the second rank is of but little use but to fall over the first.”
Lord Anglesea shared the same views. In 1835 Gen. Bacon,
of Peninsula renown, who afterwards commanded the Portuguese
Cavalry, thus writes:—“ln one rank all movements are made
with greater precision and more regularity than in two. When
cavalry has to reform after a charge it is effected more readily and
far quicker I have tried this in the presence of a
superior enemy' very frequently, and at times when hotly pursued
and under a heavy fire of artillery and musketry. A charge in
one rank will be more rapid, and consequently more likely to
succeed Everyone will do his duty ; skulkers cannot
so easily pull up, and such are found in all armies.”


Capt. Nolan, an acknowledged cavalry authority, whose short
and promising career was cut short at Balaclava, advocated single
rank or the entire rank system with all the fervour of an advanced
and able thinker. Many of our modern cavalry authorities are
equally in favour of this change, among whom may be mentioned
the late distinguished Sir Herbert Stewart.
The writer would not presume for one moment to venture an
opinion on the value of the single-rank system in cavalry warfare,
except that his good fortune has given him exceptional experience
in the training of mounted men ; and he unhesitatingly affirms
that, given a few good officers and true, he would undertake in
a few short weeks to teach and train a mounted force of such men
as Australia can with ease produce, organised in single rank,
which should manceuvre quicker, more easily, and with less dislo-
cation than a similar force in two ranks after many months —nay,
even years—of training in the riding-school system and drill in
two ranks as practised upon the Long Valley at Aldershot. It
is with some knowledge of the task that the writer ventures an
opinion, as he has had the good fortune to raise and command
mounted troops in three campaigns, and between 1888 and 1892
it further fell to his still more fortunate lot to train and command
in all 270 officers and 3,800 men improvised as mounted troops.
It is the writer’s view that the secret of success in the effective
training of mounted men for war lies in these two factors :
1. Manceuvre in single rank, or rank entire.
2. The squadron system— i.e., the squadron divided into
four divisions, and each division into permanent
sections of four men, the all important principle being
that the men and horses manoeuvre and fight side by
side who sleep side by side in the bivouac, or are
tethered side by side at the horse lines.
The last condition has been adopted during the last three years
by the British cavalry, and the former will undoubtedly follow
in a few years hence.


The advantages and simplicity of the proposed single-rank
formation will be understood by the following remarks, and it
will be seen that while the proposed system has all the advantage
of depth possessed by the double rank, it has also the all-important
merit of simplicity.
A regiment in line of squadron columns in single rank has each
squadron in four distinct ranks, each intact and separately com-
manded, yet ready to support the one in front. The intervals
between squadrons may be either squadron or half-squadron
interval, giving in the first case when deployed a line in single
rank, and in the second two distinct lines.
A regiment in line of squadron columns in the old days of
troops, as laid down in the “ Cavalry Drill ” of 1885, had the
same number of ranks as now proposed, with intervals to admit
of rear troops deploying into line.
A regiment thus organised and manoeuvred possesses the three
necessary conditions of modern cavalry tactics, as stated above,
namely :
(а) Simplicity, by reason of the single-rank formation.
(б) Rapidity arising from the facility which a manipulation
of mounted men in single rank gives.
(c) Conformity to modern conditions of opposing fire power
in that you have the old squadron system of two double
ranks, sufficient, as it has been proved for purposes of
shock, spread over a wider and deeper area, according to
the ground and the density of fire, yet each rank is
intact, cohesive, and separately commanded.
A regiment in line of squadron columns, as laid down in the
last and most recent Cavalry Drill, viz., 1891, gives no less than
eight ranks, or double that of the Drill Book of 1885, or of that
now proposed.


There are those who consider that this formation is altogether
too dense, and that it is therefore quite unsuited to the conditions
of modern fire power with its increased accuracy and long range.
The greatest stress is rightly laid in all modern works on
Cavalry Tactics upon the facility of manoeuvre in squadron
columns, but it requires no demonstration to show that the all-
important factors of rapidity and simplicity would be multiplied
one hundredfold by the abandonment of the eight-rank system
for that of the four.
I wish to invite close attention to one single-rank formation in
particular, which enables a regiment drawn up in line of squadron
columns at half-squadron deploying interval, to perform with
equal rapidity, cohesion, regularity and silence, every manoeuvre
which mounted troops in the field can be called upon to do.
This formation, initiated in South Africa in 1881, has been
adopted by the Mounted Infantry at home, and is carried out by
the mounted troops in Australia.
It has been called, for the sake of marking its origin, “ Boer
formation,” since the idea was first borrowed from the Boers in
1881, and is merely squadron columns advancing from a flank by
divisions in column of half-sections.
It will admit of the most rapid manoeuvre over broken and
difficult ground, giving equal facility for forming to the original
front in line of squadron columns, a diagonal movement to a flank
or a change of position.
The simplicity of drill and manceuvi’e which this system gives
can only be realised when seen and practised.
In the foregoing single-rank system at least two of the elements
of success for the tactical value of cavalry which were indicated
have been proved—namely, (a) simplicity and ( b) rapidity. By
the last proposed, or “ Boer,” formation, the final element of
success—(c) conformity to modern conditions of opposing fire
power—has been most effectually dealt with. This formation


gives the minimum of front, yet with the adaptability to descrip-
tion of ground or physical obstacle, combined with cohesion, and
the power of executing with the utmost rapidity any manoeuvre
necessitated by the evanescent conditions of a theatre of tactical
operations or of a field of battle.
The Strategical Power of Mounted Troops.
Napoleon has told us that the value of troops in war for strat-
egical purposes is in direct ratio to their rapidity of movement.
This axiom is more especially true of mounted troops.
It may be assumed as a corollary to such an axiom that the
mounted troops who are to take a great strategical partin war
must be capable of a self-sustained and self-contained effort; in
other words, that a mounted force, if it is to effect great strat-
egical results, must be capable of acting as an independent factor
in war. This is to practically assert that a mounted force capable
of independent action must consist of cavalry, artillery, and
infantry, to which must, in due course, be added a proportion of
those corps without which no body of troops can remain efficient
in the field, viz. : Engineers (for Engineer services or for field
telegraphy), Medical Staff Corps, and Army Service Corps (in-
cluding, as this department does, Transport and Supply^.
The military student finds with no small surprise that in recent
European wars the strategical use of mounted troops has been
but little applied.
In the Franco-Austrian war of 1859, in the Austro-Prussian
campaign of 1866, and in the Fran co-Prussian war of 1870 the
independent or strategical value of mounted troops seems to have
been lost sight >of, or underrated. The lesson of the American
war of 1862-65 would seem to have been overlooked alike by
Austrians, French, and Germans. Whether it was that, bound
down by the conservative tendencies of all standing armies, the
real value of the independent action of mounted troops was for-


gotten or intentionally neglected, it is not necessary ttf discuss.
The fact remains that the cavalry were in each and every case,
so far as their power as a solid strategical factor is concerned,
bound down to the slow-moving infantry columns. No attempt
was made to emulate those feats of the American cavalry leaders
which exercised such momentous effects upon the issue of the
longest and most bloody war of the century. The reason for the
success of such leaders as Stuart, Grierson, Forrest, Sheridan,
and others is not far to seek. .It was that, unfettered by tradi-
tions of the past, the Americans armed their cavalry with a
repeating rifle, and developed their power of independent action
in a manner which has not hitherto been equalled in modern
times. What cavalry or mounted troops have ever executed such
a feat as that of Stuart, of Confederate renown, who, leaving
Darksville on 9th October, 1862, and crossing the Potomac at
McCoy’s Ford, captured Chambersburg, and thence by a series of
unparalleled marches, completely circled round the Federal Army
under McClellan, severing all his lines of communication, and
finally recrossed the Potomac on 12th October at White’s Ford
with a loss of three men ? * A distance of 145 miles was covered
in 76 hours, and portion of the distance —viz., Chambersburg to
Hyatt’s Town, 65 miles—in 20 hours. So successful was this
raid that something near akin to a panic seized the money market
at New York, and a momentary paralysis of uncertainty made
itself felt throughout the whole Federal Army, and there further
resulted a temporary collapse of the Federal cavalry which had
wasted itself in a fruitless effort to pursue. Yet Stuart’s cavalry,
so little affected were they by their splendid exploit, contested the
advance of the Federal infantry, when, some days subsequently;
in overwhelming numbers they crossed the James.
This great raid of Stuart’s does not stand alone, and if
time admitted descriptions might be given of Forrest’s or of
* The Confederate Force consisted of three small brigades, under Brigadier General Wade
Hampton, Colonel W. 11. F. Lee and Colonel W. E. Jones, numbering 1,800 of all ranks.
A battery of four guns, under Major John Pelham, completed the column under Major
General J. E. B. Stuart.


Morgan’s numerous Confederate raids in Tennessee ; of Grfewsjjrj
great raid from Knoxville, Tennessee, in the North, across the
State of Mississippi to Baton Rouge in Louisiana, in the South,
1000 miles in 24 days—a feat which paved the way to the capture
of Vicksburg, and the seizure by the Federal troops of the
Mississippi, the great highway of the Western states. A descrip-
tion might be given of Sheridan’s final exploit with his three
divisions of cavalry, which by what General Grant called “ Sheri-
dan’s throttling process,” cut the line of retreat of the Confederate
General Lee by a long sweeping movement, and brought about
the closing surrender and the collapse of the Confederate cause at
Appomattox Court House in April, 1865. What nation has such
a record to show as these of great strategical feats successfully
achieved by masses of mounted troops 1
In earlier times in the Napoleonic campaigns of 1813 and 1814,
the Russian cavalry operations were organised and led in a far
bolder manner than in any previous campaigns of that age.
Among the most famous may be mentioned Tchernikoff’s opera-
tions far in rear of the French Army after the battle of
Grossbeeren in the autumn of 1813. On this occasion the
Russian leader, well emulated thereafter by the American com-
manders, advanced 140 miles at the head of 3000 horsemen and
four guns into the heart of Westphalia, and captured and retained
possession of Cassel, the capital of that kingdom, for more than a
week. “The effect of this stroke,” says Alison, in his history,
“ was soon felt through the whole North of Germany.” In the
same year, Tetterborn, another Cossack leader, captured Hamburg
by a similar feat. Platoff, again, with 7000 Cossacks and Austrian
horse from Bohemia, encircling the French upon the Elbe, attacked
and routed, far in their rear at Altenburg, the French cavalry
under Le Fevre-Desnouettes.
Subsequent to the American war the advance of Gourkho across
the Balkans with a mixed force of cavalry and lightly-equipped
riflemen, in July, 1877, may be cited as the first attempt by
European troops to develop a similar “ strategical power.”
B


Coming nearer home, we are proud to recall the great strategical
march of Major General Sir Drury Drury-Lowe’s Cavalry division
in 1882 which captured Cairo by a coup-de-main, and at one blow
arrested all the further bloodshed and all the loss of life which
would else have followed upon the rout of the Egyptian troops by
Lord Wolseley at Tel-el-Kebir. The bold strategical march of
the cavalry ordered by Lord Wolseley (a close student of military
histoiy) is the latest and best illustration of the system which
the American leaders had initiated twenty years before, and forms
a fitting close to that short and brilliant page of our military
history.*
I should, however, be wrong to omit a very important instance
of what can be achieved by mounted troops against savage and
warlike tribes operating in a difficult and bush-covered country.
The result of the short and sharp Matabele war is still fresh in
our minds. . In a few short weeks a column of less than 800
mounted men completely crushed and overthrew the most warlike
and savage people known south of the African Equator—a people
kindred in race and military organisation and prowess to that
Zulu nation which cost England an expedition of 24,000 British
troops of all arms and a difficult campaign planned and carried
out according to the recognised orthodox but costly laws of
modern war.
9 The following’ Cavalry Force took part in the above-mentioned march, Major General
Sir Drury Drury-Lowe, K.C.8., commanding :
/"Household Cavalry
1 4th Dragoon Guards
v 7 th
r2nd Bengal Cavalry
v 6th
113th „
N Battery, A Brigade, Royal Horse Artillery
Mountry Infantry
Mounted Detachment Royal Engineers
17th Company Army Service Corps.
This force marched from Kassassin at 8 p.m., 12th September, 1892, took part in the
battle of Tel-el-Kebir at daylight, the 13th, and marching soon after captured the citadel
of Cairo at 8 p.m., 14th September.
A strategical march of 70 miles in 48 hours.


A due appreciation of the value of mounted troops for such
warfare, and a knowledge of the necessities for rapid movement
in dealing with savages, saved in this instance a very serious
campaign, which would undoubtedly have proved from its many
difficulties costly alike in valuable lives and in public money.
Let us consider what gives this strategical power—this power
of independent action—to mounted troops. It is, I would submit,
that they shall be self-contained ; it is that they shall have with
them the fire power which will enable them to compete on even
terms with whatever description of an enemy’s troops they may
come in contact with.
Cavalry must therefore not only be trained themselves to use a
firearm dismounted and with effect, but must be accompanied by
riflemen or by infantry, who, though mounted, shall be so armed
and trained that they can deal with an enemy’s infantry or
cavalry dismounted in a manner which no cavalry, organised and
trained as modern British, German, French, or Austrian cavalry,
can ever hope to do. The mounted force must further have its
horse artillery ; must have its mounted engineers, who, as
specialists, can repair bridges, destroy railways, or tap telegraph
wires ; and must have its medical staff, who, with cacolets and
field ambulance, can collect and transport the wounded whenever
found.
The Colony of Hew South Wales may now be congratulated
upon possessing in its Mounted Brigade, under the veteran
Colonel Macdonald, a force which, in many of its essentials, will
answer such requirements, and which, with further training, and
under officers of professional knowledge and experience, will be
capable of great work, and which may, indeed, be counted upon
to emulate the deeds of their American cousins.
This brigade has now its regiment of Lancers, who, as cavalry,
represent the shock and fire tactics of European cavalry of the
latest type ; it has its regiment of Mounted Rifles, who, as riflemen,
possess the infantry weapon with the mobility that equals, if it


does not excel, the Lancers ; it has its mounted detachlnent of
Engineers, ready, part to destroy or to repair, part to send
telephone messages or to tap existing telegraph wires ; it has,
finally, its Medical Staff Corps detachment, with cacolets and field
ambulance, and its detachment of Army Service Corps for supply
and transport.
In no country in the world will a mounted force be found more
necessary than in Australia, should the Almighty see fit to afflict
the people of this great and prosperous continent with all the
horrors of war within its shores. Distances are so great, transport
away from the great lines of rail is so difficult, that, as in America
at the commencement of the great war, so in Australia would
success be to that force which had the best and the most com-
pletely equipped mounted force. It was entirely to the magnificent
force of improvised mounted troops which the characteristics of
its inhabitants enabled the Southern States to put in the field
that their initial success was due, and it was not until the Federal
States, with their far greater resources, following in the footsteps
of the South, similarly provided themselves with a powerful and
efficient mounted force, that the tide of success finally turned in
their favour. So, I venture to think, would be found to be the
result of any warlike operations which may in the future be
conducted on this continent. Success will be to that army which
can best turn to account the splendid inherent resources which
the Colonies of Australia possess in the supply of horsemen, who,
while hardy and of independent character, have all those British
characteristics which have made and are now making an Empire
and a race without parallel in the history of the world.
Let me close my remarks by reminding you that the mobility
of mounted troops for strategical purposes must be necessarily in
direct ratio to the quality of their horses. It is a fact, I fear,
only too patent to any careful observer that the Australian horse
is gradually deteriorating in bone, sinew, and therefore in staying
power—in all those qualities which go to make a horse valuable
for military purposes, and, I might add, for domestic purposes


also. It is a subject which should engross the earnest attention
of everyone interested in the future of this colony, viz., to consider
what means should be taken to arrest the tendency to breed
light, narrow, thoroughbred horses capable of nothing more useful
than to win a six-furlong race. A future generation will, I fear,
have serious occasion to rue the slight heed paid to the develop-
ment of a breed of horses which shall be valuable for its general
qualities of utility.
It is further a matter which deserves earnest thought as to
whether the capabilities of soil, of climate, and economic facilities
possessed by Australia to breed horses have not been overlooked,
and whether a great trade in horses, especially for military
purposes, might not be developed with Europe with the most
important results to the whole Continent of Australia and to
New South Wales in particular.
There are four descriptions of horses required for military
purposes, namely :
1. The Heavy Cavalry horse of bone, quality
and power ... ... ... ... 16'0 hands.
2. The Light Cavalry horse of good body
and good quality ... ... ... 15 2 hands.
3. The Artillery horse of power and activity 15 2to 16 - 0 hands.
4. The Transport horse of bone and power 15 2 hands.
The medium class, or light cavalry horse, may be estimated as
representing to a European military power £75 as a five-year-old,
or at the commencement of its military life. It may be calculated
that 30,780 horses of all kinds are yearly required by the armies
of Great Britain, France, Germany and Austria—viz., France,
14,100; Germany, 9,370; Austria, 5,840; Great Britain (ex-
clusive of India), 1,470. This enormous number is with extreme
difficulty supplied even in times of peace ; with the strain of war
the demand for horses would be prodigious.
The importance of developing a trade in horses now in times of
peace, with the prospect of increased demand in time of war, I
leave to some more able pen than mine to show. I have only


endeavoured to indicate the possibilities of a source of wealth
whicli my experience in remount questions in other parts of the
world has put me in a position to realise.
Concluding Remarks.
Having now concluded my paper on the important military
question which I have endeavoured to bring before you in a
practical form, I wish, in conclusipn, to express what is far nearer
to the heart of every soldier interested in the futui’e of this
important section of the world-wide British Empire—Australia.
We soldiers have a very heavy responsibility. We have
entrusted to us not only the safeguarding of your present interests,
of the defence of your shores, but we are charged also, with the
cultivation and increase in your midst of that military spirit
which makes great nations. We represent among you the embryo
of a future military greatness. The soldier has been reproached
with being “ outside healthy life and development of the British
nation; that he constitutes not so much an organ of the body
politic as a kind of excrescence.”
“You may tell English trade,” says the great apostle of
British development in reply, “ that you soldiers have been from
the first its instruments ; that you sprang into existence along
with the trading policy of England and grew with its growth.”
From the Revolution of 1688 to the battle of Waterloo in 1815,
war and trade have played into one another’s hands, commerce
being the principal and the army the agent. “ The more trade,”
said the distinguished writer of the “ Expansion of England,”
“ the more war ; and the more war the more trade.”
In the days of Queen Elizabeth the interests of British trade
matured by a vague English yearning for colonisation within the
closed preserves of the Spanish Dominion in the Hew World,
was developed to an almost incredible degree by the English
victories at sea over the Spanish Armada. Under the rule of
Cromwell and Charles 11. trade was yet more manifestly an agent


in the fomenting of international warfare. In the reigns of
William and Anne, and, in a somewhat less degree, in the
younger Pitt’s great French war, fears for the balance of power
in Europe were a far more vehement incentive to armed hostilities
than colonial and commercial interests, remunerative as they
have proved. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
British sailors and soldiers were invariably pioneers of British
trade. In a precise ratio to naval and military success, commerce
and the colonial empire waxed and waned, though the former
was much the more usual process. It is a frequent cry that
military feeling and an aristocratic government have in the past
plunged Great Britain into war and into debt. This fact there
is no gainsaying; however that may be, the wealth of Great
Britain and the influence of the Anglo-Saxon race have accumu-
lated through commerce. The immense domains her children
enjoy in Asia, Africa and America are, in their actual forms, in
a vast number of cases the direct fruits of continuous and inces-
sant European warfare. This great Continent of Australia may,
perhaps, be considered as the sole substantial exception to the
rule. In a word, the expansion of our trade and of our colonial
empire has generally coincided with periods of warlike vigour.
No one who knows Australia but foreshadows a great and
splendid destiny. This Continent, with its magnificent natural
advantages, must hereafter become a great and powerful country
if only its inhabitants follow in the footsteps of the great race
which has given them birth. Can Australia expect to achieve a
great future by any other means than those by which all other
great peoples have become powerful and rich? A nation, history
reminds us, can only become great by passing through the sad
ordeal of war. This is the lesson which the history of our own
empire teaches us—the lesson which the student of history will
find recorded in the story of the struggles of all great peoples.
Australia, if she also is to become a great and prosperous country,
as assuredly she will, must expect to pass through the same stern
ordeal of war and of national difficulty.


It is our duty, then, as soldiers, to prepare for the' future
demands of Australia in this respect. It is for us now to organise
for war; to teach and to train the rising generation as soldiers ;
to cultivate the military instinct in this young nation; and to
teach the rising youth that love of country, self-abnegation, and
a devotion to duty are the attributes which of all others we must
cultivate. Thus only is a great nation made, and such is our
responsibility as soldiers at this youthful and undeveloped stage
in the history of New South Wales, or, may I rather say, of
Australia ? Do not then gentlemen, let us renounce our respon-
sibilities, but each one do his best for the great cause of liberty
and freedom, and contribute all that lies in our power to mould
and to make the future destiny of this people as great, as useful,
and as glorious as that of the parent stock from which we spring.
War must be
While men are what they are ; while they have bad
Passions to be roused ; while ruled by men ;
While all the powers and treasures of a land
Are at the beck of the ambitious crowd ;
While injuries can be inflicted, or
Insults be offered ; while rights are worth
Maintaining, freedom keeping, or life having,
So long the sword shall shine : so long shall war
Continue, and the need for war remain.
Bayly.


CHAPTER II.
“Our Comrades of Greater Britain.”
A Paper read before the Military Society at Aldershot,
November 24th, 1896.
“ It is the secret sympathy,
“ The silver [link, the silken tie,
“ Which heart to heart, and mind to mind,
“In body.and in soul can bind.”
— Scott.
I.—Prefatory.
I have selected as the title of my paper one with which modern
writers have made us all so familiar. “ Greater Britain,” as an
expression, conveys to us all something of the vastness and
something of the similarity of national feeling and of national in-
stinct which permeates the whole Empire alike, whether within
the Arctic zone of Canada, in the upland plains of South Africa, or
in the vast pastures, plains, and goldfields of Australia. I have
further associated the expression “ Greater Britain ” with the
words “our comrades.” It is my anxious wish to bring forcibly
before you what we doubtless all acknowledge, but which is so
seldom publicly urged, that we soldiers, whether English, Scotch,
Irish, Canadians, Africanders, or Australians, are alike portions
of one great whole. We together form that power in the British
Empire which is called the British Army, and we all claim as an
equal birthright the name of “ British soldier.”


My object in reading this paper before your Society is to bring
forcibly to your notice the development of our Empire, its vast
resources, and the military power of Greater Britain of to-day,
and to contrast this with what existed a quarter of a century ago.
I will endeavour to do do so without wearying you by a wilderness
of statistics, but it is necessary to my object that I should re-
capitulate on this head some interesting facts, the majority of
which are probably known to many of you. I propose also to
show some of the difficulties which encompass the military systems
outside the United Kingdom, and especially in those of our
Colonies having responsible Government. After which I will
endeavour to point out some of the necessities that govern the
maintenance of a military system ; and lastly I will endeavour to
show that the true principle of defence is offence, and that it is this
principle which has influenced in a large measure, and will influ-
ence in the future to a far greater degree, those great statesmen,
soldiers, and sailors, who have together built up this vast Empire
such as we see it to-day, and who are responsible for its
maintenance.
IT.—JiisE and Military Power of our Colonies.
In considering the rise of our Colonies during the last 25 years
there can be no simpler method than to invite your attention to
the increase in population, trade, revenue, military (or defence)
expenditure, and finally in the number of troops available.
I would beg you to mark that although our Colonies have
increased their expenditure for defence purposes in something
approaching the same ratio that the revenue has increased during
the last quarter of a century, still the extraordinary disproportion
of expenditure per head of population between that of our Colonies
and that of the Mother Country is sufficiently startling. For
example, taking the average in the Australian Colonies, the
expenditure upon defence is approximately 2s. 9d. per head, while
in the United Kingdom it is 9s. Id. for military defence alone,


and adding the naval vote it becomes 17s. 4d.* Though it is
obviously necessary in young countries that all possible capital
should be devoted to their development and to trade, it remains a
question whether our Colonies might not in all reason devote a
larger share of their fast increasing wealth to their own defence,
and to their share in the defence of that Empire upon whose
wealth, security, and maintenance their commercial and national
status so largely depends. It is a question whether our Colonies
fully realize the advantages in defence alone which they derive
from their connection with the Mother Country, and whether they
maintain a fair proportion of the burdens of taxation which the
maintenance of the Empire imposes upon the population of the
United Kingdom.
Taking the three great groups of our Colonies, I will endeavour
to submit some interesting subjects for reflection in connection
with the military forces of each, viz.:—(1) Canada; (2) South
Africa; (3) Australasia.
The military forces of our Colonies generally are divided into
three portions, viz. : —Permanent or Regular Troops; Militia, or
“Partially Paid;” Volunteer; to which should also be added
armed Police. The first are relatively few in number, well paid,
and on the whole highly efficient. They are very properly utilized
for specialist work in connection with the branch of the Army to
which they belong, and for instructional purposes. The Militia,
or as they are somewhat misnamed in Australia, the “ Partially
Paid troops,” are closely analogous to the Militia of the United
Kingdom, and serve under somewhat similar Acts of Parliament.
The system of training is, however, different, in that the men have
the opportunity given them to attend a defined number of drills
at convenient times during the year, either for one whole day or
half a day at a time, for which they receive certain rates of pay.
A period of continuous training is not necessarily part of the
yearly system of training. Musketry is also carried out in a
* Note. —The latest statistics show the average expenditure upon Naval and
Defence to be for the Australian Commonwealth 4s. (id. per head of population, and of the
United Kingdom 235. 3d. (excluding the special war expenditure).—lst May, 1902.


similar manner. The Volunteers are similar to those of the
United Kingdom, and serve under somewhat similar Acts of Par-
liament. They receive from Government a capitation grant in
return for a certain number of drills, which provides them with
uniform, etc.
The same difficulty is felt in our Colonies as regards the pro-
fessional knowledge and practical instruction of the officers,
especially of the senior officers, that we are so familiar with in the
United Kingdom. Little difficulty is experienced in reaching a
certain standard of excellence as regards the rank and file, but a
very serious difficulty is encountered with the officers. Schools of
instruction for each branch of the service have been established
in Canada and in some of the Colonies of Australia, but no amount
of theoretical instruction in a school can compensate for the lack
of field training which is so unfortunately wanting in most of the
Colonies.
One serious defect in organization is, however, common with a
few exceptions to our Colonies—their military forces are for the
most part limited to a certain number of Infantry, Artillery, and
Cavalry or Mounted Rifles, while the administrative departments,
without which an Army is useless for field service, in many cases
do not even exist, or in others are in such minute proportion as to
be of small value. If the modern system of defence is to be one
of offensive-defensive operations, the military forces of our Colonies
who will have to take the field must possess a complete military
system and organization, and cannot rest content with a number
of disconnected fragments, more or less well trained, without the
requisite proportion of all arms, and without those administrative
departments which are indispensable to the maintenance of an
army in the field, however small in numbers. With the exception
of one of the Australian Colonies, or perhaps two, a military
force, as a complete military unit of organization, does not exist.
The Dominion of Canada. —Canada possesses a total Defence
force of 35,288, and has, moreover, a ballot system which in war
renders the whole male population liable for military service


between the ages of 20 and 40. The troops are almost entirely
Militia, with a nucleus only of Permanent or Regular Troops.
Having a frontier of 2,800 miles, Canada is, of all portions of
the Empire, the most exposed to invasion. Her geographical
position renders her most vulnerable to any aggressive movement
coming from our neighbours and kinsmen of the United States.
Bound as Canada is to the United States by peculiarities of
kinship and of commercial intimacy, it cannot be disguised that
serious menaces have been made in the past which may or may
not some day be followed by acts of open war. No more interest-
ing problem presents itself to the British student of war than how
best to defend Canada and its long and exposed frontier line. As
recently as December last, following upon President Cleveland’s
message, the American press teemed with proposals as to the
quickest and most effective way of invading and over-running
Canada. Plans of the probable area of warlike operations and
the plan of campaign were published in many of the leading news-
papers, especially in the Western States, where a veritable war
frenzy seems to have seized the population. The probabilities of
success in the possible campaign with Canada and the British
Empire were widely discussed.
However much we must deplore such an eventuality, we have
to look facts in the face, and there is no question but that had
the British Empire been involved in war, the successful defence
of Canada would, in the first instance, have entirely depended
upon the rapid mobilization of the Canadian Militia and their
power of rapidly taking the field. It is doubtful whether an
organization complete in all the essentials of its administrative
departments exists, which would admit of a rapid concentration
of the Canadian Army, and of offensive-defensive operations being
undertaken without many weeks of preparation.
In this consideration it is interesting to note that the propor-
tion of taxation for defence per head is only Is. 3d. in Canada,
less than any other colony, and half that of the average of the
Australian Colonies.


The Colonial troops of Canada have twice taken part as such
in military operations, viz., in the Red River expedition under
Lord Wolseley in 1870, and again in the North-West Provinces
against the rebel Riel, under Sir Frederick Middleton, in 1885.
In both campaigns did the Canadian troops acquit themselves
well. “ I can say without flattery,” wrote Lord Wolseley in his
final order in 1870, “that I have served with many armies in
the field, but I have never been associated with a better set
of men.”
South Africa.— lt is somewhat difficult at this juncture to
allude to the Military Forces belonging to the Cape Government,
inasmuch as it is understood that it is contemplated to very con-
siderably add to them. It has been stated that a Militia system
not unlike that existing in Australia may be adopted. Up to
1896 the available force is put at 8,000 men. Of this number
about 1,500 are permanent troops including police (for the most
part mounted), approximately 3,500 Militia of the partially paid
type, including Mounted Rifles, Horse Batteries, Field Artillery,
Infantry, and the balance are Volunteers.
The Colony of Natal possesses a military force, including
Mounted Police, of about 1,800, with a Field Battery. The
larger proportion are mounted. In close proximity as Natal is to
the older Colony of the Cape, and identical as are their interests
no common system of defence seems to exist between them, nor
are their military forces organized with any regard to mutual
support, whether from foreign aggression or from native risings.
There is no part of the Empire which is richer in fighting
material than the British Colonies in South Africa. The frequent
wars with the natives, the pursuit of game large and small, the
constant struggles with the physical difficulties of the country,
and the fine climate, contribute to the maintenance and cultiva-
tion of those sturdy qualities of the Anglo-Saxon race from which
the best soldiers are made. The mounted troops are especially


good, and are of their kind, in quality and physique, only equalled
by the mounted troops of Australia.
Considering the magnitude of the area of country administered
by the Cape Government, the preponderating size and importance
of the native tribes, and the security of the Colony generally, it
does not seem that the sum of Is. lOd. per head of population is
a proportionate charge for defence, and though this amount is
greater than Canada, yet it is only slightly larger than that
borne by the remote little island of Tasmania.
Natal, on the other hand, having so recently as 1879 experienced
all the menace of a Zulu invasion and of Boer aggression, and
having within its borders a very large and vigorous native popula-
tion, pays 4s. Id. per head. Natal doubtless is alive to the
dangers that surround her, but yet she pays less for her own
defence than distant New South Wales, and has, in addition, the
advantage of a garrison of Imperial troops.
Australasia. —The Colonies of Australia have already been
keenly alive to the importance of their defences. Remote as
Australia was in the past from any possible military assistance
her colonies have always assumed the responsibility of such isola-
tion, and have in this respect acted with sound judgment. The
Volunteer movement which was resuscitated in the United
Kingdom in 1859 found an echo in the young Colony of New
South Wales, and ever since that date a defence force has been
maintained.
Each of the Colonies now possesses a military force organized
and maintained upon the lines already alluded to, viz. : —(1) A
nucleus of permanent or regular troops, chiefly Artillery • (2)
Militia or .partially paid ; (3) Volunteers. There exists in addi-
tion Rifle Clubs in nearly all the principal towns, which receiving
some concessions in the way of subsidy from Government, have a
varying proportion of their members enrolled for military service
when necessary.


The six Australian Colonies together possess a force of- 18,700
troops, while New Zealand owns 7,400. Most of the Colonies
have adopted a system of organization and a scheme of defence
somewhat similar in character, which provides for the local
security of the naval bases and important commercial harbours,
while it leaves the balance available for offensive-defensive
purposes.
At the instigation of the Government of New South Wales,
Military Conferences were held at Sydney in October, 1894,
and in January, 1896, to which a complete scheme of Australian
Federal Defence was submitted by the same Colony. This
scheme was fully discussed, elaborated still further, and then
finally agreed to. The offensive-defensive troops available
from each Colony after providing for local defence are by
this scheme converted into a federal force, available for the
defence of Australia. This carefully elaborated scheme com-
mended itself in principle to the Premiers of the Australian
Colonies in January, 1895, and again in March, 1896, and there
seems reason to hope that the military defence of Australia, based
upon this sound and economical military policy, will ere long be
publicly adopted. An easy and effective step towards the much
desired federation of Australia will be thus made, which upon the
principle of natural evolution will, it is hoped, be followed ere
long by federation upon the larger issue.
The Australian Governments have not lost sight of the import-
ance of arranging for the mobility of a portion of their troops, and
attempts by all the Colonies have been made, successful in some,
partly successful in others, to have the proper proportion of each
arm complete, with the necessary administrative departments.
The defence of New Zealand must, under the existing circum-
stances, be considered as apart from that of Australia. The pro-
blem of defence which it presents by reason of its extended coast
line, its numerous harbours, and the disjointed character of its
settlements and of its various islands, is a very difficult one. The


fighting quality of its troops, if trained under a sound system and
organized upon a definite scheme of defence, are undeniable. The
effect of protracted Maori wars has not passed away ; but at the
same time it is doubtful if the scattered and disjointed Military
Forces of the Colony are organized and administered at the pre-
sent time in the most economical and the most effective manner.
lll.— Difficulties Under Which our Comrades Labour.
Though the difficulties which affect our comrades of Greater
Britain are not altogether dissimilar from those which try our
patience and tax our perseverance in the LTnited Kingdom, they
are, by reason of the smallness and the remoteness of the various
communities, seriously enhanced. These difficulties may be briefly
summarized as follows: —(a) The absence of a continuous and
fixed policy of defence ; ( b) the difficulty of popularizing military
service ; (c) narrow ideas and prejudice ; (d) political interference,
and personal influence.
(a) I place the want of a continuous or fixed policy of Defence
as the first and most serious of these difficulties. Governments
change far more rapidly in our self-governing Colonies than at
home, and the fluctuating changes of policy, and the vicissitudes
experienced in passing the military estimates through Parliament,
render it impossible to look forward from one year to another, or
even from one month to another, with any degree of certainty.
It requires no demonstration to show how difficult it is to inspire
enthusiasm and maintain military efficiency when not only the
maintenance of each and every member of the force, but even of
the force itself, is a subject of yearly uncertainty when the military
estimates are submitted to Parliament.
The want of a continuous policy of defence is an additional and
most detrimental factor to the success of any military system; it is
however, a drawback which is incidental, it would seem, to a
monarchical or constitutional form of Government. The difficulty,
great as it is felt to be in Great Britain, is greater still in that
c


Greater Britain beyond the seas, where the countries having re-
sponsible governments are less in magnitude, but are far more
subject to fluctuating political views, often of the most opposite
character.
The varying conditions, and the ever progressive changes of
military institutions, and above all of the principles of military
defence, make it hard indeed for our remote Colonies to keep pace.
That admirable military writer, Mr. Spencer Wilkinson, reminds
us very rightly that with our grandfathers “ the great idea was
the machine ; with us it is the organization.” It is this very
organization which is the most difficult of all to complete, when
the money upon which its creation must depend is a varying
factor.
(b) Our military systems throughout the Empire are based upon
a voluntary military service. This system must depend for its
success either upon the popularity of the military service, or upon
some great national danger which forces the necessity of such ser-
vice upon the public sentiment. The latter condition has never,
except in minor or isolated instances in outlying parts of our
Empire, become a necessity in our day, and please God we may
never have a national emergency which will compel us to adopt a
system of compulsory service. The necessity, however, for popular-
izing our military service in order to make our voluntary system
possible, is a present and constant source of anxiety in our Colonies
no less than in the United Kingdom. This difficulty becomes all
the greater in those Colonies where no immediate or apparently
pressing reason seems to exist necessitating a military force.
There is undoubted truth in the statement that there exists in
the Anglo-Saxon race an antipathy to military service, and especi-
ally to a standing army, which is not altogether accounted for by
the fact that the soldier is the bugbear to the political agitator,
and the emblem of law and order to the disturber of the public
peace. The unpopularity of the Army, and the resentment of
military interference in all public movements, are probably trace-


able to the wars of the 17th century. The feelings engendered
by the excesses of the Royalists on the one side, and the high-
handed treatment experienced at the hands of the Covenantors on
the other, have never passed away, and may be held accountable
in a large measure for this national instinct of dislike. The exist-
ing strong democratic feelings grafted upon this old English
animosity tends to make any military system in some measure dis-
tasteful to the popular feeling in our Colonies. It is impossible to
ignore this popular prejudice, and it is a difficulty requiring
much care and delicacy of handling to overcome. It becomes,
therefore, one of the most difficult tasks in our Colonies to bring
home to the public mind the necessity for the maintenance of a
military force without creating a feeling of uneasiness, and at the
same time to popularize the military service without jeopardizing
discipline or efficiency.
(c) A difficulty which is ever present to all our Colonial military
systems is that narrow ideas and ignorant prejudice are at least as
difficult to overcome in Greater Britain as they are in the Mother
Country. It is a peculiarity shared by all armies in common that
soldiers resent all change, and are as a class the most conservative
of humanity. This peculiarity is perhaps increased in proportion
to the distance that lies between the hub and the tyre of the
military wheel.
(d) Perhaps one of the most dangerous and sinister effects of
Constitutional Government in our Colonies is the ever recurring
tendency on the part of individual members of the Legislature to
interfere for various reasons with the working of and with the
personnel of the military machine. It is the not unnatural result
of the franchise that individuals should endeavour to bring to
bear parliamentary influence to overrule military regulations
which are found to be irksome or detrimental to the interests of
themselves, or of their friends, and even to press for advancement
on electoral grounds. The effect of such a system must from its
nature be to sap at the very roots of discipline, and to sow discord
and dissension throughout the force where it exists. The expres-


sion borne upon the winds from the Crimea, “Take care of Dowd),”
has sometimes found an echo in places beyond the seas.
Pernicious as such a system must be in any country, it becomes
doubly so in small communities where everyone’s actions are
known and criticised, and where unfair motives for acts and
words are often too unjustly ascribed.
IV. —The Necessities Governing the Maintenance of our
Comrades in each of our Colonies.
In the sense of self-preservation defence is an instinct which the
human race shares in common with the brute creation, and its
demonstration would be futile. It is, however, germane to my
object to remind you that our comrades of Greater Britain are
equally, if not more, alive to the vast importance of defence in the
maintenance of their own and our commercial security, than even
the people of England. All thinking men must fear that a recur-
rence is possible at no distant date of those conditions which
drove the old country into war, and which rendered the struggles
of the earlier Georgian period a question of life and death of
England. During our long rest of 80 years from any great life
struggle other nations have been pressing in our wake, and the
British Empire has once more neighbours and rivals in all parts
of the globe. No subject of Her Majesty, worthy of a hearing,
desires aggression on this account, but equally every man who
understands the situation knows that the day may at any moment
break when we must keep by the sword what we have gained by
the sword. It has been recently said by one of our ablest states-
men that “ Imperial Defence is only another name for the protec-
tion of Imperial Commerce,” and we generally hear it argued that
our commercial supremacy is due to our naval supremacy ; but we
should bear in mind that the converse is even still more true, and
that our commercial supremacy, born of our policy at the com-
mencement of this century, now enables us to grasp more firmly
than any nation has ever done in any previous age the proud


sceptre of naval supremacy. Certainly if two centuries ago it was
found impossible to let trade follow another flag, when our popula-
tion was small, and commerce comparatively insignificant, it is
more important and still more incumbent upon us now, and in the
future, to maintain our vast commercial interests, and retain the
existing markets for our produce and manufactures. The British
Empire must be prepared to find her commercial supremacy and
her monopoly of the sea challenged some day. From the precedents
of the past, which our comrades beyond the seas study no less
closely than we, it may be fairly inferred that we shall have to
fight in order to guard, as we have had in the past to fight in
order to acquire. This is not the spirit of bluster or pride which
has been deservedly stigmatised as “ Jingoism it is a national
purpose, it is a national and indeed a natural instinct of self-
preservation !
Facilities of communication, steam and electricity have brought
all our Colonies, even distant Australia, upon the arena of old
world strife. No portion of the vast Empire owing allegiance to
the Queen can now remain unconcerned in the active movements
of the world, and in the problems still lying hid in the womb of
the future.
Admiral Colomb, not long ago, in a lecture before the United
Service Institution, insisted with great emphasis upon the proposi-
tion that the duty of defence is common to both the Army and
Navy, and that although each has its specific share, the relative
force and employment of one cannot be determined without regard
to the corresponding force and employment of the other. This
principle is now generally accepted as an axiom of any system for
the defence of our Empire; but many leading soldiers and sailors
agree in thhiking that joint action between the Army and Navy
over a world-wide field of operations has never yet been adequately
or authoritatively considered. It is certain that no practical
solution of this problem has ever yet been enunciated as a basis
upon which the preservation of the Empire may safely rest.


It seems clear, however, that the principle has now' been
accepted that the people of Great Britain and Ireland are pre-
pared to maintain the Naval element in the defence of our Empire,
if we except the contribution of our Australian Colonies. Though
the wisdom of this policy has practically been always accepted
this principle has only recently been made public. Had it been
earlier made clear much public money in our Colonies might have
been spared to more important purposes, and the melancholy sight
of war vessels for local defence now lying idle in some of the
distant parts of our Empire might have been obviated.
The share of defence allotted to our Comrades of Greater
Britain is thus confined to a military defence, except indeed where
a purely local naval defence as an auxiliary to the military defence
is required for the security of certain harbours and for the control
of seagoing traffic in time of war within the military defences.
The principle governing the organization of this military force
and its requirements will be dealt with later.
The necessity for maintaining a military force in our Colonies
may, however, be based upon other and equally important grounds.
Military service it is which teaches to a people the sacred and
solemn duty involved in the defence of one’s country. It is mili-
tary service which inculcates the practice of self-denial, and that
discipline and subordination of mind and body which are necessary
in order to discharge that duty. Something more than various
forms of sport, whether cricket, hunting, or racing, is required to
educate a nation in those manly qualties which are vital to the
well-being of any great people. It is the possession of these
qualities which have given us our freedom and free institutions,
and it is by them that we must maintain our birthright. It has
been said that the torch of Liberty was lighted at the altar of
Religion; it is at any rate certain that the qualities required to
keep alight that torch must be hallowed by the highest attributes
which make a noble and a great people. It is a fact often lost
sight of in England, that the creation and maintenance of the
Militia and Yolunteer force is important, aye, and vital, to the


interests of this Empire, not only for the defence it affords, but
for the education it provides for the people of this country in
military exercises, in self-denial, and in discipline of mind and
body. The defence of our country is a sacred duty and a national
privilege. It is not one which can be relegated to a mercenary
army without serious detriment to the highest and best national
instincts. History tells us that once quench the warlike spirit in
a nation that nation dies. Hence the importance of our Volunteer
force as a national educator of the principle of the sacred duty of
national defence. It was Bacon, in 1612, at the birth of naval
power, who said, “Above all for empire and greatness it importeth
most that a Nation do profess arms as their principal honour,
study, and occupation . . . . No nation which does not
directly profess arms may look to have greatness fall into their
mouths.” “We may not be a military nation,” said the Iron
Duke, “but thank God we are a warlike people,” and long may
we remain so.
In England the national obligation of maintaining an adequate
army is forced upon our intelligence; we have across the streak
of silver sea 20 millions of men armed and organized for war; we
have had immediately at our doors, as lately as 1871, all the
horrors of war; and the experiences of the 18th and early 19th
century wars are not yet forgotten. In most of our distant
possessions, however, such influences are less powerful, notably so
in Australia, and the necessity for maintaining a military spirit is
not equally obvious. The old warlike influence may perhaps
slumber, but at least it must not be allowed to sleep, lest we
cease to be what our forefathers made us. This indeed forms one
of the most important reasons which govern the maintenance of
our Comrades in Greater Britain, though it is one which is not
generally accepted, and it is certainly one which many would only
too gladly ignore.
V.— Best Defence is Offence.
It has been held by military and naval commanders, as well as
proved by the study of history, that in the case of England in the


past the surest and best defence has been a vigorous offence. It
has always been held that if warlike operations for defensive pur-
poses were necessary to be undertaken they should be forced upon
England’s enemies and fought out upon other than English soil.
D uring the last 150 years five distinct threats of invasion have
been made by England’s enemies. In each instance England did
not remain satisfied with preparations for a passive defence but
followed these by a vigorous and successful offence.
First, in 1744 and 1745, France, taking upon herself the
championship of the Stuarts, endeavoured to enforce the claims of
the Jacobite cause. Not only did Great Britain defend herself by
force of arms but by a vigorous offensive she carried her military
activity into North America and India simultaneously, and
captured in the one the Island of Cape Breton, in the other she
annexed Pondicherry and Madras, thus laying the foundation of
our Indian Empire.
Secondly, in 1759, France threatened to invade England, an
attempt which Great Britain replied to by renewed military
exertions in the eastern and western hemispheres so vigorous and
so well timed that they gave us Quebec, and Montreal, and
Canada in North America; Guadeloupe, Martinique, Grenada,
and St. Lucia in the West Indies ; and the province of Goree in
the Indian Peninsula.
Thirdly, in 1779, the French and Spanish combined to plot a
joint invasion of our country. Our answer was the strengthening
of Gibraltar and the re-establishment of our naval power in the
Mediterranean as a counterfoil and menace to the French.
Fourthly, in 1797-98, the French Republic threatened an
invasion of the shores of Great Britain, and in 1798 an expedi-
tion actually landed in Ireland. Great Britain retaliated by a
military expedition in the following May, which destroyed the
sluice gates of Ostend, and in rapid succession followed the
capture of Malta, the Battle of the Nile, and the conquest of
Egypt.


Fifthly, in the memorable years 1804-5, Napoleon made his
great and final effort to destroy England’s power by an invasion
upon a magnitude and organized with a completeness that is
sometimes forgotten. This was defeated, as we all know', by the
vigilance and excellence of our Navy, and our supremacy at sea
was finally established by the Battle of Trafalgar. The command
of the sea having been thus indisputably assured we were enabled
to invade Portugal and Spain, and eventually upon the field of
Waterloo to lay the foundation of our present greatness and pros-
perity ; thus for the remainder of the 19 th century an invasion of
our shores by foreign foes has been effectually prevented.
The great principle of an offensive-defensive policy thus indi-
cated as appropriate to the defence of the Mother Country itself
is applicable in a similar degree to ocean-girt Australia, and indeed
to the great peninsula of South Africa also. Canada alone, with
a widely extended frontier coterminous with the United States,
must be influenced by a somewhat different role.
It has been continually urged and requires no demonstration to
show that the war policy of Great Britain must be governed by
our power at sea. The sea, like an ever constant highway, binds
all the fragments of our Empire into one, and makes possible the
combinations of all sections of our Empire into one integral
whole. It enable us to carry out the policy of defence by offence
which, as I have endeavoured to show, has always been and must
always remain the only successful defence policy of the British
Empire.
Having these principles in view the defence of our Great
Colonies resolves itself into two parts, one which shall provide a
passive defence of an adequate nature for those harbours and
strategical centres necessary for local security to trade and for
the maintenance of the supremacy of our fleet at sea, and the
other which shall enable an offensive-defensive policy to be under-
taken whenever necessitated by political events.
It has been already stated that our comrades at the antipodes


are in a fair way to accept a system of co-operative defence founded
upon these principles which might, it is thought, be applicable for
general adoption.
It will be interesting, therefore, to note the main points upon
which the Scheme of Australian Federal Defence is framed :
(1) A defence scheme based upon a common ground of policy.
(2) A Military Defence Act common to each of the Colonies,
which shall enable its forces to serve within a certain defined area
for the mutual protection of all.
(3) An organization suited to the defence policy, which shall
adapt the military forces at present existing in each colony to the
general scheme of defence referred to above, and which shall none
the less leave the identity of each of the Colonies’ troops intact
as at present, and during peace available for purely local
requirements.
It is proposed that the six Australian Colonies shall carry out
this system in peace so that in time of war a properly trained and
organically sound military machine will be at hand ready for
whatever military operations may be indicated by joint agreement
of the Colonies.
It is further proposed that a Council of Federal Defence repre-
sentative of the Colonies concerned shall assemble occasionally for
consultative purposes during peace, but in war or national emer-
gency this Council shall by joint arrangement between the Colonies
assume the administrative direction of the Federal force then
mobilized, and elect a military commander, thus constituting a
species of Committee of Public Safety.
Such a system will at least insure the adoption of one defence
policy, one uniform organization and equipment, and one system
of training. It will further insure the means being ready at hand
for carrying out effectively a common system of defence when a
national emergency suddenly bursts upon Australia.


The scheme, therefore, which has commended itself to the
Australian Colonies is based upon the principle that without
adding to the existing military forces each Colony shall possess
one portion allotted to passive or purely sedentary defence, being
the effective protection of commercial centres, and naval and
strategical bases, while the other is allotted to offensive-defensive
operations, and is liable to be moved to any portion of Australia
or within the area described as Australian waters when required
for the defence of Australian shores. This offensive-defensive
force becomes the Federal force of Australia and is apportioned to
each Colony in proportion to population. The Federal force thus
created by joint co-operation of the Australian Colonies comprises
a complete Mounted Brigade and a complete Infantry Division,
each being provided with the proper proportion of the adminis-
trative and departmental troops so as to be able to take the field
at the shortest notice. This military system is formed without the
addition of a single penny to the military estimates of each Colony,
and by merely utilizing the existing military establishments.
A certain influential body of those who are pressing Imperial
Federation seek to bind all portions of the Empire hand and foot
to one given policy both of defence and of finance. Attractive as
this may seem, a sojourn in our Colonies, even of short duration,
will soon demonstrate the impossibility of such a system being
accepted by the majority of our fellow-subjects of Greater Britain.
The Premier of Hew South Wales put the popularly accepted view
of this question before the Australian public in his usually forcible
and eloquent language :
“My belief,” said he, “in the future of the British Empire is
not derived from schemes of this or that kind of Imperial Federa-
tion, but upon the kinship of the peoples which make up the
British race.' Just as the sons who go from the parental home
are still an abiding strength of union and fellowship to the
parents, so do the Australian Colonies, if allowed to remain
situated as they are, and with their relations to the old country as
they are, become as strong a bulwark as if they had some grand new


complex Act of Parliament called an Act of Imperial Federation,
which might smother their generous alliance, chill their affectionate
ideas, and sow the seeds of distrust and quarrel.”
Those who, like myself, have had peculiar facilities for knowing
the real feeling existing in our Australian Colonies can alone realize
the depth of loyalty and generous affection for, and pride in, the old
country. England, throughout Australia, is always known and
spoken of as “ Home,” and with that word are embraced all that
makes a “ Home ” dear to the distant members of a family.
Entwined, however, with this deeply rooted loyalty for and love
to the old country, is that truly British love of liberty and that
freeborn and independent spirit which resents an injury and
brooks no interference —a spirit which is and has been for the last
three hundred years the heritage of our race. Overlying all lies
that very human failing of self-interest. Having realized the im-
portant influences of loyalty, sentiment, and self-interest which
exist, we shall find it is wisest in the best interests of the Empire
to base our schemes upon these and upon the force of public
opinion, which has nowhere in the world so quick and intelligent
exponents as in the Australian press.
A co-operative system of defence it is which seems best adapted
to fulfil our objects, such, for instance, as that which I have
sketched as proposed for the five Australian Colonies and
Tasmania. A co-operation based on loyalty to Her Majesty the
Queen and to our common country, upon the sentiment of race
and of common birth, and upon self interest.
Ho one who was not present in Hew South Wales could realize
the intense, almost frenzied, state of the public mind when the
contingent sailed for Suakim in 1885. It was not the fact of
sending seven hundred men to the shores of the Red Sea to join
with British troops upon a campaign in no way critical that so
violently agitated a peculiarly practical and non-sensational people,
but it was the popular realization of the fact that Hew South
Wales was the first British Colony to establish that principle of
co-operative defence which has been alluded to. This it was, you


may rest assured, which appealed with such force to our comrades
at the antipodes, and I cannot demonstrate this more forcibly
than by quoting the words of that illustrious man, the Right
Honourable W. B. Dailey, then at the head of the Government of
New South Wales, upon the occasion of the dispatch of the Soudan
Contingent in 1885. “ The statesmen who contemplate disturb-
ance of the world’s peace,” said Mr. Dailey, “ will from this time
not limit their calculations so far as England is concerned to her
ironclads and to her armies. They will consider the rapidly
increasing millions of her Colonial subjects, their boundless
resources of all forms of material wealth, their capacity of swift
and effective organisation for purposes of offence as well as defence,
and above all their triumphant resolve to stand by the Great
Empire in her troubles, and to spend and be spent in her service.
No ill-considered and uncalculated wars will be engaged in by
even the most reckless of military despots, and our joyful sacrifice
will aid the cause of peace.”
If I have not dwelt upon the existence of the same feeling in
other parts of Greater Britain it is because I am not able to speak
with the same personal knowledge, but the offer of Canada to
supply 10,000 men in the troublous times of 1878-79 will always
be in our mind. The no less generous and timely offer of South
Africa in the dark days of financial difficulties in Australia of 1893,
to guarantee any loan which New South Wales might wish to
raise, made a profound impression in the public mind of our
Australian comrades.
It seems almost superfluous to remind you of the feeling of the
Australian" Colonies, promptly voiced by all the Premiers of the
six Colonies direct to Lord Salisbury upon the 13th January, 1895,
abandoning, in their determination to emphasise the sentiment,
the official method of transmission through Her Majesty’s repre-
sentatives in Australia :—“ The Governments of Australia and
Tasmania,” ran the cablegram, “ view with satisfaction the prompt
and fearless measures adopted by Her Majesty’s Government in
the defence of the integrity of the British Empire. We desire to


convey to you our united assurances of loyal support. The people
of Australia are in full sympathy with the determination of the
Mother Country to resent any foreign interference in matters of
British and Colonial concern.”
You will recall, also, that the Government of New Zealand
cabled : —“ Recent statesmanlike and patriotic conduct of Imperial
Government with reference to the Venezuela and Transvaal
Republics has been such as to intensify loyal sentiments to the
Queen of England, making us prouder than ever to belong to the
Empire of Great Britain.” From the Canadian Parliament came
the following resolution passed amid the greatest enthusiasm :
“ That in view of the present threatening aspect of foreign affairs,
this House desires to assure Her Majesty’s Government and the
people of the United Kingdom of its unalterable loyalty and
devotion to the British Throne and Constitution, and of its con-
viction that, should occasion unhappily arise, in no other parts of
the Empire than in the Dominion of Canada would more substan-
tial sacrifices attest the determination of Her Majesty’s subjects
to preserve unimpaired the integrity and inviolate the honour of
Her Majesty’s Empire.”
Gentlemen, I think we may say that we are justified in the
belief that we can count upon our Comrades of Greater Britain
in our time of trial, but we may be equally certain we cannot, by
artificial means arouse the deep feeling of nationality and brother-
hood which breathes so happily and harmoniously from our
Colonies. It is well to beware lest by endeavouring to forge
indissoluble ties, as some would have us do, we may not be
“ substituting the form for the spirit of Brotherhood.”
Vl.— Concluding Remarks.
Before closing my paper I think that you will wish to hear
something of the quality and characteristics of our Australian
comrades, with whom it has been my good fortune to serve for the
last three years. I would preface my remarks by saying that I


went to Australia direct from Aldershot, and from an intimate
association, extending over nearly 13 years, with picked British
soldiers, so that my standard of what British troops should be
was such that I was little likely to overrate my new comrades.
The Australian soldier, like his civilian brothers, is tall and
somewhat lanky, as the soubriquet of “ cornstalk ” would indicate.
His limbs are sinewy, but his chest measurement is considerably
less in proportion to his height than with the English soldier.
He is none the less stalwart, hardy, and of excellent presence.
The Australian seems to be endowed by nature with a military
instinct, which must be born in him, since no occasion has yet
arisen in that favoured land calling forth these qualities. This
may be accounted for from the fact that a large section of the
population are descended from military and naval forbears, who
in the early days of the Colony remained and obtained grants of
land after their terms of service had expired. Be that as it may,
this military instinct, added to a quick intelligence improved by a
sound national education, makes it comparatively easy to turn out
excellent soldiers of all arms. Good as the Infantry and Artillery
are, the arm of the country is undoubtedly the Mounted branch.
The Australian is a born horseman. With his long, lean, muscular
thighs he is more at home on a horse than on his feet, and is
never seen to a greater advantage than when mounted and riding
across bush or a difficult country. The mounted troops (Cavalry
and Mounted Rifles) are recruited from the small farmers, the
stockmen, and boundary riders who, living in the saddle, seem to
take naturally to their military duties. Fine horsemen, hardy,
self-reliant, and excellent marksmen, they are the beau ideal of
Mounted Riflemen, and as such are the equal, if not the superior,
of the best that South Africa can boast. A contingent of such
men as served in the Mounted Rifles and Lancer Regiment in
New South Wales during 1893-96 would be worth their weight
in Westralian gold upon any campaign in which British troops
may be engaged. Accustomed to shift for themselves in the
Australian bush, and under the most trying conditions of heat


and cold, tliey would thrive where soldiers unaccustomed to bush
life would die.
It has been said that the weak spot among Australian troops is
discipline. The discipline, evidenced by closed heels, and of “Yes
sir,” “No sir,” may not be exactly that of European armies, but
the real and true discipline, which is the great aim and object
of all drill and military organization, is conspicuous. I am
credited with being a strict disciplinarian, so you will perhaps
credit me when I assure you that throughout the three years I
commanded the Yew South Wales troops I never heard an insub-
ordinate word or gesture, nor among the Militia or Volunteers
can I recall a single instance of drunkenness or misbehaviour in
camp or otherwise.
This fact, however, is well known to all who have had experi-
ence of the command of our comrades of Greater Britain, or of
our own Militia and Volunteers, that the better and more intelli-
gent the soldiers the better and more capable must be the officers.
If Australian soldiers, with their quick intelligence and strong-
individuality, fall into the hands of weak, ignorant, and incapable
officers, not only will indiscipline supervene but the very individu-
ality I speak of will prompt the men themselves to take matters
into their own hands. In this respect Australian soldiers are not
dissimilar from the finest troops with whose deeds history has
made us familiar, whether we take the Pretorian Guard of the
C;esars, the Janissaries of the Caliphs, the Ironsides of Cromwell,
or the Old Guard of Napoleon.
No man, be he a Cromwell or a Napoleon, could drive Australian
troops, but a strong and capable leader, no matter how strict;
could lead an Australian army to emulate—aye, and surpass if
need be—the finest and most heroic deeds recorded in the annals
of British arms.
It may seem superfluous to remind you that the expression
“ British Army ” includes alike our comrades of Greater Britain
as well as all of you now serving Her Majesty at Aldershot. All


soldiers alike swear the same oath of allegiance to Her Gracious
Majesty the Queen, all officers alike hold commissions from the
Queen or by command from her representatives. As all loyal
subjects of the Queen are British, so are we here and our com-
rades in Greater Britain alike British soldiers. The proud deeds
and the noble devotion to duty recorded in the annals of the
British Army are no less the proud heritage of us here in Great
Britain than they are of our comrades in that Greater Britain
beyond the seas. This at least is one tie we all have to bind us
together, and whether in the near future our rulers adopt a co-
operative system of defence for the Empire or no, we at least shall
always have in common with our comrades of Greater Britain this
proud knowledge that we all alike serve one Queen, one People,
and have one common end in view, the defence of the Empire and
the maintenance of our sovereign rights. The following eloquent
words, spoken by one of the prominent members of the Canadian
Legislature before the Canadian Parliament, not only echoed the
sentiments of our Canadian comrades, but may be held to embody
the feeling of the whole of our comrades of Greater Britain :
“We want,” said Mr. Alexander McNeil, “the people of the
world to know that, come what may, in whatever part of the
Empire they may happen to reside, the British people are one
people, animated by one spirit, and determined to stand as one
man in defence of their common rights, and in the maintenance of
their common interests. We desire peace before all. We regard
war with horror, but we are prepared to accept it, with all its
consequences, come from what quarter it may, if it be necessary
to do so, in order to maintain and defend the honour and integrity
of our own empire.”
I wish to thank His Royal Highness, the President, and the
Council of the Military Society, for the opportunity which has
been given me of testifying to the qualities of our Australian
comrades, the more so as in a recent article in a military magazine
unwarranted aspersions have been made upon the discipline, the
D


military spirit, and tire efficiency of the military forces of the
Australian Colonies.
I wish that time allowed of my giving you some small idea of
my personal experiences during my three years’ service in that
great continent. I can only assure you that accustomed as I have
been to command, in the Mounted Infantry, the flower of the
British Infantry, in England and in other parts of the world,
during the ten years immediately preceding my command in New
South Wales, I shall always look back with pride, pleasure, and
profit to my association with my Australian comrades, and shall
bear to my grave the ineffaceable recollection of their excellent
military qualities, their zeal, devotion, and loyalty upon all and
every occasion.
In conclusion, I must apologise for the length of my paper. I
am deeply obliged for the privilege you have accorded me in
allowing me to address the Society upon a subject which is so
near my heart, and I am glad of the opportunity which has been
given me of endeavouring, however inadequately, to show what a
vast element of strength Great Britain possesses in our Comrades
of Greater Britain. If I have succeeded also in assuring you of
the deep feeling of loyalty to Her Majesty and of the genuine
affection for the old country which lie embedded in the hearts of
our Colonial brethren, I shall feel that I have not unjustifiably
trespassed upon your time.


CHAPTER III.
The German and French Military Manoeuvres of 1897.
Some Retrospective Deductions.
A Paper read before the Aldershot Military Society,
November, 1897.
Introductory Remarks.
In the remarks which follow I have not attempted to enter into
the detail of the drill, of the equipment, or of the composition of
either German or French Armies ; nor do I propose to weary you
with a long account of the manoeuvres in detail. Excellent hand-
books are published by the Intelligence Department, with which
I shall assume that you are all more or less conversant.
I purpose, however, to endeavour to convey to you the im-
pressions formed in the mind of an onlooker, who has recently
taken part in British manoeuvres, and who has been concerned in
the instruction and in the leading of British troops—Regulars,
Militia, and Volunteers—in most parts of the Empire, and one,
therefore, who is deeply interested in the methods adopted on the
Continent.
The best plan will be to give you a few short extracts from a
diary, which, together with the comments, was written at the


time, and I will from them draw the deductions which, I venture
to hope, may provoke some interesting discussion now, and may
provide some thoughts worthy of careful reflection hereafter.
It has been my object in preparing this paper and in framing
the deductions to suggest ideas which are of importance not only
to the Regular Army, a relatively small portion only of the
military forces of the Queen, but also to that great mass of troops
in Britain and Greater Britain, which constitutes the real defence
of the British Empire.
Part I.— lllustrative Incidents.
The following accounts are extracted verbatim from a diary
kept at the time, and are intended to illustrate the deductions
which follow :
I. Ceremonial Parade (German). —Review of the Xlth Prussian
Army Corps, etc.
The parade which took place in the neighbourhood of Homburg
consisted of the Xltli Corps (Yon Wittich), comprising 3 Divisions
viz., 21st (Perthes), 22nd (Yon Collas), and 25th (Yon Mueller),
also an improvised Cavalry Division (Yon Bissing), numbering
approximately 30,000 men, and 4,000 cavalry.
‘ The comfort and the convenience of spectators were most care-
fully studied. A large and commodious stand was provided for
which a moderate charge for seats was asked. Illustrated
programmes could be purchased for a very trifling sum, and the
roads and paths leading to the parade ground were clearly
indicated by finger posts, &c.
The parade was apparently drawn up so as to occupy as much
ground as possible, with the probable intention of making the
relatively small numbers of one Army Corps look to the best
advantage. The infantry formation was line of half battalions,
company columns. The mounted troops formed a second line as


with our army ; although the parade and march past did not pre-
sent the brilliancy or the interest as a spectacle which is such a
feature in one of our reviews, yet the sameness of the uniform, its
sombre colour, and the machine-like precision of the troops, lend a
character quite its own to a Prussian review. The arrangements
for the parade and march past were so complete as to make a mis-
take or a possible hitch in the ceremony impossible. For the
march past the troops, cavalry as well as infantry, were formed up
in mass upon the passing line within 200 yards of the saluting point
before commencing. Distances and intervals were marked on the
ground at the point from which the advance took place.
‘As regards the Infantry , their level appearance, and their
soldierly bearing, was very striking; their steadiness on parade, and
the precision with which they handled their arms was also very
remarkable, especially when it is remembered that their training
lasts but two years at the most, and that therefore 50 per cent,
of those before us could have only had one year’s service. The
“ Parade Marsch ” seemed to our unaccustomed eyes to be
theatrical and forced. It is difficult to see its practical value,
except as a steadying element in the attack. Its use is limited
to 100 yards of passing line when marching past, as a salute to a
superior officer, and occasionally at the assault. The Infantry
field officers’ horses appeared to be well broken, were level in
height, and similar in appearance, and there was no galloping
about of over-zealous staff officers, and above all, there were
remarkably few words of command.
‘As regards the Cavalry, the horses appeared to be of a good
stamp and extraordinarily well broken. At the trot and gallop
past, which are, however, much slower than ours, not a horse was
seen to break the pace. All carry lances. The men’s boots
seemed tight and unserviceable. The bit is much lighter than
ours, and the horses therefore not so “bent.” The horse furniture
is devoid of brass or shining metal and consequently looked plain
and sombre. The horses looked to good advantage, as the
manoeuvres had not yet begun. The march past was good,


especially that of the 24th Dragoons (Darmstadt). There
appeared to be no uniformity in the length of the tails of officers’
chargers, the best of which had the look of being Irish hunters.
‘ Artillery . —The batteries were very weak in men and horses,
and there were no wagons. The artillery horses are lighter and
better bred than ours.
1 Staff. —The staff were well turned out, and their horses
appeared to be very level in size, and well broken.
£ Upon the Sunday morning (September sth) following the lie-
view a parade church service took place of the 13th Hussars
(King of Italy’s regiment), the Xlth Jager battalion, three
infantry battalions, and some artillery, in the presence of the
Emperor, Empress, King and Queen of Italy, and a large
assemblage of distinguished personages. The service was simple
and decorous. The music and singing proved somewhat dis-
appointing, as so much has been said of German Military Church
music. The men removed their head-dresses during prayer, at a
signal from the minister, which was effective and reverential, and
seemed to be preferable to our custom of not removing the head-
dress at all.
£ After the service the troops marched past the Imperial party.
The Jager battalion then formed line, and the Emperor, in a short
manly speech, with a clear ringing voice, announced to the
battalion that he had invited the Queen of Italy to be its
Honorary Colonel, and that Her Majesty had done the German
Army the honor to accept. In future the regiment would there-
fore be called by her name. The battalion is one of the oldest and
most distinguished in the Prussian service, and under another
name fought, at one time, in British interests, and was in receipt
of British pay.
£ The Emperor and the Queen of Italy, followed by King
Humbert, then walked down the front and inspected the battalion.
After which the officers were brought forward and introduced to


the Queen, together with the senior under officer. The officers,
thereupon, again fell in, and the battalion presented arms, cheered,
and the ceremony was over.
£ The same care in elaborating every small detail characterized
this simple and effective ceremony as at the review upon the 4th.
Nothing seemed to be left to chance, and every care had been
taken to avoid the possibility even of a blunder on some one’s
part. The spot had been thoughtfully chosen — an open space of
grass in the park with a bank of trees nearly all round, whose
foliage threw up the troops, and this, together with some gleams
of sun, lent a picturesqueness and brilliancy to the scene which
made it especially attractive and impressive.
£ It was remarked that hardly a word of command was heard
throughout the ceremony, and that all, or nearly all, movements
were executed by signal.’
2. Infantry Tactics (German). — The Attack of two Bavarian
Army Corps (six divisions') upon two Army Corps (six divisions),
of Prussians on September 7th, near Hanau, and on September Bth,
near Gross-Karben.
It is no part of my intention to go into the detail of the opera-
tions which took place upon the 6th, 7th and Bth, interesting as
they were, but in order to make the extracts of my diary intel-
ligible it is necessary to add a few words of explanation.
The General Idea had allotted to the Western (or Prussian)
Army the task of covering the exposed flank of an Invading army
moving eastward. The Eastern (or Bavarian) Army had for its
mission to advance, and strike the line of advance of the invader,
and thus delay his further progress. Each army, therefore, as a
portion of still larger armies, was allotted a distinct strategical
role, and every latitude appeared to have been given to each com-
mander as to how to solve the problems given in their respective
Special Ideas.


The Bavarian army, consisting of two complete army corps and
one independent Cavalry division, was on the sth a day’s march
south of Hanau. The Prussian army had one army corps at
Frankfort, a day’s march north of Hanau, and the divisions of the
remaining army corps were distributed at wide intervals north-
east of Frankfort, one division only being within a forced march
of Hanau. The independent Cavalry division covered the left
flank of the army corps at Frankfort.
The Prussian commander upon the night of the sth, at the
commencement of hostilities, elected to take a vigorous offensive,
and with his single army corps at Frankfort to endeavour to
anticipate the Bavarians at Hanau, and on the Kinzig stream.
Covered by the forests surrounding Hanau, he probably hoped
to hold in check the Bavarians, although in superior numbers,
until reinforced by his second army corps which had to be
concentrated.
The operations of the 6th consisted therefore of this endeavour
on the part of the Prussians to reach Hanau, which they failed to
do before the Bavarians, who in their turn pressed back the
weaker force of the Prussians upon the Hochstadt-Windecken
heights. The vigorous offensive of the Bavarian commander did
not seem to have been anticipated by the Prussian staff, and it
would be interesting to know the verdict of the Umpire-in-Chief
ypon his view of the solution of the strategical problem.
The operations of the 7th were consequently the continuation
of the advance of the Bavarians from their positions near Hanau
and on the Kinzig stream against the numerically weaker force of
Prussians opposed to them.
‘Upon the morning of Tuesday, September 7th, we left Hom-
burg, by the kind permission of the German staff, in the Imperial
train at 6TO a.m., reaching Windecken at 7 - 30. Our horses, sent
on by an earlier train, were there waiting for us. The weather of
the previous day had been atrocious, but now showed signs of
clearing.


‘ The outposts of both sides, who, in spite of heavy rain, had
bivouacked all night in the open, had already been in collision, but
the almost impassable character of the land, for the most part
arable, after two days’ heavy rain, necessitated some brief delay
before the commencement of the operations.
‘ The situation of the troops after yesterday’s engagement made
the dispositions of each side in the morning easily intelligible.
The Prussian divisions, four in number, were prepared to hold
their strong but extended defensive position, while the six con-
centrated Bavarian divisions were being gathered for assault.
‘ Going straight for a solitary tree on the ridge which, marked
Wartbaum on the map, is just above Windecken on the south, we
heard distant firing, and having anticipated a determined attack
by the concentrated divisions of the Ist Bavarian army corps upon
Hochstadt, we moved along the ridge to above the village of
Wachenbuchen. We soon saw that the Bavarians were develop-
ing a very strong attack under cover of the Hanau forest, and
this, at 10 a.m., culminated in a frontal attack by the 6th Bavarian
division upon the Corps Artillery and divisional Artillery of the
22nd Prussian division, well posted on the strongly marked
features of the high ground above, and to the east of Hochstadt.
This assault, in the absence of all covering fire of Bavarian Artil-
lery, was properly held by the umpires to be unsuccessful, and the
division was withdrawn to the bottom of the hill, where it
remained to the end of the day. Meanwhile, the Ist division
Bavarians commenced a very strong attack, which culminated in
a judiciously planned assault at 11 a.m. Outnumbering the
defenders, the Bavarians successfully turned the Prussian right,
and after a well sustained and most interesting contest gained the
crest line, and made good their foothold on the ridge.
‘ An attack simultaneous with that of the 6th division had also
been made by the 4th Bavarian division of the 2nd corps upon
the 21 st Prussian division, which was held to be unsuccessful, and
the Prussians, in their turn, following up their success at this
point by a strong counter attack, pressed their advance down the


hill and into Miittelbechen, a village at its foot. This proved a
fatal blunder, as it caused a wide gap in the centre of the Prussian
position, thus leaving it open to the enemy, now pressing eagerly
forward on their right. At this time, from the ridge where we
stood, we were able to see the whole field, and could note the tide
of battle as it ebbed and flowed with something akin to reality.
We had, within sight, some 80,000 men engaged in mimic warfare,
making up a scene not easily forgotten.
‘The Bavarian Ist corps had, by 11-45 a.m., firmly established
itself upon the Hbclistadt heights and again pressed back the
single division opposed to it, until the Prussian right was, with
difficulty, extricated from its perilous position, and retired towards
Gross-Niedenderfelden. Heavy firing had also taken place on the
extreme east of the field, and the attack of the sth, 3rd and part
of the 4th Bavarian divisions of the 2nd corps, covered by the
corps Artillery, had been also successful.
‘ The Prussians, outnumbered, were thus unsuccessful on both
flanks, and fell back as best they might across the Nidder.
‘ The “ Cease fire ” then sounded, and hostilities ended for the
time.
‘ The men were obviously very tired after the long march and
operations of the previous day and with the outpost duty which
followed, and although they were evidently glad to lie down before
being told off to their billets, yet none seemed inclined to take off
their packs, heavy as they are.
• Thus ended a most interesting and instructive day. Under a
bright sun and fresh air the field, still deep in mud, soon began
rapidly to dry. The land is entirely arable and very rich. Im-
mense damage must have been done to such crops as potatoes,
seeded clover, peas, and swedes, and many fields were practically
ruined by being churned up under the gun wheels, and by the
troops marching across and through wet land.
‘ The situation at the end of the day’s operations appeared to be
that the four Prussian divisions had been driven in a north-easterly


direction beyond the Nidder stream, and had been forced into a
defensive position until they should be reinforced by the two
remaining divisions of the Vlllth Corps. The Bavarians, with
all six divisions in line, held the left bank of the Nidder and the
Heights of Hochstadt-Windecken.
‘ It was impossible for onlookers to have had better opportunities
of studying the German system of attack than was presented to
us at this most interesting mimic battle. The preliminary stages
of the attack, like our own, are carried out by the firing and
supporting lines of infantry in single rank at intervals varying
according to circumstances • the reserves were, however, retained
in close order and even in company columns.
‘The Intelligence Department handbook tells us that the German
regulations are framed upon the rule that “ close order is the
basis of all things, and that the principle always in view is to keep
the men in close formation as long as possible, preferring to lose a
few men rather than to let their commands get out of hand a
moment sooner than necessary.” This principle is carried to such
an extent that on many occasions it was observed that companies
were kept in company columns at effective artillery and even at
decisive infantry ranges. The idea is consistently observed that
everything should be sacrificed, even human life, to a steady
cohesive discipline upon the field of battle.
‘ The most extensive latitude is left to individual commanders
as to when or how the final rush, or the prepared assault, for the
enemy’s position, is to take place. When the officer commanding
the company, or it may be a larger unit, considers the decisive
moment has arrived, he brings up his reserve, usually two deep,
with arms at the shoulder, and in close formation.
In extreme cases, and when the moment is considered most
critical, the reserve comes up with the “ Parade Marsch,” drums
beating a cadence, and the colors flying. The reserves having
reached and reinforced the firing line, the whole break into a run
and, with a cheer, endeavour to rush the position. Such is a


German attack. The possibility of a check or a reverse does not
seem to be contemplated. The only solution of the problem of
attack, which appears to be permissible, is “ success.” The old
principle of always retaining in hand a reserve seems, by the
modern tactics of both German and French armies, to be a thing
of the past. Napoleon’s maxim is now held, so it would seem, to
be out of date. In no case was any 3rd line or corps reserve to
be observed.
The assault of the 6th Bavarian division upon the line of guns,
above Hochstadt was very instructive. It was made in a close
formation, or more properly, in a dense mass, 14 or 15 deep, with
drums beating and colors flying. By no human possibility could
such an attack have succeeded, and the troops composing the
assaulting lines and columns would have suffered immense loss.
This was fully recognised by the umpires, who halted the division
for the rest of the day. In this case, with no reserve or 3rd line
upon which to rally, it is difficult to understand what could have
prevented in real war this division from lapsing into a condition
of demoralization if not of actual panic.
‘ The silence and quietness which characterize all movements of
the infantry are most remarkable. Each man seemed to know
his place and what was expected of him, and he required no
“ checking ”by non-commissioned officers. The fixing was entirely
“independent,” and hardly a volley was heard. The incessant
orders and cautions of the section leaders, so characteristic of our
own attacks, was therefore absent.
£ The steady, almost machine-like, discipline insisted upon with
the reserve was perhaps the most striking feature. No effort is
spared by means of mechanical drill and precision to prevent con-
fusion, to minimize skulking, and to make the timid firm in the
critical moments of an assault.
‘ The individual initiative of all,including company commanders,
is evidently fostered and encouraged, with the result that an
attacking line when opposed resolves itself, as a rule, into a suc-


cession of minor tentative assaults, rarely by a brigade, sometimes
by a regiment, more often by a battalion, and still more often by
a company. The actual formation adopted is left to the idea and
caprice of the individual commanders, and the actual assault is
carried out as circumstances seem to indicate.
‘ It is open to question whether such a system of individual,
spasmodic, and unsupported effort is sound against anything but
a weak and indifferently disciplined enemy. The effect upon us
as spectators was at once unpractical and unreal, and certainly
the frequent weak attacks in close formations gave the impression
that a terrible loss of life must be entailed, even if eventual success
were attained.
‘ Officers, senior and junior, were very quiet and businessdike,
everyone seemed to know what he was about and what was wanted
of him. Above all there seemed to be no interference with the
company or regimental officers by staff officers, colonels, ox-
brigadiers.’
Although the infantry tactics upon the Btlx were similar to
those of the 7th, there were incidents which were specially marked,
and which are worthy of consideration.
‘ The morning of the Bth was vei-y misty, and uncertainty as to
the movements of the enemy appeared to be genei’al among the
Pi •ussians. However that may be, certain it was that moving
with the left brigade of the 22nd division, who had been pushed
forward to a more advanced position, we, with them, tumbled
right on the top of a Bavarian brigade occupying the edge of a
wood.
‘ The Divisional Cavalry were hugging the advancing Infantry
columns, and neither scouts nor patrols had been sent forward.
A small advanced guard of Infantry alone was marching in front.
The Bavarians lay still, and not until the Prussians had arrived
within 300 yards did they open fire. It was a complete surprise,
and almost amounted to an ambuscade. The Prussians deployed


with fair rapidity, but a very serious loss would have followed,
and it was interesting to note that the Divisional Artillery at
once backed up their Infantry, and did their best, though at
decisive infantry range, to retrieve the blunder. The Corps
Artillery also came to the rescue by coming into action shortly
afterwards and firing over the heads of their own infantry, and
thus reassured the Prussians again pushed forward.
Leaving this part of the field and moving north, it was found
that the other Brigade of the same Prussian division was in fierce
combat with a large force of Bavarians, who, however, were
unsupported by their Artillery. The Prussians were being rapidly
reinforced, and every effort was being made to gain the high
ground on the right, commanding Gross-Karben and the Nidder
valley.
£ Avery interesting and fluctuating fight took place, of which
the salient features were that the tactics of yesterday were again
repeated; isolated assaults by separate battalions, and even by
single companies, were made in constant and rapid succession.
The extreme precision with which the troops for assault were
massed was again remarked. Two deep with arms at the slope,
with drums beating to mark the time, the reserves were brought
up, and there was something peculiarly impressive in the slow,
methodical, onward movement of a mass of men thus formed,
resistless as a rising tide ! It was, doubtless, very effective in
appearance, and against irresolute, half-trained troops should prove
very demoralizing, but against steady infantry in line, it seemed
a question if such a series of spasmodic efforts in attack could
possibly succeed.
‘ The numerous attacks were, in nearly all cases, followed by
an answering counter-attack- when checked, so that each of the
opposing sides became engaged in a series of minor combats, in
which each in turn took the offensive and defensive, recalling
Napier’s accounts of the battles in the Peninsular in the days of
good old Brown Bess.


‘ It did not appear that either side had any 3rd line troops.
‘ The Prussian Artillery was freely used, and pushed right up
in support of the assaulting columns, and more than once a
battery galloped up to fill a gap in the line, or to restore confidence
to a flickering infantry struggle, at decisive ranges.
£ So earnest and determined were the combatants, so quiet and
businessdike were the whole proceedings, that it was difficult to
believe that the troops were, after all, only engaged in mimic war.
Certain it is, that whether this system of isolated and spasmodic
attack on the part of the Prussians be sound or no, it was most
inspiriting to note how all units in the German Army “ back up ”
each other. There seems to be no better simile than that with
which every Briton is familiar, and to liken the action of the
Germans in this respect to a well organised football team.
Each branch of the service would seem by an impulse to know
when the moment of combined action or support is necessary.
No shouting, no giving of orders is heard, but like a well ordered,
well organized football team there is a general onward rush of
combatants, each intent on his own role, and knowing each one
when and hoAv to assist his neighbour.
‘ It seemed to us that such a system of combined action and of
comradeship form one of the most important characteristics of the
German Army.’
3. Cavalry v. Cavalry (French). Engagement on the 10 th Sep-
tember near Les Bceufs. —In order to make the following incidents
intelligible it is necessary to explain that the French manoeuvres
took place within an area defined by Arras-Cambrai-St. Quentin-
Peronne. The Southern army consisted of one army corps provi-
sionally made up, to which were added two divisions of cavalry
viz., Ist (Paris), and 4th (Sedan) cavalry divisions, numbering
approximately 25,000 infantry, 8,000 cavalry, and 18 batteries.
The Northern army consisted of two entire army corps and also
of two divisions of cavalry, viz., sth (Melun) and a provisional


cavalry division, numbering approximately 50,000 infantry, 8,000
cavalry, and 32 batteries.
The General Idea upon which the two armies operated was
that the Southern army had been directed to cover the investment
of Rheims against a Northern army sent to raise the same. An
imaginary army corps was to arrive in support of the Southern
army upon the last day of the operations.
The Northern army having assembled about Arras on the Bth
September, marched the following day upon Bapaume. The
Southern army having on the same day assembled on the Somme
about Ribemont, advanced towards the same point with a view to
delay the advance. Upon the 9th September the independent
cavalry divisions came into collision south and south-east of
Bapaume, and the advanced infantry followed by forced marches.
The Northern army, whose cavalry divisions had been worsted,
had succeeded in occupying Bapaume however with their advanced
infantry, so that on the following day, the 10tli, the advancing
infantry of both sides came into collision south of Bapaume,
while their flanks were covered by their respective cavalry
divisions, one upon either flank.
Thus it happened that the following incident took place which
may be taken as typical of many similar cavalry engagements
during these manoeuvres.
‘About 11.45 a.m. the division of Northern cavalry protecting
the right flank army was seen about three miles to the westward
to be moving forward, and after a long gallop we arrived just in
time to witness the following interesting proceedings.
‘ The above division turned out to be the provisional cavalry
division and consisted of one brigade of Cuirassiers and one of
Dragoons and Chasseurs, with two horse artillery batteries, and
a company of infantry cyclists. It was therefore weaker than the
opposing division. The Southern cavalry was the Ist Cavalry
Division consisting of three brigades, viz., one of Cuirassiers, one


of Dragoons, and one of Chasseurs, with two Horse Artillery
batteries. This division when we arrived on the scene was not
visible, and their opponents moving cautiously forward appeared
to be as if searching for them. We rode forward to the high
ground east of a small village embedded among trees, called Les
Boeufs, where, hidden by an undulation of the ground, we descried
the Southern Cavalry division drawn up in mass awaiting the
signal to advance. Choosing a very favourable moment the
division moved forward and deployed noiselessly from mass into
line of squadron columns, and then into line. Hot a sound was
heard. Exactly at the right moment, as it appeared to us, they
showed themselves on the crest line, and the centre or Cuirassier
brigade then advancing at a trot formed the Ist line, the
Dragoons, two regiments holding back, formed the 2nd line, and
the Chasseurs, in their turn, the 3rd line.
‘ The Horthern Horse Artillery came promptly into action, and
their Cavalry brigades, in their turn, rapidly and silently deployed.
‘The company of Infantry cyclists with the Northern division
had, in the meantime, materially assisted its Cavalry division by
occupying, before the commencement of the action, the village of
Les Boeufs, directly upon their flank, thus preventing the enemy’s
Horse Artillery from gaining the commanding ground near the
village and at the same time bringing its rifle fire to bear upon
the enemy’s attacking squadrons at effective range.
‘ It was a unique and realistic sight as both sides broke into a
gallop and with a cheer closed upon one another. Within four
or five yards only did the opposing lines halt, and though the pace
was relatively slow to that to which we in our service are accus-
tomed, still the ease and facility with which each side drew up
and halted, silent and in close formation, spoke volumes for the
good training of men and horses.
‘ The Southern cavalry had all the advantages of a surprise, of
ground in charging down' hill, and was also superior in point of
numbers. All units conformed very rapidly, silently, and well to
E


the situation. Each brigade and each regiment had its separate
objective, and every squadron, without shouting and without any
special orders, made for the corresponding unit of the enemy.
£ Nothing could have been better than the smoothness, the
silence and the rapidity with which this manoeuvre took place,
and it was difficult to realise that before us we had nearly 8,000
cavalry and four Horse Artillery batteries, a force equal to the
whole of the British Cavalry now serving in the United Kingdom.
The remarkable ease and noiseless facility with which this large
mass of men and horses were manipulated was little less than
astounding.’
4. Infantry Tactics and Cavalry v. Infantry (French). Infantry
fight near St. Quentin, 12 th September.
‘ Following up the General Idea which has been indicated, the
Northern army upon the 12th September, from its cantonments
north of Vermand, advanced against the Southern army which
had taken up a defensive position upon the high ground south of
the Omignon stream covering St. Quentin. The imaginary army
corps was to reach the left flank of the position later in the day
and reinforce the numerically inferior Southern army.
‘ The Southern line of defence was very extended, and covered
five miles of front with a force of approximately 25,000 men.
Considering that the Southern Army was to be reinforced upon
its left or western flank during the engagement by a second army
corps (imaginary) it seemed as if the position was too much
extended to the east, as indeed the result proved.
£ The long line was weak everywhere and strong nowhere.
This defect became later in the day still more accentuated, as
eventually the right, prolonging its line more and more to the
east, as if with its weaker numbers to outflank the Northern
attack, became altogether severed from the centre and left. The
effect of this mistake as it appeared to us would have proved fatal
if the battle had been a real one.


£ The attacking force, two complete corps d’armee and two
Cavalry divisions, numbered about 60,000 men, and the front
occupied by these was, at the end of the engagement, six miles
and a quarter in length, being about 10,000 men to a mile. The
front of the defence was considerably more at the close of the
fight.
‘ The battle began by the Northern army pressing forward and
driving the Southern advanced troops from the villages lying on
either side of the Omignon stream back upon the main position.
Pursuing their advantage, the Ist Corps on the east pushed
forward through Pontrue and Pontruet, and carried the high
ground commanding those points, thence developing a strong
enveloping flank attack towards Les Trois Sauvages and Gricourt,
so as to turn the right flank of the Southern army, and thus force
them from the Chalons-St. Quentin road.
‘ The attack upon this point was of a most interesting character,
as a definite objective having been fixed, a studied assault took
place which with drums beating and colors flying was carried
through with much spirit. The reserve and 2nd line were brought
up in close order and in step, and with drums beating the cadence.
Neither here nor at any point after the preliminary stage could
we see a 3rd line or corps reserve on either side.
‘ The 2nd Corps meanwhile held the enemy to the high ground
above the stream, but did not advance. The intention of the
Northern General was evidently to cut off the Southern army
from St. Quentin by outflanking and pressing back their enemy’s
right flank. To meet this powerful flanking movement the
Southern Commander extended his right wing more and more to
the east, thus weakening his centre in front of the village of
Fayet, which after a time became completely denuded of troops,
and was eventually pierced with ease by the enemy, about
1.30 p.m.
‘ At about 1 p.m. the Southern Commander, driven as it might
seem to desperation, and as if to temporarily arrest his opponent’s


advance in the centre, two miles away, delivered an infantry
counter-attack up the slope towards Thorigny on the extreme
right of his line.
‘ This inexplicable manoeuvre was met by the Horse Artillery
batteries of the sth Cavalry division with the Northern army,
and the Southern infantry were eventually charged in the most
effective manner by the Cavalry brigades of the same division.
Standing behind the infantry, I have no hesitation in saying that
they would have been annihilated. Nothing could have been
better than the manner in which this cavalry attack was conceived
and carried out. The division forming in a roll of the ground
manoeuvred out of sight of the infantry and were only visible for
the last 200 yards of their charge. Each portion of the division
was flung with remarkable skill and rapidity upon a separate
fragment of the extended infantry without noise, and without any
especial orders. It seemed to be a triumph of successful leading.
‘ The infantry received the attack in an extended line, and
without any attempt to close. The cavalry brigades charged well
home and only pulled up five yards from the opposing lines.
‘ It is no part of my intention to be critical, but this counter-
attack of the Southern army did not appear to be justified on any
apparent grounds. With an inferior force, driven from an
already too extended a position, the commander seemed to have
endeavoured to retrieve the situation by a still further extension,
and by a manifestly impracticable offensive movement which,
under the circumstances, seemed to be nothing less than an act of
desperation.
£ Thus terminated a long day’s operations which had certainly
partaken as nearly of the realities of war as is possible in peace
manosuvres. Lookers-on see the most of the game, and by the
kindness of the French authorities we were especially able to ob-
serve the movements, tactical and strategical, throughout the
day.


‘ The handling of the various brigades, regiments, and battalions
was business-like and quiet.
‘ The infantry appeared to be much overweighted, and were
frequently listless and devoid of energy, and of that elan which is
popularly credited to the French. The handling of the infantry
was good, but the formations looser than with the Germans and
well suited to the ground. The centre of each battalion in attack
was marked by a very small white flag which indicated the centre
of the battalion attack. The firing was mostly by volleys, either
standing or kneeling, little care being taken wdth the aiming or in
adjusting the sight. The section commanders and the men did
not seem to trouble themselves in this particular.
‘ The assaults were far less frequent than in the German army,
and were undertaken by larger bodies, and with a more defined
objective ; but, on the other hand, the assault itself was not made
with that precision, determination, and little regard to loss which
are the charactistics of the German tactics. The leading of the
men is not so silently conducted as with the Germans nor is the
discipline so strict.
‘ In neither army do the men when marching along a road or
manoeuvring keep step.
‘ An entrenching tool did not appear to be carried by the men,
and the only entrenchments which we saw made were thrown up
by the Southern force upon the heights above Vermand, and the
tools were then issued from a regimental transport cart. Little
care or pains seems to be bestowed upon the shape or structure of
the entrenchment, and in this respect differing very much from
the German system.
‘ The handling of the cavalry on the whole seemed excellent,
and the facility with which Cavalry divisions of 4,000 men and
12 guns are handled and moved across undulating and somewhat
broken ground was most remarkable. Not a sound was to be
heard, not even a whistle. The pace on all occasions seemed to be


excellently maintained, and above all there was no increase of
pace, no cantering or galloping to regain distance or change
direction. The whole division worked upon the principle of
“ foliow-my-leader,” the leader being the General of the division,
who was always preceded by a guiding peloton, distant about
three-quarters of a mile in front, with ground scouts at wide
intervals. The division worked invariably in mass, and when
preparing to attack, the flank brigades hung back to allow the
centre brigade, of usually the Cuirassier regiments, to form line
of squadron columns, and thence form line.
‘ The evolutions were invariably carried out without sound of
any kind, and with a remarkable rapidity. The precision, regu-
larity, and mutual understanding of each and every unit in the
Cavalry division could only be begotten of long and continual
practice, and the result of a close acquaintance with one another
individually, and a thorough knowledge of drill and duty
collectively.
‘ The Cuirassier regiments are remarkably well mounted upon
horses of a better type than our heavy cavalry, the Dragoon regi-
ments upon horses about equal to our Hussars, and the Chasseurs
upon horses more like those usually given to Mounted Infantry,
and are small, light, and unequal in quality.
‘ The saddlery is excellent, and better apparently than the
German, as the man sits lower on his horse. The kit is firmly
fixed, and there are no loose hanging articles, such as our nose-
bag and shoe-cases. The horsemanship is good, far better than
it is usual to credit the Trench cavalry with. The officers of the
cavalry appear to be of superior social standing to those of the
infantry, and the discipline seems of a higher order.
‘ The Horse Artillery seemed to be on the whole well handled,
and the fire discipline seemed good. In all cases the Horse
Artillery conformed to, and kept up close with, the Cavalry
divisions. The gun detachments worked nearly always in the
rear ; a great advantage, as it enabled the lead driver to see and


keep his interval with greater ease. The horses are light and not
equal to the German, but the gun is also very light. The service
of the Horse Artillery appears a good one.
£ Cyclists seemed to be much used for orderly duty. A com-
pany also of about 80 men had been especially organized as an
experiment, and equipped with portable bicycles, which when not
required for use were folded in two, and carried on the back of
the soldier. This company was said to have done well, except
upon the days when the weather was exceptionally bad, and the
roads deep. Upon one occasion the Cyclist company, attached as
Mounted Infantry to the Provisional Cavalry Division, did good
service, as has been stated in the account of the operations on the
10th September, by occupying a village and lining the hedges,
thus forming a rallying point and a pivot for their Cavalry divi-
sion in their manoeuvres against their opponents. There were no
signallers ; nor was “ signalling ” ever attempted throughout the
manoeuvres.’
Part II.— Retrospective Deductions.
(a) The paramount importance attached in the German Army to
steady discipline and cohesion at drill, and upon the field of battle,
more especially at the critical moment of attack.
The German system is worth some quiet reflection. In these
days of loose formations, when the exactitude in the details of
drill are giving way to the inculcation of principle alone, it is as
well for us in this connection to remember the fact that the suc-
cesses gained by British infantry in the past, and their reputation
for steady valour upon the field of battle, has been mainly due to
their steadiness on parade, their exactitude in drill, and their
unreasoning discipline on the drill ground, and therefore on the
battlefield, characteristics which have been insisted upon by all
officers conversant with the necessities for the successful leading
of men in war.
The traditions of these great and fundamental principles in


training troops for war, viz., exactitude in drill, precision and
steadiness on parade, and rigid discipline at all times, is still
maintained in many regiments, but it is, undoubtedly, also in
many regiments, being gradually lost sight of. It has especially
survived in Highland regiments, and it is to this that may be
traced the steady unyielding discipline which has won them fresh
renown within the last 15 years, in Afghanistan, in Egypt, and
recently upon the Indian frontier. It has been wisely said that
men are much what a system makes them, and certainly in the
case of oar Highland regiments it is the system of methodical
steadiness on parade and of an unyielding discipline which has
made them what they are, rather than any especial character-
istics of the men themselves, since it is well known that our
Highland regiments are composed of men from all parts of
Great Britain and Ireland. Whatever difference of opinion may
exist among British officers upon these points there is an absolute
unanimity among German officers. Every effort is made at all
times to inculcate that precision and steadiness on parade which
creates an unflinching discipline on the field of battle.
The reflection that arises incidental to this all important point
in the minds of those who have seen much of the battle training
of our regiments of Regulars, of our partially trained Milita
battalions, and of our zealous Volunteers, is whether our system
of training is such as to enforce these principles. Absolute steadi-
ness uihen at attention, and complete silence at all times, are the
primary conditions, and I will ask those present whether these
primary conditions are always fulfilled. Perhaps the most essential
part of the battle training of troops is that which they receive at
target practice, yet it is precisely then when a laxity of discipline,
of dress, and of military order and precision so frequently takes
place, although the importance of the accurate shooting of the in-
dividual soldier on the field of battle is small compared to steady
discipline.
( b) The encouragement given to individual effort on the part of
subordinate infantry commanders in attack and counter-attack.


In considering this question and in following the lead of our
German comrades in this particular, as the tendency undoubtedly
is, we should bear in mind the characteristics of the two nations.
The German with his stolid Teutonic instincts is naturally dis-
inclined to initiative and to individuality. The system of mili-
tary organization, as well as the national instincts, in Germany,
are subversive of these qualities. The German regulations are
therefore careful in their attack instructions and drill to teach a
principle, which otherwise would be ignored. With British troops
the characteristics are entirely different. The difficulty is rather
to restrain and steady a too impetuous initiative in war. It is
far more probable that British subordinate commanders may com-
promise the general plan of attack by an impetuous onslaught
than that, by their slow understanding or lack of initiative, they
will hang back at a critical moment and neglect to seize an
opportune chance.
There are those who think that with the British system of
small companies, with the large proportion of officers, and with
their national characteristics, we should reflect whether too much
latitude may not be given at instructional drill to subordinate
commanders.
(c) The silence and facility with ivhich all arms are manoeuvred
without apparent effort.
The highest test of training, and indeed of discipline, is to drill
and move troops in silence and without words of command. It
means knowledge, and that instinct of mutual confidence and
trust which knowledge begets. The necessity of silence becomes
only plain when large numbers of men are brought together for
manoeuvre or for drill. It then requires no argument to show
that noise breeds confusion, and that confusion must bring
disaster.
It is not fully realized that facility in handling troops, especially
mounted troops, can only be acquired by practice. The art is
not to be taught by books, nor does it come from study, nor is it


a natural instinct. It is given to some to have a greater or a less
facility for acquiring the power of handling troops, but it is prac-
tice, and practice alone, which enables men to lead numbers and
masses of men with the necessary silence and with success. In
this particular the British officers of all arms and of all services
sutler under the greatest disadvantages. Opportunities for ac-
quiring this power are a pressing want. The slightest experience
of our camps of exercise will suffice to bring this fact home to us.
The yearly concentration of troops at camps of instruction for
regimental, brigade, and division training is now recognised as an
urgent necessity, and all earnest soldiers hope that ere long these
opportunities will be general. It has been thought that much
might be done, especially with the cavalry, by having skeleton
squadrons or companies, regiments, or brigades, arranged by men
in single rank or by flags.
It is a fact, which even a casual visit to foreign manoeuvres will
make plain, that German and French officers are our superiors in
the manipulation of masses of men with silence and rapidity.
(and) The mutual reliance and spontaneous co-operation which
exists between all branches of the German Army.
The remarkable development of these valuable qualities in an
army may be traceable to two causes (Ist) that the officers of the
German army form together one class of which the head is the
Kaiser. A deep feeling of “ Kameradschaft ” permeates the
whole body of officers; a sentiment which is quite apart from the
individual esprit de coi'ps of certain regiments. This spirit of
comradeship fosters mutual reliance, and inculcates mutual
esteem ; (2nd) that the system of local military organization
creates such a thorough knowledge of one another, and such an
intimate acquaintance with the powers and the failings of each
and all, that mutual reliance and co-operative action follow as a
matter of course. When the intimate acquaintance, socially
and professionally, of each and all of the officers of a given
military locality is considered, it is not to be wondered at that


they yield one another a ready and spontaneous co-operation upon
the critical occasions, such as the attack or counter-attack.
This spirit of mutual co-operation is curiously noticeable even
to the most casual observer of any German military operation.
In the French army it is undoubtedly less distinguishable, due,
in a measure, perhaps, to the officers being of a more varied
social standing, and in a measure also to the strong part which
politics play in France, and in thus preventing the welding
together of the officers into one body animated by one spirit of
comradeship and by a single-hearted feeling of patriotism.
(e) The increased importance attached in the French Army to
precision and steadiness on parade and at manoeuvres.
One of the features in connection with modern French troops
which most strikes a visitor is the silence and comparative steadi-
ness of the men compared to what was customary before and even
after the 1870 campaign. It is evident that no efforts are spared
to inculcate the same principles of precision and of steadiness
which are so eminently the characteristics of the German army.
Although the French in their efforts to carry out these principles
contrast as strongly in their different methods as they do in their
national characteristics, still the result is that an immense change
has been effected in fire discipline. Nothing shows this more
clearly than the appearance of the infantry upon the line of
march. Marching is carried out with a regularity, silence, and
precision previously unknown. It would appear also that less
latitude is given to subordinate commanders during the attack
than is the case in the German Army, and equal efforts are made
to keep the men in hand to a late stage.
(/) The excellence of the training of the French cavalry and
the careful attention and study which the tactical action of inde-
pendent cavalry divisions has received.
For a British officer who has not seen more than two, or at
most three, weak British cavalry brigades together, the ease,


silence, and rapidity with which the French cavalry divisions are
handled constitute little less than a revelation !
Not only do the men ride well and quietly, hut the ease with
which they are handled and worked by their officers shows that
they are as well trained as horsemen as they are thoroughly well
instructed in their duties as cavalry. Words of command are
rarely given and all drill is, as a rule, done by signal.
Many Englishmen are inclined to under-estimate our neighbours
across the channel as horsemen, and to such, a visit to French
cavalry manoeuvres will be a wholesome lesson.
(g) Detail less studied, in the French Army.
In marked contrast with the close attention to details in orders,
in drill, anol in dress which characterize the German army, the
French leave much to the discretion of individuals and to the
sequence of events. The German soldier seems to live, move, and
have his beings “by order.” With the French it is far less so,
and the individuality of the soldier is more left to its natural
bent, and the soldier therefore becomes far less of a machine.
Part lll.— Some Remarks upon the German and French
Systems.
The principles upon which the military manoeuvres are carried
out seemed to differ in each of the two nations. In the case of
the German Manoeuvres ample scope existed for strategical as well
as for tactical instruction. The greatest latitude was given to all,
including those in highest command, so that opportunity was
open for strategical combinations, which proved to be of a very
interesting kind. On the other hand the French Manoeuvres
were rather a series of tactical exercises evolved from a pre-
arranged strategical operation than an exercise in strategy, the
higher art of war. This seemed to be especially the case with the
Cavalry divisions, whose commanders would appear to have had
instructions for a morning and afternoon tactical engagement.
Moreover, General La France, as Director of Manoeuvres, com-


raanded also the Northern army, for which reasons alone the
manoeuvres could hardly be expected to have much strategical
interest.
I do not propose to attempt the difficult task, even if I were
competent to do so, of drawing comparisons between the German
and French armies or of their military systems. The contrast
between the two is practically the difference between the Teuton
and the Celt. The careful calculation, the methodical organiza-
tion, the dogged persistence of the German, and his deeply rooted
national enthusiasm, endowing the whole military body corporate
with life and energy, is in the sharpest contrast with the quick
intelligence, the natural adaptability, the Celtic impetuosity, and
the undoubted instinct for war of the Frenchman.
History repeats itself, and history tells the tale that victory
more often than not is to the nation of strong individuality, rather
than to the people who have preferred by nature or by force of
circumstances to sink their individuality in the matured organiza-
tion of the mass.
History deals in surprises.
Part IV.
The German and French Armies contrasted (1) with the British
Regular Army , (2) with the Defence Forces of Great Britain and
of the Empire.
The first question that suggests itself in seeing other European
troops is how do they compare with our own, and the comparison
made, as a rule, by our countrymen is the reverse of favourable.
It is usual for us as a race to undervalue what is our own, and
the tendency at the present time is to place small value upon our
military qualities and to evince little respect for our soldiers.
In the case of our regular army at least we have no reason to
fear comparison. If we may believe our eyes and accept statistics
the physique of our regular soldiers is certainly not deficient, if we


except the small proportion of immature lads, and will compare
far more than favourably with the troops of Germany or France.
The smart and soldierly bearing of our men is unquestionably
superior to that of our neighbours on the continent, where time
can be ill spared for that finish and polish which in former years
were considered to be essential in turning out a soldier. As for
officers, Great Britain has good reason to be satisfied. At no
period in our national history has England had so many well-
trained and experienced officers as at the present time. Our
numerous and varied campaigns in all parts of the world, and in
all varieties of climate and of physical conditions, have afforded
opportunities of practical training in war with all its infinite
variety which should make our officers unrivalled.
Our regular troops are certainly not deficient in individual
knowledge or in tactical training so far as small units go. Having
a far larger proportion of officers to men than Continental
armies our troops now receive, thanks to the admirable system of
field training, a personal instruction and direct supervision from
their officers such as no foreign army can emulate. Moreover,
their training extends over seven years in place of two or three.
As regards shooting, more trouble and individual instruction is
bestowed by us upon musketry instruction and upon individual
excellence in shooting than by any other nation, and with better
results.
The comparison, however, between our Regular Army and the
Armies of Germany and France is in reality not a fair one. Euro-
pean Armies as now constituted are parts of the national life, and
Europe can only be regarded as a congeries of armed nations.
Our Regular Army on the other hand is relatively a professional
army, and apart from the national life, whose soldiers undertake
for a term of years more than twice as long as that of the French,
and more than three times as long as that of the Germans, to
serve the state in any part of the world.
A professional soldier should be superior beyond any com-
parison, and when the overpowering responsibility which rests


upon the British regular soldier is considered, his superiority in
all military attributes should be exceptional and unchallenged.
The Regular Army of Great Britain is practically an imperial
constabulary charged with the maintenance of order, and of our
sovereign rights in all parts of our vast possessions.
The obligations laid upon our Regular Army are world-wide,
and the number of troops available are small indeed. It may be
safely assumed that in the event of national complications leading
to such a grave issue as a possible invasion of the United Kingdom,
pressure would have been brought to bear upon us in many parts
of our vast territories. The residue of our Regular Army, after
satisfying the requirements of an increased pressure in India, in
West, East, and South Africa, in Egypt, in the Mediterranean,
and in the West Indies, would be at best an inconsiderable force
to cope with any national emergency.
The real comparison lies between the armies of Germany and of
France, and the Defence Forces of Great Britain and the Empire.
The expression “ Defence Forces ” has been advisedly adopted,
as the military situation which brought into being the idea of
“ Auxiliary Forces ” has long since passed away. Our “ Auxiliary
Forces ” in the United Kingdom are the veritable Defence Force
for our shores, in the same degree as the “ Colonial Forces ” are
the Defence Force for the colony to which each force belongs.
This comparison raises a deep and an abiding feeling of anxiety
and concern. A visit to foreign manoeuvres, a careful study of
their method, and a knowledge of the vast military organization
which control German and French armies, will leave only one
conviction in the mind. However reluctantly, no professional
soldier can form other opinions than that our Defence Forces, our
“Auxiliary Forces,” constituted as they are, would be incapable of
making solid resistance.
The fair excellence or the zeal of individual corps does not con-
stitute an efficient army. An army for war does not consist of a
varied assemblage of battalions, regiments, and batteries, but of a


force complete in all its parts, carefully organized and trained in
peace so as to exercise its role when time of trial comes. Our
Auxiliary Forces do not fulfil these conditions, and to pit gallant
and zealous men against highly organized and carefully trained
national armies would be but to sacrifice brave men and to court
disaster. It is a solemn thought indeed, and one which reflection
makes only more forcible, that the existing condition of the
military defence of the United Kingdom and the Empire is
nothing less than perilous. If there is any sanguine individual
who thinks otherwise I would ask him to go to next year’s
manoeuvres and note for himself the ways, methods, and perfect
system of the German Army.
The Final Deduction.
After considering the magnitude and the excellence of the
German and French armies, the final and most momentous deduc-
tion is the fact that our Defence System is altogether inadequate
to the existing requirements of the United Kingdom and of the
Empire.
Our Army and our existing Military system is practically that
which was adopted during, and immediately after, the Peninsula
War, when our over-sea possessions were far fewer, and when
European nations maintained standing armies of comparatively
small dimensions.
At the present moment we stand, with all the vast obligations
of a world-wide Empire, face to face with Europeans Nations in
arms, whose hosts are reckoned by millions. Surely the time has
arrived, with conditions so vastly altered, for a corresponding
change in our Military System.
You will doubtless recollect that in December last the Duke of
Devonshire, speaking as President of the Defence Committee of
the Empire, laid down with significant emphasis the Naval Policy


of the British Empire.* “ I am asked,” he said, to make as pub-
lic an announcement as can be made of the principles upon which
these plans (of defence) are based, so that not only the Govern-
ment, but every one of our Colonial citizens should know how
much it is that the Government are prepared to undertake in de-
fence of the Colonies, and the duties which in their turn they
think ought to be undertaken by the Colonies themselves. The
maintenance of sea supremacy has been assumed as the basis of the
system of Imperial Defence against attack from the sea. This is the
determining factor in shaping the whole defensive policy of the
Empire.” This “most momentous pronouncement” has satisfied
the whole Empire and constitutes solid groundwork upon which
to maintain naval efficiency.
Up to the present moment, however, a definite Military De-
fence Policy has never been given to the public, but signs are not
wanting that the nation is at last awakening to the necessity of
a declared military policy based upon our military needs.
The primary military requirements may be taken in the
following order : —■
1. A comprehensive and generally accepted Military Policy
based upon the Naval Policy already declared.
2. A definite Scheme of Defence for the whole Empire based
upon the Military Policy.
3. A Military System upon the co-operative plan, which shall
fulfil the conditions of the Scheme of Defence.
The Secretary of State for War has told usf that “ the posses-
sion of a large fleet does not relieve us from the need of an
efficient army,” and that “ no country can be powerful for defence
unless it is powerful for offence also.” This last statement is a
fact well known to all students of war. Our own history tells
us that in the past the true defence of England has been a
F
* Speech by the Duke of Devonshire at the Guildhall, December 3rd, 1896.
t Speech by Lord Lansdowne, November, 13th, 1896, at Bristol.


vigorous offensive. It has always been held that if warlike
operations for defensive purposes are necessary they should be
forced on England’s enemies, and fought out upon other than
English soil.
Accepting the principles of the Secretary of State for War we
shall require—
-Ist. An army of small dimensions but of high excellence for the
maintenance of order, and of our sovereign rights in all parts of
the world.
2nd. A military force for offensive-defensive and defensive
purposes throughout the Empire.
As regards the first we have our existing Regular army, to
which upon the co-operative plan our Colonies and Possessions
might well be invited to contribute men* and money.
As regards the second it does not appear to he generally known
that the whole machinery already exists in the United Kingdom
and in our Colonies for providing the requisite force by a Militia
system. Such a force must, however, be complete in its propor-
tion of three arms and in the administrative departments, and
thus form an army complete in itself for its own role of defence.
In our Australian colonies, in Canada, and in South Africa the
idea is gradually gaining ground that a co-operative system of de-
fence, based upon a Militia Act, will best meet the peculiar
exigencies of this vast Empire of ours. This co-operative system,
in which each portion of the Empire should take its share, would
provide for local defence, and for federal defence if need be, while
the Regular army of Great Britain should be maintained as already
stated for preserving order and our sovereign rights during times
of peace throughout the Empire, and for imparting a stiffening to
our federal militia in time of war. Such a system of co-operative
defence was proposed for and practically accepted by the Aus-
iS The Dominion of Canada and the larger colonies of Australia have at various times
volunteered to furnish troops for co-operation with Imperial troops, and the suggestion to
interchange regiments between England and our Colonies has been most favorably enter-
tained by our Colonial comrades.


tralian colonies, but is now being merged in the greater cause of
general federation. Such is also the system that exists in the
United States of America, while in Switzerland this federal
Militia system has been brought to an especially high degree of
military efficiency.
We are doubtless on the eve of grave discussions in Parliament
and in the press upon Military Reform. None can more devoutly
pray than we soldiers, who are now serving, that these changes,
so imperative to the present safety and to the future maintenance
of our vast Empire, may not be narrowed down to the compara-
tively insignificant limits of the short service in the Regular army,
linked battalions, or the future quarters of the Brigade of Guards.
Having recently had exceptional opportunities of gauging public
opinion in our colonies, I am convinced that the time is at hand
when our colonies with responsible government will be prepared
to consider upon a broad and adequate basis the defence policy of
the future.
I feel that I owe your Royal Highness and the audience an
apology for so long detaining you, but if I have succeeded in pro-
viding some ideas for your further thought and consideration you
will, I trust, for that reason forgive me.




CHAPTER IV.
A Co-operative System for the Defence of
the Empire.
A Paper read before the Royal Colonial Institute,
London, April, 1898.
“ Let it be our task to keep alive the torch of Imperial patriotism, to
keep warm the affection and the confidence of our kinsmen across the seas,
so that in every vicissitude of fortune the British Empire may present an
unbroken front to all her foes, and may carry on even to distant ages the
glorious traditions of the British flag ! ” *
When I accepted the invitation of the Council of the Royal
Colonial Institute to read a paper upon the Defence of the Empire,
I felt that I had undertaken a task which should more appropri-
ately have fallen to the lot of an abler advocate than myself. I
only yielded because unusual opportunities have been given me as
a practical soldier of becoming intimately acquainted with the
instincts and ideas of some of our Colonial comrades in arms.
Existing Position of the Defence Question.
It is now eleven years and a half since the late Right Hon.
Edward Stanhope, then Secretary of State for the Colonies, wrote
* Right Hon. Joseph Chamberlain, Annual Dinner, Royal Colonial Institute, March 31,
1897.


his celebrated minute to the Governors of Colonies under Respon-
sible Government, dated November 25, 1886, in which he stated
that,® “ In the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government the question
which is at once urgent and capable of useful consideration at the
present time is that of organisation for military defence.” In
ready response to the appeal of the Imperial Government contained
in the circular letter above alluded to, representatives from all
our Colonies and Dependencies met for the now almost forgotten
Colonial Conference of 1887. Since then the military defence of
the Empire to which we are all so proud to belong has made little,
if any, practical advance, and the Colonial Conference of 1887 has
not been followed by the developments which were hoped for.
That Conference may, however, be held to be responsible for the
naval agreement between the Imperial Government and the several
governments of the Australian Colonies as regards the joint main-
tenance of a sufficient squadron for naval defence in Australian
waters; which may be considered chiefly of value in that it has
in itself established the principle of co-operative defence. The
Military Defence of the Empire upon any comprehensive scale has
practically remained in statu quo , since it does not appear that
the Colonial Defence Committee has ever been authorised to
include in their labours any broad scheme for the military defence
of the Empire, nor to formulate any joint system of organised
defence in which all portions of Her Majesty’s dominions shall
take their share.
Upon December 3, 1896, you will, however, recollect that the
Duke of Devonshire on the part of the Government announced the
naval policy for the defence of the Empire in perhaps one of the
most momentous statements made by any British statesman of late
years,! as follows:—“Maintenance of sea supremacy has been
assumed as the basis of the system of Imperial defence against
attack by sea. That is the determining factor in shaping the
whole defensive policy of the Empire.” That statement has been
* Proceedings of the Colonial Conference, 1887, presented to Parliament July, 1887.
t Speech of Duke of Devonshire, President of the Defence Committee of the Cabinet at
the Guildhall, December 3, 1896.


received unchallenged by the whole world, and our Colonies resting
on its assurance for the safety of their commercial interests at sea
have ceased to disquiet themselves in, or to tax themselves with,
providing ships of war for their own protection in their own
waters. Several of the Australian Colonies are, for example, dis-
posing of their ships of war, and reducing their local naval forces,
upon which much money has in the past been spent.
There is a generally expressed hope that a military policy may be
evolved from the existing condition of uncertainty, and that upon it
may be erected some solid and satisfactory military scheme of
defence. The Imperial Government have voluntarily undertaken
the naval defence of the whole Empire, and the vast responsi-
bilities involved, unaided except by the relatively insignificant
contribution of the Australian Colonies. The question which
now agitates all who are concerned with the military defence of
our Colonies is, What does the Imperial Government propose to do
as regards the military defences of the Empire ? The Colonies
have been severally warned to arrange for their own defence, and in
their several ways have endeavoured to do so. The Colonial
Defence Committee have in their turn given valuable advice, and
brought much professional acumen to bear upon local Colonial
difficulties, and there the subject is left. Surely the time has
arrived when the Colonies should know whether they are to
receive military protection from the Mother Country in time of
war or threatened invasion, and whether they in their turn are to
bear a share in the military defence of that Empire of which they
form a part, and in whose existence they live and move and have
their being.
Vast sums of money are yearly spent in a piece-meal defence
of the various portions of the Empire, and from reasons of self-
interest, expediency, and economy, it is surely not too much to
urge that the time has arrived when all portions of Her Majesty’s
dominions, with their enormous military and other resources,
should be prepared to co-operate for mutual defence, and should
decide to accept one general policy—elastic it may be —upon


which they are to maintain their independence as a great
people.
This is a question which is pregnant with the whole future
existence of the Empire. It is not long since that the Secretary
of State for War defined our military reqirements.* Firstly, he
stated, “ a sufficient garrison for the defence of these islands is
required,” and secondly, “ two army corps for offensive purposes
outside the British Isles.” Is it to be supposed that two army
corps numbering 60,000 men, or even three, are to be the most
that the Mother Country is prepared to place at the disposal
of her Colonial children, or to place in the field for offensive-
defensive operations in defence of the Empire when the hour of
trial comes 1 It may safely be asserted that the true instinct of
British feeling throughout the Empire would, in the hour of trial,
repudiate such a totally inadequate limit to the military resources
available. The feeling of uncertainty which is caused by such a
limit being placed to the military resources of the Mother Country
is alone a sufficient indication of the necessity for some clear and
defined military policy, based upon the naval policy which has
proved so reassuring to the interests of peace, and of future
commercial development.
The absence of an officially declared military policy makes it
difficult to deal with the subject which is now under your con-
sideration ; and it is only possible to do so by assuming such
facts as are warranted by the political considerations, and
by the military exigencies of a defensive system.
Beqtjirements of a British Military Policy.
The requirements of our British military policy may be taken
to be as follows :
I. Our Imperial Liabilities. —(a) The maintenance of our
Sovereign rights in all parts of our world-wide dominions, (b)
* Speech of the Marquis of Lansdowne, Secretary of State for War, Edinburgh, December
17, 1897.


The suppression of disorder, (c) The conduct of those military
obligations necessitated from time to time by the natural expan-
sion of our trade and commercial relations.
The obligations referred to under (a) and (c) may be best under-
stood by the following extract : “ The policy of Her Majesty’s
Government is not the acquisition of new territory,” said the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, on January 18th last, “but
the maintenance of free markets even where that involves the
acquisition of new territory, and the taking up of a very firm atti-
tude in regard to any attempt which may be made to deprive us
of a territory which we already possess.”
11. The Defence of the Empire as a whole. —lt will be readily
conceded by all observers of recent events in our history that a
mutual, though unwritten, understanding exists between all por-
tions of the Queen’s dominions. The ties of sentiment and of
self-interest alike render the maintenance of the Empire necessary
for the commercial and political development of each and all. A
study of history, especially that of our own country, demonstrates
most clearly that the means by which this can best be effected is
by an “ offensive-defensive ” system of defence.
111. The separate Defence of each portion of the Empire ; in
other words, the local defence of each individual part of the
Queen’s dominions.
If we assume the foregoing as the basis of our requirements it
will be seen that for the first we have our regular army. It is
frequently and too readily assumed that our regular army with its
attendant reserve is available for the defence of the United King-
dom as well as for the defence of our Colonies. This assumption
is a misleading one, and has been ably exposed, among others, by
a recent writer in the Times (“Reform,” December 28, 1897).
The regular army should be more properly regarded as an Imperial
constabulary, and cannot be reckoned upon as the true factor in
the defence of the Empire comprised under the two last heads.


The Imperial regular army consists, in peace, of 211,867 men
and 718 guns, which in war will, by the addition of the reserves,
be made up to 292,867 men.
Of these numbers we have, in peace, as follows :
Peace
India and her dependencies ...... 75,000
Mediterranean Carrisons ..... . 10,000
Egypt 4,000
South Africa, &c. ........ 3,000
West Africa .........
West Indies, Bermuda and Halifax .... 5,000
Straits Settlements, &e. ...... 3,000
Home Service ........ 111,000
The general feeling of. insecurity and of foreign pressure con-
sequent upon the approach of such a dire event as a great national
emergency would entail the strengthening of all our garrisons
beyond the limits of the United Kingdom. It may be safely
assumed that we should have besides, upon our hands, several
minor wars and complications instigated, it may be, by our more
powerful enemies, which would involve military operations in
various parts of the vulnerable portions of our Empire. It may
be accepted, then, as certain that there would be a portion only
of the regular army left available at home.
In face of the varied character of the probable demands for
reinforcements this residuum could hardly be expected to form
any complete military unit, such, for example, as the two army
corps referred to. A dislocation of any system, therefore, which
relies upon the Imperial army for an effective defence of the
United Kingdom, much less of the Empire, must be the inevitable
result. It would at most constitute the much needed stiffening
to a defence force less carefully trained for war. It should be
recollected that the removal of the three available army corps
from the shores of the United Kingdom, for any offensive-defensive
purposes beyond the sea, would practically leave the existing
auxiliary forces of Great Britain without field artillery, without
cavalry, and without administrative departments.


We, therefore, arrive at the conclusion that if the integrity of
the Empire is to be maintained by a military force proportionate
to such weighty possibilities, it must be by some military system
which shall be capable of fulfilling the conditions of the second
heading.
This can only be insured by having the proportions of troops
required for offensive - defensive operations so organised and
equipped that they can be utilised as an army in the field.
It is useless, under the conditions of Parliamentary government,
to expect the establishment of an ideal system, and it becomes
imperative to adapt ways to means in proposing any system which
is likely to find favour. In this particular case, however, there is
in existence the Militia Act of 1882, which provides for the exact
force which is required to meet the circumstances. This Act has,
moreover, been adopted in principle by most of our Colonies, and
formed the basis of the Federal Defence Scheme recently framed
for our Australian Colonies.
The Militia Act of 1882 of the United Kingdom provides for
the raising and maintenance of certain quotas of militia which
shall be found by each county. These quotas can, if need arise, be
enforced by ballot. The system, therefore, for providing a
military defence force which shall answer our requirements is in
existence, and we have merely to consider whether its developments
may not be equally easy of creation.
In the United Kingdom the militia force consists of a certain
number of battalions of infantry, a few engineers, and a few
artillery. It is in no military sense an army or complete military
organisation. A military force which does not include the pro-
portion of all arms, viz., infantry, artillery, cavalry and the
administrative departments requisite, is valueless for any modern
military operations.
The primary condition is, therefore, that the militia of Great
Britain and Ireland shall become a distinct and complete military
force charged with the defence primarily of the United Kingdom,


and secondly, for offensive-defensive operations in the co-operative
defence of the Empire. The co-operative system of defence now
advocated will be best illustrated by stating the plan adopted in
framing the Federal Defence Scheme of the Australian Colonies.
The Australian Federal Defence Scheme a Type of
Co-operative Defence.
The principles were laid down, firstly, that each of the six
Colonies should guarantee the “passive defence ” of its own cities,
towns, and harbours of commercial importance; and, secondly,
that the whole of the Colonies should be so organised as to jointly
guarantee the “ active defence ” of any portion of Australian or
Tasmanian soil, by what may be called offensive-defensive military
operations. It will thus be seen that the second and third
requirements which were shown to be necessary for a British
military policy have formed the basis of the Australian Scheme,
though in this case limited only to'Australian waters.
In Australia, as in the United Kingdom, the troops consist of
regulars, militia, and volunteers. To the volunteers, or those
serving under the Volunteer Act of 1859, the Federal Scheme
assigned the “passive defence,” while to the militia was assigned
the “active defence,” which thus formed the federal force for
active operations. It was arranged that each Colony in propor-
tion to its population should provide a military contingent, and
that such contingent should include the proportionate share of a
force of all arms, with the requisite administrative departments.
The federal force thus created from the existing military forces
in Australia comprised a complete mounted brigade of 1,738 men,
and six guns on peace footing, which should be increased to 2,773
men in war, and an infantry division of 4,474 men, with 629
divisional troops, and eighteen guns on peace footing, increased in
war to 7,530 and 1,084, making in all
Peace War Guns
Mounted brigade .... 1,738 2,773 6
Infantry Division .... 4,474 7,530
Divisional Troops .... 629 1,084 18
Federal Force, Grand Total . . 6,841 11,387 24


To each Colony was allotted a proportionate share of all arms
and of the administrative departments, so that the federal force
of any single Colony might take the field, if necessary, complete
all its requirements of personnel. (See Appendix B).
In order to utilise the existing military forces in the manner
described, a Federal Defence Agreement was drawn up, based
upon the Militia Act of the Imperial Parliament, which, with
some minor modifications, had already been in existence in four
out of the six Colonies. This Defence Agreement contained all
the provisions necessary to be included in the Bill which would
be required to be passed by each Colony; in other words, the
Militia Bill of 1882 was enlarged to meet the fresh requirements.
It will be observed, therefore, that it was not attempted to
create anything fresh, but rather to utilise what was already in
existence. It was intended only to bring the whole of the atomic
and independent military systems of the six Colonies concerned
into one generally accepted plan.
The most serious difficulty which had to be dealt with by the
Federal Defence Agreement, was the creation of a central control-
ling authority. The plan adopted was the formation of a Council
of Australian Federal Defence, whose powers in peace, and whose
jurisdiction in times of war, were carefully laid down.
The Australian Federal Defence Scheme included the follow-
ing :
1. A General Scheme of Defence.
2. A Federal Defence Agreement, including the powers of the
Council of Australian Federal Defence.
3. Allotment of Federal Troops on basis of population.
4. Tables showing the establishment and general distribution of
the Federal Military Force among the several Colonies.
Military students will aver with reason that the system pro-
posed for Australia is not new, that a similar system exists in the


United States of America, and that we have in Switzerland at the
present moment the highest and best form of a Federal Militia
System for offensive-defensive military operations.
We shall, however, be confronted by an obvious difficulty, if the
plan proposed for the Australian Colonies be adapted to the
requirements of the Empire, since the case of Great Britain and
her Colonies presents an abnormal feature in regard to the control
of the Federal Defence Force proposed to be created out of the
various elements which compose the British Empire. History
furnishes us with no precedent. In the case of the old Greek
Republics, we find no exact parallel. In the Republics of Rome
and Carthage it was the Mother State which exacted fealty from
her offspring, her Colonial offshoots, and in each case the parent
State stood alone in influence and predominance. In the case of
the Swiss Republic and of the great Republic of the United States
of America, one central government accepts and engrosses all
central or federal control of the federal military resources of the
combined States. It may be taken for granted that the only plan
of co-operative defence which would be acceptable to Great Britain
and to her Colonies would be one based upon a representative
system. The politicial conditions of British Colonies existing
prior to 1776, based upon the ancient precedent created by the
Greeks and by the Romans in the treatment of Colonies by the
parent state, can never, and will never, be attempted again.
The solution, therefore, of this difficulty must lie in some system
of offensive-defensive alliance, or Federal Agreement, which shall
include the creation of a central controlling council, having, in
peace, the limited administrative powers necessary for the
organisation and maintenance of the federal force agreed upon,
and, in war, its control and distribution.
History affords endless examples of such alliances during times
of war and national upheaval ; among which may be cited many
where racial, religious and lingual differences might on first con-
sideration have rendered such alliances necessarily abortive.


This did not prove to be the case in Wellington’s army of the
Peninsula, where British, Spanish, and Portuguese troops fought
side by side. It was not the case in the Cidmea when French,
British, Turks, and Sardinians formed common cause against the
power of Bussia.
Surely in the case where the sentiment of race, of religion, of
language, of political inclinations are common to all, it should not
be difficult to so plan a central controlling authority which would
make possible a system of co-operative defence, such as that
framed in the Australian Federal Defence Scheme.
The Comparative System of Defence for the Empire.
A Co-operative System of Defence for the Empire would prob-
ably follow upon the lines of the Federal Scheme proposed for
Australia. These fundamental principles would then be as fol-
lows :
I. A General Scheme of Defence.
11. A Co-operative Defence Agreement, including the powers
of a Council of Defence.
111. An Allotment of Federal troops on basis of population.
I. A General Scheme of Defence. Its guiding principles may
be taken to be :
(a) That mutual defence be guaranteed by one and all parts
alike of the Empire :
(b) That British supremacy at sea be maintained by the Imperial
Government :
(c) That the true defence of the Empire may best be served by
a vigorous offensive—that hostilities should be forced upon the
enemies of the British Empire, and fought out upon other than
British soil.
11. A Co-operative Defence Agreement, including the powers
of a Council of Defence.


Following the lines of the agreement explained above, Great
Britain and her Colonies would undertake upon given terms to
mutually combine for defence and for such offensive-defensive
operations as might be necessitated for the effective defence and
maintenance of the Empire. Great Britain would as at present
undertake with her regular army to maintain the sovereign rights
of Empire, the suppression of disorder, and the conduct of those
minor military operations which are a consequence upon our con-
tinually increasing commercial development.
It has been shown how the only serious difficulty of creating a
central controlling authority might be met, and how the difficulties
attending the institution of a Council of Defence need not be
insupei’able if met in the spirit of toleration, of mutual esteem,
and of that national feeling so conspicuously shown upon all
occasions whenever the antagonistic bearing of foreign powers has
evoked it.
111. An Allotment of Federal troops. An allotment of troops
for federal purposes of defence should be framed on basis of
population. These militia troops, if organised upon the principle
proposed for Australia, would be complete in all respects, with
their proportion of the three arms and of the necessary adminis-
trative departments, and would thus be ready to take the field.
The troops for purely local or passive defence in the United
Kingdom would include, as in the case of Australia, all the
volunteers and the yeomanry of G reat Britain. It has been
urged recently by a leading journal * that the volunteers of
Great Britain are not suited by their training, organisation, or
discipline to face the trained soldiers of the Continent. Men in
a mass are much what a system makes them, and a sound military
organisation which shall effectively deal with the volunteer forces
of Great Britain has yet to be devised. The volunteer force
sprang into existence at the time of a national crisis, and to meet
a sudden emergency ; as at present constituted, it cannot be
* Leading article, Morning Post, December 23, 1897.


considered as an altogether satisfactory element in the organised
defence of Great Britain and the Empire.
As regards the militia forces of the United Kingdom, I have
already shown the changes that will be required; they are those
necessitated by a re-organisation of that force into a militia army,
thus forming a complete and effective military unit. The change
advocated need present no serious difficulty, and could be effected
with the existing numbers and at little additional cost. The
difficulties would mainly consist in the creation of the proportions
of the three arms, and of the necessary administrative depart-
ments. Three at least of the Australian Colonies have made
efforts towards forming their militia force into complete military
units, notably the Colony of New South Wales. In this respect
they have followed closely upon the militia system of the Swiss
Federal Militia, and no reason whatever exists to prevent the
militia of Great Britain also from becoming as complete and as
effective an organisation as that of Switzerland.
In Great Britain we may rest assured that no Militia system
can be satisfactory or complete which is dependent for its recruits
and for its maintenance upon a centralised system at the War
Office. A primary factor is for the county system of maintaining
the militia to be enforced, and for those counties which are unable
or unwilling to find the necessary quota of their militia to be
compelled to resort to the ballot. It may be accepted that the
fear alone of the enforcement of the ballot for militia will in itself
be sufficient to cause the county and local authorities to exert
themselves into providing the requisite troops.
The late Sir Henry Parkes correctly expressed the opinion of
all thinking men in Australia when, in the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales, in the course of a memorable speech on
November 13, 1894, he said “Unless our military forces are
federated, it would be better to abolish them. . . . The first
question, and one of the most prominent in men’s minds, is that
of military defence.”
G


The present may rightly be regarded as a favourable moment
for preparing in peace a co-operative system of defence upon
broad and comprehensive lines, which shall not only prove effec-
tive but cheap. Effective in that the Empire would be provided
with one general system of defence, capable of indefinite expansion,
which would give a feeling of security of untold value to our
national and commercial institutions ; cheap in that vast sums
now expended by Great Britain and her Colonies upon no con-
nected plan would be expended upon an organisation which would
be sound and effective.
An apology is due to the audience for the imperfect manner in
which I have presented this vexed question of British Defence to
your consideration. It is a subject of regret that a complete draft
of the Australian Federal Defence Scheme has never been pub-
lished, as it would in itself have provided an example and a
complete illustration of the co-operative system, which it has been
the intention of the present paper to explain. For reasons which
are doubtless considered sound, the whole question of Australian
Federal Defence has been dealt with confidentially, and I have
therefore been unable to state more than has already transpired
in the Australian Press.
You will allow me to remind you of the striking peroration to
the speech of the First Lord of the Admiralty upon March 10
last, when submitting the Naval Estimates for 1898-99 to Parlia-
ment * : “ The nation,” he concluded by saying in allusion to the
increased naval armaments, “ may look forward with ever-increas-
ing confidence to this prospect: that if there be peace, which God
grant, it may be peace crowned with honour ; and if there be war,
which God forbid, it may be war crowned with victory.”
It will be universally agreed that a similarly reassuring state-
ment as regards the Military Defence of the Empire is only
possible by adopting the dictufn of the Secretary of State for the
* Speech of the Right Hon. G. J. Goschen, First Lord of the Admiralty. House of
Commons, March 10, 1898.


Colonies, that * “ the Sons of Britain throughout the world shall
stand shoulder to shoulder to defend our mutual interests and our
common rights.”
You will, I trust, forgive me if I have wearied you, but you
will hold me justified if, by explaining a system which has been
officially recognised as sound, I have even in a small degree shown
how the words of the Secretary of State for the Colonies may be
brought into practice, and how the varied streams of our National
and Colonial existence may be conducted into one channel, where
their mingled waters can flow on together with regenerating
strength and grandeur to the end of time.
* Speech of the Right Hon. J. Chamberlain, Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Liverpool, January 18, 1898.
APPENDIX A.
The Australian Federal Defence Scheme was prepared and submitted by
the Government of New South Wales, upon the initiation of the Premier
(Right Hon. G. H. Reid), to a Conference of the Military Commandants
of the whole of the Colonies of Australia and Tasmania in October 1894,
and after certain unimportant alterations was adopted. A meeting of the
Premiers of all the Australian Colonies was then assembled at Hobart in
January 1895, by whom this scheme was considered and favourably enter-
tained. A further Conference of Commandants upon the initiation of New
South Wales took place in March 1896, which, with some modifications,
agreed to the provisions of the Federal Defence Agreement proposed by
New South Wales, together with all the detailed Tables of Federal Mili-
tary Establishments, &c. A second meeting of the Premiers of the Aus-
tralian Colonies followed, when, though most favourably entertaining its
provisions, it was generally agreed that the Defence questions should be
merged in the greater political move of Federation generally.
Indirectly, therefore, the Australian Federal Defence Scheme has been
the principal agency in resuscitating the question of Australian Federation
originated by the late Sir Henry Parkes in 1891.


APPENDIX B.
The military organisation for the Australian Federal Defence Scheme,
was based upon the following principles : To provide two large complete
units, each capable of action independently or in unison with the other,
viz., a Mounted Brigade and an Infantry Division complete. In sub-
mitting these establishments it was sought to make of these units a
complete military organisation—complete, not only in fighting men but
in all its departments. It has further been laid down as a principle
that the quota of troops found by each Colony should bring with it the
proportion of the departments, so that should it be considered neces-
sary for federal purposes to detach the troops provided under this agree-
ment by any one single Colony for the defence of a strategical point on its
own shores, or within its own area, it would be done without calling for
assistance from the other Colonies for thosb elements of departmental troops
without which they cannot exist as a military factor. It might possibly be
that Queensland would be requested to place half a battalion of infantry in
garrison at Port Darwin. That half battalion would take with it its propor-
tion of Army Service Corps, Bearer Company, and Field Hospital, &c.,
making therefore a complete military unit furnished by Queensland.
There are objections to departmental troops being made up by detachments
coming from different Colonies, but the disadvantages are more than
counterbalanced by the advantages. Departmental service is not popular,
and it is difficult to train and organise the departments in time of
peace. Further, it is fair that each Colony should bear its proportion of
departmental troops, and the allotment in this scheme bears the same
proportion to the federal force that the basis of population bears to the
whole federal force of Australia.
lIARSTON, PARTRIDGE AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.




