









THE PROJECTED
SUB-MARINE TELEGRAPH CABLE
TO
INDIA AND AUSTRALIA
Considered
AS BEING
THE MOST DIRECT, EXPEDITIOUS, AND SECURE LINE OF
COMMUNICATION,
Free from end to end of all foreign Political Complications,
AND
COMPARED WITH EXISTING LAND LINES.
BY
H. A. L.
“THE OLD SHEKARRY,”
AUTHOR OF "THE HUNTING GROUNDS ON THE OLD WORLD;" “THE CAMP FIRR;” “THE
FOBEST AND THE FIELD; “WRINKLES FOR TRAVELLERS AND SPORTSMEN;"
ETC., ETC.
LONDON:
A. H. BAILY & Co., CORNHILL. E. C.
1869.




PREFACE.
It may ho considered presumptuous in a simple
traveller, explorer, and sportsman, like myself,
throwing down the gauntlet—as I have done in
the following pages—and entering the lists of
controversy against an unknown number of ex-
perienced antagonists hacked up hy official
influence, and aided by mercenaries fighting for
their bread and salt; but, notwithstanding the
might arrayed against me, I am not disheartened or
abashed, feeling convinced that the cause I maintain
is the right one, and that its ultimate success is
only a question of time.
“ The Avise and active conquer difficulties
By daring to attempt them. Sloth and folly
Shiver and shrink at sight of toil and hazard,
And make the’ impossibility they feat',”
Westminster Palace Hotel,
January , 18G9.




THE PROJECTED
SUB-MARINE TELEGRAPH,
COMPARED WITH
EXISTING LAND LINES.
The object of this Pamphlet is to draw attention to
the absolute necessity that now exists of establish-
ing a direct sub-merged telegraphic communication free
from all foreign political complications; that from end
to end shall he in English hands, and under the immediate
control of the Government from Falmouth via Gibraltar
and Malta to Alexandria, from thence by land to
Suez, and again by Sub-marine Cable by Perim and
Galle, to Port Essington, in Australia.
The magnitude of our commercial relations with
Egypt, India, Australia, and China, ought long ago
to have been considered of sufficient national import-
ance for the Government to have taken energetic
action to ensure the efficient organization of the
most expeditious and certain telegraphic communi-
cation between the mother country and her richest
possessions.
Why this has not already been effected it is boot


less to question; but that it should be done, with
the least possible delay, I shall endeavour to show.
The advantages the proposed sub-marine communi-
cation offers over the existing land lines should be
considered seriatim under every aspect, and the
arguments in its favour will then appear to be un-
questionable. The matter has to be looked upon
scientifically, politically, and financially; and the
advantages that the Foreign and Colonial Office, the
War Office, and Admiralty would gain, with the
benefits that the mercantile world would derive,
should all be weighed.
THE INEFFICIENCY OF EXISTING LAND
LINES.
Two years ago, in consequence of a Memorial,
signed by many of the leading houses in the City
of London, being addressed to Sir Stafford
Northcote, a Select Committee in the House of
Commons was appointed to inquire into the question
of telegraphic communication with the East, and the
substance of their report, after minute and careful
investigation, was —“ that the system was badly arranged,
(< imperfect in its organization , ineifieicnt in its uoi Inny,
“ and liable at any time to interruption from political


“ and other causes, entirely beyond the control of the
“ British Government in point of fact, that, to a
great extent, it was at the mercy in Asia of a set
of unimprovable barbarians.
A report like this, from such high and independent
authority, disclosing a state of things actually humi-
liating to our national enterprize, ought, one would
think, to have caused an immediate reform and
change for the better, hut unfortunately this has
not been the case, and all the had elements in the
system, as they then existed, have remained in full
force up to the present time.
A second Memorial, signed by some of the most
influential Merchants in the City of London, was
handed in to the Secretary of State for India by
Mr. E. W. Crawford, M.P., on the 18th of April,
1868, in which the attention of H. M. Government
was drawn to the fact, patent to all, “ that the ex-
“ is tiny telegraphic communication until the East has
“ been proved by the experience of three years work-
“ ing to be altogether inadequate to the requirements
“ of the age, and that, notwithstanding the Govern-
“ ment of India has made great efforts and spent
“ large sums to improve the line, the delays, uncer-
“ tainty, inaccuracy, and irregularity in the transmission
“ of messages continue as great as when the line was
“ first opened.”
After a second expose of such a miserable state
of things, the mercantile community had hopes that


Her Majesty’s Government would have taken ener-
getic action, and either itself constructed and worked
a sub-merged line, or at any rate assisted private
enterprize to carry out an undertaking of such great
national importance.
The year 1868 has passed away into the domain
of history and the region of the past, and we have
entered into a new year; still nothing has been
done; and unless some energetic Members of Par-
liament set their shoulders to the wheel, nothing will
be done, until perchance another outbreak in India,
or a serious complication of the Eastern question,
shall awake “ the powers that be ” from their lethar-
gic inaction, which is as culpable as short-sighted.
THE DELAYS, STOPPAGES, INSECURITY,
LOSS OF TIME, MISTAKES, LIABILITY OF
INTERRUPTION, AND EXCESSIVE COST OF
THE EXISTING LAND LINES.
The present system of the existing land lines of
telegraphic communication is unsound from begin-
ning to end, and its defaults and failings are such that
they cannot he ameliorated or overcome. They may be
thus enumerated:—


1. Delays and stoppages are of constant occur-
rence from circumstances that cannot be avoided.
One of the principal causes of the irregularity with
which messages are delivered may very justly be
attributed to the inefficiency and apathy of the
foreign employes. For instance, the character and
habits of the Turk are neither methodical nor business
like, and of all nationalities he is about the most
unsuitable for a telegraphic official. He smokes his
pipe and takes his kieff (a dreamy state of listless
idleness when the external world is forgotten) for
hour after hour, thoroughly indifferent to all crea-
tion, and utterly heedless of an accumulation of
telegraphic messages, which are filed one after ano-
ther as they arrive ; and when at last, by some
happy incident, he bethinks him of their dispatch,
he sends them off in precisely the reverse order from
that in which they came, viz., the last first and the
first last. Even then the odds are, that he bungles
in two out of three of them.
2. There is no feeling of security that a message
will be delivered safely, and uncertainty begets
anxiety when large issues are at stake, both in the
political and commercial world.
3. The time occupied in the transmission of a
message is excessive. The average time of a dis-
patch en route by Turkey has been shown by Lieut.-


Col. Goldsmid, Chief Director of the Indo-European
Telegraph, to he 8 days and 11 hours ; via Russia,
8 days and 17 hours.
Loss of time is to diplomacy loss of opportunity,
to soldiers or sailors loss of prestige, men, and
ships, and to the mercantile community loss of
money and credit. All classes are equally affected
by the dilatory method of the present system, for
there is scarcely a family in England that has not
one or more of its members in whose welfare they
feel a deep interest in India or Australia, therefore
the long delays in the transmission of messages to
their kindred is one that concerns every circle of
society
Without dwelling upon the contingency of war
and its attendant dangers to our Eastern Empire,
the connexion, associations, and interests of the
Parent State and its Colonies would be drawn
closer together, and the administration of the
Government much more easily carried on, were the
communication between them direct and immediate.
By the Sub-merged Cable, if it were necessary,
Government could, by a little systematic arrangement,
have the wires connected and the communication car-
ried through direct from London to Calcutta, so that
the Secretary of State for India could telegraph to the
Governor-General, and receive his answer back, in a
less number of minutes than it now often requires
days; moreover the messages would be delivered


without danger of being divulged, and word for word
as they were sent, no time being lost, or mistakes
made, by repeated translations and retranslations,
the whole line being in English hands.
4. On the arrival of a dispatch by the existing
land lines, the Queen’s English is generally so
frightfully mangled by translation and retranslation
into half a dozen different languages by careless
and inefficient foreign officials, that its real meaning
is rarely preserved, and, as the Saturday Review very
truly says, “ It is often as hard to arrive at the real
meaning of a telegram as to answer an ingenious
conundrum.”
5. The present land lines are entirely dependent
upon the goodwill of all foreign nations, and
circumstances might arise that would entirely cut off
our communications with the East at a critical time
when rapid communication is most required by the
War Office and political departments.
6. The cost of transmitting a dispatch is exces-
sive, and this is not likely to be sensibly diminished,
as the expenses of working the existing land lines
must always be very heavy compared with that of a
Sub-marine Cable, for the following reasons :
I. A great staff of especially educated, intelligent
officials, able to translate messages, must


always be kept up, who receive high pay,
and, in some districts the line passes
through, have to be rationed at great ex-
pense.
11. Considerable Royalties have to be paid to
foreign Powers, amounting to about ten
shillings per message, which expense would
be saved by the proposed sub-merged line.
111. The land line passes through regions inhab-
ited by wild nomadic tribes, to whom it is
necessary to pay a subsidy or black mail,
in order to induce them not to injure the
wire, or plunder and carry off the officials.
THE DIFFICULTIES OF MAINTAINING LAND
LINES PASSING THROUGH ASIA IN WORK-
ING ORDER.
The difficulties of maintaining the communication
by land lines in semi-barbarous regions, and their
constant liability to accident, have lately been
brought forward by Sir James Anderson, in The
Times. They may be thus enumerated: —
I.—Lightning bores holes in the insulators, and
weakens the electric power.


2. —Older wires break, and come in contact with
good wires, making all nearly useless. The
more wires on the poles, the greater the
danger.
3. —ln some districts cobwebs are formed connect-
ing the wires, and in damp or foggy
weather the current of electricity is sub-
divided and carried off.
4. —A long continuance of wet weather makes
working very difficult.
5. —Strong gales and sand storms often tear down
posts and wires, and the former are liable
to be washed away by floods and rushes of
water.
6. —The weight of snow after a heavy fall has
often been known, when acted upon by the
wind, to break the wires.
7. —The wooden posts are liable to rot with damp,
and are often eaten away by white ants.
8. —The wire of a land line can be easily cut by
any one having interested motives to inter-
rupt telegraphic communication, and any
fanatic or savage, incited by the desire to
possess the material, might in a few mo-
ments do injuries that would take days to
repair.
In case of war it would be a great object to cut
away all telegraphic communication that might serve
the enemy. The interruption of a land line is not


difficult, but a Sub-marine Cable is not easily found
and cut unless the command of the sea is also accorded .
THE NATIONAL IMPORTANCE OF DIRECT
TELEGRAPHIC COMMUNICATION IN TIME
OF WAR.
Telegraphic communication has become one of the
principal features of modern warfare, the great art
of strategy in the present clay being to concentrate
an overwhelming force, and hurl it against an
enemy’s most vulnerable point, before he can orga-
nize its defence or counteract its effects.
An empire like ours, with colonies and outposts
scattered over the whole face of the globe,—many
of which are sufficiently rich to invite attack from
an unscrupulous enemy,—ought to adopt the most
efficient means of defence, and one of the first
points to be attained is for every colony or outpost
to have immediate communication with the Home
Government.
The most efficient means of defending posses-
sions so widely divided—any of which, in these
days of steam navies, is liable to be attacked a few
days after a declaration of war—is by maintaining


a strong and well-equipped force always ready to
take the field in England, which, at a very short
notice, could he assembled and launched against any
point, either for the defence of a distant colony, the
suppression of any insubordinate rising, or to attack
an enemy’s weak point.
Secrecy, expedition, and energetic action, in such
cases, are half the battle gained ; but to ensure these
very material advantages, the telegraphic lines must
be from end to end in our oxen hands, and far better at
the bottom of the ocean than on land running'
through the territories of other nations whose
interest or jealousy of British prestige might lead to
the interception of our telegraphic dispatches or
their betrayal to the enemy, so as to enable him to
frustrate our designs.
Supposing the contingency of another outbreak in
India, or a complication of the Eastern question, is
it advisable to allow ourselves to be absolutely
dependent for communication with our Indian
Empire on French, Belgians, Prussians, Austrians,
Swiss, Italians, Turks, Russians, Persians, Arabs,
and various other nomadic tribes, or, in fact, in the
hands of any or every nationality, when we might
hold it exclusively in our own possession ?
We have fleets and garrisons scattered all over the
world either for the maintenance of our communi-
cations, the defence of our colonies, or the protec


tion of that immense commerce to which England
owes much of her greatness. In case of an emer-
gency or any sudden outbreak of war, how much
more efficient these land and sea forces would become,
were it possible to guide and regulate their move-
ments by simultaneous orders given direct from the
War Office and Admiralty.
The outposts and the base of operations would then
be connected, and their defence rendered compara-
tively easy, inasmuch as our distant colonies could
be forewarned and prepared against attack.
In these days of “retrenchment” and (l reforma-
tion,” a sensible diminution of our naval and mili-
tary estimates might be effected were our land and
sea forces placed under the immediate control of
the Home Government, for in many cases, vessels of
war on foreign stations might be employed on ser-
vices that now-a-days require a ship to be fitted out,
equipped, and sent out from England to the other side
of the globe, simply because we have no immediate
means of communication with our squadrons on
foreign service which could have spared a vessel for
the purpose required.
Our great strongholds in the Mediterranean are
Gibraltar and Malta, the head quarters of our fleet
where we have considerable garrisons; and in case
of any sudden commotion or outbreak in Europe,


for which we ought at all times to be prepared, it is
absolutely necessary that the War Office should have
the communication with these important outworks
that might become the bases of our operations—
entirely in their own hands, and which can only
be effected by having a direct suh-merged wire .
Again, there is some cause for apprehension that
at a future day complications will arise between
Russia and India, as the outposts of the two nations
are every day drawing closer to each other, and the
belt of neutral ground that divides the territories of
the two Powers has of late years grown so narrow,
that it is simply a question of time when some river
or geographical line will form the boundary.
When it is evident to all who have watched recent
events that have taken place in the almost unknown
regions between the Caspian Sea and the Himalayan
range, that on many important points the interests
of the two nations clash, and when it is even
possible that we may one day have to defend our
Indian frontier against the aggressions of the Mus-
covite, is it not very unwise and short-sighted policy
to be dependent for our communication with our
Eastern possessions upon a line passing through a
country that a contingency might make our enemy,
who, besides cutting off our communication, would
not be slow to turn it to his own advantage ?
c


Great Britain ought to be self-reliant on all ques-
tions of vital national importance touching her very
existence, and besides beeping up her army and navy
efficient in strength and equipment according to the
age we live in, she ought not to wait until another
Indian mutiny, or some similar disaster occurs,
before she establishes an independent communica-
tion between the mother country and her colonies,
which can only be effectually done by a telegraphic
Cable below the sea, the common property of man-
kind, that is not liable to be interrupted or affected
like the present land line by the machinations of
the hostile, the blunders of the ignorant, or the
fanatical superstitions of barbarian and nomadic
tribes.
THE PRACTICAL FEASIBILITY OF LAYING
DOWN AND MAINTAINING SUB-MARINE
CABLES.
The most competent authorities have all agreed
that there is no real difficulty in laying down a Sub-
marine Cable, and this is incontestibly proved by
the success of the line across the Atlantic, the
insulation of which is as complete to-day as it was
when first sub-merged.


Whenever a failure of sub-marine lines has oc-
curred, it has been found attributable to defined
causes that might have been guarded against and
avoided. And there are no insurmountable diffi-
culties to be encountered in laying, and maintaining
them when laid, which skill, prudence, and dearly-
bought experience cannot overcome.
In the projected line the only physical difficulties
to be encountered appear to be in the section between
Suez and the island of Perim ; but, notwithstanding
the breaking down of the first Red Sea Cable, there
is no reason to anticipate such a misfortune again.
The first Sub-marine Cable was laid in the Red Sea
in 1859, when Sub-marine Telegraphy was in its
infancy; but since that period science has advanced
with giant strides, and become perfected by practical
experience.
CAUSES OF FAILURE OF THE FIRST
RED SEA CABLE.
The causes why the first Red Sea Sub-marine
Cable proved a failure, and broke down after working
only nine months, are as follows :
I.—No accurate survey was previously made of
the bottom of the sea, and the Cable was


laid down without regard to the irregula-
rities of the surface, and of the material of
which that surface was composed.
2. —The Cable was laid in shallow water, where it
was liable to abrasion and injury from
currents, tides, and anchors.
In the Eed Sea, near the shore, are numerous
reefs, and in shallow water the bottom is
rocky, and often covered with coral, but in
deep water (over 50 fathoms) the bottom is
almost invariably mud and sand, where the
Cable would lay in safety.
3. —The Eed Sea Cable was injured in several
places, and its insulating properties con-
siderably impaired, by over tension, being
laid down too taut, and due allowance was
not made for the irregular surface of the
bottom. Moreover, it appears to have
been severely strained by jerks caused by
some of the rather crude paying-out ma-
chinery having given way during the opera-
tion of laying. Such accidents will now
be avoided, as, since that period, many
ingenious mechanical improvements have
been made, and in paying-out the Cable is
not now liable to get strained or kink.


ie Fed Sea Cable was in every way
inferior to those of the present day. Much
experience has been gained, and great
attention is now paid in the manufacture
and selection of materials, so as to insure
great strength in comparison to bulk, and
at the same time afford a good protection
to the core, durable in water, with suffi-
ciently low specific gravity, and not likely
to be easily injured by strains.
FINANCE.
Were the Government to undertake the construc-
tion and maintenance of the proposed line, there is
veiy little doubt bin that they would gain financially
a great point now-a-days to nations as well as indi-
viduals—for direct communication would throw open
trade, and a much greater business would be done
with the East than at present.
There is in reality no question as to its success
if properly undertaken. Our relations with Egypt,
India, Australia, China, and Japan are much
more extensive than with America, yet the Sub-
marine Cable under the Atlantic ocean is now


gaining ,£250,000 a year, and the traffic is so in-
creasing, that another cable is now being constructed,
at a cost of £1,100,000, to meet the required de-
mand.
Were a direct communication with our Eastern
possessions efficiently carried out, so that merchants
could learn the price of goods in the most distant
markets of the world as easily as the value ol cotton
in Liverpool, the cable would never be idle, and hall
a million per annum might be expected to pass into
its exchequer.
Being well acquainted with the East, including
Turkey, Asia Minor, and Persia, I have often puz-
zled myself in conjecturing what occult reasons
could have induced the authorities to prefer and
subsidize the present system of land lines ovei
tracts of desert and regions that present every ima-
ginable physical obstacle, and are only inhabited by
tribes of semi-barbarians, to the direct Bed Sea
route, when, from all I can learn by a careful
perusal of the Blue Books and reports upon Ocean
Telegraphy, the most competent authorities are of
opinion that this is beyond doubt the best.
The great outlay of capital that of necessity has
been sunk in this enterprize will bring but little
benefit to the nation, a very spasmodic and unre


liable communication having been established which
can only be used as an adjunct when the deep Sea
Cable is laid, and most likely will be abandoned as
too expensive to maintain.
I cannot better conclude than by quoting the
opinions of some of the most competent authorities
on this subject.
Mr. Field says “ Ocean Telegraphy was no
longer a romance or a marvel, but a substantial
fact, just as much so as the mail train from Liver-
pool, and ought to be as t regular, as practical, and
complete.”
Sir James Anderson says:—“ln every aspect of
the case, whether in point of economy of working,
speed, accuracy, profit, and consequent develop-
ment of Telegraphy by continuing the communica-
tion on to China and Australia, experience has
proved that a well-manufactured, carefully-laid
Sub-marine line is the true system to adopt; and
again, that the direct line via the Red Sea is beyond
all doubt the best.”
The Press, to whom be all honour for its wise
foresight and unceasing watchfulness over all ques-
tions concerning the safety, honour, and prestige of
the country, has lately very strongly advocated a
fair investigation of the case. When that takes


place, facts will speak for themselves. Thus say our
principal journals :
The Times. —“ It must be remembered that with
the advance of science the conditions which
the Government have to regard are every
day changing, and that within the last three
years the success of the Atlantic Cable has
entirely revolutionized the ideas of the world
on Ocean Telegraphy. The scheme, which
might have been looked upon as extravagant
and foolhardy some years since, is now
within the scope of enterprize and
of national support.*’
The Telegraph. —“ So much has been said, and so
often, in favour of a direct route, that the
wonder is that it has not before this com-
mended itself to the attention of all. But it
has not. If it be a question of expense that
deters the official mind from dreaming of it,
the figures are so palpably in favour of the
change, that we cannot hope to convince by
argument. We can only go on reiterating
and reiterating. It is patent to all those
who are willing to see, and to the willingly
blind we cannot hope to make it obvious.
But the claims of a direct Telegraphic route
to India we shall continue to keep in view,
nevertheless, and we do not despair of seeing
them work intelligence and capacity into the
official mind in course of time.”








