

THE
BELLE BMOT
A SELECTION OF THE CHOICEST SONGS AS SUNG
BX THE
CHRISTY MINSTRELS,
IHGLUDIHGr
EASTER RAILWAY EXCURSION.
WHERE THE GRASS GROWS GREEN.
HILDA.
THE GOOD BYE AT THE DOOR.
WHEN JOHNNY COMES MARCHING HOME.
SKEDADDLE.
PULL, PULL TOGETHER, BOYS.
I CANNOT SING THE OLD SONGS.
MY DEAR GIRLS, SHE’S A PAL OF MINE.
PATRIOTIC SONG.
UP WITH THE LARK IN THE MORNING.
PRETTY SONG BIRD, SING AGAIN.
ANNIE LISLE.
LILLIE OF THE SNOW STORM.
DUBLIN BAY.
THE MOCKING BIRD.
Charles Muskett, 78 Bourke Street East.
PUKE THREE I»JEMCIS.
E. Bell, Steam Printer, 97 Little Collins Street East, Melbourne.


CHARLES MUSKETT,
BOOKSEtfcES & SYAVttHia,
78 BOURKE STREET EAST,
Begs to draw the attention of the public to his well-assorted stock of Cheap
Account Books, comprising Ledgers, Journals, Day Books, Cash
Books, Consignment Books, Workmen’s Time Books, &c., &c.
PAPERS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION,
Including Writing, Drawing, Printing, Packing, &c. Tissue paper Of
every variety of shade.
USEFUL STATIOIfEBY,
Suitable for the Office, Shop, or Family;
Including Pencils, Quill and Steel Pens, Envelopes, Sealing Wax, Office Files,
Date Backs, Inkstands, Stationery Cases, Color Boxes, Memorandum Books,
Metallic Books, Pocket Books, Parchment Tracing Paper, Tracing Cloth,
Copying, Writing, Ticket, and Marking Inks, &e.
WRITING AND TRAVELLING DESKS.
Playing Cards, Superior Cutlery, Photographic Albums, Stamp Albums,
Purses, Pencil Cases, Card Cases, Scrap Books, Inkstands, Letter Balances,
Blotting Pads, Workboxes, Ivory Tablets, Paper Knives, Color Boxes, &c.
SCHOOLS SUPPLIED AT TRADE PRICES.
Irish National and other leading School Books, with every description of Copy
Books, Slates, and general School Stationery always on hand.
Bibles, Cbureh Services, Prayers, Family Bibles, and Hymn Books, in
Plain and Elegant Bindings.
Elegantly Bound Books for Presents.
CHILDRENS PICTURE BOOKS IN EVERY VARIETY.
A large assortment of the Parlor and Railway Libraries, Juvenile Literature,
and a variety of other useful and interesting Books.
English Magazines and Newspapers promptly supplied on the arrival of the
Mail.
MORISON’S UNIVERSAL VEGETABLE PILLS, Wholesale & Retail.
Observe the Address :
78 Bonrke-st. East, and 102 Bnmswick-st., Fitzroy.


THE
BELLE BRANDON
SONGSTER.
HILDA.
Say not life is made-only of dreams!
Have we not the trees, fields and flow’rs, and streams ?
All things beautiful seem to say—
“ Why be sad, my heart ? Hilda, smile to-day.”
Flowers bright and blooming still are fair to see •;
Birds make sweet music, tuneful and clear,
Nature is smiling in all around I see ;
What says it to me ? “ oh, smile, Hilda, dear,”
Hilda, dear, Hilda, dear, what say they to me—
“ 0 smile, Hilda, dear I ”
Time for grief will he life’s wintry hours—
While youth still is mine let me gather flowers ;
All things beautiful now seem to say—
u Why be sad, my heart ? Hilda, smile to-day.”
Say not love is like some April beam.
But a fleeting ray shed o’er life’s dark stream j
Think the sun itself sets but to rise—
Why be sad, my heart ? true love never dies.
Flow’rs, though they perish, spring-time will renew,
Hope whispers to me, “ he will be here,
Soon he will come back, still constant, kind, and true j
Soon thou shalt hear him say— ‘ Smile, Hilda, dear.’ ”
Hilda, dear, Hilda, dear, soon thou shalt hear him say-*-
li Smile, Hilda, dear.”
Time for grief will be life’s wintry hours, £c.


EASTER RAILWAY EXCURSION.
Am —Xing of ike Cannibal Islands.
Charles R. Thatcher, and sung iy him with immense applause
at the Theatre Royal, Ballarat.
Good Friday’s a holiday, you know—
Thinks I to myself for pleasure I’ll go,
To see my friends in Melbourne below,
By the Easter Railway Excursion.
I walked up to the station, there,
And at the window paid my fare ;
And hundreds who had ’leven shillings to spare
Were going to Melbourne for change of air.
I got my ticket, and took my seat
In a first-class carriage—oh, what a treat!
And I thought my happiness was complete,
As I went down by the excursion.
But if ever you go to Melbourne town,
To view this city of great renown,
Pay the regular fare, but never go down
By what they call an excursion.
A woman was there with a child inside,
Te keep it quiet the mother tried,
But oh, how that wretched infant cried,
As we went down by the excursion.
Ten miles an hour the train did go,
For it’s up hill for a few miles or so ;
And though it was a fast day, you know,
The blessed engine would go slow;
Three parts of an hour, if I’m not wrong,
It took us to crawl to Buninyong—
Thinks I—what time shall we get to Geelong,
By this blessed railway excursion.
We stopped ten minutes or more at Lai Lai,
While the engineer had a chat with a pal—
We let out a man and we took in a gal,
As we went down by the excursion.
We stopped at Lethbridge, I declare,


A deal too long, then on we did tear ;
Pulled up at Lethbridge, and I got in despair,
Trying to think why a station was ever put there.
At last the sun came out so gay—
The You Yangs stood out in grand array,
And we saw the lovely Corio Bay,
As we went down by the excursion.
But when we arrived in sleepy Geelong,
The railway authorities came it too strong;
Thinks I when I get back again I’ll write a song
About this Easter excursion.
They shunted us here, they shunted us there—
’Twas Geelong all over, I declare ;
The passengers ’gan to curse and swear,
And the Geelongese at us had a stare.
They’d ancient dresses, and looked as though
They’d been buried a hundred years ago,
And dug up again for an hour or so
To witness a railway excursion.
Unto the refreshment room I went,
Had a drink with a Ballarat gent,
Called for a pie, and a tanner I spent,
As I went down by the excursion.
But there was something, by the by,
About the flavour of the pie—
The paste was most uncommonly dry,
As if made from flour of years gone by;
It had such a curious fossilly look,
And I made a note in my pocket-book—
Never eat pies made by a Geelong cook,
When you go down on an excursion.
But it was in coming back at night,
I really lost my patience quite ;
At Geelong they must have had a spite
Against the Easter excursion.
The railway officials filled my cup
Of bitterness, for they locked me up
For an hour, without either bite or sup


I led thejlife of a travelling pup.
Thinks I, if ever I come down this way,
On another fine excursion lay,
They may pitch me into Corio Bay—
Confound the railway excursion
WHERE THE GRASS GROWS GREEN
WRITTEN BY HARRY CLIFTON.
I’m Denny Blake, from County Clare,
And here at your command,
To sing a song- in praise of home,
And my own native land;
I’ve sail’d to foreign countries,
And in many climes I’ve been,
But my heart is still with Erin,
Where the grass grows green.
I love my native country.
And I’m loyal to my Queen,
But I can’t forget “ould Erin,”
Where the grass grows green.
Poor Pat is often painted
With a ragged coat and hat—•
His heart and hospitality
Has much to do with that.
Let slanderers say what they will,
They cannot call him mean—
Sure a stranger’s always welcome,
Where the grass grows green.
I love my native country, &o.
He’s foolish, but not vicious,
His faults I won’t defend ;
His purse to help the orphan.
His life to save a friend.
He’ll give without a murmur,
So his follies try and screen,
For there’s noble hearts in Erin,
Where the grass grows green.
I love my native country, &c.


’Tis true lie has a weakness
For a drop of something pure,
But that’s a slight debility
That many more endure;
He’s fond of fun, he’s witty,
Though his wit is not too keen;
For there’s feeling hearts in Erin,
Where the grass grows green.
I love my native country, &c.
There’s not a true-born Irishman,
Wherever he may be,
But loves the little emerald
That sparkles on the sea;
May the sun of bright prosperity
Shine peaceful and serene,
And bring better days to Erin,
grass grows green.
I love my native country, &c.
THE GOOD BYE AT THE DOOR.
Of all the mem’ries of the past
That come like summer dreams,
Whose rainbow hues still round us cast
Their bright, their bright but fleeting beams,
The dearest, sweetest that can be
Of days gone long before,
Are those that oft recall to me
The good bye, the good bye at the door.
Are those that bring to mind to me
The good bye, the good bye at the door.
But time and place have quite estranged
Each early friend we knew;
How few remain, how many changed
Of those, of those we deemed so true.
Those happy hours again to me,
But mem’ry can restore.
The ling’ring thought will ever be
The good bye, the good bye at the door.
The ling’ring thought, &c.


WHEN JOHNNY COMES MARCHING HOME
Music at Chapman's, Swanston-street.
When Johnny comes marching- home again,
Hurrah ! hurrah !
We’ll give him a hearty welcome then,
Hurrah! hurrah!
The men will cheer, the boys will shout,
The ladies they will all turn out •
And we’ll all feel gay
When Johnny comes marching home.
Cho. And we’ll all feel gay
When Johnny comes marching home.
The old church hells will peal with joy.
Hurrah ! hurrah!
To welcome home our darling hoy,
r ./ '
Hurrah ! hurrah I
The village lads and lasses say,
With roses they will strew the way ;
And we’ll all feel gay
When Johnny comes marching home.
And we’ll all, &c.
Get ready for the jubilee,
Hurrah! hurrah!
We’ll give the hero three times three,
Hurrah ! hurrah !
The laurel wreath is ready now
To place upon his royal brow ;
And we’ll all feel gay
When Johnny comes marching home.
And we’ll all, Ac.
Let love and friendship on that day,
Hurrah ! hurrah !
Their choicest treasures then display,
Hurrah ! hurrah !
And let each one perform some part
To fill with joy the warrior’s heart,
And we’ll all feel gay
When Johnny comes marching home.
And we’ll all, Ac.


PULL, PULL TOGETHER, BOYS.
Sung by the great "Vance.
We’ve heard of Esop’s fables when
At school we got our licks,
And, I dare say, you’ve not forgot
The bundle made of sticks;
The moral’s stick together, boys,
And that moral’s far from wrong,
So pull, pull together is
The burden of my song.
Chorus. Pull, pull together, boys,
Pull, pull together, boys,
All pull together, boys,
Like brothers ev’ry one.
Now all my life, I’ve practis’d, mind,
This good and golden rule,
Commencing when a little boy,
But greatly whopped at school:
We robb’d the master’s apple trees,
By night as well as day,
And as we pull’d the apples off,
I always used to say,
Pull, pull, cfec.
And when I went to college, still
My maxim was the same ;
By all the Dons and Proctors!
I was up to many a game.
There I was captain of my boat,
And as my gallant crew
Stretched to their oars, my fav’rite cry
Right well the fellows knew :
O )
Pull, pull, &c.
I came of age, dropp’d into tin,
Went on the town of course,
Learnt to pick out a pretty girl,
And learnt to back a horse.
With jolly dogs I went the pace,
And many a pal o’ mine


I taught to sing this jolly toast,
As pass’d the sparkling wine:
Pull, pull, &c.
At last I met the sweetest girl,
The loveliest you can see;
When I clapp’d eyes on her I knew
It was all up with me.
I hid my single friends good-bye,
Gave up all midnight strife,
Por a man must do all that you know
To pull well with his wife.
Pull, pull, &c.
The best proof of the pudding is
The eating it, they say;
I’ve tried my saying and it’s come
Out right, boys, ev’ry way.
And for the good advice you’ve had
I hope you’ll come out strong.
So pull, pull together, if
You cheer me for my song.
Pull, pull, <fec.
I CANNOT SING THE OLD SONGS.
Music at Glen’s, Collins-street.
I cannot sing the old songs
I sung long years ago,
Por my heart and voice would fail me,
And foolish tears would How ;
Por bygone hours come o’er my heart
With each familiar strain;
I cannot sing the old songs,
Or dream those dreams again.
I cannot sing the old songs,
Their charm is sad and deep ;
Their melodies would waken
Old sorrows from their sleep,
And though all unforgotten still,
And sadly sweet they be,
I cannot sing the old songs,
They are too dear to me.


I cannot sing the old songs,
For visions come again
Of golden dreams departed,
And years of weary pain.
Perhaps when earthly letters
Shall have set my spirit free,
My voice may know the old songs,
For all eternity.
MY DEAR GIRLS, SHE’S A PAL OF MINE.
WORDS BY W. M. AKHURST, ESQ.
ly Miss Docy Stewart and Miss Marion Dunn, in the glorious
burlesque of the “ Siege of Troy."
Ever since childhood’s halcyon day,
Mates we have been, I and this pal of mine,
In her short frock, and sash so gay,
She was a pal of mine.
We romped together on the lawn,
Strung many a daisy chain;
We quarrelled sometimes, and sulked for a time,
But soon made it up again.
Duett. My dear girls, my dear girls,
She’s a pal of mine, she’s a pal of mine, &c.
Schoolfellows next, our tasks we shared,
Each other helped, I and this pal of mine.
And when on Sundays for church we paired,
She was a pal of mine.
Our secrets we exchanged and told,
Each joy and each distress ;
We loved each other’s brother, and
We scorned our governess.
My dear girls, &c.
And should a conquering hero come,
And separate me from this pal of mine,
Yet she’ll for ever be my chum,
And dear pal of mine.
But unless some cruel thing’
Of her does me deprive,
That glorious hero conquering
Perhaps will never arrive.
My dear girls, &c.


PATRIOTIC SONG.
As written and sung by C. 11. Thatcher, at the Theatre Royal, Ballarat.
What a burst of indignation is flashing through the land !
A cowardly assassin has dared to lift his hand
Against our youthful Sailor Prince, who lately crossed the sea
To view Australia, and accept our hospitality.
The land is filled with horror at the bloodthirsty deed,
And every heart Is grateful that the crime did not succeed.
The Prince is out of danger, and now a thrill of joy
Is mingled with compassion for the wounded Sailor Boy.
We've loyal hearts, and well I know that each one will deplore
The news that will to England go from fair Australia’s shore;
And fancy now can feebly paint the sad and harrowing scene
When the outrage is related to a noble widowed Queen :
A feeling first of grief will weigh upon her lonely heart,
But then a tear of gratitude into her eye will start,
And falling on her knees she'll clasp her hands, and say with joy—
“ Thank God, for sparing to me yet my wounded Sailor Boy.”
SKEDADDLE.
Oh, boys, our work is over,
All, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry.
We’ll away and lib in clober—-
Oh, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry.
Cho. We’ll take unto our homes, our tambourine and hones,
De banjo and de fiddle, played in harmonious tones.
Oh, a darkey’s life is a merry one, and dat you may rely,
Den all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry.
Of work we’ve had a plenty—
Oh, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry;
Den to fill the bowls that’s empty—
We’ll all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry.
We’ll take unto our homes, &c.
Oh, my old Aunt Jemima—
Oh, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry—
Ran away with the organ grinder—
Oh, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skeddadle am de cry.
Well take unto our homes, &c.


Oh, away down Carolina —
Oh, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry—
Here stands my lubly Dinah—
Oh, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry.
We’ll take unto our homes, &c.
Den for our homes we’ll make, boys—
Oh, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry—
Our joys to awake, boys—
Oh, all skedaddle, all skedaddle, skedaddle am de cry.
We’ll take unto our homes, &c.
UP WITH THE LARK IN THE MORNING.
Sung I// the great Vance.
I like to be jolly in a moderate way,
But think it a pity to hear folks say —
“ Drink and be merry till the break of day”—
No “jolly dog-” am I.
On my exertions I depend,
No other wealth I crave,
And though I have the heart to spend,
I’ve still the sense to save.
Chorus. Bor I never drink hard, it don’t suit me,
Nor toast my friend with a one, two, three;
“ Merry and wise” is the motto for me,
And up with the lark in the morning.
There’s a time for pleasure, and a time for play;
A time to labour and a time to be gay;
If the sun shines bright you must make your hay,
And I’ll tell the reason why—j
To-day we may be hale and strong,
To-morrow, who can tell ?
Without the health to earn a pound,
Without a friend as well.
So I never drink, &c.
If I had the money that many have got,
I’d scatter a bit in the laborer’s cot,
And the struggling poor, for I pity their lot—•
No miserly man am I.


No deserving man should say
He ever pass’d my door
In want upon the world’s highway,
I’d ne’er forget the poor.
Though I never drink, &c.
I’ve always a penny if I want to lend,
I’ve always a penny if I want to spend,
I’ve always a penny for a poor old friend,
For a careful man am I.
I envy not the rich man’s lot,
Or pi'ince’s diadem,
The poor man working at the plough
Will one day equal them.
Yet I never drink, &c.
PRETTY SONG BIRD, SING AGAIN.
Music at Wilkie's, Collins-street.
I heard a small bird singing,
One pleasant summer day,
The air with music ringing
Responded‘to his lay;
I listen’d, sad and weary,
Until methought I heard
A lesson sweet and cheery
Sung by that little bird.
Pretty song bird, sing to me again.
Charm me, cheer me with thy strain.
Cho. Pretty song bird, sing the strain
Of hope, and jo j, and love again;
Charm me, cheer me, with thy strain,
I saw a small brook flowing
Through valley and through dell,
Its soft winds o’er it blowing,
It seemed with pride to swell,
Its tiny drops oft sprinkled
The leaves with mimic showers,
And in the falling twinkled
Like music ’mid the flowers.
Pretty brooklet, speak to me again,
Softest music is thy strain.
Pretty song bird, &c.


ANNIE LISLE.
Music at Wilkie’s, Collins-street.
Down where the waving- willows
’Neath the sunbeams smile,
Shadow’d o’er the murra’ring waters,
Dwelt sweet Annie Lisle,
Pure as the forest lily,
Never thought of guile
Had its home within the bosom
Of lov’d Annie Lisle.
Wave willows, murmur waters,
Golden sunbeams smile,
Eartly music cannot waken
Lovely Annie Lisle.
Sweet came the hallowed chiming
Of the Sabbath bell,
Borne on the morning breezes
Down the woody dell.
On a bed of pain and anguish
Lay dear Annie Lisle ;
Changed were the lovely features,
Gone the happy smile.
Ware willows, (fee.
Toll, bells of Sabbath morning;
I shall never more
Hear your sweet and holy music
On this earthly shore.
Forms clad in heav’nly beauty
Look on me and smile,
Waiting for the longing spirit
Of vour Annie Lisle.
Wave willows, &c.
Raise mo in your arms, dear mother,
Let me once more look
On the green and waving willows.
And the flowing brook.
Hark ! those strains of angel music,
From the ehoirs above ;
Dearest mother, I am going—
Truly “ God is love.”
Wave willows, (fee.


LILLIE OF THE SNOW STORM.
To liis home, his once white, once lov’d cottage,
Late at night, a poor inebriate came ;
To his wife, the waiting wife and daughter,
Who for him had fanned the midnight flame
Rudely met, they answer’ed him with kindness,
Gave him all their own untasted store —
’Twas but small, and he with awful curses
Spurn’d the gift, and drove them from his door.
Cho. While the storm, the wild, wild wintry tempest,
Swept across the prairies, cold and white—
What a shame that Lillie and her mother
Were abroad on such a fearful night.
Far across the prairie stood a dwelling,
Where from harm they oft had found retreat;
There now, all brave and uncomplaining
Did they urge their weary, way-worn feet;
But their strength, unequal to their courage,
Fail’d them as they wander’d to and fro,
Till at last the feeble, fainting mother,
Speechless, sank upon the drifted snow.
While the storm, &c.
Lillie prays—the harps are hushed in heaven —
Angels poise them midway in the sky;
Up from earth there comes a w r ail of sorrow,.
Such a wail as must be heard on high.
cc Father, dear! my other, better Father !
Won’t you hear your daughter, Lillie, pray ?
Won’t you send some strong and careful angel,
Who will help my mother on her way ?”
While the storm, &c.
Morning daw ns—the husband and the father,
Sober’d now% to seek his flock has come;
Lillie dear is living, but her mother—
Hours ago an angel bore her home.
Ah, poor man ! how bitter is his anguish,
As he now r repents his punish’d sin !
Bending o’er the child, who, half unconscious,
Sadly cries, “ Please, father, let us in !”
While the storm, &c.


DUBLIN BAY.
Music at Lee and Kaye's, Collins-street.
He sail’d away in a gallant bark,
Roy Neill and bis fair young bride;
He had ventur’d all in that bounding oak
That danc’d o’er the silver tide;
But his heart was young, and his spirit light,
And he dash’d the tear away,
As he watch’d the shores recede from sight,
Of his own sweet Dublin Bay.
Three days they sail’d and a storm arose,
And the light’ning swept the deep,
And the thunder broke the short repose
Of the weary sea-boy’s sleep;
Roy Neill he clasp’d his weeping bride,
And he kiss’d her tears away;
O love ! ’twas a fatal hour, she cried,
When we left sweet Dublin Bay.
On the crowded deck of the doom’d ship
Some stood in their mute despair,
And some more calm, with a holy lip,
Sought the God of the storm in prayer.
She has struck on the rocks ! the seamen cried,
In the breath of their wild dismay;
And the ship went down, and the fair young bride,
That sail’d from Dublin Bay.
THE MOCKING BIRD.
I’m dreaming now of Hally,
Of Hally, of Hally,
I'm dreaming now ot Halty,
And the mocking bird is singing on the tree ;
But she now sleeps in the valley,
In the valley, in the valley,
But she now sleeps in the valley.
And the mocking bird is singing on the tree.
Listen, listen, listen,
Listen to the mocking bird,
Tire mocking bird is singing on the tree.


Listen, listen, listen,
Listen to the mocking bird
Still singing on the -weeping willow tree.
Cho. Listen, listen, listen,
Listen to the mocking bird,
The mocking bird is singing on the tree.
Listen, listen, listen,
Listen to the mecking bird
Still singing on the weeping willow tree.
’Twas in the mild September,
September, September,
’Twas in the mild September,
When the mocking bird was singing on the tree.
Oh, well do I remember,
Remember, remember,
Oh, well do I remember,
When the mocking bird was singing on the tree.
Listen, listen, Ac.
Sad thoughts are o’er me stealing,
Me stealing, me stealing,
Sad thoughts are o’er me stealing
While the mocking bird is singing on the tree-.
As by her grave I’m kneeling,
I’m kneeling, I’m kneeling.
As by her grave I’m kneeling,
And the mocking bird is singing on the tree.
Listen, listen, <fcc.
TOASTS AND SENTIMENTS.
May he who tnma his back on his friends fall into the hands
his enemies.
Onr favorite friend and favorite girl.
The heart that can feel for another.
May industry always be rewarded as the favorite of fortune.
May the honest heart never feel distress.
May we strive to avoid the law as we would the devil.
May the new year help to make us old.
May poverty always be a day’s march behind us.
Beil, Slum Printer, 97 little Colline Street ftwt, Melbourne.


THE
BELLE BRANDON SONGSTER,
A selection of the Choicest and most Popular Songs of the day,
as sung by the Christy Minstrels, Sfc., Sfc.
The Pretty Girl of Doncaster
Early Love
The Kcon Behind the Hill
Rosalie, the Prairie Flower
Ho One to Love
Dear Mother, I’ve Come Home
to Die
Belle Brandon
The Cottage by the Sea
Let me Hiss Him for his
Mother
Finnigan’s Wake
So. 9
The Skipper and his Boy
Paddle Your Own Canoe (New
Yemen)
Paisley Road
Under the Willow She’s
Sleeping
Water-cresses
Just After the Battle, Mother
Maggie’s Secret
A Motto for Every Man
Hoi
Here’s a Health to Prince
Alfred, God bless Him
Bear it like a Man
Jersey Pride
The Letter in the Candle
Not for Joseph
Paddy’s own Irish Stew
Have you seen Ruth ?
Beautiful Isle of the Sea
Maggie May
Wheedling Ways
10. 1 c*oiEtoins
When this Cruel War is Over
Paddle Tour Own Canoe
Her Bright Smile Haunts Me
Still
Just Before the Battle, Mother
The Wearing of the Green
Some One to Love
It’s never so had hut it might
have been worse
Thou art so near and yet so far
Work, Boys, Work.
dOMftStilßS
Where there’s a will there’s a
way
Champagne Charlie is my
Name
Mabel
Pretty Little Sarah
Tramp, Tramp, Tramp, the
Boys are Marching
Shelling Green Peas
Smiggy McGlural
cotiruiiiK
I’m Lonely Since my Mother
Died
Pulling Hard Against the
Stream
! Marching Through Georgia
| Tapping at the Window
j When the War is Over, Mary
Babylon is Falling
i Let us speak of a man as we
find him
Come Back to Erin
Price 3d. eadi miuiber.
Charles Muskett, 78 Boiirke Street East.


Books f’Ol* Presents. —One of the largest and best selected stock
of books for presents, from the unpretending volume for the cottage to
the elegantly-bound book for the drawing-room table, is to be found at
MUSKETT’S well-known establishment, 78 Bourke-street East.
Parlor Magic. —A manual of amusing experiments, transmutations,
sleights, subtleties, ledgerdemain, &c., for the instruction and improvement
of youth, with the addition of some of the most noted tricks of the
modern professors. —Usual price, 6s'., reduced to 35.; post free, 3s. 6d.
Round G antes for All Fartios. A collection of the
greatest variety of family amusements for fireside or picnic, consisting of
games of action, games of memory, catch games, depending on the
assistance of an accomplice, a secret knowledge for the purpose of
mystification; games requiring the exercise of fancy, intelligence, and
imagination ; directions for the crying of forfeits, &c., &c., for the use of
old and young, and adapted to the understanding of children from the
age of seven to seventy. —Usual price, 65., reduced to 35.; post free, 3s. 6d.
The Modern Method of Training- for Running, Walking,
Rowing, and Boxing, including hints on exercise, diet, clothing, and advice
to trainers, by Charles Westhall, the pedestrian champion of England.
Price, Is. 3d.; post free, Is. 6d.
Routledgre’s Sixpenny Handbook*, with illustrations,
and illustrated boarded covers. List of the series—Swimming, Gym-
nastics, Chess, Whist, Billiards and Bagatelle, Draughts and Backgammon,
Cricket, Card-playing, Rowing and Sailing, Riding and Driving, Archery,
Fencing and Broadsword, Manly exercises, Croquet, Fishing, Ball games,
Conjuring, Football. Price, 6d. each ; post free, Bd. each.
Ronfledg-e’* Sixpenny Household Manuals. —
How to Cook Apples 100 Ways, How to Cook Eggs 100 Ways, How to
Cook Rabbits 124 Ways, How to Cook Potatoes, How to Cook Fish,
How to Cure the Cholera, How to Make Soups, How to Cook Onions,
How to Preserve Fruit, Receipt Books, Ready Remedies, for Common
Complaints, How to Dress Salad, How to Cook Game. 6d. each, post
free, Bd.
Tile Modern Fencer, with the most recent means of attack and
defence when engaged with an adversary, by T. Griffiths, professor of
fencing, gymnastics, &c., and figures showing the various positions of the
body. Price, Is. 6d.; post free, Is. Bd.
Tlae Modern Gymnast, being practical instructions on the
horizontal bar, parallel bars, vaulting horse, flying trapeze, &c., &c., with
a description of the apparatus, and hints on somersault-throwing, by
Charles Spencer, with one hundred and twenty ‘practical illustrations.
Price, Is. 6d.; post free, Is. 9d.
CHARLES MUSKETT,
xh
BOOKBEILEB AMD ITITIOSEB,
78 BOURKE STREET EAST.
