

i ■ ijfe » * v-v - •
iff > • # .. » i-rPrYV* w
• . . »UI-I -I-
hVP t ,j» r.' * • •
* • P^M.
%
cJa *
New Series.] ; . , , • [PRICE Is.
l|i * Ef)t Melbourne .gT .
. I .CHURCH OF* ENGLAND ',Bl :»
| *’ * •
.CHURCH OF" ENGLAND^
•Siessenge#. %
- 4 #
11. GEE. % I’*
| ‘ • ~ *• g
® * |i|
S they might know thee the only true jag
s? (jnd,'and jesus unrist whom thou hast sent."— John xvii. 3. ’ g?v
jpJ' 'No. 1. -JANUARY, 1854. ♦ > Vol. I.' g||f ’
. W # « V x 3 .
, . Varieties. • Intelligence. •
i'o our Subscribers 1 . St. Paul’s Church, Melbourne... 24 1^
‘ , M>X T he K>gM ’ Presentation to . . , D !ocese of New Zea land 23 SKT "
<m Vacant CuP-. 7 The “Aztecs” ■ J 7 I©
m Melbourne Hospital 12 New Colonial Bishoprics 29 g$ '
1‘ M Expediency of adopting a Syste- Colonial Church Bill 30 M
r>§| matic Plan for Training Young
fSrZ Men within the Colony as Can- Society for the Prevention of ’fc
VpS didates for the Ministry 13 Sabbath Desecration 31
Letter on Intemperance * 16 - Barrahool Hills 31
/ &5. Treasury. Moodewarra 31
v. X&d* Conversion and Call to Mission- Ordination 32 Jrsx
ary Work of the Rev. W. A. B. Ministerial 32 §{s
Igg Johnson 18 '
Jjl ftlclboiuiit:. - . 'O3
y BENJAMIN LUCAS, PRINTER, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
MDCCCLIV. • ' .
■ , f
S. *2>; >
.' ' /
j* 1 „ / -A


We regret that the Rev. R. L. King’s letter respecting “Thome,” an
“Australian Black,” reached us too lavte for insertion in the present
number.
Clergymen and Secretaries of local Chmrch Committees are requested to
forward to the Editor Reports of Meetiings, or any other matters, which
they wish to he published in the Messemger on or before the 20 th day
of the month , in order that such reporrts may be inserted in the next
ensuing number. The Editor depends lupon his correspondents for the
account of all parochial and local matters.^
It is requested that any paper which iss intended for the Varieties may
he furnished to the Editor on or before thtc 10 th day of the month.
We regret that we arc unable in thic present number to insert any
account of the Consecration of the Cathecflral Church of St. James, which
took place on the 30th ult.; or of the opening of the Ivanhoe School-
room, upon the road to Heidelberg, whiclh took place on the 26th.
BENJAMIN LUCAS’
GENERAL PRINTING OFFICE,
72, COLLINS STREET, EAST, MELBOURNE.
TRAINING OF ELIGIBLE YOUNG #KN FOR THE MINISTRY
IN YICTOEIIA.
THE Bishop of Melbourne requests thiose members of the Church who
are willing to assist in carrying ontt a plan for training Eligible
Young Men for the Ministry in Victoria; to meet on Monday evening the
9th inst. at 7 o’clock, in the Diocesam Grammar School adjoining
St. Peter’s Church, to consider about ;she best arrangements of the
purpose.
Instead of the usual Monthly Meeting of the Melbourne Diocesan Society
and Church of England Association, the
ANNUAL MEETING OF THE BOARD OF MISSIONS
WILL BE HELD ((d.V.)
On FRIDAY 1 Evening, the X3tli inst.,
All members of the Church atre invited to attend.
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND MESISENGER or other Books bound
to any pattern, with cheapnetss and dispatch, by
WILLIAM HUNTING,
BOOKBINDER & MA IP YARNISHER,
Second Turning from Prince; of Wales Hotel,
FLINDERS LANE, EAST, MELBOURNE,


THE MELBOURNE
€i)tircf) of ISttglantr iWessengev.
varieties.
TO OUR SUBSCRIBERS.
It has pleased God, in his great mercy, to bring our little periodical
to the commencement of its fifth year. Great and marvellous
have been the changes, since it first proposed to be the unpretend-
ing but solemnly commissioned, Messenger to the Church of Go
in this land; but, while mighty undertakings have been stopped in
their course, and countless minor projects have been swept away,
—while the place and name of many a more stable fabric has
utterly passed,—it has remained, like the little sea bird on the waters,
unruffled by the storm, the only tranquil thing amid confusion
and change. Nor is it altered now. The only difference is, that
circumstances have now made possible and necessary certain ar-
rangements, which have long been desired, but some of which have
hitherto been unattainable, and others not absolutely indispensable.
The same governing spirit remains, though relieved of some burdens
which must ere long have countervailed its buoyancy; but it goes
forth pretending to nothing, aiming at nothing, but to be the
medium of communication among the members of the Church in
Victoria; and, depending on the blessing and guidance of the
Great Head of the Church, it trusts to be enabled in some degree
to minister to His saints, and to bear witness to His truth. _
It has been often brought as a reproach against these Colonies,
that we have no original literature ;-that so little encouragement
is o-iven to talent here, and that every effort to raise the tone ot
periodical publications has ended in failure ; hut it is at least
a question, whether this be not rather a proof ot good taste and good
sense than of a deficiency of the one, or perversion of the other
The time is not long past, when we were taught to look back with
regret, as to a time of peculiar happiness and virtue, to the days
a When every rood of ground maintained its man,”
when the maiden ground the corn that her lather reaped,
and the matron spun the wool her sons had shorn—when
A


the little patch of flax suppllied the linen of the family,
and the garden and the dairy' furnished all their luxuries.
We know that, well as thiss sounds, the practical result
was selfishness, ignorance, and! physical wretchedness ; hut
that, by extending a little fartheir the natural division between the
labor of the brother and the sistter which had each to minister to
the other, and by regarding mamkind as a brotherhood in which
one climate and race can fumisHi to its neighbour productions in
return, our physical wants are better and more economically
supplied, labor is more usefully and more constantly employed,
an intelligent view is given to eaclh race of the state of its fellows,
and a spirit of national depencdence and national reliance is
generated, which opens out to mien the oneness of our common
nature, and reminds us of the dlay when the inhabitants of the
earth as one family were lodgeoll in one frail bark. If this be
true in the physical, it is not leas true in the intellectual world ;
and if it be true that we may borrow from other nations, how
much more should we, who have in our native tongue the noblest,
the widest, and the purest literature in the world, find it our
wisdom to export our gold, our tallow, and our wool, and import
the polished compositions of our native land. If in the next fifty
years we can compete with these in any one line, we shall have
done more than America with all her boasted progress has been
able to accomplish.
If we labour to cultivate a taste for the best works, and become
a judiciously reading people, there can be no doubt that, as society
settles down into form and shape, we shall become a writing people
too, and may add to the English liiterature the productions of our
Dwights or our Irvings. But iff we endeavour to stimulate to
premature efforts, we shall readilly obtain inferior works upon
every subject; our tastes and our standard will be lowered :—we
cannot expect first-rate men to eemigrate here, second-rate men
will emigrate in abundance ; amfl we may fix on ourselves a
character of inferiority, from wHiich we shall never be able to
rise.
Entertaining these views it is nrot the wish of the editors of the
“ Church of England Messenger to supply to the colonists of
Victoria the place of the very vahuable religious periodicals which
they can obtain from England. 'Their simple object is to apply
themselves to those matters, whiclh belong to our peculiar position
as colonists, or more expressly to oiur position as Colonial Church-
men ; to supply that which can adone be supplied by those who
are acquainted with our local wamts, peculiarities, and changes;
to endeavour, not in its highest aind grandest but in its humblest


and most individualized sense, to take up the words ot the piophet
and say, “ I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the
tower, and will watch to see wfoat He will say unto me.
If we speak of the wants off a Church, they naturally divide
themselves into those which appear to he within the range of
human power, and those over which man has no control. This
division, or distinction rather, iis intelligible and useful, but only
so long as we bear in mind that It is merely a distinction made for
convenience of expression : for we must never forget that, as man
can do nothing except it be given him from above, so God has
promised to answer in showers of blessing the prayers of His
faithful people ; and that therefore no gift is so exclusively God’s
that unbelief may not be the cause of its being witheld, and no
work so far man’s that he can accomplish any good thing except as
grace prevents him, that he may have the good will to do it, and
works with him when he has that good will.
If therefore we feel ourselves as a body to be cold and dead ;
if we are constrained to say with the psalmist “We see not our
signs” (the great signs under the new covenant are the conversion
of sinners, and the growing sanctification of saints) ; if, with
extending congregations, and schools, and bustle, there is little
increase in love, and spiritual-mindedness, and superiority to the
world, we are not to sit down, and fold our hands, and say we
must wait till the Lord sends down His Spirit from on high. No ;
there is a promise with respect to that Spirit ; our Heavenly
Father declares that He will “ give the Holy Spirit to them that
ask Him ; ” and if we want increase of faith, increase of
increase of hope, increase in the development of all the graces of
the Holy Ghost, the course is open to us; “Ask and ye shall receive,
that your joy may he full; ” the reason of past spiritual poverty
is manifest, 6i Ye have not because ye ask not.
But if we must plead guilty with regard to these things, which
do not at first sight appear in any degree to depend on us, and
which are really only remotely and indirectly referable to our
faith or holiness, what shall we say concerning those things which
are directly and obviously committed to us ? “Ye are my
witnesses ” saith the Lord ; “Yc are the salt of the earth; ” “Ye are
the light of the world ; ” yet surely, whatever exceptional
individual devotedness there may be amongst us, as a hody we
have most grievously and shamefully failed in this our calling.
We have not borne witness for’ God, we have not seasoned, we
have not enlightened, the world.—And yet, if ever there was
a Church, since the first proclamation of the Gospel, placed in
favorable circumstances for fulfilling this calling, it is the Church


of Victoria. Surrounded by a boundless territory, with a people
who are crying out for the Word of God, —a people too busy
to amuse themselves in inventing heresies, or raising objections,
but who feel the deep yearnings of the soul after something more
sustaining than created good,—a people whose most cherished
affections are bound up with the recollections of the “ heaven-
directed spire,” “ the sound of the church-going bell,” —a people
revelling to satiety in the abundance of earthly wealth, and
therefore conscious to agony of its insufficiency,—a people separ-
ated from their earliest and dearest ties, and in heart isolated from
all around, yet ready to welcome that message which tells them
they are brethren, and binds them together in a new fellowship,
uniting them to the whole family in heaven and earth.
And if we turn from these to whom we are sent to ourselves
as a Church, our advantages are not less striking. If we are not
closely united, we are not disunited. If wanting in unity of
feeling, we are in a singular degree free from party spirit, murmur-
ings, and divisions. The symbols of atoning or sanctifying grace
are not, with us as in so many parts of the world, symbols of
open contention or secret alienation.
With the Bible as our one rule of faith, with the Prayer Book
as our common guide in matters of indifference, we have neither
made the secret counsels of God from all eternity, nor His future
purposes with respect to our Redeemer’s kingdom, neither the
government of the Church, nor the forms of her services, subjects
of public warfare or private animosity. If we differ, it is not as
to the ends to be attained but as to the means by which to attain
them, not as to the direction of effort, or the question whether
effort is demanded, but as to the measure and extent of that
effort, as to the best mode of concentrating our powers, or the
points on which they should be concentrated first. Again, if by
the Church we mean the Clergy, or if by the Church we mean
buildings and endowments, then are we poor indeed, and may
console ourselves with the oft repeated plea of helplessness : but
if by the Church we mean (as both Scripture and the Church of
England surely do mean) the body of faithful men, who profess
the faith, claim the privileges, and look for the hopes, of the
Gospel, then are we, in proportion to our numbers, the wealthiest
Church the world has ever seen.
With no hindrances then from without or from within, except
those which apathy produces, what lies, —not in the wide distance,
not in the far ends of the earth, but here around us, beside us, in the
midst of us ? Look at the Gold Fields; one Clergyman at Mount
Alexander, one at Bendigo, one licensed reader at Me.lvor ; at


Ballarat, at the Ovens, at all the various subdivisions of the
immense districts we have named, not one. Look at the Bush, tor
which years ago one laborious Missionary was deemed insufficient.
Look at the immense fleet in our harbour. Look at our wide-
spread and increasing suburbs. Look at our hulks. We need not
comment as we proceed -to look is to mourn and weep.
Can the Clergy of themselves remedy such a state of things ?
If one spot could be pointed out in which the clergyman could by
the utmost amount of physical exertion properly superintend the
charge immediately committed to him, we might call on the body
to undertake additional Missionary work ; but where no one ig
able to fill his own sphere as it ought to be filled, it is manifestly
out of their power to attempt more. But the Bishop—what can
the Bishop alone accomplish in such a case as this? he can
arrange Clergymen, but he cannot create them. He can
but he cannot quality. He can locate the few men at his disposal
to the best of his judgment. He can advise, encourage, stimulate ;
but he cannot enable one man to do the work of three, or to fill
two different posts at different ends of the Colony at the same
moment. The melancholy task is his to say, in the choice of
evils, which spot must be for the present neglected ; and melan-
choly indeed his task would be, if it were not likewise his privilege
and duty to cry mightily to the Lord for the people committed to
his charge, and against hope still to believe in hope,—believe that
the Lord of the harvest will send laborers into his harvest, and will
yet return to bless His people.
But it may be asked, In such a case what can we do ? What
can the air do ? What can the water do ? Take up a vessel into
which one or the other intrudes, or from which it escapes, and
often the most practised eye cannot detect an opening ; but they
are always at work, always pressing, and have in some degree
attained their end when the most minutely divided particle
penetrates or exudes. Let us be thus on the watch for oppor-
tunities. Here a school may be established, though a house cannot
be built . There a house may be raised, though we cannot obtain
a school-master. Here a weekly service may be obtained, and there
a church may be built, though no Clergyman can be found. And
is it impossible to suppose that some man of education and ability
can, be found, who with the foot on the ladder that leads, and here
leads so rapidly, to wealth and honors, will account it his real
wisdom to give up all for Christ, and give up the pursuit of
earthly wealth that he may be able to say “As poor yet making
many rich, as having nothing yet possessing all things.”


Some years ago a book was writtten which startled England
from one end to the other. It wais called the “ Perils of the
Nation,” and described the mass of siin and misery that lay welter-
ing beneath the fair surface of sooiiety at home. A hook soon
followed, supposed to be by the sarnie author, called “ A Remedy
for the Perils of the Nation.” In thiis, among other things, it was
proposed, in reference to the fearfull wants ot the Church the
previous volume had described, that,, though neither Clergyman,
Church, nor School, could be ohtaiined, each district should be
divided into parishes small enough for one Clergyman to attend,
and one church suffice ; and it was arg;ued that, though people might
be very indifferent to the fact thadt one Clergyman had 10,000
souls to attend to in one Church, so that 8,000 were excluded from
the Church and none efficiently ministered to, yet the case of
four parishes without Church, Clergyman, or School, could not
fail to excite attention, and, exciting attention, to be remedied.
Such a proposal would he premature for this Colony; but the
spirit of the proposal is, 4< Let us look our evils in the face ; let us
lay them bare, and not shroud them over.” The result of such
a view would be, that a cry would he raised which would pierce
the ears of those who are sitting at ease at home, and induce those
who felt themselves called to the ministry of the Word to come
to the rescue, and not suffer their brethren of the same blood and
of the same faith to perish without help—to perish in the dark-
ness, where the lights so widely dispersed only serve to make the
darkness visible.
Believing then that the Church of God has a calling,—that duty
and privilege are co-extensive, so that every member has not only
his place but his office ; believing that the Church in Victoria has
a peculiar calling,—that it is hers to “ send out her boughs unto the
sea, and her branches unto the river,” —that there is no good work
which does not become her, —'that no brother can perish within her
confines, concerning whom she can justly say, “ I know not. Am
I my brother’s keeper X ” believing that she has power above and
around her, in the promises of God and in the social condition in
which He has placed her, if she will , to fulfil her calling, and to
be to tins Colony what the Church of Jerusalem was to the
world ; and believing that if she intends to stand still, she will
really wander , —that her vitality must be maintained by progress,
her vigour by exercise, —our motto shall be u Forward,” and we
shall endeavour, so far as the Lord grants us opportunity, grace,
and power to do so, to point out her wants, her failings, her
privileges, her duties towards those who are slumbering within,
and those who are perishing without. One of these duties we


would affectionately remind our readers is to pray tor this little
work, that He who has blessed it hitherto may bless it to the end>
and may enable its conductors to carry it on to His glory, and to
the well-being of the souls of many. M
THE RIGHT OF PRESENTATION TO VACANT CURES,
AND THE STATUS OP THE CLERGY,
Of the various subjects which must engage the attention of the
next conference of the Clergy and Laity of this Diocese, we do
not know any which are of greater practical importance, and oj
which the settlement is more urgently needed, than these two,
viz : the right of presentation to vacant cures, and the status of
the parochial clergy. It is therefore very desirable, that all
who are interested in the well-beimg and progress of our Church
should make themselves acquainted with the existing laws and
customs in respect to these particralars, and should carefully and
calmly consider the effect of any proposed change. To afford our
readers the requisite information, and to suggest some hints for
their reflection, the following paper has been prepared.
There appears to be some doubt to whom the right of presenta-
tion to vacant cures properly belongs. Earl Grey, when Secretary
of State for the Colonies, while he waived the exercise of it,
distinctly claimed it as the prerogative of Her Majesty in any
case where the minister received a stipend from the Colonial
Treasury. The late Bishop of Sydney, however, as distinctly
denied that the Crown possessed any title to it; and we do not see
upon what principle of equity the Sovereign, by virtue of Her
office as Head of the Church, could be justified in interfering with
the ministerial appointments of a Colonial branch, which derives
no privileges from the State. Most certain are we that, if this
claim were enforced, the Church would speedily lose all hold
upon the confidence and affection of the people ; who would not
endure that, while all the apparent benefits of a national establish-
ment were taken away, this one incident to such an establishment
should be retained. We do not however apprehend, in the
present state of the public mind, any such infringement upon our
ecclesiastical liberty by the Government, either at home or in the
Colony. We have a good confidence, that they will continue to
act as they have acted hitherto, and will leave the Church of
England, as they leave every other church, free to manage her
own local affairs, subject only to those general regulations, which
they impose upon all alike.


But, to whomsoever the right may legally belong, the power
is practically exercised by the Bishop alone. For by 8 William
IV. No. 5, entitled “An Act to regulate the temporal affairs
of Churches and Chapels of the United Church of England
and Ireland in New South Wales,” it is enacted, that no person
shall he allowed to officiate in any Church or Chapel, unless he
be duly approved, and thereunto licensed either by the Archbishop
of the province, or Bishop of the diocese ; ” and by virtue of this
Act, and, we may add, by the tacit consent of the people, the
whole patronage, as it is usually called, of the diocese has fallen
into the hands of the Bishop, with whom it is likely to remain
until the Church shall form a Constitution for herself a measure
which is much to he desired. For although, if we were required
to choose between the Government and the Bishop, we should
undoubtedly prefer the latter to appoint to any vacant cure, yet
we do not think that the right of presentation ought to belong
either to the one or to the other. The office of the Bishop,
as it seems to us, is rather to receive and approve, than to
present. In fact the proper meaning of the term, is to “present ”
to the Bishop for his appointment, not, as we have just now
used it, and as it is commonly used, to “ present ” to the
vacant cure itself.—ln our opinion therefore, when a cure
becomes vacant, some person or persons, to whomsoever the
Church may entrust the responsibility, should present a Clergy-
man to the Bishop; and the Bishop, if he approve such presentee,
should appoint him according to a prescribed form.
But here two questions suggest themselves, viz. What person or
persons should he authorised to present ? and what power should
the Bishop have to reject the presentee ?
There are some who maintain the expediency of allowing
individuals, who may be willing to build and endow (in whole or
in part) particular Churches, to retain the right of presenting the
ministers of those Churches for themselves and their heirs in
perpetuity. To such an introduction of private patronage
into this Colony we entertain the strongest possible objection.
We believe that it would be fatal to the spirituality and prosperity
of the Church ; and we do not know of any argument in its
favour, except that wealthy persons would be thus induced, as in
the early ages, to build and endow Churches upon their own
estates. For ourselves however, —and the subject has occupied
much of our thoughts,—we would unhesitatingly reject any gift
clogged with such a condition. Our own deliberate opinion is.
that every congregation ought to possess the privilege, not direct-
ly but by their representatives, of choosing their own minister,


subject to the approval of the Bishop, by whom he is to be form-
ally licensed or instituted. In the American Episcopal Church,
if a particular cure become vacant, the Yestry for the time being
elect a Clergyman, whom they nominate to the Bishop for
appointment. This method is found to answer extremely well
there, and we know no reason why it should not answer equally
well here the members of the Vestry being not only professed
members of the Church, but also regular communicants.
With respect to the power which a Bishop should possess of
rejecting any presentee, we feel it to be a question of consideiable
difficulty ; but we cannot but think that he should be invested
with some discretionary authority, and not be compelled to
appoint all against whom no canonical disqualification can bo
alleged. Otherwise there would be great danger of inefficient and
unsuitable ministers being chosen for important posts, from which
it would afterwards be exceedingly difficult to remove them.
There is certainly a possibility of siuch an authority, when exer-
cised by a single individual, being sometimes used improperly;
and we should not object, by wajy of security, and also for
strengthening the hands of the Bislhop, that it should be shared
by him with two Presbyters chosen iby the Church as his assessors.
Indeed we think that, in all acts mot purely Episcopal, a small
elective council might be - very advantageously associated with
him. This however may be a mattes’ for future consideration ;
we cannot discuss it now.
From what we have said, our readers will be able to understand
the state of the law, and the existing practice, with respect to the
appointment of clergymen to vacant cures ; and we hope that
they will also be led to reflect upon the subject, and to consider
whether the system which we are disposed to advocate, or any
other, may be the most likely, with (the blessing of God, to esta-
blish our beloved Church upon a sound and permanent basis ; in
other words, to secure for it the faithful and efficient ministry of
the Word, and the confidence and affection of the people.
2. We now proceed to speak of the .second particular mentioned
above, viz., the status of the Parochiatl Clergy.
All must, we think, agree that tthe present position of the
Clergy is not that to which they awe entitled: for, as they are
appointed at the sole will of the Bishopp, so they are also removable
at his will ; and no man of an indepemdent mind can be satisfied
to continue thus dependent upon thffi fiat of an individual. On
the other hand, no right-minded Bishiop can desire to retain the
Clergy in such dependence : for he miust know, that while he is
liable, either from mistake or prejudice, to exercise his authority


wrongfully, if he exercise it arbittrarily, he can never exercise it
at all, however rightfully and mecessarily, without subjecting
himself to the imputation of tyraanny and oppression. Suppose
a Bishop, upon a charge being brought against a clergyman which
he felt might lead to the remowal of that clergyman from his
cure, to take the course which would be perhaps, under ex-
isting circumstances, the best he ■ could pursue suppose him to
institute a public enquiry, at whiich the accused would have the
opportunity of hearing the evidemce alleged against him, and of
adducing any evidence in his owm defence ; —suppose him further
to associate with himself in such an enquiry a clergyman and •</
layman, whose characters were a sufficient pledge that they
would form each his own independent judgment ; —suppose all
three to concur in the truth of the charge, and in the necessity
for the clergyman’s removal ; —yet, notwithstanding all his care
to guard himself from being, or being thought to be, influenced
by a secret bias, so easily are people excited when their feelings
are appealed to, and so ready are they to take part with one who
complains of being ill-used, that by revoking the clergyman’s
license he could scarcely fail to become the object of general
indignation and obloquy. A Bishop therefore would naturally
wish, that, if he could not be freed from all painful responsibility,
yet that responsibility should be shared by others ; and that the
authority committed to him, not for his own gratification but for
the benefit of the Church, might be defined, and the mode of its
exercise duly prescribed.
It appears therefore very necessary for their own comfort and
that of their Bishop, for the peace of the Church, and for the
removal of an objection which many clergymen in England feel
against emigrating to a Colonial Diocese, that the parochial clergy
should possess the same status as their brethren in England ; —so
far at least that no one, who had been appointed to an independent
cure, should be liable be displaced except by the sentence of a
competent tribunal. We do not however agree with those, who
think that such a clergyman should not be removable for any
cause, except one for which he might be removed from an
incumbency in England : for we regard the fixity of tenure,
which the English Clergy possess, as one of the greatest practical
evils of the Church there. A man may be utterly inefficient as a
pastor of the people committed to his charge—nay, he may be an
insolvent, his income may be sequestrated, and he may be obliged
to leave his parish to the care of a curate—and yet he cannot be
removed from his incumbency. Surely this 'property in a living
is utterly inconsistent with the real character of the ministerial


office. The tenure of a parochiall Clergyman ought to be
dependent upon the efficient performsance of his duties. So long
as he discharges these with fidelity, diiligence, and ability, he ought
to be irremovable ; but if he becomee unfaithful, negligent, or in
any way disqualified for his work, he ought to be displaced.
Such is the case with all persons holding responsible secular
offices ; and why should the holder <of a spiritual office be differ-
ently dealt with 1 Men will not endure to have their bodily
health and life risked, on the plea that a certain physician, who is
confessedly negligent or incompetent, has a freehold in his situa-
tion : and shall the souls of men be sacrificed to the idea that
a Clergyman is not to be dispossessed of his cure, unless he be
convicted of immorality, or unsound doctrine, or some flagrant
offence against Ecclesiastical law? We do not wish that the
Bishop should retain the power of .removing any minister by his
own sole authority ; but we wish that some duly constituted
tribunal should be invested with smell a power. The nature o
that tribunal will be properly a sull.ject for the consideration of
the Conference. It should be such a® to command the .confidence
both of the Clergy and Laity of tine Church ; and its members
should not be too numerous. One ®r two Clergymen elected by
the Clergy, and one or two Laymen chosen by the Laity, with the
Bishop or his commissary as their president, would form a very
suitable Court for the purpose. They ought not, in our opinion,
to be empowered themselves to pass any sentence, but only, in
analogy with a court martial, to report their judgment to the
Bishop, who might confirm it, or otherwise, at his discretion.
Thus neither would the Bishop have the power of removing
a Clergyman without the judgment of the Court, nor the Court
without the confirmation of their judgment by the Bishop. We
should be disposed also to restrain such a Court from sentencing
a Clergyman to any other punishment than a public admonition
and removal from his cure. , .
In offering these remarks we have no other desire than to bring
the subject under the dispassionate consideration of our readers.—
We shall be glad for it to be carefully thought upon, and fully
discussed, before any measure is finally decided upon.
C. M.


THE MELBOURNE HOSPITAL.
In our last number we called the attention of our readers to the
fact, that by the present rules of the Hospital no minister of reli-
gion is allowed to read and expound the Scriptures to his people,
or to pray with them, collectively in any of the wards; and we
stated our scruples in affording any support to an Institution,
wherein the sick are thus debarred from the enjoyment of their
Christian privileges. At the time of writing that paper we appre-
hended no objection to such public reading of the Scriptures and
prayer, except that it would offend the religious feelings of the
Roman Catholics ; and we had reason to hope that some arrange-
ment would be made for separating them from the Protestant
patients, so as to allow of the latter receiving the ministry of the
word without affording the former any pretext of complaint.
This hope has now been disappointed by an objection upon a
ground, and from a quarter, for which we altogether unpre-
pared. The subject having been brought before the Committee,
they referred it to the consideration of the medical officers of the
Institution ; and these have reported, that a religious service in
the wards might he productive of serious injury to the patients.
Such an objection, coming from such a body of gentlemen, has
excited in us no less astonishment than regret. For we doubt not
that our readers have knowm many hospitals in England, where
religious services are constanttly performed in the wards, and no
such apprehension has ever beeen expressed by the medical officers.
We ourselves know one, whesre, we believe, from the time of its
establishment to the present dlay, a service has been held daily in
one or other of the wards ;; and the physicians and surgeons
attending that Institution, mem of the highest reputation in their
profession, have never hinted! at any evil which was likely to
ensue. It is alleged that therce might he particular cases of disease,
in which it would be essential! that the patient should be kept free
from all manner of excitemient. But such cases, we imagine,
must be very rare ; for we ncever heard of any at the Hospital to
which we have alluded : and the house surgeon might be autho-
rised, when one did occur, to prohibit for a time the holding of
service in that particular ward. This discretionary authority would
afford such patients a security from the risk of excitement hy
the subject of religion being brought before them, which they do
not now possess : for at present a minister may enter any ward,
and go to the bedside of any member of his own communion, and
read, and converse, and pray with him, without being informed of


the nature of his complaint, or knowing whether any peculiar
caution ought to be used in addressing him. Such private minis-
tration would surely be far more likely than any public service
to injure one who was in a very excitable state. We cannot there-
fore attach any weight whatever to this novel objection; and we feel
that those gentlemen who have alleged it have thereby incurred a
very awful responsibility before God. They have rendered yet
more difficult than before, the settlement of a question, which
those who regard the eternal, as well as the temporal well-being
of their fellow creatures cannot allow to rest as it is. We again
commend the subject to the serious consideration of all our
readers.
EXPEDIENCY OF ADOPTING A SYSTEMATIC PLAN
FOR TRAINING YOUNG MEIN WITHIN THE COLONY
AS CANDIDATES FOR THE MINISTRY.
Year after year has the want of additional clergy in this rapidly
increasing colony been more and more urgently felt : and, espe-
cially since the discovery of the gold fields, the continual stream of
immigrants, which has been pouring in upon us, has forced upon
every thoughtful Christian the enquiry, How shall we provide the
ministration of “the bread of life” for this great multitude? At first
it was supposed that, if means could be obtained for paying the cost
of their outfit and passage, and if a competent maintenance could be
secured to them in the Colony, there would be found a sufficient
number of faithful and earnest clergy in England and Ireland
willing to “ come over and help us.” But experience has shown
this expectation to be fallacious. At the Annual Meeting of the
Diocesan Society in 1852, it was determined to raise a sum of
£2,000, for paying the expense of bringing out at least ten cler-
gymen ; and a large portion of this money was actually raised and
remitted. The Legislature also at the beginning of last year
passed an Act, whereby a provision, which, with reference to
clerical income in other parts of the British Empire, may certainly
be called ample, was secured to every parochial minister. Never-
theless, and notwithstanding that the utmost exertion has been
used by the late Archdeacon and other friends in England, only
four clergymen have come out within the last twelve months,
one of whom has declined employment ; and there is now only
one, so far as we know, upon his way. It appears therefore that
there is some cause other than the want of money, which prevents


us from obtaining the men that we require. Money has been
provided ; and yet the men cannot be procured. To what is this
to be attributed ? It may be said that the dependent position of
the clergy here, and the social state of the Colony which has
been represented as so deplorable, have prevented many from
offering themselves; and we think it probable that both these
circumstances have operated to a certain extent ; but we do not
attribute the failure of our hopes to either of them. We believe
the real cause to have been the deficiency of such ministers as we
want in the parent Church itself. There is no lack of clergymen
willing, and desirous, to come to us ; but they are, for the most
part, such as we should prefer to be without. Wc do not require
mere officials to do certain Ecclesiastical acts, —-to baptize, marry,
and bury, or to perform certain prescribed services, —to read the
prayers and a sermon in the congregation on Sundays : but we
require “ ministers of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of
God,” who-shall “give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to
doctrineshall be “wise to win souls,” and “watchful over them
as having to give account.” Hence arises the necessity for a careful
enquiry into the character and qualifications of those who apply
to be sent out to us ; and hence it happens that so few actually
come. Those who have kindly undertaken 4he responsible
and difficult office of examining into the suitableness of ap-
plicants for ministerial empiloyment in this Diocese may be
complained of by some as too strict in their requirements ; but we
are sure that, if they were to relax their vigilance, a much more
serious complaint, viz., of tlheir sending out unfit men, would
soon be alleged against them. If this should happen—from which
God of His great mercy preserve us!—instead of that demand
which is now so loudly made; in almost every district for a resi-
dent clergyman, there would soon be mainifested an indifference
to the ministrations of the Church, and a preference for those of
other denominations ; or, where this w-as not the case, instead of
the confidence wdiich is now felt that any one who may be ap-
pointed over them will be a man taught of God, and so, competent
to teach them, there would be a fear among the people lest then-
minister should himself prove experimentally ignorant of the
power of the Gospel, careless about his own soul, and therefore
careless of the souls committed to his charge. The introduction
of unfaithful, or negligent, or inefficient ministers, —and it is only
by the exercise of the greatest caution, in dependence upon the
divine blessing, that we can be safe from this, —would occasion far
more mischief to the Church, and more greatly retard the progress


of religion in connection with the Church, than even the contin-
uance of our present sad deficiency of clergymen. Nevertheless
we must not acquiesce in this deficiency as a necessary evil ; but
must try and devise some means for providing, by God’s help, at
least a partial remedy.
Since we cannot obtain an adequate number of suitable ministers
from England, let us endeavour to supply our want by training up
pious young men, into whose hearts the Lord has put the desire of
labouring in His vineyard, and on whom He has bestowed the
requisite abilities, within the Colony itself. If it be objected to
this suggestion, that such young men could not enjoy here the
the same educational advantages which candidates for the ministry
possess in England, and that we should have a body of clergy of
inferior attainments to their brethren at home, we at once acknow-
ledge the objection as being to a certain extent well founded. We
confess that we cannot hope to train here ministers, who may
take rank with the first-class of our English divines, either
in natural endowments or in literary acquirements ; but we have
a good confidence that we might, with Giod’s blessing, train such
as would not be inferior to the general body of the parochial
clergy in any part of the United Kingdomi. There are not a few
young men in these Colonies at the prcsemt time, who received a
good education at school, but were prevtented by some cause or
other from completing that education at a university; and who
are most anxious, if the opportunity should be afforded them, to
prepare themselves for ordination. Some such have been already
ordained ; and we could mention more than one, whom their
parishioners would thankfully acknowledge to have proved them-
selves most able and useful pastors. Others are now employed
under the license of the Bishop as lay readers, some of whom
may probably be hereafter ordained. But a more systematic plan
is wanted for encouraging them to come forward ; and for directing
and assisting them in their studies, and maintaining a vigilant
superintendence over them, during the period of their prepa-
ration.
The subject was recently considered at a meeting of the Bishop
and several of the parochial clergy of Melbourne and its neigh-
bourhood ; and their unanimous opinion was, that it is expedient
at once to adopt such a plan. In the first instance the more sim-
ple the scheme proposed, the more likely is it to be speedily and
successfully accomplished, and they would therefore merely suggest,
1. That any eligible persons who may offer themselves should
be placed under the care of some one clergyman (if one can be
found able and willing to undertake the charge), who shall direct


and assist them in their studies, and shall exercise a general super-
intendence and control over them ;
2. That they should he employed, under the direction of the
clerical superintendent, in pastoral visitation, Sunday School in-
struction, and, (with the permission of the Bishop) in conducting
service in hamlets where there is no resident clergyman ; and,
3. That, for defraying the cost of their maintenance and other
expenses, a fund be raised to be called, “ The Church of England
Fund for training Candidates for the Ministry.”
For the purpose of submitting this plan to the approval of the
members of the Church, and for adopting means for carrying it
into execution, the Bishop has called a public meeting in the
Diocesan Grammar School near St. Peter’s Church, on Monday
the 9th instant, at Seven o’clock in the evening. We doubt not
that many of our readers have frequently heard complaints,—
perhaps have complained themselves, —of the inattention which
is shown to the spiritual wants of so many populous districts, the
inhabitants of which have ■ repeatedly applied for clergymen, but,
notwithstanding that the requisite stipends are guaranteed, have
applied in vain. Let all such make a point of attending this
meeting, and endeavour to procure the attendance of their friends.
They will thus show that they are really desirous of remedying
the evil of which they complain.
LETTER ON INTEMPERANCE.
We think it well to puhlishi the following letter : more, as the writer
reminds us we have expressed a hope that the subject should be fully
and fairly discussed.—En.
To the Editor of the “ Church of England Messenger.”
“ Sir, —In the November number of your periodical you have
inserted an article pleading for temperance ; which gives en-
couragement to all who are of opinion that the subject ought to
be ‘fully and fairly discussed for the good of the whole com-
munity.’
“It is no doubt an inveterate and chronic disease, and will
he difficult to root out; but there are sufficient reasons that the
attempt should be earnestly made.
“ The vice no doubt took its rise from the native proneness of our
kind to err, and find out many inventions ; but it has been prin-
cipally fostered by the higher ranks of society—or those who had


the means to indulge these evil desires and create artificial
appetites. And therefore there was less hope of its being abandon-
ed, until the same rank were convinced of the appalling and
unmixed evils consequent upon the practice of indulging in any
kind of intoxicating drink. It is ventured to assert this in the
presence of those, who plead for the use of ale and light wines.
Those may possibly in imagination, seem
< To cheer the drooping spirits, and bathe
Thom in delight, beyond the bliss of dreams.’
Though we believe it is only in imagination : for, if they fully and
fairly compare those who use them with those who do entirely
without them, they will find the sum total of cheerfulness in
favor of the latter class : and looking at the whole bearing of the
question, it is not an unreasonable demand made upon those who
entertain the idea that there is good in the moderate use of these
light wines and ale, and upon those who are amassing wealth by
traffic in them, that they should be prohibited.
“ In the first place it cannot be quesstioned that intoxicants quite
unman our kind. —They destroy tthe distinctive qualities ol
man. They destroy the reason amd reasoning powers, and
also the moral sense, or consciencce ; make him utterly in-
capable of controlling or governing himself, and therefore unfit
and unable to exercise ‘dominion,’ ®s intended, ‘over everything,
that moveth on the face of the earth.’
“ They, intoxicants, destroy their moral sense—their perception
of good and evil—right and wrong—and make them dead to
shame. Hence it is that the gaols and workhouses in our father-
land are so densely filled with victims of crime and idleness—•
shameless idleness.— And if the ‘ strong measures ’ pleaded for in
your sheet be not adopted, it will and must produce, as a necessary
consequence, the same effects here ; though, in this warm
climate, death will more frequently remove them from the sight
of men. But this is the most grave part of the subject. They
have not answered the end of their being here—the end for which
they were created. And they are without the hope or promise of
life eternal. These great principles being destroyed, they are
classed among ‘ thieves, and covetous and revilers,’ &c. &c. who
shall not enter the Kingdom of God.
“ The position taken here might be substantiated at any length
by evidence and facts to convince the most incredulous : but such
are patent to the public and need not ask for a place—now at
least—in your pages. Only this idea is entertained, that the
legislature of a professing Christian country—a patriotic legis-


lature—should be willing, and the people, should see to this a fits
help them, to put any and every restraint upon the practice of
that, which destroys the faculties that were given to distinguish
man, and fit him—to replenish the earth and suhdue it : and it is
evident that if this vice prevail, neither this, nor any other
nation or people can be prosperous, powerful or acceptable, or in
favour with God.” J• S.
TREASURY,
CONVERSION AND CALL TO MISSIONARY WORK OP
THE REV. W. A. B. JOHNSON, MISSIONARY AT
SIERRA LEONE.
Soon after Mr. Johnson’s settlement in Africa, he felt a strong:
inclination to place on record the circumstances of his conversion
and call to the missionary work. From this paper, now preserved
among his Journals, in the Church Missionary Society’s office,
we extract the following details :
‘ I have several times determined to keep a day-book, and
actually begun, but have not been able to perform it. This
shows me my weakness, that I can do nothing of myself. Now,
may God the Holy Spirit enable me, the weakest of all saints,
and the chief of all sinners, to fufil this determination ; and may
it be done to the glory of my dear Redeemer, Jesus Christ.
‘ First, it would be desirable to give a brief account of my
conversion ; and secondly, of my call to the Missionary work :
and may this be done to the glory of God.
‘ First. How I was called by grace.
‘ It would be long and tedious to go through the whole of my
life. I will therefore only say that goodness and mercy have
followed me all the days of my life. I have been wonderfully
and miraculously preserved in m3' dangers.
‘ In 1812 it pleased the Lord to make me willing to accept the
salvation of Jesus. The following means were used :—I was
brought very low in temporal circumstances. One evening, having
nothing to eat, and being almost naked, and my dear wife lying in
bed, weeping for hunger, which drove me into great distress, I
threw myself also on the bed, and turning myself from one side
unto the other, thinking what I should do—•“ No friend to go to.”
What to do I did not know.
‘ When I was about eight years of age, my schoolmaster used
the method, that every child had something to repeat on Monday
of the sermon preached on Sunday morning. Accordingly, I
remembered the following passage, which the minister mentioned
in the pulpit. “ Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will
deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.” When the schoolmaster
came to me, and I told him this passage, he was dissatisfied, and
replied that it was merely a passage out of the Bible, and that he
never had thought that sufficient, and so on, which grieved me
very much ; so that I never forgot it afterwards.


< Now when I was lying in bedl, and did not know what to do,
this passage struck my mind ail at -once. “ Call upon Him ! but
thought 1, “ will God deliver mffi?—me call upon God! have
not 1 done such things ?—and comimitted such sins I —and now call
upon God to deliver me ! ” In short, it was as it a book had been
open, and I had read all the sins I lhad been guilty of. “Oh what
shall I do, what shall Ido ! no worldly prospects, and an angry
God.” In short, I was in a despairing state : oh, what a dismal
night was this ! .
‘ The following morning I went to work, (having employment
the same time in a distillery, wliuirc 1 received IBs. per week,
which was insufficient for the suppwrt ol me and my wife, () now I
felt Ido not know, for 1 was like' a madman. Breakfast-time
came—all the men went home, butt it was ot no use for me to go
home ; yet to stay there would causse suspicions, therefore I went
home.
‘My wife met me at the door very happy. I his was something
strange to me ; she told me that tine breakfast was ready. 1 was
astonished, and did not know what tto say. She then told me that
a lady from India had taken a house) in the street, and had sent to
the mistress of a neighbouring shop), lor a woman to stay with
her, and the mistress had recommended her, and the lady had
given her 4s. and told her to get the house ready, and it she
behaved well, she would reward her accordingly.
‘My feelings at that moment I cannot well express. Ihe
greatest sinner in the world, and God so merciful! _ My despairing
state was turned a little into joy ; hut still my sins, my sins lay
very heavy upon me. I tried to pray, but I did not know how
or what to say, lest I should add sin to sin. I beheld the world,
and 1 thought there was none that did right. I tried to do good,
but I could not bring it into performance. Oh, what shall Ido .
What shall I do \ „
‘ Having heard that a prayer-meeting was held in the German
Church at the Savoy, every Iriday and Monday, I determined to
go on the following Friday. Accordingly the time came, and 1
went. . , ,
it Clili # -
< A missionary, Mr. Lehman of the Moravian brethren, gave an
exhortation : Mr. Steinkopff being on the continent at the time.
Mr. Lehman explained the love ot Jesus ; how he came into the
world to save sinners. He exclaimed, “Is there a sinner here,
full of sin ; and ready to sink under it?--I hid, in the name ot
Jesus, such an one to come unto Him ; for He has said, 4 Come
unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and 1 will give
you rest.’ 99 This was what I stood in need of—in short, 1 was
enabled to cry to Jesus for mercy. I could pray —I felt my sins
forgiven—l felt joy unspeakable and full ot glory. I thought
could have gone to Heaven at once ; and, at last, like the Eunuch,
I went on my way rejoicing. Many" passages ot Scripture, and
spiritual hymns which I had learned! when young, entered
mind, and appeared to me as if I nevw had known them betore.
One passage in particular, made me wronder that 1 never had seen
the beauty which it contained, beftme. It was the following :
* It should be remembered that this was the ptcriod of the highest price of pro-
visions ;—bread being at that time just four time's its present price.
B 2


“ In the beginning was the Word ; and the Word was with God,
and the word was God. The same was in the beginning with
God ; all things were made by him, and without him was not
anything made that was made and so on until 1 came to those
words, “ and the W ord was made flesh, and dwelt among us.”
Here I was lost in wonder. God, who made all things, came into
the lower world, became a little child, and lay in a manger for the
sake of poor lost sinners ! Oh, what manner of love is this i
And then I began to see how wonderfully he had led me ; had
protected me in so many dangers, and even when in rebellion
against him, had loved me, and called me out of nature’s darkness
into his marvellous light ; turned me from evil paths into the
paths of life. Oh, why me ! the chief of sinners! the vilest of
the vile, why me, why me 1
_ ‘ After I was thus called out of darkness into the marvellous
light of God, I felt a great desire to convert those who were about
me ; which I believe is the case with every young Christian.
Accordingly, the first thing I undertook was to tell my wife all
that had happened unto me, which she well knew herself, and to
persuade her to come to Jesus ; but I was disappointed, and soon
found that it belonged to the Lord to “ bring men out of darkness
into light.”
‘ The same experiment I tried on my fellow-labourers, but they
laughed me to scorn, and called me a hypocrite, &c., and after
that they began to persecute me. My master, who had not done
any business for some time, began business again, and I had to
work on Sunday. This set me quite against my situation, I there-
fore (after having struggled with the cares ot this world) left it,
and obtained, through the mercy of God, a situation as ware-
houseman, in the sugar-house, in Prince’s Place, Cable Street.
‘ I had then joined the Savoy Church, and used to go with my
wife to Zion Chapel on Sunday evenings.
‘ One Wednesday evening, a young man who lived in the same
house where I was, asked me if I would go with him, and he took
me to Pell Street Chapel. An old gentleman preached that even-
ing. I understood but little English at that time, but still my
soul was so interested that I determined to go again. Accordingly
I and my wife attended on the Sunday evening following. Mr.
Stodhart preached, and I thought I could understand him better
than any English minister that I had heard before. His text was,
“ There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.” I thought I
never had heard so much of the Lord Jesus before, neither had I
heard such a sermon before. This induced me to take a seat, and
I and my wife attended the week-day lecture, and on Sunday
evenings.
‘ But I must confess that at first when I attended there, I stag-
gered much at the doctrine of free and sovereign grace. But
blessed be the Lord Jesus Christ that he has taught me otherwise
since, through his Holy Spirit. lam fully persuaded that no one
will nor can believe except he is taught by God the Holy Spirit.
‘ I come now to the time when it pleased the Lord to fill my
heart with something else. About November 1818, some mission-
aries were publicly addressed in a chapel in Fetter Lane, and I
was present on the occasion. One of them, Mr. B—, stood up
and declared what the Lord had done for his soul, and how he was


called to the missionary work. I felt what I never had felt before.
First, I saw the unspeakable privileges I enjoyed, and what the
Lord Jesus had done for my soul: and, secondly, I saw the
misery and wretchedness of the poor benighted heathen. Oh,
what did my heart feel! Oh, could I but go and help them, and
tell them of Jesus ! how gracious and merciful He is to poor
sinners ! I must see others go, but shall I never go ? lam mar-
ried and have no ability; but still if I could but go, and tell them
of Jesus ! “Oh Lord, to Thee nothing is impossible ; —here am
I, send me these were my feelings that night; I was drowned
in tears—l turned myself to the wall and gave free course to the
fulness of my heart/ In this state was my mind for some time.
“ Oh, if I could but go ! here am I, oh Lord, send me !” But I
took it into closer consideration, and I thought that it never could
be, for the Society would not engage a married man, and many
other difficulties came into my mind, therefore I tried to quench
the desire. But this brought me into great darkness, and I
became quite prayerless and careless.
‘ Soon after Mr. Stodhart used in the pulpit the following-
words, * Are any of you in darkness, examine yourselves, for
something is the reason that God hides his face.’ This brought
me to a close examination, and I foumd that ever since I quenched
the desire about the missionary work, I had been in darkness, and
was constrained to call out, < That iss it, that is it. Lord, to thee
nothing is impossible ! —here lam send me il it thy will !*
Thus it was. Very often when I quenched the desire, a dark
cloud overshadowed my mind.
‘ In May 1814, I attended some of the annual Missionary
Meetings, and was at the communion in Zion Chapel. Here my
desire was renewed again, and I thought that nothing else than
this could make me happy, wherever I was. This was mj r first
and my last thought, “ Lord, to thee nothing is impossible !
here am I, send me.” But still, when I took it into closer con-
sideration, mountains of difficulties arose in my mind, insur-
mountable to reason. . .
‘ Also another desire arose in my mind, which was to join the
church in Pell Street, for my heart was there. I thought, “ Oh,
if the Lord would but be pleased to call my wife by His grace,
and we both could join that church, how happy should I be. We
live close by ; my employment is close by ; I would sit myself
down and spend the rest of my days in peace and comfort,”
However, my wife remained still unconverted. Once Mr. Stod-
hart mentioned in the pulpit that if we could continue to pray for
a particular thing, it would certainly be granted. This was a
great consolstion to me, for I was enabled to continue to pray for
my wife, and by this I knew that he who is a prayer-hearing and
a prayer-answering God, would sooner or later answer my prayer.
But this hope soon vanished away, and I thought the Lord would
not hear my prayer ; unbelief prevailed, and brought me very
low, and when in this unbelieving state, I am ashamed to say, the
Lord answered my prayer. One Sunday while she looked on,
when the people of God in Pell Street, were surrounding- the
Lord’s table, it pleased the Lord to give her conviction of sin.
Oh what did my heart feel then ! Jesus is a prayer-hearing and
a prayer-answering God. When I was full of unbelief, then he
answered my imperfect prayers. n 3


‘ I was then delivered from a heavy burden which had caused
me to mourn very often ; ray prayers were heard and answered,
and my heart did sing for joy. I thought I should he happy and
comfortable now.
‘ But I soon found that I was mistaken. Some time after I
found myself in darkness again and worse than ever. I was
brought very low, and my spiritual distress was great. I could
not utter a word in prayer. My heart seemed like a heavy stone
within me. When I went to heair the word, I appeared as insen-
sible as steel. On Friday evening I intended to go to Pell Street,
hut I felt a great desire to stop ait home ; however, after several
resolutions, I went, hut came late;. Mr. Stodhart gave an exhor-
tation, and I came just before he began. He explained the first
seven verses ot 1 Tim. iii. “ Tliis is a true saying, if a man
desireth the office of a bishop, he has desired a good work,” and
so on ; and he used the following expression, “ If once a desire is
laid on the heart by the Holy Spirit, if it be to the ministry or to
any other office, that desire will never be quenched. The indivi-
dual may try again and again to quench it, but he will never have
any rest till it is accomplished.” This came with power to my
heart, and I thought I had resisted the Holy Spirit, for I had
tried to quench the desire again and again. I determined to go on
and to speak to Mr. Stodhart about it ; but when I attempted to
go to him, I was taken with great fear and unbelief, and did not
go. My heart was then filled with anguish and horror, so that I
had no rest day nor night. “ I have resisted the Holy Spirit, for
I have quenched a desire, which the Holy Spirit has raised within
me,” was my continual anxiety. One day, my mind was relieved
through a passage, which struck my mind very forcibly, and has
ever since been a great comfort too my soul, “ My grace is suffiU
cient for thee, for my strength iis made perfect in weakness.” 1
encouraged me to go on amd the following Wednesday
evening I went to Mr. Stodhart iin the vestry, and opened my
mind to him. He made my heartt bleed, but did not dismiss me
without hope. He told me of a ggentleman who often met with
the Committee of the London SocMety, and advised me to go to
him, and open my mind to him. .Accordingly I went a few days
after to Mr. A , and told him miy desire. He told me that he
did meet with the Committee very frequently, and as soon as he
could find an opportunity, he womld mention it. Thus I went
home more comfortable, but my trroubles soon came on again, and
sorrow overshadowed my mind. I thought it was now high time to
acquaint my wife with my intention. When I opened my mind
to her, she replied that she could not think of such an undertaking,
for she was very happy and comfortable now, and would rather
stay where she was, but that if I thought proper to go, she would
not hinder me. This grieved me very much, and I was in some
measure sorry that I ever had gone so far, and not considered the
matter better before.
‘ However, I was enabled to make it a matter of prayer, and
soon found that my prayers were heard and answered ; for a few
days after, my wife had as great a desire as I had.
‘ I continued to wait, hoping that Mr. A would bring my
offer before the Committee, when one day Mr. During called upon
me. He told me that he was engaged in the work of the Church
Missionary Society, and that the Society wished to send another


with him to W estern Africa. I told him I had a great desire to
»o out as a Missionary, and hte replied, that it I thought proper,
he would mention it to Mr. Pisatt.
‘ A few days after he came ;again and told me that Mr. Piatt
wished to see me. I saw in sonne measure my way clear now, anil
every obstacle seemed to give way, but still a great fear rested
upon my mind. I thought if U should run unsent, and engage in
this great work without being' effectually called to it, I should
bring myself into a most miserable state. However, these were
the means again of bringing mie to a throne of grace, and I found
that my desire increased, and I was more and more determined
« to know nothing among mem, save Jesus Christ and him cru-
cified.” A few days after, I went to Mr. Pratt, and after a short
■conversation, Mr. Pratt told nne he would bring it before the
Committee, and would let me know. About fourteen days atter
I was called before the Commiittee, with my wife ; and we were
received. I again thought thatt I had passed over all my trials,
but I soon found them come in again, spiritual and temporal. My
wife was afflicted with illness, amd I was tempted and distressed
on behalf of my ability. Once II was mercifully delivered through
a sermon preached by Mr. Sttodhart, on the following words :
■“ Because the foolishness of Gobi is wiser than men, and the weak-
ness of God is stronger than mem This was a precious sermon
to me, and especially an aneodiote Mr. Stodhart mentioned about
a fellow-student who was three. 1 years at college, and could not so
much as learn English grammar, and yet the Lord made him
afterwards a useful minister otf the Gospel. This abated my
doubt and fears for a little, but not long, for I again doubted whe-
ther I was truly called or not. This arose because I was con-
vinced that many engaged in this work without being effectually
called to it by God the Holy Spirit. At length I was led to
doubt even my being ever called by grace out of nature s darkness
into the marvellous light of God. I tried to trace my past expe-
rience, but it seemed to me as if it had arisen through my own
imagination, and appeared like a dream. When this was carried
on to the uttermost, and I was about to go to Mr. Pratt the
following day and give up all, a dream, in which that precious
promise, “ My grace is sufficient for thee,” was powerfully im-
pressed on my mind, became the means of calming my fears.
‘ After this I was led much to think about the place of our
destination, and it appeared to me a very dark spot. When
Sierra Leone came into my mind, a dark cloud appeared before
me, but through the darkness, the following promise came con-
tinually into my heart, “ I will bring the blind by the way that
they know not, I will lead then® in paths they have not known ;
I will make darkness light beftbre them, and crooked things
straight ; these things will I do unite them and not forsake them.”
‘ At length the time of our departure was at hand ; everything
was got ready, and I, still doubtiing and fearing, but encouraged
by the above-mentioned promises, went on, and we embarked on
board the “ Echo,” the 11 of Mairch, 1816, for Sierra Leone.
< Thus I have briefly declared tthe dealings of the Lord towards
me so far. 1 must pause for a mioment and compare my present
state and circumstances, with thee above-mentioned exercises, and
say with one of old, “ Oil the dejpth, both oi the wisdom and the


knowledge of God ; how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
wa ys past finding out!” Why has the Lord bestowed so much
mercy upon me, who am so vile and wretched. Oh ! why me
why me! - Memoir of the Rev, I V. A, It. Johnson.
INTELLIOEKCE.
St. PAUL’S PARISH, MELBOURNE.
Sundav the sth ult. being the anniversary of the opening of
St. f aul s Church in this city, two sermons were preached
therein, that in the morning by the Bishop of the diocese and that
m the evening by the Rev. S. L. Chase the incumbent: after each
service a collection was made in aid of the fund for the erection of
School Buildings on the vacant piece of ground adjoining the
Church, in the discourse delivered by the Rev. S. L. Chase he
enumerated the various works undertaken and carried on by
the Congregation during the past year, which consisted of,
Ist, A branch of the Melbourne Diocesan Society & Church of
Engiand Association 2nd, “A District Visiting Society;”
f 4[ lc formation of a Mission to the Aborigines and,
4th, the establishment of two additional Sunday Schools.”
He also noticed the formation of the “Class for Devotional
1 salmody, -the erection of galleries in the church, and the pur-
chase of a dwelling for the Minister-; and in conclusion he exhorted
ms hearers to attend not only tlhe services on the Sabbath, but
also the usual week-day meetings, which are held as follows :
At the Bounce Street School Room every Monday evening, for
social intercourse and the promotion of works of faith and love ;
-nr j i P £ ul s . Chur-ch every Tuesday Morning and every
Wednesday Evening, for the reading of large connected portions
of the Holy Scriptures ; and every Thursday Evening for the
practice of congregational psalmody.
On the Monday following the children of the three Sunday
Schools in connection with St. Paul’s assembled in the church
and after a short service and address from the Incumbent were
taken to the 1 addock adjoining the Botanical Gardens, where
a treat had been prepared, and where they spent the afternoon.
In the evening the Lord Bishop met the members of the Con-
gregation at their usual weekly meeting in the Bourke Street
School Room, and presided.—Plans of the intended Parochial
Schools were submitted by Mr. C. Webb, the architect for the
Church, and after addresses from Revds. S. L. Chase & L. Baker
Messrs. Curtis, Cock, Allan, Ray, Graham, & J. M. Smith—it
v as resolved, amongst other things, that the entire portion of the
desjon estimated to cost ,£B,OOO should be at once carried out.
the Bishop in closing the meeting remarked, that the 2nd
resolution, which required the immediate prosecution of the work,


gave him sincere pleasure.—He liked that word “immediate.”—
xMany works had been contemplated in the diocese, and much
apparent interest had been exhibited for their accomplishment; —
meetings had been held, plans submitted, and much discussion
carried on —but after all nothing, practical had been effected.—The
wording of the resolution to whiich he adverted inspired him with
a good hope, that such would ncot he the case with the St. Paul’s
Schools.—After the Bishop’s xaddress, a subscription list was
opened, a Committee appointed to co-operate with the Trustees,
and instructions were given to tthe architect to call at once for
tenders, and proceed with the wank with all dispatch.
The thanks of the meeting were then tendered to the Bishop,
and the proceedings terminated with praise and prayer.
Communicated.
DIOCESE OF RVEW ZEALAND.
The Bishop of New Zealand lhas addressed a Pastoral Letter
to the members of the Churclh of England in his Diocese,
stating the reasons which hxxvce induced him, “ with great
reluctance,” to come to the detoirmination of sailing for England
during the present month. We subjoin those passages which seem
most likely to interest our reader* :
“1. The necessity of obtainingt the consent of the heads of the
State and of the Church in England to some form of Church
Constitution adapted to our circumstances and wants.
“ The lamented death of the Metropolitan Bishop of Sydney,
who went to England chiefly for this object, appears to have led
to the postponement of the question, till further information shall
have been furnished by the Colonial Churches
“In order that I may go prepared to represent fairly and hilly
the mind of the Church "in this country, I have convened public
meetings at all the principal settlements; and have caused the
resolutions passed at each meeting to be printed in a tabular form,
with my own original draft.
“2. The necessity of removing , if possible, the difficulties which
still prevent the sub-division of the Diocese of New Zealand.
“ No appointment has yet been made to the See of Lyttelton,
and I am still nominally charged with the care of that important
settlement, distant more than 700 miles, and of the English
Community at Otakou, distant more than 800 miles from this
1 “ The rapid increase in the English population of all the New
Zealand settlements, and the locail difficulties which have led to
the establishment of six distinct IProvinces, seem to justify me in
urging upon the Authorities in Enggland an immediate Sub-division
of the Diocese. I cannot be satisfided with less than two additional
Bishoprics, one at Wellington, andd the other at Lyttelton ; but
my written representations, supported by the strong recommend-
ation of the Governor in Chief/, have not as yet received the
attention which they seemed to deaeerve.
“ 3 The absolute necessity of vbbtaining additional Clergymen
and Schoolmasters to carry out thke plan of operations which the
present state of the country requirees.


“ The pacification of the country, and the reduction of the
price of land, will cause our population to disperse itself far and
wide ; and I am most thankful to find that, wherever a new
community is formed, an immediate desire is expressed for a
Church, a Clergyman, and a School.
_ “ The native people with the most praiseworthy liberality have
given noble estates in various places for the endowment of In-
dustrial Schools ; and al ways with the express condition, dictated
in most cases by themselves, that the Trusts should be for the
benefit of both races.
“ We have already three large estates given for this purpose on
the Waikato River : one at Ahuriri : two in the Wairarapa
Valley : one at Taranaki : one at Otaki: and one at Porirua. In
several instances the native inhabitants have made a written
pledge to give a tenth part of their produce for the maintenance
of a Clergyman. At present we are utterly unable to meet these
demands, for want of competent men to undertake the charge of
the proposed Institutions. The liberality of the Government and
of the Native proprietor's has removed every other difficulty.
“4. The necessity of organising some regular means of support
for our Northern Missions, and of providing for the future con
duct of the work.
In a former Pastoral Letter I stated to you the reasons which
led me to undertake this duty : viz. first, the charge which 1
received from the Archbishops and Bishops of the English Church
in 1841, directing me to look upon the See of New Zealand ‘as
the central point of a system extending its influence in all
directions, as a fountain diffusing tfn e streams of salvation over
the Islands and Coasts of the Pacific z ’ and secondly, the renewed
commission which was given to me fan conjunction with the Bishop
of Newcastle by the Bishops of the IProvmoe of Australasia. But
I have been made aware by the experience of six voyages among
mo'V than 50 populous islands tnrat I cannot continue for an
indefinite time to conduct these expended duties with any advan-
tage to the Church ; and therefore itt is my intention to offer my
services for seven years, if it please 'God to prolong my life, as a
pioneer to prepare the way for the establishment of a Missionary
Bishopric among the Islands of the Western Pacific ; and then
after resigning the charge into the lands of the New Bishop, to
concentrate all efforts and to spend the remainder of my days, in
the place where my heart is fixed. The division of New Zealand
into three or more Dioceses will enable me, I hope, to carry out
this plan without the difficulties which arise from the wide range
of my present duties.
“6. Collection of Funds.”
Under this head the Bishop explains the financial arrangements
which he proposes for the endowment of the Church.
In conclusion, after mentioning that the Archdeacons would
act as his Commissaries in the several Archdeaconries, he com-
mends them “to the Divine guidance and protection.” To the
same guidance and protection we would commend this noble-
minded servant of the Lord, praying that he may be preserved
from evil, and brought back in safety to carry out his Master’s
work m the place, where, as he himself says, his “ heart is fixed.’


THE .AZTECS.
We have within the last few years had opportunities of seeing
specimens of at least two races of diminutive people not above
one-half the height or dimenskons ot the ordinary average of the
human race. First, the Buslhmen, who appeared to have no
articulate language ; and next,, the Earthmen, who are now par-
tially civilised. Both these raotes were stated by their introducers
to be the degenerated remnaiitss of ancient nations ; but it seemed
just as likely that they were ffrom the first as they are now-
pigmy races, varying, for some inscrutable reason, from the na-
tural standard of men. But if the Bushmen and Earthmen were
curious, the children now beingg exhibited in the Hanover Square
Rooms are most mavellous. 'JThe first glance at them utterly
astounds the spectator. They i are so small—their heads are so
strangely formed —their little litinbs are so meagre—their cries are
so shrill—their pranks so stranage, that one in the first flush of
astonishment thinks rather of sprites and hobgoblins than of
human beings. A closer inspection, however, soon removes the
impression, and we begin to try tto trace the race of these wonder-
ful creatures, whose home was umdoubtedly in the recesses of the
Cordilleras. But first let us diescribe them. They are boy and
girl, and from their dental condlition, so it is stated, are believed
by medical men to be of respectively seventeen and eleven years
of age. We confess that we coudd form no satisfactory judgment
on the point. The appearance oil' the little creatures is so utterly
anomalous that we gave up the iattempt._ Their height, however,
is another matter. The boy, thte elder, is certainly under three-
feet in stature ; the girl measures only two-feet six inches. As
we have said, the limbs of the Aatecs are very thin ; but they are
evidently full of life and spirit, and gambol and run, and look
through a lorgnette, and ride a rocking horse, and scrape a fiddle
with great glee and apparent enjoyment. The head is, of course,
the most interesting portion of tmeir development. 11 corresponds
in size to the diminutive proportions of the body which hears it,
while the hair is of a glossy black —thick, soft, and silky, with a
tendency to curl, stronger in the male than the female. _ Ihe lore-
head is low, and recedes almost aft an animal angle, but just under
the hair there is a sort of ridge which encircles the brow. Ihe
eyes are piercingly bright, and bllack, and the nope of exaggerated
Hebrew proportions, forming, iindeed, the main feature oi the
face, as the under jaw recedes froim the upper, and the chin again
recedes rapidly from it. This coonstruction of the lower part of
the face gives the whole eounteenanoe a peculiar expression, the
reverse of that of persons endowed with mental faculties ; but,
on the other hand, it is only fairr to say that the children exhibit
marked proofs of intelligence, thaat they are as inquisitive as they
are lively, and that they are beginning to understand the words
which Professor Anderson —our oldd wizard friend, who has brought
the little creatures from South Aimerica—addresses to them. As
a whole, then, the expression of thhe face is strongly Jewish, the
remark was general in the room, amid universally agreed m. fhe
nose, the black lustrous eye, and tithe hair with a tendency to curl,
all corroborated the opinion. But i a resemblance more remarkable
still is to be traced in the features < of the Aztec to the drawings ot
the basso rclieros in Mr. Stephens's’ volumes describing the won-


(irons ruins of the ancient Mexican cities. These remains are to
full as remarkable and interesting as those of Ninevah, to
which indeed they bear no slight resemblance, both in architecture
and ornament, and a figure painted upon the wall, copied from
Stephen’s drawings, is a perfect fan simile of the profiles of the
little Aztecs, particularly of the boy.
, Tim story of the discovery and removal of these children is
given in a little book sold in the rooms. Professsor Anderson is
understood to be not in the least responssble for the authenticity
of the tale. All he says is, that the history is that communicated
by a Spaniard named Pedro Velasquez, who, we presume, obtained
the children, and the main points of which are as follow : Two
adventurers, smitten by Stephens’ account of the ancient cities of
Mexico, and particularly by the report ol an old Mexican priest
to Mr. Stephens, that on the east side of the Cordilleras there still
exist cities and populations similar to those which Cortez con-
quered, resolved to proceed to them, and that he, Velasquez,
being accustomed to traverse these regions, accompanied them as
interpreter and guide. After a long journey, the city of Ixmaya
is discovered from the top of the Cordilleras, and they descend
towards it. The mounted police of the Ixmayans attack them,
and one of the adventurers—Mr. Hammond, a Canadian, is
wounded, and dies of his wounds. The others, professing peaceful
intentions, are received hospitably by the Ixmayans—the account
of whose city is evidently copied from those of Mr. Stephens.
The remaining adventurer, Mr. Huerlis, of Baltimore, having
formed an acquaintance with a fair Ixmayan, is burned upon an
altar. Vclansques alone escapes with an Ixmayan priest, having
the charge of the two children—who are members of a race of
which there exist about 500 in Ixmaiya, and who are held sacred,
as forming a sort of priesthood, hawing been, when driven by
Cortez across the sierra of the Cordlilleras, received by a nation
which had built the ancient cities, amd by them condemned only
to intermarry amongst themselves ;; the result of which turned
out to be the degeneracy of stature amd intellect before us.
. ls the story told by those wiho brought the children to a
civilized part of America. We suspeect it will find few believers ;
but that signifies but little. There stand two of the strangest
specimens of the human race ever jpresented to civilised man ;
and let physiologists decypher, if they may, their probable origin
and race.”
The following is Dr. Latham's opiinion above referred to :
“ 29, Upper South wick- street,
My dear Sir, July sth.
I think you must have been fully convinced, by the interest
which our best savans have taken m your little ones, that they
are objects of no ordinary novelty. They tell their own tale by
their shape, size, and colour, —but only to a certain degree. The
external history, or the details of their birth, parentage, and
other important antecedents, is at present by no means propor-
tionably clear.
My own opinion—that of an ethnologist rather than a terato-
logist, and subject, of course, to be influenced by future facts—-
is,—


a. That they do not represent a separate species of the genus
Homo, —although one of the likeliest localities for such a species
is the one to which they are referred.
h. That they do not represent any permanent variety,— i.e. that
they are not the actual offspring of parents, nor the probable
parents of offspring, like themselves.
c. That they are the progeny of the natives of the district to
which they are referred, —those being Indians of the ordinary size
and organization (there or thereabouts).
d. That there are other individuals more or less similar to them
in the same quarters.
e. That there have been such for several generations.
/. That physical and social causes, in proportions not yet ascer-
tained, have effected their organisational peculiarities, and made
them endemic.
q. That the language of the division to which they belong is
akin to either the Quiche (see Stephens’) or to the Mixe of
Oaxaca.
h. That this language belongs t® a population older and more
indigenous than the Aztec,—just a* Welsh is older and more indi-
genous than the English.
i. That they are Aztecs in the way that a man from Snowdon
would be English, supposing all Blritain, except North Wales, to
have been brought under (say) Fireneh or Prussian dominancy.
He would not he English in blood land language, but he would he
English so far as he retained certaiin English characteristics, con-
trasted with those of the intrusive (conquerors. Hence, I take no
exception to the designation.
k. That they come from the neighbourhood of some of the
so-called Casas Grandes.
l. That they come from a locality where a certain amount of
political independence and ancient Paganism may still be retained.
m. That access to these parts may be more practicable to an
Indian a half-blood, a black or a white (provided he be not
a Spaniard) than to the Spaniards of the country around. This
is the case with some independentt districts of the Phillippines ;
and it suggests a promising field for future enterprise.
I have given my opinion upon tthe chief points suggested by
their history and appearance in dettail in preference to expressing
it by the use of any general term,, inasmuch as I know no word
which, if used without considerabde qualifications, would give
other than a wrong idea. This is a igood measure of the extent to
which they arc unlike anything yet seen.
I remaiin, dear Sir, yours most truly,
R. G. LATHAM.
English Paper.
J. M. Morriss, Esc,,
NEW COLONIAL BIISHOPRICS.
The arrangements having been conmpleted for establishing two
new Bishoprics in Southern Africa—-one at Natal and one at Gra-
ham’s Town—it is the intention of i the Colonial Bishoprics Com-


mittee to proceed forthwith with the attempt to establish five
additional Sees in the colonies and dependencies of the British
Crown. The first in order is that of Christ Church, New Zealand,
which has for some time past been in abeyance. Towards the
erection of this See the Society for Promoting Christian Know*
ledge has granted a sum of £. 1,000. The next is the bishopric of
the Mauritius, at present under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Colombo. Towards this see there have been promised
,£3,000 by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts ; £2,000 by the Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge ; and £.1,000 by the Christian Faith Society. A
third bishopric is that of Borneo, towards which £.5,000 have
been promised by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel,
and £2,000 by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
Towards another bishopric, in East Canada, £2,000 has been pro-
mised by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and
towards an additional bishopric in western Australia £3OOO has
heeen promised by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.
Negociations have been opened with Her Majesty’s Government
for the establishment of the bishopric at the Mauritius, and there
is reason to believe that the means of its endowment will he pro-
vided from sources independent of the Colonial Bishoprics fund.
The seat of the new bishopric in East Canada will he at Kingston,
and that in Western Australia at Perth. The Rev. F. T. M‘Don-
fall, M.A., will be the first Bishop of Borneo, and the Rev.
'hilip Gell, M.A., Curate of St. Mary’s Church, Bryanston
Square, formerly warden of Christ’s College, Yan Piemans Land,
will be the first Bishop of Christ Church, New Zealand.”
Since the above paragraph was in type we have seen a letter
from the Bishop of Cape Town, dated London, September 24,
1863. His Lordship writes:—
“ I have been in the country since tfflie first of April last year.
God he praised, I have, amidst much weakness, been able to ac-
complish far more than I dared to anticipate. Two new bishoprics
Ixave been founded, additional clergy halve been obtained, one im-
portant mission has been planted, and the funds raised for the
maintenance of our existing work, andl even for its extension, so
that I trust that I may he permitted to return to my distant home
with a good hope that the Church will at length take root in that
dark and desolate land.
“ For the last year, I have been employed, almost daily, in
preaching or attending meetings, and have, by my appeals, raised
a sum of £14,000 —and £2,300 a year in subscriptions for the three
South African Dioceses. The two new Bishops must each employ
themselves in a similar manner for six months, and then, I trust,
they will be in a position to attempt a fair mission-work amidst
the heathen masses by which they will find themselves sur-
rounded.”
COLONIAL CHURCH BILL.
From a private communication from England, we learn that the
Colonial Church Bill, which was recently introduced into the
House of Lords by the Archbishop of Canterbury, was the result


of many long and interesting discussions among the Bishops in
England. The Archbishop summoned them all to deliberate on
the subject; and they met, never less than twenty-two or twenty-
three in number. Although there was, at first, considerable dif-
ference of opinion amongst them, as to the details of the measure,
yet, after a full discussion, they all came to a unanimous judgment
upon every point. The value of the Bill, as a guide to us in all
matters of principle, is greatly enhanced by this concurrent ap-
proval of all the Heads of the Church in our Fatherland.
SOCIETY FOR THE PREVENTION OF SABBATH DE-
SECRATION, AND THE SUPPRESSION OF VICE.
As most of our readers have doubtless already seen a report of the
public meeting held on Tuesday evening, the 20th ult., for receiv-
ing the report of the preliminary (committee, which had been ap-
pointed for the organization of thee above-named society, we need
not here furnish any summary of the proceedings; but we cannot
omit expressing our thankfulnesss, that our Christian laity are
binding themselves together to steim, if it may be, by the blessing
of God, the torrent of ungodlinesss and vice, which now threatens
to overflow the land, and of whiclh nevertheless a large number
of our citizens seem to be wholly mnaware : for we cannot suppose
that they know and are indifferenlt to the means, which an insa-
tiable covetousness is employing to enrich itself by the de-
moralization of the people. We tirust that this society will, if we
may so accommodate the language of the apostle, “ bring to light
the hidden things of darkness,” and by bringing them to light
will cause them to be universally denounced, and authoritatively
put down.
BARRABOOL HILLS.
On Tuesday, November 22, a parochial meeting was held at the
Church of England School-room, Barrabool Hills, with a view to
the erection of a Church, The Lord Bishop of Melbourne pre-
sided. Tea was partaken of, after which the question of a site
was discussed at some length. Upon consideration it appeared
desirable that the point should be settled by a meeting of subscri-
bers, to be held subsequently. A subscription list was at once
opened, the immediate result of which was an amount of £( >7*l
15 S ; and Monday, December 26th, was named for a meeting of
subscribers to arrange the site and .-appoint a Building Committee.
The Barrabool Hills District is mow supplied with a clergyman,
(the'Rev. W. R. Croxton) the presemt school room is unable to con-
tain the numbers who attend Divinte Service, and the above liberal
subscription is one of the best prootfs of the sincere desire of the
inhabitants for the ordinances of thae Church.
MOODEWAARRA.
On Wednesday, November 23, the (-children attending the Church
of England School in this District were entertained with tea and
cake; a large booth had been erectedd for the occasion, and refresh-


ments provided, not only for the children, but the assembled
friends and supporters of the School. The children were examined
by the Rev. T. C. B. Stretch and the Rev. W. R. Croxton.
After tea Mr. H. Ridler, the master of the School addressed
the two Rev. Gentlemen on behalf of the inhabitants, and pre-
sented to the one a bible and to the other a prayer book, as a
token of gratitude from the teachers in the Sunday School, for
the interest they have taken in the spiritual welfare of their dis-
trict. Messrs. Stretch and Croxton returned their acknowledge-
ments, and addressed the children and friends at some length.
Two or three friends from the neighbourhood also said a few
words.
The party then broke up, and the children accompanied their
departing friends in procession—with their flags flying—out of the
township; parting with three cheers for the Queen, and the same
for the Bishop and Clergy of Victoria and the Moodewarra School.
ORDINATION.
At an ordination, held by the Bishop of Melbourne on Sunday
the 26th nit. (Christmas-day), Mr. G. 0. Vance and Mr J. Brennan
were admitted to the order of Deacons. The former has been
licensed to the Curacy of the Cathedral Church of St. James ;
the latter to that of Prahran, in the suburbs of Melbourne, where
the ministrations of a Clergyman have been long greatly
needed.
MINISTERIAL.
We are happy to announce the- long-expected arrival of the
Rev. George and Mrs. Goodman. As the “ Cotfield,” by which
they were passengers from Enghund, was likely to be detained
some time at Adelaide, Mr. & Mirs. G. left her, and came on in
a coasting vessel. The time of Mir. G.’s arrival was most oppor-
tune ; and we thankfully acknowledge it as another token of the
Lord’s remembrance of us in our necessities.
The want of Clergymen is at present more distressing than
ever. Continual appeals from the various gold-fields are made to
the Bishop, to which he can only neply by urging upon those who
make them the use of the means which our Saviour himself has
enjoined ; “ Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that He
will send forth labourers into his hairvest.” We hope, and believe,
that the Lord is only trying the faith and patience of his servants ;
and that He will both give them grace to wait upon Him, and
hear and answer their prayers. Liet not any by their impatience
provoke .Him to send them unfaithful or incompetent men, who
will retard, rather than promote, ithe progress of true religion.—
It is some encouragement to he aide to add, that a lay-reader,
Mr. Searle, who has been for son* months labouring with the
Rev. J. 11. Gregory at Bendigo, is appointed to the Me Ivor gold-
field, where his services are likely t® be highly appreciated by the
people.


MR. GEORGE MACKETT has been appointed Canvasser and Col-
lector to the Church of England Messenger. He vyill per-
sonally wait upon those Members of the Church whose names and ad-
dresses are known, and his receipt will be a sufficient discharge for all
monies paid to him.
J. M. SMITH, Hon. Manager.
NOTICE.
ONE of the objects for which The Church of England Messenger was
established being the furnishing intelligence of all that has been going
on in the Church in this Diocese, it is hoped that the Clergy and Secreta-
ries of Local Committees will transmit, under cover, to the Rev. S, L.
Chase, St, Paul’s Parsonage, Stephen Street, Melbourne, Reports of any
Meetings which may have been held, and of any interesting circumstances
which may have occurred in their respective parishes ; and also that they,
as well as every member of the United Church of England and Ireland,
will not only become subscribers to the Messenger, but also endeavour to
promote its circulation by every means in their power.
PRAHEAM.
THE MISSES ARIMSTRONG
(Daughters of the very Reverend J, Armnstrong, Dean of Kilfenora, and
Archdeacon of Clonfecrt, Ireland.)
BEG to inform the neighbouring Gentrvv that they have just opened a
DAY SCHOOL, IN WESTIBY’S PADDOCK,
Prahran, near to the Presbyterian Church,, now r in the course of erection.
The Advertisers undertake to teach Engl'lish, French, and Italian, in all
their branches ; also Drawing, Music, Slugging, &c., and hope that their
efforts to forward the Education of Pupilils entrusted to their care, will
merit the approbation of those who patroniiize them.
References are allowed to His Excellency / Mr. La Trobe, the Lord Bishop
of Melbourne, and His Honour Judge Barrry.
For Particulars, as to Terms, &c., apply :atthe Establishment.
December 31st, 1853.
WILLIAM BARIDWELL,
TAILOR AND DRAPER,
No. 63, SWANSTON STREET,
(Opposite the Town Illall,)
PATRONISED BY THE LORD BISHOP AND CCLERGY OP MELBOURNE AND
ITS VICINITY,
IN returning thanks for the patronage wHiich has been for many years
conferred upon him, begs to intimate thiat, having recently purchased
the Stock-in-Trade of Ms. Mason, late of Bourke Street, and also some
large consignments, his customers can now naake their selections from one
of the largest and richest stocks in the Colonjy.
W. B. would call particular attention tco his unique assortment of
Summer Goods, consisting of black and colomred Cloths, Fancy Doeskins,
Vestings, Fancy Quiltings, Moire Antique, &tc. &c.
Bedford Cord and Elastic Doeskins, suitablle for Riding Trowsers.
Maker of the Victoria Paletot, a light and gentlemanly garment, suitable
for every climate.
a suit of clothes made in twvelve norms.
Economy—Strength'—Duirahility.
OBSERVE!—63, SWANSTON ST., OPPOSITE THE TOWN HALL.


To those who have heen enriched, directly or indirectly, by the
discovery of the Gold-fields.
CHURCH AND PARSONAGE TOR CASTLEMAINE.
SOME Members of the Church of England at Castlemaine are en-
deavouring to raise a Fund for the erection of a Church and
Parsonage in that important rising Tot™, the centre of the Go'drfields of
Mount Alexander. They have raised a considerable Sum in the locality,
and they now appeal to their brethren in Melbourne, whose participation
in the gains of the Gold-digger in a manner connects them with him, and
ought to make them compassionate his spiritual destitution, —the more
that he is himself in general so insensible to it. —They appeal for aid in
their undertaking; and they trust that they will not appeal in vain.
The following Subscriptions have been already received.
The Lord Bishop of Melbourne 10 0 0
John Thomas Smith 10 0 0
E. P. Sturt 10 0 0
Win. Rolleston 10 0 0
J. M. Smith 10 0 0
Robert Willan 10 0 0
Stubbi & Sou 10
W. H. Taylor 2
W. F. Stawell 10
Jno. Mackenzie.'....: 3 0 0
E. M. Dyne 10 0
John Hodgson 5 0 0
William Riley 2 0 0
S. &R. Gregory 2 2 0
►J. W, it. VilCgUlJ Z 2
James Nicholson 3 o
G. Nicholson t. 10 0
Thomas Clark 3 3
F. G. Moule 2 2 0
Henry Box *6 5 0
nenry nox 6 6 0
D. S. Campbell 5 6 0
T. T. a’Beckett 5 6 3
O. Browne 20 0 0
jorowue zu u O
Benjamin Lucas 5 5 0
'S T ■ <>
Subscriptions will be received by
Majou Campbell, Messrs. J. M. Smith, W. F. Stawell, and R. Willan,
who have kipdly consented to act as a Sub-Committee of the Diocesan
Society for the purpose f also by any of the Clergy; or they may he paid
at the Church of England Book Depot, Swanston-street.
MELBOURNE CHURCH OF ENGLAND MESSENGER.
Printed and Published for the Proprietors by ‘Benjamin Lucas, Printer,
72, Collins Street, East, Melbourne.
( .. . Monday, January 2, 1854.
