

WRECK, RESCUE & MASSACRE


PRESENTED BY THE COMMITTEE
OF THE
|uknilc Ulrsstoiiant Sothti),
CENTENARY CHAPEL,
MIDDLESBROUGH.
To lt* M
(j 7
NOVEMBER C 187^






THE WRECK, THE RESCUE,
AND
THE MASSACRE.
AN ACCOUNT OF
THE LOSS OF THE BARQUE “ THOMAS KING,”
ON
CATO’S REEF, NEW-HOLLAND,
IN APRIL, 1862.
BY
CAPTAIN J. H. WALKER.
EDITED BY THE REV. JOSEPH BINNS,
OF THE WESLEYAN THAMES MISSION.
380.


PRINTED AT
THE CHILDREN’S HOME, BONNER ROAD,
LONDON, E.


INTRODUCTION.
The particulars embodied in the following
narrative were communicated by Captain J. H.
Walker, at the Seamen’s Chapel, Commercial-
road East, London, at the Quarterly Meeting
of the Collectors of the Wesleyan Seamen’s Mis-
sion, held on Wednesday, December 29th, 1852.
However startling and improbable some of the
statements may appear, they contain, as Cap-
tain Walker observed in his address, “ not
fiction, but facts; not romance, but what had
been to him 'painful reality
We have read, during the past year, of
“ Sorrow on the Sea,” and “ Sorrow on the
Land.” The loss of life and property occa-
sioned by the burning of the steam-ship
“Amazon,” and the devastations caused by the
Holmfirth flood, have excited a painful inter-
est throughout the nation, and have awakened
and called forth a generous sympathy towards
380. a 3


the unfortunate survivers, worthy of British
hearts, and British liberality.
In the wreck of the “ Thomas King,” and the
subsequent massacre of four of the crew and one
passenger, and the great privations and hard-
ships endured by Captain Walker and the rest
of his men, we have Sorrow both on the Sea,
and on the Land ; —a catalogue of sufferings,
varied and protracted, which ought to excite
our commiseration and sympathy, and call forth
our most strenuous exertions in behalf of all
those “ that go down to the sea in ships, that do
business in great waters.” The following pages
contain an affecting account of seamen who have
not only suffered shipwreck, and been nights
and days in the deep, but have also been “in
perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils
by the heathen, in perils in the wilderness,
in perils in the sea; in weariness and painful-
ness, in hunger and thirst, in cold and
nakedness.”
London,
January 31*7, 1853.
380.


THE WRECK, THE RESCUE, AND
THE MASSACRE.
The “Thomas King” was a fine barque,
built originally for the West-India trade, to
bring home the produce of the estates belonging
to Messrs. Thomas and William King, to whom
she belonged at the time of her loss. She
sailed from London, on her last and disastrous
voyage, September 30th, 1851; and, ultimately,
from England, (Torbay,) October 17th; and
arrived in Sydney, New South Wales, February
sth, 1852. After discharging her cargo, she was
taken up by the Australian Sugar Company, to
bring a cargo of sugar, &c., from Manilla; on
which voyage she departed from Sydney, April
7th, 1852. In consequence of the gold-mania,
sailors were receiving very high wages; and, in
many instances, those who were shipped for a
voyage out and home again, no sooner arrived
in Sydney, than they exercised all their inge-
nuity to get clear of their ship; and the
“ Thomas King ” was not more fortunate than
others in this respect. When the pilot came
on board, five hands out of fourteen (viz., the
carpenter, boatswain, and three able seamen)
380.


refused duty; and, as there was great diffi-
culty in getting others, I was under the
necessity of putting to sea with these men in
confinement; but after four days they returned
to their duty.
It was my intention to take a common route
for vessels bound from the colonies to Manilla
or China; that called the eastern passage, going
either to the eastward or the westward of New
Caledonia. But I was only twenty-four hours
sail from Sydney, when the wind set in from
the eastward; so that it became impracticable
to make easting : I therefore stood to the north-
ward. On Friday, April 16th, at noon, by
observation, I was in 24° 34' 05" south latitude,
and east longitude about 155° 18', having
Cato’s Bank bearing north, or nearly so; the
wind gradually favouring me, and the ship
heading N.N.E. and N.E. by N. In my chart
(which I believe to be the last published by the
Admiralty) was a reef laid down to the S.B.
from Cato’s Bank, said to break only in bad
weather. This reef, I thought, from the long
easterly wind setting a current to the west-
ward, we might probably fall in with, should
it show itself; which was likely, on account of
a heavy swell on at the time, and consequently
Ishould be enabled positively to determine its ex-
istence. I therefore gave particular instructions
for maintaining a careful look out; and did not
go to bed myself, but lay down on the lockers in
380.


the cabin. At half-past twelve, I worked the
ship’s way up. She had averaged knots
upon a N.N.E. compass-course: the weather
was cloudy overhead, with a thick haze on the
water; consequently, we could see but a very
short distance from the ship. But, allowing, as
I did, 1£ knot per hour for current to the
westward, it gave me, in longitude 155° 38' E.,
from fifteen to seventeen miles to the eastward
of Cato’s Beef. At this time, I took a good
look round, and lay down again; giving fresh
orders for a strict look out. Shortly after
3 a.m., I heard the man at the helm exclaim,
“ What is that 1” and then something was
said about breakers ahead. 1 immediately
went on deck, but could not for the moment
see anything distinctly. I, however, directed
the second mate to call the hands to tack
ship, and then ordered the helm to be put
hard a-lee; at the same time, I could see
nothing that appeared like broken water. The
vessel came head to wind, or nearly so. I
hauled the main-yard; when immediately she
struck on a rock. As I could see nothing ( to
leeward, I hauled over the weather jib-sheets,
hauled the fore-yard aback, and squared the
main-yard, after taking in the mizen, and
hauling the mainsail up, —thinking she would
probably beat over the reef; never for one
moment supposing it to be Cato’s Reef. But
the ship hung firmly and immoveably on the
380.


rock; and her head did not vary one point, till she
went to pieces. When I found she was fast, and
that the sea was making a clean breach over
us, I ordered the hands aft, to lower the two
quarter-boats; but before we could lower the
port-boat, a sea washed her away from the
davits. I then lowered the starboard-boat;
but she had not been in the water more than
a minute, when a sea struck her, and carried her
away, with two men in her. These, for awhile,
we gave up for lost. By this time, the ship
had heeled over on her beam-ends, or nearly
so, on her port-side; and, to our great distress,
we discovered water-casks, deals, hay, &c.,
floating out to windward, too clearly indicating
that she was breaking up fast. I then, with great
difficulty, got the long-boat out, and dropped
her astern, with a good hawser fast to her;
and, the sea being so heavy that we could form
no idea of the position of the reef, I cut the
masts away to form a breakwater for the boat
till daylight. Just after the masts went over the
heavy sea struck the long-boat, tearing her
out, and she went adrift, with three men in
her. We were now left without a single boat, our
only refuge beingthe quarter-galley, where eleven
of us were huddled together; and we could do
no more than commit ourselves to the care of
that Being who commands both winds and waves,
and wait till daybreak. Before we took to the
quarter-galley, I endeavoured to get some
380.


water from below, but did not succeed, as the
casks were all floating in the hold, except what
had already floated out through the starboard-
bilge. A more complete wreck could scarcely
be seen, than was the “ Thomas King,” in less
than an hour after she first struck upon the reef.
When the long-desired daylight broke upon us
we discovered a bank inside the fatal reef on
which our unfortunate vessel had struck; and a
considerable distance between us and the reef,
was nothing but broken water,—the sea break-
ing heavily on the reef itself. The ship, to all
appearance, was rapidly breaking up. It was
a great relief to our minds when we discovered
by the increasing light, that the three boats,’
which we supposed had been dashed to pieces, or
drifted out to sea, were on the reef, and in one
of them all the men whom we had given up as
lost. It appears, that the port quarter-boat
had turned bottom upwards, and by some
means got fast upon the coral-rock; the men
in the starboard quarter-boat coming in contact
with her, and having lost their oars, were
afraid of drifting out to sea in the gig; they
therefore let he 1 go, and hung on the boat
among the corak The long-boat also drifting
in the same track, with her bows out, fell in
with them, and the men gladly availed them-
selves of the same refuge, and let the long-
boat go; which was the cause of our finding
the men all together. By their carted strength
380. , & ’


they were enabled to right this boat ; but, when
she floated, they found she took two of the
hands to keep her free from water, having
damaged her bottom considerably on the reef.
They made signals to us on the wreck, that
they had no oars; and as soon as we could
understand what they meant, I asked for
volunteers to endeavour to reach the reef
with oars, which appeared to be the only chance
of saving them in the boat, and us on the
wreck. But I am sorry to say, that, out of
nine seamen, none could be found who were
able to swim sufficiently to trust themselves in
the surf with an oar. I afterwards discovered
that one part of the reef was connected with
the island; so that, had we got on to the reef, we
might have reached the island or bank without
the aid of a boat. Finding there was no one
willing to make the attempt, I divested myself
of all my clothes, except my trousers and
flannel, cast myself into the sea with an oar,
and succeeded in reaching the reef. The
carpenter, seeing that I had been successful,
followed the example, and brought another oar.
But now came the worst part of our task; for
we had both come without shoes, and, to reach
the boat we had to travel at least half a mile
on the sharp-pointed coral, the boat meanwhile
drifting along the reef, so that we were afraid
she would drift to leeward of the island and
out to sea before we could reach her, and thus
3SO,


leave us without themcans of saving ourselves, or
those on the wreck. But by dint of perseverance,
and by the aid of Him who is the helper of the
helpless , we reached the boat, very much ex-
hausted. We immediately pulled for the island,
where we perceived a number of things had
drifted already from the wreck, —among which
we found some of the oars which had been lost
out of the boats. After landing myself, the
boatswain, and a boy, the men in the boat
went off again to the reef ; by which time the
tide had fallen so much that they could walk
within ten fathoms of the ship’s stern. I directed
them to get lines laid out from the ship to the
reef, and then, making themselves fast to
the lines, to let those on the reef haul them
through the surf ■ and by following these
directions all hands were saved. I was sorry
that I could not accompany them in the boat,
for my feet were so much cut with the coral
that I could not stand for a considerable time;
and the carpenter’s feet were also dreadfully
lacerated. By 1 p. m ., as near as I can judge,
v e were all again safe on land • and our first
act was to return thanks to Almighty God for
our providential preservation from a watery
gia\o. Our next business was to ascertain
vhat the island produced, and what means we
had at command to prolong those lives so
signally preserved.
We found several casks of biscuits, flour, and
380. B


brandy; and also one sheep and six ducks alive.
The rest of our live stock —namely, five horses,
one milch cow, twenty-three sheep, two pigs, two
dogs, and a number of fowls —we found lying
dead at different parts of the island and reef.
We also discovered a quantity of salt pork, which
was very acceptable. In the course of the after-
noon, as I found some of the men disposed to
indulge too freely with the brandy,! started the
whole on the beach. Our next concern, and it
was of great moment to us, was to ascertain if
any fresh water could be obtained : as yet we
had seen no signs of any, and without fresh
water our provisions would be nearly useless.
We dug in several places in the hope of obtain-
ing it, but our labour was in vain : for after
digging nearly twenty feet in the sand, both in
the middle of the island and near the beach,
we found the sand as salt as at the surface.
We were, therefore, obliged to give it up. This
caused us imnjense labour, as we had only
pieces of wood to supply the place of shovels.
When we found that there was no water to
be obtained by digging, we made a tent of
some deals that floated on shore, that we might
catch water during the night should it fortu-
nately rain, as, from the appearance of the
heavens, we hoped would be the case. The
morning came, but no rain, and, consequently,
no water ; and the sun shone with such power
as to make it almost intolerable. What aggra-
-380.


vated our case was, we had no means of light-
ing a fire ; and, even if we had succeeded with
this, we had no utensil, not even a saucepan,
by which we could hope to distil the smallest
quantity of water. Amidst these disappoint-
ments and privations we felt it our duty to do
all in our power to prolong those lives which
God had so mercifully preserved. I, therefore,
distributed some of the hands about the island
to search every part of it, and ascertain if
anything for our subsistence could be obtained;
others were employed in trying to repair the
boat, that we might get to the wreck again, in
the hope of saving something that would be
useful; while a third party were engaged in
getting up a signal-staff, so that if a vessel
should heave in sight, those on board might
know there was more on the island than usual,
and be induced to come to our relief.
The first party returned with a welcome
supply of booby’s eggs,—with which, and a
little biscuit, and one egg-shell full of rum,
(a small portion of which had come on shore,)
we made our first meal on this inhospitable
sand-bank. About noon (Sunday) I took the
carpenter and four men with me, in the boat,
to go to the wreck; but our efforts to get
on board were unsuccessful. We had, how-
ever, the good fortune to pick up several
articles of clothing washed on shore ; and also
a three-dozen case of sherry wine, which was
380. B 2


particularly valuable, as it assisted, in some
measure to allay our thirst. With these acqui-
sitions we returned to the island, to pass
another night, in the hope of better weather
on the morrow, to enable us to get to the
wreck; or that some friendly ship might
near the island, and rescue us from our deplo-
rable situation. The next day we started with
the boat somewhat earlier. I again took the
carpenter, and Mr. Rowe, the third mate, with
me. We found that one end of the mainmast
had washed on to the reef, and the other end
was lying on the poop-deck. The carpenter and
Mr. Rowe got on board; but they found every-
thing washed away, except a few articles in the
after-cabins on the starboard side; and in them
only such things remained as were secured up to
windward in battens, namely, a chronometer, a
quadrant, spy-glass, chart, and some knives.
My sextant was also obtained, but unfortunately
lost in endeavouring to get it on shore. The
cabin-deck was entirely washed away, excepting
the three side-planks on the starboard or weather
side ; and the barometer and tell-tale compass
were gone from the beams in the cabin. The
boat-sails we fortunately saved; and with the
things thus secured we returned to the island.
As every prospect of obtaining fresh water
had vanished, and we had little hope of
any vessel reaching us to rescue us from our
perilous condition, and having nothing but a
380.


lingering death before us in remaining on
the island, the men all requested me to take
whom I liked with me, and endeavour to
reach the mainland of Australia, as the only
chance of saving the lives of the party. I
immediately set them about stopping the leaks
in the boat as well as they could; and began
to make preparations for our departure as
early as possible. I resolved to take with me
Mr. Dallas, second mate, four seamen, namely,
Howard, Thompson, Smith, and Sherry, with
Dr. Hyslop, a passenger, and provisions for
three days. Our boat was, after all, in such a
leaky condition, as to keep one man constantly
baling. Under these circumstances, on Mon-
day, April 19th, at five p.m., we started, in the
hope of being able soon to reach Moreton-Bay,
or Wide-Bay, and procure a vessel to save
those whom we left behind. From this
time until Wednesday afternoon, when we
made the land close to Wide-Bay, our suffer-
ings may be better imagined than described, —
in a leaky boat, with a burning sun, without
uater, —and this the fifth day since any of us
had tasted water. Although I knew there was
a settlement at Wide-Bay, I did not know in
what part it was situated. Neither did I
know the entrance to the bay; yet I thought,
as any other seaman might have done, that
there would be very little difficulty in finding
it, and, after entering in, making my way
380. b 3


to the settlement. But I have, since found
that the entrance, to strangers, is very difficult;
and, moreover, could they get inside, they
would scarcely think of looking fifty miles
up a river for the only settlement in the
district, which appears to be the situation of
the one at Wide-Bay.
On our nearing the land, Frederick Howard
pointed out the part where he said the settle-
ment was, and mentioned the names of per-
sons who lived there. When I questioned
him as to his knowledge of the place, he said
he had been there two or three times; and,
from his description, I was induced to bear up
for the spot: but, on our nearing it, we could
discern no trace of a landing-place or settle-
ment, but saw some native fires inland. I
thought, if we could get to these people, they
would probably tell us where the settlement
was. We now made out what we supposed
must be the entrance to Wide-Bay; and, as we
could not effect a landing where we were,
without great risk, I determined to run for
it : but by this time it was getting dark, with
a moderate breeze from the eastward; yet I
hoped we should accomplish the distance
before the moon went down, which now shone
right between the heads of land before us.
To our great astonishment, when we were
within a cable’s length of these headlands, we
found ourselves suddenly among breakers, and
380.


it appeared to us scarcely less than a miracle
that the boat was not capsized ; for a more
dangerous place (as I saw by daylight after-
wards) could not well be imagined,—the sea
with the tide running out having the appear-
ance of a boiling caldron. On discovering
our position, I immediately lowered the sail,
struck the mast, brought the boat’s bow to
the sea, and got the oars out. The men Were
very much fatigued and exhausted; bat they
were pulling for life! and what will not a man
do for life 1 “ Skin for skin, yea, all that a
man hath will he give for his life.” After
about an hour’s hard toil, during every minute
of which we expected to be swamped, we got
clear of the breakers. But we had escaped
one danger only to encounter another ; for no
sooner had we got out of the breakers than
the wind died away, so that we had to pull
hard all night to keep the boat off the shore.
April 22d, at daylight, we could see the
land stretching out far to the eastward, form-
ing Double-Island-Bay, a name given to it, I
suppose, on account of there being two hum
mocks, which at a distance appear like islands,
but are really a part of the mainland. For
this place we now pulled, as there was the
appearance of a good landing; and in the
hope of obtaining water, without which we
must all soon perish. We succeeded in reach-
ing the place about ten a.in., and effected a
3SO.


landing without much difficulty, though in
doing so we damaged the bottom of our boat
seriously. Our joy and thankfulness on reach-
ing the land again, after such a voyage, in
such a boat, can be better imagined than de-
scribed. Our first object was to find water,
to quench the thirst which was consuming us;
and, after wandering about for an hour or more,
we discovered some in a swamp. The delight we
experienced on obtaining this relief compen-
sated for all our previous trials, and we began
to imagine that the worst of our troubles were
over. We earnestly wished that we could
convey some of this refreshing beverage to
those we had left on the island. But our joy
was of short duration; for greater troubles and
more painful sufferings awaited us. We filled
everything that would hold water, and again
put to sea, to endeavour to reach Moreton-
Bay, as we would not again venture on the
attempt to pass Wide-Bay bar; and the man
Howard acknowledged that he had only been
once in the bay, and that he was deceived in
his idea of the place. We beat about in the
bay till about four p.m., when we had nearly
succeeded in clearing the headland; after
which we should have had a fair wind, had it
continued as it then was: but it now came on
very squally, and shifted to the S.E., and by
half-past five p.m. we had, as the only chance
of saving our lives, to run for Double-Island-
-380.


Bay again. I have landed through many a
heavy surf, but I never ran a greater risk
than we did in landing at this bay, the water
broke so far from the beach : however, through
God’s mercy, we got safe on shore. Our boat
had become so much injured as to require two'
men constantly baling to keep her afloat, from
the time we launched from the beach.
On landing we hauled the boat up as far as
our feeble strength would allow us, and, making
a tent with the boat-sails, &c., we held a con-
sultation to determine how, under existing
circumstances, we should act. I, and the
passenger Dr. Ilyslop, were against the project
of attempting to reach Moreton-Bay by land;
but the men were all opposed to our going
into the boat again, as they considered it was
only tempting Providence to venture to sea
in her, after the narrow escapes we had
had from a watery grave. T\yo of them volun-
teered to walk round the bay, to see if any
trace of the Wide-Bay settlement could be
discovered; and the rest of us remained by the
tent, anxiously waiting for daylight, and for
their return.
Friday, April 23d. Daylight at length came;
but our companions did not return: we there-
fore concluded they had either found the
settlement, or had lost their way. So we
determined to go after them. As I told them
to keep along the beach as much as possible,
380.


I thought that we, by keeping the beach likewiae,
would be sure to fall in with them ; and, if they had
found the settlement, it would save the people
a long walk, and we should also get the tidings
sooner. We therefore set out, taking with us
all the provisions we had left; but had not
travelled more than an hour and a half before
we perceived the two men coming towards us.
They had travelled a considerable distance
round the bay, without discovering the least
sign of a human habitation, and had seen only
one native path, which they followed for
awhile, and then lost it in the bush. We
were now at what I doubt not was the en-
trance to Wide-Bay: whether the entrance
had become choked up lately, or whether it was
only the effect of recent strong winds, I could
not take upon me to say, but a more dangerous
place for a boat could scarcely be found; and
it could only have been by the kind interposition
of Providence, that we were saved from perishing
at this place. After returning thanks to Him
who had rescued us in the hour of peril, we
retraced our steps towards the tent. By the
time we reached it, we were all much ex-
hausted, and greatly perplexed to know how to
act. We partook of some refreshment, but very
sparingly; namely, a quarter of a biscuit each,
and two pounds of soup and bouilli amongst
seven of us. We then lay down in our tent
to rest (though not to sleep) till the heat
380.


should become a little less oppressive, before
we made another movement. At four p.m.
Dr. Hyslop and myself laboured hard to per-
suade the men to try the boat once more, and
endeavour to reach Moreton-Bay by sea. We
could not persuade ourselves into the propriety
of attempting the journey by land, for the
distance was seventy miles in a direct line ;
and as we thought it safest to keep by the
coast, its windings and headlands would render
our journey very much longer. These, with
other probable difficulties that we could not
well foresee or avoid, together with the fact
that we were without shoes and hats, rendered
it very undesirable to us to attempt the over-
land route; though I confess that the idea of
being molested by the natives never for one
moment entered our minds. Our arguments
were all unavailing: the men would not be
persuaded. Dallas, the second mate, joining
the rest in the proposal of a land-journey, and
professing moreover to know the native cha-
racter, and to be acquainted with travelling
in Australia, the men unanimously refused to
have anything more to do with the boat. We
were therefore forced to yield to them. After
committing ourselves to Him who still held
our lives in His hand, we commenced our jour-
ney, dividing the carriage of our provisions
amongst us. We had four tins of two pounds
each, soup and bouilli, and four and a half
380.


biscuits, left; so that, at tbe rate of our last
meal, we had nearly four days stock.
The chronometer, compass, and other things
we had preserved in the boat, we buried close
to the tent, in the hope that when we got to
Moreton-Bay we should be able to send for
them.
When we crossed the high land forming
Double-Islan d-Bay, we came on to a sandy
beach, which extended as far as the eye could
reach; and, as the sun went down, the moon
shone for a short time upon the beach, which,
had we been differently circumstanced, would
have made it a very pleasant walk: even as it
was, we did not regret taking the land-route in
preference to hazarding our lives in a leaky
boat, particularly as we now found that the
wind would have been against us. We calcu-
lated that we might reach our destination in
about three days by walking from four a.m. till
about ten, and then commencing again at about
three p.m., and walking till seven. Lot short
was our rejoicing; and soon these encouraging
and brightening prospects were to be enshrouded
in gloom and disaster. About nine p.m. we
came in sight of fires on the beach, indicating
the presence of natives. At first we thought
that we could pass and not disturb them, but
in this we were mistaken; for, as soon as we
neared them, their dogs (of which every native
has generally two or three) set up a horrible
380.


howling and barking, which awoke the natives,
and they called out to know who we were. At
first we took no notice of them, and walked
on; but they still continued to call out, and I
thought it the wisest course to have an inter-
view with them. Our company halted near
the water’s edge, while I went alone to speak to
them ; for they appeared much afraid of us,
until I, unfortunately , made them understand
that we were without arms of any kind. My
object in this was to disarm them of any hostile
intentions, and to excite their compassion
towards defenceless strangers. One of the men,
who appeared to be their Chief, came up to me,
and I endeavoured to explain to him, by signs,
that we wanted to get to Moreton-Bay. At
first he seemed to be kindly disposed towards
us. But shortly after, others, both men and
women, came about me; and as I moved away
towards my companions, these people followed.
We all got near to the beach, resolving to
move on as fast as possible; and we intimated to
the natives that we did not want to stop. But
they followed us, and began to muster very
strongly; and shortly afterwards some came
among us with boomerangs* and waddeys, or
clubs. They then sent away all the women.
• A boomerang is an instrument of war, made of
bard wood, in a semicircular form, about two feet long
and sharp at both edges. They throw them with great
precision and force, and do very serious damage with
them. °
380. o


At this we were greatly concerned; for those
acquainted with native customs regard this as
a bad omen, of the truth of which we had
painful experience. Shortly afterwards, they
came in large numbers, and two or three began
to surround and attack each of us, and to take
from us such things as we had saved, namely, our
scanty stock of provisions, my quadrant, spy-
glass, and a portion of our clothes, which only
consisted of shirt and trousers. As soon as
they had taken these things, they left us with-
out further molestation. We were glad to be
thus rid of them; and, as soon as they were
gone, we recommenced our journey, and tra-
velled with all the speed of which we were
capable, in the hope of getting some other
tribe between them and us. We imagined that
their savage rapacity might not be satisfied,
and that, supposing we had other articles about
us which they had not discovered, they might
be induced to follow us for purposes of plunder,
if not of murder also. Instead, therefore, of
resting as we at first intended, we pursued our
journey all night, during part of which we had to
encounter squalls of rain, which, having been
robbed of part of our clothing, made our
circumstances the more distressing.
About two a.m., on Saturday, April 24th, we
came to a river, the opposite side of which I
imagined to be a place called, in my chart, the
Low Bluff. This river we tried to cross, but
380.


found no means of doing so, it being too broad
for us to swim, supposing that we bad all been
swimmers. We, therefore, followed the course of
the river in the hope of finding some place where
it could be forded; but had not proceeded far
before we saw more native fires, and heard the
dogs barking. We tried to avoid them, and in
doing so got among swamps and morasses, and
were sometimes up to the middle in mud and
water, and in other places found them altogether
too deep for us to proceed at all. We had,
therefore, to retrace our steps as well as we
could; and after about four hours of this intense
labour, (as there was no place to sit down
without sitting in mud and water,) daylight
broke, and discovered the traces of a native
path. This we judged would lead to one of
their camps. While we were deliberating
about the propriety of trying to find another
path, or throwing ourselves on the mercy of
these savages, we came in sight of some chil-
dren, who immediately gave the alarm, and we
were very shortly afterwards surrounded by
dozens of these barbarians. Like the others,
they seemed very friendly at first, and gave us
some fish in exchange for a couple of handker-
chiefs. We remained with them in their huts for
about an hour, and they apparently vied with
each other in little acts of kindness towards us.
But our suspicions were at length excited by
their feeling about our persons, which, I doubt
380. c 2


not, wab to ascertain whether we had arms
concealed upon us or not. As soon as the rain
was over we made preparations for proceeding
on our journey, as we concluded, from their
movements, there was something going on
among them not favourable to us. We soon
found our conjectures to be too true. We had
left the camp, and they had brought their
canoes to put us across the river, or one branch
of it, for the locality consisted of a number of
sand-banks and small islands, covered with
thick brushwood. We had only crossed the
first swamp on our way towards the beach,
when they sent all the women and children
away, and began taking away our clothes and
other things from us, until they had plundered
us of everything but our trousers, and these
for the most part were in rags. From one man,
Thompson, they took all his clothes, and
left him in a state of perfect nudity.
Dr. Hyslop was near-sighted; and they took
his spectacles otf, and threw them from one to
another till they were broken in pieces. He
had also some valuable jewellery and papers,
of which they also deprived him. From me they
took a purse containing forty-six pounds in
English and American gold coin, a watch, the
ship’s papers, and some certificates of my own,
the only articles of value I had saved from the
wreck. One of them took my watch off my
neck, where it was suspended by a riband, and
380.


put it over his own neck, in imitation of the
manner in which I had worn it, and then threw
the watch behind his back, every now and then
turning and twisting himself about, and talking
to those that were holding me, asking them, I
suppose, to observe and admire him in his ill-
gotten ornaments.
At this time some of them wanted apparently
to kill us,but were restrained by others pointing
to their camps; for these tribes have never been
known to kill a white man near their camps.
Having plundered us of all they could take, they
left us to pursue ourjourney,underaburningsun,
and over very lofty hills. We got on as fast as
our lacerated feet and feebleness would allow
us, still thankful that our lives were spared; for
while there was life there was hope.
After travelling over these hills for some two
hours, we had the pleasure of once more gaining
the beach, and we imagined the natives had re-
tired to their camps, satisfied with their plunder.
The sun shone with intense heat: my back was
dreadfully scorched, and extremely painful; and,
all being much fatigued, we ventured to lie
down under the shade of a sand-bank until the
heat of the sun had somewhat abated. We
had not rested long before we were startled by
a horde of the savages, yelling and making signs
for us to get up and go back. They were all
armed with waddeys and boomerangs, but no
spears. Unfortunately for us, we had not a
380. c 3


weapon among us for our protection, excepting
a small piece of a boat’s mizen sprit, which I
had brought for a walking-stick. I told the
men to take no notice of them, but to keep
close together, and walk on to the southward.
They did so, and by the time we had proceeded a
cable’s length the natives appeared to become
more friendly; and we inferred from the signs
they made that it was their purpose to show us
the path to Moreton-Bay. We had not walked
together long in this amicable manner before we
began to feel the effects of their treachery. One
of them suddenly slung his waddey round, and
struck Frederick Howard a heavy blow on the
left cheek, laying the face open from the ear to
the nose; and before I had time to look round,
I received two blows from a waddey on the left
shoulder, rendering the arm useless for some
time. I, however, stood over Howard, who
had been struck down, brandishing my stick,
at the same time calling upon the others to
come I’ound me, which they did immediately.
At this moment there Came on a heavy squall
of wind and rain, accompanied with thunder
and lightning; and, having a great dread of
thunder and lightning, the natives instantly
started, and ran away towards the bush. Poor
Howard rose bleeding from the ground; and we
made the best of our way through the storm,
thankful for this signal deliverance. It ap-
peared scarcely less than a miraculous inter-
-380.


position of Providence to preserve some of vj
alive; for I doubt not, had this storm not come
on at the time it did, they would have murdered
every one of us: so that to this day no European
would have known our fate; and it would
have been concluded that we had been lost in
the boat. These natives are a cowardly set of
creatures. They shrunk from my stick, when
it came near them ; but I durst not strike,
knowing that, if I did, it would break, and,
expose my weak and defenceless condition.
I feel assured that had we been armed with
clubs, guns, knives, or any similar weapon, they
would not have dared to molest us. But, alas!
we had none, nor the means of obtaining any.
We travelled till about 4.30 or 5 p.m.
along this beach, till we came to a place where
the high land formed a bluff running out into
the water, to pass which we must go over the
top of it. We congratulated ourselves on not
being followed by the savages; and concluded
that, were we only on the other side of the
promontory, we might consider ourselves
clear of them, as we should then be onlv
a short distance from Moreton Island, and
we thought they would not dare molest us so
near to a Eritish settlement. But we were
doomed to more bitter disappointments and
disasters than we had yet experienced; for we
found ourselves a greater distance from Moreton
Island, or any other settlement, than we had
380.


imagined. And, on reaching the top of the
promontory, and looking back, along the beach,
we discovered a body of the natives following
ns, but yet a long way off. We felt assured
that this body of savages, numbering not less
than forty, and armed with spears, as well as
clubs and boomerangs, were bent on slaughter,
and that our lives were now in imminent
danger. What confirmed us in this con-
viction was, that when they first attacked us
they made signs to us, (at least we so under-
stood them,) that, if we got to Moreton-Bay, we
should have them hanged for robbing us. I
learnt afterwards that, for some crime com-
mitted about Wide-Bay by the natives, efforts
had been made to bring them to justice, and to
punish the offender. The individual who, it
was supposed, had perpetrated the deed had
been traced out, and brought to Brisbane for
trial, and was liberated about the time of our
attack; but the natives were informed that he
had been hanged, and it had produced great
horror in their minds, though it had not re-
strained them from their plundering habits,
as we proved to our cost. After they had
robbed us, they put their hands about their
necks, and then pointed upwards, representing
a man hanging by the neck ; and intimated, as
well as they could, that if we reached Moreton-Bay
we should get them hung, as they supposed had
h in the case with him. In these peril ouscircum-
obO.


stances we held a consultation as to what was the
best to be done. W e first though tof stopping where
we wei e, and selling our lives as dearly as pos-
sible ; but a little reflection showed us the folly
of such a course, for we had not even a stick
or a stone to defend ourselves with; and, more-
over, we were so worn out with exposure,
hunger, and fatigue, that some amongst us were
ready to give up in despair, as we saw little
probability of escape. On one side of us lay
the sea; on another an immense tract of land,
as far as the eye could reach, covered with a
long coarse grass, with here and there a tree.
On the other side was a range of lofty hills;
and about one hundred yards from the brow of
one of these hills w r as an immense jungle : for
this we determined to make, and endeavour to
baffle our pursuers among its thickets. But
little did we know the enemy we had to con-
tend with. When we came to the jungle, we
entered it at different parts, but not out of
hail of each other. Myself, the second mate, and
Mr. Dallas were close together, so close that we
could converse with each other. We remained
here watching until we saw the savages come
oyer the hill we had just passed, and proceed
directly towards the place of our concealment.
What were our emotions as we looked through
the bush, and saw them coming towards us for
purposes of murder and of blood, are known
only to that Being who knows all things. We
I 330. i


could now see clearly that, in addition to clubs
and boomerangs, they had also armed them-
selves with spears. On seeing which Mr. Dallas
said to me, “ It will be useless our trying to
escape: they will track us as straight as an
arrow; and if they only once catch sight of us
through the bush, they are sure to prick us off
with their spears. I will go no farther, but
shall give myself up, and hope they will des-
patch me quickly.”
This was the last conversation I had with
poor Dallas, and it sufficiently shows the peril
and hopelessness of our condition. There must
have been a spring near this jungle; for there
was a stream of water about ankle-deep running
at the bottom of it.
The jungle in most places appeared impene-
trable ; but near the ground where I stood was
an opening, about one foot high : through this
I crawled, or dragged myself, for the space of
about four or five yards. Ilow valuable was this
place of concealment to me! It was the means
of preserving my life. I had not been here
long before I heard the natives speak to Mr.
Dallas, saying, “Gome, come.” I suppose they
meant for him to come out of the jungle. He
answered, “Ho, Jacky, it is too cold:” (it was
then raining:) the next moment I heard a blow
from the club of one of the savages, and a groan
from poor Dallas. This was repeated many
times; and I could distinctly hear each blow
380.


as if struck upon something that became softer
and softer, and the groans of the victim gradu-
ally became fainter, till they ceased altogether.
I concluded that my turn must come next: I
therefore knelt where I was, against the stem
of a small tree, and near to ray middle in water,
and committed my soul in prayer to God
who gave it. I committed my dear wife and
children to Him also, as He has promised to be
“a Father to the fatherless, and the Judge of
the widow,” expecting every moment to feel
the point of a spear or the blow of a club; but
that gracious Being in whom I had put my trust
still preserved me. I could also hear my other
companions attacked, and the blows and groans
similar to those of Mr. Dallas became fainter
and fainter, till they ceased. And yet I was
not touched. It was dark before they had
finished their bloody work. I could hear them
after they had massacred the others, as they
moved about, and supposed they were looking
for me. A short time after they seemed to have
taken their departure, I heard groans and
screams from some of my companions whom
they had not quite despatched; and the
dying groans and meanings of my poor men
were continued all night in my hearing. O,
the horrors of that night! It is impossible to
describe a thousandth part of them! I still
knelt, and continued my prayer. It was heard,
and I was saved. The morning broke : and,
080.


after attentively listening to ascertain if the mur-
derers still lingered about the spot, I could only
hear the groans of the dying. 1 therefore ven-
tured to crawl out of the place of my conceal-
ment, and forced my way towards the spot
from whence the sounds proceeded. After
some time I found poor Smith in a shocking
state. He was still alive; but his head and neck
presented one mass of bruises, quite black, and
almost beaten to a jelly. He was delirious, and
muttering some incoherent sentences, of which I
could make nothing. While I was speaking to
him I heard another groan at a little distance,
and, making my way to the spot, I found Dr.
Hyslop* in an equally bruised and shocking
condition, so disfigured that I should not have
known him had he not been able to tell me
who he was. He made me understand that he
wanted water; for, although he was lying partly
in the water, yet he had fallen in such a posi-
tion, and was reduced to such a helpless state,
that he was unable to obtain a drop to relieve
his agonizing thirst.
They had beaten Dr. Hyslop much in the
same manner as poor Smith. His head, neck,
and shoulders were in a dreadful condition. His
• Dr. Hyslop had been practising at Amoy, where
his health had failed, and for its restoration he had been
recommended to visit the colony, and had come as
surgeon-superintendent to a vessel conveying a large
number of labourers. His health was considerably im-
proved; and he had taken his passage with me from
Sydney to Manilla, where he expected to meet his wife.
380.


tongue was hanging out of his mouth,and he was
evidently dying, yet he could speak in a whisper,
so that I could make out, with some difficulty,
what he wished to convey, by putting my ear close
to his face. He told me that he knew his end
was fast approaching; begged of me to try and
get to a settlement, and, if I could reach Sydney,
to desire Mr. Henry Moore to write to his wife
and make her acquainted with his tragical fate.
The last words he said to me were, “God bless
you,” I promised to fulfil his request if pos-
sible ; although at that time it was doubtful
whether I should ever be able to do so. Both
the murdered men had been stripped of their
trousers, the only garment that was left them
after the attack of the savages the morning before.
I stopped with the Doctor some time; and also
tried to penetrate the jungle to see if the others
were dead, but I could not find them. And,
after looking out and listening for some time,
to ascertain if the natives were within sight or
hearing, I ventured to call out, but got no
answer. I therefore concluded that all my
companions were killed outright.
What to do now I was at a loss to know. If
I remained where I -was, I must die a lingering
death by starvation; and I expected, if I left
the jungle, to fall into the hands of the assassins,
who were probably watching for me. After some
time I ventured to go out; and, after looking
cautiously round in every direction, and seeing
380. D


nothing, I crawled on my hands and knees
through the long grass to the foot of a hill,
"which, in that posture, I slowly ascended, stop-
ping frequently and looking round, to ascertain
if any one was near. This hill was lofty, and
took me a long time to ascend. Having reached
the summit, I looked about me very carefully,
and could see no living creature. I had the sea
in view from where I stood; but, on account
of a chain of lofty hills connected with the one
on which I stood, I could not discern the beach.
I could see in the distance what I thought must
be Moreton Island (although it proved to be
another place). This persuasion gave me fresh
courage; and I took my course in the direction of
the sea, travelling over hills and valleys till past
sunset. Coming at length to a long semicircu-
lar sandy beach, leading to what I took to be
Moreton Island, I posted on my way during
the whole of the night, occasionally sitting down
to rest for a few minutes. The pain in my
back, shoulders, and arms, from the effects of a
burning sun, and the blows I had received, would
not suffer me to lie down; and, although greatly
fatigued, I could not sleep, because of many
sad and melancholy reflections, arising from the
scenes I had passed through, and my almost
hopeless condition. I thought of the wreck,
and our sufferings on the island without water
our distresses in the leaky boat under a burn-
ing sun; our five days’ agonizing thirst; the
380.


defenceless condition we were in when attacked
by the natives, plundered of our clothes and
the few valuable articles we had saved, and
my arm rendered powerless by the blows I
had received. All these varied and accu-
mulated sufferings appeared tolerable while
our lives were preserved, and we could cheer
and help each other. But now my companions
had all been massacred, save one, (and of his
escape I was not aware,) and I was left a lonely
wanderer in this vast wilderness, with the pro-
spect of dying of hunger, or of meeting with a
similar fate. That I might be enabled in some
measure to escape from the saddening thoughts
which oppressed me, I travelled on all night,
in a state approaching to delirium, and scarcely
knowing at times where I was, till some shell,
or stone, or rougher ground than usual, would
arouse me by the pain it caused to my lace-
rated feet. I kept on my weary way till the
day was considerably advanced, when I came
to a river, on the opposite side of which was
what I had taken for Moreton Island ; but
which, to my great disappointment, I discovered
was only a point of the main-land running
out into the sea. How to cross this river was
a -cause of great perplexity to me for some time.
I walked along its margin to a considerable dis-
tance, until I came to a place much narrower
than any part that I had seen, and where the
water appeared to be shallower, and attempted
380. n 2


to wade over; but bad not proceeded above ten
feet from the edge when I lost my footing. It
appeared as difficult to return as to proceed: I
therefore struck out for the other side; but before
I could reach it I was so much exhausted that
I sunk once or twice. At this time my feelings
were very distressing. I had experienced great
deliverances, but thought that I should now
die in this river, and no one would ever know
what had become of me, nor could any one
inform my dear wife where or how I had
perished. Just as I was losing my senses my
foot touched the ground : this appeared to put
fresh life into me. I struck out a few strokes
more, and happily reached the bank, where I
fell down exhausted. How long I continued
thus, I could not tell; but, when I came to my-
self, the sun was fast sinking. I rose somewhat
refreshed by sleep; returned thanks to Him
who had again preserved my life; got a little
water from a pool close by, and again made my
way towards the beach. This took me a long
time, and caused me a large amount of suffer-
ing; for I had to go through the bush all the
way; and my feet, arms, and back were now
become so sore that I could not bear anything
to touch them. And, if I sat down, the mos-
quitoes tormented me so dreadfully, that I was
glad to get up and pursue my journey. I
managed to reach the beach before daylight.
Considering the distance 1 had travelled, 1 con-
-380.


eluded this mdt be the last beach between me
and Moreton-Bay: and 1 therefore travelled on
with better spirits, but suffered much from the
pangs of hunger; fori had scarcely had ?
mouthful of anything since we left the boat,
except water, of which, fortunately, I could get
an abundant supply, and sometimes a great
deal more than I wanted.
A short time after daylight this morning a
circumstance occurred that threw me into
despair. As I walked along the sand, my mind
wandering at the time, all of a sudden I saw
in the distance before me what I took to be
one of the natives. He appeared to watcli me
for a short time, and then went into the bush.
Soon after two came out, and then returned;
and then three came, and looked towards me,
and went back again into the bush. I con-
cluded that they were lying in wait for me;
and, if they were part of those who had
slaughtered my companions, they would most
assuredly kill me, and, consequently, all my
perseverance in endeavouring to reach a settle-
ment had been in vain. I knew that if they
had seen me, it would be useless to turn back;
and therefore determined to walk on, not with-
out serious apprehensions that I should soon be
called to meet the fate of my companions, and
be beaten to death by the clubs of these savages.
I walked past the place where I had seen them
enter the bush, but could see nothing of them;
D o


and therefore, after a while, came to the con-
clusion that my imperfect vision must have
deceived me, and that these supposed natives,
who had caused me so much alarm and distress,
were nothing more than harmless kangaroos.
I now walked on to the southward for, I sup-
pose, two days and nights more; but my mind
was wandering most of the time. I know that
I crossed tw r o or three narrow rivers during the
time, and got a few berries, the name of which
I am ignorant of, but they bore a great resem-
blance to the African palm-nut. And these,
with the tenderest grass I could find, together
with the small branch of a kind of cabbage-
tree, which I tried for a few times, but found
very little moisture in, constituted my only solid
food for thirteen days from the time of onr
leaving the tent to the time I obtained relief.
I now came to another river, which appeared
to present a complete barrier to my further
progress. It was too broad for me to attempt
to swim; and, besides, the freshes were running
out very rapidly. I went as far as I could
penetrate along the banks, but could not find
any means of getting across. I therefore
returned again to the mouth of the river, and
began to construct a raft, in the hope of getting
across on it. I spent two days at this; but my
feebleness "would not allow me to get wood
large enough, and the lashings were of a very
imperfect kind, being only a sort of creeper that
380.


grows on the sand-banks. What was ray dis-
appointment when, after expending so much
time and labour I found that the raft would
not bear rny weight! I had, therefore, to give
it up ; and moreover, by this time, my back,
shoulders, and arms were become one mass of
corruption, and I fully expected that they
would mortify, and death would soon terminate
my sufferings.
I put up marks in various places to warn
any one that might perchance come that way,
that a white man was in the neighbourhood
starving. I made marks also upon the trees;
and put a stick in one of them pointing to the
spot, and then went in search of a place where
1 might lie down and die. My feelings at this
time are not easily to be described. After all the
trials I had gpne through, and the deliverances
1 had experienced, to give all up, and die of
want in this wilderness! And then the thought
of leaving my dear wife a widow, and my children
fatherless, and the remembrance of the poor fel-
lows on the island where we were wrecked dying
for water, without any prospect of relief, added
greatly to my sufferings. But I found that He
in whom I had put my trust had not forsaken
me; for, a short time afterwards, two native
women, mother and daughter, and two children,
hove in sight. My heart leaped with joy when
1 saw them, and, advancing towards them,
they took pity on me when thev beheld my
380.


destitute condition. T made signs to them that
1 was starving; and in a few minutes they
made a fire, and caught some fish, which they
put on the fire whole.* It was not the time
to be nice about dressing, and it may easily
be conceived with what eagerness and gratitude
I partook of this unexpected and providential
supply. Towards evening they showed me the
way to their camp, which 1 could never have
found without a guide, although it was situated
on the bank of the river. When I arrived at
the camp, I expected to be treated as my com-
panions and I had been by the other natives, —■
with apparent hospitality at the first, and then
with treachery and cruelty afterwards. But it
was not so: these poor simple creatures treated
me only with the greatest kindness. They saw
me in pain, and tried to relieve me. They laid
an opossum-skin rug under my back for me to
lie down upon ; and when once laid down in
this hospitable hut , I could not move again for
two or three days, during which time the elder
of the two women was particularly attentive.
I endeavoured to make them understand my
situation, by drawing the form of a ship, and
then breaking it to pieces, in order to show
* It may be asked, how these women could make a
fire so soon. They had a piece of wood or bark on fire
with them; for the natives never travel from their camps
without this. Should it, by any accident, be extinguished,
they produce fire by rubbing two pieces of hard wood
together.
380.


them that I had been wrecked, and had lost
icy ship and companions; but they appeared to
have no conception of my meaning. I also
endeavoured to show them where I wanted to
go to; but they seemed to have no knowledge
of Moreton-Bay. This camp did not consist of
more than twelve persons besides children; and
shortly after I arrived part of them went away,
leaving only the two women and the children,
and one very aged man, in the encampment.
These poor aborigines are the lowest in the
scale of intellect of any of the human race, and
in their habits and moaes of life scarcely differ-
ing from the beasts of the forest. They roam
abroad without a shred of clothing, and have
no idea of cultivating the ground. They show
some expertness in fishing; and what they thus
take, with the spontaneous productions of their
native forests, form their only food. Their huts
are of the meanest construction, consisting only
of long pieces of bark stuck into the ground, the
edge of one piece overwrapping another, and then
bent together in the upper part so as to form a
sort of cone. These wretched dwellings are not
sufficiently large to allow a man to iie don n at
full length: so they coil themselves down in their
frail huts like the fox in his hole. A number of
these huts near together form what is called
a camp. As soon as I was able to move, I made
signs to the women that I wanted to be con-
veved over the river. They procured two
380.


canoes immediately, into one of which I stepped
with one of the women ; the other woman took
the other canoe, and after some half hour of
hard toil, and the greatest anxiety on my part,
we reached the opposite side. Some may be
ready to ask, “What cause was there for anxiety
at this time V Why, we were crossing a river
at least half a mile broad, with a strong current
setting down it. Our canoe was only a piece
of bark, -eight or nine feet long by three feet
broad, tied up at each end ; and as the tying up
of the ends had somewhat damaged the frail
skiff, and rendered it leaky, the crevices and
interstices were filled up with clay, to keep
out the water; and I knew, that if this apology
for a boat had filled or capsized, I could scarcely
swim a dozen yards. However, by the kind
care of Him who had so often delivered me,
we reached the opposite bank in safety; and I
thought, “Surely, there can be no other river to
cross between this and Moreton-Bay.” It was
night by the time we got across the river. The
women walked with me for a while, impressed
with the idea, so far as I could understand
them, that Moreton-Bay was not far off. 1 deeply
regretted my want of means to reward these
poor simple and kind creatures. After walking
with me for about half an hour, and seeing
nothing, they returned, and left me to pur-
sue my journey alone. On several occasions
during the night I fancied I could see the
380.


lights at the town, but my imagination deceived
me; and I walked on till I came to another
small river, which I could not cross, as it was
high water. I therefore stopped, and slept for
a while on its bank : during which time I
dreamt of home, and those so dear to me far
away. This dream, together with the rest I
had enjoyed, put fresh life into me; for I got
up, and immediately began to ford the river,
which I accomplished with much less difficulty
than I had expected. I travelled on till towards
daylight, when I came to what I thought was a
very deep bay; and a little way from the south
point there appeared to be an island. “Now,”
thought I, “ certainly this is Moreton-Bay
and a few hours more will bring me among
civilised beings; I shall have accomplished my
task, and be able to send relief to the poor
sufferers on the island;” for I never took a
draught of water but I thought of them, and
that their lives depended upon my getting to
some place from which I could send them relief.
I forgot at the time how long I had been from
them, and that, if they had not obtained relief
by some other means, they must certainly
have perished. However, the consideration of
their sufferings, and the hope that if I got to a
settlement I might send a vessel for their
rescue, —the thought of the destitution of my
dear wife, left with six children, —and the hope
of saving my life after all, —animated me
380.


to exertion, and made mo “ hope against
hope.”
I pressed on my way as well as I was alue ;
but, alas ! I was again disappointed ; for after
following the coast round this bay for a con-
siderable distance, I came to swamps, across
which I could see no passage. I had, therefore,
to stop till daylight. As the tide receded I
found a passage across the swamps, and again
went forward ; but I had not travelled far
before I came to a river larger than any I had
yet seen, which again arrested my progj-ess. I
travelled along its banks for a great distance, in
the hope of finding natives, or some means of
getting across; but my search was in vain, and
the river appeared to get wider as I passed
along. I therefore retraced my steps to the
bay, and wandered about all the next night, as
I still imagined this must be Moreton-Bay, and
I might see some boat or vessel going up, to
which I might make signals. Morning again
came, and no relief. I now began to suffer
severely from hunger; and, as I could find no
means of crossing the river, I determined to
follow its course as long as my strength would
allow me. I saw on my way several kangaroos:
these I watched for awhile, and saw them eating
something. I followed after them, and in so
doing I discovered a few seeds very like beans,
which Ipicked up, and found them to be very good
and acceptable. I also found a small herb which
380.


resembled the shamrock : this I tasted, and found
it to resemble the English sorrel. These things
in some degree relieved the pangs of hunger;
but they were a poor substitute for food. I still
followed the course of the river, and towards
evening came in sight of a canoe made fast in
the bush, evidently hauled up to prevent its
being carried away by the tide. I hesitated
not a moment in trying to launch it: but
in this I found greater difficulty than I had
expected; for I was so weak, and my back,
arms, and breast were so bad, that it took
me at least half an hour to get her into the
water, although the distance did not exceed
from fifteen to twenty feet. And now an-
other difficulty presented itself, arising from
the state of my shoulder, and it was question-
able if I should be able to get her across the
river. But perseverance will overcome great
difficulties; and by perseverance I managed to
get over the river a short time after the sun
went down. When I tried to get on shore I
found the mud so deep that I sunk over my
middle without finding any hard bottom: this
compelled me to get into the canoe again,
where I was forced to remain till high water,
which was near midnight. I then got ashore,
and wandered about, —sometimes sitting down
and dozing for awhile. At daylight, finding
there was no path to be seen, and nothing but
a hilly country before me covered with a long*
380. e


rank grass, I thought it better to take to the
canoe again, and explore the river a little far-
ther, or try to get round the point I had seen
when on the other side. But I had not pro-
ceeded far before I saw another canoe made
fast close to a rivulet of fresh water ; and, as I
neared it, I could see a native path or track. I
determined to follow it; and, if I should hill
in with the natives, to throw myself on their
compassion. I had n.at travelled a great dis-
tance (although it took me a long time to
accomplish, on account of my feet being so
bad) before I saw some native fires, and shortly
after discovered their huts. I went among them
without hesitation, and they received me very
kindly. I made signs, by putting my hand
to my mouth, that I was hungry. They gave
me some fish and some pamwall; which I ate
with great relish, and thought I had never tasted
anything so delicious in my life. The pamwall
is the root of the fern, which they roast,
and then pound on a block of wood with a
stone. It is their principal vegetable diet, and
is to them what bread is to an Engbshman.
This camp consisted of about twenty men, a
number of women, and about thirty children.
Upon the whole, they behaved very kindly to
me. I stayed with them that night, and strove
to make them understand where I wanted to
go to, and desired them to show me the path.
The next day they professed to do so; but,
380,


whether wilfully or not I cannot say, they
tjave me a wrong direction; for, after travelling
about twohours,through water,sometimes above
the knees and sometimes up to my waist, I found
myself inextricably involved in swamps and
thickets. I therefore retraced my steps, and,
after most fatiguingexertion, again reached their
camp, and remained with them another night.
Their conduct was somewhat changed towards
me: they became very sparing of their food,
and only gave me a small piece now and then,
which they threw at me as I sat at some
distance from them. This was not a time to
criticise the customs and habits of the natives
too narrowly; but I observed that the fish was
put on the fire and partially cooked, and much
of it eaten in that condition. The pamwall
was pounded; and when they had prepared as
much as they could hold in one hand, the hand-
ful was eaten, —without the help of knives,
forks, spoons, or cups. Next morning some of
the women were going out to collect crabs,
when they made signs to me that they would
show me the path I had to travel. I followed
them to the beach, which appeared to me the
same as the one I had seen before I fell in
with them; they then pointed to the distant
land round the bay, the extremity of which
was scarcely visible, and gave me to understand
that I must round that before I could reach
my destination. I set forth again; and, after
380. s 2


walking till about noon, I caino to another rive*,
which presented a further barrier to my pro-
gress. I tried to make my way along its banks,
in the hope of finding some means of crossing ;
but in this I was foiled. I waded through mud
and water, sometimes above the knees, and some-
times much deeper,—so that frequently it was
difficult to extricate my feet from the mud. At
length I came in sight of a canoe, and managed,
after a great struggle, to reach her, and by im-
mense toil to get her into the water; but great
was my disappointment when I found that she
would not swim. Notwithstanding this disheart-
ening circumstance, I was determined to perse-
vere ; but the farther I went the worse it
became. I now felt much fatigued, but could
find no place to rest, —not so much as to sit
down, except in water and mud. It appeared
to me evident that if I remained where I was
I must perish; and therefore I determined to
retrace my steps, and it must have been a late
hour of the night before I reached a dry beach,
along which I had come that morning. Here I
sat down, quite exhausted and discouraged;
and soon after this it began to blow and rain:
this compelled me to get up again, and walk
on till daylight. My only chance of safety now
seemed to be in returning to the camp I had left
on the morning of the previous day. I therefore
tried to discover the path on which I had come with
the women, and succeeded in reaching the camp
380.


in the afternoon. Here I met with a most
agreeable surprise; for, on going into the camp,
1 beheld a white man, who turned out to be
one of my own seamen, named Sherry, but so
much disfigured that I did not at first recog-
nise him, nor did he at first know me; but
we very shortly recognised each other, to our
mutual astonishment and delight. Like myself,
he supposed himself to be the only one who
had escaped the massacre, I questioned him
as to how he had been saved, and how he had
managed to reach this place. He told me that,
after we went into the jungle, (as before related,)
when he saw the natives coming towards us, he
crawled on his hands and knees through the
thick grass until he made his way considerably
beyond the jungle, and he saw nothing of
the natives afterwards. He travelled a long
way inland before he attempted to get to the
southward, and had fallen in with many natives
at different places, who all, with one exception,
treated him very kindly. While he was asleep,
one day, he was aroused by a spear piercing
his breast ; he arose, plucked the weapon out,
and fled. The spear had been thrown from a
distance by one of the savages, who was lame
and unable to pursue him. Sherry had still a
slight wound in his breast, but fortunately it
did not prove to be dangerous. He told me
that he had crossed several rivers in the native
canoes, and that on the previous day he had
380. n 3


arrived on the bank of the river I had crossed
three days before: the natives from the opposite
side saw him, and sent a canoe over for him, and
he had been in the camp ever since. This man
had been much more fortunate than myself :
he had not been so much fatigued,—for he bad
not travelled at night at all, nor had he been
two days without food : he was not so much
scorched by the sun as I was, —for he happened
to have a pair of drawers on as well as his
trousers, which the natives had left him; these
drawers he had made to do duty as a shirt, and
they had proved of immense service to him in
preserving him from the heat and the mosquitoes.
Notwithstanding this, however, his looks were
haggard, and he appeared a most pitiable
object. I may be permitted to remark here
that Sherry was one of the men I had shipped
at Sydney for the Manilla voyage, and the
individual who had the look-out when the ship
struck. I afterwards gleaned from his remarks
that he was asleep at the time, and was only
awakened by the striking of the ship upon the
reef; but I considered the officer of the watch,
who lost his life through his neglect, more to
blame than Sherry, although previous to this time
I could have trusted my life in his hands, because
he was at all times so attentive and careful.
We remained at this camp two days, each
day the people promising, as well as they could
by signs, that they would show us the path to
380.


Brisbane ; for they could not tell what place
we meant when we spoke of Moreton-Bay.
Every hour that our departure was postponed I
became more uneasy and anxious to reach a
settlement; but still they Avould not be pre-
vailed upon to come with us, and it appeared
to me next to madness our attempting to go
by ourselves. On the third day an old man,
apparently the head of the tribe, made signs to
us that he was ready to go; and right glad we
were to follow him. By the time we reached
the beach along which we were to travel we
were joined by four women and two children,
and we all walked on together till it was, as I
supposed, about eight o’clock, when we encamped
for the night, after crossing the river where I
had been previously stopped. To reach this
place we had come a most circuitous route, in
which it would have been almost impossible for
any but a native to find a path. We spent a
miserable night, it being very squally, with
rain. At daybreak we pursued our journey,
crossing rivers and swamps where I could not
see the smallest trace of a path; but our guide
seemed to know the road well, although for
every yard of dry ground we travelled over we
had to travel ten times the distance through
water, sometimes rising above our knees, —at
other times up to our waists. We suffered
severely, also, for want of food; for we had
only got a few muscles, picked up on the beach,
380.


from the time we left the camp. Towards
evening we came in sight of some huts, and
heard the voices of natives not far away, at
which our guides appeared very much alarmed,
and I began to fear we should have to encounter
another hostile tribe; for the women who were
with us made signs to us that they expected
the tribe we were approaching would kill them
and eat the children. Whether this fear was
feigned or not, I cannot say: but, from what I
heard afterwards, I should suppose that it was,
to a great extent, simulated and groundless;
for the Brisbane people gave that tribe a good
character for their kindness to white people.
Perhaps our guides were afraid, if they had
been seen going with us, they might have been
compelled, on their return, to give up a portion
of whatever reward they might receive for guiding
us to Brisbane. Be this as it may, it caused our
guides to go a long distance round to avoid
them, and I think they must have lost their
way ; for we travelled till near midnight
through a path we found very painful and
difficult, as it lay principally across stumps of
trees and rocky ground, both of which were
most distressing to our bruised and lacerated
feet. Had they not halted for the night where
they did, we must have given in; for it ap-
peared impossible for us to walk another
mile. We spent a few hours wretchedly enough
at this resting-place—as it rained most of the
3£o.


night. When daylight broke, we resumed
our journey; but I could not move without the
greatest agony. I do not remember ever to
have suffered such intense pain in walking as I
did this day. We were completely exhausted,
and our feet were much cut, and swelled to a
large size. Our guides, too, travelled so fast
that they were more like kangaroos running
than human beings walking, and we found the
greatest difficulty in keeping up with them.
They often left us behind so far that we lost
sight of them, and had to call out to ascertain
where they were. Once we lost them completely,
and that at a very critical place; for it was on
a piece of high land, over which there were
several paths, and we were at a loss which
to take; but, after wandering about for a short
time, we again saw the print of the children’s
feet, and came in sight of them waiting for us in
an old native camp. We did our best to keep up
with them, and shortly after found ourselves in
the midst of a large camp of natives, near to a
river, and had scarcely got to the banks when,
to our great joy, we heard the voice of a white
man, on the other side, asking where we were.
The sweetest music that I ever heard never
sounded half so delightful to me as that voice!
To know that I had come at length to the end
of this tedious, perilous, disastrous journey !
that I had got among civilised beings once
more ! —and to hear the voice of a white man,
380


tn a language that I could understand, address-
ing me in accents of kindness ! How joyful and
how thankful did I feel! I kept up till they
sent a boat across for us; but, on reaching the
other side, my strength gave way, and I fell
prostrate on the ground, and they were obliged
to carry me to the nearest hut. My powers,
which had hitherto been sustained by excite-
ment of various kinds, seemed to collapse as
soon as I came among civilised beings.
There were several white men encamped
here, and they were prompt in giving us the
assistance we needed; for which I shall ever
feel grateful to them. They immediately sent
into Brisbane, which was about three miles
distant, and made the resident magistrate,
Captain Wickham, acquainted with our circum-
stances, who at once sent a conveyance for us.
They then wrapped us up in blankets, and set
off with us to the town, where we arrived about
three o’clock, and every attention that could be
paid to persons in our situation was cheerfully
rendered. We were sent to the hospital, as
the fittest place for persons in our condition;
and Doctor Barton, the house-surgeon, took me
into his quarters, and attended me night and
day with the greatest care. I need not say that
I required great attention; for, when it
is considered what I had gone through, in
hunger, in thirst, in nakedness, in cold, and in
exhausting toil, I suppose it will bo as sur-
-380.


prising to others as it is to myself that I could
survive it. I certainly must have been supported
by a power not my own. I did not fully recover
my strength for three months, and to this day
feel the effects of the blows I received from the
waddey of the savage. My companion was not
so much debilitated as I was, and appeared to
be as well as ever in a few days. On the after-
noon of the day that we arrived, Captain
Wickham and the authorities of Brisbane re-
warded the blacks who had guided us to the
town. A number of volunteers also set off the
{ame day for the north, in search of my poor
shipmates, in the hope that some of them might
possibly have escaped the massacre, as well as
ourselves ; but I had very little expectation of
their finding any of them alive.
The next day I learned that the men we had
left on the island got rain two days after our
departure, and consequently their sufferings for
want of water were of short duration; and that
ten days after the wreck, the “ Lady Blackwood,”
a whaling-vessel, hove in sight, rescued them
from their perilous condition, and brought them
to Moreton-Bay, where they found the “ Eagle”
steamer going out, and they arrived in Sydney
on the 9th of May. We arrived in Brisbane on
the 17th of May,—just one month after the
wreck of the “ Thomas King.” It is a sin-
gular coincidence, that, on the 17th of May ;
1851, (just twelve months before,) on my home-
-380.


ward-bound passage, in command of the “ Mary
White,” from Sydney, with wool, tallow, and oil,
the cargo took fire from spontaneous combustion.
1 was rescued by a Russian brig, in the western
ocean, just as we were about to go into the boats,
after the cargo had been on fire for nearly a
week, when the vessel had become one mass of
fire, and all hope of saving her was gone.
My most sincere and hearty thanks are due
for the kindness I received at Brisbane, espe-
cially from Doctor Barton, Captain W ickbam,
Mr. Harris, Captain Sproule, of the ship
“Fatima,” and also to those men whom I
mentioned as having first received us on the
banks of the river, and who despatched the
messenger to Brisbane.
On the 21st of May, four days after our
arrival, Captain Wickham procured us a passage
to Sydney in the “ Eagle,” where we arrived on
the 2d of June,— being thirteen days in ac-
complishing a voyage which is ordinarily made
in about fifty hours; and if I received kindness
in Brisbane, I received it no less on my arrival
in Sydney. Both acquaintances and strangers
tried to make amends for our sufferings, by
their kind attentions.
A few days after my arrival in Sydney, news
came from Brisbane that the people who went
in search of my unfortunate companions had
returned, having obtained some clue , but,
before they could follow it up, they had been
380.


compelled to return for a fresh supply of pro-
visions. Being fully equipped for the journey,
they started again, and in a few days they
succeeded in finding three of the bodies—so far
decomposed that they could scarcely be recog-
nised. From their emaciated appearance, it was
thought they had died through starvation; but
no doubt they were three of my poor men who
had died under the clubs of the savages. From
the description given of the spot where the
bodies were found, and its distance from Wide-
Bay, it exactly accords with the place where
the natives attacked us; and they found the
bodies in a thick and almost impenetrable
jungle,—so that they had to cut a passage
before they could get them out to bury them,
which they did in as decent a manner as cir-
cumstances would allow. The bodies were found
about ten yards apart, and in a state of complete
nudity; which was the condition in which I left
poor Doctor Hyslop and Smith, having been strip-
ped by the blacks of the only garment that had
been left after the former attack. These cir-
cumstances leave no room to doubt that they
were my slaughtered companions.
The other two bodies were not found ; the
natives told very conflicting tales about them.
First, they said that the sea had washed them
away; which was impossible, the jungle in which
they were murdered being at least three quarters
of a mile from the sea. They then said that
380. j


they had thrown thorn into the sea; but others
said that they had taken them inland, and
buried them. They had disposed of them in
some way or other; but in what way is still a
mystery, —and such, I suppose, it will remain.
I must now finish my melancholy tale by
stating that the death of the five men, butchered
by the natives, did not complete the list of
tragic events arising out of the unfortunate
wreck of the “ Thomas King ; ” for, a short
time after the remainder of the crew had been
taken on board the “ Lady Blackwood,” James
Hayes, one of the men who had come with me
from England, was going aloft to assist in making
sail, when he missed his hold, and fell from the
fore-yard-arm to the forecastle, and was killed.
Of the remainder of the crew, some had
sailed for England before I arrived at Sydney,
and others preferred staying in the colony. I
remained in Sydney, recruiting my health, until
July, and then took command of the barque
“Unicorn,” and sailed for England August 22d,
1852. I arrived in London, after a splendid
passage, December 17th, 1852, thankful to the
(liver of all grace to be again found in the bosom
of my family and surrounded by my friends.
The foregoingnarrative cannot fail to excite in
the mind of the Christian reader some interest in
behalf of two classes of our fellow-men; viz., our
own seamen, and the natives of New-Holland.
380.


It must be admitted by all who have paid
attention to the subject, that no class of men
are of greater importance to this nation than
seamen. It is by our maritime power (under
God) that this country has attained its present
elevated position amongst the nations of the
earth, and for many years past has gone on
enlarging her boundaries, increasing her colo-
nies, multiplying her manufactories, and aug-
menting her wealth and power ; —so that our
beloved Queen (whom may God bless and pros-
per) reigns in the affections of her people over
an empire on which the sun never sets.
It is by this interesting class of our country-
men, our seamen, that our extended commerce
is maintained; —so that British ships visit
all shores, crowd every port, and our mer-
chants transact business with all people and
languages. If the manufactures of our country
have attained an extent and importance which
no nation, ancient or modern, has ever reached
before, giving profitable employment to vast
multitudes of the population, in those hives
of industry, found in our manufacturing
districts, and producing immense stores of
wealth to the nation, we are much indebted
to our seamen for these results. How limited
those manufactures would necessarily be, were
it not for those by whom our mercantile navy
is manned, who bring home the productions of
every clime, in the shape of raw material, and
380. f 2


export our manufactured goods to the various
markets of the world!
Our sailors are especially important when con-
sidered in connection with the diffusion of the
Gospel and the extension of Christianity. It is
Christianity that has given to our country its ex-
alted and influential position. It is the Gospel
to which we are indebted for our happy homes
■ —our peaceful sanctuaries—our free Bible—our
noble institutions—our religious and civil liber-
ties. It is the Gospel that has built up our com-
merce—fostered our manufactures —increased
our colonies—and given us an extent of empire,
sources of wealth, and an amount of influence
and power, unparalleled, in their combination, in
ancient or modern times. And all these benefits
are conferred upon us, not for our sakes alone,
but that wemay diffuse the benefits of Christianity
as widely as our influence and our commerce
extend. In doing this, our seamen must neces-
sarily take an important part.
To a very great extent our sailors represent us,
as a nation, in foreign lands. They are generally
the first to visit newly-discovered countries; they
mix extensively with the inhabitants, and these
people very naturally take their impression of
our country from our seamen. It has too often
been the case that our sailors have been profli-
gate and wicked, and heathen natives or tribes
have formed their judgment of Christianity from
these representatives of a Christian nation, and
380.


Untold evil has been the result ; but, through
the Divine blessing on the labours of our
“Seamen’s Missionary Societies,” there have been
sent out, of late, representatives of a different
kind, —men who fear and love God, and who
find the religion of Jesus Christ not only com-
patible with a mariner’s life, but greatly helpful
to them, while prosecuting their perilous calling
on the mighty deep; and men who are anxious,
in their intercourse with the natives of barbarous
countries, to instruct and benefit them. How
desirable it is that this class of seamen should be
multiplied !
Converted sailors have, on several occasions,
acted as pioneers of the Gospel in heathen lands,
and are always found amongst the most valuable
auxiliaries in promoting Missionary and philan-
thropic objects. Let these be multiplied, and
they will be in an important sense Missionaries
themselves, —witnessing for Christ, testifying of
His power to save, and, what is of even greater
importance, exemplifying the power of Chris-
tianity in holy and virtuous lives; —so that
their example and conversation will powerfully
recommend Christianity to heathen and anti-
Christian nations.
The friends of Christian Missions will do
well to bestow more attention than they have
been accustomed to do upon this important
but much-negle ;ted class of men, not only for
the sake of tl i seamen themselves, but also
380. f 3


because of the important bearing it would have
upon the great work of evangelizing the heathen.
By diffusing throughout both branches of the
British navy the influence of Divine revelation,
so that our ships may be manned only by
Christian men, or those who are under the
powerful restraints which religion often imposes
even where its renewing influence is unfelt,
not only would an incalculable amount of evil
be prevented, but much good would be achieved.
The wicked example and the brutal passions
of seamen would no longer, as they have often
done, produce those evil results which prove so
detrimental to the labours of Missionaries; and
these Christianised sailors would do much to
prepare the way for the introduction of the
Gospel amongst barbarous and savage tribes.
The compiler of this narrative therefore offers
no apology for urging, as he now takes this
opportunity of doing, upon the attention of
all who read these pages, the claims which
the Wesleyan Seamen’s Mission has upon
the sympathies and the liberality of those who
love the Lord Jesus Christ and the souls of
their fellow-men. This institution, commonly
called “ The Thames Mission,” which has been
for some years in operation, has for its im-
mediate object the intellectual and moral
improvement of British sailors; and deserves
a more liberal support than it has yet obtained
from a religious community, like the Weslevan
380.


body, who take such an important part in the
conversion of the world to Christ.
This narrative is suggestive of the great
privations which seamen are called to endure.
They are deprived, during a large portion of their
lives, of the comforts of home, —of social inter-
course with those they love, —and of the means
of grace. They have, moreover, to encounter
great perils and dangers,—as the numerous
wrecks and the fearful loss of life which have
taken place during the last few weeks painfully
testify. A large proportion of sailors either die
at sea or on foreign shores, by wrecks or by
diseases caught in unhealthy climes.
It may be questioned whether all is done
that ought to be and that might be done by a
paternal Government for the protection of our
seamen, in the various disasters they are
exposed to, especially when cast on foreign
shores, or amongst savage tribes,-—as in the
case of Captain Walker and his men. More,
perhaps, might be accomplished in teaching
the natives to respect life and property, and
when sailors are thrown among them to show
them kindness in their distress, and to assist
them in reaching a settlement of civilised peo-
ple : at all events, the Christian church is
called to perform her duty to this important class
of our follow-men, and to do all in her power to
instruct and evangelize our seamen, and give to
them “ the pearl of great price,” that in those
380.


numerous perils and privations to which they arj
exposed, which no prudence can avert, and which
no human forethought can prevent, they may
have the consolations of religion to sustain them,
and be prepared for the undying joys of a better
life when snatched suddenly away from earth.
From the view presented of the state of the
natives of New-Holland, in this narrative, there
is much to excite the interest and commiseration
of Christian philanthropists.
A proposal was made (though I fear never
carried out) after the massacre of the liev.
John Williams and his companion by the
natives of Erromanga, to send Missionaries to
instruct and Christianise that people. This
would have been a noble act of Christian gene-
rosity,—a befitting requital of the evil they
had done, and in perfect accordance with the
precepts and practice of our great Master, whose
dying prayer for His murderers was, —“ Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do f
and who commanded His disciples “to preach
repentance and remission of sins to all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem” And it would be
an equally proper and befitting act that efforts
should be made to enlighten and evangelize the
degraded natives of New-Holland, whose clubs
and spears have been so lately employed in
despatching our countrymen.
The aborigines of our own colonies have
special claims upon us; they are not only our
380.


fellow-men, but our fellow-subjects, and under
the same Government. We have taken posses-
sion of their lands; and, whether it has been
done by conquest or by purchase, our obligations
to them are the same. Our great Creator has
permitted us, in His providence, to gain posses-
sion of their country, not for the oppression or
extermination of the natives, but for their
j preservation , instruction, and moral elevation.
Common justice, as well as every principle of
our holy and beneficent Christianity, requires
that we should extend to these aboriginal tribes,
whose land and treasure we have appropriated, the
comforts of civilisation, and the higher blessings
of the Gospel of the grace of God; and the results
will be advantageous both to them and ourselves.
Captain Walker justly observed,in the conclusion
of his interesting address, at the Wesleyan Sea-
men’s Chapel,—“ Let institutions like this be
supported,—let Christian Missionaries be sent
to these natives,—let them be properly and
carefully instructed in the Christian religion,
—and we shall hear no more of disasters and
massacres such as I and my poor men have
been called to endure.”
These remarks may be very properly con-
cluded by the following extract from an impor-
tant public document: —
“ The British empire has been signally blessed
1 y Providence; and her eminence—her strength
•—her wealth —her prosperity—her intellectual,
380.


her moral, and her religious advantages—are so
many reasons for peculiar obedience to the laws
of Him who guides the destinies of nations.
These were given for some higher purpose than
commercial prosperity and military renown. It
is not to be doubted that this country has been
invested with wealth and power—with arts and
knowledge—with the sway of distant lands and
the mastery of the restless waters —for some
great and important purpose in the government
of the world. Can we suppose otherwise than that
it is our office to carry civilisation and humanity,
peace and good government, and, above all, the
knowledge of the true God, to the uttermost
ends of the earth 1 He who has made Great
Britain what she is, will inquire at our hands
how we have employed the influence lie has
lent to us, in our dealings with the untutored and
defenceless savage; whether it has been engaged
in seizing their lands, warring upon the people,
and transplanting unknown disease and deeper
degradation through the remote regions of
the earth ; or whether we have, as far as we
have been able, informed their ignorance, and
invited and afforded them the opportunity of
becoming partakers of that civilisation, that
innocent commerce, that knowledge, and that
faith with which it has pleased a gracious Pro-
vidence to bless our own country.”— Parlia *
mentary Report, 1836—7.
380.








