

EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XV.
EMIGRANT MANUALS.
No. I.
The British Colonies Described
WITH
ADVICE TO THOSE WHO CANNOT OBTAIN
EMPLOYMENT AT HOME.
BY
WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON, ESQ.,
AUTHOR OF “HOW TO EMIGRATE,”
&c. &c.
Published under the Direction of
The Committee of General Literature and Education , appointed
by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN
KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
4, ROYAL exchange;
AND 16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
1851.
Price Fourpence.






CANTERBURY SETTLEMENT.


EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XV.
EMIGRANT MANUALS.
No. I.
The British Colonies Described;
WITH
ADVICE TO THOSE WHO CANNOT OBTAIN
EMPLOYMENT AT HOME.
BY
WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON, ESQ.
AUTHOR OF “ HOW TO EMIGRATE.”
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION, APPOINTED BY
THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.


LONDON:
Printed by James Truscott, Nelson Square.


THE
BRITISH COLONIES DESCRIBED,
&c. &c.
There are in this great country many pros-
perous and wealthy people, and many who,
having abundance of employment and ample
wages, are contented with their Jot, and ought
to have no wish to change; and there are
also numbers who have toiled, or who are
ready to toil, early and late, but can find no
employment which will afford them even the
necessaries of life—lodging, food, and cloth-
ing, and an education for their children. To
both classes I would address myself. To the
first I would say, not only give your sympathy
to your suffering countrymen, and bestow
your charity when they claim it of you, but
study diligently how they may permanently
be relieved, and placed in such a position that
they may depend on their own exertions, as
men should do, for their support. To the
a 3


second I more particularly speak. I acknow-
ledge that there is much poverty and wretch-
edness, sickness and starvation, much igno-
rance and discontent in our country; but I
am very confident, and I trust so will be my
readers, that the great and beneficent Ruler of
the world would not have allowed these evils
to exist, without also providing us with the
means of remedying them. He permits, for
His own inscrutable purposes, disease to creep
into our mortal frames and to rack us with
pain; but at the same time He puts into our
hands herbs and minerals of healing qualities,
and enables men to obtain by study a know-
ledge of their properties, and so to administer
them, that they can conquer, or at least miti-
gate, all the diseases which attack us. In
the same manner He permits disorders to
break out in the social body, but He also
enables us to overcome them by good laws
and regulations. Now as far as this country
is suffering from having more people in it
than can readily obtain employment, one
clear and easy remedy is presented to us;
there may be others, but of this one I wish
more particularly to treat, because I believe
it to be the most speedy and efficacious. We
are in possession of many fertile and beautiful
lands, with climates equal, if not superior to
that of our own, but which are almost entirely
destitute of inhabitants. To those lands must


go forth some of those who find themselves
too much crowded, and who cannot obtain
employment in England; they must occupy
them and make them fruitful, and create in
them a home for themselves and a rich
heritage for their children. I think it is very
evident that these lands were given us for
that object; that when more people were
born in England than England can support,
the surplus should cheerfully leave the old
country and go and occupy them. This idea
is now becoming general; thousands have
gone, and are happily settled in those new
lands, and prospering greatly; thousands
more of all classes are ready to go, but with
most of them the great difficulty is to find
the means of getting there; to raise money
to pay for the necessary outfit and the pas-
sage. In another tract I shall point out all
the methods with which I am acquainted,
now existing, for enabling poor persons to
obtain passages to the British colonies. My
object at present is to exhibit in true colours
the advantages to be derived from emigrating,
and to give a description of each of our
colonies, that those who may determine to
quit their native land may be able to select
the one most likely to suit them.
Formerly people were deterred from emi-
grating by the feeling that they were to be
separated for ever from their friends, and


might never hear of them again; by a dread
of the voyage, which was supposed long and
dangerous, and full of hardships; and by a
fear of the natives and the wild beasts, which
were said to attack the settlers, and frequently
to destroy them. Whatever was the case
formerly, there is now a constant communi-
cation kept up between the mother country
and the colonies; letters are sent as regu-
larly as through the post-office in England,
and those who go out first are almost certain
to have some relatives or friends from their
own neighbourhood following them. The
ships employed to carry emigrants to the
more distant colonies are now as fine as any
floating on the ocean; they are well pro-
visioned and well commanded, and the voyage
is performed in half the time it formerly was,
while accidents are so extremely rare, that
amongst several hundred ships sent out by
the government during a course of many
years, none have been lost. The voyage is,
indeed, far safer in proportion to the distance
than one across to Fi ance or round our own
coasts. With regard, also, to ferocious wild
beasts and savages. In Africa alone, of all our
possessions, are the first to be found, and
they seldom or never approach the settlements
of the Europeans; people have, indeed, to
make long journeys in order to hunt them,
and even then the hardy sportsman eagerly


encounters a troop of elephants in their native
plains or the fierce lion in his den. The truth
is, that wild beasts, notwithstanding their
strength and their fierceness, have a natural
dread of man and the power of his weapons,
and their instinct teaches them to avoid the
neighbourhood of his dwelling place. The
natives also have in all our settlements, by
kind and considerate treatment, become
tamed and friendly to the British; in some
settlements completely civilized. Not only
do they not molest them, but they mingle
with them, and afford them much assistance
in their farms, in making roads, and cutting
wood; indeed, in many operations where skill
is not required. Formerly savages were too
often ill treated, and often destroyed without
remorse or excuse, and of course they retali-
ated on their oppressors; now, happily, they
are recognized as fellow-men; as beings with
souls, for whom, equally with ourselves,
Christ died on the cross, and every effort is
being made to civilize them and to teach
them the truths of Christianity. Where the
example of the teachers has been more in
accordance with their precepts than formerly,
the result has been most satisfactory, and
whole tribes, who a few short years ago were
fierce savages and cannibals, have now be-
come in faith and conduct Christians indeed.
While on the subject, I must remind those


who may settle among heathens, that on the
purity of their lives and on their example
it much depends whether those heathens re-
main on in their ignorance and unbelief, or
whether they are brought to embrace the
faith through which we hope to be saved.
The same remark applies, however, to those
who remain at home. Fearful is the re-
sponsibility if they do not set a good example
to their dependants and neighbours. I think
that I have thus shewn, that the dangers of
the voyage, as also from the natives, and
from wild beasts, are more imaginary than
real. We see sometimes in the papers ac-
counts of the total loss of emigrant ships;
but I have remarked that they are nearly
all German or American ships, bound to
the United States, and that their loss has
occurred from their being ill-found and ill-
officered, and from their not being placed
under the strict regulations which have been
established with regard to British emigrant
ships bound on long voyages.
I have also frequently been asked by poor
people, “ What shall we do when we arrive
in those parts ? Who will look after us ?
Who will employ us ? Who will give us
food ? They say we are to be put on shore
in a wild country, among the woods, where
there is no squire and no manor house, no
clergyman and no church steeple; no one to


care for our bodily wants; no one to teach
us and our children the word of God.” I
shall have, in another little book, more par-
ticularly to answer these objections, by
showing you exactly what is done and what
the emigrants will have to do on landing; but
in the meantime I may assure you, that there
are churches and clergymen ready to receive
all comers, and men of capital anxious to
give them employment; and that food and
lodging is provided, and every care is taken
of them by the government on first landing
till they can make arrangements for the
future.
Every year has made great changes, and
the emigrant of the present day has not to
encounter one quarter of the difficulties and
inconveniences which were the ordinary fate
of those who, a few years ago, went to the
colonies. Ido not say that there are no dif-
ficulties to be met with, but that there are
none which a man with common prudence
and perseverance cannot overcome, and there
are absolutely no hardships, properly so
called.
The climate of all the southern colonies is
good; there is an abundance of food, cheap
and good, and people with capital are ready
to give employment to all able and willing to
work, and, except on an occasion when a
number of ships arrive together with large


parties of passengers, lodgings can be pro-
vided for all new comers; and even in the
latter case, in the newer settlements, people
would not suffer from sleeping in the open
air or under tents : besides, it is the custom
to provide that ships should afford accommo-
dation to their passengers for a fortnight after
their arrival, till they can make arrangements
to live on shore; therefore there is neither
danger nor hardship to be encountered. There
is a loss, and that is leaving relations and
friends, tearing apart old associations and
strong ties, but all the rest is positive gain.
The man who can labour is certain to suc-
ceed ; of that I have no manner of doubt.
Numerous letters from poor people who went
out to the colonies all assure me of that.
Every one who has been fairly industrious
has bettered himself. Many who went out
with the assistance of the parish, without a
farthing in their pockets, are now the owners
of land, and houses, cattle, sheep, and poultry.
A strong and willing arm, provided the owner
is honest and temperate, is there of ten times
the value that it is in England; formerly I
would not have ventured to say so: now, after
much experience, I may say that man is cer-
tain of success. But I wish it clearly to be
understood, that the life of a colonist is a life
of toil, happy and remunerative toil, however,
in the fresh air of heaven. No where without


labour will the earth yield its increase, and I
am certain our countrymen do not expect it
to do so, but are ready and eager to labour
whenever they can reap the fair fruits of their
labour; those fair fruits will always be found
in the British colonies : that I promise you,
but nothing more. Remember, Ido not say
that you will find nothing more; I think you
will, but it is better not to expect more, and
then you will not be disappointed, as the un-
happy and misguided gold diggers in Cali-
fornia have been. At all events, I will not
take upon myself to promise you more than
this.
I have spoken of the particular advantage
gained by those who emigrate; but not only
do they benefit, but so does the colony, and
also the mother country they leave. There
is a certain sum expended every year in sup-
porting the population of the country; I
mean in finding them food. A portion of
this only is paid as wages to labourers who
earn it; a very large part goes to keep alive
paupers, people who do nothing for it, who
can do nothing because there is not work for
them to do. I have first one question to ask.
Why is there not work ? Because the farmer
or other employer of labour has to pay away
part of his capital in supporting paupers.
Now many of these paupers are able-bodied
men willing to work; let them emigrate to a
B


British colony, or let some of those who are
receiving wages for their labour emigrate; it
matters not which, some of the employer’s
capital will be free. He will with it, conse-
quently, employ more labourers in producing
food; thus he will be able to produce food
cheaper. In other words, by letting half of
those who cannot find employment at home
emigrate, or rather an equal number, the
capitalist is relieved from the heavy burden
of supporting them, and thus with this surplus
capital before employed in supporting paupers,
the other half will find employment at home.
From this either of two things will happen ;
the labourer will get higher wages, or, if
wages remain the same, they will get food
cheaper as well as the other necessaries of
life. To them it does not in the least matter,
as the difference is only nominal. This is a
very important point, and I wish it to be
clearly understood, that by some of the popu-
lation emigrating those who remain are at
once benefited; and it therefore becomes the
interest as well as the duty of those at home,
to aid by every means in their power those
who may resolve to go. Now do not let any
one foolishly and selfishly say, Why should
I go there ? why should I benefit others who
have not the pain and trouble of going. I
answer, that those who go are far more
largely and immediately benefited than those


who remain, and amply repaid for the addi-
tional pain and trouble to which they are
exposed.
I have also to observe (and this is another
very important point), that those who become
colonists immediately begin to wear better
clothes, to live in better houses, and to use
better furniture than they ever did at home.
Now these clothes, the glass, and paper, and
canvas for the houses, the furniture, and
other articles, are all manufactured in Eng-
land ; consequently, these very people who
were a burden on the industry of others at
home, by becoming colonists actually afford
employment to a number of people who, but
for the colonies, would have been compelled
to remain idle.
It is calculated that in the Australian colonies
and New Zealand, every person consumes to
the value of £7. of British manufacture ; and
thus, supposing £l4. will support a labourer
at home for one year, every two people who
go to those colonies supports one in England
who would otherwise have been idle; besides,
those who go to the colonies marry and have
children, who also consume manufactures.
Indeed, the wealthy population increases far
more rapidly than it does at home; in fact,
in the colonies all must be considered
wealthy.
It thus becomes almost difficult to reckon
b 2


the many different ways in which England is
benefited by her colonies. First, by one half
of the unemployed going, the other half in-
stantly are able to support themselves, and
the first half, on their arrival in the colony,
by consuming manufactures, enable the second
half not only to support themselves, but to
have constant and highly remunerative em-
ployment; by this means it is clear that all
classes benefit, both those engaged in farm-
ing pursuits, and manufacturers of every
description. I shall afterwards, when I come
to treat of the colonies, show how they are
more particularly benefited. Indeed, I wish
it were better understood how the true inte-
rests of the community are bound up with
each other, or are, rather, identical: what is
to the interest of the farmer is to the interest
of the manufacturer. God created the world
in harmony, and society was formed on the
same plan, and it is only through the folly
and mismanagement of man that interests
clash and disorders break out. As I before
remarked, there is no disorder without a re-
medy if we have sense to find it, and the very
evident remedy of over population is emi-
gration. Of course, if we blindly neglect to
try and remedy disorders, they may, as a just
punishment, get beyond all control; and so
if we refuse to emigrate, we shall fill our
workhouses, and our children will become


paupers, the parents of fresh generations of
paupers, sickly, ignorant, and vicious. There-
fore I say to those of every class, who can-
not find employment at home, emigrate; set
to work manfully; use every exertion, use
every means, to obtain a passage to one or
other of the British colonies; and again I
say, if you have strong arms, and are indus-
trious, with God’s blessing you will succeed.
The yearly increase of the population of
Great Britain and Ireland is three hundred
thousand souls. Think of that. We have
too many people now; what number shall
we have next year, and the year after, and
the year after that? The choice is given us
either to stay and push and shoulder our
neighbours, we keeping them back they
keeping us from—we will not say getting on,
but from—even getting bread to put into our
children’s mouths; or to bid farewell to the
dearly beloved little island, which is, after all,
only part of England, and to go across the
wide seas to another part of England, where
we shall have all the good England can
afford, and none of the evil which belongs to
her crowded state, besides many benefits she
cannot afford : plenty of elbow room, abun-
dance of food, and a fine climate, where there
is great demand for labour, and where labour
is richly rewarded; where no one need starve,
and where none can be poor who have hands
b 3


to work, but the idle, the profligate, and the
drunkard.
I ask which are the wisest people ? those
who stay at home and run all the risks of
poverty and starvation, or those who man-
fully gird up their loins, and take their staffs
in hand, and go forth to lands where their
industry will be rewarded, and where, if they
are prudent and honest, they need not fear for
the future? I say, those who cannot go will
be wise to help those who can, and the wisest
are those who soonest make up their minds
for the change. I repeat, some of all classes
must go, rich and poor, educated and igno-
rant, workmen who work with their heads,
and workmen who work with their hands.
The poor would do little without the rich,
who can bring implements to cultivate the
land, and capital to purchase food till the
land can give its returns; the hands, too, can
do very little without heads to guide them.
To get on well we must have science, capital,
labour, and land ; the three first we must
take to the last. I mention this to show you
how completely all classes of society are con-
nected together in a bond of union; how
entirely dependant we all are one upon
another. The poor and ignorant can no more
do without the rich and educated, than the
latter can without persons strong and able to
labour with their hands for them. Now to


those who are called the labouring classes
who read this I speak. I ask you to believe
that which I write is for your good. I ask
you, by those feelings of love and affection
which you have for your wives, your children,
your parents, your brothers and to
believe that there are those with names as
noble as any in this land, who have hearts
which feel for you, mouths which will speak
for you, and heads which will think and will
work for you, and will endeavour to find out
the means by which your distress may be
relieved. When, as offering the means, I
say to you emigrate, I do not say so to get
rid of you, but because I believe it is one of
the modes by which our social ills may be
remedied. I say the same to dear brothers
and friends, to all who cannot find employ-
ment at home.
And now comes a very important question.
What colony to select? There arises my
difficulty. I cannot, Ido not like, rather, to
advise. Where all have many excellencies,
and many of them in common, and where
their interests are so much bound up with
each other, it would not become me to praise
one above another; all I can do is, to point
out some general rules, by which you will, I
trust, be able to select the colony most likely
to suit you. First, let me entreat you not to
mistake foreign countries for British colonies,


and give up your home and relations and
become aliens and strangers, perhaps enemies
to old England. When I would persuade
you to emigrate, I would persuade you to go
to British colonies, where you will still remain
British, under British laws, subjects of our
gracious sovereign; and do not, as you value
your happiness or the name of Englishmen,
go, as too many have done and are doing, to
the United States of America, to Texas, to
South America, to California, indifferent to
every thing but the thought of becoming
rapidly rich, in which they are likely to be
most grievously and miserably disappointed.
Those countries are not British; they differ
in every respect from England, except that
the English language is spoken in most of
them. They are now our friends, and it is
the prayer of all right-minded men, of all
Christians, that they should always remain
so; but they may become our enemies, and
then in what a position will those be who
have taken up their abode in them. In
most important respects are they infinitely
inferior to British colonies. In the first
place, in the more remote districts to which
emigrants go, there are few or none of the
means of enjoying the ordinances of religion;
no churches, no regular clergyman, no oppor-
tunity of hearing the word of God. For
years people live on in a state bordering on


heathenism. Ido not say this is always the
case, but I may safely assure you that it is
so generally, and nearly always.
1 hen if a person falls sick, the chances are
that he is miles and miles away from a doctor,
and that, from the small remuneration to be
obtained, no regular medical man is to be
found at all, and that the so-called doctor is
an apothecary’s boy, who knows how to mix
drugs, but who is more likely to kill than to
cure with them. Then with regard to the
climates of those countries. They are gene-
rally inferior to those of all the British colo-
nies, and in many large districts agues and
fevers are prevalent among all the settlers,
and people who were rosy and healthy in
England, there become sallow and racked
with pain. When I say that there is so little
law, that people have frequently to take the
law into their own hands to defend them-
selves with bowie knives and rifles, and to
hang offenders on the nearest tree, I think
you will agree that the name of liberty and
equality is dearly purchased by the sacrifice
of our country, and the laws and privileges
of the British constitution. The population
of the United States do not consume to the
value of ss. of British manufacture, therefore,
it requires more than fifty-six people to go
there before one person in England can, by
that means, obtain support. I therefore, on


public grounds, for the good of the nation at
large, am anxious to persuade Englishmen to
go to English colonies and not to foreign
countries.
To select a colony, enquire first,—Does
that colony enjoy the ordinances of religion ?
Depend upon it, without these you cannot be
happy and prosperous. Are there clergy-
men ; are there churches; are there bishops
to govern, and to see that all do their duty ?
Let no persuasions tempt you to settle in a
spot where the Christian faith is not taught.
Do not go where there is not good govern-
ment j where good laws and regulations are
not established. Make particular enquiries
as to the climate; whether it is hot or cold,
whether the winters are long or short, whether
the land is marshy and damp, or high and
dry, whether healthy or unhealthy. Be very
careful not to settle in an unhealthy locality.
No gain will compensate you for so doing.
If you can stand cold well, and can wield an
axe, Canada, or some other of the British
North American Colonies may suit you;
otherwise, go to one of those in the southern
hemisphere.
The voyage to the first is short, but then
there is some considerable expense in getting
up the country to the locations; to the latter,
all expense to the labouring man ends on
arriving in harbour, as those wishing to em-


ploy him, are ready to convey him to their
farms. However, I do not wish to compare
one colony with another, but exactly to
describe each in its proper colours.
The following is a list of the British co-
lonies, settlements, and possessions abroad;
but it must be understood that some of them
are in tropical climates, and that others are
merely military and naval stations, while some
may be considered rather in the light of pro-
tected states, inhabited by native races,
among whom English emigrants would not
think°of settling; and I shall therefore con-
fine my description solely to those true co-
lonies which are particularly fitted for British
colonization.
It is difficult to know in what order to place
them. Our possessions in Europe should be
named according to their geographical po-
sitions ; but I prefer mentioning first the
largest, the most ancient, and probably the
most important. I shall add the races by
which they are inhabited, and a remark as to
their present condition.


Possessions.
Inhabitants whence derived.
Present Condition.
NORTH AMERICA.
Nora Scotia
British, a few French are
settled there
A fair field for emigrants, but few go
there at present.
Cape Breton
Ditto
An island, few go there at present.
New Brunswick
British
A fair field for emigrants.
Lower Canada
French and now British ...
To be described.
Upper Canada
British and a few Indians..
Ditto.
Hudson’s Bay Territory
Scattered British, and tribes
of Indians
Used chiefly as a hunting ground, with
trading stations, and one or two settle-
ments. The Red River is the prin-
cipal one.
Labrador
Esquimaux and a few Mis-
sionary stations of Mora-
vians
Fishing on the coast.
Newfoundland
British
An island valuable for its fisheries. No
fresh inhabitants can find employment.
Prince Edward’s Island
Ditto
Few emigrants go there, but there is
room for many.
Anticosti Island
Ditto
A small island at the mouth of the St.
Lawrence.


Vancouver’s Island ...
British and Indians
In the possession of the Hudson’s Bay
Company. Coals found there. A few
only go there; those wishing for pas-
sages must apply to the Company,
WEST INDIA ISLANDS.
Trinidad
British,Spaniards, & Negroes
Sugar, coffee, cocoa, cotton, &c. &c.
Tobago
British, a few French, Ne-
groes
Ditto.
Grenada
Ditto ditto
Ditto. From their productions, these
Grenadines
Ditto ditto
Ditto islands were of great value before
Barbadoes
British, Negroes, and a few
Ditto the just abolition of slavery. From
j-ziuo. the idleness of the free negroes, less
Caribs
produce has been raised, and the
St. Vincent
British, Negroes, Caribs, and
Ditto. same duty only existing on foreign
slave grown sugar, the latter has
..... successfully competed with it. It
Ditto. j s t 0 j, e hoped, by a different system
St. Lucia
Ditto
Dominica
Ditto
Ditto. of cultivation, this prosperity may
Antigua
British and Negroes
Ditto. t> e restored, aided by the abolition
Anquilia
Ditto
Ditto °f slavery in foreign states.
Virgin Islands
Ditto
Ditto, There are ten or more small
islands.
St. Christopher’s
British, a few French, and
Negroes
Ditto.
Monserrat
British, French, Negroes ..
Teas.
c


Possessions.
Inhabitants whence derived.
Present Condition.
British, Negroes
Sugar.
Negroes, Mulattos, and
British
The largest island, produces sugar, &c.
T> 1
British, Negroes, a few
French, and Spaniards
On the main land. The inhabitants
British, Native Indians, and
Negroes
occupied chiefly in cutting logwood.
Guiana, embracing the
British, Native Indians, and
Negroes
Sugar, coffee, &c.
settlement of Deme-
rara, Essequibo, and
Berbice
hot to allow British labourers to work in
The above intertronical settlements, as they are too
the open air without suffering in health, I will not further describe. There is an interesting
British community on Pitcairn’s Island, on the west coast of South America.
Bermudas
I British, and a few Negroes..
Islands in mid ocean surrounded by
coral reefs, valuable as a naval station,
and very healthy.
In Asia we have large possessions and several protected provinces, in which British influence
is predominant.
Aden
| Arabs, and a very few British
1 Valuable as guarding the mouth of the
1 Red Sea


Mahometans and Hindoos, \
Valuable from the commerce they create 1
Bombay
Bengal
\ and numerous British!
with England, their vast revenue,
1 military and civilians, I
and from employing many thousand
] but there are few others [
British. These territories seem given
Madras
I comparatively, and those|
into the hand of Britain, in order that
' are of inferior rank '
she may rule well, and bring them
into the pale of Christianity.
Ceylon
Cingalese, and a few British
Probably the inhabitants are descended
from a colony of Singhs or Rajpoots
from India. Itsproducts of greatvalue.
Martaban
Malays, Chinese, &c
Of value from their products & commerce
Tenasserim
Ditto
Paulo Penang Island..
A mixture of oriental tribes,
A beautiful and healthy island. From 1
mostly from India
its position, very valuable as a com-
mercial port.
Wellesley Province . .
Malays, Chinese, &c, &c. ..
On the main land.
Malacca Province ....
Ditto
Tin mines and other products valuable.
Singapore Province . ■.
A mixture of Malays, with
Established by Sir Stamford Raffles;
many nations of the East,
and numerous British
merchants and others
Very important as a commercial depot
Sarawak
Dyacks and Malays, with a
few British
Given to Sir Jas. Brooke, who is Rajah.
Labuan
British, and a few natives of
The British have lately taken possession
the East
of it as a naval station.
Canton Factories
Chinese and British
Trading posts
Lately taken possession of to protect our
trade with the Chinese.
c 2


Possessions.
Inhabitants whence derived.
Present Condition.
IN AFRICA we have
Bathurst, on the river
Gambia and Ports
Negroes and a very few
British
These settlements are retained to aid in
putting down the Slave Trade, and also
Sierra Leone )
l to carry on a legitimate commerce with
Cape Coast Castle and V
Ditto
the tribes of Africa, to which objects
they have materially contributed.
Posts )
>
Cape Colony
British, Dutch, and Natives
To be described hereafter.
IN THE SOUTH ATLAN
TIC OCEAN
A naval and military station, lately
settled.
St. Helena
Ditto
A naval station, as also affording water
and vegetables to ships.
Tristan d’Acunha
Ditto
Ditto.
Falkland Islands
Ditto
To be hereafter described.


IN THE INDIAN OCEAN
Mauritius Island
British, French, Negroes,
Captured from the French. Produce
and Indians
sugar, coffee, &c. &c.
Roderiques Island ....
Ditto
Ditto. a, collection of small islands
Seychelles Islands ....
Ditto
Ditto. under the Governor of the Man-
Chagos Islands
Ditto
Ditto. ritius -
AUSTRALASIA consists of
New South Wales
British, and a few scattered
tribes of native Blacks
To be hereafter described.
Victoria, lately Port
Philip
Ditto
Ditto.
South Australia
Ditto
Ditto.
Western Australia ....
Ditto
Ditto.
Tasmania
British
An island south of New Holland.
New Zealand
British, and numerous tribes
of natives
Norfolk Island
British
A convict station exclusively.
The Auckland Islands.
Ditto
Lately colonized as a whaling station.
Near our own shores we have the Channel Islands and Heligoland, and in the Mediterranean
Gibraltar, on the Spanish coast, peopled by numberless races, and many British, and valuable
as guarding the entrance to the Mediterranean.
Malta; British and Maltese. Most valuable as a
naval station : and the Ionian Islands,
Greeks and British troops. They are rather protected states than British possessions.
c 3


It will thus be seen that these almost num-
berless possessions and provinces are retained
not for idle ostentation, nor to increase the
territorial extent of Great Britain, but because
for various reasons they are of intrinsic value
to her. Many are doubtless very expensive
to support, but they are of vast importance, to
protect her commerce, on which her pros-
perity, and even her very existence depends.
Others it has become her bounden duty to
protect, that she may advance the cause of
religion and civilization, instead of allowing
them to return to anarchy and misery.
Doubtless, however, the most valuable are
her proper colonies, of which I am about to
give a fuller description.
I think it useful to consider the territories
of Great Britain, suitable for colonization, as
divided into three great fields; namely, North
America, South Africa, and Australasia, besides
which there are the Falkland Islands of con-
siderable extent, and a few other healthy spots
hitherto unoccupied, in which Britons may
find a home. I will first describe
THE NORTH AMERICAN PROVINCES.
A very talented and elegant writer,* who
has travelled over them in every direction,
thus speaks of them: —“The inhabitants of
* Captain GoorgcWarburton, R. A., author of “ Hochelaga
Depicta.”


British North America enjoy many eminent
advantages, social and political. The will and
power to labour gives them independence, if
not wealth, as surely as the sun in summer
ripens the fruits of the earth. No peculiar
gifts of mind or fortune are necessary to rea-
sonable success; around them lies a fertile
wilderness; the industrious hand and honest
heart soon change it to fruitful fields. There
is no keen strife as at home for 1 leave to toil,’
where the strong win scantily, and the weak
fail helplessly. There man strives for not
against his neighbour, —all find ample room;
the success of each is gain to those around
him.” The same may be said of the colonies
at large; they all mutually benefit by the
prosperity of each other. Let no ignorant
foolish rivalry separate them. Let them re-
member the story of the bundle of sticks, and
cling together, and adhere faithfully to the
mother country for their mutual support and
protection. the British North American
Colonies consist of Upper and Lower Canada;
New Brunswick; Nova Scotia; Prince Ed-
ward’s Island; Newfoundland; the Hudson’s
Bay Company’s Settlements; the Coast of
Labrador, and Vancouver’s Island. “These
colonies” says Captain Warburton, “possess
advantages of water communications greater
than are known in any other part of the
world. The ship that leaves an English port


may now ascend the St. Lawrence, and dis-
charge her cargo a distance of nearly 2500
miles from the sea. From this great main
artery numerous rivers navigable for small
craft open up a vast and generally productive
country. The coast harbours are unequalled
in number and excellence, and the fisheries
are inexhaustible.
“ In this enormous territory there are na-
turally considerable varieties of climate. It
may, however, be safely said that all the dis-
tricts now cultivated, and to which the tide
of emigration usually flows, are eminently
healthy. The frost of winter is sharp and
severe; the sun of summer at times fierce
and scorching, but the air is ever pure, dry,
and invigorating. Every production of the
earth known at home, and many others be-
sides, may be grown there; and every do-
mestic animal increases and multiplies even
more rapidly than in our own islands. For
the most part, British laws, language, and
manners prevail among the inhabitants; they
enjoy the fullest rational liberty, and taxation
is probably according to their means lower
than that of any other people.”*
CANADA.
Did we possess no other colony than the
* For a full and interesting account of the “ British
colonies in North America,” see two volumes published by
the Society, one entitled “ Canada”—the other “ The
Maritime Provinces.”


superb country known under the name of the
Canadas, and did we take the full advantage
of it which it is capable of affording, we
might well be contended with that alone. It
is known as Lower or Eastern Canada, and
Upper or Western Canada. Lower Canada
is to the north of the mighty river St. Law-
rence. It was conquered from the French,
and a great portion of the inhabitants are
French in language, habits, and are of the
Roman Catholic religion.
The land is generally fertile, and diversified
with mountains and plains, embracing scenery
of the most magnificent kind. The climate
in the short summer is very hot, and in the
winter very cold. Various classes of crafts-
men will there find remunerative wages, but
unskilled labourers must move farther west.
Upper or Western Canada was the last
settled by English and Scotch emigrants,
mostly men of no capital but their strong
arms and knowledge to wield the axe and
drive the plough, by whose persevering energy
the wild forest land has been converted into
fruitful fields, and covered with flourishing
towns. By means of its superb lakes and
numberless rivers, aided by canals, there is
water carriage to every part of Upper Canada,
but notwithstanding this abundance of water,
the climate is neither damp nor unwholesome,
and the air is so pure that both heat and


cold can far better be endured than in Eng-
land. The ground is less occupied than in
Lower Canada, and the winters are shorter
and less severe. The emigrant will find there
also men of his own habits and way of think-
ing, and ready to assist him in the arduous
task of settling. Canada is strictly an agri-
cultural country, with certain grazing districts;
but the necessity of providing fodder for the
winter prevents the breeding of any large
number of cattle. Axemen, sawyers, agri-
cultural labourers, and rough craftsmen are
clearly those who will most easily find em-
ployment, but wherever they congregate,
tradesmen to supply them with the neces-
saries of life will also find employment for
their capital. Persons, however, who from
habit or health, are unable to endure severe
cold, should rather select one of our southern
colonies than Canada. There is a most ex-
tensive emigration to the United States from
Great Britain and Ireland.
This arose, in the first place, from the ac-
tivity of their agents in inducing people to go
there to purchase their lands, and the su-
pineness of patriotic men in advocating the
cause of our own colonies. Those who
have succeeded there, —and they would have
succeeded equally well, if not better, in Ca-
nada, —send for their friends, and thus the
stream is kept flowing. All Canada is healthy;


many parts of the United States are very un-
healthy. I feel that I cannot too often urge
this subject on the consideration of my coun-
trymen. Let me entreat any of you who may
think of going to America, to consider well
before you desert the country we ought all to
revere and love, in spite of the faults we may
find in her, before we abandon her laws and
institutions. Do not with careless indif-
ference become aliens and foreigners.
“ The soil and climate of Western Canada”
says the Hon. James Boulton, of Toronto,
“ are second to no part of America, and lands
may be had either from private individuals,
the government, or the Canada Company, at
a credit of five years or more, to suit the pur-
chaser, upon paying a small deposit of five
per cent., with an agreement to pay the
balance, with yearly interest, at six per cent.,
the legal rate in the colony. As to price,
lands may be had from 7s. 6d. per acre to 50s!
for good farm land, uncleared, and in a state
of nature, covered with wood, the price de-
pending more upon the goodness of roads,
convenience to market, mills, and the density
or paucity of the population in the neigh-
bourhood, than upon the quality of soil,
which may be equally good at either price.”
We hear much of land being sold in the
United States at ss. per acre; but when this
price is mentioned, do people reflect on the


above considerations; do they consider that
the climate may be unhealthy, and that they
may be far removed from any religious in-
struction for themselves or their children.
The chief cities of Canada are Quebec, Mon-
treal, Toronto, and Kingston, with many
other thriving towns and villages, and lakes
and rivers innumerable, traversed by steamers
which convey passengers at a very cheap rate
from one end of the provinces to the other.
There is a Bishop of Toronto.
Montreal is the seat of Government and
capital of the united provinces.
The ordinary voyage to Quebec lasts about
a month, and the cost of a steerage passage
is from £3. to £4, but for that no other pro-
visions but bread and water are supplied,
sufficient only to keep a person alive.
New Brunswick is situated to the south of
the river St. Lawrence. It is a fine country,
thickly covered with forests, which supply the
timber for an extensive trade. It is a good
country for the emigrant, and is becoming
thickly populated. The capital is St. John’s.
Nova Scotia is a peninsula, and the nearest
to England of her North American provinces.
It has an extensive trade in timber, and good
axemen can find employment. It has also
considerable trade in fish, but the land is not
in general very fertile, and the climate is of
course very cold in winter. Emigrants do


not go there in great numbers; still many,
centuries to come, will there find ample re-
ward for their labour. The Island of Cape
Breton is under the same Government.
Halifax is the capital. There is a Bishop of
Nova Scotia.
Prince Edward’s Island is near the mouth
of the river St. Lawrence. The land is very
fertile, and though in winter the ground is for
many months covered with snow, from its
peculiar position the cold is never intense, and
the air is deliciously pure from the fogs being
caught up by the high land of Cape Breton,
which lies seaward of it. Charlotte Town is
the capital.
Newfoundland, a large island to the north
of the above mentioned colonies, is celebrated
for the vast quantities of cod-fish caught on its
coasts, and all the inhabitants are connected in
some way with the trade carried on in them.
The climate is very healthy, but except during
the short summer it is cold. St. John’s is the
capital. There is a Bishop of Newfoundland.
Attached to the same Government is the
coast of Labrador, on which there are no
British residents, and of which very little is
known.
To the north and west of Canada are the
extensive territories of the Hudson’s Bay Fur
Company. The principal settlement is that
on the Red River, to which a Bishop has
D


lately been appointed, under the title of
Bishop of Rupert’s Land. There are also
numerous trading- posts scattered over it, and
extending to the Pacific Ocean. The western
portion is called New Caledonia.
Vancouver s Island, on the western coast,
belongs to the company. It contains rich
fields of coal, and the land is said to be fer-
tile. A party of colonists have lately settled
there, and report favourably of it, and w'hen
British steamers traverse the Pacific its im-
portance will be greatly increased.
AFRICAN COLONIES.
There are two, —Cape Colony and Natal.
The Cape of Good Hope is on the great
high road to India, and to our flourishing
colonies of Australasia. The climate is tem-
perate, and very healthy. In summer the
heat is considerable, but not oppressive ; it is
at all times exposed to violent gales of wind,
and in the higher regions much cold is felt.
Droughts also sometimes occur, and the
stock and sheep owners have to drive their
flocks and herds far in search of water. Its
sheep runs are, however, fine, and of great
extent, and its pastures are good. It is di-
vided into two provinces; Cape Town is the
capital of the western province, and Graham’s
Town of the eastern province. It is about
600 miles from west to east, and 300 from


north to south. The voyage occupies about
two months, and the expense of a steerage
passage is about £lO. Many of the inha-
bitants are of Dutch descent, the farmers of
which race are called Boers; including them,
the population amounts to about 220,000
Europeans. There are also a great number of
Hottentots and Fingoes employed as servants,
as policemen, and even as soldiers. There
is a Bishop of Cape Town.
Natal was the last established British
colony. It is about 500 miles from the
eastern frontier of Cape colony, and three
degrees further north. The climate, from all
accounts, is very fine, though hot, and the
country is better watered than the Cape
colony. It is said that the soil will produce
cotton, indigo, sugar, and tobacco ; we have
not proof sufficient to make us certain that it
will the latter productions, and few persons
only as yet are engaged in cultivating cotton,
with what means Ido not know. Port Natal
is a shallow but large harbour, and the capital
called D’Urban is situated on its shores.
There is another town in the interior called
Pieter Mauritzburg.
Three or four thousand persons have lately
gone out there from England and from the
Cape; but from the bad system pursued, the
objectionable practices of the agents, and
exaggerated statements made of its excel-
d 2


lencies, numbers have been grievously dis-
appointed, their just complaints very naturally
tending to arrest the progress of colonization.
At one time, several influential persons of the
Romish Church contemplated the formation
of a settlement there of Roman Catholics, but
it was abandoned; many, however, of that
persuasion have gone there. There is no
doubt that it will become one day an im-
portant colony, but for some time society
cannot form itself, and the early settlers must
suffer in consequence considerable incon-
venience. It must be remembered, also, that
the native tribes who remain in the neigh-
bourhood are numerous and warlike, and,
unless judiciously treated, may yet cause
some annoyance.
The Falkland Islands are what I call one
of the small fields for colonization. They
are situated off' the coast of South America,
and are valuable as affording a spot where
ships bound round Cape Horn may water,
provision, or refit. No trees grow there, but
the pasturage is very fine, and there are an
immense quantity of wild cattle on them.
The climate is cool, but it is said not to be
very damp, and in summer it is very dry and
healthy ; strong winds are prevalent. Those
who do not desire a warm climate, may pro-
bably find ample employment and a happy
home there. There is a Governor, and there


are a few hundred pensioners with their wives
and families settled on the island, some
merchants, and some Spanish North Ameri-
cans, who have been brought over to hunt
and take care of the cattle.
We next come to those possessions, the
importance of which are every day increasing.
THE AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
They are so called from being to the south
of Asia, and forming a Southern, or Austral
Asia; Auster being the Latin word for South.
They comprise the whole of New Holland,
Tasmania, New Zealand, and many small
islands. Over the whole of this vast extent
of country England holds supreme dominion;
and when we observe the rapid progress in
a right direction which these colonies have
lately made, we may feel a hope that she
will not be considered unworthy to complete
her important and noble mission of peopling
those vast tracts with Christian men of the
Anglo-Saxon race and tongue.
New Holland is now universally called
Australia. In extent it is 3500 miles from
east to west, and 2000 from north to south,
with a coast line of 8000 miles. In shape it
is an irregular oval, with deep indentations,
and the size almost of Europe. Consider
what a vast extent of country, and though
much of it may be unfit for cultivation, there
d 3


is sufficient to afford a home and all the
necessaries of life to millions and tens of
millions of our countrymen for ages to come.
Although the northern parts are under the
tropics, and in the south the climate is warmer
than that of Italy, it is as healthy as any part
of the world. There is a purity in the atmo-
sphere which exhilarates the spirits, brightens
the faculties, and makes even simple existence
delightful. A tent or a log hut is a sufficient
protection from the weather throughout the
year; beef, mutton, and bread are abundant,
and not only is there work for all who are
already there, but as many more as can reach
those shores will be heartily welcome, and
sure of obtaining ample employment.
Sixty years ago a few wandering tribes of
blacks were its only inhabitants. Not a white
man dwelt on those shores ; not a field was
cultivated, not a building was erected; the
emu, the kangaroo, and the native dog were
the only animals which scoured its woods and
plains; now, including Tasmania, there are
five large British settlements on its coasts,
containing among them upwards of 350,000
inhabitants of the Anglo-Saxon race, 8,000,000
sheep, 2,000,000 horned cattle, besides a
large number of horses and pigs, goats, and
poultry. It exports largely to England of
wool, and supplies even corn to our starving
people, while it takes in return to the value


nearly of .£7. of British manufacture for every
one of its inhabitants. It sends, you will
observe, wool, and also copper, to give em-
ployment to some of our people who would
not otherwise have employment, and corn, of
which we cannot grow enough at home, to
feed them. It employs 116,666 persons who
would otherwise be starving at home, and it
is ready to receive many thousands more
every year who are without employment and
are a burden here, and will then add to its
wealth and prosperity, and give farther em-
ployment to others who remain. This is one
of the advantages we possess in our colonies.
Australia produces, also, the vine and olive
tree, the orange and citron, and all English
fruits grow to perfection j while tobacco,
cotton, indigo, and even the sugar-cane, are
said to flourish in the northern districts.
Under the soil, copper, lead, and coal are
found in profusion, and probably many other
valuable metals will be discovered. Thus
men of all conditions of life, and every amount
of capital, may there find employment and
remuneration for their labour. Ihe five set-
tlements of which I speak are New South
Wales, Tasmania, Victoria (till lately called
Port Philip), South Australia, and Western
Australia. They are constantly confounded
with each other, but as they are at great
distances apart, and vary in some respects
d 4


very considerably, it is important that then-
position should be remembered, for which
purpose I should advise an attentive study of
the map of Australia.
New South Wales is on the east coast.
Sydney is its capital, on the superb harbour
ot Port Jackson. It was first settled about
sixty years ago, when a body of convicts
were sent out under Captain Philip to be
located on the shores of Botany Bay. That
locality not being found suitable, they were
landed on the present site of Sydney, when
a camp was established, and some hundred
persons took up their abode there, none of
them acquainted with the most ordinary
qualifications of colonists. After being
brought to the verge of famine, by the energy
of Governor Philip they triumphed over all
difficulties, and were certainly the pioneers of
colonization in those regions. When once
they were able to supply food,, there was
comparatively little difficulty in establishing
other colonies. There are numerous other
large towns, between which a constant com-
munication is kept up by means of steamers
and coaches. Its sheep runs are of great
extent, and there is much ground brought
under cultivation, but it does not export
corn. Many of the inhabitants are pos-
sessed of considerable wealth, and have
handsome country houses. The Governor is


Sir Charles Fitzroy, and the Bishop is Dr.
Broughton. The northern portion is called
the Moreton Bay District, the capital of
which is Newcastle, so called in consequence
of the coal mines worked there, has been
erected into a separate see from that of Sydney,
and Dr. Tyrrell is Bishop. It contains the
finest and most extensive sheep downs pro-
bably in the world, and a large number of
gentlemen squatters are settled over it. New
South Wales was originally a penal colony,
and still suffers from the system pursued at
its foundation, though the settlers pray that
no more convicts may be sent there. Agri-
cultural labourers, and mechanics of every
description of rough craft, are certain of
finding employment and good wages there.
The length of the passage there may be cal-
culated at about four months, and the ex-
pense in the steerage at from £lO. to £l4.
for each adult. Wages of farm servants are
from £2O. to £3O, without board and lodg-
ing; mechanics, without board or lodging,
get about ss. per day. Indeed, I may observe
once for all, in regard to the Australasian
colonies, that employment in most crafts is
constant; that wages are twice as high as in
England, and food half the price; while
clothes and most other articles are not dearer,
and that there are few taxes of any de-
scription.
d 5


Tasmania, which is also called Van Diemen’s
Land, is a large island to the south of Aus-
tralia, and divided from it by a narrow channel
called Bass’ Straits. It is nearly as large as
Ireland, contains 60,000 inhabitants; the land
is especially suited to agriculture, and the
climate is peculiarly congenial to British con-
stitutions. The capital is Hobart Town on
the south, and there is a large town called
Launceston on the beautiful river Tamar on
the north. Sir William Denison is the Go-
vernor, and Dr. Nixon is the Bishop. It
was colonized from New South Wales with
convicts, and nearly one half of its present
population are emancipated convicts. How-
ever, no more will be sent there, and by the
enlightened efforts of the Bishop and his
clergy, and the leading colonists, to educate
and improve the people, it is to be hoped by
God’s blessing, that the evil seed, which must
of necessity have been sown, may be eradi-
cated, and that the colony may keep equal
pace with its sisters in virtue and prosperity.
Western Australia, or the Swan River
Settlement, as it was called, was the next co-
lonized on the west coast of Australia. It
contains 5000 inhabitants only. The soil and
climate is good, but its progress to prosperity
has been delayed by the enormous grants of
land which have been made to private indi-
viduals, which lands coming into competition
with the sale of crown lands, no fund could


be raised for the purposes of emigration.
The colonists possess all the necessaries of
life, the land is suited for agriculture, and
the woods are very valuable, especially the
sandal wood. The timber sent to Her Ma-
jesty’s Dock Yard at Deptford was highly
approved of for naval purposes, as it is also
by the engineers about to form the railroad
from Calcutta to Delhi, in India A lead
mine has also been discovered. At the wish
of the colonists convicts have been sent out
there, and others are going to be employed
on the public works, and for every convict, a
free emigrant is to be sent at the Government
charge. A scheme also is on foot to locate
a class of small farmers in the colony, and
there can be no reason why it should not ad-
vance as rapidly in future as its sister colonies
have done. It is at present within the see of
the Bishop of Adelaide,but it is earnestly to be
hoped that shortly a Bishop will be appointed
to it. The Governor is Captain Fitzgerald, R.N.
The voyage occupies rather more than three
months, and the passage costs from £lO. to
£l3. Wages are higher than in most of the
other colonies, and provisions are rather
dearer.
South Australia was the next colony settled
in 1837, and it now contains nearly 50,000
inhabitants, the greater part of whom have
emigrated from Great Britain, Adelaide, on
d 6


the Torrens, is the capital. No colony, per-
haps, has ever risen so rapidly to such solid
and lasting prosperity. No wars, no blood-
shed stains its early history. The early settlers
found it a desert; they, and those who have
joined them, have converted it into a fruitful
garden, not only to supply their own wants,
but to export corn to supply food to those
they left at home.
This is true wealth, far more useful and
real than any the gold mines of California
can supply. Yet at first the progress even of
this flourishing colony was paralyzed by the
mania for speculating in land which seized
the settlers. Many who remained gambling-
in the infant city of huts and tents were
ruined; others more wise, turned their atten-
tion in time to agriculture, and sheep farming,
and many rich copper and lead mines having-
been discovered, and true industry taking the
place of gambling, it at length triumphed
over the difficulties into which it had been
thrown, and is now one of the most flourishing-
colonies of the British crown. The colonists
generally bear a high character. Agricultural
labourers, and especially all craftsmen con-
nected with building, are certain of immediate
employment at high wages. The climate is
very healthy and genial, though the hot winds
from the interior which are felt in most parts
of Australia, are excessively disagreeable,


parching the skin, and filling every crevice
with sand. Fortunately they last only three
or four days at a time in the summer. The
present Governor is Sir George Young, and
the Bishop is Dr. A. Short. His see embraces
Western Australia. It must be understood,
that in the British colonies all recognized
Christian communities are put on the same
footing of political equality. In none of our
colonies has the Church of England been
better provided from the first with ministers
than has South Australia.
Victoria, till lately known as the Port
Philip district of New South Wales, has been
erected into a separate province. It was
formed in 1838, chiefly by persons passing
over from Tasmania. It is equally flourishing
with South Australia. The country is better
watered, the land is richer, and the climate
cooler than in the two last mentioned colonies ;
but in consequence of the greater dampness
of the climate, it is said to be not entirely
free from inflammatory complaints, though
they are much less common than in England.
It already possesses large herds of horned
cattle, and horses. Its rivers are fed from a
range of lofty mountains covered frequently
with snow, called the Australian Alps, which
form its northern boundary. Mr. La Trobe,
who has long resided in the colony, is the
Governor, and Dr. Perry is the Bishop, and


we may well believe that much of the well
being and high repute of the settlement is
owing to his untiring zeal and energy. Agri-
cultural labourers, herdsmen, and mechanics
of most crafts, are certain to find employment
and good wages, a little lower perhaps than
in Adelaide and its neighbourhood. It has
run an equal race with South Australia in
prosperity. Unhappily a number of emanci-
pated convicts from Tasmania have been
landed there, and although they may have
hastened its material wealth, it is impossible
not to believe that they must have retarded
its moral and religious improvement. It is
to be hoped, however, that with God’s blessing,
the efforts which the Christian men of the
colony are making, may counteract the ill
effects they are calculated to produce, and
that a further result may be their reformation.
Port Essington, on the north coast, was a
small military and naval station. It was very
unhealthy, and is now abandoned.
New Zealand is the next and last colony
we have to describe. It consists of two large
islands and a small one. Its scenery is most
beautiful, its soil is rich, and its climate is
bracing and healthy, though warm in summer,
and with a purity of atmosphere far sur-
passing that of England. The northern island
is peopled by tribes of aboriginal natives, who
are warlike, of fine stature and feature, and


more intelligent and easily civilized than any
savages ever yet met with. Their number is
about 108,000. A few years ago they were
cannibals, their ordinary food being the sponta-
neous fruits of the earth; they now extensively
cultivate the soil, and own many flour mills,
cattle, and beasts of burden, and numerous
vessels of considerable size, commanded and
manned by their own people; a large portion
of the coasting trade being in their hands.
Many of the chiefs live in houses, furnished
in the English fashion, and they are said to
be men of the most courteous and pleasing
manners, while Christianity and general edu-
cation is making rapid progress among them.
They placed themselves of their own accord
under the British Government, to which they
willingly submit, fully comprehending the im-
mense advantages they have thereby gained.
The manner in which they have been treated
by their European visitors affording a happy
and blessed contrast to the conduct in nearly
every other instance of the white men to-
wards the natives of the country of which they
have taken possession. This has arisen from
two causes; first, the enlightened and just
conduct of the British; secondly, from the
superior intelligence of the natives, which
enabled them to comprehend that we truly
desired to be their friends and benefactors,
not to deprive them of their property, and to


afford them perfect legal equality. In the
north island there are three principal British
settlements; Auckland the capital, and seat
of Government; Wellington, which is the
largest and most flourishing place in Cook’s
Straits, and New Plymouth, justly famous for
its rich soil, its beautiful scenery, and its
almost Arcadian prosperity. In the middle
island there are also three settlements.
Nelson, on the shores of Cook’s Straits, is the
oldest. Next, Otago on the east coast, chiefly
a Scotch settlement, though many English
have gone there. It possesses a fine harbour,
and the settlers send home good accounts of
their success. Land is £2. per acre. Lastly,
the Canterbury settlements, which is now in
course of establishment. The harbour was
called Port Cooper, now changed to Victoria,
to the north of Bankes’ Peninsula. It is
managed by an association of high minded
disinterested gentlemen, of purely Church of
England principles, of which character are
the large body of colonists who have already
gone there. Mr. Godley, a man of fortune
and pure patriotism, has gone there as the
agent of the association, to act as the head of
the colonists, to whom the management of
their own affairs is chiefly confided.
The nominal price of land is £3 per acre,
of which £l. is devoted to emigration pur-
poses, 10s. is the .'cost of the land to the


Association, 10.9. is expended in surveying
and road-making, and £l. is devoted for
ecclesiastical and educational purposes; there
will thus be always an ample emigration
fund. The advantages of the care taken for
the religious and moral welfare of the colonists
cannot be over estimated; and those who
know how much all early settlers have suf-
fered from the want of proper surveys having
been made, and the country opened up by
roads, will justly value the importance of the
plan pursued. It is the first great and en-
lightened scheme of colonization this country
has ever seen. That all the settlers will be
satisfied and entirely successful, is not to be
expected; but that a flourishing, healthy, and
happy community will be established in a
hitherto unproductive country, there is every
just reason to hope, and we may feel very
certain that no poor industrious man can be
disappointed. The soil is reported to be very
good, and the land plain and free from
timber, with numerous rivers and streams,
while there are forests in the neighbourhood
from which wood can be procured. There
are several flocks of sheep already feeding
there belonging to squatters, and from the
precautions taken food will be abundant. It
is about 150 miles north of Otago, and rather
further from Nelson. Lyttelton is to be the
name of the capital, the "fite of which will


probably be on the shore of the harbour of
Port Cooper.
The occupation of the settlers will chiefly
be agriculture, the raising of sheep and cattle,
and commerce, though we do not know what
natural production may be found in the
country to increase their wealth and pros-
perity. It is intended to be the seat of a
Bishopric, and a clergyman has already gone
out thither, who will be consecrated the first
Bishop. Among the settlers are several men
of high rank and family.
I have given more than the proper space
to this infant settlement, because I consider
success most important to the cause of
systematic colonization, in opposition to the
irregular and ill-guided efforts of individuals
at establishing settlements.
Sir George Grey is the Governor of New
Zealand, and Mr. Eyre is Lieutenant-Governor
over the southern division, which embraces
the middle island and most of the European
settlements. The admirable, and energetic
Dr. Selwyn, is at present the Bishop of the
whole of New Zealand. In the middle
island there are but two or three thousand of
the aboriginal inhabitants, and they appear
anxious to labour for the European settlers.
In the course of a few years, probably, the
aborigines will either have completely mingled
with the British, or at all events, have adopted


our language, manners, and customs; and
there can be no doubt, considering the
climate, and the good stock from which it
has been peopled, that in after years New
Zealand will become the Britain of the
southern seas. There are about 30,000 white
inhabitants.
I here conclude a very brief sketch of the
British Colonies. I have endeavoured to be
most impartial in my descriptions, that emi-
grants may select with unbiassed judgment
the colony most suited to them; in all a happy
home and independence is to be found.
Those who prefer a cold climate, and wish to
be near England, will select one of the North
American colonies; those who have a predi-
lection for trade, and enjoy a wild life and
field sports, may select the Cape; while no
one who can labour will do amiss in selecting
one of the Australasian colonies. It must,
however, be remembered, that by labour alone
can independence be secured. Without a
person is prepared to undergo that, let him
remain at home and be a burden to his friends
or the parish. The emigrant must also bear
in mind, that as, in the colonies where there
is no competition, one person is the better
for the success of his neighbours, so does
one colony flourish by the prosperity of the
mother country and of all the rest; let those,
therefore, who find competition too keen for


them at home, wisely go forth before their
energies are weakened and their resources
exhausted. Nowhere will they find a Para-
dise ; nowhere can they be totally free from
some disappointments and inconveniences;
everywhere must they toil, but honest toil is
as certain as anything in the world is certain,
not only to afford them food and clothing,
but to bring them an independent com-
petency, and to raise them in the social scale
in the British colonies.


APPENDIX.
I am most anxious to see established, for the
purpose of forwarding but more especially
for regulating emigration, a local board, or
society, in every rural district in Great Bri-
tain and Ireland, with a central managing
board in London. The local societies should
distribute information, collect funds, and fit
out and advise poor persons wishing to emi-
grate, and forwarding them to the ports of
embarkation. The central society should
communicate with the colonies, send inform-
ation to the local boards, and superintend
the embarkation of the emigrants. Local
societies may, however, be formed without
the existence of a central society, by employing
an agent in London. The whole plan pro-
posed will be found fully detailed in the author’s
little book entitled “ How to Emigrate,”
which was especially written for those who
may wish to assist emigrants to quit the
land of their birth as Christian men should


s.
d.
The Colonization Circular; issued by Her
Majesty’s Colonial Land and Emigration
Commissioners -P r^ce 0
Information for Emigrants to the Cape of Good
Hope and Natal, in the shape of Questions
and Answers; issued by Her Majesty’s Co-
lonial Land and Emigration Commissioners 0
2
6
Arthur Hodgson’s Lectures on Emigration to
Australia . 0
6
Canada, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, with
regard to Emigration 0
6
Wilkinson’s Hand-Book to South Australia... 1
6
Emigrants’ Letters; T. Saunders, Charing
Cross. These were collected by the Com-
mittee of the Emigrant School Fund. The
work contains Letters from all the British
Colonies, perfectly authenticated. From it
may be obtained a very correct and tho-
roughly impartial account of the Colonies
from persons now residing in them 1
0
do, as also for the use of the higher class of
emigrants.
The most useful works an intending emi-
grant can get, are—


IMPORTANT NOTICE.
It is most important for the welfare of poor
emigrants, that gentlemen and ladies should
be found who, proceeding to the more distant
colonies, are ready to undertake their super-
intendence on the voyage. Gentlemen who
are willing to act as Religious Instructors on
the voyage, should apply to the Secretary of
the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel,
79, Pall Mall, as that Society grants a hand-
some gratuity to those who perform that
office. Ladies who are willing to act as Ma-
trons in charge of the single women, should
apply to the Secretary of the Matron’s Com-
mittee of the British Ladies’ Female Emi-
grant Society, 25, Red Lion Square, London.
That Society also awards a gratuity, and in
both instances a free passage is granted.
In a letter just received from the Bishop
of Melbourne, the Bishop says that school-
masters and school-mistresses of the same
description as are employed in our National
Schools, and of truly Christian character, are
much required in his diocese.


London ;
Printed by James Truscott, Nelson Square.




