

The Wyreemian
I'm only the saucy Wyreema,
From my Crow's-nest I can see
Fires of triumph gleaming
A New World for you and me.
W. R. MAY, Corpor*
The Magazine of the Ship's Company
H.M.A.T. Wyreema.
Nov. 7th, 1918.
EDITORIAL STAFF:
Editor - - Sgt. M. Green
Publisher - - Cpl. W. R. May
Staff - - - Pte. E. M. Howard
F. A. Casson
J. Kinnear
V. O'Gorman
Sgt. C. Bruer


' ' : ; ' ■■■
wis ft . . . ■ ■ ■ ■■■■
■ ' -V .. ■ . - / " ' ■'/!.
ft'/'' l_-fe 8ft . Mft _ ; I
r,"k K ' ft ■ ' ft. ■ ft ■. : : ftftft^ft| :
■
iSlR/ft/"?" '."? :/ : ;,■•■ .:■ : : . ", ; ' •: ■ /:./•■■ :
.■ ; ' ! '. ft. . , . . ■ ■:•. ; :.
.?"■/: -:. ft'- .ft. .ft/ ' ft ' ft ; .ft-'.-.:. ""'" ' /'./ //ft ft. ft.; '-ft^
V ■ : / ftv'ft'., ' ■■ A ft . ' '.:-. ft"- / 'ft'ft/" X -V'/'ft ft,X '■■" X-XX' '
'
"ft .ft" - .ft' ft.': ft - . "ft: . -■" ■ , ■ 'ft ' ■'ft
.' ||||
"■'- . ■ ft -ft- - '.ft- ■-. ' :■ ' •■- .■" "* ■ ■ ■■ '. ■ ... ft ft / .ft ' /ft' .ft \
.ft "ft ft ft"' ft-ft 'ft. "ft. :ftftft.ft.,/ ft .'ft ft; ft : ■.ft;/:/. t ftft..:ftftft:ftftftftft:,-.ft;>/. ; 'ft: ft ft/ft/ft:///}


The Wyreemian
I'm only the saucy Wyreema,
From my Crow's-nest I can see
Fires of triumph gleaming
A New World for you and me.
W. R. MAY, Corporal.
The Magazine of the Ship's Company
of
H.M.A.T. Wyreema.
Nov. 7th, 1918.
EDITORIAL STAFF:
Editor - - Sgt. M. Green
Publisher - - Cpl. W. R. May
Staff - - -< Pte. E.'M. Howard
F. A. Casson
1. Kinnear
V. O'Gorman
Sgt. C. Brner


jforewor.b tbe ©.©.
« I take advantage of this opportunity to extend to all
on 'board my appreciation and thanks for their loyal
support and co-operation on all 'occasions.
I desire to specially thank the Master of this Ship,
his Officers; and Crew, for theiryepurtesy and, tbe kind
consideration shown for the comfort of the troops
throughout the voyage.
Tli. .ilw( nci- with regard to food and
accommodation is most marked*, ah|l| clearly indicates
that all on board are satisfied and comfortable, .in spite
„[ the fact thatl we had a week pfiyery. bad | weather
at the commencement of the voyage. The discipline
on board has been of a high order, and is extremely
satisfactory. ■ , "... , ■ ' _
i .consider myself highly honoured in'having the com-
fiiWidlfK,'-s.uch an excellent body off troops, and feel
sure that, when called upon, they will acquit them-
honour, and -pxaintain record
gained.by the Australian Imperial FForce.
The presence of forty-six Nursing Sisters- on board
this ship has had;a Pgopd effgi on all Concerned,: and
they have assisted in m ! akin|i|fte ; ;;yoyage a cheerful
The 1 ik nt; of the " Wyfeema " is of sggvaried a
character that I feel sure I can safely leaLe'to 'the
promoters of this Magazine (who deserve every com-
mehdatjon,), the task of successfully bringing out a
tnemenio of the voyage which will harbor pleasant
memories. '
©ut ©.©.
The, following are a few, particulars of , the record
of our 0.C.:
Lieut-Colonel P. M. McFarlane is a member of the
Instructional; Staff of the Australian Permanent Forces.
Hd served- ;in the South African War, and received:
the King's and Queen's Medals, with live clasps. After
serving with the Imperial Forces, 111 i.9-io he joined
those; of the Commonwealth, in which he held various
positions on the Headquarters and District Headquar-
ters Staffs. He landed in Gallipoli as a member of
the. Staff of the 3rd Light Horse, and was promoted
Major, and mentioned' in despatches. \Ltun.i'd %
with the Eighth Light Horse;,; he wagGwounded and
invalided back- to Australia. Until now his services
have been required in Australia, where he has acted as
General Staff- Officer in training in all New
South Wales Camps,< as Assistant, Adjutant-General and
Director of Personnel af Headquarters; he has been
promoted to brevet rank for meritorious service.


JEbttorial,
This little Magazine represents the. mixed cargo of
military units which , good ship " W yr.eema " is
carrying, at the time of writing, towards the great War
centres fourteen thousand miles, away from home
our home. Artillery:-thegiitst Reinforcement of the
Ist and 2nd .Australian H AB , Infantry: Q7 and N 22,
23, and 24; and A.M.C. ;|. Qe.ntal, Sea Transport and
Pay Units. We number altogether"' some 700 men,
besides' the Nurses—of course- we don't forget the
Nurses. And then there ar.e the Naval Officers and
Crew—we don't forget" them either. Altogether, the
" Wyreema" carries a good thousand of us—a fine
bite for a tin fish. We are proud of the little Maga-
zine, just as we proud of ourselves andf of the
•good' -ship. At any rate the Editorial' Staff directly
responsible for the. Magazine is proud,' and., we hope-
the,. main body of us will -be, as,„soon 'as 1 it has ''an op-
portunity of judging. At the" same time we realise
Mi iu i ori necessary 1 m [,' loin i.il iliin The
Magazine {has / been wjgipriri together • in : the
intervals, between parades, and every other 'kind of
duty'; it has been printed and. published in a hurry
at Cape Town, the first suitable port of call; and even
those of its contributors who have had any training
in writing would hardly be here if they had not pre-
ferred the sword to the pen. Still, for good or bad,
we are all represented in these pages. They contain
.contributions by almost every military rank, from Q.C.
to Mess Orderly, and they have been produced under
all sprits of sea. circumstances. .We believe we have
reached a very fair journalistic standard on the whole.
Anyhovv, here you are, and that's all there is to it.
We hope that' the Magazine may give many people a
few moment's interest and amusement, and' that it
may constitute afterwards a more lasting memento of
the ■troopship's voyage, and of the men whp undertook,
if,§.of friends*;and acquaintances made on the road to
®;|rlin,,.. and who, are now perhaps a-long, way off, and,
of the hope's, and fears and of the J common life sve-
shared for a time.
TTbe "Hussie" on Boavb.
Pte. E. M. Howard (N22).
Amongst 'the troops on board the " Wyreema " are
men of all dispositions and. temperaments:, of all creeds
and beliefs. They mix congenially together,. rpgard-
liesrifof these .differences. . There is the humorist who
originates his sayings,; and the humorist who, borrows
Ahem. There is the wit; .also the. man who is "too lazy
to "be either witty, humorous oriferious, and is . a little'
of each as a result; and there is the truly serious,:
individual. All are in khaki. We do mot congregate
io-Wh \ 1 t fatHpr, in each' group,' may
be .fqund sbme of each description.. We come of all
occupations, trades and professions, and' : are of vary-'
rag• social standing, or, rather, we.were, |f|lr, except in
very rare cases, the khaki may truthfully-be said-to
"bring all to a "uniform"/ Standard. J A-m||Jgst -hs is
an astonishing spirii of matcship. It is that kind of
mateship that makes a than offer hisMSst cigarette to
another, 11 in n 'My aristf3hger, 5 dry ou the other hand,
Stretch to the nearest cigarette box ■ if
he hagpejts'to of smokes himself. And, know-
ing Ahrif spirit in which the offer- is sihddeUleven d; last
jraiclk c -it 'ii 1 u 1 - 1' But, whilp this: feeling of
mate-ship is burning strongly,, the spirit .pf'.fairness is
never lost sight of. iSpr instance i f .mi soldier should',
endeavour to presume upon the: good lSftu.re.of another,
he finds himself suddenly up agamst aSick wall Fair
play is a motto, of the " Aussie.'"' So much, so that if
one Were to win, by fair play, jhe last "copper" of
another man—even a mate—the winner, would have no
thought' of offering - that penny, .back other than as a
loan, to be wiped out'on the fifst pay day. The Aussie
again, is' always .cheerful. H,e swears, but he'never
means it. yhich is pgrhaps just as well, pW the■'whole,
considering the nature and vigour of the invective.
And he believes that thereris: only harm wherp harm is
intended; the. words don't matter, -bur,only the spirit
in which they, are used.
He is ever ready to do a favour for a brother
Aussie, t * even thodgh , himself incqnveniencgfe thereby.
Hisrigood points' are many and well proven; his had
ones aire" inconsiderable by, epmparison. Such is the
Aussie 1 abpard the Wyreema,, and l by all accounts he is,
like this everywhere, i


Xtfe on a Uroopsbtp.
(Partly) by Pte, A. A. Wood, N. 23.
M S Tis-six o'clock. Get up! Get out of bed ! "
The bugler blows-—the wakeful corporal hears,
And in a voice that would arouse the dead
Yells "Up, yer blanky cows ! " and someone jeers
And then the cookhouse bugle shrilly blows.
"Mess orderlies'"on deck," the sergeant calls;
And meat and drink upon the table shows,
And " Darn this# plurry .stew," the soldier bawls.
At ten the wretched bugl'er once again,
Rousing us up from a digestive doze.
'So for an hour Upon, the deck we train,
Waving our arms and rising on our toes.'
Mow for a while, a little while, we rest —■
And. dead and smoke, and yarn and read again.
Some to the Canteen go, and make their jest
On lemonade, and, lacking beer, complain.
'Tis noon, and down below we scamper fast
For dinner, and with clinking dixies .soon
The. long lines Of mess orderlies file past;
Stew, stew once more, and now 'tis afternoon.
At two, parade again. " blanky cows!
Why can't they let us sleep? " ... But lectures drear
And 'boresome, sore oppress our aching brows,
And drone upon, the inattentive ear.
Fatigue and-guard and drill—all's in the game.
1 We .gruht and-growl, a soldier's privilege.
We know we have to do them just the same,
Although the thought of work sets teeth on edge.
Next tea timp comes) p the same and Still the: same.
Thick squishy stew! and bread, and tea, and nun
Still gobbling fast, although the cooks wc blame,
Down greedy throats the final crumb we cram.
And . so, with boat-drill, fire-drill, church parade,
Concerts and cards and " Housey " day by day
Our lives are filled and the long voyage made
From somewhere fourteen thousand miles away.
passing it on.
" Hasbeen.'
There, is nclldoubt about it, Chick Harrison was a
** lrf.il." Bom just in time to turn eighteen six months
before the Hun started the Gott strafe England bizney,
Tie Fad kept' thing's moving one way or another ever
since he was able to*toddle. Soon after starting school
his teacher became subject to nightmares, in which
Chick used to figure prominently, adorned .with horns
;and a. tail. As,, older he put away childish
pranks, but his socialistic ideas didn't coincide with
the views of .the' neighbouring orchardists. On -attain-
ing fh^ : -^#? : ;to work in a warehofise:
in Melbourne, where he was a constant source ox de-
light and entertainment to his- -fellow ' clerks, and a
ditto of despair to the " Heads."
In Augmm-4, he' joined a little party that was
forming in Aussie under the name of " The Six-Bob-a-
Day Tourists." 1 IKi broke rules and committed every
sin on the programme (except the unpardonable- 'one,
of being found out), and his
officers, (2) his cobbers, and (3) lastly, but not least,
himself..
In due, course he arrived in Egypt along with the
First Division A.I.F: He was still the old. Chick, how-
ever. For instance, once after having a good day in
-Cairo, he and two bosom pals found themselves
stranded with no piastres for- the fare back to camp*
Si oing a certain. high official's motor unattended out-
side Shepherd's, and wishing to be in camp before
"Eights Out" he was always a punctual lad he
hopped in, motioned, his cobbers to do likewise, and
was soon exceeding the . speed limit along the oldi Mena
Road., ' Absent-mindedly increasing speed "as he ap-
proached,the quarter-guard, he flashed past them: before
.they had time to ask for his pass, which was lucky for
Chick, whose only possession in this respect was one
d ik'd Melbourne, 25/8/1914. He ran. the car into the
camp, abandoned it. leaving a polite note* of regret for
the owner, and reached his own lines, taking care tc
go a very roundabout course. '


However, luck can't last for ever, and Chick fell-foul
of the " Heads." It happened in this way. Chick had
left Aussie as a sergeant, ant! after serving as such
in Egypt for a couple of months, the: fatal day came.
He was put in charge of a small squad for local guard
purposes, and just as they were marching along the
road, up came a native waggon loaded with beer.
•Chick immediately lined the guard up, and gave it the
Royal salute. Unfortunately an ofiicer with no sense
of humour happened to be. there also,r and Chick lost
his bars. The episode does not end here though..
Chick remembered that officer.
Time went on," arid the First Division again em-
barked. This time for/the dinkum stuff.
About two weeks after the landing, anyone proceed-
ing up Shrapnel Gully might have seen three privates
sitting just outside a dugout with their Shirts on their
,ki ees Yes, Chick had come down to this. They were
passing a small tobacco tin from one to another as
each registered a'" find." • After .about half an hour's
interesting entertainment they' rose. Gravely, and; with-
out undue haste, they endered a dugout where a "Sam
Brown'' figured prominently. Turning back the
blankets, they carefully scattered the contents of the
tin among the bedclothes and departed—rather'quickly.
The same onlooker, if he had lingered,, might have
seen the owner of the dugout entering later in the day,
and would ha.ve noticed that it was the officer who had
had no sense of humour during the beer episode at
Men a.
I dare say Chick, is still going strong. The last I.
heard of him. was ,as a patient at Alexandria in Tommy
hospital, careering round Alexandria clothed in a
dressing gown, and informing his taxi driver what he
thought of niggers in general and the taxi driver ia
particular. I heard later that his airy costume was
due to the matron taking away his .clothes in a vain
attempt to keep him within the hospital grounds. Well,
good luck Chick, anyhow!
Blokes at Breakfast.
A Shipboard Idyll,
Corpora! Bock, \ 23.
Scene A .certain V. y, M.Si Table on B Deck.
I . . Time: 7,30 a.m.
Characters: .Shellshock, a hardrbitten lad' from the
'Loo, who says he has been to the war, a statement
.7 as. to' which some of his mates profess unbelief ;
Baldy, .Flawless, and Mid., mess orderlies; Mac and
Rusty, Salvation Army representatives; Bugles,
who blows an,instrument of music'; Pooh Pooh and
. Cupy.
Baldly: " Cqine'.on, Flawless; there'goes Cookhouse.
We want to be there lively. We're, first this morning.
Flawless - "Right 0, Baldy, me boy; off you go"
Bugles _ (just > out of bed, greeting the Section)
" Spare me days, this .is getting-.worse every day. I
had a look at the wash-house, and she's flooded out
again." .
P.ooh Pooh: " There he goes; at it again; always,
complaining."
Bugles: "'Tis enough to make an angel complain,
when you're washing your face vbluntarily to have .
your feet washed- compul.sorily' '
(The conversation is interrupted by. the return of the
Mess Orderly with food.)
Bakly: " Oh; come or , hoist your plates up here for
burgoo."
Bugles (with a moan of anguish) : Burgoo again!
Mac Never mind, Bugles, there's .better days c'om-
ing."
Bugles takes porridge all the same.' H e can always
do his whack with it. : 1
Baldy ! having: sefyed them all round, breakfast pro-
eeeds. 7 ,f - ) r WVAri r- ■ A;,', 1
A voice is heard floating over from No. 16 mess,,
where is telling a war yarn—one his own.
Shellshock: ."-So they bombed us all night, and at
:wo o'clock a.m., Friday morning, they got us." 77. - '
Pooh Pooh (densely) ; "What with?"
Shellshock: " A bomb, oGcourse" .
Bugles (chipping in) • " Yes, one, of Eden's ice-creams
bombs He was fighting behind -Toohey's .Brewery."
(Loud laughter from surrounding tables.)
Shellshock: " Yes, that's all right. You wait, old b»y„
you'll see. He subsides, muttering and murmuring- t©>
himself.


Bugles: "Any bleedin'jam up there? There never
seems to be any down this end.'
The Table (indignantly) : "What! You mop the tin
up yourself every day, besides eating all the bread and
butter! "
Bugles fiercely denies this, and there is very nearly
a riot, but the Corporal comes and quietens them.
Mac: " Have you been talking to the Chaplain lately,
Mid.?"
Mid.: " Yes, he told me we would have service -on
Sunday."
Bugles (explosively) : " Who the blank, blank,
pinched my blankety blank fork?"
Mac, Mid., and Rusty turn horrified eyes on the in-
terrupter, who, amid much "language," recovers his
fork and proceeds with his breakfast.
In the silence that follows, Shellshock is heard telling
another of his thrilling escapes.
Shellshock: "I heard it go buzzrz-z-z-z-z past my
head, and it just missed me."
Pooh Pooh (breathlessly interested) : " Did it ex-
plode?"
Cupy (sarcastically) : " Yes, and the waste nearly
-broke his heart. It was a bottle of beer that somebody
threw at him in Belfield's pub! "
Shellshock (in fierce denial): "You blokes thinks
you's is clever, don't you. I'll fight any of you for a
liver."
Nobody taking this challenge seriously, he becomes
bolder, and offers the whole mess out, when suddenly
a large sticky piece of bread and jam, hurled by
Bugles, obliterates his features, reducing him to a
glutinous Silence. i
Mac: "The only time there is peace in this mess is
when Bugles talks about that bonzer little photo."
Baldly nearly chokes # over a piece of meat, whereat
Bugles glowers fiercely at him, and it seems as if there
will be another fight, but an opportune remark by Mid,
breaks the strain.
Mid.: "But there's no denying she's nice."
Bugles glances suspiciously at him, not quite sure
whether he is being got at or not.
At this point a riot occurs in the neighbouring mess
over jam, ending in Shellshock's beating a hurried re-
treat, covered with stew.
Conversation returns to the previous subject.
Baldly: " Was that photo he showed us supposed to
be her? "
Bugles (belligerently): "Yes, it was. What about
it? (At the same time grasping firmly a cup of tea.)
Baldy (not noticing this) : '' Well, it's a wonder he
never got pinched for chicken stealing!
Immediate hostilities by Buglas bring the meal to .ao.
end in a flying cloud of plates and stew.
Competition IResults.
The name adopted for this magazine. "The
Wyreemian," was suggested by Corpl. W. K. May.
This was a non-competitive suggestion, however, and
so was the suggestion adjudged to be the next best,
"The Wyreema 'Roo," sent in by Sgt. Thomas Currie.
The prize goes, therefore, to the third, " Reinforce-
ment Ramblings." The name of the sender of this
has been lost, and it is requested that it be given to
the Editor.
The winning limerick has been sent in by <jne of
the Nurses, " Sister X." It is as follows:
My best girl is bound for Salonika;
Her name it is just plain Veronica.
If my first line is wrong,
In the second I'm strong,
For per wireless she told me her moniker.
The following, by Pte. D. C. Mitton (N. 22), was
given second place:—
There was a young corporal named Wild;
With his section he often got riled.
When he said " at the 'alt,"
They were always at fault;
Then his language by no means was mild.
The following was placed third:—
The transport "Wyreema" was slow;
She was struck by a fish, don't you know.
That fish was indeed-0
A German torpedo,
And now she is deep down below.
The joke adjudged the best was sent in by Mess No
2, N. 23, B Deck (Pte. J. V. Thornton). This rnes-
will receive an order on the canteen for £l. The joke
is as follows:
Scene: Main gate at Liverpool. Soldier approaches
Sentry : " Who goes there ? "
Soldier: "Friend—hie —with a bottle."
Sentry: "Halt bottle: pass friend,"


(puritans anb (Quakeresses.
It has been discovered that there exists on board a
.number of Quaker girls, although one does not re-
member even to have seen a Quakeress wearing a red
bib and tucker before. Being Puritans ourselves, we
take this as a delicate compliment. If these had been
ordinary ladies we should undoubtedly have had to get
off the boat at Freemantle,. [You would have got off
anyhow if you could have managed it.—Ed.] But see-
ing that the idea of holding conversation with a private
or even an N.C.O. is obviously as abhorrent to them
as it is to us, why,' all is well. And yet .... I did
think once I caught the faintest glimpse of.just the
least ghost of a smile. I wonder!
S. ANTHONY.
Boytno.
By far the most popular part of the ship's life has
been the boxing which has gone on day by day. This
remark by no means applies to the tournament alone,
though ft has caused great excitement, and every rope
or stay or bulwark a man could possibly standi on or
hang on to has been about four deep for long before
the show began. It applies also to the various un-
official bouts, some of them exceedingly willing, which
have taken place between decks, and before big audi-
ences, too, most of them. You have only to raise a
glove in the air, and men come streaming up from
all parts of the ship.
The most exciting of all the bouts was an exhibition
three-round spar between Lieut. Brown and Corpl.
Clabby. This took place on. the afternoon of the second
batch of contests, November 3rd. Everyone had been
anxious to see the well-known and popular professional
give an exhibition of his skill and cleverness, and in
Lieut. Brown, who is a distinguished amateur ex-
champion, he had as opponent a man of considerable
skill and experience.
The tournament opened 011 October 29th, when the
following heats were fought:—
LIGHT WEIGHTS.
Pte. Duck (Qld.) beat Corpl. Whiffen (N. 24) on
points. Whiffen fought well, but the other man was
too good for him. •
Pte. Dunk (N. 24) was beaten in one round by Pte.
Bennett (N. 22). The referee stopped the bout, seeing
that Dunk had 110 chance.
Pte.-King (N. 23) outpointed Pte. Chambers (N. 24)
after an exceedingly willing go. King was full of
pluck and energy, but the result was a near thing until
the last round.
WELTER WEIGHTS.
Pte. Axford (N. 24) beat Pte. A. Walker (Qld.) on
points in three rounds.
Pte. Luke (N. 24) was given the decis'on over Pte.
C. H. Brown (N. 24) after three good rounds. A
number of the crowd consider that Brown should have
been handed the verdict.
iost. 7lb. to list.
Pte. McGrath (Qld.) beat Pte Young (Qld.) in one
round.
Pte. Jefferies (N. 23) outpointed Corpl. Butt (Qld.)
in three rounds. Jefferies has a dangerous uppercut,
which did not quite come off,
11st. to I2St.
Sergt.-Major Lampard (N. 24) won from Pte. Shep-
herd (N. 22) in three rounds of hard hitting. The
condition of the ex-Navy man enabled him to stave off
his heavier opponent;.
The following are the results of the heats fought on
November 3rd: —
LIGHT WEIGHTS.
Pte. Cowley v. Pte. Campbell.
The first round was fought at a great speed, and was
in favour of Cowley. Campbell made the second round
very sultry, bringing his opponent to the floor twice
with a right to the jaw. The third round was also in
favour of Campbell, who was declared the winner.
Pte. Brown v. Se'rgeant White.
This was a good fight, both men displaying science
and speed. In the first round Brown was the aggressor,
and White was in difficulties more than once. Towards
the end 6f this round, however, White brought off a
lovely right to the jaw, just missing the point, but
knocking him man down. The second round saw White
doing most of the leading, but towards the end he tired,
and received punishment. The third round was
Brown's, who, using his weight and reach with good
effect, piled up enough points to come out a winner.
MIDDLE WEIGHTS (iost.).
Corpl. Bock v. Pte. Miller.
This proved a willing go, both men taking punish-
ment freely. At the conclusion of the third round the
referee was unable to give a decision, and ordered an-
other round. Miller stayed the longest, and was de-
clared the winner.


HEAVY WEIGHTS.
Pte. Payne v. Pte. Payne.
This was a three-round exhibition contest, in which
both men did some clever work. Payne was the
winner.
LIGHT WEIGHTS.
Pte. King v. Pte. Bennett.
Both of these had won previous heats. The fight was
fast from the start, and evoked cheers from the spec-
tators. In the first round honours were even. King
got in some good work in the second round, his right
swings to the head proving effective. The third round
was fast and furious, both men falling repeatedly
against the ropes. King seemed to come to light sud-
denly just before the conclusion, and connected re-
peatedly with his opponent's head, varying this' some-
times with a straight one on the ribs. King was ad-
judged the winner.
Lieut. Brown v. Corpl. Glabby.
From the beginning of the first round Brown was
quick, clever and aggressive, but Clabby side stepped
and got out of danger with no apparent effort. The
smallness of the ring prevented either man from doing
justice to himself, but all who saw Clabby in any of
his great fights agree that he is as clever as ever. This
was shown particularly in the first round, when he
side-stepped Lieut. 0 - Brown, letting him go clean
through the ropes. Clabby's footwork and infighting-
Were a pleasure to watch, while his speed in getting
after his opponent .has in no way diminished. Lieut.
Brown's, fighting was also of a high-class order, and
often evoked cheers from the spectators. The want of
a referee during the match was very apparent, as the
men remained too long in clinches. They were loudly
cheered at the conclusion* of the bout.
Of the unofficial contests, one of the most exciting
took place between two artillerymen a couple of weeks
ago. Corpl. Clabby, it appears, was showing the first
gunner, whom we may call M, some wrestling holds,
when the second gunner, E, attempted, so it is; said,
to put a piece of greasy meat in his (the first gunner's)
mouth. M at once extricated himself from Clabby's
grip, and made a wild rush across the table at his tor-
mentor, at the same time giving his head a resounding
whack on one of the rafters above the table. Once
within each other's reach, the two flew at each other
like wild cats. They were separated., a space cleared,
and the gloves were put on. Then ensued five exciting
rounds. Neither of the combatants showed much
science, or if they did possess any they threw it to the
winds. They simply tore into each other, and slugged
and milled till they had the spectators boiling over
with excitement, and shouting instructions. From what
could be seen of the affair, M. had the best of the first
three rounds, but in the ensuing two his condition be-
gan to fail, with the result that wiped off his early
deficit. Both men, however, seemed relieved when
time was called. M. carried away a nicely filled eye,
and E. a bruised face. Corpl. Clabby, who refereed,
carried out his duties quite capably, but no decision was
given.
Ptes. D. and B. had quite a willing little scrap a day
or two after the affair between the R.A.A. gunners.
The two privates are members of the same mess, and
at dinner, when plum pudding was on the menu, D.,
who is a mess orderly, after serving everybody, had
some pudding over, which he kept for himself. B.
evidently thought that he wasn't getting a fair share,
for he went up and took some of the pudding from
D.'s plate. During the three rounds which followed,
B. proved too strong for his smaller opponent, and had
matters practically all his own way.
Amongst the spectators were two others, Corpl. B.
and Pte. Mac., who also had a difference to settle. So,
to the delight of the onlookers, they put on the gloves,
and hammered- away at each other for three rounds.
Pte. Mac. descended -upon his opponent with a whirl of
flying arms, and kept this up throughout, and to some
effect. The cause of the dispute 1 had something to do
with a misunderstanding and a hammock rope.
Glutffs.
Captain (looking up and discovering a man in the
rigging) to Private: " Call that man down at once! "
Private: " That ain't a man, sir ! That's a sergeant."
Heard at Freemantle:
"Had a rough time, Digger?"
"Rough?. Gee! The waves were breakin' over the
balcony and wettin' the skipper! "
Officer: "Where have you been, Private Jones?"
Private: " Mess- Orderly, sir; down stairs cleaning
the windows! "
" Q. 7, G.S.R. will parade at Orderly Room at 10
a.m., Friday, ist November, for pay."
" Pay," murmured the bewildered Queenslander, on
reading the foregoing on the notice board, '' pay, what's
that, a new kind of herb? "
F J. BLAKE, Q. 7.
One of D Company mess orderlies suggests that on
disembarkation the O.C. should present all mess order-
lies with housemaid references.


An enterprising genius, after a " city stunt," was
asked his impressions of General Pau.
. " He looked as though he'd swallowed a horse, and
had the tail sticking out of his mouth," was the answer.
There are, says a rude man, plenty of peaches on
board; —not only canteen ones.
One of our country lads on board thinks the Captain
has lost his way. We have , not seen land, or even a
ship, for two weeks, and there don't seem to be any
tracks anywhere.
(No. s Mess, N. 23.)
"We are all sergeants in a ntess." (Sergt. —in
the famous debate on the arrangement of the seats at
the mess table.)
Bill had dropped his "send-off" overboard. Said, his
pal Jim: "He dunno how to look after a wristlet watch.
Yer might as well put a collar and tie on a pig."
N. 23 must be a most angelic Company. It contains
the only Perfect man.
The 5 a.m. broom-swishers from Fuller's Earth (N.
23) report that the coffee has lately had an earthly
taste. This, so the writer ascertains, is' due to' its being
" ground " the week before.
P'irst Sergeant (at dinner table) :" By Jove, Navel
oranges!"
.Second Sergeant: "Well, aren't we at sea? "
Officer (during Boat Parade to Private without his
life-belt) : " Where's your belt? "
Surprised Private: " I haven't on'e, sir. Pm a Mess
Orderly."
A recent argument re ocean travelling ended thus:
" Garn! Why I've washed more salt water out of my
socks than you've ever travelled on."
Two privates are leaning on the bulwark, gazing out
to the horizon (15, days out from Australia).
Blue: "By Cripes, Bill, I wisht I'de 'ave given it a
second thought and brought a bucket of earth with me."
Bill: " Why?"
Blue: " Oh! just so as I could 'ave had a look at it
now and again. Pm beginning to forget the colour of
it." . .
Overheard 011 the Sick Parade:
Doctor: " Well, my lad,, what's the trouble? "
Private (aged 18) : " Pve got a sore throat, and I
don't know what I've got."
Doctor examines same. Result: Rx. 01. Ricini; mag.
Sulph.; Quinin to flavour.
There was a man of N. twenty-two,
Who said I am Crook thro' eatin' the stew.
Me Kidneys won't work, me knees have the Knox;
I'm Aylin all over, Pve run on the rocks.
A burly Bull- y of N. twenty-four,
Was Gowin to lay Clabby out on the floor.
He paid for his Folly, by leavin' his hoardin l ,
Farewelling the ship, and going o'er Jordan.
" HATTER MACDIQ,, N. 23.
stra\>
Incidents of the Voyage.
Corpl. W. R: MAY.
" The 7th Queensland Reinforcements got as far as
Durban during the South African. War," one of a
group of stalwart Queenslanders said to me as we were
leaving the wharf a few weeks ago. "Then they were
turned back! I wonder if that is going to be our
luek!" "Why?" I asked him. "Because we are the
7th Queensland Reinforcements," he replied, " and I
do not lik'e coincidences."
The speaker barely twenty years of age, was one of
the 21 st Reinforcements, 36th Australian Heavy Artil-
lery Brigade, Royal Australian Artillery.
It is dfivoutly to be hoped the war will end soon, as
ihe paper shortage will not permit of the full descrip-
tive title being given of the various units on board.
Two incidents linger in my memory—both of which
occurred as we were lying at anchor. One was the
frantic effort of a recruit to obtain a last drink. The
other the picture of a modern Grace Darling (in calm
weather), or a silhoutte from. Tennyson's " Eady of
the Lake." Clad in blue-grey, with long fair hair
falling loosely from her shoulders, " Mollie," as she
was familarly greeted by the boys on board, rowed
backwards and forwards to the accompaniment of -the
" toot-too-toot, too-too " of steam sirens and the sing-
ing and waving by girls in saucy harbour launches until
dark, when the patrol-boat took charge. There were
some people on board, however, who were not trusting
solely to memory. " Turn round," said a voice near
me. Click! Major C. L. Lempresis, 5.M.0., had taken
a snap-shot of the " lady in the rowing boat."


No Church Parade would be complete without the
presence of the Sisters. Their white caps and scarlet
capes blend strangely with the preponderating khaki
and the unison of voices in singing that grand" old
hymn, " For those in peril on the sea " is an impressive
incident. Matron Russell, R.R.G., is in charge of
" Six and forty sisters true,
Whose duty is to all of you."
All are bound for hospital duty " Somewhere."
Included in our Company are quite a number of
newspaper men and sportsmen.. Jimmy Clabby leads
in the boxing world, and the reverberations on the up-
per deck when " Jimmy" is. ball-punching are as regular
as the throbbing of the propeller-shaft. Sportsmen
run in all shapes, and some of the 18-year-old brigade
have all the making of sportsmen in them. One bright
18-year-old specimen accosted me recently, saying:
" Say, Corp., I want to be sick. I want to be made
sick!' I looked him over, and said: "My son, you
go to the O.C. Tell him your right age. A few weeks
in ' clink' will make you sick! "
Boxing, wrestling, cock-fighting, tugs-of-war all
tend to shorten the tedium of the run.
One of the many lessons of the war is the attention
in detail to Boat and p'ire Drill. These warning calls
are probably the strictest parades on the voyage. The
drawingrup of parties for either boats or rafts is an-
other detail worked out thoroughly and diplomatically.
For instance, the A.M.C. are instructed thatno man
is allowed to bestow any attention to himself until all
hospital patients are safely transferred." An instruc-
tion came through to the effect that eight men were
wanted for a raft. The remainder of the unit were,
therefore, eligible for a place in the boat. The order
was duly carried out. Those selected for a boat were
naturally elated. Later came an additional instruction
that should one patient be in hospital one man was to
be deducted from the boat and transferred to the raft;
if two patients were in hospital two men iyere to be
deducted from the boat and transferred to th.e raft,
and so on. The elation of the '' boat " section ,was sud-
denly turned into consternation. But everyone is satis-
fied. The Hospital Staff know what is required of
them, and will not hesitate when necessity arises.
flDoch parliament.
On the evening of Friday, November ist, a debate
on the " Terms of Peace as embodied in President
Wilson's Fourteen Points " took the form of a Mock
Parliament in the Sergeants' Mess. Lieut. Allen, ex-
M.H.R. for Q., kindly consented to act as Speaker,
while Sergt. Thornton represented the Prime Minister,
having against him, as leader of the Opposition, Sergt.
Udy.
After the House had been formally opened, the
Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition con-
gratulated the Speaker, in the usual terms, on his ap-
pointment to the chair. After the Speaker had re-
sponded the Prime Minister announced the formation
of Jris Cabinet, and the Leader of the Opposition an-
nounced his election as Leader.
Under the heading " Notice of Motion " the Fourteen
Points were brought in by the Prime Minister. He ad-
mitted that already they had aroused considerable criti-
cism, but he hoped that when they were better under-
stood they would become more popular. As they stood,
they meant that at last the liberty of the world was ih
sight. Speaking on the return to France of Alsace
Lorraine, he pointed out that the Lorraine which would
be given back was a far different Lorraine from that
which had been taken by Germany. Instead of the un-
developed country of 1870, there was now a country,
the improvements on which represented millions of
pounds of German capital. The result of providing full
assistance to Austro-Hungary for autonomous develop-
ment would be the break-up of "that nation, thus re-
moving a military menace. The clause regarding Tur-
key would reduce Turkey's sway. This, as Turkey had
always been the hot-bed of trouble in Europe, would
make for the peace of the world. Clause i would do
away with secret diplomacy, which has been' a curse
to the world for ages.
Sergeant Barker spoke in opposition to the clauses.
He stated that they were probably good in theory, but
would be found lamentably weak in practice. Germany
had deliberately planned the war for world-wide con-
quest. We could never rely on her word again, nor
include her in any proposed league of nations. He
considered that the terms were not stringent enough,
* The proposals were seconded by the Minister of
War (Sergt. Green), who confined himself to the clause
dealing with the return of German colonies. He ar-
gued that Germany's treatment of subject races gener-
ally had proved her unfitness to rule over them. He
outlined her behaviour to .the natives in the Herrero
War and in South and East Africa during the present
war, as showing that the interests and wishes of the
natives would obviously be against coming again under
German rule.
The Leader of the Opposition declared that -the pro-
posals were consistent with all the other proposals


which had been brought forward by the present Govern-
ment. They were full of nothing, as usual ! They re-
minded him of an oyster, large to the eye, but which,
when opened, revealed nothing but an empty shell. It
was strange that more careful consideration had not
been given so important a subject. For instance, so
vital a point as the disposal of the German colonies had
not been indicated in the policy of the Government as
shown. The first of the Fourteen Points stated de-
finitely that no secret undertakings of any kind would
be allowed, but point No. 3 would, under certain cir-
cumstances, allow secret or private undertakings. There
ought to be included in the terms of peace huge indem-
nities, and as a guarantee the whole of the German
Navy should be surrendered. Further, after the war,
the manufacture of munitions of any kind whatsoever
in Germany must be disallowed.
Considerable amusement was caused when it came
to the turn of the First Lord of the Admiralty (Sergt.
Morgan), for, obviously caught napping, he declated
that the Prime Minister's proposals had no interest
for him.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs (Sergt. Lear) de-
clared that France would in effect be obtaining a huge
indemnity when got back Alsace Lorraine, whose
mines had been developed at German expense. Also
Germany would havcf to give guarantees that she would
keep the terms of peace.
Sergt. Riddell (Opposition) pointed out that the Go-
vernment's proposals would involve the reduction of
the British Navy, and Sergt. Pardoe took up an inde-
pendent position.
Sergt. Ditchburn said that the clause which insisted
on the demobilisation of the German Army must, to be
consistent, insist on the demobilisation of Britain s
Navy too. The enemy would be only too glad of such
a clause, for this war had shown that though an army
might be raised and equipped in a very short time, a
navy, once demobilised, would take so long a time to
replace that the war would have been won by the
enemy. Moreover, on the adoption of the peace terms
proposed the Allies would be confronted with a formid-
able burden in the commercial war which must follow.
For the greater number of the ships left to us would
be taken up with 'the transport of troops back to their
various countries, while Germany would be able to use
for trade her mercantile shipping, which was practically
intact.
The Leader of the Opposition declared that he had
nothing to answer, and, the Prime Minister having re-
plied, the proposals were rejected by 18 votes to 8.
we come Xate.
Hamilton Gray.
In 1915 we crept down to the wharf at dead of night,
and without a single farewell embarked on the great
adventure. Though entirely lacking in the picturesque,
the system had merits.
On October 14th, 1918, we marched through the
streets of Sydney with colours flying and bands playing
amid the cheering crowds. When we had eventually
embarked, and while the boat was' still tied up, our
mothers and wives and sisters- by the thousand were
admitted to the wharf, and hundreds of coloured
streamers flashed out in the brave sunshine while part-
ing farewells were said and signalled. Seldom, if ever,
have the farewells to a departing troopship been so
cheery and happy. There were few tears and many
smiles. * No doubt the chief cause of this happy mood
was the great news of.September and October, and the
feeling common to all that a long lakt peace was in
sight. So strong was this feeling in Sydney on the
I.4th that several friends rang me up early on Monday
morning, and said they supposed we would not sail
after all. Since then the prospect of immediate peace
seems to be less likely, though the certainty of absolute
victory becomes happily more certain day by day; but
if those of us on this ship are too late and never see
any fighting, there will be many who will thoughtlessly
ask why we were so late? I think the answer should
be in the case of the great majority of cases that we
were not late at all.
Three-quarters of this ship's company are young
single men, and two-thirds of the reinforcements on
board are boys under the age of twenty who were
at school when war broke out, and even now have
barely reached maturity. Of the others, many are mar-
ried men approaching middle age who, under any sys-
tem of conscription, would not have been called upon
to go at all, but whose patriotism had forced their en-
listment in .order to keep up the falling numbers.
We are a very mixed lot, as we have always been.
There are publicans and sinners, pugilists and jockeys,,
violinists and artists, journalists and joinery men,
tinkers and tailors, and clerks and bookmakers, and
policemen, and representatives of a hundred other
trades and callings who are never brought together in
any other time and place. Some of us like noise and
others quiet; some of us are sea sick and others home-
sick ; some of us like elbow room, and to others a


-crowd is as the breath of life; some of us read " The
Story of the Blood-stained Putty Knife'' and others
Shakespeare; and yet, taking it all round, we live in
peace and harmony with one another. Never have I
seen in club or tram or street or school or church or
stock exchange so much real courtesy and considera-
tion shown for the feelings of others as is shown daily
and hourly by one and all, from the O.C. downwards.
We discuss politics and religion and conscription very
frequently, but the discussions are entirely free from
that animony and bitterness that we have become so
accustomed to in Australia in the last few bad years
of internal strife and disharmony. Many of us have
never been at sea before, and the school of whales we
have just passed has been the cause of much excite-
ment and unscientific discussion, and our letters home
on the subject will no doubt cause the younger genera-
tion to open wide their eyes. They, passed us about
sunset spouting and rolling along due East, and a man
standing alongside me wondered how long it would
take them to get to Aussie. I have known this man
for three weeks now, and never heard him utter a
word of sentiment until this moment, when he uninten-
tionally revealed the secret longing of his heart. The
conclusion I am forced to, after talking to all sorts
of men on all parts of the ship, on A deck and B deck,
in the fo'castle, and in the " Plouse," around the box-
ing ring, and at the Salvation Army's meeting, is that
95 per cent, of those here have ccfine at the earliest
possible moment that could be managed.
If we ever get to France we hope we may be worthy
successors of the diggers who went before us, and
whatever betides us, " come weal cofne woe," we think
that our own individual effort, puny and insignificant
as it appears in relation to the vast Volume of vicarious
suffering, will still very truly in its own degree help to
make the world free and happy for the children we
love, and for their children to the tenth generation.
£bev> can't catcb Jack,
During the South African War a certain transport
on its way South carried, among others, a party of
bluejackets belonging to the Naval Brigade. The sol-
diers were issued with knives, forks, spoons and so on,
but all the sailors had was their own uniform l knife,
known as a " Purser's Dirk." While going the r ounds
at dinner time, the 0.C., noticing the sailors eating
with their knives and fingers only, complained of their
manners to the naval officer in charge. A rather heated
argument followed, and the naval officer offered to
bet i 5 that the sailors were just as well, if not better,
mannered than the soldiers. Finally it was agreed to
put the matter to the test. To a dinner given at
Gibraltar in honour of officers and men leaving for the
front was invited a sailor who was supposed to be the
worst mannered in the fleet. His place at table was
set between two particularly •'high-toned" ladies,, and
he was left without knife or fork. Soup was served
and everything went well, but when the meat and vege-
tables arrived all eyes were turned on Jack. For a few
moments he sat still, watching the rest of the guests
intently. Suddenly turning to the lady on the right,
he said with the greatest of politeness: "Do you mind
lending me your knife? " The lady having obliged him,
he turned next to his left-hand neighbour, and asked
her if she would mind lending him her fork. She also
having obliged him, he set himself heartily to his din-
ner. Meanwhile both ladies - watched him with w.ide-
opened eyes, and then they ,asked him for the return
of,the knife and fork.
Looking up from his meat for a moment, Jack said
calmly: " Borrow them, the same as I had to."
W. F. LAMPARD, C.S.M., N. 24.
Jfor UJoung Solbters.
Some Remarks by the C.O.
The good soldier is punctual in his habits* temperate,
careful in his arms, clothing, accoutrements, etc., clean-
ly both in person and dress, alert in all his duties, re-
spectful and obedient to all those who are put in
authority over him. If he does wrong he is really help-
ing the enemy; if he is absent without leave from camp
his training suffers, and the efficiency of his platoon is
diminished; if he drinks or gets diseased, he becomes
physically less fit; if he fails to obey orders for cleanli-
ness the general health suffers. On service misconduct
is still more - harmful, therefore offenders are punished
for their own good, and in the interests of the whole
force.
It should be the aim of the soldier to so order his
general bearing and demeanour as to live on good
terms and fellowship with all his comrades, and he
should always be animated with a love of and zeal for
his unit. Upon the obedience and respect shown by
soldiers the whole foundation of discipline depends.
Orders given by superiors of whatever rank must be


instantly obeyed without question as to the propriety
or reason for . such order. Should the soldier feel
aggrieved by the receipt of any order, he is at liberty
to appeal afterwards to his Commander for redress.
Comradeship has a good effect on the conduct of the
individual soldier, and the most careless, and unthink-
ing soon finds out that it is absolutely necessary for
his comfort and safety. In war each man has always
to rely on his comrades performing their duty, and soon
learns to realize that he must also to his duty, and not
fail them. In battles men together will do things that
no individual man or only the very bravest could 1 pos-
sibly do. The comradeship springs from the fact that
all are undergoing risks and hardships in common, and
men learn to know and esteem each other when they
have to live and suffer and fight together.
Discipline is essential, not only for the success of an
army but for its very existence. Without discipline
troops form not so ,much a military force as a mob,
with all its notorious unreliability and ineffectiveness;
for a mob is always an irresponsible and irresolute
body, incapable of concerted action and sustained effort.
Discipline today is for free men, giving willing service
to their country and willing obedience to orders. Due
subordination is quite compatible with the self-re?pect
of a free man of spirit, who understands that it is
essential for his co-operation in the great work in hand
—beating the enemy.
tlbe jfuture of tbe Solbier.
Sergt. Percy Llewellyn Hughes.
The distribution of its returned man-power is, as
everybody knows, a vital problem for the Australian
Government. To us also, being part, it~is to be hoped,
of that returning man-power, the question is vital. A
few men may say: " It is immaterial to us, as our
employers promise us re-instatement in our old capa-
cities, if we return safely." This is comforting, pro-
viding the promises are honoured. But will they be
honoured? A e s a matter of fact, they by no means
always are. Therefore comes the necessity for
strengthening the Returned Soldiers' Association, or
for forming a new and influential body on somewhat
similar lines to one lately formed in England: (i) To
promote and further the interests of discharged sol-
diers and sailors. (2) To secure representation on
local government bodies. (3) To secure Parliamentary
representation. , (4) To secure exemption of dis-
charged men's pensions from income tax. As a result
of this movement, in the matter of pensions only, about
75 per cent, of the cases reviewed during the first month
after representation was obtained resulted in greater
advantages to the men concerned. Light occupation
was also obtained for numbers of limbless soldiers.
These results 'prove the usefulness of such a body, and
its necessity is already easily apparent.
The war has been painfully beneficial to us in many
ways. Above all, it has taught us tljat it is the public
who suffer when our representatives sink themselves
in party politics. Nothing is more disastrous to a
country than, as in the case of England recently, find-
ing herself at war, with Ireland bellowing like a kid
at her side, and a few still wanting to act the fool while
the majority were in grips with death. Men who were
good enough to fight for their country should be good'
enough to share in its administration. It remains to
be seen whether steps will be taken properly to recom-
pense our soldiers' services, or whether the authorities
will wait for the action of our Federation. In any
case, it will be our business, when we get back, to work
together, and hurry them up.
Concerts.
Two Concerts have been held on the Parade Deck.
Both have been well attended and much appreciated:.
The first, "held on Saturday, October 26th, included
Chopin's famous Polonaise, played by Pte. V. J. Tim-
mins. This was followed by a song well rendered by
Corpl. T. Bevan; a banjo solo played with considerable
skill by Mr. G. F. Long, 3rd ship's officer, and a song
by Mr. W. Fairbotham. Then there were some magi-
cal novelties by Sergt. R. Langrell, a song by Pte. T.
C. Clark, and a violin solo expressively played by
Ld'g. Sig. Kennedy; a recitation by Sergt. Marsh/ some
lightening sketches by Pte. A.-H. Wood, and a cornet
solo by Pte. Rust completed the programme.
The second Concert was even more appreciated, and
contained some items worthy of a better platform. The
first, a solo by Gunner Watson, was received with much
applause, and ! was followed by a very fine rendering
of " The Battle Eve," by Sergt. Bruqe and Corpl.
Bevan. Then came a violin solo, a Polish Dance,
played by the composer, Pte. G. H. Stone; a recitation,
" Mons,"»by Sergt. Thornton, and a solo by Sergt. H.
C. Ingleton. Sergt. R. Langrell again entertained the
audience with his magical novelties. An instrumental
trio was rendered by Sergt. Paton, Ldg. Sig. Kennedy
and Pte. Rust, and this was followed by a recitation,
" The Dinkie di Soldier," by Pte. Hilliard; " A Perfect
Day," sung by Pte. McColl, and "Larboard 1 Watch"
by Corpl. Bevan and Pte. Donaldson.


Clabb\>'B Ibarbeet jfiabt
Boxers as Soldiers.
11 Don't Forget the Straight Left."
" The fight with Darcy; that was my hardest fight.
Darcy was a world's wonder. He was so strong; per-
haps his being a blacksmith may have had something
to do with it. But it wasn't only his strength; he
was so clever, too. Outside the ring he didn't look
to be a clever boxer; it was not until you were in the
ring before him that you realised what he was. But
you saw it then! Some of them used to say: Darcy
was merely strong, but that was all nonsense. He
was a really clever chap—really clever —a natural born
fighter. Why, he had practically everything. He
had strength, he could give a good punch, he had skill,
and he could take punishment. He had practically
everything to make him a wonder at the game."
There is many a good man who prefers himself to
any other subject of conversation, and this is natural
enough. But Jimmy Clabby is not that sort. And
so when he was asked to tell about his hardest fight,
instead of making the most of his own achievements,
lie edged off at once on to that wonderful boxer, Darcy.
And yet Clabby might have been excused if he had
spread himself a little, for he has a fine record himself.
An Irish-American, even if he is now an Australian
soldier, he has been thirteen years at the game of
boxing, and has fought more than two hundred fights.
When he came out to Australia to meet Darcy—it was
on a £2,000 contract to fight three fights for Snowy
Baker—he had already beaten Dave Smith and Ed.
McGroorty, and had been welter weight champion of
the world. He went into the lightweights after that,
however, and when he met Darcy he weighed just under
11 stone, while Darcy stripped at 11 stone 6 lbs. It
was big odds fo give a world's wonder, and that at the
height of his career. Yet Clabby claims that if Darcy
gotothe decision, he (Clabbyj came out of the fight the
fresher of the two. Ana whatever may be one's
opinion as to that, there is no doubt that Clabby lasted
the full twenty rounds against Darcy, and that no one
else ever did, except Knockout Brown.
" For four rounds," said Clabby, sitting back on the
bunk in the small cabin which had been borrowed for
the interview, " I could hardly stand on my feet. I
found Darcy a very much harder contract than I had
expected! " 1 had seen him fight before, and thought
I had a good chance of beating him. Perhaps he had
an off day when I saw him. But, as I told you, he
was deceptive. Why,.. I thought I was one of the best
in-fighters in the world, but he outfought me even at
in-fighting! Another thing, the more I hit him, the
harder he came at me. In the eighth round I was
pretty nearly knocked out, and as I told you, I could
hardly stand on my legs. Between the eighth and
the fourteenth rounds, Darcy did his damnedest to stop
me. In fact, I believe he fought harder than he had
ever fought in his life to put me out, and I had all I
could do to save myself. But in the next six rounds
I turned tlie corner and put my best work in, and I
reckon I finished the fresher, as I said."
The question of Datcy's- weight came up, and where
he might have stood as compared with the big men of
the ring in other times. Clabby shook his head at
this. "He was not heavy enough for the best cf the
big men," he said. And he repeated the old maxim
that a few of us forgot when Burns was training for
his match with Johnson: " A good big man will always
beat a good little man." " Tor instance, take a man
like Jess Willard," said Clabby, " six foot six and built
in proportion. It would be iiopeless to put a middle-
weight against a man like that."
Another fight that " very much interested " Clabby
was his fight with Dave Smith. "It was very amus-
ing," said he. " The referee called us into the middle
of the ring to give us his instructions about clean
breaks, and we both agreed. After I had been jobbed
in the nose by Smith a couple of times, we went into
a clinch. The referee said ' Break.' I stepped back
a pace and then—it was within the rules—l immedi-
ately jumped into Smiths again with a right hand upper-
cut. Smith turned round and complained to the
referee that I was hitting in clinches. As he turned,
I hit him a left hand punch on the chin and his head
hit the floor first! He was ' out ' for half an hour,
and the referee awarded the fight to me. After he
came to, Smith said: 4 Jimmy, you took an unfair
advantage of me. You hit me when I wasn't looking.
I replied: ' Oh, yes, you were looking, Dave. And
so was I! ' "
Finally, Clabby had something to say about the
boxing we have had on deck, in the earlier stages of
the tournament. He began with a little criticism.
" The boxing has been very good," he said, "though
there weren't as many entries as we expected. But
the men haven't taken enough advantage of the natural
conditions under which they fought. The first thing
Idois to look for natural advantages. It's quite fair,
and if you don't the other man will. You know how
the ring slopes high in the centre and low on either
side P Weil, I warned the men to keep always in the
centre of the ring, because it is always better to be
hitting down than up, especially if the other man is a
couple of inches the taller. I also warned them to
keep the sun in the other man's eyes. But they didn't
pay enough attention to these things. Another thing;
they neglected the straight left, and the straight iett
is the. natural offensive weapon—and the defensive
weapon, too. There were fellows there who are natural
left-handers, and yet they never used the left at all.
" The boys played a little on the rough side, but
they showed they had plenty of gameness, "which is
the main thing in boxing. And when a man is game
in boxing he is game at anything—and that's what is
wanted in the army."


By W
March 30Ih.—Rose at 4 a.m. and milked the cows.
Arter breakfast weht out for a shot at some rabbits,
baw a notice on the cemetery put up by the recruiting
''WAKE UP, YOUR KING AND COUNTRY
f; \OU." Spent the rest of the day reading the
Life of Napoleon."
- March 31st. —-The Sergeant of Police isn't a bad cove
•after all. Told him I was thinking of enlisting, and
he bought me a ticket to Sydney. I start to-morrow.
April use. —This place, Sydney, is wonderful. The
people are awfully friendly. As soon as I got out of
the train, a cove rushed up to me and said: " Have
you seen our Harbour?" The harbour was very
pretty, though. It's a lot bigger than Mr. Wheatoat's
dam. Went round to the recruiting depot in one of
the electric trams. They go very quickly, and are
pulled a*ong by a wire on top. The doctor at the
depot tested my heart, my lungs, my eyes and my
cough. Then a fellow with some red on his collar and
a crown unuerlined with gold lace on his sleeve made
me sign a lot of papers. The cove next to me said he
was one of our returned generals. Then they told me
I had to report at the Camp next day and learn drill.
In case I didn't know the way out, someone would meet
me at the recruiting depot and we would all go out
together.
April 4lh.—Have been two days in camp. • It is great
fun. They gave me a blue suit to wear so as I wouldn't
dirty my other ones. Everybody is very nice to me.
Two or three of the coves in my hut let me clean their
guns for them.
Aprii sth.—l forgot to mention that they have a very
pleasant way of calling you in the morning here. There
is a band comes round in the morning playing the latest
songs. One of them is called " What do you want to
look out of your eyes at me for? " or something like
that. Then we all have to get up and get dressed,
and shaved, have a shower and a wash, brush our hair,
and put those winding things round our legs and be out
on the empty space near the huts in 5 minutes. It
takes doing, .but lam always out first. Then we have
exercises. The fellows tell me that the official name
for them is physical jerks. Sounds funny, doesn't it?.
We have to do each action when the fellow out in front
says a number. He is what they call a sergeant.
He is a bonzer chap. Always dressed up, too. He
wears three wrigley things on his arm so as to show
that he is an officer. Then we go in to breakfast. The
first morning I was in camp for breakfast I was a little
bit late, as I was doing a favour for the corporal who
wanted a brush as he had to whitewash the last post,
and he asked me to get it for him from the Sergeant-
major. Unfortunately the latter had just that moment
lent it to the quartermaster, and when I got to him I
was told that the adjutant was pitting new hairs in it,
so I left word for the adjutant to bring it along to
me when it was done, and that made me late as I said.
The breakfast was not too good the first day. When
I got in, I could only see a little dry bread on the table.
They told me, however, that this was the food you
always got when you first went into camp so as to make
you hardy, and that the empty jam tins were there to
put the scraps in, as you were not allowed to waste any-
thing.
J. D.
+ k rea kfast we have a little rest and get the huts
tidied up. I was very nearly late to-day as I was
helping the others to get their blankets folded and then
they didn t have time to help me fold mine. Drill
was very-nice. They show you how to turn round like
it is done at the front. You do it in numbers like the
physical jerks. I couldn't do it easily at all, and I
am afraid I made the sergeant very angry once or
twice. He called me out in front and made me do it
by myself, and then I accidentally went round the
wrong way and he got red in the face and said I was
Clumsy and asked me what I thought I was there for ?
Or course I said that I wanted to be able to turn round
numbers like they did at the front. Then he said
he gave it up I didn't quite see what he meant, but
he is a nice fellow, and I think he meant it kindly
April 6th.—Up at reveille again this morning. Still
think that the band is very nice, but think that they
might change their tune occasionally. This morning
the corporal (he wears two of those wrigley things on
his arm) came in and asked whether anyone could ride
a bicycle. I knew that several of the coves in the
hut could ride one, and was surprised that they did not
S °' that it was a good day for a ride
and so told him that I had once ridden one. He said
Gome along then." When I got outside there was
a lot oi other cyclists there. They were evidently
looking forward to the ride for they 'were all smiling.
Ihen he took us for a long walk. He said that the
bicycles were all kept near the gravel pits. When we
got there we found that there was another job to get
done first. This was to fill up a cart with gravel for
the footpaths. This took nearly all day, although the
cart was nearly full when we started, and so I missed
my ride.
April 7th—That sergeant is not so nice as I first
thought he was. He was growling at me a lot this
morning. I had the misfortune to be a little late this
morning, and he marked me absent. I reasoned* wdth
him, but he said that he was not going to alter the
roll for me, and I should have been there to time.
Ihen he found fault with the way I did my physical
jerks. ITe was evidently in a bad temper. To-night
lam to have a proud position. Fortunately for me
one of the fellows on the guard of honour has had an
urgent call to Sydney, and he told me that if I gave
him my leave pass he would let me take his pface.
Of course I accepted, as the guard of honour are all
picked men. They call this Guard of Honour the
Picquet. When the Governor make his nightly visit
to the Camp, we have to turn out and present arms.
He told me I would have to practise this up.
April Bth.—Unfortunately the Governor did not call
He was sick. I have had very bad luck
to-day. Strange thing, some of the coves asked me
to lend them my pull-through and oil-bottle and some
other things and then the officer came round and wanted
to see all our things, and when I told him what had
happened he said he had heard that yarn before, and
to try a new one.
April 9th.—To-day I saw some of the Pitt St. Light
Horse. They tell me that they are, with the possible
exception of the Week End Lancers, the finest body
of men in the Camp. I greatly admired them, with
their spurs and riding whips and their military bearing,


with just the slightest suspicion of a swagger. Just
as they were passing, some foolish person called out
" Kiwi, kiwi! " and this somehow seemed to make them
very annoyed.
April 10th.— Got my uniform to-day. I was told
that it fitted very well wherever it touched. I don't
think that it fitted too well myself, but I suppose they
are better able to judge.
April 30th. —Have been too busy to write up this
diary since the last entry, but will try to keep to it
better. I have been promoted to B Company, Re-
cruits. Was very glad to get rid of that sergeant too.
He was a regular beast.
IV!ay Ist. —Have got to do a lot more drill in this lot.
The sergeant here is very particular. These sergeants
don't seem to make allowances for anything. They
expect you to do things just as if you have been doing
nothing else all your life. Got my rifle issued yester-
day. Not the one to take away with me, but one to
do drill with. Spent all yesterday evening cleaning it
up and it looks as bright as a new pin. First of all
I cleaned out the barrel with some brilliant shine, and
then gave it a good rub over with a dry rag so as it
will take the varnish all right. I won't actually var-
nish it until to-morrow.
September Bth.—lt's a good while since I wrote any-
thing in this diary, but I had mislaid it. I hear that
we are to embark soon, and that we are to get final
leave next week It is very funny to see the way
that the blokes kid the new fellows. They send them
hunting for the acting blank files. They pole on them
something awful. Give them their rifles to clean up for
them, and do them out of their leave and all sorts of
things. And you ought to see the way the new ones
rush when the"C.S.M. comes round and asks whether
anyone wants to join the air corps, and then they get
copped for fatigue at the gravel pit or something. I
don't know how they can be so silly.
October Ist.— Have just returned from final leave.
These chaps up the country don't know much, I'm
satisfied about that. Am to go into the composite
battalion to-morrow.
October 12th. —Have just heard a furfy that we are
to sail on Monday on the Wyreema. She is a good
boat, and they all reckon that she is a good sea boat.
October 14th. —Came to Sydney and had a route
march round the city, crowds cheering and all that sort
of thing, and then we marched on board. No more
rotten old band to wake us up in the morning, no more
cleaning up the camp, no more picquet, no more sentry,
only a good time for the next six weeks. We are
going through the Panama too, and going to do our
training in America. We have now pulled out from
the wharf. Coloured ribbons all over the place, and
a great crowd on the wharf. They reckon that we are
to sail at midnight.
October 15th. —Not feeling too well this morning.
Don't think I like hammocks very much. They seem
deliberately to dodge you when you try to get into
them. After I had fallen out of mine three times,
I decided to sleep on the floor, and then everyone who
had not yet turned in came and trod on me. That
must be why I feel so funny now. Think I'll go up-
stairs and get a breath of air. Think I'll go and look
over the side to ,see if there are any fishes in the
sea
Later.—Don't think I'll have any dinner; it's only
waste time. Can't see why anybody should want
dinner. Greedy beasts!
October 16 Still feeling very off. The sergeant
came in at reveille this morning and wanted to know
why we weren't all up. Strange thing, he came in
just as we were all going to get up. He said that tale
was no good to him, and made us turn out there and
then. Some of these sergeants don't seem to believe
a man. Still very rough.
October 17. —Sick.
October 18. —More sick.
October 19. —Horribly sick.
October 20. —This boat would roll in a millpond.
October 21. —Feeling a bit better. Went to Church
parade. Couldn't hear a word of the sermon. Then
I went and had a lie down, and some silly idiot came
and dangled a piece of fat pork under my nose, with
the result that I started all over again. Now every-
thing I eat tastes of filthy pork, only I don't eat any-
thing, so it doesn't matter. ' ; '
October 21. —The cups and saucers were forming
fours all last night. So was my inside. Feeling better
this morning though, and have been put on Mess
Orderly. Must be good-0 being Mess Orderly. Don't
have to turn out to parade or anything. Start the
job to-morrow at breakfast.
October 22.—This job isn't as good as I thought it
was at first. Went up this morning for the tucker.
The other mess orderly told me I could manage it on
my own. I balanced*the dixie lid of porridge on the
dixie with the tea in it, and was juggling with some
meat in the other hand, when the ship gave a lurch
just' as I was coming down the steps. I had a hard
job getting the cook to give me another lot of tucker,
and the orderly sergeant made me clean up the mess
on the steps. 'Heis a very bad-tempered, unjust man.
I am to have no leave at Durban just because he slipped
and fell on the mess. I uon't see why I should be
blamed if he can't keep his balance.
October 23.— They opened the portholes last night
as they sea seemed a bit calmer. During the night,
however, it got less calm, and chaps near the portholes
got about half the Indian Ocean over them. This mess
orderly job is getting on my nerves. When you want
to clean up the tables you have about half an hour's
work shunting the fellows away, and as soon as you
turn round again you find a Nap or Poker school started
down at the end of the table you are going to start
on. And while jou are arguing the point with them,
the sergeant comes along and wants to know why the
—: you haven't cleaned up yet. Finally you get
things spick and span and all the spoons shining, the
table white as snow, etc., etc., and go up on deck to
have a draw. When you come back, someone has been
chucking all the dirty water and scraps in creation
over the side, and it has caught in the scoop out of the
porthole, and is splashed over your table. It's a great
life in the Army.
October 24. —A1l the talk of the ship is now on the
sports to be held shortly. There is going to be boxing,
and tugs-of-war, card tournaments, and draughts, and
all that sort "of thing. They have got a space up at
the sharp end of the ship that they are going to use
for the boxing, and I have entered for the lightweights.
October 25.— Busy training; don't think very much
of these amateurs.
October 26. —Still busy training; they rub me down
with banana skins.
October 28 Hope I don't have to meet Glabby, or
that officer, either.
October 36.—Now in hospital. Don't think I will
ever take on professional boxing, after all. It's too
rough and brutal.


Xetter to Xi3a.
Peter Macdig,
Sydney's Farewell.
" All at sea .
" They've shifted the blessed clocks that much I've
lost the date.
u My dearest Liza,
" I'm loaded with tons of news, but where to begin
I'm hanged if I knowes.
u We had a spiffin' send-off at Sydney. * Oh it was
great! Pitcher us stridin' down George Street, bands
a-playin', flags a-wavin', and the crowds hurray in' like
fury. Tork about a crowd, Liza! Why the n-ost
tremendous crush you ever seed at Bourke wouldent
be as many. They was everywher, peepin' out of
windows (some of 'em that high up I nearly km eked
me neck gettin' a squint at 'em), swormin' on the
rooves, jammed in the doorways, piled on the foot-
paths, stacked in the streets. O, oceans and oceans
of 'em, wavin' hands, flags, hankies and hats; it was
simply staggerin' glorious. Wot O! showers of.
blessin's! An, gifts, too; they tumbles in torrents;
chpcklets, toffey, peanuts, cigerets, oranges, apples and
wotnots. Me pockets was that stuffin' bulgin' that I
pushes the feller 011 each side of me out of line. The
sargin was rorin' ' rare files cover! ' but it was no good,
the further we marched Hie wosser me pockets poked
out and the more they was pushed off.
u Centepedes and spiders, Liza! I can't find words
to describe the wonder fulness of it all, but if yer'd been
within cooee yer could have picked me out by the weigh
I held up me hed and puffed out me chest. Sometimes
I was the only one in step, but I was determined to
keep up the reputashon of Sleepy Holler.
"At last w r e ochies to the worf and the offeser says,
' Boys, yer have a while to say goodbye.' I tell yer
Liza" it makes a lump come in.me throat like a pertater
when 1" thinks about it—speshully some o' them nice#
lookin' girls; but I was always faithful to you, Liza.
Then we goes up the gangweigh, a walk-up-top con-
structshin somethin' like the race out of a sheep-dip.
The engines begins bobbin' and aw*ay we goes. The
diggers climbes up everything there was to clime and
hurrays and cheers like mad. The crowd did ditto
xcept the olimiti'. A lot of ladies (I think they was
single ones) shouts out ' Be sure and come back single,'
and a mob of fellers, some married and some single,
says, ' Right oh; you bet.' I told yer about goin'
to Manley and Bonddie in a real ship, but this was the
really furst time I had been on a see-goin' one, so yer
can guess I was partickuler curious to see all I could
four me money, or rather four the govermint's. Fust
we did an xplorin' trip, and then the bugle starts up
with the ' Come to the cookhouse door ' tune. We
w ires into the tucker holesale, all the time larfin' and
jok in' at the yarns about sea-sickness, loss of happy-
tiglit, etc. Why we never feels better in our lifes.
Folks must have been pullin' our legs.
" After a bit the order is given ' Swing hammicks! '
'Pon me word Liza when they all was swingin' it looked
fur all the world like strings and strings of soseidges
hangin' in a butcher's shop. Next mornin' I wakes
with a queer mixed-up, stirred-up, fixed-up, inside-out,
upside-down feelin'. The boys kept saying ' I must
have a blow of fresh air,' and kept hurry in' up on
deck. I had a feelin' somethin' was goin' to happen,
and rushes up on top meself. It did happen too.
What a spekteakel there was! Most all seemed to
be desperately anksus to feed the hungry sharkes, por-
pises, wales, albertrosses, gulls and little fishes. I ses
to a feller, ' How close them gulls are comin.' He
says, ' Yes, that's Wot I was just thinkih' about you! '
He was above five stone taller than me so I dident
say all I thought. Yer know, Liza, how generous I
always was, so I pitches in and helps with them feedin'
opera shins fur all I'm worth
" All that day the feelin's of the majority made 'em
reckogiiize the most pertickuler and importent work
goin' was to stuff them poor starvin' fish.
" I goes dow/n to dinner. I dident want none; in
fact it made me feel like the borspittle to think of
eat in' ; but 1 was determined to crack hardy and be
110 fether-bed soldier. Wot on earth was those sounds
comin' up from below? Seemed as if I was nearin'
Bourke racecourse. Fellers was yell in' ' Too to one
oil stew! Even money on the field; butter leads. No
she don't; it's a cake walk for the jam! ' And then of
all the sights I had ever sighted this w as the sightiest
Plates, butter, mugs, spoons, soup, puddin', and jam,
slidin', slitherin', tossin' and skitherin' mixin' up and
rollin' over. Some had stew* on there plates and some
had stew 011 there pants and some was in a stew. A
few starts to sing ' Pack up yer troubles in yer old
kit bag,' but a mob pitches in with ' Pull for the shore,'
and blows 'em out.
" Now r Liza, I reckon I'll take a pull. I jest want
to say in spite of the Aussiesoo wares, the tliunderin'
big sw ells, the Niagerer dives, and the part-company-
with-dinner feelin's, I'm doin' splendiferous. I hope
you and the kiddies is better even than that. Trustin'
that the rabbets ain't multeplyin' too fast, nor the
dingows gettin' to parshal to lam, or the sheep be-
cornin' to tickey, nor the whether keepin' two dry,
" I remain, the best husband yer ever had or are
likely to have,
" Yours from the crown of me hat to the tips of me
bootlaces. _ .
" PETER MACDIG.
<< p.S.—J gont too kisses for yerself and one each fur
the young uns, total nine. If they ain't there I bet
the sensor has pinched 'em.">—P.M,


jfoob Economy.
A correspondent writes to complain of the scandalous
waste of good food which takes places almost daily—
and indeed three times on some days—on board. This
waste was, as he explains, most noticeable during the
first few days after leaving Sydney Heads, but it has
by 110 means ceased altogether even yet. The food
supplies of the ship are intended, our correspondent
points out, for the men, not for the fish, and to deliber-
ately tlA'ow large quantities of it overboard, as some
do, immediately after each meal, or even in some cases,
between meals, is no less than a public scandal. Thou-
sands of British and other allied homes are, as we all
know, suffering from an insufficiency of foodstuffs, and
the statesmen of the allied conn fries have found it
impossible to do more than palliate the evil. The
fishy nation, on the other hand, besides not being even
one of the allies—indeed, the tinned fish have on occa-
sions given no inconsiderable assistance to the enemy—
are well off as it is for food. They can eat seaweed
much more easily than we can. Why, then, bur corre-
spondent demands with the utmost indignation, these
wasteful and traitorous offerings to Neptune, their
Kaiser P
" PORK-BEANS."
jfrom the Crow's IFlest
A couple of gunners are said to have abandoned long
and well-established habits to the extent of having a
wash as the boat entered Fremantle, in expectation of
going on leave there. What a Catastrophe when no
leave was granted! But the desire for cleanliness is
fierce in some people. Already, as (at the moment
of writing) we draw near Durban, it is rumoured that
the less steadfast of the two has been heard to make
enquiries as to the whereabouts of the bathroom.
The Sergeants' Mess broke all records the other
evening by spending nearly two hours of passionate
argument upon the question whether a man should sit
at one table or at another a few yards away. The
heights and depths of rhetoric were explored, the pre-
sident tendered a dramatic resignation, the committee
threatened to throw itself out of office, a bnember de-
clared he would have no more to do with anybody. Yet
everything ended in smoke, after all.
One of our boys appears to have a considerable
amount of skill in the manly art. Whilst in a boxing
bout with our ex-world's middleweight champion,
James Clabby, he proved to have a stop for every blow
delivered by the champion. The stop was his face.
In an interesting little ungloved contest held recently
on Deck A, if Corporal Punishment was administered
on the one side, Private Satisfaction was expressed on
the other. So that honours seem to have been, on
the whole, fairly even.
A certain Lance-Jack, says an anonymous contri-
butor, on board a transport that recently left Australia,
consulted his medical man with a view to reducing his
superfluous flesh. "In order to do so, you must regu-
late your appetite," said the medico. trying a
number* of ways, he at last hit upon the happy idea.
On commencing a meal, he sits six inches away from
the table, and when he touches he's done.
A Mess Orderly of N. 23 is said to have worn the
skin off his arms to the elbow in a futile attempt to
keep his dixie shining, before he discovered that Rust
had set in at his table.
An R-.A.A. man has been heard to affirm that the
prodigious proportions of the artillery* are attributable,
to the fact that We-av-er Rose(y) cheeked Welsh
Cornish Cook, who has given us nothing but Rice for
Tucker since last East(h)er. This Cooke has never
B(r)een known to Byrne.
Boots,
By Corporal V
There is a Lance-Corporal of 23 who is said to
measure nearly 6 ft. 2 in. in height, or about 8 ft. 6 in.
if he stands on tiptoe. Mindful, no doubt, of the
American soldier who had to be discharged because
none of the army boots would fit him, he took care to
bring two pairs of boots on board; he says, they are
only size 14. The boys are pleased at this. It makes
them feel safe; they are not frightened of submarines.
A. Humfrey.
There's a Lance-Jack of N. 23,
Whose boot is as big as a boat;
If the transport should sink in the sea,
Twelve soldiers could still keep afloat.
It has been suggested, accordingly, that the two pair
of boots be removed from B. Troop deck, where they
take up all the room, and placed on the upper deck.
They will then be ready in case of shipwreck.
CPL. V. A. HUMFREY, N. 23.


punishment
If 1 were pun-Ushed
For every pun I shed,
There would not be a puny shed
Left to cover my punnish head.
—Dr. Johnson.
It has at last been discovered, says a correspondent,
how N. 23 secure such abundant " shickering " sup-
plies. The facts of the case are as follows :
For some days Mrs. Grundy GOSSIP(s) to her neigh-
bours that if the diggers CANN get much FULLER
they WOOD WANT the POWER of the LAW to make
them les-sMELLEY. and MOORE PERFECT. Our
ecclesiastical friends, DEAN, JACOBS, and FRIAR,
FLYNN, exclaimed TUTT, TUTT, to* the suggestion,
declaring that when the PAYNES of re-MORSE began
to BYRNE like a THORNE in the sides and A. SPEAR
to the consciences, and the effects of the tanglefoot
began to WAIN, they would BELCH(ER) forth the
remaining GARLICK, lose their tHIRST, turn over a
NEW PAGE, and from henceforth go WRIGHT.
But their hopes were unrealized. The mystery was,
who was the BRUER or* diSPENCER of the alcoholic
beverage? Judging by the effects it had on some,
there must have been WELLS of it, and it COSTEL-
LO(W) price; but rumour said someone was making
a pile of G0(0)LD. At length the WEBB of mystery
was penetrated.
A man came to Mr. FORSYTH saying:—I regret
having MISTER MOORE favourable opportunity but
kindly GRANT me an interview. Folks think I
KNOWLESs than I do; they say they can C. GREEN
in my eye, and that I am getting RUSTy; but if the
O.C. will DRIVER round the ship H. E. MAY C. a
BRUER at work.
The same punster has had the infinite audacity to lay
his impious hand upon the Sisterhood. The Sisters'
Unit, he says, must be better equipped to try conclu-
sions with submarines than any other aboard.
They are alert at,the slightest RUSSELL of danger.
They never get in a SCOTT.
They have a MAYOR adept at presiding amidst
stormy scenes.
Every sister is MOORE than a match for the best
MANN.
They have a KANE that delivers knock-out blows.
They have a GUNN that is incomparable.
They have two BELLS (not to say belles) that will
ring the death-knell of any foe.
They are inimitable at MANNING a boat.
If the boat sinks they will WALKER wav, every
JACKSON of 'em. '
Bbout flDess ©tberlies.
" Chips."
In the bowels of the ship dwells a queer species of
soldier. Ihe members of this species are known by the
fallacious term ii Mess Orderly." They do not drill
neither do they work between meals. They are to be
distinguished from the common soldier by a remarkable
naky outer covering, composed principally of stew rein-
forced by quantities of sago, tapioca, and rice, studded
with currants plus a little natural grease. They are also
to be distinguished by another remarkable phenomenal
characteristic; their backs and legs are peculiarly
warped and bent. This is the direct result of the con-
stant negotiation of numerous stairs between the com-
missariat and the troop decks, while encumbered with
dixies containing matter for the consumption of the
unoffending troops.
After a little time, the mess orderlies are apt to
assume a worried belligerent air, and to develop the
habit of returning profane answers to questions on
table etiquette, the food problem, and other matters
directly encompassed by their activities. They often
develop, too, an unnatural antipathy to their environ-
ment, and especially to stew and that wonderful pro-
duct of the soil, the haulmy potato. There are excep-
tions, of course. One mess orderly has been known
to show a great regard for that wonderful tribute to
the inventive genius of man, the aforementioned stew.
After the commotion attending a playful lurch of the
ship had subsided somewhat, he .was observed to be
lying prone beneath , his table, head'projecting, simply
wallowing m the sliminess of the awful concoction. Of
course, it may have been the result of an accident, but
there was, so it is asserted by witnesses, positive enjoy-
ment depicted in every lineament of his features. And
such is the peculiar disposition of man, the troops*
actually censured him for failing to provide them with
much-needed nourishment. Laugh and grow fat, says
the wise man. That explains the condition of the
troops; owing to constant contact with the mess order-
lies, we note the prevalence of a certain rotundity of
figure. At times mess orderlies are subject to open
insult. It is the soldiers' privilege to growl, and
during heated moments the mess orderly frequently is
asked pertinent questions, such as what he is paid for,
why didn't he get strawberry jam or cream—all of
which is distinctly exasperating when one is confronted
with tinned railway accident first day in a port.
In times of stress, mess orderlies have stuck manfully
to their posts, it must be admitted, and have survived
the Colonel's withering gaze on many an inspection.
As to their pedigrees, it can only be remarked that they
are wrapped in gloom. But on general appearance,
the truth of the Darwinian theory of the descent of
man from monkeys is fully borne' out; in fact, it 'is
thought that it must have been from some such ex-
amples of the human race that Darwin got his inspira-
tion. Notwithstanding their shortcomings, mess
orderlies are generally deemed indispensable to the
good working of the modern troopship. It is an un-
alterable habit of theirs to " swarm " at least three
times a day. In this swarming they resemble the
humble bee, though not in other aspects; for instance,
they are not so inclined to be as " busy."
There are many aspects of the daily, life of this
strange creature which cannot be enumerated owing to
short space, the censor, and the limits imposed on the
printer by the conditions of civilisation. But this brief
history may be closed with the remark that they show
a remarkable propensity for paddling in water, and are
said to be developing splay fingers through constant
mopping of decks, tables, etc., in the exercise of their
manifold occupations.
" CHIPS."


Ibornble fbaiv IRaib.
Fifty Casualties.
Description of Atrocities
Great excitement was caused on board on the night
of October 25 by the occurrence of a terrible Hair Raid.
No warning whatever was given, and the Anti-Hair-
craft weapons proved useless. The attackers seemed
to have volplaned suddenly from the clouds, and within
two minutes they were at their horrible business, amid
the cries of the first victims. There was a general
stampede for shelter, but the sight of the fierce faces
and deadlv weapons of the raiders paralysed all but
the most stalwart. These, their hyacmthine locks
waving behind them in the wind, struggled to the last,
some being only discovered days later, hidden 111 the
inaccessible recesses of the hammock bins, in the House,
or underneath the Crown and Anchor. The treatment
of the victims received adds one more to the list ot
cruel mutilations practised by the common enemy.
Each was marked, either with a cross 011 the scalp or
by the amputation of the forelock, however curly or
prized. Finally the whole scalp was shaved, and the
victims, having been robbed of a silver coin, were left
to make their painful way home, leaving the scene ot
the raid strewn with the horrid fragments or the
slaughter. <, nAvn „
" DOXO."
Court flfoarttal.
The general« smoothness of the voyage—speaking
quite metaphorically, of course—has been broken by
one serious incident. This was the trial, by drumhead
court martial, of Private Wouldbe Fuller, on a grave
Reappeared that during the fighting in France be
not onlv " inflicted malicious injury upon the property
of His "Majesty the King," but had been ' guilty_of
conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline Lhe
part of the accused was taken by a Sergt.-Major of
somewhat similar name. The court, which sat in the
Sergeants' Mess on October 31st, consisted ot Major
Slosh'em (Sergt. Green), Capt. McTavish (Sergt.
Barker), and Capt. Clinkem (Sergt. Nankervis). Ihe
counsel for the prosecution was Sergt Mo Yea, counsel
for the defence Sergt. Hughes, and the chief witnesses
Pte. Lampwiek (Sergt.-Major Lampard), Col. Curry
Powder (Sergt. Currie), Capt. Punch and Judy (Sergt.
XJdie) and Dr. Knowd'em (Sergt. Morgan). -
The Court having taken the required oath to fine,
clink, ,or in some way or other, by fair means or foul,
to well and truly squash the accused, or any similar
insect which may come before it, strike me sk\ >u<
scarlet," the accused was dragged in partly dancing
"what appeared to be a kind of skirt dance and P ai t y
bv the nape of his neck. After a struggle, Sergt.
Cozen'era (Sergt.-Major Cozens), assisted by a some-
what disreputable looking escort, got him into dock.
His hat having been removed, the Court demanded why
his boots had not been removed also, in accordance
with the latest amendment to military procedure
After a short inspection, however, the president decided
to exercise a discretionary power given him, ana leave
the prisoner's boots on, out of regard to the general
Evidence was produced that the prisoner had been
seen on December 1, last, near Fricourt devouring his
boots, and then on being spoken to by Corporal King
Lear (Ser<>t. Lear), lie became insulting, and also on
being paraded before his O.C. lie threw him a kiss and
said to him : " You're a ladv! "
At this stage the court was obliged to order that
the accused, who was creating disturbances, should be
and skirt dancing, the court adjourned.
hit three times in the stomach and that two kit bags
should lie stuffed into his mouth to keep him quiet.
Further evidence showed that accused was, at the
time of the offence, " in the rear of the vanguard ' of
his platoon, and that whilst eating the boots aforesaid,
he had " let his eyes stick out of his head."
The court ordered an examination of his teeth in
order to see whether any pieces of leather were
adhering to them, and whether they were the same
leather as the boots aforesaid.
Counsel for the prosecution: They were a false set,
and had been removed at the time.
Accused: Not so false as this evidence! His defence
was that he had been driven to the eating of his boots
by sheer starvation, and that the words used to his
(i.C. were, not " You're a lady," but " How's the
Baby? " such words being intended merely as a polite
family enquiry.
Counsel for the defence having produced evidence as
to the prisoner's exemplary character and magnificent
heroism, the prosecutor produced his crime sheet.
According to this, the accused had been at various
times convicted of the following crimes: Drunkenness,
pawning his C.O.'s overcoat, skirt dancing on parade
being disguised at night with intent to commit a
Felony, refusing to kiss a Sister, striking a superior
officer, malingering (twenty-five convictions), creating
a disturbance in a canteen, overworking a phonograph,
balancing on the tip of his nose a cruet, and A.W .L.
from rum issue, . .
The court, though it expressed the opinion that there
must have been some mistake about the last conviction,
found the prisoner guilty, and sentenced him
1. To fight five rounds with Sergt.-Major Lampard,
2. To drink four quarts of the tea usually supplied
to the Sergt.'s Mess,
3. To be keelhauled,
4. To rise at reveille for three days,
5. To do half an hour's real work during the next
week,
6. To be hung, drawn, and quartered, and finally,
7. To be thrown out of the port-hole.
The prisoner having been removed, blowing kisses


Manteb
Wanted, for a ship at sea,
A port—to drown our misery.
A silencer, to stop the noise
One hears at bed-time from the boys,
An extra kit bag—made of tin,
To pack mess ord'lies' troubles in
A poet, who will write that there
Is sometimes language in the air.
A little bit of lace and frill,
To ease the hours 'twixt meat and drill.*
A shark—and one less hungry than
The shark that takes the form of man.
A bit of all things That might tend
To bring this journey to an end.
PTE. E. M. HOWARD.
A cook who has no recipe
For stew, but has one, new, fAr tea.
* This verse may be repeated
twice, or even three times.
Übe Wotseless Bo\>s.
We are the boys who make 110 noise,
[I don't think.—Ed.]
Though we're always full of glee,
And if our war cry is a big, big lie,
At least we're in time for tea.
When on parade you will all agree
We are as smart as smart can be,
And while on leave we all declare
There's nothing with us can compare.
When once in France we congregate,
We'll be the boys the Huns will hate;
We'll drive them to their Vaderland,
The fun and frolic will be grand.
And when to Aussie we return,
From all the press you'll read and learn
The No Noise Boys, who did their bit,
Were noted for their pluck and grit.
W. C. EVANS, N. 22.
(With apologies to Mess 30 A.)
H in
An Episode of Samoa
" Two native runners from'Falealile, sir, report that
a. German man-of-war was landing a force at daylight
this morning." The Adjutant rapped out his message
smartly to the C.O.
" That will mean," replied the Colonel, " that with
40 miles of rough country to cross, they should be close
to Apia by midnight. It is now 5 p.m. Issue a
general order that everybody stand to arms to-night.
Place an advanced guard of your best men about three
miles along the road to Felealile, with a screen of men
in the bush on each side at short intervals. Absolute
silence, and no shots to be fired until the enemy is at
close quarters."
With a quick salute the Adjutant vanished.
Everything wais ready for a stubborn defence of the
town. The whole of the 1,100 New Zealanders, who
had captured the island a week previously, were placed
in the most advantageous positions in readiness for
the attack. Rain began to fall about 8 p.m., and the
night was dark and threatening. The advance guard
had taken up their , position as directed, the party on
the road gazing intently ahead of them into the dark-
ness. A quarter of a mile on each side of the advance
guard were screens of other men, placed at shoj't inter-
vals in the bush, alert for the approach of the German
seamen. All remained quiet until close on midnight ,
when a sharp, crackling sound broke the silence, and
there were visible distinct movements in the bush. The
whispered order passed down the line: " At 100 yards,
firing low, 5 rounds, rapid, load." Bayonets had
the fUQbt.
already been fixed,' and in the intervening moments,
with set teeth and muscles braced, most of the young
soldiers commended their souls to their Maker. Gradu-
ally the sounds of the enemy's approach became more
distinct. At length the bushes ,a few yards away were
parted, and a dim form emerged.
« Fire! "
The young lieutenant's voice was never so clear or
firm, and as he spoke the sharp crack of the rifles split
the night air. To the watches on the road it seemed
as if a whole army corps were engaged, and they waited
tensely for their turn, which was surely coming. A
movement of running feet in the bush quite close gave
them the direction. " Fire! " came the order for them
too, and before the five rounds were finished it was
evident that the enemy were in full retreat. A re-
connoitering party dashed forward to examine the dead,
and bring them in. Ah! this is the hardest part of a
soldier's lot—to see the dead face of the man whom
you have killed. There they lay, prime young two-
year-old cattle, which had strayed from an adjoining
coooanut plantation, had been mistaken for Germans,
and had paid the penalty.
The young lieutenant, who had remained with his
men, became impatient. "If you find tlfem heavy,
place one across two rifles and four men can carry it,"
lie called. This broke the tension, and a roar of
laughter greeted him. He became infuriated, but on
the situation being explained, joined in the laughter.
After a weary wait till daylight, another runner came
through with the news that a mistake had been made.
It was not a German man-o'-war that was landing
troops, but a coastal boat unloading cargo!


/} I t
4 { -r. *
-
'
>
•
■
»
i
1
1
V
'
I
4
■r
I
1
|
*
•
I
<
•


'
L 1:1- :• ,0"
'
.
■ :<■ • • ■' .
.
.
■
,
(
'
X.


v " ' ' ; " ■ - ' ' ' ' ■ ' : ■ . ' ' \
w-/. .:■■■• : : • ' " ; ' :■ ■ ; . • • V • -
V ' ' . ' ; ' ;
, ' • ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ■, '
IP;-': ■■ f ;
. ■' ' { :
>
" • ' ' •• ■ ' • •. ' ' " ■ -.
i
.
.
'
■
♦
.
.
i
i
I
■
.
■
: ' ' ■ 1 ■■ ' ■ : ■ '
