

F&tlfO
THE NEEDED CHANGE
IN THE
AGE OF CONSENT.
AN APPEAL
For the Better Protection
of Our Girls.
EICHAKD ARTHUR, M.A., M.D.
Sydney :
The Christian World Press, 301 Pitt Street.




% Btctifit (flpngc itr
tk |.gc of Consent
Good laws, as a great statesman has
said, are for the purpose of making it
easy to do right and difficult to do
wrong. Such laws protect the weak and
ignorant who are unable to take care of
themselves, and deter the cunning and
unscrupulous from injuring their fellows.
When the strong prey upon the weak in
any community, without the law in any
way attempting to prevent it, such
apathy points to a low moral sensibility
in the community in which it exists.
This moral indifference and tolerance
of injustice, must be charged against
the people of New South Wales. Their
representatives in Parliament have so
devoted themselves to the strife for
office and the incidence of taxation, that
the question of protecting by law, the
chastity of young girls, has been ignored.
And the people have been content to
have it so. In New South Wales, at
the present time, any girl of fourteen


years and a day, may be outraged, and
unless it can be proved that actual
violence was used, the law will do
nothing to the man who has ruined her.
In other words, the law of New South
Wales gives its sanction to the seduction
of every girl above fourteen, if this can
be done without the employment of
brute force. And experience shows that
men are not slow to avail themselves of
this license. In Sydney, the Kescue
Homes, the Lying-in Hospitals, and the
lock wards are filled with girls, some
about to become mothers, others suffer-
ing from loathsome diseases, all social
outcasts, and with a future of woe and
tragedy before them.
Is not this a foul blot on this colony ?
Are there no men with chivalrous feeling
and pity for the weak, whose blood boils
when they hear of these things, are
there no women whose hearts go out to
these poor, fallen children to save them ?
And cannot all see that it is infinitely
better and easier to try and prevent this
fall, than to remedy it after it has
happened ? For the means of doing
this is at hand. It is to raise the age
at which a girl can consent to her own
seduction. The “ Age of Consent ” so-
called, at present stands at fourteen
years. Increase this age to at least
eighteen, and thus'give the girl protec-


tion during the four years of her life in
which experience proves that danger
threatens her most.
After this age, the girl must be the
guardian of her own virtue, and it is
most probable that increased know-
ledge and strength of will power would
preserve her from moral ruin. It is a
significant fact that while the law holds
the child of fourteen capable of defend-
ing her honour, it does not allow any
girl who may possess property to
manage or dispose of it in any way till
she is 21 years old, and anyone marry-
ing her without the consent of her legal
guardians, even though she may be
willing herself, is liable to severe
punishment.
If the girl of fourteen is capable of
being the guardian of her own virtue
then we must concede that physically
she is fitted to become a mother, that
she realizes to the full, the consequences
of immorality, and that her self-control
and power of moral resistance render
her proof against any bribes or threats
by which it may be sought to influence
her.
Now all medical authorities would
utterly condemn the idea that a girl of
fourteen was fit for the stress and strain
of motherhood. Not only would she
run great danger herself, but her off-


spring would in all probability be sickly
and unfit for the battle of life.
Again, can a young girl comprehend
in the least degree, the consequences of
consenting to her own ruin ?
The majority of girls are brought up
in entire ignorance of all matters con-
nected with sex. It is the parent’s boast
that they are perfectly “ innocent,” by
which is meant that they know none of
the facts of the genesis of life, and are
totally unwarned against the dangers
which may assail them at any moment.
Nothing could be better fitted for the
purpose of the seducer, and the innocence
which is supposed to throw a halo of
purity round the girl, is sometimes the
instrument of her ruin. But, granting
that she has learnt in some imperfect
and unsatisfactory way, about these
matters, can she adequately grasp the
results which may come upon her ? Is
she aware that she may become a
mother, with all the dangers attending
maternity, can she estimate the social
ostracism, the life-long shame that will
be her lot if her fall is discovered ; does
she know that this first downward step
taken through ignorance or thoughtless-
ness, is the first on the path which leads
by the streets of the city to the harlot’s
grave?
And further, is the period between 14


and 18, one in which self-control is
firmly established, and the actions
governed by prudence and reason ? We
know it is not. Girls at this age
have little resisting power. Their vanity
is easily appealed to, their ignorance of
life leads them into situations which
older women would avoid, often their
affections are easily engaged, and under
the caresses and blandishments c f the man
—generally much older than themselves,
they are but as clay in the potter’s hands.
And it would be difficult to say how
many of these case are actually, if not
legally, cases of rape, for often a con-
siderable amount of resistance has to be
overcome before the crime is effected.
In fact, if we considered this subject
calmly and without prejudice, we will
see that it is monstrous that in our
colony, a young girl may be robbed of
her most precious possession, dearer to
her than any material wealth, or even
than life itself, and our law tacitly
connives at it. The girl consented to her
moral ruin, and so there is nothing more
to he done.
This law, or rather want of law, is
altogether in the interests of immoral
men. Here, adequate protection is not
given, because if it were, men would
have to desist from debauching young-
girls, or run the risk of severe penalties.


The only argument ever brought for-
ward by those opposed to giving girls
adequate protection, is that if this were
done, false charges would constantly be
brought against men for the purpose of
blackmailing. Now, we may admit
that this argument has a certain rele-
vancy, but very much less than those
who use it, claim for it. It is true
that some additional cases of false
charges might arise, but in all proba-
bility they would be very few. And for
this reason, that in, the majority of
these cases of attempted blackmailing,
the charges are brought either by very
young children, at the instigation of
older people, or by adult women who
have the knowledge and cunning neces-
sary for the planning out of such a
charge. The period from 14 to 18
during which it is suggested to give the
protection already accorded to those
below 14, is one where there is the
least likelihood of false charges being
brought.
But the most important counter-
argument is this. Any girl or any
woman can bring a charge of indecent
assault against a man, and the same
evidence as is required in a case of
seduction, would be needed here. Thus
any man in this colony, whatever his
position, is liable to the danger of false


accusation, and the age of the woman
bringing the charge, makes no difference.
Especially are medical men exposed to
this danger, and yet they have never
clamoured for additional protection from
the law, but have so regulated their
actions as to minimise the possibility of
such false charges.
It can thus be seen that if a girl
wishes to attempt blackmailing, by far
the easiest course open to her is to bring
a charge of indecent assault, and this is
really more difficult of disproof than a
charge of seduction. When this can be
so readily done, the theory of a greatly
increased number of false charges from
raising the age of consent, can practically
be ignored.
Again, it is urged that girls will tempt
young men and then extort money from
them. But all who have given attention
to the subject agree that it is almost an
unheard of thing for a previously chaste
girl to invite a man to immorality. If
a girl does this, it points to the fact
that she has already been seduced, and
the change in the law is asked for that
this very thing may be prevented. If
men are kept from violating young
girls, there will be no unchaste girls to
tempt men in their turn.
It may be that in a few cases, injustice
may be done and men wrongly punished,


but this may be urged against every
law. And can this possibility outweigh
the hundreds of cases of girls who, every
year in this colony, meet with physical
and moral disaster, which a juster state
of law might have prevented ? Have
we no pity for these children, who on
the threshold of what- might have been
a bright and prosperous life, meet with
woeful shipwreck, and instead of becom-
ing the happy wives and mothers of the
future, join the unspeakably sad ranks
of the prostitute ?
Men who have any chivalrous feeling
in their nature will gladly accept what-
ever increased risk there may be, in
order that this further protection, till an
age when knowledge and prudence are
greater, may be given, and immoral
men will have to learn that, if they do
not wish to incur this danger, they must
not place themselves in positions in
which they will be liable to false
charges.
What then must be done ? It must
first be recognised that unless the public
voice unmistakably demands this reform
those who can give effect to it will not
move in the matter. This was shown
in England, where for some years the
proposal to raise the age of consent was
contemptuously rejected by the House
of Commons, until Mr. Stead’s memor-


able articles in the Pall Mall Gazette
raised public feeling to white heat, and
the desired legislation was rushed
through with almost no opposition in a
few days. In the United States, too,
during the last eighteen months a well-
organised agitation, in which the
Women’s Christian Temperance Union
has taken a leading part, has succeeded
in obtaining the age of eighteen in eight
States, and the agitation is still being
continued to raise it to this in other
States where the age is lower.
The W.T.C.U. of New South Wales
has determined to follow the example of
the American unions, and undertake
this momentous work on behalf of its
sex. If it can succeed in enlisting the
sympathy and co- operation of the
Churches and philanthropic societies,
and all work together cordially for this
great object, public opinion will soon be
roused, and from one end of the colony
to the other will come the demand that
this scandalous state of affairs be
instantly remedied. If this be so, the
government will hasten to carry out the
wishes of the people, and we will take
rank with those who cherish and defend
at all costs the honour of their daughters.
All can help in this work. There are
petitions to be signed, public meetings
organised, members of Parliament to be


0/4 t f
&i &L i o 12
f U' u O
interviewed, and many other means by
which success may be ensured.
It is to be hoped that none will hold
back from assisting on account of
prudery, or false delicacy. The purest
can and should aid in this crusade, and
if they decline to do so from any selfish
motive, and this reform is not carried, the
blood of those who perished because this
has not been done will be upon their heads.
But we believe better things of the men
and women of New South Wales, and are
convinced that, with the help of God,
1896 will not pass till this most needed
of all laws has been placed on our
Statute Book.
After reading, kindly give this to . a
friend, and sign, if possible, a petition
in favour of this object.
“ Christian World ” Press, 301 Pitt-st., Sydney.
