

THE
CHAMPION OF THE SEAS
TIMES
Published weekly on hoard the clipper ship
CHAMPION OF THE SEAS
Of the Australian “Black Ball” line
During a passage from Liverpool, England, to Melbourne, Australia,
with 474 emigrants, in the year 1855


Clipper ship, CHAMPION OF THE SEAS, John McKirdy, Commander. From an old print showing her in the
harbor of Portsmouth, England in August 1857 on the occasion of the visit of Queen Victoria for the purpose of inspect-
ing the ship. By courtesy of Richard McKay.


THE
CHAMPION OF THE SEAS
TIMES
Published weekly on board the clipper ship
CHAMPION OF THE SEAS
Of the Australian “Black Ball” line
During a passage from Liverpool, England, to Melbourne, Australia,
with 474 emigrants, in the year 1855
Reproduced in facsimile by
THE MARINE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION
INCORPORATED
Published Mystic, Connecticut October, 1952
PRICE $3.00


Foreword
reprint of the file of ship’s newspapers some months ago
f under the title “THE WHITE STAR JOURNAL” was so fav-
I , orably received and, life Oliver Twist’s thin porridge, was fol-
lowed by so many demands for “More”, that it has been decided
to issue another publication of similar character. For this purpose a news-
paper published on board one of the largest and finest American-built clippers
has been selected. Aside from the element of human interest which attaches
to the product of British editorial genius, no mean thing in itself, there is
another reason for the choice. It is to rescue from comparative obscurity a
ship which well deserves the same encomium which Captain Clarf pronounced
on the JAMES BAINES “One of the grandest ships that ever sailed the sea”.
In 1853 James Baines, principal owner and manager of the Australian
“Blacf Ball” line, gave Donald McKay an order for four ships. It was not
only the largest order for sailing craft that had ever been received by an
American builder, but it called for ships exceeding in size and speed those
of any other line then in existence. The result was, perhaps, the noblest and
certainly the most famous quartet of clippers that ever sailed under one
house flag.
The first to be launched, the LIGHTNING, measured 2080, registered
tonnage. All the others were considerably larger. In order of construction,
the CHAMPION OF THE SEAS, rated 2447 tons, the JAMES BAINES,
2515 tons, and the DONALD McKAY, 2598 tons; the latter being the largest
sailing ship of her day, aside from the GREAT REPUBLIC. All, with the
possible exception of the DONALD McKAY, were extreme clippers. All
have records of noon to noon (less than 23y 2 hours) runs of 400 nautical
miles and upwards. Moreover, they jointly accounted for, roughly, fifty
percent of the all-time total of such runs which have come to light up to
the present time.
Of the four ships, the CHAMPION OF THE SEAS, oddly enough,
seems to have attracted less contemporary attention than any of her “sister
ships”. Even today, she is little more than a name to many readers of mari


time history. Yet in one respect, at least, she seems to be entitled to first
place among all the clipper ships that were ever built. She arrived at Mel-
bourne on her first voyage from Liverpool on the 26 of December, 1854, her
passage under sail being 71 days, or 73 days, total elapsed time from port
to port, a fine achievement hut by no means a record, even then.
The next day, however, the Melbourne “Empire ' printed an extract
from her log for the 12th day of December, showing that on that day she
ran the unprecedented, and still unequalled, distance of 465 nautical miles.
Since, during this run to the eastward the ship covered 10 degrees, 44 minutes
of longitude, it was made in a trifle under 23 hours and 20 minutes. The
average speed, therefore, was almost exactly 20 \nots, from which we may
draw the reasonable inference that the ship exceeded that rate by a substan-
tial margin at times.
Captain Newlands, then in command, was a man of unblemished repu-
tation as a seaman and a man of the highest principles. Since he furnished
complete navigational data from his log in support of the run and afforded
every opportunity for competent navigators to inspect the log itself, it must
be conceded that the evidence rests on as sound a basis as that for any of
the great runs of the period.
Nevertheless, the record was forgotten and subsequently overlooked by
all the later maritime writers, including Captain Clark, who regarded, or at
least seemed to regard the JAMES BAINES as the fastest ship that ever
sailed the seas. Instances of this sort were by no means unprecedented. Sev-
eral remarkable early runs were “lost” for many years, among them the all-
time China record of the SEA WITCH of less than 75 days from Canton
to New York, which was widely acclaimed in 1849 and then forgotten for
more than eighty years. In the present case, it was not until a few years
ago, when an old copy of the CHAMPION OF THE SEA TIMES published
on board the ship on December 12th, 1854, turned up, that her record was
rediscovered.
The CHAMPION OF THE SEAS, in fact, was almost a duplicate of
the JAMES BAINES, and on occasion, when they sailed in company, proved
herself the equal, if not the superior in speed. For instance, they left
Portsmouth together the 7th of August, 1857, with troops for India. They
arrived out on the same day and almost side by side, according to some
accounts. According to others, the CHAMPION beat the BAINES two
days on the passage. Since, in the absence of the logs, the accounts are based


on newspaper reports, I have been unable to determine the precise facts
with any degree of assurance, but it is obvious that under virtually identical
conditions the ships were closely matched.
Such was the ship and such her quality on which the newspapers
herein reprinted were published during her second voyage from Liverpool
to Melbourne. John McKirdy had replaced Captain Newlands in command
and her port to port passage was ten days longer than on her first voyage.
It is evident, however, that this was not the fault of the ship or her com-
mander. With a relatively small passenger list, her lower ’tween dec\s
was available for freight. She not only carried 2,000 tons more cargo than
on her first voyage and was four feet deeper in the water, but she encount-
ered lighter weather throughout. Her log shows that her topsails were
reefed only twice and then with single reefs. Consequently, she neither
equalled any old records or established new ones. Her run of twenty days
from the longitude of the Cape of Good Hope to Melbourne, however, was
only one day over the record and has been equalled by but very few ships.
Although she bro\e no records for passages from port to port, the
CHAMPION established an enviable reputation for consistently fast pas-
sages. That she was well and faithfully built is evidenced by the fact that
she survived twenty-three years of hard driving a long life for a heavily
sparred extreme clipper. It has been erroneously reported that she found-
ered off Cape Horn in 1877. The fact is that she was abandoned in sinking
condition in the North Atlantic on the 3rd day of January, 1877, latitude
33°40' North, longitude 3°lo ' West. She was still under the British flag
and then bound from Pabillon de Pica to Cor\, in command of Captain
Wilson.
CARL C. CUTLER
15 August, 1952


THE CHAMPION OF THE SEAS
TIMES.
“ Men of thought and men of action—Clear the way." 1
PUBLISHED ON BOARD “ THE CHAMPION OF THE SEAS.”
TO OUR READERS.
Cjjantjpn of % Chnw.
No. L] MONDAY, JULY 16, 1855.
It has been often said, that “ this is the age of newspapers ;”
and when we consider the astonishing way in which they
have of late been multiplied, and their extraordinary influ-
ence in creating and fostering the growth of public opinion,
every unprejudiced observer must acknowledge that the press
is one of the most remarkable characteristics of the times in
which we live. We have now become so accustomed to the
sight of a “ Times ” or a “ Chronicle,” that the breakfast-
table seems incomplete without some such adjunct. The
passengers on board the Champion of the Seas are not stran-
gers to this feeling, and they have thought that the absence
of some stated publication (without of course the ambitious
aim and comprehensive range of our home papers), was a
blank that should be filled up. To meet this wish and at-
tempt some memorial of a voyage, which has hitherto been
so prosperous, we now launch the “ Champion of the Seas
Times.” In commencing this series, we beg distinctly to
state, that we have no literary vanity to gratify—no hobby to
mount; but our simple object is to interest and amuse our
fellow passengers. We propose, in accordance with our title,
to give a record of the times on board our good ship—the
times of embarkation, of parting from home and country,
when memory and hope seem to mingle in the present,—
the times when the last outline of the land fades from our
view, and when fresh associations spring up in the new world
around us, —the times when our noble ship, like a bird on full
wing, flies through the waters, and the intervals when she is
becalmed, —the times of sea sickness, when rueful visages are
u sickbed o’er with the pale cast of too painful thought,” and
the pleasant times when we recover our sea legs, and with
steadier gait pace the deck, or in friendly groups chat or sing
or smoke, just as the varying spirit of the hour prompts us,
—and thus we hope to bring our little publication down to
the times of landing with all their joyous bustle and excite-
ment, when we shall exchange our comparatively inactive,
though agreeable, times on board for the scenes of more la-
borious duty which await us on shore.
Whilst we deprecate unfair criticism, which might expect
from us more than is reasonable, we shall gladly avail our-
selves of the hints and contributions of those who are ani-
mated by a similar desire to promote our common enjoyment.
Our sources of news are of course but “ few and far be-
tween ;” but if in the treatment of the few that arise our
readers will be gratified, we shall feel amply repaid. But if,
on the contrary, our effort does not meet with their sympa-
thy, the sooner our periodical closes the better; At the same
time we have no disposition to indulge in fears as to the suc-
cess of our humble efforts. We have no sympathy for those
who would dwell too much on difficulties and hindrances, we
would rather first ascertain if our motives are right, —if they
are, let us then do our duty like men, and persevering in that
course we may, without being too sanguine, ever hopefully
look forward to
“ The good times coming.”
T. McC.
CAPTAIN'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
July 1 Qth, 1855,
Dear, Sik,
Subjoined is a tabular statement of our progress since
leaving Liverpool, together with barometrical and other ob-
servations which will doubtless prove interesting to many of
the passengers. It may be as well to fill it up-each week,
so that at the termination of the voyage it will form a con-
tinuous abstract, lam sorry our progress hitherto has not
been so rapid as could be desired, but we are highly favoured
in having such beautiful weather, which so much tends to
heighten the enjoyment of our journey.
The island of Madeira has been full in view since daylight
this morning, and I hope, in a day or two, to have the north
east trade winds, which at this season ought to be pretty
fresh to carry us at least to 10° north latitude.
I am glad to find the medical report is so favourable.
Trusting it may continue so, and that nothing may occur to
interrupt the harmony which I am pleased to observe pre-
vails amongst all on board,
I am, Dbab Sib,
Yours, faithfully,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander,
CAUTION TO PASSENGERS.
On Saturday evening an accident occurred which, though
it fortunately did not prove serious, may act as a warning to
others. A German passenger, standing under the rigging of
mainmast, was struck on the forehead by a rope dropped
from abaft. Not understanding English will account for his
not observing the order—“ Stand from under.” Parents
should have a watchful eye over their children.


DOCTOR'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
July 14 th, 1855.
Dear Sir,
Ten days having elapsed since leaving Liverpool, I have good
data, from which to form an opinion with regard to the sanatory
condition of passengers and crew, than which nothing could be
more satisfactory. The unfortunate sufferers from sea sickness
have, with one or two exceptions, recovered. The continuance
of health amongst those on board, depends of course more on the
passengers than they imagine. I would recommend them to take
advantage of every opportunity of being on deck; air and
exercise being unavoidably so limited on board ship. A strict
attention to cleanliness , is a duty also they owe not only to them-
selves but to their neighbours. The birth of a young
“ Champion” during the past week, will be hailed doubtless by
most parties, as anything but a bad omen at the outset of a
voyage.
I cannot conclude without expressing my gratification at the
sympathy and co-operation of our worthy Captain, whose anxiety
for the health and comfort of those around him, I have had
frequent opportunities of observing.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
G. J. WOOD, M.D.
EDUCATION.
We are happy to learn that daily classes for the instruction of
the young on board, will be held D.V. on each week day, at
eleven o’clock in the forenoon, and two o’clock in the afternoon.
The instruction in the elementary branches of useful knowledge
will be given by'Rev. Mr. Downes, and others who are fellow
helpers in this good work. Let none neglect so favourable an
opportunity.
We also hail the establishment of a Sabbath school, which has
been most successful. Hours on Lord’s day: nine to ten o’clock
a.m., and five to six o’clock p.m.
LEAVES FROM “OUR LOG.”
No. I.
On Thursday, the sth of July, 1855, the Champion of the Seas
weighed anchor in the Mersey, and having received her last
quota of passengers and mails, at one o’clock, the signal gun
announced her second departure for the Antipodes, amidst the
waving adieux of passengers and friends, and many a heart-felt
prayer that she might have a speedy and prosperous voyage.
Two steam tenders accompanied the good ship out to sea. In
one was Mr. Greeves, the agent to Messrs. J. Baines and Co.,
the spirited proprietors of the unequalled Black Ball Fleet. The
Rev. J. Buck, who has been most assiduous in visiting the various
emigrant vessels that leave the port, was also on board and
delivered an earnest address to passengers and crew. About
seven o’clock, when we had passed the N. W. Light, 15 or
20 miles from port, these gentlemen returned with one of the
tenders ; not separating however till three hearty farewell cheers
were given on both sides. The Tartar river steamer still
remained, to bring us well out of the Channel. No incident
worthy of note occurred on the following day. The weather was
propitious, and even the most uninitiated could scarcely perceive
any motion in the vessel, as she calmly glided along. Towards
evening we sighted the coast of Ireland, and soon the Tuscar
lighthouse appeared in view. On the following morning the
bold headlands of Erin were still visible, Ballycotton Lighthouse,
Queenstown, and other localities, were passed in succession. We
now encountered what in nautical parlance are termed the
“chops’’ of the Channel. These aforesaid chops were not found
so agreeable in digestion, as the excellent fare which is daily
purveyed for our use, if the wry looks and reserved air of some
of the passengers may be taken as an indication. We shall not
attempt to follow the sufferers into their own cabins, but it needs
no great stretch of imagination to fancy how reluctantly they felt
constrained to sympathise with each “heave” of the vessel, as it
rocked to and fro. However, we have no disposition to enlarge
upon this, the least agreeable feature in a voyage ; and from which
few travellers can expect complete exemption, but we shall hope
ere long to be able to report that our friends of “the rueful
countenance ” will regain their equanimity, and all again go on
“ Merrily, as a marriage bell.”
This afternoon, our little friend, the Tartar parted company
with us ; and the passengers generally availed themselves of the
opportunity afforded them, of sending by her the latest intelligence
to absent friends. The Tartar seemed like the last chain that
bound us to the old country, and when this final link was snapped
asunder, then indeed was fully realised by many an ardent and
ingenuous heart, the bitterness of separating from
“ My own, my native land,”
and all the blest associations, which made us leave it with
feelings, akin to those which children experience when parting
from a kind and time honoured parent. The next day was our
first Sabbath on sea. The morning was so much overclouded,
that we feared it would be impracticable to hold service on deck,
at the usual hour half-past ten. However a few minutes before
that time, the rain ceased, and the sun shone out cheerily, so that
this obstacle being unexpectedly removed, preparations were at
once made. A large sea chest, covered with a banner, served for
a reading desk; the benches and a recumbent mast for pews, and
the blue canopy of heaven for a sounding board. The Rev. Mr.
Downes, a minister of the Scotch church, commenced the service
by giving out the 100th psalm, which was heartily sung by those
present. He then engaged in prayer, and the congregation hav
ing again joined in praise, the preacher delivered an expository
address on the 20th chapter of St. John’s gospel, which was
listened to, with marked attention by about 160 hearers. In the
evening, a second service was held on the quarter deck, when the
Rev. gentleman again officiated, taking for his text the magnani-
mous declaration of St. Paul, as found in 2nd Timothy 4th chap.
6to 8 verses. Thus terminated our first Sunday on shipboard;
the novelty of our situation, the attention of his auditors, and
the simple earnestness of the preacher, giving a peculiar impres-
siveness to the occasion. In the past week we have become
more familiar with our new position, the angles of our square
propriety and reserve, are gradually wearing off, and with reading
or song, —smoking above, or chess playing below, —friendly walks
and convivial meals where none are unsocial, our days seem
insensibly to glide away, and we would fain hope that in the
remaining term of our association, nothing may occur to damp
the progress of a journey so auspiciously begun. In the interval
that has elapsed, our brave ship has steadily maintained her
course ; the winds, though light, have not been unfavourable, and
already has she given ample evidence of her admirable sailing
qualities. On Tuesday, the breeze was a little fresher, and she
sometimes accomplished with ease 14 knots an hour. Of our
daily progress, we are enabled to give a clear abstract in another
column, through the courtesy of the Captain, and his very
efficient first officer, Mr. O’Donnell. Indeed, here in passing, we
cannot but congratulate ourselves on having over our ship a
Captain, who to his acknowledged nautical skill, and great
experience, has superadded an affability, to which those who meet
him in the saloon or on the deck, can bear unhesitating testimony.
The other officers seem animated by the same spirit, and show
how possible it is to combine talent with urbanity; and indeed
the crew are no exception to the remark. It may be said that
we are premature at this early stage of our voyage, to give an
opinion on this point, but we have no apprehension that at its
close, we shall see* any thing to qualify but rather to confirm it.
T. McC.
ORIGINAL VARIETIES.
SAILING ON FRIDAY.
The superstitions by which our forefathers were influenced
are rapidly disappearing before the progress of enlightenment,
consequent on extended education; and the attributing to


fmysterious and supernatural agencies, the effects of simply
natural causes, is daily becoming more and more confined to
those who have never participated in the advantages of edu-
cation. It is, however, in many cases a matter of extreme
difficulty to entirely eradicate the superstitious tendencies
imbibed in early life ; and it frequently requires an effort of
reason to overcome the belief in certain prognostications of
good or evil, which were religiously observed by the nurses
of our infancy.
Independent of the superstition existing in connexion with
the life of a “ landsman,” there are others peculiar to the
“ rovers of the deepnot the least curious of which was
the firm belief in the dangers incurred by commencing a
voyage on Friday.
During my residence in Melbourne, the following circum-
stance, in connexion with this superstition, came tinder my
notice:—
The Madagascar, Captain W. F. Harris, arrived in Port
Phillip in July, 1853. During her stay at port I had an
opportunity of forming the acquaintance of Captain Harris ;
and on the evening previous to the day appointed for her
sailing to London, I walked with him from Melbourne to
Sandridge.
The conversation happened to turn upon the question of
the fatality said to be attendant on ships proceeding to sea
on Friday. The day appointed for the Madagascar to sail
was Thursday. I asked him if he would have any objection
to make the commencement of his voyage on Friday ?He
replied —“Yes; when testing the matter by reason I feel
quite satisfied of the absurdity of yielding so much to super-
stition ; but still the idea is so firmly engrafted on my mind
I would not willingly sail on Friday.” I left him expecting
the Madagascar would sail next day, but an unforeseen cir-
cumstance prevented her.
As the crew were about to weigh anchor on Thursday
morning the police officers came on board, and instituted a
search for the parties who had some time previously been
concerned in the robbery of the Gold Escort Company,
which resulted in the arrest of some of the passengers, and
a seizure of a considerable quantity of gold found in their
possession. The ship was accordingly detained, the captain
had to go ashore, and it was found impossible for the Mada-
gascar to proceed to sea on that day.
In the evening I met the captain again in Melbourne, and
he asked me to go on board with him, and come ashore the
following morning. I complied, and sat with him in his cab-
in on Thursday night. After some general conversation, he
recurred to the subject of our remarks on the previous even-
ing, and said—“ls it not strange that circumstances, over
which I had no control, should lead to the Madagascar sail-
ing on Friday ?” I answered immediately,—“ Why do you
not wait till Saturday, if ypu feel any unpleasantness on the
subject ?” He replied—“ I would never have appointed Fri-
day, but as an accidental circumstance has so arranged it, I
will not detain the ship another day.”
Next morning as I went over the side of the ship, he said
—“ Well, we shall have an opportunity of testing the super-
stition, and if I arrive safely with my ship, I shall probably
become a sceptic as to all nautical superstitions.”
I was the last who left the ship, and the last that ever be-
held captain, passengers, or crew, in this life. The Mada-
gascar, as all will recollect, was never subsequently heard of,
and is supposed to have been lost among the icebergs in the
southern latitudes ; but few are perhaps aware that she sailed
on a Friday, thus by a strange coincidence, furnishing an
additional fact in favour of those who give credence to this
superstition.
C. G.
FACETIÆ.
The Editor, whilst regretting the loss which our facetious London
contemporary has sustained in the removal of some of his most witty
redacteurs, feels bound to congratulate the readers of the Timet, on the
accession to his staff of a gentleman whose pun—gent ridicule, would of
itself, have established the fame of that journal.
The voyage of the good ship Champion of the Seas, has up to this
date, been of the most agreeable nature. No ship has been allowed to
pass us, and none to accompany us but the good fellow-jAip which has
never left us.
Every account from our own Correspondent, with regard to the
supply of provisions, assures us that nothing is looking down except
cabbages, but a very zealous and sanguine passenger has suggested
speculative ideas with regard to that article, that may cause a great glut
in the market, on the ship’s return to England, viz., of planting the
roots of the said cabbages at various distances in the sea, in the hope of
a large crop; but it should be observed, that this gentleman has a great
leaning towards the verdant green.
Those who are disposed to go with the Times are cultivating beards,
and although some are down about their chins, we recommend them to
persevere.
Several gentlemen having expressed a wish to find a ship bound for
the German baths : should one be found, it is proposed that the band
which comes from Sad-en should accompany them.
Oats are up—early in the morning, for the breakfasts of the hens
that are to supply our dinners, and this is the way they pay their way.
There are little jealousies sometimes during their meal hours, and often
some fowl-play, but no foul words.
BIRTHS.
On Friday morning, the 13th instant, the wife of Mr. Conolly, of a
son. Mother and child are doing well.
MARRIAGES.
We have none to report this week, but shall faithfully chronicle any
which shall hereafter be celebrated above- board.
* # * All communications to he addressed to the Editor, and posted
not later than Thursday evening in each wee Tc.
Champion of the Seas Times.
No. ll.] MONDAY, JULY 23, 1855.
On presenting a second number to our readers, we feel some-
what like a young lady who has just made her dehut —not
quite recovered from our maiden blushes; but still the heart
beats less nervously, and a degree of confidence has come to
our aid, which we have no doubt will increase as we, and our
public become better acquainted. Indeed, we have every
reason to be grateful, for the manner in which our humble
efforts to beguile the listless hours of shipboard have been
appreciated. This we attribute very much to the disposition
“to please,” and “be pleased,” which we are glad to
observe, prevails on all sides. We are sure it is almost
superfluous to urge upon our readers the continued practice
of this duty. Nothing can be more obvious, that of all
places in the world, where “ selfishness ” should find no place,
shipboard is that spot. On shore, the monster is hideous
enough, but he has wider range and more numerous nooks to
secrete himself from observation. But on sea it is otherwise.
Whilst we have the population of a village, we are brought
together as closely as if we dwelt under one roof. It
becomes our interest, therefore, as well as a duty, “to live
for the happiness of each other.” Let no one say that he is
but a unit, who could not affect the mass. The happiness of
our little commonwealth depends as much on individual, as
on collective effort. The humblest of us all has his concentric


circle of influence, and if each of these circles radiate kind-
ness and good humour, it is amazing how soon the entire
mass becomes permeated with the same feeling.
We are now in the Tropics, a new region to many of us.
We shall probably have no reason to complain that the
elements are not warm enough. But there is a warmth
which is not peculiar to any place, which belongs exclusively
to no latitude,—a warmth which emanates from kindly
hearts, and this, we trust will never desert us till we cast
anchor in Hobson’s Bay, and even then may it still be our
companion, to journey with us in all our wanderings.
T. McC.
CAPTAIN'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Monday , July 23rd, 1855.
Deae Sie,
Since ray last report, our progress has not been so rapid
as I could wish, but the extremely beautiful weather with
which we have been favoured, atones in some degree for our
loss of time. During the early part of the week, we passed
Palma, and Ferro, two of the Canary Isles, belonging to
Spain, and producing wine in abundance. We are now
opposite the Cape de Verde group, consisting of ten principal,
and some smaller islands. They extend from 14® to 17®
north latitude, and from 22° 30" to 25 Q 30' west longitude.
They are mostly high, some of them having sheltered bays
and tolerable anchorage. At St. Vincent, there is a coal
depot, for the Cape and Australian steamers. These islands
have not much trade, in consequence of their prevailing
barrenness. We now enjoy a good breeze, which I hope
may last a few days, and make amends for lost time. I
would wish to convey a notice to the passengers through the
medium of your columns, namely, to caution them against
giving spirits to the crew of the ship. lam sorry to say
something of this kind occurred last night, which exposes
the men to punishment, and militates against the good order
and discipline of the vessel. This hint will, I trust, be
sufficient, as the safety of ship and passengers are involved
in this matter. lam happy to notice the tolerably healthy
state of the passengers. The hot weather, no doubt, may
cause a few complaints, which have been unimportant
hitherto. The continued good will, which still prevails
amongst us, is a source also of much pleasure. Trusting it
may remain with us-to the end.
lam, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
DOCTOR'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
July 23rd, 1855.
Dear Sie,
The past week presents nothing worthy of notice, with
the exception of a mild case of scarletina, and I hope by
isolating the patient, to prevent a recurrence of this. The
warmth of tlie latitude we are now in, demands increased
caution on the part of the passengers, and immediate
application in case of indisposition. Should any cause for
complaint arise, the parties will please address themselves by
letter to Captain McKirdy.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
G. J. WOOD, M.D.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
On Sunday, the 15th instant, the Rev. J. Downes con-
ducted three public services, at which the audiences were
large and respectable. A morning and afternoon Sabbath
School was instituted under favourable auspices, which we
trust to see still better attended. On yesterday Rev. J.
Downes again held three services. His discourse in the
morning, on the quarter deck, was an exposition of the
employments of heaven, Rev. vii. 9—12. At three o’clock,
Divine service was celebrated on the forecastle, for the special
benefit of the seamen and others to whom it was more
convenient. The subject which the preacher expounded was
the mission of the Saviour, see John x. 10. In the evening,
at five o’clock, the Rev. gentleman resumed on the quarter-
deck the subject of the morning. We congratulate our-
selves on having obtained so efficient a choir, led by Mr.
Young. Mr. Downes, at the request of several, announced
a religious service for Thursday, at a quarter to five, p.m.
J. D.
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT ON THE
MIZEN TOP.
Trade is rather dull in town this week, arising principally
from the fact of nobody having any thing to dispose of, and
the remainder having no money to purchase it. The latest
intelligence from the seat of War is, that a blow has been
struck by a brave man in the second cabin, the assailed party
being his wife, the mother of his child—the weaker vessel —
the woman he has promised to love and cherish, as long as
both shall live. We hope to be able to report by next week
that he has received a fitting reward for this manly and
courageous action, namety, a jolly good ducking. The
amusements of last week w T ere decidedly below par. The
band piped unto us, and but few danced. Nobody sung,
and the rest did not join in the chorus. Leeside Street
seems to be the only place of amusement, and even it “fast”
young men would call “ slow.” If we might judge from a
small singing party held in the after-saloon ten or twelve
evenings since, we would say that there is sufficient vocal
and instrumental talent among the ladies and gentlemen of
the First Cabin, if it were exercised, to make a few evenings
of our time on board pass away agreeably and profitably to
all. Then, why, in the name of wonder, do we not have a
concert F Why are the brilliant examples of other vessels
not followed by us ? The way to get up a concert will pre-
sent no difficulty, and we hope the will of any of us may
not stand in the way of rational and harmless amusement.
We know a few gentlemen who would give a trifle to be al-
lowed to sing.
F. McC.
LEAVES FROM OUR LOG.
No. 11.
In the last leaf of our Log we jotted down some particulars
of the first week of our voyage. In the succeeding interval we
have got still more familiarised with our new life, and even the
most homesick amongst us are now becoming reconciled to their


inevitable position. It is extraordinary, after all, what a faculty
we bipeds possess of accommodating ourselves to circumstances.
You may, for instance, see here the busy man of the world (with
whom activity seems almost constitutional, and whom one might
naturally suppose would feel the inaction of shipboard to be most
irksome) good-humoredly submitting to his lot, and from his
cheerful physiognomy, a stranger might now infer that he was as
happy as if “ on ’Change ’’ amidst the exciting whirl of business.
The delightful weather we have been favoured with has no doubt
conduced to this happy result. On Wednesday, the 11th alt. the
first organised attempt at a musical re-union was tried in the after-
saloon, with a success that leads us to hope the experiment will
often be repeated. On the following evening some of the lovers
of Terpsichore tripped along the deck with
“ The light fantastic toe,”
whilst our German band co-operated. One of the gentlemen ex-
cited some merriment by using the boatswain’s whistle, to signal
the band at the expiration of each quadrille. For these agreeable
interludes we are greatly indebted to the fair sex, who, by their
wonted cordiality, have done much to give our meetings
that social homelike character, which, deprived of their sweet
presence, no other resource or ingenuity could so well supply.
On Sunday the 15th ult., the Rev. Mr Downes conducted three
religious services, the particulars of which will be found in
another column. A Sabbath school was also inaugurated, at
which the attendance was encouraging. In the afternoon we
passed a large vessel in full sail, which evidently could not com-
pete, in sailing qualities, with our good ship. On signalling
she was ascertained to be the Columbine, from Hull, bound for
Calcutta, and eighteen days out (nearly a week longer than we
were). Having replied to her questions, she courteously wished
us a speedy voyage, and soon we left her far behind. This was
the anniversary of St. Swithin of rainy memory; but as there
was not
“ A drop of rain
The whole of the live-long day,”
in honour of his moist saintship, we may look forward (if the old
proverb is to be credited) to continued dry weather for at least
forty days. On Monday last, the first number of our “ Champion
Times” made its appearance. It was out by lunch-time when the Cap-
tain in order to give greater eclat to its natal day, called down our
“ middy,” Sheridan Knowles Marshall, to read it aloud to the
first cabin passengers. He came post haste from the rigging, and
was of course “ a little blown,” but a humorous friend and well-
wisher of our journal kindly relieved him of the office, and though
a sly twinkle would ever and anon overspread his features, he
read on with becoming dignity to its close. To-day we sighted
Madeira, and certainly if the report of its delicious climate needed
confirmation, the balmy breezes that were wafted across, bore
the same story. On Wednesday we were in the vicinity of the
Canary Isles, and during the day our ship was abreast of the
island of Palma. Its appearance, in the morning, could not fail
to impress the beholder. Its base was nearly hidden from view
by a mass of beautifully tinted clouds, whilst above them towered
majestically the blue peak, like a monarch surmounting a glorious
throne. The following day another of the group, “ Hero ” or
“ Ferro,’’ was in view. We had gone too far to the westward to
get a glimpse of the lofty Teneriffe, In the morning two steam-
ers, the one a Swedish, and the other an English, boat, passed on
ahead of us. On Friday, however, we overtook the latter, which
proved to be a Glasgow vessel, bound for Calcutta, and out eleven
days. Her name was the Lightning , she was proceeding to coal at
St. Vincent.
On Sunday (yesterday) the Rev. J. Downes again officiated in
three services to large and attentive auditories.
We have been cheered by the N.E. Trade winds, that have ac-
companied us since Saturday, which have enabled us to report
improved progress. Up to yesterday we have logged from Liver-
pool 2,381 miles; we need only sum up our wishes in one line, —
“ Blow, breezes, blow !”
T. McC.
ANAGRAMS.
Answer to last week’s anagram.—Nine thumps.
Form an anagram out of the name “ Horatio Nelson;’’ which,
exhausting all the letters, will make a Latin quotation, compli-
mentary to the hero.
THE NEW VICTORIAN CONSTITUTION.
The importance of the New Constitution for the Colony of
Victoria can scarcely be over estimated ; the present one has al-
ready created deplorable results. God has given us a splendid
country, but man has done more to render it uninhabitable, than
to adapt it to his wants. The revenue has been raised to upwards
of £3 000,000, which is five times the rate of British taxation,
and yet the expenditure has exceeded that large sum by nearly
£1,000,000. The country uncultivated, paying more than
£2,000,000 annually to America and other countries for flour and
provisions ; and yet some of our best agricultural colonists leave
for America with their gold, because land cannot be had in the
colony at a reasonable rate. Roads remain unmade,—bridges
unbuilt,—and, to crown all, the diggers have risen in in insurrec-
tion, and many lives have been lost. Surely any project to
change so gloomy a picture, with a rational hope of improvement,
must be of interest to those who have selected the colony as their
future home. We therefore present our readers with a brief out-
line of the New Constitution, which gives nearly every man a
voice in the management of public affairs; it will be the fault of
the colonists themselves if they do not now see matters better
attended to. The Bill, as sent home by the Colonial Legislature,
has been somewhat modified by the Colonial Secretary, and the
following may be taken as its leading features :
Two Houses to be established, —
Ist—The Legislative Council, or Upper House.
2nd—The Legislative Assembly, or Lower House.
'The first, or Upper House, is to consist of thirty members.
Each member must be thirty years of age, and must hold pro-
perty of the value of £5,000, or of the annual value of £5OO.
Every elector for the Upper House must be twenty-one years of
age—be resident one year in the colony previous to registration
—be worth £lOOO in property, or £lOO in annual value, or be a
leaseholder for £lOO per annum for a term of five years. Gradu-
ates of an University in the British dominions are also eligible as
electors,—likewise barristers, or solicitors on the roll of the Su-
preme Court of Victoria,—or legally qualified medical practition-
ers, officiating ministers,—or officers of the sea and land forces,
except on actual service.
Two years after the passing of the act, no person is to be al-
lowed to vote who cannot read or write, A president shall be
elected by the council subject to the approval of the Governor.
Ten members to form a quorum, six to retire annually.
(To be continued.)
R.C.
LARRY MURPHY'S RECOLLECTIONS OF
AUSTRALIA.
“Musha! thin is it myadvintures in Australy youT afthur axin
fur ? faix thin I’m the boy ’ill give you the thrue varshin and nomis-
take. Shure thin, one day, and a mighty sore day it was entire-
ly, Biddy took had wid an alloverness, and lay on the bed all
nocked av a hape. Biddy, says I, what ails you ? says I. I'm
mighty bad, Larry, says she. Will I send for thedocthor, Biddy?
says I. No, you wont, Larry, says she. Shure thim docthors
is bad cattle, and I’ve no faith in thim at all at all. Did’nt Jerry
Doolin die whin he broke his neck ? although the grate docthor,
oTiaherty, all the ways from Dublin was on the race-course, and
thried his best to set it for him.
“Bedad thrue for you, Biddy, says I, for be the same token
there was’nt a w r ord av lie in it. Afthur a while says I to her—
Biddy, says I, what can I do toaiseyou? says I. Give me a
dhrink av tay, says she. So I makes a cup of the rale ould bo-
hay and she takes a dhrink. Biddy, is that doin’ you good ? says
I. The divil a taste, Larry, honey says she. ISothin’ill ever do
me good again, says she, barrin the priest. Och, Wirra, Wirra !
says I, is it goin’ to lave me you are, Biddy Jewel ? says I. Wid
that the childer set up a pillellew, and there was a sorrowfid
schreech intirely. Larry, says she, be a man, says she, and let
me die in pace and quite. Send for the priest, and let me make
my sowl. Shure if I don’t die this time, it’ll do for the next.
To make a long story short, Biddy’s words come out thrue, and
she got worse and worse cvTy day till 1 lost her intirely.
So we gave her a dacent berriu with plenty av pipes and to-
baccy, and lash ins av whisky, and Father O'Rourke said Masses


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ENCOURAGEMENT TO GOOD BABIES.
REWARD.
A REWARD of Five Shillings will be paid for the Baby who cries
least during the week. Apply to E. C.
WANTED, a Male Teacher, to educate the daily classes of the Boys’
school. A competent remuneration will he given, apply, without
delay, by letter addressed to A.8.C., through the Editor of the Champion
of the Seas Times
Published at the Times Office, on board the Champion of the Seas,
on Monday, July 23rd, 1855.
to help her sowl to glory. Whin the house was clear and no-
hoddy in it, harrin myself and Jimmy and Polly (thim's the chil-
der), I felt mighty lonesome like, and did’nt like the looks av the
place at all at all, and says I to myself, says I, I’ll lave the coun-
try and be off to Amerikay, says I.
Well, shure enough I was walkin’ along the road thinkin’ av
furrin parts beyond the says, whin who did I meet but Peter
Doolin, dhrivin’ as nate a slip av a pig as you’d wish to make
bacon av. The top av the mornin’ to you, Larry avick, says fie.
God save you kindly, Peter, says I. What are you thinkin’ about
this fine mornin’ ? says he. I was thinkin’ av goin’ to say, says
I. To say! says he, what would you do at say ? says he. I’d go
to Amerikay, says I. Amerikay! says he, what ’id bring you to
Amerikay ? shure the sorrow hapurth you’ll get there harrin you
work for it; go to the new counthry, says he, where there’s lash-
ins av goold for the takin’. Shure thin, Peter, its Australy you
mane, says I. You just guessed it, Larry, me boy, says he. But,
Peter, says I, haven’t they to dig for the goold in big holes, and
musn’t it he mighty quare work to turn yourself into a dirty
grubbin’ varmint, away from the blest light av day. Larry, says
he, you’re a gommerale; Australy’s a free counthry, says he, and
the Govermint stands to the people, says he, and shure they pay
the best av wages to a troop av slashin fellows that takes the
goold right into the town av Melbourne, and ladles it out to the
people like Indhy male stirrabout Peter, says I, are you shure
av what you say ? Nabockalish, Larry, says he, did’nt I hear it
from Peggy Murphy’s first cousin, that knows a man, that saw a
woman, that’s cousin to a boy, that saw a letther that come to his
wife’s aunt’s brother in-law all the way from Melbourne. Faix
thin its all thrue, says I. D—l a doubt of it, says he; and wid
that he hit the pig, a skelp av the suggawn, and away he wint
lavin meself standin’ starin’ in the road.
(To be continued.')
C.G.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
THE DAYS OF MY CHILDHOOD.
The days of my childhood how sweet to my mind.
Around my fond heart are their relics entwined;
Those quaint recollections, they flash on my view.
And flow on my memory now as if new.
That mud wall thatched cottage, how plain to my eye.
With its garden, fresh blushing, surrounded close by;
It starts on my vision and lights up a joy,
And tells me of home when I was a boy.
Loud laughing I danced on the small village green.
Oh! how sweet and engaging was every scene.
My heart was too full, oh! then could I sing
With notes that could make the broad welkin to ring.
That paradise sight, is still calling forth joy,
And calls my attention to scenes when a boy;
Not a vestige remains of that little thatched cot,
Yet still I remember my own native spot.
Intermediate Cabin,
THOMAS SHEPHERD.
13th July, 1855.
The following effusion was intercepted in passing through our Post
Office. — E. Ch. S. T.
To Mr. Timothy O’Donohue.
Dear Tim, —I sind you a few varses kimposed be a poet an boord av
our ship, on the removal ave the dancin’ from the weather to the Lee
side. Yours, Patsy Bbanigau.
So Tim we’er to have no more dancin’
Except in a “ masculine ” way,
An’ I’m shure you ne’er seen such divarshin.
As goes on ev’ry night afther Tay.
The weather side, now is for walkin’,
In the mornin’, at noon, and at nite.
The Lee, is for sewin and talkin.
As long as we’ve got any lite.
Good nite!
The captain I’m sure has done right.
There’s no doubt, but the rules and regTashins
Are made for the good av us all;
But, as far as myself is concarned,
I don’t like this new shystim at all.
There’s so many “ classes ” above us.
That its hard to know, what for to do;
But I’m shure it would simplify matthers
To unite number one unto two.
But you
Know this is opposed be a few.
I liked for to see the young ladys
A twistin’ about on the deck,
All talkin’ and smilin’ so sweetly
Ontil we got this severe check.
But now (Tim) you can see be their faces
That our sport we must shurely curtale.
And that all of the plans and regl’ashins
We made, must ondou’tedly fale.
Since we sale
Along with the English male.
But, Tim, boy, there’s one thing quite sartin
We’re all going out for to see.
If by talent —work—luck, or beauty
Our position bethered will be.
And those Ladys or Gefats that cant’ ruff it
Had betther, I’m sure, not go,
For England’s the counthry for high,
Australy’s the place for the low.
Just so;
Which all av us ’ill very soon know.
FACETIÆ.
A gentleman, making an observation that the Champion of the Seas
would have been a good ship to bring a horse in, another informed him
to his surprise, that the ship permitted each passenger to bring his hobby
on board, provided that it was kept pretty much out of sight.
Although the passengers have had the pleasure of sitting so near the
hen coops, taking them as it were under their wings, it will be gratifying
to all on board to hear, that, as yet, there has been no one hen-pecked.
We are compelled to state that the largest early assemblage of
gentlemen on deck, took place on Monday, under the temptation of
indulging freely in Madeira, the effect of which, however, was consider-
ably diminished, by what many considered too great an addition of
water.
The jollity of the good ship Champion continues, but is not expected
to be at its height until we shall be, at least, half seas-over.
. A Mr. Verdant Green, has made a bad spec, by bringing on board a
large number of empty cages, in the expectation of carrying therein to
the Colonies, a supply of birds from the Canary Islands.
Thampion of the Seas Times.
No. lII.] MONDAY, JULY 30, 1855.
Oue fourth week at Sea. If it be true that first impressions
are the most permanent, it may safely be argued that those


who are now making their novitiate voyage, must entertain
a favourable idea of “a life on the ocean wave.” Uninterrupted
fine weather, the good order amongst our body politic, the
steady progress of our good ship —and if last, certainly not
least, the frequent interchange of friendly offices amongst
those who a month ago were perfect strangers to each other,
combine to give to our voyage somewhat of the character of
a pleasure trip. In fact, our community may not be inaptly
compared to an instrument of curious construction, whose
parts may widely differ, but yet in concert happily blend
together, so that no note is out of tune. Old Voyagers say
that they never travelled in a ship where so much propriety
of conduct has marked both passengers and crew, and we
trust that the Champion of the Seas will on all her future
voyages be entitled to add this to her other laurels.
It is true that we are as much excluded from the external
world, as if the walls of a monastery enclosed us. We know
nothing, for instance, of the great “ vexata questio” of the
day, the fate of Sebastopol; whether the daring of a
Pelissier, the military skill of a Simpson, or the masterly
movements of an Omer Pasha, had at length triumphed over
apparently invincible obstacles, and planted the allied flag of
liberty, where so lately the Russian eagle proudly waved.
The letters of our great namesake’s own correspondent, with
all their picturesque force and vivacity, are not before us to
the latest date. Though it is usual for the leading journals
to exchange their papers, yet our readers will pardon us for
not having completed the necessary arrangements, as our
Electric Telegraph is not as yet in working order. The
same reason must account for our omission of Court news,
where the astounding fact, that a royal baby had a carriage
airing in the park, is narrated. Though yielding to none, in
loyalty to the best female sovereign that ever sat on the
British throne, we trust we shall incur no reproach for
omitting such interesting intelligence. Neither have we
devoted any of our columns to accidents and offences, for the
very valid reason (and we trust it will always exist) that we
have none to relate. But though we are not in a position to
gratify public curiosity on these points, let it not be sup-
posed that our life is utterly devoid of topics of interest.
If Sebastopol is not taken, we may at least sing pseans on
the destruction of a shark. If no accessions to the Royal
Family have taken place, yet we can announce the advent of
a young Neptune upon our little stage. And though no fe-
lonies or murders, have been brought under the magistrate’s
notice, we have the authority of a correspondent of un-
doubted veracity for the fact that fowl (foul) play has been
carried on, and that many an unwary goose has sighed its
last cackle. Let none hereafter say that the sea hath not its
moving incidents as well as the land.
T. McC.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Deae Sie,
In reporting progress this week I am rather at a loss, in-
asmuch as we have not had observations for the last three
days to determine our whereabouts, but considering the dis-
trict of the globe we are in at present, we may be thankful
for the winds we have had, and the tolerable progress as
shown by the log.
I imagine now that we are very near the S.E. trade winds,
and I hope in another week to be able to report more favour-
ably. We are now in the region of the equatorial rains and
calms, the atmosphere dense and close, and singularly op-
pressive before the heavy showers.
This cloudling, as it is called, is the great receiver of the
ceaseless volumes of heated air loaded to saturation with
vapour brought from the north and south by the trade
winds, when they become condensed on the lower side of this
cloud stratum, and deluge this part of the sea at this season
of the year with rain. I hope we shall all keep in good
health throughout this gloomy region, and we shall soon feel
our spirits revive on entering the S.E. trade winds. I beg
to apologise for not filling up the abstract of this week, but
our writing table is so wet that is impossible to write it
out; our estimated distance, run for the week to Sunday at
noon, is 750 miles.
Wishing yourself and your numerous readers good health
for this week,
I remain, &c.,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
DOCTOR’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Deae Sir,
Wet weather and heat are certainly not conducive to
health ; but still I may congratulate the passengers on the
very small number added to my list from this cause. I
trust that the worst period of our passage has nearly passed
over, and that an early meeting with the trade winds will
insure a continuance of health amongst us.
Yours faithfully,
G. J. WOOD, M.D.
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT ON
THE MIZEN TOP.
Our news this week is very limited, and if we except the new
pudding “ everything including the shark caught on Monday,” is
stale, flat, and unprofitable. We are happy to think that our re-
marks of last week, in reference to the amusements on board,
have had their effect; and we are delighted to hear from one
or two persons propositions for the bettering of our condition.
Readings from Shakespeare have been proposed and kindly agreed
to by a number of gentlemen, and we are sure the ladies will
give us their aid and countenance (and their ability is unques-
tionable) in this interesting project.
We regret to have to remark that a pig was found lately in the
second cabin, thrown down, we believe, by a person who, as far
as age goes, ought to have known better, than to abuse in this man-
ner an animal, which perhaps deserves the name applied to it less
than its tormentor. Apart from the cruelty altogether of the act,
a frightful accident might have resulted from this outrage; the
pig in its descent fell within a few inches of the wife and child of
the Rev. J. Downes, who were sitting below.
Should this person’s propensity for practical joking overcome
his fears while on board, we would suggest that he be given over
to the tender mercies of the sailors, in order to their making a
“ Spread Eagle ” of him.
F. McC.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
MARY.
She was, all my heart could wish
Of beauty, love and truth—
She is, in memory’s holy shrine,
The dream, my dream of youth.
I saw her in her maiden bloom.
Too fair with us to stay;
I saw her mine by holy vow—
I saw her pass away.


Too soon for us the vision pass’d
Of life’s kaleidoscope—
But not for her —’twas Sabbath’s all,
All full of peace and hope.
I see her in each form of light—
I think her ever near;
Her spirit with my spirit lives,
Her voice in memory’s ear.
The heart, like smitten deer, oft turns
From sunshine to the shade.
And leaves the living songs of earth
For music of the dead.
The flow’ret may forget the dew, —
The lamb the daisy lea.
But still within this heart shall live
Our God, our babes, and thee.
’Tis mercy weaves for man the veil
That hides the coming day,
But mercy yet shall tear the last.
The parting veil away.
Oh! for the wings of mystic dove
To waft me, and my fair.
My sacred trust, to Glory-land.
To meet my Mary there.
14th July, 1855.
SCOTUS.
LEAVES FROM OUR LOG.
No. III.
In the past week week we have been putting in our first term
of hona fide tropical weather. Alpaca and linen coats have re-
placed our usual English attire, and grave seeming gentlemen
have exchanged responsible looking head-gear, for the more airy
juvenility of straw hats and caps of many colors. As for collars
and vests, they are at a complete discount; and some gentlemen,
from whom we might have expected better things, have aban-
doned the “ ties” which bound them at home. As for the ladies,
bless their sweet physiognomies, they look as well in prints and
bareges, (and we are sure they feel more comfortable) than when
their fair forms were encased in more cumbrous drapery; and
though some with gaudier tastes, may fancy that the fair sex
look best in all the gloss and glitter of satins and silks, feathers
and jewels,—for our part we own a weakness for simple elegance;
and the poet agrees with us, who wrote
“ Beauty, when unadorned, adorned the most.”
On Monday last the Trade wind sped us bravely on our course,
and we logged two hundred miles. But how fickle is the whis-
pering breeze ! Before night it fell, and our progress dwindled
down to two or three knots an hour. It hath been libellously
said by some jilted bard—
“ Oh ! never trust in woman,”
but we would suggest that the poet meant —
“ Oh! never trust in a Trade wind.”
Notwithstanding this falling off, our good ship has made an ave-
rage progress, and we are now within a few days’ sail of the line.
On Tuesday we were abreast of the Cape de Verd Islands, but
Bonavista was too distant to be visible. This day, however, was
memorable in our history, as being that on which was fought and
won, —the great battle of the shark. In this action too much
praise cannot be awarded to the chivalrous bravery of Lieutenants
O’Donnell and Glass. Our line having been formed by the latter,
the former gallant officer, by one of those skilful manoeuvres
which often make or mar the fortune of the day, threw out a
piece of pork as a bait to the voracious enemy. The unwary foe,
thrown off his guard by the suddenness of this escapade, rushed
headlong into danger, and when, too late, he found our cold steel
too much for him, he heroically struggled to again get out of
range of the besiegers’ attack. But here, at the crisis of the en-
gagement, the intrepid coolness of the officer in command of the
detachment, as well as the undaunted bravery of our troops,
shone most conspicuous. The Blue Jacket reserve were mus-
tered at the stern, and, on being ordered to charge, gave a long
pull, a strong pull, and a pull together, and soon the shout of
victory announced the capture of our fierce antagonist. When
the battle was over, and the prisoner securely hauled on board,
he again made ineffectual attempts to escape ; and, for a while,
there was on deck a rushing to and fro of our forces. But they
soon rallied, and the monster having received a tail wound from
one of our brave fellows, had no alternative but to throw himself
on the mercy of the conquerors. We regret to add that the vic-
tory was not marked by that forbearance which now-a-days,
thanks to the progress of civilization, is a redeeming feature in
modern warfare. The unhappy monster soon found, to his cost,
that he was indeed out of his element, and, with tearful pen, we
must record that he was sacrificed to the popular appetite. Tell
it not in Gath! (with a spirit more akin to warlike savages, than
humane Englishmen), on the very day of the engagement we
dined on the foe, which had indeed been “too easily led’’ from the
society of his furnish compeers. This event has given a great im-
pulse to the disciples of Isaak Walton, who have since, with an
ardour worthy of a better cause, been sounding with line and
bait the fishy deep. But, as yet, they have toiled in vain. Dol-
phins have obdurate hearts, and, (like many a fair one on shore,)
cruelly jilted these ardent wooers, and were proof against their
most shining allurements. It is true that a coquettish sword-fish
nibbled the bait, but, no doubt, wondering at the prolonged ab-
sence of the shark, prudently objected to be hooked. On Wed-
nesday the luggage was exhumed; and though the weather was
hot, it did not prevent many laborious researches being carried
on.
T. McC.
THE NEW VICTORIAN CONSTITUTION.
We last week presented to our readers an outline of that por-
tion of the New Constitution of Victoria terminating with the
Upper House. We this week propose to give the remaining
clauses of the Bill, as briefly as the meaning will admit of.
The Legislative Assembly, or Lower House, is to consist of
sixty members. They must be twenty-one years of age—resident
in Victoria two years possessed of property to the value of
£2,000, or of the annual value of £2OO. No judge, minister, or
felon, shall be capable of being elected. Electors must be twenty-
one years of age—resident in the Colony for one year previous
to registration—must hold a freehold of the value of £5O, or of
the clear annual value of £s —or be a leaseholder of the value of
£lO annual rent for twelve months, or a householder within the
district of the value of £lO annual rent —or occupying waste
lands and paying rent for twelve months, or be in possession of
an annual salary of £100; —all being duly registered and in occu-
pation six months previous to registration. No one shall be en-
titled to vote who is a felon, or who owes taxes, or who, two
years after the passing of this act, is unable to read and write.
Every Assembly to continue five years, unless dissolved by the
Governor. A Speaker to be elected to preside at the meetings.
Full powers are given to deal with the waste lands.
The appropriation of the revenue is to be made by the Assem-
bly, or Lower House, and may be rejected but not altered by the
Upper House.
No alteration can be made in the constitution unless by an ab-
solute majority of the whole number of the members of both
Houses, and the said alteration must be reserved for the approba-
tion of her Majesty.
By the above Act every digger may have a vote; every house-
holder, almost every man, may have a vote. An end is put to all
cause of discontent with the mother-country; year by year the
alliance will only be more closely cemented : the mother-country
commercially will be the great gainer by the prosperity of the
colony, which it must now be the business of the colonists them-
selves to promote.
R. C.
LARRY MURPHY'S RECOLLECTIONS OF
AUSTRALIA.
M. II.
“ Well I kept on thinkin’ av the goold, and couldn’t get it out
av me head at all, at all. Goold is a mighty fine thing says I, and
shure if I git hould av two or three ladles full, I’ll come back to
ould Ireland, and live on the best av fat bacon and greens for the


remaindher av me days, and can’t the childher be edicated wid
larnin and be mighty ginteel intirely. Throth thin, the ind av it
all was one fine mornin I found myself aboord av a ship etartin
for the goolden town iv Melbourne.
“ Musha! but a ship is thunderin wonderful crayture, and the
sailors are always saying she to it, for all the world as if it was a
woman. So I axed one uv thim, and says Ito him, —You dirty
spalpeen says I, is it bemainin the fair six you are, says I, be say-
ing She to the ship, says I. Murther, Larry, says he, where did
you go to school for your larnin not to know the inanymout arti-
cles that goes along wid the females in the feminine ghender, and
shure that’s the raison the ships wares stays, says he, to keep her
all tight and straight.
“ When I heard uv the stays I was bothered intirely, and kept
it in mind. I’d ax Father Flanagan if it was all right—any ways
a ship bates railways all to smash ; for isn’t she a lokey motive
road that keeps folleyin and folleyin on undher your feet and you
walkin the says? More betoken didn’t I ware out a pair uv
brogues thrampin the same road all the ways to Melbourne.
“ Well, bedad, I wasn’t long on deck, when a chap comes up to
me, and says he to me, says he, come and I’ll show you your
berth, says he. Och murther, says I, who iver heerd uv a man
goin to his own birth afther bein man and boy for forty yerrs, any
how I hope there’ll be a decent christnin. But, musha, what do
you think was a birth, but a bit uv of a dale shelf that you wor to
sleep on all night. Och, wirra, says I, is it dacent Christins your
going to shuv in there, says I Well I jist took a stritch on it to
see how I’d feel on a shilf, and there right fornint my nose, as I
lay on the broad uv me back, was another shilf. That’s for your
mate, says he. Bedad, thinks I, its a cupboard it is. And where
do you keep the dhrink, says I; for Father Flanagan tould me
we’d be mighty dhry in the Thropicks, and wantin a dhrop ov
somethin to moisten our clay. But shure the divil a taste ov
mate or dhrink wint on the shilf, but that same night a chap comes
and gives a jump upon it and snores away like a grampus. Now
ye see he was a great thumpin chap, and the shilf wasn’t used to
heavy weights—so whin the ship gave a rowl, down came shilf
and all tumblin a top ov me, and batterin me nose as flat as a pan-
cake. Be aisy, says I, you dirty bliggurd, says I; take your
elbows out ov my ribs, is it goin to murdher me you are, afore I
eit a taste ov tne goold, says I. Wid that I gave him a nate
dhrive, and sint him away wid a flay in his ear. Nixt mornin a
chap comes up to me they called the purser. What mess are
you in, says he to me. Faix, says I, its in a sorrowful mess I’m in
intirely, scratchin my nose. But the nagur grinned at me, and
took me along to seven other chaps, and, says he, There’s your
mess, says he. So I runs off to a big hole they call the Hatch-
way, the place where the bins keep their chickens, as one of the
sailors tould me, and a fellow popped up his head, and, says he,
Here’s your pork, and he hands me a lump av dirty greasy mate.
Might Ibe afther axin you for a thrifle av greens, says I. Be off
wid you, says he, and come for your praties. More power to you,
says I, shure there’s the decent dhrop in you yet, and I gives him
a big bag to hould them, whin he hands me a lot of dirty, maly
stuff like the dhry scrapins ov a pot of stirrabout. What’s that,
says I. Preserved praties, says he. Och, thunder, says I, if
that’s the way you preserve your praties, what way do you save
your bacon ?”
C. G.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
ADVERTISER seeing the numerous advantages married gentlemen
possess over bachelors on a long sea voyage, is anxious to exchange
from the latter, into the former enviable, position. It may not be be-
coming for an individual to praise himself, however, in such a case as
the present, it is necessary to give an outline of appearance, &c. Ad-
vertiser is of middle stature, and the various points of his person are
admirably constructed. His face is one, that when last seen by the
owner, which was previous to his leaving England (as he cannot get a
view of himself in the gilt frame aifair hung up in his berth, and face-
tiously termed a looking-glass), might be styled “ beautiful.” His tem-
per could not be ruffled by all the Mrs. Caudles in Great Britain. He
loves music, and he dotes on little children. It may be easily imagined
that a young man (by the bye, age has not been stated, however it is
about thirty) possessing so many quslifications, will require some equiva-
lent on the part of the candidate young lady. She must not exceed
five-and-twenty, and as this is an age ladies stand at for many years,
there will he little difficulty in meeting this requirement. She must be
thoroughly accomplished in language, music, dancing, and drawing, and
as to personal appearance, it must be such as a young man of good taste
in such matters could desire. Advertiser is going out without any means,
but this is of course a secondary consideration, as his prospects are good
and his qualifications great. However, it will be necessary to any lady
replying to this advertisement, that she possess ample means for main-
taining a respectable establishment in Melbourne, or, in fact, the adver-
tiser is not particular where in the colony.
Please address, without delay, XYZ, at the office of “ Champion of
the Seas Times.”
ANAGRAMS.
Answer to last week’s anagram.—“ Honor est a Nilo.”
Champion of the Seas Times.
No. IY.] MONDAY, AUGUST 6, 1855.
The influence of the weather upon our mental constitution,
though often a contested point, we think can hardly admit
of reasonable question. It is true the mind can be indepen-
dent of external circumstances, and not suffer the even flow
of its sensations to be disturbed by the pressure of outward
things. Hunger or Thirst, Sickness or Health, may not be
able to impede its regular action; and even “ amidst the
crash of worlds,” it may smile serene. But though this may
be theoretically possible, such is not agreeable to fact. Our
own experience in the past week will testify io the contrary.
Who has not felt a mental as well as physical lassitude in
these sultry and oppressive latitudes ? Who has not enter-
tained a, disposition “to grumble” (that dearest privilege of
an Englishman) whilst winds have varied to every point of
the compass except the right one, and our good ship is count-
ing her progress by minutes instead of degrees ? Indeed of
late, the question doubtfully put by one to another, has
been, “ When shall we reach the Line ?” This does not yet
admit of a positive reply, although we are now thirty-two
days out; but we hope the problem is on the eve of a speedy
solution. This protracted delay all ships are subject to at
this season, and though it may prevent “ The Champion of
the Seias” from fully deserving her proud designation this
voyage, we have no doubt the delay will be in a great mea-
sure retrieved when her sails are fanned by the long-de sired
Trade winds.
Solacing ourselves with this hope, the realisation of which
we trust may be recorded in our next number ; let us at all
events congratulate ourselves that whatever “ ill winds”
have beset our ship’s progress, none have been able to blow
down the common bond that cements us all together in peace
and amity.
T. McC.
CAPTAIN'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Dear Sir,
Since my last report, I am sorry to say that we have made
extremely little progress. Since Sunday week the winds
have been uniformly and steadily against us, and it is not to
be wondered, that under such adverse circumstances, in con-
nection with a lee current, that our good ship Lis not ad-
vanced much further since your last issue.
The wind this morning, thank God, shows a symptom of
change for the better. I sincerely hope that it may last, as
really our patience gets almost exhausted at continued ill


fortune. I am glad that the health of the ship is still
tolerably good, notwithstanding the very warm weather we
have had.
Hoping next week I will be able to present a more en-
couraging report,
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
DOCTOR’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Dear Sir,
In accordance with your request I forward you a report of
the past week.
With the exception of a few cases, which our delay in
these latitudes will easily account for, I have nothing par-
ticular to notice.
The state of the ship, on the whole, is healthy, and much
more satisfactory than I could have expected.
I am, &c.,
G. J. WOOD, M.D.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
On Thursday evening last the Eev. Mr. Downes con-
ducted divine service on the quarter deck ; his address was
based on Isaiah 1. 4.
Yesterday being Sabbath we had two services on the quar-
ter deck ; the one at 10 o’clock a.m., the other at 3 r.m.
The subject of the former address was the twenty-third Psalm;
that of the latter, our Redeemer’s prayer, in the seventeenth
chapter of St. John ; at both the audiences were respectable.
We earnestly hope that the members well timed remarks on
Sabbath sanctification will be practically improved.
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT ON THE
MIZEN TOP.
Who grumbles about the weather ? Our readers must not
imagine from the enquiry that we have the same object in
view as that pugnacious son of Erin who was at Donnybrook
Fair, and being as he said himself, “ blue mowlded for want
of a batin,” made a chalk ring round his hat,* and challenged
all and sundry to deny that the mark was silver lace, with
the obvious intention of laying prostrate any insane indi-
vidual who might be inclined to express a doubt on the sub-
ject. No! such is not our wish. But if there be any one
on board at all disposed to complain, that person would oblige
by sending his card to the editor ; and we have no doubt that
in the course of a few minutes’ quiet argument, we will be
able to convince him that he is the victim of a misguided
imagination. The steward is the last person we expect will
offer an objection, as we are certain that out of gratitude for
the washing of his dishes and floor yesterday, he will not be
inclined to differ with us. The same sea that did him this
good turn washed away an article we had written for to-
day’s paper, on the necessity of exporting baked potatoes to
the Carribee Islands. The readings from Shakespeare, which
we mentioned in our last, wo are glad to say progress favour-
ably, that is to say, somebody spoke something to somebody
else on that subject one night, but beyond this we have not
as yet advanced.
F. McC.
LEAVES FROM OUR LOG.
No. IV.
We brought down our last Log to the battle of the Shark, and
its train of consequences. On Saturday morning (the 28th ult.)
sleepers were aroused from their slumbers by the news that a
homeward bound vessel was in sight, and that an opportunity
would accordingly be afforded to send letters. The call was not
unheeded. Dressing was got through with unwonted rapidity.
Gentlemen postponed shaving, and ladies flitted about en dis-
habille and soon pens and paper were in great requisition.
Here a parent might be seen writing lines of advice and encourage-
ment to a far-off child; and there a husband gave expression to
the pent up feelings of four long weeks, and made the paper elo-
quent with accents of comfort addressed to the wife of his heart.
In one recess, the “ lover,’’ who could doubtless in some rapturous
moment even
“ Make a sonnet to his mistress’ eyebrow,”
with abstracted air now pens his souvenir of hope to “ the girl
he left behind him,” whilst in another “ the friend” (how rare the
title) fills his sheet of heartfelt sympathy for one, towards whom
he feels
“ Mountains may rise, and oceans roll.
To sever him, in vain.”
Mr. O’Donnell having kindly undertaken the office of postmas-
ter, received our various effusions, and the boat being lowered,
six stout oarsmen speedily brought him to the vessel’s side. The
captain did not speak English fluently, but was fortunate enough
to have a “ belle’’ interpreter in the person of a Chinese lady.
Our representative, with his usual gallantry, lost no time in po-
litely sounding the not unwilling fair one, from whom he ascer-
tained the ship was of Dutch build, bound from Batavia to
Amsterdam, but that she would find an opportunity to send or
leave our letters to Falmouth. Compliments having been inter-
changed, Mr. O’D. received a token of the Dutchman’s regard in
the shape of some Schiedam and cigars, in lieu of some English
papers. (Our office was not opened at that early hour.) On the
following day, owing to the inclemency of the weather, Rev. Mr.
Downes only officiated once on board. During the succeeding
week, little of any interest has transpired. The days have gene-
rally been sultry and oppressive, but the nights have been more
cool and enjoyable. Lovers of Astronomy have been gratified
with a sight of the “ Southern Cross.” We have to mention for
the first time, the occurrence of a death on board, and though it
was but that of an infant, the unusual circumstance could not fail
to be impressive. We must not forget to record that the new erec-
tion on deck (the enlargement of the poop) is nearly completed ;
and is found a great boon, especially to those whose range of view
was heretofore necessarily limited, from the height of our bul-
warks and their own diminutiveness, but who can now rejoice in
the commanding elevution which this new post of observation
affords.
We are gratified by a fresh indication which an untoward event
has called forth, of the determination of the passengers to co-
operate with the captain in maintaining good order on board.
Some malicious person at an early hour yesterday morning threw
a bottle into the steerage, which unfortunately injured one of the
passengers. The captain and party struck immediately offered
rewards for the discovery of the perpetrator of this senseless out-
rage, and on the circumstance being made known, both the first
cabin and steerage passengers offered a reward of £5 each for the
same object. We trust the spirit thus evinced to discountenance
all such irregularities, will prevent their recurrence in future.
T. McC.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF A COBWEB.
In the summer of ’54 I happened to be sojourning in the South
of England, during which time I resided in the house of a farmer,
where the wholesome unadulterated diet, the pure and bracing
air, and sweet-smelling wild flowers of field and hedgerow, were
so many sources of unalloyed enjoyment, as to make me despise
the refinement and luxuries of an artificial city life. There was


but one drawback to this pleasant healthy life ;my sitting-room
was infested with various tribes of Insectoria; wasps, slugs, cock-
roaches, and spiders, against whom I waged a deadly warfare ; the
labours of Hercules were as nothing compared to the continuous
struggle carried on between myself and these indefatigable intru-
ders on my equanimity ; for, after spending hours one day in at-
tempting their extermination, on the next their places would be
supplied by others equally disagreeable and contumacious.
In the cupboard of my sitting-room, (common to houses of this
class), I noticed a species of spider commonly known as the grass
spider, which I never observed in dwelling-houses before, whose
webs had escaped the ruthless attacks of the housemaid’s sweeping
brush. Struck by its solitary isolated condition, perched on
its web—like the lone heron on the sandy mound, left bare by
the receding tide—and observing no “ Chamber of Horrors,” no
remains of slaughtered victims, the question occurred to me,
“ How does it sustain life ?” With the laudable desire of obtain-
ing information on this point, I seized a catiff fly and flung him at
the web; but he escaped, passing through its wide interstices un-
jured. After several futile attempts, lat length succeeded in
striking one against the mesh. The spider, who heretofore re-
mained perfectly motionless, immediately and without moving
from the spot where he was perched, by a quivering oscillation of
his body, transmitted a tremulous motion throughout the web,
which no doubt fixed the captive more securely in the toils ; then
advancing leisurely, like one perfectly certain in his prey, and
taking the captive between his forelegs, he attached two threads
(so delicate as to be invisible to the naked eye) to its body, then
holding it at the full length of the forelegs, he proceeded to spin
a web with the hinder ones, by a rapid cross movement. But
once did he stop in his fell purpose, and that for an instant only
to adjust a refractory wing. In vain the poor wretch struggled:
on sped the winding sheet, fainter and more faint became the hum,
until his victim was completely enveloped in a clammy shroud,
and the last faint hum struggling for utterance, was cut short as
the web closed up, and then a silence as of the grave told that all
was finished!
The poor fly lay clasped in its living tomb.”
Once more the spider approached this living mummy, and attach-
ing another thread to it, turned round and was making off with
his freight suspended from his body, when I rushed to the rescue,
and cut the thread that bound the victim to its fate. Taking a
needle I gently separated a part of the swathing; a slight hum
stimulated me to renewed exertion, and with a little care I man-
aged to strip it completely off. I was then about to examine the
exhumed wretch to ascertain what daniage he had sustained,
when, with one flutter to adjust his wings, he was off—as if his
late incarceration had rather improved his powers of flight than
otherwise.
C. B.
LARRY MURPHY'S RECOLLECTIONS OF
AUSTRALIA.
NO III.
“ That same evnin I wint to take a sthrowl on the deck, to
thry and pick up a thrifle or two av navigation, whin I heard one
sailor chap say to another, I say, Jack, where’s Jim? He’s
in the watch, says he. Och, tare an ages, says I, how did he
git into the watch, says I, barin it was as big as the clock in St.
Patrick’s steeple. Wid that I heard a tarin grate whistle, that
ud skin the dhrum av your ear. What’s that ? says I, to one av
the sailors. That’s the Boatson, says he. Murther in Irish, says
I, has the Boat a son, and what sort av a crayture is the mother ?
Well, bedad, 1 walked on wid my ey'es and mouth starin open at
the wondhers av navigation, whin what did I hear over my head
but 800-00-oo ! Holy Biddy, says 1, there’s a whale goin to ate
the ship. But, whin I looked up, what did I see but a pair ov horns
and two grate sorrowful eyes starin down at me. The saints betune
us and harm, say's I, is the cows cmigratin ? says I; but, shure you
ould fool av a baste, wouldn’t it be betthur for the likes av ymu to be
grazin a field than to be grazin your ribs agin the side ov that ould
sinthrybox ? 800-00-00. say's the cow; manin, av course, Thrue for
you, Larry' Murphy, avieh ; shure it isn’t in clover I am, this fine
evenin. Arrah, boo away, say's I, makin answer to her, for shure
be the time you git across the says, you wont be able to say boo to
to a goose. No sooner wor the words out av me mouth, whin I
thought the sight ud lave my eyes wid the fright, for may I niver
die in sin if right fornint me there was not a whole ridge av cab-
bages grown out av a tight rope, wid their heads down, but, bedad,
the soil didn’t agree wid em at all, for they wor as yellow as a
duck’s claw, and looked mighty withered and dhroopin. There I
was standin whin up comes a chap and, says he, What are you
doin here ? says he. Who are you, says I, that’s axin me ? I’m
the constable, says he. Musha, sweet bad look to you, says I, is
the polis abourd av a ship ? shure you don’t want to take us whin
we’ve no agints to shoot, barin we’d sind a bullet thro’ that nagur
av a purser that pisins us wid filthy messes of scroush that a well-
bred pig wouldn’t be afthur atin. Come, none av your jaw, says
he, aint you a steerage passenger ? The sorrow a taste I’ve to do
wid the steerin, says I; I lave that to the man at the wheel. Get
off the quarther deck, says he. Shure if I walk off the deck, says
I, wouldn’t Igo into the say ? Wid that he takes and he points
out every taste av the deck, barin the dirty ind av it where the
pigs and the ducks and the cook lived. Be aisey, says I, shure
its yourself that’s takin the good measure, if that’s a quarther av
the deck, where’s the other three-quarthers ? But the ignorant
baste knew nothin av the thrue prenciples av minsirashin, and he
walked me off. Well, by gorrah, if there was a dacint gintleman
in the whole ship, it was the docthur ; and you’d be sayin it was
the tindher heart he had if you wor to see the care he’d be takin
av the faymales, and shure wasn’t he always feelin their pulse and
axin how the hot weather agreed wid thim; and musha if they
felt the laste taste quare, he’d be ordherin them a bowl av gruel,
or maybe its a ticket for soup he’d give thim. Och, musha, but
it was the kind crayture he was intirely, and bedad it was lookin
afthur thim he was night, noon, and mornin. Some av thim said
he had a way av winkin at thim, but the sorrow word av truth
there was in it; for I heard himself sayin it was by rason av a
wakeness av the eyeleds that made them be fall’n down unknownst
to him. One night, afthur we wor all laid on the shilf, and the
lights out. I felt mighty dhry entirely, so up I got, gropin in the
dark, to git a dhrink of warthur. Well, faix, jist as I got outside,
what did I see in the laste glimmer av light, but some sort av a
big live thing stalin and stalin along. Be the piper that played
before Moses, says I, here’s a Hippypottamouse, come up from the
depths av the say to ate the lavins. Shure its swallyin me too
he’ll be; so I kept quiet, all av a thrimble and shake. But, be-
dad, the monsthur made towards me, and before I could make the
sign av the Cross, he was plump agin me, so there was nothin for
it but to show fight. Just as I gripped hould av him, says a
voice in my ear, in a whisper, Hush, hush. Arrah, says I, can a
Hippypotamouse spake ? Who are you ? says he. I’m Larry
Murphy, at your sarvice, says I. Arrah, Larry, says he, don’t
you know me ? says he. How could I know you, says I; share
Saint Patrick doesn’t allow varmint like you into my country.
Larry, says he‘ are you ravin? don’t you know I’m the docthur?
Musha, thin, bad look to you, says I, for frightnin a dacent boy.
Then you aint a Hippypotamouse, and you aint a goin to ate me ?
Larry, says he, I must report you for bein about the ship at this
time av night. Docthor, says I, I must report you for bein about
the ship at this time av night. Larry, says he, you wor goin to
stale somethin, says he. Arrah, Docthor, jewel, shure it was only
stalin a march on you, I was, says I. Larry, says he, you see its
a wakeness av sleep-walking I have. I wondher you didn’t walk
into the say, thin, says I. Larry, says he, I was dhramin that
one av the faymales was taken bad—you know how careful I am
av thim—so I just got up, and I asleep, thinkin I’d go and give
her a thrifle av medical comfort. But, Larry, says he, there’s
always bad-minded people aboard av a ship, and 1 think it ’ll be
betther to say nothin about seein me. Mum is the word, says I;
but, Docthur, jewel, is there any whiskey among the medical
comforts ? Come to me in the mornin, says he, and 111 give you
a quart. Bedad thin, says I, I wont be dirtying my mouth wid
the dhrink av the water I was goin to take, but I’m off for a
stretch on my shilf again.’’
G. G.
SKETCH OF A TOUR IN ITALY.
In the year 1851 I determined to carry out a project long en-
tertained, of visiting some of the most celebrated cities in Italy,


and in the month of October, having obtained the necessary pass-
ports, and taken out circular notes, I started accompanied by a
friend via Folkstone and Bologne, for Paris, and thence without
stopping, we took the Crain to Chalons sur Soane, at that time the
terminus of the Paris and Lyons Kailway. Then we enjoyed a
good night’s rest, and after an early breakfast started for Lyons
by a fast steamer. The scenery of the Soane, though not equal
to that of the Seine or Rhone, is still varied and interesting ; and
as we approach Lyons it is really beautiful.
I had visited Lyons some , years previously, hut as my friend
had not been there before, we remained two days to explore the
environs. The old part ot the city is built on a tongue of land
formed by the confluence of the Rhone and the Soane. The sub-
urbs have extended on the opposite sides of both rivers, which are
spanned by several stone bridges. On the right bank of the
Rhone is an avenue of two miles, forming a beautiful promenade.
Lyons is principally celebrated for its silks, of which manufacture
it is the seat; and at a distance of twenty miles is the town of
St. Ettienne, equally celebrated for the manufacture of ribands.
The climate of Lyons is very disagreeable from its humidity;
dense fogs are of frequent occurrence, and it is as notorious in
France for its frequent rains, as Manchester and Glasgow are with
us. We left Lyons at eight o’clock in the evening for Geneva.
There was no diligence leaving in the morning, which we exceed-
ingly regretted, as our route lay through some very fine ranges
of the Jura mountains. About seven in the morning we arrived
at the summit of one of the highest passes; for some distance we
had walls of rock on either side, when suddenly, at an angle of
the road, a scene burst upon our view of extraordinary extent and
beauty. Apparently at our feet, though still many miles distant,
lay the Lake of Geneva, and exactly opposite to us rose, in stern
majesty, Mont Blanc; its summit being veiled in clouds whilst
the peaks of the adjacent mountains were distinctly visible—the
whole forming a magnificent panorama, far beyond my powers of
description, but which is indelibly impressed upon my mind. Two
or three hours rapid travelling down the winding descent brought
us to Geneva, situated at the foot of the Lake and on the Rhine,
which receives, and indeed is formed by the waters of the Lrke.
There is nothing remarkable in the town of Geneva. It is, for a
Continental town, very clean ; the hotels are particularly good
and spacious, and the charges moderate. No wonder, therefore,
that it is a favourite resting-place for travellers. The beauty of
the surrounding scenery, the salubrious climate, and the cheapness
of living render it also a desirable place of residence, so that there
is good society to be met with. The people themselves are sturdy
Republicans, proud of their independence, honest and industrious.
Their principal trade is the manufacture of watches. After leaving
Geneva, our route lay through the ancient duchy of Savoy, now
forming part of the dominions of the King of Sardinia. The
country is mountainous and barren, the people miserably poor,
and the villages through which we passed dilapidated and dirty.
A day’s journey brought us to Chamberry, the capital of Savoy,
where we intended to sleep, but we found the hotel so bad, that
we proceeded on in the same diligence, and after travelling all
night and the following day through a district of the mountains of
the Alps, we arrived at Lanceleburgh, a small hamlet at the foot
of the celebrated Mont Cenis Pass. Hitherto our diligence had
been drawn by teams of six horses; to this number we now added
eleven mules, yoked on all sides, and we commenced the ascent
of the Pass, which was six hours work. It was a brilliant moon
light night, and I joined a party of young Frenchmen, who had
determined to walk, guided by one of their number who knew
the route, and as we were enabled to make several short cuts, we
arrived at the summit two hours before the diligence.
T. H.
{To he continued.)
The following letter from our esteemed friend Patsy
Branigan to his brother Tim, has fallen into our hands, and
we have much pleasure in giving it insertion: —
Dear Tim, since I last had this pleasure,
We’re all in a very sad way,
For both wind and weather together
Are goin on, as much as to say,
McKay,
“ We” are the Champions av the Say.
On won-tack we’re goin to the aist.
On t’other, we’re goin to the west.
And thin hetwin shoutin and haulin,
In throth we can’t get any rest.
If we only get wonce cross the ’quaytor,
I’m tould that we’ll make bether way,
But calk’lations are hard enuf on land Tim,
The’re conthrary intirely on say;
So good day!
To the time we’ll see Port Phillip Bay.
Ould Ireland’s the place after all Tim,
For producin a pathern man;
And I’m glad for to tell you, dear Brother,
We’ve got one, deny it who can.
Larry Murphy, from Kills, is on board Tim,
And ’tis he that’s the chap at a dhrink.
For smokin or tellin a story,
Or coaxin a girl with his wink.
But I think
He must stop or be cot in the link.
Me. Editor, —Perhaps the following dates may prove in-
teresting to the numerous readers of the “ Times”;—
Fall of Robespierre 1794
1
7
9
4
Fall of Napoleon 1 1815
1
8
1
5
Fall of Charles X 1830
1
8
3
0
Fall of Duke of Orleans 1842
1
8
4
2
Fall of 1857
ENIGMAS.
What Island forbids the sailor to land ?
Why is a man’s coat on a boy’s back like two towns in
France ?
What is Majesty deprived of its externals ?
What is that was made without a soul, lived and had a
soul, died without a soul ?
RELIGIOUS APHORISMS.
To come to Christ is the first act of Christian obedience.
What we .get from God in private will wear well in public.
Religion makes the best clothing, but the worst cloak.


ORIGINAL POETRY.
THE BATTLE OF CITATE.
The Russian hosts are swarming, where the mighty Danube roars.
They have seized upon Wallachia, and threat Bulgaria’s shores;
With willing heart and ready hand —all eager for the fight,
By priestly guile excited, stands the stolid Muscovite.
Dark clouds of mounted Cossacks are pouring o’er the plain,
Inspired by hopes of booty, and the plunder of the slain;
With many a savage Tartar from Tobolsk! and Kasan,
And many a shaggy Calmuc horde, and wild Siberian clan.
And who are those to meet them on the Danube’s sedgy strand ?
O ! as gallant a host as ever met, to guard their native land !
’From where the towers of Trebisond look o’er the sunny sea,
From the myrtle-bowers of Bithnia, and the plains of Galilee;
From Syria’s land of roses, where the Zephyrs love to roam,
And the cypress groves of Cythera, the gallant Moslems come;
With swarthy cheek, and flashing eye, and sun-bright scimitar,
All eager for the contest, with the fierce hosts of the Czar.
The Arab leaves his lonely tent, amid the desert bare,
And hurries to the scene of strife on his steed of lineage rare;
And swart Egyptians marshalled stand, in close and threat’ning ranks,
From the warm valley of the Nile, and its palm-embower’d banks.
And many a dusky Nubian, from Dongola and Sennar,
Has left his sands and burning plains and took him to the war!
All firm to brave the wintry blast, and stem the battle’s van.
And strike a blow, ’mid Europe’s snow, for the throne of the Sultan.
Then out spoke Ismael Pacha —“ Before you stands the foe,
They come to desolate our land, and lay our cities low,
To shed o’er all our sunny hills and orange-scented bowers,
The blight they cast o’er Poland’s plains, and Warsaw’s ruined towers;
They come in bigot wrath to hurl, your Sultan from his throne,
And on his marble palaces, to trample as their own;
To number us amid the serfs —all soulless as they are,
Who crouch with fear and trembling at the foot of the stern Czar.
And shall they overrun our land, like the locusts famished flight ?
And shall they wreak their savage will, and bow us to their might ?
No! by the heavens that shine so bright o’er StambouTs glittering domes
Not while our hands can grasp these swords to guard our fathers’ tombs.
The heritage those fathers won in the days of Moslem might.
Defend it, as becomes a prize so beautiful and bright.
Upon them! and remember, as ye breast the battle’s van.
To strike deep for Turkish freedom and the rights of your Sultan.”
He ceased—that gallant Pacha—but the echoes of his words.
Were battle shout, and cannon roar, and the clash of driven swords;
Ten thousand vivas rent the sky, as they clove their eager way.
And through the Russian’s riven ranks, let in the light of day.
Nor paus’d ’till from that fatal field, the Northern hosts were driven,
Their valor stain’d, —their foremost slain, —their eagles cleft and riven;
Whilst high o’er all the mortal clash of sword and scimitar,
The silver crescent floated like a meteor of the war.
What ho! ye Northern chivalry, who threaten’d in your might,
To quench in darkness and dismay, the crescent’s beaming light;
And thou ! whose mad ambition, caus'd this scene of rout and shame,
Gone is the terror of your arms, and the prestige of your name.
For the shouts of Moslem-triumph, ring o’er Wallachia’s plains,
Till the rampart mounds of Kalafat, reveberate the strains;
And long the trumpet-tongue of fame, the triumph shall relate.
Of the gallant Ismael Pacha, and the victors of Citate.
J. BRENCHLEY.
Champion of the Seas Times.
No. Y.] MONDAY, AUGUST 13, 1855.
We have at length passed the Rubicon, and are now deni-
zens of the Southern Hemisphere. On one side of the Line
we have left behind us our Fatherland—famous as being the
heir of ages—the great reservoir where the streams of ad-
vancing Science, Art, and Literature have converged in the
maturity of a full grown civilization —but dearer to us, as
the home of our youth,—the scene around which cluster re-
collections of outer and inner circle of friends —of employ
ments in which we so lately took delight—of joys and sor-
rows equally prized, because heightened or relieved by the
presence of unerring sympathy. These, and a hundred other
things, which when past are invested with a peculiar charm,
can never be forgotten, “ whilst memory holds her seatand
now distance gives piquancy and force to what heretofore
seemed but a poetical anomaly.
“ Absence makes the heart grow fonder.”
On this side of the Equator, we are advancing to a coun-
try which is Antipodean in more senses than one. Of enor-
mous extent —embracing within its ample limits the area of a
Continent, whilst the entire population does not equal that of
a metropolis at home—with unparalleled mineral and agri-
cultural resources, but of recent colonization—a land as yet
without a place in history, but evidently destined to play no
unimportant part in the stirring times of the future. Whilst
there are so many points of contrast between the Home we
are leaving and the Home we are seeking, it must not be for-
gotten that these are lessening every day. With emigration
have also travelled the arts of civilized life—the full tide of
commerce —and religion, (the true civilizer) has not been left
behind. Since these things are so, we hope ere long, to see
Australia arise—Pharos like —as another England in the
Southern seas, with its well-built cities, its teeming popula-
tion, its well-ordered Constitution, where the voice of Liberty
will ever be heard, and the ravings of license effectually
hushed ; and though its seasons may be transposed, we trust
that the heart of this mighty young England will ever beat
kindly towards its venerated and time-honored namesake;
and thus on every Continent—whether on the torrid plains of
India, or amidst the mighty forests of America —in the sunny
climes of Australia, or where the race has its primal home in
Europe, —the Anglo-Saxons will, in all these wide ramifica-
tions, ever prove the true guardians of freedom and civiliza-
tion, and the banded foes of oppression and barbarism.
T. McC.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
August 15th, 1855.
Deae Sie,
Our progress for the week is not such as I anticipated at
your last issue of the Times. On Monday last the breeze
was just beginning to blow so favourably that I expected a
good week’s run, and to be considerably advanced on our
journey by this time ; but, unfortunately, the wind hangs so
much to the south-east, it is impossible to sail in a direct line.
We have come quite across (since last week) from the African
shore, and we are now within seventy miles of the coast of
Brazil. The weather is very delightful, and I am happy to
observe those of our number who were suffering from sick-
ness, once more about the deck. lam in hopes that the
wind will change shortly, and that we may pursue our jour-
ney without further delay.
I remain, &c.,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
DOCTOR’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Deae Sir,
I have great pleasure in being able to state that there has


been a decided decrease in the number of applicants at my
establishment since the last report; and this lam surprised
at, considering our unavoidable continuance in these latitudes.
Trusting to be able to speak as favorably next week.
I am, &c.,
G. J. WOOD, M.D.
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT ON
THE MIZEN TOP.
After a great many crosses , we have at last made that most im-
portant cross —namely, “ Crossing the Line.” All on board must
have been struck with the want of attention on the part of Mr.
and Mrs. Neptune and their attendant sprites, and have wished
for the good old days when the sanitary condition of the passen-
gers was more carefully looked after by these marine deities—
when grease and tar were as familiar in our mouths not as
“ Household Words,’’ but something else. What a degenerate age
is this in which we live—c(s)harapagne is the only pain we have
experienced on this occasion. We are glad not to have it in our
power to relate a very serious accident this week; but we are
happy to be able to notice a very providential escape made by
some of the crew and passengers. A chain which is used for
hauling up the maintop-gallant yard gave way in one of the links,
and fell with a number of blocks which were attached to it from
that great height to the deck, injuring one of the boats in its fall,
and knocking down two of the ship’s company. One of them—
the bo’son’s mate—was cut on the forehead ; the other sustained
only a trifling damage. Both are now, we are happy to state,
doing well.
F. McC.
LEAVES FROM OUR LOG.
No. V.
If we have hitherto complained of the lethargic tendency which
we landsmen, at least, experienced whilst tossing about in the
unhappy “doldrums,” who does not feel something of exhilaration
when we consider that “ crossing the Line ’’ is at length “il fait
accompli.'' Apart from this fact the atmosphere has lost its oppres-
siveness, whilst the weather still continues warm and sunny. It is
singular how much, in a long voyage, we become identified with
our ship. If it is becalmed or going out of its course, we also
feel out of sorts, but when it sweeps the waters
“ Like a thing of life,”
and each day tells sensibly on our progress, our spirits rise also;
and dulriCss and weariness fly away. The great event of the week
was accomplished about 3 o’clock on Wednesday. At dinner
time the happy occasion was celebrated in the first-class cabin,
and those who had crossed the Line, for the first time, having
provided champagne, soon “ the bumper toast went round.’’
Mr. Hocknell proposed, in very kind terms, the health of the
novitiates, and congratulated them on having advanced so far
towards their new destination; Mr. Hewlett having suitably
responded to this toast, Mr. McOomas rose and gave the health
of Captain McKirdy, which was received with enthusiasm, those
present vocalising the appropriate air—
“ He is a jolly good fellow.”
The worthy captain having returned thanks and reciprocated the
kind wishes of those around him, Mr. Barnsley proposed the
toast of “the other officers of the ship,’’ to which Dr. Wood re-
plied in an appropriate speech, and the company separated.
As the evenings have become more cool dancing has again been
resumed, and the beautiful starlight nights tempt even the fair
sex to join the gentlemen in promenading the deck, or in friendly
groups to sit and chat the hours away on the new poop. In the
daytime mimic horse racing has proved a formidable rival to chess
or reading; and the little favourites are engerly welcomed by the
lookers on, as now “ a bay ’’ and anon “ a grey ’’ gallantly clears
the course.
We have received intimations from an authentic source of
Shakespearian readings being commenced in the ensuing week,
and we hail this as a pleasing and profitable addition to our fu-
ture evenings’ enjoyment.
T. McC.
ANSWERS TO LAST WEEK'S ENIGMAS.
1. —The Island of Ushant. (You shan’t.)
2 - -Because it’s Toulon (too long) and Toulouse (too loose).
3. —Jonah’s fish.
4. —A jest.
Make an anagram on the word “ Lawyers,” which shall not only ex-
haust the letters, but be characteristic.
REVIEW.
Land, Labour , and Gold , or Two Years in Victoria, by
Wm. Howitt. 2 vols.,'Longman & Co. The Gold Era
of Victoria ; published by Messrs. Orr & Co.
A short review of the two last published books on the
Colony to which the most of our readers are bound, will, we
hope, be both interesting and instructive.
As a literary production, that of Howitt is superior to any
recent work on the subject, and, as an amusing book, we can
with confidence recommend it; but, as a guide, we fear it
will prove in many parts but the blind leading the blind.
The extracts which we, shall make will be from that por-
tion which is trustworthy. It must be borne in mind that
our author is a habitual grumbler whose former mode of life
totally disqualified him for the monstrous and severe work
of the digger. Let us follow then this gentleman, with his
son and nephew, all equally unaccustomed to such work, but
full of hope, starting for the diggings to make their fortunes.
We give his own words for a description of his difficulties
at starting. First let us remark that his English cart and
harness were the subject of jest and laughter, and had to be
exchanged for more suitable articles. The date is the end
of October.
“About a mile from Melbourne we encountered a celebrated
bog, called Raleigh’s Swamp. This is a place not only deep in
mud, but in mud as stiff as unbaked paste, and as tenacious as
glue. This was ploughed out by the force of ponderous drays,
drawn by a dozen bullocks each into deep trenches, and thrown
up into ridges a yard high. Oh! ye good people travelling
smoothly over the macadamised roads in England, how little do
you conceive of travelling in Australia.
“ If you could but see Raleigh’s Swamp, with its mud, its
deep holes, its huge stems, the deep gullies torn by torrents
through it, and with sides as abrupt as walls, you would, like us,
stand appalled; but we did get through it by the help of Mr.
Bakewell’s carter. These men are like eels in skinning, they are
used to it.’’
After crossing the Plenty Eiver, he describes the road as
dry and good. But soon they encountered again bogs and
swamps ; however, they finally got on dry land, where they
encamped, and made their first experiment of sleeping in a
tent. From a settler they purchased a side of excellent veal,
and plenty of milk, and from him they learned that the pre-
tended owner of the paddock was an impostor, and not the
proprietor at all, but a good-for-nothing fellow trading up to
the Diggings. The birds of Australia have sometimes been
said to have no song, but they are remarkable for their beauty
and variety. Howitt says they are the most striking feature
of Australia. The laughing jackass, the leather-head, and
magpie are constant companions. There is a species of grey
thrush, which has a splendid but unvaried note; the richness
and music of the tone is unrivalled. There is a droll jollity
—a spirit of the grotesque —mingled with the merry and the
musical. The wattle bird has many curious cries. Amongst
others, “ Where’s your bacca-box ?” “ your box ?” “ your
box ?” And then the cry as rapidly changes into a jovial


rollicking note of “ Gyroc-de-doc, roc-de-doe, eheboc che-
boc.” Red and blue and green parrots abound. As you
pass along, your journey is enlivened by the bandicoot, the
kangaroo, and opossum. To-day we have seen a crane, and
that amphibious creature the platypus; and found many
nests in the hanging branches of the trees. One is very
small, like a willow wren’s. In the creeks we have
caught blackfish, perch, trout, and mullet, besides the bright
blue crawfish.
R. C.
(To be continued.)
LARRY MURPHY'S RECOLLECTIONS OF
AUSTRALIA.
“ Shure, whin I was at home in the ould country, I often heard
av the moustashirs’ movement —be way av a hair sieve to sthrain
the air through afore brathin it; but, bedad, abourd av a ship it
wasn’t moustachirs, but you’d see some chaps like hillygoats, wid
as much hair on their face as ud thatch a pigstye. Others couldn’t
git up a crop to their likin at all at all, but,it ud be growin quite
conthrairy, all sthragling about their jaws ; maybe its one hair ud
be stalin up their nose, and another ud be turnin the corner into
their mouth, gittin the ind bit off in atin. Be ghorra, meself
thought it was all through soap bein scarce, and I offered to make
a latthur av fat pork and shave them all round, at a penny a
head, but they wouldn’t hear av it. One mornin I wakened up,
and heard thim savin, Here’s a ship goin to spake us. Holy St.
Patrick, says 1, is it a ship to be talkin to us? says. I; anyways it
wouldn’t he a faymale av it couldn’t make use av its tongue- Up
I ran on deck, and there shure enough, fornint me, was another
ship. Says I, to one av the sailors, says I, Will our ship be able
to talk too ? That she will, says he. Whenever you see the cap-
tain touching his mouth with that long brass thing, that’s the sig-
nal for the ship to spake. Well, be the powers, I was watchin
and watchin, whin up wint the brass thing, and, the saints pre-
serve us, the ship began to spake, but bedad the voice was some-
thin between the dying growns av a jackass and the yelpin av a
cur with his tail in a rattrap. With that the other captain made
the same sign, and the strange ship began to spake; hut, och,
raurther, its the sorrowful could she must have had, for the voice
w T as like a bulldog tarin his throat wid growlin. What are they
sayin, says I, to the chap next me. They’re going to sind litthers
home in her, says he. So down I rushed, and borryed a sheet av
paper, but as ill look would have it, just as I was goin to begin
my letthur all av a suddint I recollected the sorrow taste I knew
how to write. Abourd av the ship there was a murtherin ould
brass band, that ud be playin the quarest tunes ever you heard,
without a haporth av rale music in thim ; and shure you’d niver
hear any thing dacent, such as Tatthur Jack Walshe, or Patrick’s
Day in the Mornin comin out av their pipes. One evenin they
played the mischief entirely, for without rhyme or rason they
struck up the tune the ould cow died av, and no sooner did the
crayture in the sinthry-box hear it than she gave a sorrowful
moan, stretched out her legs, and it was all over wid her. Och,
murther, but it was the melancholly sight to see the grief av the
ladies afther her; bedad, you’d think it was there own mother
was gone, when they heard there ud be no more milk in their
tay. The quarest thing abourd av the ship was the dancin; in-
stead av weltin the flure, in a good jig, it was makin game av
dancin they wor—slidin about in quadrills. But after a while
they improved on it; bedad the band ud sthrike up a tune, and
the sorrow taste av lie in it, the gintlemin ud catch hould av the
ladies be the waste, and spin round and round, wid a hop, step,
and a jump ; shure they wor like the ship whin the wind ud be
conthrairy ; first they’d tack on one side, then they’d tack on the
other. After that, whin a good puff of wind ud come down the
pipes, they’d give a rowl that ud shake every tack av clothes on
their backs. Arrah, ladies, jewil, says I to myself, shure its a
beautiful invintion, and the finest help to coortin ever I seen;
but what puzzled me entirely was, as soon as iver the music ud
stop, the gintlemin ud take away their arms from the ladies’ wastes
’like a shot, just as if they wor dhroppin a hot praty. Shure it ud
make no differ to lave thim where they wor, for the convayniency
av the thing, till the music ud sthrike up again* and bedad
its a wondher that some av the gintlemin wid a wake memory,
didn’t forgit to take thim away at all. But, shure, the Poulka was
only a canthur, for after a while they said they’d have a gallop;
and maybe there wasn’t the hoight av caperin and prancin.
Larry, jewil, says I to meself, why don’t you thry your hand at it
yourself, says 1. So bedad, I wint up to as nate a slip av a girl
as you’d see in a day’s walk, and says I, Might I make bould to ax
the condescinsion av a poulka ? With all the pleasure in life,
says she. So I took a tight grip av her, fearin she might slip
through my fingers whin the ship ud rowl. Keep your proper
distance, says she. Arrah, jewel, says I, shure it’s distanced en-
tirely we’ll be if we don’t make a start. Well, bedad, off we wint
but you see my legs wasn’t used to the caperin—one ud take a
slide to the right, and the other ud take a slide to the left ; thin
I'd be left in the lurch whin the ship ud lurch to the right ; and in
the ind I hadn’t a leg left to stand on —for away I wint rowlin on
the deck. Larry, says she, you musn’t dance any more till you
git say legs. Arrah, darlin, says I, if it’s all the same to you,
I’ll be afthur keepin the legs I have.”
C. G.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Yesterday we had two divine services on the quarter-deck,
as usual. In the forenoon Rev. J. Downes expounded the
beautiful parable of the Prodigal Son in Luke xv. chap.; and
in the afternoon he explained and applied the Saviour’s
Legacy in John xiv. 27. The day was delightful, and the
audiences large and attentive.
SKETCH OF A TOUR IN ITALY.
From the top of the pass the road winds down the side of the
mountain to the Plains of Piedmont, in the midst of which stands
the city of Turin, the capital of Sardinia. Turin differs essen-
tially from all other Italian cities, resembling in fact rather a well
built English town than an Italian city: and there is an air of
comfort, cleanliness, and prosperity about it which you find no-
where else in Italy. The streets are wide and straight, and run-
ning at right angles. There is, however, little to interest the
tourist; the public buildings are few and comparatively insig-
nificant, and there are no noble old churches nor fine galleries of
sculpture and paintings which render a visit to other cities in this
favoured land so interesting and instructive. Sardinia is the only
Italian state, the Government of which is not despotic. They
have a Constitutional Ministry and a House of Representatives,
elected by the people, and the result of this liberality is evidenced
in the increased prosperity and content of the people, and in the
influence which they have obtained in their Foreign relations.
They have been able to repel the attempted encroachments of
Austria, and they most gallantly endeavoured to assist the neigh-
bouring state of Lombardy to throw off the Austrian yoke, which
however they failed to do, owing to the want of union in the
Lombards themselves. Naturally , Sardinia is by far the poorest
state in Italy ; its soil is the least prolific, and its climate the least
fertile ; but the people are intelligent and industrious, and are
not trodden down by a despotic government. Hence they are
prosperous and happy. From Turin we travelled by railway to
Genoa, the second city in the kingdom. The finest view of Genoa
is to he obtained from the sea. The city is situated on the mar-
gin of a crescent-shaped bay, and is built on a rising ground, the
houses forming terraces one above another; and in the back
ground are numerous villas, dotting the mountain side, or perched
on the tops of the cliffs, and commanding extensive views of the
surrounding country.
There are a great number of noble churches, and the palaces
of the ancient Genoese nobles are amongst the finest in the world.
Each one has its gallery of paintings, varying of course in merit,
but amongst them are to be found many of the most celebrated
productions of the old Italian masters. These private galleries
are always open to strangers, who have only to give their names
at the porter’s lodge. The neighbourhood abounds in beautiful
drives, and there is a very fine promenade on the face of the cliff
on the south side of the city. From Genoa we took the steamer
to Livorno (anglice Leghorn). There is a line of excellent steamers
(all built in England) plying between Marseilles and Naples, and
calling at »11 the intermediate ports; and as travelling by Dili-
gence through some parts of the interior of Italy is very tedious,
and not always safe, these steamers are often preferred to the over-
land route.


Alas ! alas! that mind should yield to matter! The brilliant
intellect of our facetious correspondent has succumbed to “ indis-
position,’’ and we have been obliged to hire a couple of miserable
penny-a-liners, to write the following wretched trash, which we
are much ashamed of heading
FACETIÆ.
The Secretary of the “ Champion of the Seas” Magnetic Telegraph
Company, has much pleasure in announcing the following important
'■ntelligence :
London, Bth August, 1855.
Last night her Majesty retired to rest at the usual hour. She wore a
pink silk night cap, with three borders of lace. This morning the royal
family sat down to breakfast at half-past eight. There was decided im-
provement in the royal appetite; her Majesty had a rasher of bacon, and
Prince Albert disposed of two eggs, laid by his favourite Cochin.
At Sebastopol things go on much the same as ever, John Bull is of
opinion that instead of shelling out the Russians, he is shelling out the
cash! On the sth, the Malakoff and Redan were to have been stormed,
and no doubt those important works would have been carried, but that
operations were suspended in consequence of General Simpson having the
toothache. On the 4th, Mr. Layard asked Lord Palmerston in the
House of Commons, whether the Government expected to take Sebasto-
pol ? The noble lord at the head of the Government replied with his
usual candour, that if the Allies were able to drive out the Russians,
there existed a strong presumption that Sehastapol might perhaps be
taken on some future day.
Champion of the Seas Times.
No. YL] MONDAY, AUGUST 20, 1855.
In the past week our number has been lessened by
the sudden removal of one, who in the prime of life has
been hurried away to
“ that bourne
From whence no traveller e’er returns.”
The circmmstances connected with this unhappy event, which
are yet so fresh in our recollection, have of course cast an un-
wonted gloom over our circle. Death is at all times an un-
welcome intruder, but no where more than on board ship.
On shore our eyes are but too familiar with the mournful
processions that daily pass along the streets; but in the
whirl of business the impressions which such are naturally
calculated to produce, become soon obliterated. But confined
within the narrow limits of our home upon the waters, the
infrequency of such an occurrence, and the suspension of our
stated occupations, necessarily tend to rivet the attention
whenever mortality through accident or sickness is in our
midst. Is it the part of a wise man to turn a deaf ear to
the lessons which such an event is apt to teach ? It reminds
men of their common humanity—that how much soever they
may pride themselves on their rank, their acquirements, or
their pleasures, Death will one day prove the great leveller of
all distinctions, and from sceptred monarch to lowly peasant,
all must own his sway. It is strange after all how this the
tritest of all truths, should be practically unheeded or for-
gotten by most. If it were but sufficiently apprehended, what
earnestness would it not infuse, and what dignity would it
not impart to duties so often neglected, or coldly performed ?
and with what a lofty purpose would it animate the humblest
of us to leave the world something better than we find it ?
It has been said of the Great Duke, that the ruling principle
which was the key to all his illustrious achievements was
Duty. At her command he unsheathed the sword, and in a
hundred battles led on his victorious squadrons ; and, obey-
ing her voice, he again replaced that sword in its scab-
bard, and exchanged the tented field for the council room.
If in the complicated relations of his life every action could
be subordinated to so simple a principle, let us each in our
more limited sphere, also choose Duty for our mistress; so
shall our daily life, ceasing to be tame and monotonous, be-
come transformed into a glorious Epic ;
“ Lives of great men all remind us
We may make our lives sublime.”
******
“ Let us then be up and doing,
With a heart for any fate;
Still achieving, still pursuing,
Learn to labor and to wait.”
T. McC.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
20 th August, 1855.
Deae Sie,
Our anticipations of progress in the past week have been
again frustrated, —calms and light winds still impeding our
course. Our week’s run, up to yesterday at noon, was but
660 miles in a direct line, whereas the usual week’s sailing
in the Trade winds should be at least 1,500.
The breeze is better this morning, I am glad to say, and
notwithstanding the heavy head swell, we are making good
progress. I only trust that it may last, and that our hopes
may not be disappointed in the coming week. However, from
the telegraph signals yesterday received, I am glad to find
we are not worse off than our neighbours. Hoping for a
good time coming,
I am, &c.,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
DOCTOR’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Deae Ste,
Since my last report very little of any consequence has
occurred. You will be glad to hear that the poor woman in
the hospital is gradually recovering from the shock occasioned
by the loss of her husband. The health of the passengers
still continues remarkably good, and as we proceed into cooler
latitudes, I think I may predict its continuance.
I am, &c.,
G. J. WOOD, M.D.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Yesterday the Rev. Mr. Downes officiated as usual on the
quarter-deck, at 10 a.m. He practically illustrated Moses
coming down from the Mount, as narrated in Exodus xxxiv.
In the afternoon, at half-past two p.m., from the Psalms Ixv.
3,4, on the duty and privilege of communion with God.
On Tuesday last, at five o’clock p.m., at the request of the
captain, the rev. gentleman held a religious service on the
quarter-deck, for the purpose of improving the melancholy
event of the preceding night. The whole service was deeply
impressive, and the audience unusually large. We trust the
impression made may be as practical and abiding as it was
deep and general.


RELIGIOUS APHORISMS.
Prayer moves the hand, that moves the universe.
Christianity has nothing to fear, and infidelity nothing to hope,
from the march of intellect.
Prayer brings down the first blessing, and praise the second.
He who would know how to command, must first learn how to
obey.
“ I couldn’t do it,” never succeeds. “ I will try,” often con-
quers.
LEAVES FROM “OUR LOG."
No. VI.
The past week has been saddened by a disaster—the first, and
we trust the last, of the kind which it may be our lot to record.
We allude to the catastrophe of Monday night. About half past
eight o’clock, we were startled by the fearful cry, “ A man over-
board !” Instantly there was a general rush on deck—some from
an unfinished game, others from their quiet reading, and all in
anxiety to learn his fate. The alarm was first given by one of
the passengers, who heard a gurgling noise and a faint cry for
help on the starboard side of the vessel; and the captain, with
his usual promptness, gave immediate orders to do everything pos-
sible to rescue the poor fellow A life buoy was hurled out, and
a boat in which were Messrs. O’Donnell and Glass, was quickly
lowered, and rowed along the wake of the ship to discover if
possible any traces of the missing one. The night was beauti-
fully calm—the stars shed a mild radiance over the glassy wa ves—
even the winds seemed hushed. Our ship was going unusually slow,
and everything appeared favorable for the drowning man’s rescue.
By the captain’s direction bluelights were burned at the stern,
which cast a lurid glare over the scene, bringing into bold relief
the ship with its rigging and sails, and giving an unearthly hue to
the countenances of the groups who thronged the bulwarks and
poop. All were now hushed into silent suspense, only broken by
the challenging shouts of those in the boat, or the plash of the oars.
When about twenty minutes had elapsed, the boat was seen re-
turning to the vessel. Some whispered sanguinely, “ They have
got him j v others thought the silence seemed ominous ; whilst all
waited with intense interest to have their hopes or fears confirmed.
When it was sufficiently near, the captain called out, “ Have you
got him ?” and was immediately answered by the mournful mono-
syllables, “No, sir.” All hope was now over, and few did not
feel an overpowering sadness creep over them, when they thought
that one so lately in our midst should now be beyond the reach of
human help. It was not clearly ascertained at the time who the
unhappy man was, but it has since transpired that he was a steer-
age passenger, named George Williamson. He had hitherto
borne a good character, and had made himself very useful on
board—especially in the stores. He has left a wife and two child-
ren to deplore his loss. The solemn event was improved on
Tuesday evening by a discourse from the Rev. J. Downes. On
Wednesday evening a Shakesperian reading took place in the
after saloon. The play selected was “As You Like It;” and as it
was the first of the series, it was naturally looked forward to with
some interest. The experiment we think succeeded admirably,
and we are of opinion that the ladies and gentlemen who
undertook the several parts, deserve credit and encouragement in
their praiseworthy attempt to make the immortalities of Shake-
speare “ familiar in our mouths as household words.’’ We hope
ere long to have another evening with glorious Will. On Friday
a ship being observed bearing towards us, the word flew from one
to another that now we might send despatches homeward. Many
a hasty letter was accordingly penned, but when they were sealed
and directed, the tantalizing fact oozed out, that the supposed
homeward bound was only a Brazilian “ Will of the Wisp.’’
T. McC.
LARRY MURPHY'S RECOLLECTIONS OF
AUSTRALIA.
No. V.
“ Shure, it was my advintures in Australy I promised to tell
yees, but there was such quare goins on in the ship, I couldn’t
help talkin a thrifle about thim. Anyways, one fine mornin we
came to the ind av the say, right fornint the town av Melbume.
We were all bundled abourd av a steamer, and sint up a filthy
sthrame av water, they called the Tallow Yallow—aud the dirty
yallow it was intirely! Well, bedad, as soon as we got near the
town, I seen all the chaps holdin their noses. What’s that for,
says I, to one av thim. We’re just at the slaughter-houses, says
he. Well, begorrah, I looked about me, and there was a lot av
ould tumblin down sheds, and piled all round thim was hapes av
cows heads and a crowd av pigs, all nawin and munchin away at
thim. Bedad, says I, shure its beef instead av bacon they’ll be
whin they’re kilt. Ashore we wint, and maybe I wasn’t fright-
ened whin I heard the state av things. May I niver die in sin,
but praties was £SO a ton ; bacon half-a-crown a pound; cabbages
half-a-crown each. Och, rriurthur in Irish, says I, shure the
curse av God must be on the country where the luxuries av life
is so scarce. Give me a hould av a lump av gould, and I’ll be
back to ould Ireland. Well, off I wint walkin through the
sthreets, thinkin where the gould was kept, till at last I made
bould and wint up to a chap, and, says I, Where’s the gould? says
I. The gould, says he. Yis, says I. Do you mean the gould be
the Escort ? says he The sorrow taste I care what its be, says I,
so as I git a good grip av it. So he looked mighty puzzled in-
tirely ; but, as luck would have it, up come a throop av horsemen,
cuttin and slashin and dhrivin qll about a couple av carts tarin
away like mad. Who is thim ? says I. The Gold Escort, says
he. Well, begorrah, as soon as I heard it, More power to you,
Peter Doolan, says I, shure it was the thruth you tould me the
mornin you wor dhrivin the pig, and here’s the chaps goin to
ladle out the gould. So off I ran, as fast as my legs would carry
me, till I came to the place where they stopped, and in I wint,
and there I seen a man with a pen behind his ear, perched on a
stool. Sur, says I, (for you see its a good thing to keep a civil
tongue in your head) plase, sur, can I have the gould now ? Is
it the gould just come down ? Yis, if its plasin to you, says I. It
wont be given out before to-morrow mornin, says he. So with
that ray heart gave such a jump for joy. that I thought it ud
come into my mouth, and says I to myself, Och, Peter Doolan,
jewil, may you niver want a pig to dhrive—and may the heavens
be your bed when you lave off dhrivin thim, for it was the gospel
thruth you tould me. Well, that night I slept in the biler av a
steam ingin on the quay, and in the mornin off I wint to the same
place, and there was the same chap on the stool, and says I, Sur,
I’m come for the gould. Give me the recate, says he. Be asey,
young man, says I; shure its afthur gittin the gould I’ll put my
my mark to the recate. Nonsense, man, says he; give me the
Company’s recate. The sorrow taste av company I have, says I;
shure I’ll go shares wid nobody, barin I’d give Peter Doolan
a thrifle whin I git home. Will you give me the recate ? says
he. Will you give the gould ? says I, you dirty rapscallion ; but
he walked away and took no more notice av me than if I wasn’t
in the place. Well, thin, says I. you naygur, here’s my mark for
you, and whipped up an ink-bottle and threw it at his head. With
that he shouted out for the polis. Ochone, says I, is the polis in
this counthry, too ? Shure Peter Doolan said nothin about thim.
Well, bedad, you’d think it was in the town av Dublin you wor,
for in walked two polis with blue tail coats and hats with leather
tops to thim, and bedad I didn’t sleep in the biler that night, for
they walked me off to jail. Next mornin they took me before
the magistrate, and I was axed what I had to say for myself.
Your honor’s lordship’s worship, says I, shure its a dacent boy I
am, that only wants my rights. What do you mane ? says he.
Arrah, shure, your honor’s lordship’s worship, didn’t I meet
Peter Doolan one mornin dhrivin a pig, and didn’t he tell me that
if I wint to Australy the gould ud be ladled out to me. Why,
you must be mad, says the magistrate. Dont you know if you
want gould you must dig for it ? Arrah, thin, the sorrow taste
ever I’ll dig, says I. Shure what ud be the use av diggin for
gould, whin bacon is half-a-crown, cabbages half-a-crown, eggs
is—— The case is dismissed, said the magistrate—the man is a
fool. Well, there was I left outside the place with my mouth
open, and says I to myself, sullillyquisin, Arrah, Peter Doolan,
says I, sweet bad luck to you, Peter Doolan; is it sixteen hundred
thousand miles I’m come—and aint I to git the gould? Well,
bedad, the thought sthruck me to go abourd av the ship and thry
to git back agin. So off I wint, and tould my storey to the cap-


tain ; and bedad its the dacent man he was—for says he, Larry,
says he, it was the pigs was the beginnin av your throubles, and
its the pigs must ind thim. So, bedad, he made me purser to the
pigs, and the ducks, and the hins, and gave pie a passage home
for mindin and feedin thim. Well, praise be to the saints, here I
am in ould Ireland again, in pace and quiet—barin the leatherin
I’ll give Peter Doolan whin I find him; and may I niver git the
taste av a maley praty if ever again I’m found five miles from the
town av Ballymacwhack.”
C. G.
REVIEW.
Land , Labour , and Gold, or Two Years in Victoria , by
Wit. Howitt. 2 vols., Longman & Co. The Golden Era
of Victoria; published by Messrs. Orr & Co.
In our last we gave a short notice and some extracts from
William Howitt’s work on Victoria, and we now propose
continuing our remarks. The prejudice of the author against
all Irishmen was illustrated in our last, and against all
Scotchmen he is equally indignant. Unintentionally, how-
ever, he pays the Scotch a compliment in the following:—
“ Before the gold discovery, this colony was almost entirely
Scotch.” Now he no doubt gives utterance to his honest con-
victions in this statement; and by it must be understood that
the owners of many of the finest stations, and most of the mer-
chants and wealthy inhabitants were Scotch. The Census shows
only 5,764 Scotch out of a population of 47,920. Ten times
Scotch, however, are all Highlanders. Poor as rats at home,
they are as rapacious as rats abroad. Catch a Highlander
out here that has any feeling for an Englishman, except
that of fleecing him. In support of this charge, he gives an
instance of a highland drayman charging him £2 for carrying
an axle ten miles in an empty dray along the road he was
travelling, and for which an English drayman only charged
10s. Such is a sample of the prejudice and temper with
which this work, otherwise admirable, is too much filled.
Imagining highwaymen are very numerous in the colony, two
parties meet, and both look like banditti. Each takes the
other for bushrangers—each look to their arms, and stand
on the defensive. The following is one of the encounters
our worthy friend Howitt got out of:—
“ One day at noon seven horsemen rode up to my tent. As
they approached, I was quite satisfied what they were. They
drew up in rank at about a hundred yards from the tent, and one
of them rode forward. I gave notice to our party that seven
bushrangers were at hand, and they got their arms ready. For
my part, I determined if they demanded money, to go into my
tent on pretence of fetching it, and giving them the contents of a
revolver in rotation. We made up our minds from the first to
greet such fellows as we would so many wolves. The one who had
advanced rode round to the front of the tent, and gazed at me
without saying a word. I asked him very sternly what he
wanted, and he asked, in reply, if we sold lemonade. I said
‘No, we sold nothing, except what we should sell pretty dear;’
and desired him to take himself off. The man seemed quailed by
my manner, wheeled his horse round, rode to his fellows, said
something, and away they rode ”
Now, if the facts were known, the poor fellow who was
thus unceremoniously treated for daring to want lemonade,
was more astonished at Mr. Howitt, than Mr. H. would feel
flattered by knowing.
Dysentery is the trouble which is most dangerous to the
new arrivals. Many people are cut off by it shortly after
they come to the colony. Mr. Howitt says that the public-
houses do not sell the splendid home-brewed beer of England,
but chiefly a vile species of stuff called grog, made of arrack
or rum, adulterated with oil of vitriol and the finest specific
in the world for the production of dysentery, and of course
causes the loss of many a valuable life. He might also have
added, that the colonial beer has the same effect. It is not
the climate, nor the water, which destroys health, but the
grog, the brandy, the beer, and other stuff sold at the poison-
shops, called public-houses,
“ Hurrah! there are the diggings, at last! after the arduous
and eventful journey of nearly two months, over nearly 350 miles
of ground—but such ground. There are really the diggings. The
white tents stand thick in the valley, while all the ground has
been turned up, and looks like a desert of pipeclay. The idea of
walking up to Mount Alexander in a couple of days, and shovel-
ing up a few sacksful of gold and going home again, is very
charming, and quite as true as the romance of Aladdin’s Lamp.
As for ourselves, we shall dig and shall buy gold; and whether
we get more or less, we shall still be picking up information for
an ultimate object ’’
“ As to the two maidservants whom you say wish to come out,
I cannot advise them to it. Let them reflect on the unpaved
streets, on the heat, the flies, the mud and slush. Let them re-
flect well, too, on the rude character and blackguard state of the
lower classes. As to girls marrying here, that is soon accom-
plished ; for I hear that lots of diggers get married every time
they go to Melbourne to spend their gold. The vilest scoundrels
are assembled here from all the four quarters of the globe ; they
marry and go off, and are never heard of again.”
It must be remembered that the diggers here referred to
are the farthest off and the poorest.
“We have wandered about the diggings. No language can de-
scribe the scene of chaos where they principally are. The brook
is diverted from its course, and all the bed of the river is dug
up —the holes sunk as close to each other as they possibly can be,
so as to leave room for the earth that is thrown up. They are
pits and creeks and yawning gulfs from ten to thirty feet deep.
The earth is drawn up in buckets ; many of these holes are filled
with water, black as ink, and the stench of a tan-yard. In the
midst of this the diggers are working away, thick as ants in an ant-
hill. We saw some parties who had worked out in the course of
the day one pound of gold ; others, five and six ounces—and so
most of them had some golden result. We found more than we
ever expected.”
(To le continued .)
FACETIÆ.
The Secretary of the “ Champion of the Seas Magnetic Telegraph
Company” has received the following important despatch :
London, 16th August, 1855.
A complete revolution has taken place in the mode of wearing the bon-
net. The hair is all withdrawn from the face, and united in one plait,
descends the back ; to the extreme point of the plait the bonnet is at:
tached, which sways to and fro with a peculiarly graceful undulation in
walking. The only inconvenience as yet experienced, consists in the
delinquency of mischief-making young vagabonds, who will take a pull
at the plait in passing, but the Police have strict injunctions to keep a
sharp look out. —Louis Napoleon was lately seen whispering in corners
with the State Physicians, from which it is inferred that something in-
teresting is on the tapis. —On the 14th inst. the Earl of Muttonhead was
led to the hymenial altar by the Honorable Miss Jemima Poptuft. The
noble bridegroom is only seventy years the senior of the bride, he having
attained the mature age of eighty-six, and the lady being but sixteen.—
In consequence of the increasing expenses of the war, it is proposed to
levy a tax on moustaches ; each man to pay in proportion to the number
of hairs composing the manly excrescence. Anything under a dozen
hairs is not to be considered rateable. It is expected there will be a
great deal of hair-splitting in collecting the tax.
It has been proposed in the House of Commons to disband our present
armies, and get the war carried on by private contract. It is suggested
that as we are a nation of shopkeepers, the formation of a Company for
the purpose, will be the only remunerative means of taking Sebastopol.
ANSWER TO ANAGRAM.
Sly ware.


Champion of the Seas Times.
No. YIL] MONDAY, AUGUST 27, 1855.
We are now about the latitude of the Cape, and from the
progress we are at present making, we may reasonably enter-
tain a “ Good Hope ” that in three or four numbers more we
shall have to record the completion of our journey. We
must congratulate our readers on having attained to this
stage of our voyage under so many favorable circumstances.
'Tis true we have had to encounter many delays, but still the
“set offs ” must not be forgotten. We have passed through
the Tropics, the most trying part of our course, with a re-
markable freedom from sickness or accident. We have had
such a continuation of fine weather, that on no day have pe-
destrians been precluded from a stroll on the deck ; and best
of all (what would of itself reconcile one to the most pro-
tracted voyage) the genius of sociality has ever presided over
our company, and many an hour, which would otherwise have
been dull, has been charmed of its monotony by the merry
anecdote, or playful raillery of our shipmates. We are quite
sure that when at length we shall exchange our temporary
residence on the waves for a life on shore, we will carry with
us to our new homes, many a pleasant reminiscence of the
days we have spent together, and of the unexpected friends
we have found where we but anticipated loneliness. There
is no enjoyment so likely to be remembered as that which
comes unpremeditated and unsought.
“ Pleasure that comes unlooked for, is thrice welcome.
And if it stir the heart, if aught be there
Which may hereafter, in a thoughtful hour
Wake but a sigh, —’tis treasured up
Amongst the things most welcome
And the day it comes
Is noted as a white day in our lives.”
If the great end of life, “ happiness,” is only secured, it mat-
ters little where our lot may be cast; and though it seems a
thorny path to travel from homes and friendships that have
consecrated those homes, yet if it is chosen from a sense of
duty, we shall find the way strewn with unexpected flowers,
which, redolent of sympathy and kindness, will make the
wanderer’s sacrifices more easy to be borne, and will nerve
both hand and heart with a fortitude and a strength which
will rise superior to every difficulty.
T. McC.
CAPTAIN'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times,
Deae Sie,
As is not unusual on Monday mornings, our prospects are
brightening up, and we are now sailing with a favorable
breeze at the rate of thirteen knots an hour. It is rather
singular that our winds should always be better on the par-
ticular morning that the “ Times ” is issued; it may be that
they wish to be favourably reported of in that widely circu-
lated journal, to give “ intending emigrants ” a good opinion
of them, —in which case I would beg to suggest that the
“ Times ” should be published daily instead of weekly, that
our prospects might be always improving instead of waiting
a week for a favorable change. We are within a day’s sail
of “Trista d’Acunha,” a small island which, during Napoleon’s
imprisonment at St. Helena, was occupied by an English
force, on the withdrawment of which, three men volunteered
to remain (a corporal and two seamen of the squadron), from
whom have sprung the present colony, increased occasionally
by whaling seamen tired of their voyage. The population
two years ago was eighty-five. The climate is healthy, the
land in the valleys very productive, and the settlers employ
themselves in the capture of seals which they barter with
whales ; the island is 8,000 feet high, and may be seen forty
miles in clear weather.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
DOCTOR'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Deae Sie,
The past week presents little more than usual to remark on.
The change in temperature, though very acceptable, was more
sudden than I expected. The only result noticeable from
this cause is a few cases of influenza, and these, I am happy
to say, are of a trifling nature.
I am, &c.,
a. T. WOOD, M.D.
RELIGIOUS APHORISMS.
The briefest moment is the meeting point of two eternities.
Of two physical evils choose the lesser ; but of two moral evils
choose neither.
He who has only the form of religion is a hypocrite ; he who
has not even that, is an atheist.
The proud professor talks much and does little ; but the humble
Christian talks little and does much.
J. D.
LEAVES FROM OUR LOG.
No. VII.
The week just concluded, has witnessed a total reformation in the
attire of our fellow-passengers. A fall in the thermometer of
12° or 15° could not fail to produce this' result. Indeed so marked
has been the change, that one might imagine that in this short
interval, we had passed from sunny June to wintry December,
Gentlemen who heretofore, with an air of languor, lounged about
denuded of cravat and vest, and arrayed in the thinnest of thin
alpaca wrappers, may now be seen in all the full-blown import-
ance of a heavy surtout, briskly pacing the deck as if they were
walking for a wager. Indeed their rapid pedestrianism seems to
throw even our favorite horse-racing into the shade. The
weather has not however interfered with any of our amusements.
The ancient game of Chess has acquired unwonted popularity,
and it now appears the height of some romantic young gentlemen’s
ambition to get “ mated.” We shall not attempt to anticipate a
new edition of Frank Stone’s celebrated pictures, but consider it
a hopeful sign of the times, when so many are found yielding
their suffrages to this most intellectual of games. The perseverance
of some of the novitiates in pursuing this abstruse amusement,
whilst the vessel heaved to and fro like a drunken man, is worthy
of all praise; and promises to form another page in the interesting
record of those who have rendered themselves famous for the
pursuit of knowledge under difficulties. Many of us have been
gratified for the first time with a view of that beautiful bird, the
Cape pigeon. The dark brown Cape hen, the petrel, and the
snowy albatross, have also hovered about our stern, and some
have even asserted, with all the deliberateness of a Polonius, that
they really beheld something “ very like a whale.” Be this as it
may, there is nothing unreasonable in the anticipation that we
may see ere long many “ a behemoth upheave its vastness.”
On Friday night, we had our first experience of a squall on sea.
It is true that we are familiar enough with some kind of squalls,


(and who would be out of hearing of such evidences that little
innocents were to be found in our otherwise incomplete company,)
but this particular squall was not quite so tiny an affair. Though
it came upon us rather suddenly, and with some violence, it did
not find our Captain and officers off their guard. The necessary
precautions were immediately resorted to, but it soon passed over.
In the interim the wind veered round from N.W. to S.W., and we
went along scudding before the gale at fourteen knots an hour.
We had thus palpable evidence of what our beautifully modelled
craft could do, if (alas! for that unwelcome monosyllable) we only
had good winds. This excited our hopes, which were, however,
doomed to be disappointed the following day, when we were nearly
becalmed. Another evening with Shakspeare, is on the tapis,
and as the motion to day is steadier, we trust those who have
hesitated heretofore to enact a staggering scene on the dais of the
after saloon, will screw up their courage to the sticking point, and
favor us this evening with a glimpse of the “ Merchant of Venice.”
T. McC.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Yesterday the Rev. John Downes conducted the Divine
services on the quarter deck, as usual. In the morning he ex-
pounded “ Christian love,” as drawn by inspiration with a pen
of surpassing beauty, in 1 Cor. xiii. And in the afternon he
discoursed from Hosea ii. 14, 16, on “the spiritual wanderer
restored and comforted.” The day was fine and cool, and the
audience very attentive. We were peculiarly glad to see
some faces present we had not seen there before. We accept
this as a token of good, and a pledge of better, things.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
SONG.
To the South ! to the South! to the land of the free.
Where the gum forests stretch over the upland and lea;
Amid whose vast Prairies the flocks fleecy white.
Roam countless as stars in the Temple of Night.
Oh! falsely the West is termed “ Land of the Free,”
AVhere millions still languish in dark slavery;
And the Stars and the Stripes, though they gallantly wave,
Have their pattern cut deep in the back of the slave.
To the South ! to the South ! to the land of the free,
Where the cool balmy breezes blow fresh from the sea;
Where a man is a man, if he’s willing to toil,
Or to culture the surface, or delve ’neath the soil.
Oh! Islands there are, scatter’d far o’er the main.
Deep gleaming with verdure amidst the blue plain;
But not one of them all, though you try every portion.
Can compare with the Isle of the Southern Ocean.
Amid whose vast regions and plains ever green.
Whole nations may shelter in comfort serene;
Then away,—let us speed, with the favouring breeze.
And build a new Empire amid the South Seas.
To the South ! to the South ! &c.
Whether onward to where, like an infant asleep,
Tasmania lies hushed on the breast of the deep;
Or where the soft gale, as o’er ocean it roves.
Pans the plains of New Zealand and bright sunny groves.
Long, long, may they flourish, untrammelled and free,
United with England, the Queen of the Sea;
And forward advancing, with standard unfurl’d,
Speed the mission of freedom across the wide world.
To the South! to the South, &c.
J. B.
MR. & MRS. CAUDLE AT SEA.
Mr. and Mrs. Caudle are very generally known to the public,
through the medium of their conversations already published; but
all are not, perhaps, aware, that some time since in consequence
of a change in circumstances which involved them in difficulties,
the interesting couple decided on proceeding with their family to
Melbourne, and they accordingly embarked as second cabin
passengers on board the good ship “ Go-a-head,” Capt. Timothy
Set-sail, Now there was a strong presumption in favor of the idea
that as Mr. and Mrs. Caudle had been for so long a period in the
habit of indulging in nocturnal dialogues, respecting their private
affairs, when ashore, they would also give way to the same prac-
tice when afloat. We accordingly find this supposition confirmed
by the facts of the case, according to the report of Miss Ta-
bitha Muzzlewig, a maiden lady of faded respectability, who
occupied the .cabin next them. She, influenced by the laudable
desire of rescuing from oblivion any matrimonial interchanges of
thought which might occur during the voyage between these
interesting celebrities, according to her own acknowledgment, was
in the habit of nightly climbing to the top of her berth and
approximating her ear to a convenient aperture, which post she
held each night until warned by the customary nasal sound, indi-
cating sleep, that the dialogue was closed. Now as Mr. Caudle
occupied the upper berth, and his help-mate the lower, it is
reasonable to suppose that some elevation of voice was required
to enable the one to hear the other, and we, therefore, do not
entertain the shadow of a doubt, that Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig
heard every word, and we must believe in the fairness of her
report, for she does not even suppress the parts in which Mrs.
Caudle reflects with undue severity on herself. We have there-
fore compiled the following dialogues from the notes taken by
Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, and at once make a plunge “ in medias
res ” into
Dialogue No. 1.
“Well, Mr. Caudle, are you sure the luggage is all safe?”
“ I think so, my dear”—
“You think, Mr. Caudle, what business have you thinking?—
there were the three large boxes, Mr. Caudle, and the big trunk,
and the trunk covered with canvas, the trunk with the broken
lock, and the trunk without a lock, the box with the thin rope,
and the box with the thick rope, the yellow trunk, and the tin
box with a hole in the lid, the small red box, and the middling
sized blue box, the big travelling bag darned in the corner, the
little travelling bag, and six band boxes, two for my caps,
and four for Sal and Jemima’s bonnets, —are they all safe, Mr.
Caudle?”
“ My dear, I saw the tin box getting a great dinge on the side,
and the sailors knocked the top off one of the band boxes.”
“ Mr. Caudle, I’m ashamed of you ; are you the head of a family,
and a husband, and permit the innocent beings leaning on you for
support, to be the victims of such outrage ? And pray, Mr. Caudle,
was it one of the bandboxes with my caps, or one of the band-
boxes with Sal and Jemima’s bonnets ?
“ My dear, I didn’t look—”
“ No, Mr, Caudle, you didn’t look ; of course you didn’t look.
Who would expect you to look, Mr. Caudle, when you ought to
look?”
“ Why, my dear, I was looking at the other five bandboxes.”
“ Oh! yes, Mr. Caudle, you are always looking when you
oughtn’t to look. Well, Mr. Caudle, I know half the luggage is
lost, and the other is battered and bruised, and crushed into no-
thing; but we will say nothing about it; it’s of no consequence;
the clothing of your wife and children is nothing to signify, as
they are going to be starved by inches, What is to become of us,
shut up in a box like this ? We’re worse than the brutes in the
Zoological Gardens, Mr, Caudle, for they get fresh meat every
day. Do jmu hear, Mr. Caudle ?”
“ Yes, my dear ; but you see it can’t be helped.”
“ Can’t be helped, Mr. Caudle! Oh no! it can’t be helped—
there’s no help for the unfortunate wife of a helpless man. Well,
I made my own choice. There was Timothy Snuffins, the draper,
Jeremiah Tuffleton, the saddler, and ever so many other nice
young men, I refused for you, Mr. Caudle, and this is what you
have brought me to.”
“ I’m very sorry, my dear—”
“ Oh ! Mr. Caudle, you’re very sorry I didn’t have one of them,
are you? You think I’ll die under hard usage, but I’ll live on
starvation to spite you, Mr. Caudle.”
“ My dear, I didn’t mean”—
“ Oh, no! Mr. Caudle, you didn’t mean, of course you didn’t
mean ; who would expect any meaning from you, Mr. Caudle ?
But what do you mean that your wife and children should live on
for the next three months ?”


“ My dear, didn’t you see the ship’s scale before we took our
passage ?”
“ The ship’s scale, Mr, Caudle! What has a woman to do with
the ship’s scale ! Is it not the business of every man to provide
proper food for his family ? What was put before your wife and
children this very day, Mr. Caudle—a lump of salt beef that I
couldn’t get a tooth into, and rice boiled in dirty water. Pray,
Mr. Caudle, what is for dinner to-morrow?”
“ Pork and pea soup, my dear.”
“Oh! Mr. Caudle! is it come to this? and is a respectable
female expected to digest such rubbish. We have a choice of
death by starvation or poisoning. But, Mr. Caudle, we might
die without a groan, if we might do it respectably; but to think
of the family of the Caudles being put into a mess with a lot of
potwollopers, who have come from the Lord knows where, and
have been a doing the Lord knows what. There’s that
nasty scraggy old maid in the next cabin to us, Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig, I’d muzzle her tongue instead of her wig if I had a
hold of her; and then there’s that young man with the crooked
nose, he says he is highly connected at home, but whoever heard
of any one of the name of Swigg being highly connected? Oh,
Mr. Caudle ! Mr. Caudle ! I’m ashamed of you, to think that my
daughters, Sal and Jemima, should sit down to salt beef with such
riffraff!”
“My dear! didn’t you say you wouldn’t mind the inconvenience
of the voyage, as you were sure Sally and Jemima would get well
married at Melbourne ?’’
“ Mr. Caudle, you’re a brute! Who wants the girls to get
married ? Their unfortunate mother ought to be a warning to
them to remain all their lives in a state of single blessedness; but
if they did want husbands, Mr. Caudle, is pork and pea soup
likely to improve their good looks ? There’s Sal, didn’t she put on a
bran’ new silk dress on Sunday, that cost 3s. B d. a yard, Mr.
Caudle, not reckoning the trimmings, and a bonnet that an angel
might have envied ? but those whipper-snapper chaps in the first
cabin took no more notice of her than if she was nothing. Be-
tween you and I, Mr. Caudle, the half of them are tailors.”
Here the feelings of Mrs. Caudle proved too much for her; and
after indulging in a fit of sobbing she gradually sunk to repose,
cutting short the vigil of Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig. That res-
pectable lady, in the first paroxysm of wrath at hearing herself
styled a nasty scraggy old maid, was inclined to rush in and pull
off Mrs. Caudle’s nightcap; but on second thoughts she deter-
mined on submitting to such gross indignity for the sake of hear-
ing the following dialogues. And in the mean time she consoled
herself with the following words : —“ When I get to the end of
the voyage, won’t I claw her!’’
(To he continued.)
C. G.
REVIEW.
Land, Labour, and Gold, or Two Years in Victoria, by
Wm. Howitt. 2 vols., Longman & Co. The Gold Era
of Victoria; published by Messrs. Orr & Co.
We last week left Mr. Howitt, with his son and nephew, at
the Ovens diggings, where they had been more successful
than they had expected. Such, however, is not the case with
gentlemen diggers always, more frequently they are unsuc-
cessful; neither education nor ability are so much required at
the diggings as a pair of strong arms.
The following is one example out of many which are to be
met with in Victoria:—
“ A young man tending sheep came up to us as we were at
breakfast: I thought he cast loving glances at our tea and mutton
chops, but he only asked if we had seen a person on horseback
inquiring for him and the sheep. He was ordered, he said, to
keep them there until a Mr. Campbell came for them, which he
hoped would be soon, as he had not breakfasted. I told him I
would give him some breakfast, which I did. Whilst he ate, he
told us he was of a good family in Scotland. That his elder
brother had a fine place in Fyfe ; a sister had married a Polish
count. He had lived, he said, in Italy three years, and evidently
knew Italy and France well. Yet here he was shepherding on
the diggings for the butchers at £3 10s. per week. He said out
of his £3 10s. he paid 7s. Gd. a week for a licence, and £1 ss. for
provisions, so he had only £1 17s. out of which to purchase
clothes and save money to return home.
“ Digging he had tried without success, how far the fault might
be with himself I cannot say; but you are continually stumbling
on scions of good families, in such humble occupations.’’
On the rioting at the diggings he makes the following
remarks: —
“ The discontents are, respecting the licence-fee for digging,—
the mode of collecting it, the administration of justice, and the
general treatment of the digger. What is put forward most
prominently is a repeal of the gold licence; but besides this there
is a strong feeling against the arbitrary treatment of the diggers
by the commissioners and police. The diggers being by far the
largest class of the community, the greatest consumers, and the
largest tax-payers, —paying in direct taxation £500,000. While
the great landowners and wool producers pay only £20,000.
Nothing can be clearer than that they should have their share of
the soil on which they live, —land and houses on the land; —and
should not be while enriching the whole community, themselves
vagabonds, and rootless aliens in the country. It is well known
that not more than one-half of the diggers pay the licence fee.
Now by a reduction, so as to render it less oppressive, an increase
instead of a decrease may be the result; that the Government
will abolish it altogether is not to be expected. Neither would
this benefit the digger; without it the Government could not pro-
tect the digger, he would then be left to the mercy of the host of
scoundrels who even now are with difficuly held in check. No
one would be safe in his tent or in his hole. If he found a rich
claim, a swarm of desperadoes would rush in, turn him out, and
possess themselves of it. A moderate Government licence is in-
finitely preferable to the licence of the brutal men who abound on
the gold fields. The mode of collecting the tax has done more to
make it unpopular than the amount of tax itself. You are placed
in violent juxta-position with the tax-collector, not twice a year as
at home, but daily and hourly you may be required to produce
your receipt. You may show it to one, and then descend to the
bottom of your hole of one hundred feet, and the next minute
you may be called upon to show it to another who may be wan-
dering over the field. A dozen men have at once been ranged be-
fore the magistrate on the charge of being found without licences.
He would ask the first—‘Have you got a licence?’ ‘Yes, your
worship.’ ‘ Where is it ? ’ ‘ln my tent,’ ‘Oh ! you have not
got it here?’ ‘No, sir.’ To the second:—‘Have you got a li-
cence? ’ ‘Yes, sir.’ ‘Where is it?’ ‘ln my other trousers.’
And so on through the twelve; every one having a licence, but
not with them. He would say— ‘ You are all fined five pounds a
piece, and locked up till paid.’ Such is the system that has raised
up the indignation of high spirited free-born men, and excited the
universal hatred of the people, as a cold-blooded, un-English,
un-Christian despotism. Sticking up is by no means so profitable
and pleasant as some may be disposed to think it.”
R. C.
SKETCH OF A TOUR IN ITALY.
( Continued .)
Leghorn is a seaport of considerable importance, being the only
outlet for the produce of Tuscany and Central Italy. Its exports
consist principally of silk, olive oil, fruits, &c. It is also celebrated
for its platting for straw hats, &c. Its imports are numerous,
comprising a great variety of produce, and it is thus rendered the
most important commercial city in Italy, In other respects there
is nothing to interest or to detain the traveller. There is a line
of railway up the country as far as Florence, It is well con-
stucted, and under good management About twelve miles in-
land, and close to the line, is the small and very ancient city of
Pisa, celebrated for its Cathedral and its Leaning Tower, which
all travellers stop en passant to view. From Pisa, a few hours
ride brought us to Florence, the capital of Tuscany, and renowned
for its beautiful situation and delicious climate. It is built in the
centre of a plain, on the banks of the river Arno, and surrounded
on three sides by lofty and precipitous hills. The country for
miles around is exceedingly fertile and well wooded; it is inter-
sected by good roads, and there are great numbers of elegant vil-
las, standing in the midst of their own gardens and pleasure
grounds. Many of them are occupied by English families. The


security and freedom which foreigners have always enjoyed in
Tuscany, have rendered Florence a most agreeable place of resi-
dence, and have contributed much to its wealth and prosperity.
For centuries it has been the resort of artists and scholars, who
under the patronage and support of the powerful nobles of the
land, were enabled peacefully to prosecute their studies. Hence,
Florence is rich in monuments of art—in fine churches and splen-
did galleries. Foremost amongst the latter are the “ Gallerie de
Medici,” occupying part of the palace once belonging to the
powerful family of that name, and the “ Pitti Gallerie” in the
palace of the present Duke. These two are the most celebrated
in Europe, and contain the greatest number of the finest works of
Titian, Raphael, Correggio, Guido, Carlodolci, Salvator Rosa,
Domenichino, and others. Here, also, are to be found some of
the most celebrated monuments of the genius of Michael Angelo.
Indeed Florence may be truly called the Cradle of the Arts, as
under all forms of government, they have flourished under the
patronage of its once powerful nobles. The reigning ducal family
is a branch of the House of Hapsburgh. The present Grand Duke
Leopold is very unpopular—so much so, that he has been obliged
to call in the aid of Austria to enable him to retain his throne ; and
there are now some few thousand Austrian soldiers stationed in
Florence. No doubt Austria would gladly add the flourishing
state of Tuscany to her other Italian possessions, and thus secure
under her sway the whole of central Italy; and unless prevented
by the joint intervention of France and England, she seems likely
to be able to accomplish this object. Leaving Florence we returned
to Leghorn, and thence took the steamer to Civita Vecchia, the
only seaport in the Roman States, and distant thirty miles from
the Eternal City. It is a miserable place; the port being half
choked up from neglect, and the trade being very insignificant.
(To he continued.)
FACETIÆ.
The Secretary of the “ Champion of the Seas” Magnetic Telegraph
Company has received the following dispatch :
London, 23rd August, 1855.
There is nothing new stirring this week, with the exception of an un-
precedented abnormal phenomenon which made its appearance on the
coast of Cornwall. A lady walking along the beach, found lying on the
sand a letter which had floated in from sea. It was addressed to Mrs.
Molly Mulligan, the next house to the style at the ind av the green lane
in the ould country. Being a matter of extreme difficulty to arrive at
a correct idea of the intended destination of the letter, it was opened by
the Post Office authorities, and found to be a communication from one
of the passengers of the ship “ Champion of the Seas,” dated, “ In the
middle av the say, 28 July, 1855.” The matter having excited great
public attention, it was taken up by Prince Albert, and he appointed
twelve of the most eminent men of the day (including himself as Chair-
man) to investigate the particulars. After mature deliberation, they
came to the decision, “ That in all probability the e Champion of the
Seas’ had sent home letters by some ship not yet to hand, and that this
individual letter had fallen overboard, and by a wonderful coincidence
been carried to the coast of Britain. The letter has been going the
round of the papers, and the following is a copy;—“ Arrah, mother,
jewel, is it there you are at home, and is it here I am in the middle av
the say, roulin and roulin about! Anyways, I do be thinkin av you
night and day; and the pigs, and the ducks, and the goat, and Judy
Flanagan, and be the same token it’s Judy has the natest ancle ever
wint over a style. But, och, murthur ! shure they’re waitin for my let-
thur, and the sorrow taste I know what to say, for I’m all av a thrimble,
and shake. Arrah, mightn’t they give a dacent boy a week to write a
letthur, whin he hasn’t Father O’Toole to help him out ? Well, bedad,
shure mother this is the ‘ Champion av the Says.’ Isn’t that a thunderin
grand name? and the captain’s a gintleman every inch av him, but be
the powtliers isn’t the first mate a darlin ? Shure my heart warms to
him, for his name begins with an o—and the O’s is the rale ould ginuin
stock that was kings av Ireland before Moses or Saint Patrick was born.
And, bedad, and you’d see it in him; for there’s the fun roulin out av the
corners av his eyes, like flashes av lightnin. But there’s himself bawlin
out for the letthurs. Arrah, mother, darlin, what will I say to you ?
We’re all purty well, I thank you, barin we niver git as much to ate as
we would if we helped ourselves. Give my love to Jerry O’Toole and
the girl he has a tinderness for. The beef is mighty salt entirely, and the
pork—Och, tare an ages,-there they are again calling out for the letthurs,
and this murtherin ould pen won’t let a scratch out av it. Anyways,
tell Judy Flanagan I do be dhramin av her wakin and slapin, and the
sorrow such ancles ever—there’s the ould pen again won’t scratch. Be-
dad its murtherin hot; I wish I had a dhrink av buttermilk. Anyways
mother, it’s the dutiful a son you have. Bedad, I don’t like the pre-
served praties at all. How is Molly Nale ? Arrah, be just tellin her
there’s no use in her thinkin av me, for Judy Flanagan is my luck. Tell
Father Murphy to give me absolution for all my sins abourd av the ship,
for the sorrow priest there's to be had here for love or money. Anyways,
here’s a rowl at my name,
Your own darlint av a son,
TERRY MULLIGAN.
Champion of the Seas Times.
No. YIIL] MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 1855.
We are sure there are none who will not participate in the
satisfaction that generally prevails on the retrospect of last
week’s splendid run. We have now got over the most tedious
part of our voyage, and may congratulate ourselves on the
prospect of soon reaching our destination. Speculation is
already rife on the subject, and some gentlemen have been
hardy enough to hazard a guess as to the day of our arrival.
Although this may as yet be premature, still we all feel
exhilirated at our near approach to the shores of our adopted
home. Our feelings on coming to a new country for the
first time, are necessarily of a mixed character. Few can bid
“ Their native land ‘ Good night/ ”
without a lingering sensation of regret. We contemplate it
as friends do a departed one, when removed from the scene,
his faults are not remembered, and his virtues stand out with
fuller prominence. So is it in reference to the land we have
left behind us—
“ With all its faults we love it still.”
But then if the past is tinged with regret, the future beams
with hope. Australia is pre-eminently the land of progress.
The remarkable strides which it has made in the last few
years are unparalleled in the world’s history. Melbourne, a
village a quarter of a century ago, with its quiet bay scarcely
disturbed by a single sail, has in that short interval been
transformed from the comparative
“Waste,” to be “the city full.”
Its glorious bay now gleams with a forest of masts, its streets
now resound with the hum of a busy population, and from
its site and traffic it may justly be termed the Liverpool of
the Southern World. In approaching such a place where
labour finds a higher recompense than in the overcrowded
markets of the old country, a new emigrant may well feel
buoyed up with a confidence of bettering his condition.
And this expectation will no doubt be realised, if he is only
willing to toil. But if any should have the misfortune to go
out with the idea that Australia is a proper outlet for the
lazy and indolent, 'who have only themselves to blame for not
succeeding at home, they will find themselves as egregiously
mistaken as our green friend Mr. Larry Murphy in his late
remarkable voyage. No—there is no place where the dig-
nity of labour is more apparent. The digger who folds his
arms and saunters about in the vague hope of one day find-
ing a treasure at his feet, is not so likely to discover the
monster nugget as the hardy navvie who, with pickaxe and
spade, delves his way perhaps 120 feet beneath the soil. The
merchant who sits placidly in his counting-house, or the re-
tailer in his store, who fancies business will pour in upon him
without effort on his part, will not so soon realise an inde-
pendence as the man who is ever plodding, ever working—
who perseveres amidst rebuffs and disappointments, till he
emerges from the temporary waves of difficulty, and gains


the terra firma of success. If the world is now 6000 years
old, it has not grown old for nothing. The age of shams and
idlers has passed away. Whatever be a man’s position—
commercial, professional, or legislative—“ earnestness ” is the
great desideratum. Let a man only be in earnest , and hin-
drances will glide away as vapours before the sun; he will
find within himself resources which he hardly expected, or
which will render him equal to every emergency.
“ There is a stream about to flow;
There is a flower about to blow;
There is a warmth about to glow;
There is a midnight darkness changing into gray;
Men of thought and men of action, clear the way.”
T. McC.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times,
3rd Sept., 1855.
Dear Sir,
I am happy to have the pleasure of informing you, that
our progress during the past week was favourable; up to
yesterday, at noon, our week’s run was 1865 miles—a very
decided improvement over our usual progress. I hope now
that we may carry good winds with us to our destination.
We are in the region where strong westerly winds generally
prevail at this season of the year, and although accompanied
by a little rolling, we must try and put up with the inconve-
ence, for the sake of the greater speed attained, and the con-
sequent advance made towards the completion of our voyage.
I am glad to find this morning that every one has been en-
joying a good night’s rest, which has been so desirable after our
late tossing.
I am, &c.,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
DOCTOR’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times,
Dear Sir,
The only additions to my list of this week of any import-
ance, are two cases of dysentery—one, I am glad to say, is
decidedly improving. Of the other, having only come under
treatment this morning, I can scarcely report progress, but I
trust that by care and attention we shall have no increase.
I must urge the passengers again to apply immediately in
case of indisposition.
I am, &c.,
G. J. WOOD, M.D.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Yesterday, the weather being unfavourable on deck, the
Rev. John Downes conducted the public religious services,
at half-past ten o’clock, A.M.. in the First Cabin, and at half-
past two o’clock, P.M., in the Second Cabin. In the former
he lectured on “ The internal connexions of the Lord’s
Prayer,” in Matt. vi. 9—13. And in the latter, he preached
from Rev. xxii. 17, on “ Mercy’s last invitation.”
J. D.
RELIGIOUS APHORISMS.
Good affections, are the best helps to bad memories.
If religion has done nothing for your temper, it has done no-
thing for your soul.
Life is too short to make differences, and far too short to keep
them up.
J. D.
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT ON THE
MIZEN TOP.
We are delighted to find that our progress this week has been
so good, and that with comparatively little inconvenience we have
made the distance to Melbourne so “ beautifully less.” On Mon-
day evening last the Shakespearian play of the Merchant of
Venice was read by the ladies and gentlemen of the Dramatic
Corps. We received a ticket of admission, but being detained
until the house was filled, we were compelled to take a back seat
about fifteen or twenty feet from the performers, and could not
hear more than a few words, and these were spoken by our friend,
“ Launcelot Gobboour readers will at once see the difficulty
we have in giving a critique of the performance ; but we have no
doubt that those who had the good fortune to hear the play were
highly gratified.
F. McC.
LEAVES FROM OUR LOG.
No. VIII.
The past week has not been signalized by many striking inci-
dents. The great topic of conversation has been the succession
of fine runs we have made, which have brought us sensibly nearer
to our destination. We hope this afternoon to double the Cape,
and if our fickle mistress, the “wind,” only proves constant to us,
we may accomplish the remaining 4,000 miles of our course in
three weeks from hence. On Monday evening last we had our
second Shakespearian reading in the after saloon. The play se-
lected was the t: Merchant of Venice.” The role was ably sus-
tained by about a dozen ladies and gentlemen, and even those
previously familiar with this gem of the great dramatist, expressed
themselves gratified with the manner in which it was rendered.
We trust ere we reach Melbourne, we shall enjoy some more re-
unions of this kind. We cannot too often have our memories re-
freshed with the masterpieces of the bard, who, above all others,
“ Held the mirror up to nature.”
Our pedestrians have during the week met with unlooked for
difficulties. The deck being unusually slippery and the motion
of the vessel so extremely eccentric, not a few have measured
their length on the planks ; and on one occasion “ the bronzed
Champion,’’ who so politely holds the compasses, was nearly car-
ried away by the involuntary rush of a gentleman from the
weather to the lee side. Fortunately we have no more serious
accident to record. Below decks the scenes have been equally
eventful. At meal times the dishes seem animated by some fugi-
tive impulse. Now they move towards one, and anon to another,
with evident indecision as to where they will remain. As for
drinking a glass of wine or taking a cup of tea, it has some-
times been found rather problematical as to whether they would
safely reach their destination; and seldom hjis the old adage—
“ There’s many a slip
“ ’Twixt the cup and the lip,”
found apter illustrations. On retiring from the table, one
naturally looks out for a firm seat where calmly you may rest
amidst the rocking elements. But even a sofa has proved no
refuge at such a time. By some mysterious biology it performs a
peregrination from one side of the saloon to another, carrying of
course its fair freight with it. Chairs have also been detected
making acrobatic movements; in fact these varied phenomena
beat “table turning’’ hollow. But this motive power is not ex-
erted in waking hours merely, but even —
“ Oft in the stilly night ”


has its influence been felt. Tidings have reached us of one gen-
tleman who started from his repose by a brisk fire of desks and
boxes, from the shelf over head; bounced out of his berth, but
instead of reaching the floor found himself in the middle of the
mysteries of a drawer. Another was involuntarily precipitated
from the warm blankets, and found his “ lodging on the cold
ground,” and for a while laboured under the hallucination that
some sprite had immured him in “ the hold.” Many an unhappy
wight, who retiring to rest has tidily hung up his spotless shirt to
prevent its becoming creased, has awoke in the morning to find it
(“ horrendum visu!”) sweeping the floor. The breakfast bell
rings, and he looks for his shaving tackle in its accustomed place,
but it too has taken an excursion. As for his stockings, they have
probably migrated to the passage with a hankering after the boots.
After exploring for some time, the truant duds eventually turn
up, but not till breakfast is half over, and then the unfortunate
stalks in, like a guilty thing, “ chewing the cud of bitter fancy.”
T. McC.
MR. & MRS. CAUDLE AT SEA.
No. II.
At the usual hour of Mr. and Mrs. Caudle retiring to rest,
Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig’s perseverance in listening was fully
equalled by Mrs. Caudle’s perseverance in talking; after very
little delay the following saluted her ears:—
“ Well, Mr. Caudle, it’s a nice day we’re after putting over us.”
“ Yes, my dear, it was a very fine day.”
“A fine day, Mr. Caudle! who’s talking of a fine day? It's
nice goings on, I mean. There’s Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, she
comes up to me yesterday morning, and, says she, pray, Mrs.
Caudle, are you professional ? Ma’m ? said I. Oh! said she,
Mrs. Caudle, you see I’ve a brother in the legal line, and Miss
Matilda Flowerpot has a cousin that’s going to be a doctor, and
Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap’s grandfather once read for the church,
though unfavourable circumstances prevented his getting in, —so,
Mrs. Caudle, we are going to form ourselves into a select party,
and we decline speaking to any common people, such as stocking
hosiers’ wives or daughters. Well, Mr. Caudle, as soon as I heard
that, knowing it’s many a good pair of stockings ever we sold, I
felt something rising up within me, and saying,—Mrs. Caudle!
Mrs. Caudle ! why don’t you scratch her face ?—but I swallowed
it down and didn’t. Well, Mr. Caudle, what’s the fruits of for-
bearance, —Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, with her nasty stuck up
phiz—Miss Matilda Flowerpot, with her mop of air that she says
is auburn —and Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap, with her great puffy
cheeks, —came and sat themselves down opposite to me:— ‘ How
very dreadful!’ said Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig. ‘ How very shock-
ing !’ said Miss Matilda Flowerpot. ‘ Truly distressing!’ said
Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap. ‘ How very dreadful!’ continued Miss
Tabitha Muzzlewig, ‘ for any one in my sphere of life to have to
sit in the company of common people; to be sure, one need not
take any notice of them, but to breathe the same hair is dis-
tressing to elegant refinement. What would my brother, Horatio
Theodore Muzzlewig, that’s in the legal line, say, if he knew the
sufferings of his dear Tabitha?’ ‘My dear friend,’ said Miss
Matilda Flowerpot, ‘ you have my heart’s best sympathy, it’s
dreadful to be removed from the sphere of refined associations,
but we must draw from the supplies of our own bosoms, and live
on our intellectualities.’ ‘ Yes, my dear,’ said Mrs. Sophia
Rattletrap, ‘but I wish we had a mutton chop to help it out.’
‘Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap,’ said Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, ‘l’m
ashamed of you, what’s a mutton chop to the flow of soul? We
might put up with the privation,’ she continued, ‘ if it were only
for the voyage ; but to think that when we get to the end of the
voyage, there can be no people in Melbourne fit to associate with
persons of our rank in life.’ ‘What do you think?’ said Mrs.
Sophia Rattletrap ; ‘ but I was on deck last night till ten o’clock.’
‘ Oh! Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap,’ exclaimed Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig,
‘ were you? Well, now I wouldn’t be on deck after dark, —for—
for 6s. Bd.\ its highly improper for us young ladies, but then, Mrs.
Sophia Rattletrap, you’re a widow, and have latitudes.’ ‘Well,’
said Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap, ‘ when I was on deck, I see —.’ ‘ Oh!
dear, Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap, what did you see?’ said Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig. ‘I see,’ said Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap, ‘one of the
gentlemen in the first cabin a talking to one of the girls in our
cabin.’ ‘ What shocking behaviour!’ said Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig.
‘ What shameful conduct,’ said Miss Matilda Flowerpot ; ‘ but,
my dear, did you hear what they were saying.’ ‘ No,’ said Mrs.
Sophia Rattletrap, ‘ I did’nt, though I kept walking behind them
till somebody stamped on my corns ’ ‘Well, and what else did
you see ?’ said Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig. ‘ I see them dancing
the polka.’ ‘ The polka! Oh, how shocking !’ said Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig; ‘ and do you mean to say they let the men put their
arms round their waists?’ ‘That I do,’ said Mrs. Sophia
Rattletrap. * Well now,’ said Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, speaking
slowly and solemnly to suit the importance of the occasion
‘ Well now, if any man, except my brother, Horatio Theodore,
that’s in the legal line, was to go for to put his arm round my
waist, I’d—.’ Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig paused, such a circum-
stance never having occurred throughout the extent of her rather
protracted experience, she was at a loss to decide on the proper
course to adopt. ‘What would you do?’ said Mrs. Matilda
Flowerpot. ‘l’d annihilate him with a look,’ said Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig. ‘ But, my dear,’ said Mrs. Sophia Rattletrap, ‘if it
was dark, and he could’nt see how you looked ?’ Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig did’nt seem to have made up her mind on this point,
as she made no reply. “ And now, Mr. Caudle,” continued Mrs.
Caudle, “there’s goings on for you ; what do you think of that,
Mr. Caudle?’’
“ My dear, I dont think of it all.”
“ Oh, Mr. Caudle ! you dont think, when your family is walked
on, and made nothing of by such rubbish as that old cracked
flowerpot! Well, Mr. Caudle, may be you’d like to hear another
conversation. What do you think? but I heard Mr Swigg, the
young man who says he’s highly connected, saying to another
man he calls his mate, —‘I say, mate, Sal and Jemima is fine gals.’
‘ Reg’lar out-and-outers,’ said his mate ; we ll cultiwate them on
the woyage.’ ‘ All right, my boy, and no mistake,’ said Mr.
Swigg. ‘ Which will you have ?’ ‘ I’m not ’ticular,’ said his mate.
‘Come, I’ll say Sal, and you can have t’other one; but doesn’t
the old gal look wicious ?’ ‘ Oh! gammon,’ said Mr. Swigg,
‘leave me alone for managing the old uns.’ “Now there’s for
you,” said Mrs. Caudle, “is that enough, Mr. Caudle, or do you
want to hear any more ? Mr. Caudle! is the feelings of your
family outraged and violated, or are they not outraged and vio-
lated, Mr. Caudle ?’’ Here a sound which could be mistaken for
nothing but the consequence of deep sleep having been emitted
by Mr. Caudle, his amiable helpmate found herself alone in the
conversation, and with a great deal of practical wisdom adjourned
proceedings till next night.
C. G.
(To be continued.)
ORIGINAL POETRY.
STANZA
Adapted to the Austrian National Hymn.
Hark ! where from Alma’s banks
Loud thunder roars.
Where fierce oppressing ranks.
Crimson her shores.
High o’er the mortal clash,
The black eagle screams,
And mid the lurid flash,
The British steel gleams.
Hark! tis a sound shall shake
Europe’s wide plain,
Bidding lost nations wake
To freedom again.
Bouse thee, Hungaria!
Forth to the Field,
The foe is hard pressed
That late forced thee to yield.
The hoof of the Cossack
Hath printed thy plain.
Let the edge of thy falchion
Atone for the stain,
Let Buda’s proud towers
Give the signal of fight,
And from Presburgh to Semlin
Arise in thy might.


Poland, why slumberest thou ?
Burst from thy sleep.
Thy wrongs have been great,
Let thy vengeance be deep.
Eemember the days
Of thy freedom and fame,
E’er thy sun set in blood
Amid sorrow and shame.
O’er thy wide marshy wastes
Let the war-cry resound.
Till thy dark tangled forests
The echoes resound.
And thou, too, Italia,
Lovely and bright,
Thy star shall beam forth
O’er thy long hopeless night,
And the sons of the Caesars
Unsheathing the brand,
Shall hurl their oppressors
For aye from the land.
For the war-cry of nations
Shall shake Europe’s plain.
And freedom rebuild
Her lost altars again.
J. B.
SKETCH OF A TOUR IN ITALY.
We landed at Civita Yecchia, about nine in the morning, and
were informed that the diligence would start for Rome at eleven.
This gave us time to breakfast and get our passports vise’d, and
we were all ready in time ; not so the diligence. We were kept
waiting for two hours; being informed, whenever we made in-
quiry, that we should start immediately. But it was one o’clock
before we got off, and then we little anticipated the sort of
journey before us. Our carriage was a shattered miserable affair,
with broken windows and leaky roof. The rain poured down in
torrents, and the Toads were almost impassable; and we did not
accomplish the distance of thirty miles under nine hours, arriv-
ing at one of the gates of Rome at ten o’clock, p.m. At the
Barriere we were detained half an hour, waiting for a file of sol-
diers, by whom we were escorted, guarded like so many criminals,
to the Custom House, where we were kept waiting fully one hour
before the official who had to pass our luggage would condescend
to make his appearance. When he did come, he lounged about
with his hands in his pockets, surveying us with a furtive glance,
but not displaying the least intention of ordering down the lug-
gage, which still remained piled on the roof of the diligence. The
conviction at length dawned upon us that he was waiting to be
bribed, and we walked quietly up to him, and each deposited a
coin of the value of about half a crown in his open palm ; upon
which we were requested to point out our luggage, and it was
brought in and passed without examination. We left other “pas-
sengers, who did not seem to disposed to be fleeced, still waiting,
and, calling a coach, drove to the Hotel D’Angleterre, where we
arrived exactly at midnight, thoroughly disgusted with our
journey—for w r e had been eleven hours accomplishing a distance
of thirty miles ! and we had had no dinner, as there was nothing
to be got at the wretched hotel where we changed horses. On
relating our grievances to some gentlemen we found in the Salle-
a-manger, we were informed that it was no uncommon occurrence,
and that all strangers visiting Rome were subjected to great an-
noyances. And we afterwards found that plundering all who
come under their clutches, is the order of the day with the offi-
cials at Rome.
The Government and the priests plunder the people, who, for
the most part, are sunk to as low a state of degradation and po-
verty as it is possible for a people to be in. It is a remarkable
fact that the population of the Pontifical States are in a more
wretched condition than that of any other part of Italy, and the
nearer you approach to the City itself, the more apparent is
their wretchedness. They are greatly exasperated against their
rulers, but they are kept in subjection by foreign bayonets.
Were the French troops at present quartered there suddenly
withdrawn, not a priest nor a cardinal dare show his face. It is
hardly to be expected that this state of things can continue
long; and the gallant defence made by Garibaldi against the
advance of the French under Oudinot, proves that the ancient
martial spirit of the Roman people is not thoroughly extinct.
Our first thought the morning after our arrival was to visit St.
Peter’s. I was disappointed with the first view ; and this I have
found to be the case with others. It arises from the fact of a
large portion of the building being hidden by the double row of
pillars which enclose the court in front of the principal entrance.
There is indeed a lofty flight of steps, the full width of the
grand entrance, and forming a noble approach. But it is only
on entering the building that you are struck with the full extent
of its grandeur. It is not the richness of the interior, for there
are many churches more highly decorated,—but the admirable
proportions and magnitude of the whole that produces so grand
an effect. There are several noble statues of gigantic dimen-
sions, and there were a number of valuable paintings. These,
however, were found to be receiving injury from damp, and they
have all been taken down, and are being replaced by copies in
mosaic. A number of skillful workmen in this art are kept con-
stantly employed by the successive Popes, and their productions,
which are mostly copies of celebrated paintings, are distributed
amongst the different churches with which Rome abounds. A
special order is required to visit this atelier; and it is a very in-
teresting sight, quite equal, in its way, to that of the Gobelin
Works in Paris,
(To be continued.)
T. H.
FACETIÆ.
The Secretary of the "Champion of the Seas Magnetic Telegraph
Company ” has received the following despatch:
London, 31st August, 1855.
Having nothing particular to communicate respecting public affairs,
I give you further information respecting the letter written by Jerry
Mulligan on board your ship “ Champion of the Seas.” I told you of
its having gone the round of the newspapers, and in this way the con-
tents came into the possession of Mrs. Molly Mulligan, who accordingly
addressed the following letter to Prince Albert: —
“ Musha, —thin long life to your honors Majesty, and the Queen, 'your
good woman. I hope she’s doin’ well, and the childur, that’s manin’ the
young princes, and shure its the thumpin’ boys I hear they are. Well
shure its a thrifle av business I want to be talkin’ to your Honor’s
Highness Worship Majesty about; av its plasin’ to you, musha, then be-
dad the other mornin’ whin I was puffin’ the braythin’ out av myself
thryin’ to light a wet sod av turf, who should come in but Peggy Duffy.
The top of the mornin’ to you, Mrs. Mulligan, says she. Morrow kindly
to you, Peggy, a cushla, says I. Arrah, Mrs. Mulligan, says she, its the
proud woman you ought to be this fine mornin’. The sorrow taste I have
to be proud of, says I, barin its perseverance, for this is the contrhrariest
wet sod av turf ever was cut from the bog of Allen. Arrah, Mrs.
Mulligan, says she, didn’t you see the letthur in the papers from your
son ? Well, no sooner were the words out of her mouth, whin down I
sossed on a three-legged stool all knocked av a hape, and by the samp
token down came the pot av wathur, lavin’ the sod av turf wetter than
ever. Well she out, and she told me every word about the letthur, and
it’s mighty thankful I am entirely for your dacent thratement av my hoy
in houldin’ the committay, which I suppose is a genteel name for a tay
party; but bedad I can’t get any pace or quiet till I tell you the grate
mistake you made when you said the letthur came by a coincidence, —
shure that ’ill be some new invention for flyin’ through the air. Sorrow
taste av a coincidence ever laid a hand on the letthur; it was all owin to
Saint Bridget, for wasn’t I prayin’ to her night, noon and momin’ to
hear from my son, and I hope your Majesty’s worship and the other
gentlemen that were at the tay party will give the saint her due, and
not be chatin’ her out av her good works. Thin there’s them dirty
blackguards that writes the newspapers, laughin’ and grinin’ at the di-
rection av the letthur ; but if the Omadhauns will come and look, they
’ill see my house is at the style at the end av the green lane, and shure
whin my son wint to the new counthry, isn’t it to the ould counthry he’d
write back ? so, you see, it’s all the want av lamin’ ih these chaps. Any
ways, between you and I, there’s part av the letthur I don’t like, and its
where he’s talkin’ av Judy Flanagan’s ankles. Sorrow taste av nater
ankles has she than the other girl’s barin’ she wares shorter petticoats ;
and I want none av your high flyin’ light-heeled cattle for my daughter-
in-law. There’s Biddy Nale, he says he won’t have; but that’s the girl
for my money, as soon as the boy is ould enough to he thinkin’ av a wife,
but shure your honors Majesty he’s only turned av forty. Though he’s
talkin’. To be shure it would be just as well if Biddy Nale’s hair wasn’t
quite so like carrots, and thin she has a knack av lookin’ two ways at
once ; but hasn’t she a pig and a cow, and a dozen av ducks, and a hen
that’s hatchin’ a dozen more, and isn’t that betther than nate’ ankles any


day ? but boys will be boys. Well now I’m cornin’ to the thrifle av
business I have with your Honor’s Majesty’s Highness’s Grace’s Worship.
Shure myself doesn’t know what to be callin’ you, but any ways some av
them ’ill be right. Musha, thin what did I hear the other day, but that
when anybody comes into notice as a public character, the Queen does be
givin’ them a pension. Now it’s mighty thankful to you entirely I’d be
if you and the gintlemen at the tay party would get the Queen to put
down my name for a thrifle. I know the war with that ould thunderin’
nayger, the emperor av Russia, must run away with a power av money,
but if the Queen is short av cash, as I hear yourself is a bit of a farmer,
I’d take it out in a pig or a cow, or a dozen of cuthin hens, as might be
conyaynient j and when the boy that your worship’s Majesty sends to
dhrive the hastes, gets to the cross roads, let him turn down the green
lane, and there’s myself livin’ next the style. And that’s the direction
I’ll stand by in the teeth av the dirty spalpeens av newspaper chaps.
And now I’ve got to the corner av the paper, and I’ll be writin’ myself
down
“ Your Honor’s ’unable sarvant.
“MOLLY MULLIGAN.”
Champion of the Seas Times.
No. IX.] MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1855.
The nearer we approach our destination, the more do we feel
our spirits raised and our hopes excited by the prospect of
engaging in the new scene of effort that lies open before us.
The emigrant going out at this period has far greater ad-
vantages than one who went a couple of years ago. Then
in the unforeseen rush of thousands to the Eldorado, lodgings
were unattainable, or if attainable at all, only at a fabulous
rate. The great resource left for many was to erect a tent
for themselves and family in the purlieus of Canvas Town.
Since then, however, circumstances are widely altered. Immi-
grants’ homes have benevolently arisen, and whilst the tide
of emigration has not been so enormous, Canvas Town has
disappeared, and more substantial buildings, as if by magic,
have sprung up to take its place. But not only are lodgings
now more easily obtained, provisions also have become more
reasonable, and although they still maintain higher rates than
at home, yet it must not be forgotten labour is more valuable,
and the settler can therefore afford an advanced price. From
the last accounts it would appear that business was settling
down into more regular channels. The depression caused by
the failures of last summer was giving way, and though the
markets had not yet recovered their elasticity, the prospects
of the spring trade were encouraging. We believe that the
late commercial crisis will have a most salutary effect. The
reckless consignments from home, apart from the excitement
of the gold discoveries, certainly tended to overtrading ; and
as consignees have now got so decided a check, we may an-
ticipate henceforward that business will be conducted on more
legitimate principles. The future of Melbourne is one that
may well kindle the imagination of the most ardent. When
docks and railways, gas and waterworks, sewerage and other
projected appliances are completed, “who will fix a limit to its
advancement ?” Let those who are going there remember
that they have a part to perform in accomplishing that fu-
ture. Let us show that whilst not inattentive to our private
interests, we have still the common weal at heart. Let us, in
our individual spheres, discountenance the voice of faction,
uphold rightful government, and foster the growth of edu-
cational and benevolent institutions. And with such men and
such citizens, it is not too much to augur for Yictoria’s future,
a prosperity worthy of its name.
T. McC.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Deae Sie,
I am happy again to have the pleasure of reporting favour-
ably of our week’s progress; the distance run up to yesterday
at noon was 1600 miles. We have now got into steady
winds, which I hope will not desert us again. The weather
is rather cold to be comfortable, but we must try and bear it
for a few days, and in the course of a week we shall be turn-
ing to the north again, and will soon feel the genial influences
of the Australian climate. We are to-day about 3,500 miles
from Cape Otway, a distance which could easily be performed
in a fortnight, and with good winds I hope to be near our
journey’s end by that time. lam glad to find that the cold
weather has not had any serious effect on the health of the
passengers, and I sincerely trust that our reports in that
respect may still continue to be favourable, and that we may
all arrive in comfort and good health is the earnest wish of
Yours, &e.,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT ON
THE MIZEN TOP.
We have been taking it rather cool for the last week, and we
are glad to find that of all the haps which we have undergone,
. none has turned out a mishap. Coats have been decidedly great,
and though few of our number get warm with trifles, a good many
have had their collar (choler) up. The songs of the seamen want
the spirit that was wont to pervade their harmony, and we are
sorry to observe that the verbal promise and mutual agreement of
the sailors to remunerate a gentleman they familiarly denominate
“ Paddy Doyle ” for a useful portion of their apparel, have of late
been almost forgotten. Cold indeed must be the heart that will
not respond to the call of a shoemaker, whose sole object is to
work to the last for us all (awl). We had a passing call from an
iceberg on Saturday ; the meeting was very cold, and we cannot
better describe it than by a quotation from one of England’s most
eloquent statesmen “ Surrounded by the fawning puerilities of
celestial conglommeration, human nature displayed its detonating
properties amid the genial origin of octagonal rhinoceroses.’’ We
add no more, as we fear the age is not ripe enough for so trans-
cendent an eloquence.
F. McC.
RELIGIOUS APHORISMS.
Win the cross, that you may gain the crown.
Grace is glory in the bud; glory is grace in the flower.
The law is the gospel foretold ; the gospel is the law fulfilled.
LEAVES FROM OUR LOG.
No. IX.
Our run for the past week, if it does not quite come up to what
we chronicled in our last, is at least more than an average one.
We have gone more south than Prince Edward’s Island, and will
probably now see no land till the height of Cape Otway comes in
view. The weather of course, as we might expect in these lati-
tudes, has been quite wintry; snow and hail, and rain have fallen
in abundance, and many a time have those accustomed to home
comforts longed for a cozy fireside, where they could warm their
shivering anatomies. As this has been out of the question, we
have only had to try the more healthful resource of exercise, and
accordingly at all hours muffled figures may be seen skipping


along the deck, getting up “ the caloric’’ with praiseworthy-
assiduity, Considerable excitement was awakened on Saturday
morning, by the announcement that an iceberg was in sight.
Instantly gentlemen given to napping, started up with preternatural
haste; and though some went through the formality of dressing,
in their eagerness to see the novelty, ablutions were deferred.
We, as well as the common herd, were aroused by the summons,
but did not think it becoming our editorial propriety to pay our
respects to the “ berg” in an unwashed condition. Having there-
fore, with our usual dignity, gone through the mysteries of shaving
and trimming our inconveniently bushy beard, we deliberately
ascended the poop to reconnoitre, when lo !to our mortification,
the iceberg was “ non est inventus .” We smothered our vexation
as well as we could in fried ham and brown bread, and when
breakfast was over, we felt restored to our usual equanimity.
However, though our eyes beheld it not, it is not the less certain
that it was really seen, and as the Captain mentioned he saw one
in the same locality in a former voyage, no little speculation has
been hazarded by some that this was the identical iceberg. We
have heard that some rather “ fast’’ gentlemen have expressed a
wish to get their skates out of the hold, we presume with the
intention of cutting capers on the next berg that has the temerity
to come in their way. This cold weather has not been able
however to chill our sociality, as well as our extremities. Select
convivial reunions have been more than usually frequent. In
these nocturnal assemblies, the time has not been tediously passed
away, but the story, the song, or the strains of a violin, have
alternately been heard, and the melodies have been generally
ushered in by that simple though popular air “ the odd man out."
These musical assemblages have not been confined to the first
cabin, but we are glad to observe that the first concert for the
season was given in the saloon of the second cabin, on Thursday
evening. Not having received a card of invitation, we are not in
a position to give the particulars, but we understand the attend-
ance was numerous, and the singing and recitation most creditable,
and we trust that our fellow passengers will repeat an experiment
so auspiciously begun. Some little diversion was occasioned on
Saturday, by a snow-balling match, which was kept up with great
spirit till the ammunition was expended. Many a combatant
received a practical illustration of that current Australian phrase,
“ a damper,” but we are bound to say that these dampers, though
inflicted rather unceremoniously on necks and ears, and nasal
protuberances, did not damp the ardour or good humour of the
parties concerned. We regret to learn on the morning of the
same day, that death had visited the family of our much esteemed
pastor. We are sure there was no heart on board that did not
feel sincere sympathy, when the father’s tremulous voice was heard
performing the last sad offices over the remains of his youngest
child. We trust that the example of Christian resignation thus
strikingly evinced, will not be without its effect even on the most
unconcerned amongst us.
T. McC.
MR. & MRS. CAUDLE AT SEA.
No. III.
Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig had just been engaged in a highly
interesting conversation with Mrs. Matilda Flowerpot, in which
they displayed much ability and indefatigable research, for not
only were they acquainted with the private history of all their
friends, but they also found themselves in possession of many
particulars not even known to the parties concerned, but conver-
sation even as interesting as this, did not deter Miss Muzzlewig
from hastening off to her cabin as soon as Mr. and Mrs. Caudle
had retired to rest, and her auditory nerves were accordingly
saluted with the following discourse :
44 Pray, Mr. Caudle, do you intend to take an interest in the
feelings of your family, or do you not intend to take an interest
in the feelings of your family ? it’s better to let us know the worst
at once, and let us become resigned victims, Mr. Caudle.”
44 My dear, I’m very aiixious to see you all comfortable.”
“ Anxious, Mr. Caudle ! who ever heard of an anxious man a
snoring the way you did last night, and I telling you all about the
audacity of Mr. Swigg and his mate talking about our Sal and
Jemima. Oh ! Mr. Caudle, to think that you would bring your
wife and family to such a pass as this. Oh ! Mr. Caudle, did ever
I think when first we met—it was a fine summer’s evening, and I
was in the garden, in front of the house, there were two dozen
and a half of cabbages and a bed of turnips all a growing beauti-
fully, with borders of batchelor’s buttons round them, and I was
watering them with a green watering pot, when you went by
Mr. Caudle, —you weren’t so stout then Mr. Caudle, and I suppose
my own figure isn’t quite as genteel as it was twenty years ago;
but you had on a pair of drab pantaloons, and carried a blue
umbrella under your arm, you walked by very slowly, looking at
me through the railings, and I thought tnere was something par-
ticular in your eye; you stopped Mr. Caudle, and said— ‘ ah!
excuse me, but Miss ought I ask you what o’clock it is,’ and I
kept looking down at the cabbages, and said, ‘ Sir, I don’t know,
but I’ll ask my Ma,’ for I thought there was something particular
in your eye: and you said, ‘ Oh no, Miss, please don’t, it’s of no
consequence; that’s a very nice watering pot.’ And so Mr. Caudle
you went away, but you came back the next evening, and the
next, and I thought you were a hero, because you spoke to me
through the railings, and I gave up all the nice young men I
knew for you, Mr. Caudle, —and now, Mr, Caudle, see what
you’ve brought me to; wouldn’t the poor-house be better than
pork and pea soup, rice and salt beef? Well, Mr. Caudle, I have
patience that would stand almost anything, but it can’t stand salt
beef. No, Mr. Caudle, I couldn't eat that, no not even if I was
pressed to do it by a nice young man that was going to marry Sal
or Jemima, and that’s saying a great deal, Mr. C.; for, of course,
mothers ought to make sacrifices to get their daughters settled in
life. Well, Mr Caudle, when I could not eat the salt beef to-
day, I felt such a nothingness within me that I sent for the doc-
tor, and said I, — 4 Am I to be starved or am I not to be starved ?
just tell me at once that I make up my mind.’ So he says,—
‘ Well, ma’m, we must have the system sustained by a little
nourishment.’ So he takes out a pencil and bit of paper, and
what does he do, Mr. Caudle, he writes down— 4 Please let Mrs.
Caudle have the backbone of a duck.’ Now, Mr. Caudle, there’s
adding insult to injury. What’s the backbone of a duck to a
person having a feeling of nothingness within that can’t be de-
scribed ? And how could the ducks be expected to have anything
on their backbones shut up in a coop ? And now, Mr. Caudle,
there’s for you, Mr. Caudle ; and if you had as much spirit as a
sparrow, you’d do something desperate, Mr. Caudle. But, Mr.
Caudle, im thankful for the patience and resignation with which
Providence has blessed me, and I’ll try to get over the voyage
with the help of the sympathy of three very agreeable ladies I
found'out to-day. Mrs. Jacobina Puffmuffin, Miss Jacintha
Sweetlove, and Mrs. Anna Maria Tuffleton, —we’ve formed our-
selves into a party, and we are determined to put down the airs
and impudence of Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig. So we sat down
this evening to have a chat, —‘And,’ said Miss Jacintha Sweetlove,
4 ladies, can you tell me what is the meaning of the odd man ?’
‘ The odd man, my dear,’ said Miss Jacobin Puffmuffin, 4 1 never
heard of him, is he a nice young man?’ 4 My dear, I don’t know,’
said Miss Jacintha Sweetlove, 4 that’s what we must find out.’
4 But tell us what you do know about him,’ said Mrs. Anna Maria
Tuffleton. 4 Well then,’ said Miss Jacintha Sweetlove speaking in
a whisper, 4 yesterday evening, Mr. Swigg came up to that other
young man, and he says— 4 1 say, mate, will you go the odd man?’
4 All right, Swigg, my boy,’ said his mate, and off they went.
Now what can the odd man be?’ ‘Oh!’ said Miss Jacobina
Puffmuffin, ‘ I heard them talking of the odd man too; and it’s the
strangest thing of all, —whenever they talk of the odd man of an
evening, they’re never seen the next morning till twelve or one
o’clock.’ 4 Well now,’ said Mrs. Anna Maria Tuffleton, 4 111 not
rest till I find out who the odd man is. I’m sure there’s some
desperate villany going on, and if there’s any one on board that
ought not to be on board, may be the ship would sink; so, my
dears, I’ll tell the first mate in the morning, and get him to ferret
out this odd man.’
44 Well, Mr. Caudle, even friendly intercourse wounds and lace-
rates my feelings. What does Mrs. Anna Maria Tuffleton say,
‘ but, Mrs. Caudle, sailors are worse than cannibals, for some of
them have ever so many wives. The other day I heard one of
them say to another,— 4 Well, Jim, how often were you spliced?’
4 Well,’ says Jim, reckoning on his fingers, 4 1 think it’s five wives
I have; —there’s Sally at Liverpool, and Peggy at Newcastle, and
Katty at New York, and Molly at Cork, —no that’s only four, for
I didn’t count my thumb, —Sally, and Peggy, and Katty, an,d


Molly, that’s only four, and I’m sure there’s another somewhere.
Oh ! I have it now, Jack, its two Sallys I have at Liverpool,—
that’s five.’ ‘Well,’ says Jack, ‘ you’ve one handful any way, and
you’ll soon have to count with the fingers of the other. Well
myself only has two, and as ill luck would have it, the second
lives in Melbourne, and I’m sure she’ll be waiting for me on the
wharf; only for that Sally Caudle would be the gal for my money.
I’d get spliced, and be off with her to the diggings, and the first
lump of gold should pay for a silk dress.’
“ Now, Mr. Caudle, there’s for you, Mr. Caudle, what do you.
think of such outrage as that, Mr. Caudle? Oh, Sal! Sal! my
daughter Sal! —did ever I think that we’d come to such insults!”
The consideration was of so overpowering a nature as to com-
pletely overcome Mrs. Caudle’s power of speech, and after in-
dulging in a series of convulsive sobs, she consigned herself to
repose.
(To be continued.)
C. G.
REVIEW.
Land, Labour, and Gold, or Two Years in Victoria, ly
Wm. Howitt. 2 vols., Longman & Co. The Golden Era
of Victoria; published by Messrs. Orr & Co.
In our former notices we referred but incidentally to the
land question, which, for the present and for some time to
come, may be considered the great “ vexata questio.” In no
other respect has the Colony suffered greater injury. This is
a subject which concerns every one; it is not simply a ques-
tion of—whether flour is to be forty pounds per ton or ten, —
whether the four-pound loaf is to be two shillings or sixpence,
but it assumes even a more serious aspect,—for on it depends
whether the agriculturist has to leave the Colony for America
and other places, and the labouring man left without employ-
ment.
On no subject does Howitt write more strongly than on
this, and on none is he so just in his observations. Those
who have been so fortunate as to hold stations or farms even
at the high rates, have made money as the following example
will show ;
“A Mr. Simpson, on Charlotte Plains, holds a station on the
usual terms, viz.:—from £lO to £2O for the whole, and re-lets a
single paddock to the Government for the sum of £5OO per an-
num ; and this while Government might take the whole station
into its own hands.”
Mr. Robertson purchased—what is called—his pre-emtial
right, of 640 acres, at £1 per acre, from the Government; he
fenced in 80 acres of this, the land required no clearing; on
it he grew 100 tons of hay, which he sold to the Government
for £6O per ton, one year’s crop paying for the whole estate,
and leaving a balance as profit of £5,360. We allow all na-
tions liberty to dig up the gold and carry it away, and in this
surpass the Americans in liberality; but unlike them we hold
out no inducement for the digger to invest his gold in the
land again. Their’s is a profound policy. They allow the
gold to be dug, but they secure the digger for a citizen, by
giving him land at five shillings an acre, with three years to
pay for it. California is thus growing enough already for its
own wants, and for export. The Colonial Government, instead
of holding out any inducement for foreigners to settle in
Australia, has done all it possibly could to drive them away,
and their gold with them.
It refused to sell them land except on terms such as mad-
men only could comply with; therefore all foreigners have
marched off with their booty as soon as they got it. Thus
both England and the Colony have been impoverished. The
German can become elsewhere an independent landed pro-
prietor for less than in Australia. The Chinaman can become
a great man in the Flowery land with the hundred pounds he
has dug out of Australia. In America £lOO will purchase
400 acres of land, and the emigrant will have three years to
pay it; so that in the meantime his capital is left in his
hands to fence in and crop his land. We have adopted or
surpassed America in one half of its policy, but the other
and more important half has been totally abandoned. The
American system I can understand. It is a sound liberality
with a politic object. Ours is a fungous liberality, with no
object at all, except to plunder, and show as it were John Bull
drunk, scattering his money amongst a mob, and when they
have picked it up driving them away with a cudgel. When
the gold is exhausted or comes hut sparingly into the washing
dish of the digger, what will be the condition of the mass of
landless, homeless men who are in the gold fields ? They
might have been gradually drafted off and settled as farmers
on the land, instead of which their earnings have been spent
in the public-house, and we have a pauper with a broken con-
stitution, instead of a sturdy farmer with a happy family
and well cultivated fields. Such is Colonial policy, —to
drive away or make paupers of the gold diggers! Is this
to last for ever ?
Howitt holds out encouragement to a higher class of
emigrants if land could be had, for he says the intellectual
men love country life and are capable of cultivating cheap
land of their own.
“In reluctant compliance with the public outcry, small quan-
tities of country land have been put up for sale; but what
was our astonishment to find that the auction was not held
on the spot, but 30 miles off our doors! This is a fair sam-
ple of the disposition of the officials here, to give themselves
no trouble and to put the public to all the trouble they can.
Those of the diggers who have money to buy, say that they
are so put out by these things, and by the price at which the
land is offered, that they shall give up the idea and go to
America.”
When is this wretched, crooked and wayward policy to
cease ? When is this fine country capable not only of pro-
ducing every luxury for a large population, but of exporting
to other countries, cease to exhibit the strange picture of all
its inhabitants, except the diggers crowded together in two
or three towns on the coast, and almost its whole extent of
suriaee still a forest wilderness ?
R. C.
FACETIÆ.
In consequence of an accident what has occurred to the wires of the
Telegraph, we have been this week deprived of our customary communi-
cation, and are unable to give any particulars respecting the Queen,
Prince Albert, and Mrs. Molly Mulligan, but we fill up the column with
a communication from a steerage passenger:—
“ Well, genteels, Pm just goin to begin to tell yees all about it, you
see it’s a steerage passenger, I am abourd av the “ Champion av the
Says,” and the other day when we were all goin to ate our dinner, we
heard a foot comin down the ladder, and all av a suddint a gintleman in
black popped in amongst us, and says he, which of yees is Jerry Mulligan,
Molly Mulligan’s son? Who are you that’s axin says I? I’m the
Editor av the “Champion av the Says Times” says he. Arrah, musha
thin says one of the boys, ’its murtherin bad times you’re given us, is
that a male for a man, pointing to as much fat pork as wouldn’t graze a
dacent size pair of brogues. ’Hould your tongue says another, shure its
the Times newspaper, and this is the chap that gave Larry Murphy a
bottle of whiskey, for writin something for the genteels to be grinin at.
A newspaper says another, thin it’s a murtherin informer he is, that’s
come to spy out and he’ll be tellin the captain on us, we’ll toss him in a
blanket. Sorrow taste av a blanket says another, we’ll be ill-using this
could weather tossin the like av him, run for a bucket av salt wathur and
we’ll make him dhrink every dhrop av it, and if ever he writes another
newspaper anyways he’ll be wathurproof. Now you see while all this
discoursin was goin on the hair was standin av an end on my head with
fright for bedad it’s myself that’s Jerry Mulligan, barrin I came aboard
undhur another name, for a thriflin rason I have that we need’nt be
talkin about, and says I to myself how he could he know anything
about Jerry Mulligan, barin he’s ould Nick. With that I took another


look at him, and shure enough he had the quarest hat ever I seen, it was
like a church steeple, and says I, that will be for hidin his horns, and
didn’t I often hear av his comin as a gentleman in black when he wanted
to make a genteel appearance. Well bedad, as soon as he heard the way
the boys was talkin he made off with himself, and I thought it the best av
my play to folly him out, so I wint up to him on the deck, and says I, shure
there’s no use in concaling anything from you, says I, for it’s knowing
everything you’ll be, anyways shure you ain’t come for me yet, it was only
a thrifle of sheep staling made me change my name, and didn’t I get
absolution before lavin home. Oh! then says he, you’re Jerry Mulligan.
No sooner wor the words out av his mouth, than a puff av wind came
and blew off his quare hat, and as the sorrow taste av horns was under-
neath, I got easier in my mind and began to think he wasn’t the ould
boy. So he out and he told me all about the telegraph bringin the news
av my letthur to Mrs. Molly Mulligan, but says he, the wires av the tele-
graph are out av ordher and the sorrow taste av anything dacent we have to
put in the paper this week, it’s murdhering hard up we are for faxaties
says he. Who are them, says I ? Well you see, Jerry, says he, your
letthur to your mother last week did for a faxatie. Well then says I,
that’s an illigent name for writing to a man’s mother, and, says I, if I was
to take another scratch at the pen, what would Ibe getting, says I? A
quart of whiskey, says he. Arrah, but Editor jewel, says I, would you
give it to me in a quart bottle that ud hould a quart, for it’s murthering
bad measure they give aboard of a ship. Well bedad the bargain was
struck, but as ill luck would have it, sorrow taste av a word iver I
thought av it till this mornin, and afther scratching my head for half-an-
hour, I could think av nothing but just to tell yees all about it, but
bedad, if the whiskey is the rale ould mountain due, maybe it’s some-
thing else I’d be writing for the next paper.”
C. G.
Champion of the Seas Times.
No. X.] MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 1855.
We think there is scarcely a heart amongst us that does not
baat high with the anticipation of seeing the outlines of the
Australian Coast ere another week rolls round. If that expec-
tation is realised, our good ship will have made an average voy-
age, notwithstanding the dispiriting delays we encountered in
crossing the line. It is a matter for congratulation on
having so nearly completed our journey, that though we have
passed through every variety of temperature, from the broiling
tropics to these Antarctic regions, we have not lost one adult of
our number through sickness. But this is not the only pleasing
fact in the retrospect of the last two months. We have been
favoured with most agreable society, and the tedium of so
long a voyage has been whiled away by many an hour of
delightful social intercourse. We are now on the eve of
separating, the majority of us perhaps never to meet again,
yet we doubt not that the incidents connected with our
association on board, will furnish subjects of pleasing reminis-
cence in after life. Some of us will probably encounter each
other again, in the city, or in the bush, or perchance in the
all-attractive diggings. We have no apprehension that the
excitement of active occupations, will quite obliterate from
the memory of such, the happy companionships which have
been formed during the voyage. We will not think so ill of our
fellow travellers as to imagine that from the moment they
land, they will become altogether indifferent to each other.
If others become so engrossed with their pursuits as to stand
aloof,we trust that we shall feel interest in the future fortunes of
our ship companions, and that the foundations of many a
friendship which have been laid here, may be cemented by
subsequent intercourse, and thus shall the prospect of meet-
ing again charm away the lonely feeling which might other-
wise come upon us, “ that we were indeed strangers in a
strange land.”
T. McC.
CAPTAIN'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Deae Sib,
I am happy to have to state that the week’s run has been
again favourable, the distance made being 1,730 miles. I find
that in trying her speed, the “ Champion of the Seas ” does
not sail so fast as she did on her last voyage to Australia, but
the fact of our carrying out this time about 2,000 tons of
cargo, and being four feet deeper in the water than she has
hitherto been, may fully account for our diminished speed ;
as it is however we have made a greater run this week than
she has ever done before, viz.: —lB6s miles, the greatest
distance in one week last voyage was one mile less, 1864.
In the early part of the week we passed the Island of Deso-
lation, so named by Captain Cook for its barren and inhospit-
able appearance, and during the week we have passed great
quantities of sea weed, showing evidently that the current is
setting eastward and consequently in our favour, the breeze
still keeps good, and I hope the next number of your journal
will contain the pleasing intelligence of the promised land
being in sight. lam glad the health of the passengers gene-
rally still continues good, although the weather is rather cold to
be comfortable, and those who cannot take exercise on deck
must be at a loss to keep themselves warm. Some gentle-
men have resorted to the plan of sleeping all the morning.
The idea is not a bad one provided they can afford to lose
their breakfast.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
DOCTOR'S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Deae Sib,
I am happy to be able to state a decrease in the number
of cases applying for relief this week, some of the Invalids
are already convalescent.
I am, &c.,
G. T. WOOD, M.D.
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Yesterday our pro tern. Chaplain having recovered from his
indisposition, officiated as usual at 10 o’Clock, a.m., in the
First Cabin, and in the Second Cabin at half-past 3 o’Clock,
p.m. In the former Service he lectured on the precedents,
accompaniments, and sequences of the Transfiguration, as
narrated in Matthew xvii. 1. In the latter he discoursed
on the Consolations offered by the Gospel to bereaved Christ-
ians in 1 Thess. iv 13—18, by way of improving the recent
deaths of the four infants who died in that cabin during the
voyage. Truly “ childhood and youth are vanity,” as well as
“ manhood and old age.”
J. D.
RELIGIOUS APHORISMS.
Wherever I have a tent, God shall have an altar.
Kindness is the key to the human heart, all the world over.
Uneducated virtue is educated vice. No happiness without
holiness; and no sin without misery.
A man’s real worth is his religious worth. No cross, —no
crown. Be over-careful for nothing, prayerful in everything,
thankful for anything, and humble in all things.


LEAVES FROM “OUR LOG.”
No. X.
We have had another fine run during the past week, and
generally speaking, good weather. The days have not been unlike
late autumnal ones at home, —clear and sunny, crisp yet not abso-
lutely wintry; and with the wind on our quarter, and the
“ Champion ” with all sail set, making thirteen or fourteen knots
an hour, nothing could be more exhilarating. We have had a
remarkable freedom from the rocking motion of former weejcs,
and if the wind keeps up, we hope, ere we issue our next number,
to be within sight of “ the Heads.’’ A sweepstake was formed on
Tuesday last, by fifteen gentlemen, as to the day on which the
Melbourne pilot should come on board. The days named are
from the 22nd to the 29th, instant, and at present the early tickets
are looking up. Of course, as yet, the winner is extremely
problematical, and all seem looking forward with much anxiety
for the cry—“ Land ahead.’’ It is strange how eager we are to
get ashore at the latter part even of a pleasant voyage. When
the prospect of landing was much more distant and our progress
greatly slower, we appeared quite indifferent on the subject, but
now when it seems almost within our reach, a moderate day’s run
makes us quite fidgetty. When eight bells strike, there is quite
a rush to the little bulletin of our day’s progress, and if it has
been favourable a smile of complacent satis'action irradiates each
countenance, and luncheon is dispatched with hearty digestion;
but if otherwise, the meal loses much of its social character, the
soup is condemned as “ cold,’’ and the cheese has suddenly be-
come “ dry.” A change has come over the spirit of the weather
this morning, which has not been favourable to our editorial ope-
rations. The ship has again resumed its lurching propensity,
and amongst other effects of the gale, the editor’s “ sanctum ” has
been invaded by a migration of the fair sex from the after saloon.
The unfortunate editor has accordingly 'had a struggle between
his natural gallantry and his duty to the public. In endeavouring
to effect a compromise between both, he has had no easy task.
Just when the spirit of composition would descend upon him, and
an impressive sentence was on the point of projection, the current
of his ideas would suddenly be checked by an anxious question;
and in spite of his bachelor’s exclusiveness and extreme bashful-
ness, the pen has fallen from his digits while he endeavored to
allay the fears of his tremulous enquirers. Though, of course,
occupied with ’ his leader, he could not help observing one lady
and gentleman who sat down to spend a pleasant and thoughtful
hour over a game of chess, when lo! “all of a suddint’’ (as Larry
says), her chair became restlessly locomotive, and the chess men,
with sympathetic gallantry, tumbled over the prostrate demoiselle.
We have been informed that another gentleman who had the cu-
riosity to go on deck, and was scientifically steadying himself on
his weather leg, was interrupted in his experiment by an illiterate
wave, which striking the bulwarks with great force, deranged his
centre of gravity and forced his stalwart frame into an involuntary
recumbency. Want of room compels us to omit other circura-
stances which we purposed noticing.
T. McC.
MR. & MRS. CAUDLE AT SEA.
No. IV.
To those interested in the conversations of Mr. and Mrs
Caudle, we are sorry to announce that owing to an unfortunate
accident which had occurred to Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig on the
evening ensuing after that on which the last recorded conversation
took place, she was debarred from listening during the remainder
of the voyage, and thus posterity has incurred an irreparable loss
in as much as there is no existing documentary evidence of what
the numerous ensuing conversations consisted. It appears that just
as Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig had fixed herself in a convenient posture
for listening, and that Mrs. Caudle had opened her mouth and made
a commencement with, “Well, Mr. Caudle,’’ the boards against
which Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig was leaning gave way with a crash,
and in she tumbled to Mr. Caudle’s berth. That worthy gentle-
man starting up under the impression that some party or parties
unknown were making a deadly assault upon him, grappled with
his assailant, and a spirited conflict ensued Victory at one time
inclining to the side of Mr. Caudle, and anon to that of Miss
Tabitha Muzzlewig. In the mean time the combatants were
cheered on to the fight by the shrill screams of Mrs. Caudle, who
remained below in a state of terrified mystification as to what was
going on over her head, at length Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig proved
herself the better man, and shaking off the grasp of her assailant,
down he tumbled into the lower berth, but this he found only
realized the truth of the ancient adage, out of the frying pan
into the fire; for Mrs. Caudle in turn under the impression that
she was subjected to the assaults of the enemy, made a desperate
rush at the intruder, and seizing him by the nose commenced
battering his head with a hearty good will. Whilst all this was
going on, the other passengers were aroused and went rushing
about screaming murder, and calling for lights. As soon as these
arrived, in rushed the spectators, and there was Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig in a dreadfully distracted condition, presenting a
mysterious alteration of appearance, in consequence of an assort-
ment of false hair which she was in the habit of wearing, being
found not on her head, but in the grasp of Mr. Caudle, who
flourished it about in his excitement as a trophy of war; whilst
that worthy gentleman himself, being in the habit of hanging up
his wig each night on a peg and replacing it with a night-cap, now
with night-cap torn to ribbons, presented a bald pate streaked
with vermillion, from a scratch in his head inflicted by the nails of
Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, giving him altogether somewhat the
appearance of an American Indian in his war paint; and poor
Mrs. Caudle looked like a bundle of desperation and misery
wrapped up in night clothes. Dire was the confusion, terrible the
outcry, and deafening the babel of tongues, everybody knew
everything about it, but no two agreed as to the facts. The most
plausible explanation was that given by Mrs. Matilda Flowerpot,
namely:—that Mr. Caudle had fallen in love with Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig, and that Mrs. Caudle in a fit of jealousy, had made a
desperate rush at her thro’ the boards of the cabin. Such was
the unfortunate circumstance, which ended in Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig removing to another part of the ship, and thus all
chance of recording the Caudle dialogues was lost.
It is not improbable that some of our readers may be desirous
of learning the subsequent history of the parties referred to in
these dialogues, especially that of Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, in
whom all seem to take a great interest, we therefore add a few
particulars which came to our knowlecge in Melbourne.
On arrival of the ship “Go-a-head,” Mr. and Mrs. Caudle
found it advisable as a first step in life, to set up a greengrocer’s
shop, and Sal and Jemima might be seen each day in silk dresses,
selling cabbages with such an air of elegant refinement, that
business increased wonderfully, and the Caudle family flourished.
Sal was subsequently seen in a crimson satin dress, and blue bon-
net and feathers, seated on a bundle of hay on a bullock dray in
Elizabeth Street, from which it is inferred that she married a
lucky digger, who was taking her up to the bush along with his
other winter supplies. We cannot state positively whether the
bonnet was adorned with orange blossoms, but we have it on
very good authority, that she wore a wreath of roses, which looked
much better. But Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, what of her ? yes we
are very happy to be in possession of the following particulars.
This lady was what we ordinarily understand by the term, a
strong minded woman, endowed with great powers of endurance
and fortitude, perseverance to which all things were possible, and
principles of go-a-head activeness to which nothing was impos-
sible residing in the bosom of her family at home surrounded by
the best of society, and moving in an atmosphere of elegant
refinement, this accomplished woman happened one day to see in
the pages of a Melbourne Argus, an advertisement from a young
gentleman offering Bs. per dozen for getting his shirts well washed.
The liberality of the remuneration produced a very powerful
impression on her mind, and she suddenly formed a determina-
tion of going out to Melbourne, and setting up a washing estab-
lishment on an extensive scale. With this object in view, Miss
Tabitha Muzzlewig with praiseworthy foresight took with her a
mangle packed up in a case, which excited much attention from
the other ladies on the voyage, and various were the conjectures
as to what it could contain. Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig however
preserved her secret to the end of the voyage, and suddenly
burst upon the public of Melbourne with the following advertise-
ment immediately after arrival: —“ Go-a-head Young Australia —
Clean Shirts for the Million!—Who wants to get his shirts
thoroughly washed, let him call on Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, No.
105, Little Bourke Street, East. Clear starching on improved


principles—who wants the breasts of his shirts to have an out-and-
out touch, —let him call on Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig, No. 105,
little Bourke Street, East.—Take notice, mangling done without
crushing a button, —stockings darned and linen mended for an
additional trifling consideration. Don’t mistake-Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig, No. 105, Little Bourke Street, East.” The effects of
this advertisement were truly astonishing. Men, who never pre-
viously thought of changing a shirt oftener than once a month,
suddenly rushed into drapers’ shops, purchased shirts by the
dozen, put on one every half hour, and sent them off to Miss
Tabitha Muzzlewig to be clear-starched on improved principles ;
it was the great Melbourne clean shirt movement which has since
been so much talked of. The result of all this was that Miss
Tabitha Muzzlewig became rich in money, goods and chattels, and
began to look about for a suitable helpmate to share the cares of
wealth, but, unfortunately, the tastes of none of the gentlemen
who came to get their shirts washed seemed to incline towards a
strong minded woman ; the fact of it is—they admired the glossy
breasts of the shirts, but they didn’t admire Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig. One day Miss Muzzlewig was walking down Collins
Street, and she saw looking wistfully through a window at a bottle
of rum, a shabby genteel young man, with a shocking bad hat with
brim dreadfully demolished, a recognition at once took place, Miss
Tabitha Muzzlewig! said the young man with the shocking bad
hat, Mr. Swigg ! said Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig. Mr. Swigg soon
told his tale —the habit of going the odd man had become so
strong on board ship, that it followed him on shore—when he
tried to go to sleep, voices were perpetually ringing in his ear,
Swigg! Swigg! go the odd man ! —so he couldn’t help going it until
all the needful was gone, and then when he looked about him all
his mates were gone too. On this occasion Miss Tabitha
Muzzlewig proved herself to be possessed of great magnamity of
soul, for she took him home, bought him a new pair of boots,
gave him two pair of her own stockings, they just fitted him, and
a month’s trial at turning the mangle. At the expiration of this
period of probation, Mr. Swigg proved himself a truly reformed
character. Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig bought him a new hat and
coat, and gave sundry mysterious hints, that that there was no
knowing what he mightn’t come to in the course of time. At the
end of two months more, Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig found her affec-
tions in that state which authorized her making a proposal of
marriage to Swigg, which that gentleman accepted with becoming
gratitude, having previously made a private inspection of the con-
tents of the till. An early day was named and in due form Miss
Tabitha Muzzlewig became Mrs. Tabitha Swigg. At the end of
the week ensuing, Mr. Swigg happened most unfortunately to go
the odd man, and showed decided symptons of relapsing into bad
habits, but Miss Tabitha Muzzlewig or rather Mrs. Tabitha Swigg,
had seen on board ship the morally beneficial effects of a rope’s
ending, she accordingly administered a little gentle admonition of
this kind to Mr. Swigg, not laying on quite so heavy a hand as she
might if she liked, and the result was truly gratifying to her
feelings. Mr. Swigg was never again known to go the odd man,
he took rather a religious turn, and waited on the ministration of
the Rev. Hezekiah Habbaccuc Dustcushion, a new light light who
shone in the neighbourhood. Mr. and Mrs. Swigg continue to
live on in uninterrupted domestic felicity, and Mr. Swigg has been
known to make the following philosophical observation: —It’s a
provision of providence, that strong minded women should take a
fancy to weak minded men, and lead them through their path in life
rejoicing.
C. G.
REVIEW.
Land ', Labour, and Gold, or Two Years in Victoria, by
Wm. Howitt. 2 vols., Longman & Co. The Gold Era
of Victoria; published by Messrs. Orr & Co.
We shall now conclude our series of articles from Wm.
Howitt’s Two Years in Australia.
We confess we have made very free with these books, using
them to some extent as a cloak for what we wished to say,
and in this our concluding article we shall throw aside the
cloak altogether and conclude with a few remarks of our own.
Three hundred thousand people are all the population of
this vast country, which is but one corner of this Island
continent. Rome was not formed of more heterogteneous
materials, nor was that or'any other population formed in so
short a time. The.se are the pioneers of the millions yet to
follow, preparing the way for happy homes and waving fields;
—giving to surrounding nations the blessing of peace, of arts
and sciences, of religion and of commerce, and offering a
home to the weary multitudes of the old world, the refugees
from worn-out institutions and oppressive despotisms. A
country is now at our disposal, unequalled for natural resources
and already rich in its flocks, herds, and gold. But mines of
wealtli still greater, remain to be developed. We are yet but
on the threshold of our prosperity and greatness. We can
foresee through a dim vista the future of Australia. We
believe indeed, that sooner or later these rich lands must
become cultivated, fields, orchards and vineyards studded
with comfortable homesteads and spacious mansions. We
believe that the copper, the tin, the coal and iron mines will
some day be worked; the flats of the Murray may one day
grow rice, the banks of the Darling will probably yet produce
cotton, the silk worm, the sugar cane, and the tea tree ; and
rich cargoes may yet be returned to England for her manu-
factures.
But who amongst us can tell if this is to be in one genera-
tion or a hundred years hence; and yet we believe that a
very few years of well directed energy might realize this happy
picture.
SKETCH OF A TOUR IN ITALY.
The best view of Ancient and Modern Rome, and the adjacent
country, is to be obtained from the tower of the Museum, a
building erected on the Capitol Hill about three hundred years
ago. Standing at the top of this tower, and facing the south,
you have immediately below you the site of the Ancient Roman
Forum, of which there are at present remaining only a few
broken pillars ; and a little further on, is the triumphal arch
erected by the Emperor Trajan, still in a perfect condition. Be-
yond this is the Colosseum, an immense amphitheatre, which was
capable of containing upwards of 100,000 people, and which is
still in excellent preservation. To the right of the Colosseum,
and crowning one of the seven hills on which the city was
founded, are the ruins of the Palace of the Ciezars, and the eye
then roams over a large extent of country once teeming with an
active population, but now silent as the desert. The horizon is
bounded on this side by a range of hills, a spur of the Apennines,
at the foot of which, and about twenty miles distant, are situated
several ancient Roman villages. The Campagna is pretty thickly
covered with ruins, particularly on each side of the “ Via Appia,”
now the high road from Rome to Naples, as it was formerly to
Pompeii the favourite summer resort of the Patrician class. There
is one palace built by the Emperor Nero, which has escaped the
general ruin in which all the others were involved, owing to its
having been filled up and built over by the Emperor Titus. In
modern days the earth has been cleared away from the interior,
and by torch-light you walk through the various rooms forming
this extensive palace, and find many of the fresco paintings still
remaining on the walls. To the west of the capital is a flat
marshy land, intervening between the city and the shores of the
Mediterranean, and through which the muddy Tiber flows slug-
gishly to its mouth. To the west and east is the modern city, the
capital of the Pontiffs, who have for a thousand years exercised
so extraordinary an influence over the affairs of the nations of
the world. From the foot of the Capitol runs the principal street
called the “ Corsoin ancient times, the “ Via Flaminia.” This
is the only really good street in Modern Rome, and in it are to be
found the principal banks and houses of business. It is a narrow
street about a mile in length, and leading to an enclosed space
laid out as pleasure grounds and gardens, and which, with the
Corso, form the fashionable drive and promenade. The remaining


streets are generally narrow and dirty, and throughout the whole
city the want of good drainage is painfully evident. There is no
gas, and at night the streets are but dimly lit by a few oil lamps;
and as the police of Rome are somewhat like the “ Old Charlies ”
in England a century ago, it is not particularly safe to be about
after dusk on foot. Adjoining the cathedral of St. Peter’s is the
Vatican, the usual residence of the popes. It is an immense
building, but not noted for any architectural beauty, The private
apartments are not shewn, except the chapel, the walls and roof
of which are covered with frescoes, the work principally of
Raphael. The Great Gallery of Sculpture, ancient and modern,
is by far the most extensive and the most noted in the world.
It occupies an immense number of rooms. There is only one
room containing paintings, and they are only four in number, but
of great value ; the most celebrated being “The Transfiguration,”
by Raphael, his last and greatest work. There are, as in other
cities, numerous private galleries, which are open to strangers ;
amongst the finest are those in the palaces of the Prince iJoria,
and the Prince Borghese. There are also a great number of
churches, most of them worthy of a visit. The Castle of St
Angelo is a gloomy fortress, close to the rivers, and now used as
a prison. There is some difficulty in gaining admission, and we
did not make any application.
(To he continued.')
FACETI Æ .
Steerage, aboard the Champion av the Says.
This is the letthur that I’m going to write to the Edithur, “ Well
Edithur jewel, it’s thankful to you I am intirely for the whiskey,
it’s the dacent man you are, for you sint me down a bottle full and
the other half-pint in another bottle, so that it was all fair and
straight. But och, murther you see, it’s whiskey that’s always
gettin dacent boys into throuble ; that night, myself and my mate
not been used to the dhrop since we come on board, got as dhrunk
as pipers, and when I was the worse av the liquor, I let it out
that I was Jerry Mulligan. Arrah, they says he, if you’re Jerry
Mulligan, it’s up to sheep-stalin you’ll be, and we’ll lay our hands
on the dead sheep above ! Well, be gorrah, the dhrink and bad
company purvailed on me, and myself and my mate stole the
sheep. All that night I had mighty quare dhrames, all about legs
av mutton, and shoulders av mutton, and loins av mutton, roast
and boiled, but I was the first to awake in the morning, and there
was the sheep for’nint me, so I roused my mate, and as soon as he
saw the sheep he was frightened out av his seven sinses, and says
he, och murther, it’s ruined entirely we are, and it’s hanging us
they’ll be from the yard arm. Well you see, I always had a
ganius for invention, and says I, hould your tongue, and go and
hide yourself, and I’ll make all square, so off he went, and I took
the sheep and I put a shirt and a nightcap on it, and laid it on his
bed rouled up in the blankets; and when the officers came down,
says I, don’t be makin a noise av you plase, the crayture has a
heavy could on him, he had a mighty bad night av it intirely, and
now he’s thryin to get asleep,—so off they went. Well now you’ll
be sayin what was the use av the sheep shure how would you
cook it ? Well bedad, it was the simplest thing in the world, we
didn’t cook it all, we ate it all raw, I finished the last shoulder
this mornin for my breakfast, and mighty good atin it was, and if
any av you genteels was just to live down here for a month I’d
venture to say you’d think nothing av atin three or four pounds
av raw mutton to your breakfast. Well now bedad, yee’s know
all about tee sheep, and I’ll throuble you to send me the gallon
av rum, and let it be measured out in the same way as the whiskey.
Now you see there’s another thrifle I want to be talkin about, I
was always a poor man, and ashore I had a notion that the law
always had a lanin in favor av the rich, but at say, the sorrow
doubt av it at all, for bedad it seems there’s an act iv parliament
lor lettin gintlemen dhrink their full aboard av a ship, but the
likes av us isn’t allowed to get a dhrop av spirits for love or money
to keep the could out av our hearts, that’s sometimes like stones.
Well bedad, myself was puzzlin and puzzlin over the mainin av
this, and at last I found out, it’s be rason a gintleman never gets
dhrunk ; you see if the likes av one av us was to take a dhrop
too much and make a thrifle av noise, the civilest word we’d get
would be, you baste, it’s dhrunk you are, put him in irons ; but
if a gintleraan takes a dhrop too much, it isn’t drunk he is, he’s
only gay ; a thrifle more, and he’s merry; athrifle more, and he’s
jolly. Now if a gintleman aboard the Champion av the Says was
to dhrink a bottle av whiskey, and a bottle av rum, and a bottle
av brandy, and a bottle av wine, and a bottle av shimpayne,
sorrow taste av him id be dhrunk, he’d be only afthur “ goin the
odd man.’’ Now this is the way the members av parliament are
deceived in makin laws, the faults av the rich get such genteel
names that they don’t look like faults at all, and laws isn’t wantin
to keep them in ordhur ; but bedad, the sins av the poor man
gets such hard names that they think the laws can’t lane hard
enough on them, but bedad, I suppose it will be all set to rights
in the next world.
Mr. Edithur, yours to command.
TERRY MULLIGAN.
Champion of the Seas Times.
No. XL] MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1855.
We cannot conclude this series of Our “ Times” without
wishing a kind farewell to the readers, whose sympathy and
support has enabled us to carry it down to the termination of
our voyage. We are almost astonished at the rapidity with
which the interval has glided away since we issued our first
paper. Eleven weeks have passed, and yet few betray
symptoms of uneasiness at the duration of the voyage. But
time flies quickly, when the hours are filled up by agreeable
society, and though sometimes we may mourn for departed
days, yet all is not lost that ceases to be present. The past
is ever a rich heritage of which none would do well to be
entirely deprived, Even when our experience has been pain-
ful, the retrospect is not without its advantage. But when
it has been pleasurable, memory loves to live over again joys
that are fled. And though the future may not fulfil the early
promise, recollection gives to blessings once enjoyed a
perpetuity of existence.
“ A thing of beauty, is a joy for ever.’’
If there has been one thing more pleasing than another in
the journey now almost concluded, it is the remarkable
harmony and good feeling that has pervaded our miscel-
laneous company. That 600 people daily thrown in each
others way, should have lived together for more than two
months in the uniform interchange of friendly offices, is a
fact we think that speaks volumes for our ship’s company.
We are glad to find that in this respect the hopes and wishes
which we ventured to express in our first number, have been
amply fulfilled. Though strangers to each other, we have
not been strange ; and though some may have thought, in the
fulness of their first grief, that they were leaving behind
them all that life held dear, they now feel regret on separating
from newly found friends, whose society they are sorry so
soon to lose. This life indeed seems made up of meetings
and partings, and it is well if amidst its constant vicissitudes,
our principles remain firm. We are now about to enter upon
a new, and to some of us an untried, voyage. We will do
well to carry with us into its perhaps more eventful course,
the qualities and feelings which have so much tended to make
our life on board agreeable. Though a firm and steady hand
be required at the wheel to steer our vessel clear of the shoals
of disappointment, and to keep her on the right course when
the storms of difficulty beat high,' yet the haven of success
will be all the more surely attained if we combine with the
skilful hand a cheerful bearing and a kind heart. _ Many a
gallant bark has been detained from the port by winds that


were contrary; and as many a man, with talent enough to—
“ Breast the blows of circumstance,
“ And grapple with his evil star,”
has found that an ill regulated mind and heart have made
shipwreck of prospects that once were fair. And now we
must bid a sincere adieu to all our fellow travellers, —to our
Captain whose intelligence and urbanity are—
“ Familiar in our mouths as household words,”
—to the officers who have won golden opinions from every
one—to our staff of contributors who have kindly afforded
us the benefit of their time and talents, —and to our more
numerous friends the public, for whose gratification we have
labored, and whose support has so much encouraged our little
undertaking. We heartily wish that in this new land of ours’
each of our shipmates may attain that success and prosperity
which they hope for, and which is so likely to follow those
who obey the self reliant maxim.
“Help yourselves and Heaven will aid you.”
T. McC.
CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Dear Sir,
Our progress this week has been again favourable; the
distance to yesterday at noon was 1,947 miles, and leaves us
about one day’s good sail from Cape Otway. The weather,
however, I am sorry to say, has changed since, and the wind
has now got round to the north-east quarter, which is very
unfavourable for us, and may delay us a day or two more
than we anticipated.
As this may be the last number of the Times issued on
board, will you allow me to convey to the passengers
generally my sincere thanks for their uniform good conduct
and peaceful behaviour while on board the “ Champion of
the Seas.” There are evils inseparable from emigrant ships
and long passages, which I do not pretend to have escaped in
this ship. But I will say that the voyage has passed over
(with the blessing of Almighty God) with a measure of peace,
good-will, and orderly propriety, which, for myself, I feel I
cannot be sufficiently thankful.
We are shortly about to separate, and I sincerely wish
each and all of you success and prosperity in the country of
your adoption, —may your utmost wishes be realised, and
may you find Australia in reality the land of promise.
Tours, &c.,
JOHN McKIRDT,
Commander.
DOCTOR’S REPORT.
To the Editor of the Champion of the Seas Times.
Dear Sir,
I am happy to be able to state there is a still further de-
crease in the number of cases applying for relief during the
past week. Most of the invalids are now convalescent.
I am, &c.,
G. J. WOOD, M.D.
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT ON THE
MIZEN TOP.
It is to be hoped that our publication of to day will be the last
issued, but it would not surprise us much if we found ourselves
next Monday morning in all the horrors of composition. Our
good friend, the wind, which so nobly supported us from the
Cape, has within the last twenty-four hours, without not having
the least cause for offence, chopped, as the sailors say, and left
our back, where for some time he had encouraged and supported
us, and actually turned round and blew into our very face.
There has surely been some misunderstanding. You may talk
of tha capriciousness of the gals, but really the caprice evinced
by the gales of late is not to be compared with it.
On Friday night last the second cabin passengers gave an en-
tertainment to the Eev. Mr. Downes. The proceedings com-
menced by selections from Hamlet. The scene in which Hamlet
sees his father’s ghost was the great event of the evening. Just
as the ghost, (who by the way was dressed in a white sheet and
sou’wester,) was reciting that part—“l am thy father’s spirit,
doomed for a certain time to walk,’’ —a lurch of the vessel cut
short his discourse, and prevented him from fulfilling his doom,
and was not even permitted to stand as a respectable ghost ought
to do.
Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus, from the same cause, were
hurled into a closer proximity to the ghost than they seemed to
desire a few seconds previously, but in a short time every one re-
turned to his former attitude, and the ghost, with all due dignity,
proceeded to enlighten Hamlet as to the character of his depraved
uncle. Singing and recitation made up the remainder of the
evening.
On Saturday evening we passed a few hours very happily in-
deed, and we have no doubt that all who were present will join
us in saying that it was decidedly the happiest time we have spent
on board our good Champion.
The accident of the hour is one which all our readers will de-
plore. The editorial hat has gone overboard, and perhaps what
makes the incident the more remarkable and striking, is the cu-
rious coincidence of time and manner. At three o’clock this day,
just as he was about abdicating the post he had filled so well,
(scarce was the ink on the paper dry, which forms our last leader,)
he went on deck to inhale the fresh sea breeze before dinner,,
when lo! an envious gust of wind irreverently curled beneath
the leaf, and whirled it from off the head it adorned. We are
certain the loss sustained by our worthy editor will gain him the
sympathy of our readers, and of the fair portion of them in par-
ticular, who have often admired the good natured glow it imparted
to his benign features.
We now descend from the mizen top, and are about to mix
with the common herd on terra Jirma. We feel almost sorry to
abandon our post of observation, and shall often think with-
pleasure of our life on board the “ Champion of the Seas."
LEAVES FROM OUR LOG.
No. XL
CONCLUSION.
This has been, indeed, a week of leave-takings. Birthdays and
partings have been quite the order of the day. First amongst
these has been the celebration of our chief mate's natal anniversary,
on Tuesday last. At dinner we drank his health in a glass of
foaming champagne, provided by, not a Cold, but a Cald-well
wisher, and in the evening, Mr. o‘Donnell entertained a large
number of the passengers in his cabin. As it was not as large as
his heart, and consequently could not accommodate all his friends
at once, the matter was compromised by relays of visitors, coming
at intervals. First of all, our worthy Captain qnd the ladies, paid
him the compliment of being present, when his fair visitants drank
his health with all the honours; after this, his masculine admirers
mustered in strong force, and thus, by a happy contrivance, hig
‘ salon,' which could not comfortably hold more than eight or ten
persons, was made to accommodate twenty or thirty in the course
of the evening. We had the privilege of “ entree" and feel bound
to say that the reception passed off with great eclat. Speeches


were delivered on the occasion, not only by gentlemen, but even
by the fair sex, and a number of melodies were pleasingly vocalised,
and we believe there are none on board who will not agree with
us in saying that a more “jolly good fellow’’ it has seldom been
our lot to meet. On Friday evening Eev. J. Downes was enter-
tained in the second cabin, and an address and testimonial were
presented to him. We were glad to observe that in paying our
respected minister this tribute of esteem, all classes of the passen-
gers united. On Saturday evening a large company met in the
after-saloon to do honour to our esteemed Captain, who is so richly
entitled to the respect and gratitude of all on board. In the
early part of the evening we were favoured with a 1 soiree musicale ’.
We do not know how it is that music is so popular amongst us,
unless it is that living so harmoniously together we are predisposed
for harmony. That there is a connection between the two, is
established we think by the testimony of different ages. Biblical
history informs us how the haughty king of Israel was charmed
out of his sullen moods by the harp of the son of Jesse. In classic
times the beautiful fable of Orpheus, attracting by his lute the
rocks and forests and streams, and even taming the ferocity of
of the wild beasts by his unearthly strain, shows what an influence
was then ascribed to the divine art. And in more modern days
has not the Bard of Avon sung ?
“ The man that hath no music in himself,
“ Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
“ Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils,
«♦ .j. *** «# *
“ Let not such men be trusted!”
But, this is a digression ;we will only add that the gathering of
Saturday night was harmonious in the double sense. It also hap-
pened to be the anniversary of the birth day of a young lady, who
has contributed in no slight degree to our enjoyment. The
Captain’s health was drunk with enthusiasm; the toast and the
song went merrily round; and, altogether, we know not when we
spent a more agreeable evening. We have now come to the last
leaf of “ our log.” While its pages were yet unwritten, we felt
no little depression of spirits, no slight comminglings of hope and
fear, on leaving a home radiant with happiness, and entering upon
a journey which for aught we knew, might be tedious and unsoci-
able; but, as we wrote on the i agremens' multiplied, our melan-
choly was dissipated, our doubts and fears have been removed—the
dove of peace has ever brooded o’er our ark, —and in all the vary-
ing latitudes through which we have passed, no contrary wind has
been able to disturb the good fellowship that has reigned over us
from the first. We are now not far from our destination.
Already some hospitable butterfles, the tiny heralds of an
Australian summer, have come to give us a gay welcome to our
new home. We accept their visit as a happy omen. We are
reminded that whilst at home Autumn holds its sway, we arrive
here in the first full flush of Spring. The season is one which of
all the year is the most exhilirating. Hope marks as its own the
time of the ‘ bursting of the bud,’ —when the feathered choristers of
the wood resume their song,—and when all nature seems revived
from its wintry sleep and adorns itself with its fairest mantle—
“ Its brightest of green.”
At such a period we feel a peculiar sympathy with nature, our
hopes are springing too. Visions of future independence flit across
the minds of many an ardent emigrant amongst us, and we trust
they may never know the bitterness of that “ hope deferred which
maketh the heart sick,” but that courageous workers , as well as
cheerful hopers , they may find in the land of their adoption, a
success, which while it will reward their persevering efforts, may
also fulfil their most sanguine expectations.
And now we close “ Our Log.” If it be our lot to traverse
once more “ the trackless deep,” may we have as many pleasant
incidents to record, as we have attempted imperfectly to chronicle
in these stray “ leaves.”
T. McC.
SKETCH OF A TOUR IN ITALY.
I remember meeting one day a good specimen of the genuine
Yankee. He sat next to me at the “ Table d’Hote,’’ and soon
commenced a conversation, from which I gathered that he had
come over to England to see the Great Exhibition in London,
and had then been induced to extend his travels. He had rushed
through France by express trains, on to Marseilles, taken the
steamer to Naples, where he had stayed a day, and had, he said
seen everything; thence posted to Borne, where he arrived the
morning of the day I made his acquaintance. He had been to
see St. Peter’s, through the Vatican, and had already seen every-
thing worth seeing; was off on the following day, and declared
his intention of returning post haste to New York, which he
regretted having left, as he had found nothing in the old country
worth coming so far to see. After remaining a fortnight at Home
we hired a vetturino to take us on to Naples. Our route was
along the Appian way, through the small town of Albano, over
the Pontine Marshes to Terracina, end thence via Capua to
Naples. There is probably no city in the world, the situation of
which has been more extolled than that of Naples. I have often
heard the Bay of Dublin compared to it, but to my mind the
view from the Frith of Forth, approaching Granton from the
opposite coast of Fife, presents features much more nearly re-
sembling it, and still each differs in many respects. The head-
lands of the Bay of Naples, dividing it on the north from the
Gulf of Gaeta, and on the south from the Gulf of Salerno,
are bold and precipitous. Opposite the north side of the bay is
the Island of Gaeta, a strong fortress, in which are confined a
large number of prisoners, many of whom are guilty of no crime
but that of being too liberal for opinions to be tolerated by the
existing Government. Facing the Southern Promontory, is the
beautiful island of Capri, so celebrated for its Marine Grotto, the
visit to which forms one of the many delightful excursions in the
vicinity. The city is situated on the north east side of the bay,
within about four miles of the foot of Mount Vesuvius. The
streets are usually crowded, and there is an air of great animation
and gaiety about the Neapolitan Lazzaroni. It is an arduous task
to ascend Mount Vesuvius. We took a carriage to Portici, at the
foot of the mountain, where there is an establishment of guides
appointed by Government. Here we left our carriage, and
mounted ponies, and attended by a chief and guide, and several
assistants, we commenced the ascent. From this point to the
hermitage, the road winds up the side of the mountain for about
six miles. Here we left our ponies, and clambered on over broken
rocks and lava to the foot of the cone. From this the ascent is
very difficult, and for those who are timid, a sort of basket chair,
slung on two poles and carried by four of the guides, is provided.
It is something like the sedan chair of olden times, but much
lighter in construction. There is no regular path, and the bear-
ers have to climb over broken and irregular masses of lava,
causing the position of the occupant of the chair to be as unsteady
as that of a person standing on the poop deck of a ship in a heavy
rolling sea. The majority of our party preferred trusting to
their hands and feet, and we managed to reach the top in about
thirty minutes. The view from the apex of the cone amply re-
pays all the labour in attaining it, and must be seen to be appre-
ciated. There is a wall of crust forming a path round the edge
of the crater; w r e walked round it, sometimes obscured by the
sulphurous smoke, and sometimes being able to look down for a
considerable depth into the crater, where the streams of molten
lava, of varying colours, presented a beautiful appearance; but as
one false step would have precipitated us into an abyss from which
there could be no escape, the position was too dangerous to be re-
tained for many minutes. The descent is much more easy than
the ascent. One side of the cone is covered with a thick layer of
ashes. To ascend on this side would be impossible, but to de-
scend you have only to throw yourself well back, and stride boldly
forward. The ashes form a sufficient foot hold to your
gaining too great a velocity ; and you accomplish in five minutes
the distance it took thirty minutes to ascend. After regaining
the hermitage and partaking of luncheon, for which we were well
prepared, we mounted our ponies and returned to Naples. I al-
ways look back upon this excursion as one of the most agreeable
I ever had. Of equal interest is the visit to Pompeii, about seven
miles from Naples. The road runs along the shores of the bay.
Pompeii was suddenly buried by an eruption of ashes, and thus it
remained for a thousand When the excavations were com-
menced, the earth and ashes being light were easily removed, and
they have now thrown open about what is supposed to be one-
fourth of the city. It is exceedingly interesting and curious to
walk through these silent and deserted streets, treading the same
pavement over which the gay Roman patrician drove his chariot;
and finding the houses on each side in their original state. In the
interior of many are to be found fresco paintings, with which most


of their rooms were decorated, and the beautiful Mosaic pavement
is still wonderfully perfect. It is to be regretted that the best
specimens have been removed to the museum at Naples, increasing
doubtless the attractions of that institution, but diminishing the
interest one would have had in seeing them where they were
originally found. The remains of Herculaneum are not so inter-
esting. This city was buried by an eruption of lava, which has
become as hard as the hardest rock; and it is only by great labour
that a small part of the amphitheatre has been excavated ; and
this can only be seen by torch light. There are many other inte-
resting excursions in the neighbourhood, the Palace of Caserta,
the ancient village of Baias, the extinct crater of the Solfa Tara
and Neros Bates, the town of Amalfi, celebrated for maccaroni,
and the ruins of Poestern on the Gulf of Salerno, said to be of
Phoenecian origin and of a date much earlier than the Roman
Ruins. From Naples we preceded by steamer to Malta, calling
en ronte at Messina, and with the intention of going on to Gib-
ralter, and home via Seville and Cadiz to Southampton. Circum-
stances induced us to alter our arrangements, and we returned
from Malta, via Marseilles and Paris, having passed three months
in a most agreeable and instructive tour.
A FEW PARTING WORDS FROM THE AUTHOR
OF LARRY MURPHY.
At the close of our voyage I have been constrained through the
influence of editorial authority, to cast aside the quill, with free
and easy nib, which indighted past effusions ; and select a pen of
iron stiffness, fitted to write with philosophical sobriety. It only
remains to decide what it shall be all about!—What say you to
something about nice people ? Well, we have all most indubi-
tably come to the unanimous decision, that we are all not only
nice, but very nice people. Now this feeling being understood
to exist in the bosom of each individually toward all collectively,
the gentlemen who are sufficiently juvenile, find themselves in the
delightfully pleasing position of being considered by all the ladies,
as nice young men, which coming from the lips of a young lady,
means fully as much as though an Irishman in addressing a lady,
were to exclaim “ Arrah ! Murther in Irish, shure it’s the darlint
you are,” and it is second only to those words, never applied to
any but military men of most unexceptionable whisker, Oh ! la!
what a duck of a man! This pen I find has not got the true
philosophical stiffness, so 1 have given the nibs a twist the reverse
way, which has brought them to their senses. It being arranged
that our newspaper is to be published, it will probably meet the
eye of many of our friends in the mother country, who have
never been a long sea voyage, and to them it may appear strange
that we felicitate ourselves so much, on account of the absence of
what they call in Ireland, a shindy, or a “ thrifle av a skrimmage.”
I can imagine some old lady after reading the paper with spectacled
vision, exclaiming, dear me 1 what extraordinary people! they
think themselves very nice because they were not always
squabbling!—my dear old lady allow me to explain, and in order
that we may fully understand each other, let us in the most
philosophical manner in the world, go back to first principles;
my dear old lady, I don’t know your name, but you will be kind
enough to allow me to call you Mrs. Muggins for the time being ;
my dear Mrs. Muggins, you have often heard of a child of nature,
and I dare say your idea of the animal is embodied in a very
charming young lady, finished off with an assortment of very
elegant graces, but my idea of a child of nature, is a savage whose
existence is so absorbed in the petty interests of No. 1 as to quite
overlook the claims for consideration of Nos. 2, 3 and 4. The
progress of civilization converts savages into highly accomplished
ladies and gentlemen, who, meeting at those very delightful re-
unions at which the polite assemble, with gay smiles and char-
ming glances, present an uuruffled surface, beneath which is
carefully concealed the feeling so natural to us all to keep a
sharp look out for No. 1. Let us suppose a nice young man to
put his hair in paper, and order a waistcoat of celestial texture
and cut, with the view that all the young ladies should fall in love
with him at a coming dinner party, imagine him on the appointed
evening by some sad mishap, finding himself seated not by a
young, but a very fat old lady, who delivers him a lecture on the
composition of her favourite pudding, and the merits of Anderson’s
Pills. The promptings of No. 1 vote her a horrid bore, but con-
sideration for No. 2 produced by the usages of polite society,
constrain him tot listen with smiling attention. Or imagine a
young lady, who has proceeded to the same dinner party bent on
conquest, placed beside a puffy old gentleman from the City, who
is kept by the cruet stand in memory that pepper is down, mus-
tard up, and vinegar rising; now this ought to be enough
to make the young lady rise too, but politeness induces her to
keep her seat. Now, on shore it is easy enough to endure all
this sort of thing, because there is always a chance of escape,
besides on returning home, you can always vent your spleen on
the servants, or by kicking the cat, should she be so unfortunate
as to come in your way. But on a long voyage, there is no
opportunity of getting away from the disagreeable, and there
is scarcely anything you can kick at, except your own heels.
Ashore No, 1, is generally occupied with matters unconnected
with those whom we meet in the social circle, and which do not
conflict with their interests. At sea the world is shut out from us;
the vessel becomes our little world, and mere trifles connected
with it, matters of importance, so much so, that the passengers
are in hourly risk of disagreeing about trivial real or
imaginary. We, in contradistinction to the experience of all of
us who have gone the same voyage before, have passed through
the ordeal unscathed. We therefore, consider ourselves l, very
nice people,” not as being people of any extraordinary qualities
but as having always kept No. 1 so much in hand, as not to give
any annoyance to Nos. 2, 3 and 4. We would be guilty of much
ingratitude if we did not attribute this, in a great measure, to the
ladies. In approaching this subject, I must confess Ido not feel
quite at my ease, it has been already in such masterly hands.
One gentleman on a late occasion expressed himself strongly in
favour of the “ angel idea,” and another in the most elegant man-
ner in the world, conducted the ladies up to the seventh heaven,
on a ladder of ivy. I must confess I always had a strong weak-
ness in favour of women, versus angels, but, as poetry is the order
of the day, on board ship, having some indistinct recollection of
writing, when a boy at school, a sonnet in praise of a young
maiden who served the establishment with milk, I determined on
venturing on a piece of poetry in honour of our fair passengers; after
two hours of intense mental agony, I found I had got no further
than “ whilst I gaze upon those charms,’’ now I could think of no
word to rhyme with charms but alarms, and as there can be
nothing alarming connected with what is very charming, I came
to a dead stop. At last I thought of changing the last word, and
wrote it, whilst I gaze upon those eyes. Whether it was the
effects of roast pork on the imagination is a query, hut I could
think of nothing to rhyme with eyes hut pork pies, and as this
did not sound exactly like a poetical idea, I gave up the attempt,
and was obliged to deliver myself in prose, simply observing that
the ladies on-board the “Champion of the Seas,” unite with many
personal charms, so delightful as forgetfulness of No. 1, as to
render Nos. 2, 3 and 4, and so on to to the last number of our
mess, disposed to follow so good an example, and to their amiable
dispositions, accompanied by elegant and pleasing manners, we
must attribute a great deal of the social union which has existed
amongst us, —and the general good feeling with which we part, as
“ very nice people.”
C. G.
FAREWELL REUNION.
On Saturday evening last we were privileged to be present at a
Farewell Entertainment given to Capt. McKirdy by the First
Cabin Passengers. The company assembled at 8 o’clock in the
After-Saloon. In the early part of the evening our ears were re-
galed with some choice selections of instrumental and vocal music,
which were rendered with much good taste and feeling by the la-
dies and gentlemen who came forward on the occasion. At half-
past 9 o’clock supper was announced, and we adjourned to the
dining saloon, where a cold collation was prepared. On the mo-
tion of Mr. Boyd, seconded by Mr. Allen, the chair was taken by
Robert R. Macredie, Esq., on whose right hand sat the guest of
the night, our worthy Captain. After doing justice to the good
things placed before us, the Chairman rose, and calling for a bum-
per, proposed in suitable terms the health of Captain McKirdv.
Mr. McComas was then called on to read the Address unanimously
adopted by the Passengers, and which will be found in another


column : after which, the toast was drunk with musical honours,
and Mr. Hocknell favoured the company with the appropriate
song—“ Ye Gentlemen of England’” The Captain responded in a
feeling speech, in which he expressed the gratification which this
voyage had given him from the unusual harmony that prevailed
amongst the passengers. He also paid a glowing tribute to the
ladies, whose society has so much contributed to the happiness of
our journey, and resumed his seat amidst loud applause. The
other toasts of the evening were “ The Ladies;’’ proposed by Mr.
McOomas, and responded to by Mr. Thompson:—air “ Tis when
the cup is smiling, &c,’’ sung by Mr. Hewlett. “ Mr. O’Donnell,
the Doctor and the other officers of the ship,” proposed by Mr.
Hocknell: —air “ The Anchor’s weighed,’’ by Mr. Harbottle.
“ Rev. Mr. Downes,’’ proposed by Mr. Hewlett:—air “ Kathleen
Mavourneen,’’ sung by Mr. Blythe. “ Mr. McComas and the
Editors of the Times,’’ proposed by Mr. Harbottle : —air “ Hearts
of Oak.” “Mr. Gill,” proposed by Mr. Barnsley:—air “The
Bonnets of bonny Dundee,’’sung by Mr. Blyth. “Sweethearts
and Wives,’’ proposed by Captain McKirdyair “Here’s a health
to all good Lassies,’’ by Mr. Harbottle. The health of “the
Chairman’’ was then proposed by Mr. Willett;—song “Mary
Draper,” by Mr. Hewlett. After which the “ National Anthem”
was sung by Messrs. Harbottle, Hocknall & Blythe, and the com-
pany separated, much gratified with a reunion in which the—
“ Feast of reason and flow of soul ”
so agreeably predominated.
FACETIÆ.
Steerage av the “ Champion av the Sags.”
To the Edithur av the “ Thimes,”
Arrah ! Musha, thin shure I hear it’s comin to the ind av the voyage
we are, and it’s mighty sorry I am to here it, for you see, I’m gettin
thunderin fond av the ship. Sorrow taste av throuble a man has thinkin
where his breakfast is to come from, but bedad, the purser must fork it
out. Och, but it’s a beautiful independant way of livin, and myself will
thry it ashore, as soon as ever I’ve ten pound. I’ll get somebody to con-
thract to feed me, and I’ll live like a gentleman till the time is up, and
thin you’ll be no worse than if you come to the ind av a voyage with
three-pence hay-penny in your pocket. It isn’t a right thing to be makin
a jest av your best friends, you see, there’s Larry Murphy a while ago,
said the cow was dead, and faix it’s dead in earnest, she is now, and I hear
the ladies is gettin preserved milk in their tay, Och, murthur in Irish,
don’t I pity them if it is'nt betthur preserved than the praties. Shure all
av us has heard av the ingratitude av the world, afther the dacant animal
av a cow given yees milk for your tay all the voyage, barin the last week,
Is it not the laste might be expected, to sew her up in canvas, like any
other dacent corpse, and put her over the side with all the honors due to a
useful member av society. Instead av that, down comes a chap to the
steerage, and says he, boys, you may ate the cow. You dirty spalpeen,
says I, do you think we know no betthur than to ate a dead cow ? Sor-
row taste av a dead cow, says he, didn’t we cut her throat to save her
life, and shure she did’nt die when she was kilt. But it was no use, we
would have nothin to do with the cow. But Edither jewel, wasn’t it the
dirty thratement I got, shure the sorrow taste av the gallon av rum I
got afthur tellin yees all about the sheep. I wouldn’t be mindin it only
I wanted to get dhrunk in honor av the birthday av that darlint av the
world, the First Mate. Shure hasn’t he been the joy av our hearts all
the voyage, and didn’t he keep the life in the girls with the pleasant
ways he has. Well anyways myself was delighted, when I heard the
ladies was goin to do him the honor av drhrinkin his health in Shimpayne
in his own cabin, myself bored a hole in the top av it with a gimlet, to
look thro’ and see all the goins on, and may be I wasn’t disappointed, for
the sorrow taste av rale fun there was the whole evenin, but shure my
heart misgave me from the first that it wouldn’t be the right sort av a
screech, whin I saw one av the clergy present. Well bedad, early in
the evenin the entertainment broke up, just at the time that the fun
ought to be commencin, and it’s then the ladies acted mighty badly
intirely, instead av kissin the dacent man all round as they ought, there
was nothin but bowin and scrapin, and curtsayin, and bedad, the ladies
walked away in as strait a line to their cabins, as if they were practisin
the could wather cure all the evenin, instead of lookin at them beautiful
little bubbles that does be jumping about in the Shimpayne
Yees all know my mind about the Captain, and the dacent man I
always thought him, now it’s the greatest pleasure in life to be sarvin
ones friends, so i’ll just give him a hint that may he useful to him on the
voyage home.
When we were settin’ out we all expected to be in Melbourne in 65
days, and shure myself was thinkin it’s a hundredweight av gould I’d
have dug up by this time, now the “ Champion av the Says ” was just
the ship to do it, for bedad she cuts the wathur like a razhur, and the
sorrow taste av doubt there is, we’d be in Australy long ago, only for
somethin’ and the main point for the Captain, is to find out what that
somethin’ is. Well bedad I heard the sailors talkin’ about it the other
day, and one and all agreed it was for want av a fair trade at the be-
ginning, now myself was thinkin’ and thinkin’ what could be the manin’
av this, and at last I found it all out, and proud av the discovery I am
for the Captain’s sake.
There’s a dacent boy, a counthry-man av my own, av the name av
Paddy Doyle, that the sailors is owin’ for a pair av boots, and as soon as
the blagguards get a pull at the ropes, they remember the debt, and
sing out at the top av their voices “ we’ll pay Paddy Doyle for his boots,”
but bedad, as soon as ever the pullin’ av the ropes is over, it’s all over
with Paddy Doyle too, and he hears no more av payment, ’til the next
pull at the ropes; and may I never die in sin, but the dacent man isn’t
paid yet, for I heard them singing out on Saturday, we’ll pay Paddy
Doyle for his boots. Now Captain, jewel, shure you know yourself this
isn’t a fair trade, upon my sowl it’s cornin’ it stronger than free trade,
for it’s a mighty free and asay sort av trade to be warin’ out an honest
man’s shoe leather, before it's paid for. Now you see Captain as the
sailors have spoilt the voyage for want av a fair trade, they’re now tliryin’
to get into port by giving fair promises instead; but Capain darlint, it
won’t do, for shure din’nt I hear the wind was threatnin’ to come a-head
av us, and shure that you know all about it, if the money was to
come out av your own pocket, settle the dacent man’s thrifle av an
account, and when the sailors are dropping the anchor, let them sing one
and all—“ Shure it’s honest men we are, for we’ve paid Paddy Doyle
for his boots,” and yon may depend upon it, whin the ship starts for
home, it’s a fair trade ’ill take her into Liverpool in 60 days. And now
Edithur darlin’, it’s biddin’ you good bye, I’ll be along with all the
genteels, and shure it’s the wish av my heart, that the young gintlemen
may soon pick up with good dacent wives, and that the darlins’ av young
ladies may have the pickin’ and choosin’ av good husbands, out av an
illigant collection av sweethearts.
Yours to command.
TERRY MULLIGAN.
C. G.
REVIEW.
Land, Labour, and Gold, or Two Years in Victoria, by
Wm. Howitt, 2 vols., Longman & Co. The Golden Era
of Victoria; published by Messrs. Orr & Co.
The first epoch of our history is past—the second is begun.
The first was one of selfishness, ignorance and presumption
—they reigned triumphant and unquestioned. The poor were
oppressed, and the country retarded, so far as the ingenuity
of man could accomplish it. Fortunately the flocks would
increase, and the cattle would multiply ; and the squatters
and the merchants got rich in spite of all the deadening in-
fluences to the contrary.
The second epoch is now begun. This must be one of
struggle, where every right-hearted man must espouse the
cause of humanity and of progress. The selfishness of the
first yet reigns all powerful; the friends of monopoly raise
their unabashed and brazen faces ; and ignorance is their
willing bottle-holder. God will favour the right, if we only
be true to ourselves.
The prosperity of the whole community is the problem to
work out. If the country is now made prosperous and
happy, we shall not want for emigrants. Friends bring out
their friends, and one tells another, until soon that enor-
mous tide of emigration, now flowing from Europe to Ame-
rica, would be directed to our own more favoured country.
At present we have more than we want. We have peo-
ple requiring work and leaving the colony—people whe
would be glad to grow us wheat and vegetables,—but no,
they must go to New Zealand or America. There they aro


Officers
Male.
6
Female.
Infants.
Total.
6
Crew, including stewards, &c.
108
2
110
Passengers; —
First Cabin ...
21
13
4
38
Second Cabin
58
60
6
124
Intermediate
85
60
6
151
Third Class ...
127
33
1
161
Total
590
Officers
Male.
6
Female.
Infants.
Total:
6
Crew, &c.
... 108
2
|t ,
110
Passengers ; —
Adults
... 245
116
361
Half ditto
48
48
96
Infants
17
17
Total
590
received with open arms. Plenty of land is at their service,
and plenty of time is given to pay for it.
This vast country is our birthright. We are each and
every one of us owners of land equal to the estates ol the
English nobility. It is our own fault if these lie dormant
and unproductive. The mother-country makes no claim on
them —they are handed over to us colonists to do what we
like with them. The squatter has had the use of them and
prospered. Beef and mutton has thriven, long may they
continue to thrive ! But we also require agriculture—we
cannot live on beef and mutton alone. Why should the same
liberty which the squatter has enjoyed not be granted to the
agriculturist P Why should the farmer, who employs more
men, and requires only a small piece of land, not have the
same privileges as the squatter ? The licence system has
answered with the one, why not with the other? The
squatter has become rich —he has given the colony abun-
dance of food, he has been a good customer to the mer-
chant, he has been a good subject and paid his taxes.
Why, with such a successful experiment before our eyes,
do we not say to the thousands now floating to our
shores, “ See the squatter, what he has done! he has had
his hardships, but see the result. Go, and do likewise!
Choose your land, take your plough and grow rich as the
squatter, who has preceded you, has done, and who is of infi-
nite service. There is room for both ; one station will cut up
into a thousand farms, each large enough for a good estate.
The adjoining squatters will be glad of your proximity—you
are a good customer to them, and would keep up the value
of their herds and flocks.” Thus may all be prosperous and
happy ; there is room for all —for the squatter who has the
first claim, for the agriculturist who has the most 'pressing
claim, for the diggers who have been the worst used—
and thus will the merchant thrive on the general prosperity
of the colony, the revenue be easily raised, and the govern-
ment richly supported.
Never in the history of the world were such prospects
within the reach of men. The children of Israel had a rich
country given to them—but they had first to fight for it.
All ancient conquests were by the sword, and not for the
people, but for their tyrants. Now we have a vast country,
richer and vaster than ancient conquests, and it belongs to
the people. We are surrounded by teeming populations who
will gladly join us, and modern science has divested of its
terror even the ocean transit.
R. C.
CONCERT AND PRESENTATION.
Last Friday evening we witnessed with very great delight
a most successful attempt to entertain the passengers in the
saloon of the Second Cdbin. Mr. O’Donnell, our chief mate,
having been unanimously voted into the chair, after a few
appropriate preliminary remarks, proceeded according to the
programme, to call for the selections from “ Hamlet,” which
were acted by Messrs. Blythe, Brenchley, Wheeler, Izard,
and Price Brothers. An excellent address from the Captain,
Officers, First and Second Cabin Passengers, to the Rev.
John Downes, M.A., was then read by Mr. John F. Young,
expressive of our obligation to him for his ministerial ser-
vices on board, and begging his acceptance of a purse of so-
vereigns as a token of the esteem and affection with which
he is regarded. The Rev. Gentleman replied in feeling
terms.
A number of songs were then sung in succession, among
which we must not forget to mention those by our kind
Chairman, and our humourous pro temporary Negro, Mr.
Smith. Messrs. Blythe and Brenchley sung most accept-
ably, and George recited “ Ned Bolton ” like a true tar.
The National Anthem having been sung, refreshments were
served round, which the Cnptain’s liberality had supplied for
the occasion.
OUR SHIP.
Before parting with our good Ship we are desirous of re-
cording a few particulars regarding her, which though more
scanty than we could wish, will, we trust, prove interesting
to our fellow-passengers.
She was built by Donald McKay of Boston, U.S., 1854 ;
register tonnage, 2,237 tons. Her extreme length over all
264 feet- Length from inner part of main stem to fore part
of stern post, 247 feet ; the length of keel is 230. Breadth
in midships 42 , 3, and depth of hold 29 feet. The height
of her masts are; —foremost 150 feet, above deck to top of
royal; mainmast 175 feet; mizen mast 168 feet. She has a
flush deck, the advantages of which we fully appreciated
during our run through the southern latitudes. The dining sa-
loon is very commodious, and the berths airy and comfortable.
The after-saloon is elegantly fitted up with rosewood panell-
ing and gilt mouldings ; and her general accommodations are
excellent and commodious.
The “ Champion of the Seas ” made her first trip to Mel-
bourne in 73 days, starting from Liverpool in October, 1854.
She left Melbourne on the 15th February in the present
year for Liverpool, and made the passage home in 87 days.
Her present trip, which notwithstanding unexpected calms
and contrary winds, she has made in 83 days, is therefore the
third within a period of twelve months.
We subjoin a List of the Passengers and Crew she carries
out on this voyage.
STATEMENT OF PERSONS ON BOARD.
ABSTRACT.
ADDRESS FROM THE FIRST CLASS PAS-
SENGERS
TO
JOHN M'KIRDY, ESQ., COMMANDER.
Sept. 22nd, 1855.
Sir,
We, the After-Saloon Passengers of the “ Champion of
the Seas,” are desirous (as our voyage to Melbourne is on the
eve of completion) of conveying to you the unanimous ex-
pression of our feelings before we separate. Since we bade
adieu to the shores of Old England on the 7th of July last


Days
out.
Day of the
month.
Latitude by
observation
Longitude.
Course.
Distance
Winds.
Force of
winds.
Weather.
Barometer.
Clouds.
Clear sky.
W. B.
D. B.
July
5
North
o »
West
0 >
O
0
b c
O
’
1
2
6
36
SSE
1
b c m
30
12
str
8
60
7
51
SSW
4
c
30
14
cir str
9
65
3
8
50
36
10
31
South
4
c r
29
85
cir cum
4
62
4
9
<9
2
12
28
S 39 W
120
SE
1
b c v
29
73
cir cum
5 8
60
65
5
10
46
28
13
40
S 18 W
162
NW
6
c r—b c
29
95
cum
6 8
60
63
6
11
42
34
14
4
S 6 W
236
WNW
5
c q—b c
30
15
cir str
8 4
61
64
7
12
39
55
12
49
S 20 E
170
Westerly
4 3
b c—c p
30
16
str
8 1
62
66
8
13
37
39
13
20
S 10 W
139
WNW
3 2
b c m—b c
30
16
str
8 5
64
67
9
14
35
44
14
29
S 26 W
129
NW
2 2
b c—b c v
30
30
cir str
5 8
67
7i
10
15
33
49
15
3
S 11 W
119
NW
2
b c v
30
42
cir str
8 8
66
71
11
16
31
49
16
6
S 24 W
132
Northerly
2 3
b c—c
30
34
cir str
5 8
67
71
17
30
20
17
33
S 40 W
117
NNE
2 1
b c y—0 c
30
23
cir cum
6 1
70
76
13
18
29
18
18
35
S 41 W
83
North
I 1
b c—b c m
30
30
cir cum
1 8
70
76
14
19
27
23
19
13
S 16 W
120
NNE
2 3
b c v—c
30
29
cir str
7 8
71
75
15
20
25
12
20
42
S 32 W
154
ENE
2 3
b c v—c
30
23
cir cum
7 5
68
73
16
21
22
43
21
39
s 19 w
158
ENE
4
b c—c
30
23
cir str
8 4
73
75
17
22
19
25
22
4
S 7 E
200
E by S
5
b c m—c
30
15
str
4 7
68
72
18
23
16
6
21
47
8 4 E
200
NEerly
5 4
b c m—c m
30
15
cir cum
5 4
68
70
19
24
14
34
21
37
S 7 E
93
do.
3 1
b c y—c
30
10
1 cum str
7 6
74
81
20
25
13
32
2l
40
South
62
do.
1 1
b c v—c m
30
16
cum str
4 9
79
82
21
26
11
42
22
22
S 21 W
118
NW
2 2
c—b c v
30
16
cum
7 6
76
80
27
10
9
23
29
S 35 IV
115
Northerly
2 2
b c—b c v
30
16
str
4 7
78
82
28
8
29
23
36
SWerly
3 2
b c m—0 c
30
15
cum str
6 00
76
79
24
29
7
7
23
19
SSWS
12 3
0 c—c r
30
19
cum nimb
0 2
76
76
25
30
7
32
20
4
SW
353
c—c r
30
12
nitnb
2 0
75
76
26
31
7
26
17
5
SWerly
4 5
c r—b c—c
30
12
cum str
4 5
77
80
Aug- i
No obser
vation
West
4 3
c m—c r
30
10
str
4 00
77
79
2 8
29
2
0
5
13
40
S 61 E
84
SW by S
4 5
b c—b c v
30
15
cum
4 2
79
81
3
5
33
15
8
SSW
6 4
c r—b c
30
15
cum str
4 2
78
79
30
4
5
21
14
24
do.
4 5
c—0 c
30
9
str
0 1
76
77
31
32
5
4
57
15
40
S 6*9 W
82
do.
5 6
0 c, c r, b c
30
13
str
021
76
77
6
3
54
17
42
S 65 W
135
do.
5
0 c h c v
30
8
cum str
1 0 2
76
77
33
34
35
7
2
32
20
51
S 66 W
207
South
4 5
p, bcm, bcv
30
10
cum str
3 4 5
76
77
8
9
S. 2
21
2
23
26
40
33
S 52 W
S 50 W
216
235
SSE
do.
5 6
6
b c—b c
b c v—p
30
30
19
15
cum str
cum str
7 8
8 9
76
76
78
77
36
3 7
10
4
6
10
29
44
S 56 W
231
S by E
5 6
b c—b—b c v
30
8
cum str
9 8
77
79
1 1
43
32
54
S 51 W
247
do.
5
b c—b c v
30
20
cum
9 8
77
78
38
39
12
8
9
33
48
S 32 W
102
SSE
4 3 4
b c—b c v
30
13
str
7 8
81
78
13
9
44
34
33
S 26 W
106
do.
4 3
b c—b c v
30
14
cir str
8 7
81
79 .
4l
14
3
34
22
S 5 E
140
ESE
2 3
b c—b c y
30
12
cir str
6 9
79
78
15
10
35
1
S 30 W
78
SE
2 1
b c m—b c v
30
9
cir str
6 7
74
78
42
l6
13
49
35
48
S W 49
60
SSE
1 2
b —b c v
30
15
cir str
10 9
74
77
43
17
14
22
36
9
S 32 W
40
South
0 2
b — b c v
30
24
str
10 8
75
78
44
18
16
52
35
20
S 18 E
158
Easterly
4 4
b c—b c v
30
20
cir str
9 8
75
77
45
l9
IS
67
34
49
S 13 E
129
ESE
4 2
b c v—b c
30
25
str
8 9
74
76
46
20
21
36
33
51
S 19 E
169
East
3 5
b c — b c m
30
4
cum str
8 2
7 2
73
4 7
21
24
47
32
6
S 27 E
214
NE
6 3
b c—0 c
SO
29
cum str
6 1
72
72
48
22
26
12
30
52
S 38 E
108
NEerly
2 3
0 c—r—b c v
30
25
cum
00 8
69
70
49
23
27
41
29
10
S 45 E
128
NNW
2 3
b c—b c v
30
20
cir str
8 6
69
70
50
24
29
30
25
8
S 62 E
236
NWSW
4 8
b c—0 c
30
10
cum str
2 6
57
58
51
2®
29
14
22
1
E 6 N
164
South
5 2
b c—b c v
30
35
cir str
8 I
56
53
52
26
30
11
21
50
S 10 E
58
SE
012
b c —b c v
30
52
cir str
8 4
60
65
53
27
32
52
18
4
S 49 E
249
East
3 5 6
b c v—c
30
48
cum str
5 00
59
62
54
28
34
55
13
21
S 62 E
262
North
5 6 7
b c—0 c
30
37
cir str
8 1
61
59
55
29
36
32
7
25
S 71 E
300
NESW
7 6
c—c r
30
23
cum str
00 00
49
51
56
30
36
22
2
5
S 86 E
256
Southerly
7 6 7
c—q p
30
16
cum str
4 5
46
47
5 7
31
36
20
K. 4
10
East
300
South
6 7
b c q p
30
3
cum
4 6
46
47
58
Sept. 1
37
20
9
29
E 13 S
260
WSW
6 7
c q p
29
81
cum
4 1
47
43
59
2
38
52
14
8
E 23 S
238
WNW
6 5 4
b c q p
29
87
cum str
1 4 1
55
56
6o
3
40
50
18
52
E 28 S
248
NNE
4 5
b c—b c p
29
84
cum str
8 4
58
60
6l
4
43
48
23
23
E 42 S
265
NEE
5 8
b c—g m
29
88
cum str
6 0 0
49
50
62
5
45
20
26
20
E 25 S
152
ENE
8 3
c m—m
29
45
cum str
00 00
44
43
63
6
46
33
31
51
E 25 S
236
NESW
3 4 5
m—c q s
29
65
cum
00 5
39
41
64
7
48
0
36
30
E 25 S
225
W to N
5 4
b c—0 c d
29
7 5
cum
5 00
4l
4l
65
66
6;
8
48
15
41
54
E 6 S
200
NWSW
3 6
i c m —b c s
29
50
cum
00 6
32
33
9
48
14
48
52
East
280
WSW
6
5 c q s—b c s
29
75
cum
5 6
32
32
10
48
30
55
21
E 6 S
260
W WNW
5 4
2 q s—0 c s
30
19
cum
5 00
35
37
63
11
48
48
61
4
E 4 S
226
Westerly
4 4
0 c s—c m
30
35
cum
00 1
39
39
69
12
47
40
67
1
E 18 N
225
Northerly
5 6
c m—b c m
3G
18
cir str
5 7
40
41
70
13
47
33
74
45
E 1 N
314
NW
6 7
cm, r, bcm
29
59
str
6 00
3 7
38
71
14
46
47
81
27
E 9 N
280
SW
7 5
b c—s—c
29
95
cum str
5 00
36
37
72
15
46
54
87
21
E 2 S
243
SW.NW
6 3
-) c —c s—c q
29
90
cum str
00 6
38
39
73
l6
47
5
91
45
E 4 S
184
WNW,KKW
2 5
c—c p—b c
29
70
cum str
3 2
40
42
74
17
47
0
100
18
E 1 N
347
N to W
6 8
3 c—0 c—c r
29
22
cum str
7 0 0
40
40
75
18
46
50
106
50
E 2 N
256
W to SW
6 4 5
q—b c q—h
29
75
cir cum
060
36
37
76
19
46
16
111
57
E 11 N
230
West
5 4 2
0 c—s —b c
30
3
cum str
1 3 00
43
44
77
20
45
36
117
36
E 10 N
244
NWN
4 5 6
c m—b c q
29
93
cum str
4 63
47
49
78
79
21
43
52
124
4
E 21 N
299
NNNE
6 8 7
c—q p—b c
29
95
cir str
00 3 4
49
49
22
42
46
130
44
E 12 N
300
NNE
6 7
c m—b c m
29
88
cir str
00 3 6
49
51
80
23
41
23
136
28
E 18 N
271
North
7 6 4
0 c—c r—r
29
89
cir cum
3 00 00
50
51
81
24
40
50
133
34
E 19 N
101
N, SE. E
3 0 5
)cr,oc,cr
29
50
cum str
00 00 6
54
55
83
25
39
33
143
38
E 18 N
245
NNE
5 6
b c—0 c m
29
68
cum str
5 3 00
53
54
83
26
Arrival
1
THE LOG of the CHAMPION OF THE
our course has been marked by no striking incidents, or ex-
traordinary dangers. It is true that we have been favoured
with weather too delightful for a very rapid passage ; yet,
notwithstanding many days of calm and contrary winds, we
have reason to congratulate ourselves that our good ship has
made such an average run.
Our fellow-passengers have, of course, been of a varied
character ; differing in creed, in party, and position in life,
embracing both old colonists and new, —and yet amongst all
the utmost harmony has prevailed. This we feel bound to
say, in common justice, has in no small degree been attribut-
able to the uniform urbanity which has characterised you
from the first. Though we are aware of the anxiety which
the care of 600 people must naturally have occasioned you,
and of your assiduous attention to the duties of an arduous
profession, yet we have never known an instance where the


Sea.
Specific gra-
vity of water.
REMARKS.
Noon, tripped the anchor. The steamers Tartar and Saratov, towed us out.
Samson cast off twenty miles north of Tuskar.
62
Noon, Roche’s Point Lighthouse bore N. by W.
62
At 5 p. m. the Tartar cast off. Made all sail.
64
Passed a number of vessels.
63
Showery, wind shifting to N.W. Set all starboard studding sails.
62
1-028
Light winds and squally. Passengers had their luggage on deck.
65
1*028
Light winds and showery.
67
Light winds and fine. Heavy roll from Westward,
69
Very light winds. A very heavy westerly swell.
■70
Held Divine Service on deck. Signalised the ship Columbine from Hull to Calcutta.
,71
Saw the island of Madeira bearing west.
71
1-029
Light airs and cloudy weather.
70
1029
Saw the island of Palma bearing S.E. by S
71
Saw the island of FerrA, S.E., thirty-five miles distant. Two steamers in sight.
71
Fine settled weather. All studding sails set.
71
69
I" 02g
Spoke the steamer JAaMnina. from Glasgow to Calcutta.
Divine Service on deck by Rev. J. Downes.
72
1-027*
1-027
Fine weather; misty on the horizon; water discoloured. Variation 16 0 West.
71
Light airs and calms.
81
Hot and sultry weather. A swell from SW. Variation 18° 24’ West.
76
All starboard studding sails set. Water smooth. Variation the same.
82
Verv hot weather. Setting up stays, &c. Variation the same.
80
1-028
Rainy appearance. Sent a boat to a Dutch ship with letters.
80
1 027
Rainy weather. A large ship in company. Divine service on deck.
80
1-027
Heavy rain, and very close weather.
80
1-026
Rainy and squally weather. Swell from S. W.
82
1*026
Rainy weather. Tacking. Took in studding sails.
81
1-026
Fine weather. Steady winds. Working to windward. Variation 11° 12’West.
82
1-026
A child died. Steady winds.
80
1’026
Cloudy weather. Beating to windward.
80
1026
Steady winds and showers. The sea luminous at night.
80
1’026
Passing showers. Several vessels in sight.
78
1-025
Steady southerly winds and fine weather. All possible sail set.
78
1-026
Fine weather and steady winds. Foretopmast studding sail set.
78
1-026
Moderate trades and beautiful weather. All plain sail set. Variation 15® West.
78
1-027
Fine weather. Wind far south. Shifted inner jib,
79
Fine clear weather. Shifted mainsail. All plain sail set.
79
1 O27
Beautiful weather. Passed a Hamburgh brig. Divine Service on deck. Var. 13° W.
80
Light winds. 8 p. m. tacked off Brazilian shore. Very hot weather. Variation 10’ W.
79
Light winds. George Williamson jumped overboard and was drowned.
78
Light airs and calms. Temp, of water at 60 fath. 7l° . Strg cur. from S.W. Var. I2°W.
77
Calm and fine weather. Setting up rigging,&c. Current from NW.SW. Var. g® 26’ W.
77
1027
Light airs and calms. Spoke to the ship Magdalena, Bio to Hamburgh. Var. 10® W.
77
Moderate S.E. winds. Spoke Brazilian barque Cabrera. Variation 8® 32’ West.
77
1 027
Light winds and calms. Heavy southerly swell. Div. Ser. on deck. Var. 9® 35* W.
75
1-027
Light airs. Latter part of the day moderate breeze. All port studding sails set.
73
1 -027
Fresh breezes; all studding sails set. Swell from S.E.
70
1-028
Variable wind and heavy rain. Easterly swell.
68
l-02 74
1-027*
IO27
Light winds. Very heavy swell, and ship rolling much. Var. 12® 30’ West.
58
Wind shifted suddenly from N.W. to S.W. Took in all studding sails and braced up.
65
Becalmed. High swell. Wore ship.
65
1-027
Light airs from S.E. andhigh swell. Divine service on deck. Var. 6® W.
62
1 027
Steady breezes. All port studding sails set. Altering spanker.
61
1-027
Steady breezes.
51
1'027*
Wind shifted and took in all studding sails. Cold squally weather.
53
1-027*
Strong breezes and squally weather.
54
1-028
Cold weather. Squally with passing showers.
54
1-028
High swell. Passed a ship outward bound.
58
1-028
Westerly swell. Ship rolling very much. Squally with rain.
57
1-027
Northerly winds. Fine weather and smooth sea. Var. 30® 36’ West.
56
1-027*
Wind blowing hard. Took in 1st reefs. Cold gloomy weather. Strong breeze.
42
1-027*
Thick misty weather. High seas. No observations.
44
1-028*
Wind shifted. Thick misty weather. Variation 36® West.
40
1028
Clear weather. Wind shifted. Set all port studding sails. Variation 36® West.
42
1-027*
Gloomy weather. Passed an iceberg. The 3rd seen in same locality within 18 mouths.
36
1-027*
Cold and squally, with snow- Starboard studding sails set.
37
1-028
Fine clear weather. Over-cast and snow showers.
39
1028
Thick misty weather. Very damp and cold.
39
1-028
Misty weather. Steady breeze. Took in port studding sails.
38
1-028
Fine weather. Wind shifted to west. Thick misty weather. Variation 28® West.
40
1-028
Cold but fine weather. Wind shifted to S. W. High swell. Seaweed passing.
48
1-028
Wind ver> unsteady. Temperature of water changed suddenly.
45
1-028
Almost calm. High westerly swell. Held Divine Service. Fresh breeze.
44
1028
Strong breezes. Dull, rainy weather. Took In royals.
45
1-028
Wind shifted to S.W. Set starboard studding sails. Very cold.
44
1-028
Light winds and snow showers.
SO
T028
Fair weather. Showery and fresh breezes. All sail set.
50
1-028
Strong breeze. Dark threatening weather. Took in 1st reefs.
52
1-028
Strong northerly winds and fine weather. Took in 1st reefs.
52
1-0-28
Strong winds and cloudy weather with rain. Held Divine Service.
54
1-028
Heavy rains. Wind changing. Cape Otway, E. 27® N. 256 miles.
55
1-028
First part fine. Latter part dark cloudy weather. At noon King’s Island E. by S.
18 miles, Cape Otway N. 35 miles.
SEAS from LIVERPOOL to MELBOURNE.
comfort and convenience of the passengers have not been
with you of paramount consideration. The ladies desire es-
pecially to record the entire confidence which they have all
along reposed in you, and the pleasure which your society
has always given them.
It is not our place, as landsmen, to speak of your profes-
sional character, to which previous voyages bear such ample
testimony. We would rather wish to regard you now no
longer as a stranger, but as an “ old friend,” and if we
should again revisit the land of our fathers, we would esteem
ourselves fortunate indeed to travel under similar auspices.
We wish to express through you our hearty appreciation of
the services of your Officers, and of the skill and unwearied
attention ever evinced by the Doctor of the ship.
In now bidding you farewell, we only give utterance to a
common sentiment when we wish you, in all your journey-
LETTERS TO INDICATE THE STATE OF
THE WEATHER
AND
FIGURES TO DENOTE THE FORCE
OF THE WIND.
b Blue sky.
C Clouds detached,
d Drizzling rain,
f Foggy.
g Gloomy dark weather,
h Hail.
1 Lightning.
m Misty hazy atmosphere.
0 Overcast,
p Passing [temporary] showers,
q Squally,
r Rain continued.
8 Snow,
t Thunder.
U Ugly weather, threatening appearance.
V Visibility of objects, clear atmosphere.
W Wet, dew.
0 Calm.
1 Steerage way.
2 Clean-full from 1 to 2 knots.
3 Ditto 3to 4 knots.
4 Ditto sto 6 knots.
5 With royals.
6 Topgallant sails over single reefs.
7 Two reefs in top sails.
8 Three reefs in top sails.
9 Close reefed top sails and courses.
10 Close reefed main top sail and reefed
fore sail.
11 Storm stay sail.
12 Hurricane.
CLOUDS-
Cirrus ... ... cir.
Cumulus ... ... cum.
Stratus ... ... str.
Nimbus ... ... nim.
Cirro-cumulus ... cir-cum.
Cirro-stratus ... cir-str.
Cumulo-stratus, &c.... cum-str.


ings, that success, and, when you once more regain your
“ ain fireside,” that
“ Honour, love, obedience, and troops of friends,”
to which your character and abilities give you so just a
claim.
{Signed) Margaret Turnbull Thomas E, Boyd
Janet Macredie Patrick Boyd
E. C. Laby William Clarendon
Eliza Hall Charles Gill
Anna M. Laby Thomas McComas
Mary Charnley Nind Victor Hiron
Elizabeth Allen William Clarke
Helen Ramsay P. H. Hewlett
Anne Bradford John Gorton
Harriet Hiron A. R. B. Thompson
E. Barnsley Charles Barrett
S. J. Perkins James D. Patterson
George Willett Thomas Perkins
Thomas Harbottle F. McCombe
J. R. Hocknell Robert Caldwell
Robert R. Macredie Robert Allen
John Barnsley John Downes,
Preshy. Minister.
CAPTAIN McKIKDY’S REPLY.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Allow me to express my gratitude for the Address which
you have just presented, and which is doubly valuable to me
from the evident impress of sincerity that it bears. To the La-
dies who have so much contributed to our happiness, my thanks
are especially due for their present and indeed uniform kindness.
I have in the course of my experience undertaken many
voyages, but seldom, if ever, have I had a more agreeable
one than that which is now drawing to a close. The Pas-
sengers have from the first cordially co-operated with me, and
peace and good-will have invariably reigned over us. Though
we have been tried by calms and contrary winds in no ordi-
nary degree, we must feel grateful to that gracious Provi-
dence which has kept us so remarkably free from sickness
and accident.
I thank you sincerely for your kind allusion to “ my ain
fireside,” and shall not fail to make known your friendly
sentiments towards its inmates when I again have the oppor-
tunity.
I have also to convey to you the thanks of the Officers of
the Ship for your kind expression of regard in their favour.
Whilst it gives me unaffected regret to part from a company
where there has been such a happy union of intelligence and
sociality ; I can only wish, in bidding you farewell, that you
may meet with the utmost prosperity and happiness in the
land of your adoption. Believe me, Ladies and Gentlemen,
With the greatest respect,
Your faithful servant,
JOHN McKIRDY,
Commander.
BIRTHS.
On Wednesday last, the wife of Mr. Ridings, of a thriving boy. On
yesterday the Rev. Mr. Downes christened the young stranger, at the
request of the parents, by the Christian name, “Benjamin Champion. ”
OBITUARY.
On Thursday last, died at her residence, on deck, after a lingering
illness, “ the cow.” The doctor has not given any official report of the
complaint under which the patient suffered. We believe however, it was
from general debility, caused by the exhausting process carried on for
some time, which while it made our tea more palatable, and the babies
more chubby, tended to bring the generous creature into a rapid decline.
EEQTTIESCAT IN PACE.
OUR ARRIVAL.
On Wednesday, the 26th of September, we reached our
destination. At half-past seven, a.m., the pilot came on
board, and was soon surrounded by an anxious group of in-
quirers. It is satisfactory to find that we are not the only
ship that has had to contend with light or contrary winds.
The “Donald McKay” took 81 days, the “Ben Nevis,”
which left with the mail 15 days before us, has not yet arrived;
and the “Lord Warriston ” from Glasgow, which came in
with us this morning, has been 4 months and 9 days out; so
that we may congratulate ourselves on our run of 83 days
from the Mersey. From the Cape we have come in only 20
days, an unusually short period. It is a hopeful omen that
we reach the Australian shores on a fine clear sunny spring
day, which raises our spirits and cheers our hearts. Let us
offer unitedly, our sincere gratitude to the Giver of every
good, and perfect peace —who has preserved us from all the
perils of the deep, and granted us such a happy conclusion to
a truly delightful voyage.
T. McC.
* # * P.S.—The Editor legs to state that he has been un-
avoidably obliged, from press of matter, to curtail and
omit many contributions which were originally intended to
be inserted.
Goodhugh & Trembath, Printers, 48, Flinders Lane, East, Melbourne.




