

I
5fT- "ig^^' m " "W.
Jw* M *JEm
1'ViHhPl# jJEal
2~~zZ*m
W, A >H
'•i||||I|se HHffl£90i H *8
~ 9
r " «fi . I
I* ■ H k ■ 'HIK" I
I i | 1 I;
f 99| 19
■X -1|PP W 9
9v\ ' • *9
Bk>\ >BBPBP JB
.
»■ ■ : ' -;J
*. ' -"** -**
_ JSSB
H 7 ;,':• s ,^H
I I 1 I
1* Jl


/yV^J'ERGUSON COLLECTIOr^Y^
U( LIBRARY j|


THE
7TH FIELD ARTILLERY
BRIGADE YANDOO
Containing publications of the organ
of the 7th Field Artillery Brigade,
Australian Imperial Forces, whilst in
camp at various Artillery training-
centres in the South of England,
principally at Larkhill, Salisbury Plain.
BY
THE YANDOO MANAGEMENT
Bombardier Hobu and G/tinier Harding (26th 'Rattery)
VOLUME 11.
DECEMBER, 1916


FOREWORD
/N writing this introduction, I am cognisant of
an obportunity to retaliate on behalf of various
members of the Brigade for the contents of those
nightmare columns " Who Said and " They Say,'
and for various comments regarding the misdeeds of
numerous readers.
Nevertheless, second thoughts suggest heaping
coals of fire on the heads of The Management as the
wiser course; and I desire to express my sincere
appreciation of the effort put forth in the production of
The Yandoo. Such an organ materially assists in
stimulating good fellowship, and promotes that com-
bination in the Brigade which is indispensable to a
fighting force.
1 am yet young to the Ith Brigade, but I realise
that it has been more carefully tended then I dared
to hope. Officers, N.C.O's. and men have already
learned loyalty and devotion to duty, have attained the
power to hold together under all conditions; as soldiers
they recognise the value of sport; and it is a matter
for congratulation that they are capable of producing a
publication so interesting, amusing, and of such historic
value d§ The Ith F.A.B. Yandoo.
Finally, I wish the organ of the Brigade which
I most sincerely count it an honour to command, every
prosperity, and trust to see further publications
respecting doings in France.
H. D. K. MACARTNEY,
Lieut.-Col.
Larkhill,
Salisbury Plain,
December, 1916.


PREFACE
WE are pleased to be able to issue Volume 11. of
THE YANDOO, dealing with the second period of
our soldiering experience.
A common belief was that the interest in the paper
would wane after leaving the troopship and encountering the
many distractions of a stay in England. Quite the reverse
has been the case. The interest has been more than
maintained, and the accord of all ranks in the many details
affecting the welfare of the paper has been abundantly
manifested. Our thanks are particularly due in this regard to
Captain Playfair, who has been a guide, philosopher and
friend; also to Gunner Bert Duckworth, who continues to
refresh our pages with humorous sketches, contributing in
no small degree to the successful production of the paper.
We are indebted to members of various Batteries who
assisted in the distribution of the publications, to Gunner
S. W. Hodge for poems and prose, and to the following who
furnished negatives and prints for the photographs appearing
in this Volume : Sgt.-Major Allett; Bdrs. Rohu, Allport and
Iffland; Gnrs. Ross, Cogle, Duckworth, W. Fahey, Goatley,
F. M. Jones, Wilshire, Newman and Kelynack.
ESPRIT DE CORPS is our motto, and if to any extent
THE YANDOO has assisted to stimulate this spirit it does
not live in vain. The 7th Brigade has been referred to
as " The happy family of the 3rd Division," and when
Volume 111. is published it is our hope that comradeship
will have proved itself of some intrinsic value in our
Brigade's operations across the channel.
SIL. ROHU,
ERIC HARDING
(THE YANDOO MANAGEMENT).
LARKHILL,
SALISBURY PLAIN,
DECEMBER, 1916.


3rd Divisional Australian Field Artillery Headquarters Staff.
Front Row (left to right): Major Nicholls, Brig. Gen. H. W. Grimwade, Capt. J. M.
Irwin. Lieut. A. L. Chomley.
Middle Row (left to right): Wt. O. Macartney, Gnr. Stirling. Bdrs. Mulley, Hunt and
Badgery, Dvr. Marsh.
Back Row (left to right): Gnrs. Bartholomew, McGoulrick, Kay=Sewell, Graham and
O'Regan.
Absentees: Gunners Keep. Tricker, Walker, Smith, C. I). Bell, Mackey, Armytage,
S. S. Bloodworth, J. Stone, Deamer.
7th Brigade Headquarters Staff.
Front Row: S.=Sgt. W. Allatt, Lieut. (Adj.) G. J. Hammond. Capt. (R.M.O.) C. M.
Samson, Lieut.=Col. (C.O.) H. D. K. Macartney, Capt. (Vet. O.) C. N. Callow.
Lieut. Jordan, W.= 0. Squair.
Second Row: Sgt. C. E. Thompson, Gnr. F. Allatt. Bdr. McManus, Gunners Home,
Shannon, Tindale, C. Thompson, Dvrs. Tully, Moroney, Cp;. Hinds (A.M.C.).
Third Row: Cpl. Patrick, Dvrs. Alford, Williams, Gnrs. Cassidv, Talbot, Dvrs. Robin=
son, Wilson, Reece.
Fourth Row : Dvr. Collins, Gnrs. Smith, Corkery, Bdr. A. Doughty, Gnrs. C. Doughty,
McKinnnon, Dvr. Gardner.
Back Row (left to right): Sgt. Buckle, W. O. Curran. S.*Sgt. Merrit, Gnr. Patterson,
Bdr. Fraser, Dvr. Love.
Absentees: Gunners T. V. Smith, B. Skelton.


Front Row (left to right): Bdr. Smythe, Gjir. Maxwell, Dvrs. Cray, Scott, Ellis, Gnrs. F. Phillips, F. M. Jones, Ryder, Gersbach, Bdrs. McLeod, Harris, Gnr. Allen, Dvrs.
Londregan, Fraser, Howard, Teasel.
Second Row (left to right): Corporal Cherrie, Bdrs. F. R. Jones, Philp, Davison, Sgt. W. S. Jones. Col. Wynter, Sgts. Chaoinan. Richards, Browning, Mounter, Q. M.-S.
King, Lieuts. Ferris, VemBrown, R. R. Smith, K. D. Watson, Jordan, B.=S.*M. Willis, Sgts. Chegwyn, Sheedy, Woodbridge, Tailby, Vet. Sgt. Paul, Sad.=Sgt. Willcock,
Sgt. Abbott, Cpl. Parnell.
Third Row (left to right): Gnr. Baker, Bdrs. Jenkins, W. F. Macdonald, Barton, Dvrs. Corbitt, Vince, Bradford, Gnr. Harcourt, Dvr. Lyster, Gnrs. Hartnett, Hewitson,
Bdr. Thorn, Gnrs. Ramage, W. A. Niddrie, Norton, Medcalfe, Dvrs. Byrne, Butchart, Gnr. tiibbs, Cpl. Willis, Gnrs. Tiernan, Watsford, Croucher, Howell, Pte. Murray
(A.M.C.).
Fourth Row (left to right): Dvr. Gillon, Gnr. A. F„ Deacon, Dvrs. Holland, Murphy, Kinkead, Hanger, Gnr. F. S. Thomson, Bdr. Whitcross, Gnrs. Crapp, Chaplin. Mack,
Bower, Dvr. Dunn, Bdr. Tulk, Gnrs. Tyerman, Browne, Bdr. Drury, iffland. Gnr. Murison, Dvr. Miller, Gnr. Partridge, Dvrs, Kennedy, Taylor, Beveridge, McCann.
Fifth Row (left to right): S. Smith Looseniore. Driver N. E. Hiatt, Gunner Dwyer, Dvrs. Beeby. Cooper, Gnrs. Horsley, Greentree. Small, Laverack, Bdr. Kath. Gnrs. Jacob=
son, Clay, Dvrs. Bruce, Phillips, Gnrs. Ohlson. H. Greer. Redman, Dvr. French, Gnrs. Dewhurst. Henderson. Cansdell, Dvrs. Rloodworth, R. Stevenson. Harrison.
Back Row (left to right): Dvr. Dalton, Gnrs. Stevenson, Hodge, Manning, Wilshire. Schollv, Dvrs. Consid'ne. Godfrey, F. E. Hiatt, S.-Smith Herrington, Gnr. Heudry, Dvr.
Leath, Gnrs. C. E. Thompson, Smith, Rdr. Gourlav, Dvr. C. W. Grear, Gnrs. McDonald, Schev. Dvrs. Beaumont, Ford. Bdr. Mumford, Dvr. B. Niddrie, Fit.Sgt. Gibson.
Absentees: Major T. B. W. James (O.C.), Gnrs. A. J.'Deacon, E. R. McCulloch, J. O'Brien, Whiitaker, Moorhouse, Bdr. Everingham.


&9immm 1 1 ; I'| f : 'Hs; ;• | -> l : i ? ;j f ;
'X' ' •' i^fe a? lii^ ! m!V^T r ' M»r HrTTrlr^ V ' * m "ifc 'ii « mil ifi* ' "'"^ZJ
26th BATTERY, 7th FIELD ARTILLERY BRIGADE.
Front Row (left to right): S.=S. Ilultin. Dvrs. Begg, French, Hills, Glover. Bates, Gnr. Neal. Cpl. S."Smith Russell, Gnr. Pountmey, Dvr. Noble, Trumpeter Herbert, Saddler
Houlder. Bdr. Grose, Gnr. Green, Dvr. Mason, Gnr. Goddard, Dvr. Mackenzie, Gnrs. Ross, Goldacre, Neilson.
Second Row: Bdr. Rohu, Dvr. Thearle, Cpls. Tindale, Hughes, J- S. Shiels, Peach, Leeds, Sgts. Kille. Far, Arnold. Vet.=Sgt. IFvans, Sgt. Weill, Lieuts. C. W Watt, H. G.
Rourke, Capt. 1. A. Playfair, Lieuts. L. J. Colquhoun, A. Raw, B.-S.-M. Peyton, Sgts. Harrison, Mcintosh, Fitter-Srgt. Birindlev, Sgt. Fountain, Bdr. Ainsworth. Gnr.
R. M. Fowler, Gnr. Chapman, Pte. Walters. J *
Third Row: Drivers Dale, Scott. Bdr. McKellar, Gnrs. Kaufman, Monev. Dvr. Vickerv, Gnr. Fenton, Dvrs. Hogan, Avard, Bdr. Radford, Gnr. Kay, Dvrs. C. J. Ross, Nail,
Bdr. Irazer, Gnr. Faton, Dvrs. Shand, L. L. McCarthy, Gnr. Goatley, Bdr. DeDear, Dvr. Pearce, Gnr. Gentle. Dvr. Randall, Gnrs. Harding,' Seale.
Fourth Row: Gnrs. W. S. Anderson, Verey, Dvrs. Jarrett, O'Brien. Gardiner, Gnr. Thomas. Dvr. J. D. McCarthv, Gnrs. Luck, McDonald. Goswell, B. H. Anderson. Dvr.
e . w . P ' H ' Moore, Gnrs. Harris, Mutkins, Bdr. Durning, Dvr. Whitehair, Gnrs. Wilson, Windon, Dvrs. B. McCarthy, Aspinwall, Gnr. Whale, Bdr. Johns, Gnr. Kelvnack.
Fifth Row: Gnr. Noakes, Dvr. Ferris, Gnrs. H. E. Smith, Windeyer, Dvr. Gambley, Gnr. Clark, Dvrs. Henson, Tyrrell, Murray, Gnrs. Farrington, Corbett, Lavzell, G. W.
Bleach, Dvrs. Neilley, Knight, Gnrs. Shipway, H. B. Bleach, Nelson, Dvr. Stagg, Gnrs. Cogle, W. G. C. Smith, Dvr. Stone.
Back Row : Gnr. Neill, Dvr. Gorton, Gnrs. Castles, O'Neill, Dvrs. Deer, Stewart, P. F. Moore, Gnr. G. E. Fowler, S.-S. Peacock, Gnr. Hav, Bdr. A. J. I. Shiels, Gnr. Astill,
Bdr. Hicks, Dvr. Burton, Bdr .Quigley, Dvr. McLeish, Bdr. King, Gnr. Uther, Bdr. Barnard. Gnrs. Cadell, Galzier, Duckworth. Dvrs. Havward, Sanders.
Absentees: Q.=M.=S. Slater, Sdl.<Sgt. Tebay, Gnrs. Robinson, Newman, Dvrs. McCulIoch, Whiting and Andrews.


m 1 m *r*i ' % '■ jtF% : -' L !
I'- It VwajL-. '*<'•%. •<'■ JsT JL. J" f *t#**WM '&, * M S? 1 „s+#m l -*^ > f" j <J W *#ipp^^^MBiMB
J.,' \Sii&-^ r ■ -:' r " !: l" . VV > : ; J.-, Y"'" -i1^-^: i^f■^ ;' : :i:;::; ; ,.V' / :': ://:,/ ;:;;;;:.::v.;ll : ;>- ' |f : :
27th I! \TTER Y, 7th FIELD ARTILLERY BRIGADE.
Bottom Row (left to right): Onr. Cameron, Dvr. Morgan. Bdr. Fitzgerald. Dvrtt. H. C. Carter. Liddeli, Cambridge, Anderson. Gnr. Shepherd, Sdlr. Key, Gnr. H. B. O.
S S S
"IK SSr «"/' tinn. "^aKe R rl
FM esr ss
Fitth PI Rnw' (lln'fo right) 1 : Dvr ,1C Adcock, Gnrs. Young, O'Keette, Gannon, Cormack, Bdr. Anscombe. Dvrs. Miller, Bartholomew, Gnrs. Rose, Sparks, Leplastrier, Slade, Dvr.
Gosper Ildr Lee, (inr. Burton. Dvrs. Breakspear. McPherson, Marks, Gnr. Champion, Dvr. Parker. Col. Bowling, Dvr..Shearman, G nr « Ca er Rurdess
i i> ii »♦ «« rirthtt • it a r o nirk (inrs Holt Scliofield Bullen, Case, Dvr 0 F. W. Carter, Gnrs. Raymond, Ollis, Dvr. Aberneathy, Bdr. Cooper. Driver S. M. Burgess,
P Gn°r:t> C. Caliagha'n Gnrf'sGmson. J. A? Hunter. Binnie, Jordan, Dvrs. Skelton, Gnrs. .1. C. Smith. It. C. Robinson. Baxter, Newman, Faddy, Bdr. It.
C. Trevanion. . .. ,
Absentees: Q.M.-S. Lark, Sgt. Jaques, Dvrs. F. Burgess, Duckham. Long, Faulconer.


107th BATTERY, 7th FIELD ARTILLERY BRIGADE.
Front Row: Bdr. Hill. Gnr. W. K. Grierson. Dvr. Gillespie. Gnrs. Piper. Burgess. F. Smith. Bott, Dvrs. A. G. Jackson, J. Anderson, Creech.
Second Row: Gnrs. Driver, Black, Cpls. Stitt, Lake. Sgts. Ladd, Fidler. McCann, 2nd=Lieut. A. H. Pitman. Lieut. G. J. Greenshields, Capt. G. H. Patterson, Lieut. G. P.
Mays. B.=S.=M. Allan, Q.=M.=S. Herbert, Sgt. Morris, Far.=Sgt. Trevitt, Sad. Sgt. Walters, Bdr. Griffiths, Gnr. Carlsen, Bdr. Munro.
Ihird Row: Gnr. Heesh, S.=S. Ackland, Gnrs. W. C. B. Fahey, Payne. Dvr. Combe, Cpl. Abbott, Bdr. Mashman, Dvr. Bragg, Gnr. Yeend, Bdr. Dent Gnrs. Newman, Wilkes,
Parkinson, Bdr. Cade, Gnrs. Butler, Crawley, Bdr. Walder, Dvr. McPherson, Dvr. Hogarth. Bdrs. Breakwell, R. H. Jackson.
Fourth Row: Gnr. Whealey, Dvr. Allen, Gnr. A. L. Anderson, Dvr. Nelson, Gnr. Moncrieff, Bdrs. Patterson, Johnson, Dvrs. Graham, Crighton, Williams, Gnr. Harrison.
Dvrs. Dalton, Slade, Gnr. Gill, Dvr. J. A. Pogson, Tpr. Pickett, Gnr. McRobert, Gnrs. Hall, Rice.
Fifth Row: Dvrs. E. W. King, Farmer. O'Shea, Doyle, Cody, Gnr E. J. Fahey, Gnrs. Knight, Burton, Greig, A. Anderson, Dvr. Nettleton, Gnr. Suttor, Dvr. Richards, S.-S.
Carlton, Dvrs. Powderly, Danson, Gnr. Morris.
Sixth Row: Gnr. E. V. King, Dvrs. Giltinan, Wilson, Gnr H. N. Grierson. Dvr. Symons, Dvrs. Darragh, Grimshaw, Bdr. Jeayes, Dvr. Holmes, Gnrs. Miller, Oakes, Wood=
ward, Hardwicke, Taylor, McLeod, Gibb, Mackie, Dvr. Parnell, Gnr. Erwin.
Absentees: Dvr. Abigail, Gnrs. Barclay, Biggar, Buttsworth, Dvr. W. Breakwell, Cpl. Capel, Dvrs. Clavton, Franks, Gnr. Ferguson, Dvr. A. S. Hedges, Gunners Hamstead,
Huthwaite, Dvrs. J. S. Hedges, A. E. King, Gnrs. Kernahan, Lynch, Bdr. McDougall, Dvr. W. Pogson, Bdr. Stratford, Dvr. F. W. Smith, Bdr. Shaw. Sgt. Thornthwaite,
Bdr. Whitham, Dvrs. Westwood, Wynn, Cpl. S.=Smith Wiggins, Gnr. Brown, Whlr.=Sergt. Atkinson, Dvrs. Newcomen, Oliver, Pettit, Riddle, Gnrs. Rowan Dahl White
Hosking, Maltravers.


. I
' 5 I
j
, *• ~wr^m
Larkhill Palaces, in each of which thirty
growling voices are heard at reveille.
_
' ' mornings.
■ -'*- ' - -u* -■■ •
The interior with sleeping boards raised so as not to
harbour the rats.


" -
Football—A pastime enjoyed when there is no
Harness=cleaning, Cook's Fatigue, Guard,
Grooming, etc.. etc.
Gun Drill in the Mud.
Letters from Home—Pals and the Girls who don't forget.


The hoys of the 7th have augmented the foroes of the sun-tanned Aust-
ralians who have rallied in the defonoe of the mother country. It
seems that all have been impelled by two great motives; primarily sent-
iment and then reason.
Love of the oountry from whloh their fathers sprang, and a sense
of gratitude for the proteotlon they have enjoyed (and are still enjoying)
during the period in whloh lustful powers would have wrested their
homes and Commonwealth from their comparatively defenceless hands, has
been more than sufficient to bring them 15000 miles across the ooean;
but added to that is a bitter hatred of the atrocities and treachery
of the barbarous Huns who have plunged Europo into this Armageddon with
its enormous loss of life, the pals who laid down their lives at Gall-
ipoli being among the sacrificed.
With reason, the secondary and less unselfish motive, oomes the
conviction that Britain's downfall would mean German Kultur in Australia,
and in preference to that contingency, every man would see his
country wiped off the map. ,
During the course of training in England," these impulses must be-
come more and more intensified. Proximity to the seat of war conduoes
to a deeper realisation of what is going on aoross the ohannel; and
visits to suoh places of historio interest as Westminster Abbey, the
House of Commons and the Tower of London forcefully recall the lives and
deeds of the Empire builders who fought in freedom's oause and vigorous-
ly maintained the rights of the people.
a study of Britain's past strengthens the resolution to preserve
her future, and though often simulating by-interest and banter, each
man is eager to "do his bit" and assist to uphold the best traditions of
the Bnpire, «rush the villainous Hun who has outraged all the principles
of civilisation, and establish a permanent peaoe for the Old Land and
fair Australia.-
A certain Gunner of 2-th Battery has so many girl correspondents that he
has requested that the following letter be published for the edifloatlon
of them all.- (He prefers to be anonymous, but isn't he lucky).
My Dearest Treasure,-
I must ask your pardon for not writing before, but I thought it
advisable to wait until we had left the ship and severed the shackles
of the censorship. Writing on board a heaving vessel with head and arms
protruding above a oumbersome life belt, and almost^ strangled with a
water bottle, is not oonducive to the writing of a letter such as you
deserve. (How nioe of him.- Ed. Yandoo).
I think I wrote last when we were leaving Dakar oonvoyed by the
"Kent" and"Swiftsure" on Ist July. The former vanished while I was
writing and we saw her no more.
The apuearanco of a single mast above the horizon on the oth caused
some excitement, and many entertained a lurking suspicion that it was.
an approaching hostile craft, which idea was accentuated by the sounding
of the alarm. X knew it was only a dereliot and preserved my usual calm
soldierly domeanour. (We wonder if they will believe that).
The "Swift sure" approached the derelict and firod 8 shots and afterwards
rammod and sank her. Captain Chicken of the "Argyllshire told us later
thai the VQSS&I was a Russian barcue "Ekomen .


•n* c Th ? Sam f afternoon another 'boxing performance took place, Burnslde-
the rhfn o' n"° ° al lads of fo'o'sJe fame and prominent performers in
the Chinese Opera Coy., gave an exhibition of the noble art of no
oi x one 6 •
e h e Woa^ er was warm ._nd I slept on deok among the many
pilgrims who fled from the odour of bilge water on the troop decks.
Being Scotch and having a clear conscience I am a sound sleeper, but 35
restless ramblers stumbling over me during the night made several more
bruizes on me than usual, ?/ith the result tht I was up before reveille
and in time to see a large Greek liner approaching on our port side
and I believe heading for Gibraltar. Later in the day wireless news'
from Portugal was posted on deok, and we felt still closer to Europe,
From Friday 7th we oommenoed using Welsh coal, thus materially
diminishing the volume of smoke from the funnel. A fully rigged
sailing vessel passing on our port side was a fine sight. We reckoned
we were now opposite the Bay of "Biscuits". Four oolumns of smoke
appearing right ahead about 7.30 the following morning proved to be
Issuing from the funnels of torpedo boat destroyers ooming to undertake
our protection. On their arrival the "Swiftsure" turned and
disappeared astern. Each of these "mosquite fleet" vessels attaohed It-
self to a troopship and zig-zagged continually in front of the bow, in
th s way affording a very striking example of their great speed oapaoity.
The ships of our fleet now oarried on independently, the "Marathon , muoh
to everyone's surprise leaving the "Argyllshire 1 ; "Benalla" and "Beltana"
in the luroh. We sighted suoh a number of vessels (and doubtless a good
number were under the water which we did not sight) that Bill Ryder (25)
began to think the ohances of his new cap being picked up from the sea
were muoh brighter.
5 When I oame on guard at 2 a.m. on Sunday morning 9th July, it was
quite daylight, and as it was twilight when I turned in from the previous
shift at 10 p.m. I reckoned that the sun worked overtime in this part of
the globe-during summer at any rate. I began to speoulate on the chances
of football and other sport from 6 to 10 p.m. when reaching the new oamp.,
I omitted to mention that I was caught for main submarine guard on
account of making a possible at 500 yards on the Long Bay range. (The
Yandoo wonders how he did it).
At 10 a.m. on the same day we had the last Churoh parade on the
boat, being then within sight of the shores of the Old Dart. Eddystone
light-house appeared on our right, recalling the history of, and many
stories oonneoted with that solid sombre pillar standing solitary above
the "ea.
The sight of Plymouth about 3.15 on the same day was to me at least,,
the ..ost weloome since leaving Sydney Harbour. Hedged in fields arid
meadows extending to the very waters edge were most picturesque and quite,
novel. On the right were rows and rows of houses of even height and
uniform design; in the central foreground throngs of people were taking
Sunday afternoon relaxation on the lawns overlooking Plymouth Sound, and
directly ahead of the bow rose the tall buildings of Davenport.
Intimation was received that shore time was 1 hour in advance of our
watches and the ship's olook in consequence of the introduction of the
daylight saving scheme.
During the afternoon, illuminated addresses, prepared on the ship by
Gunner Bleach, and signed by all the officers on board, were presented
to Captain Chicken, and Chief Officer Wynn. I got a prize with others of
the tug of war teSS; aiitflfcuUen Whloh followed. (We will not
tell what we know about this).
Vie rose on the morrow at 4.45 a.m., broke our fast and disembarked
from the "Argyllshire" on to the tug "Sir Walter Raleigh". Captain
Chicken was standing at the gangway to bid us farewell, and we all felt
that in parting from him, we were saying goodbye to a genuine friend.
The mascots, deerhound, bulldog and Nigger, were left behind to go
through quarantine, and wo hope to have them restored to us in a few
weeks time.
On reaching Plymouth., we boarded a waiting train and were soon being
hauled through the oily by two engines at express speed, All transport
arrangements were executed with machine like precision. For my part,
railway travelling is infinitely preferable to the ancient mariner stunt,,
and on sight of English lassies waving Australian flags I was so
intensely excited that none other than the practised hand of the former
ships police could have averted my prec.ipation through the window.
The train journey was a surprise and an education. I have seen
great stretches of the verdant carpet on "4D" and waving crops of wheat
on "Prairie Lands" also travelled all day out back ob "Lake Victoria"
station, but the idea that England with its huge population contained
anything but backyards and congested oities with occasional estates, never
presented itself to my mind. Imagine my awakening when the train speeded
through expansive stretches of beautiful country, eaoh


little hedge-bordered farm stocked with high class cattle and sheep,
grassy meadows prolific with wild flowers, fields of whoat and poppied
oats ripening for reaping or stooked for hay, giant caks and chestnuts
towering here and there in the' dense'woods figuring copiously on the
great panorama; the whole forming innumerable shades of /green and a
variety of colour, which together with occasional villages of grey stone
wa 11 r-.:.and thatched roofs, was a sight which all the portrayals of England
written or committed to canvas, have failed to adequately describe.
; At Exetor the Mayoress arid ladies supplied us with tea and ooffee
on the station, which in addition to being very acceptable whs an indic-
ation of the heartiness of our welcome to. Old England.
We arrived at Amesbury at about 5 p.m. After marching through the
village ar.d innumerable camp huts, we arrived at our future quarters, This
place is a stunner, Dotted all 0/or Salisbury Plains are similar camps
containing thousands of men, and in spite of this, extensive stretches
•of open country aro preserved for Artillery ranges, training, sports
etc. We can walk through the paddocks (or meadows) in all directions
for miles among grass, olovor and wild flowers, or along the narrow reads
with li9dges and dense woods on both sides. Tho booming of largo howitzers
and field guns rattles tho windows of our huts,' in Artillery range being
adjacent to the camp. The fire is directod by aeroplanes, and scores
of these machines fly over the oarnp daily from the aviation school a
short distance away. *1
The provision for our comfort is astounding when it is considered
that an army of millions has boon raised in tho brief period since tho
outbreak of war. The huts are most oommodious: a building 'which in
Liverpool would shelter 50 men, is here allotted to 30. Separate mess
rooms are provided in)addition, so that tho huts are used for sleeping
places only, Each man is furnished with sleeping boards and mattresses
in fact we have all the comfoi'ts of home, except the lying in bed in the
morning. Hot and cold showers are available except when Johnnie Norton
is on duty in the boiler house and lets the fire go out.
The army servico wagons are hauled almost exolu&ively by mules.
The artillery and saddle horses are of a splendid type.
Batches of Australians oontinue to arrive and I have looked up
quite a host of old pals, and hope to meet quite a number of others.
It is here that we appreciate the work of the Y.M.C.A. more than
ever. As in Australia, writing facilities are always availablo freo of
charge. In each of the many buildings are piano, musio and spacious
accommodation for concerts; refreshments and soldiers' incidental re-
quirements are provided at low cost, and there aro billiard tables,
post offices and many other conveniences. The staff are most obliging
and set themselves out to render the greatest possible service to the
boys. Work so comprehensive and efficient on so vast-a soale is remarkablf
The first mail sinoe leaving Sydney arrived on Friday the 14th
July, and as you may imagine, the day was a notable one - a "road"
letter day in fact. We all thought it was our birthday. -I got three from
you.
Will write again soon, telling you. all. about Salisbury, Amesbury,.
Stonehengo and other places of Interest in proximity to the camp.
Goodbye and good 'luck.
Yours smilingly,
"X" .
WANTED
Waitreses for tho dining halls-
nioe arid plump for proference.
»h:-»
News and jokes from all huts and
caraps* Don't be bashful, send it
in.
ANIMAL"AND POULTRY COLUMN
Niggor's familiar"yap has been
heahd at Avington Park.
Exit of cocky at Tom Ugly's Point
at rips and feather less age of 120.
SPOUTING
Bdr. Rohu has 4d to say that tho
shamrock and peat he brought
back from Spudland are genuine. Now
then Bdr. Shields.
MYSTERIES OP THE MAIL
Driver Shand (26) will not answer
her last letter. Ooll! tall the
Boys why.
###
Bdr. Willis (25) was seen taking
20 men and a oart to Larkhill P.O
for mail, but only brought back
5 letters.
Cpl. Ladd (28) reoeived mail from
France.
Capt. Campbell's mail included a
letter and a rose.
Dry your eyes boyst letters are
scarpe, but the Yandoo is inquiring
for k'lnd poople who are willing to
write to lonely soldiers.


A man who waves at a scarecrow
should have his eyes tested.
Gnr. Maxwell (£sth) has since
found out why the old girl near
Exeter did not retnm his wave.
THEJ_, SA.Y: -
That the Billjims received a
royal weloome from C.Os and
Tommies at Fareham and Avlngton
Park. What's 1 the news from the
other camps? t
That Sontimental Bloke Williams
of Hd. Grs, has offered his
valuable colleotion of ourios to
tho British Museum.
That Fitter Sgt. Brindley must
have been eanteenized when he
killed the rat. POOR PUSS.
That Sgt. LSwry's snoring must
have been bad when the fitter Sgt.
of £7tb thought it was a oase of
out throat ana rushed for raedioal
aid.
That Capt. Samson nearly erred
when painting Gnr. MoNally's
(25) throat.
That Driver D, McCarthy (26) is
a vaseline king.
That no wonder Gnr o Rohu got
SHEEPISH and wanted to Stay in
T50.4 ward at Fargo Hospital
under the treatment of Sisters
Sheppard Lamb and Ramsbottcm*
tHC-*
That Driver Leeds and Gnr. Ross
find overcoats necessary at
Avlngton Park on Sundays. It has
not been'at all cold at Swanage
or Fareham.
That Gnr. Skelton (Hd.Qrs) tried
to stop an aeroplane.
That ".Nancy Dear" is the title of
a romantic poem by Cpl. Riohards
•of 26th.
That all is not rubber that
"bounoos-it may be Perdriau.
That the Officers of Avlngton
Park should be expert at standing
gun drill.
Hioe to hear she *s praying- for
the other fallow. No lvonder Gnr-,
Ross (26) oried all night.
WHO SAID
Tho English' hoat has upsot the Aus
tralians at Avlngton Park. A
siesta from 2 to 4,50 p.m. cer-
tainly indicates that way.
Londoners wondered at the number
of oircus trainers with the long
whip handles.
That the boys at Avlngton park
forgot what a Paymaster was like.
The man with the money bags was
soon recognised and warmly re-
ceived,
iS;S»
That Bdr, KoManus (Ed.Qrs) does
not know a Naval Officer from a
spruiker at the Theatre Royal,
Erury Lane.
That Gnr. Murison (25) is a non
unionist,
That Gnr. Coolahan's (26) order
astounded Oapt. Samson.
Tho Boys at Avlngton Park are
oanarlos-that they bath in their
mess tins is not denied.
That Gnr, Fowlor's (26) ambition
is to havo touch pole shifted.
»**
That Sgt. Ldjwry (27) was a phil-
anthropist. The Belgian refugee
was gratoful for the badges.
oh:-
That at Avlngton Park tho Q.M, is
unable to appease the appotito
of the Australians.
V/ho was tho man who gate 5/- for
an Empty lunqh basket at Exeter.
He would never make a Q.M.S.
B, sub of 7th at Avlngton Park-
have a dSll masoot. The Yandoo
thinks hanging too lenient treat-
ment and oertainly the hut is
not an appropriate place.
That Monday is Monday. The man
who reported to the Sydney
Bully that Monday is "stewsday"
was evidently a soldier.
Rev. M.S. Bell, late Chaplain on the "Argyllshire" has forwarded
the following 6xtraot from a letter signed by the Director of Doctor
Barnardo's Hemes, with a request for its publication in the Yandoo:-
Let mo thank you very sincerely for .cheque for £9.10.0, the amount
collected at ore of your Ohurch Parade Services for those Homes.
X much appreciate your kindness in appealing on behalf of cur work, and
am grateful for tho generous response. 'War-time difficulties have greatly
added to our burdens', and the problem of providing food for our large
faailly of boys • and girls is hot an easy ono. The help you havo afforded,
is exceedingly welocme and opportune",
The Yandoo Management,-- Bdr. Rohu, 26th Battery, LARKHILL
C-nr. Harding, 25th Battery. FAREHAM.


Char=a=banc.
Winchester contingent was fortunate in matter of
Saturday and Sunday leave.
A party invited to a country home.
1 1 f 'V 1 ' SLjf 1 -«■ 1
1
Fareham.
The members of the 25th were complimented on their
good conduct —due. no doubt, to the high walls and
the sentry on the gate. No Warren tattoo and paling
fence there.
■? t-'2 -**
y ■■ '
* —". ,- ij it
■ " ff>*- % %,
\ -■•
Chalk Cliffs at Swanage.
Members of the 107th found the "view" very enticing.


No. 4 Y.M.C.A. Where the boys went for a yarn
over the counter (before the notice appeared) and
incidentally for billiards, coffee, Yandoo=biscuits and
letter writing.
A Route iMarch on Salisbury Plain.
T une—
" Way down in Tennessee,
That's where I long to be,
Right on my mother's knee,"
etc., etc.
■M'^ > W l^i
German Prisoners with their "ports" passing a Battery
halted for smoko and gall inspection.
16


AH. ! ij-miiy 'ifljiufti.'ii
REST AFTER LABOR■
A suggestion was recently put forward by a certain organisation
in New South "Wales, that leave for three months should be granted to
members of the A.I.P. after two years' service. Is this practicable,
and would the establishment of such a precedent expedite the ultimate
objective, i.e. the successful termination of the war? We think the
boysj/ould prefer to delay their return until the job is finished and
they can go home .with the consolation that it will not be necessary
for thera to leave again.
A return ticket on a troopship issued at the European end, even
with a few days in Australia and another Good-bye thrown in, is a
doubtful benefit, it would withdraw ships from very important war
service, and experienced troops so long away on a weary voyage, would
represent so many less teeth in the Huns' trousers.
v Many Anzaes undoubtedly deserve privileges in the direction
suggested, and suoh cases can be decided on their individual merits,
hut in the broader sense, an equitable and more economic scheme than
the one proposed is worthy of consideration.
QO o
HEARD IN THE HUTS.
"When do you reckon we shall get leave again Bill? 11
"Dunno, hut reckon it's about due. We have had none to speak of
for years, at least my 'dairy' says the Brigade went in two instal-
ments on 17th and £4th of July. By jove, it was some holiday. Three
nights between the sheets, with early morning tea and shaving water
brought up, made me think I was a 'civie' again."
"Where did you get to after looking at the captured German sub-
marine U.C. 5 at Temple Pier?"
"London's a mighty big village. After leaving you we had a look
round the Thames Embankment and tried to decipher the 'morse code' on
Cleopatra's Needle; then went over to see who kept the Hotel Cecil.
At mid-day we stood on London Bridge, then inspected the Tower Bridge
and mooched through the Tower of London. Alphonso with the Napoleon
hat on, refused half a dollar for the crown jewels, and as they dazzled
our eyes vie rambled through tho ramificatione of the various towers.
In the Bloody Tower we saw the place where Sir Wal. Raleigh was im-
prisoned, the cell wherein the Princes were smothered, the inscrip-
tions of numberless prisoners on the walls, and then looked over the
vast collection of old guns, rifles, swords, armour, spurs, etc. ate."
"I was there too and reckon it would take 6 weeks to eee the lot.
Saw the change of guard at Buckingham palace. An officer's guard
there you know, and don't they spring to it! Taking a tan we drove
round Hyde Park, past Rotten Row, Albert Hall, the Albert Statue, back
through the world's great news centre, Fleet St., saw the Law Courts
and the famous Downing St. Stood under the enormous dome of St.Pauls,
and visited Westminster Abbey. In the former I picture
'The Light of the World", which created such a profound impression m
Sydney. The statues, memorials, etc., of poets, royalty, statesmen
and others, would take years to thoroughly examine." _
"Did you see Australia House? I tell you, the sight of that ft ne
Commonwealth building in the heart of London made me think wuh pride
of the possibilities of our young country, now so admirably justi-
fying her representation in the centre of the Empire."


"The Revue 'Razzle Dazzle' at Drury Lane was fine. Bill.'"
, "I believe the programme girl bit you for 6d."
told you about that? The girl handed me a programme smiled
Sa cr5 hat be ' and before I knew it I had done the sprat."
.. , " gu®-leaves on you. You're as had as S. Maj. Trevanion who
paid 6s. 6d. to a London hairdresser for a quack concoction called
hair oil. I'll have to tell the Yandoo." *
" Como 1 was about to veil you about witnessing the scene in
the house of Commons when Mr. Ginnell was emptied out for disorder
but it you are laying information before the press, will shut up."'
"Why go crook Bill? Try and imagine yourself doing the Strand
and Piccadilly again."
"Dry up and go to sleep, I'm tired."
Snorrrrrrrrrrs interspersed with dreams of tea and toast in the
morning, ships biscuits. 'Clever Mary' at the Warren, and Sunday tea
at the best girl's place. What but the army's merciless REVEILLE
would have the heart "to interrupt;
PROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPOHDSHTS■
LARKHILL. fßy Remnant'-), Here it is comparatively quiet, fewer horses
to lock after and only two 18 pounders. The stay-behinds, 26th, 27th,
BAC and 7/1, work in two Batteries which means Brigade duty every
alternate night. Main guard is eliminated and most of the fatigues
report on parade at 10 a.m.
Vet. Sgt. Evans is heard above the din of early morning stables
directing a new-chum groom "That horse is the q-qui-quietest -of the
lot; it's only the ring-worms that makes him c-cra-cranky."
We miss the physical.drill and Scotch Grey Drill by Farrier
Sgt. Arnold.
One of the greatest surprises is the indirect laying of Pte,
Walters; his performances would do credit to any seasoned gunner.
"Pass it out dear" was the amorous saying of one of the remain-
ing Captains in a recent football match. Was it force of habit'
The Pood Committee is worrying over the constant questions re-
garding the per day.
The re-assembling of the Brigade is eagerly looked forward to.
oOo
Phiti WALLINGTON. PAREIiAM. (By 'Good old Bill'). Major James in
charge of part of 25th Bty. with BAC and 7/l acquisitions, was here
from 3rd August to sth Sept. The pretty suburb of Fareham, City of
Portsmouth, the good ship Victory, Southampton and the Isle of Wight,
were the chief localities where leave was spent.
22 mumps contacts with Cpl. Kerr as attendant, went into qua-
rantine. They were 'stiff' but 'Tales-by' a Q.M.S. furnished adequate
food for reflection, food for the body being another matter.
A cricket match 25th v 57th Reserve Bty, resulted in a win for
bhg Ic'tH/ies 32 runs. Top score for Kangaroos Gardner 25. Best
bowiing by Herrington 5 wkts. The return match was a "right reverse",
25th winning by 6 wkts. and 57 runs. Gardner ascendant with 57 r and
6 wkts.
Following a Ist class Y.M.C.A concert and refreshments on the
occasion of bidding farewell to 57th Bty. Maj. James expressed the
Australians' appreciation of the welcome received at Port Wallington,
and referred to the excellence of the instruction imparted. The
remarks of Lt. Col. Leaver in reply were eulogistic of the Australians 8
behaviour and appreciative of the comradeship between them and the
home troops while at the Fort.
The usual reveille growling, this time intensified by velsdlotion,
commenced at 5-15 next morning.
oOo
CODFQRD (By 'Boot and Saddle'). Drivers here have not got over the
send-off at Larkhill. Drivers Knight and Hayward will sell their
Amesbury claims to the highest bidder; photos on application.


WINCHESTER- (By 5.W.0,) After six weeks' spell at_
Winchester ' the various detachments have returned to their ft „
at Larkhili and are again settling down to the sight of the übiquitous
aeroplane and the shriek of the roar of the 60 pounder. Q ,- 110
Training was, at times, rather arduous, for a week or two reveille
sounded at s'a.m. and the Bugler, christened by our Boys „ Aul ? r ® y f muuh
to his disgust) was cursed fluently and eloquently m perfect Austia-
-liane°e The English officers were exceptionally courteous ana snewed
every consideration to us, while "Tomrty" did everything, in his power
to make our lot■a happy one. We have nothing buc pleasant memories
of both officers and men. Ac , „
Winchester is a city full of historical interest being as it is,
the old capital of England. The Cathedral is especially interesting
and was built by William the Conqueror, and m it many of the oarly
Kings were crowded, while Cromwell's Ironsides have destroyed much of
its exquisite,, k ' lled iQ & y/ood immed iately behind our Camp
and a tree bears a sign indicating the fame it achieved by diverting
the arrow from its mark. " - ..
King Arthur reigned there, and the Round Table abouu which the
famous Knights gathered is still preserved. A house near the Camp
was built by King Charles for Sweet Nell of Old Drury, but the amorous
monarch died before the edifice was completed. On two occasions we
had half holidays to attend Garden Fetes; one was at Alresford and
the other at Tiohbourne. We enjoyed the halt holidays very much but
Petes are like bazaars - bettor left alone. At Tiohbourne some of the
chaps paid Is. 6d. for their afternoon tea and then obtained, after
considerable struggling and much pleading, a piece of bread (thin as
a wafer) with margarine painted on it, and a cup of luke 'warm water
coloured to look like tea. t . .
Tiohbourne House is somewhat of interest ro a ° 1
forms a portion of the estate claimed by Arthur Orton of.Wagga H.S.W.
and who, some years ago, gained great notoriety as the Tiohbourne
The country people were most hospitable and to hear rhose who arc
usually unemotional and reserved speaking proudly and feelingly of the
part the young nation of the Southern Cross has played in this Wpr was
wonderfully^ inspiring. G<o> before we left Avington
Bark and accompanied by the London Irish Rifles' Band at
7 a.m. to the Railway Station. We are glad to be back with oui old
battery and brigade mates and hope that the 7th may be kept intac
and all the present members go to the firing line together.
oOo
3WANAGE. (By R.H.A.) Life at Swanage. was mostly "froth and Bubble
at least so a visitor said when he saw most of the 38th Battery on
the beaoh. Leave from 5-30 p.m. to 10-15 p.m. (more or less) with
two late nights a week was profitably spent. The camp was imme-
diately above the cliffs, about three minutes walk from the town
and on fine days the Isle of Wight was visible. Bournemouth is
popular among the boys as a week-end resort. The skill o , e ..
Australians at the principal pastime "square pushing exoi e
envy and admiration of the Tommies. So far _as we can see there
nothing wrong with Swanage as a camp, but will lt^last.
oOo
N.O.O's SCHOOL. TARTU-ILL. (By 'Dial Sight'). The strain of long
hours without smokes is counteracted by profitable instruction. On
recent manoeuvres some of the horsemen made the return journey over
rough country and fallowed fields, on shanks' pony at a trot.
Sgt. Jacques (27th) and Opl. Slater (26th) m their spare time
are studying the dynamic principles of a runaway gun, ana the art oi
riding on a -limber. _ i „
Two squad teams put up the good time of 21 and 21 g sees, res-
pectively for changing the wheels of gun limber and wagon.


GERMAN SAUSAGE SIZZLES AND SINKS.
-Gnr. L. Harrison (25th) was an
eye-witne€s of the fall of the
Zep. raider near London on 3rd
inst.
A reporter of this paper inter-
viewed him in his apartments on
a well watered expanse at Hilsea,
The damp had penetrated Gnr, Har-
rison's spirits as well as the
bell-tent, and knowing his quar-
ry's reticent disposition a deli-
cate handling of the situation
was necessary in order to seoure
the coveted interview:-
i"Returning from the theatre
about 11-30 on Sat. night a po-
liceman sidled up to me with a
bull's eye lantern in his hand
saying 'A man's stiff - got to
be up at 6-30 in the morning
and now called out to a bloom-
ing air raid that's coming off
to-night.' Reaching liolloway, 1
I retired to bed and almost dis-
missed the matter from my mind,
I was awakened at 1-50 by 'Get
up Les. the Zeppelins are com-
ing. The explosions of anti-
aircraft guns shook the house.
All was excitement. Occupants
of the - house, proceeded to the
basement, but curiosity led me to
the verandah where I heard a
whirring noise as of a gigantic
bird. Hundreds of searchlights at
length disclosed a huge cigar-
like bright steel contrivance
which hovered round and became
lost to sight. To my intense de-
light the searchlights again lo-
cated it almost directly above me.
Suddenly it burst into flames and
illuminated the sky for miles
around. Assuming a perpendicular
it seemed tc hover for
a moment, then plunged nose fore-
most towards the earth, leaving
a massive trail of flame in its
wake. The exultation of that mo-
ment I shall never forget. My
triumphant yell united with the
cheers that passed like a vast
insuppressibie wave from one side
of the city to the other, echoing
and re-echoing throughout the
whole of London and its envir-
ons .
The organisation displayed
by constables, ambulance-men,
etc., was nothing short of
marvellous."
THEY SAY
That B4r. Frazer's (26th) wash-
ing hp at Y.M.C .A.'Avington Park
was a labor of love
I I I
• • •
That limber Gnr. Scholley
(25th) holds special rapid in-
direct laying record. Test time 5
sees, taken at The Warren.
I I I
That Gnr. Stinson (27th) came
here to fight - not to wheel his
country about in a barrov;.
11l
That a lengthy 7th man rides
about Amesbury with M.P. on his
arm. Does that denote "Member of
Parlt." or "More Prisoners."
I I »
..That Gpl. Peach (26th) is no
Chinese gardner. Turnip throwers
arrested.
Til
That Lieut. R.R.Smith has been
pleased to appoint C.3. (alias
Tiny) Thompson, Peris,copic Gunner.
11l
That our Adjt. was in the tren-
ches recently - after a cricket ball
i r i
That trial by jury -.found Bar.
R.V.F. guilty.' Damages and costs
granted in favor of Driver McCarthy
I ! i
That Sgt. Mounter (25th) finds
needle and khaki cot ton-useful por-
table property, though not always
a good match for a stocking.
I I I
That Gnr. Cansdell was -fright-
ened to open the breach when 'the
first blank shell was fired.
i i t
That the vibration shook the
gold out of Cpl. Browning's teeth
when 25th won the day near Pareham.
1 1 I
• • •
That Gnr. Hamilton used bad
language during his term as driver
at port Wallington.
I I I
That Sgt. Buckle (Hd. Qrs.) has
a fine collection of studies. He
was annoyed when he walked about
the hut looking for the "Blighter"
who did it.
lit
Officers at Winchester are
devoting time to the practical and
theoretical intricacies of fatigue
with harness cleaning as a specia-
lity I


WHO SAID
That Sgt. Keid (26th} was of-
fered a job as instructor in a
rough riding school.
I I t
That Gnr. Coolahan (26th) goes
to Y.M.C.A. only to play bill-
jai ds.
I > I
That Sgt. Venn-Brown estab-
lished a rep. for horseman-
shio at Winchester.
I T I
That Br. Knight (26th) re-
ceived gifts of tobacco prior
to leaving for Codford. Some
mixture I!Ii
I I X
Gnr. Wostwood (27th) was wil-
ling to take all the punishment
that came his way.
I I f
"That 25th has no rough riders.
Ask Bdr. Mulley.
11l
That the "Lord 'of Clean Log-
gins" did not have the N.C.O.
School bluffed when Sgt. Foun-
tain meekly murmured "Sir, may
I take off my spurs."
1 1 I
QUERY COLUMN.
Who were the i girls and the
kangaroo dog walking along the
beach with Tiny Abbott (28th)
at Swanage, and what i 3 their
nick-name?
I I t
Who came from Heaven to Hilsea
on Horseback? Rough Rider Small
(Fiji) .
I 1 T
Where is Bvr. Miller's (25th)
native .Land? He dinna ken the
bonnie Purrrrple heatherrrrr.
I 1 t
What time does it take trams
to go from the Quay to the Hail-
way? Can any kind reader inform
G-nr. Eatcliffe (Hd. Qrs.)
i i i
•• • 1
What damage does 1764 x
represent to a troopship? Who
is the culprit? Where is the"
oroof of damage and does pay-
ment of the fine constitute an
admission of guilt? 'What pro-
portion did the crew pay? Why
not a counter a/c from the ban-
queters of the troop-decks?
I t I
BIRTHS. DEATHS AMD MARRIAGES.
Dead: perpetrators of printers'
errors-spelling and grammatioal-
in last Yandoo. (Notice rather
previous as it has since been dis-
covered that the printers were
women and sentence commuted.)
FOR SAI-3
A Sam Brown - Sgt.Barton (27th)
1 I I
Issue leggings and 3 3tripes.
Lieut. Venn-Brown.
T I T
Ho. 1 dial sights - apply 7th
Bde School.
i i t
Gold ring, bargain, originally
cost 1/6 Cpl. Kerr (25th)
r i r
ADVICE (Six & Sightpence.)
For sick leave consult Farrier Sgt.
Armstrong.
I t I
For the edification of B Sub.
26th the Platypus and Penguin are
not related as the scientific
names signify ORNITHORHYNCHUS
ANATINUS for the former and the
latter EUDYPTULA MINOR.
I I I
Sgt. lila j. Allen - Ho vacancies
in-Wirth's Circus at present but
you Sgt. Gill and Bdr. Jayes (28th-
should have no difficulty in obtain-
ing a job after the war.
lit
Wash basins should only be used to
wash in.
t i i
Dvr. H. Gray - It should not take
a Farrier 10 hours to get a fire up.
i i i
WANTED.
Patterns of "shifton" suitable
for curtains in huts. Farrier Cp-.
Parnell.
I I I
A nurse maid and lackey to be in
constant attendance - should be able
to drive sheep. Dvr. Scott of
Melrose Plains.
I 1 T
Soft beds - apply the night camp
police, Gun Park, Larkhill.
i i >
Singing Teacher - Farrier Cpl.
Russell.
J J !
Some more meat - Gnr. Mason (7/1)
t I 1
• • •
Chamber maid: must be expert bed.
maker. Apply Fargent Satan (26th)
I I J
LITERARY ATTEMPTS.
Sgt. Maj. Shelly-Jones. Your ef-
forts deserve encouragement. The
pcem "Gwen Dear" shov/s talent, but
too sentimental for this paper.
1 i !
YANDOO FUND.
On completion of saie3 of Vol. 1
a balance sheet will be issued
showing position of funds.
I I I
THE YAHDOO MANAGEMENT: Bdr. Rohu (26th) and Gnr. Harding (25th).


' *■==£—"
| V
- siiBif "
//OIV 5G7- BP/NOLRY K/LL.CO
THE "/Q/IT. " ' *"
c
—" FFFLTCA/S /)£&C/=>/SW/T/S /F
-.' —— -—:3»5r.a>"j *
!
'CORPORAL. FEFA S HIS FLJPIPS WOPF/ES"ATFAPEJ/ATT ,'F


-
Cook's Fatigue —Which was never popular.
Barbering spuds was all right, but cleaning dishes,
etc., was
i
Larkhill Rickshaws.
Wheeling a Chalky Country for Flooring Stables.
I ' "
Manure Fatigue—A Job to Suit any Profession.
Note the Ice Fatigue doing his bit.
Ice which is generally three-quarters of an inch thick
has to be removed from the troughs every morning.


Bulford.
The " Too=proud=to=ride" Party from the 7th Brigade
on the Road to the King's Review.
\
His Majesty at the Saluting Base, at the Review of
Australian Troops on Salisbury Plain.
27th September, 1916.
Batteries Waiting for the King after three nights of
grease and bathbrick and a 4.30 reveille —all this
without a growl ( ?).


dt. - '
y ti. au.s.c-
*> f£>k ,v #
/V W£m£ xmoc o«> £o.~>'rf*c f/fifie.o o'ri «""««'«•■
*6 Bl
Yj^-ywpn.^
«v.vo *v-u the. lad av wf -?/'' 2y c* /-)/•) n yc A !/ /k -CP F O ~ T/or£ * lejs°h **«/* S'tt- /z/c/was
H»OJW*C OOLO*/O£??1- ■jP(Jk/,j NUMDLJC.
W* *m*' —
feSSL*
rlTO,
uj
J Tjy\ 6Me THOKNZ. a»n ALi-coj~re.«s y\
*" *~y6fL&\ "* me y"yL°" r/6MT ~pi-
*F>
"" iv^
xly - yC'xV >CfP>
- Ma$&=s=*dL TV /?k
f y$*;\
&vr 7M£ rr&YT G£ rJ * #ooa/y /HS1AC4& ■
!/OL2-PM73OCr./6-m


THE REVIEW
Empire' ® r °®use^ir.°case^of t war^°^A^d°ye^'i? e^as^^OTe o so'' r^d^° :t
ambition? deedS > the emulat ITlnr
such a hosn? m r «a e ,^n e r n in do^ e r^ S s e : h ix^i a ° f
able and resolute of our race the w*i tf, P i e s P irit > unconquer-
land Australia, and the spftdMSig S^tST^. 01 " ° W IOVSd
George V. It was a great and happy \lay for the "bovs wp t *
of work preparing to Sake a decent P show? everyviil.Wa 1 ft' V
™ RT " - 5 ~S?H
th. Royal Standard"and •.f'SrS^SI
the march past which the 7th had the honor of leading' the TMn I at 7h
base taking the salute. Some of the £ys with thfi?'usual Sfing
ingenuity, succeeded in 'snapping- His Majesty as they passed
MiftnT" t™ S was the first odcasd ® °n which the Ktog hid Viewed
-well with nrid^anT 1 ? We 5 11 felt OUr P ulses tingle and our hearts
n and love for our loyal native land, and our wonderfu 1
fives to tl Burvey ® d the lon S linesof well built men all offering their
in sniration of th!f?!L' ea « e F. to , d ° th eir bit, and in the splendour and
and f eallsed th at Australia was destined for big
the fMn d fid that these very men, and their brothers alreadf in
the firing line, would most assuredly be the men who would guide Australia
to greatness. The day was altogether a notable one in our lives, both
as citizens and of the Empire.
honooc -, Tha .hoauty of the wide undulating parade ground, the dashing
tbs Sh^ ln S harness drawing the fully equipped guns and wagons,
T bayonets of the Infantry, and the music of the huge band
aided by the softer sounds of tramping men, rumbling wagon whetls and
jingling trace chains, entered into our beings. Be were all ennobled
and reminded clearly once again of the true meaning of our pilgrimage
to the old world. & &
Once the Empire was only a name. By the loya.l sacrifices and
generous giving of her overseas dominions we are all now one - one Kino-
one Ideal - and we felt the truth and meaning of it all at the Kings
Revl e w • 3 y/ JJ
FOR SALE
Bandolier cleaning outfit -
did good work for Sergeants.
Edr. Grose 26th.
% i'f
Hat., a hit dilapidated and
unsuitable for Church Parades.
Lieut. Richards.
Chamber Maid. Young and
very agile. Once made the bed
for a Sergeant. Gunner Goat-
ley (26th).
WAN TED
Fly strainer for cook-house.
> t- *- -s:-
Scheme for catching trams
tl\at have gone.
Will all those who pinched hyim hooks
from the A 8 kindly bring them along to
Church Parades. Now we know what we
paid the 4jd per man for.
» « ■*
Tenders will he received for the supply,
and manipulation of a flat iron,'
isuitahle for ironing hats.- 25th Bty.
* ■» *
Bdr. Rohu and Gnr. Pountney of the
Sports Committee have returned to duty.
» *- *
D suh 25th is being trained as a mumps
and. measles specialist corps.
LQSI
A bandolier, somewhere near Winchester.
Gnr. Fowler R.M. (26th).


mo SAID
That Gnr. Foreman's uncle was
a steeple jack because he.was high
up in the world. « j4
That Gnr. Gregsop (27th) was a
lonely soldier. .;•< * *
That Gnr. Rateliffe (HQ) was so
beautiful that the lady bought
her own ticket. « a
Three cheers because the bing
boys were here, but not in Driver
L. McCarthy's company.
That the cook of the 107 th got
lost in a dust storm.,
»,t «
That this "go'dam climate" is no
good to Gnr. Geof. Clay" of Thursday
Island, >i ii «
"It's 8d on the meter sir". Vhy!
the taxi driver to Driver Knight
(26th). « x r,
That the cooee for the King was
given by a blue gum.
»
That the horses of 25th owe their
lives to Jam tinebottle, and rusty
knife of the dispensary department.
That Sgt. Wilson of Don Ack is
like hig name-sake of the dollar
country - a man of notes.
That Cpl. Peach lound that ivy
is not the only thing that clings.
'«* iv J!-
That Cpl. Harris (27th) climbed
a ladder for Water.
v j; «
That the badge does not make
the layer, even though worn by 107 th
man from Winchester.
That the old mare used bad lang-
uage to Vet. Sgt. Evans before
"closing her penknife".
« *
That Sgt. Thompson's (HQ)-reveille
was at 4am,
That Gnr. Too Hughes (25th) Was a
vocalist - master piece 'Let stammer-
-ing ESSES ACK EMMA sing'
That Gnr. Francis (27th) is fond of
elastic sided boots.
That Sergeants are strongest after
tea. What a lot can be done on bread
and onions!. K
That Gnr. Harding -got the job of
permanent mess orderly at hie own
request. « » .»
Old 15-oners should listen for the
order "ra-w-h-e-e-e-1" in a trench
"'mofctar section. Are we right or are
we wrong.
THEY SAY
That Cpl. Jone9 (25th) will make no
further donations to any cause until
the food improves.
•x V. i't
That Gnr. Park (27th) thought it
best to -work on the farm one day.
Wha' for? ~ „
That the 107 th are looking for the
man who broke the screws in the number.
7 dial sight. „ nJs
That Barqueillbzuzivie is Belgian
for 'How do you like my photo'.
Q.M.S. Slater knows.
at it it
That Bournemouth is .
Bdr. Jeyes (107 th, please complete,
i:- -v.- x
That according to Pte. McLean (HQ)
ASperin will relieve pressure of a
blood clot on the brain.
S A 5.V -It
That pillowfights between Gurmeir
Cec. Ross and Limber Gunner Duck-
worth are the nightly entertainments
Of A sub 2.6 th.
That wt. Officer Squair still has
hopes of his £2 bringing in a return
That Driver Dalton'.s (2Sth) harness
motto is "bright on the near side,
dull on the off".
«- » !■'
That 25th has an idea for keeping
overcoats dry in heavy rain. Take
the ooats off and put them under
cover - an incinerator will do.
That Jock (Canteen) nearly pur-
chased the pig for the Sports
Committee. B „
That Driver McCulloch (26th)
known 1 as Jim Fish of Durban, lost
good business by not having his rick-
sha outside after 7th Bde. Concert.
That the Hilsea Signallers are ex-
perts at moving dead horses, although
they did pot take this subject in
their course.
That Gnr. Burrel (27th) would have
created a financial crisis in Lombard
St. had he obtained his leavej.
That because of the new Persian
Mascot, Gnr. Stein (27th) did not
object to his walk from Arrjesbury.
« « t-
That a future instructor was over-
heard giving the order "without
dragropes prepare to mount".
That notices have been posted up
in France concerning a lost Division.
Though not lost it might have gone
before. ... ....


THE 7TK F.A.B. GYMKHANA
Tho Gymkhana took place on the natural amphitheatre adjacent to
Mo. 17 Camp at Larkhill. Weather conditions were anything hut favorable
bu.t did not interfere to any great extent with the events.
The weather was against the eliminating contests on Friday 6th,
but competitors lined up and onlookers were undeterred. During tfie sig-
nallers content rain came down in torrents and a stiff gale whistled across
the plair from the S.W. Laying a wire across the large shelter shed,
climbing telegraph p4le ar.d despatching a message while clinging to the
pole B.nd the portable telephone, accurately transmitting the message on the
buzzer flag and disc, made a severe test, and gave the competitors a fair
idea of what was to be expected across the channel.
On Saturday the weather broke comparatively fine, but during the
afternoon intermittent showers somewhat dampened everything-but the ardour
of the competitors.
Specialist races like other events, were conducted on active
service conditions and were quite a feature of the performance.
In the sub-section alarm turnout, A sub 107 th came out victorious
after twice dead heating with D sub 26th.
The Fancy Dress turnout showed that individuality still survived
the influences of the army environment. The make up was excellent notwith-
standing that large feet and brawqy arms were great handicaps to female
imitators.
Some of the Officers entered in the competitions and into the
Spirit of the proceedings.
Apart from the amusement ana relaxation arising from the gym-
khana is the stimulatior of a better understanding between Officers and men,
and the fostering of that spirit of esprit de corps which means so much to
a body of men who will be erterlng the firing line together.
The interest taken in the everts by competitors and spectators
was most encouraging, ard it is hoped the gymkhana will be the forerunner
of other functions in the future.
The following are the results of the various events:-
Field Sports
100 yds champ. Driver Beaumont (25th) 1 ; Gnr. Gardner (25th) 2.
22b " " - Cpl. Robinson (27th) 1 ; Gnr. Gardner (25th1 2.
440 " " Gnr. O'lfeill (26th) 1 ; Gnr. Gardner (25th) 2.
880 " " Cnr. O'Heill (26th) 1 ; Cpl". Hughbs (26th) 2. '•
Smile cross country champ. - Gnr. O'Neill (26th) f; Gnr. Chapman (26th)2.
1 mile championship Gnr. O'Neill (26th) 1; Gnr. Ghr. Bates (26th) 2
120 yds Hurdles Champ.- Sgt. Gregory (27th) 1, Dvr. Beaumont (25th) 2.
1000 yds Flag Race - 26th Bty. 1; (Sgt. Harrison, Bdrs. Qulgley, Grose
Shiels, Gnrs. Pountney, Thomas, Ferris, Shipway, Nelll and
Dtriver Shand.
High Jump - sgt. Gregory (27th) 1; Gnr. Smith T.V. (HQ) 2
Broad Jump - Cpl Robinson (27th) 1; Gnr. Smith T.V. (HQ) 2.
Tug-of-war champ. 107 th Eattery ; (Lieut. Mayes, Sgt. Fiddler, Cpl. Abbott
Bdr. Dent, Cnrs. Fahsy, E. Fahey, W. 'suttor, Capel, Ander-
son and Lynch.
120 yds handicap - Gnr. Thomas (26th) 1 ; Pte Chidgey (HQ) 2
"Wheelbarrow Race - Dvrs Lake and Hedges (107 th) 1
Obstacle Race - 3gt. Harrison (26th)
Egg » 5 poor Race - Gnr. Williams (HQ)
Sack Roce - Gnr. Green (26th)
potato Race - Bdr. Grose (26th)
Putting the shot - Dvr. Tyrell (26th)
Throwing Cricket Ball - Sgt. Gregory (27th)
Kicking Football - Gnr. Lynch (107 th)
V.C. Race (dismounted) - Sgt. Harrison and Driver Shand (26th)
Pillow Ficht - Grr. Thorn v2sth)
Fancy Dress Parade - Dvr. Begg (26th) "Australian Sundowner" 1 ; Gnr.
Partridge (26th) "A Flossie" 2.
Greasy Pig Contest - Gnr. Arderson (107 th)
Three Legged Race - Grr. Redman and Dvr. Beaumont (25th)
r Mounted Events
Bending Race Dvr. Hensorr (26th)) 1 \ Dvr. Richards (107 th) 2.
Musical Chairs on Horseback - Dvr'. Cambridge (27th)
V.C. Mounted - Dvr. Richards (107 th) Grr. Nivisor (27_th) 2.


Lloyd Lindsay Competition - 107 th Bty." 1, Bdr. Capel, Dvrs A.E. and E.W.
Officers Hunt 8 : Co""^' 6 (siv!S s (26th) 2^
Wrest! ing - Horseback ; , S.S.^inlay,
Tug-of-war lo7 26th t ßty':'l; Bdrs. Leeds, Quigley and King, Gnrs. Goswell &
Green, Bvrs. Herson, Shand, Murray, Tyrell and McLeish.
Fl a p Pace - 7 25th l Bty! 1; Cpl. Willcock, S. S .'.!er rirgtor , Edrs. Bartor, Mumford
Flag Race & _ £ a rdne.r, Dvrs . Stevenson, Maxwell, Koornouse and
Officers Tent^Pegging 1 - Col. Jackson (Div- ii.fi. )AC apt _ Playfair (26th) 2.
Mule Rare - Bdr . McDougall (107 th) 1; Dr. Whitehalr (26th). 2..
Skill at Arms Contests
Alarm Race on Horseback - Dvr. Avard (26thl 1; Dvr. Tyrell (26th) 2.
Driving Competition - 25tf Bty, Dvrs. McDonald, Vince, Harrison, Hanger,
Bradford, Howard. >w
o lffTl aTiers Contest - 27th Bty. 1, Bdr. Westbrook, Gnrs. Robinson, Cameron,
Slgn Alarm Jordan, Edmindson, Sparks, Schofield and Williams
Sub-section Turnout - 107 th Bty. 1, Sgt. Fiddler, Bdr. Capel, Gnrs. Anderson,
Sbttor , Lynch, Fahey E.J., Bdr. Jackson, Dvrs. King A.E., King E. .
' Rang 0 'otrectormers Contest - 26th Bty. Bdrs. AllworthP .R. , Barnard
R. Shiels A. J., Gnrs. Money and Onr. Fowler R.M,
Fuze Setting - Gnr. Kay (27th) hn ,. k i
Breech Block Contest Howitzer Gun - Gnr. Bigger (107 th)
do 18 Pdr. Q.F. - Gnr. Sheppard (2't.h)
Harnessing Up Competition - 26th Bty., Sgt. Kille, Dvr. Tyrell, Hensen and
c t ©WO.}"t .
Man Handling Gun Competition - 107 th Bty., Sgt. Fiddler, Gnrs. Anderson,
Lynch, Fahey, Suttor, Ferguson, Fahey W. Mackie and Parkinson,
stretcher Bearers Race - Gnrs. Case and Parnell (27th)
The following is a summary of the events wor. by the Batteries respectively;-
26th 17 firsts 7 seconds
27th 11 Firsts 3 secords
107 th 10 Firsts 2 Seconds
25th 5 Firsts 5 Seconds
LIEUT-COL. R. St.J. PEARCE V.D.
The return to Australia of Col.
Pearce marks the severance, of the Com-
manding Officer in whose charge most
of the hoys have been since entering
Victoria Barracks, the Show Ground or
The Warren as "marmalades".
. It was Col. Pearce who inter-
viewed each aspirant for acceptance
in the Field Artillery, and to him
the credit is due for the formation
of a Brigade unique in good conduct
and wherein comradeship is an axiom.
The sympathy of the hoys is
•with Col. Pearce in his regret that
advancing years have necessitated
his return.
An enthusiastio artilleryman, a
strict disciplinarian, our former
Commanding Officer was at the same
time always solicitous for the wel-
fare of his troops, and on more than
one occasion privileges in the way
of general leave have been due to
his efforts. For the enjoyable times
ashore at Durban and Cape Town thanks
are due to Col. Pearce.
"Play the Game" vas a favorite ,
exhortation, and throughout this cam- ,
paign and afterwards, the boys will |
show by their conduct that they can do
it, and that the training under their
first C.O. has not been in vain.
YANDOO ROUGH RIDERS CONTEST
To be decided on points as fcllows:-
3 for falling off (f)
2 for a throw (t)
1 for sliding off rump (s)
Candidates to date,-
Lieut. Watt (26th) 1(f) 1' (s) 4pts
Cpl. Wynter (25th) 2(t) 4
Sgt. Maj. Allett (HQ) 1 (f) 3
Sgt. Richards (25th) 1 (f) 3
Gnr. Newman (26th) 1 (f) 3
Gnr. (Jade 11 (26th) 1 (f) 3
Dvr. Begg (26th) 1 (f) 3
The Yardoo would be pleased to
receive further names to the list.
The first competitor to reach 12
points will be considered the Brig-'
ade champion.
THE ELECTIONS
Driver Hayward (26th) Is against
corscription or. account of the crowd
that would be assembled behind the
lines. Me maintains that this Would
harass operations when running
away.
The Yandoo voted YES to reduce
the competition for their girls
at home.


f.HRTSTHAS CARDS
The design has been executed in his , !
usual excellent planner, by Gnr. Geo.
Bleach as a donation to the Brigade. i
It represents a panel surrounded by
Australian native flowers, with a
suitable verse inscribed.
The cards are expected to arrive in
a week or ten days, and can be had
from the Yandoo Management at cost prioe
which will include envelope.
Mtiß gfaVß-
It is with pleasure that we announce
the formation of a Glee Party for the
7th Brigade.
with the talent available, and under
the able tuition of Gnr. Wilson (26th)
we confidently expect something very fine
in the musioal direction.
above their camp at will long
remember the shots of anti-aircraft guns,
the powerful searchlight rays.concentrating
on the silver cigar shaped raider, the rude
awakening at midnight, the bare muddy feet
below and dark sky above, the luminosity of
the star shells and the hurried exit from
the camp.
Several cornstalks merited the commend-
ation of, an English Officer for assistance ir
the removal of horses. Ditches, hedges,
open fields all secured favor as places of
safety. Gnr. Curly Eyre was in a quandary
as to the relative merits of inside and out-
side .
Salvos oh all sides and vehement barr-
acking failed to bring the zeppelin to eartl
and disappointment was keen; but no damage
was done and the spectacle was unforgetable.
AUSTRALIAN MAILS
Kails still retain the reputation of
being rare and erratic.
"Non-receipt of papers is perhaps pardon-
able owing to possible appropriation for oth<
purposes by reason of paucity of paper; but
-the wherefore of 30 bags of "TeHys", "Orann-
"Refs", "Bullys", Sydney Mails etc. addressee
to High Commissioner, London, being stowed u;
opened under Brigade coal is a.mystery.
Apropos of the subject, cables, say tha-
the Defence Dept. is arranging for Australia;
weeklys to be despatched regularly to A.I.F.
Units abroad.
BREVITIES
The nightly entertainments
at the Canteen now ohiefly con-
sist of the Kettle Drum Parade,
with Old Jock with the ribboned
broom handle as drum major.
r it
Capt. Samson on Pte. Chldgey,-
"A great man at a great work*.
it it ts
No more harnessing up comp-
etitions as they are not edifi-
catory. The language would
stagger an Australian bullocky,
it it it .
Gnr. Medcalfe (25th) will
undertake shopping commissions.
Every care but no responsibility.
■>t it *
Vet. Sgt. Paul wondered why **
the horse could tackle his feed
with a temperature of 106.
;Fortunately he noticed the bubble
in the thermometer before treat-
ing the nag for cerebral throm-
bosis
it » »
Driver Sh SH Sh McCulloch is
annoyed with Ruby for not letting:
him know the meet was off.
it it it
Gnr. Bowker (107 th) can have
the piece of ribbon Sent by
-Irene on application at this
reffice.
Gnr. Wilson (26th) got half
vay to Larkhill without his
-Leggings - the consequence of
•rearing gum boots,
h, SPORTING"
.I The 7th P.A.B. was repres-
-i-ented at Divisional Sports,
Gnr. T. O'Neill winning the 3
pile cross country championship
and finishing 2nd in the mile.
it it »
er On Oct. 1 football was
I played between Ist F.A.B.
ies"team and Officers of 33rd
dl Battalion; also between our
;n- 2nd team and N.C.Os and men
i of the same unit. In the
•t j former the 7th won by 59, to
nj nil, but the Infantry lads
j knew too much for our 2nd
; team which accounted for the
result 25 to 3 in favor of
the 33rd.
/ ! j '* \ /
, —j' / . _ A STUDY IN BOTANY
( A It is not generally known that a
\"" ~s\j vast difference exists "between the 1
\\ shamrock grown in the North of \)
Ireland, and that which flourishes V
Northern Specie in the South. Southern Specie
THE YANDOO MANAGEMENT, GNR. HARDING (25TH), BDR. ROHU (2STH),


... ...s .. .; V.J; .: §&:. . :
Sports—Wrestling on Horseback.
Shirts and Singlets Suffered.
The Winning Team (27th).
Sports —Wrestling on Horseback.
A Catch=as=Catch=Can Hang On.
t :
Sports —Mounts for the Mule Race.
Quadrupeds which are Groomed with a Broom.


" Ladies "
and their Portable Property on the Lawn at Brigade
Gymkhana.
Pillow Fight.
Where one had an opportunity of paying back old scores.
MMBgjBpBSBi^
........... . . . . ■ ■ . ■
Lloyd = Lindsav Competition.
A large fatigue was kept busy, owing to the " Excellent"
Jumping.


The Staffs' Greetings.
While Christmas Tide is coming And o'er the great wide ocean,
With gladness igood cheer, We send our wish sincere,
Our thoughts ape turning homewards A Gay d Merry Christmas,
To Australia, Land so dear. And A Happy Bright Hew Year.
THE 25TH OP DECEMBER 1916
Our location next Christmas Day is a matter for conjecture, "but
wherever that day is spent, it is certain to "be vastly different from any
preceding one (and we hope from any future)#
The first Christmas Day "brought Peace and Goodwill, "but this one
comes to nations in the throes of a bloody struggle, a world of home folk
sorrowing for those who have "been taken, or anxious concerning those part-
icipating in the conflict. __
At this season of the year thoughts are more then ever prone to fly
home to those who so nobly and self-saorifioingly sent us in our country's
defence, and who are so heroically resisting the inroad of nerve-straining
anxiety and the encroachment of depression, that inevitable companion of
ower w hi o h defied and outraged the principle of peace and
goodwill, has wrested Australia's manhood from their homes, and until Brit-
ain and her Allies have successfully dealt with that militant and aggressive
disturber, there can be no peace. Duty first; then victory, peace and home.
The Yandoo can wish the boys of the 7th a Merry Christmas, knowing
that with comradeship and a life of activity as assets, such a wish is com-
patible with circumstances. For the anxious folk at home, Comforts Funds,
senders of parcels, papers and correspondence, and all other persons and
Institutions so ably backing us up - three hearty cheers aid more.
We trust that the ensuing year may see the reward of the combined
sacrifices of those at home and at the frcnt, and witness the dawn of a
permanent and lasting peace.
01 Can you think it Christmas,
And all so far away.
So strange there is no surfing,
So breakers and no spray;
So strange there is no cricket,
(Jo trips down Manly way;
Ho week ends at Cronulla
t!o heat on Christmas Day.
* » «
Yet, truly it is Christmas,
Though strange the scenes may be;
Though winds are cold and wintry
And wail on hill and tree;
Though trees are gaunt and leafless
All sad with mystery.
And keeping us from homeland
Are leagues on leagues of sea.
Still all our dreams are cm u™
On that young southern land,
And mem'ry lingers fondly
O'er beach and golden sand;
On sea nymphs, laughing, merry,
On ranges wide and grand,
On rolling plains of wheatfields
On bushmen, tall and tanned.
« « e
But duty was the master
That bade us sail and fight,
And duty bids us conquer
For Empire, Home and Right.
Quite soon our turn is coming
For trenches day and night;
And then we'll "up and at 'em" -
We'll strike with all our might.
- S. W. Hodge, 25th Bty.
CHRISTMAS
M<S.


WITH THE HAMMER AND TON GS AT CODFORD, BATH AND WOOLWICH
(By "Fitter Sergeant"
Arriving at Codford to attend a Fitters end Wheelers' School, I
found the village not a large one, but a busy place and quaint mixture of
ancient and modem. It is a large agricultural centre, and distant 14
miles from Salisbury. Boyton Camp is on part of an Estate belonging to
an rhglish gentleman. In the vicinity the green lanes of Ehgland are much
in evidence, as well as old fashioned thatched cottages, swift ruining streams
and undulating and wooded land stretching away in the distance.
Nugget and I spent a week end at Bath. This is a fine city Sit-
uated in a beautiful valley the adjaoent hills being covered with fino and
palatial residences. The city owes its prosperity to the healing qualities
of its mineral water. It is a historic place and was the ancient Roman
spa used by the patricians of that warlike race. Here was erected the
great temple of Sulis little of which now remains. The baths are now much
below the city level and although the construction has been restored the main
parts are much the same as when the Romans left them, and a great source of
revenue to the Corporation.
For advanced instruction the genial Nugget and I arrived at Wool-
wich encumbered with much portable property. . This place might justly be
termed the industrial hub of the Empire's military wiverse. Disciplino
in these barracks is Strict and everything is done according to custom and
tradition. The Staff inherit the proud spirit In the army which is supremo,
Woolwich arsenal is a huge place and in it are employed, I was told, between
60,000 and 70,000 men. The output as one oan imagine is something enormous.
We were taken through the various factories and saw gins of all sizes end
calibres in all stages of manufacture, from the small but useful 18 pdr Q.F.
to the huge 15 in. naval gun, one of which latter, belonging to the Queen
Elizabeth, was being fitted with a new A tube. A comprehensive description
would violate the censorship laws, but what I saw convinced me more than
ever that there is a particularly warm and lurid time ahead for our "friand"
the Hon.
WANTED
An easy chair: apply Sir. G.
Bleach NQ. 4 Y.M.C.A.
•i * »
3ome Kiwi. Lieut. Mayes for 107 th
harness room.
» •» «
Drivers with long finger nails as
ring-worm attendants, vice Gillon,
Dunn and Klnkead resigied.
« » *
The cove who changed the rusty
legiron.- Driver Shand (2Sth).
» « »
A rope ladder to nouit chargers
with. Tptr. Brown (107 th).
(Bdr. Mumford provides for small men
in 25th by leaving steps and stairs
when clipping horses).
# « *
Another good time at Hampstead.-
Driver Dalton (25th).
«• » •»
Correspondence recorder, to comm-
ence duties from No. 55 letter.
Sgt. Maj . Shelly-Jones.
» » »
LOST
Eull-dog mascot. "Dragropes"
offered as a reward.
Tables. Apply Orderly rooms and
huts.
The art of perspiring.
* •» *
A kit bag: last seen stowed in
Bdr. Barnard's NO. 12s. Return
to No. 10 hut.
MULE ADVICE
(a) Safety first; always groom with
a "broom.
("b) When selecting mules always
.plok fat ones; they must be quiet
or they would not be fed,
(c) If a mule gets you under the
manger, stay there.
(dj then ploklng hoofs hold up all
legs fore end aft, as a mule can
stand on one leg and kick with three.
INSTRUCTIONAL CLASSES
The following will take place
during the week: »
(1) How to Tell a Gelding - Bdr.
Grose (26th).
(2) Stetsons and their uses.
Gnr. Robinson (H.Q.).
(3) Hints on Stable Duties.-
Gnr. Savnders (27th).
(4) A Malt Lecture - Gnr. Reece
(H.Q.).
(5) The Art of Climbing Poles
and Derricks.- Edr. Doughty (H.Q.)
(6) Judging Spurs. - Bdr. Philp.
(7) Laws of Signalling.- Gnr.
Tulley (H.Q.).
(8) How to Form Detachment Rear
in Front of Horses.- Sgt. Chegwyn "
(25th).
(9) Colors of Horses Including
"dark blues", cerises, heliotrope,
mauves, amber, end dapple blacks.
Sgt. Kille (26th).
(10) How to guard polished bits.
Cpl. Shiels (26th).


A SAD SIGNALLING STORY
The signallers met their Waterloo,
on Friday the 6th. inst. leaving the
27th Bty. to retain their usual
composure. The remaining Brigade
"Sigs" have lost their elastic step
now console themselves by
neaping endearments upon their Hos.l.
The scene of disaster was the
telephone post. TheNSs.l of each
team had to run from the starting
base to a telephone post from which
a line had been run to No. 2 Base,
climb same, connect up their tele-
phone and speak a message to the
operator at No, 2 Base. The message
was to be transmitted by means
of flag, disc, and buzzer around in
a circle and back to the starting
point by the other 8 sigiallers of
each team.
Salisbury Plains fulfilled its
reputation with respect to the
weather, the day being cold and bleak
with a strong wind and a fine soaking
drizzle.
The 25th Bty. set the ball rolling.
Their No. 1 skied all obstacles en
route and soared up the post most
successfully but there the message
stopped, arrested by a medley of line
and earth terminals, receivers , trans-
mitters and the confusion of Schey.
The 27th Bty.followed and sxxcceeded
in transmitting their message success-
fully with a steady swing. Telephone
poles were nothing to them.
Hdqrs. Staff came next. They were
optimists then« Their No.l arrived
safeky at the telephone post, gazed at
it and said "Bother". He fixed the
climbing irons on and commenced his
ascent. Half way up he hesitated and
the old proverb scoted once more, and
Dinkum Dot Dash Doughty was Doubly
damned.
Fate followed the 26th No. 1. He was
safely seated up aloft and had made a
start but that gentle wind took 'charge
of the cherished message and Gnr.
Noakes descended with a Hunnish Strafe
in. his bosom.
After the 107 th No. 1 trying hard to
commit suicide with the assistance of
a surcingle on top of the post their
considerate N .C.O. ordered Gnr,
Woodward to earth after hanging aloft
for 40 minutes.
The 27th Bty. won and the boys join
me in "Three hearty cheers". They
were v<eli earned.
The remaining yeans now make life
one joyous dream for their N°s. 1. The
Nos. 2/9, inclusive of the respective
teams stuck to their posts like true
soldiers, straining every nerve to read
correctly the message that never came.
After many anxious minutes of waiting
word slowly filtered along the line and
flags, discs, and buzzers signalled
"WE ARE DISQUALIFIED."
BY. P.R.
THR ftmWKR
It's great to "be a soldier,
And "battle for your King;
To sacrifice your billet,
And give up everything.
Young Reggie Jones, the Bank Clerk,
Was gay and debonair;
® knut of high society
And asked out everywhere.
He spent his nights at dances,;
He'd lovely girls galope,
Until his notice drifted
Towards the "awful war".
One morn the notion seized him
T& join the A.H.A»;
He's now a bright young gunner,
"Fatiguing all the day,"
His mates have gone and fallen
Out there in No Man ' s Land*;
And Reggie's blood is boiling-
Hefd die - you understand.
Bell, Reggie is a gunner;
A layer too I'm told-
He lays the Sergeants' table
Just like a steward bold.
Some days he's on the stables.
An aromatic stunt;
With barrow, broom and shovel
His mates join in the hunt.
By little bits of smooging,
which no oneerer knows.
The Sergeant kindly puts him
Among the "R.M.O's."
And then the Sergeant Major,
Who knew his father dear -
Details him for a sentry
In Gun Park cold and drear.
Then goes he forth to barber -
The spuds and wash the dishes
Until he sends the Army
To with all good wishrs.
*
He spends his hours of "leisure" 1
In. calling hut-mates "coots";
IN cleaning up his leggings,
Or shining up his boots.
His only joys' are reading
The letters got from home,
Until the weary gunner
Regrets he learnt to roam.
So Reggie serves his country
And serves the Empire too,
By waiting on the Sergeants
or serving out the "stoo".
>"
It's great to be a soldier.
To battle for yoxxr King,
To sacrifice your billet
And give up everything,
* - S.W. HODGE-


•SO«KE»PAPOGRAPHS
V<hy did Gnr. Mudkins object?
» » #
Behold! Gome Sgts. work. Sgt.
Mounter (25th) was seen manipul-
ating the broom.
it * it
Heard in 27th lines,- "(kir.
Burgess D you, don't call me
Mac... Sgt. JBajor please".
it it it
"Tack" is short for Gnr. Nail
(26th).
it it it
Who switched the live wire to
the "nice bright bit" in A sub
(251J0) harness room.
ft a *
Gnr. Gates (27th),- "If I don't
get the S.M's job I want to be
A.D.C. to Mills'."
it it «
To clear up a mystery the horse
that has "gone west" devoured ten
bags of oats.
« it it
Its a long way to Comb Downs
(Bath) as Gnr. Astill knows. He
found his bandolier though.
it it it
Routine Order No. 1.- Sgt. Gill
Privilege (107 th) is this day
granted permission to
use climbing irons to
mount with.
it it it
Dvr. Tyrell (26th) to his N0.1,-
"We needn't put on dungarees if we
have not got them".
* it *
Somewhere in Australia
Midnight: Awake Jack? Awake ...
yes - me and the mosquitos are!!!
Why don't they civilise the pests
here !!! Gorblimy its 'ot. Why
did I leave old Ehgland - they've
got the climate sensible there!!!!
Somewhere in Lark-hill
6a.m. "By cripes Bill, its blanky
cold! That the reveille? I've
beer, playing the bones since about
4am." "Come on Joe, the quarter
call's gone". "Orlright Bill, wait
till 1 get my boots on. Cripes this
here Pommyland will be the death of
me. D the Kaiser: they ought
to put him here instead of on St.
Helena. Instead of fighting for
a confounded, cold, clammy, cow of
a country like this they ought to
give it to the Germens"! !
it it a
Who are the two brothers of 7th
who won' t wear striped sox or chew
chewing gum, even if it hails from
the-.Brigade Comforts Fend?
» * )f
Gnr. Living (27th) has been app-
ointed to the Captaincy of the sail-
ing ship "Robert E. Lee" of Todn-
gabbie. It ia »t present in dock
in C <3ub".
That Bdr. Smyth (25th) would make a
better butcher than a hair-cutter.
(Poor Ramage).
* *
That Sgt. Douglas (27th) does not see
why he cannot lay out aiming costs
without the aid of the rocking-bar
sight, and Irrespective of the position
of the gun.
«• »
That Gnr. Kay (26th) can tell by feel-
ing a hard wall.
# n it
That the reason why Bdr. Stadford didn't
hurdle was because he wasn't too sure of
his steed. Let us giggle,
* * »
That Gnr. Howell (ex 25th cook) is not
a somnambulist - he wanted to be up in
time for early parade.
J '- o o
That Gnr. Pearce (26th) will shortly
be transferred to the Post Office Branch
of No. 4 Y.M.C.A.
» ff
That Battery Specialists are, as a body
excellent horsemen. The office boy
says "Clothes horses or rocking horses".
» * «
That soae of our Officers did not vote.
Y ?
* « »
That Sadler Sgt. Tebay (26th) is no*
a gipsy fortune-teller although Gen.
•Bronker crossed his hand with silver.
* it *
That Bdr. Capel (107 th) did not know
enough for the horse the Q.M. found.
* * it
That according to Bdr. Durning (26th)
by cooeeing through the keyhole is the
quickest and surest way of calling a.
policeman.
it it
That Bdr. Barton (25th) can't work
without warming his hands at the forge.'
He is blessed with a natural propensity
for work. '
* * *
That Ack I Bdr. Johnson (107 th) told
the sigiallers that they were all worse
than one another. If the worst of the
worst were getting worse and worse
matters would be worse.
That while on horse parade Dvr. Jock
Miller (25th) proved himself no muddy
swimmer.
That Gnr. Col. Harsh (26th) starts his
letters with "My Dear Little Girlie".
* it *
That Q.M.S. Herbert (107 th) did not
steal the horse. That is the question.
i'- it it
That Gnrs, Creach, Anderson and T.
Pogson were mushroom experts. Certain-
ly they did•look like them.
* it it
That Gnr. Case (27th) thinks "drown
tnem the best policy with regard to
measle germs.


/iHN tlMv\ TTj
I noKeytai I ! :<r -M
j
Three cheers for the philanthropists
of the 26th Bty. who formed the oats
crushing Brigade.
Ohi eet To crush oats for horses Be-
fore reveille end after tea.
HOW QNR.
SEDERS J£-
(2STH) yA
RECEIVED AT IcV W
HIS 2ND "£ 4jA ■[ \
ISSUE OP >y> }\
DARDENELLE i|l?1 HA \
PUMPS. V 7 --' \h
Qualification for Membership An
tr.tidy kit.
Members and Conveners
dir. Noakes dir. Bleach H.B.
" Bulfin " McDonald
" Corbett " Foreman
" Goddard " Bates
" Astill " Whale
" Gentle Dvr. Deer
Tpr. Herbert
JF sopim
It is expected that Staff Sgt. Fitter
Astill's (26th) appointment will shortly
be confirmed.
r i t
A silver earth pin pendant is "being
pres)ented to Bdr. Abbott (107 th) as a
souvenir of the Si^iallers 1 Contest.
Owen Cadell (26th) has just re-
ceived a new pair of "breeks from his
tailor,
t i i
Sgt. Fitter Merritt will shortly "be
•changing his residence to a locality
with "better facilities for sleeping in.
i i i
Learning from Cpl. Andie Kerr that
horses were supplied to Corporals in the
B.AkC., the public was surprised to see
him riding past the stables on on issue
ntulc.
i t«
tSar. Rod. Tieman (25th) is now a
proud end happy pater families.
Photo expected by next mall.
11 t
Sgt. Major Curran' s address while in
London Is,- third floor, ri orf old Hotel.
.Attendants are snice.
I t I
Sgt. Wilson (DA) expects his visit
to "Edinburg" will eventuate before the
termination of the war.
t « I
Gossip in the Gunpark predicts that v
Limber Gunner Bill Uther (26th) aspires
±o the position of Batman.
Y/N DOO ROUGH RIDERS CONTEST
In last issue Lieut. Watt & Cpl.
Viynter were leading with 4 points
each. The scores now are.-
Sgt. Richards (25th) 2 f 6 pts
Capt. Campbell, f 4 drag 5
Q.M.S. Lark (27th) t and
* twirl in air 4
Cpl. Stitt (107 th) f 3
Capt. Samson f 3
Gnr. Skelton (HQ) f 3
a/s.Maj. McCulloch f 3
Sgt. Houiter (25th) f 3
! Sgt. Sheedy (25th) f 3
Bdr. Drury (25th) f 3
Bdr. Barton (25th) f 3
Sgt. Willcock (25th) t 2
Cpl. Cherrie (25th) t 2
Lieut. Rourke s 1
dir. Allford (HQ) 50x drag 1
(Additional names should be handed
in to The Management).
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
dir. Frank Jones (25th).- When cn
fatigue duty you should hand any-
thing you find in to the orderly
room.
» » *
Farrier Sgt. Arnold (26th) says,-
"'"Your statement re two species of
shamrock is grossly misleading; I
ought to know as my wife came from
Ireland". We are still unconvinced
' « » »
Sgt. Buckle (HQ),- You Cmi lead a
horse to tucker, but you cannot make
him eat. Try an "epidemic".
9 »
Gnr. Jacques (HQ).- Greasy heels
in human beings is rare, but from
your description, you appear to have
the complaint. In our opinion you
|win the bet.
9 9 9
"Lamps",- Gnr. Brom. Windon is
jnot trying to do you out of you.-
j job.
The breaking of the. OA.ts-rcrushar-
handle was purely an accident????
9 iV »
Did Gnr. Bill Wilson (£6th) find
the half crown?
* » »
The drought has broken at Larkbill


7 / - CMG/srmS - />A£$cA.'T/
<"W ■•?*•_* •
»«a , s'r&^isr&isr^
v CJv. I, TRQOPSPIP ISGyp. As frequent inquiry has been made for further
Ir^
tor.Sparks; 107 th! tor! Cody! Harding; 26th Bdr. Rohu; 27th
rmwk!fii S , P !? ltad S Ut f ? r S®"® 1 " 111 information that orders for Yandoo
'"li t ? of any description should be handed in to the above so as to
!!!!!!!.!!;!!! P !^^?l!:._.^ lp To^su P plies will only cover the number orderdd.
THidY SAY that Bdr. Griffith can THBY CAY - That c £7t »/«*,-»*. An "777
SS.-S; ems
„ ft . , , T **" STOP PRESS :hh>
r° mm b.vo y ? fflo ® rs nominated by General Jobson) from 9th Brigade
Group, have been received for Yandoo Rough Riders Contest. srigade
oIAThiMSNT OF ACCOUNTS - 7TH F.A.B. YANDOO
receipts ! „ ,
Troopship Issues £4s= 13:9 0^1^61.0. £21;ll:6
m arrival". S g ; o. 3 To Typewriter 9:10:0
" Camp Issues 13:' 14:*0 » Voting .130: 11: 5
' Booklet 163: 9:8 * d ° t P !£" t 8:19:5
0:0 A* etl:° art - 5: 1: 7
standing for ■ supplies paper 4_:;L0:1£ 158:13:3
cairn issue... 3: 6:o
o donations
18i: 3: 8 Gymkhana Prize Fund 10-0- n
Brigade Gl&e Club 5:0:0
Recreation Room Equipment 5:0: 0
Bank Balance 20:12-8 T178.13. 3
£503:11:11 C&Sh * hand 6: 2 £4:18:8
t - a - j- pl atfair,c ca t. £ sa3mui
Larkhi BDR - ROHU * HARDING 26TH BATTERY.
31st OCTOBER 1915


Winchester.
Enjoying the hospitality of " Hinton House " and
a "return" to the "love 40" and "deuce."
Amesbury. The Village Pump.
A scheme recommended to Sydney Water Hoard to
prevent waste.
Durrington (near I.arkhill).
"God made the country and man made the town."
—Cowpcr.


■ " 'f
1
■» '5»~£4e : *•««• 'Ju •** * \ -y •*»*■ '
Winchester.
Itchen River. A Trout Fisher's Heaven.
Some of the boys failed to recognise "a cove in old
fishing clobber" as Sir Edward Grey.
= j
Figheldean.
The place where Christopher Columbus (?) wrote
" The Village Blacksmith."
L M m
&■■■■» . t . :J|
Stonehenge (1700=1800 B.C.).
.4 mile from Larkhill Camp.
" Pebbles" which took some juggling". It is incredible
that these stones were carried by one man.
" Under a spreading
chestnut tree
The village smithy
stands;
The smith,, a mighty
man is he,
With large and
sinewy hands;
And the muscles of
his brawny arms
Are strong as iron
bands."
—T ennvson.


THE CONSCRIPTIION REFERENDUM
Australia is now at a critical stage of her national life. The
conscription turmoil has shaken, the fibres of the Commonwealth from the
"Gulf Country" to Gippsland, "She Speck", and across the "Never Never" to
the Western State. The momentous question is about to change the whole
aspect of Australian politics, and who knows what the future may bring
forth? Certainly politioal parties had reached a dead-lock, and the des-
irability of a party of a broad national character to Intercept the futile
"Redre.g-Bloated Capitalistic" wrangle, has long been felt. The Consorlpt-
lcn disagreement will be the clarifying factor.
Australia, like other parts of the Empire, is fighting for her
existence. Those who knew, pronounced the voluntary system of recruiting
inadequate. The majority of those to whom patriotism and honor appeals,
are already doing their share; the minority are covered by the liberal
exemption clauses in the Conscription Bill. Others, eligible soldiers,
are among the agitators in the present disgraceful coal strikes, and in the
cro7/ds which assemble at any spectacular functions in the vicinity of the
city.
Probably, the most potent argument against Conscription, is that
Australia has sent her quota of troops, and the remaining men are required
at home to back up the army, and assist in the .sustenance of the Empire
by primary production. A logical contention, ond one not lost sight of
when framing the Conscription Bill.
German newspapers, of course, make mi.oh of the Australian Refer-
endum figures. They acclaim an indication of the disintegration of the
Empire. Therein they err. The difference of opinion lies solely in the
mBthod of procedure, Australia- being as determined as ever to solidly
support the Mother"x 9 the utmost: the determination always has been that
the drafts of troops are to continue, and Conscription was put forward as
the fairest and most business-like proposition.
Anti-Conscription leads with 1,102,227 against 1,033,753. With
Conscription discarded - which seems a likely contingency - the task before
Australia to keep up her forces at the front is a tremendous one. The
alternative process of stimulating the national morale so that eligible
men will fully realise what Australia and the Empire have at stake, is long
and difficult, but in the circumstances it is one that must be tackled at
once, and tackled forcefully, in order to maintain the honor of Australia
an da secure the safety of the Empire.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
£. Sgt. Walters 107 th- She sells
peanuts and soft drinks from the
basket over near Stonehenge on fine
days.
» o P
Dvr. Andrews 2Sth,- It is a con-
scientious objection. i'cu should
not he asked to sleep with measle
ccntaots on horse picquat.
Dr. Lyster 25 th,- scbf^y, you're wrong.
A hogget is not a young pig.
■a » '■
Infantryman,- Bdr. Duming is not a
Staff Sgt. Fitter.
Legal, - Case Hiatt v J iiwmythe Rat has
not yet been heard.
Ess? @° a-
• 59i® v


THE 7TH IN A DIVISIONAL TRY-OUT
About'9am on Monday sth Nov., several bodies of mounted troops
were riding across the plain past the Infantry Camp at Rollestone, towards
ye olde Bustard Inn. The weather was fine, and horses hoofs beat softly
on the verdant carpet of the plain. Here and there were woods, their
varied and beautiful tinges betokening the approaching winter. The assemb-
ly was adjacent to a clump of timber (which the boys have now learned to
call a wood) from whence a mass of field telephone wires ran out in all
directions. This was the Brigade Head Quarters, and the Officers with the
Battery Staffs were out to test communications for the stunt on the follow-
ing day. 25th, 26th, 27th and 107 th Batteries each had wires leading tc
their Battery positions and observing posts, at the various locations on
the plain. A few curt instructions from, the C .0.»( Colonel Macartneyl, and
parties dispersed In all directions. Soon the buz of the telephone and
"How do you get me?" coming over the wire, Indicated that the 'phones had,
been connected at the distant terminals.
The following morning, after the horrors of a 3:30 reveille,
snlosti, splosh, in the darkness went horses with lowered heads, their rider:
and the men on the guns, vainly endeavouring to shelter their faces from
the sting of the cold and driving rain, and from flying lumps of wet
Hhgland. The drought of the previous morning had only lasted a few hours.
Following the 26th Battery Staff was the Chinese Gardiners' Cart, with a
load of ,r leeks" - 8 dripping runners, muscular messengers, Mercuries of
the military. About Bam (just after daybreak) when the guns came up,
communications had already been tried, and calculations completed for open-
ing fire. The scheme was for the Infantry to attack the enemy trenches
(distant not many yards from our own) and at precise prearranged times, they
were to be assisted by barrages of artillery fire. Engineers, Flying Corps
Trench Mortars and A.lif.C. all cooperating. At 9:45 am, artillery opened
fire. 10:00 (zero time) a mine in enemy territory was exploded, the crater
of which becoming part of the infantry's object ive. The artillery commenced
the first barrage, or curtain of fire, at. 10:1, and this was kept up for 5".
The second barrage commenced at 10:4, continuing until the Infantry had
taken, and were entrenched in the crate: of the mine. The taking of the
•crater proved a difficult task,for the Infantry had to call upon the Art-
illery for extra fire by means of the SOS signal, distinguished by the
■disch.arge of a rocket. The experience produced a clear comprehension of
the obvious necessity for absolute accuracy in the control of firs,
and to the onlooker was a very vivid picture of what actual trench warfare
is like, more particularly in regard to the Infantry; for after having
taken the crater they had to dig" themselves in, and this, even with the
shovel i's no light task In the hard chalky substance. nevertheless, with
the entrenching tools they appeared to make light work of it, and soon vises
properly entrenched in the crater.
At 12:30 pm the order came to cease firing. The "heads" sought
the motor cars ranged in goodly numbers at the side of the road. Gunners,
Drivers, Signallers etc., tired cold and wet showed no reluctance to leave
and soon horses were brought up, teams hocked in, and Batteries en
to Larkhill.
IN SOCTi-'TY
<3.M.S. King (25th) has secured the
agency for the War Cry.
» ft
The latest a la mode, Gnr. Geo.
Bleach's new hat, l/9d per —.
ot
Sgt. Atkinson (107 th) will visit
"his flat at Woolwich shortly.
r. ft
S. Smith John Bulfin has returned
from Ireland. We leam that he
Spent the extra day looking for
shamrocks.
« ft
Lieut. R. Allworth has taken his
tin of "boot polish to the 23rd Bde.
The friends of Gnr. Bill Cody (107 th)
will "be gratified to know that he
has recovered from the tonsilitis
contracted in the peat factories in
Ireland." T
iLieut. Baraciough has left with pleas-
} and reminiscences of his association
witn Gnr. Alf Manning (25th).
Cpl. Stokes Hughes (25th) with war
time economy, sewed on his own color
patches (evidently.
ft ft ft
Gr.r. Campbell "Whale (26th) was sur-
prised and gratified on the recovery
of his money belt.
IGnr. Percy Hodge (2Eth) is not suffer-
ing from ptomaine poisoning, although
the wagon ran over his toe.
|Gnr. Cather has ceased to "cather" for
ithe Officers , and now overlooks the
Iprovender of the 27th.
ft ft »
jLieut. Shelly-Jones was seen making
traeks for 9th Brigade.


THE DRIVER
It's great to be a driver
At sever, bob a day;
A gunner for a batman
To flunkey and obey.
My name is William Wattle
1 hail from N arromine .
I'm now a blooming driver
With lots of steel to shine.
'Twas hard for blokes to get in
The seventh A.F.A.,
But influence obtaining
I got in right away.
Of oourse I joined the drivers;
Such work a squatter suits:
A gentleman of leisure
And pastoral pursuits.
'f » ff
Board ship we stencilled harness
Heard lectures on the horse
And "Texas" Paul most kindly
lave me a private course.
*t a ft
i. at days I cart manure
With gunners on the van -
It's not a dainty billet
For an influential man.
» ft ft
We cadge all bits of clothing
Not wanted any more;
We pick up bits of bathbrick
That lie about the floor.
f* * ft
And so I rub and polish
Until my spirits wane.
I'll never be a driver
When off to war again.
I'm often on the picket,
And raid ray harness sleep
With horse rugs for a pillow
While rats around me creep.
D- * 4 <.
One night I dreamt of homesteads;
Of gumtrees white and blue -
Of wild days in the township
Of sweethearts fond and true.
ft ft
And then I woke up startled;
My eyes began to weejj -
The rust was on my harness -
Two hours I'd been asleep!
ft ft- ft
And so at harness cleaning
My days and nights are pasted
My extra bob I'm earning
With gunners sleeping fast.
" ft ft
The gunner goes fatiguing
And envies us our pay;
But spare me from the harness
I'll swop him any day.
ft ft ft
One day I asked the Sergeant -
A decent sort of bloke -
Oh! V.hy not blacken steel-work.
The Sergeant never spcko.
'And so I'll serye the Smpiro
And work for right and good, '
By shining rusty steel-work
As any patriot should.
- S.W.H.
THEY SAY
That (Sirs. Dick Pountney and Kelynack
(2Sth) paid for their own dinner, and
not for the two girls they met inside.
That S.M. Willis (25th) got confused
with the reveille, and tried to get his
Battery up in the middle of the night.
That the cutlery in the Sgts. Mess was
made in Germany. What's this! someone
in the 7th trading with the enemy,
ff ft
That A sub (23th) is back to the darkest
depths. Who appropriated the lights?
That the four chestnuts of the 27th, the
two Hunters, Slade arid Callaghan, are the
tidy bunk experts. Who dares to doubt
it!
ft #
' itherto on 'erballst, 'ence the 'orrcrs
of 'arry 'icks 'ateful 'erh 'ablts.
ff- ft- f-
That Fragments-from-France Home is the
autocrat of the H.C). Mess table.
- ff- c-
That Dr. Frank Stagg (2oth) carried a
bag of manure a long way ond found it was
not what he thought it was.
« ft- •»
That rats by post is the latest fad in
the 107 th.
ff ff ff
That vaseline saved Dr. Bert Gillon (25th
from the necessity for having his meals
off the mantle piece.
ff ff ff
That the Officers' Mess Cart is unsuit-
able in daylight for Lieut. Jordan - at
night it's different.
■V- Vr
That Artificer Sgt, Gibson is afraid >cf
the guns patching ringworms if the/sick
horses are not shifted.
ff f ft
That Sgt. Fountain (26th) had a banquet
"with the flies" at 1 a.m.
ft f- ft
That the burning question is Gnr» &eof.
Clay's go'dam overcoat.
ff " ft
That Bdr. Allport (26th) took his mascot
towel with him.to the flying corps.
That another auction will be conducted
by Sgt. Thompson (D.A.) when he returns
from his next leave.
ff ff ff
That "Tiny" Greer (secundus) would like .
to meet "Tiny" Thompson in a scratch pull.
ff ff' «
That Sgt. Arnold will be the Hon. Seo. of
the dance to be given by the Sgts. shortly.
ff ff ff
That a new groom is wanted for "Dragropss™
vice Cnr. Faulkoner transferred.
That Gnr. Ted. Smith (26th) is no con-
jurer with plates.
That Bdr. Munro (107 th) is mothering
10 kittens.


J« 1 4 Bo ll M EXHIBITION' OF KESMERISH BY "*E
<r<*V c-H SGT- ARNOLD-ABLY ASSISTED AT , \ vd
THE PIANO BY HIS COLLEAGUE, St
0> MESMERISED ? SGT. BROWN ING.-
GLEE—EARTY'S CONCERT ITEM.
THE YANDCO MANAGEMENT,- BDR. RCHU & GNR. HARDING, 26th BATTERY
LARKHILL, SALISBURY PLAIN
GUiOA DM OF THE 26TH
Driver Stone now plays his part
On 26's water cart; *
Holds a badge of which he's proud
By this you'll know him from the
crowd.
Mile on mile, with smile on dial
Comrades chortle all the while
"Din Din Gunga Din".
There's no drought while he's about
Gunga Din.
When they halt along the road
With horses sweating the load
Drivers with their water bags,
To get a drink for thirsty nags
Go'to Gunga Gunga Din.
That's the time his jobcomes in -
Din Din Gunga Din.
Yell it out "Is Din about".
Gunga Din.
BREVITIES
Congratulations to our contemporary
The 9th Bde. DINKUM NEWS. Our aims are
one - Comradeship: Esprit de Corps,
we trust to see the oacer strongly
supported by the boys of the otj,.
* * *
Vie are in receipt of acknowledgements
of Yandoo Vol. 1 (Troopship Issue) from th<
Librarian to Hi 3 'Majesty the King, The
High Commissioner for Australia, and the
Curator of the British Museum.
:{■ ■?*
Overheard at the Canteen,- "Yes, poor old
Bill has got 'eccentric' fever."
ROUGH RIDERS CONTEST
. Last issue Sgt. Rlchardsr-held
I record (6 points), Capt. Campbell
, 2nd with 5. Present count,-
Capt. Campbell f 8
Qnr. Hall 2t If (fastest
time) 7
'Gnr. Windeyer 2f 6
Gnr. Holmes 2t 4
Gnr. O'Brien J . 2t 4
(Sir. Miller If 3
Gnr. Andersen B. If 3
Gnr. Gates If 3
&ir. Levington If 3
Sgt. Mo In tosh If 3
Dr. Glover If 3
Gnr. Fen ton If 3
Gnr. Gibbs If 3
I Dr. Ferris If 3
Gnr. Fowler If 3
Gnr. Veery If 3
Dr. Randall If 3
Dr. Stagg If ' 3
Sgt. Harrison If v 3
Lieut. Williams (T.Ktr)lf 3 ■
Sgt. Lawry If 3
Lieut. Raw It 2
Bdr. Smyth It 2
Ist Officer,- "What was that
rumbling, gurgling sound near
your quarters last night?"
2nd 0.,- "That was Lieut. Hill
. snoring."
» « »
It is noticed that the attend-
ance at M 0.4 y.M.C.A. has fallen
off since the notices about
lounging round the counter.
A constant visitor was seen with
the notices under his coat.


Ijpf ***" 'jt-lfff
Interned Huns near Larkhill.
"Nigger," smuggled on "Argyllshire" six
~ "y times at Sidney only to he pinched by mascot
lovers of another unit.
I
Vaccination—The Third Ordeal.
An operation with 44 taking " ways.


Drawing Water from the Avon at Upper Woodford,
remembered as the terminus of an eight=mile "foot
slog."
I he New " Hut" for the High Commissioner in the
Heart of London.
Three inches of Sncw at Larkhill, 19th November, 1916.
Stopping Snow=balls with the face was quite a feature of
the event.


MAIL DAY
°" B da y the soldier's life which stands out above all
pthers, one that he looks forward to with moeasing interest, and a little
anxiety. That day is nail day. It is, indeed, the soldier's Red Letter
V, "4 1 day forms a llnk wlth the loved land far away; it tells of
wattle blooming cn the creeks end ranges; tells of those things so dear to
Islimd CwJtinfn? ° Ur S and relations of the happenings in our
j„ + ~ - < , And \ t ?°' J eCfius ? of tha man y lon g weeks intervening between the
dates of despatch and receipt, letters are opened with a faint trace of anx-
?? news be? But, happily, most of the tidings are pleas-
ant end we feel relieved to think the old folks at home are sailing'along
-ta y 811 wlth ? ut disaster. They are, doubtless, distressed
at our absence, and our avocation, but they bravely incline in their letters
to bright and cheery things, and so, by their thoughtfulness, save us many
an acne•
<• V, r ® c ®ipt and holding out of the malls is a big job. As soon
as the heavily burdened post orderly appears in the lines, he is surrounded
by eager men who wait expectantly for their letters. If a man receives sev
more than four or five, every time he receives another, the fellows cheer '
and chaff him, but they tolerate a lot of chaff for a "big mail".
One mail day in particular, I remember. It had been a pleasant
autuim day, and the mail had been handed out after tea, at about 5 o'clock
We all immediately retired to the hut to read our letters. One fellow
laughed loudly at each paragraph of his many letters, and, in his loy, per-
sisted in reading portions out to his mates, but, of course, much to their
annoyance, and they did not hesitate to tell him to blanky well keep his
blanky letters to his blanky self. Eut generally a solemn hush fell over
the hut as the chaps, in the failing light, began to read. It was an occas-
ion too reverent, too Important, too precious to spoil with noise - they have
plenty of that at other tines. One n.on who, as a rule, spoke hut little
remarked, "Another doll down." "How's that Bill?" asked his neighbour. '
Wife writes to say she has gone and collected another baby bonus." That
night Bill was a bit rocky ir. his steps, as he came into the hut. "Been
wetting the young in' s "aid," he told us.
Dicky, a splendid and happy go lucky chap, let his solitary letter
arop to his bunk and then sauntered out of the hut whistling as usual. Latei
on he cane across and told me that his only sister was lying gravely ill*
even though it was dark, I saw the tears cloud his fine blue eyes. "Better
for me to go than her, he said in a musing, broken voice, as he strode away.
Another fellow, knov.n as "Darkle' did not receive any letters.
Me was a wild careless sort of chap, but everyone liked him. ""I will have
the joke on you coves", he laughed, "when it comes to answering them." But
he went outside and wandered down the lines while the stars came silently
into the sky. His eyes were not looking tb the stars - they were looking
into a pair of sweet gray eyes, out there in Australia, the fickle owner of
which had promised to write several times each mall. She had missed alto-
gether, the last three. '
Other letters told of the spring time out there now; of the warm
sunny days and the blossoms in the orchard; the bright gold of the beaches;
the call of the surf; the shearing in full swing, and wheat coming into ear
Oh', how great and how sacred are the little domestic doings, the happenings
ir. our homes and in our native land! There is nothing dearer to the sold-
ier's heart than news from home, and we all feel better able to, happily, go
through our somewhat monotonous days after rdading our mail and learning
that all is well with the dear old folks at. home. -• S W-H. (
K VQL\2- PAFT-TD-DTC-HASR


Found by the R.M.O. fatigue.-
"Dovecote", St. James' Park
Dear Old Bill,- London, 29th November 1916
, , 1 call 11 jolly hard luck that you could not getdown last Saturday.
It is now three week ends that you have been on duty. Do you not get even
off? Tfcy and manage it next week end, and your throat will surely
be bad enough for you to make a stay of several days. Mother knows a
doctor who will give you a certificate. Try the best of your good tales if
you have not used them all up.
It is too bad your having to fall In at 6:15 am instead of 6:30
I think 7 o'clock would be early enough in winter. Do you really groom the
horses till almost 6 o'clock. However do you find time to read the patier
and have a shave.
I do think it was horrid of that officer to tell you to put the
switches on the guns in tans, saying that gunners are not sufficiently educ-
ated to do it any other way. But Bill, why do you carry all those switches -
your horses must be terribly lazy? Since you showed me the guns in the
rower of London I have become quite a connoisseur of artillery. The single
barrelled guns are the old 15 ndrs and the double barrelled ones the 18 pdrs
am t they Bill? I remember the little pouch on the side of the gun in '
"hioh you told me the spare bubbles for the sight gasometers are kept.
I met Lieut. Woodphyte from your camp and he says that you must
have made a mistake when you said that gunners and drivers are Issued with
serviettes, and have flowers on the table. Do you know a tall man in the
Australian Forces? tVe met him at Atntie's place, and he was so interesting
tolling us all about his station right out on the plains East of Sydney.
.Ie told us his place is simply over-rui with green kangaroos which are flash-
eating and most fierce, being responsible for the almost complete extinction
of the A.ustralian aboriginal. They must be almost as grdat a pest as the
iadkeroo, which destroys the crops and packs the eyes out of the lambs.
I am just longing to see you again, Bill, so do get sick or
something and come up.
Your loving Julie.
SNOW
Three inches of snow clothed
the whole landscape round Lark-
hlll in dazzling whiteness on
Sunday 19th November 1916.
Bombardments took plaoe all
over the camp, and round every
comer lurked some desperate
miscreant, his arms full of
missiles.
A statue of one of the off-
icers was a good likeness, but
one intended for a charger
(English for horse) with tall
erect, was more like a battered
tin kettle with spout intact.
■ Snow is pretty, it affords
sport; it. is novel and delight-
ful - but it thaws. Slush is
neither pretty nor delightful ,
certainly is not novel to Larkhill
there is no sun to dry it, but
freezing, we sadly soliliquize,
is an excellent solidifying sub
stitute.
Snow is a climatio custom in
England which won't change even
though good soldiers happen to
hail from sur.ny Australia.
APOLOGY~Gnr. ~Ast 111 ~(~26th 1 "did
not leave his bandolier at Comb
Downs - it was Upsyde Downs.
The Q.M. Store of 27th is in
eharga of Dick Whittington-
Lark and nis cat.
-»(• * -;'r
Why did Pte. Chidgey's lady cry?
To perpetuate the memory of the Lamp Att-
endant and growling champion of the"Ar-
gyllshire" ILamps), a new order has been
introduced, and honors will be conferred
on deserving members of the 7th on nom-
ination by a majority vote of a Sub-Seo-
tion. For this pumose the Officers &
Hd. Qrs. may be considered Sub-Sections.
Appointment will entitle the holder
to "Lamps" hyphenated and prefixed thus
GNR. REGINALD LAMPS-DE JCSLYN . Recip-
ients of these honors will be duly elect
ed by the singing ofour founder's favour
lte anthem (wording must not be corrupte
"Growling, growling, growling.
Always jolly well growling.
When you're dead and in you're grave
You'll jolly well growl no more."
Prompt advice of appointments should be
sent to this paper for publication ir
next issue.
Any member may surrender the title if
agreed by a vote of the Sub-section
and the vacancy filled at a bye-election
IK SOCIETY
Bdr. Hisbett 1 s (£7th) figure shows
to advantage In his new warmer.
n it
Lieut. Ferris is not a somnambulist.
He walked the floor because the stove had
a cold.
'f it it
No. 74 letter has arrived. Lieut.
Shelly-Jones' promotion has not cur-
tailed his correspondence.
>t *
Capt. -hlcken (Argyllshire) wishes to
be remembered to the boys.


mo SAID
That fitter Sgt. Gibson (25th)
found a horse would not lead out
of the stable when girthed up to
The dividing bar.
it it it
That stripes come and go in one
night in the 107 th. Who is the
kleptoman lac?
it *t it
That Bdr. Cliff King (26th)
would have tipped the waiter at
Bath only for . Wait until he
gets pountney.
That Bdr. Burton (107 th) would
have caught the hare, only it was
done on the irvpulse of the moment.
it
That "papaillasses" mentioned in
routine order No. 230 means por-
poises .
tt it it
That Gr.r. Ron. Jaoobson (25th)
would be a good man on R.M.C. Gnr.
Hewitson knows he wouldn't.
it it 't
That Gnr. Frank Johes (25th) Is
a bom leader of men - so his
correspondent writes.
* it "• J
That our C.O. Lieut. Col. hacartne.v
will have to near his great eoat
beck to front so that the oolor
patches will be on right.
t » it
That Dvr. Stan. Knight (2Sth)
did the drunk for his tobacco
pouch.
That the shell with which Lieut.
Ven-Brown nearly hit General
Crimwade was "unobserved?
■><• y.
That Capt. Patterson was rot
absent minded when he roardd
through the megaphone at the
telephonist 2 yards away.
AS SWERS~ TO' C ORRKSPQN D£N TS
Gnr. Cec. Thompson (H.Q.) . -
Yes it was Robt. Bruoet who wrote
The Village Blacksmith" and not
Sir Riohard Drake - the latter
was the Field Marshal who in-
vented submarines.
it P
"Cookie"Holt (2Sth),- It is
bad policy to parade for a favor
with patches of skin off your
fade.
~ r it
Gnr. Fred. Chapman (26th),- It
would be preferable to lace your
boots to save borrowing a shovel
to dig them out of the mud.
it 'i it
Gnr. Cameron (27th),- As the Sgt.
did not. go away the money you
collected could be given to re-
turned (from leave) soldiers.
TKKY SAY
That Cpl. Geo. Russell (26th) will
explain what are the meanings of T.0.1.L.
and F. A. F. F. H. and' S.W.A.L.K. on
the back of his letters.
it it it
That Bdr. Drury wanted to motor from
Amesbury to the camp, but could not
get off the platform as Showerman
Ohlson had his tioket and wanted to
walk. The argument lasted during the
3 miles "pad"& continued in hut.
it it it
That a Gunner telegraphed from London
"Dear Captain, can I possibly get an
1 extra day's leave", and even then it
did not work.
i*. it it
That Cpl. Bill Kinds £A.K.C.) would
not be like "them pommy coves, squeak
and say nothing."
it « it
That Dvr. Jim French's (26th) appeal-
ing look and pitiful tale about fight-
ing for him was lost on the ticket
collector.
r it it
That the value of Major Nicholls'
autograph has increased considerably
sinoe his visit to the Bustard Inn.
"SOMME" PARS.
Shoeing Smith Jack Bulfln's scale of
charges,- 1 hair-cut = 1 centeen mug -
full. After 10 hair cuts business
closes.
it it it
Jim of the Canteen stayed in Wooloo-
mooloo for 3 nights and yet he says
Southampton Hbr. can hold-more boats
than Sydney Hbr. He probably had some
Southampton mud in his eyes. He ought
to know that the biggest river in the
world (the Parramatta) flows into our
Harbour. it *- it
"Who is this Bill Richards?"
"Why he's the chap who is taking > er
ther-3rd Dlv., can clip 3 horses a day,
takes the Bty. Staff out, is an author-
ity on ir.Jiall, mulga and niggers, and is
the general factotum'of the 107 th. He's
the cove who wears the pipe in his mouth-
it >t it
Why did Dvr. Roy Payne (107 th) say he
couldn't ride a bike? - Because he did
not think he would have to pad the hoof.
Capt. Samson has been officially
appointed reporter to The Yandoo at
firing practices on account of his ex-
perience in observing (measles).
it JJ. y.
Gnr. Living (27th) and Bdr. Munro
(lu7th) push pens better than bikes which
accounts for their being first home from
the Winterbourne Stoke route, march.
it it
Since orders anent short hair end the
specifications of moustaches, the barter-
ing trado has revived, and amateurs clip
men when they are not doing horses.


6 ///*ws/^A
t/l/A&%£- ' 9-JeAvc. YOU THE.
/1 I M "®1 ro r/«f '
//'/v/A rr*%j thatshot?
I III' M- , MJ OXBEKSf j
II M\ ) H J, 0 * O£ £s/ /
h 111II' l/rK w fUiOGneGS '.J
■ 'iHsi'L
If /.
i f i y
ffL
: 11/ ir r |k>
ji/ * \\v«
[•" / Yl
«S"£A/;
&!/<3AD£5 F/A/N& 7S3T.
-to. 2 Vol. closes with this issue. it
will consist of 52 pages (against 36 in Vo
1) and contain photographs of the whole
Brigade, of Camp Life, Sports, Scenery etc
48 photographs in all, in addition to the :
productions of the 6 Ehglish Issues of The
Yandoo paper.
Those desiring booklets will please han<
their orders to the following battery rep-
resentatives not later than eth instant,-
H.C.., Cpl. Patrick; 25th, Gnr. Harding; 26;
Bdr. Ilohu: 27th Gnr. Sparks; 107 th Gnr. Cot
k SYNCHRONIZING EPISODF.
Jrigade manoeuvres, Head Qrs. Signal Stal
icn.
COLON EL,- "Put me through to all'Batterles,
(OPERATOR,- "You're through sir."
COL.,- "Are you there, 25th - 26th - 27th ■
107 th T"
All answer "Yes".
COL.,- "Synchronize your watches."
Pause of 30 sees, at Battery terminals.
COL.,- "Are you there ???"
25TH (timid voice) "What did you say sir?"
26TH (undertone) "This 'phone's blanky bad,
COL. ,-"Synchronize - s-y-n-o-h-r-o-n-i-z-e.
"Are you there?".
27TH (Brain wave) "I haven't got a watch si
»ssth, 26th, 27th, 107 th babel let loose.
COL.,- 25th, 26th, 27th andlo7th: tell your
officers I want to speak to them."
Telephonists retire and despite the temper-
ature being somewhere below zero, there is
sweat upon their honest brows. - P.R.
CONCERT
The 7th F.A.B. Sports Committee held a
Concert at which the C.R.A., General Grim-
wade presented the prizes won at the Gym-
khana which were in the form of silver and
bronze medallions enclosed in velvet cases,
and deslgied by Gnr. Duckworth (26th).
The General, cn behalf of the Committee, al
presented Bdr. Rohu and Cnr. Pountney each
with a silver medallion for their efforts
in connexion with the Sports.
Musical items were rendered by the 7th
F.A.B. Glee Club, Sgt. Williams (9th F.Amb.
Sgt. Major Peyton, Sgt. Major Wheylan , Gnrs
Ross, Partridge, Cansdale and Goldacre.
. ROUGH RIDING CONTEST
Fall 3 points, Throw 2, Slide 1. Additional
scores follow. Sgt. Richards now leads
Capt. Campbell by 1 point only,-
Sgt. Richards (25th) f 9
Dvr. Stagg (26th) f 5
Dvr. C. J. Ross (26th) f 6
Major (i icholls (D.A.) fall misrepresented
as a slip 5
Lieut. Rourke f and loop-the-loop 5
Dvr. Avard (26th) f 3. not reporting it 4
Bdr. Capel (107 th) f 4 " ' " 4
Cpl. Dent (107 th) 2f 6
Tpr. Jones (27th) f 3
Dvr. Dale (2Sth) f 3
Gnr. Noakes (26th) f 3
Cpl. Peach (2Sth) f 3
Dvr. Hason (26th) f" 3
Gnr. Daker (25th) f 3
Sgt. Brindley (26th) f 3
Bdr,_Shiel4s_(26thl f 3
mim if in n-A >r ™ _T ~T .T" "T \
Gnr. Living (27th) f 3
S. S. Peacock (26th) f 3
Gnr. McKinncrv (H.Q.) f 3
, Gnr. Camp (27th) f 3
Capt. Samson, on his own ad-
mission, would have won, hut
scores of over a century are
not recorded. The championship
(12 points) lies between Sgt.
Richards (9), Capt. Campbell (8)
& Gnr. Hall (7) unless defeated
by an outsider.
For sigs. only,- (- .... „
llErpnksr


* , ** -M ,
. «■
■ .. '■
' • *f\ ■ ■... ' •'■ ' : A-
Physical "jerks" before the horses arrived.
Sports —The problems of a harnessing
up competition.
Jgpi&
n
..... jpfc : -*
£ "V
Sports—"Up the Pole" in a gale send
ing a phone message.
("See page 35.)


If W" •* * * >'
Near London: The Work of a Zep.. afterwards brought
down at Potters Bar, early in October, lfilfi. In room,
in centre of picture, one man was killed and another
severely injured.
A Captured German "Tin=Fish" on the Thames,
visited by the Boys while on leave.
4
Cowes—A typical Isle of Wight Residence, where the
first white man came from. This place was often
visited by our Boys from Winchester. Farehant and
Swanage.




