

THE
Life of Perouse,
AND HIS
Surprising Adventures
In a VOYAGE to the
SOUTH-SEAS.
Ebellished with a neat Frontispiece.
DINBURGH;
RINTED BY OLIVER &c. CO NETHERBOW.
1807.






LA PEROUS.
“Sh» £.a«»cL up,vtvtove c( .tr «W. fevr.*».-« f M~t« * lli* .
RtWirh ty CUnf IcC*.


THE
LIFE
OF THE
CELEBRATED NAVIGATOR
LA PEROUSE;
AND
Surprising Adventures
IN HIS
VOYAGE TO THE SOUTH SEAS.
EDINBURGH;
PRINTED BY OLIVER & CO. NETHERBOW.
1307.




THE
LIFE
OF THE
CELEBRATED NAVIGATOR
LA PER OUS.
When an individual, of superior genius and
enterprise, voluntarily devotes the prime of
his life to the service of mankind, we natu-
rally sympathise with him in every vicis-
situde ; and those Navigators who have con-
tributed to the extension of commerce, are
particularly entitled to our esteem.
Among these public benefactors, may just-
ly be ranked La Perouse, the subject of the
following Memoirs, which, while they exhi-
bit his progress from the earliest period of
life, down to the disastrous termination of
his voyage to the South Seas, in 1788, must,
from the variety of adventure they contain,
render his memory interesting to every feel-
ing mind, and lover of science,
2


John Frances Galoupe de la Perouse
was the son of a respectable merchant in Tou-
lon, where he was born on the 3d of May
1760. From his earliest years he manifested
a spirit of enterprise, and an inclination to go
to sea ; which induced his father to give him
such an education as might facilitate his ad-
vancement in tto navy.
Having studied navigation and nautical
tactics, under the best masters at the marine
school in Toulon, our hero, in his eighteenth
year, was entered a midshipman on board
La Belle Poule, a frigate of thirty-two guns.
In the year 1779, ves sel, in consequence
of the captain’s refusal to salute the British
flag, was attacked and captured by one of
our frigates, after an obstinate engagement,
in which La Perouse distinguished himself
by his activity and courage. He was brought
to England, and continued a prisoner of w r ar
for eighteen months ; during which, he made
a tolerable proficiency in the study of the
English language.
On an exchange of prisoners, he returned
to his native country, and entered on board
the Ville de Paris, the French admiral’s flag,
ship, in which he was again captured on the
memorable 12th of April 1782.
These vicissitudes, though they retarded
his promotion, yet they inured the mind of
La Perouse to adversity, and invigorated his


fortitude. At the conclusion of the war, he
was appointed captain of a trader to India,
bj a company of merchants ; and on his re-
turn, he was married, in 1784, to Leonora
Montmorcnci, the daughter of a rich banker
in Toulon. He received a large fortune with
his wife, whose beauty and accomplishments,
though of the first order, could not prevail
on her husband to relinquish his maritime
pursuits.
About this time the French government,
being desirous to enlarge the sphere of their
commerce, and make farther discoveries re-
specting natural history and geography, fitted
out two frigates, named the Boussole and
Astrolabe, and gave the command of them
to La Perouse, and M. de Clonard, who offi-
ciated as second captain.
Abundance of provisions and other neces-
saries were shipped on board these frigates *
and astronomers, botanists, and other scien-
tific men, were sent on this voyage of disco-
very. Accordingly, our hero, after bidding
an affectionate adieu to his wife and
set sail from Brest on the 1 st of August 1785/
Our hero, after having experienced a voy-
age of nearly three years, daring which pe-
riod he combated a variety of difficulties in
navigating his vessels in unknown seas, and
exploring many islands heretofore not disco-
vered.—-On the 17th of January 1788, the
3


frigates made the island of longatafcoo, so
accurately described by Cook. All inter-
course with the inhabitants of this place was
confined to a single visit. La Perouse re-
ceived a few refreshments from the Indians ;
and made some astronomical observations,
which tended to confirm Captain Cook s;
but all the provisions obtained were scarcely
adequate to the consumption of one week,
' hich induced our hero to proceed to Botany
Bay.
On the 24th of January 1788, the frigates
came in sight of an English fleet at anchor,
with their colours and pendants flying. Eu-
ropeans are all fellow-countrymen at such a
distance from home \ and the moment La Pe-
rouse’s ship entered the harbour, an English
lieutenant and a midshipman were sent on
board by Captain Hunter of the English
frigate Sirius, to offer him all the services in
their power. Ihose officers informed La
Perouse, that the fleet was commanded by
Commodore Phillips, who had arrived but
five days before, and was gone farther to the
northward, in the Spy sloop, to choose a
more convenient place for the settlement.
La Perouse then proceeded to the north-
ward, where he found a convenient harbour,
and received a supply of provisions from the
Indians, in exchange for toys, hatchets, &c.
On the 10th of February he again stood to


§ea, and steered for the Isle o£ France, where
he arrived on the 20th of March.
After taking on board a sufficient supply
of necessaries, our hero, according to his in-
structions, sailed from the Isle of France, to
make discoveries on the northern coast of
Japan. The weather was inconstant, but
generally stormy, and the frigates very leaky;
insomuch that the pumps were almost con-
stantly kept going. A very severe storm,
which had bandied them about for several
days, at length subsided into a perfect calm,
accompanied with fogs.
Several birds, which from time to time
alighted on the rigging, sufficiently indicated
that land was near ; but the fog was so impe-
netrably thick, as to preclude the possibility
of seeing the shore, even at the distance of
only hatyf a mile.
On sounding, the depth was found to be
only nine fathoms ; on which La Perouse
gave directions to cast anchor ; but before
this could be accomplished, both vessels struck
upon a ridge of rocks.
Consternation took possession of the sailors;
La Perouse, however, with a few of his offi-
cers and men, preserved their fortitude, and
launched the boats, into which provisions and
arms were thrown ; and as the ship was ex-
pected to go to pieces every moment, they


left her, and put off, in hopes of reaching
some hospitable shore.
All the crew and the passengers of both
ships now proceeded cautiously among the
breakers that appeared on each side ; but
alas I after several hours of fatigue in row-
ing, night surrounded them in this deplorable
situation; and the darkness was so intense,
that there were no other means left of elud-
ing danger, but in resting on their oars till
the return of morning.
When day-light appeared, the long-boat,
which contained La Perouse, with his first
lieutenant and ten men, only remained ; —all
the other boats had either been dashed to
pieces upon the rocks by the breakers, or
overwhelmed in whirlpools.
La Perouse looked around in vain for his
comrades ; —they were gone for ever !—He
called through a speaking trumpet, but no
friendly voice answered.
Meanwhile, the fog slowly dispersing, he
found himself within half a league of land.
Thither he steered, with the expectation that
some of the boats had reached it before him.
On his approach, however, he was convinced
that it must have been impossible for them
to live in the swelling surf which chafed the
bleak rocks of the shore. About noon, he
put into a small creek, and landed, together
with his mournful companions. They car


ried their arms and provisions ashore, and
found the place desolate and barren. After
searching in vain for any trace of human be-
ings, they were obliged to take shelter in a
cavern near the shore. Yet, even in this
wretched place, and secluded from the cheer-
ful haunts of men, the survivors consoled
each other with the hope that some ship
would appear off the coast, which they might
reach in their boat, and return to their native
country.
These natural but delusive hopes were
soon succeeded by another calamity. It was
now about the middle of May ; and one
morning, about sun-rise, La Per-ouse and his
companions were roused by the sound of se-
veral voices. They ran to their arms, and
prepared to act on the defensive, if necessary ;
but while- they were deliberating, an Indian
came in sight, who no sooner beheld them at
the entrance of the cavern, than he set up a
yell, similar to the North-American war-hoop.
Unwilling to be surrounded, La Perouse
led his men to the extremity of the defile ;
and on his arrival there, he beheld two hun-
dred Indians, armed with bows and arrows,
marching rapidly to the attack.
He made signs of peace and friendship, si-
milar to those he had formerly seen used by
the Japanese, on which the Indians halted,
and after viewing him and his little party.


one of their chiefs gave him to understand by-
signs, that he must lay down his arms. On
La Perouse’s refusal, he was assailed by a
shower of arrows ; which his party instantly
returned by a discharge of musquetry.—
conflict was dreadful ; but after acting with
all the energy that extremity could rouse
in brave minds, the French were over-
powered, and all killed, except our hero and
a seaman, whom the savages dragged away
prisoners, with yells of triumph.
La Perouse and his fellow-sufferer were
taken to 'the shore; where they found up-
wards of fifty canoes belonging to the Indians,
who immediately put to sea ; and after sail-
ing round a promontory, they came in sighs
of another island, where they landed about
sun-set.
Thus perished the unfortunate but brave
companions of La Perouse, while only himself
and another remained of all those enterprising
adventurers, who had braved every danger in
the pursuit of knowledge.
Our hero was wounded in several parts of
the body; his clothes were sprinkled with
blood ; and in this state he was dragged to a
large village, and exhibited to the barbarous
inhabitants. Nor was the situation of his
unfortunate companion better ; he also was
wounded, and ready to faint at every step,
through loss of blood.


The chief of the village and the women
viewed the prisoners with attention, but
without any appearance of pity, except a
young Indian female, who, from the moment
she beheld La Perouse, became interested in
his fate. This young woman was the chief
Indian’s daughter ; and, happily for our hero,
her influence over the mind of her father was
amlimited.
By the directions of the Indian chief, the
prisoners were bound to two trees, to be shot.
Ten young Indians were selected, and stood
with their bows bent, awaiting the signal of
death.
At this moment of suspence. Aura, the
daughter of the Indian chief, rushed forward,
threw herself on her knees before her father,
and interceded in favour of La Perouse. Her
request was reluctantly granted; and our
hero was unbound, at the very moment that
his less fortunate countryman was shot be-
fore his eyes.
La Perouse was led forward by his pre-
server, and her protection proved a safeguard
against any outrage. The Indians now con-
sidered the stranger as one of their own tribe ;
he was formally adopted, and entertained with
rice-bread and fish.
"I he island was called Miona ; and its fer-
tility formed a remarkable contrast with the
rocky and desolate isle where La Perouse had


landed after the shipwreck. The population
of Miona was about five thousand, including
women and children. The persons, manners,
and dress of the inhabitants, were similar to
those of the Chinese, excepting that a degree
of ferocity marked the character of the isl-
anders, in contradistinction to the gentle man-
ners of th& natives of the continent.
Their form of government was a kind of
aristocracy, with one supreme head. This
chief was the father of the female whose com-
passionate interference had saved the life of
our hero.
Aura was in the flower of youth ; her coun-
tenance was pleasing, her complexion olive,
and her stature was above the middle size 5
her dress was composed of fine ermine, and
ornamented with trinkets. Her demeanour
was majestic ; and she was not only the most
beautiful female in Miona, but her father’s
authority obtained her a particular degree of
respect from the whole tribe.
A young warrior, who had often distin-
guished himself against the tribes of other
islands, was the only man who aspired to the
hand of Aura ; nor was she averse to his
suit, till the appearance of La Perouse in
chains. From that moment, pity, admiration,
and love, took possession of her bosom in fa-
vour of the stranger ; and Verado, the Indian
warrior, was neglected.


As love is ever accompanied with a degree
of jealousy, which renders it vigilant and
quick-sighted, the discontented Verado soon
discovered an innocent rival in the person of
our hero, whom he now secretly doomed to
destruction. Meanwhile, by the tender at-
tention and care of Aura, the wounds which
La Perouse had received were gradually heal-
ed ; and as he began to understand the com-
mon phrases of the Indian language, he was
able to hold some conversation with his beau-
tiful preserver. He presented her his watch,
which she received with a look that sufficient-
ly evinced her affection ; but the mind of our
hero was too fully occupied with his misfor-
tunes, and grief at the idea of an eternal
separation from his country, his wife, and
friends, to permit him to meet the amorous
advances of the Indian.
Chagrined at his neglect, Aura resolved to
withdraw that protection, which had preserv-
ed him from the ferocity of the Indians since
his arrival amongst them. Accordingly, she
removed him from the comfortable hut where
she had ordered him to be accommodated, to
a most w'retched hovel, at the extremity of
the v ilr-je.
O
Disconsolate, forsaken, and alone. La Pe-
rouse did not find security even in this mi-
serable place; for the moment that the san-
guinary Verado heard of his disgrace, he flew
£


to the spot where our solitary adventurer sat,
and without the least notice, the savage pierced
him with an arrow, and left him weltering in
his blood.
In this deplorable state he was found by the
inhabitants of the adjacent cabin, who, touched
with compassion, applied a healing leaf to his
wound, and administered to him the milk of
a cocoa-nut.
When Aura was informed of this circum-
stance, her tenderness revived. She hastened
to the cabin where he lay, bathed him with
her tears, and attended him till his recovery
was no longer doubtful. . When his health
was re-established, Aura again pressed him
to become her husband ; \\ lien, apprehensive
of farther misery if he persisted in his re-
fusal, he yielded to necessity, and w'as mar-
ried to her according to the Oriental custom.
It might be concluded that he was now
perfectly safe ; but Aura, who well knew the
inexorable disposition of heir countrymen, re-
solved to remove, with her husband, to the
desolate island, where he had at first landed,
and where there would be less danger from
the enmity of Verado.
She obtained her father’s consent, who pro-
vided a canoe, well stored with provisions,
in which she and our hero embarked, and
were rov/edbyfour Indians to the very creek
where La Perouse had formerly landed.


They took possession of the cavern, which
*n a short time was rendered more commo-
dious. They were occasionally visited by
Aura’s father, who sent a regular supply of
provisions for their support; and gave orders
that they should not be molested. He also
commanded Verado, on pain of death, not to
land on the desolate isle; and with these pre-
cautions, our hero and his Indian wife lived
jn a state of tolerable security, and enjoyed
as much happiness as their secluded situation
would permit.
About a year after their marriage, Aura
was delivered of a son, whom she called Ori-
on, in honour of the sun ; but though the
birth of this child, in some degree, endeared
her to La Perouse, yet the recollection of his
happiness in the refined society of his former
spouse, excited the most unpleasant emo-
tions.
Let the reader for a moment contemplate
the hopeless situation of our hero. Detached
from civilized society, with all his prospects
of advancement and fame obscured—.and con-
fined to an intercourse with barbarians—what
must have been his feelings ! Did not impa-
tience, bordering on frenzy, sometimes tor-
ment his mind? Yet even in this state, iso-
lated from the busy world, the rich cordial of
female tenderness served as an anodyne to al-
leviate his sorrows. The affection of Aura


daily increased ; and the innocent prattle of
their son, served to amuse his parents.
While La Perouse was thus confined to an
island in the eastern regions, his countrymen
were not forgetful of his services ; and his
name was often mentioned with respectful re-
gret by the lovers of science. As there was
but little probability of his being alive, he
was neglected during the volcanic concussions
of the French revolution ; but when the go-
vernment of that country became established
on a firmer basis, the attention of the legisla-
ture was roused, to make inquiries respecting
a man whose genius was an honour to his
country.
Accordingly, in the year 1799, a stout ves-
sel was fitted out, by order of the French go-
vernment, and sent on a voyage of discovery ;
and particular instructions were given to M.
Montaigne, the cajitain, to make all possible
inquiry respecting the fate of La Perouse and
his fellow-adventurers. Madame La Pe-
rouse, whose tenderness for her long-lost hus-
band continued undiminished, was determined
to brave all the dangers of the winds and
waves, and the vicissitudes of climate, in
search of our hero ; nor could all the entrea-
ties of her friends dissuade her from this reso-
lution—This magnanimous woman, there-
fore, accompanied by her son Henry, and a


male servant, embarked on board the ship,
which was called the Intrepid.
After a voyage of several months, the ship
arrived at Manilla; but Madame Perouse re-
ceived no farther intelligence respecting the
object of her search, than such as he had sent
to France from that place several years be-
fore.
On the 19th of April 1800, the Intrepid
sailed from Manilla, and proceeded towards
the Chinese coast. Chinese vessels passed
within musket-shot; but when hailed by the
French, they returned no answer. At length
a fishing smack ventured to approach, and the
men on board bartered their fish for some Eu-
ropean toys.
As the Intrepid approached the Chinese
coast, the men on board saw several fires ; and
in coasting to the northward, about two days
afterwards, they came in sight of a Chinese
fleet, at the mouth of a large river. The
French cast anchor abreast this river, but
found it impossible to count the number of
ships, many of which were under sail, others
at anchor on the coast, and a great number of
them lay in the river.
The admiral’s flag-ship was distinctly visi-
ble, and decorated with various coloured rib-
bons and pendants. Madame La Perouse, her
son, and indeed all the people on board the In-
trepid, were much gratified with this novel
3


and unexpected scene; but could not help
laughing at the vain-glorious shew of arms,
exhibited by a nation so remarkable for their
timidity.
In the beginning of June, the Intrepid was
becalmed near the dangerous island of Quel-
part ; and the captain, though unapprized of the
characteristic ferocity of the inhabitants, sent
a party of armed men on shore. When they
landed, they found at least a thousand men
armed, and ready to attack them : in conse-
quence of which they re-embarked with pre-
cipitation. The hostile islanders dispatched a
number of canoes, filled with armed men, in
pursuit of the French ; but a few volleys of
musquetry obliged them to return.
Leaving this inhospitable shore, the Intre-
pid entered the channel of Japan ; and after
coasting for several days, the man at the mast-
head descried a sail, which, on nearer approach,
proved to be a French merchantman, home-
ward-bound from China.
The joy of this unexpected meeting between
countrymen in this remote region, may be
easily conceived. The captain of the Intre-
pid, accompanied by Madame La Perouse and
her son, went on board the merchant ship, to
make inquiries concerning our hero ; but they
could obtain at least no satisfactory intelligence
on that point. There were various reports in
circulation at China respecting his fate ; but


the general opinion was, that he had either
been cast away, or destroyed in a contest with
the people of some of the islands which ly
scattered along the northern coast of Japan.
In this state of uncertainty, Madame La
Perouse entreated the captain of the Intrepid
not to relinquish the object of their search, but
to send a boat ashore at every island. Ac-
cordingly, he touched at several, and bartered
articles of European manufacture for fruits
and fish.
The French merchantman, which was call-
ed La Nymphe, sailed in company with the
Intrepid for several days, not only for the sa-
tisfaction which the crew derived from an a-
micable intercourse, but in order to obtain
wood, water, and provisions, at some island,
which they could the more easily accomplish
in conjunction : besides, the perils to which
Europeans, who navigate those seas, are ex-
posed, from the treachery of the Indians,
made such a conjunction particularly neces-
sary.
On the nth of June they came in sight of a
most beautiful island ; and as the weather was
temperate, Madame La Perouse ventured a-
shore. The armed parties, from both ships,
who accompanied her, amounted to fifty men ;
and as the field adjacent to the shore exhibited
marks of cultivation, they were in hopes that
the manners of the inhabitants were humane.


The woods, which skirted the fields down
to the water-edge, abounded with deer, seve-
ral of which were killed by the party. Dur-
ing an excursion of two hours, they had not
beheld a single dwelling ; but, on passing the
extremity of the wood, they came in sight of
one of the most delightful prospects imagina-
ble. A village, consisting of at least two hun-
dred houses, constructed of bamboo, and wa-
tered by several rivulets, appeared in the
midst of a plain, exhibiting fields of rice, and
pastures covered with flocks. The noise of
the musquetry had alarmed the natives, who
appeared on the confines of the village, to the
number of five hundred, armed with bows and
arrows.
In consequence of the pacific gestures made
by the French, the Indians deputed two of
their chiefs to interrogate the strangers, who,
by signs, explained the motives of their visit,
and gave presents to the chiefs.
Madame La Perouse, who had remained in
the rear of the party, attended by a guard,
now came forward ; and the Indians imagining
her to be the queen of their European visi-
tors, made obeisance to her in the Eastern
manner, and invited her, by signs, to visit
the village. She accordingly entered the hos-
pitable village, which was called Arvas, and,
together with her military party, was regaled
on venison and rice bread.


One of the most intelligent among the na-
tives conversed with an officer of the Intrepid,
who had acquired a smattering of the Japanese
language, during several voyages to the east.
The Indian informed him that the name of the
island was Asper ; that it was about thirty-
leagues distant from the continent, and con-
tained two other villages besides Arvas. The
island was of a circular form, and about six
leagues in circumference. He estimated the
population at about twelve thousand.—The
extreme fertility of the soil nourished this
great disproportionate population ; and from
the pacific disposition of the inhabitants, they
never went to war, except on the defensive a-
gainst some of the marauders, who invaded
them from the more barren islands.
The people of Asperia are tall, muscular,
and well proportioned. In their features,
they bear a strong resemblance to the Chi-
nese ; but there is more animation in their
looks. The gentler passions, how 7 ever, pre-
dominate in their minds, especially among the
women, who are very graceful ; and their in-
expressible gentleness of look and demea-
nour, is rendered irresistibly persuasive, by
their soft, harmonious voices. They appear-
ed extremely modest, and rejected the ad-
vances of the seamen, while they behaved with
the greatest respect to their parents and hus-
bands.


As the climate is temperate, and the Aspe-
rians live principally upon milk and vegeta-
bles, they are very healthy ; and longevity is
by no means uncommon among them, as was
evident from the number of venerable old men
and women who appeared at the doors of the
cabins as the Frenchmen passed.
Filial piety is a characteristic virtue of the
inhabitants of Asperia, insomuch, that, like|
the Chinese, every family is governed by the’
patriarchal authority of the father, or, on his
decease, by the eldest male relation. Their
government is remarkably simple, and regu-
lated by a few chiefs appointed by the public;
for that purpose.—Crimes being unknown a-
mong these happy people, they have no cri- ;
minal code ; their greatest penalty is that in-
flicted for disobedience to parents, and consists
in a temporary banishment to a solitary valley
in the island, from which, however, they may
be recalled, whenever the offended parent shall
think proper.
An Eyropean, accustomed to the horrible
spectacle of a public execution, may smile at
this mild mode of punishment; but his con-
tempt will be changed into admiration, when'
he reflects on its salutary effects j for, strange •
as it may appear, our voyagers were assur-
ed, that the youth of Asperia dread this tern-*
porary confinement more than, they would
death itself!


Their religion, like that of most Eastern
f nations, is a compound of idolatry and pure
} devotion. They acknowledge the existence,
■ and believe the superintendence of a good Be-
■ ing over the universe, but they worship the
sun as his minister or agent; they also be-
lieve in a future state, where they will be re-
: united to iheir parents and friends, without
any danger of another separation. Their
marriage ceremony consists in a present made
by the bridegroom to the parents of the bride,
who is given to him in the presence of their
mutual relatives.
Seduction, adultery, and divorce, are un-
known among those primitive islanders ; and
the chastity of their women form that great
bond of reciprocal confidence and security,
which is the principal source of their rational
happiness.
On the decease of a parent, the children tes-
tify their sorrow by a voluntary seclusion
from society for ten days; at the expiration
of which, they receive the consoiitary visits
of their neighbours.
We have been thus minute in describing
the manners, &c., of these islanders, deem-
ing them, in some respects, worthy of imi-
tation.
The voyagers made particular inquiry con-
cerning La Perouse, but could gain no infor-
mation concerning him. Madame La Perouse


now went on board; and the ships, after tak-
ing in abundance of wood, water, and fresh
provisions, bade adieu to the hospitable and
happy Asperians.
After having encountered several heavy
gales, ,both vessels continued their course a-
long tfie coast; and on the 21st of June, in
the evening, they came in sight of the very
island that contained our hero.
Madame La Perouse being desirous to visit
this bleak and barren spot, notwithstanding
its forbidding appearance, the ship cast anchor
within a league of the shore ; and, early next
morning, a boat, well manned and armed, was
sent from each ship. Our fair adventurer,
who felt a presentiment of something extraor-
dinary, went in the boat of the Intrepid, ac-
companied by her son and M. La Roche, the
first lieutenant.
They landed at the creek, where the ship-
wrecked La Perouse had formerly escaped a
watery grave, and proceeded cautiously along
the black and sharp rocks.
By a strange circumstance, it happened that
a large party of the Indians of Miona had land-
ed on the opposite part of the island; and just
as the French had reached the summit of an
eminence, they beheld these fierce islanders,
who immediately advanced with bows bent,
as if to attack. M. La Roche placed Madame
La Perouse under the protection of two arm-


ed seamen, with directions to re-conduct her
to the boat; but they had not proceeded
twenty paces, when the whole party, con-
sisting of only twenty, were surrounded by
three hundred hostile savages !
The Frenchmen evinced their pacific inten-
tions by a variety of signs ; but the Indians,
unmindful of their gestures, discharged their
arrows, which killed one man, and wounded
two others of the party. Repeated discharges
of musquetry did terrible execution among the
savages, killing or wounding upwards of for-
ty men, while the bayonets prevented them
from pressing too closely.
Meanwhile, Madame La Perouse, and her
son Henry, were obliged to stand exposed to
surrounding dangers, till overcome by the
sight of blood, the dying, and the dead, she
fell into a fit, and continued in that helpless
state, unattended, except by her son, during
the remainder of the battle. So great was the
emergency, and so powerful the voice of self-
preservation, that the men who had been ap-
pointed as her protectors, were irresistibly
compelled by their feelings to stand to their
arms, and assist their countrymen.
Just as the little party had exhausted their
ammunition, Aura and La Perouse, who
had been alarmed at the sound of the fire-arms,
appeared, and, by their timely interference,
prevented farther carnage. The Indians and
C


their opponents desisted : but how great was
the astonishment of M. La Roche, and his
brother sailors, to find the object of their search
in the person of their deliverer !—They could
scarcely believe their senses ; but the sobs and
tears of La Perouse ascertained the fact.
The Indians retired, murmuring ; and the
attention of the Frenchmen was now turned
to Madame La Perouse, who was supported
by Aura and her husband to their adjacent ca-
vern. On her recovery, her features were
recognized by La Perouse, who stood before
her in fixed amazement, and unable to articu-
late a syllable. As he was dressed in the In-
dian habit, and his features much changed by
the lapse of years, and the variety of hard-
ships he had suffered since his departure from
b ranee, he was as effectually disguised as if
he had appeared in masquerade. His voice,
however, excited a tumultuous and strange
emotion in the bosom of his faithful and ami-
able wife. La Perouse retired for a moment,
to change his dress; and on his return, she
started up, uttered a feeble scream, and faint-
ed in his arms; while Henry gazed oh his pa-
rents with mute astonishment!
Strong emotions sometimes operate so
powerfully, as to destroy the vital principle ;
but happily, in this case, nature was relieved
by a sudden flow of tears. The lovely ad-
venturer gradually revived, and found herself


in the embrace of that long-lost husband, for
whom she had undergone such a variety of
dangers. Henry sympathized in his mother’s
joy, though almost unconscious of the cause.
The venerable name of father had never be -
fore been addressed by him to any other be-
ing ; and for the first time, he knelt and re-
ceived the blessing of his delighted parent.
The sudden entrance of Aura, leading in
her son Orion, interrupted the full flow of
joy which arose spontaneously in the bosoms
of La Pcrouse and his consort. Aura too
soon discovered the truth ; and found that she
must now relinquish the object of her fondest
regard to a stranger !—No words can describe
the agony of her mind : she raved, execrated
herself and La Perouse, and attempted to stab
the intruder on her happiness. M. La Roche,
who was a witness to this interesting scene,
sprung forward, and arrested the arm of the
exasperated Indian ; who, seizing the hand of
her child, rushed with him out of the cavern,
hastened to the shore, and embarked with her
countrymen for her native island.
Meanwhile, the French sailors carried their
wounded companions into their boat, leaving
four armed men as a guard at the entrance of
the cavern. M. La Roche took his leave of
our hero and Madame La Perouse, with a
promise to send a strong guard for their pro-
tection 5 as the shock which the lady had suf


fered, rendered it impracticable to remove her
to the ship, without the manifest hazard of
her life.
Accordingly, two boats, with forty men,
well-armed, were sent from the Intrepid, and
landed, under the command of the second lieu-
tenant. The party pitched their tents in the
vicinity of the cavern ; and several cordials
and other necessaries were brought, by direc-
tion of the surgeon, for the use of Madame La
Perouse.
Cheered by the presence and endearments
of her husband and son, she slowly regained
her health ; but as feverish symptoms conti-
nued, it was thought expedient to continue her
on shore for a few days.
While our hero was providentially restor-
ed to the prayers of his friends, the vindic-
tive Aura, whose love was now changed into
the most implacable hatred, used all her in-
fluence to rouse her countrymen to revenge.
Verado was particularly active on this occa-
sion ; his passion for Aura was not yet extin-
guished ; and her presence and entreaties were
powerful incentives to his enterprising mind.
He collected a body of two hundred Indians,
all well armed with bows and arrows, and
embarked them in twenty war canoes. The
fierce and jealous Aura herself accompanied
them on this expedition ; and with arms in
her hands, and vows of revenge on her tongue.


she led the van, in the largest canoe, accom-
panied by Verado.
The enterprise was conducted with such
secrecy and address, that the Indians doubled
the promontory, and after coasting the barren
isle, disembarked during the night, without
being perceived by the French centinels. The
attack commenced with the dawn ; and Vera-
do, who led the vanguard, displayed such
courage and skill in his arrangement, as evin-
ced a superior mind.
He detached small parties, with orders to
conceal themselves among the rocks, and, soon
after the attack was begun, to fall on the rear
of the enemy ; above all things, he gave them
directions to take the cavern by surprise, anu
put La Perouse, his wife and child, to death,
without delay.
As the Indians approached the encampment,
the French centinels gave the alarm, and their
party turned out with such alacrity, as pre-
vented the enemy from obtaining any advan-
tage. The superiority of fire-arms over bows
and arrows, soon rendered the defeat of the
Indians inevitable ; but while the Europeans
were engaged in pursuit of the enemy in front,
they found themselves assailed in the rear by
showers of arrows, which killed and wounded
several men. Disconcerted by this unexpect-
ed manoeuvre, they retreated in turn, and
rallied at the entrance of the cavern.,
3


This critical movement saved the lives of
the devoted victims of Aura’s jealousy. Im-
patient, and stimulated by various passions,
she rushed forward precipitately, at the head
of a detachment, and entered the cavern with
a kind of dagger in her hand, a few moments
before the French party had returned.
A lamp enlightened the cavern ; and as she
advanced to destroy the objects of her ven-
geance, she found them guarded by four sol-
diers, who, with fixed bayonets, prevented
her sanguinary purpose.
The Indians were disconcerted at the ap-
pearance of this opposition, and began to re-
treat; but Aura, in a voice of anger and de-
spair, commanded them to assist her in the de-
struction of her enemies.
La Perouse, who was also armed with a mus-
ket and bayonet, entreated his guard not to
injure Aura. He then besought her to retire,
and not persevere in her sanguinary desire to
destroy him ; he expostulated with her on the
necessity of her return to her native island ;
mentioned his prior engagement to Madame
La Perouse; and assured her of his grateful
sense of all her favours While he conti-
nued speaking, the mind of the forsaken In-
dian was agonised with contending passions ;
and at the conclusion of his pathetic address,
all the woman overpowered her bosom ; she


uttered a deep sigh, the dagger dropped from
her nerveless hand, and she fainted away !
La Perouse carried her to a couch ; and
while he was busied in effecting her recovery,
the detachment of Indians retreated to the
entrance of the cavern, where they were in-
tercepted by the French party, and made pri-
soners.
The victory was now complete, and the In-
dians were pursued to their canoes by the con-
quering Europeans. Meanwhile, Aura con-
tinued in the cavern in a state of stupefaction :
medical aid at length restored her to the use
of her reason; but her grief returned with
renewed violence, when she found herself at
the mercy ot the Europeans, and all her hopes
frustrated.
jjy degrees, however, she became more
calm, and consented to return to her native
j s land She parted from La Perouse, never
to see him more ; and was accompanied in
her canoe by several armed sailors, and two
boats full of armed men had directions to land
her in safety. The boats set out early in the
morning, and about noon landed the disconso-
late Aura, who cast a reproachful look on her
conductors, and turned away.
The sailors observed a considerable num-
ber of people on the shore, who hastily came
to meet Aura, and conducted her to the vil-
lage.


Madame La Perouse, who had suffered a
relapse in consequence of the fright occasioned
by the Indian enterprise, still continued in a
very doubtful state ; and her husband employ-
ed his time in drawing up an accdunt of his
misfortune, in order to publish it on his re-
turn to his native country.
The tedious interval of Madame La Pe-
rouse’s indisposition, was employed by the
two ships in exploring the coast, which they
found intersected with several bays, and bor-
dered with islands.
In their cruise northward, they came in
sight of an island, which, on account of the
appearance of its verdant fields and woods,
was particularly inviting.
The captains of the Intrepid and La Nymphe
both went on shore, attended by a guard of
forty men, well-armed. As they proceeded
towards the interior of the island, they were
delighted with the flourishing state of several
fields of rice, which were laid out with the
greatest regularity, and covered the fertile val-
leys ; while numerous palm and cocoa-trees
flourished on the intermediate eminences.
They also observed several herds of black
cattle, and flocks of sheep, remarkably large,
feeding on the pastures ; but their attention
was soon afterwards engaged by more inte-
resting objects.


A large village built on an eminence, and
adorned with a spire, excited the curiosity of
the Europeans. They approached, and found
it inhabited by a people, whose neatness of
dress, and cleanliness of person, was equal to
the most polished nation.
The Indians came to their doors to view the
armed strangers, and betrayed some emotions
of fear on contemplating this armed force.
The Frenchmen, on the other hand, were de-
lighted with the simple but neat style of ar-
chitecture which adorned the houses ; and on
arriving at the centre of the village, they
came in sight of an edifice, with a turret, a
spire, a sun-dial, and a clock ! 1 heir asto-
nishment was inconceivable While they
stood gazing at these objects, a middle-aged
man, of a very dignified appearance, came for-
ward, attended by a number of young Indians.
He accosted the strangers in the English lan-
guage ; and when the captain of the Intrepid
replied, he continued the conversation in the
French ; and informed him, that he was an
Englishman, who had been shipwrecked on
that island in the year 1778. The natives,
he said, had given him a hospitable reception,
and he, in return, had directed them in the con-
struction of their houses and other buildings,
the culture of their fields, and those improve-
ments in their dress and manners, which ren-
dered them so much superior to the people of


the other Islands, who were gradually imitat-
ing them in those refinements.
This extraordinary man (whose name was
Thomas Windham) then invited the party to
dinner, and conducted them to a large and
cleanly cottage, the court-yard of which was
adorned with flowers and evergreens.—Mr
Windham introduced his visitors to his wife,
who was the queen of the Indians, and had
chosen him for her husband, as a reward for
his instructing her people in the useful arts.
During an elegant repast, the company
were gratified with several pleasing airs,
played on the German flute, by a youth
whom Mr Windham had taught. To the in-
genuity of this remarkable personage, the In-
dians were also indebted for the sun-dial and
clock, which were both of his workmanship.
After dinner, he accompanied the French
to his granary, and offered them any quanti-
ty of rice they required, together with live
stock and other provisions necessary for their
sea-store. They accepted his generous offer;
and a number of Indians were collected by Mr
Windham, to assist in shipping the provi-
sions. The alacrity and zeal with which they
obeyed the commands of their benefactor, and
the reverential awe with which they seemed
to attend his motions, sufficiently demonstrat-
ed the ascendancy of his superior genius over
their grateful minds.—Mr Windham appear-


ed perfectly happy, and expressed no wish to
return to his native country.
The Frenchmen were enchanted with his
courtesy, and presented him with two mus-
kets, a quantity of ammunition, several
spades, hoes, and other implements of hus-
bandry, in return for his munificence.
Mr Windham saw his visitors on board
their boats, and returned with his attendants,
while the French ships again steered for the
barren island.
On their arrival there, they found La Fe-
rouse, his family, and guard, all in perfect
security Madame La Perouse was consider-
ably recovered from her indisposition, but
not deemed sufficiently so to bear the fatigue
of a voyage.
Meanwhile, the captain of the Nymphe re-
luctantly urged the necessity of his proceeding
to Europe as fast as possible 5 and as, of
course, he should arrive some time before
the Intrepid, he prevailed on La Perouse to
entrust him with his dispatches. These do-
cuments, which formed the basis of the fore-
going Narrative, were transmitted to the
French government, immediately on the ar-
rival of the Nymphe at Bourdeaux.
FINIS.






