





THE ROMANTIC CAREER
GEORGE ADAMS
( Tattersall )
“In this man there was such force of mind
and character, that in whatever country he had
been horn, he would have been hound to have made
his fortune for himself”
—Livy (of M. Porcius Cato).
*


PREFACE
I.—THE MAN WITH A MESSAGE.
Humble Beginnings—Cobb & Co. Brings Message—Why Driver
Was Perturbed —“O’Brien’s Pub” Changes Hands —Good Friends
in Sydney—The Famous Marble Bar—ldeas in Architecture.
2.—ORIGIN OF SWEEPS.
Where Sportsmen Assembled —Sweeps Become Public —Im-
mediate Success —Mr. D. H. Harvey Enters Business —New South
Wales Legislative Action —Transfer to Brisbane.
3.—PERMANENT HOME.
Beginnings in Tasmania —Van Diemen’s Land Bank Lottery—
Invitation to George Adams—Hobart Becomes Headquarters—
Staff Augmented Sir Edward Braddon’s Bill Author of
“Braddon Clause” Parliament’s Attitude Adams Initiates
Building Boom.
4.—PROGRESS UNDER FEDERATION.
Federation Causes Anxiety Postal Restriction Removed in
1930—Remarkable Growth—Mr. T. Lyons Assumes Control-
Records of Staff Service —How Charities Benefited —Unclaimed
Moneys—Procedure Followed by Tattersall.
S—SQUARE AND ABOVE BOARD.
Government Supervision—Check and Counter Check —Drawing
Explained—Advice by Telegram—State Treasury Strong Room
Holds Key “Draining” the Barrel Ramsay’s “Railroad”
—Change to Cash Consultations —Precautions in Horse Events.
6.—PRIZES—AND OMENS.
The Chinese Joss—Dream in Suburbia —Reward After 50 Years
—Ticket That Was Too Late—Novel Birthday Present—The Man
From Mount Morgan—Transformation From Outback —China-
man’s Luck Tilts at Fortune Australians Thrifty High
Ethical Standards.
7.—THE SPIRIT LIVES ON
Hosts of New Friends —Acquisition of Highfield—Man “With a
Way”—Word Was His Bond —Extensive Interests—Death at 65-
Example to Aspiring Youth.


1 J/f /
Mte y V iatcke4
TattersalVs has grown with Australia. The narrative
that follows is the romantic story of the life of George
Adams, the founder, who, with honesty and integrity as
his watchwords, built his business on firm foundations.
It is due to his keen business sense, his flair for fair
dealing, and the blending of his personality into Tatter-
sail’s, that the firm has kept pace in the march of time.
George Adams was no mere opportunist, but he grasped
opportunity by the forelock. His “sweeps” offering
comparative affluence for a small outlay, appealed to
sport-loving Australians. It was natural that with a
prize-list built on a generous scale—generosity was a
characteristic of the man—the scope of the consultations
should become wider, even to the extent of playing their
important part in Tasmanian history.
The passing of George Adams on September 23, 1904, was
an event mourned throughout the Commonwealth. It
was the end of a life, whose pleasant duty it had been to
bring brightness to many homes throughout the Com-
monwealth and beyond, not alone through the announce-
ment of success in consultations, but through many
benefactions distributed on a broad-minded and unde-
nominational plan.
George Adams left his character in his business. His
successors—some of them men of his own choosing—
directed the progress of the business on the firm founda-
tions on which it had been begun. The spirit of George
Adams still lives.


The Man with a Message
Humble Beginnings Cobb and Co. Brings
Message Why Driver was Perturbed “O’Brien’s
Pub” Changes Hands Good Friends in Sydney—
The Famous Marble Bar Architectural Ideas.
IT IS APPROPRIATE that the story of George Adams (Tattersall)
should begin with an incident in the career of the famous firm of
Cobb and Co., an organisation that indelibly stamped itself on
Australian history as a trustworthy blazer of transport trails. It is
just 60 years since the first George Adams Sweep, born of the spirit
of good fellowship, was drawn at Sydney. The locale was Tatter-
sail’s Hotel, Pitt-street, Sydney. A small affair, the subscribers to
which were patrons of the hostelry, it was the seed which blossomed
into the famous Tattersall’s Consultations, now in their 58th year,
and their 43rd year at the present address, 77 Collins Street, Hobart.
It is a story in the spirit of the times, and romantically rich ini
its narrative of outstanding success from small beginnings. In ital
present day history Australia has provided variations of the story
of Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States, told under the
title “From Log Cabin to White House.” Don Bradman came to
world fame in his own sphere from the obscurity of village cricket
in Bowral, New South Wales. Phar Lap, the wonder horse, changed
owners for a modest 160 guineas in the sale ring in New Zealand,
Tattersall’s Hotel, Sydney—lB6s


and went on to win £66,738 in stakes in a comparatively briefi
career. The story of George Adams and “Tattersall” is an analogy
of an earlier period. Its humble birth was in “O’Brien’s Pub,” in
Pitt-street, Sydney, an obscure hostelry of the times, but one in
which George Adams saw promise.
One day in the year 1878 a Cobb and Co’s coach pulled up out-
side the small, but excellently conducted hotel, the “Steam Packet”
at Kiama, on the South Coast of New South Wales. The driver,
one Jim Conroy, was a remarkable and most popular character, using
the term in its broadest sense. It was Conroy who had conferred
on him an enviable honour at a later period in his life —the Imperial
Service Order for 30 years of service as a guard on the Melbourne
Express, which displaced the Cobb and Co. coaches. It was the first
decoration of its kind ever bestowed on an Australian. At Kiama,
Conroy dismounted with the consciousness of a man who had under-
taken a mission of some importance.
Though enjoying in common with all of his race the peaceful
beneficence of the reign of Queen Victoria, the day found Conroy in
a state of perturbation. He was the conveyor of a message of great
purport to the landlord of Kiama’s leading hotel, and his perturba-
tion was caused by his doubt as to the manner in which the landlord
would receive it. The landlord himself was no ordinary man. He
possessed strong force of character, and as a prospector and a pursuer
of various other activities in Australia, including a station property
at Wellington, New South Wales, he had developed personal powers,
which, though in keeping with the rugged, direct, candid, and pur-
poseful nature of the people of this country, were yet all his own.
His name was George Adams, and the news which Jim Conroy
had brought from Sydney with strict instruction that it must be
conveyed personally, was probably, in the opinion of the rugged
driver, sufficiently momentous to cause Adams some disturbance.
The actual conversation is lost in the mists of obscurity, but the
tenor of it has been preserved in sentimental recollection.
“George,” (or he might have called him Mr. Adams), “I’ve
come to tell you that O’Brien’s ‘Pub’ in Pitt St. is yours.”
The statement would not have been remarkable, were it not
for the fact that George Adams had never paid any money towards
the acquisition of the “pub.” Its situation on the Western side of
Pitt St., Sydney, between Market and Park Streets, however, had
brought his thoughts to the point of considering it as a medium
through which he could express his own personality and enter-
prise. And, according to Jim Conroy the “pub.” was his.
Further questions assured him there was no mistake. George
Adams hastened to Sydney to tell those interested that he had not
the money to pay. “Never mind,” his friends replied, “You’ll pay
when you can.” So with no preliminary deposit for his purchase,
George Adams entered into possession and began to lay the foun-
dations of “Tattersall’s,” the influence of which was to spread
throughout Australia and beyond.


Who then was this George Adams, who inspired so much con-
fidence that friends were prepared to, and did, stand behind a
purchase on the mere expression of a desire some time before that
he would like to acquire a lease of, or own the hotel? He was
born on March 14, 18.39, at Sancton, Hertfordshire (England) and ar-
rived in Australia on May 28, 1855, with three brothers on the
sailing ship “Constitution.” He was thus 16 when he landed in
Australia. Interesting as it would be to trace the story of his life
from his arrival as a hefty lad, seeking a new country to his
installation in what is now the splendid edifice of Tattersall’s Hotel,
Sydney, in the 70’s of last century, it could not be adequately done
here. His first serious occupation seems to have been that of
butchering in the towns of Kiama and Goulburn, and engagement
on a sheep station at Wellington. He was of fine athletic build, a
follower of ail outdoor games and sports, and had a keen interest
in horses and dogs. In the middle ’7o’s he was a frequent visitor
to Sydney and became a favourite among the sportsmen of the day.
He established a fine business and personal reputation in Kiama,
and in the transition from butchering to the proprietorship of a
hotel, his already wide circle of friends grew. In the course of
time, Tattersall’s Hotel, colloquially known as “O’Brien’s Pub,” in
Pitt St. was acquired in the remarkable manner here set forth, and
in 1884 he purchased the freehold for about £40,000.
It was not long before Tattersall’s Hotel began to undergo many
transformations, culminating in the construction of the Marble Bar
about 1892. This acquisition out-distanced every hotel in Australia,
and Tattersall’s Hotel took its place for all time as having one of
the finest single bars in the world. The marble in its construction
cost in those days £32,000. It was drawn from all parts of the
world, and assembled in Belgium. Transported in large boxes its
construction in Australia was under the superintendence of an ex-
pert. The countries of origin of the marble which went to form
the bar, make it perhaps the finest collection in any one structure
ir the world. Italy provided the Griotte d’ltalie marble, Vert
Campan came from the Pyrenees, Grand Antique from Belgium,
Vert des Alpes from the Pyrenees, Bleu Fleuri, Jaune de Sienna,
and Bardigilis from Italy, Jaune de Numidie from Africa and the
remaining forms, Rouge Girotte from Belgium and Breche Ombree
from the Pyrenees.
George Adams was a man who liked to make money, but he
was no mere money-maker. He had architectural ideas, which
were not confined to his immediate surroundings. He liked to em-
bellish a city. He liked to see an imposing structure, where pre-
viously there had been a shabby one, and he believed in the proper
admixture of beauty and utility.


Origin of Sweeps
Where Sportsmen Assembled Sweeps Be-
come Public Immediate Success Mr. D. H.
Harvey Enters Business New South Wales
Legislative Action Transfer to Brisbane.
When George Adams took possession of the premises now
licensed as TattersalTs Hotel, it was a typical big town Australian
hostelry. It had no particular claims to distinction except that it
was the headquarters of Tattersall’s Club, and as such was the
meeting place for the biggest sportsmen of the day. It did a legiti-
mate business second to none in Sydney. The saloon bore the
name of ‘'the Tin Bar” where 6d. could be well spent by the
thirsty. There was a genial atmosphere about the place. Although
originally it made no claims from the residential standpoint, a num-
ber of small cubicles had been built above the dining room, and at
race or show times visitors to Sydney found them quite comfortable
as bedrooms, in spite of limited space and lack of furnishings.
It was the custom of the proprietor of the hotel to conduct
small sweepstakes on the more important race meetings. Customers
and club members made them particularly popular. In this Adams
saw his chance. The regular patrons initiated the sweepstakes,
confined to their own circle, but in 1881 Adams decided that, rather
than confine them to the hotel patrons, they should be thrown open
to the general public. Their success was immediate. When the
Sydney Cup of 1881 was run Tattersall’s Sweep had come into ex-
istence as a public institution. Progress won the race—an excel-
lent augury for the beginning of public sweeps. The total amount
of the stake was £2,000. The first prize paid was £9OO, the sec-
ond £6OO, and the third £3OO. No enterprise could have been
better adapted to the spirit of the times. It caught the public fancy
tremendously, and its popularity increased rapidly. TattersalTs,
the title given the sweeps, was a name already honoured in the
English sporting world.
George Adams was always a good judge of men. The rapidly
growing popularity of the sweeps demanded assistance, and in his
search for able and trustworthy men, he found Mr. D. H.
Harvey. It was a happy association, and the long ser-
vice that Mr. Harvey gave to TattersalTs in several States and
various undertakings, was strong testimony of the promoter’s
shrewd judgment. Mr, Harvey, with his great organising ability,
was the right man in the right place and he was most ably support-
ed by the late Mr. E. H. Reid throughout the whole period. Devel-
oped on sound lines, the sweeps became an immensely popular form
of investment, and the name of TattersalTs became a synonym for
fairness. By the well-to-do the investment was regarded as an in-


teresting little flutter, and to the poorer classes it became a ray of
hope. George Adams’ name immediately became known through-
out Australia and beyond.
Success brought imitators, but for one reason or another they
did not stand the test of time. The expansion of the business that
George Adams had created, continued, but it received its first set-
back by Act of Parliament. Legislation was framed declaring all
sweeps illegal in New South Wales, and its ratification by Parlia-
ment meant the end of George Adams (Tattersail) sweeps in that
State. It was the end, too, of the first decade of the sweeps—a period
in which every farthing had been accounted for, and in which not
the slightest aspersion could have been cast on the methods of con-
ducting the s-weeps.
D. H. Harvey


It was with this proud record that the business of George
Adams was transferred to Brisbane in September, 1893. Other
lottery promoters followed. The legislative move against sweeps
initiated in New South Wales, however, made its appearance in
Queensland in the course of a few years. An anti-sweeps mea-
sure received the approval of the Queensland Parliament, and the
organisation, which had not been impeded by its removal to the
Northern State, was again ready for transfer. On the last day of
December, 1895, Tasmania became the headquarters of George
Adams (Tattersall’s) sweeps. Its arrival in that State was under
happier auspices. Legislation, instead of being antagonistic, provided
a legal home.
E. H. Reid


Permanent Home
Beginnings in Tasmania Van Diemen’s Land
Bank Lottery Invitation to George Adams
Hobart Becomes Headquarters Staff Aug-
mented Sir Edward Braddon’s Bill Author
of Braddon Clause Parliament’s Attitude
Adams Initiates Building Boom.
George Adams opened his business in Tasmania on January 7,
1896. but the coming of the sweeps was preceded by a lottery con-
ducted by him in that State. The invitation came from Tasmania
to dispose of the assets of the Bank of Van Diemen’s Land through
the medium of a lottery. The bank, along with many other in-
stitutions in Australia, had suspended payment owing to shortage
of currency arising out of the general financial crisis of those years.
That initial lottery met with substantial success and it was the
means of establishing George Adams (Tattersall) sweeps in Tas-
mania, for the bank by this means had disposed of its assets at
prices far in excess of what sales on the open market would have
realised. It was too late to consider the little practical help that
would have saved the Bank of Van Diemen’s Land, which was not
bankrupt, but in temporary difficulty for liquid assets, when all the
creditors of the financial institutions throughout the country were
asking for cash. The Bank owned much freehold property on which
it was necessary to realise to get cash, and it had to be realised on
a market in which values had fallen disastrously. Immediate ac-
tion in that direction would have meant large sacrifices.
It was decided that a lottery on liberal lines, and only a lot-
tery, would realise anything like a fair equivalent of the real
value of some of the properties. Who could successfully under-
take a task of these dimensions? George Adams accepted the
chance, and immediately set about organisation of a sweep with
100,000 tickets at £1 each. This help enabled the bank to com-
plete its liquidation with satisfactory results. The drawing took
place in the presence of the public at the old Exhibition Building
at Hobart in 1895, under the personal supervision of George Adams.
This was George Adams’ first introduction to the State. He
was greatly impressed by it, and the public was grateful for the
material help given to the Bank of Van Diemen’s Land by the
lottery. It was a mutual attachment. George Adams found
himself at home in Tasmania, and Tasmania took to him. It was
quite natural in these circumstances, that when Queensland legis-
lated against sweeps he should try his fortune in Hobart, With
the security of legal status, the year 1896 therefore marked an im-
portant milestone in the history of George Adams (Tattersall)
and, too, in the history of Tasmania.
The original plant used for the drawings in New South Wales
and Queensland was transported to Hobart, together with a nuc-
leus staff of nine. The staff was augmented to number 20 al-


most immediately on his arrival at Hobart, and the business be-
came established in premises known as Fysh’s Buildings. The
site of the original offices has undergone many changes since, and
Is now occupied by Goodwill Stores.
The first sweep conducted at Hobart on a racing event was
one of 25,000 tickets at 5/- on the Anniversary Handicap at
Randwick (N.S.W.), on January 26, 1896, and the first Tasmanian
event upon which a sweep was promoted was the Hobart Cup of
the same year. It was won by Lena, a well-known performer in
her day. The first prize of £9OO was won on that occasion by
cne, Lawton, a resident of Mathinna.
The following year marked another important step in the con-
trol of sweeps, for from about the middle of 1897 the sweeps were
conducted under Government licence. Sir Edward Braddon, a
man of marked ability, reputation, and personality, was Premier,
and his prevision and wisdom in the preparation of legislation for
the Tasmanian Parliament, was demonstrated in a wider sphere
in the incident of Australian political history which received
the name of “the Braddon Blot.” When the Constitution of the
Commonwealth was being shaped by the Convention of 1897-8
the disposal of Commonwealth revenues was found to be difficult.
The various colonies had derived a good deal of their public funds
from customs duties, which under any genuine form of Federation
must inevitably be collected by the Central Government. It was
Sir Edward Braddon who perfected the clause, afterwards em-
bodied in the Constitution. It provided that during a period of
10 years after the establishment of the Commonwealth, and there-
after until the Parliament otherwise provided, not more than a
quarter of the net Commonwealth revenues from customs and
excise duties should be applied annually by the Commonwealth to
its expenditure. The balance was to be paid to the several States
or applied towards the payment of interest on debts of the several
States taken over by the Commonwealth. In actual working the
clause did not prove as satisfactory as its supporters intended, and
in July, 1910, it was replaced by per capita payments. Yet under
the Braddon clause the Commonwealth paid to the States in 9£
years £68,140,353, and the effect of another clause brought the
total payments to £74,000,000, or more than 81 per cent, of the
customs and excise revenue collected. It was the application of
the Braddon clause that received the name “the Braddon Blot.”
The Tasmanian Parliament, generally speaking, viewed Tat-
tersall’s advent in a mucn more friendly and reasonable spirit
than was the case in New South Wales and Queensland. Doubt-
less, Sir Edward Braddon, who was an experienced legislator and
a man of courage, had a keen appreciation of the anticipated ad-
vantages to be derived by the State Exchequer, chiefly through
increased postal revenue, a Sl?te instrumentality before the com-
ing of Federation. Although there was a considerable amount of
opposition in some quarters, legislation authorising the licensing
of a lottery received Parliamentary approval. Naturally the State
imposed conditions, and one of them was the requirement that
George Adams, as a guarantee of good faith, should deposit with
the Treasurer a sum of £lO,OOO bearing no interest.


Sir Edward Braddon’s measure, in its approved form, served
the four-fold purpose of regulating sweeps, of bringing much need-
ea xevenue to the Treasury, of minimising the evil of shop betting,
wh’fh at that time was prevalent, and of preventing the entry of
unauthorised and undesirable sweeps from elsewhere.
The sweep on the Ellesmere Stakes at Randwick on June 3rd.
1897 was the first in Tasmania under Government licence and
supervised by Government officials. The extent of the sweeps in
those times was from 10,000 at 5/- to 100,000 at 5/-, with one on
the Melbourne Cup of 100.000 at 20/-. Tattersall’s popularity
grew rapidly in Tasmania, and the sweeps made such steady pro-
gress that larger premises were soon required. In 1898 the pre-
mises now occupied by George Adams (Tattersall) at 77 Collins
Street were erected. The contractor was Mr. William Smith, and
the new office was opened in January, 1899. with a staff number-
ing about 50.
Tasmania was slowly recovering from the effects of the bank
suspensions, and the financial crisis that supervened. Towards
the end of the century George Adams initiated a decided boom in
the building trades in Hobart, It served, not only to improve the
appearance of the city, but to lift the community, by the spirit of
his enterprise, out of the back waters of the aftermath of the
State’s financial troubles. He bought a number of buildings, and
built others, at a time, when, to indulge in speculation of that
character, required a degree of courage and good judgment, and
an outlook of real optimism.
Among the buildings that made their appearance by reason of
that display of courage and judgment were the Tasmanian
Brewery, which stood at the corner of Warwick and Elizabeth
streets, Tattersall’s offices, with warehouses at the rear, Fitzgerald’s
warehouse in Collins Street (afterwards destroyed by fire and re-
erected by the late Mr. G. P. Fitzgerald), Wellington Chambers,
and Beattie’s property, now in the occupation of Charles Davis
Ltd., a terrace in Melville St., and among other premises High-
fieid, Theatre Royal, and Old Commodore Hotels. He also par-
tially rebuilt or put into repair a large number of properties,
which he had acquired and which required expenditure of some
dimensions to bring them up to date.
Progress Under Federation
Federation Causes Anxiety Postal Restriction
removed in 1930 Remarkable Growth
Mr*. T. Lyons Assumes Control Records of
Staff Service How Charities Benefitted
Unclaimed Moneys Procedure Followed By
Tattersall.
George Adams had his business firmly established in Hobart
when the Federation of the States came into being. Opinions vary
among those competent to form an opinion, on the effect of Federa-
tion on Tasmania, but the advent of a Commonwealth Parliament


caused Tattersall’s much anxiety. It was in March, 1902, that the
Federal Parliament decided that the Post Office should carry mails
addressed to Tattersall’s or George Adams (Tattersall) no longer.
The effect of the legislation against the use of the postal service
for the carrying of such correspondence offered an exceedingly
serious problem and it was some time before the business return-
ed to normal by re-organisation of the means of communication.
For the six years ended June, 1924, the Commonwealth col-
lected £625,654 in taxes from the institution whose mails it would
not carry, or, at least, would not carry if they were specifically
addressed to the institution whence it was deriving its Treasury
revenue. The embargo against the delivery of letters addressed
to George Adams (Tattersall), Hobart, was in existence until No-
vember 13, 1930, when it was repealed by “Gazette” notice. The
Post Office has since delivered all letters so addressed from within
the Commonwealth.
Comparisons of the extent of George Adams’ business after his
establishment in Hobart, with its size to-day, afford interesting
evidence of its remarkable growth in the 40 years of its existence.
The Brisbane staff of 35 was reduced to a score when the business
was transferred to Hobart. The regular employees to-day number
220 in the Hobart office, and the extra business entailed by the
approach of the Melbourne Cup each year means an annual tem-
porary augmentation of staff to 250. The pay sheet for the year
ended June 30, 1897, was about £4,400. For the year ended June
30, 1938, it was £45,100. Wages and conditions in the industry
are covered by the Sweep Promoters’ Wages Board.
The development of the business for 40 years had, as its
guiding hand Mr. D. H. Harvey, in the capacity of General Mana-
ger. For 23 years to the time of his death in 1927 Mr. Harvey
acted, too, in the capacity of one of the trustees of the estate of
George Adams.
On the death of Mr. Harvey, Mr. Thomas Lyons, also a trustee,
and for some years a confidant, adviser, and close friend of George
Adams, assumed executive control of Tattersall as Supervising
Trustee. Mr. Lyons was well known in the racing world as
Chairman of the Tasmanian Racing Club for 17 years, and in the
financial world as a member of the Hobart Stock Exchange for 40
years. Mr. Lyons, though still a trustee, retired from super-
vision in April, 1938, and after a brief illness, died at Sydney on
July 6of that year. His passing removed a man of sound judg-
ment and strict integrity. The business has been fortunate in
securing men at the controls who have maintained the sound nrin-
ciples imbued by George Adams. Mr. A. W. Hutchin early in
1938 became General Manager of all the Hobart businesses of the
estate.
It says much for the general amicable relations between em-
ployer and employee in the business of George Adams (Tatter-
sall), and for the perspicacity of the founder in the choice of his
staff, that of the original staff of nine brought to Hobart from
Brisbane, two are still in the business with records of between 40
and 50 years of service, and more than 30 others have been on the
pay-roll for more than 35 years.


Thos. Lyons


Considering the degree of employment the huge mail business
handled inward and outward for Tattersall’s must have had its
influence in the extent of employment in the postal services.
Money Order, Postal Note, and Telegraph Departments of the
General Post Office have felt the influence of Tattersall’s huge
business. Without it such large staffs in those departments would
not have been necessary.
An instance of the generous and charitable nature of the
founder is to be found in the early beginnings of the business in
Tasmania. It was his personal pleasure to distribute many thou-
sands of pounds. They were acts of charity known only to the
donor and the recipient. Before the passing of the Act of 1896,
under which George Adams received a licence in 1897, charities
throughout Australia and Tasmania were the recipients of large
donations from the sweep business. When the Act came into force
George Adams made it a definite condition that all unclaimed
moneys should go to charities in all States of the Commonwealth
and in New Zealand. These were supplemented by further hand-
some donations to deserving causes from his own resources. The
present trustees of the Estate are authorised to continue this
work of beneficence begun by George Adams. These distribu-
tions were of the most admirably conscientious, broad-minded and
undenominational character.
At the suggestion of the Government of the day in 1918 the
Tasmanian Parliament passed an Act calling upon all public
companies and trading concerns to pay to the State Treasurer all
unclaimed moneys when they became legally unclaimable under
the Statute of Limitations (six years). This move, naturally,
was something of a blow to charities concerned. The unclaimed
moneys in Tattersall’s, however, had not amounted to the sum
that might be supposed. For example, over the past five years
the total of moneys unclaimed was £787, representing only .02
per cent, of the total prize money distributed.
The Statute of Limitations applies somewhat strictly to
amounts due and unclaimed in ordinary business. That was tne
moral justification for the State legislation of 1918, requiring a
transfer of such sums by companies to the Treasurer after a lapse
of six years. But the business had never previously taken advan-
tage of the Statute of Limitations. If anybody could prove his or
her entitlement to an unclaimed prize it was paid by Tattersall, no
matter how long it had been outstanding. The procedure of the
business in every case is uniform. Tattersall sends two registered
letters to the reputed addresses of all who have won prizes and
failed to claim them, and the claims are honoured at any time, on
reasonable proof that they are those to whom the money is due.
Considering the wide advertisement given to all prizes, it is as-
tonishing that there should be any unclaimed moneys, but Tatter-
sall is not the only organisation that has experienced the careless
and forgetful elements of human nature. Unclaimed luggage in
railways, sometimes containing rolls of notes and valuables, and
the contents of the Dead Letter Office of the Postmaster General’s
Department are witness.


' r
,
' 1
1
.S' 4 *
, 4
.
' fli '
3 SBi 4 *|Lfe& rl
Jfcp n m I * .
mmm. P ISmmmm. .JPm. <W
*■• -.• ■ ' ---.v -v./. ■ '
mf*- tU
' -:' .:.■ ft ;. • ’ 8"' ■ ■ ■
Si 4 1 '*: ?i*
: •■■■ • ■ f ■■■/■■ ■
100th. Cash Consultation


Square and Above Board
Government Supervision Check and Counter
Check Drawing Explained Advice by
Telegram State Treasury Strong Room Holds
Key “Draining” the Barrel Ramsay’s
“Railroad” Change to Cash Consultations
Precautions in Horse Events.
It is and always has been the proud claim of George Adams
and his successors in the business that no shadow of suspicion
has rested, or can rest on any one aspect of the organisation’s ac-
tivities. The public may judge for themselves in the accompany-
ing brief outline of the method of drawings and the degree of
work entailed in the regular check of the marbles. Drawings are
conducted in public in the commodious Drawing-Room at the head-
quarters of Tattersall’s, 77 Collins St., Hobart, where seating ac-
commodation is available for 250 persons. The Government Su-
pervisor and his staff read and check the number on every marble
drawn. They retain the original manuscript of the result slips
circulated to subscribers and published in the Press.
Marbles for the major prizes are drawn singly from the barrel
by a gripping device (or “Jigger”), which holds only one marble at
one time. The gripper is plunged into the barrel, the spring released
and out comes a single marble, and under the continual surveil-
lance of the Government Supervisor, is read, checked and coun-
ter-checked, and recorded on the manuscript list. The smaller
prizes are taken from the barrel by means of a scoop, the marbles
being placed in trays for checking and recording of the numbers.
Before the drawing begins, an explanation of the method em-
ployed is made by a representative of Tattersall, who introduces
the Government Supervisor and his staff to the audience. With
the completion of this very desirable preliminary the Government
Supervisor breaks the seals placed by him on the door of the bar-
rel at the conclusion of the previous lottery, and the drawing is
ready to proceed. The barrel is revolved to ensure the thorough
mixing of the marbles by a special device built into its walls. Then
the door of the barrel is unlocked, the gripper plunged into the
marbles, to emerge with a marble carrying fortune to a lucky
investor. Between the drawing of each of the singly drawn major
prizes, and between each scoop of minor prizes, the barrel is closed
and revolved. That practice is maintained throughout each draw-
ing to its completion.
It is the custom of Tattersall to advise the drawers of major
prizes of their good fortune by telegram, but in sweeps on horse
events such as the Melbourne Cup, the result of the race, of
course, decides the principal prize winners. Even in this event
winners of major cash prizes in a schedule are notified. Immediately
the major cash prize numbers are known, a messenger repairs
with the list to the records of names and addresses. Before the
passage of many minutes, names and addresses, as well as num-


':, : '" ■■; C | *f%
In* 'ililt ;
:^r
r ■ OTsuimito’M.
f* —
?$ -
WOmsmmi
•i //•..■» ;.- •■' ‘
. £ (.250*1 f 9 .
1 1 ! •
4' £1,000 86 7 9
',-... .„.; Lm HHK ‘ BE \ 1 i '
S' 2750 5 7 6 7 2
m ggHHuiaa
S' £500 88 164
7* £250 14 353 1
■ -,vis ; ■ m> 5*i«&P4sJ
- j ST i 250 162 20 9
Bfiini
JiBi
•ip*' " 2245 68 7 7 6^^^™
„ ,y A'
IwiH
‘
v
**■*
,1
" ' f
mm •
m
1, . ■ ... . n
Barrel and Semaphore


bers, are in the hands of the Manager, who announces them to
the audience. The telegrams are already on their way. As each
manuscript page of results is completed and checked by Treasury
officials, a copy is rushed to the printer, and not a moment is lost
in advising subscribers of the results of the draw. When the
printed result slip has been checked by the Treasury officials
against the manuscript and is given the Government imprimatur,
the staff of Tattersall is concentrated on the outward mail. Re-
sults literally are sent from China to Peru. When the drawing
is complete the Government Supervisor re-seals the barrel, and
returns the key to the strongroom of the Government Treasury,
where it reposes until he brings it to the next drawing.
No member of Tattersall has any access to the barrel in the
period intervening between drawings, except at periodical inter-
vals when the barrel is “drained’’ and the marbles inspected and
checked. The “draining” of the barrel is a long process, occupy-
ing some days, and here, too, the whole operation is under the
strictest Treasury supervision and control. When completed to
the satisfaction of the Government Supervisor, the marbles are re-
turned to the barrel. It is re-sealed and the State Treasury rep-
resentative retains custody of the key.
Supervising activities of the Government do not cease with
the overseeing of drawings, and check of the barrel and marbles.
The accounts of the business are subject to Government audit. In
a nutshell, therefore, the Government, through its representatives,
acts as custodians of the seal and key of the barrel containing the
marbles, scrutinises closely the actual drawing of the marbles from
the barrel, subjects the result slips to close scrutiny and from
time to time checks the actual payments of prize money against
the records of the sweeps. Unclaimed prizes (if any) also are
examined, for those remaining unclaimed make additions to the
State Consolidated Revenue in due course.
To make assurance doubly sure that everything is in perfect
order the barrel is “drained” of its marbles from time to time in
the presence of Government officials who are required to certify
that the full number of marbles are actually present in it. The
marbles are of selected Kauri wood, each weighing one-seventh
of an ounce, and with a diameter of 27-32nds of an inch. The
marbles at present in use already have had a life of some 48
years, and they come out of the barrel to-day as good as new.
This is due to the excellence of Kauri for the purpose, and to the
construction of the barrel, its baize lining and the mixing appara-
tus in use.
On each marble is imprinted with a steel die a number in
sequence with those above and below.
When the marbles are “drained,” and the checking of the
barrel’s complement is complete, the process of arranging them in
sequence begins. It is a long job extending over several days.
The first sorting separates them into batches of 10,000. The first
batch comprises the numbered marbles, 1 to 10,000; the second
batch, 10,001 to 20,000, and so on until the final batch. The second
operation divides each group of 10,000 into their respective thou-


Ramsay’s Railroad


sands, and the third operation again sub-divides them into groups
of 100. The fourth and final operation is the arrangement of the
groups of 100 in their proper sequence. At this point the mar-
bles are set up on trays, with the numbers uppermost, and it be-
comes the duty of Treasury officials to check the complete se-
quence before the marbles are returned to the barrel, and the
barrel sealed against the next day of drawing.
The tedium of this regular undertaking has been reduced con-
siderably by an ingenious device, the invention of the manager
of the lottery (Mr. W. Ramsay). It consists of a series of what
are known domestically as “railway lines,” a reproduction of
which is shown in this booklet. There are 10 tracks. Whether
the marbles are being sorted in tens of thousands, thousands, or
hundreds, the device suits admirably for the purpose. The as-
sistants read the numbers on the marbles, drop them into the ap-
propriate railway track, along which they roll into a receptacle
provided at the end of each track.
It will thus be seen that every operation from the receipt and
banking of moneys, the issuance of tickets against that money,
the custody of the marbles, the drawing of the marbles and their
return to the barrel, the listing of the prizes, payments of prizes,
and the return of unclaimed moneys down to the periodical over-
haul of the barrel and marbles, are subject to the closest scrutiny,
not only of Tattersall’s officers, but to Government officers directly
appointed by the State Treasurer. At no point could anything
occur which might shake the long standing and well founded con-
fidence of the public in the institution. Thus is preserved the
original stamp of genuineness imposed on Tsttersall by its foun-
der, the late George Adams.
From its inception, and for many years, TattersalTs consulta-
tions were conducted in conjunction with the principal horse rac-
ing events in the Commonwealth and New Zealand. They were,
indeed a powerful aid in building up first-class racing because of
the public interest they developed in that sport. But with the pro-
gress of time, and for many reasons commonly known, Tattersall
changed over from “horse race” consultations to “cash” consulta-
tions, with the sole exception of its greatest sweep, the £50,00(1
first prize event on the Melbourne Cup, and other Melbourne Cup
sweeps it seems desirable to run. It is as well to noint out that
with the Melbourne Cup sweeps the drawings are fixed after the
publication of the final acceptances for the race, thus reducing t©
a minimum the time between the drawing and the race.
If, as time goes on, any other very important horse race such
as the Sydney Cup, is brought into the purview of a Tattersall
Consultation, the same policy will be followed, for Tattersall
knows nothing of “form,” and is not interested otherwise than to see
that its subscribers get a fair deal after having had the good fortune
to draw a horse, and that they are not harassed by persons inter-
ested in the competing horses in any other way.


W. Ramsay
So to-day Tattersall’s programme is made up of the regular
cash consultation, drawn fortnightly, offering a prize programme
outlined hereunder, and the 20/- Monster Melbourne Cup Con-
sultation with horses. The programmes are: —-
FORTNIGHTLY CASH CONSULTATION
Ist Prize, £12,000; 2nd Prize, £2,000; 3rd Prize, £1,250; and
other cash prizes ranging from £l,OOO to £5. In all there are
3,580 participants in the prize distribution—an average of one
prize for every 56 tickets.
MELBOURNE CUP
Ist Prize to drawer of winning horse, £50,000; 2nd Prize to
drawer of 2nd horse, £10,000; 3rd Prize to drawer of 3rd horse,
£5,000; to be divided among drawers of horses advised by the


Victorian Racing Club as not being scratched up to the day pre-
ceding the drawing (exclusive of the three placed horses), £3,642.
Cash prizes ranging from £lO,OOO downward also are allotted,
making in all approximately 11,000 prize winners out of the
sweep.
Tattersall, it may be noted, takes the iitmost precautions to
ensure that names of drawers of horses are not divulged until
after the race is run. All results appertaining to those who have
succeeded in drawing horses are kept under lock and key until
after the race is run.
J. Colman


Prizes —and Omens
The Chinese Joss Dream in Suburbia
Reward After 50 Years Ticket That Was
Too Late Novel Birthday Present The
Man From Mt. Morgan Transformation
From Outback Chinaman’s Luck Tilts at
Fortune Australians Thrifty High Ethical
Standards.
Tattersall’s naturally has become a repository for examples
of good fortune and misfortune. Stories abound of the courteous
man who made a place in the ticket-buying queue for a woman
who bought the ticket which won first prize, or of the ill-mannered
person who did not go to the end of the queue, and by not doing so
achieved the same result. Dreams have formed the basis for
countless tickets in the history of Tattersall’s; ex-service men have
found magic in their former regimental numbers. Superstitions
die hard, and some of the “hunches” have lived up to their prior
reputation.
Take, for example, the case of one, Regan, who found him-
self wandering in a bazaar towards the end of a pleasant holiday
A little Chinese Joss attracted his attention. The Chinese Joss,
it may be explained, is the subject among Chinese of fragrant of-
ferings of incense and much prayer, but if the Joss fails to bring
its owner happiness, and good fortune, it is soundly beaten, some-
times chopped up and replaced by another. Regan bought the
Joss for £6 and, although he had some doubt, was told that it
would bring him good fortune. His cynicism about the good luck
story was not strong enough to prevent him trying it out. Tat-
tersall’s was duly approached and a ticket bought in the name of
the “Joss.” It drew Statesman in the year Statesman’s number
was hoisted as the winner of the Melbourne Cup. Can it be said
that the Joss played Regan false? He thought so when he could
not find his ticket. In desperation he informed Tattersall’s a
week after the Cup was run that the winning ticket had been
mislaid, but there was a way out, and the owner of the Joss re-
ceived his £20,000, the value of the first prize, without any diffl-
culty.
A recital of some of the experiences of Tattersall’s subscribers
would not be complete without at least one to represent the classi-
fication under “dreams.” A humble resident of Melbourne’ sub-
urbia startled his wife one night by waking her and telling her
he had “struck Tatt’s.” Her reply, on being awakened from a
sound sleep, is not necessarily part of the story, but the dreamer
was so insistent that at last she turned on the light. Handicapped
by a disabled right hand, the dreamer seized the stub of a pencil
and wrote down the number of his dream. It was no surprise
to him, a few days after he obtained the ticket in Tattersall’s
bearing the same number, to learn officially that he had drawn
first prize— £ 12,000. Dreamland gained another advocate.


Luck sometimes has been a long time coming. It is recent
history that a subscriber for a £1 in the Melbourne Cup Sweep
indicated his belief that hope springs eternal by giving his ticket
the name “Over Fifty Years Trying” Syndicate. _ Could Lady
Luck resist that appeal? A cheque for £50,000 for his patience and
tenacity was the reward.
A Queensland subscriber can tell of an interesting experience
that befell him. His application was for £1 ticket in the Sydney
Cup, but he left it too late. The Cup was almost due to be run
when the application arrived. The subscription was put into the
next Melbourne Cup event of similar size—a race seven months
hence. In the wealth of equine talent, including Phar Lap, which
contested the race that year, the almost forgotten ticket drew
White Nose, the winner, and the Queensland resident became
£20,000 richer because his ticket came too late for the Sydney
Cup Sweep.
What it was that induced a lady subscriber to seek a ticket
bearing a special number has not been disclosed. It might have
been a dream. The ticket was not available. Advised to that
effect, her reply asked for a ticket bearing any number, but the
condition she made was that the number she originally sought
should be included in the name of the syndicate on the ticket. It
was—and the ticket at the draw became worth £50,000.
In every group of prizes incidents can be related. A lady
going home to an old friend, whose birthday it was, decided on a
novel form of birthday present—a ticket in Tattersall’s. It brought
a second prize of £2,000. Out of trouble came good fortune in
another instance. A young man returning home from a party
late one night ran his car slightly off the road. Unable to extri-
cate it himself he sought the aid of a friend living nearby. His
reward for the friend was a ticket in Tattersall’s, For five
minute’s work the friend has not received so much recompense be-
fore, or since. The ticket provided him with £2,000.
Older members of Tattersall’s staff like to relate an inci-
dent in the earlier history of the business. It concerned a man
who could hold his own among he-men. He was from Mount
Morgan, Queensland. Landing at Hobart from the S.S. Oonah, he
made a bee-line for Tattersall’s building. He excited no curiosity
until he bolted the door behind him, and leisurely proceeded to
divest himself first of his coat, then his vest, and shirt and finally
his under-vest. Sown with a more or less neat stitch on the in-
side of his singlet was the ticket bearing the number against
Eiridsdale in the result slip, and that horse a few days previously
had run second in the Launceston Cup. He had been told stories
of the affable strangers he was likely to meet on the way to col-
lect his prize, but his care was such that if there were any affable
strangers among his acquaintances of the trip, they did not have
a chance.
Another true-to-life incident concerns a first prize winner in
the early days of the Sweeps. There entered the Sydney office
of the business one day a man from outback. His make-up was
complete—bushy ginger beard, cabbage-tree hat, red handker-


chief draped negligently round a strong neck, bowyangs and even
a billy-can. He gave the impression that every penny of the
first prize to which he was entitled would find a good home. He
left the ticket with the remark that he would call in half an
hour for the cheque. He did so, but the transformation was amaz-
ing. An outsize in shaves, haircuts, possibly a bath, and some
new clothes had changed him beyond recognition but comparisons
of handwriting and a few other papers he carried were sufficient
to convince the manager that this Beau Brummell was indeed the
man from outback.
Even among the minor prizes some amazing experiences have
occurred. In one Sweep drawn at Hobart a Chinese resident draw
three prizes with one ticket. When he collected his £lOO, £4O, and
£lO with the single ticket it was regarded as a real example of
“Chinaman’s Luck.” There are those subscribers who make a
point, when buying more than one ticket, of asking for tickets that
are not consecutively numbered. “Mixed numbers” is the term
used to describe it. Yet one man who invested £ 1 took four con-
secutive numbers in a sweep, and with them won four minor
prizes. Tales of successes in Tattersall Consultation share some
of the romance associated with the business through its founder.
Even narrow escapes from personal injury have been an in-
ducement to buy prize-winning tickets, on the score that the luck
of narrow escapes may hold during a draw in Tattersall. A Ho-
bart man has had this experience. Boarding a tram car one night,
he selected a seat, which, within a few minutes, became the cen-
tre of an unusual disturbance. Some irresponsible threw a home-
made bomb at a passing car. It broke the window and exploded
within feet of the passenger. How he escaped injury was a
miracle. But, deciding that Lady Luck must have been smiling
on him, he called at the old address in Collins Street and bought
a ticket which won first prize.
If there is one characteristic of the Australian community
that is more important than another it is the willingness or read-
iness to take a chance. It has shown itself in large spheres of
activity, and it would, indeed, be surprising if the same character-
istic were not exercised in smaller ways. The spirit of emula-
tion in sport is well developed in the Australian community. An
occasional tilt at Fortune appeals to it. No harm can come of
such ventures provided the amount hazarded is within the capa-
city of the individual, and it will be admitted, too, that in this
respect the average Australian has a sense of values. The taking
of a chance is present in every walk of life. No odium attaches
to the business man who takes a chance in a business venture.
His investment may be, and sometimes is, unsound, but it would
be stretching the term to call it wicked. Yet a mild flutter in a
game of pure chance is often wrongly labelled To what°ver the
investor applies his money in the hope of profit, a necessary pre-
cedent condition applies in that the exercise of thrift alone has put
him in the position of being able to invest. The assumption,
therefore, is that virtue is not divorced from speculation.
The hundreds of millions of pounds Australian salary and
wages earners hold in savings banks, insurance societies, building


societies, stocks and shares and real estate are conclusive evidence
of the level-headedness of Australians. If a small fraction of
the earnings goes occassionally into a raffle, a lottery, or a wager
in any branch of sport, who shall say that any social or individual
harm follows? That there is a very small minority whose self-
control is insufficient to order their affairs on the lines of com-
mon sense, is not an adequate reason for irksome restriction on
the great majority who can, and do.
Comparisons may be odious, but idle gossip and the traducing
of character by the self-righteous provide sets of circumstances
much more harmful to society than the sporting chance taken in
moderation. Of all ways offered for taking that chance, surely
“Tattersall,” on its pre-eminently fair basis, is one of the most de-
sirable forms. Its reputation and continuity provide proof of its
fairness. Its pools are built up of the shillings of the many. It
offers no temptation, even to the weak, to “go the lot” and go
“broke.” and withal the process is slow and exhilarating. It is a
builder of homes by the thousand, and never a wrecker. It brings
the chance of independence, or semi-independence to many in a
year, at a cost to the unlucky investors of amounts they never miss.
That Tattersall holds a warrant from public opinion is provided by
the fact that it has operated for more than half a century, and its
reputation throughout that long period has never been questioned.
The high ethical standard set by the late George Adams is still
maintained as the most valued asset in the business of Tattersall.
The Spirit Lives On
Hosts of New Friends Acquisition of
Highfield Man “With a Way” Word Was His
Bond Extensive Interests Death at 65
Example to Aspiring Youths.
From the time George Adams acquired Tattersall’s Hotel in
Sydney, until he transferred his business to Tasmania, the New
South Wales capital was his home. During the period when the
sweeps were conducted at Brisbane, he made occasional visits to
Queensland. The transfer of the business to Tasmania, however,
brought about a personal change for George Adams, too. He soon
made a host of friends in his new State, and it was not long before
he changed his permanent address to Hobart. For a time he lived
at the Orient Hotel, but after acquiring Highfield Hall, the name of
which was changed later to “Highfield Hotel,” he made that his
home. He declared often that of all the communities in which he
lived, or visited, none could compare with Tasmania.
When Tasmania knew him he was a bearded man, with a dis-
tinguished, if somewhat portly, presence, and a personality both at-
tractive and forceful. He was genial and kindly, with a counten-
ance that pleased, a man of more laughter than words, and a man
who “had a way with him.” In business he was shrewd, but al-


ways fair. He knew his own mind, and what things were wmth.
On a question of price, George Adams was a generous bargainer.
Because of that characteristic, perhaps, he was not a bargaine’. If
he was ready to do business, it was, indeed, business of outstaiding
importance if the details and discussion occupied more than e few
seconds. He appeared to come to his conclusions almost by intui-
tion. His “Yes” was yes, and his “No” meant what he said and
always his word was his bond. That was his reputation h his
dealings in Sydney. It was enhanced by his business associations
in Tasmania.
George Adams impressed as a man of many parts. His interests
extended to coal—he bought the Bulli Colliery in New South
Wales in the early 90’s, and at that time he already ownec the
Bulli Coke Works; to shipping—he bought the steamship “Govmnor
Blackall” to provide transport; and to electricity. He became as-
sociated with the supply of electric power at Broken Hill, Syiney,
and Newcastle, and established the Palace Electric Light Stition.
The Paper Mills, established at Waterloo, New South Vales,
were part of his extensive interests, and he gave Syiney
the Palace Theatre in 1896. The Marble Bar of Sydney Tatteßall’s
Hotel, erected at a cost of £40,000, and the Palace Theatre, aie to-
day monuments to his good taste. He was proud of his success,
but more proud of the country that became for him the land cf op-
portunity.
George Adams won through by qualities that all men admire,
and throughout this life the poor were the constant object tf his
benefactions. His building enterprises in Hobart were eviderce of
a man of courage and well founded optimism. Apparently ii full
vigour, he was laid low by a stroke in 1903, and failed to rally The
end came on September 23, 1904, at Highfield Hotel, at the Ege of
65 years. No man was ever mourned with such intensity of feel-
ing throughout the Commonwealth. His funeral was one cf the
largest and most representative ever seen in Tasmania’s capita city.
His resting place is Cornelian Bay Cemetery.
George Adams was twice married. His first wife died at Syd-
ney early in his career, and his second wife at Highfield Hotel on
April 14, 1913. There was no issue of either marriage. The princi-
pal beneficiary by his will was his nephew, William J. Adams who
died in 1921.
So lived and died “the man who made Tattersall’s.” Tonu-
ments to his memory abound wherever he resided. No matterwhat
one’s attitude to lotteries may be no man can deny that ther was
something very winsome and great-hearted about the late Gorge
Adams. Indeed, it is not over-stating his character to say tht his
reputation for all that is best in a man and citizen will long rmain
as a splendid memory, and a grand example to aspiring ;outh.
The affairs of the State since his death have been administeed in
the same conscientious spirit as though he were still in the flesh.
The spirit of George Adams still lives.
Printed by W. R. Rolph & Sons Pty. Ltd., at “The Examiner’
Offices, Paterson Street, Launceston, Tasmania.


Tatters ail’s, Hobart


<3
O
X
o
X
3
S'
X
