

THE
Voice of the Dead.
HE
“BEING DEAD YET SPEAKETH”
“A STRANGER IN A STRANGE LAND.”
HIS HYING TESTIMONY WAS:
“I AM QUITE HAPPY, TRUSTING IN
THE BLOOD OF JESUS!”
For Private Circulation.
Sydney :
GEORGE LOXTON & CO., MACHINE PRINTERS,
42, NEW PITT STRESST.




“A MAN OUGHT TO LIVE LAEG ENOUGH TO BE ABLE
TO THINK AND TO FEEL FROM MANY CENTRES!”
The following add ess was intended to have been
delivered in the N h. K g- Chinch, on
the afternoon of Sabbath the 25th January,
hub the day turned out so web and stormy no service
could be heM.
It is now given to the people in this form by one
who has long taken a deep interest in their temporal
and eternal welfare, in the hope that it may be read by
them carefully and prayer 'o dy, and that God’s bless-
ing may go with it.
The writer is quite conscious of the feebleness of the
effort compared with the impoi tance of the subject of
which he wished to treat. Whatever may be its shore-
comings however, it is the earnest utterance of the
heart under the influence of deep emotion, and a vivid
realization of “ the things unseen and eternal.”
Northfield,
February, 1874.


BEHOLD!
“The Limb o? God which taketh away the sin
OF THE WORLD”
Said John the Ba jtist to his disciples one day,
more than eighteen hundred years ago, as they walked'
by the banks of the river Jordan, in the land of Judea.
He had previously told them “ There cometb one
ye know n t, the latchet of whose shoes I am not wor-
thy to unloose.”
. The next day, seeing Jesus, the long expected Mes-
siah, coming towards him, he exclaimed to his followers
“ Behold the Tamb of God ! which taketh away the sin
ol the world.” This exclamation and figure of speech
would sound strangely enough in Gentile ears, but
to the Jews, conveyed ideas with which they had loin
been familiar; carrying them back fifteen hundred
years, to that eventful v night in the world’s history
when their forefathers, after a long and weary bon-
dage of 430 years in the land of Egypt, were brought
out by the God of Abraham, with a strong hand and
outstretched arm, in spite of Pliaroah’s long-continued
resistance.
It reminded them of the Paschal Lamb, whose shed
blood, sprinkled on the doorposts and lintel of every
Israelitish house, had preserved its inmates from the
fatal blast of the destroying angel, passing over the
land of Egypt that night, and smiting the first-born in
every house with death, from the ‘ palace of proud
Pharaoh, to the mud-hut of the meanest of his subjects.
It reminded them, not only of the great salvation
and deliverance their fathers had then experienced bv
means of this sacrifice of the Paschal lamb, but of the


constant repetition of this sacrifice, year after year,
down the long past ages since then, in the Feast of
the Passover.
It reminded them also of the daily shedding of blood
in the Tabernacle and Temple services, and of what
Go! had told Moses so long ago m the wilderness of
Sinai in reference to all these bloody sacrifices : “ For
the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given
it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your
souls : for it is the blood that maketh an atonement
for the soul—(Leviticus xvii. 11, 14.”) all
typical of, and pointing to the one Great Sacrifice for
sin to be in these later days once offered up for all, by
Jesus, the Saviour of sinners, in His own body on the
cross. “ For the blood is the life, and
thou mayst not eat the life with the flesh ” —Deut.
xii. 23. “ Almost all things are by the law purged
(or purified) with blood, and without the shedding of
blood there is no remission.”—Heb. ix. 22.
In all these bloody, oft-repeated sacrifices, the
blood represents the life which Christ was to give for
the sins of the world, as the Apostle Panl says in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, “ How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit of-
fered Himself without spot to God, purge your con-
sciences from dead works to serve the living God 1 ”
“Behold ! ” then, “ the Lamb of God which
taketh away the sin of the world ! ”
“Not all the blood of beasts
On Jewish altars slain,
Can give the guilty conscience peace,
Or wash away the stain.
But Christ, the Heavenly Lamb !
Takes all our sins awaji,
A Sacrifice of nobler name,
And richer blood than they.”


“ If you are able to go to B cl., why not go onto
k —g.r
Said a Sydney physician to a young man in almost
the last stage of consumption, who called upon him
a few months ago, to say he was going into the
country to try a change of air.
“If able to go to B d. : why not ""go on 'to
K g., where the mountain climate will be more
beneficial ? ”
This simple suggestion changed all his plans, and
sent him to our mountain home, where he lived for ten
weeks, and died happily on the 12th January last, in
the faith and hope of the Gospel,—“ trusting in the
Blood of Jesus”-
“ The Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of
the world ! ”
“ Our times are in our Father’s band,
Wha ecer they may be,—
Cheering or painful, dark or bright,
As best may seem toTbee.”


Address.
Sabbath,
2 5 tli January , 1874.
Dear Friends, —
About this time last year you had the privilege
of enjoying the faithful ministrations of the good
Bishop of Sydney.
He set before you, Sunday after Sunday, the open
door of Salvation, and urgently entreated you to enter
in and secure the great prize of Eternal Life. He failed
not to preach unto you Christ, —ciucitied for you and
for me—the Lamb of God ! which taketh away the sin
of the world—the sinner’s Life—the sinner’s Hope—the
sinner’s Friend—the Saviour of sinners, even the
Chief.
Since then you have had many faithful admonitions
from this pulpit, and now, at the beginning of another
year, God speaks to you in a still more solemn manner,
by another voice—a voice which ought to strike home
to every heart —The Voice of the Dead !
The lirst month of the New Year has scarcely passed
away, and already has Death, the King of Terrors,
twice visited our mountain home, and taken aw'ay on
the one hand the affectionate wife and loving mother,
and on the other the young man in his prime.


The King of Terrors is a foe we must all meet, face
to face, sooner or later. It would be well, yea, it
would be the truest wisdom to prepare while we are in
health, and able to do so, for that great inevitable en-
counter we cannoi avoid. He has lately spoken with
a loud and unmistakable voice, in tones of solemn
warning, and he tells the living that they too must die.
Now, God in His great love and mercy hath not left
ns to fight this last battle alone, for Christ hath van-
quished Death and stripped him of all his terrors, and
whosoever—for there is no restriction—whosoever be-
lieveth in Christ shall, through Him, triumph over
death and sin, and gain an abundant and joyful en-
trance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ.
We know and feel how sinful and impure we must
be in the sight of a holy, pure, and just God ; and God
has toll us in His word that without the shedding of
blood there is no remission of sin—“ for the blood is
the life.” God’s moral law once violated entails pun-
ishment, for His moral law must be maintained in its
integrity, and if transgressed, punishment must follow.
Just as the laws enacted by man on earth for guidance
and good government must, if violated, be followed by
penalties, so must God’s moral law be upheld and
vindicated. If His natural or physical laws be trans-
gressed the transgression entails punishment and suf-
fering. You cannot thrust your hand into the fire
without being burned, for God has so ordered it. Yet
you do not think of finding fault with God ; the fault is
yours and so is the punishment. So also is it with
God’s moral law. You, a free agent, transgress, and
punishment follows—sometimes in this world—most
assuredly in the next—follows as a matter of course—
as a natural sequence.


Look at the thief, the liar, the drunkard, or the
licentious man, even here in this world, how sore a
punishment often befalls him ! Butallthatis as nothing
compared with the punishment awaiting him in another
world, where, we are told by Christ Himself, “ Their
worm dieth not, and their fire is never quenched.” Ic
matters little whether this means a real fire and a real
worm, or something else. If a figure of speech, it is
meant to represent an awful and a sore punishment
following the impenitent sinner into another world,
and there abiding with him for ever. Conscience,
once roused within the human breast, and sent forth
on its endless pilgrimage, will be as bad as any worm
that ever gnawed, or any fire that burns unquenched.
And if no previous change, or moral transformation
takes place in that man while grovelling in his moral
degradation here, —the fires of hell already smouldering
within his breast, —it matters little where his soul goes
at death, for it carries its own punishment with it.
XJnsanctified and impure, he can never be happy, for
God has so interwoven purity and happiness that the
one cannot exist without the other. Were that un-
saved sinner—all unchanged and vile—to be at death
ushered into the glorious company of the ransomed
and the redeemed from among men, he could realize no
pleasure in mingling among those high intelligences,
dwelling in the pure atmosphere of that holy place
called Heaven—he would find it no Heaven to him.
No, he would feel at once that it was no place for him,
and, rushing in dread from its holy precincts, he would
seek his place in those dark and dismal abodes where
the wicked, with each other, for ever dwell.
But God hath provided a remedy for all this. He
hath so loved the world as to give His Son to be a sacrifice
for sin • to pay the penalty which would otherwise fall


on us ; to live among men as an example of a godly
life ; to shed His precious blood, the Just One for the
unjust, that God’s moral law might be maintained in
all its integrity, that God’s love might flow forth in
an uninterrupted stream towards the children of men ;
and that through His death and the shedding of that
blood, without which there is no remission of sin, the
sinner might have life, and purity, and peace, might
have new motives implanted within him ; the whole
current of his life changed, and become in fact, as the
Scripture has it, “a new creature in Christ Jesus.”'*
* “ All adaptations lay a basis for induction.
“If we find light existing, and an eye adapted to see in the
light, and objects around us which, when illumined, the eye
perceives, we naturally infer that the whole arrangement has
bad a common origin, and that He who made the light made
also the eye, and the world on which the eye gazes. So when
we find a great human perplexity prevailing in all ages and in
all climes, and a religion revealing a remedy, the fair inference
is, that He who created the heart with all its sorrows pro-
vided also the remedy, and that the arrangement has had a
common origin in the bosom of a holy and loving God.
“ But if we can add another element having the like claims
to a common origin, the argument will derive therefrom ad-
ditional force and strength ; and this we can do in the fact
that earnest consciences, in sufficient numbers to exclude fac-
titiousness, as soon as they hear of Christ being the world’s
Atonement, eagerly look up to Him and embrace Him. And
still another may be added, more weighty in itself than any.
History yields evidence that men have from time to time
lived in various parts of the world who, though unenlight-
ened by revelation, have offered animal sacrifices with pure
hearts and with a true conception of the Divine idea wnieh
sacrifice symbolizes.
“ The human soul, in its loftier moral aspirations, and im-
pelled by the perplexities of its position, conceives the idea of
atonement independent of revelation.
“ If we take these several facts, and deal with them as facts
to be ttsted by observation and experience, and if we place
them side by side and examine their adaptation to each other,


Henceforth his affections are centred in Christ, the
God-Man ; he yields himself np willingly to he His
faithful follower and servant, and is gradually, day by
day, transformed into His image, and prepared for the
inheritance of the saints in light.
“ I know that death is before me,” said the affec-
tionate wife and mother I have already alluded to, a
few days before her death. “ I know the separation
that awaits me, and it is sad, very sad, to have to leave
husband and children , yet, as it seems to be God’s
will, lam quite resigned, and quite prepared —I have
no fear of death for I know that my Redeemer liveth.”
I saw her several times before her death and these were
about the last words she said to me—"‘l know that my
Redeemer liveth ! ” Blessed assurance ! “ For we are
not redeemed with corruptible things such as silver and
gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb slain without blemish and without spot.” “ I
know that my Redeemer liveth ’’—and thus the ran-
somed spirit passed away from earth with all its suf-
fering, and all its anxiety, and took its place for ever
among the redeemed in glory.
it is impossible for any candid mind to resist the conclusion
that they have a common origin, and that man’s moral nature
and ‘ the Gospel of our Salvation’ are alike from God.
“ It is a great mistake therefore to say that it is only the
Divine nature that requires an Atonement : for not only must
the penalty of broken lav/ be paid in a way that will save
and purify the sinner, but our human nature requires it as
much as the Divine.
“ We need more than to be made safe ; we need also to have
our sense of what is right satisfied ! Our sense of Guilt, as
w r ell as the principles of the Divine Government, demand an
Atonement. If I could be forgiven without an Atonement—
If I could be made pure without an Atonement—lf Ic- uld be
taken to Heaven without an Atonement—l should not be
morally satisfied ! ” — Dr. Thomson, Archbishop of Yoi k.


“ I am quite happy, trusting in the blood of Jesus,”
were among the last utterances of the young man who
died so lately at B e L e. He had braved
the dangers of the deep for several years with-
out fear of death, or thinking much about it ;
but suddenly he is arrested in his course, laid
aside from active life, and brought face to face
with death in a way he had never been before.
The conscience is aroused, and the vital question be-
comes urgent “ How shall I prepare for the great in-
evitable 1 ” What must I do * to be saved 1” is the all-
important question now—the uppermost thought of
* Nothing, either great or small,
Nothing, sinner, no ;
Jesus did it, did it all
Long, long ago.
When He, from His lofty throne,
Stooped to do and die,
Every thing was fully done ;
Hearken to His cry,—
It is finished ! Yes, indeed,
Finished every jot :
Sinner, this is all you need ;
Tell me. Is it not ?
Weary, working, plodding one,
Wherefore, toil you so ?
Cease your doing ; all was done,
Long, long ago.
Till to Jesus’ work you cling,
By a simple faith,
‘ Doing’ is a deadly thing,
‘Doing’ ends in death.
Cast, then, all your ‘ doing’ down,
Down at Jesus’ feet ;
Stand in Him, in Him alone,
Gloriously complete!


his heart, and is answered by the precious assurance
gradually dawning on him-—-the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanseth from all sin—“ Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ—as the Saviour of sinners, even the chief, (for
it is all in believing) and thou shall be saved.” As
he begins to r ealize what this really means, and feels
its adaptation to his own case, he just takes God at
His word. No cavil, no doubt is allowed to intervene.
He feels himself a sinner in the sight of God, and
simply takes possession of the salvation God hath pro-
vided for sinners through the shed blood of the Great
liedeemer—the Lamb op God, which taketh away the
sin of the world—whose blood atones for all past
guilt, and purities the entire life.
Although, as he told me, he had been careless about
religious subjects for years past, he had been r eligiously
trained, and the godly instructions of his early years
came back upon him with a force and a value they had
never possessed before. Special encouragement is this
to gcdly parents and godly S. S. teachers. The hymns
and prayers, and scripture texts he had learned when
young, are all remembered now, and help him greatly
in his new life. Solemn thoughts and feelings, expe-
rienced during his first communion, after confirmation,*
but long since forgotten, came rushing back upon him
with softening influences, and, with steady, earnest,
prayerful effort, salvation from the punishment and the
power of sin is thus, not only sought and found, but
ultimately enjoyed !
But I must try to give you some more definite in-
formation about this interesting case, for it is rather a
remarkable instance of God’s providential dealings, and
the working of llis gracious Spirit in the human
heart, through the medium of His own precious truth.
* He belonged to the Scottish Episcopal Church.


I saw him the clay after his arrival here, when the
hectic flush and laboured breath told at once how seri-
ous was his case. I looked out some books as soon as
I got home, and sent them to him—among them,
“ The Blood of Jesus,”* “ It is all in Believing,” and
“ The Old, Old Story.” In return I received the fol-
lowing note :—“ The books were exactly what I
wanted, but w'hat I want more is some one to talk
to me about them, for I have never had any one to
speak to on that all-important subject, which has been
brought so forcibly before me.”
I went to him at once, and had a long and interest-
ing conversation with him. He listened with eager
interest to all I said, as I tried to explain the way of
salvation to him. This was the beginning ot an inter-
course which lasted ten weeks, and which resulted
in the triumph of God’s grace in his salvation. The
minister and the doctor saw' him frequently and took
much interest in him. The latter did everything he
could for his body, and the former did his best to aid
his spiritual state, and as he raid to you last Sab-
*“ ‘ The Blood of Jesus ’ may be purchasedfor sixpence at
the Bible and Tract Depot, George-street, Sydney. This re-
markable book, written by a Presbyterian minister, has had
an immense circulation, and has been eminently blessed by
God as the means of bringing thousands to the full enjoyment
of salvation through a crucified Redeemer.
“The writer brought this book to the notice of the Rev.
P. B. Power, a clergyman of the Church of England, and an
author of some celebrity in the religious world—of deep
piety and a most catholic spirit—who lately visited these
shores in search of health.
“ He read it with deep interest, and was so pleased with it,
he went to the Bible Hall, as soon as he got back to Sydney,
purchased a dozen copies, and circulated them among his
friends. In bis last letter to the writer from Melbourne he
saj's,- —‘I still go on circulating ‘The Blood of Jesus,’ and
will continue to do so—it is a singularly good and useful
work.’ ”


bath, he was quite satisfied that he had “ passed from
death to life,” and had been made meet for the
inheritance of the saints in light.”
He was only once able to go to church, but I went
through the church service occasionally on Sunday
mornings with him and another young man, a con-
sumptive patient in the earlier stage of the disease,
who had recently come out from England to try and
stay its progress.
I saw him almost daily, and sometimes twice a day.
He assured me that he now under-stood clearly the way
of salvation through the blood of Jesus, and the per-
sonal appropriation necessary for every sinner who
would make it his own, but he did not seem to have
reached the full enjoyment which such personal ap-
propriation ought to bring. He read with interest a
valuable little work, “ Salvation Sought, Found, and
Enjoyed,”t and during the last week of his life entered
into the full enjoyment of the great Salvation. He
said to the minister the last time he saw him, “ A
great change has come over me, and I feel quite
happy.”
The doctor had told him that there was now no
hope, so his mind was prepared for the worst, yet he
remained peaceful, calm, and resigned.
Then the great change which had been gradually
passing through his mind, became more apparent.
The value of the sacred truths he had been dwelling
upon, shone out with all their sustaining influences, in
bold relief. Amidst the saddening circumstances of his
peculiar case, and under the power of God’s gracious
Spirit, he manfully drew around him the mantle of
Salvation —the robe of his Redeemer's righteousness,
+ This useful book can be had for Is. 3d. at the Bible and
Tract Depot, 256, George-street, Sydney.


and stood forth before us all more than conqueror
over Death and the grave, through Him who loved
him and gave Himself for him.
On the Friday before his death I passed some hours
with him. We were talking of God’s wondeiful deal-
ings with him, when I remarked, with reference to his
careless indifference about religion previous to his ill-
ness, “ If it were God's will to raise you up again and
spare your life a few years longer, I should think you
would live very differently, so far as religion is con-
cerned, to what you have done.” He shook his head
significantly and exclaimed, “Ah! wouldntl! very
differently indeed ! ”
On the Saturday morning I went down and sat with
him for an hour on the verandah. He was then cheer-
ful and quite composed, looking forward to see his friend
from Sydney for whom he had telegraphed. That gen-
tleman could not come, which was a disappointment to
the invalid. Letters from home must also have agitated
him a little, yet he took his dinner, and seemed much
as usual. At half-past three of that same day I was
suddenly summoned to see him to bid him good-bye.
I hastened down without a moment’s delay, and found
him very ill, with choking, laboured breathing, and
the perspiration pouring from him in large drops,
arising, as the doctor said, from the fact that the outer
coating of the diseased lung had given way. When
his eye caught sight of me as 1 entered the room, a
look of most eager satisfaction lighted up his face, and
stretching out his hand to grasp mine, he cried out
with great effort, “ I am going fast now, Good-bye,
Good-bye.” But seeing how deeply concerned I was
about him, he hastily added, “ My mind is quite com-
fortable.” This was evidently in allusion to an inquiry
I had often put to him, and was intended, no doubt, to
relieve my anxiety on that point. I said to him, “Is


Jesus still precious to you 1 ?” “Oh, yes,” lie ex-
claimed emphatically, his bright and glistening eyes
almost starting from his head with eager earnestness —
“ Oh, yes, Jesus only. None but Jesus now !”*
The doctor said nothing more could be done for
him, but he must be closely watched, so I accepted
the duty, took my place beside him, and told him
I would not leave him till all was over. It turned
out a much longer watch than any of us had antici-
pated. For thirty-six long, weary, trying hours that
death-struggle continued, during which his landlady—
with unvarying kindness, and I, watched beside him
till about a quarter to four o’clock on Monday the 12 th
* How sweat the name of Jesus sounds
In a believer’s ear !
It sooths his sorrows, heals his wounds,
And drives away his fear.
It makes the wounded spirit whole
And calms the troubled breast ;
’Tis manna to the hungry soul,
And to the weary rest.
Dear Name ! the rock on which I build,
My shield and hiding place ;
My never failing treasury, filled
With boundless stores of grace.
Jesus ! my Shepherd, Brother, Friend,
My Prophet, Priest, and King,
My Lord, my Life, my Way, mine End,
Accept the praise I bring.
Weak is the effort of my heart,
And cold my warmest thought;
But when I see Thee as Thou art,
I'll praise Thee as I ought.
Till then I would Thy love proclaim
With every fleeting breath ;
And may the music of Thy Name
Refresh my soul in death.


January, when the last breath left the worn-out] body
and the weary one was at rest. He was conscious till
within three quarters of an hour before death, and
during the whole of that trying time his mind was
peaceful and happy, calm, clear, and collected. He
had to endure a great deal of discomfort, for he was
never able to be moved from the easy chair in which he
was reclining when he was so suddenly seized. The
laboured breathing was very painful to witness, but he
was very patient through it all, without murmur or
complaint of any kind.
It was a case in which human sadness mingled
greatly. He had no relatives in this country, few
acquaintances, and only one friend. He was indeed
“ A stranger in a strange land.”
“Be kind to each other ! ” What a great blessing
it is in this world of sorrow and suffering to be able
to feel for others—to pour the balm of consolation
into the wounded spirit—to alleviate pain—to raise
up those who are bowed down with trial and disap-
pointment—do cheer the dying and smooth their pas-
sage to the tomb.
“ Be kind to each other, —
The night’s coming on
When friend and when brother
Alike may be gone.”
His father and mother had both died of consumption ;
a sister and several brothers had followed, and only
himself and a younger brother weie left with a fondly
attached aunt, who had taken care of the orphans when
their parents died. He had expected to go back to
them by the same vessel that brought him to the
colony, but instead of that, he was lying dying among
strangers, in a strange land. It was very sad, and


very solemn. On that Saturday night before his death,
while alone with him for a little, I asked him if he had
any message to give me to his aunt and brother, for I
was very anxious to get every drop of comfort I could
to mingle in the bitter cup I knew I would soon have
to send them. I expressed at the same time my regret
that he had not, as I had wished him to do, written
to them by the previous fortnightly mail. He thought
for a little, and then exclaimed, “ Give me pen and
ink, and I will try to write now, while my breathing
is a little easier.” I did so, and he leaned forward,
tried to collect his thoughts, and then, without stop-
ping, or the least hesitation for a word, but with heav-
ing breast and trembling hand, wrote one of the most
beautiful dying testimonies, and loving farewells it
has ever been my lot to witness :
“ 10th January, 1874.
“ Dear A and B ,
I am lying here waiting hourly for my summons
home, to be with, the other dear ones who have gone
before, and it is in this way you must look on me.
* Not lost, but gone before.’ Good-bye to both of
you in this world. May God bless and keep you, and
may we meet in Heaven to part no more. Good-bye
again. lam quite happy, trusting in the Blood of
Jesus !
“ (Signed), A. B.”
Is not that a precious document to send to distant
relatives from this far-off* land 1 It is so concise
and to the point. Its beautiful simplicity and touch-
ing pathos could scarcely be surpassed. To me it is
very precious, and is a rich reward for all the anxiety
I have felt on his account, or for any little attention
it may have been in my power to show him. The cir


cumstances were particularly solemn. The light of
eternity dawning on his soul, —far away from “ kith or
kin”—the dear ones who had gone before seeming
nearer now than the dear ones to be left behind. How
intensely interesting does every word become, and how
unspeakably valuable is that mnltum in parvo of a
dying testimony ! “I am quite happy, trusting in the
Blood of Jesus !”
“ Dear dying Lamb ! Thy precious Blood
Shall never lose its power,
Till all the ransomed Church of God
Are saved to sin no more.”
The night before he died I had been reading some
hymns to him, when he beckoned me to give him the
hymn-book, and looking up the index, he put his fin-
ger on the line, “ Jesus, lover of my soul,” and
begged me to read it to him. He had before told me
that he had learned that hymn among many others
when he was young, and that it was a great favourite
with him, but that he had never realized its value till
now. I read it, and he evidently enjoyed it. I re-
peated this verse to him at intervals as a prayer :
“ Hide me, 0 my Sayiour hide
Till the storms of life are past,
Safe into the haven guide,
Oh, receive my soul at last.”
So the hours wore on, and at length the end drew
near. He was leaning his head on my shoulder, un-
able, poor fellow, to find ease in any position. I said
to him, “ What a long weary waiting you have.”
“ Oh, yes,” he exclaimed, “ a weary, weary waiting.”
“ Yes, indeed,” I replied, “ but it will soon be all
over now, and then it will be—
“ Earth exchanged for Heaven.”


He gave me a look of great satisfaction, nodded his
head and said, “Yes, yes!” and looked so pleased
and happy. I also repeated to him these words, “ I
am the resurrection and the life,” and he at once caught
them up, and added with evident interest “ He that
believeth in Me, though he were dead yet shall he live,
and whosoever iiveth and believeth in me shall never
die.”
These wmrds, “ T am the resurrection and the life,”
fell upon my ears in solemn tones as we bore him to
his grave, recalling all the scenes of his dying hours,
and giving hope of everlasting life, through Him wdio
loved him and gave Himselt for him.
* ‘ Thou art gone to the grave ; but we will not deplore thee,
Though sorrows and darkness encompass the tomb :
The Saviour has passed through its portals before thee,
And the lamp of His love was thy guide through the gloom !
“ Thou art gone to the grave ; but we will not deplore thee,
Whose God was thy Ransom, thy Guardian and Guide !
He gave thee, He took thee —and He will restore thee ;
And Death has no sting, for the Saviour has died ! ”
What could be more consoling to those who are left
behind ? How cheering to thinkof the unfaltering faith
with which this young believerrealized the power of that
shed blood which atones and jmrijies —first implants
the motive—the new, loving, self-sacrificing motive,
and then purifies the heart and life. We come to love
Him who shed His blood for us, because He first loved
us. We yield up our hearts to Him—we cannot help
it—we yield love for love—for love begets love.
“ Herein indeed is love ” said St. John, “ not
that we loved God but that He loved us, and
gave His Son to be the propitiation for our sins.”
Henceforth, we are constrained to live, not to our-
selves, in the spirit of selfishness, but, in the spirit of
true self-sacrifice, to Him who loved us and gave Him


self for us. We live in Him—we follow His ex-
ample—we drink in His Spirit, and we are thus
gradually assimilated into Him who was holy, harm-
less and undefiled.
Just as the graft is gradually, by means of
the sap and nourishment derived from the stock
into which it is fixed, assimilated, into the vine,
so do we, deriving daily strength from the Great Mas-
ter, become gradually,—by a shorter or a longer process
it may be, —prepared, even here, amid all our grievous
shortcomings, for the Higher and Better Life above—
that life on which he who died so happily has already
entered—a life, not of endless psalm-singing—nor of
aimless palm-waving—nor l’eclining on flowery banks
by streams of running water—nor walking golden
streets-—nor wearing golden crowns—nor shouting
poeans of victory like ancient warriors rolled in blood !
No ! —emphatically No ! All these scriptural figures
are but meant to represent something far higher and
better, which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard—for the
heart of man in this imperfect state cannot conceive
the joys which God hath prepared for them that love
Him.
All the glories of earth pale before the brighter
glories of that better life. The Trumpet of Fame
ceases to stimulate, mere worldly Ambition loses its
power, and the voice of Duty alone is heard and obeyed.
The honours and distinctions of this world are
estimated at their true value, —useful for a time, it may
be, but mere earthly baubles, to be parted with for ever
at the entrance to the tomb.
The riches which many are toiling so hard after,
and are so fond of ‘ heaping up’ here, become mere
cumbrous dross, unless made use of for the benefit of
our fellow-creatures.


The petty jealousies so rampant everywhere—those
troublesome “ foxes that spoil the grapes ” —-those con-
temptible meannesses that deface many an otherwise
fair and estimable character—the party prejudices, the
paltry pride, the narrow-minded cavillings, the
unworthy suspicions, the strifes, divisions, misunder-
standings, and all those separating influences contrary
to the great law of Christian charity, which is the law
of love—hide their diminished heads, and disappear
before the large-hearted, generous, noble impulses of
the HIGHER LIFE ! *
Justin proportion as this life is dwelt upon and re-
alized here, will those unworthy jealousies and sus-
picions disappear—the various barriers of separation,
now looming so large and formidable, dwarf down to
their proper petty dimensions, and the “ oneness’ 7
there is in Christ draw all true believers in Him to-
wards each other, in closer bonds of Christian fellowship
and love.
* The grand testing text of Holy] Scripture, and the infallible
gauge by which every true Christian must try himself, is
this—
“lf any man have not the spirit of christ, he is none of
His.” Romans viii. and 9th.
“ Now, the fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-
suffering, Gentleness. Goodness, Faith, Meekness. Temperance.
For they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk
in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain-glory, provoking
one another, envying one another. Bear ye one anothers
burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ, and be not weary in
well-doing, for in due season ye shall reap if ye faint not.
Be not deceived ; God is not mocked : for whatsoever a man
soweth, that shall he also reap. He that soweth to the flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption ; but he that soweth to the
Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting! Let us do
good, therefore, as we have opportunity, unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.”
Gal. v. and 6th.


Blessed be God for the hope and assnrancethe Gospel
gives of that Brighter—Better Life beyond the grave,
a grand and glorious life of ceaseless, useful activity—
endless progress in knowledge of the highest kind,
extending throughout all the vast and the minute —
grasping with a clearer perception those mysterious
and intricate laws regulating the movements of mind"j~
and of matter, with their reflex infiuences on each other,
which are now so difficult to unravel ; and opening up
to us more and more plainly the mysteries of God’s
Providence here, and clearing away all the difficulties
which now encircle us on every side.
Yes, what we know not now, and, with our limited
faculties, cannot understand, will then be made
quite plain to us by degrees, and show forth the glory of
God in a way we can have no idea of at present. The
marvellous wisdom displayed in the Divine scheme of
man’s redemption from the punishment and power of
sin. and his transformation into that higher state of
being, will then shine forth with pre-eminent lustre ;
around which all our future glorified lives will for ever
centre and revolve, as around the great Sun of Ever-
lasting Righteousness —the brightness of the Father’s
+ “ Laws not yet made plain, but certain,
Kindred spirits may controul—
No human hand can lift the curtain,
And reveal the awful soul.
But the hour, the hour is hasting ;
Spirit shall witu spirit blend ;
Fast mortality is wasting,
Soon the secret all shall end,
And the naked soul, surrounded
With the numerous hosts of light,
Triumph in the view unbounded,
And adore the Infinite !”


glory, the express image of His Person. inW hom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.
The sanctified intellect, ever strengthening and ex-
panding, and stretching away farther and farther
into the boundless universe of God—the capacities
for enjoyment ever deepening and widening—no note
of discord to mar the general harmony—no misunder-
standings to distract or annoy—every soul true and
transparent—the purified affections ever in active,
lively exercise—where “ All the air is love.”
This is what a life of faith and self-sacrifice here
leads to above. But there must be the self-sacrifice,
for without that there is no evidence of the life of faith.
True faith can only be known by its works, “ by their
fruits ye shall know them,” and good works, to be of
any value, must spring from the pure and disinterested
motives which arise out of a life of faith.
This then is the Higher and Better Life on which our
dear young friend, having, as the Scripture phrase is,
washed his robes of sin and defilement and made them
white in the Blood of the Lamb, has already entered,
and has met with the friends who had gone before him ;
and where he now looks for those he left behind to
join him “ to part no more.”
What a priceless boon must this Salvation be to a
dying, sinful world ! so suited as it is to the wants of the
young and the old, thfe high and the low, the rich and
the poor, the ignorant and the learned. *
* All ye that pass by,
To Jesus draw nigh ;
To you is it nothing your Saviour should die ?
For sins not His own
He died to atone ;
Was love or was sorrow like His ever known ?


“ I am quite happy, trusting in the blood of Jesus,”
said the young believer, with all his earthly hopes
crushed out of him, and suddenly called, in the prime
of his days, to pass through the dark valley of the
shadow of death.
“ I know that my Redeemer liveth,” said the affec-
tionate wife and mother, with unflinching courage,
when called to leave all and pass alone into the unseen
land.
“ Rock of Ages ! cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee,”
said the dying Prince a few years ago, when suddenly
called, in the midst of a noble life, to pass on through
the dark river of death to the bright world beyond.
“ Pray for me as a sinner whose only hope is in the
blood of Jesus Christ his Lord,” said that eminent
Christian divine, Dr. Candlish, of Edinburgh, lately
on his dying bed, after a long life of Christian expe-
rience, great usefulness, and unwearied activity in the
service of his Great Master.
Oh ! lift up your eyes—
‘ ’Tis finished,’ H e cries,
Impassive He suffers ! Immortal He dies.
His death is my plea :
He nailed to the tree
The bond that condemned me—the sinner is free !
And when I’m to die,
Receive me I’ll cry,
For Jesus has loved me I cannot tell why—
But this I do find,
We two arc so joined,
He’ll not live in glory and leave me behind.


“ Jesus is ever near me, mother, and I am quite
happy/’ were among the last words of the Earl of
Kin tore’s second son, who died of consumption, a few
months ago, in the South of France, in his 22nd year.
“ Jesus is ever near me, mother, and I am quite
happy.”
“ My earthly faculties are slipping away day by
day,” said the most distinguished Scientific Discoverer
of modern times, as his end approached.” My earthly
faculties are slipping away day by day. Happy it is
for all of us that the true good lies not in them. As
they ebb, may they leave us as little children trust-
ing in the Great Father of mercies, and accepting His
Unspeakable Gift. I bow before Him who is Lord of
all.”
“ When I look back upon ray past life, I see nothing
but a dark array of sins and follies, and my only hope
of obtaining mercy rests on the Atoning Sacrifice of
my Saviour Jesus Christ,” said the accomplished and
distinguished Professor of Medical Science, to his
mother, as he lay dying of an incurable disease, which
had poisoned all his blood, and was fast eating into his
vitals. He had lived a correct, moral life, as a dutiful
son, loving husband, an affectionate father, and a useful
and much esteemed member of society, but no com-
fort can he find in all that now—his only hope is in
the Atoning Sacrifice of his Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.


“ I revel in the Atonement now," said the Christian
Philosopher triumphing over Death, to a friend who
had sailed to bid him a last earthly farewell.
He had, during a lifetime of philosophic investi-
gation, put that Atonement aside as incomprehensible.
He could not understand it clearly and he would have
nothing to do with it. Forgetting the important con-
sideration in connection with this and kindred topics,—
emanating from a Divinity, which, apart from the man-
ifestations given to the human race in Christ Jesus, is,
in a very great measure, incomprehensible to finite
minds,- —-that what may be beyond our reason may not
necessarily be contrary to reason ; but that were our
reasoning faculties only enlarged, as we believe they
will be in the Highe:r Life waiting us hereafter, what is
now to us mysterious and incomprehensible, will be-
come clear and intelligible, showing forth the marvel-
lous wisdom of Deity in a way to call forth from His
creatures ever-increasing adoration and praise. For-
getting this, he had sought to be wise above what is
written—to know more than G-od thought it wise to
reveal, and to go farther than his present limited facul-
ties could carry him. But all is changed now. The
Spirit of God has touched his heart and opened his
eyes. He lays his philosophy at the foot of the cross,
and humbly accepts the salvation offered to him
through the shed blood of the Great Redeemer.
“ Christ is mine, I revel in the Atonement,” he ex-
claims to his friend. “To think that the Saviour de-
scended from the throne of God, to suffer all the
sorrows of humanity and to die to save rebellious man !
Can I doubt when Igo to that Saviour? Ponder
every verse of that holy book (the Bible) and in a
voice of thunder pour it into the ears of the people.
Tell them to read it simply, just as it is, and believe it :


to take the words as they are and not reason, —reason
onlv perplexes. I reasoned, but it was in vain. It
IS A PROOF TO ME THAT THAT BOOK IS DIVINE, BECAUSE
REASON COULD NEVER HAVE WRITTEN IT.”*
Sir David Brewster, the eminent Optical Philoso-
pher ; Sir James Simpson, the celebrated Physician,
and Dr. Thomas Guthrie, the devoted Philanthropist and
eloquent preacher; men ofclear heads and large hearts, —
bosom friends while alive, — had all similar experiences
when they came to die. Not their past lives of sim-
ple faith and devoted obedience afforded them true
peace and comfort at last, but Christ —the Bock of
Ages—the Lamb of God, slain for sinners from the
foundation of the world—-the once crucified, but now
risen and exalted Bedeemer, was their only hope and.\
trust.
The Christian mysteries gave these great minds no
trouble. “ Why should they ] ” said Brewster, “We
are surrounded by mysteries—our own being is a
mystery, and no one is able to explain the relation of
the soul to the body !
*Ad honest doubter and earnest seeker after truth, who has
attained some celebrity in the literary world, gives utterance
to what is supposed to be his own experience in the following
beautiful and suggestive terms :
“About this time, beginning to read once more the history
of Jesus Christ the following questions occurred.
Could it be —might it yet be that, if there were a God, He
would visit His children after some fashion ? If so, is this a
likely fashion ? May it not be the only right fashion ?
In the story I found at least a perfection surpassing every-
thing to be found elsewhere ; and I felt at least sure that
whatever this man said must be true. II one could only be
as sure of the record ! But here certainly the sky will break
and the shadows flee away—and here I thought I already saw


‘‘The Trinity or the Atonement is a great deep, so is
Eternity, so is Providence 1 That causes me no uneasi-
ness, however. These are secret things that belong to
God, and he would make no attempt to reconcile the
sovereignty of grace with the responsibility of man—
they were both true —he could wait to see their har-
the first tinge of the returning life-blood, of the swooning
world !
How did men find Thee in days of old ?
How did they grow so sure ?
They fought in God’s name, they were glad'and bold,
They suffered, and kept themselves pure.
But now they say—neither above the sphere,
Nor down in the heart of man,
But only in Fancy, Ambition- or Fear,
The thought of Thee began.
If only that perfect tale were true
Which with touch of sunny gold,
Of the ancient many makes one anew,
And simplicity manifold.
But He said that they who did His word
The truth of it should know :
I will try to do it—if He be Lord,
Perhaps the old spring will flow ;
Perhaps the old spirit-wind will blow
That He promised to their prayer ;
And doing thy will, I yet shall know
Thee Father, everywhere?
Afterwards, 1 saw, shadowed out in the absolute devotion
of Jesus to men, that the very life of God, by which we live,
is everlasting giving of Himself away. He asserts Himself,
only, solely, altogether in an infinite sacrifice of devotion.
So must we live. The child must be as the Father. Live
he cannot on any other plan. Struggle as he may the Father
requires of him nothing He does not do Himself, who is the
prime unconditioned Sacrificer and Sacrifice.
The sorrows of all humanity make a thoroughfare through
the heart of Jesus, as they ought to do in some measure
through the heart of every one of His followers !


mony cleared—they were not contrary to reason, how-
ever incomprehensible they might be. We should not
expect in this world to be free from obscurities and
apparent discrepancies, and many things beyond our
now very limited grasp. He thanked God the way of
salvation was so simple—no laboured argument, no
hard attainment was required. To believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ was to live—he trusted in Him
and enjoyed peace.”
To one who spoke admiringly to him of the pride
of intellect being sacrificed at the foot of the cross,
he exclaimed, “ That rather disgusts me ! A merit
for a man to bow his intellect at the foot of the cross !
Why, what can the highest intellect on earth do but
bow to God’s word and God’s mind thankfully 1 Rest-
ing on the great Atonement affords me perfect peace !
It cannot be presumptuous to be sure of salvation
because it is Christ’s work, not ours—on the con-
trary, it must be presumption to doubt His word and
work ! ”
Like Abercrombie, Arago, Agassiz, Faraday,
and Simpson, Brewster believed in the distinct
spheres of sanctified speculation and simple faith,
and, like these great Christian philosophers, he
showed that he could walk in both without
stumbling. Simpson says of him : —“ He freely
expressed the unbounded and undoubting faith
of a very humble, and a very happy Christian.
Like my dear friend Professor John Reid, he seemed
impressed with the idea that one of the great joys, and
glories of heaven, would consist in the revelation of all
the marvels and mysteries of Creation, and Science, by
Him by whom all things were made, and who, as
Professor George Wilson held, was not only the Head
of the Church, but the Head and origin of all Science !


“ 1 have been infinitely happy here” he said to me,
“ but 1 shall be infinitely happier with my Saviour and
Creator ! ”
Science ought to go hand in hand with religion—the
one revealing the skill and wisdom of God in creation,
the other making known His marvellous loving kind-
ness in the redemption of man. As declared by no
less than 716 Students of the Natural and Physical
Sciences, in a written document published a few years
ago, to which their names are appended, many of them
now illustrious, and evidently “ not born to die”—all
of them men of scientific research and intellectual
attainment, Professors, Physicians, Surgeons, Natu-
ralists, Authors, &c. “We conceive it is impossible
for God’s word, as written in the great book of Nature,
and God’s word as written in Holy Scripture to con-
tradict one another, however much they may appear
to differ.” Time, and patient investigation will ex-
plain much—the Higher and Better Life above will
explain and harmonize all the rest.
“ I’m no fear’t tae dee, Peggy, woman,” said a
dying blacksmith to his wife, who belonged to the
Didyinus school of professors, and who, surprised to
see her husband’s cheerful, joyous, animated faith,
had just said to him, “Oh, Phil, man, are ye no fear’t
tae dee.” “lam no fear’t* tae dee, Peggy, woman, for
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin. God,
Himself, says this, and I just believe it. I just lippent
tae this—ye ken, He canna be mista’en—is His word
no’ to be lippen’d tae as weel as the best o’ men’s 1
Yes, indeed, and far better ! Wi’ Christ’s blood and
God’s word, I’m no’ fear’t tae dee, Peggy !”
* Fear’t means afraid. + Lippen means a clinging trust.


“1 see it a’ noo,” said an old Scotchwoman, on the
verge of the grave, to the city missionary, who
was explaining to her in simple language the way of a
sinner’s acceptance with God. “ I see it a’ noo !
Jesus offers to save me, an’ I’m just tae lippen to
H im,-— an’ I will tae —yes —I’ll lippen tae Him, for I
ken noo He’s able and willing to save even an auld
sinner like me.”
But some may say, as has sometimes been said to me,
“ Tell me not how people die, but how they have
lived.” My answer is simply, “ Tell me both how
they have lived and how they have died.”
“ Come, my son, and see how a Christian can die,”
said the brave Sir Henry Havelock, the hero of Luck-
now and Cawnpore, as his end drew near on the scene
of his military triumphs. “Come, my son, and see
how a Christian can die !” And, turning to Sir James
Outram, his brave companion in arms, he exclaimed,
“ I have, for forty years, so ruled my life, that when
death came I might face it without fear.” Shortly
after he calmly resigned his spirit into the hands of
his Redeemer, in the blessed hope of immortality.
“ For more than fifty years I have loved and served
God,” said an aged saint lately on his dying bed, in a
neighbouring colony. “ For more than fifty years I
have loved and served God : I made many mistakes,
but I am not conscious of having once wickedly de-
parted from Him.” He landed first in Sydney as far
back as the 28th June, 1812, and for more than fifty
years he laboured in the cause of Christ, in this and


the neighbouring colonies, in New Zealand, and in the
islands of the South Pacific. He was made the
honoured instrument, in God’s hand, of turning
thousands from darkness to light—from the power of
Satan to serve God, the most of whom he was spared
to see give evidence of the radical change they had
undergone, by long lives of consistent usefulness in the
cause of Christ. I made his acquaintance nearly thirty
years ago, and a more guileless, consistent, self-devoted
character it has seldom been my lot to meet with. He
had many troubles and trials* to contend with and
* Trials are God’s discipline to fit us tor the Life to
which He is leading us. Whom He loveth He chasteneth
and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. If ye endure
chastening God dealeth with you as with sons : for what son
is he whom the father chasteneth not?
“ There will come
Alike the day of trial unto all,
And the rude world will buffet us alike.
But when the silence and the calm come on,
And the high seal of character is set,
'We shall not all be similar. The scale
Of being is a graduated thing ;
And deeper than the vanities of power,
Or the vain pomp of glorv, there is writ
Gradation in its hidden characters.—
In the temper of the invisible mind,
The God-like and undying intellect,
There are distinctions that will live in heaven
When time is a forgotten circumstance !
The elevated brow of kings will lose
The impress of regalia, and the slave
Will wear his immortality as free
Beside the crystal waters : but the depth
Of -wisdom in the attributes of God
Will measure the capacities of mind ;
And as the angels differ, will the ken
Of gifted spirits glorify Him more.
It is life’s mystery. The soul of man
Createth its own destiny of power :
And as the trial is intenser here,
His being hath a nobler strength in heaven ! ”


endure, and not a few persecutions among the heathen,
endangering his own life and the lives of those dear
to him, but he maintained his consistent Christian
character through all, and his steady, cheerful faith
remained with him to the last. “I am going home,”
he said, as his end drew near, “ but all is well. The
blood of Jesus Christ, God’s Son, cleanseth me from
all sin. I am going home. All is well ! ”
“ I shall die in these uplands,” wrote Dr. Living-
stone to Sir Thomas McLear, at the Cape, whilst tra-
versing the wilds of Africa, solitary and alone, shoitly
after the death of his wife. “ I shall die in these up-
lands, and some one else will carry out the plans I have
longed to put in practice and carry out to completion.
I have been thinking a great deal since the departure
of my beloved one, about the regions whither she has
gone, and I imagine, from the manner the Bible de-
scribes it, we have got too much mockery in our ideas.
There will be work there, as well as here, and nossiblv
not such a vast difference in our being as is expected ;
but a short time there will give more insight than a
thousand mu sings. We shall see Him by whose in
expressible love and mercy we got there, and all
whom we love, and all the loveable. I work with as
much vigour as I can, and mean to do so till the change
comes; but the prospect of a home is all dispelled.’
Thus wrote the Missionary hero, the intrepid Explorer,
the'Martyr in the cause of science and Christian phi-
lanthropy, a few years ago, and now the great change
has indeed come, and he has passed into the Higher
and the Better Life, and has seen the Saviour he loved
so well, and has met with all the dear ones he longed
to meet again.
“ The sons of ignorance and night,
May dwell in the Eternal Light,
Through the Eternal Love 1


What a great similarity there is in the dying
experience of all these and of many, many others
that might be given. The young believer, with his
foot, as it were, only on the threshold of the divine
life—the middle-aged, in the midst of active useful-
ness—the aged, experienced, Christian Minister, the
learned Divine, the skilled Physician, the military
Hero, the worn-out missionary, the distinguished
Philosopher, appear all at last as sinners whose hope
and confidence in the sight of a pure and Holy God,
are in the power and efficacy of a Saviour’s blood to
save and sanctify.*
* There 13 a name I love to hear—
I love to speak its worth ;
It seems like music in mine ear,
The sweetest name on earth.
It tells me of a Saviour’s love,
Who died to set me free ;
It tells me of His precious blood—
The sinner’s perfect plea.
It tells me of a Father’s smile
Beaming upon His child ;
It cheers me through this ‘ little while,’
Through desert, waste, and wild.
It tells me what a Father hath
In store for every day,
And though 1 tread a darksome path,
Yields sunshine all the way.
It tells of One whose loving heart
Can feel my deepest woe,
Who in my sorrow bears a part
That none can bear below’.
It bids my trembling soul rejoice ;
Dries every rising tear,
It tells me in a still small voice”—
To trust and not to fear.
Jesus ! the name I love so w r ell—
The name I love to hear !


The religion of Jesus Christ, when rightly under-
stood, carries with it an inherent power to influence,
purify, and ennoble the whole life, to cheer the gloom of
' ' : ' 1 " to I’Shton up the entrance to the tomb with
a radiance nothing else can bestow.
This great Salvation is offered to all, without money
and without price. And it is offered this day once
niore to every one of you. The Spirit and the Bride say
Come ~and whosoever will-let him come and take
the water of Life freely P’ “ Now !is the accepted
time . Now . is the day of salvation !” Not to-
morrow or next day, but Now ! The Present alone is
ours The Future belongs to God. We cannot tell
what a day may bring forth 1-To-day ! if ye will hear
tat nZ) yOU ' Not ° thCT * V, or hour,
* ma 7 "? 0n
“Let the wicked forsake his ways and the un-
righteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto
No tongue on earth its worth can tell,
No heart conceive how dear.
This name shall shed its fragrance still
A long the thorny road ;
Shall ever smooth the rugged hill,
That leads me up to God.
And there with all the blood-bought throne
; h rom sin and sorrow free,
IMI sing the new eternal song
Of Jesu’s love for me.
* See “ The Anxious Enquirer after Salvation Directed
Tract Depot g 2s(‘7' to b ® h f d f or Q sixpence at the Bible and
iract l >epot, Job, George-street, Sydney.


the Lord, and He will have mercy upon him, and unto
our Go<i and He will abundantly pardon.
.. Thoo-h your sins may have been as scarlet they
shall be made y white as snow j though they may ha e
been red like crimson they shall teas wool fm the
“ Let not conscience make you hoger,
‘ Or ofi.litness fondly dream,
All the fitness He re.mireta,
Is to feel your need of H im,
This He gives you
>lis the Spirit’s rising beam.
T ook • Believe ! and Live ! a life, henceforth, of
simple fidth,'pore mojiv e and loving,
. M /" iCh C o W nS et the by w^
which purilieth the heart, and overcometh the wo 1
of equal import to this» ± b h - ■ be com .
cannot eq r it, of JJhly P^lo-
pared with it! w nerc m j it were, into
sophy that can ht or the place of this
Divine
-f s-sM.vsj.ti .i~.
peace f that dear young fellows
80 f “ from
„-,s
Syduey.


kindred, with the light of another world shining
around him, and showing him all his shortcomings
and his sins 1 Where is the philosophy that could
have brought, at such a time, not only peace, but joy
and rejoicing into that young heart—brought suddenly
face to face with Death, and (to mere philosophy) all
the dread beyond 1
Talk of Philosophy indeed ! Thou Bleeding Lamb !
The true Philosophy is Love of Thee !
“ There is a fountain filled with blood
Drawn from Immanuel’s veins ;
And sinners plunged beneath that flood,
Lose all their guilty stains.
The dying thief rejoiced to see
That fountain in his day ;
And there may sinners vile as he,
Wash all their sins away.
Dear dying Lamb ! Thy precious blood
Shall never lose it’s power,
Till all the ransomed Church of God
Be saved to sin no more.
E’er since by faith I saw the stream
Thy flowing wounds supply,
Redeeming love has been my^theme,
And shall be till I die.
Then, in a nobler sweeter song,
I’ll sing Thy power to save,
When this poor lisping, stammering tongue
Lies silent in the grave.
Till then I would Thy love proclaim
With every fleeting breath,
And may the music of Thy name
Refresh my soul in death.”


Sacred
To the memory of
A R B N,
Who died at B e L e, N h K g,
On the 12th January, 1874,
Aged 22 Years and 11 Months.
A stranger in a strange land, his dying testimony was :
“I am quite happy, trusting in the Blood of Jesus.”
“Jesus, lover of my soul,
Let me to Thy bosom fly,
While the raging waters roll—
While the tempest still is nigh.
Hide me, Oh ! my Saviour, hide,
Till the storms of life are past ;
Safe into the Haven guide,
Oh ! receive my soul at last.”
Pot Private Circulation.
Loxton & Printers, 42 New Pitt Street, Sydney.
