

-J /V F p
96








THE CEREMONY
OF THE
UNVEILING
OF THE
Sir Joseph c ßanks Memorial
His Excellency Rt. Hon. W. J. McKell,
Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia,
CAPTAIN COOK’S LANDING PLACE,
KURNELL,
SATURDAY, 6th SEPTEMBER, 1947.


E. J. L. HALLSTROM, Esq., F.R.Z.S.
The impressive memorial to Sir Joseph Banks is the gift of
Edward J. L. Hallstrom, Esq. (Fellow of the Royal Zoological
Society), to the Captain Cook's Landing Place Trust, for the
Australian Nation.
Appreciation is here recorded by Mr. Hallstrom of the services rendered
by those associated with him in the design and erection of the Sir Joseph
Banks Memorial.
1. The Captain Cook’s Landing Place Trust suggested the design, com-
posed the inscriptions for the tablets and selected the site.
2. Mr. K. R. Cramp, 0.8. E. (President of the Sir Joseph Banks Memorial
Fund Trust and Trustee of the Captain Cook’s Landing Place), repre-
sented the donor in the general supervision of the production and
erection of the monument.
3. Mr. S. Radecki prepared the design ba,sed on the sketch originally
suggested by members of the Captain Cook’s Landing Place Trust.
4. Mrs. T. Jean Hill modelled the head of Sir Joseph Banks that appears
on the memorial.
5. Mrs. E. M. Folkes, of Willoughby, produced the cast of the head.
6. Messrs. J. Castles & Son, of Newtown, produced the tablets with the
inscriptions.
7. Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson drew the detailed working plans, and
prepared, shaped and polished the trachyte.
8. Mr. Colin M. Arnold erected the memorial on the site at Kurnell.


During the afternoon the New South Wales Police Band
played selected items.
Ihe Queen Anne Jack was flown at the Monument.
1. 2.00 p.m. The official launch left La Perouse for Kurnell.
2. 2.15 p.m. Arrival at Kurnell and assembly at the Sir Joseph Banks
Monument.
3. 2.30 p.m. A Welcome to His Excellency the Governor-General by the
President of the Captain Cook’s Landing Place Trust.
4. 2.35 p.m. Edward J. L. Hallstrom, Esq., F.R.Z.S., invited His Ex-
cellency to unveil the Monument and present it to the
Trust on behalf of the people of Australia.
5. 2.45 p.m. His Excellency the Governor-General, Rt. Hon. W. J. McKell.
6. 3.00 p.m. Address on “Sir Joseph Banks” by the President of the
Trust (K. R. Cramp, Esq., 0.8. E., M.A., F.R.A.H.S.).
7. 3.15 p.m. Hon. R. J. Heffron, M.L.A., Minister for Education, pro-
posed a vote of thanks to His Excellency.
8. 3.25 p.m. Planting of Banksias near the Monument.
9. 3.35 p.m. “God save the King.”
10. 3.40 p.m. The official party partook of afternoon tea at the Trustees’
Cottage.
11. 4.30 p.m. Departure of the official launch from Kurnell.
5


''SikMhd. v JM Pf 6 '■ -■ W-
'* ’ ■* • t "- ■
- .. ‘
1
■ ■■ ./
1
r ■
* ■
s
*!*. ; • V 4
■* ...3S
■f ■
9
BSP
■
♦, ~ » v.
,
*
■
*•
T/ie Memorial faces the anchorage of H.M.S. “Endeavour,” and is situated mid-way between the Captain Cook and Solander
Monuments. It consists of a column and semi.circular seat of polished trachyte with an oval trachyte floor twenty-two feet in
diameter. The column carries a bronze head of Sir Joseph Banks, a bronze tablet appropriately worded, and a tablet bear-
ing the donor’s name. Subsequent to the unveiling ceremony another plaque was attached to the foot of the column bearing
the inscription : “Unveiled by His Excellency the Governor-General, Mr. W. J. McKell, 6th September, 1947.”


SIR JOSEPH BANKS.
Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820) is known as the Patron or Father of
Australia. As the result of his visit to Botany Bay with Captain James
Cook, R.N., in H.M.S. “Endeavour” in 1770, he developed an active and
beneficial interest in the foundation of the first British settlement in this
continent. He placed before the British Government in I 779 a proposal
for British settlement in New South Wales; and later supported similar
schemes advocated by James Mario Matra (1783) and Sir George Young
(1783). After the establishment of the colony, he was influential in the
selection of its early Governors, and became a “godfather” to the Governors,
explorers (especially Matthew Flinders), artists, botanists and other scientists
who for a time made their sojourn here. The British Government learnt
to lean on him in matters of policy connected with New South Wales.
Banks devoted himself to a study of the natural sciences, and gained
world-wide fame as a leading botanist of his day. In 1766, when only
23 years of age, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society; in 1778
he became its President, and retained the office to the day of his death
42 years later.
His collection of specimens of Australian flora, which were kept in
the Royal Gardens at Kew, aroused considerable interest in England. In
1904 some of these specimens were returned to New South Wales, and
are now housed in the Herbarium, Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
The name of Banks is immortalised in the naming of plants and places.
The Banksia, in particular, grows freely in the soil at Kurnell, where Sir
Joseph Banks first found them. The plant will be utilised to enhance the
character of the beautiful memorial which is being unveiled in his honour.
Cape Banks, at the north entrance to Botany Bay; the Sydney suburbs
of Bankstown and Banksia; Mount Banks (now Mount King George), in
the Blue Mountains; Cape Banks and Sir Joseph Banks Group (islands off
South Australia), Banks Island (Queensland), Banks Peninsula (N.Z.), and
Banks Land (within the Arctic Circle) are among the places named in
his honour.




THE STORY OF THE MONUMENT.
In 1905 a committee of fifty-two citizens, of whom Mr. J. H. Maiden,
F.L.S., Curator of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney, was the leading spirit, was
formed “to perpetuate the memory and distinguished services of Sir Joseph
Banks.” A statue was considered an appropriate and desirable form of
memorial.
The movement languished for several years. Nevertheless, thirty years
later. Sir Daniel Levy, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and the last
survivor of the original Banks Memorial Committee, announced that the
fund had amounted to £B5O.
Since that time, several proposals relating to the memorial have
been considered, principally by various Cabinets. Eventually the McKell
Government decided upon the establishment of “The Sir Joseph Banks
Memorial Fund Trust” to consider the form the memorial should take, and
to recommend to the Government accordingly. A special Act of Parlia-
ment for the establishment of the Trust was sponsored in 1943 by the
Minister for Education, Hon. Clive Evatt, K.C., M.L.A. The Trust repre-
sented various bodies which had some interest in the Banks proposal, and
was constituted as follows :
K. R. CRAMP, 0.8. E., M.A., Chairman of the Trust, appointed by the
Minister for Education, Mr. Clive Evatt, K.C.
E. J. L. HALLSTROM, representing the Royal Zoological Society of
New South Wales, of which he was shortly afterwards elected a
Fellow.
J. W. METCALFE, 8.A., Principal Librarian of the Public Library of
New South Wales.
J. LUDOWICI, Naturalists’ Society.
Hon. T. D. MUTCH (an ex-Minister for Education), Royal Australian
Historical Society.
NORMAN S. NOBLE, D.Sc.(Agr.), M.Sc., D.I.C. (London), the Linnean
Society of New South Wales.
T. H. COMPAGNONI, Managing Trustee of The Captain Cook’s Landing
Place Trust.
R. H. ANDERSON, B.Sc.(Agr.), representing the Minister for Agri-
culture and Forests.
(Mr. G. H. HERWIG, of the Education Department, was appointed
Secretary to the Trust.)
The Act allowed the Trust six months, or such further time as the
Governor might sanction, to furnish its recommendation to the Governor.


The Trust considered the merits of no fewer than seventeen proposals
and reported favourably to the Government on four of them, though it was
recognised that two of the four made demands which could not be met by
the limited amount of funds at the disposal of the Trust. With the
augmentation of the Fund, however, by a special grant of £2,000 by the
McKell Government and the generous gift of £5OO by Mr. E. J. L. Hallstrom,
the total amount in hand stood at £3,941, and the Trust decided it could
safely approve of the preparation and publication of the Banks letters and
papers which were hidden away in several libraries in Australia, Great
Britain and the United States of America. On the recommendation of the
“Banks Trust,” the Government passed another Act transferring the fund
to the Trustees of the Public Library of New South Wales, since that body
was the custodian of a very substantial proportion of the Banks papers.
A second gift of £3OO by Mr. Hallstrom—on this occasion to the
Captain Cook’s Landing Place Trust—made the erection of a Banks
Memorial at Kurnell a practicable proposal. The donor, however, was not
convinced that this contribution was adequate to do fitting honour to
Australia’s Patron. Prompted by a suggestion by the Chairman of the
Banks Trust, he undertook to make a much more costly memorial than
was originally envisaged his own gift to the people of Australia. As a
result, a dignified trachyte seat and column has been erected close to the
spot where Banks first placed foot on Australian soil with Captain James
Cook on April 29, 1770. (See illustrations on pages 6 and 8.)
The total cost of the memorial, which was approximately £2,000, was
borne entirely by Mr. Hallstrom. In addition, he insisted that The Captain
Cook’s Landing Place Trust should retain his gift of £5OO and invest it
so that the proceeds might meet the cost of maintenance of the memorial.


THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL UNVEILING THE BANKS MEMORIAL.


Proceedings at the Unveiling of the
Sir Joseph Banks Memorial.
On the afternoon of Saturday, 6th September, 1947, under a
bright, sunny sky, a monument to commemorate the services of
Sir Joseph Banks to New South Wales was unveiled at Kurnell by
His Excellency the Governor-General of the Commonwealth, Rt.
Hon. W. J. McKell, who was accompanied to the historic spot by
Her Excellency Mrs. McKell.
The Vice-Regal party was met at La Perouse by Mr. K. R.
Cramp, 0.8. E., M.A. (President of The Captain Cook’s Landing
Place Trust), Mrs. Cameron O. Cramp, and Mr. E, J. L. Hallstrom,
F.R.Z.S., the donor of the monument. Other distinguished visitors
introduced to His Excellency included Rear-Admiral Moore, Lieut.-
General Berryman, Wing-Commander Guthrie, Hon. R. R. Downing,
M.L.C. (Minister for Justice), and Mrs. Downing, Hon. R. J. Heffron,
M.L.A. (Minister for Education), Mrs. and Miss Heffron.
The party was conveyed by the official launch to Kurnell, where
the President introduced the other members of the Trust, Mr. T. H.
Compagnoni (Managing Trustee) and Mrs. Compagnoni, Mr. Justice
J. A. Ferguson, 8.A., LL.B., Commander J. S. Bovill, R.N., Messrs.
J. B. Nelson and H. G. Conde, and Mr. K. W. Britton (Secretary).
Their Excellencies were conducted to the Monument, where
over 150 invited guests and a large concourse of people had been
entertained by the New South Wales Police Band with musical
items while awaiting the arrival of the Governor-General and party.
THE OFFICIAL WELCOME.
The ceremony opened with a welcome to their Excellencies
Mr. and Mrs. McKell, expressed on behalf of The Captain Cook’s
Landing Place Trust by the President, Mr. K. R. Cramp.
THE PRESIDENT :
Your Excellencies, Mr. Hallstrom, Rear-Admiral Moore, Lieut.-
General Berryman, Wing-Commander Guthrie, Ladies and Gentle-
men, —To-day we have reached the culmination of a movement that
commenced over forty years ago. We are here to do honour to
the memory of a very distinguished figure in the history of Australia,
namely, Sir Joseph Banks. It seems but fitting that, as he was
such a great figure and so closely associated also, not only with
Australia, but with His Majesty of the time, George 111., we should
have with us this afternoon His Excellency the Governor-General
as the representative of the present King of England, George VI.
We desire to extend to him and to Her Excellency Mrs, McKell a


very warm welcome to this historic spot, and wish them to be
assured that we are very glad they are here to honour us and the
memory of Sir Joseph Banks.
We also welcome Mr. Hallstrom, who, I have to tell you, has
been almost completely instrumental in this monument being erected.
I will tell you more of that later on. We are very glad he is here
to-day at the unveiling of this memorial to Sir Joseph Banks, the
total cost of which was borne by him. lam extremely proud, and
so are all the members of The Captain Cook’s Landing Place Trust,
to have been associated with him in bringing this movement to a
successful climax.
May I also express our very great pleasure in that we have
the three services represented in the persons of Rear-Admiral Moore,
Lieut.-General Berryman and Wing-Commander Guthrie. 1 believe
they are particularly pleased with this spot. Rear-Admiral Moore
and Lieut.-General Berryman come over frequently, and they have
addressed us on former occasions.
Unfortunately the Prime Minister of Australia, who wished to
be here, was unable to cancel another engagement. Mr. McGirr,
State Premier, wrote me a few weeks ago asking could he delay
his final reply. Yesterday he sent a letter to me by hand saying :
“Both Mrs. McGirr and I had been looking forward to attending
this function, and will you kindly convey to the members of your
Trust our very sincere apologies that we are unable to be at the
unveiling of the Memorial to Sir Joseph Banks.”
I think it is unnecessary for me at this stage to say any more,
and I am now going to call upon Mr. Hallstrom to invite His Ex-
cellency to unveil the monumennt and present it to The Captain
Cook’s Landing Place Trust on behalf of the people of Australia.
Mr. HALLSTROM :
Your Excellencies, Mr. Cramp, and Ladies and Gentlemen, —
It is a great pleasure to me to see at last the Banks Monument
erected on this lovely spot with which Australia’s early history is
associated. I had a year of work in connection with this monu-
ment, and to have it placed in this position has not been quite as
easy as it would appear. Because of that, I have had to call on
a number of people to help me—the designers, artist, artificers of
the stone, the builder, members of The Captain Cook’s Landing
Place Trust, and all the others who assisted in this work to the
memory of a great man who is regarded as “The Patron or Father
of Australia.” I think it is very fitting that another great man,
the Governor-General of Australia, should be here to-day to unveil
this monument to the memory of Sir Joseph Banks.
I would ask your Excellency if you would kindly unveil and
present the monument to this Trust on behalf of the people of
Australia.


THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL’S ADDRESS.
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL :
Mr. Cramp, Mr. Hallstrom, Hon. Ministers, Members of the
Services, Ladies and Gentlemen, —I desire to thank Mr. Cramp for
the invitation that he extended to me on behalf of his Trust to
come here to-day. I want to thank him for the very generous
personal reference that he made, and I also want to thank Mr.
Hallstrom for the remarks for which he is responsible.
I am full of gratitude to the Trust for inviting me here to-day,
and for giving me the opportunity to unveil this monument and
present it to the Trust on behalf of the people of Australia. That
invitation and my pre:ence here to-day give me great personal
pleasure. In addition to that, it enables me to associate myself
with an event of tremendous historical importance to Australia, and
officially I am happy indeed that the Trust has seen fit to recognise
the position which I hold by associating that position with the event
we are celebrating to-day, because this is an event not only of local
but of Australian-wide significance.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a long step from that day on the
29th April, 1770, when those two gallant and intrepid men, Cook
and Banks, left their little boat in the bay we are facing, and first
set foot on this historic spot, to this day when we gather together
to do honour to the gentleman who was described by Mr. Hallstrom
as “Patron or Father of Australia.” It does not make us happy
to realise that it took 177 years to arrive at the stage when we
erected a monument to Banks, but we have at last arrived at that
day; and now that we have arrived at that day, I feel that we should
reflect for just a few moments for the purpose of paying some
tribute to those who have brought us to this stage. Our sincere
thanks are extended to that little band who held a meeting in
Sydney in 1905 and lit the torch, and also to those who have carried
the torch through the intervening years.
We should pay a special tribute to j. H. Maiden, F.L.S., the
man who has done so much to make Banks and his work known
to Australians, and who generously contributed the proceeds of his
great work to the construction of a monument. Thanks are due
c 5
to them all.
And, gentlemen, our great thanks are due also to that big-
hearted, generous, public-spirited citizen whom we have with us
to-day, Mr. E. J. L. Hallstrom. It is due to his generosity that
we are able to celebrate this eventful day. We express to him
our gratitude and our thanks. It is through him that we are
able to unveil this memorial, which is unquestionably a magnificent
monument; magnificent in conception, beautiful in design, and it
also has utilitarian value in that it includes a semi-circular seat. I
feel to-day that we should all be happy and content that some-
thing has been erected to Banks which is worthy of his memory.
To-day, ladies and gentlemen, you will notice by the pro-


gramme that there is to be an address on Banks by Mr. Cramp,
so that I will not go into any detail in referring to him, but I would
like to say that, not only was he a great friend of Australia, but
that he was a great Englishman, and one who made a great con-
tribution towards scientific development. For 42 years he was
President of the Royal Society, and died in harness. Appreciation
of his services is indicated by the statue erected to his memory in
the National History Museum, London. The fitting out of the
Endeavour for scientific purposes was paid for from his private
purse. His public spiritedness and great service are an inspiration
and an example to all those who have been and are interested in
the development of Australia and in the development of the British
Commonwealth of Nations.
Ladies and gentlemen, again I want to express my thanks.
I am most grateful for the opportunity of linking myself with this
historic ceremony to-day, and I want to conclude by making refer-
ence to the vision and faith of Sir Joseph Banks, indicated in a
letter which he wrote to Governor Hunter on the 30th March, 1797.
In that letter he said, “I see the future prospect of Empire and
Dominion which now cannot be disappointed.”
THE UNVEILING.
Mr. CRAMP (President) :
Ladies and Gentlemen, —I will now ask the Governor-General,
Mr. W. J. McKell, to unveil the monument, and Mrs. McKell to
remove the flag from the back of the semi-circular seat.
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL :
Ladies and Gentlemen, —I am honoured indeed to have the
opportunity of unveiling this Memorial, and, on behalf of the people
of Australia, in presenting it and handing it over to the care and
attention of The Captain Cook’s Landing Place Trust.
(The Governor-General then unveiled the column and revealed
the bronze head of Sir Joseph Banks and the tablet commemorative
of Banks’ services. The flag removed by Her Excellency Mrs.
McKell had covered the name BANKS in large lettering on the
back of the seat.)
The tribute to Banks on the monument is worded as follows :
In grateful memory of
SIR JOSEPH BANKS
1743—1820
Famous British Scientist
who visited these shores with
Captain James Cook, R.N.,
in 1770.
His advocacy of British settlement in
New South Wales, his beneficial influence
on its early administration, his comprehensive
researches into its flora, his vigorous
personality and breadth of vision, merit
his recognition as
The Patron of Australia.


AN ADDRESS ON SIR JOSEPH BANKS.
Mr. CRAMP (President) :
Your Excellencies, Mr. Hallstrom, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Sir Joseph Banks, who is the object of our attention to-day, once
said, “We are all too fond of hearing ourselves well spoken of by
persons whom we hold in high regard.” We are going to speak
well of him this afternoon, but he will not hear it, and the eulogistic
references will be made by those whom he knew not.
One hundred and seventy-seven years have elapsed since this
distinguished botanist visited these shores with Captain James Cook.
As a result of that visit, his advice was sought time after time by
the British Cabinet whenever questions of settlement and adminis-
tration were calling for decision, yet very little has been done until
recent years to commemorate his services to this country in an
adequate and appropriate manner. A few grateful citizens inaugu-
rated a movement more than four decades ago to acknowledge our
indebtedness to him, and a few Cabinets gave the question a more
or less desultory consideration. Eventually the very definite and
practical interest manifested by the McKell Government, who formed
a Trust to consider how best to commemorate Banks’ services, and
the generosity of one Banksian-spirited and big-hearted citizen,
Mr. E. J. L. Hallstrom, Fellow of the Royal Zoological Society,
rendered possible public recognition of the great man’s services.
As you have been called upon this afternoon to pay tribute
to Sir Joseph Banks’ memory, it is but right you should know on
what justification we act. The progress of a country often depends
much more than is realised on the sagacity, vision and common
sense of one individual. It was so when the question of settling
Australia was first taken into consideration.
Joseph Banks, born in 1743, was but twenty years of age
when his father’s death endowed him with an ample fortune, which,
fortunately for the world, he spent wisely and altruistically in the
cause of Science. We should thank God for at least some wealthy
men and for the good they do with their possessions. Banks and
Hallstrom may both be included in this category. At the University,
Banks even assisted to provide the salary for a Lecturer in Botany
when he discovered that no lectures in that subject were being
delivered.
At the extremely early age of 23 years he was elected a Fellow
of the Royal Society, which probably means that he was the youngest
member ever on the Royal Society’s list. Equally remarkable is
the fact that he was elected its President in 1778, and remained
ruch until the day of his death, 42 years later, in 1820. The
Council definitely refused his resignation when it was offered.
A young man in the eighteenth century with £6,000 per year
to spend was in a most advantageous position. Instead of follow-
ing in the well-worn track of wealthy men of social standing who,
to use an Americanism, “did” the recognised tour of Europe and


made the orthodox sojourn in Paris, Banks devoted himself and
his resources to scientific investigations. He travelled to new and
little known countries in pursuit of knowledge. He collected plants
in Newfoundland and Labrador, and his scientific enthusiasms were
not damped in any way by the discomforts associated with the
sailing vessels of those days. When Captain Cook was commis-
sioned to sail to the Southern Seas to conduct astronomical obser-
vations of the planet Venus and to search for new lands, the rich
young man was granted the privilege of accompanying him as an
independent scientist, with his own retinue of botanists, artist-
draughtsmen, recorders and servants. ■ At all ports of call—Rio
de Janeiro, Staten Island, Otaheite, New Zealand, Botany Bay and
the Endeavour River—Banks collected botanical specimens strange
to the world. He was with Cook in the first boatload to land on
these shores. He scoured the foreshores of the bay to collect
hundreds of samples of Australian flora.
His specimens were carefully dried and preserved by him, and on
his return to England housed in the world-renowned Kew Gardens.
In recent times six hundred of these specimens were returned to
Sydney and placed in the National Herbarium, Botanic Gardens,
Sydney, established by the late J. H. Maiden, who wrote that he
regarded these specimens with especial veneration, and “their care
is an everlasting object of solicitude with me.” We all hope that
some day a fireproof structure will be provided for this Banksian
collection, if only as a tribute to the memory of both Banks and the
public-spirited scientist, j. H. Maiden.
Sir Joseph Banks has been described as a “public institution”
by one writer, and as “Honorary Secretary of State for New South
Wales” by another. He was both. As the President of the Royal
Society, a Trustee of the British Museum, King George the Third’s
scientific adviser, the Honorary Director of the world-famed Kew
Gardens, he practically dedicated himself and his wealth to his own
generation and posterity. The first meeting for the foundation of
the Royal Institution (9th March, 1799) was held in his residence;
he was a founder of the Linnean Society in 1788; a promoter of the
Association for the exploration of Tropical Africa; a member of a
committee to investigate the subject of lightning conductors. His
interest in poetry and porcelain accounts for his acquaintance with
Josiah Wedgwood, who modelled a vignette from clay sent from
Sydney and representing “Hope” in classical attire on the shores
of Sydney Cove. His scientific inquisitiveness led him to plunge
into a chamber heated to 260° F. in order to test the degree of
human endurance of heat. His experience before he emerged in
a state of collapse sufficed to preclude a repetition of the experiment.
His herbarium, it is said, constituted the foundation of the
General Herbarium of the British Museum. His name appears in
the Charter of the Horticultural Society in 1809. He enjoyed the
esteem of the intelligentsia of France, so that he was elected a


member of the National Institute of that country. Even in the
midst of the Napoleonic War, his influence there was sufficient to
secure ameliorated conditions and subsequent release for Matthew
Flinders, who was a captive at the Mauritius Isle. In fact, Banks
was so popular in France that someone ventured the opinion that
his name would have been a passport of welcome throughout the
French nation. The breadth of his mind was exemplified in the
cosmopolitan nature of his sympathies, in that he held scientific
men should not be separated by political or international differences.
When circumstances led Banks to cancel his preparations for
a second Pacific voyage with Cook, he and Dr. Solander went to
Iceland on a scientific excursion in a vessel constructed especially
for him. It is said he was the first man to reach the summit of
Mount Hecla. He was instrumental in rescuing the Icelanders
from starvation that threatened them when they had been cut off
by the exigencies of war from communication with the Continent of
Europe.
He was a patron of artists, draughtsmen, scientists and ex-
plorers. He maintained artist-draughtsmen were a necessary en-
rolment in voyages of discovery. He employed Sydney Parkinson,
who drew nearly a thousand sketches of plants and animals on
Cook’s first voyage. Alexander Buchan was engaged as a land-
scape and figure painter. William Westall was a draughtsman
on Flinder’s vessel in 1800. There were others too numerous to
mention on this occasion. Suffice to say, Banks right hand man
was Dr. Solander of Sweden, a pupil of the renowned Swedish
botanist Linnaeus, who referred in a letter to “the immortal Banks
and Solander,” and recommended that the new Southern Land
“ought to be named Banksia after its discoverer.” (We, of course,
cannot ignore so completely Cook’s claims to be regarded as the
discoverer.) Solander, an assistant in the British Museum in 1760,
completed his career as a botanist-librarian in Banks’ own home.
It was Banks who, without any commercial or selfish motive,
favoured a British settlement at Botany Bay, declaring that the
soil and climate would enable such a colony to be self-supporting,
while the blacks would offer little opposition; timber, fuel, fish and
animals existed in abundance, and grass grew luxuriously so that
sheep and oxen would assuredly thrive. In 1783 he supported
lames Mario Matra’s plan for establishing the Empire Loyalists
who had fought a losing battle for England in the War of American
Revolution. He gave equal support to Sir George Young’s pro-
posals of colonization in 1785.
I have quoted J. H. Maiden’s remark that Banks was an
Honorary Secretary of State for New South Wales. The British
Government could find none else so fitted to give advice. He was
the only man in England of eminent standing and sterling worth
who could offer advice based on first-hand knowledge. He was


in touch with the first four Governors. He eulogised Phillip’s
administration, and described him as “that invaluable friend to
mankind, Governor Phillip”; Governor Hunter sent him a bird of
paradise and samples of coal; King made gifts of a water mole,
a platypus and some waratahs; at the British Minister’s request,
Banks unofficially offered Bligh the governorship of the colony
because of his integrity, resourcefulness in difficulties, firmness in
discipline, and civility in deportment; Bligh shipped home to him
a koala in spirits; Bass forwarded wombat skins and skull; and
Lieutenant William Kent submitted specimens of iron extracted
from ironstone in the vicinity of Sydney, ore which, it was claimed,
was superior to the finest Swedish iron. Kent also sent emus
and black swans. George Suttor, the founder of the Australian
family of that name, was induced by Banks to migrate hither, and
it is claimed that the appointment of the first cleric, Rev. Richard
Johnson, was due to Bishop Porteous’ interest with the renowned
botanist. Flinders frequently consulted Banks, who encouraged
him in his great task of exploring the shores of this continent.
It was said that “everything of a scientific nature seemed to gravi-
tate naturally to him.” Even Macarthur sent samples of Australian
fleeces to him, while Banks in his turn, though not at first well
disposed, either to Macarthur or his experiment in the wool industry,
was at least broadminded enough to suggest the use of a huge area
to Macarthur until such time as the land would be required for
tillage, etc.
Thus, in a sense, Banks was the uncrowned king of the new
colony, interested in all its resources and potentialities, always
ready to advise and encourage, and the willing recipient of all the
gifts of Australia’s flora and fauna.
It was, as he himself said in one of his letters : “Since the
first institution of the colony of New South Wales, (I have) taken
a great interest in its success, and have been constantly consulted
by His Majesty’s Ministers relative to the more important concerns
of the colony.” We can therefore readily appreciate the statement
of a Captain William Wilson when, in 1806, in a letter to Banks,
he wrote : “I have learnt that the colonists look up to you as the
patron and promoter of their prosperity.”
His confidence in the future of New South Wales seemed to
grow with the years. In a letter to Governor Hunter in 1799 he
declared : “Your colony is already a most valuable appendage to
Great Britain, and I flatter myself we shall before long see her
Ministers made sensible of its real value. Rest assured in the
meantime that no opportunity will be lost by me in impressing them
with just ideas of the probable importance to which it is likely
before long to attain, and to urge them to pay to it that degree
of attention which it clearly deserves at their hand.”
“The climate and soil,” he had written two years earlier, “are,
in my opinion, superior to that of most lands which have yet been


settled by Europeans I see the future prospect of empire and
dominion which now cannot be disappointed. Who knows but
England may revive in New South Wales when it has sunk in
Europe ?”
How like this optimism of Banks as to the future of this
country was to the sentiments expressed twenty years later or more
by Wentworth, when, in his poem on “Australasia,” he penned the
following lines :
“And oh Britannia ! shoulds’t thou cease to ride
Despotic Empress of old Ocean’s tide ;
Should thy tam’d lion—spent his former might—
No longer roar, the terror of the fight ;
Should e’er arrive that dark disastrous hour
When bow’d by luxury, thou yields’t to power,
When thou, no longer free’st of the free,
To some proud victor bend’st the vanquished knee :
May all thy glories in another sphere
Relume, and shine more brightly still than here;
May this, thy last born infant then arise
To glad thy heart and greet thy parent eyes;
And Australasia float, with flag unfurl’d
A New Britannia in another world.”
VOTE OF THANKS BY THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION.
The President asked the Hon. R. J. Heffron, M.L.A., Minister
for Education, to propose a vote of thanks to His Excellency the
Governor-General.
Hon. R. J. HEFFRON :
Mr. Cramp, Your Excellencies, Mr. Hallstrom, Members of the
Services, and Ladies and Gentlemen, —I am honoured indeed to have
been asked to propose this vote of thanks to His Excellency Mr.
W. J. McKell, Governor-General. It is very fitting that on this
historic occasion one of Australia’s illustrious sons occupying the
high and distinguished position of Governor-General of the Com-
monwealth should have been given the pleasant task of unveiling
the monument to the father of Australia, Sir Joseph Banks. lam
very pleased that His Excellency was able to come here this after-
noon. We have waited a long time for this day, and we have
had more than a few headaches in the preparation and completion
of this monument. We owe a great deal to our good friends,
Mr. Cramp and Mr, Justice Ferguson,
To our good friend, Mr. Hallstrom, I want to add my meed of
thanks to what has already been said. He has done outstanding
work in this and other spheres of public importance. The Kurnell
Trustees had long realised the definite need for a memorial of this
nature, but lacked the necessary funds to erect it. Mr. Hallstrom
heard of our need and immediately made the required finance avail-
able. For this benefaction the Trustees and the people of Australia
are eternally indebted to him.


Your Excellency, thank you for coming here to-day ! Thank
you for your address, and thank you also for all that you have
done for New South Wales and Australia, particularly for educa-
tion and culture ! (Applause.) 1 remember very well your direc-
tions with regard to the introduction of the Sir Joseph Banks Trust
Act. I also recall that Mr. Cramp became President and Mr.
Hallstrom a member of the Trust. They and their fellow-trustees
advised the Government on the form the memorial was to take,
and now that splendid monument has been erected and the Banks
Papers are about to be published. But you, Sir, provided an
additional £2,000 so that it would be possible to make a very
complete job of the publication of the papers. To-day I take
this opportunity of publicly thanking you for it. 1 remember that
when Mr. Cramp, then Honorary Secretary of the Royal Australian
Historical Society, informed you that his body was short of funds,
you provided £2,000 towards the extinction of the overdraft on
“History House,” and you doubled the grant they previously re-
ceived. These generous and timely acts by you in the interests
of this country’s historical records remain to your credit and will
be as lasting as the stone on which 1 am standing.
[Mr. Heffron then went on to refer to His Excellency’s efforts
on behalf of educational and cultural activities in other directions.
He spoke of his proclamation of the provisions of the Libraries Act;
the encouragement extended to the Art Gallery by providing funds
for a new wing to the building; his promotion of travelling art
exhibitions; the part he played in the formation of the Sydney
Symphony Orchestra and the financial assistance he offered, thus
rendering it possible to secure the services of Eugene Goossens as
its resident Conductor as well as Director of the Conservatorium
of Music.]
He then concluded : “I wish to thank your Excellency and Mrs.
McKell for your presence here to-day, thus helping to make this
function such a successful one, and for your many years of out-
standing work in the interests of education and culture in Australia.”
The vote was carried with acclamation.
CONCLUSION.
At the conclusion of the ceremony, five Banksian trees were
planted immediately behind the monument respectively by their
Excellencies Mr. and Mrs. McKell; Mr. E. J. L. Hallstrom, F.R.Z.S.;
Mrs. Jean Hill, who modelled the Sir Joseph Banks head; and Mr.
K. R. Cramp, 0.8. E., M.A., President of The Captain Cook’s Land-
ing Place Trust, and, during its existence, of The Sir Joseph Banks
Memorial Fund Trust.


PRESIDENT.
MANAGING TRUSTEE.
CAPTAIN COOK’S LANDING PLACE
TRUST, 1947.
K. R. CRAMP, Esq., 0.8. E., M.A., F.R.A.H.S. (President).
T. H. COMPAGNONI, Esq. (Managing Trustee).
J. B. NELSON, Esq. (Honorary Treasurer).
The Honourable Mr. Justice J. A. FERGUSON, 8.A., LL.B., F.R.A.H.S.
Hon. R. J. HEFFRON, M.L.A. (Minister for Education).
Commander J. S. BOVILL, R.N. (Retired).
H. G..CONDE. Esq., M.I.E. (Aust.).
Honorary Secretary :
K. W. BRITTON, Esq., A.F.I.A.
The President and Trustees join with Mr. Hallstrom in expressing
appreciation of the excellent organisation of the afternoon’s proceedings
by the Managing Trustee, Mr, T. H. Compagnoni, whose keen and active
interest in the Captain Cook’s Landing Place Reserve at Kurnell has been
for years a material factor in the maintenance and beautification of that
area.




D. S. Ford, Printers, 44-50 Reservoir St., Sydney




