

THE LEGEND
OF THE
Petrified or Marble Man
BY
HARRY STOCKDALE,
WITH PRESS EXTRACTS FOR AND AGAINST.
Sydney:
F. CUNNINGHAME & CO., STEAM MACHINE PRINTERS,
146 PITT STREE
1889








THE MARBLE MAN.
THE LEGEND OF THE MARBLE OR PETRIFIED MAN.
BY
HARRY STOCKDALE.
We eat and drink we come and go,
(The sunlight dies upon the open sea):
I speak in riddles. Is it so ?
My riddles need not mar your glee;
For I will neither bid you share
My thoughts, nor will I bid you shun,
Though I should see in yonder chair
The Egyptian’s muffled skeleton.
One toast with me your glasses fill,
Ave, fill them level with the brim,
De Mortins, nisi bonum. nil!
The lights are growing dim.
Weary and wasted, and worn and wan,
Feeble and faint, languid and low,
He lay on the desert a dying- man,
Who has gone my friends, where we all must go.
A. L. Gordon.
THE MARBLE MAN.
BY
HARRY STOCKDALE.
The cry in this instance is not have you seen “ the ghost,” but have you seen the
<« Marble Man,” and having seen —what do you think about it, such are the ques-
tions asked on every hand from early morn until late at night, and nineteen times
out of twenty the answers are, we do not think at all we feel sure that we have
looked upon the form of what was once a living man, and no common man either,
a man evidently possessed of more than average intellect, unflinching courage,
great hardihood and activity, joined to a graceful wiry frame, and a handsome
determined almost cruel face; feeling as I do that the probability is that the
marble figure was once the embodiment of a soul, or if not a work betraying signs
of genius from the hotly formed head to the toe nails of the feet. It may not be
out. of place to offer a few conjectures as to how he bearing the semblance of a cul-
tivated white, became entombed in a marble quarry at or near Orange. In the
first place there is a look of antiquity about this marble mystery, that at once
brought to my mind our Lord’s question to Cain—“ Where is Abel thy brother ?”
Now Abel was undeniably the first missing man, and if any one of our numerous
scientists could satisfactorily prove that this was the murdered son of our first
parents, then the vexed question as to their colour would be forever set at rest,
and acknowledged to have been white. Now who can say that Cain did not bear
off his brother Abel and hide him in the very limestone cave, perhaps the beautiful
lines of Hood were prophetically inspired when he wrote—
So with the fierce avenging sprite,
Till blood for blood atones ;
Aye, though he’s buried in a cave
And trodden down with stones,
And years have rotted off his flesh,
The world shall see his bones.
What a boundless field for research here opens before the world’s greatest
scientists, spiritualists, clairvoyants, &c., but as I hold that it bespeaks not only
a narrow but a prejudiced mind to be wedded to one theory and stick to it. I desire
to show that I may yet hope to become a politician, and if defeated on one point


turn with equal ardour to an opposite one. My next theory takes partly the turn
of a riddle, for a man being dust “ to dust returneth,” but here we have found in
our sunny land the one glorious exception to the general rule who has become a
block of marble, so that the case of Lot’s wife is no longer the one solitary land-
mark out of the general and regular grove ; and whereas the pillar of salt was a
special ordination, we have no holy writ to account for our marble man, though
thousands have come to ridicule and gone away convinced that if they had not
viewed the actual remains of mortal man, they had certainly looked upon a won-
derful and marvellous imitation. Still further touching the Biblical records, I
would ask my readers to recall the history of the great flood that destroyed the
whole world, and on whose waters Noah and his family rede triumphant. Now,
is it not possible (I do not say probable), that that immense ark might have held
one lone stowaway, who, after the grounding of the ark stole silently off and
became a wanderer on the face of the earth, or in other words a great traveller
eventually shuffling off this mortal coil in the limestone cave at Orange, thereby
unquestionably becoming the first “ Orangeman.” Coming down to modern re-
cords have we not the authority of Scotia’s wondrous bard, who, speaking of
Nature says : “ Her prentice hand she tried on man, &c.” Now, can it be pos-
sible, some say all things are possible, that we have actually dropped upon the
first rude model (vide Geological Surveyor) of our common ancestor Adam, or
greater marvel than all else can it be the veritable Adam himself, for even our
ablest men differ as to the number and position of his ribs, and Adam is the only
being mentioned in history as having a doubtful number of those necessary appen-
dages. Perhaps some of your many readers deeper read than my humble self, who
have made the great past and many of its almost incomprehensible mysteries their
special study, will take up the thread of these arguments or theories where I have
laid them down, and be able to clearly prove to one and all their feasibility, per-
haps even their probability, and may we hope to establish their certainty, which
perhaps may come to pass—due allowance being made for the changes of the face
of the earth wrecked by flood and deluge, and shattered to its very core on her
travail with great seas of molten lava, and giving birth to fearful and monstrous
earthquakes. Or coming nearer still to our own period within the last century,
this cold marble moved, breathed, and suffered some perhaps many of the terrible
agonies of our convict days, his proud spirit chafing at his bondage, tortured by
the relentness cat, and the thousand and one miseries of a convict’s life fled from
the scene of his suffering anywhere out of the world. And over the blue moun-
tains in those days was veritably out of the world. Once free, standing on those
towery heights, breathing without fear “ God’s glorious oxygen,” looking down
upon the scene of his agony with a heart full of compassion for those still within
the grip of the tyrant overseer, and with an undenying hatred to and longing for
revenge upon those who had made this fair bright sunny land a living hell to him.
He may have been our first bushranger ; his hand against all men and every man’s
hand aginst him, with heavy rewards of the bright pure gold set upon his head,
payable to whomsoever should be courageous enough to sneak behind some mighty
monarch of the forest and stalk the unfortunate being, formed after God’s own
image, who in many cases was more sinned against than sinning, and in others
driven by an unbearable tyranny to do or dare anything to be for one short
moment —free.
Oh Justice ! how honoured and sacred should be thy shrine, thou in whose fair
sight it were better that the heavens fell than wrong should be done in thy name.
How often, oh ! how often hath the cruellest of wrongs been perpetrated by those
supposed to be holding thy unerring balance ; how many an honoured head hath
been sent in sorrow to an unwept tomb, and still the mighty dome of arches above
us decked in its indescribable splendour, lustrous with its countless myriads of
twinkling jewels, lovelier, brighter, more enchanting far than ere was found in
mine or hidden beneath the changing blue of the ever murmuring sea. Justice,
how grandly sounds the word, almost overawing us in its majesty, and how vastly
changed would be the face of the world, and what numbers in it if justice even
handed justice was but dealt out to rich and poor alike. But alas ! such is almost
as far off now as when the subject of this brief sketch toiled perhaps wounded,
assuredly hungry, footsore, and weary over the rugged mountains, envying even


the tiger’s cats their lair, then as now “ Man’s inhumanity to man made countless
thousands mourn.” Then as now how often grim death freighted with myriad
fears to the pampered few was the “ poor man’s dearest friend,” and when we look
in the stern relentless face of this wonderful fossil man, or perhaps still more
wondrous fraud, we cannot help feeling that death came as an angel of relief to
one whose burthen had been heavy. The left eye missing, the right side of the
firmly closed resolute mouth pierced as by a bullet; another indent on the right
side of the massive head, probably the resting place of another leaden missile; but
from whose hands who shall say, “lam Him who makes the sparrows fall.” This
man—defiant lived—defiant died, the body shrunken and wasted to an unusual
degree from exposure, want of rest and nourishment, the big heart faltered not
but laid down to his last rest as resolved and firm as the rocks around him, into a
nook of which he crept him in to die unseen, unmourned, but withal unmanacled
—free. We can picture the dying thought of such a man to be very similar to
Gordon’s beautiful lines in “ Podas Okus ”
Men will call me unrelenting.
Pitiless, vindictive, stern ;
Few will raise a voice dissenting,
Few will better things discern.
Speak ! the fires of life are reeling,
Like the wildfires on the march ;
"Was I to a friend unfeeling?
Was I to a mistress harsh.
Was there nought save bloodshed throbbing,
In this heart and on this brow;
Whisper girl in silence throbbing,
Dead Patroclus ! answer thou.
Through the death mist hovering o’er me,
As the stout ship cleaves the wave ;
To my father’s gone before me,
To the god’s who love the brave.
It may have been that in those last brief moments ere the soul had winged its
flight, his mind brought to his side “ a dearer one, still and a nearer one yet than
all other.”
Lower vet. my own Briseis.
Denser shadows veil the light;
Hush ! what is to be, to be is,
Close my eyes and say good-night.
Lightly lay your red lips kissing,
On this cold mouth, while your thumbs
Lie on these cold eyelids pressing,
Pallas ! thus thy soldier comes.
But alas, there were no violet orbs to glisten, no beloved amber tressees to shower
down their golden rain. The probability is rather that some dusty maiden un-
tutored wild, watched his last moments, “ closed his- eyes and said good-night,”
then after the manner of her race, lopped off the white man’s arms to bear about
with her in memory of one to whom herself and her tribe had become endeared.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir,—lt is just possible that the “petrified man” lately discovered near Orange
may have been the handiwork of a gentleman of the name of Nicholls, a sculptor,
who visited Sydney about 1853. He was a superior artist, and I remember him
saying that he had visited that neighbourhood, and that he had seen some marble
of a superior sort, fit for sculpture. I met him afterwards at the Liverpool Town
Hall, in England. He was then at work doing some statues for the hall. He left
here in about 1855.— June 1, 1889. I am, &c.,
W. M. WALLIS.


THE MARBLE MAN.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir,—The theory of rude carving may be put aside at once, also the theory of
hoax, unless we concede that a skilful workman has obtained a corpse, with the
arms cut off, one eyeball missing, and three toes, and has made a cast of this muti-
lated corpse for the purpose of deceit. I think this theory will not stand, because
the circumstances would be so unusual, and because of the difficulties involved in
the casting of the mould and recasting of the statue, and the absurdity of apply
ing such a process to a mutilated body. My theory is that the man was a runaway
convict, who had probably been living with the blacks, and had adopted their
habits, the body being entirely naked. The head is large, with great power and
ferocity. He had lost one eyeball during life, and one leg was slightly thinner than
the other, possibly the effect of leg-irons. Three toes on the left foot and the side
of the foot itself are missing, perhaps broken in getting it out. Theorising as to
how the body came there, it seems to me probable that, being caught in a thunder-
storm, he lay down under an overhanging ledge on his back, and placing his hands
under his head, went to sleep. The storm of rain loosening the earth above him,
it fell upon him, and hermetically sealed him up. The water charged with lime
was injected through the body, and the petrifaction became complete. If anyone
doubts the possibility of this process taking place in a short time —geologically
speaking—l can prove the contrary by a specimen of petrified wood in my office,
which has become completely metamorphosed since 1837 at all events. But the
records of petrification extend to very much shorter periods. I now approach
(very gingerly) the one puzzle to me, viz., the missing arms. Jim armpits show
conclusively that the arms were turned upwards. Dr. M‘Carthy thinks they were
sawn off. Query : Was the man killed as he lay, and were his arms sawn oft tor
food by his mates, or did they find him dead and then saw them off for convenience
of burial or for food, or have they been broken off when the body was shifted by
the water ? Let doctors decide these points. I say shifted by water because it
appears to me that the fall of earth on him contained pebbles. One in particular
appears to have pressed the lips apart at each corner, and I understand from the
quarryowner that after moving six or seven tons of marble boulders, the body was
found in a bed of lime. Other observers considered that he had been speared by
blacks in the mouth and elsewhere. If so, they might have hung him up alive and
flung spears at him till he died. But I dont think that would be the way of the
Australian black. At all events this body will furnish much food for discussion.
If it be determined as the work of a sculptor, we can only regret that such a
supreme artist should have lived and died unknown, and that he should have had
a fancy to carve such a fragmentary work, instead of our great men. Particularly
would I direct attention to the exquisite carving of the toe-nails and the change
of material which looks like polished glass, and exhibits the difference between
the petrification of flesh and that of horn, if it be not a sculpture.— June 1.
1 I am, &c.,
W. LOVEGROVE.
To the Editor of the Herald.
gi r> As, notwithstanding the official pronouncement on the above, the question
of its being a’fossil or fraud is by no means settled in the public mind, judging
from recent newspaper notices and talk about town, perhaps you will kindly
permit me to say a few words on the subject. Since giving a certificate to the effect
that I believed it to be a specimen of petrified human remains, I have on several
occasions re-examined it most minutely, and am still positively convinced of the
correctness, in every detail, of the opinion I then expressed. Of course it is just
possible it may be the petrification of the mould of a dead man left m clay, the
body having disappeared wholly or in part by decomposition, but this theory
appears to be far-fetched. I have judged the specimen from two standpoints—
the anatomatical and the artistic. (An anatomist is not necessarily conversant
with the details of outward form given by muscular and other structures m various
poses: a sculptor on the other hand, must base his handiwork on a correct know-
ledge of, at least, superficial anatomy. I have found myself greatly aided m.


forming an opinion on this matter by some knowledge, however limited of sculp-
ture.) 1. There is in this marble man, making allowance for some displacement
by pressure, and some extra calcareous deposition in parts, perfect anatomical
correctness. 2. There is perfect form, first of all in the muscular arrangement,
showing the flattened post-mortem condition as distinct from the full, elastic
appearance in life ; secondly, in the position of parts effected by postuie and by
pressure, such as the muscles and tissues of the right calf, buttock, and shoulder j
thirdly, looking at the specimen as a whole and m detail, there is at once un-
mistakably conveyed the form and pose of death, and this in such a manner that
no living sculptor could produce it without having as his model a dead body or its
cast in exactly the same pose, with its parts similarly effected by pressure and
posture. Even then the fraud would be self-evident, and, in my opinion, no
amount of “doctoring” would prevent its being detected as such. It has been
said the pittings on the body resemble chisel marks. It is true a rough imitation
might be produced by pick or chisel, but an expert could not fail to recognise this
rough-hewing, however disguised. No acid rubbing or soaking in acid would give
the pits the uniform smooth appearance which they have. With the most careful
chiselling there would be left some narrow indentations, which would escape the
rubbing process. If the roughly chiselled specimen were plunged into an acid
bath, the unmistakable appearance of corrosion would be manifest, owing to the
varied density of the marble. On these points I have also had the opinion of a
sculptor of many years’ experience, who states positively it was never done by the
hand of man. The acid theory evidently originated from the fact that the finders
of the specimen stupidly washed it over in front with acid, to bring out the
features, &c. Fortunately, however, the back part remains intact. However
sceptical one may be by a front view, all doubt should be immediately dispelled
by turning over the specimen on its back. The signs of pressure (from lying) are
here plainly manifest, the appearance of age is undeniable, and numerous irregular
calcareous incrustations, hard as flint, and some of them nearly half an inch high,
are seen coursing along in various directions.
Some medical friends, who viewed the specimen with me, supposed —as I
myself did on first superficial examination —the number of ribs to be in excess of
the usual number; but I have pointed out—l. That one or two folds underneath
simulate ribs; 2. That the upward direction of the arm-stumps gives apparent
length to the rib area; 3. That the form in the lower part of the neck and upper
part of the chest is obliterated and encroched upon by an excessive deposit of cal-
careous matter, which is heaped up, so to speak, giving an erroneous impression of
the natural position of the first rib. Thus the clavicles (collar-bones) are not seen,
nor is the true position of the notch of the sternum (chest bone)—these being.land-
marks from which to begin the counting of the ribs. To find the exact position of
this sternal notch, a straight line should therefore be drawn from the middle of one
arm-pit, opposite the head of the arm-bone, to a similar point on the opposite side.
This will exactly intersect the true position of the sternar notch, and from this
landmark the counting of the ribs downwards will be found correct on both sides
of the specimen. The upward and outward position of the arm-stumps would be,
in a dead body, to say the least, curious. I have already given as my opinion that
this arose through the man having been killed while lying in the dorsal position,
with his hands supporting his head ; and that the arms were removed and burial
took place while the body was rigid—in other words, before rigor mortis had passed
away.
One of your correspondents suggested !that the specimen was simply carved
out by one of the early settlers, the arms having been subsequently broken off. If
so, may I ask was it likely the settler would carve a dead body, and how does he
account for the sections of the arm bones in both stumps ? If it be the image of a
dead body,' carved, as has been suggested, in Cows’ Flat, near Bathurst, where is
the model from which it was copied ? For I positively assert (and a,m quite sure
my opinion would be borne out by any sculptor viewing the specimen) that it
would be an utter impossibility for any man—no matter what his artistic powers —
to carve this from memory in all its minute exactness, with its dead rigid muscles,
its various marks of pressure and corresponding bulges of contiguous parts, and its
true corpse-like appearance. To my mind the man who could successfully perform


this feat, and at the same time fashion out the numerous raised hard calcareous-
incrustations on the portions untouched by acid, would be the greatest artist the
world had ever produced.
Is the rather hasty decision of the Government Geological Surveyor in this
matter to be final, or is there yet any possibility in the interest of science of
procuring a section of this wonderful specimen, so as to clear up the difficulty ?
I am, &c.,
CHAS. W. M'CARTHY, M.D., F.R.C.S., Irel.
THE PETRIFIED MAN (?)
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —One of your correspondents in to-day’s issue speaks of an American im-
position in the shape of a disinterred plaster model palmed off as a fossil man, and
leaves us, by inference, to regard the present specimen as a fraud. An almost
similar view has been taken by another gentleman whose position in art spheres
would entitle him to an opinion. I allude to Mr. Oscar Meyer. However, I have
shown forth his error by pointing out the natural striae and true graining of marble
on the specimen ; also the presence of a certain “ hair ” or flaw (which is incrusted
with calcareous matter) and in parts some metallic deposits. It has, too, the true
ring of marble on striking. A further and final proof was needed, and I have got
it. A small piece was, in my presence chiselled off one of the shoidders, and I
found it on analysis to be composed of carbonate of lime, not sulphate, which it
would be if it were plaster of Paris or alabaster. The “marble man” is therefore,
a natural, not an artificial, production. The ingenious theory of artificiality may
once for all be eliminated. And now there only remain the suppositions—(l.) That
it is a chiselled marble image, or (2) a genuine specimen of petrified human
remains. (There is a third supposition—viz., that it might be the petrified mould
of a dead man’s body; but even in this case it could properly be designated
“ petrified human remains,” for, at least, the bony parts would be found in the
specimen.)
Well, I have already given ample reasons why it could not be a chiselled marble
image. I have argued solely from anatomical and artistic standpoints, with no
other interest than that of the advancement of science and the unfolding of truth,
and it is at length satisfactory to me to find men of intelligence coming forward
unbiased by prejudice and honestly trying to solve this most highly interesting
problem.
Allow me in passing, to correct an impressiom left by one of your correspond-
ents. I did not, as he implies, throw down the gauntlet to the Government
Geologist, nor would I have introduced Mr. Wilkinson’s name into the controversy
were it not that he outstepped his position and wandered into the anatomical and
sculptural aspects of the question. But it was so patent to me that the statement
of its being the “clumsy work of some rude sculptor,” with, as another gentleman
remarked, “crude chiselling at the back of the figure,” &c., were (to use your
correspondents words) so “ pitifully absurd ” that I felt called upon to speak out
and substantiate my opinion.
By-the-bye, it appears, on indisputable evidence, that in the year 1854 a black-
fellow’s body was found in a state of semi-petrifaction in a cave in Mosquito Plains,
near Panola, in Southern Australia—a fact which Mr. Tom. Coward, of Sandgate,
Queensland, can verify. It also turns up that a fully petrified wallaby is to be
seen in the Maneroo district I have spoken on the subject with a member of
Parliament, at present in Sydney, who saw the specimen, which, strange to say,
has exactly on it the same pittings as are on the present petrified man. Everybody
knows that it is not uncommon to find petrified wood in parts of these colonies.
If certain of the wells and streams and droppings from caves have properties
capable of impregnating with calcareous matter wood, wallabies and black men,
can it be that a white man’s skin is sufficiently pachydermatous to resist this
beautiful embalming process, or is there in the white man s composition some
strange want of affinity for lime salts I—June 8.
Yours, &c.,
CHAS. W. M'CARTHY, M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
223 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park, Sydney.


To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —Having after a weary search succeeded in finding the petrified man, who
has changed his lodgings several times lately, I confess myself more than rewarded.
Having adopted as a matter of course the views expressed by Mr. Wilkinson,
I was rather nonplussed by Dr. McCarthy’s letter and my interest became inten-
sified. Regarding this as a specimen of petrified human remains, it is at once an
object of interest and wonder. If you dismiss this theory and regard it as the
production of the hand of man, it becomes more wonderful still, for it is simply
human in its ghastly resemblance to a corpse. At the first glance the head is of
the true Caucasian type, disposing at once of the Red Indian theory. The calm
majesty of the expression upon the very noble features, coupled with the splendid
development of the head, indicate the very highest type of humanity, not the
aspect of a convict or a bushranger, but that of a man of great culture and nobility.
In the space of an ordinary newspaper letter it is impossible to go into the
details of this extraordinary specimen, but if it be a statue or sculpture it is worthy
of Phideas, for a more vivid representation of a corpse it is impossible to conceive.
Having studied for years the finest specimens of ancient art at the British Museum
and being able to draw the human figure, I consider this wonderful if sculpture.
Has it been yet clearly stated what quarry it came from ? I assume there is
no difficuly in ascertaining. Here is one solution which I offer. If the substance
is tapped it decidedly rings, indicating it is hollow. I incline to the opinion it is
a cast from a human corpse which has been laid out for the purpose, as manifested
by the position of the feet and also the raised position of the head, which other-
wise would have fallen back with the mouth open. I suggest that the wasted
condition of the left leg and the gangrenous appearance of the ankle indicates an
advanced condition of disease. The huge pits all over the body and limbs likewise
point to the same conclusion. I suggest it has been desirable to take a cast of this
fearful specimen for scientific purposes, and that it hails first from Naples and last
from Orange quarries. The absence of the arms also tends to this theory, they
having been probably removed for dissection. The removal of the scalp and one
of the eyes still further points to the same conclusion. It may be a cast from
Pompeii—or is it the “ original Adam”?— June 10. Yours, &c., CAST.
The mystery of the Marble Man has been explained at last, and a hoax which
promised to rival in interest Mark Twain’s great American delusion has been
nipped in the bud by Sub-Inspector Ford’s careful and painstaking investigations.
It appears that the inspector traced the so-called petrified man from his first incep-
tion in the ingenious brain of Mr. Sala to his alleged discovery in the marble quarry
near Orange, and he explains how Mr. Sala, shutting himself up in seclusion at
Cow Flat, carefully shaped a block of marble into the wonderfully lifelike, or rather
deathlike figure, about which we have all been marvelling for the past few weeks.
It is a pity that Mr. Sala’s talent for sculpture has been wasted on such a task as
this, and it would be worth while for the Government to consider whether they
might not find some more suitable work to occupy his energies. Some of our most
frequented public buildings are notably deficient in decorations of any kind, and
the dismal monotony of their blank walls might be very much relieved by the
addition of a few suitably-designed figures, the execution of which would, no
doubt, engage Mr. Sala’s attention for several months to come. But, apart from
any consideration for Mr. Sala’s personal welfare, it does seem most disappointing
that the savants of Europe and America should have been deprived of the treat
which was awaiting them, as the proposed visit of the marble man to the other
parts of the world would have furnished a subject for an interminable discussion,
and would have provided the leading geologists with a foundation upon which
to base an entirely new theory as to the origin of the human race and the habits of
those prehistoric nations to one of w r hich this deceptive relic was presumed to
belong. All hope of this is over, and the one-eyed figure is now only of value as
a curious piece of handiwork, illustrative of the inborn tendency of man to deceive
and the willingness of the world to be deceived Echo, January I^.


THE MARBLE MAN.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —Mr. Oscar Meyer’s theory as to the composition of “the marble man 1 '
is, to say the least, ingenious; but it is only a theory, after all. His opinion is
much more at variance than mine with that of the Government Geological Sur-
veyor. I, at least, agree with the Geologist that it is a natural calcareous forma-
tion, whereas Mr. Meyer says it is purely artificial; though it does seem strange
that he can advance any opinion at all, considering his admission that he has not
been afforded sufficient opportunity for examining the specimen. Mr. Meyer
proceeds to give what he calls “ a prescription ” for the chemical manufacture of
such articles. He speaks of acids, but fails to mention the names of the acids
employed. He gives us the name of one ingredient (alabaster); why not include
the names of all the others ? Is there, for instance, hydrochloric, hydro-fluo-
silicic, or carbonic acid, in the mixture ? lam quite sure there should be at least
a goodly supply of the latter to make the present specimen. By what unaccount-
able means can Mr. Meyer convert the sulphate of calcium in his “finest alabaster
plaster” into carbonate with dissolving away his cast? He will also have to
satisfy us, before we can place credence in his theory, how he can successfully
imitate the marble graining seen on the specimen, and also certain striae and
metallic deposits, as well as that “ hair ” or flaw which Signor del Vescova speaks
of in his letter to-day, none of these evidences of natural formation being seen in
alabaster. Lastly, he will have to produce, in his imitation, such a condition of
molecular arrangement as will give, on striking the article, the true ring of marble.
Unless my perception of the quality of sound is very much blunted, I have recog-
nized that true ring on striking the present specimen. So has the gentleman whose
name I have just mentioned—a sculptor of 40 years’ practical experience, whose
opinion is certainly worth having.
I am aware there is, or was, an establishment belonging to the Marquis of
Campana, in the Porta del Popolo in Rome, in which alabaster imitation-marble
images were made, but sold and easily recognized as imitations only. For all I know
the trade in this Tuscan Yolterra alabaster may be elsewhere carried on ; but cer-
tainly the man who could introduce into the industry such improvements as would
give the natural striae, graining, and unmistakable ring of the real stone, in such
a manner as to deceive even those who have worked at marble for nearly half a
century, deserves to make his fortune.- June f
I am, &c.,
CHARLES W. M’CARTHY, M.D., F.R.0.5., Irel.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —May I suggest that the “marble man” is only one more instance of
those terrible blunders so often committed at funerals. What is easier to suppose
than that there was once a fashionable funeral at Orange—lots of undertakers—
even more refreshments ? Result: They buried the cherub by mistake.
I am, &c.,
DOWELL O'REILLY.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir —The problem whether this wonderful marble man is genuine or not may
be easily solved, in a manner most simple and efficacious. The authorities on the
matter differ, and the owners, in their own interests and those of science, should
only be too willing to allow a piece of the marble to be chipped off and polished ;
if a genuine petrification, the marble would be grained with the arteries, muscles,
etc. There need be little disfigurement, and in the event of its being proved
genuine, the proprietors would literally coin money and the matter be set at rest.
As they are confident of its genuineness, the owners should be only too glad to
allow such a test. Yours, &c.,
INQUIRER.


Shall we never hear the last of this troublesome marble man ? Is he to sit
sempiternally there, cold and silent as the Egyptian Sphinx sowing doubt and
distrust among his interviewers ? Already he has entranged friends o y
years’ standing, who came to inspect, and remained to dispute. One observant
palaeontologist, it is whispered, discovered the outline of his ribs and noticed with
natural elation that one was missing. Can it be But the supposition absurd.
How could he ever have wandered so far south ? Besides, were he really the father
of our race, be sure that his helpmeet would be met in contiguity, while the serpent
would not be far off. The subject is perplexing. Cain, it is true became a va fflan 5
but his claims would be effectually disposed of should closer inspection of the
exhumed body disclose the undoubted absence of a rib. In the meantime an in-
genious correspondent of the Herald breaks fresh ground by suggesting that the
snecimen is in reality the undertaker’s cherub buried in mistake for the real corpse
bv the facetious or, peradventure, tipsy, hearse-officials. There sno denying ia
persons who attend to the last sad offices of the dead are often given to practical
iokiim of a ghastly kind-are frequently swayed by the most reprehensible levity.
One would think that men whose melancholy duties lay among tombstones and
coffins —among plumes and epitaphs-would be sombre in demeanour and speech
Attendance at one of the undertakers’ picnics, however, held annually lnt e
vicinity of Sydney, at once disabuses the mind of any such opinion. For rollicking
o-aiety, accompanied with a certain unsympathetic garrulousness, the conventional
“ mute ” can hold his own even against a music-hall comique or the chorus leader
in a new opera bouffe. At Botany, a year or two ago, the manner in which these
same mutes and hearse-drivers drank to the health of smallpox and ostentatiously
lamented the absence of measles sent a shock through the non-professional visitors
present. If it could be shown that the undertakers’ employees of Orange really
did enter the cherub and return with the cadaver, the offenders should be sougit
out and severely dealt with. It is time the authorities took the matter up seriously.
No Government can afford to sit idly by while a reputed marble man is distracting
the public from their legitimate pursuits. — Herald, June 8.
MENIPPUS AND THE MARBLE MAN.
One never can tell what will happen next, nor can one see what the day will
bring Had I been told on Saturday morning last that I should before Church time
on Sunday be the one to solve a great and interesting mystery I would not have
believed my informant—yea, even were it told me by the Witch of Atlas herself.
Ido not take any credit to myself for having unfolded the mystery. lam not the
hero of one of Gaborian’s novels, nor do I pretend to be any sharper than my
fellows The mystery unfolded itself, and I was but the agent chosen to give the
explanation to the world. The love of talking about myself is one of my greatest
loves ; so I must pull up now and apply myself to my subject, ere I am led s y
to unfold the mystery of myself, instead of giving to the world the mystery of the
“• Marble Man,” as unfolded by himself. . . ,
I had been to the Randwick races to see the Steeplechase, and having backed
Sir Joshua, I was in good spirits. No despondency or sadness weighed me down,
nor was my mind prone to be imaginative. I returned to Sydney by the special
tram immediately after the race, and after a good dinner at the City Buffet, I went
to see the excellent play “On ’Change” at the Criterion Theatre. As I was
leaving the theatre I saw in front of me a figure, closely muffled m an overcoat and
wearino au ordinary “ bowler ” hat. Something struck me that I ought to accost
him? s°o, acting upon the impulse, I spoke, and, as I expected when the figure
turned round I was confronted by the face of Jack Blair, who had parted with me
that morning when we were locking-up our respective offices bef(ore; leaving tow a
for the day. We discussed the day’s events, and finally I went with Jack to the
Kino'-street tram stopping-place, where he took last car to Redfern, and left me to
go home alone. The moon was shining clearly, just past her first quarter so I
thought that I would take a turn round the Domain before going home. This 1
did and was returning down King-street, when just as 1 was crossing Elizabeth-
street I felt strongly drawn to walk down by the Victoria Arcade. I had been


thinking over the events of the day—principally the races—and I had been
wondering why so many horses appeared to run “stiff.” A certain “dead bird,”
too, which I had expected to see, but had not seen, was in my thoughts, so that
it can be easily understood that I was in a grave and serious humour. As I have
said, I felt drawn to the arcade, and thither I went. At the door of the corner
shop,, where erstwhile were obtainable fruit and summer drinks, I observed a card
hanging with this legend, “On View, Marble or Petkified Man. Admission,
2s .’’—Echo, June 15.
And so at last I had come near to the “ Marble Man,” who had created such a,
sensation on his debut into Sydney society ! The desire to see and examine the
wonderful being that had set by the ears of surgeons, sculptors, larrikins and
journalists, grew strong upon me. I had two shillings in my pocket—yea, I had
many shillings through the existence of the good Sir Joshua, but there was not
anybody at the door to take them. I was much excited, and I pushed gently
against the door, hardly hoping to find it unlocked. It yielded to my pressure,
and swung open. All about me was still. The last of the trams had gone to-
Kandwick sheds, not a footfall disturbed the silence, the whole city slept. I entered
the shop, and. found it divided by a curtain, behind which I knew the “Marble
Man ’to be lying. This I was sure of, as he was not in the outer part of the shop.
1 quietly drew aside the curtain, and there before me lay the mystery. Oh, the
feelings of that moment! There it lay, with the reflected beams of the moonlight
bghting up its proportions. It lay upon its back on a raised platform, admitting
a full view of it on all sides. I examined it closely. Of a good average height, it
showed the proportions of an adult man. Its head was large and well-formed—so-
la rgethat my hat, a No. 7. did not nearly fit it. Its features were clearly marked
and its face smooth, while its well-cut Roman nose stood out prominently. The
scalp appeared to have been removed, as a clear-cut line extended along the top of
tne forehead. Armless, its ribs showed clearly, and its legs showed that they must
have belonged to a strong man. The left leg appeared to have been broken, but to
have again re-knit, and it was somewhat atrophied compared with the right one.
I here was no sign of hair about the figure ; but the toe-nails were quite perfect.
All over its body, with the exception of the face, it was deeply and broadly pitted,
in a way that may be seen on calcareous incrustations. My mind was divided,
even as Sir Lancelot’s when he hesitated about throwing Excalibur into the Mere,
and I could not make up my mind as to whether or not the object before me had
ever been a living man. There it lay on its back, straight and even, its head and
neck not lying back, the whole frame carefully placed. In other days I had been
a frequenter of dissecting rooms, and I had not been infrequently present at post
mortem examinations. Something in the pose of the mysterious thing reminded
me of the bodies I had seen on the operating tables. All was still; only the gentle
hissing of water escaping from a water-pipe outside broke the silence ; an eerie
feeling grew upon me, and I still kept examining intently the “ Marble Man.”
I was feeling the toe-nails, which, strange to say, were perfect; while there was
no vestige of hair. It is the generally accepted opinion of medical men that hair
and toe-nails are of the same nature and composition, and I had been thinking
that if the toe nails petrified, why should not the hair also ? There passed through
my mind rapidly the scalped cranium, the smooth, well-cut face, the absent left
e y c ’ . an f mu tilated right corner of his mouth, all of which I had observed, and
all of which made me more and more doubt the humanity of the thing.
All at once, as I was pondering on these matters, I heard a quick, cracking
sound, and a cold, hard voice, with a shiver in it, uttered these words :
“Y ou are on the right track, old man.” The accent was Hibernian, with a
flavour of Yankee twang, so that I was at once put at my ease by its matter-of-
fact tone. I looked round to see who had spoken, but found that there were but
two of us present —the “ Marble Man ” and myself. Now, lam an Irishman, but
I have never been in America, and I here declare that I have never cultivated a
Yankee twang. It was not my own voice that I heard, so that I was satisfied that
it had come from the “Marble Man.” Sure enough, I was right, for, as my glance
fell upon his face, I saw his under-jaw work with an uneven movement, as though
the socket were stiff. There was something comic about the appearance of my


countryman, for his accent had betrayed him, and I felt sure that he had been
born and had lived for some years in the “poor distressful country.” There he
lay, still stiff and straight, just as I have already described him; but his jaws
were going like clockwork, as though they were being exercised after a long spell
of idleness. Surely, there was life in the thing! The motion of the jaws was
continued, and the exercise went on
Till the cold cheeks, delight inspired.
Blushed: to sweet life the marble grown.
These are not my own lines, but are a translation of some written by Mr. Schiller
at the end of the last century. '
I was getting used to the situation, and the symptoms of gooseflesh which
were threatening cleared away. Remembering that the Marble Man ” had
spoken, I bethought me that it would only be common politeness to keep up the
conversation, so I said :
“ Indeed. lam glad to hear it. I did not think that I would ever get on the
right track again.” _
This was said generally, as I had no idea of what he was alluding to.
“You are, sir. I have been much amused by the various remarks I have
heard from those who have come to see me every day. The only point they agree
on is that lam wonderful; but I reckon that you have hit off rightly what I am.”
I was surprised at this, as I had not spoken out what I had thought. My
countryman was evidently a thought-reader.
“ You have nearly reckoned me up, he continued, and as we are here together
sociable, Arcades ambo, as we said at school, I will tell you all about myself.”
“Thank you,” said I. “1 will be very glad to listen.” And, lighting a
cigarette. I leaned over the rail that surrounded the platform and prepared to hear
his story. ~
“ My great-grandfather, ” he began, “ was the descendant of an Irish king ——
Knowing how my countrymen are apt to talk about their ancestors, and being
aware that, once launched on that subject, an Irishman cannot be stopped, I
remarked :
“So was mine. I know all about that, so that Irish history will not be new
tome. You will do me a great favour by being more egoistic. Tell me about
yourself. ”
I was afraid that I had offended him, as he did not at once go on with his
story. His jaw was not working as freely as before, and, on looking closely, I
discovered that a piece of chalky stuff had got broken off his upper jaw, and had
stopped the free working of the lower one. I removed the obstruction, and my
friend was once more fit to talk.
“Thank you,” he said, “ I will talk about myself. My great-grandfather was
not a descendant of an Irish king, for the good reason that I never had a great
grandfather. As St. Augustine said, “lam what I am,” that is, a marble sham !
An Hibernian gentleman who had been living some years in New York got smashed
up in a street-car accident, and died from concussion of the brain. He was a man
with an abnormally large head ”
“ My hat is a No. 7, yet it did not nearly fit your head,” I murmured.
Not minding the interruption the “ Marble Man” continued :
“This man, Michael O’Brien by name, died in the hospital, and the pupils
that there attended, being struck with the size of th 6 cranium, determined, to
make a complete post-mortem examination. The body was placed on the operating
table, and the scalp was removed in order to enable the head to be examined.
This was done with results satisfactory to the pupils. It was also found that the
left tibia had been fractured, and there were signs that one of the ribs had at some
past time been displaced so as to give that side the appearance of being deficient
in the number. The remarkable size of the head determined the pupils to retain
a cast of it, and while they were obtaining that it was resolved to take a cast of
the whole figure.”
“ What was the inducement to do so ? ” said I.
“ How can I tell?” responded the “ Marble Man,” “ Anyhow, the cast was
taken, and like other things of more value was found before long to be in the way,
and was put aside.”


“ But what about yourself ?” said I, in order to briilg him to the point, as he
was far away in New York.
“ Bank your fires ; I will get there in time,” answered the “ Marble Man.”
and he proceeded with his tale.
“After some time, when the useless matters that accumulate everywhere, from
a schoolboy’s pocket to the saloon of a palace, were removed from the hospital
theatre, among the things condemned to be taken away was the cast of the dead
Irishman. By this time it had got somewhat damaged, its arms in particular having
disappeared. One of those enterprising men, with ingenious turns of thought from
which have been evolved wooden nutmegs, observed the plaster cast, and, being
struck with its appearance, he obtained it. ”
“ What will you never come to yourself?” I again said. “ I have heard all
about the wooden nutmegs before.”
By this time the jaws of the “ Marble Man ” were working freely, and, in the
joy of the facility of utterance, he never minded the interruption, but continued.
“ The cast was taken to a part of the States with which the enterprising man
was familiar, and there was subjected to the action of water which had the
property of incrusting anything placed in it with a calcareous deposit. After the
figure became deeply coated with the mineral it was carefully removed, and a
scene for further operations was sought. Australia was pitched upon ”
“Ha!” said I. “You are coming near the mark, and you will be at last
telling me about yourself.”
“ Yes, ”he answered, “I am approaching my first appearance. The cast, being
thus coated with chalk, was packed securely in a box. I may mention that the
features of the face having had deposited in them, in their cavities, a considerable
amount of chalk had been obscured, so that the chisel was brought into requisition,
and the features W'ere smoothed, the nose particularly being well shaped. The box
was conveyed to New South Wales, and after a short time I was discovered and
brought to Sydney. Do you take, my good sir ?”
By this time I had connected the story of the cast with the “ Marble Man,”
and I responded quickly, “ Rather ! Ido take. But can I believe yon ?
“ Believe me ! Well, I don’t care whether you do or not. The story I have
told you is quite reasonable ?”
“Yes,” I said; “ it is quite a likely one ; but how do I know that you are
plaster inside ? ”
“ The proof of the pudding is the eating,” said the “Marble Man,” whose
voice was beginning to fail him. The orifice between his jaws was getting filled
with white powder, produced by the friction between the under and upper jaw.
“ Not that I want you to eat me. If you are not satisfied, put a bore down through
me, and you will find that, as the upper part of the core is formed of carbonate of
lime, the lower part will be sulphate of lime. Every schoolboy knows the difference
between marble and plaster of Paris.”
“ Anything else ?” said I, anxious to learn all I could before he was silent.
‘ "There is one other matter I will confide to you before I close my jaws for ever,”
murmured the “Marble Man.” I pitied him, he seemed so dry, and there were no
hotels open. He went on :
“You know all about specific gravity ? A petrified man would have a specific
gravity different from that of a figure cast in plaster of Paris and coated with
chalk. The bones would not be so dense as the mineral, and various cavities
would not be filled with the deposit so that a scientific test of the truth of any
story could thus be obtained. lam quite played out, so I wish you good night.”
As Hamlet said, “ the rest is silenee ” as far as the Marble Man is considered.
“ Quietly I left the ex-fruit-shop, after taking a last look at my marble friend,
who was now lying as I had first seen him, ready to draw the fair florin from the
pockets of the curious public. I went to my home more than ever wondering at
the way in which human ingenuity is made use of. I had passed a most satisfactory
day and night. Sir Joshua had won the Steeplechase, I had a good dinner, and I
had been entertained at the theatre, while, to crown all, I had had unfolded for
me the matter which had been puzzling all classes in Sydney for some time—the
mystery of the “ Marble Man.”


THE MARBLE MARVEL.
REPORTS OF ORANGE AND BLAYNEY POLICE OFFICERS.
A REMARKABLE HISTORY.
Echo, June IJ+.
The Minister for Mines stated in the Legislative Assembly last evening, in
reply to a question, that he had received a number of papers, which he had brought
to the House with him, relating to what is known as the marble man. A good
deal of curiosity has been aroused with reference to the marble figure which has
been represented as petrified human remains found in a limestone quarry near
Caleula. Instructions were given by the Government to the Superintendent of
Police at Bathurst to have the matter thoroughly inquired into. The reports
submitted by the police officials, and which are now in possession of the Mines
Department, will probably be read with interest. We publish the more important
of the documents x IA .,
Sub-inspector Ford, of the Orange police, reports as follows, under date 10th
June, to Superintendent Anderson, of Bathurst: —“I have the honour to inform
you that, in accordance with your instructions, I have made very careful inquiries
about the so-called petrified man, said to have been found by G. F. Sala and son
at the marble quarry at Caleula, about 15 miles from Orange. lam thoroughly
convinced that the marble figure was made at Croaker's old public-house, at Cow
Flat by G. F. Sala, and that the marble was obtained from Bell’s quarry, about
two miles from Cow Flat. I have obtained the following information . That
Joseph Bell conveyed from his marble quarry, about five months since, a large
piece of marble, about one ton weight, to G. F. Sala’s residence (Croaker s old
public-house), at Cow Flat, and put it in out of the dray, half way into the back
kitchen, through the door ; and Bell states that some 10 or 12 weeks afterwards
he saw that a man had been modelled out of it by Sala, and that he used acids ,
and, whilst Sala was making the figure, that his son Fred, was always on the
watch, and would at once whistle if any person came in sight, and that Sala would
then come out of the kitchen, and shut the door. Alfred J. Hammond, of Cow Flat,
most positively says that he made the box in which the marble man or figure was
taken to Orange ; and further, that one of the boards is marked G. S. in paint ;
and he further states that shortly before the figure was taken to Orange he, by a
mere chance, saw the marble figure in the ground in the kitchen at Sala s residence.
He showed me the hole, which is about 9ft. long, 2ft. 6in. wide, and about 2ft.
deep Hammond further states that Sala promised him £SOO if he could find a
o-ood suitable place to plant it in for a time, or he would give him a third of the
profit when exhibited. On Friday last I heard that a Mr. William Guilfoyle, the
Public schoolmaster at Cow Flat, had a lot of acids consigned to him from Elliott
Brothers I then interviewed the railway station-master at Perth, and obtained
from him the exhibits marked C and D. It appears that the first consignments were
destroyed by combustion on the railwav premises, and nearly set fire to the store-
room • On Saturday last I saw Mr. Guilfoyle, and he informed me that he acted
as secretary for Mr. Sala, and that he ordered the acids, sulphuric and nitric,
in his own name from Elliott Brothers for Mr. Sala, and that the latter informed
him that he was making columns for Mr. John Jagger, of Sydney. I have since
then traced Sala and son with the grey horse and waggonette from Cow Mat to
Newbridge, thence to Blayney, where a Mr. Boxhall saw the box in the convey-
ance and describes it to have looked like a coffin. Sala left Blayney on Monday,
supposed the 6th or 13th May last, and had breakfast at Millthorpe and then
proceeded to Orange, via Lucknow. I also beg to attach a report from Constable
Rossitor, who was on temporary duty at Orange on the 20th May last. William
Brydon is a partner of Sala’s in the marble quarry at Caleula. consequently he ex-
pected to share in the profits of the marble man’s exhibition ; and he is most
anxious to have this quarry brought prominently before the public. In conclusion,
I beg to give mv reasons for saying in my telegram of Saturday last that the
marble man was manufactured at Cow Flat,—viz., the marble at that place is
very white, like alabaster. I saw the quarry and the place that the marble was
said to have been taken from, also pieces hewn from the quarry at least lift, by
10ft on the ground. All the marble that I have seen from the Caleula quarry is


is a very different sort from the Cow Flat marble, it being mottled. On visiting
G. F. Sala’s late residence at Croaker’s old public-house at Cow Flat, I found
quantities of clippings of marble secreted in the old closet, some covered over with
sheep manure, and others in a drain covered over with earth. I also was shown
one of the empty bottles which had contained the acid. It was one of those large
ones usually kept by chemists for acids, with glass stopper.”
Under date 10th June, Sub-inspector Ford writes as follows :—“ I beg to in-
form you that since writing my report of yesterday concerning the marble man, I
ascertained that G. F. Sala hired the waggonette and grey horse from James
Small, of Orange, on or about the 9th May last, and when he returned to Orange
on Monday the 13th, he had a long box in the same. On the following day he
took the same to Dr. Souter’s residence in Anson-street. Orange, and the doctor
then found it contained the marble man, and he retained the same for nearly a
week for examination. Sala then took it away, and exhibited it in Summer-street
for two or three days, and then took it to Sydney. I am now more fully convinced
than ever that the marble or petrified man never was at Caleula.”
The extracts referred to in the report are all attached to the papers, but they
contain very little additional information. Police-constable E. F. Rossitor, of
Blayney, reports on June 8, for the information of Sub-inspector Ford, “ That on
the 20th May last, during the time he was doing temporary duty at Orange, he
visited a house in Summer-street which was occupied by a man exhibiting a
marble figure, which he represented to be ‘an ancient sculpture, or petrified
human body.’ Before entering the building the constable was accosted by a man
who stated his name was Bridon. He also informed the constable that the figure
that was being exhibited inside was carved by the man who was exhibiting it at
his quarry at or near Caleula, and added that it was a fraud and an imposition on
the public. He also stated that his boy was engaged by the sculptor for three
months, his duty being to watch the place and give an-alarm in the event of any
person approaching, so that he would have time to cover it up in order to prevent
its being seen. Bridon also stated that he had visited the place times out of num-
ber during the time the man was working at the figure, and noticed that he used a
quantity of acids and other chemicals. He assured the constable that he was
speaking the truth, and, when leaving, stated that he was going to each of the
local newspapers to have a paragraph inserted so that all the public should know
that it was a fraud.”
Mr. Oscar Dilmer, of Orange, writing to Sub-Inspector Ford, on June 6,
says : —“ The first time I heard about this specimen was on the 13th of May last,
when Dr. J. C. Soutar informed me that a certain Mr. Sala had found in a quarry
at Caleula the petrified remains of a human body, and had conveyed them into
Orange with the view of consulting the doctor as the genuineness of the find. The
specimen, packed in a case to fit its size, was then at Mr. J. Small’s Tattersall’s
Hotel, but was brought the next day to the doctor’s residence, his place being
more convenient for examination. Mr. Sala, in course of conversation, told its
that he was the owner of a marble quarry at Caleula, and whilst engaged in laying
bare a large block of marble, suitable for his purposes, discovered a foot of the
abovementioned specimen sticking out of the ground. He then, with the assistance
of his son, a youth of about 14 years of age, dug the specimen out, and finding it to
be the shape of a human body, hid it out of sight from the other workmen. Later
on, when alone, they washed it, first with soap, then with soda, and lastly with
acids, in order to get the loose dirt off, after which they brought it into Orange
for examination, and also asked us to keep it perfectly secret and not to allow any-
one to see it until the doctor had examined it and proved its geuuineness. Well,
he did examine it, and soon proved it to be a hoax. I refer to Dr. J. C. Souter’s
letter in the Western Advocate of the 22nd May last. The next day Mr. Sala again
paid us a visit, and on hearing the doctor’s doubts about the specimen, again told
the interesting story how he found it, but in want of a little memory contradicted
his former statement somewhat. He also informed us, under the seal of secrecy,
that he had found in the same place a petrified woman and a child complete ;he
had hidden them under a large tree, and had covered them with leaves. I did not
believe him, more so as Mr, Brydon, from Lewis Ponds, suddenly became his
partner, whose name he (Mr. Sala) never mentioned in our first interview, and it


was. from him he wanted to hide his finds. As Mr. Brydon knew nothing about
them, according to Mr. Sala’s statement, he (Mr. Sala) intended to have the speci-
men exhibited, but without his name being connected with the affair, in order to
cheat Mr. Brydon, as he explained himself. The next day, to my astonishment,
Messrs. Brydon and Sala put in their appearance, and it seemed, from what I could
see, that the former knew more about the specimen than the latter. The whole
affair, therefore, seemed to me a made-up thing, a swindle, and I was in this belief
confirmed by Dr. J. C. Soutar, who, after visiting the place where it was alleged
the specimen had been found, declared it utterly impossible that the specimen
could have been found there. A few days after a man from Cow Flat, by the name
of Bell, came and informed us that he knew about this marble man being hewn
out on Cow Flat.
The following exhibits attached by Sub-Inspector Ford to his memorandum
are interesting documents : —*' I hereby Certify that i conveyed from my marble
Quarry A large piece of marble about one ton to croakers old publik house at cow
flat for Mr. J. F. Salla wich i afterwards saw made into a man. I know he used
assid i have three of the empty bottles in my possetion. i ham in a position to
prove that it was made by the hands of J. F. Salla. i have a large marble bason
made by him off the same piece of marble he was About ten weeks making it and
his boy watching all the time So has pepple would not see what he was doing.—
Joseph Bell. June 7th, 1889.” “I here certife that I made the box for the
marble man which was made at Cow Flat by Mr. Sala I made the box at his request
from boards at the works at Lime Stone one of the boards his branded CS with
paint I have this day showm Sub in Spector Ford the place where the Marble Man
was buried by Mr. Sala at Cow Flat after he had made it which he took away in
a waggonette with a gray horse abour five or Six Sundays ago.— Alfred J. Ham-
mnd Cow Flat June 7 1889.”
THE MARBLE MAN.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph .
Sir, —As one somewhat interested in the marble man, I wish to draw your
attention to some rather contradictory statements published in your yesterday’s
issue, purporting to be made by one Constable Rossiter.
Please oblige me by printing these two statements side by side, and let the
public judge of the value of such evidence.
Police Station Blayney,
June 8, 1889.
Constable E. F. Rossiter, No. 4894, re-
spectfully reports for the information of
Mr. Sub-inspector Ford that on the 20th
May last, during the time he was doing
temporary duty at Orange, he visited a
house in Summer-street, which was occu-
pied by a man exhibiting a marble figure
which he represented to be “ an ancient
sculpture or petrified human body.”
Before entering the building the con-
stable was accosted by a man who was
standing near the door and who stated
his name was Bridon.” He also in-
formed the constable that the figure
that was being exhibited inside was
carved by the man who was exhibiting
it at his quarry at or near Caleula, and
added that it was a fraud and an im-
position on the public.
Yours, &c.,
I also beg to attach a report from
Constable Rossiter, who was on tempo-
rary duty at Orange on May 20 last.
William Brydon’s veracity cannot be
depended upon, as he is a partner of
Sala’s in the marble quarry at Caleula,
consequently he expected to share in the
profits of the marble man’s exhibition,
and he is most anxious to have this
quarry brought prominently before the
public.
THE PRESENT PROPRIETOR OF THE MARBLE MAN.


INQUEST ON THE FOSSIL MAN.
AN EXTRAORDINARY VERDICT.
Haynes’s Weekly , June 16, 1889.
The City Coroner, at the direction of the Government, held an inquest at the Ob-
server Tavern yesterday on the fossil remains of a man brought down a few days
ago from Orange. _ ,
Inspector Lenthall was the first witness examined after the jury had viewed
the body, and he deposed that he had been called to see the remains. _ The arms
were missing and two of the toes of each foot were absent, hut everything else was
there. There were no marks of violence. H e should say the remains were those of
a man of about 60, and well-nourished.
By the Coroner : It was impossible to say how the man came by his death,
but his features bore strong evidence of the fact that in life he had been addicted
to strong drink. Believe the remains to be those of a fossil man.
Dr. McCarthy deposed : Was called by the police to see a man supposed to be
in a dving condition at a house in Castlereagh-street; proceeded to the place and
found the man as described ; the body was comatose ; pulse low, pupils of the eye
dilated ; at once ordered brandy to restore animation, but subsequently found that
the policeman had not administered it. Did not charge the policeman with spilling
it; immediately ordered the removal of the man to the Infirmary, but his friends
refused to have him removed. . .
By the Coroner : The body was not warm ; noticed that the arms were missing
but was informed that the deceased was an old soldier, and had lost his arms in
the battle of Waterloo. In conjunction with Dr. Strong held a post-mortem on
the body. Did not cut the body up, the relatives being very sensitive on that
point. Used the stethescope and other instruments ; the heart was healthy but
the liver was swollen; bladder abnormally large; had been evidently a heavy
drinker ; skull slightly contused ; brain clotted. The brain was abnormally small.
Believe that deceased died from stone in the bladder accelerated by external
injuries, after death.
By a Juror ; Will you swear it a man ? Witness (to the coroner): Am Ito
be insulted in this way. I suppose I have seen as many corpses as any medical
man in this country, and I say now without hesitation that the deceased was a
middle-aged man, and was fairly healthy excepting a slight inclination ot the
extremities towards petrefication.
A Juror : Would stone gin produce that result! Witness : Undoubtedly.
Dr. Strong was next called : Am a duly qualified medical man, holding certm-
cates from all the principal universities on this earth. Held a post-mortem °u the:
body in company with Dr. Macarthy. Found it a virgo Intacta with a slight
wound over the left ear. Hold the same view as Dr. Macarthy, and believe that
the deed was accomplished with much violence.
By a Juror : Was he a consenting party ? Witness: Ido not think so.
The Coroner : Are you any judge of corpses, doctor ? Witness : Excellent,
consider myself quite as good as Dr. McCarthy. I ascribe the cause of _ death to
violence. A Juror : When you first saw the deceased did you smell drink.
Witness : I did, but there were several medical men present, and two policemen ?
Alfred Allen Esq., M.P., was called, and made affirmation : Had viewed the
deceased and recognised him as head of the Quakers. Was present with witness
at the last meeting ; the deceased was still silent. A Quaker will not speakunless
moved ; the people where the body lay refused to let the man be moved. Had no
doubt of the deceased’s indentity.
Jabez Luscombe was next called and disposed : Have heard the evidence of
Alfred Allen, M.P., read over, but swear positively he is mistaken. The deceased
Fossil was founder of the protection league at Orange; the body is none other
than that of Michael Flaherty, J.P., a well known nationalist who has been-
missing some time and whom I suspect to have been murdered by freetraders. By
a Juror : I knew he was a protectionist notability for in his left pocket I found


two membership tickets in the National Protection Union and the Clanna-Gael
Society (Orange and Bathurst branch) and there was also a note in his pocket
telling him to meet his party at Punch’s Hotel, and on going to the polling booth
to watch another Nationalist, named M‘Grath put his hand up and scratch his left
ear.
The Coroner : Your evidence confirms the medical statement that the deceased
had an abnormally small brain with a sugar-loaf head like the member for Glen
Innes Mr. Hutchison. (The witness retired muttering something apparently in
anger.)
Constable Mulqueeny was the last witness called and stated : Was called to
see the body at 10 a.m. Recognised the fossil at once. The body was that of
David Buchanan, formerly a member of the Upper House.
At this evidence, the coroner, jury, press and public proceeded again to view
the fossil, when all became agreed that the fossil was David Buchanan.
On return to the Court, the coroner charged the jury. He said there was no
evidence against the doctors. He warned the jury against accepting the evidence
of Mr. Allen and Mr. Luscombe, who may or may not have been mistaken. The
officers evidence and their ow 7 n observation were sufficient for aright verdict. The
jury then retired and in due course returned the following verdict: —“ We find
the fossil to be one David Buchanan, formerly a noisy demagogue, who became
petrified by natural causes after death, which was occasioned by an accidental
flood of light on a clouded brain. We suggest that the fossil remains of deceased
should be erected at Paddy’s Market and used as a scratching post, free of cost.”
THE PETRIFIED MAN (?).
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —Some idle rumors having gone abroad to the effect that I have some
monetary interest in the marble man transaction, be kind enough to allow me to
deny the truth of this statement in the most positive way. For giving my certifi-
cate payment was neither asked nor offered. It is true that subsequently Mr.
Sala voluntarily offered to send me a small marble block for a pedestal, but, on
consideration, I thankfully declined his offer. It is neeeless to add I have no share
whatever in—nor shall I derive the smallest benefit from, the profits derivable
from the exhibition of the specimen.
The following may be interesting to those who would, in an unprejudiced
manner, follow out the solution of this highly interesting problem.
Mr. S. Clayton, late of Dunedin, New Zealand (his present address being, care
of Mr. Charles White, _ 3 Montagu-chambers, Hunter and Elizabeth streets,
Sydney), stated to me this evening that seven years ago he saw lying as a curious-
ity on the shelf of a hotel bar, Caversham, a suburb of Dunedin, a fully petrified.
Maori’s head. He and other friends examined it closely. He wanted to buy it,
but it would not be sold to him. The features were those of a Maori. The color
was whitish, like the present specimen, compared with which the face was shorter
but proportionately wider across the cheek bones ; it was slightly pitted. He
does not remember having seen hair on it petrified; the features, though some-
what distorted, were perfectly well shown, including the nose and ears; one side
of the face was slightly wasted. He knew it was not partially but fully petrified,
because he saw the section or fracture at the neck.
This bit of evidence is certainly suggestive. For my own part lam more and
more convinced, after several most minute examinations, of the correctness of my
opinion on the present specimen, and I believe a time will come when our Govern-
ment will regret having allowed this treasure so easily to be removed, and perhaps
will be glad to make overtures for its transferral back from its honoured place in
some one of the great European collections.
Before too late I wish to state here publicly that I have, even within the past
week, discovered on the specimen certain most minutely accurate anatomical details
that it would be out of all reason to suppose could be dreamt of, much less executed
by the most learned and ingenious living sculptor.
Just a few words more. I should wish to put what I consider a crucial
question to any independent geologist. It is this : Admitting, for the sake of


argument, that the body was carved and then plunged into a petrifying medium,
would the resulting calcareous incrustations be general over the surface or only
partial ? If the latter, is it reasonable to suppose it would shape itself into the
form of veins, fashioning and mapping out these veins exactly in the positions in
which they are naturally found on the surface of the human body ? How, also,
does it happen that certain of these normally placed veins are encrusted and others
not so, even those corresponding on opposite sides, such as, for instance, what
medical men will recognise as the internal saphena veins, the left on the specimen
being encrusted, the right not so, though distinctly traced. To suppose these en-
crusted veins carved and traced with acid is an absurdity. It could not be done.
The suggestion, on the other hand, that they may have been laid on by some
artificial process is incorrect, for I have analysed their composition and have found
them composed of carbonate of lime. They are of the same hardness as the speci-
men, and there is no known method of manufacturing true stone.
Yours, &c.,
CHAS. W. M’CARTHY, M.D., F.R.C.S.L.
223 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park, Sydney.
June 19.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —As in your issue of the 14th inst. you published certain statements in-
jurious to my character I hope you will in fairness publish my contradiction of
that portion of Mr. Ford’s report embodied in Constable Rossiter’s statement of a
conversation which affirms he had with me. I now deny the statement from
beginning to end.
The common sense of your readers should show them how absurd it would be
that whilst assisting to exhibit the petrified man I should inform the constable on
duty that I was about to publish paragraphs in the papers to prove that I was
acting the part of a swindler. I have now been a resident in the Orange district
for nearly 30 years, and am proud to say that my reputation for honesty and
industry is so well established that I can treat any attempt to injure my character
with contempt. Having had no knowledge of Mr. Sala previous to our becoming
partners in the marble quarry at Caleula I am not in a position to comment on
Mr. Ford’s statements with reference to his actions. —Yours, &c.,
WILLIAM BRYDON.
Lewis Ponds, near Orange, June 15
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —In your Wednesday’s issue appears an account of a petrified blackfellow,
which you state was found in a cave near Mount Gambier. Permit me to state
that the petrified blackfellow you evidently allude to was discovered in Mosquito
Plains caves near the township of Narracoorte in the south-east of South Australia.
There are numerous gentlemen at present in Sydney who, like myself, have seen
this blackfellow, amongst whom are Mr. W. T. Wright, J.P., of Greylands,
Marrickville, and Mr. Robertson, a nephew of the owner of the run on which the
caves are situated. I may also add that the said petrified blackfellow was railed
in with iron rails at the instance of the authorities, and the man to the best of my
recollection who did the work was named Samuel Dunning. Mr. T. Hales, the
well-known crack Australian horseman, lived for many years quite close to the
place, and can also corroborate this testimony.
Now, this Mosquito Plains blackfellow did not disappear, but was stolen by a
white man and taken to Warrnambool, the man afterwards being arrested and the
petrified black taken from him and secured in its old position as above stated.
Yours, &c.,
June 19. HARRY STOCKDALE.


THE PETRIFIED MAN (?)
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —I think you will agree with me that thus far I have striven to continue
this controversy in a purely argumentative spirit, maintaining an attitude of courtesy
and deference towards those who have differed from me. Nor shall I be moved
from my straight course by any discorteous attitude assumed by those “scientific
professors” of the geological order, who, in this free country, would, after the
manner of the dark ages, essay to stifle legitimate argument, fetter the free
development of thought, and thus retard the advancement of scientific research.
But to the point. I now reply in brief to Mr. John B. Laing’s argument
thus :
1. There is self-evident refutation in his statement that “the genineness of
the specimen is one for the geologist and not for the medical practitioner to deter-
mine.” The error made by the Government geologist on the medico-artistic side of
the question, in pronouncing the figure as “rudely carved into the form of a human
body,” would alone disprove this statement. I take it that the main duty of the
geologist is simply to determine whether such and such a thing be geologically
possible, and I am quite sure in the present instance where, in the absence of a
section, one should rely solely upon external evidence, this could not be done by a
hasty examination of a clay-smeared figure. Now supposing, for the sake of
argument, the geologist, seeing from the material before him, a geological possi-
bility, said “yes,” but the anatomist and sculptor, seeing the specimen manifestly
faulty from their standpoints, said “no,” what would avail the geologist’s opinion
then ? I solidly maintain, therefore, that it is, in the present instance, a question
first of all for the sculptor, next for the anatomist, and last of all for the geologist.
2. “ That a human body could resist the action of decomposition long euough
to enable the process of petrification to take place ” is not a “ palpable impossi-
bility.” The degree and time of such resistance would mainly depend upon (a) the
strength and antiseptic properties of the petrifying medium ; (b) the period, post-
mortem, of subjection to its action ; (c) the surrounding temperature, as well as
other conditions.
3. Mr. Laing asks can anybody contradict the following statements, viz., (a)
“ That soft animal tissues have never yet been found in a petrified state ” and (b)
That no fossils in marble have ever yet been discovered. ” This is not argument.
Time was when it might have been as reasonably asked, “Can anybody contradict
the statement that steam or electricity has never yet been utilised as a motor
power, or the latter as a speaking medium?” We live in a new and wondrous
land. The extent of its mysterious resources we have not yet realised. Who
knows but that its yet undiscovered geological curiosities may contribute
materially towards revolutionising old world theories. I shall leave it to geolo-
gists to determine whether “ soft animal tissues have ever yet been found petrified.”
(Would that I were one, and I would try to call some better argument to my aid
than mere petrified conservatism, propped up by conflicting police reports.) Does
not Mr. Laing recognise this possibility, namely, a deposit and crystallisation of
staligmite material in the mould of the decomposed soft tissues, with, at the same
time, true infiltration and petrifaction of the bony skeleton, bursting of the mould
being prevented by the exit of gas (if any) through the crevices for admission and
exit of water? We would thus have a human form with petrified bones inside it.
Mr. Laing, before he pronounces the present specimen a marble one, had better
make another examination. I have heard grave doubts expressed on the subject
by those who have studied geology, one of whom thinks it has not reached the
degree of crystallisation of the marble series, and looks more like a stalgamite
formation. Perhaps it was this very appearence that made Mr. Oscar Meyer call
it imitation marble. The incrustations which appear on the normal sites of the
sirperficial bodily veins, and which Mr. Laing says would be obliterated by the
process of marble crystallisation, are, according to this statement, some evidence
that the figure belongs to a more recent gradation in the series than marble.
Perhaps it is stalagmite after all. On this geological point I shall bow to the
decision of those geologists who, no doubt, shall be afforded every facility for a
thorough examination by the owner (who, by-the-bye, I hope will not bring our


petrified friend too hastily to Melbourne.) But about those naturally-placed
veinous incrustations. There they are, at all events. I know their composition,
and if Mr. Laing can reasonably account for them by other means than by the
natural process of petrifaction I shall admit my defeat and abandon the controversy.
In his failing to do even this much, my contention as to the palpable necessity for
a section is unmistakably proved. At all events I adduce, by inference, one fact
from Mr. Laing’s arguments —namely, that owing to the semi-obliterating effect of
crystallisation, evidence of tissue, if discovered, will show but faintly. If seen at
all, whether in the shape of fleshy, cartilaginous or bony tracings, I shall claim a
victory. Yours, &c.,
CHAS. W. MACCARTHY, M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
223 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park, Sydney.
June 24-
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —I have carefully and thoroughly examined and re-examined, as to its ex-
ternal anatomical appearance, the figure now exhibited in Sydney as the “ petrified
man,” and have compared it closely with an articulated skeleton. The outward
anatomical details are, in my opinion, correct in every particular. I have noted
the accurate direction, shape and position (making allowance for posture, pressure,
&c.,) of the bony parts, including the ribs, as far as they are shown, and the bones
of the legs and feet, the extremities of the long bones being distinctly marked. I
have noted also the correct outline of the crest of the tibia as shown through an
incomplete portion of the left leg, and have also been impressed with the perfect,
though necessarily blurred anatomical outline of the cavity of the bony orbit on
the left side The upper ribs and clavicles, the upper part of the sternum (breast
bone) and the lower part of the neck from just below the Pomum adami, are ob-
scured by increased stony material in these parts. The ribs, therefore, can only
be reckoned by finding, as Dr. M'Carthy has pointed out, the sternal notch as a
landmark.
There are traces and rough rugged hard irregular linear incrustations (some
embedded in the surface), which tracings and incrustations correspond exactly in
position and direction with three prominent sets of superficial bodily veins, namely,
the external jugular (the left only being shown) and the internal and external
saphenous veins. Strange to say the left internal and both external saphenous
vein markings are incrusted with this hard material, while the right internal
saphenous marking is not incrusted, nor is the marking which corresponds with
the left external jugular vein.
I have also noted the correct muscular groupings, the accurately shown ex-
tensor tendons of the feet, the tracing of the sphinctor muscle of the anus, and the
perfectly natural cadaveric flattening at the back of the figure —specially well
marked on the right buttock and calf.
As distinct from anatomical details I have noted, at the outer side of the left
leg, three or four most natural pressure marks, as if from some substances leaning
against these parts, and also a roughened portion lower down with somewhat
everted edges.
I have been particularly impressed with a calcareous seam or line of demar-
cation in the thick webbing between the knees. This seam extending all round
the webbed part, showing (if we accept the petrifaction theory, and it would be
difficult to account for it otherwise) the gradual growth and ultimate juxtaposition
of the calcareous substance from side to side. It is very strange that the left
segment of this webbing is a little longer than the right and comes to an abrupt
ending at its upper part.
The question of the incrusted veinous markings is most puzzling. 1. If the
figure be a petrifaction, Dr. M’Carthy would account for the presence of these
incrustations by the affinity of the blood for lime salts, by the nearness of these
veins to the surface, and by perhaps the facility for the processes of endosmosis and
exosmosis being carried on here. 2. On the other hand, if the figure be not a true
petrifaction these veinous incrustations must have been formed either by nature
or by art. Their appearance is enough to convince one that they could not have


been formed with acid or with a chisel. They could not have been artificially laid
on, being composed of carbonate of lime in the condition of stone—(see appended
certificate). They bear the stamp of a natural formation, and unless we accept
the hypothesis of full petrifaction, the presence of these incrustations on the natural
sites of the superficial bodily veins can only be accounted for by the absurd suppo-
sition of the submersion of the hewn out figure in some calsifying medium causing
chance deposition of lime salts in these natural sites and not over the surface.
On the whole it is a gigantic puzzle. If it be not a petrification lam astounded
that any artist should have thought of, or could have introduced with such minute
exactness, the above and other details upon which I have not time to dwell. lam
totally unable to account for the presence of the abovementioned incrusted and
naturally-placed veinous markings (some actually imbedded in the surface) as well
as the other calcareous seam devising the webbing between the knees.
For those reasons, and until some more scientific and valid evidence than that
contained in the police report is forthcoming that the “ petrified man ” is an arti-
ficial production, I am at one with Dr. Macarthy in expressing my opinion that the
greatest weight of evidence points to it being a petrified human body.
Trusting that some means may be found to secure a section of this highly
interesting specimen. Yours, &c.,
265 Elizabeth-street, W. EDWARD WARREN, 8.A., M.D.
June 2lf.
THE PETRIFIED MAN (?)
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —The persistency with which Dr. McCarthy adheres to his belief in the
genuineness of the alleged petrified man must go far towards shaking the faith
which simple laymen have been wont to place in scientific professors, especially
those of the medical order.
The question as to the genuineness of the specimen is one for the geologist
and not for the medical practitioner to determine, and I have been surprised on
reading the correspondence on the subject that no one has approached it from the
geological point of view.
The most elementary acquaintance with geological science would prevent any-
one from falling into the gross error of regarding the “ marble man ” as anything
but an artificial production. In the first place, admitting to be possible what is a
palpable impossibility, that a human body could resist the action of decomposition
long enough to enable the process of petrification to take place, the result would
be, in the case under consideration, an effigy not of marble but of limestone, in the
form of carbonate of lime.
Before this substance could become marble it would have to undergo the com-
bined action of intense heat and enormous pressure, under which the carbonate of
lime would become crystalised. But this process of crystalisation would so com-
pletely alter the relation of the particles of the body to one another as to effec-
tually obliterate all those delicate markings of veins on which Dr. McCarthy relies
to prove the soundness of his opinion.
I believe that no one competent to speak on the subject will contradict these
two statements : (1) that soft animal tissues have never yet been found in a petri-
fied state, and (2) that no fossils in marble have ever yet been discovered.
Petersham, June 21. Yours, &c.,
JOHN B. LAING.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —In a letter which appeared in Thursday’s Telegraph on the above subject
it was stated that there is a substance called imitation marble. I imagine that
this material is capable of being moulded, otherwise there would be no advantage in
using it. Now if an ingenious man were to make a mould from his own body, which
could be very easily done in a recumbent position, excepting perhaps the arms and


head, and were to take a cast in imitation marble, he would obtain a figure
anatomically correct, and at the same time bearing the semblance to solid marble
—probably it would actually be marble if the imitation is made from what 1
imagine it is, hence there would be no deception in calling it a marble man, and
the person who made it could truthfully say that he did not carve it. Of course
it would be still easier to take a cast from another man, arms and all, but then
there would be two in the secret. —June 20. Yours, &c.,
C. H. HUNT.
THE PETRIFIED HUMAN REMAINS.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —I am glad to be able to state that I have at last got from the owners of the
petrified human remains (as the specimen must now be correctly called) a written
guarantee, with permission for publishing their statement, that they will allow a full
section, adding that they specially wish me to be present, and will duly communi-
cate with me when ready for it. I have this day forwarded to the owners an
important and conclusive analysis, as appended, of portion of the petrified bony
tissue, which analysis has been made by Mr. Mayne at his analytical laboratory in
Oxford-street, and lam armed with another most important test. It is this : —A
few days ago I cut into half the circumference of the protruding right arm bone,
including portion of the adjacent structures—that is to say, I chiselled, gouged,
rough-filed to a plain surface, fine-filed, sand-papered, pummiced and roughly
polished, thus getting about a quarter-inch under the surface. Here I found semi-
circular lines of demarcation —one indicating the margin of the bone, another
limiting its investing membrane, and another showing the line of the soft tissues,
all these segmentary lines meeting, and corresponding exactly with the outward
markings on the uncut portion, and having their analogue in the outward markings
seen on the left arm stump. I did not polish sufficiently, nevertheless these mark-
ings were clearly seen, even by rubbiug vaseline or any unguent over the part.
This test alone, irrespective of the analysis alluded to, I regard as perfectly con-
clusive. The owners, however, at my special desire, have wisely consented to a
full section in public, which I shall have the pleasure of superintending ; and I
shall then also have the opportunity of verifying the conclusiveness of the above-
mentioned chemical test by analysing the petrified soft tissues and bony structure
in other parts of the specimen.
For my part I have fought this battle very strenuously and honestly, and
having in my single-handed effort been subjected here to much public discomfiture,
I am better pleased thus to be allowed to take elsewhere my full measure of credit
for having, in the cause of science, forced the truth in the face of overwhelming
odds. —I am, &e.,
June 29. CHAS. W. M'CARTHY, M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
“ Analytical Certificate. —Analytical Laboratory, 203, Oxford-street, Sydney.
To C- W. MacCarthy, Esq,, M.D., Elizabeth-street, —I, the undersigned, analytical
chemist, do hereby certify that I received, on the 29th day of June, 1889, from
C. W. Mac Carthy, Esq., M.D., a sample of chipping and powder for analysis, and
and have analysed the same, and declare the result of my analysis to be as
follows :—No, 1 (chipping) : Carbonate of lime. No. 2 (powder) : Carbonite of
lime and phosphate of lime. Phosphate of lime is the form in which phosphorous
is found in bone ash or bone earth. As witness my hand this 29th day of June,
1889. (Signed) James Mayne, F.C.S., F.R.M.S., M.P.S. Witnesss, H. P.”
“ I certify that the ‘ powder,’ analysed by Mr. Mayne on 29th June, 1889, and
found by him to contain carbonate and phosphate of lime, the latter in the form
of ‘ bone ash or bone earth,’ was portion of the substance gouged and filed by me
from the stump of the right armbone of the petrified human remains latety exhi-
bited in Sydney. I further certify that the ‘ chopping ’ analysed by him on the
same day, and found to be composed of carbonate of lime only, was a small portion
chiselled off the site of the soft fleshy tissues of the right shoulder of the petrified
figure.
“ (Signed) Charles W. M'Carthy, M.D., F.R.C.5.1., 223, Elizabeth-street,
Hyde Park, Sydney, June 30, 1589.”


THE PETRIFIED MAN. (?)
To the Editor of the Australian Star.
Sir, —The police evidence in re the marble man is neither conclusive nor con-
vincing. In consequence of the diversely opposite statements on the main question
of the rival quarry owners—one stating the specimen was made at Cow’s Flat and
the other that it was made at his quarry at Caleula —it is neither reasonable nor
just to arrive at any conclusion in the matter. The supposition that it could be
fashioned as it is in the time stated is an utter absurdity, and on this crucial point
not alone Signor del Vescovo, but also another well-known sculptor in a prominent
position in town, thoroughly agrees with me. To do justice in this matter, a
section should be enforced as the only means of solving the problem. Should it be
thus shown that I am incorrect in my opinion I shall admit my error and grace-
fully retire. Otherwise, for abundant reasons, which are palpably plain and con-
vincing (and which shall be stated in extenso in a letter of mine in the next issue
of the Bulletin), I cannot be forced into a conclusion from which my entire
reasoning capacity shrinks.
Yours &c.
CHAS. W. M’CARTHY, M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
223 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park, Sydney,
June 15, 1889.
THE PETRIFIED MAN.
To the Editor of the Australian Star.
Sir, —I have pleasure in replying briefly to your article of yesterday in re the
above. It will be my first and last communication with you on the subject. But,
first of all, let me thank Dr. Warren for his manly attitude ; let me compliment
him for having had the courage of his convictions, and assure him that very soon
he will have the satisfaction of seeing the correctness of his opinion established.
This question has three sides, the sculptural, the anatomical, and geological.
That, in the present instance, the two former aspects stand pre-eminently forward
in the question of petrification or non-petrification I have already clearly shown
in my reply in another newspaper to Mr. Laing, geologist; and I hope, one of
these days, to have the opportunity of verifying and establishing it by practical
demonstration. The objections raised from a sculptural and anatomical point of
view I have already exhaustively and unanswerably replied to in the Bulletin and
other newspapers. The only remaining objections come from two sources, firstly,
that of the geologist, and, secondly, of those suspicious persons who doubt the
honesty of the finders of the specimen. Nobody of any common sense can any
longer place credence in the police evidence ; and, as regards Sala, I know little
and care less. I have judged the specimen, not the man. So much for this And
now the last remaining plank is that of the geologists. A crystallisation of all
their arguments would reduce them into two, namely —Argument No. 1 : This
figure is composed of marble. The Cow Flat marble belongs to primitive strata
where “ worm-like animals and a few low-type fishes were the leading creatures
inhabiting the vast seas and oceans ” (Dr. Souter.) Reply : Dr. Souter must
prove it is Cow Flat marble. Competent geologists express grave doubts that it is
marble at all. I, in my ignorance of geology, thought it was so, until it was
pointed out to me that from the condition of its crystals and its molecular state
and general appearance it looked far more like a stalagmite formation. If this be
correct (and let geologists settle the question), our petrified friend does not belong
to a pre-historic, or even a remote period ; so that Dr. Souter need not have raked
up his geological strata to look for him there. Argument No. 2: Soft animal
tissues have never yet been found petrified. (Mr. Laing). Reply : Mr. Edward
Heaton, of the firm of Wright, Heaton, and Co., gives me permission for stating
and using his name in full support of the statement that he has seen .and closely
examined part of a blackfellow’s soft tissues fully petrified. He also has told me
that at the head of the Diamantina, in Northern Queensland, he has seen fully
petrified snakes. They were not merely encrusted over, but petrified through-
out, hard and soft tissues alike, in proof of which he states that he had in his


hands fractured portions of these specimens. He promises to do his utmost to
procure one for me. Yet another fact. Dr. Morris, of this city, gives me per-
mission to state that he has seen a section of a petrified specimen of certain of the
soft structures of a man, and in that section he discovered distinct traces of mus-
cular and other structures. In conclusion, I would advise the geologists to close
their books, divest themselves for once of conservatism, scepticism, and prejudice,
and come to Melbourne to witness a section of the figure. Let them, however, be
prepared for the startling surprise which, I am now in a position to state, we shall
have in store for them. I wonder will the newspaper authorities then make man-
ful reparation to Dr. Warren and myself in proportion to the ungenerous (I had
almost said unjust) manner in which they have dealt with us in our single-handed
effort in the cause of truth and science ?—Yours, &c.,
C. W. M‘CARTHY, M.D., F.R.C.S., C.I.
22,3 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park,
Sydney, June 28.
ONE THEORY MORE.
To the Editor of the Australian Star.
Sir, —In my opinion the marble man is neither a petrifaction, a carven statue,
nor a cast (in the ordinary acception of the term). I have minutely examined it,
and I think it is an exact representation of a dead body, and that such reproduc-
tion has been effected by artificial and novel means. To effect this purpose, a
mould must have been taken 'of a dead body, the arms of the corpse having
been removed, as their positions would materially interfere with the success of the
experiment. The mould may then have been charged with a strong solution of
carbonate of lime. Water containing carbonic acid has the power of dissolving
calcium, and when the surplus acid has passed off the calcium is deposited in the
form of carbonate. That is the familiar process which has created the beauties of
the Jenolan and other caves. That process, however, is, as a rule, extremely slow,
but science can come to the aid of the experimenter who wishes to hasten that
deposition, and the agency used in the present case is probably electricity. The
science of electrolysis is as yet in its infancy, but by the aid of the electric fluid
many minerals can be deposited from their solutions. A current of electricity
passing through water, previously treated so as to form a conductive, decomposes
the water and its constituent elements, oxygen coming off at one pole and hydrogen
at the other. Apply these facts to the present case and the possibility of the
manufacture of the marble man by electrolysis is apparent. I may point out that
the beard and hair would have interfered wfith the making of the mould. The
figure has neither beard nor hair. At that point where the successive chargings
were made the deposition of carbonate would take place almost in horizontal
layers, and if any deception were intended that portion would have to be broken
off. As a matter of fact, tne portion of one foot is missing. May I ask the
medical men who are interested in the case if the raised position of the arm,
twitching at one corner of the mouth, forward position of the breast, and slightly
curved spine are not evidences of death by poison ? Ido not think the electro
subject was made in Australia, spite of all the police allege, and it may have been
made with no fraudulent intention, but simply as an experiment. If this theory
is correct, there should be cavities in the chest, the head, and probably in the
thicker portions of the legs. Also, if this theory is correct, the work now done
by sculptors in reproducing statues will be done by electro-deposition. It will be
possible to reproduce in marble or metal all kinds of statues and ornaments. It
may be also possible to copy from life much more accurately than sculptors ever
did. Metal shells might be made by this means, and filled with sand, cement,
and other suitable substances, and thus cheap statues be made available. Every
park, street, and public place might have its statue, and replicas of famous works
might be brought within the means of most private persons. Thanking you in
anticipation for the insertion of the above,
Redfern. Yours, &c.,
EDWARD DEMPSEY.


THE MARBLE MAN.
To the Editor.
Sir, —Pursuant to the intimation conveyed in your issue of Saturday week
last, I went to Sydney last week to see this alleged “ Petrified ’’ man, and to
either expose the trick, or place the subject on an incontrovertible basis. Whether
it was the notice of my coming, or some other cause, immediately after that
Saturday the “petrifaction ” absolutely disappeared, It was no longer to be seen
either at its old place at 294 Castlereagh-street, or in Park-street where it had
been subsequently removed ; nor could even the offer of a guinea procure any in-
formation as to its whereabouts —the scent had been so completely cut off! lam
very much inclined to suspect either that the whole thing was a clever hoax, which
there was no one competent to expose ; or that a cross section, which was repeated-
ly called for, has exposed it to be no petrifaction ; or that the “marble man ” has
resurrected ! At any rate, though petrified human remains are a fact, as I stated
before in Upper Austria, there were many circumstances connected with this
“ Orangeman ” which led me antecedently to question its genuineness. These
need not be stated now.
Yours, etc.,
A. M. CAMERON,
Member of the Society of Biblical Archaeology, London.
ORIGINAL CORRESPONDENCE.
FOSSILS, GIANTS, &c.
To the Editor of the Dubbo Despatch.
Sir, —Re fossils, giants, and petrifications, on this subject, I may be allowed
to say a few words, as from a lengthened experience, I flatter myself that I am
entitled to be heard. Your correspondent, Mr. Doherty seems to know T something
about natural history ; but when he asserts that if any trace of animal substance
remains in organism, it is proof (as in the case of the Orange petrified man) of
fraud, I confess I cannot agree with him. Mr. Doherty, to an extent, is quite
correct in this assertion, but he forgets that under certain circumstances the con-
dition or process of fossilization materially differs, and is very various. In Pleisto-
cene formation, the organic remains are but slightly altered, and are spoken of as
sub-fossil. This is the state in which the remains of the monstrous struthrous
birds in New Zealand are found, still retaining large portions of the animal basis.
Now, in the case of the Orange petrification (for such I undoubtedly pronounce it)
this stage presents itself. I admit it is not always found ; but most frequently,
however, a petrifying infiltration occupies the cavities left in the fossil when the
animal matter disappears, which becomes hardened (and I say this in contra-
distinction to Dr. Souter of Orange), and in fact solidified. It not frequently
happens that the whole organism is dissolved and carried off by water percolating
the rock, and its former presence is indicated by the mould of its outer surface
and the cast of its inner in the rocky matrix, leaving a cavity between the cast and
mould agreeing with the size of the fossil— {vide Maguire’s “ Historie veritable du
Geant Teuto Bochus.” from which I have largely quoted, vol. 2, page 66), As to
your correspondent, “ Mastodon,” I think his quotations utterly absurd, as I am
not aware of any book of Pasteur’s printed by “ Mickee Cartee,” —it must be a
mistake of the printer’s. I join issue with him as to the detection of the Irish
Giant, being brought about by the formation of its toes, etc., etc. The fact is it
was the formation of the diaphragm so that “ Mastodon,” must have forgotten the
accident. Your correspondent, Iguanadon, attempts to answer the question put
by “ Mastodon,” and I must say that it is absurd to suppose, however well one
may be up in the knowledge of fossiliferous matter in anatomy, that a person could
recognise a corpse as being that of a Scotchman or an Irishman, or belonging to
any other nationality if found 25 years after death. Trusting this will interest
your readers who some day may be called upon to judge for themselves in solving
a controversy of such a very important value.
I am, yours &c.
ARISTRATIS.


THAT PETRIFIED MAN.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph,
Sir, —In your issue of the 14th inst. you refer to “ the petrified man as a grim
and palpable fraud,” and you refer to what Sub-inspector Ford, of Orange, tells
the Minister for Mines in a report handed round the Legislative Assembly. Mr.
Ford states that from statements made to him he is thoroughly convinced that
the marble figure was made at Croaker’s old public-house, Cow Flat, by myself.
I deny most positively that the figure was made by me, and I assert that it was
found at Caleula. Mr. Ford may be a most capable police-officer, but in his
report he evidently knows little or nothing of geology, or he never would have
come to his conclusion on the flimsy evidence adduced by him to the Minister for
Mines. It is perfectly true that Bell did cart a piece of marble for me to
Croaker’s old public-house, but it was done under the following circumstances. I
had an order by letter from a Mr. Jagger to make for him eight columns and four
pilasters about 6ft. high. I was to furnish the marble, and Mr. Burns (stone-
mason) was to cut them. I obtained the marble, which Mr. Jagger told me to
take to Mr. Burns, and that upon his (Burns) receiving the same he (Jagger)
would give me the cash for it. Burns refused to take ttae marble, stating it was
no good, but in order to prove that Burns was wrong about its quality, I
told Bell to take one of the columns to my residence at Cow Flat. Bell carted
this column to Cow Flat, and then I tried to cut it, but I found the marble
defective and too small. Finding it was too small I made a marble basin out of it
and gave it to Mr. Bell, and hence the supposition that the figure was cut by me.
It is absolutely untrue that Bell ever saw me modelling the figure. As to the
acids, they were purchased through Mr. Guilfoyle for me. One acid was used in
soldering the wire used in the machinery, and the other was used by me in
endeavoring to separate minerals from auriferous specimens found by me. I also
used the acid for testing stone for cement. Whilst at Cow Flat I made some arti-
ficial marble called scagliola, and during the making of this composition thos<s few
who know the secret never allow anyone else to look on, and during the time I
was at work on this composition I preserved the strictest secresy, and instructed
my son to watch for intruders. My son had a small dog and occasionally whistled
to him to keep him quiet, and this accounts for the statement as to the
“whistling.” I had an order from Mr, Ryan, butcher, of Bathurst, to make him
some artificial marble tables. I made five in all, one for Mr. Ryan, one for Mrs.
S. Webb, one for Mrs. Bell and and two for Mr. Atkins. All these were made
from the composition, and during the work I preserved the secresy before referred
to. As to the box referred to as being made by Hammond, this is not true. The
box I took to Orange was one made at Mort’s Dock, and sent to me full of
machinery from Sydney, and as to Hammond’s statement that “he saw the
marble figure on the ground in the kitchen,” this, too, I deny. How could
Hammond have seen this, when it is alleged that my son was constantly on the
watch for intruders ? Would anyone of common sense think that 1 would show
Hammond the “ hole ” referred to by him if I desired to preserve secresy ? The
statement that “I promised Hammond £SOO if he could find a good suitable
place to plant the figure in for a time ” bears its own refutation. Hammond is a
poor man, and I would ask is it likely he would refuse such a good offer of £SOO ?
I have nothing to say as to Mr. Guilfoyle’s statements. They are strictly true,
but the use of them has been twisted so as to bolster up Sub-inspector Ford’s
report. The waggonette referred to was hired by me from Mr. James Small, of
Orange, for seven days. I took the vehicle first to Caleula for the purpose of
digging up the figure The figure was taken up, placed in the waggonette on
some straw, and taken by me to a place within two miles of Orange. I then re-
turned to Cow Flat, got the box which I obtained from Mort and Co. and some
rope, and then returned towards Orange, having visited a black limestone quarry
on the way near Blayney. I went to the spot where I had previously left the
figure, placed it in the box and took it into Orange with the rope referred to.
This rope is now at M‘Fay den’s public-house in Orange. On arriving at Orange
Mr. Small asked me what I had in the waggonette, when I told him, at the same
time asking to keep the matter secret. I also told Small that I intended taking


the figure to Sydney to show it to some scientific men. Dr. Souter, who was at
Small’s, was also shown the figure and expressed himself astonished at its appear-
ance. I then had the figure taken to another place in Orange and exhibited it at
a small charge, whilst I was getting a suitable box made to take it to Sydney. As
soon as the box was made the figure was placed in it and forwarded to Sydney for
inspection by the doctors. As to Bridon’s statement, I assert that I only knew
him first about a week before I found the figure. Bridon lives at Lewis Ponds,
and he does not reside at Caleula. He had an interest with me in the Caleula
quarry, and he has received his one-third share of the profits arising from the sale
of the figure. As to Dr. J. 0. Souter stating that the affair is a “ hoax,” how is
it that he is now lecturing in Orange on the subject of petrification and exhibiting
a life-size portrait of the figure ? The statement that the figure is a statue cut by
me is false. I never attempted such a work in my life, for the simple reason that
lam unable to do so. lam not a sculptor, and all I can say is that if the figure
is a sculpture it must have been done by a most clever artist, and one claiming
much more ability than myself.
I again most positively assert that the marble or petrified man was obtained
by me at Caleula from the earth, and that not one portion of it was ever cut by
me. lam a foreigner, and unable to speak or write English, and I have endeavored
with the aid of an English-born friend to give you the true version of the whole
affair. Mr. Ford’s report is all based upon heresay, his principal evidence being
from unreliable sources, and I defy him or any living man to prove that I was
ever seen cutting out this figure at the old public-house at Cow Flat or anywhere
else. Yours, &c.,
June 17. G. A. SALA.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —In view of the “ petrified man ” controversy, the following extract from
the British Medical Journal (1887), which I came across the other day, may be of
interest:—
“ Petrifying Human Bodies.—The secret of the method of petrifying human
and other bodies, which was discovered by Dr. Massedaglia in the early part of
this century, has never been revealed, and the curiosity of those who are anxious
to know it seems unlikely to be gratified, at present at least. When the discoverer
died he left a description of the method in a sealed packet to his ‘lawful heirs,'
but no lawful heirs have come forward until just recently, though Dr. Massedaglia
died more than 40 years ago. It is said that immense sums have been offered for
the secret, but that the fortunate possessors are in no hurry to share it with any-
one else. Some bodies of animals petrified by Dr. Massedaglia himself are, we
believe, to be seen in the museum of the University of Padua.”
Yours, &c.,
Walgett, June 17. R. AUSTIN.
“THE PETRIFIED MAN OF COW FLAT.”
Dr. McCarthy, Surgeon and Artist, declares the Police Case not Proven.
—Phidias Outrivalled. —John Dillon’s Colossal Skull. —Let us see
what the Cow Flat Man is Stuffed with.
Perhaps a dissertation on the subject of our not yet vanquished friend the
Marble Man of Cow Flat —for as yet he has only been convicted on police evidence
may not be inappropriate from one who has been fighting his battles, and who,
though prepared to publicly recant if convinced of his error, still holds out against
great odds. The evidence procured by the police authorities may be conclusive
to some logical minds, but society has before now been shocked by a miscarriage
of justice, by evidence much stronger and certainly less discrepant. I quote as
follows from the Sydney Daily Telegraph of June 14—extracts from what that
journal designates “ particularly interesting documents ” :
“ I hereby certify that I conveyed
from my marble quarry, a large piece of
marble about one ton to Croaker's old
publick house at Cow Flat for Mr. J. F.
Salla, which I aftenvards saw made into
a man.— Joseph Bell.”
“ He (Briden) also informed the con-
stable that the figure that was being ex-
hibited inside was carved by the man
who was exhibting it at his [Briden's)
quarry at or near Caleulu. —E. F. Ros-
siter, Constable.”


Bather suggestive, these conflicting statements of rival quarry owners, each
naturally anxious to advertise his own quarry. If, as Sub-inspector Ford says :
“ Bryden’s veracity cannot be depended on, as he is a partner of Sala’s in the
marble quarry at Cal eula,” and “is anxious to have this quarry brought before
the public,” may he not apply a similar motive to the quarry owner, who is the
rival of both these gentlemen ?
*******
From this contradictory evidence it is quite as reasonable to infer that the
“Marble Man” was made at Caleula as at Cow Flat. Perhaps, after all, the
specimen was imported. Not that, so far as scientific investigation is concerned—
and it is only from that standpoint that the writer is interested in the affair—it
matters one rap whether it hails Caleula, Cow Flat, or California. The question
is not were it came from, but “ is it a genuine petrifaction of human remains?”
If a figure was seen carried out anywhere in the Orange district, was it that of a
dead body like the present; from what model was it executed ; where was that
model procured, and where is it now ? If Sala sculptured it from memory, unaided
by the model of a dead man, in a similar pose and affected similarly by pressure,
posture, &c., then indeed we have in our midst a supreme artist, though an erring
one—a man of transcendent genius—and when he has atoned for his fault, in
Wisdom’s name let the Australian Governments lay hold of such a prize, and we
shall soon have around us, by the work of his hands, a nucleus of art-monuments
that will bid fair to rival the best specimens of ancient or modern sculpture. That
this figure, with its natural and sculptural perfections, could have been carved out
by Mr. Sala or anybody else in the time specified in the police evidence is a wild
absurdity. On this crucial point lam borne out by the opinions of more than one
well-known sculptor in whose company I have again examined the specimen.
* * *****
Notwithstanding police-reports, there is a mystery about the whole affair which
thinking men cannot fathom ; and I contend that the Scotch verdict “ Not
proven ” must apply to the case until a section of the specimen be obtained. It
is with the hope of yet enforcing this crucial test that I write the present letter.
Refusing as I do to swallow a theory which I can in no way reconcile with the
result of my careful and unprejudiced observations. I turn again to the specimen,
any opinions upon which must be given chiefly from the indications shown by its
outward appearance. These opinions must necessarily be based upon (1) the
physico-chemical, (2) the geological, (3) the anatomical, and (4) the sculptural or
artistic aspects. I shall proceed on these lines to deal with the question, merely
premising that the consideration of outward form in the specimen is by no means
a matter specially and' solely within the province of a medical man, or even of an
expert anatomist. A very skilled anatomist who doos not understand the art of
sculpture would, for instance, lamentably fail not alone in modelling but in pointing
out the true modelling of, we will suppose, the sterno-cleido-mastoid muscle and
other structures of the neck in different positions of the head, though he can
lecture with accuracy on the origin, insertion and relations of the muscle. And
so-likewise with other muscles and bodily structures contributing to outward form.
This is, no doubt, why a few medical men have made blunders in their privately-
expressed opinions. (By the bye, why do they not all speak out as Dr. Souter
has done, and let me have the opportunity of meeting their arguments ?In not
doing so they leave us, by inference, to imagine that all the statements are at their
side, the proofs at mine.) It is satisfactory, however, that medical friends who
have examined the specimen with me in a thorough and exhaustive way, and
whose opinion I value, have been impressed with the strikingly correct anatomical
proportions and natural death-like pose and shape of the figure.
With the admitted affinity for lime salts in the human composition (our bones
being chiefly composed of phosphate and carbonate of lime, and our blood carrying
those salts in solution) is complete impregnation with and transformation into
calcareous matter possible in the dead body ? I believe it will readily be conceded


that it should he so under favourable circumstances, the foremost condition being
that the body is subjected to the action of a sufficiently concentrated calcifying
medium before decomposition has set in. (Remark that there is evidence of such
disposal of the body in the present instance, the raised arm stumps showing that
the body was placed in position and acted upon before rigor mortis had passed
away —in other words, before the advent of decomposition.) In a cave in
Mosquito Plains, near Penola, S.A., as I have elsewhere mentioned, a blackfellow’s
body was found in 1850 in the leathery condition of semi-petrifaction from the
mere dripping from the stones overhead—this leathery, semi-elastic consistence
being due to the fact of the animal constituents still being in excess of the earthy,
as we see in rickety bones. A member of Parliament has told me that he himself
saw in Monaro district a fully-petrified wallaby. Completely petrified wood is
not uncommonly picked up in parts of Australia. “If,” as I have elsewhere
asked, “certain of our streams and wells and drippings from caves have such
powerfully petrifying properties on wood, wallabies, and black men, is the skin of
a white man, notwithstanding his affinity for lime salts, so pachynermatous as to
resist the physico-mechanical processes of endosmose or exosmose as contributing
to the necessary lime impregnation ?”
Not being a geologist, I do not pretend to discuss the geological aspect of the
question. Least of all do I wish to pose as an antagoirist of the New South Wales
Government geologist, nor would I at all have introduced Mr. Wilkinson’s name
into the discussion, but that he wandered outside his sphere into the domain of
the sculptor. I shall simply say it appears to me that this portion of the question
would resolve itself into the following considerations, namely :
1. In what length of time would a human body be fully petrified ? Would it
not depend chiefly upon two conditions, namely : («) the chemical affinity in the
body for salts of lime, and ( b) the strength of the petrifying medium ?
2. Could a body be petrified a whitish colour while in close contact with
marble blocks of a different colour ? In other words, is the acquired colour depen-
dent on the petrifying medium or the substance upon which it acts, or on both
together ?
3. What are the specific reasons, from a geological point of view, why this
figure is or cannot possibly be a true instance of petrification ?
4. How long would it probably take for the natural formation of the hard
raised venous calcareous incrustations seen at the back and sides of the figure, and
also those embedded in certain flaws thereon ? (Strange that this incrustation,
instead of being general over the body, should take the form of special vein-like
markings, and this in the exact position of certain of the superficial veins of the
body. Is this chance?)
5. Are the thick webbings or “juxta-posed substance” between the ankles,
heels, knees, and thighs likely to have been formed by close contact of these parts
during the process of petrification ? If not how is to be accounted for the dividing
seams to be seen with the naked eye in certain of these webbings, showing some
want of continuity, as if by the growing calcareous deposition the parts gradually
approached from side to side and at last touched and became practically con-
tinuous ? How many years, or scores of years, would Nature take to develope
these thick webbings, not into the stalagmite state, but into the condition of true
marble in which they are admittedly found ? (Certain it is these webbings were
4 never fashioned by the hand of man. As to the absurd theory of their having
been copied from the cast of a dead body, why, I should like to know where was
there ever seen a body in such a condition ?)
These, however, are questions which can only be satisfactorily answered by a
geologist; and it would be interesting if some authority on the subject would
come forward and record his opinion.
Next in order to claim our attention will be the anatomical aspect. 1 shall
now put the anatomical objections seriatim and answer them. _
Objection No. I. —“ There is an unequal number of ribs on the two sides.
(Dr. Souter.)


Skeleton.
1
Mable Figure.
ft.
in.
ft. in.
Height—
Depth of chest from
5
3
5 9
last dorsal vertebra to
end of chest-bone
8i
8Jr
Do. from midway on
\
81
91-5
chest-bone
1
°2
Do. from junction of
third rib to sixth dor-
sal vertebral spine
8
81
Width between hip
bone prominences
10£
11
Length from hip’
prominences to knee
joint
1
fj
4
1 10^
Do. from knee joint
1
Q1
°2
1 d 1
to outer ankle
1 *2
Reply. —Some of the upper ribs are not shown. They, with the clavicles
(collar-bones) are simply obscured and lost to view, owing to extra calcareous
deposition at the root of the neck and upper part of the chest. To count the ribs
correctly in the specimen one should find where they commence, below the notch
of the sternum (chest-bone). This land-mark is lost for the reason stated. Its
true position can be found, however. It will be, in the present raised position of
the arm-stumps, intersected by a straight line drawn from nearly the centre of one
arm-pit, opposite the head of the arm-bone, to a similar point on the opposite side.
Its position thus will be found about four inches from the chin of the specimen.
By counting the ribs from here downwards the correct number (twelve on each
side, including the floating ribs) will be found. I have reckoned this number
accurately, in the presence of medical friends.
Objection No. 2. —“ The very inaccurate formation of the chest.”— (Dr. Souter)
Reply. —l have, in presence of an esteemed medical friend and in presence of
an experienced sculptor, taken most careful measurements, with compass and tape,
of the chest and other parts, both of the specimen and of an articulated skeleton
placed beside it, and I have found the chest proportions and the entire bodily pro-
portions strikingly accurate.
Objection No. 3. —“ The standing out of the bones in a too well-developed
thorax.” —(Dr. Sorter.)
Reply. —The thorax, on the contrary, we found proportionately developed
(indeed, pather under-developed compared with the skeleton. I cannot conceive
how Dr. Souter fell into this error otherwise than by supposing an apparently
increased chest-area owing to the partial subsidence of the abdomen.
Showing the general bodily proportions I append the following measure-
ments :
Bearing in mincl the difference of six inches between the skeleton and marble
figure, even allowing for shrinking, these measurements will be seen strikingly
proportionate.
Before leaving this part of the subject I shall just mention a few anatomical
accuracies noted by me as well as by other medical men—namely, the correct out-
lines of the extensor tendons of the toes, the correct shape, in section, of the’
severed arm-bone, the normal tracing of the external jugular and other veins,
some incrusted and others not so ; the accurate shape and position of the joint
surfaces and other bony prominences, in face and figure ; and lastly (a very
curious circumstance) the striking anatomical correctness of what appears sus-
piciously like a section of the severed bone of one of the broken toes, its angles
and planes correctly numbered, each angle and plane pointing exactly in the same
direction as they do in a section of a similar part on the skeleton I have taken a
paper-rubbing of this part for better comparison, and shall be glad to show it to
any medical man who may desire to see it. Such close-fitting, such perfect
similarity and minute exactness of detail in this small bony part made its impres-


Petrified Man’s Head.
Head of John Dillon
(not including the hair).
Measurement from before back-
wards (Fronto occipital)
9 in.
Ditto
9£ in.
Ditto from side to side (Bi-
parietal)
7 in.
Ditto
7£ in.
sion upon the medical man who courteously accompanied and remained with me
during this inspection. Shall it be said this is a mere freak of Nature or the
result of the sculptor’s chisel ? If the latter, I ask again where did he procure
the model ?
The artistic or sculptural aspect carries with it, to my mind, most weight
in this discussion. I shall now reply briefly to various statements made and
theories propounded on this side of the question.
Statement No. I. —“lt forcibly reminds one of pictures one has seen of American
Indians, Californians,” etc.—(Dr. Souter).
Reply. —The face with its aquiline nose is not of the hatchet-faced, receding-
forehead type of the American Indian, nor is the shape of the head indicative of
such.
Statement No. 2. —“ The head is that of a giant.” (Anonymous).
Reply. —l am at present modelling a larger head (life-size) —a magnificent type
of head it is, viz., that of my friend and countryman, John Dillon, M.P. I append
the measurements :
Statement No. 3. —“ The specimen is unquestionably the handicraft of a not very
able sculptor.'’—(Dr. Souter). It is “rudely carved into the form of a human
body.”—(Mr. C. A. Wilkinson.
Reply. —An artist attempting to carve this figure, as it stands, should have not
alone an intimate knowledge of anatomy, but also a most accurate idea of out-
ward form in the dead body ; and with this a degree of delicate chiselling-power,
and general manipulative dexterity that, in my humble opinion, has never been,
and shall never be, arrived at in the glorious profession of the sculptor. Of course
a copy can be chiselled, using the present figure as a model, but it will show pal-
pably as an imitation, There is something in this figure that gives it the unmis-
takable stamp of death. In viewing it one feels himself in the presence of death.
Look particularly at the back of the figure, spoken of as being “ rudely chiselled ”
and conviction seizes you that you are unmistakably viewing a rigid dead body
flattened here and there from posture ; the right calf, buttock and shoulder show-
ing distinct evidence of pressure from the body having partly lain on the right
side. That “ crude chiselling ” could effect this general accuracy of form, and
special minuteness of detail, is palpably absurd. The treatment of the muscular
and other structures showing the post mortem condition, the treatment of the parts
affected by pressure and posture, the pose, form and special details are such as to
render it inconceivable that anybody with an eye for form could speak of it as “ a
rudely-carved human body.” The reasons I have given in refuting this idea are
plain enough. So thinks an authority on the subject, Mr. Oscar Meyer, who
candidly admits in his letter to the Herald that “Dr. M‘Car thy gives plenty of
very good reasons which seem to render any other theory impossible from a scien-
tific standpoint.”
Statement No. 4.
trunk and limbs in working off the superfluous stone in his progress towards a
finish.”—(Dr. Souter.)
Reply. —To describe the appearance as “honey-combed ” is not quite correct
the idea which the word quoted conveys being that of small, sharp, regular indents*
such as would be produced by the corrosion consequent on the submersion of
certain qualities of marble in acid. The surface has not this appearance but it is
covered with rather large, smooth wave-like pittings, which it would be im-
possible to form by means of rough chiselling and acid without leaving indelible


chisel-marks. On this point Signor del Vescovo (sculptor) has written very clearly
and unmistakably—(l) Corroborating my statements with regard to the rough
chiselling theory; (2) Stating he could easily detect chisel-marks in spite of age
or any treatment of the specimen ; (3) Detailing special positions where these marks
would be particularly evident; and (4) Positively asserting that on account of the
presence of a “ hair ” or flaw on the right leg, that limb would certainly have been
broken by chiselling. This is an opinion which cannot be despised—that of a
man of forty years’ practical experience in marble working.
Statement No. s. —“ The eye that has not been gouged out is quite round,
with its lid closed.” (Dr. Souter.)
Reply.—The eye is not rotund, but flattened. The lids are semi-open, not
closed ; and here is also seen something very remarkable, The eye-ball, flabby in
death, and as if bagging out at the lower part (perhaps for a while resisting the
petrifying process) is caught and fixed and frozen, so to speak, in this position
before its humours could escape. Strange, also, this bagging is at the most
dependent part, the outer angle of the orbit, where the part would naturally tend
to gravitate in the right dorsal position of the body.
Statement (or theory) No. 6. “Basing my opinion upon my knowledge of
marbles and sculpture, I say this ‘ petrified man ’ is ‘ nothing but a cast ’ made from
‘the finest alabaster plaster,’ and, however strange my theory may seem, I hope
that eventually it will be found lam correct.” (Mr. Oscar Meyer.)
Reply.—Prom mere inspection alone Mr. Meyer’s theory can be disproved.
A glance at the marble graining, this strim and metallic deposits, as well as the
presence of a flaw where the calcareous formation was interrupted, is all-sufficient
to prove it a natural, not an artificial formation. Besides which there is the true
ring of marble on striking. But'l have got indisputable proof in the fact of
having procured and analysed a small piece chopped off the specimen in my pre-
sence. Everybody knows that plaster of Paris and alabaster contain sulphate of
lime. I found the chip that I analysed composed of carbonate of lime, not sul-
phate. It is, therefore, true stone, not imitation. Mr. Meyer’s theory thus
vanishes.
Theory No. 7. —“ It may be a plaster cast transformed into stone by burial.”
—(Anonymous.)
Reply.—l should like to know by what strange geological process can the
sulphate of calcium in the “cast” be transformed into true marble. We have
been treated to yet another absurdity in the shape of a suggestion that the so-
called “ cast ” is merely coated over by nature with a delicate veneering of marble.
Let us only be enlightened on the chemistry of these problems, and soon an
artificial process will spring into existence, which will bring to an abrupt end the
era of sculpture, and will afford people of limited means the rare opportunity of
gracing their households, on a ridiculously cheap scale, with marble representa-
tions of their ancestors, and with exquisite marble images from the antique.
I have now stated the case of “ our marble friend,” arguing, I hope, logically,
step by step. That I have, in this controvery, been actuated solely by a love of
science and a desire to unfold the truth, those who know me will, I think, believe.
I claim there is ample reason why the true and only conclusive test ought to be
applied, and it should have been in the beginning. I allude to the making of a
section —cutting the model in half. There are other proposed methods, such as
drilling into supposed cavities, the skull-cavity, &c., testing the gravity of the
figure in water, &c.; but, to my mind, these tests would not be final. If it be
proved a fraud, then it is one of the most astoundingly clever deceptions of the
present century—a deception practised by a man not alone well versed in the
minutest antomical details, but also an artist of the first order, who should yet
take his place high amongst the greatest of all time.
I believe this controversy has been approaehed by most people with a degree
of prejudice. In the first instance the case was evidently prejudiced in the minds
of certain Sydney scientists, owing to the communication which Dr. Souter ad-
mittedly sent them. There are others again, who, having seen or heard of a decep-
tion, colorably of this nature, practised in America, have arrived at the conclusion
that therefore this must be a similar fraud. In these instances prejudice not alone
mars judgment, but absolutely prevents its exercise. I verily believe there are others


who still doubt the capacity of Nature for doiog this work. Take a leaf or flower.
Look at this delicate maiden-hair fern plucked from some gully in the Australian
bush. See, also, this rose with its soft, delicate petals, and say whether it is more
difficult for Nature to fashion such exquisite foliage and flowers than to merely
impregnate with natural lime salts an already-created human body which contains
similar salts.
A few words more and I have done. Dr. Souter says, “The man who
still holds it may be a petrifaction, could never be convinced of his error, though
he should read volumes on the subject.” In reply to this I can only say that as
long as the facts before me point clearly to a certain conclusion I will stick to my
opinions. When convinced of my error I shall willingly and manfully abandon
them. I stoutly maintain that the theory of the marble man having been fashioned
artificially either from a mould or with a chisel, is rendered more than doubtful
by the plain facts above-stated; and that, in justice, a section of the specimen
should be demanded. Perhaps those who have “ read volumes on the subject ”
will now come forward and enlighten us with a few facts and arguments to the
contrary—based on an examination of the figure itself. I may here add that if
honoured by an interview, at the residence of our marble friend, with those
editors of Sydney newspapers who at once accepted as infallible the police
evidence, should I there and then fail to substantiate, in presence of independent
medical and artistic witnesses, each and every one of the statements above made,
and should I not, at the same time, be able to convince them fully that there is at
least such grave und palpable doubt in the matter as to necessitate the section
which I demand, I shall treat them to a box at the opera and a champagne supper.
Chas. W. M‘Carthy, M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
THE PETRIFIED HUMAN REMAINS.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —Mr. Edward Heaton, of the firm of Wright, Heaton and Co., allows me
to use his name in publishing the following information, w hich, if accepted as
accurate (and I am quite sure it is so in the fullest sense), would at once com-
pletely upset the widely-accepted geological doctrine as to the impossibility for
soft tissues to be petrified. Mr. Heaton states to me that he has seen fully petri-
fied snakes at the head of the Diamantina, Northern Queensland. These specimens
were not encrusted on the surface, but had all their tissues, hard and soft, petri-
fied throughout, in proof of which he states that he had a fractured one in his
hand. He also states that he has seen a part of the soft tissues of a black man in a
thorough state of petrifaction and considers it absurd any longer to doubt its possi-
bility. I think that in this matter we shall soon have here in Australia some
startling revelations for the scientific world.—Yours, &c.,
CHAS. W. M'CARTHY, M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
223 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park,
Sydney, June 27.
THE PETRIFIED MAN.
To the Editor of the Australian Star.
Sir, —At last I have got from the owners of the petrified human remains (as
the specimen must now be correctly called) a written guarantee, with permission
for publishing their statement, that they will allow a full section in public, adding
that they specially wish me to be present, and will duly communicate with me
when ready for it. I have this day forwarded to the owners an important and
conclusive analysis of the bony and other petrified structures, made by Mr. JVlayne
at his analytical laboratory in Oxford-street (see appended certificates), and am
armed with another crucial test, news of which, somehow, has crept into one of
the evening papers, and which, consequently, I may here freely state. It is this:
A few days ago I cut into half the circumference of the protruding right armbone—


that is to say, I chiselled, gouged, rough-filed to a plain surface, fine-filed, sand-
papered, pumiced, and roughly polished the part, thus going into the surface for
about a quarter of an inch, I observed here, notwithstanding the semi- obliterating
effect of crystallisation, distinct semi-circular lines of demarcation (recognised
subsequently by other medical men), one line indicating the margin of the bone,
another limiting its investing membrane, another showing the line of the surround-
ing soft parts ; these segmentary lines corresponding with, and meeting exactly,
the external tissue markings on the uncut part, and having also their perfect
analogue in similar outward markings of the bony and surrounding structures of
the left arm-stump. This test alone, irrespective of the analysis alluded to, is
perfectly conclusive evidence. The chemical discovery of “ bone ash, or bone
earth, ” however, in the site of the bony part, settles the matter beyond all dispute.
It is of itself, applied to this human figure, a final proof that we are dealing with
metamorphosed human remains ; the “ bone-earth ” having been found only in the
bony site, and not in the site of the soft parts (see certificate). At my special
desire, however,—for the particular reason that I have got here such little fair
play in this important scientific controversy, having had to break down
a great wall of popular prejudice, fighting single-handed against biassed
newspaper reports, governmental authorities, geologists, scientists, sceptics, and I
am ashamed to add (as I have been positively assured by members of the press
and others)against the hidden and unmanly efforts of certain of my own professional
brethren —the owners have consequently consented to a public section of the
figure elsewhere which section I shall superintend. I shall then also have the
opportunity of verifying publicly the above-mentioned chemical test by making an
analysis of other bony and muscular textures. Now that this controversy is
practically ended, I may as well mention two vital mistakes made by the geolo-
gists, including Dr. S outer (who, bye-the-by, has been a straightforward and clever
opponent). These mistakes were made, first of all by taking for granted (as I did
myself through my ignorance of geology) that the figure was marble, and, conse-
quently, wandering off at a tangent into a process of reasoning foreign to the
question, that is to say raking up primitive geological strata to account for the
“ pre-historic existence” of a figure which, judged by its peculiar crystalline and
general molecular state is, palpably, a comparatively recent stalagmite formation.
Their second error was in sticking with true stand-still conservative blindness to
the widely-accepted doctrine of the impossibility of the petrifaction of soft animal
tissues ; whereas, we have here ample proof to the contrary, owing, no doubt, to
our living in a new land, its geological history yet to be fully written, and the
chemical strength of its petrifying waters being evidently in excess of any yet
discovered in older lands. I have procured most valuable information on this
subject from Edward Heaton, Esq., of the firm of Wright, Heaton and Co., and
also from Dr. Morris, of this city, both eye-witnesses to examples, in this country,
of the complete petrifaction of soft tissues in man and reptiles, which tissues they
saw in section, and in which Dr. Morris assured me he distinctly traced the out-
lines of muscular and other soft structures (both of these gentlemen allowing me
full permission to use their names in this matter). I may mention that Dr. Morris,
besides being- a well -known consulting physician, is well versed in geology, and
bears the reputation of being one of the foremost microscopists in these colonies.
I intend bringing this matter, and the discovery of the petrified human figure
under the notice of Professors Huxley and Haughton, for we have thus got a new
departure in geological science, and I have no doubt that in Europe this petrified
body will be regarded by scientific people as one of the wonders of our time. Well,
Mr. Editor, “ Truth will out.” For my part, I have fought this unequal battle
very strenuously and honestly, and having been subjected here to much public dis-
comfiture, I am the better pleased thus to be allowed to take elsewhere my full
measure of credit for having in the interest of advancing science, as opposed to
petrified conservatism, at last forced the truth in the face of overwhelming odds.
Yours, &c.,
CHAS. W. MacCARTHY, M.D., F.R.S.C.I.
223 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park, Sydney,
July 1, 1889.


“ Analytical Certificate. —Analytical Laboratory, 303 Oxford-street, Sydney.
To C. W. MacCarthy, Esq., M.D., Elizabeth-street. I, the undersigned analytical
chemist, do hereby certify that I received on June 29,1889, from C. W. MacCarthy,
Esq., M.D., a sample of chipping and powder for analysis, and have analysed the
same, and declare the result of my analysis to be as follows : —No. 1. (chipping) :
Carbonate of lime. No. 2. (powder): Carbonate of lime and phosphate of lime.
Phosphate of lime in the form in which phosphorous is found in bone ash or bone
earth. As witness my hand this 29th day of June, 1889. (Signed) James Mayne,
E.C.S., E.R.M.S., M.P.S. Witness, H.P.”
“I certify that the “powder,” analysed by Mr. Mayne on June 29, 1889,
and found by him to contain carbonate and phosphate of lime, the latter in the
form of ‘ bone ash or bone earth,’ was portion of the substance gouged and filed by
me from the stump of right armbone of the petrified human remains lately
exhibited in Sydney. I further certify that the ‘ chipping,’ analysed by him on
the same day, and found to be composed of carbonate of lime only, was a small
portion chiselled off the site of the soft fleshy tissues of the right shoulder of the
petrified figure. “ (Signed) Charles W. MacCarthy, M.D., F.R.C.S.I.
223 Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park, Sydney, June 30, 1889.”
THE PETRIFIED MAN (?.)
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir,— l willlingly admit that Dr. McCarthy has maintained his part in this
controversy in a “ pure argumentative spirit,” and in an “attitude of courtesy
towards his opponents,” and I regret very much if, in anything I have said, I
seemed to show a less commendable spirit. Certainly nothing was further from
my intention than to be discourteous to the worthy doctor, whom all who have
read his letters must respect, not only for the ability with which he has discussed
the subject, from his point of view, but also for his manifest sincerity and earnest-
ness.
My letter, to which Dr. McCarthy replied in your issue of Monday, was based
entirely on the assumption that the so-called “petrified man ” is of marble, as has
been asserted from the first without contradiction—in fact it is said to have been
dug out of a marble quarry —and in saying that its genuineness or otherwise was
for the geologist and not for the medical man to determine, my assertion had
reference solely to the possibility of a petrifaction of the human body, or of any
other body, in marble. Dr. M‘Carthy disputes the competency of the geologist in
this particular instance by a general denial of his competency in all cases where
the genuineness of alleged fosils is in question, a claim which was certainly not
put forward by me in behalf of the geologist. Dr. M ‘Carthy says that a geologist
may declare that to be possible which other evidence may show not to be a fact.
Of course ; but when the geologist declares a thing to be impossible (which was the
case I put), and if the declaration cannot be disputed, no amount of evidence to
the contrary is of any value. What is possible may still be untrue ; but what is
impossible cannot be true.
To my great surprise Dr. M‘Carthy endeavours to fasten upon me the
responsibility for the statement that the specimen if of marble, and he advises me
to make a further examination before I again insist upon it. I made no such
statement and offered no opinion on the point; I simply took for granted what
other people (Dr. M‘Carthy included) asserted. If lam not mistaken I have seen
a letter under the doctor’s hand, averring, in opposition to the suggestion that the
figure was a casting, that he had chipped off a piece and on analysing it had found
that it was actual marble.
Dr. M‘Carthy thinks it no argument to say that “ soft animal tissues have
never been found in a petrified state,” or that “ fossils in marble have never yet
been discoveredbecause, even supposing those statements to be true, it does not
follow that in this new and wonderful land discoveries may not be made which
will contradict them and revolutionise old world theories. Possibly so, but then
the contradicting fact must be attested beyond all possibility of denial. If Dr.
M‘Carthy had found in the “petrified man ”an unnatural arrangement of bones,


muscles, and veins, he would probably have declared at once that the thing was a
fraud, and have ridiculed the suggestion that nature had produced, at some bygone
time in this new and wonderful country, a man, or race of men, different as to
their anatomical structure, from all of the human race whom anatomists have
hitherto examined. , , .. , ~
The proof as to their non-petrifaction of soft animal tissues and the non-
discovery of fossils in marble is both of the a priori and the a posteriori kind.
Science says that owing to the exceeding slowness of the process of petrifaction
and the rapidity with which soft animal tissue. decomposes, the latter cannot
become petrified, and' experience confirms this dictum by the fact that no such
instance of petrifaction has been found. Science also says that fossils cannot be
looked for in marble, because the metamorpliic change which that substance has
undergone must have destroyed all traces of organic structure existing m the
original limestone, and experience here again adds its confirmatory testimony.
Instances are frequent in which a portion of a mass of limestone, which has been
converted into marble by the intrusion of an igneous rock m a molten state, is
utterly destitute of fossil remains, while the unconverted portion of the mass
abounds with them. ~, , „ . , ,
But, the specimen being no longer entitled to the character of a marble
man,” Dr. McCarthy suggests that it may be a “ stalagmite, and he asks
whether it is not possible that a deposit and crystallisation of stalagmite material
may take place “in the mould of the decomposed soft tissues, with, at the same
time, true infiltration and petrification of the bony skeleton,” thus producing “ a
human form ”(a cast, I presume) “ with petrified bones inside it. The possi-
bility of this could only be proved by the discovery of such an object. As none
has ever been found, and as it is prima facie impossible, the doctor s question
must be answered in the negative. Before the process of petrification could begin
the body would have to remain undecomposed until the mould had formed around
it, and in the ordinary course of events this, would occupy many scores, if not
hundreds, of years, and the body in the meantime would probably be lying at the
bottom of some lake, or river, or ocean bed, where nearly all fossils have been
originally preserved. Fossils are sometimes found on. the floors of limestone
caverns, where the deposit of carbonate of lime, precipitated from the water
which has dripped from above, has enclosed the substances, usually bones, acted
upon, but in those instances the original substances are preserved. If the
“ stalagmite man,” to give him his new name, has been preserved in that way he
will be discovered whole beneath the encrusting stones when Dr. McCarthy makes
the section to which he is looking forward. , .
Dr. McCarthy appears to think that a human body might become petrified in
the same manner as wood and other porous substances are often petrified—that is
by being immersed in water holding a mineral in solution until the particles of the
mineral have taken possession of all the interstices of the immersed substance.
When this has taken place and the original material of the substance decays its
place is taken, particle for particle, by the mineral until at last we have a com-
plete petrification of the object with its original structure distinctively reproduced
in stone. But that any animal body could undergo this long and gradual process
is beyond all belief unless a well-attested instance can be produced. Even in
such a case, if it were possible, the mineral could not be marble nor anything
approaching to it in texture. , ,
Dr. M‘Carthy asks me to account for the naturally placed venous incrusta-
tions on the specimen. This I must confess that I am unable to do, and I shall
not venture to set up any theories. For the most accurate information on this
point I would refer Dr. McCarthy to Mr. G. F. Sala, of Cow Flat.
1 In conclusion, I should like it to be understood that I have no wish and no
claim to pose as a geological expert. I know no more of the science of geology than
any fairly well-informed person may be expected to know, but I have been careful
to advance nothing which cannot be supported by the best authority. . My only
object in venturing into the discussion was, if possible, to direct it into what
appeared to me its proper domain—namely, that of geological science.
I think that I can at any rate take credit to myself for having demolished the
claim of Dr. M‘Carthy's prot6g(3 to the title of the “ marble man.”—Yours, &c.
Petersham, June 26. JOHN B. LAING.
