

/O , 5* 0 0
/L 6^'j * 7 ~
0 7^.
f/ — * /Ayt^i
<-y x > y . y
,4^
r <£-
.
fry y ££T -t£T2_


■
■ • ' • ■
■
►


THE OEIGrIN OF TOTEMISM.
The general explanation of totemism to which the Intichiuma cere-
monies seem to point is that it is primarily an organised and co-
operative system of magic designed to secure for the members of the
community, on the one hand, a plentiful supply of all the commodi-
ties of which they stand in need, and, on the other hand, immunity
from all the perils and dangers to which man is exposed in his
struggle with nature. Each totem group, on this theory, was
charged with the superintendence and control of some department of
nature from which it took its name, and with which it sought, as far
as possible, to identify itself. If the things which composed the
department assigned to a particular group were beneficial to man, as
in the case of edible animals and plants, it was the duty of the group
to foster and multiply them; if, on the other hand, they were either
noxious by nature, or might, under certain circumstances, become so,
as in the case of ravenous beasts, poisonous serpents, rain, wind, snow,
and so on, then it was the duty of the group to repress and counteract
these harmful tendencies, to remedy any mischief they might have
wrought, and perhaps to turn them as efficient engines of destruction
against foes. This latter side of totemic magic, which may perhaps
be described as the negative or remedial side, hardly appears in our
accounts of Central Australian Totemism; but we shall meet with
examples of it elsewhere.
In favour of this hypothetical explanation of Totemism I would
urge that it is simple and natural, and in entire conformity with both
the practical needs and the modes of thought of savage man. Nothing
can be more natural than that man should wish tcf eat when he is
hungry, to drink when he is thirsty, to have fire to warm him when
he is cold, and fresh breezes to cool him when he is hot; and to the
savage nothing seems simpler than to procure for himself these and
all other necessaries and comforts by magic art. We need not, there-
fore, wonder that in very ancient times communities of men -should
have organised themselves more or less deliberately for the purpose,
of attaining objects so natural by means that seemed to them so
simple and easy. The first necessity of savage, as of civilised, man
is food, and with this it accords that wherever Totemism exists the-
•
majority of the totems are invariably animals or plants—in other
words, things which men can eat. The great significance of this
fact has hitherto been concealed from us by the prohibition so com-
monly laid on members of a totem clan to eat their totem animal or
plant. But the discovery of the Intichiuma ceremonies among the
YOL. LXY. N.S. 3 K


Central Australian tribes proves that in keeping our eye on the pro-
hibition to eat the totem we have hitherto been looking at only one
side of the medal, and that the less important of the two. For these
ceremonies show—what no one had previously dreamed of—that the
very man who himself abstains in general from eating his totem will,
nevertheless, do all in his power to enable other people to eat it; nay,
that his very business and function in life is to procure for his fellow
tribesmen a supply of the animal or plant from which he takes his
name, and to which he stands in so intimate a relation. With the
new facts before us, we may safely conjecture that whatever the
origin of the prohibition observed by each clan to eat its totem, that
prohibition is essentially subordinate, and probably ancillary to the
great end of enabling the community as a whole to eat of it—in other
words, of contributing to the common food supply.
Yiewed in this light, Totemism is a thoroughly practical system
designed to meet the everyday wants of the ordinary man in a clear
and straightforward way. There is nothing vague or mystical about
it, nothing of that metaphysical haze which some writers love to
conjure up over the humble beginnings of human speculation, but
which is utterly foreign to the simple, sensuous, and concrete modes
of thought of the savage. Yet for all its simplicity and directness we
cannot but feel that there is something impressive, and almost
grandiose, in the comprehensiveness, the completeness, the vaulting
ambition of this scheme, the creation of a crude and barbarous philo-
sophy. All nature has been mapped out into departments ; all men
have been distributed into corresponding groups ; and to each group
of men has been assigned, with astounding audacity, the duty of
controlling some one department of nature for the common good.
Eeligion, it will be observed, has no place in the scheme. Man is
; still alone with nature, and fancies he can sway it at his will. Later
on, when he discovers his mistake, he will bethink himself of gods,
and beg them to pull for him the strings that hang beyond his
reach.
A further recommendation of this way of regarding Totemism is
that it falls in with the traditions as well as with the practice of the
Oentral Australian tribes. We have seen that, according to these
traditions, people began by regularly eating their totems, and marry-
ing women of the same totem group as themselves. To the ordinary
view of Totemism, which treats as fundamental the prohibitions to eat
the totem animal or plant, and to marry a woman of the same totem
group, these traditions present almost insuperable difficulties; the
adherents of that view have, indeed, little choice but to reject the
traditions as baseless, although strong grounds exist, as I have
pointed out, for holding them to be authentic. But if we accept the
theory that Totemism is merely an organised system of magic intended


to secure a supply, primarily of food, and secondarily of everything*
else that a savage wants, the difficulties vanish. For, on this hypo-
thesis, why should not a man partake of the food which he is at so
much pains to provide ? And why should he not marry a woman
whose function in life is the same as his own ? Nay, we may go a
step further,, and say that, according to a fundamental principle of
Totemism, there are good reasons why he should do both of these
things. That principle, to which I would now direct the reader’s
attention, is the identification of a man with his totem.
Among the Central Australians, we are told, “ the totem of any
man is regarded, just as it is elsewhere, as the same thing as him-
self.” 1 Thus a Kangaroo man, discussing the matter with Messrs.
Spencer and Gillen, pointed to a photograph of himself which had just
been taken, and remarked: “ That one is just the same as me; so is
a kangaroo.” This incapacity to distinguish between a man and a
beast, difficult as it is for us to realise, is common enough, even
among savages who have not the totemic system. A Bushman,
questioned by a missionary, “ could not state any difference between
a man and a brute—he did not know but a buffalo might shoot with
bows and arrows as well as a man, if it had them.” 2 When the Russians
first landed on one of the Alaskan Islands the natives took them
for cuttle-fish, “on account of the buttons on their clothes.” 3 The
Bororos, a tribe of Brazilian Indians, calmly maintain that they are
birds of a gorgeous red plumage, which live in their native forests.
It is not merely that they will be changed into these birds at their
death, but they actually are identical with them in their life, and
they treat the birds accordingly, as they would their fellow tribesmen,
keeping them in captivity, refusing to eat their flesh, and mourning
for them when they die. However, they kill the wild birds for their
feathers, and, though they will not kill, they pluck the tame ones to
adorn their own naked brown bodies with the brilliant plumage of
their feathered brethren. 4 Now, it is by identifying himself with his
totem that the Central Australian native produces the effects he aims
at. If he desires to multiply grubs, he pretends to be a grub him-
self, emerging from the chrysalis state; if his wish is to ensure a
plentiful supply of emus, he dresses himself up as an emu, and
mimicks the bird; for by thus converting himself into a grub, or
an emu, he thinks he can move the other grubs and emus to comply
with his wishes.
But it is not merely by disguising him&olf as an animal and copying
its habits that the Central Australian savage seeks to identify himself
(1) The Native Tribes of Central Australia, p. 202, cf. p. 168.
(2) J. Campbell, Travels in South Africa, being a Narrative of a Second Journey in that
Country, ii., p. 34.
(3) I. Petroff, Report on the Population, Industries, and Resources of Alaska, p. 145.
(4) K. von den Steinen, JJnter den Naturvblkern Zentral-RrasiVens, pp. 352, 512.
3 k 2


with his totem. -All over the world primitive man believes that by
absorbing the flesh and blood of an animal he acquires the qualities
of the creature, and so far identifies himself with it. Examples of the
belief are too well known to be cited. The same idea forms the basis
of the familiar blood-covenant practised by so many races : two men
make themselves akin by each transfusing into the veins of the other a
little of his own blood. From this point of view it is quite natural
that the savage, desirous of uniting himself as closely as possible with
his totem, should partake of its flesh and blood. And we have seen
that according to the Central Australian traditions men did com-
monly eat their totems in days of old. In those early times the
Kangaroo people may have lived chiefly on kangaroos, strengthening
their kangaroo nature by constantly absorbing the flesh of the animal
whose name they took and whose habits they copied. The Opossum
men may have justified their name by consuming more opossum meat
than anybody else ; and so with the members of the other totem clans.
With this it would agree that two clans of Western Australia, who
are named after a small species of opossum and a little fish, believe
themselves to be so called because they used to live chiefly on these
creatures. 1 Even at the present day in Central Australia, though
men are in general nearly forbidden to partake of their totem animal
or plant, they are still bound occasionally to eat a little of it as a
solemn ceremony, because it is believed that otherwise they could not
successfully perform the Intichiima ceremonies, and that the supply
of the plant or animal would consequently fail. Clearly they think
that, in order to multiply the members of their totem, they must iden-
tify themselves with it by taking into their bodies the flesh and blood
of the animal or the fibre of the plant. Here, then, in the heart of
Australia, among the most primitive savages known to us, we find the
actual observance of that totem sacrament which Robertson Smith,
with the intuition of genius, divined years ago, 2 but of which positive
examples have hitherto been wanting.
The reason why men should in course of time deny themselves the
food on which they had formerly subsisted, and which they continued
to provide for the use of others, is not obvious. We may conjecture that
the change came about through an attempt to carry out more consis-
tently than before that identification of a man with his totem, which
seems to be of the essence of the system. Men may have remarked that
animals as a rule, and plants universally, do not feed upon their own
kind; and hence a certain inconsistency may have been perceived in
the conduct of Grub men who lived on grubs, of Grass-seed men who
ate grass-seed, and so with the other animal and vegetable totems. It
might be argued that men who behaved so unlike the real animals
(1) Sir George Grey, Vocabulary of the Dialects of South-western Australia, pp. 4, 95..
(2) Religion of the Semites, p. 276, seq. Edinburgh, 1889.


and plants could not be true Grubs, Emus, Grass-seeds, and so on,
and therefore could not effectively perform the all-important cere-
monies for multiplying the beasts, birds, and vegetables on which the
tribe depended for its subsistence. Further, a wish to conciliate and
entice the creatures which it was desired to catch for food may have
helped to establish the taboo on killing and eating the totem. This
wish is widely prevalent among savages, and manifests itself in many
»quaint observances, which the hunter and his friends are bound to
■comply with for the sake of alluring the game, and making death
to them as painless and even attractive as may be. Among
tribes which have the totemic system this need of adopting a con-
ciliatory attitude towards any particular sort of animal would
naturally be felt chiefly by that part of the community whose special
business it was to breed and kill the animal in question; in other
words, it would be felt chiefly by the group or clan which had the
particular species of animal for its totem. For it is to be remembered
that in early times the members of a clan appear to have been by
profession the hunters or butchers as well as the breeders of their
totem animal; this comes out in the legend of the Euro man who
turned himself into a Kangaroo man in order to kill a kangaroo, and
a trace of the same custom appears in the case of the other Euro man,
at the present day, who made and charmed a magical instrument for
the very purpose of enabling a Plum-tree man to catch euro. Now,
if it came to be generally thought that a Kangaroo man, for example,
would be more likely to entice kangaroos to their fate if he were, so
to say, personally known to them as one who had no selfish ends to
gain by cultivating their acquaintance, public opinion would gradually
impress on the Kangaroo men the duty of abstaining in the interest of
the majority from the slaughter and consumption of kangaroos, and they
would be urged to confine themselves to their more important function
of securing by magical means a plentiful supply of the animal for
their fellows. If this explanation is right, the common practice of
■sparing the totem animal originated in anything but a superstitious
reverence for the creature as a superior being endowed with marvellous
attributes; it was more analogous to the blandishments which a shep-
herd or herdsman will lavish on a sheep or a bullock for the purpose
■of catching the animal and handing it over to the butcher. Nor need
we suppose that in abdicating their ancient right of eating kangaroo-
ilesh the men of the Kangaroo totem .were either coerced by their
fellows or animated by a noble impulse of disinterested devotion to
the common weal. A similar self-denying ordinance would be simul-
taneously imposed by common consent on all the other clans which
had animals or plants for their totem; and thus each clan, in re-
nouncing a single kind of food for the benefit of the community,
would calculate on receiving in return a more abundant supply of all


the rest, not so much because there would he fewer mouths to feed with
each kind of viand, as because the abstinence practised by the several
clans was expected to add to the efficacy of their charms for multi-
plying and attracting the game. For we must bear in mind that under
the totemic system the various clans or stocks do not live isolated
from each other, but are shuffled up together within a narrow area,
and exert their magic powers for the common good.
This answer to the question why men gave up the right of eating
their totems is put forward with diffidence. The problem is difficult,
and I am far from feeling confident that the solution here suggested
is the true one. So far as the explanation rests on a supposed desire to
conciliate the totem it is open to the objection, raised by my friend
Professor Baldwin Spencer, in the letter to which I have referred, that
the Central Australian natives at the present day seem to show no other
trace of an attempt to conciliate or appease the game which they kill
and eat. I have no wish to disguise or extenuate the force of the
objection. Indeed, I had myself, nearly ten years ago, remarked on
this absence of the conciliation of game among the Australian abori-
gines, whom in that respect I contrasted with the North American
Indians. 1 Yet it is not easy to see how, without introducing the idea
of conciliation in some form, we are to explain the attitude of the
savage towards his totem animal.
On the new theory of Totemism it is thus quite easy to understand
why men should have begun by regularly eating their totem animal
or plant, as in fact they seem to have done, if the Central Australian
traditions can be trusted. The real difficulty, indeed, is to explain how
they ever came to give up the habit. Similarly the theory suggests
a very simple reason why men should have begun by marrying women
of their own totem group in preference to any others, as they are
represented doing in the Central Australian legends. On the principle
of the identification of the members of a clan with their totem, what
can be more natural than that an Emu man should wed an Emu
woman and an Opossum man should marry an Opossum woman, just
as an emu cock mates with an emu hen and a male opossum pairs
with a female opossum ? Now this, which may be described as the
natural system of Totemism, is just the one which appears from their
traditions to have prevailed among the Central Australian tribes
before the introduction of Exogamy. 2 Whatever the origin of Exogamy,
there is the clearest traditional testimony that among the Central
Australians it was an innovation imposed on an existing system of
(1) “ The aborigines of Australia have Totemism in the most primitive form known
to us, hut, so far as I am aware, there is no evidence that they attempt, like the North
American Indians, to conciliate the animals which they kill and eat. The means which
the Australians adopt to secure a plentiful supply of game appear to he based, not on
conciliation, hut on sympathetic magic.” —The Golden Bough, ii., p. 133, seq.
(2) See F.R., April, p. 656.


totem clans who previously knew nothing of such a rule. 1 This
accords perfectly with the present hypothesis that the natural and
original system of Totemism was one in which men and women of the
same totem regularly cohabited with each other. Further, it is
supported by the striking fact that among a large group of the Central
Australian tribes the law of Exogamy is not now, and apparently never
has been, applied to the totem clans. 2
The principle of the identification of a man with his totem may be
looked at from the two points of view according, as we think mainly
of identifying the man, let us say, with an animal, or of identifying
the animal with the man. In the former case we have, so to say, a,
man who is transformed into an animal, in the latter case we have an
animal which is changed into a man. Now the Central Australian
natives appear to have taken measures to ensure this double transfor-
mation. By transfusing the life of their totem animals into their own
bodies, the men and women of each clan converted themselves, as far
as they could, into animals ; and by transfusing their own human life
into the bodies of animals they converted the animals, as far as it lay
in their power, into men and women. The first of these transferences
of life was effected by eating the flesh and blood of the animals ; the •
second appears to have been effected by means of certain magical
instruments called churinga and nurtunjas.
The churinga are slabs of stone or wood carved, for the most part,
with devices relating to the totem ; in shape they generally resemble
the well-known instrument called a bull-roarer, which is employed by
savages in many parts of the world in the performance of their most
solemn rites and deepest mysteries. Among the Central Australian
tribes every man, woman, and child has one of these mysterious imple-
ments specially associated with him or her from birth to death; those
of each group are kept together hidden away in a small cave or crevice
in some secluded spot among the hills, and the entrance to the cave is
carefully blocked up with stones arranged so naturally as not to arouse
the suspicion of a chance wayfarer that here lie concealed the most
sacred possessions of the tribe. The loss of these deeply-prized sticks
and stones is the most terrible evil that can befall a group of people;
natives who found their cave robbed of its precious contents have been
known to remain in camp for a fortnight, weeping and lamenting
(1) The Native Tribes of Central Australia, p. 420.
(2) This remarkable exception to the rule that totem clans, when they fall within
the sphere of our observation, are generally exogamous, appears to be susceptible of a
very simple explanation in accordance with the hypothesis here put forward. Briefly
stated, the explanation is this : that the object of Exogamy was to prevent the marriage,
primarily of brothers with sisters, and secondarily, of parents with children ; and that
in consequence of the peculiar rules regulating the descent of the totems in these tribes
an application of the principle of Exogamy to their totem clans could not have pre-
vented such marriages, and was, therefore, never attempted. This I hope to explain
jnlly at some future time in dealing with the origin of Exogamy.


over the loss, and plastering themselves with pipeclay, the emblem of
mourning for the dead. Further, it is believed that in the far-off
times of the Alcheringa their ancestors also had each his own churinga ,
which he carried with him in his wanderings about the country, and
dropped on the ground where he died. On this belief Messrs. Spencer
and Gillen remark :
“We meet in tradition with unmistakable traces of the idea that the churinga
is the dwelling-place of the spirit of the Alcheringa ancestors. In one special
group of Achilpa men, for example, the latter are reported to have carried about
a sacred pole or nurtunja with them during their wanderings. When they came
to a camping-place and went out hunting the nurtunja was erected, and upon
this the men used to hang their churinga when they went out from camp, and
upon their return they took them down again and carried them about. In these
churinga they kept, so says the tradition, their spirit part.” 1
Further, the same writers observe: “ We have evidently in the
churinga belief a modification of the idea which finds expression in
the folk-lore of so many peoples, and according to which primitive
man, regarding his soul as a concrete object, imagines that he can place
it in some secure spot apart, if needs be, from his body, and thus, if
the latter be in any way destroyed the spirit part of him still persists
unharmed.” 2 At the present day, as the authors point out, this ancient
belief has been modified among the tribes of Central Australia. The
loss or injury of the churinga is indeed a thing to be deeply deplored,
and the man who suffers such a mishap fears vaguely that some evil
thing will befall him in consequence of it; but he does not apprehend
that the loss, or even the destruction of the sacred stick or stone, must
necessarily entail his death. In short, the natives no longer regard
the churinga as the abode of their spirits laid up for safety in the
-secret cave, like the soul of the ogre or warlock in the children’s story,
-hidden far, far away in some fairy bird or beast at the world’s end.
Even to the naked savage of the Australian wilderness the time for
such beliefs has gone by. Yet they are nearer far to him than to us,
for he ascribes them, not as we do to imaginary beings, to the giants
and monsters of nursery tales, but to his own real forefathers, whose
figures can yet be discerned, faint and dim, in the distance as they
recede down the long road that leads to fairyland.
The second of the implements by means of which the Central
Australian appears, like the giant or ogre in the story, to have
formerly transferred his spirit to some beast or bird or thing is the
magic pole or nurtunja . 3 This is an instrument which still plays a
great part in the sacred ceremonies of the natives. It takes many
forms, but in every case it stands for the totem with which the
(1) The Native Tribes of Central Australia, p. 138. (2) Op. cit., p. 137.
(3) An equivalent, though differently shaped, instrument is known among the
Southern Arunta as a waning a. See The Native Tribes of Central Australia , pp. 306-309.


particular ceremony is concerned. Thus, if the ceremony relates to
the Wild Cat totem, the nurtunja will represent a wild cat; if it relates
to the Sun totem, the nurtunja will represent the sun ; and so on.
Hence, when we hear that in the remote days of the Alcheringa the
men of the Achilpa, or Wild Cat totem, before they went out hunting,
hung up their churinga , in which they kept their spirits, on a nurtunja,
which necessarily represented a wild eat, we can hardly avoid the
inference that in doing so they believed themselves to be placing
their spirits in their totem animals, the wild cats. That they
permanently kept their spirits in the animals is not suggested by the
legend; on the contrary, as they are said to have hung up the
churinga on the nurtunja when they went out hunting, and to have
taken them down again when they came back, the natural inference
seems to be that they only deposited their spirits temporarily in the
animals for a definite purpose and withdrew them again when the
occasion was over. Now, the occasion mentioned in the legend is the
■chase, and as in the days of the Alcheringa, to which the legend
refers, people seem to have subsisted mainly on their totem animal
or plant, we may conjecture that when the Wild Cat men went out
hunting the game they sought above all were wild cats. If this
was so, the previous transference of their spirits to the animals,
effected by hanging up the sticks or stones, in which they kept their
spirits, on a pole which represented a wild cat, can hardly have had
any other intention then that of compelling the creatures to come to
the hunters and be quietly knocked on the head. “If we can
only put ourselves or a good part of ourselves,” so these primitive
huntsmen may have argued, “ into yon wild cats which are now
scurrying from us, we shall very soon make them, whether they like
it or not, walk straight up to us, and so we shall kill them quite com-
fortably and make a meal of them. And, of course, in doing so we
shall get back the vital part of ourselves which we temporarily trans-
ferred to the animals.” On the other hand, if the game which the
Wild Cat men went out to hunt were not wild cats, the motive of the
hunters in depositing their spirits in the nurtunja , and hence in their
totem, the wild cats, must have been different. It may have been
done simply for safety, lest during the hunt any accident should
befall them; for clearly, in the absence of their spirits, which they
had taken the precaution of leaving elsewhere before they started,
nothing that might happen to their mere empty carcases could have
any serious consequences. Whichever of these explanations be adopted,
the tradition points clearly to a custom of depositing a man’s spirit,
for longer or shorter periods, in the body of his totem animal.
Yestiges of the same custom are also preserved in the practice, which
the natives still keep up, of hanging their churinga upon nurtunjas


iii certain solemn ceremonies concerned with the totems. 1 The prac-
tice is identical with that ascribed to the Wild Cat men in the legend,
and its original meaning is probably the same. For example, before
the novices undergo the painful operation of subincision they are
made to embrace a sacred pole ( nurtunja ) to which some churinga
are often, though not invariably, attached. The effect of this embrac-
ing the pole is thought to be that the lads will not feel the griding
knife. Perhaps their ancestors, who invented this primitive pain-
killer, held that by extracting the spirits of the novices from their
bodies and transferring them for a time to the pole, or to the totem
which it represented, they rendered the bodies of the youth inert and
numb. To effect this salutary purpose it may originally have been
deemed needful in every case to attach to the pole the churinga or
receptacles in which the lads kept their spirits; but with the decay
of old ideas about the churinga it is no longer considered indispens-
able to fasten any churinga at all to the pole, and a simple embrace
bestowed on the latter by the novice now passes occasionally for a
sufficient anaesthetic.
Some time ago I suggested that the transference of a man’s spirit
or soul for safety to some external object constituted the essence of
Totemism, that in facta totem is no more than a sort of strong box, in
which a savage keeps his soul. The evidence for the former practice
of such a soul-transference among the Central Australians has now
been put before the reader. That it is slight and scanty I fully
admit. Such as it is, when considered along with the Intichiuma
ceremonies and other indications, it seems to show that the purpose
of the transference was not so much to deposit the man’s life in a
secure place as to enable him to control the totem for his own and
the common good. When the totem was an animal this control was
directed to multiplying the species and compelling the members of it
to come and be killed for food. When the totem was the sun the
savage would hope, by placing a vital part of himself in the luminary,
to direct its course and secure a due supply of light and heat for
himself and his fellows. And so, miitatis mutandis , with the other
totems. But it is quite possible that the other motive—the natural
desire of frail man to put all that is mortal of him beyond the reach
of chance and change—may also have operated. That it really did
so is strongly suggested both by the rigorous precautions taken to
conceal the precious objects with which the spirits of the tribesmen
are so closely associated, and by the bitter grief and vague alarm
excited by their loss.
If the intention of transfusing a portion of a man’s life into an
animal was in part at least to exercise a sort of mesmeric attraction
over the creature, and thereby to catch and kill it, the apparent
(1) The Native Tribes of Central Australia , pp. 253, 284, 312, scq.


inconsistency in the conduct of the hunter, who first endows a beast
with his own spirit, and then kills and devours it, need cause no
difficulty, for, in consuming the flesh and blood, he recovers all of
himself that he put into the animal. The case, however, is somewhat
different when the animal which contains his life is killed and eaten
by somebody else. If I deposit my soul in a hare, and my brother
John shoots that hare, roasts, and swallows it, what becomes of my
soul ? Am I not thereby put in the parlous state of being left without
a soul ?To meet this obvious danger it is necessary that John should
know the state of my soul, and that, knowing it, he should, whenever
he shoots a hare, take steps to extract and restore to me my soul
before he cooks and dines upon the animal. This, we may conjecture,
is in part the intention of a Central Australian rite which has been
already described. AVe have seen that after the Intichiuma ceremony
the first supply of the totem animal which is brought into the camp
is solemnly laid before the men of the totem, who eat a little of it and
then pass on the remainder to the others to be consumed by them.
By thus partaking first of their totem animal the men of the totem
may be supposed not merely to absorb its qualities sacramentally but
also to recover that portion of their own spirit which they had tem-
porarily deposited in the animal. In this connection the ceremonies
observed by a Brazilian tribe in killing some sorts of game and fish
are instructive. The Bororos believe that the souls of their medicine-
men transmigrate at death into the bodies of certain kinds of large
and succulent animals and fish, which are reckoned the greatest
dainties, such, for instance, as the tapir, the cayman, the large jahu
fish, and a sort of shad. Whenever one of these creatures is killed a
ceremony has to be performed over it by a medicine-man before its
flesh can be eaten, the purpose of the ceremony being to make sure
that the animal cannot be restored to life. Cowering down on the
ground, the wizard blows and spits upon the carcase, claps it, and
shrieks and spits into its open mouth. Nay more, he is bound to be
present at the actual killing of the animal. If, for example, a johu
fish or a shad were caught in a net when no medicine-man was by, the
fish would be set free again. The Indians think that anyone who ate
fish, flesh, or fowl over which the needful ceremony had not been
performed would soon die. 1 The analogy between the Brazilian and
the Australian practice is, if lam right, very close. Both peoples
believe that the bodies of certain animals are tenanted by the souls of
men belonging to their tribe; both use these animals as food; and
both perform certain ceremonies over the dead animals for the purpose
of disengaging the souls of their friends from the carcases of the
beasts before they proceed to convey the latter into their own bellies.
The only essential difference between them is that in the Brazilian
(1) K. von den Steinen, Unier den Katurvollcern Zcntral-Brasilicns, pp. 492, scq., >512.


case the souls so disengaged are the souls of the dead, while in the
Australian case they are the souls of the living. 1
We have still to inquire how far the explanation of Totemism
suggested by the new Australian facts is confirmed by similar facts
observed among totemic peoples in other parts of the world. I may
remind the reader that the explanation, based on the Intichiuma cere-
monies, is that the totem clans are essentially bands of magicians
charged with the duty of controlling and directing the various depart-
ments of nature for the good of man. A crucial question, therefore,
is, Are analogous ceremonies performed by totem groups in other
parts of the world ? and in general are totem clans elsewhere than in
Australia credited with the power of exercising control over the
totem ? Before adducing some evidence of the existence of such
beliefs and practices in various parts of the world, I would ask the
reader to remember that, although the Intichiuma ceremonies have
probably been practised from time immemorial in the centre of
Australia, they were never observed by Europeans until quite lately;
nay, that one of the authors, to whom we are indebted for their dis-
covery, lived (as I understand) on intimate terms with the natives for
many years without getting the least inkling that any such solemn
ceremonies were going on around him. With his experience before
us we may surmise that similar rites practised by other totem tribes
have escaped the notice of Europeans elsewhere, and that the scanti-
ness of the evidence for their existence is due not so much to the
rarity of the ceremonies themselves as to the ignorance or carelessness
of observers. With this caution I proceed to give the few r notices
I have thus far collected of customs and beliefs analogous to those
revealed in the Intichiuma ceremonies of the Central Australians.
In one of the Torres Straits Islands members of the Dog clan were
believed to understand the habits of dogs, and to be able to exercise
special control over them. 2 In one of the new Hebrides, when a man
wished to catch octopus he used to take one of the members of the
Octopus family with him; the latter stood on the beach and called
out, “ So-and-so wants octopus,” and then plenty of octopuses would
come and be caught. 3 On a cloudy morning the Sun clan of the
Bechuanas were wont to make the sun shine out through the clouds ;
the chief kindled a new fire in his dwelling, and every one of his
subjects carried a light from it to his own hut. 4 The intention of the
(1) The remarkable ceremonies observed by some of the Torres Straits Islanders
before they will eat of the turtles which they have caught may, perhaps, be explained
in the same way. Among some of the islanders the turtle is a totem. See A. C.
Haddon, “ The Secular and Ceremonial Dances of Torres Straits,” Internationales Archiv
fur Ethnographic, VI. (1893), p. 150, seq.
(2) A. C. Haddon, in Journal of the Anthropological Institute , xix., pp. 325, 393. 1890.
(3) R. C. Codrington, The Melanesians, p. 26.
(4) Arbouset et Daumas, Voyage (VExplication au Xord-est de la Colonie du Cap de
Bonne Esperance, p., 350, seq. Paris, 1842.


ceremony clearly was, by means of sympathetic magic, to blow up into
a brighter blaze the smouldering fire of the sun. In the Murray
Islands, Torres Straits, it is the duty of the Sun clan to imitate the
rising and setting of the sun, 1 probably to ensure the punctual per-
formance of his daily duties by the orb of day. Among the Omahas
of North America the Small Bird clan performs a magic ceremony to
keep small birds from the corn ; the Beptile clan performs a similar
ceremony to protect the crops from worms; and the Wind clan
think they can start a breeze by flapping their blankets. 2 The same
Wind clan practices a magic rite to stop a blizzard. They paint one
of their boys red, and he rolls over and over in the snow, reddening
it for some distance all around him. This stops the blizzard, 3 the
notion apparently being that the white snow will not fall when it
knows that it will be thus reddened and defiled. In another North
American tribe the Hare clan seems to have been credited with the
power of stopping a heavy and long-continued fall of snow; at least,
this seems a natural inference from a passage in one of the letters of
the early Jesuit missionaries. The writer tells a story to explain why the
body of a certain old man, who had just died, was burned instead of
being buried, though interment was the regular mode of disposing of
the dead in the tribe. “ They regard it as certain,” says he, “ that
the father of this old man was a hare, which walks on the snow in
winter, and that thus the snow, the hare, and the old man are of the
same village, that is to say, are kinsmen. They add that the hare
said to his wife that he would not suffer his children to remain under
ground—it was not suitable to their rank, seeing they were kinsmen
of the snow, whose country is high up in the sky ; and that if ever
his children were put in the ground after their death he would pray
to the snow, his kinsman, to punish mankind for their fault by falling
so thick and so long that there would be spring no more.” In con-
firmation of this story the Indians told the missionary that three years
ago the brother of this same old man died at the beginning of winter,
and that as he was buried instead of burned the snow fell so heavily and
the winter was so long that they began to fear they would never see
spring again. However, they bethought themselves of digging up
the body of tie kinsman of the snow and burning it; and no sooner
had they done so than, sure enough, the snow ceased to fall, and
spring came with a burst. 4 Apparently, the men whose bodies had
thus to be burnt belonged to the Hare clan, and yet were deemed so
(1) A. E. Hunt, in Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xxviii., p. 6.
(2) J. Owen Dorsey, in Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, pp, 238, seq.,.
241, 248. Washington, 1884.
(3) J. Owen Dorsey, in Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, p. 410, seq.
Washington, 1884.
(4) Relations des Jesnites (1667), p. 19 (of the Canadian reprint). Compare Let!res
edifantes et curieuses, vi., pp. 169-171.


closely akin to the snow that to burn their bodies was equivalent to
melting the snow itself. We may conjecture that the same men were
believed in their lifetime to be able to stop a snowfall by their charms
and spells.
Some of these examples explain the attitude of a totem clan towards
its totem when the totem is or may, under certain circumstances,
become of a noxious and maleficent nature. In such cases it is the
function of the clan, not, of course, to multiply the numbers of the
totem or increase its virulence, but, on the contrary, to disarm, coun-
teract, and keep within due bounds its dangerous influence. Hence,
members of the Snake clan in Senegambia profess to heal by their
touch persons who have been bitten by serpents ; 1 and the same pro-
fession was made by Serpent clans in antiquity. 2 Similarly, in Central
Australia, members of the Fly totem claim to cure, by the touch of a
magic implement ( churinga ), eyes which are swollen and inflamed with
fly-bites. 3 And, on analogy, we may conjecture that certain Arab
families, who believed their blood to be a remedy for hydrophobia, 4
were descended from men of a Dog totem.
Further, when the case of the Indian, who was a kinsman of the
snow as well as of hares, is considered in the light of the preceding
discussion, we arrive at a simple explanation of a peculiar feature
•of Australian Totemism which has hitherto baffled enquirers. In
many Australian tribes the members of a totem clan believe them-
selves to stand in a very intimate relation, not merely to their own
totem, but to a number of other natural objects or phenomena ; and
this relation seems to amount to a claim of ownership, the natives
affirming that the things belong to them. 5 It has been proposed by
Mr. Howitt to designate these things as sub-totems or pseudo-totems;
they might also be called multiplex totems. To take instances of
them, we are told that in some tribes of New South Wales “ every-
thing in the universe is divided among the different members of the
tribe; some claim the trees, others the plains, others the sky, stars,
wind, rain, and so forth.” 6 Another writer, speaking of a tribe in
■Queensland, says: “ Everything in nature, according to them, is
■divided between the classes. The wind belongs to one, and the rain
to the other. The sun is Wutaroo, and the moon is Yungaroo. The
stars are divided between them ‘ and if a star is pointed out they will
tell you to which division it belongs.” 7 Among the Wakelbura and
(1) Revue d’Ethnographic, iii., p. 396.
(2) Strabo, xiii., p. 588 (ed. Casaubon); Pliny, Nat. Hist., xxviii., 30.
(3) The Native Tribes of Central Australia, p. 546.
(4) W. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 369. New edition, 1894.
(5) A. W. Howitt, in Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xviii., p. 61.
(6) A. L. P. Cameron, in Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xiv., p. 350.
(7) Gr. F. Bridgman, in lison and Howitt's Kamilarbi and Kurnai, p. 168, Compare
id., in Brough Smyth’s Aborigines of Victoria, i., p. 91.


kindred tribes of Northern Queensland we are told that everything,
animate and inanimate, belongs to one or other of the two exogamous
classes into which the tribes are divided. A wizard in performing his
incantations may use only things which belong to his own class. The
stage on which a corpse is set must be made of the wood of a tree which is
of the same class as the deceased, and similar rules hold in other matters. 1
In the Mount Gambier tribe of South Australia, which includes ten
totem clans, the men of the Black Cockatoo totem claim to stand in
this peculiar relation towards the moon, the stars, &c.; men of the
Fish-Hawk totem claim honeysuckle, smoke, &c.; men of the Pelican
totem claim dogs, blackwood trees, fire, frost, &c. ; men of the Crow
totem claim thunder, lightning, rain, hail, winter, clouds, &c.; men
of a Snake totem claim fish, seals, eels, stringy-bark trees, &c.; men of
the Tea-tree totem claim ducks, wallabies; owls, crayfish, opossum,
&e.; men of the black, crestless Cockatoo claim kangaroos, sheoak
trees, sun, wind, summer and autumn. A man will not, if he can
help it, either kill or eat any of the animals which he thus regards as
peculiarly his own; if he is compelled by hunger to do so, he expresses
his sorrow at having to eat his “ friends,” or his “ flesh,” by touching
his breast as a sign of relationship. 2 In the Wotjoballuk tribe of North-
western Victoria men of the Hot Wind totem looked upon as their own
three different kinds of snakes and two kinds of birds; the men of the
White Cockatoo totem asserted a right to no less than seventeen dif-
ferent species of plants and animals ; and claims of the same sort were
advanced by the members of the other totem clans, namely, the Black
Cockatoo clan, the Sun elan, the Deaf Adder clan, and the Pelican
clan. 3
Now, on the hypothesis that each totem clan is a band of magicians,
whose function it is to control certain natural phenomena for the
common good, we can easily see that, where the totem clans were not
numerous, it might be found necessary to entrust several departments
of nature to' each clan. Thus, to take the case of the Wotjoballuk
tribe, which we have just been considering, it seems to have included
no more than six totem clans, four of which were concerned with
species of birds or beasts (pelican, adder, black and white cockatoo),
one with the sun, and one with the wind. Clearly, if each of these
six clans were to give its attention exclusively to its particular totem,
whole departments of nature, including multitudinous species of
animals and plants, would be uncared for, and the consequences to
the tribe might be disastrous. What would become of kangaroos,
(1) J. C. Muirhead, cited by Mr. Howitt, in Journal of the Anthropological Institute,
xviii., p. 61, note. Compare id., in E. M. Curr’s Australian Race, iii., p. 27, seq.
(2) D. S. Stewart, in Fison and Howitt’s Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 168, seq. ; id., in
E. M. Curr’s Australian Race, iii., p. 461, seq.
(3) A. W. Howitt, in Report of the Smithsonian Institute for 1883, p. 818.


opossums, and wallabies if it was nobody’s business to multiply them ?
How could gum-trees be reasonably expected to flourish, and plum-trees
to bear fruit, if they were suffered to droop and dwine in the cold
shade of indifference and neglect ? The thing was not to be thought
of. There was nothing for it but that the members of each clan
should buckle to and, after discharging their primary duty to their
totem, should devote their superfluous energies to the laudable task of
keeping a few more of the great processes of nature a-going. Again,
take the ten clans of the Mount Gambier tribe, with their totems —
fish-hawk, pelican, crow, two sorts of black cockatoo, a harmless snake,
the tea-tree, and an edible root (the totems of two clans are unknown).
Consider how far even fish-hawks, pelicans, crows, black cockatoos, &c.,
are from exhausting the sum total of the universe, and you will readily
perceive why Crow men, in addition to looking after crows, had to
take charge of thunder, lightning, rain, hail, &c.; why Black Cockatoo
men, not content with exercising a due supervision over black cockatoos,
had to extend the sphere of their operations to the sun, the wind, the
summer, the autumn, and so on. In short, the fewer the clans the
more numerous necessarily were the magical functions to be dis-
charged by each, if the great cosmic movement was still to go on.
We can now hazard a conjecture as to the meaning of the numerous
prohibitions imposed on each of the clans in the Queensland tribes,
whose social system has been so patiently observed and recorded by
Mr. W. E. Both. 1 Among these tribes the members of each exoga-
mous class are forbidden to eat, not merely one, but several, and some-
times many different kinds of animals. The exogamous classes are
four in number, and the lists of foods prohibited to each class, though
constant throughout each tribe, are found to vary from tribe to tribe.
In one district, for example, the class called Koopooroo are not allowed
to eat iguana, whistler duck, black duck, “ blue-fellow ” crane, yellow
dingo, and small yellow fish “ with-one-bone-in-him ” ; another class,
called Woongko, have to avoid scrub-turkey, eagle-hawk, bandicoot,
brown snake, black dingo, and white duck; a third class have to do
without kangaroo, carpet-snake, teal, white-bellied brown-headed
duck, various kinds of diver birds, “ trumpeter ” fish, and a kind of
black bream ; while members of the fourth class, called Bunburi, dare
not eat emu, yellow snake, galah parrot, and a certain species of hawk.
They firmly believe that if anyone were to eat a forbidden food he
would fall sick and probably die, and that the food could never satisfy
his hunger. Should the delinquent be caught in the act by his fellow
tribesmen, he would in all probability be put to death. 2 With the
(1) W. E. Roth, Ethnological Studies among the North-west-central Queensland Aborigines
(Brisbane and London, 1897) ; id., Notes on Social and Individual Nomenclature among
certain North Queensland Aborigines, read before the Royal Society of Queensland,
Nov. 13, 1897.
(2) W. E. Rotb, Ethnological Studies, &c., p. 57, seq.


evidence as to the Intichiuma ceremonies of the Central Australians
before us, we may surmise that the animals which are thus tabooed to
the various intermarrying classes of these Queensland tribes are neither
more nor less than what I have proposed to call multiplex totems, and
that the members of each of these classes are, or have at some time
been, bound to perform ceremonies of the same sort as the Intichiuma
for the multiplication of all the kinds of animals which they are
forbidden to eat. The surmise is confirmed by the circumstance that,
though the members of each class are forbidden to eat the animals in
•question, they are not forbidden to kill them. In other words, they
ure at liberty to provide their fellows with the food of which they may
not themselves partake. This entirely agrees with the view of
Totemism here suggested, that it is a co-operative system designed to
procure for the community a supply, primarily of food, and secondarily
of all the other necessaries of life. It is interesting to observe that
Mr. Roth, to whom we are indebted for our knowledge of the social
system of these Queensland tribes, has been led by a different chain
-of reasoning to the conclusion that “ the whole class system has been
devised by a process of natural selection, to regulate the proper dis-
tribution of the total quantity of food available.” 1 But under a
superficial appearance of agreement his conclusion differs funda-
mentally from the one which we have reached. For while he supposes
that the rules of abstinence imposed on each class had no other
object than that of leaving more food for the remaining mouths
of the tribe, the conclusion to which we have been led by a considera-
tion mainly of the Intichiuma ceremonies is, that such rules of absti-
nence originated rather in a belief that by observing them the
members of each group or class would possess, in a higher degree than
before, those magical powers for the multiplication and enticing of
the game to which the tribe, as a whole, trusted for its supply of
food. 2
It may be asked how an elaborate social organisation, based on the
mutual co-operation of many separate groups, and aiming at nothing
less than a systematic control of the whole of nature, can possibly
have sprung up among savages so rude as the Australians. The
answer seems to be that the system may have begun in a humble way
(1) Notes on Social and Individual Nomenclature among certain North Queensland Aborigines
(read before the Royal Society of Queensland, Dec. 11, 1897), p. 10.
(2) The Battas of Sumatra seem also to have multiplex totems. They are divided into
■exogamous clans called margas , one of which has for its totems the ape and the goat;
another has the tiger, the panther, and beasts of that sort; while a third has the wild
turtle and other kinds of pigeons. See J. B. Neumann, “HetPane en Bila-stroomge-
bied op het eiland Sumatra,” Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genoot-
schap, Tweede Serie, Deel iv., Afdeeling: Meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 1, p. 8, seq.
Amsterdam, 1887.
VOL. LXY. N.S. 3 L


f ■ ‘‘ ' ’ • • - •: ■
by the union of a few neighbouring groups under the influence of
some able men, and may have gradually spread to more distant
groups, extending its scope and perfecting its organisation as more and
more groups fell in with the scheme. That such a thing may have
happened appears to result from the observations of Messrs. Spencer
and Gillen. They remark that, “ after carefully watching the natives
during the performance of their ceremonies, and endeavouring as best
we could to enter into their feelings, to think as they did, and to-
become, for the time being, one of themselves, we came to the con-
clusion that if one or two of the most powerful men settled upon the-
advisability of introducing some change, even an important one, it
would be quite possible for this to be agreed upon and carried out.” 1
It might be premature to say that the admirable researches and
discoveries of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen have finally solved the-
problem of Totemism ; but at least they seem to point to a solution
more complete and satisfactory than any that has hitherto been
offered.
J. G. Frazer.
(1) The Native Tribes of Central Australia, p. 12.
3 1508 02008829 5


' *


,
.
'
-*
