

THE ABORIGINES OF
AUSTRALIA
A Plea for the Remnant
By
C. E. C. LEFROY,
formerly Archdeacon
of Perth, Western
Australia
Reprinted from
“ The Manchester Guardian ”
Octobers, 1932.


THE ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA
By the Rev. C. E. C. LEFROY,
formerly Archdeacon of Perth, Western Australia
It seems to be now generally agreed
by anthropologists that the Australian
aborigines belong to the Caucasian
stock, with some admixture of negroid
blood. In that case they are the most
ancient representatives of the Indo
European family on the earth to-day.
and on scientific grounds alone are
well worth preserving.
What was the manner of life of these
primitive folk, in their far-off Australian
home, when the white man first came
within their ken 150 years ago! From
the evidence of those who still survive
that question is not difficult to answer.
The aborigines were separately organ-
ised, under a very simple but strict
rule of law, into little tribes or groups,
scattered far and wide throughout the
continent. In that vast land when
they had it all to themselves they had
ample space for hunting and roaming
and a happy existence. Unlike the
savage inhabitants of some of the most
lovely islands of the Pacific, they seem
to have generally lived peaceably with
one another. The first colonists were
greatly impressed by their friendliness
and trustfulness —and savage people do
not become friendly and trustful all at
once; it could only havxe been their
ordinary condition.
They were not merely inoffensive
people; they were positively well
disposed towards the white strangers
at their first coming. They actively
befriended lost travellers and explorers
and the first settlers in their difficulties.
The members of the tribe were strongly
attached to each other and to their
particular bit of territory. Parents
were devoted to their children, and
the general lot of the aboriginal woman,
in the opinion of the late Sir Baldwin
Spencer, the well-known anthropolo-
gist, was probably quite as happy as
that of many European wives and
mothers. They were a merry and
cheerful folk, possessing the kindred
qualities of generosity and courage.
Captain Sturt, the explorer of South
Australia in 1838-40, relates how on one
occasion some wild natives, who had
never before seen a white man or any
animal larger than a kangaroo, at once
made friends with his little party and
brought troughs of water for his horses
to drink. “I am quite sure,” he writes
in his journal,
that no white man (having never .seen or
heard of a horse before, and with the
natural apprehension which the first sight
of such an animal would create) would
deliberately have walked up to what must
have appeared to them most formidable
brutes, and placing the troughs against
their breasts would have allowed the
horses to drink with their noses almost
touching them.
Under such conditions of physical
nature and of human character the
Australian blackfellow’s life from time
immemorial must have been a fairly
happy one, notwithstanding the
general scarcity of food and water and
the constant struggle for existence.
EFFECT OF COLONISATION
The probable number of the aborigines
when Captain Cook discovered Aus-
tralia is less easy to estimate. The
present Protector of Aborigines in
Queensland suggests that they
numbered at least a million. Even
this may be below the mark, for the
natives were evidently widely distri-
buted throughout the continent and
everywhere in considerable numbers.
Only twenty years ago Sir Baldwin
Spencer, the Chief Protector of
Aborigines in the Northern Territory,
put the aboriginal population of that
territory alone at nearly 50,000. Of
course it is much less now, taut if that
estimate when it was made was at
all near the mark, the total number
surviving throughout the Common-
wealth to-day must considerably
exceed the 70,000 generally supposed.
But in any case the drop from 1,000,000
to even 100,000 gives cause for serious
reflection. What can account for such
rapid diminution 1 Recent events, as
well as the records of every past period


in the history of settlement,
leave little doubt as to the cause. The
advance of the white man has simply
swept the aborigines away. It is true
that these children of nature them
selves seem to wilt and wither fvway
at the mere approach of the European
But there has also been a vast amoum
of deliberate cruelty. The natives o;
Tasmania are said to have “become’
extinct. Biit the fact is that in 183)
martial law was proclaimed, and a
force of 3,000 or 4,000 troops and
civilians of all classes were engaged
for six weeks in hunting them down
and driving them into a narrow
peninsula. Eventually the remnant
were transported to Flinders Island
One of their gaolers there has recorded
his opinion that many of the miserable
creatures “ died in the sulks like sc
many bears.” In reality they were
broken-hearted.
SHOOTING NATIVES
In 1838 Sir George Gipps, Governor
of New South Wales, issued a pro-
clamation to. the effect that the
indiscriminate slaughter of natives
must cease. On the other hand; a
certain Governor of Queensland, at a
much later date, is said to have
advised a settler that if natives were
shot there was no need to report the
fact. A well-known traveller, De
Beauvoir, who visited Queensland
about sixty years ago met a young
man, only twenty-four years of age,
who boasted of the possession of two
rifles with sixty-five notches on the
stocks, each notch representing a
native whom he had shot. More recenl
history—of which there is abundance-
may be left alone, except for reference
to the acknowledged shooting in
Central Australia in 1928 of thirty-one
wild natives (including some women)
by a police party in revenge for the
death of a white man. The excuse
made by the police for some of this
slaughter was that these wild natives
“tried to escape” when called upon
to stand in the King’s name! Dr.
Gilruth, formerly Chief Protector of
Aborigines under the Federal Govern-
ment, has expressed his opinion that
“in respect of the treatment of the
aborigines the British occupation of
Australia presents the worst chapter in
the European domination of the
world.”
A RACE WORTH SAVING
It is not too late for the Governments
and people of Australia to save the
remnant. In the “ Commonwealth
Year-book” for 1909 Professor Ramsay
Smith wrote:
The problem of what to do with the
fthorurines— who are the most interesting
race at present on earth, the least
deserving to be exterminated by us, and
the most wronged at our hands—is not a
difficult one to solve, were a solution
really desired.
The italics are mine. But in this
twentieth century, with the League of
Nations in operation, a solution ought
to bo found and promptly applied.
Putting aside all humanitarian con-
siderations, the aborigines in them-
selves are well worth saving. It is
generally acknowledged that the rapid
spread of settlement, especially through
huge sheep and cattle stations, was
only rendered possible by the large
amount of unpaid and very valuable
labour supplied by the natives. They
make excellent stockmen, teamsters,
shearers, “bush” carpenters, and
blacksmiths. A well-known squatter of
North-west Australia told me that one
particular aboriginal was the best
shearer, stockman, and carpenter he
had ever had. They regard their
master’s animals and property as their
own, have a pride in them, and take
care of them. The aborigines respond
in an extraordinary way to education
or manual training, for they are by
nature as intelligent as they are deep-
feeling. I myself have vivid recol-
lections of a talk with a full-blood
aboriginal one starry night on board a
coastal steamer wuthin the Great
Barrier Reef off the Queensland shore.
I felt I was conversing with a refined
and courteous gentleman. There must
be great possibilities in a race which
has such natural endowments and
which has made such wonderful use of
its very scanty opportunities. Indeed,
the aborigines have never yet been
given the ghost of a chance of showing
what is really in them. From the start
they have been cruelly branded as “ the
lowest race on earth” —and treated
accordingly. In the name of reason,
humanity, and pity let this waste of
human life and goodness be ended now
and a new day brought in for the
remnant of them that is left.


The Anti-Slavery and Aborigines
Protection Society
Exists to maintain Justice for Native Races
The Committee cordially invites all those
to whom the maintenance of justice for
weaker races of the world appeals as a
duty, to become Members of the Society.
A Subscription of half-a-guinea and
upwards constitutes Membership of the
Society, and entitles Members to all
literature issued by the Committee.
Forms of Membership and Bankers’
Orders can be obtained from the Secretary
of the Society.
50-52, Denison House,
Vauxhall Bridge Road,
S.W. 1.
December, 1932.
