

THE PUBLIC FINANCES
NEW SOUTH WALES
REPRINT OF LETTERS TO THE PRESS,
OCTOBER—NOVEMBER, 1897,
Sir GEORGE R. DIBBS, K.C.M.G.
SYDNEY:
\%^j
V ■




The Public Finances of N. 8. Wales.
It has occurred to me that my Ions?
(public life in this colony, and the circum-
stance of having filled for several years the
post oif Colonial Treasurer, entitles the 'pub-
lic to expect at my hands some explanation
of the state of the public finances at the pre-
sent moment, and the working of the same
during past yeans.
I may at once say that in submitting,
through the press of the colony a full expla-
nation of the finances, I do so without anv
political or party motive. My desire alone
is to perform the duty of a patriotic citizen,
and to give to the public of New South
Wales the result of my knowledge and ex-
perience.
I propose in a series of three or four let-
ters to review special items in the public
accounts of this colony which have been
dealt with during the last three years-—to
state absolute facts, based in every Instance
upon statements officially made by the
Treasurer, and verified, not only by his
speeches, but by the official records bear-
ing his nlame, I am impelled to this course
because people, as a rule, do not profess to
understand the public accounts, and that
when a statement of figures is made in the
Assembly, surrounded by clever and plausible
language, a colour is likely to be given not
borne out by actual facts. Frequently I
have helard it said, “Oh! Treasurers and ex-
Treasurers always differ in the system of
account keeping.” To give the exact words
of one member of Parliament, “I am. blessed
if I understand this blooming question; it is
beyond me—only I know tihat one Treasurer
always says the other one is wrong.”
The 'Public Accounts are perfectly simple,
if carefully read. There is no need for mys-
tery, no need for confusion, if in dealing with
the Public Accounts we apply principles
common to our private affairs.
I propose in this series of letters to endea-
vour to make plain what at present appears
October 26, 1897.
to some people a matter of difficulty and
confusion. Having retired from public life,
with no possible object to gain, nor motive
of a personal (character to serve —no party
to help, but the State alone—as an ordinary
citizen, possessed of certain knowledge, I
hope that my letters will at least receive a
careful perusal, after wlhich I am quite
ready to submit to the fullest criticism.
Above all, I. pledge my reputation and the
confidence which I believe the people have
in me as to the truth of every line that I
write. I shall write with no bitterness—no
hostile feeling to any Government. I do not
■intend to deal either with Government or
Opposition, but to clearly and distinctly lay
facts—-and facts only—before the public.
I may further add that I am sending
simultaneously a copy of these letters to
each of the daily papers published in Syd-
ney, in order that the fullest expression of
my views may be obtained. I have before
me as a mlaltter of history the value of such
a course of action as the one I now propose
to take, which many of your elder readers
with good memories will appreciate. I al-
lude to the letters published in the press
of Mr. Alexander Campbell, in criticising the
budget speeches and accounts as presented
to Parliament by Mr. E. C. Weekes, the
Treasurer of the day, and of the powerful
leaders which appeared thereon, and which
led to the public accounts being put at that
time upon a correct basis, land to his retire-
ment from office. | gju
In my first letter I propose to deal with
an item in the accounts for 1894-5 by which
a transfer, or book entry, was made cre-
diting to the Consolidated Revenue the .sum
of £389,152, and, in order to make the trans-
n Alinn n Oim rv 1q f rl rvlv ifito cv T /-v om c< A o,Aonv.+
action complete, debiting Loams Account
with a like sum.. The object of this transfer
was explained by the 1 present occupant of
the Treasury as follows:
“Mr. Reid: I -am going to call the attention


to take, which will credit, land I believe fairly
and honestly credit, the 'Consolidated Re-
venue by the sum of £389,152 15s lid. . . .
As honorable members know, when a loan is
floated in London, in order to promote the
success of the operation, inducements are
held out to intending tenderers. That is to
say, if the loan is floated in October the
coupons run with interest from the Ist July.
That is a bait and inducement to take up the
loan. There is no harm in it, because it
does undoubtedly promote the success of the
«■ ’
loan. But the Auditor -Gen enail fairly points
out what is the effect of it. The obligation
on the Consolidated Revenue is not to offer
baits to promote the success of the loan fund,
/ but simply to pay interest on the loans from
the date that they are actually floated.
Hitherto the revenue thiait pays the interest
has been made to piaiy interest on a loan
sometimes four months before the loan is in
existence, which is utterly wrong. . . I
am making the loan fund pay that which
belongs to it, and I am crediting the Conso-
lidated Revenue with what belongs to it,
in order that ta proper entry shall be made.
. . The total amount which the Auditor-
General gave credit for was £ 463,000. I
thought it only fair to take off the discount
allowed an the instalments which are paid
beforehand, and that amounted to £74,000,
making tlhe net credit £'389,000.”
See Financial Statement made by Mr. Reid
on 7th November, 1894, and Ways and Means
i «! of same date.
In dealing with this particular transaction
I think I shall succeed in showing that St was
an improper credit to be made to the Conso-
lidated Revenue. To the credit of that ac-
count in the books of the Treasury passes
■every farthing of revenue received in cash
during the current year, while to tlhe debit
passes the whole of the cost of government,
as granted by the estimates of public ''ex-
penditure and other charges authorised to
be paid out of the Consolidated Revenue. To
pass an litem, on paper only, of £389,152 to
the credit of that account is to treat it 'as
revenue received, and to live upon it is (abso-
lutely irregular. I shall prove that the
Treasurer has done this —that he has treat-
ed a paper entry as money received, and has
lived upon it.
■V
The item of £389,152, as explained above,
represents transactions ever since the be-
ginning of responsible government—about 45
of the committee to a cour.se which I propose years. For am infinity of reasons the custom
forecast la surplus on June 30, 1898, of £59,477
2s 7d. This last surplus, however, of £59,477
2s 7d was created by estimating the amount
of £'85,000 to come from an amendment of
the Stamp Duties Act.
If that sum of £3189,152 had not been in-
correctly passed to the credit of the Con-
solidated Revenue account, and all other
figures had worked out as they have appear-
ed the last two years, and as forecasted fQ"
the current year, in lieu of a surplus of
£59,477 2s 7d there would be a deficiency of
£414,675. If £85,000 is obtained from stamps
then this deficiency, dealing with this one
item ialone, is £329,675.
Unfortunately for the Treasurer in taking
advantage of the credit entry he has cre-
ated a Nemesis. There remains at the de-
bit of Loan Account £389,152 to-day staring
him in the face. It will be for the facile
Auditor-General to provide some means for
disposing of that entry. To my mind it can
only be got rid of by crediting Loan Account
with a sum to be obtained by charging the
various public works built from money bor-
rowed during the last 45 years. Will the
Treasurer before authorising such a debit
go to the scrap heap at Eveleigh and look
at the assets which represent the original
loans? Will he remember the miles of worn-
out rails paid for out of public loans? Will
he sanction any addition to the charge al-
ready existing on the old and worn-out brid-
ges built 40 years ago? It was an easy thing
to create a credit but it’s an awkward thing
to dispose of the corresponding debit.
I will add one argument, which I venture
to think will be conclusive as to the unsound-
ness of this particular entry by putting a
supposititious case. Let your readers ima-
gine the Government to have but one ac-
count at its bankers—.the Consolidated Re-
venue Account. Drawing upon the cash at
the bank in credit to this account a time
would arrive when there would be no funds
has been to charge such items to the debit
of Consolidated Revenue. This item of
£389,152 was not revenue received during the
particular year to which it was credited; it
had not been earned Turing that particular
year. It was a transfer of figures only; hut
it enabled the Treasurer to present a surplus
as the result of his administration,of £333,296
Is 2d (see Ways and Means, 16th July, 18196),
and to show a surplus on the 28th Aprl, 1897),,
of £104,465; and, further, allowed him to/OL'


to meet the cheques drawn, the expenditure
exceeding the cash receipts. The bank would
request its customer to cover the account
which is being overdrawin. The Treasurer
would reply, “My dear fellow, I can show you
that in the Treasury books the account is in
sutf^ I credit £31313,000, so I continue to draw my
cheques.” The bank would say, “no funds.”
The reason why we are able to draw without
being pulled up by our blank is because the
Government has a large amount of trust
funds in its general account. I could add
arguments in excess if they were needed. I
am only illustrating the cleverness of the
Premier in obtaining the approval of Par-
In my letter to you of 26th ult. I con
ckded by showing that but for the improper
crediting of the sum of £389,152 to the Con-
solidated Revenue the true deficiency of the
Treasurer on June 30 next (if he failed to re-
ceive £85,000 from his proposed amendment
of the Stamp Duties Act) would be £414,000.
jj But another somewhat similar entry was
made under the circumstances I now describe —
an improper paper entry crediting the Consoli-
dated Revenue with the sum of £224,000.
Adding this to the £414,000 above referred to.
thf truly estimated deficiency on June 30, 1898,
should be £636,000. There are other sums to
be discussed which will seriously increase this
amount.
When Sir Henry Parkes passed the measure
known as the Centennial Park Act there was
appropriated (in obedience to a snecial clause
' - in the Act) the sum of £200,000, to be charged
to the debit of the Consolidated Revenue; the
purpose being to improve what Avere practi
cally Crown lands, and to convert them into a
grand park for the benefit of the people. The
money Avas duly spent and charged to the Con-
solidated Revenue. Mr. Burns was Trea-
surer, and faithfully carried out the terms of
the Act, and when he retired from office the
payments he had made formed a portion of the
balances left to his successor, Mr. M'Millan
(also the Treasurer of the Parkes Govern-
ment).
My friend (Mr. M'Millan) made his first fin-
ancial statement on April 10, 1889, and made
no reference to the payments on the Centennial
Park account charged to the Consolidated Re-
venue, and he showed that for the year 1889
Hament to (any suggestion he may make,
unsound though It be.
My second letter will deal with an item of
£224,000 'improperly credited to Consolidated
Revenue upon lines similar to the foregoing,
while my third letter will deal with one or
two items of a doubtful character, which will
enable your readers to form a reasonable
view of the state of the public accounts. My
last letter will contain a statement of ac-
counts showing the true balance of the col-
ony’s finances and of the corrections which
some future Government and Parliament will
require to make.
November 1, 1897.
ho would have a surplus estimated at £25,392
12s 3d.
His next financial statement was made on
December 4, 1889. He then showed that he
would have a surplus on December 31 esti-
mated at £52,483 19s 9d, but to bring about this
result he made “a paper entry” of £150,000,
debiting Suspense Account with a like amount
—an entry very much on the lines of the pre-
sent Treasurer’s act with regard to the £389,' /A
000 referred to in my first letter.
Mr. M'Millan made a third financial state-
ment on October 16, 1890, in which he showed
that in finally closing the accounts for 1889 he
had an ascertained surplus of £40,458 12s 2d,
and foretold a surplus at the end of 1890
estimated at £208,435 16s, but to enable this
favourable result to be arrived at he made an I
additional paper entry of £50,000, absorbing-
the remaining portion of the Centennial Parkj
appropriation.
This form of book-keeping was sharply criti-
cised at the time without effect. The Auditor-
General was brought forward as an authority
and the House weakly let the accounts pass,
the GoA r ernment haying a majority. So things
remained until the retirement of the Parkes- f
M'Millan Administration in October, 1891.
The incoming Government at once dealt with
the financial position of the colony, which was
threatening and gloomy in the extreme. It a .
AA’as not long before Mr. John See, the new iwJcC^
Treasurer, realised that the banks would not
honour the Government cheques without hav-
ing the sovereigns available to meet the de-
mands upon the Government account, and on
the delivery of his financial statement he re-
CoaA 6 a '"i r f
ComAtAl ‘ic-CcruV


placed to the debit of the Consolidated Revenue
i in the books of the Treasury the sums repre-
V*' sented by “paper entries,” viz., £200,000, thus
placing the accounts in the position as left by
Mr. J. F. Burns in 1888-9.
The House approved of this correction of
the accounts, and the Government of the day
accepted the responsibility of £200,000 against
them. So matters remained until the present
a (H I Treasurer delivered his first financial state-
i ment on November 7, 1894, when, adopting
Mi, M'Millan’s views, Mr. Reid credited Con-
stlidated Revenue with the amounts above ex-
plained (£200,000); restoring the system of
paper entries. This sum has grown by pub-
lic expenditure—probably for sand-shifting—
until it stands in the accounts for the present
A at £224,371 19s 2d.
‘l I now repeat the principle 1 endeavoured to
lay down in my previous letter, that no Go-
In my letter No. 2, under date the Ist inst.,
I brought forward the estimated deficiency
on the 30th June next at £636,000. I propose
to show in the present that there are three
other items which must be added to that
deficiency. My concluding letter will show
in account form the total deficiency—which
should be shown —if the consolidated reve-
, nue had not been built up for the purpose
of showing a surplus, when a deficiency ac-
tually existed.
During my visit to London, in 1892, one
of my efforts, and one which I am pleased
to find formed the subject of the present
Premier’s labours when there, was to en-
deavour to induce the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer, then Mr. Goschen, to introduce a
bill into the Imperial Parliament to enable
trustees to invest in colonial securities. I
had the honour and privilege of two special
interviews with that great financier, but I
failed in that portion of my mission. Mr.
Reid must have been equally unsuccessful.
The reason w T as this: Mr. Goschen bore me
down with unanswerable logic. He pointed
out that New South Wales, in common with
the other borrowing colonies, persistently
borrowed, but, as with the others, she had
made no provision from her large revenues,
from general sources, and from the sale of
the Crown lands, for providing any sinking
fund, if only as a proof of good faith; that
letter, that no Go- sury.-
£- 4rcf Op*
£ 2Xt ri7 i
UJf* 1
vernment can be carried on upon paper or
f. ctitious entries.
I know that there are some persons who
endeavour to make the Post-office resumptions
in Moore-street run parallel with the Centen-
nial Park. I shall not occupy your space by
anticipating their case. When, if ever, that
case is attempted to be set up I may ask for
room for a special rejoinder. I think, so
far, I have proved that the improper dealing
with an expenditure extending over 45 years
will land us on the 30th of June next with
an actual deficit of |414,000. To this add
£224,000 for paper entries for the Centennial.
Park, and you will have a deficit of £636,000.*
Plainly speaking, not one penny ~of these
paper entries can be drawn from the bank,
because the money is not in the bank to re-
present the entries in the books of the Trea-
November 8, 1897.
until some such course was carried out we
would ask in vain for the concession I
sought. I have no doubt in my mind that
Sir Michael Hicks-Beach made a similar re-
ply to the present Premier.
The late Government, which I had the
honour to lead, were so fully impressed with
the wisdom of, and unassailable position
taken by, Mr. Goschen that it was deter-
mined to make the great reform of establish-
ing a sinking fund. Already for the mil-
lion loan granted to the Railway Commis-
sioners during the Administration of Mr.
M‘Millan provision for its repayment had
been made by annual amounts of £75,000.
To this the late Government added £175,000
more, thus establishing our credit in Lon-
don upon the soundest basis it had ever
stood upon.
The jfilTijJlOO so set apart by the Dibbs
Government has been appropriated by the
present Administration, and that amount
goes forward to add to the deficiency upon
the other two items, making £811,000!
The next misappropriation was the item
of £213,000, a portion of the savings impera-
tively caused by the collapse of the panic
year of 1893.
The cry was got up that an amount of
£213,000 had been saved upon the roads and
bridges vote during that painfully eventful
year. Had the Government of that day not


saveo £750,000 by reducing its expenditure
fron! sheer necessity the Government
cheques would have been dishonoured, as
the banks had not the funds to hold their
own and help the Government, and it was
alvsolutely impossible to raise a loan in Eng-
land, even at 5 per cent!
The incoming Government told the Assem-
bly that as this £213,000 should have been
si ent they would spend it, and charge the
amcunt to the deficiency to their predeces-
sors, and actually issued Treasury bills now
current for this portion of the savings of
the Dibbs Government! The deficiency of
£Bll,OOO must be increased by this amount
if ever New South Wales is to have her
accounts placed upon a correct basis. I pre-
9il ~(jzv
rx>i
In the beginning of this series of let
ters I promised your readers to conclude
with a statement of the public accounts as
they should have appeared and been pre-
sented to Parliament when the Treasurer
made his financial statement on October 15
last, in lieu of that which was submitted.
I have taken the pages 10 and 11 of the
Ways and Means, headed “No. 2 Consoli-
dated Revenue Fund Account of Estimated
Revenue and Expenditure for the year end-
ing June 30, 1898,” and summarising the
improper credits have recharged the con-
solidated revenue with the various items in-
corporated into the public accounts for the
purpose of showing—under the cash sys-
tem —a surplus when in reality a large de-
ficiency existed, as follows:
CONSOLIDATED REVENUE FUND.
Account of estimated revenue and expen-
diture for the year ending June 30, 1898:
Dr.
Tc estimated char-
ges on the Conso-
lidated Revenue
Fund, during the
year ending June
30, 1898, as shown
in the summary
of estimates for
1897-lTpage 3 9,124,824 2 0
To amount of
payments to be
made under spe-
cial Acts in re-
duction of the
public debt —
31 Victoria No. 11 42,258 0 0
53 Victoria, No. 9 150,000 0 0
53 Victoria No. 24 75,000 0 0
‘ - 567 ’ 25 * 0 0
sume that will come some day. We have
the deficiency to June 30 next now standing
at £1,024,011. Is it worth while my going
further? There is a very suspicious item
of £198,000 in the ways and means sheet, a
large portion of which must represent
vouchers unpaid in the Treasury on June
30 last. Doubtless under the “cash_^ystem”< /
it would be more convenient to allow them
to stand over till July, and so make the ap-
parent surplus look better than it other-
wise would. Suppose I take £98,000 of this
sum and add to the figures of £1,024,000 I
would not be far out, and then the deficiency
(estimated) for June 30, 1898, will stand at
something like £1,120,000!
The amount im-
properly credited
to consolidated
revenue, being
part cost of rais-
ing loans during
the past 45
years
The charge for
work done at ,
the Centennial
Park,properly de-
bited to consolida-
ted revenue byMr
Burns in 1887-8,
improperly char-
ged to a sus-
pense account,
and treated dur-
ing Mr. M‘Mil-
lan’s term of of-
fice as revenue
Restoration of
commencement of
a sinking fund,
debited by the
Dibbs Govern-
ment, but treat-
ed as revenue
by the present
Administration
The savings of
the Dibbs Gov-
ernment on the
road vote, in the
panic year of
1893
This amount re-
presenting liabi-
lities due on
June 30, but un-
paid
November 15, 1897.
389,152 15 11
224,371 19 2
175,000 0 0
213,000 0 0
98,000 0 0
£10,491,606 17 1


By balance from
account for the
yeiar 1896-1897,
brought forward ppJb****. 120,092
By amount of es-
timated revenue
and receipts for
the year ending
30th June, 1898:—
4 7
Taxation 2,491,790 0 0
Land Revenue—
j Sales .. £1,090,800
! Annual
1 revenue _845,380
1,936,180 0 0
Receipts for servi-
ces rendered 4,551,020 0 0
General miscella-
neous receipts 267,477 0 0
9,246,467
0 0
By amount esti-
mated to be re-
ceived from an
amendment of
the Stamp Duties
Act 85,000
0 0
1898. —June 30—
By balance, being
estimated deflci-
ency 1,040,047
12 6
Total £10,491,606
17 1
The Treasurer showed that on the
30th
June next he should have a surplus estimated
at £59,477 2s 7d; my statement of the
ac-
counts shows a deficiency of £1,040,047 12s 6d!
■When I took upon myself to review the
finances of the colony, I endeavoured to
write as an impartial critic, and to avoid
the use of any language calculated to weak-
en Mr. Reid’s cordial friendship; also I pro-
mised him before a line was written that I
should preserve a gentlemanly tone through-
out. Tour readers may think that in the
former case I may have not been impartial;
if they do the partiality was unintentional.
But I do not think they will believe that I
have in any way departed from a. fair and
respectful attitude in the manner in which,
so far, I have con dueled -this correspondence.
Mr. Reid has been so good -as to honour me
by being interviewed by the “Daily Tele-
graph, ” but has hardly followed my lead iin
his form of expression, I am not master of
I conclude this correspondence by repeat-
ing the statement with which I commenced,
and with a renewal of the pledge contained
in my first letter.
-So far there has been no criticism in the
press, Parliament or elsewhere of my figures.
In one paper a sneer of surprise found utter-
ance: “That I could spare sufficient time
from my official duties in the public service
to write.” In another paper a grim humour
was attempted of comparing my figures to
the rolling of a snowball. In reply to the
former I beg to state that 1 am not in the
public service, and therefore fear mot the
fate which a civil servant would meet in dar-
ing to expose the doings of his masters —the
hint given, however, shows that a form- of
tyranny would be adopted if my position
justified it. With regard to the snowball
j humourist, I may say that in presenting my
| views in detail in separate letters I was ac-
tuated solely by a desire to carry my read-
| ers along with me, step by step, so that the
j humblest man in the community might un-
| derstand the figures when simply stated.
My acknowledgments are due to the “Daily
Telegraph,” the “Star” and the “Evening
■News” for their courtesy in affording me
space for publication. The “Sydney Morn-
ing Herald” declined to publish the letters
because of their rule which excluded any-
thing that appeared in another paper,—l be-
lieve the importance of the question in the
public interest sufficient to set aside tany or-
dinary office rule.
November 22, 1897.
the iart of bluff, neither am I by profession
entitled to follow out the instructions which
a solicitor gave to a member of the Bar on
one occasion: “There is no case for the de-
fendant; abuse the plaintiff.”
My' blunders during the term of my
political pilgrimage are certainly no fair
criticism on the part of Mr. Reid. He and
his friends made the most of my errors of
judgment which I may have committed, but,
strange as it may appear, my blunders were
never sufficient to induce the Parliament to
defeat me. His Government owe their office
not so much to my fault as to the partisan
conduct of the late Governor.
The gravest political blunder of my life,
and the one which my opponents have made
the pmst of, an act which I wias a party


to <diuiriinig the regime of the Stuiairt Adminis
tratlion, in which I filled the post of Trea-
surer, and had as a colleague Mr, G. H. Reid,
as Minister for Education. That gentle-
man will pardon my reminding him that he
was tan active member of the Government
and strongly supported the proposal in Ca-
binet by which I wlas induced to give up
something between two and three millions
sterling pier annum in the shape of revenue,
derivable from land sale®, before securing
another form of taxation to provide for itihe
loss this act entailed. I will remind Mr.
Reid of the penalty which he plaid for that
alleged blunder. He sought election for
East Sydney at the time I endeavoured to
pass a tax on property, aJnld while formerly
always triumphantly returned by huge ima-
jorities he was defeated by Mr. Sydney Bur-
dekin.
I would not have spoken of this circum-
stance but for the reference made by Mr.
Reid to my blunders. These blunders have
not been land marks for his guidance, other-
wise he would have retained his Customs
duties until his direct taxation schemes were
upon a safe footing. Had he done so there
would have been no need for this correspon-
dence; he would have had a real instead of a
fictional surplus.
But, as I have said, my blunders were not
before the public, at lelalst at this moment.
The question was the public finances, and
I will get back to the real issue with one
sentence more of past history. The stopping
of the sales of public lands, while it caused
a miserable deficiency of a few hundred thou-
sands of pounds, Slaved countless millions of
acres off land from being withheld from the
legitimate settlers, and Mr. Reid and I can
certainly meet on one common ground—that
we were active Ministers in the Stuart Go-
vernment, which brought labour so hopeful a
state. My opponents forget, but Mr. Reid
should not, that as Treasurer I bore all the
brunt of that fight, and have carried the
odium ever since. This I have been content
to bear for the good done to the people, but
my colleague of that day should not turn
round upon his olid comrade in a good cause.
If Mr. Reid possessed am accurate know-
ledge of account keeping he would not have
to be reminded that no amount of paper
v transfers will reduce .any deficiency. If ia
deficiency is created it is because the income
for the year, under the cash or any other
system flails below the money actually spent.
That deficiency so created must be met in
one of two ways. The following year spend
less than the income you receive, or ask Par-
liament for further revenues by new or in-
creased taxation. I will, wixn every respect
to Mr. Reid, Lay down la rule for his guidance
in one sentence: You can only cover your
own or your predecessor’s deficiency by ac-
tual coin, or in the manner above stated.
Paper entries will never meet the difficulty,
because you create a debit to another ac-
count, or open suspense accounts, or take
actual savings of your predecessors or leave
unpaid accounts lait the end of your year
which should have been paid.
Now a few brief words in reply to Mr.
Reid, as reported in the “-Daily Telegraph’’ of
November 17. In effect be says he did not
treat the item of £389,000 as revenue re-
ceived, but wrote that sum off his predeces-
sor’s deficency. Of course the intention was
to be very kind to those predecessors, who
had been charged with money actually saved
by them for the purpose of piling up a de-
ficiency to their discredit, by taking back
£175,000 of a sinking fund, and by being
generous to give bis predecessors the item
of £224,000 for the Centennial Park expen-
diture; which they had adopted as portion
of their deficiency. But unfortunately I
have before mle a statement of accounts
signed by G. H. Reid, Treasurer, dated No-
vember, 6, 1894, headed “No. 3 Consolidated
Revenule Fund. Account of estimated re-
venue and expenditure for the period from
January 1 to June 30, 1895,” in which I find on
the credit side of the page:—
1 By estimated revenue and re-
ceipts for the period from Jan-
uary 1 to June 30, 1895—<
Taxation £1,393,263 0 0
Band revenues 1,024,970 0 0
Receipts for services rendered 2,002,864 0 0
General miscellaneous receipts 160,593 0 0
£4,581,690 0 0
By amount due by the loan fund
to the Consolidated Revenue
Fund, for accrued interest
which has been improperly
credited to loans as proceeds
of stock sold instead of to
the consolidated revenue,from
which the accrued interest
was paid 389,152 15 11
£4,970,842 15 11


/)
I
be disposed of.
I have already pointed out that this last
item is a paper entry, made by creating a
debit to the loams account, (and which has
yet to be got rid of, but Mr. Reid fails me
in any explanation of this problem.
The loans account is not an asset account,
but ia record of money received, and how
expended, by works sanctioned! by Parlia-
ment to be paid for from loams, and should
balance, when the works are completed, for
which the loan was authorised. It has at its
debit to-day £(389,000 of a block sum yet to
I need not again reiterate my argument
respecting the item of £216,000, the cash
savings of the late Government, spent by
the present Administration, but charged to
the late Government land Treasury bills is-
sued by the -present. This cannot be bluffed
off.
And with regard to the item of £175,000—■
the beginning of a sinking fund —also wiped
out, I need say nothing further than that,
some portion of the press claim that
everything of the pa«t should be covered, be-
cause we have a new system, which Parlia-
ment has (approved. The Parliament did
approve of the sinking fund and of the £175,-
000 being set aside for that purpose, and in
due course a bill would have bean submitted,
and, speaking from memory, such a bill was
laid upon the table o-f the House by the late
Ad miinistsrat i o*ll .
The defence set up by a portion of the
press land the friends of the present Govern-
ment is summed up in a few words.
Parliament approved of all that the nre-
sem't Government did financially, and it was
necessary to do all these wrong acts to bring
into operation the cash system.
In the former case, as Parliament has ap-
proved, Mr. Reid’s act has been condoned;
but the wrong has been dome nevertheless,
•and Parliament in its (deplorable ignorance
has erred, and must retrace its steps sooner
or later.
With regard to the second phase, the cash
system wias never intended to cover paper
entries of vast sums of money, to create sur-
pluses on paper where none existed in
reality.
That the cash system will break down is
manifest from one remark made by Mr.
M'Milian during the late financial debate,
that the Treasurer should bring down a
schedule of 'the balances due and unpaid on
the 30th June of each year, thus pricking the
balloon in one act.




■ \ . Sfi
£> Sl f- //)


S —' PERSONAL AND POLITIC.
The Financial Statement has caused some
surprise. Briefly stated it means that on Both
June, the surplus was £135,000, but from that
amount had to be deducted £32,500, which was
voted last year as a grant to municipalities,
and had been paid this year. This made his
actual surplus £102,500 to be carreid forward
to the credit of the current financial year. He
estimated his revenue for the financial year
1898-99 would amount to £9,433,000, whilst
the expenditure was set down at £9,681,000.
This would leave a deficiency of £248,000,
which he proposed to make good partly by
extra and new taxation that would yield
£175,000 for the eight months of the financial
year that have yet to run. This additional
revenue of £175,000, together with the credit
balance in hand of £102,000, made up a sum of
£277,000, and would enable him to wind up the
current financial year with a surplus close on
£30,000. The subjoined statement shows the
list of new duties, proposed, the old ones that
are to be reimposed, and the one that is to be
retained
The New Duties.
Tea, per lb .3d
Coffee, roasted, ground, or mixed with any
other article, per lb ... 6d
Coffee, raw, per lb . . . . 3d
Chicory, dandelion, or taraxacum, raw, or
dried, per lb ..... 3d
Chicory, dandelion, or taraxacum, roasted,
ground, or mixed with any other
article, per lb . , . . 6d
Chocolate, plain, or mixed with any other
article, and chocolate creams, per lb . 4d
PP>cos, prepared paste, or mixed with any
other article, per lb . . . 4d
Cocoa, raw, per lb . . . .2d
Rice, per ton ...... 60s
Old Duties Restored.
The following diminishing duties will be res-
tored to the rates in force on 30th June last:—
Biscuits, per lb . . . . , .Id
Jonfectionary (including cakes, comfits,
liquorice, liquorice paste, lozenges, of
all kinds, cocoanut in sugar, sugar
candy, succades, and sweetmeats) per
lb 2d
bruits, dried, candied, and prunes (ex
elusive of dates) per lb ... 2d
ams and jellies, per lb, or reputed
package of that weight, and so on in
proportion for any such reputed
weight Id
'reserves, canned and bottled fruits, peel
drained or dried, per lb Id
lugar, present duty to be retained, per
ton 60;


JuWin
i UiibDA Y, JNO V EMBER 8, 1898. new duties were not allowed shows plainly
♦ enough that he knows his row is a hard
The Einancial Statement has come upon one to hoe. He says it is giving him
the country as a surprise. The impression what he asks or the use of the pruning
created by the reiterated assurances of knife. That is to say, if Parliament will not
the Premier was that that the finances try what he suggests to raise a quarter of
were in such a glowing condition there a million of money, then the Estimates
was no reason to anticipate either a deficit will have to be cut down and the further
or increased taxation. Month after retrenchments, retirements, and dismissals
month Mr. Reid, in interviews, told a take place in the Civil Service. The
glowing tale of an increasing revenue, country members, the local wants of
and hence now, when we are informed whose constituents are provided for on
that the estimated expenditure for the the Estimates and those members who
coming year will be about £200,000 less have the Civil Service vote to consider
than the revenue, it is hardly necessary will, it is expected, swallow a good deal
to say that those who have had their rather than force the Premier into doing
hopes raised and their fears quieted by what he threatens, and he hopes, there-
the rose-coloured representations of the fore, to obtain through fear what he could
head of the Government are somewhat not poasibly expect from a following
disappointed. We are informed that the which feels that in granting these drtiß
Treasurer’s speech was received with an they are contradicting everything they
ominous silence on the ministerial have been boasting of to their constitu-
benches, and this is hardly to be won- ents in a measure—at all events, so far
dered at in view of the fact that during as portion of the additions to the tariff is
the last general election every supporter concerned, making that policy of the
of the Government made a point of the Opposition which they so unsparingly
successful way in which Mr. Reid had condemned their own policy. They feel
managed the finances—how he had paid a certain amount of humiliation in having
off old debts, relieved the poorer classes recourse to duties which are in every
of a heavy burden of taxation, saddled sense Protectionist, but it is either this
those who could afford to pay them with or another general instruction to the
taxes which forced them, for the first Civil Service Board to reduce the number
time, to bear their fair proportion of the and salaries of the Civil Servants. So
cost of carrying on the affairs of the faa as the Opposition is affected there
country. The Treasurer’s announcement should be no great love on their part for
on Wednesday evening pricks the bladder, the Service. In the last three elections
and now we know that Mr. Reid has the vote of Government employes has
only been able to carry on, and make the been cast solid for the Reid administra-
accounts square, by charging to loan tion, because it gave us Free Trade and
funds works that should have been con- Land and Income Taxes. * And as no
the other by the views of the importers
of the metropolis. Mr. Reid is in a tight
corner, and no one knows it better than
himself. The veiled threat with which
he foreshadowed the alternative if the
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 1898.
structed out of revenue, by transferring doubt those who in Parliament are
moneys from one account to another, and, arrayed against the Ministry will remem-
as Mr. Lyne suggested, by ruthlessly ber this, and will not be affected by the
starving roads and other votes. It threat of the Premier, it is just on the
was impossible to keep on this policy, cards that the Financial Statement of
for in pursuing his ideas of fiscal re- last Wednesday may produce a political
organisation Mr. Reid went too far, crisis and be the means of pulling down
and is compelled to propose the re-im- that strong Government which for over
position of duties which he took off four years has defied all efforts to destroy.
but also add to his tariff those duties it.
which in the interests of the masses the
Dibbs Government removed.
In order to provide the quarter of a’
million which the Treasurer says he will'
require to meet the necessary expenditure
of the year the duty of 3d. per lb. on tea,
and the duties on coffee, chicory, cocoa,
and rice, which were surrendered befcre|
the Premier’s Free Trade run m:/J
obtained are proposed. This certainly*}
inconsistent with the professions of the
Government. A free breakfast table is
the ideal to which democratic Free]
Traders have been moving, and it is)
difficult to understand why Mr. Reid
becomes retrogressive. It is now nearly
forty years since Sir Henry Parkes
induced, against the wish of tne Govern-
ment, the Assembly to affirm that as tea
and sugar were necessaries of life
should not be taxed. Though this resolu-
tion was not given effect to then it was
not forgotten. A Protectionist Govern-
ment, thirty years afterwards, obeyed it
by placing tea on the free list, and a Free
Trade Cabinet completed the work by
arranging for the graduated reduction of
the sugar duty, until it entirely disap-
peared. Anyone who fairly looks at our
fiscal policy can hardly object to the I
re-imposition of the tea duty and the *
retention of £3 per ton on sugar, for
though both articles are used by every
one and are in this colony as much neces- 1
saries of life as bread and meat, the sur- |
prise is that Mr. Reid should have turned \
round on himself. No doubt what he
proposes will assist to distribute more
equally the incidence of taxation, for
nearly all the revenue he collects now ,
comes from the classes. All his direct i
taxation is supplied by a section of a I
community—stamp duties, land and in- P
come taxes, probate duties, &c.—and the
tea duty is only a levelling up—making
those who are now paying nothing con-
tribute something to the public revenue.
The tea tax is a recognised Free Trade one,
so that no objection can be offered to it
on that score. It is also unimpeachable J
judging by the canons of the economists, j
for it is a charge which is general in its4|
operation and easily collected. If, there- 1
fore, we were to judge of it from a scien- J
tific fiscal standpoint, there would be I
nothing to find fault with. It is only as I
coming from a Government which adopted I
a forward policy and now turns round in I
the tracks and, as in the case of restoring I
the duties thoroughly Protectionist on
biscuits, confectionery, fruits, jams, pre- J
serves, &c., restores the duties of which*
it condemned the imposition by their
predecessors. Nearly every item of the j
additional customs taxation affects the 1
working classes, and no doubt it is in \
order to satisfy a section of the minis- j
terial party, who look upon wealth as a I
mark always to be shot at, and eau«i
them to view with a degree of satisfacti
the volte face of the Cabinet that -therl
proposition is made to double the probate I
duties. Dead men’s money, although the I
charges upon it will come out of the I
pockets of the living, is looked upon, not I
only here but in England, by the Radical I
and Socialistic elements of the community I
as leviable upon down to even the vanishing I
point, so that Mr. Reid probably expects I
from those who will be the hardest hit I
by the other duties support which might I
have been withheld if there had not been I
any attack upon the property and accumu- 1
lations left behind by rich men. 1
The Government proposals, judged by 1
themselves, are not open to much objec- 1
tion. The trouble is in the disappoint- i
ment with which the knowledge comes to {]
the ministerial supporters that the J
finances which they were led to expect 1
were flourishing are in a parlous way. i
No party which has been buoyed up day M
after day with the information that every- I
thing was ‘ coleur de rose ’ cares to face I
the opposite side of the picture. It feels I
it has been led astray—living as it were I
in a fool’s paradise—and we should not I
be astonished if any determined attempt I
made to condemn the Government polio}' I
did not obtain a certain amount of I
support from the ministerial benches. J
The commercial community, which never I
agreed with the notion of taking the I
duty off tea, views rather complacently I
the taxation proposed, but then merchants 1
have little power in Parliament. They I
are essentially players off their own bat, I
and as all their opinions are tainted more I
or less with selfishness, honourable mem- I
Jjfjrs will not be influenced one way or
