

PETV)
/ / A ~£S<6
THE ANNEXATION OF FIJI
AND THE
PACIFIC SLAVE TRADE.
SPEECH OIF*
Mil. ALDERMAN M C ARTHDR, M.P.,
IN THE
HOUSE OF COMMONS,
TUESDAY, JUNE L 3, 1873.
PUBLISHED FOR THE ABORIGINES’ PROTECTION SOCIETY,
WILLIAM TWEEDIE, 337, STRAND.


LONDON:
GILBERT AND RiyiNQTON, PRINTERS,
st. John’s square.


INTRODUCTION.
Recent intelligence from Fiji announces that the native chiefs,
with the approval of the entire white population, have offered to
cede the islands of that group to Great Britain, and that Mr.
Consul Layard has provisionally accepted the cession, as well as
undertaken the duties of carrying on the local government until
he receives definite instructions from home. We have no doubt
that the report of the two commissioners, Commodore Good-
enough and Mr. Layard, who were sent out last year, will amply
vindicate the important step which has now been taken. In
order, however, to come to a satisfactory understanding of
the various questions which are -connected with the proposed
annexation, the Committee of the Aborigines’ Protection Society
have decided to republish the luminous and exhaustive speech
which Mr. Alderman McArthur delivered on this subject last
year. This is the more necessary, because, as a general elec-
tion has since taken place, many members of the new Parlia-
ment are necessarily unfamiliar with the facts and arguments
which conclusively justify the establishment of British authority
in Fiji. This year Mr. McArthur has given notice of his in-
tention to renew the motion which has already been debated in
two successive sessions of the late Parliament; and although we
feel confident that both the Government and the House of Com-
mons will be prepared to give effect to a policy which is sustained
by the deliberate approval of every responsible person who has
mastered the subject on the spot, it is nevertheless desirable that
the annexation of Fiji should command the unanimous assent of
statesmen and political parties in this country. We therefore
give to those who may still entertain doubts as to the expediency


INTRODUCTION".
of that measure, an opportunity of making themselves acquainted
■with “ the case ” so ahly put forward by the member for
Lambeth.
We believe that since the debate last year the wisdom of the
views expressed by Mr. McArthur and the hon. gentlemen* who
supported him has been emphatically confirmed by various
occurrences in the islands. Mr. Gladstone, in opposing the
motion, remarked that “the Government did not agree with
those who thought that the alternative should be absolutely cast
aside, of using the Government actually established in the Fiji
Islands as the instrument of governing the country.” This
policy the right hon. gentleman and his colleagues endeavoured
to carry out, the result being that our naval representatives in
the Pacific have repeatedly interfered to bolster up the authority
of King Thakombau and of his European advisers. Long ago
that weak and corrupt Government, under whose auspices the
iniquitous traffic in Polynesians achieved its greatest develop-
ment, would have totally collapsed but for the moral and physical
support rendered to it by the very cruisers which a too confiding
nation supposed the Admiralty had sent out to the Pacific for
the sole purpose of abolishing the slave-trade. To discredit such
a policy it is surely only needful to make its real character
known. The other aspects of the question have been so fully
dealt with by Mr. McArthur that we do not feel called upon to
extend these remarks.
12, Lambeth Terrace,
May 10 th, 1874.
* His motion was supported by Sir Charles "Wingfield, Mr. R. N. Fowler,
Admiral Erskine, Mr. Eastwiok, the Hon. A. Kinnaird, and Sir James Elphin-
stone.


SPEECH
MR ALDERMAN MARTHUR, M.P.
Sir, I rise in terms of the motion of which I have given notice
to move—
“ That as the chiefs of Fiji and the white residents therein
have signified their desire that Great Britain should assume the
protectorate or sovereignty of those islands, it. is desirable that
her Majesty’s Government, in order to put an end to the con-
dition of things now existing in the group, should take steps to
carry into eifect one or other of those measures.”
Last year in bringing this question before the House I spoke at Epitome
so much length that it is not necessary for me now to do more of speech
than call attention to the main facts upon which I rest my case fCgyP
for the establishment of British authority in Fiji. On that occa-
sion I showed that the Fiji Islands occupied one of the most im-
portant positions, both naval and commercial, in the Pacific; that
in the opinion of high naval authorities we could have no better
station for our ships of war in the great highway between America
and Australia; that the islands themselves were most fertile and
productive; that besides yielding edible roots, and fruits, drugs,
spices, fibres, timber, dyes, vegetable fats, and other articles of
commercial importance, they were pre-eminently the home of the
cotton plant; and that although barbarism still retains some of
its former hold on the habits of the people, yet since the advent
of the Wesleyan missionaries in 1834 a marvellous change for
the better had been wrought amongst the cannibal tribes. I
called attention to the fact that so long ago as 1859 all the princi-
pal chiefs of Fiji offered the country to the Queen, and that the
offer was declined on grounds which have since been admitted to


be untenable. I pointed out the great interest wbicb the Austra-
lian colonies took in the solution of the question, and endea-
voured to explain the reasons which justified them in expecting
that the Imperial Government would take the initiative in estab-
lishing British authority. Finally I urged that kidnapping could
not be extirpated in the Pacific unless Fiji, the great centre of
the traffic, was placed under the protection of our flag.
Sir, the events of the last twelve months have strengthened
my conviction that the course I then ventured to recommend was
the right one; that it deserved the support of every just-minded
and patriotic man ; and that by tampering with the grave inte-
rests which are at stake, instead of boldly grappling with the
difficulty, her Majesty’s Government are assuming a serious
responsibility.
The policy I have to complain of the course pursued by her Majesty’s
of the Go- Government on this question. In the first place it was unworthy
anhstaken a S country such as this to intimate to New South Wales
one that if that colony would assume the protectorate over or annex
Fiji, the requisite powers would bo conferred upon it. Sir James
Martin and the Government of that colony very properly re-
garded it as an Imperial question, and declined to accede to the
proposal. Again, in acknowledging a de facto Government in
Fiji, they have established a principle as dangerous as it is un-
precedented—namely, the right of British subjects to throw off
their allegiance, and either alone, or in association with foreigners,
to form themselves into an independent State. Such a course is
fraught with evil alike to Imperial interests and to the natives
who are left to the mercy of adventurers, and is subversive of
the just responsibility of the Crown. Also by leaving the consul
without authority or support they have still further complicated
matters. The great proportion of the white population regard
themselves still as British subjects, claim her protection as such,
and refuse to recognize the new Government, thus placing it in a
most difficult position.
Erroneous The House may probably recollect that the principal ground
impressions taken by the Government last year was that no intimation had
of Mr. K. been given by the Fijian authorities since 1859 of any desire to
Mid S Mr° n to th® British Crown. My right bon. friend the
Gladstone. Under-Secretary for the Colonies, in his speech remarked: “ A
fallacy ran through a great majority of the speeches that were
delivered. It seemed to be assumed that at present the inhabi-
tants of Fiji were supplicating us either to assume authority, or
at all events to establish a British protectorate over them. As
far as his information went, the inhabitants were doing nothing
of the kind, and therefore, brushing that cobweb aside, he would
proceed with the general question.” Again, referring to the first
offer made through Mr. Pritchard, the right hon. gentleman re-
marked : “ Since that time nothing like a formal offer has been
made on the part of those islands that we should assume
sovereignty over them.” The right hon. gentleman the First


Lord of the Treasury also remarked : “ Under these circumstances,
he appealed to the House and to the supporters of the motion,
not to attempt to force upon her Majesty’s Government the duty
of forcing the Fiji Islands to annex themselves to this country,
for there really was no evidence that they desired it.” Now, will Petition
the House believe that in 1871 a memorial was sent to the Go- e'uto
vernment, signed by King Thakombau, by Mafua and the princi- p eang ; n
pal chiefs, and by the principal white residents, praying that favour of
since annexation to the Crown was opposed to the policy of her a Proteo.
Majesty’s Government, it would grant Fiji protection for ten, torate-
fifteen, or twenty years, in order that the native chiefs, with the
assistance of competent foreign residents, might be permitted
and assisted to cultivate a form of government analogous to that
of the Sandwich Islands ? The memorial goes on to say :
“Tour memorialists pray your lordships may dwell upon the
large and increasing connexion with the Australian colonies, and
the apparent necessity for providing due protection alike to
settlers and natives. In the event of her Majesty’s Government
entertaining this petition, your lordships’ memorialists pledge
themselves to accept all the obligations her Majesty’s Govern-
ment may deem it wise and necessary to impose, and your lord-
ships’ memorialists, as in duty bound, will pray.—Signed,
Thakombau, King of Bau, for himself and family ; Mafua, King
of Lau, for Tivi Bau, and Tui Cakau, and 120 white residents.”
The Fijian Times in relation to this petition observes: “An
answer to this petition should reach Fiji in a few months, and is
anxiously looked for by both natives and Europeans. There
can be little doubt that the document will receive due considera-
tion at the hands of British statesmen, who represent a people
whose population to the extent of one-eighth are dependent upon
cotton for subsistence, and whose export of this manufactured
staple is something like thirty-five millions sterling.” No reply
was sent to this memorial, although one was anxiously looked for
in Fiji. I think, therefore, the House has a right to ask why a
document of so much importance should be received by the
Foreign-office and treated so discourteously. Was it not conduct
of a similar kind in relation to Abyssinia that led in the first place
to retaliation on the part of King Theodore, and afterwards to
that war which cost this country so many millions of pounds ?
Sir, I acquit the right hon. gentleman at the head of the Govern-
ment, and also my right hon. friend, the Under Secretary for the
Colonies, of any intention of misleading the House, but I must
say the Foreign-office is greatly to blame in this transaction.
In the debate which took place last year the Prime Minister
remarked: “ So far as it was possible to lay down an abstract
and general rule with regard to annexation, he was prepared to
say that her Majesty’s Government would not annex any territory
great or small without the well-understood and expressed wish
of the people to be annexed, freely and generally expressed and
authenticated by the best means the case would afford.” The


Under-Secretary for tlie Colonies also remarked: u lf hereafter
the white population and the natives should desire the territory
to be annexed, the British nation would never hesitate where the
interests of civilization and Christianity were concerned to take
whatever steps might best promote those ends.”
Sir, I regard these statements as a pledge on the part of the
Government that they will entertain the question of annexation
if the great majority of the people of Fiji are desirous this should
take place. I think I shall be able to prove to the satisfaction
of the House that the conditions laid down by the right hon.
gentleman at the head of the Government, as well as by the
Under-Secretary for the Colonies, have been fully complied with,
and that the almost unanimous feeling of both the white and
native populations of the islands is in favour of annexation to
Great Britain. I have already referred to the petition sent to
the Foreign Office in 1871, which was never answered. Since
then the feeling has intensified. The Fiji Times, which may be
regarded as reflecting the sentiments of the population generally,
strongly advocates annexation to England. It says :
“ Fiji geographically situated must belong to England, if
England wishes to maintain her present position in the Pacific.
As a coaling station, Fiji must of necessity belong to England.
As a link in the communication between England and her most
valuable colonies, Fiji belongs to England. In the event of a
war between England and any other European power, Fiji would
be invaluable as a depot for the protection of her colonies and
her commerce, and therefore should belong to England. Our
produce is one of England’s staple articles of commerce, the
finest and best of which we can produce in any quantity to
be sent to the English market, and therefore invaluable as
a source of supply, and should belong to England. France
has Tahiti and New Caledonia; America the interesting Navi-
gator’s Islands ; while Fiji, the most fertile and healthiest of
the group of islands in the South Pacific, has been looked upon
by the above powers as virtually belonging to England.” _
Mr. Thurston, who now holds the office of Prime Minister to
Thakombau, has given expression to similar sentiments, and
I believe the parties now associated with him in the Government
would hail with great satisfaction the annexation of the islands
to Great Britain. In one of his letters, written in March, 1870,
he says :
“ The opinion of myself and the majority of settlers is, that
Fiji is a necessity to, almost the birthright of, the Australian
colonies ; and having real interests in this country, we shall not
desist from our attempts to effect with them a recognized and
legitimate connexion. At the close of last year the chiefs of
Fiji, in conjunction with the majority of the planters, signed
a memorial to her Majesty’s Government, praying for the British
flag, and the memorial in a regular way was sent to England
through her Majesty’s Consul. The colonies, if they see their


own interest, can support this memorial in any way they may
deem advisable. The European population of these islands has
now so largely increased, and the transactions of the settlers,
both in cultivation and commerce, are assuming such propor-
tions, that the people are anxious to become a portion of some
older and more established community. With this object they
convened a public meeting at Levuka in June last, to consider
the expediency of being annexed to the American or some other
Government. The British element, however, so largely prepon-
derates in the settlement, that the meeting would not entertain
the idea of joining any foreign Power.”
In another article, written by him about two years ago in
reference to the petition, he is reported to have said:—
“We support the petition because England, the great chief of
the commercial world, possesses a power that enforces. She has
the force to civilize; she is the great colonizer of the world. In
the short space of three centuries America, sprung from her
loins, has become a giant offspring. Of later date, and with
more rapid development, Australia rises a triumphant proof of
England’s power to rescue wild lands from barrenness, to wrest
from utter savagedom mighty tracts of the earth’s surface.
Regions hitherto counting as nothing in the world’s great total
have risen to take the lead in the world’s great future. Thus
England’s seed cast upon the earth’s surface germinates upon
soils destined to reproduce her race. The energy and industry
of the mother country become the natural instincts of her de-
scendants, and wherever nature has endowed a land with agri-
cultural capabilities, and favourable geographical position,
slowly, but surely, that land will become (under England’s
auspices) a centre of civilization. Firmly believing in the above
words, the gentlemen who attended the public meeting in June
last, and who, in conjunction with the head chiefs of Fiji, signed
the petition to her Majesty’s Government, calling upon all
British subjects, who have the honour of the flag and their own
interests at heart, to unite in securing for this country that
glorious inheritance to which the lineage of nine-tenths of the
settlers justly entitle it The majority of British settlers
in Fiji have not yet severed the ties of kindred which bind them
to their ancestral country, nor have they forgotten their proud
traditions We appear, so far as I can learn, united in
regarding native Government as an impossibility.”
Such is the language of Mr. Thurston, the present Prime Discontent
Minister of King Thakombau, and I cannot quote a higher with the
authority or one more conversant with the state of affairs in Fiji.
Another proof of the strong desire for annexation is to be found ment of
in the fact that the members elected to serve in the House of Fiji,
Representatives are being called upon by their respective consti-
tuencies to resign their seats. The Fiji Times of November 22
last writes : —•
“ The cry for annexation to Great Britain is not a Levukan
a 3


one, but is rising in the various districts of Fiji. It is not con-
fined to a small section of the community merely, but we may
safely assert without the fear of any truthful contradiction, that
it is the voice of the majority of settlers. These are not random
statements, but are based upon the fact that the settlers of many
of the outlying districts are taking up the question earnestly,
feeling also that it is impossible to carry on a Q-overnment under
the present Constitution, they are asking their members to
resign. The districts of Navua, Nadroga, ISTadi, and Ba, repre-
senting the greater portion of the coast of Yiti Levu, have
requested their members to resign; and Taviuni, one of, if not
the most populous out-districts in Fiji, has determined upon
asking its two members to resign. Savu Savu, the most popu-
lous district on Vanua Levu, has also expressed its strong dis-
satisfaction with the existing Government; and, we are informed,
is strongly in favour of annexation. Other districts have not yet
been heard from, but the majority of the settlers we believe
are represented by those we have named. The hon. treasurer
(Dr. Clarkson) has been asked to resign, and the hon. the chief
secretary (Mr. Thurston) is to be asked, he being one of the
Taviuni representatives. These matters speak for themselves.
They prove that the voice of the settlers is against the present
elaborate system; and the natives, judging from their non-
payment of taxes and widespread disaffection, are opposed to the
system likewise. Some very serious complications have recently
arisen between the whites and natives, and settlers have been
compelled to take the law into their own hands, owing to want
of power to protect them. These circumstances naturally lead
all those who desire the real interest of Fiji to look outside of
our small community for a power to govern us ; and so the cry
is for annexation.”
Sir, —I shall close this part of my address with a petition
which was being extensively signed early this year, and was to
have been forwarded to her Majesty’s Government. I presume
it is already in the hands of the Foreign-office, but, if not, it will
reach them shortly. As the petition puts the case very strongly,
I will take the liberty of reading it to the House : —-
“ To the Eight Hon. Earl Granville, from Her, Britannic
Majesty’s Subjects and other White Ebsidbnts in Fiji,
“ Humbly Showeth, —That your Petitioners respectfully beg
that your lordship will be graciously pleased to lay the following
supplication herein contained before her Majesty’s Cabinet, in
order that her Majesty Queen Yictoria may be favourably moved
to annex unto Great Britain the Fiji Islands, and thus con-
solidate under one powerful head the conflicting interests which
are now so injuriously retarding the praiseworthy efforts made
towards advancement by the industrious white settlers scattered
throughout the Fijian group of Islands.
“ That the agricultural resources of the Fiji Islands are of


obvious and growing importance to the manufacturing interests Agricul-
of Great Britain has been amply demonstrated by the constantly tural re-
increasing supplies of cotton and other important tropical pro- ![°”° e e s 0
ductions raised in Fiji; whilst the eminently suitable character .rrapWoal
of the soil and climate for the unquestionable growth of the position of
finest descriptions of sugar-cane in luxuriant profusion, hitherto Fiji,
neglected from the want of capital; also tobacco, which arrives
at maturity in ten weeks from the time of planting, thus annually
furnishing four crops ; also, india-rubber abounds—in all abun-
dantly testifying to the proved and undeveloped richness of the
Fijian Archipelago; collectively rendering them a group of
islands to be justly regarded with much favour, and forming in
the aggregate a valuable acquisition to any European Power.
“ That the geographical position of Fiji places the direct
marine line of communication between Sydney, New South
Wales, and the Continent of America, at San Francisco; and
experienced navigators have frequently dwelt upon the natural
advantages which offer for maritime commerce in Fiji, from its
numerous harbours and roadsteads furnishing some of the finest
anchorages of safety and security for vessels of all sizes, thus
demonstrating pre-eminently their manifest superiority over
other havens among the tropical islands of the Southern Pacific
Ocean.
“ That the friendly leanings so frequently expressed by a very
large section of the Fijian aboriginal natives towards her Britannic
Majesty’s subjects in Fiji, and the unquestionable esteem and
regard which they universally entertain for Great Britain, as
well as the reverence indelibly fixed in their minds for her
Majesty the Queen of England—in some measure evinced by
their pleasurable eagerness and anxiety to be visited by his
Eoyal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh—incontrovertibly prove
the strength of the united and widespread affection prevailing
among all races in Fiji for her Britannic Majesty’s person and
people—which indubitably renders them truly, faithfully, and
earnestly solicitous in their prayers for annexation to the British
Empire.
“ That the United States of America have recently taken pos- The United
session of an island —one of the Navigator Group —lying between States in
Fiji and San Francisco, for the purpose of establishing a coaling possession
depot at Pngo Pngo Harbour, and which your humble p'eti- °. * r a '
tioners are respectfully of opinion, from its relative proximity to Group,
the Australasian Colonies and New Zealand, might, under cer-
tain complications, be highly detrimental and menacing to British
commerce and progressive enterprise in the Southern Pacific
Ocean, manifestly furnishing a very strong reason why the Fiji
Islands should forthwith be included among her Britannic
Majesty’s dominions.
“ That by far the largest majority of the white inhabitants
residing in Fiji are exceedingly desirous that her Britannic
Majesty’s Government should take under her wise and beneficent
a 4


governance—by direct annexation —the Fijian group of'islands •;
and in this irrefutable and heartfelt wish the more important
and influential aboriginal chiefs in authority throughout the
group are in happy unison.
“ That your petitioners would most respectfully urge upon
your lordship’s notice the palpable and numerous advantages
which offer in Fijian waters for the establishment of a per-
manent naval station* a desideratum much needed in these seas ;
and in connexion therewith a Vice-Admiralty Court could be
instituted, whose especial province it should be to promptly
punish evildoers implicated in malpractices with Polynesian
aboriginals, and thus be the means of felicitously placing the
labour trade upon a righteous basis of beneficent security abso-
lutely essential to the best interests of the country, whereby a
general improvement may be happily initiated among all classes,
and thus munificently conferring universal benefit upon the
inhabitants generally.
“ That, moreover, your lordship’s humble petitioners venture
to draw the especial attention of her Britannic Majesty’s Govern-
ment to the significant fact that practically the seaboard of Fiji
is owned by pioneer white settlers, and that from the paucity of
their numbers and the widely-scattered character of their habi-
tations, they are incapable of themselves to form a strong Govern-
ment, which your petitioners humbly submit is urgently needed
among this community, and the establishment of which would
be hailed with unbounded joy and satisfaction, inasmuch as it is
obvious that any prolonged indecision might be attended with
the gravest consequences.
“ And your humble petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever
pray,” &c. &c. &o.
I think I have now clearly proved to the House —to use the
language of the Prime Minister—that there exists on the part of
the white population and natives of Fiji “ the well-understood
and expressed wish for annexation freely and generally expressed,
and authenticated by the best means the case would afford,” and
I claim from the Government the implied pledge given by
the right hon. gentleman—that the question of annexation
should be conceded. Sir, looking at the whole case, I am sur-
prised that there should b'e any hesitation on the part of her
Majesty’s Government to accept that which is now again pressed
upon them. The arguments on political, commercial, and phi-
lanthropic grounds are so strong that they cannot be refuted;
regarded politically, it is impossible not to be struck with the
important strategical position which the Fiji Islands occupy.
They lie in the direct route between San Francisco and British
Columbia on the one side, and our Australian colonies on the
other. They are as important to the maintenance of our power
in the Pacific as Malta and Gibraltar are in the Mediterranean.
Sooner or later they are destined to fall into the hands of some
strong power. To us they would prove invaluable, whereas if in the


hands of an enemy they might inflict upon us great injury, I Opinion_or
cannot do better than read again to the House the opinion of jj'.'jj,]',',.
Captain Washington, the Government Hydrographer. He says, the Admi-
“ln looking over the subject, I have been struck by the entire ralty and
want of Great Britain of any advanced position in the Pacific of t}ie
Ocean. We have valuable possessions on either side, as at Van-
couver’s Island and Sydney, but not an islet or rock on the 7000 Conference,
miles of ocean that separate them. We have no island on which
to place a coaling station and where we could ensure fresh sup-
plies.” The Inter-colonial Conference held at Melbourne, in one
of its resolutions transmitted to her Majesty’s Government, bears
a similar testimony, and remarks, “ That the geographical posi-
tion of the Fiji Islands renders their protection of the very
highest consideration as regards Australia, and both British and
Australian commerce, and that it is of the utmost importance to
British interests that those islands should not form part of, or
be under the guardianship of any other country than Great
Britain. And Hew South Wales, at a public meeting held at
Sydney, states, “ While her Majesty’s Government have declined
to proclaim the Fiji Islands a British colony, notwithstanding
the earnest desire of the principal inhabitants, both native and
European, they are liable at any moment, in the event of any'
disturbance or civil war amongst the. natives themselves, to be
annexed by any maritime power other than Great Britain —a
consummation which would be detrimental in a very high degree
to British interests throughout the Pacific Ocean, but more espe-
cially to the interests of all the Australian colonies.”
I have already alluded to the fact that America and France Practical
have important positions in the Pacific, and now that the most aclvan.
important of all is placed within our reach, surely interest and tages °f
policy alike demand that we should not refuse it. In a com-
mercial point of view these islands would be most important. up .
I have referred to their situation on the great highway of com-
merce between America and Australia. To the other groups in
the Pacific their position is equally favourable. On the north
lie the Samoan group, on the east the Tonga and the Friendly
Islands. On the west extend the Hew Hebrides and Hew Cale-
donia. All these are within a few hundred miles of Fiji as their
centre. It must, therefore, naturally take the lead and become
the depot of trade for them all. As to climate, the mean tem-
perature of Fiji during the whole year is not more than eighty
degrees. Its soil produces all kinds of tropical fruits in rich
abundance. It abounds with fine harbours admirably situated
and easy of access in all weather. Its most important article,
however, is cotton, which it produces equal, if not superior, to the Cotton,
finest Sea Island, it being of that peculiarly fine quality —long
in the staple and silky in the texture. The prices obtained can
not only compare favourably, but are considerably in advance of
the prices obtained for American cotton. It is gradually on the
increase, and may be cultivated to an indefinite extent. In 1869


its value was 50,000 Z.; in 1870, 90,0002.; in 1871, upwards of
120,0002. The exports and imports, which in 1867 were about
50,0002., will this year amount to about 300,0002. There is no
doubt that under British rule there would be a large increase to
the white population from emigration, while the islands would
prove a valuable outlet for the employment of British capital. On
this subject I may quote the language of my right hon. friend,
the Under-Secretary for the Colonies, in the debate which took
place last year. The right hon. gentleman remarks; —
“ The acquisition of territory freely offered by the good-will of
its inhabitants, securing to them advantages of order, good
government, civilization, and Christianity, and at the same time
opening up to us new markets for our trades, new fields of labour
for our people, this was not an acquisition to be spurned or
lightly estimated. The peculiar condition of Great Britain
should never be forgotten, the smallness of its area at home, her
large and ever-increasing population, the active, energetic, rest-
less character of her people, all point to the wisdom of enlarging
by every legitimate means the field of action before us ; and he
would venture to say that if English statesmen, forgetful of these
conditions, ignoring its responsibility as a great nation, and
thinking only of economy, should ever lay down as an axiom of
policy that Great Britain should under no circumstances acquire
additional territory, they would not only do an unwise and
wrong thing, hut they would sound the first note of their
country’s retrogression in the scale of nations.”
These are sentiments which ought to find an echo in the breast
of every Englishman, and they are especially suited to the ques-
tion now before the House. Fiji, that country lately so deeply
degraded by the most dreadful crimes, now presents a population
advancing in education, civilization, and Christianity. I hold in
my hand a return, which, considering the number of inhabitants,
presents a marvellous state of things as regards the accommoda-
tion for public worship and the state of education. From this it
appears there are 611 chapels, and 1389 day-schools, while
the attendance at public worship amounts to 107,250, and the
number of day scholars to 45,243. Give these islands a strong
Government which will command respect and confidence, and
ultimately they will prove the most prosperous of the islands
of the South Pacific.
Sir, I advocate the annexation of these islands on philanthropic
grounds. In no other way will you be able to put down the new
slave trade which has sprung up of late years. The revolting
circumstances connected with the “Carl” prove that a strong
Government is needed in Fiji—a Government which will not
only proclaim laws hut compel the execution of them, and which
will not select for its agents men whose interest it is to defeat
the ends of justice. The “labour traffic,” so called, is neither
more nor less than a system of kidnapping and slavery. The
correspondence which has been laid on the table of the House


during tlie last few years shows that no power save that of the
British Government is strong enough to keep its own subjects in
order in Fiji, or to repress the crimes which are too generally
perpetrated when white men are brought into contact with a
weaker race. In one of these papers Captain Palmer, of the
“ Eosario,” gave details of the torture which was practised on
a plantation in one of the islands by its European proprietors.
Slaves were flogged, cayenne pepper was applied to their wounds,
and the toe of one of them was cut off. The facts were revolting
beyond the power of tongue to express. Lord Belmore in the
first instance, and more recently Captain Markham in his report
to Commodore Stirling, gives us another phase of this most
infamous traffic. He writes :
“ The diabolical practice of head-hunting is, I am told, also The prac-
practised by vessels engaged in the labour trade. The mode in tice of
which it is carried on is, that the chief of one of the tribes or j“ad-
islands enters into an agreement with the master of a ship that 111111 mg '
if he will supply him with so many heads of his enemies, which
they keep as trophies, he will give him an equivalent in men to
be sent away for labour. My informant detailed to me the fol-
lowing account, of which he was actually an eye-witness : He says
that a low green brig arrived off the island of Florida (one of the
Solomon group), that on a canoe going off to her, whilst passing
under the stern, the stern boat was suddenly lowered on the top
of the canoe, smashing it into pieces—that boats were then
lowered apparently to pick up the men in the water, but directly
they were seized their heads were cut off over the gunwale of the
boat with long knives —this was also observed by other natives
in canoes, who immediately took to flight. I was also informed
that the English fore-and-aft schooner ‘ Cambria,’ from British
Columbia, whose master and mate had both been killed by the
natives of some of the Northern Islands, had been cruising about
in charge of a Mr. Sinclair (her charterer), and whose habit was
to entice the natives alongside in their canoes in small numbers,
then to slip a running noose over their heads and so drag them
on board.”
Captain Palmer, in his report to Commodore Lambert, which Captain
may be found in the Blue Book presented to the House, Palmer,
remarks : the^traffic
“ Although your orders to me are simply to collect evidence,
I should deem my duty unfulfilled if I failed to state my opinion
that the traffic in natives as at present carried on is in no way
removed from a regular slave trade, and consequently cannot
fail to be productive of the very worst results to the natives
themselves, as well as to those who have devoted their lives to
the task of bringing them under the influence of civilization, and
by the divine blessing to Christianity. Many hopeful young
men have been seduced or torn from their homes, who were
under the beneficial influence of the Missionaries. Husbands
have been taken from their wives, and daughters from parents—


many have been brutally treated, and some murdered in cold
blood by men calling themselves Englishmen and professing
Christianity.”
Slavery in It is, however, not only that British subjects have been and
Fiji. are engaged in a nefarious traffic in human beings; there is the
further consideration that, whether the so-called emigrants are
lawfully brought to Fiji or not, there is no real security for their
just treatment. I am aware that the Government of Fiji is
more respectable than that which preceded it; but still no one
will pretend that such an authority exists as Great Britain
should or could entrust with the guardianship of her rights,
duties, and interests. Even if that Government be credited
with good intentions, it has no power to secure adequate pro-
tection to the labourers who are brought within its jurisdiction.
It has been well observed by one of the Australian papers:—
“ So long as these islands are under no recognized sovereignty,
they are liable to become the property of any foreign Power, and
slavery may virtually be established despite England’s efforts to
the contrary. If a protectorate were established over Fiji, or if
it were annexed to Great Britain, there would be no occasion to
keep a squadron afloat, for, though Polynesians might be kid-
napped, there would be no market for them, and the game
becoming unprofitable, would soon come to an end.”
Anarchical The hon. member for Warrington, in the amendment which he
condition of proposes to submit to the House, states that “ so long as there
the islands. ex i s t s a constituted Government in Fiji, exercising actual authority
over the district, and acknowledging its rule, this House is of
opinion that any attempt on the part of Great Britain to assume
the protectorate or sovereignty of those islands by superseding
the de facto Government of Fiji, would be contrary to public
policy, and an unjustifiable interference with the rights of an
independent people.” In reply to the hon. gentleman lam pre-
pared to affirm that the so-called Government of Fiji is not
recognized by the majority of the population, either white or
black ; that it is powerless to maintain its authority in the most
important of the districts over which that authority nominally
extends ; and that scenes of turbulence and bloodshed constantly
occur which it is utterly unable to prevent or repress. If the
hon. gentleman denies these statements, I hold myself prepared
to substantiate them. Not long since a party of Fijians invaded
the plantation of two Englishmen in the Island of Taviuna, the
most civilized portion of Fiji, and murdered in cold blood eleven
unfortunate Polynesian labourers. To the present moment the
Fijian Government have been unable to punish the perpetrators
of this crime, simply because it is powerless outside the Island of
Ovalau. The petty chief who committed this barbarity is under the
protection of the powerful chief Tui Thakau, and when last heard
of was unmolested and employed on the plantation of a settler.
The inability of the Government to enforce its rule or protect the
settlers, has led them frequently to take the law into their own


hands and commit great outrages. Lately on the Ban coast some
planters, in revenging the murder of two planters named Mackin-
tosh and Spiers, indiscriminately slaughtered the inhabitants of
a native village. Their huts were burned down, their pigs killed,
and the crops destroyed. Still more recently, on the Eewa River,
in close proximity to the residence of Thakombau, a native
having been arbitrarily shut up by a planter, some of his com-
panions obtained his release by means of threats, whereupon the
white settlers in the district, all of them British subjects, armed
with Henry rifles, attacked the village of the offenders, and shot
down several. The Fijian Government took no notice, because it
was powerless. A letter from Fiji, dated January 31st last,
states that the local steamer, “ Pride of Yite,” was about to be
chartered by public subscription to make a tour of the islands
where settlers resided, for the purpose of organizing a more
general resistance to the Government, and that the Minister for
Foreign Affairs had written to Sir Hercules Robinson, Governor
of Hew South Wales, advocating annexation in the name of the
settlers and powerful chiefs,owing to the failure of their attempt
to establish a real and effective Government. Again, a numerous
body of planters, at a public meeting held on December 7th last,
in the important island of Yite, even resolved, in view of a
threat held out by the Government, “ that if the self-styled Threats of
authority in Levuka attempt to remove any of the settlers of the civil wal ' -
Ba district against their will, they, their brother settlers, loyally
pledged themselves to resist by force of arms any such outrage.”
The districts of Ba-Haudi and Madronga cordially supported the
resolution, and it was afterwards proposed and determined that
a petition should be passed for annexation to Great Britain. All
over the group requisitions have been signed to their representa-
tives requesting them to resign. Let me read to the House a
letter from the Ba Province and the reply thereto. The inhabi-
tants of that district addressed their representative in the follow-
ing language:—
“ To De Courcy Ireland, Esq.
“ Dear Sir,' —We, the undersigned inhabitants and planters of The Ba
the Ba Province, beg leave to request that you will resign your province
seat in the Legislative Assembly of Fiji, as our representative, Thakom 1 ” 8
for the following reasons : ban’s Go-
“ Self-government having now been tried for more than a year vernment.
in this country, has proved to be such a signal and complete
failure, that we have abandoned all hope of any improvement in
in the state and prospects of the country from that source. If
we look at the condition of Fiji at the present moment, under the
present system, what do we find ? An insolvent Government,
carried on in the most reckless and expensive manner; a deluge
of worthless Treasury notes, and nearly all articles of a foreign
production at more than double their former price. As regards
the future prospects of the country, it is patent to any man of


reflective mind that the present state of affairs cannot long con-
tinue. The Government will shortly be unable to meet a single
tithe of its engagements, we apprehend, and, were that to happen,
nothing would remain for us but repudiation, and with repudia-
tion, adieu to the last rag of our credit.
“ Under these circumstances we beg to request your resigna-
tion, as it is our intention to withdraw ourselves from all con-
nexion with the so-called Fijian Government, and endeavour, by
petition or otherwise, to place ourselves under British protection,
and to get these islands enrolled in the list of British colonies.
“ Thanking you for good exertions, whilst hope in the forma-
tion of stable Government was still entertained, we feel that to
retain a representative in the Fijian Parliament would be to
countenance a system of Government which we believe to be
a delusion and utter ruin to the country.”
Mr, Ireland’s reply is as follows:
“ To the Planters and Residents of the Ba Province: —
“ Gentlemen, —In reply to your requisition (unanimously
signed by the planters and residents of this province), calling
upon me to resign my seat as your representative in the Parlia-
ment of Fiji, I have much pleasure in acceding to your request,
and, at the same time, beg to say that there is no statement
contained in it that I do not endorse.
“ I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,
“ Tour obedient Servant,
“ Be Cotjbct Ireland.
“Tawarau, Ba Coast, ISTov. 15, 1872.
“ True and exact copy of the original is hereby certified by
0. J. Lindberg and Adol. Rydell.”
Yet this is the state of things the hon. member for Warrington
asks the House not to interfere with, but allow to remain. The
hon. member, I am sure, is opposed to the slave trade, and if
I mistake not is an advocate of woman’s rights. Let me read
to the House an extract from a letter addressed by Mr. March,
of Santander, to the Daily News, in which he gives an extract
from the diary of his son, late Consul in Fiji : —-
“ The manner in which attractive girls verging into woman-
hood are bartered and sold to English planters is abominable.
Ho sooner is a labour vessel espied coming into the harbour of
Levuka, than the commission agents ashore (they should be
called slave-dealers) jump into a boat and go on board to learn
the news. A tacit understanding is soon arrived at to the effect
that if the ‘ labour,’ as it is termed, or Polynesians, are passed
by the British Consul, the best-looking girls are to be handed
over to the dealer at higher rates than are given to the ordinary
class of imported labourers. And as it is simply impossible for
me to know what becomes of these women after they are distri-
buted in the islands, every facility presents itself to men of the
type in question to carry on surreptitiously an extensive and


lucrative traffic. These women are usually allotted to planters,
who, in their periodical visits to Levuka, make an arrangement
with an agent for a ‘ left-handed partner,’ as it is called, to be
procured for them. The practice has become so glaringly com-
mon that no one takes any notice of it, any more than of dis-
honesty and drunkenness, both being regarded by the better sort
of settlers as a normal and unavoidable condition of the social
state of Fiji. Even young Fijian girls are bartered away in this
manner, and instances have occurred when young creatures of
thirteen and fourteen have been purchased from a chief for a
small consideration on the Ea coast, brought to Levuka, and
sold to planters for eight times the original cost. All this is
well known to the Fijian Government, but as amongst its
members are some notorious profligates, no good can be expected
from it in trying to put a stop to these enormities, which set the
stamp of infamy upon a settlement composed almost entirely of
Englishmen. The gross immorality also which is so common on
board labour vessels with respect to the girls who are being sold
ere they take their departure for their respective plantations,
is as well known as it is melancholy. Englishmen go on board
with bottles of gin, and then the most revolting orgies take
place, the wretched females being of course made drunk; and so
these saturnalias go on, degrading the sharers to the level of
brutes without meeting censure or punishment. It was on board
one of these floating hells that an Englishman, named Thomas
Muir, was murdered on the 30th of April last. The vessel was
called the ‘ Marion Eennie,’ and the assassin’s name Antonio
Franks, a mulatto. They quarrelled about a native girl while
the worse for drink, and the latter killed his rival. This murder
was committed in the harbour of Levuka; and although I have
often asked the Fijian Government for an account of the property
of the deceased, including nothing less than a British ship of
which it took possession, my requests have not been attended to.
It is no use blinking the question; ugly and disgraceful facts
deride our wordy humanity, and stare us mockingly in the face.
I say, ‘ Down with the labour traffic! Extinguish, trample it
out! Why should the British flag be disgraced to minister to
the cupidity of a few cotton-growing adventurers ? ’ ”
Such is the state of things with the “ independent people,”
and the de facto Government which the hon. member advo-
cates. The truth is, as matters now stand, it is impossible to put
down slavery in these islands. A planter requiring labourers
proceeds to Levuka, obtains a permit from the Minister for
Native Affairs, then goes round some of the islands in quest of
the men he wants. Many chiefs will not dispose of their serfs,
but others, on receiving presents, force the people to work for the
white man. It is no unusual thing for planters to sell boots to
chiefs for Fijian labourers, and equally frequent for these slaves
to run away from their white masters, and be forced again into
servitude.


I am aware that one great objection to the annexation of tke
Fiji Islands kas been tke apprekension tkat it would subject us to
considerable outlay. This is a mistake, as I believe they would
not entail one shilling expense upon tke English taxpayer. A lieu-
tenant-governor, a colonial secretary, a chief magistrate, a judge
of a Vice-Admiralty Court, and a number of other officers, in
carrying out tke Government ought not to cost more than 6000 Z.
a year. Colonel Smyth estimates the expense at 7000 Z. a year ;
but even should it amount to 10,000 Z., still you have a large
margin. You would not require any European military force.
A native police could be organized under the supervision of a few
officers of her Majesty’s army on half-pay, acting as inspectors of
districts, and receiving, say 200 Z. a year, with travelling expenses ;
one or two gunboats at the disposal of the Governor, with an
occasional visit from some of the ships of war on the Australian
station, would suffice to maintain the authority of the law and
repress any attempt at outrage or insubordination.
I hold in my hand a statement, signed by a high authority in
Fiji, giving the duties and harbour dues of the month of July
last year as 6206 dols. 52c.; those for the year are calculated to
produce at least 10,000 Z, The document goes on to say:—
“ In addition to that source of income we have a poll-tax on
all adult natives estimated to yield this year 10,000 Z. Allowing
for all the difficulties with which we have been hampered, I do
not anticipate a less revenue than 30,000 Z. this year from customs,
poll-tax, land assessments, and other sources. Our resources
should, and I believe would in a couple of years, give us a return
of 100,000 1, . . . The exports amounted last year to about
90,000 Z. in value. This year they will be doubled. The area of
land under cultivation has also doubled.”
The imports and exports, as I have already stated, for this year
will amount to upwards of 3G0,000Z. I think therefore there
need be no misgivings on the part of the Government as regards
expense. Indeed, on the contrary, I might argue the question
on the ground of economy. The attempt now made to put
down the slave trade by keeping a large number of men-of-war
in the Pacific will cost far more to the nation and be less pro-
ductive of results than the annexation of the islands. The
Chancellor of the Exchequer informed us the other night that
during the last five years we had spent a quarter of a million
on the East Coast of Africa.
Sir, I must apologize for trespassing so long upon the atten-
tion of the House, and also thank it for the patience with which
it has listened to me. The question, however, is a most impor-
tant one, affecting as it does not only great national interests, but
the cause of liberty, civilization, and Christianity throughout the
islands of the Pacific. Already the accursed labour traffic which
has been going on has arrayed the natives against us, and shut
the door against those Christian and civilizing influences which
were rapidly spreading amongst them. The murder of the


lamented Bishop Patteson, and several other excellent men, may
he traced to this cause. Let Fiji be declared a British colony,
and the immense moral influence of the British flag would at
once ensure order and protection, I should not be surprised
if in a few years a well-organized and healthy system of emi-
gration were established, conferring advantages on both parties.
It is impossible for things to remain as they are. On no ques-
tion affecting the colonies is there so much unanimity of opinion
as on this question of annexation. The Australian colonies are
unanimous in favour of it, and surely some deference ought to
be paid to their often-expressed sentiments on the subject. With
hardly an exception the press of the country advocates the same
policy. The Saturday Review, in one of its leading articles,
remarks: —
“ The conduct of the Government has been unworthy of a The
great nation. The advantage of an advanced post in the Pacific Saturday
is too evident to escape even the official mind, and it is also clear
that unless a strong Government in Fiji co-operates with the ation-
exertions of our cruisers, no effectual control can be kept upon
the enterprise of dealers in the labour market. To put the
matter plainly, we must annex Fiji if we really desire to control
the Polynesian slave-trade. It is better to take these islands
under our Government than to ‘ protect ’ and perpetually inter-
fere with a Government which we profess to consider ‘ indepen-
dent.’ It is not alone philanthropy in a general sense that is
concerned, the character of this country must suffer by the per-
petration of outrages by its own subjects. This country did not
attain greatness, and will not preserve it, by timidity and
parsimony.”
Colonel Smyth, now Major-General, who made the first report, General
has been led by the force of circumstances to alter his views, and Smyth’s
has sent me a letter, in which he says_ change of
“ In case you should bring the question of this country taking °P lnlon '
possession of the Fiji Islands before Parliament this session, I
would wish to say that the condition of affairs at those islands
has undergone such a complete change since the time of my
mission, that I am now of opinion that the best course, both for
the interests of the natives and of England, would be to accept
the offer of sovereignty of the group made by the chiefs.”
I am glad to learn that a communication has been made to
her Majesty’s Government by Mr. Thurston, who is acting as
Foreign Minister for the Fijian Government, in which he states
that “ the King (Thakombau) has officially authorized him to put
the question of cession direct to her Majesty’s Government, and
that if it will entertain the question, the Ministry as his respon-
sible advisers, are prepared to make a proposition.” Sir, I trust
this communication will receive that consideration its importance
demands, and that the House will listen favourably to the almost
unanimous voice of Fiji praying for annexation.
In concluding these remarks I desire to make a personal appeal


3 i
to the right hon. gentleman the First Lord of the Treasury.
Last year he did not exactly oppose the spirit or the objects of
my motion. He rather deprecated premature or precipitate
action, and invited the House to wait until circumstances should
make the duty of the country in this matter perfectly clear.
Well, we have waited a whole year—surely a sufficient time for
deliberation. In the space of that year new outrages have taken
place. Slave ships have scoured the South Seas in search of
their human prey. Slavery practised by Christian Englishmen
has fastened its roots more deeply in the soil of Fiji, and the
best and most orderly of our countrymen, with the full sympathy
of the native chiefs, have again and yet again prayed the mother
country to give them the blessing of a stable government based
upon just laws. The right hon. gentleman has filled the office
of Colonial Minister. He is therefore no stranger to the tradi-
tions of that office, and to the glorious history of our colonial
dominion. He knows, I feel sure, that my motion accords with
the best of those traditions, and with a just view of both the
interests and duty of the nation. Will he then take upon him-
self the responsibility of a further ptolicy of delay—a policy of
ignoble timidity and vacillation' —a policy which will perpetuate
in the year to come, as it has done in the year that is past, those
crimes and outrages which her Majesty in her Speech from the
Throne bas so fervently deplored ? Our representatives in Fiji
and Australia have done their duty, while public opinion both
there and at home has urged the Imperial G-overnment to per-
form its duty. It, therefore, remains for the right hon. gentle-
man to decide whether he will allow the present state of things
to remain, or whether he will realise the legitimate wishes of his
countrymen, and by accepting the annexation of Fiji open out
new fields for British commerce and British enterprise, and thus
add another to those magnificent colonies in the southern hemi-
sphere which have contributed so largely to the wealth, the pros-
perity, and the power of the British Empire. (Loud cheers.)
3 1508 01515635 4


-
'


.
.
