

The RABBIT PLAGUE
IN AUSTRALIA,
AND A
Scheme for its Suppression.
BY
R. J. MURCHISON,
ROBERT BARR, Printer, Fitzroy.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE AND BRISBANE,
1887.


PREFACE.
I THINK it will be admitted by most people that
hitherto no Rabbit Act that has been passed by the
Legislatures of any of the colonies has so far carried out the
expectations of the framers by coping to any appreciable
extent with the Rabbit Plague. Nor has any scheme'yet
propounded been looked upon with much favor by the
public ; indeed, a large portion of them are by no means
anxious to see the rabbits destroyed. It is to the farmers
and the graziers they are the greatest plague, and worst of
all, to the poorest and most struggling of these classes. A
short time since I was out on the very outskirts of the
Wormbete Forrest, and I was told by one man who had
been compelled to burn down his brush fences that if the
Government persisted in enforcing the present Rabbit Act
that he and many others would be obliged to abandon their
selections, and yet these men are the very pioneers of
settlement, who should be assisted in every way instead of
being persecuted. The rabbits still continue to hold their
own, and to multiply and spread wherever the nature of the
country offers favorable facilities for their increase, and as
in Victoria alone there must for many years to come be
thousands of acres of waste Crown lands for them to disport
in, where they can be little disturbed, there will always be
large breeding grounds ready to pour out their surplus stock
on the cleared lands wherever the efforts at destruction are
relaxed. The present Babbit Act in Victoria is costing the
colony over £30,000 a year, and judging by the results as
yet obtained by this expenditure during the last three years,


it way be continued for the next half century, and the
rabbits still be to the fore. The costly schemes of fencing at
present projected in this colony and New South Wales
must of necessity prove failures, when the wonderful
fecundity of the Rodent race is taken into consideration,
unless immediate and persistent efforts are adopted for their
extermination within the enclosed areas. Indeed I have
little hopes of fencing checking their inroads even for the
shortest time. What is necessary is something that will
prove a constant and permanent check upon their increase,
and it was the feeling of this want that first gave me the
idea of the manner in which ferrets and polecats might be
employed to cope with them. What is really required is
some scheme that being once initiated will work its
own course, and whilst a harmless will still be a constant
and inexpensive means of extermination. The scheme I
embody in this pamphlet will, I firmly believe, meet all
these requirements, and ultimately achieve the end in view.
It has already been laid before the Legislatures of the worst
infected colonies, hut has not met with the approval that I
fee' sure will some day be accorded to it. At the earnest
desire of some of my friends, who believe in it as firmly as I
do myself, I have determined to put it before the public in
a pamphlet form, m the first instance to give greater
publicity to it, and secondly to secure to myself any benefits
arising from it, when, as I feel sure will be the case, it is at
last adopted as a’“ Dernier Ressort ”by some of the worst
infected colonies.


THE RABBIT PLAGUE IN AUSTRALIA,
AND A SCHEME FOR ITS SUPPRESSION.
Whilst giving a short history of the rabbit itself, it
is of little use entering into an account of its introduction
and spread in Australia ; this, as well as the extraordinary
plague it has proved, are facts that are known to most
people.
The rabbit, as most people are are aware, belongs to the
Genus “ Lepus Cuniculus,” which are all rspresented by
animals of the Eodent order, which are the most prolific
animals on the earth. The wild, or silver-gray rabbit, is the
only one with which I need deal, as although there are many
varieties of this animal, the former is the only one that
has achieved a distinction as a plague either in ancient or
modern times. The common grey rabbit is distinguished
from the hare externally by its smaller size and shorter ears
and feet. It weighs from to 3, and even up to 51bs.
weight. It breeds from four to eight times a year, its
period of gestation being about thirty days. It begins to
breed at about six months old, and brings forth from 5 to 6
in a litter, and occasionally even 8, and I believe that in the
warmer parts of the colony, and under favorable circum-


stances, they breed in all months of the year. A single
glance at this short account of them will show at once their
wonderful capabilities of increase, and convince the most
incredulous that they must be dealt with not only instantly,
but continuously. The young rabbit, unlike the hare,
which comes into the world fully developed, is born blind
and naked, but rapidly acquires its strength and natural
covering. At from ten days to a fortnight old it begins to
come out of the mouth of the burrow to feed, not for some
time venturing far from the hole. The young does generally
make a fresh burrow in some secluded spot far away from
their accustomed haunts in which to bring forth their
young. In this they make a warm nest of grass and fur
stripped from their own bodies, and on leaving it in search
of food they carefully fill up the mouth of the burrow, cover-
ing it with grass,' so as almost to defy detection. The
foxes are well aware of this habit of the young does, and
many is the nest of young they root out, as these burrows
seldom extend far under ground. That the rabbit has been a
pest to mankind in ancient times, and that the ferret was
then used for its destruction, is fully demonstrated by
Strabo, who gives the following graphic description of their
ravages in Spain, and some of the adjacent Islands of the
Mediterranean :
The Geography of Spain, by Strabo.
Vol. I, Page 217.
Speaking of Spain he says :
Of destructive animals there
are very few, with the exception of certain little hare?,
which burrow in the ground, and are called by some
Leberides. These creatures destroy both seeds and trees by
gnawing their roots. They are met with throughout nearly
the whole of Iberia, infesting likewise the Islands. It is
said that formerly the inhabitants of the Gymnesian
Islands sent a deputation to the Homans soliciting that a
new land nlight be given them, as they were quite driven
out of their country by these animals, being no longer able
to stand against their vast multitudes. But for the ordinary
increase of these little hares many ways of hunting them


have been devised, amongst others by wild cats from Africa,
trained for the purpose. Having muzzled these they turn
them into holes, when they either drag out the animals there
with their claws or compel them to fly to the surface of the
earth, where they are taken by people standing by for that
purpose.
Note.—According to Pliny this deputation was_ sent to
Augustus to demand of him a military force apparently for
the purpose of assisting the inhabitants to destroy the
rabbits. The same writer hag brought together a variety of
instances in which cities have been abandoned or destroyed
through similar causes.
Advocating as I do the use of the Ferret and the
Foumart or Polecat, it may not be amiss to give here a short
account of these animals, and also of the weasel, taken from
“The Natural History of Quadrupeds,” by Thomas
Bewick.
THE FERRET.
The ferret is known to us only in a kind of domesticstate
it was originally a native of Africa, from whence, according
to Strabo, it was introduced into Spaih, and from its known
enmity to the rabbit it was made use of to reduce the
numbers of them with which that country abounded, but as
it cannot bear the severity of a cold climate it cannot
subsist without care and shelter. It breeds twice, and
sometimes three times a year, and usually brings forth from
5 to 6, and somes 7 or 8 in a litter. It is apt to degenerate
in this country, and to lose in some degree its ferocity.
\Varreners are therefore obliged to procure an intercourse
between the female and the Foumart. This animal is
naturally such an enemy to the rabbit that if a dead rabbit
be laid before a young ferret it instantly seizes upon it,
although it has never seen any before. When employed in
the burrows of the Warren it must be muzzled, that it may
not kill the rabbits in the holes.


THE FOUMART OR POLECAT.
The length of the polecat is about 7 inches, exclusive of
the tail, which is about (> inches long. The shape of the
polecat, like others of this genus is long and slender. Its
toes are long, and its claws are sharp. It makes great
havoc amongst rabbits, and its thirst for blood is so great
that it kills many more than it can eat, ; one or two of them
will almost destroy a w hole warren. The female brings
forth in the summer sorG at a time. She suckles them but a
short time, and early accustoms them to blood and slaughter.
The polecat is very fierce and bold, and if attacked by a
dog it will defend itself with great spirit, attack in turn,
and fasten on the nose of its enemy with so keen a bite as
often to oblige him to desist.
THE WEASEL.
The length of this animal does not exceed 7 inches from
thenose to the tail, which is only 2 inches long, and ends in
a point. Its height is not above 2 inches and a half, so
that it is nearly four times as long as it is high. The
animal Is very common, and well known in this country, is
very destructive to young birds, poultry and rabbits, and is
a keen devourer of eggs, which it sucks with great avidity.
The weasel is very useful to the farmer, and is much
encouraged by him. During winter it frequents his barns,
outhouses and graneries, which it effectually clears of rats
and mice. It is indeed a more deadly enemy to these than
the cat. It carries all its food to its hiding place, and will
not touch it until it begins to putrify.
From the foregoing it will be at once seen that the
o O
polecat and ferret are far more deadly enemies to the
rabbit than the weasel. Independently of its smaller size,
and itsprrtiality for birds and small game the habit it has of
allowing all its food to putrify before touching it shows at
once that it is by no mea’s so destructive an animal as the
polecat. The cross between the polecat and (he ferret is
now common enough in this country ; indeed I think they
'predominate over the pure ferret. The polecat is a native


of England, and naturally a very hardy animal, that will
stand any vicissitudes of climate, and will live wherever a
rabbit can live ; when once accustomed to its wild state here,
it would soon increase and multiply. I say accustomed to
its wild state advisedly, for it must be borne in mind that any
animal that has been kept in a domestic state requires a
certain time to recover its natural instinct for self-preserva-
tion, and to become used to shift entirely for itself. Even the
rabbit did not increase very rapidly, .until it had become
once thoroughly acclimatised. But I have little doubt that
by judicious and careful attention for a tune both ferrets
and polecats could soon be si completely habituated to their
wild life that after the second or third generation they would
increase almost as rapidly as the rabbits in localities where
the latter were plentiful. It is urged by many people that
both the ferret and polecat are so subject to foot-rot that
they would not live if turned at large. That they are so
liable to this disease, also to a kind of distemper, as well
as other complaints in their domestic state I will not deny,
but to anyone who has been accustomed to see the state of
filth and dirt in wh'ch the animals are invariably kept by
rabbiters, the surprise is not that they are liable to disease,
but that they should be able to exist at all.. They are
naturally very objectionable an'mals to have to attend to,
•and are therefore treated with scant consideration in the
way of housing and cleanliness.
There are many old squatters in this colony who can
remember well when it was no unusual s : ght to see half a
flock of sheep feeding on the’r kr.ees from the ettec's of
ioot-rot when sheep used ti be shepherded and folded at
night, a d'sease that has a'most dsappeare 1 from these
•c donies since the sheep have been turned at large, as well as
catarrh and some other complaints they were I'aHe to in
those old days of shepherds and sheepfolds. Others are
again averse to the use of the ferret and polecat in the manner
proposed by me, from the dread that they might become a
pest themselves when the rabbits became scarce. This I
have no hesitation in saying, they can never be. They may
kill a few poultry kept in an unprotected state, but not to
the same extent they are k lied at present by the foxes and


these animals which bid fair soon to become a most serious
pest (more particularly as along the south coast they are
establishing a crossbreed between themselves and the dingo).
They will help to keep thesein check, as they will kill numbers
of the young foxcubs. Lambs they will not touch ; these seem
to be an animal entirely outside of their region of slaughter.
Snakes I have seen them turn out of the burrows, and I
have been informed on the very best authority that they
have been seen to kill them ; under any circumstances they
are an animal that could be easily poisoned off w hen the
use for them no longer existed. The opinion that many
people entertain that they will eat nothing that they do
not kill is altogether erroneous as they will refuse no putrid
bait when the least pressed by hunger. Although the
rabbits may appear now to be much scarcer in many places,
and probably they are, it requires only a ride round amongst
the farmers particularly where there are any scrublands in
the vicinity, and to notice the disheartening way in which
the crops are eaten down and in many instances entirely
destroyed, to convince anyone that if not as numerous as
as ever, they are still a serious and most expensive pest to
the colony, and I feel sure that if the present intelligent staff
the Government are employing under the present useless
Act were made to devote their misspent, and what must be to
them unsatisfactory, labours to the development of this
scheme, far more encouraging results would soon be apparent.
There are no doubt a great many people in these colonies
who, though they are aware that the rabbits have been a
great plague’ and are still a great evil, have little or no con-
conception of the awful magnitude of the devastation they
committed before any- attempts were made to cope with
them. Indeed this was not attempted until they had already
compass, d the ruin cf many and bid fair to take possession
of the colony altogether and stamp out its human inhabi-
tants. I purpose giving a few statistics gathered from
rel able sources, which will tend :n some measure to show
those who have had no actual experience with the rabbits
themselvts, what their less fortunate brethren had to go
through and indeed, in many instances, are going through
now. I will I egin by giving a few facts and figures of my


own from which it will be seen that I have had, unfortu-
nately for myself, a terrible experience of the plague. It
was about the 10th of January, 1876, that I came down to
take possession of a property purchased by me in the Coast
Riding of the Shire of Barrabool. I had previously seen or
heard but little of the rabbit plague, having been for some
years in the eastern parts of Riverina. At this time the
rabbits were just beginning to become numerous on the
property, but had not then to any serious extent interfered
with the feed which was looking splendid, especially one pad-
dock of about three hundred acres all laid down in English rye
grass. I was able at this time to, graze without difficulty
from 4,500 ko 5,000 sheep on the estate of 7,00.0 acres, but
two years afterwards there was scarcely a blade of grass left
upon the property ; the artificial grass was so entirely killed
out and the whole estate was reduced to such a desert that
it was a struggle for existence between the rabbits and the
miserable remnant of 1,500 sheep left alive ; indeed the
rabbits were then barking all the scrub on the property and
also on the Crown Lands attached to obtain a subsistence.
Of course this could not last long and the weakest, viz , the
poor sheep, had to go to the wall. I am writing now of
what took place some seven years ago, and though the
rabbits by the persistent efforts to destroy them have been
greatly decreased, the legacy they have left behind them is
a barren desert all along the coast, and where there was
once grass there is nothing now but the coarsest kind of
herbage quite unfit for stock to eat, and could the rabbits be
all cleared out of the Coast Riding of the Sh : re of Barrabool
to-m. rrow, the next ten years would still bear witness to
their ravages in a weakened and deteriorated sward of grass.
For nearly six months I paid weekly for over 5,000 rabbits
caught within a radius of half-a-mile of the homestead, and
the same year for over 150,000 trapped and shot upon the
entire property, without making the smallest appreciable
difference in their numbers. The poisoning after this for a-
while killed them off rapidly, but when once their number
was sufficiently diminished to allow of a spring in the grass
they would not touch the poisoned grain.
Dr. Cree in writing to the Sydney Morning Herald esti


mated the loss caused by rabbits in New Zealand, Tasraama
and Austral'a in the year 1884 at £2,800,000. At the
Intercolonial Stock Conference lately held in - Sydney, Mr.
Lance assessed the cost of the rabbit plague to New Zealand
at half-a-million a-year while Mr. McKenzie added that
where the rabbits were numerous the carrying capacity of
the land was reduced by one-third, the weight of the fleece
was decreased by lib. to lambing decreased 30 or 40
percent, and the death rate was increased from 3 and 6 per
cent, up to 10 and 13 per cent. Mr. Tabbart said that in
Tasmania for the last six years the number of had
decreased 250,000 and the lambing percentage had fallen
from 75, 79, and 80 per cent, to 50 and 60 per cent. Mr.
Bigot estimated that in South Australia the rabbits had
invaded 40,000 square miles. The Rabbit Act has now
been in force for nearly three years ia Victoria and brush
fences-have been burnt, burrows dug out, poisoned grain
scattered wholesale on the crown lands where it is rotting
still. Hardworking, struggling, p'oneer settlers have been
heavily fined, and have the rabbits been exterminated yet?
I unhesitatingly say no ! an 1 that such a happy consummation
is as far off apparently as ever, and though not t ! e serious
plague they were, their numbers are still sufficient to cause
serious loss. In this part of the co’onv —the south coast—
the rabbits have fairly held their own all through the recent
war waged aga'nst them, and at the present time are
increasing at a most alarming rate. I know of ore man in
this district who is at present offering two shillings per
dozen to have them destroyed on his property, and there are
many others who are suffering from them quite as badly as
him. There are hundreds of young labbits to be seen
everywhere in this part of the colony now, showing beyond
& doubt that the plague is only scotched not killed, and
would be as bad as ever in a sd.ort time were the efforts at
destruction relaxed ever so little, and how long is this costly
Act to remain in force 1 Is the colony to be taxed for
years to corne at the rate of some £30,000 a-year merely to
have the rabbits kept partially down, when with half the
yearly erst expended for a few years only they might be put
down for ever? The Government were told in a recent


report (I quote from the Argus) that the rabbits are decreasing
in all parts of the olony and apparently from some disease.
I do not hesitate to say that it is not true of firs part of
the colony at least. Here they are again increasing rapidly
and finer and healthier rabbits are not to be seen.
Before closing the subject I must again revert to the
extraordinary craze that has taken possession of some people
with regard to fencing off' the rabbits, A fence to be some
hundreds of miles in length has already been commenced in
New South Wales with the intention of fencing off all the
infested parts of the colony from the non-infested. How
any man who knows anything of the rabbits can lend him-
self for a moment to such an insane and preposterous waste of
the public money is beyond my comprehension. The best I
can hope for it is that the scheme has been initiated by men
who have had no experience of the rabbit plague. Sydney
Smith tells us that “ during an exceptionally high tide in the
Atlantic that energetic old lady Mrs. Partington was found
mop in hand vainly endeavouring to repel the advancing
waves as they rolled in at her cottage door. The Atlantic
was in flood, Mrs. Partington was roused, but I need
scarcely add,” says Sydney Smith, “Mrs. Partington was
beaten.” And anyone who has seen the rabbit plague at its
worst may well look on in wonder and amazement, and com-
pare the gigantic efforts of these would be rabbit stoppers with
those of the venerable old lady I have mentioned, something
of a like kind in the way of fencing is about being commenced
by the Victorian Government and I venture to say that in a
few years to come these fences will be lying rotting on the
ground as mementos of the folly of those who erected them.
If the rabbits could cross the Murray in sufficient numbers
to defy their natural enemies how can a fence be expected
to restrain them. They will find their way under it, over
it, and through it, for in spite of all efforts it will be
constantly broken down, and they will I e found on the
other side in thousands though no one will know how
they came there. A gentleman speaking at Bourke
admits that one pair of rabbits will in two and a half
years will amount to 2 000,000 and he is under the
mark. Granted this, and the fact that few will deny


that in the course of the year a few dozen pair of rabbits
will find their way in some manner through the hundreds of
miles of fencing, and say that a dozen pair only escape, add
up their twelve months’ progeny and you have the rabbit
plague well established on both sides of the fence at once.
One advantage possessed by my scheme is that it might
he tried on a small scale first by fencing off say about five or
ten thousand acres of Crown Lands. This would not cost
much to enclose with netting, and if the ferrets or polecats,
or better both were judiciously let at large in this enclosure,
it would prove the worth of my scheme in a very short time,
which if successful here would be the same on a larger scale.
And I do not hesitate to assert that were the Government
of this colony to initiate this scheme under the present
efficient staff administering the present Rabbit Act, Victoria
would in a few years be comparatively free from the pest.


MR. MURCHINSON’s SCHEME FOR THE SUP-
PRESSION OF THE RABBIT PLAGUE.
Submitted to the Eabhit Conference, Sydney, 1885.
Ist. THE FEATURES IN WHICH THE PAST AND PRESENT
ACTS ARE DEFICIENT.
In the first place it has been quite impossible under the
former Act, and will be equally so under the present, to
secure unanimity of action. If this could be done there are
thousands of acres of scrub land, particularly on Crown
Lands, where it is utterably impossible to get at the rabbits,
either by trapping or poison ; poison will only be taken by
the rabbits where there is no grass for them to eat. As
soon as their numbers are so decreased by poisoning that
the grass grows' the poison is neglected by them ; and
further, no matter how much their numbers may be de-
creased under the present Act the moment action is relaxed
in any district their numbers rapidly increase again.
2nd. THE MEANS PROPOSED TO BE EMPLOYED UNDER THE
PRESENT SCHEME.
To attack them by means of their natural enemies—the
ferret and the pole-cat.
3rd.—lN WHAT WAY TO BE EMPLOYED.
That the Government should take the matter entirely in
their own hands ; should in the first place buy up at a
fixed price all the ferrets in the Colony, also importing as
many as can be procured from England and the Continent.
That depdts should be formed (say) one at least in each
shire, and put under the charge of competent persons ; that
in these depots ferrets should be bred in large numbers, as
well as the imported ferrets received.
4th. PROTECTION FOR THE FERRETS.
That previous to anything else being done an Act should
be passed by the Legislature prohibiting the keeping of any
ferrets by others than those duly authorised by the Govern-
ment, and that a heavy penalty should be inflicted for the
destruction of a ferret or any rabbit-destroying animal.


stll. THE GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF THE SCHEME.
The breeding establishments being once formed, that the
ferrets should be let out (always keeping sufficient numbers
in the depot to ensure a large supply whenever required)
under the supervision of men who have a thorough know-
ledge of the ferret and its habits, choosing those places
always where the rabbits are most numerous ; that there
should be a manager for each shire or depot, independent of
the person in charge of the breeding—under whose super-
vision the latter should be—all to be under one general
manager, responsible to the Government alone.
oth. REMARKS ON THE BREEDING AND THE MANAGEMENT
OF THE FERRET.
The ferret under proper supervision is a very prolific
animal, averaging six or seven at a litter, and having two
litters in the year, the young of the first litter breeding the
same year. Their natural food is the rabbit, so that under
the charge of competent men there would be no difficulty in
supplying the depots with food for any number of ferrets.
Of course great judgment and care would have to be excer-
cised in keeping the bucks and females apart; also the
young ferrets up to a certain age.
7th. GENERAL REMARKS.
It is an opinion held by many that the English ferret
will not live In a wild state, an idea fostered and kept alive
to a great extent in these Colonies by old rabbit-trappers,
who fear always that they should gain a footing in the
Colony, knowing that if they once did their avocation would
be gone. The ferret will live and thrive in this country in
a wild state at all times of the year, and the ferret when
crossed v ith the pole-cat produces a hardier and more active
and much more bloodthirsty animal. I have frequently
found ferrets that I had lost in all seasons of the year,
sometimes six months and even two years afterwards, fat
and sleek. Care and judgment would have to be exercised
in patting out the ferrets ; the does should be set at liberty
(just before bringing forth their litters) in warm, com-
fortable localities, and the bucks should not for some
time be let loose in the same places. The ferret and pole


cat are tl.e natural enemies of the rabbit, and kill for sport
as well as for food. So fierce and determined do some of
them become that I have known them turn foxes out of
the warren or large wombat holes, and they will greedily
destroy the young fox cubs.
When ferrets are turned into a rabbit warren in the
breeding season the destruction they make among the young
rabbits is prodigious, never willingly leaving one alive in the
holes ; indeed it is in the havoc they would make amongst
the young ones that they would exercise the most potent
influence in keeping down the plague, and it must always be
remembered that when they once gain a f oling, which
under tins plan they would soon do, they are a power
always at work, and without further cost or trouble,
whereas any other means require to be constantly kept up
without a moment’s relaxation at great trouble and expense.
There are parts of this Colony (Victoria) from which the
rabbits will be far more difficult to exterminate than in the
mallee. For instance, parts of the Cape Otway Ranges,
where there are thousands of acres of scrub land, through
which a horseman cannot ride, and where even on foot
there is the greatest difficulty in forcing a passage. Yet
this country is teeming alive with rabbits, and could they
be exterminated elsewhere, would form a breeding-ground
sufficient to stock the whole of Victoria in a twelve-month.
Again the whole coast line of the southern ocean, from
Queenscliff to the South Australian Border is alive with
rabbits, who find splendid burrowing ground in the cliffs
and sand hummocks, and a dense undergrowth of scrub to
protect them. Through all this country the ferrets would
slowly and surely pursue , them, killing the young rabbits
and preventing the fear of them spreading to more favoured
places. I know of no enemy the ferret has in the colony,
unless it might be the eagle-hawk, and I scarcely think they
would kill many. There would have been far less rabbits
in these colonies had the enemies they already have here
been properly protected, viz., the native cat, tiger cat, and
domestic eat, all of which, the latter particularly, are
destroyed and killed off wholesale by the trappers, and also
by poisoning. I have myself found seven or eight native


cats dead round a bait put out for eagle-hawks. I have
little hesitation in saying that if this scheme were adopted
and properly supervised that in five years the rabbits would
be so reduced as never to be a plague again.
PROBABLE COST TO THE COUNTRY.
£
Ist year—Establishment of 25 depots ... ... 2,500
Salaries of breeders and managers of depdts, at
£BO per annum ... ... ... ... ... 2,000
Cost of ferrets in Colony (say) 1,000 at Bs. each ... 400
Cost and importation of 3.000 ferrets ... ... 1,500
Salaries of managers for each depot district, at
£2OO per annum ... ... ... ... ... 5,000
Salary of general manager 1,000
Incidental expenses ... .... ... ... ... 1,500
Total cost for Ist year .. £13,900
For each succeeding year, £9,500.
This would admit the Ist year of 8,000 ferrets being
turned loose; 5,000 the second year; and 10,0Q0eaohin
the 3rd, 4th, and sth years.
Probable number of ferrets at large at the end of sth
year, 500,000. These would kill annually (allowing one
rabbit a day to each ferret) 182,500,000 rabbits.
R. MURCHISON,
Jan Juc, near Geelong.
Mr, Strachan, for report. —T. H. Myeino, 8.C., 7/4/85.
This scheme might work the result the projector calculates
if the ferrets could be as easily propogated as represented.
My experience has been that ferrets will not live in this
climate without great care, numbers having succumbed
during the summer, and especially when hot winds were
blowing. The scheme however, has, I think, reason in it,
and if ferrets could at once be bred in such numbers as
would be required might produce the estimated result.
—J.5..8.C., 14 | 5 | 85
