

THE
PARLIAMENT
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA




THE PARLIAMENT
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(An outline of its history, its proceedings
and its buildings)
Prepared by
G. D. COMBE, M.C.,
(Clerk of the House of Assembly)
1960
A




Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II
opening a session of the
South Australian Parliament in
Legislative Council Chamber, 1954




THE PARLIAMENT
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Constitutional History
South Australian Colonization Act, 1834: This Imperial Act
gave statutory authority “to erect South Australia into a British
province”. It empowered a Council of Government (when established
in South Australia) to make laws, constitute courts, and impose taxes
necessary for the peace, order and good government of the province.
A Board of Commissioners was set up to sell lands in the new
province, half the proceeds of which were to be used to convey
emigrants to South Australia. The transportation of convicts was
prohibited. Under the Act, a Constitution of local government was
to be granted when the population reached 50,000.
Council of Government, 1836-1843: From the arrival of the
first Governor, Captain John Hindmarsh, K.H., R.N., on 28th
December, 1836, until 4th December, 1839, there existed in South
Australia a Council of Government of five Members—the Governor,
the Judge, the Colonial Secretary, the Advocate-General, and the
Resident Commissioner. This Council of Government exercised
both legislative and executive powers. However, the sale of land in
the new province and the application of the proceeds therefrom
were the responsibility of a Board of Commissioners, and the
division of control between the Governor and the Resident
Commissioner in South Australia brought its problems and conflicts,
in 1838 the separate authorities of the Governor and the Resident
Commissioner were united in one person, and from that year until
1843, the Council of Government comprised the Governor and
Resident Commissioner, the Colonial Secretary, the Advocate-
General, the Surveyor-General and the Assistant Commissioner of
Lands. All these Members were appointed by the Crown.
Legislative Council, 1843-1856: By Imperial legislation of 1842,
the authority of the Board of Commissioners was terminated, and
by the vesting of all power in the Colonial Office, South Australia
was placed on the same footing as other Crown colonies. A
Legislative Council was constituted to consist of the Governor,
with three official Members —the Colonial Secretary, the Advocate-
General and the Registrar-General—and four non-official Members,
*B


all nominated by the Crown. In 1843, for the first time in South
Australia, the voices of Members other than paid servants of the
Crown were heard in the Council’s deliberations and the public
were admitted to its proceedings. South Australia was governed
by this type of Legislative Council from 1843 to 1851.
Under the authority of the Imperial enabling Act for the “Better
Government of Her Majesty’s Australian Colonies”, the Legislative
Council passed Ordinance No. 1 of 1851, to constitute a new
Council. This new form of Legislative Council consisted of 24
Members—four official and four non-official Members nominated
by the Crown, and 16 Members returned by the electors. The
Governor no longer presided over the deliberations of the Legislative
Council, and the Members now elected their own Speaker. The
constitution of the new Council was in some respects an experiment
and power to amend it was given to the Council, provided that any
Bills for such purpose were reserved for the signification of Her
Majesty’s pleasure. This hybrid Council of appointed and elected
Members (with a preponderance of the 4atter) continued to be
the Legislature until the inauguration of responsible Government
in 1857.
Inauguration of Responsible Government: In the Constitution
and Electoral Law Bills passed by the Legislative Council in the
session of 1855-56, provision was made for the following new
features in the Constitution of South Australia: —
A bicameral Parliament consisting of a Legislative Council
of 18 Members and a House of Assembly of 36 Members;
the Legislative Council to be elected by the entire colony voting
as one district; the House of Assembly to consist of 17 districts,
varying in representation from one to six Members.
The inauguration of a system of responsible Government.
The franchise for the Legislative Council to be based on a
property qualification—freehold of the value of £5O, leasehold
of the annual value of £25 having three years to run or a
right of pre-emption, or occupation of a house of the annual
value of £25.
All adult males to be entitled to vote at House of Assembly
elections.
Voting at Parliamentary elections to be by secret ballot.
The new Constitution Bill was laid upon the table of both Houses
of the Imperial Parliament on 19th May, 1856, and in accordance
with the enabling statute remained there for 30 days. It was
assented to by Queen Victoria at Buckingham Palace on 19th May,
1856, and on 24th October, 1856, was proclaimed in South
Australia by the Governor, Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell. On
the same day the Governor announced the personnel of the
first Government under the new Constitution, led by the
Hon. B. T. Finniss. The first bicameral Parliament of South
Australia met on Wednesday, 22nd April, 1857.


PRINCIPAL CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGES SINCE 1857
“Women’s Franchise” Act, 1895: The Constitution Act was
amended in 1895 to confer on women the right to vote for, or to
be elected as, members of either House of Parliament, subject to
the same qualifications and in the same manner as men. This Act
brought to fruition the most significant change in the franchise in
the history of the Parliament of South Australia. The Legislature
of South Australia was the first in Australia to extend Parliamentary
franchise to women.
Federation, 1901: Under the spur of external danger and some
domestic inconveniences—chief being internal tariff walls—the six
Australian colonies, after long negotiations, agreed to federate.
A British Act of Parliament—the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act—was passed in 1900 and became operative on
Ist January, 1901. The terms of the federal compact were that
the colonies should be States in the Federation and retain their
existing Constitutions and apparatus of Government; that a new
central authority should be created with Australia-wide authority,
similarly equipped with Parliament, executive, judiciary and the
subordinate machinery of Government; that the States should retain
a general unspecified legislative power, qualified only by the grant
to the new federal authority of a specific list of powers; and that
the courts should police the whole system.
The Changing Federal Constitution: The people of Australia have
shown a marked aversion to changing the Federal Constitution. Of
24 referenda embracing amendment proposals submitted to them
in the first 56 years of Federation, only four were carried; of
these, the three most important ones were related to the assumption
of State debts by the Federal Government, financial agreements
between the seven Governments and extension of Federal social
services.
The High Court was designed to stand above both State and
Federal authorities and to interpret the Constitution. Perforce, the
High Court, in interpreting the Constitution has become a kind of
legislator. The general trend of High Court interpretation has been
to increase the power of the Federal Government.
Two most significant changes in Commonwealth-State relationships
were the Financial Agreement of 1927 and the inauguration of
uniform taxation in 1942. The Financial Agreement, inter alia,
authorized the setting up of the Loan Council to co-ordinate public
borrowings of the Commonwealth and the States; and empowered
the Commonwealth to take over existing State debts, provision
being made to extinguish such debts by joint Commonwealth-State
contributions to a sinking fund.
In 1942 the Commonwealth Parliament passed legislation which
imposed a high rate of Federal income tax, gave that tax priority


Colonnade—southern facade


in collection over State income taxes, and made provision for some
reimbursement to the States of amounts they would otherwise have
collected in income tax —on condition that they imposed no State
income tax. The legislation was challenged by the States of Victoria,
Queensland, South Australia, and Western Australia in the High
Court; however, a majority decision of the High Court ruled the
Commonwealth legislation to be valid. Although enacted for the
period of the war and one year thereafter, uniform taxation is still
in operation.
Elements of the Present Constitution
of the Parliament of South Australia
General: The Parliament of South Australia has the residuary
powers of legislation not handed over to the Commonwealth
Parliament.
The Parliament of South Australia consists of two Houses—
the Legislative Council and the House of Assembly. Except as to
“Money Bills” the Legislative Council has equal power with the
House of Assembly in respect of all Bills.
The Governor summons and prorogues Parliament; he may
dissolve the House of Assembly whenever he deems it expedient,
but he may dissolve the Legislative Council only in pursuance of
the deadlock provisions in the Constitution Act.
The Governor issues the writs for general elections, but the
Presiding Officer (President or Speaker) of the House affected issues
a writ for a by-election to fill a casual vacancy.
The normal life of a Parliament is three years, and there must
be a session of Parliament once at least in every year.
No Member of Parliament is permitted to sit or vote therein
unless he has taken the oath of allegiance or made an affirmation
in lieu thereof.
Both Houses are empowered to make standing orders to regulate
their own proceedings.
The second and third readings of any Bill to alter the Constitution
of the Legislative Council or House of Assembly must be passed
with the concurrence of absolute majorities (i.e., more than half
the total number) in each House. In practice, this qualification
has the effect of making the Constitution comparatively rigid.
The Legislative Council: The Legislative Council consists of
20 Members and is presided over by the President. No person
can be a member of the Legislative Council unless he is at least


30 years of age, is a British subject, and has resided in the State
for at least three years. The State is divided into five Legislative
Council districts, each represented by four members. The minimum
term of Members is six years —half of the members retiring usually
every three years. The following persons are entitled to vote at
the election of Members of the Legislative Council: —
An owner of freehold estate of clear value of £SO; a lease-
holder of leasehold estate of clear annual value of £2O under
a lease granted for three years (or which contains a right of
purchase); a registered proprietor of Crown Lease on which
there are improvements of his to the value of at least £SO;
an inhabitant-occupier of a dwellinghouse; and persons with
certain war service qualifications. Persons entitled to vote
at Legislative Council elections, other than those entitled by
war service, must be at least 21 years of age.
Voting at Legislative Council elections is not compulsory.
The House of Assembly: The House of Assembly consists of
39 Members, each member representing a separate district. The
Assembly is presided over by the Speaker. Any person qualified
to vote at a House of Assembly election is entitled to nominate to
contest an election for the House of Assembly. To be a qualified
House of Assembly elector, a person must be 21 years of age
and a British subject, and have the continuous residential
qualifications of six months in the Commonwealth and three
months in South Australia. Age requirements are waived for
persons with certain war service qualifications. Voting at House
of Assembly elections is compulsory. The usual term of a Member
is three years.
The Government of South Australia: This follows the British
system of responsible Cabinet Government. As applied to South
Australia, this system requires that the Governor should act on
the advice of a Cabinet of Ministers, headed by the Premier; that
the Ministers should individually be in charge of the various
executive departments of State, and that the Ministers should be
Members of Parliament having the support of the majority Party
(or coalition) in the lower House. These provisions are not set
out in a statute, but are governed by convention. The functions
of Cabinet include usually the final determination of the policy to
be submitted to Parliament; and the control of the public service
in accordance with the policy prescribed by Parliament. It is
essential to the Cabinet system that responsibility should be collective.
Matters are discussed in Cabinet and a decision taken. It then
becomes binding on every member of the Cabinet. He must vote
for the Government’s view if a vote is taken in Parliament. He
must, if called upon, defend the decision. He must not excuse
himself on the ground that he was outnumbered in Cabinet. If
he does not agree to take responsibility, he must resign. Again,
this is an unwritten convention of the Constitution. The South


The Centre Hall


Australian Cabinet consists of eight Ministers, five of whom are
Members of the House of Assembly and three are Members of
the Legislative Council. The allocation of portfolios may be varied
as required by changes in the personnel of the Ministry or otherwise.
No person can hold office as a Minister of the Crown for more
than three months unless he is a Member of Parliament. Every
Minister, ex officio, is a member of the Executive Council. The
Executive Council, presided over by the Governor, is a purely
formal constitutional agency, giving legal force to certain Cabinet
decisions, appointments, and similar matters.
The Opposition: The Opposition is the largest minority group
of members in the House of Assembly who are not supporters of
the Government. The prevalence of the two-party system in South
Australian politics usually obviates any uncertainty as to which
group is entitled to be called the Official Opposition. The head
of this group is the Leader of Her Majesty’s Opposition, a title
which in itself recognizes the importance of* the Opposition in the
system of Parliamentary government. He is aided in the House
of Assembly by two other office holders—the Deputy Leader of the
Opposition and the Opposition Whip.
The duty of an Opposition, as often stated, is to oppose, but not
merely in the sense of bringing the Government to a standstill
or trying to turn it out; it is the group which can best put the
opposite point of view, and its function is to test, to probe, and to
criticize the policy of the Government. It has a duty to expose
as well as to oppose.
Opposition in the form of criticism of the Government has a
threefold value. Firstly, it is a perpetual check upon injustice,
and an incentive to efficiency. In the second place, criticism of
the Government by the Opposition furnishes the voters with the
material on which it can judge the worth of the varying policies.
Thirdly, in its criticism of the Government the Opposition is on
trial as an alternative Government and cannot afford to be simply
carping or destructive. A responsible Opposition is as necessary
to the effective working of Parliament as a responsible Government.
Officers of Parliament
Officers of Parliament fall into two categories—first, officers who
are Members of the House they serve; and second, permanent
officers who are not Members of Parliament. The first group
consists of the President of the Legislative Council, the Speaker of
the House of Assembly and the Chairman of Committees; and the
second group comprises the Clerk of each House and his staff.


Presiding Officers: The President of the Legislative Council
and the Speaker of the House of Assembly are elected by secret
ballot by Members of their respective Houses.
Each of these Presiding Officers is the representative of his House
in its powers, proceedings, and dignity.
His functions fall into two main categories. On the one hand
he is the representative and mouthpiece of the House in its
relations with the Crown, the other House, and other authorities
and persons outside of Parliament. On the other hand he presides
over the debates of the House and enforces the observance of all
rules for preserving order in its proceedings. The chief
characteristics attaching to the office of President and Speaker are
authority and impartiality.
On ceremonial occasions, both the President and Speaker wear
Court dress, with full-bottomed wig and black silk or satin damask
gown, with lace at the throat and wrists. On ordinary sitting days,
the President wears the gown and lace over a Parliamentary uniform,
and the Speaker wears both wig and gown and lace. The President
performs the dual duties of President and Chairman of Committees
in the Legislative Council.
Like the Speaker, the Chairman of Committees and Deputy
Speaker in the House of Assembly is elected by the members of
that House, but by resolution and not by ballot. The Chairman
of Committees presides when the House forms itself into a
Committee of the whole, a Committee with most important legislative
and financial functions to perform. The Committee considers in
detail every Bill after it has passed its second reading, and also
the annual loan and revenue expenditure estimates. The Chairman
of Committees wears no special dress, a fact which serves to
emphasize the comparative informality of the deliberations of the
Committee, wherein members are at liberty to speak more than
once to any particular question.
Permanent Officers of the House: The four principal permanent
officers of Parliament are the Clerk of the Legislative Council and
the Clerk of the House of Assembly (one of whom holds
the additional appointment of Clerk of the Parliaments), the
Clerk-Assistant of the Legislative Council and Gentleman Usher of
the Black Rod, and the Clerk-Assistant of the House of Assembly
and Sergeant-at-Arms. These officers are sometimes known as the
Table Officers, this designation having reference to the fact that
they sit at the Table immediately in front of and below the Presiding
Officer’s Chair in their respective Chambers.
On ceremonial occasions, the Clerks in both Houses, and Black
Rod, wear wig and gown and the Sergeant-at-Arms wears Court
dress without wig and gown. On ordinary sitting days in the
Legislative Council the Table Officers wear the gown but dispense
with the wig; and in the House of Assembly the Clerk and
Clerk-Assistant wear wig and gown over Parliamentary uniform.


The Legislative
Council Chamber


The Clerk and his staff in each House provide the necessary
permanent element in a Parliament whose membership is subject
to change. The Clerk must be an authority on Parliamentary
procedure as it is one of his main functions to advise the
President or Speaker, Ministers and Members on such matters.
He is responsible for the compilation of the Journals of the House
and is the custodian of all records, and of all documents laid
before Parliament. In these duties he is assisted by the
Clerk-Assistant.
Black Rod is an ancient office with great traditions associated
primarily with the Sovereign and subsequently with the Imperial
Parliament. Black Rod is a central figure in the ceremonial at the
Opening of Parliament each session; in South Australia where his
duties are combined with those at the table, he wears evening dress,
wig and gown and carries the traditional black rod surmounted
with the Crown Royal Arms and State Emblem. By direction of
the President, Black Rod maintains order and decorum within
the Chamber and its precincts. The rod or staff is the symbol of
his authority.
In the House of Assembly, the Sergeant-at-Arms is clothed with
the necessary authority to preserve order in its precincts. In
extreme cases the Sergeant-at-Arms’ duty is, in obedience to the
House, to arrest a Member, or by the direction of the Speaker,
to arrest disorderly strangers; and to keep such in custody if
commitment be ordered.
When the Speaker enters and leaves the Chamber before and
after a sitting, he is preceded by the Sergeant-at-Arms, carrying
the Mace on his shoulder. The same ceremony is observed when
the Speaker, with the House, leaves the Chamber to proceed
elsewhere, for example, to the Legislative Council, to participate in
the Opening of Parliament.
The Mace: In Parliament, the Mace is the symbol of the
Speaker’s authority. Until a Speaker has been elected the Mace
is kept under the Table of the House, and is placed on the Table
as soon as the election is complete to demonstrate that the House
is now properly constituted for its proceedings.
The Mace in use in the House of Assembly was the gift of
the Government in 1957 to commemorate the centenary of
responsible Government in South Australia. It is fashioned in
sterling silver gilt in the style of English maces made over
hundreds of years, including that in use in the House of Commons.
It has an overall length of 4ft. and weighs 141 b.
In the beautiful ornamentation on the Mace is to be found a
harmonious blend of traditional British symbols and devices of a
South Australian character. The head of the Mace bears a Royal
Crown in which superb specimens of South Australian opal are
used with fine effect. Beneath the Crown, the head of the Mace
is divided into four panels by applied straps of wheat ornament.


On opposite panels, chased in relief are the Crown and Royal
Cipher E II R of our present Sovereign, Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II and, on the reverse, appears the Royal Cipher VR
of Queen Victoria, the reigning., Sovereign when responsible
Government was inaugurated in South Australia in 1857. This
use of the Royal monograms was graciously authorized by Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II and symbolizes the beginning and end
of the first century of responsible Government in this State. On
the remaining two panels of the head, the Coat of Arms of the
State of South Australia is chased in relief. The shaft is flat
chased with an incised wheat ornament, and the knops which divide
the shaft into sections are beautified with traditional Tudor roses
and flat chased scroll work. On the heel of the Mace is reproduced
a motif of vine and wattle which forms an integral part of the
State’s Coat of Arms. The Mace is an outstanding example of the
art of true craftsmen.
The Proceedings of Parliament
Sources: The sources of authority for the procedure of the
Parliament of South Australia are to be found in certain statutes
the chief of which is the State Constitution Act, in the Code of
Standing Orders of each House and the Joint Standing Ordefs of
both Houses, and in the rules of practice which have been built
up over a number of years to meet local requirements. In all
cases not so provided for, resort is had to the rules, forms and
practice of the House of Commons at Westminster.
Meetings and Sittings of the House: A session of Parliament is
held annually and the present arrangement is that the Houses
meet from March to May, and then resume in August and continue
in session until November or December. The holding of a session
of Parliament once a year, as well as being a statutory requirement,
is a practical necessity, as the bulk of the large sums of money
necessary to carry on Government services in a modern society
are subject to annual Parliamentary approval.
The sitting days of each House are Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday. The House of Assembly usually sits from 2 p.m. to
6 p.m. and from 7.30 p.m. until the adjournment (at no fixed time)
on Tuesdays and Wednesday and from 2 p.m. to the adjournment
on Thursday afternoons. The Legislative Council meets at
2.15 p.m., and usually adjourns later in the afternoon, except in
the last part of the session when it is necessary to sit after dinner
at night to deal with the spate of end of session business.


Question Time: In each House proceedings are commenced by
the Presiding Officer reading prayers. Immediately thereafter
opportunity is given to Members to present petitions. Then follows
a period in which Members may give notices of motion or direct
oral questions without notice usually to Ministers of the Crown,
but occasionally to other Members relating to any matter connected
with the business of the House in which such Members may be
concerned. Question time is one of the most important facets
of Parliamentary life. Questions may cover the whole field of
the State’s activities; the nature of them varies greatly from day
to day as the House reacts, barometer like, to the atmosphere of
public life. Questions are an important aspect of the critical
function of Parliament, and the Party line tends to fade at question
time. In addition to questions asked orally without warning,
questions may also be asked by written notice. Answers to such
questions are considered by Cabinet and furnished in the House
usually on the following Tuesday. If necessary, question time may
proceed in the House of Assembly for two hours, and in the
Legislative Council for one hour. Question time is a feature of
proceedings in the House of Assembly, and on average,
approximately one hour is devoted thereto each sitting day.
Parliamentary Papers: During question time, the opportunity is
taken to lay Parliamentary Papers upon the Table of the House.
These papers may be laid on by Ministers, Presiding Officers, or
Members representing Parliamentary Committees—by command, or
in pursuance of a statute or following an Order of the House. They
include reports of Government Departments and Boards, Royal
Commissions and Parliamentary reports and financial papers and all
subordinate legislation, i.e., rules, regulations, by-laws, and the like
made under the authority of an Act of the South Australian
Parliament. All papers laid upon the Table of the House thereby
become public documents, and by arrangement may be examined
by Members, press, and public alike. The more important papers
tabled are ordered by the House to be printed, and subsequently
become available for sale at the Government Printing Office, and
are incorporated in the annual volume of Parliamentary Papers,
commonly called the “Blue Book”.
At the completion of Question Time, and on disposal of the
occasional urgency motion, the House proceeds to the business set
down on the Notice Paper. Government business takes precedence
over all other business except questions on Tuesdays and Thursdays
and after six o’clock on Wednesdays. For the greater part of the
session, private members’ business may take precedence over
Government business on Wednesday afternoons, so it will be seen
that reasonable opportunity exists for private Members to bring
Bills or motions before Parliament. However, the bulk of business
on the Notice Paper usually comprises the consideration of
Government Bills, which have been prepared by the Parliamentary
Draftsmen in pursuance of Cabinet instructions.


The President’s Chair


HOW A BILL BECOMES AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT
A Bill is a draft Act of Parliament presented to either House
of Parliament by a Member thereof. Before a Bill can become
an Act and the law of the land, it must pass through a number of
similar stages in each House, and then receive the Royal Assent.
Introduction and First Reading: During Question Time the
Member in charge of a Bill (usually a Minister) gives notice of
motion for leave to introduce a Bill, and this notice appears on
the notice paper next sitting day. On the day set down for its
consideration, the Member moves the motion for leave which is
agreed to usually without discussion or dissent. The Member then
presents a copy of the Bill to the House, and a further motion
for the first reading of the Bill is usually agreed to.
There are three “readings” of a Bill in its progress through each
House. In England, before the invention of printing, the only
practicable means of informing members of the contents of a
Bill was for the Clerk to read it aloud from beginning to end.
Eventually the circulation of printed copies of Bills made it
superfluous to read Bills at length, and by the end of the 18th
century it had become the practice for the Clerk to read only the
title of a Bill, the practice adopted by both Houses of the Parliament
of South Australia. After the first reading, the House orders the
Bill to be printed and the second reading to be taken into
consideration on a future day. One class of public Bill which
must be introduced in the House of Assembly is a “Money Bill”.
Broadly, money Bills are those Bills which appropriate revenue or
other public money, or deal with taxation, or the raising, guarantee
or repayment of any loan. The introductory stages for money Bills
are somewhat different. Briefly, money Bills are based on a
resolution passed in a Committee of the whole House, and a
Committee of two or three Members is formally appointed t«
prepare and bring in a Bill to give effect to that resolution. In the
case of either an ordinary Bill or a money Bill, the introduction
and first reading are usually an uncontested formality.
Second Reading: The second reading is acknowledged to be the
most important stage of a Bill, for here it is that the principles
of the Bill are affirmed or rejected. When this stage has been
reached, the Bill is in print and Members usually have had an
opportunity to study its contents. On the day set down for the
second reading, the Minister or other Member in charge of the
Bill will rise and move “That this Bill be now read a second time”.
He will then proceed to make his main speech in favour of the
Bill, explaining the reasons for its introduction, and expounding
the principles of the measure. Usually the Leader of the Opposition,
or some other prominent Opposition spokesman, secures the
adjournment of the debate. Before the resumption of the debate
on a future day, opportunity is taken to study the Minister’s speech


in conjunction with the Bill. On the day nominated, the second
reading debate will be continued, and may be finalized on that or
a future day, the debate being closed usually by the second speech
of the Minister. The question “That this Bill be now read a second
time” is then submitted to the House by the Speaker for decision.
Committee Stage: Upon being read a second time, ordinary
public Bills are considered in a Committee of the whole House.
In the House of Assembly the Speaker leaves the Chair, the Mace
is taken off the Table and placed on hooks thereunder, and the
Chairman of Committees assumes the role of presiding officer,
taking his seat between the bewigged Clerks at the Table. In the
Legislative Council, the President performs the dual duties of
President and Chairman of Committees.
The common conception of a committee is that of a small group
appointed by a larger group. But when the House is “in
Committee”, the Committee in this context means a Committee of
the whole House, with the Chairman Committees presiding
instead of the Speaker. The origin of Committees of the whole
House has been traced back to the distrust felt in former times
in English history towards Mr. Speaker who, as a nominee of the
King and often his creature, was felt to spy upon the proceedings
of the House and to be a potential menace to the freedom of the
debate. Going into Committee was a means of getting rid of the
Speaker.
The purpose of the Committee stage is the scrutiny of the Bill
in detail, and its amendment where it is considered by the majority
to be necessary. Every clause is considered separately by the
Committee and agreed to, amended and agreed to, or rejected,
with or without debate. Members may speak more than once
in Committee, but the discussion must be strictly relevant to the
particular clause or amendment before the Chair. When the
Committee has concluded its deliberations, the Chairman reports
the results thereof to the House. If the Bill is reported without
amendment, the report may be adopted by the House forthwith,
but if there has been any amendment made in Committee, the
report is considered at a future time.
Third Reading: More often than not, the third reading stage
is a formality with little if any debate and rarely a division. The
rules governing the third reading are somewhat similar to those
which apply to the second reading. However, the scope of the
debate on the third reading of a Bill—now in its final form—is
more restricted and may not go beyond what is actually contained
in the Bill as it ultimately emerged from the Committee stage.
In the House of Assembly, after the Bill has been read a third
time, the Speaker puts a further question: “That this Bill do now
pass and the title be ... An Act . . and then quotes
the long title of the Bill. This question is purely formal, and is
not open to discussion, amendment, or adjournment.


Consideration of the Bill by the Other Chamber: When the Bill
has been agreed to by one House, it is transmitted by written
message signed by the Presiding Officer to the other House for its
concurrence. Here the Bill is, with the exception of the introductory
preliminaries, subject to a similar gamut of procedure—three
readings, with a Committee stage between the second and third
readings.
The Black Rod on Legislative Council table
(Gift Bible in foreground )
Disagreement Between the Houses: Any amendments made by
one House in a Bill received from the other House are considered
by the House of origin. If eventual agreement on these amendments
cannot be reached, the Bill may be laid aside, or resort may be had
to a Conference between five representatives (called “Managers”)
from each House, at which an attempt is made to settle the matters
in dispute by informal discussion. An officer from each House
and a Parliamentary Draftsman attend the conference, but no
“Hansard” record is taken of the proceedings. Rarely does this
type of joint meeting fail to reach a compromise.


Assent to Bills: When a Bill has finally passed both Houses, six
“Royal Arms” copies are printed, certified by the Presiding Officer
and the Clerk of the House in which the Bill originated, and then
presented by that Presiding Officer to His Excellency the Governor
for assent. The Governor assents to Bills in Executive Council
“in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty” unless the Bill is in
a category required to be reserved for Her Majesty’s assent. The
class of Bill required to be reserved for Her Majesty’s assent
includes any Bill to alter the Constitution of either House of
Parliament; any Bill whereby a grant of land or money or other
gratuity is made to the Governor; and any Bill of an extraordinary
nature or importance whereby the property of British subjects not
residing in the State, or the trade and shipping of the United
Kingdom and its Dependencies, may be prejudiced. The Governor’s
signature and the impress of the public seal of the State are
necessary formalities which represent the final stages in converting
a Bill into an Act of Parliament.
Governor’s Speech and Address in Reply: The Governor opens
each session of Parliament by reading in the Legislative Council
Chamber a speech prepared by the Government, and which sets
out, inter alia, the policy the Government intends to pursue and
the legislation proposed to be introduced during the session. Of
course, in this duty, the Governor acts as the mouthpiece of his
Ministers, and they alone are responsible for the contents of the
Speech.
A short Address in Reply to this Speech is drawn up in each
House, and becomes the subject of a general debate therein,
usually lasting for a number of days. This provides an excellent
opportunity, free from the more restrictive tests of relevance that
apply in other debates, to vindicate or criticize the policy of the
Government. After the address is agreed to, it is presented to the
Governor by the President or Speaker (as the case may be)
accompanied by the mover and seconder of the motion for its
adoption and by Members of the relevant House.
The Rules of Debate: A Member desiring to speak in the House
must rise and address himself to the Speaker or President, as the
case may be, and not to the House at large or to individual
Members. While he is thus on his feet, he is said to be “in
possession of the House”.
Members other than Ministers in the Legislative Council are
referred to by name as the Honourable Mr. ... In the House
of Assembly, however, Members must never be referred to by name,
but should be referred to by descriptive phrases such as the
Honourable Member for (Member’s district), or the
Honourable the Minister of . . . (name of portfolio).


The most important privilege which attaches to a Member of
Parliament is freedom of speech. No legal action may be taken
against a Member for anything which he says in the House or any
Committee thereof, but this immunity does not mean that a
Member in the House can say what he likes when he likes. The
House itself imposes certain restraints upon Members’ utterances.
For example, to protect the impartiality of the Crown, no Member
may use Her Majesty’s name or the name of the Governor
irreverently or to influence debate; offensive or unbecoming words
in reference to another Member may not be used; reference to
matters which are sub judice, awaiting the decision of a court of
law, is out of order as being likely to prejudice the course of
justice.
Other prohibitions are that no Member may reflect upon any
decision of the House except for the purpose of moving the
rescission of that vote, and no Member shall use offensive words
against either House of Parliament or against any statute unless
moving for its repeal.
A speech must be relevant to the question before the House.
To prevent endless repetition no Member may allude to any debate
of the same session of Parliament upon a question or Bill not then
under discussion. No reference may be made in debate to the
debates or proceedings of the other House. This rule, which
eliminates the opportunity for mutual recrimination, gave rise to
the custom by which Members refer to the other House as “another
place”.
In the House, a Member may not speak more than once on any
matter, except where he has initiated a substantive motion or moved
the second reading of a Bill, in which cases he has the right of
reply. In Committee there is no restriction on the number of
speeches a Member may make.
Order in debate is maintained by the Presiding Officer in each
House. The Speaker or President, as the case may be, is empowered
to “name a Member” and report his offence to the House if he
persistently or wilfully obstructs the business of the House, or
refuses to conform to any standing order of the House or to
regard the authority of the Chair, or, if having used objectionable
words, refuses either to explain the same to the satisfaction of
the Presiding Officer, or to withdraw them and apologize for their
use. After a Member has been named, he may, by resolution, be
suspended from the service of the House for a stated period.
It is pertinent to point out that moderation and good temper are
the characteristics of Parliamentary language.
The Parliamentary custom observed in both Houses of bowing
to the Chair when Members enter or leave the Chamber, or move
to or from their seats is now considered as an act of courtesy to
the Presiding Officer and an acknowledgment by all Members of
the authority of the Chair. The custom is said to be of religious


The House of
Assembly Chamber
(with the Bar drawn
in foreground)


origin, for St. Stephen's Chapel, once the most beautiful and
ornate chapel in Christendom, was used by the House of Commons
as its Chamber from 1547 to 1832, and behind the Speaker’s
chair was an altar; and members upon entering or leaving or crossing
the Chamber bowed to the altar in accordance with ecclesiastical
custom. The practice was continued by Members of the House
of Commons after they ceased to meet in the Chapel and the
act of obeisance in Parliaments today is regarded as a mark of
respect for the Chair and its authority.
Financial Procedure: The roots of financial procedure lie far
back in British history, but space does not permit any dilatation
upon the interesting subject of the struggle between the Crown and
the Commons and the evolution of present-day principles. Suffice
to say that our procedure was based largely on that of the House
of Commons and the local rules may be summarized as follows: —
All financial business is originated by the Crown alone
(i.e., by the Government). A private Member is not able to
move a motion or an amendment which imposes a charge
upon the people or authorizes the borrowing or expenditure of
public money. In such financial proposals, a Minister acting
on behalf of the Crown, must take the initiative in a Committee
of the whole House.
Financial business must originate in Parliament in the House
of Assembly.
The purpose for which it is proposed to appropriate or
expend public money must be first recommended by the
Governor to the House of Assembly during the current
session.
The necessary financial resolution is considered and agreed
to in a Committee of the whole House and then adopted by
the House itself; this then forms the basis of a Bill which,
after progress through the regular stages of a Bill in the
House of Assembly, is transmitted to the Legislative Council
for its consideration and concurrence and finally submitted for
Royal assent.
The Legislative Council may not amend any money clause,
but it may suggest amendments therein.
The greater part of the expenditure of public money is voted
annually in Parliament in the form of estimates of expenditure.
However, some expenditure of public money is authorized by a
permanent charge on the State’s general revenue pursuant to a
special Act of Parliament. For example, specific Acts provide
continuing authority for the payment of salaries and allowances to
the Governor, Ministers of the Crown, Judges, Members of
Parliament, and some high Government officers; further examples
of this continuing appropriation of public funds are the payment
of interest on public loans and contributions to the National Debt
Sinking Fund, Government contribution to the South Australian


Superannuation Fund, and the payment of the net proceeds of
motor vehicle registration fees into the Highways Fund. These
special Acts, of course, may be amended by Parliament from time
to time.
The sources of revenue to meet these expenses of Government
include State taxation (land tax, stamp duties, succession duties,
and motor vehicle fees), receipts for the provision of public works
and services (railways, waterworks and sewers, hospitals, harbours
and the like), territorial proceeds (Crown lands rents, land sales,
and mining fees), and reimbursement of income tax and other
payments received pursuant to Commonwealth legislation. The
Loan Council, which consists of a representative from the Federal
Government and each of the State Governments, controls the raising
of loans for all Australian Governments and the division thereof
between the Commonwealth and States.
Income tax rates were considered annually by the State Parliament
prior to the inauguration in 1942 of uniform taxation. Since this
field of taxation was vacated by the States? there has not been the
necessity for a regular annual review of the rates of other taxation
by the South Australian Parliament; they are, of course, altered
from time to time as occasion demands, but not necessarily each
year.
The two main financial matters considered yearly by the House
of Assembly are the expenditure estimates and the loan estimates.
These two sets of estimates approximate the division respectively
between the current and capital requirements of the Government
for the financial year.
The expenditure estimates to meet the running expenses of the
State are considered in the Committee of Supply. Prior to “going
into Supply” on each occasion, it is necessary to move a motion
in the House “That the Speaker do now leave the Chair and the
House resolve itself into a Committee of Supply”. This motion is
open to debate and provides Members with the opportunity to
exercise the ancient right of seeking the redress of grievances
before granting supply. Discussion on the expenditure estimates
is initiated in the Committee of Supply by the Treasurer’s Financial
Statement or Budget speech. The early debate ranges over the
whole of the estimates, but once the first vote or subdivision of
the estimates has been agreed to, subsequent discussion is restricted
to the particular vote then before the Chair. When all the votes
have been agreed to, then the Committee of Ways and Means by
resolution issues out of General Revenue a lump sum equal to the
total of the sums voted by the Committee of Supply, and, on this
resolution, when agreed to by the House, the Appropriation Bill
is founded. This Bill is passed through the normal stages, is then
transmitted to the Legislative Council for its consideration and
concurrence and is finally presented for Royal assent. The
Appropriation Act then becomes the Government’s statutory
authority for the expenditure of the money voted by the House.


The loan estimates setting out the Government's capital require-
ments for the year are introduced by the Treasurer in a Committee
of the whole House in the House of Assembly. The Committee
proceedings on loan estimates are similar to those in the Committee
of Supply in relation to the revenue expenditure estimates, and
discussion on the loan estimates usually lasts for a number of
sitting days. On the resolutions of the Committee as agreed to by
the House is founded the Public Purposes Loan Bill, which, because
of the detailed and lengthy prior consideration of the loan estimates
in Committee, is passed in the Assembly with expedition (as is the
Appropriation Bill) and transmitted to the Legislative Council and
subsequently presented for Royal assent.
No Bill may be introduced into Parliament which authorizes the
construction of, or appropriates money for any public work
estimated to cost when complete more than £lOO,OOO, unless such
project has been first inquired into and reported on by the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works. This
Committee, appointed by the Governor, consists of two Members
of the Legislative Council and five Members of the House of
Assembly. The Committee is non-Party in objective, but
multi-Party in composition. It has wide powers of investigation,
and reports to the Governor and both Houses of Parliament the
result of its inquiries.
It is the responsibility of the Auditor-General to audit the accounts
of public revenue and expenditure and to satisfy himself that all
moneys granted by Parliament have been properly accounted for
and in particular to see that no money has been used for any
purpose other than that for which it was appropriated by
Parliament. The Auditor-General submits a report annually to
Parliament. His independence of the Government of the day is
safeguarded by statute as he may be removed from office only
after an address praying for his removal has been passed in both
Houses of Parliament.
Divisions: In Parliament, a decision on a question put from the
chair on the completion of any debate is obtained in the first
instance by the majority of voices “Aye” or “No”. It is the
endeavour of the Presiding Officer (Speaker, President, or Chairman
of Committees) to judge from the voices which side has the
majority. If his opinion is challenged by the minority, the House
must divide so that the exact numbers voting on each side of
the question may be ascertained. A division is effectively called
for by those considered to be in the minority calling
out “Divide” whereupon the Presiding Officer directs “Ring
the bells”. The division bells are set ringing throughout the
building, and the two minute sand glass is turned by the Clerk.
(Possible confusion outside the Chamber as to whether a division
is imminent in either the Legislative Council or House of Assembly
is avoided by the noticeable difference in tone of the division bells
for each House.)


The Speaker’s Chair


When the sands have run out, the Presiding Officer orders the
Chamber doors to be locked and the Bar is drawn. No Member
can be admitted to or leave the Chamber now until the division
is completed. The Presiding Officer again puts the question to inform
those who were not in the Chamber when the question was first
put, of the matter upon which the division is taking place.
The Presiding Officer directs the “Ayes” to proceed to the right
of the Chair and the “Noes” to the left and appoints one teller
for each side. The tellers advance to the Table and standing on
the right or left, call out the names of the Members voting on
their respective sides, to officers of the House who mark the names
on the division lists. The tellers then count the number of Members
on their respective sides while the Clerks count the names marked
on the division lists to ensure that the numbers correspond. The
Clerk then hands the division lists to the Presiding Officer, who
announces the voting figures and the majority and declares the
decision of the House accurately arrived at by physical division
into “Ayes” and “Noes”. In the event of the voting being equal
the Presiding Officer exercises a casting vote.
Pairs: Voting by proxy is not allowed but a similar effect is
achieved by resorting to a practice known as “pairs”. This
arrangement enables a Member to absent himself (e.g. through
sickness or for official conferences interstate or overseas) and to
agree with another Member that he shall be absent from divisions
at the same time. By this mutual agreement a vote is neutralized
on each side of a question and the relative numbers in the division
are the same as if both Members were present. The arrangement
of pairs is left in the hands of the Party Whips.
“Hansard”: The primary function of the Government Reporting
Department is the production of the Official Reports of the
Parliamentary Debates, commonly known as “Hansard”.
A South Australian “Hansard” has been published every year
since the inauguration of responsible Government in 1857. Prior
to 1914 the reporting and publication of Parliamentary debates
had been let by Government contract to Adelaide newspapers. In
1907 the Government Reporting Department was established to
report Royal Commissions, Boards of Inquiry, and the like, and in
1914 the duties of this department were enlarged to include the
reporting and production of the Parliamentary Debates.
The Director of the Government Reporting Department is leader
of the “Hansard” staff, and his staff includes an assistant leader,
shorthand reporters, and typists. Working on a roster, each
reporter takes a note in the Chamber gallery usually for 15 minutes,
then goes out and dictates to a typist from his notes, making
allowable emendations in the process.


In compilation of its report, the “Hansard” staff is guided
substantially by the definition of a “Hansard” report as enunciated
by a House of Commons Select Committee on Parliamentary
Debates in 1907, viz.:—
“It is a full report, in the first person, of all speakers alike,
a full report being defined as one ‘which, though not strictly
verbatim, is substantially the verbatim report, with repetitions
and redundancies omitted and with obvious mistakes corrected,
but which on the other hand leaves out nothing that adds to
the meaning of the speech or illustrates the argument’.”
Verbal corrections by Members are allowed, provided they do
not alter materially the meaning of anything that was said in
the House.
Within a short time after a Member makes his speech, a
transcript is on its way to the Government Printer. On the next
day, separate printed copies (in galley proof form) of the daily
“Hansard” for the previous day’s proceedings in the Legislative
Council and the House of Assembly are available. These daily
copies are for internal use in Parliament and in Government
Departments, and are issued as “confidential and subject to
revision”. A weekly “Hansard” booklet is published, and bound
indexed volumes are produced after each session. Any member
of the public may obtain from the Government Printer copies of
“Hansard” at the nominal charge of 3d. per weekly number or
4s. for the weekly numbers for a whole session.
It is fundamental that Parliamentary proceedings should be given
the fullest publicity and that the discussions by the people’s
representatives in Parliament should not be clothed in secrecy.
“Hansard” is one means of safeguarding this basic principle.
Parliament House
During the period 1836 to 1843 the Council of Government held
its meetings in a sitting room at Government House, a convenient
arrangement as the Council was presided over by the Governor
and consisted of only five members; furthermore, its deliberations
were in camera.
With the enlargement of the membership of the Council and
the proposed admission of strangers to witness the proceedings, a
more commodious meeting place became necessary. The location
chosen for the new building was on North Terrace, immediately
west of the present day Parliament House site. The new Chamber


erected was a neat brick structure with a slate roof and consisted
of a single room complete with a gallery capable of holding 50
people and reserved seats for reporters. The new Council Chamber
was opened on 10th October, 1843, when non-official Members
(as distinct from the official Members) took their seats for the
first time. This was the meeting place of the Council for the next
12 years.
With the infusion of the elected element into the Legislative
Council and the increase in the membership to 24, the inadequacy
of this building was obvious. A handsome new two-storey stone
and brick building was designed by W. Bennett Hays, the Colonial
Architect, built by the firm of English and Brown, and completed
in or about July, 1855, at a total cost of £17,000. The Legislative
Council met in the new building (upstairs) for the first time on
Ist November, 1855. This building still stands and is at present
used by Government departments.
From 1857 the Legislative Council shared this Parliament House
with the newly created House of Assembly. The advisability of
erecting new Houses of Parliament was considered on a number
of occasions from 1864 onwards. In 1874 a Commission was
appointed by the Governor to inquire into and report on the
designs submitted in competition for the new Parliament Houses
The Mace resting on House of Assembly table
(Mace is placed on hooks below table
when House is in Committee )


and the succesful design was that of Messrs. E. W. Wright and
Lloyd Taylor. Further delay and inquiry followed and eventually
the Government Architect (Mr. E. J. Woods) was instructed to
prepare working drawings to incorporate alterations decided upon
by the Parliament Building Committee. Although it was apparent
from tenders submitted that a saving would be effected if imported
stone were used, it was decided to use local materials marble
from Kapunda and granite from West Island (near Victor
Harbour) —for the building. The contract was let to the Kapunda
Marble and Building Company. The Company built the foundations
and granite basement on the site immediately east of the then
existing House; but in 1885, following a dispute with the architect,
the Company suspended operations. No settlement of the dispute
could be reached so the Government terminated the contract.
J. Shaw & Company’s tender of £98,745 to complete the western
wing of the building was accepted and the work thereon finished
in 1889. The total cost of the building, including furniture and
fittings amounted to £165,404.
On sth June, 1889, 1,200 guests attended the formal opening
or the new building by the Speaker of the House of Assembly
(Hon. J. C. Bray) and the first meeting was held in the new Chamber
on the following day. The former Assembly Chamber in the old
building was converted into a spacious Parliamentary Library.
The question of the completion of the new Parliament House
was raised on a number of occasions over the years, but it was
not until 1913 that sketch plans were prepared by the Architect-in-
Chief’s Department for this project. These sketches were approved
by a Joint Committee of both Houses, but the work was not
proceeded with owing to the outbreak of World War I.
Parliament House as it stands today was eventually completed
to commemorate the centenary of the State. Towards this end,
the Hon. Sir J. Langdon Bonython, K.C.M.G., one of the State's
greatest public benefactors, made the munificent gift of £IOO,OOO.
Appropriate legislation was passed in 1934, and plans for the
completion of the building were drawn up by the Architect-in-Chief
(Mr. A. E. Simpson, 1.5.0.) to implement the scheme which had
been approved by the Joint Committee in 1913, with the exception
that the dome was omitted.
The successful tenderer was Mr. A. Slater, of Kilkenny, South
Australia, and the contract price was £223,995; subsidiary contracts
amounting to £17,892 were also let. The work commenced in
March of the State’s centenary year, 1936. The Government
architects supervising the work were Mr. Simpson and
Mr. W. Lindsay. To harmonize with the 1889 wing, West Island
granite and Kapunda marble were again used.
In the presence of a most distinguished gathering, the new building
was opened by the Governor-General of Australia and former
beloved Governor of South Australia, Lord Gowrie, V.C., on sth
June, 1939, precisely 50 years after the opening of the west wing.


A gratifying feature of the ceremony was the presence of the
Hon. Sir Langdon Bonython, the donor of the magnificent gift, who
was able to view with justifiable pride, the consummation of one
of the superb edifices of the Commonwealth.
THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY CHAMBER
The present House of Assembly Chamber was completed in
1889. Its lofty walls and the beautifully decorated ceiling and
the oil portraits of past Speakers and Premiers, contribute to the
charm and distinctive character of the Chamber. The layout
of the Chamber is in the traditional British style with the
Government benches on Mr. Speaker s right and the Opposition
benches on his left. The cross benches at the southern end of the
Chamber are carried round to meet the gangway leading into
the Chamber from this end.
Mr. Speaker occupies a beautifully carved chair on a dais at
the northern end of the Chamber. At the table below the
Speaker’s chair are three chairs, that on the right being used by
the Clerk, the centre chair by the Chairman of Committees, and
that on the left by the Clerk-Assistant and Sergeant-at-Arms. There
are two brackets on top of the table which support the Mace
when the Speaker is in the chair. When the House is in Committee,
the Mace is removed from the table and placed in two supports
below the table.
On the front Government bench, known as the Treasury bench,
sit the House of Assembly members of the Ministry, in order of
precedence, with the Premier nearest to the Speaker. Behind the
Treasury bench, sit the Government supporters. Directly across the
floor of the Chamber from the Premier sits the Leader of the
Opposition and, alongside and behind him, sit members of his Party.
Other Members who are affiliated neither with the Government
nor Opposition Parties sit on the cross benches on the Opposition
side of the Chamber. Each Member is allocated a specific seat
in the House and this is indicated by his name printed on the
desk in front of his position. Microphone and speaker sets are
on the desks for amplification in the Chamber and galleries.
Before the front benches on either side is a long narrow border
of red carpet. This serves to remind us of the more boisterous
and dangerous times in the House of Commons when Members
were required to keep both feet behind this red line, as to cross
this barrier would put them in a position to make a successful
sword thrust at a Member on the opposite side of the House.
Of course, the wearing of swords in the House of Commons has
long since been discontinued, but the rule still operates there to
prevent any front bench member of either side from putting his
foot even slightly across the red strip when rising to address the
House. The presence of this strip of carpet in the House of
Assembly Chamber is a visible reminder of the source of our
Parliamentary heritage.


Above the Speaker's chair are the galleries occupied by the
“Hansard” reporters (in the centre), and the press and radio
reporters (on the two sides). At the southern end of the Chamber
and beyond the bar of the House is the Speaker’s Gallery. Members
of the public may be admitted to this gallery by signing a special
ticket; by custom, the western portion of the Speaker’s Gallery
is reserved for men. The Strangers’ Gallery is immediately above
the Speaker’s Gallery and is freely open to the general public
when the House is in session.
Figure of stone lion, facing North Terrace (A gift from
Westminster, it was formerly part of the old House of
Commons)


THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL CHAMBER
The Legislative Council Chamber was completed in 1939. It
is a handsome Chamber in the modern idiom. Its lighting and
acoustic properties are superb and its beautiful Queensland maple
panelling and traditional red carpet enrich the atmosphere of the
'‘House of Review”.
Its overall dimensions are the same as those of the House of
Assembly Chamber. The Vice-Regal throne (which is also the
President's chair) at the northern end has been in use in the
Legislative Council since 1855. It is a beautiful specimen of
colonial workmanship. Framed of massive English oak, it is richly
carved with Gothic decorations, and the seat is covered with red
velvet. The back is supported by spiral columns, surmounted by
the Royal Arms carved also in solid oak.
Beneath the President’s dais is the Table of the Council, with
the Clerk’s chair at the right and the chair of the Clerk-Assistant
and Black Rod at the left. The centre chair is occupied by the
President in his capacity as Chairman of Committees when the
Council is in Committee. Black Rod’s staff lies in the brackets
on the front of the Council Table during the sitting of the Council.
On the front bench on the right of the President sit the three
Legislative Council Ministers. The allocation of the remaining
seats is not necessarily made on the basis of a Member’s affiliation
with the Government or Opposition Party, but is arranged so as
to give numbers more or less evenly balanced (numerically, not
politically) on either side of the Chair.
Galleries surround the Chamber on three sides on floor level
and on all four sides on the first floor level. The galleries on
either side of the Chamber, immediately behind Members’ benches
are of particular value at the Opening of Parliament for the
accommodation of distinguished guests. Beyond the bar is the
President’s Gallery and upstairs are the Strangers’ Galleries.
“Hansard” and press and radio reporters occupy the northern
upstairs galleries.
It is in the Legislative Council Chamber that each session of
Parliament is opened by the Queen’s Representative (the Governor
or Lieutenant-Governor) in the presence of members of both
Houses. It is an occasion of traditional and colourful ceremony
and the galleries are thronged with important guests to witness the
meeting of the “Trinity of Parliament”—the Crown’s Representative,
the Legislative Council and the House of Assembly.
It was in the Legislative Council Chamber on 23rd March, 1954,
that Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II opened a special session of
the Parliament of South Australia, the first occasion on which the
reigning Monarch had performed this function, and therefore a
day of singular significance in the State’s Constitutional history.


Portion of the
Parliamentary
Library


THE PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY
The beginnings of the Parliamentary Library date back to 1851
when Mr. G. S. (later Sir George) Kingston moved in the Legislative
Council that a Select Committee be appointed to inquire and report
what books and maps should be purchased for the use of the
Council.
Two years later, Mr. Kingston was successful in having a motion
carried in the Legislative Council that a Select Committee be
appointed as a Standing Library Committee to make arrangements
for the purchase of books, maps, charts, globes, etc., and to have
the general management of the Library. The first Library Committee
was appointed on 14th September, 1853, and on 17th February,
1854, Mr. J. S. Browne was appointed first Librarian, the duties
of which he combined with those of the Assistant Clerk of the
Council.
Prior to 1889, the Library was housed on the ground floor of
the old Parliament building, but in 1889, when the House of
Assembly shifted to the new building (the western wing of the
present Parliament House), the Parliamentary Library was moved
to the first floor to the Chamber vacated by the House of Assembly.
It remained there until its transfer in 1939 to its present location.
The library is a separate department of the Legislature and its
policy is under the direction of a Joint Committee consisting
of the President of the Legislative Council, the Speaker of the
House of Assembly, and three other Members from each House,
while the professional and administrative work is carried out by
the librarian and his staff. The primary function of the library,
of course, is to serve the needs of the Parliament, and, to this end,
books are lent, research carried out and information supplied for
Members and official staffs. Ex-members and South Australian
Federal Members have access to the library facilities. In addition,
frequent reference is made to the Parliamentary Library by
Government departments, and valuable assistance is rendered to
persons undertaking special Constitutional and political researches.
The Parliamentary Library is a general reference library which
contains some 65,000 volumes. Parliamentary and Constitutional
works predominate, but the wide subject field embraces, inter alia,
valuable and comprehensive sections devoted to Economics and
Social Science, Australiana, History, Biography, and Agriculture.
Parliamentary records held by the library include the Journals
of the House of Lords and of the House of Commons from the
early 16th century onwards. Of course, the Votes and Proceedings
and “Hansard” of the Parliament of South Australia from its
inauguration are in its possession. Comparative statutory research
is facilitated by the availability in a separate room of the Acts of
all Parliaments of Australia and practically all of the British
Commonwealth countries, together with the laws of the United
States of America.


In the reading room, in addition to local, interstate and overseas
newspapers and periodicals, the “Hansards” of the British, the
Commonwealth, and other State Parliaments are housed, together
with bound volumes of Australian Parliamentary Papers and
“Government Gazettes”.
Exhibits which never fail to excite admiration in this magnificent
library are the valuable 36-in. celestial and terrestrial globes, the
work of artisans in the years 1845 and 1854, respectively; the
volumes donated and signed by Queen Victoria in 1864, 1868,
and 1884; and a copy of the first two editions of South Australia’s
earliest newspaper “South Australian Gazette and Colonial Register”,
the first number being published on 18th June, 1836, in London,
and the second on 3rd June, 1837, in Adelaide.


Division sand glass
in the House of Assembly—
a gift from Westminster


W. L. HAWES, Government Printer, Adelaide


The Royal Arms on back cover is a wood carving
featured in the Legislative Council Chamber door


