

THE STONES OF BRAY




THE STONES OF BRAY


BRAY IN THE END OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
(From an old print in the possession of W. R. Le Fanu, Esq., London)


THE STONES OF BRAY
AND THE STORIES THEY CAN TELL
OF ANCIENT TIMES IN THE
BARONY OF RATHDOWN
BY
GEORGE DIGBY SCOTT, M.A.
RECTOR OF BRAY
DUBLIN
HODGES, FIGGIS & CO., LTD.
104 GRAFTON STREET
I9H




MATRI CARISSIMAE
QVAE IN HAC BARONIA OLIM NATA
VILLAM DE BRE
DILIGENS IPSA ATQVE AB OMNIBVS DILECTA
lAM PER DECEM LVSTRA
FELICITER INCOLIT
HVNC LIBELLVM PIETATE SVMMA
DEDICAT AVCTOR




PREFACE
I have found it add greatly to the interest and the
pleasures of my rambles about my birthplace, to which it
was my good fortune to return as a permanent residence
just twenty years ago, that I was led by circumstances as
well as by inclination to investigate its history. And
having from time to time during those years collected a good
deal of information upon the subject from various sources,
I have ventured now to put together the results of my
researches in a little book, hoping that other people also,
when they read it, may find that new pleasures and interests
are added to their enjoyment of this most delightful spot in
the world.
Every orthodox Irish History begins with Adam, and
goes on to the Flood. I have tried to do even better than
that, by going back many millions of years before the
appearance of man upon the globe, to the time of Oldhamia
Antiqua; and I have not had to desert the proper scene
of my history and wander oft* to Mesopotamia for the
purpose. But it must be understood that I have not limited
that scene to the Town, nor even to the Parish of Bray.
Bray, as it appears on my title-page, must be taken to
include all the ancient Deanery of Bray; that is to say,
just a little more than the old tribal district of Ui Briuin
Cualann, which corresponds to the modern Barony of Rath-
down in both the counties of Dublin and Wicklow.
In order to try and make the history readable, and restrain


myself from overburdening it with too many dry details of fact
or discussions of intricate problems, I have thrown it into
a conversational form, of a very one-sided character,
imagining how I might tell it all to a very inquiring and
very patient listener. I must confess, however, that I have
yet to find the friend with such a thirst for information
and such long-suffering patience as would be needed.
Perhaps, however, what people could hardly be induced
to listen to, when they would want to be talking themselves,
they might find it tolerable to read, when they had no one
else to talk to. For any who may take up this book in a
serious way, looking for some contribution to the materials
for their own study of the history of their country, the
notes and appendices will be found to contain any little
contribution that I am able to make.
The references in those notes and appendices will show
how much I owe to the learned scholars who have in old
or in recent days laboured at the history of Ireland in
general and of Co. Dublin in particular. Hitherto very
little has been published about Co. Wicklow. I am also
indebted for many valuable hints and suggestions and
much generous help to Rev, Precentor H. J. Lawlor, D.D.,
Professor of Ecclesiastical History in T.C.D.; T. P. Le Fanu,
Esq., C. 8.; V. C. Le Fanu, Esq.; and the ever courteous
officials of the Dublin Record Office; also to the Earl of
Meath for kind permission to examine all the ancient deeds
and records in his possession; and Fane Vernon, Esq., for
permission to consult the Calendar of Ancient Deeds and
Muniments preserved in the Pembroke Estate Office.


CONTENTS
CHAP. PAGE
I. The Cambrians ...... 1
II. The Great Intrusion . . . . .12
III. The Rocks that Travelled .... 20
IV. The Cromleac Builders .... 26
V. The Rath Makers ..... 34
VI. Ui Briuin Cualann and its Saints . . 46
VII. Rathmichael ....... 57
VIII. Killruddery ....... 76
IX. De Ridelesford ...... 91
X. Newcastle and Shankill . . . .107
XI. The Ruined Castles . . . . .119
XII. Some Country Houses ..... 139
XIII. The Old Glebe House ..... 155
APPENDICES
I. The Deanery of Bray . . . . .177
II. St. Paul’s Church ...... 201
III. Sir Walter De Ridelesford’s Estates in
Crioch Cualann ..... 208


APPEN. PAGE
IV. The Name of Bkay . . . . .218
V. The Manor of Bray ..... 222
VI. Obrun ........ 231
VII. The Vicars of Bray ..... 233
Index ........ 239


ILLUSTRATIONS
Bray in the end of the Eighteenth Century . Frontispiece
To face p.
Bray Head ........ 1
(a) Tilted Cambrian Slates at Bray Head; ( b ) Quartz-
rock behind Meath Industrial School; (c)
Weathered Granite over Lough Bray; ( d)
Twisted Strata of Mica-schist at the Scalp . 12
Powerscourt Waterfall ...... 18
Cromleacs : —(a) Kilternan, ( b ) Glendruid, (c) Bally-
brack, ( d) Glaskenny ...... 28
The Sugarloafs and Carrigoona ..... 38
Map of Crioch Cualann and its Surroundings . . 48
(a) Gravestone at St. Begnet’s Church, Dalkey; ( b) St.
Begnet’s Chapel on Dalkey Island ; ( c ) Killiney
Church, vista through doorway ; ( d ) Rathmichael 57
Ancient Crosses : —(a and b ) at Tullow; (c) at Kill
of the Grange ; (d) at Delgany .... 71
Killruddery ........ 86


To face p.
(a) St. Paul’s Church in 1907; ( h ) The Church
at Raheenaclig; ( c ) Cross in Fassaroe Lane;
{d) Cross in Churchyard of Killarney . . . 102
Castles: (a) Shankill, ( b ) Dalkey, (c) Little Bray, (d)
Puck’5......... 112
Drawings from Seventeenth-Century Maps . . .142
(a) Old Court Castle; (6) Kindlestown Castle; (c)
Killincarrig House; ( d) Carrigeen, the old
Glebe House of Kathmichael . . . .155


AUTHORITIES
Among the historical authorities quoted in the Notes are
the following: —
“ Chancery Rolls.” Rotulorum Patentium et Clausorum
Cancellariae Hibernicae Calendarium, Vol. I, Pars I. The first
Roll in the Calendar is that known as “ Antiquissime Litere
Patentes.” The Calendar contains deeds from Henry II to
Henry VII.
Rotuli Chartarum in Turri Londinensi (ed. Hardy), Vol. I,
Pars I, 1199-1216.
Rotuli Litterarum Patentium in Turri Londinensi (ed.
Hardy), Vol. I, Pars I, 1201-1216.
“Inquisitions.” Inquisitionum in Officio Rotulorum Can-
cellariee Hiberniae asservatorum Repertorium. Vol. I.
Calendar of Patent Rolls, James I. (A volume with neither
title-page nor index.)
“Sweetman’s Calendar.” Calendar of Documents relating
to Ireland, 1171-1307, by H. S. Sweetman. (In Record Publi-
cations.)
“State Papers.”—Henry VIII, Correspondence, &c. Eleven
volumes published under the authority of His Majesty’s Com-
mission.
Calendars of State Papers, Ireland.—Several volumes deal-
ing with the latter part of the sixteenth and the greater part
of the seventeenth centuries. (In Record Publications).
Calendars of Patent Rolls—Henry HI, Henry VI, Henry
VIII, (In Record Publications.)
Calendars of Patent and Close Rolls : (1) Henry VIII to
Elizabeth, (2) Elizabeth, (3) Charles I, edited by Morrin. (In
Record Publications.)


Calendars of Carew Manuscripts. (In Record Publications.)
“ Papal Letters.” Calendars of entries in the Papal Registers
relating to Great Britain and Ireland : Papal Letters.
Calendars of Fiants. In the 7th to the 22nd Reports of the
Deputy Keeper of the Records in Ireland.
Christ Church Deeds. Calendars of Christ Church Deeds in
the 20th to the 26th Reports of the Deputy Keeper of the
Records in Ireland.
Register of St. Thomas’s Abbey (ed. Gilbert), in the Rolls
Series.
Chartulary of St. Mary’s Abbey (ed. Gilbert), in the Rolls
Series.
Registry of All Saints (ed. Butler), in the Rolls Series.
“ Crede Mihi.” Original Roll in the Archbishop’s custody.
MS. copy in T.C.D. Library, f. 217. Reprint by Sir John
Gilbert.
“ Repertorium Viride.” Original Roll in the Archbishop’s
custody. Copy in Marsh’s Library. Copy by Bishop Reeves in
T.C.D. Library.
Archbishop Jones’ Report on the Diocese of Dublin, 1615.
Original in private hands in Derry. Copy in the custody of
the Dean of St. Patrick’s.
Royal Visitation, 1615. In the Record Office. Copy by
Bishop Reeves in T.C.D. Library, MS. 1066.
Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report on the Diocese of Dublin,
1630. T.C.D. Library, MS. F 3, 17. Reprinted in '‘lrish
Ecclesiastical Record,” Yol. V. pp, 158 sqq.
Depositions of 1641. In T.C.D. Library, MS. F ii, 3 and 4.
“ Fleetwood’s Survey.” A Survey of the Half Barony of
Rathdown in the County of Dublin, made by order of Charles
Fleetwood, Lord Deputy, 4th October, 1654. Printed in
Lodge’s "Desiderata Curiosa Hibernica,” Vol, 11.
“Down Survey.” Report and Maps of the Survey made
in 1655 to 1657 by order of Sir William Petty. Dublin and
Wicklow Volumes. In the Record Office.
Sir William Petty’s Atlas of Ireland, 1683. A copy in
possession of Richard M. Barrington, Esq., Fassaroe.
“ A Contemporary History of Affairs in Ireland.” Edition


by Sir John Gilbert of “ Aphorismal Discovery of Treasonable
Faction,” and other documents dealing with the Civil War of
1641 to 1649.
“ Ordnance Survey Letters.” Archaeological Investigations
made at the time of the first Ordnance Survey, 1837. In the
Library of the Royal Irish Academy.
“ Proceedings of R.1.A.” Proceedings of the Royal Irish
Academy.
“Journal of R.5.A.1.” Journal of the Royal Society of
Antiquaries of Ireland. The Volumes are cited by their
dates. By the consecutive numbering Vol. XXX = 1900.
O’Hanlon, “ Lives of the Irish Saints.” The work was not
completed when the author died, and there is no index; but
the Saints are arranged according to the days of the year on
which they are commemorated in the ancient Irish Calendars.
“ Dictionary of Christian Biography,” Dr. Wm, Smith and
Dr. Wace.
“Pembroke Estate Deeds.” Calendar of Ancient Deeds
and Muniments preserved in the Pembroke Estate Office,
Dublin. Privately printed.
“Documents in Possession of the Earl of Meath.” Deeds
and records preserved at Killruddery ; not printed, but excel-
lently scheduled in Manuscript.


BRAY HEAD (CAMBRIAN ROCKS)
(From a photograph by B. Killick, Bray)


THE STONES OF BRAY
CHAPTER I
THE CAMBRIANS
That was a jolly swim, wasn’t it? Certainly there is no
other place between Greystones and Dalkey to compare
with this cove of Bat Naylor’s for a really delicious bathe.
That is one reason why I persuaded you to get up early
and come down here with me this morning. And another
is, that no better place could be chosen for me to begin to
fulfil my promise, that if you would come and spend a
summer in Bray, I would show you how to read stories
from its stones about ancient times.
I think the most interesting way to do that, is to start
with the oldest stones, which have stories to tell of the most
remote past, and then to go on in a sort of chronological
order. If you really like it, and find it adds to the enjoy-
ment of your stay here, I will make out expeditions for
you, to go to the places all round this district, where the
interesting stones are to be seen, and will tell you all I know
about their history.
Our first stones are, indeed, what proper scientific people
would not call stones at all, but.rocks. You looked at
them, didn’t you, as we swam in—those grand old veterans
standing up out of the sea, all hammered and battered by
A


many a thousand easterly gales, great tilted slabs of grey
and green and purple and dark red, and above them the
steep slopes of heather and furze and pine-woods, stretching
up to the bold bare knobs of hard quartz-rock which form
the rugged skyline of Bray Head !
You wanted me to point you out some old things?
Well, there is something old! People say “as old as the
hills.” But, let me remind you, there is a great deal of
difference in the age of hills. They were not all born in
the same year, nor in the same millennium either. Some
hills are veritable infants in arms as compared with others.
And here you see one of the real old patriarchs, belonging
to the very first generation of sedimentary rocks. There
is only one older kind of stone in this quarter of the globe
at any rate, and that is probably the original ancestor of
all the sedimentary rocks, the primal crust which was
formed over the surface of this planet, when its ball of
molten matter first began to cool sufficiently on the out-
side to allow of the crystallisation of a solid shell. Those
Archaean Rocks, as they are called, are not to be found
as far south as this. But here you have the very first of
their successors. The people over yonder are mightily
proud of their chalk cliffs of Dover, but these rocks had
certainly been formed, and Bray Head had probably been
raised up to bear the brunt of the storms, countless ages
before the little shellfish lived whose remains were after-
wards compressed into that white stone at the bottom of
a Mesozoic sea. Something old you wanted ? Just look
at any geological chart, and down at the bottom of it,
with only the Archaean Rocks below them, the very oldest
group of the Palaeozoic or Primary Rocks you will find to
be the Silurians, and the oldest family of that group the
Primordial or Cambrian Rocks, called Cambrian (another


injustice to Ireland), because they are also to be met with
in Wales. Well, there they are, Cambrian shales and slates,
and what have they got to tell us of the ancient days when
they were made ?
They tell us that in those very ancient days there was
no dry land here, but Co. Wicklow was at the bottom of
a shallow ocean, into which from a great Northern Con-
tinent of Archaean Rock mighty rivers were carrying down
quantities of sand and mud, which century after century
were deposited here, layer upon layer on an ocean-floor,
which must at the same time have been slowly sinking,
until, in an enormous length of time, a mass of sediment
actually thousands of feet deep had accumulated, and was
slowly solidified into the rocks, of which we see a fragment
exposed here. Was there life on the globe in those very
ancient days? Oh, yes, of a kind. I tell you what! It
will be low tide before twelve to-day. We’ll come down
in the middle of the morning and bring a hammer with
us, and go round that Point there, and see if we can be
lucky enough to find a few specimens of the oldest fossil
that is known in the world, Oldhamia Antiqua. No, not
Old Hamia! It had nothing to do with the least reputable
of the sons of Noah. It is called after a distinguished
geologist who was the first person to discover this fossil,
and this is the place where he first discovered it. It is
nothing much to look at certainly, only a few wrinkles
radiating from a central point, found here and there on
breaking the slates along their bedding. It has indeed been
disputed whether it does represent any organic structure
at all or not. But now it is generally admitted as organic,
and so it shows that there was life of a kind, a very elemen-
tary kind, either floating in the sea, or washed down from
that Northern land, in those extremely ancient days, when


the mud was being deposited which now forms the rocks
of Bray Head.
Sorry for keeping you waiting! When one begins talk-
ing one forgets to dress quickly. Besides, it is very tempt-
ing to linger in this lovely sunshine. But, if I am ages
talking, at any rate I have got ages to talk about. For I
defy you to form any conception of the enormous ages
that it took for this mass of Cambrian Rocks to accumulate,
with occasional remains of very primitive living organisms
imbedded in them. And even then, when all the Cambrians
were laid down, the story was only begun. For then came
another enormously long period, during which another
series of layers of sand and mud was deposited on top of
the first series, and formed what we now know as the Lower
Silurian Rocks, a group one degree less ancient than the
Cambrians. No, they are not to be seen just here. Those
upper layers have entirely disappeared from Bray Head.
But I’ll tell you of one place at any rate where you can
see them conveniently exposed to view. l Go out along the
Dargle Road till you cross the river by the bridge at St.
Valerie gate, and there you will see them, where the cliff
was stripped and cut years ago, to make the ill-fated
Enniskerry Railway. And when there you had better go
a little farther up the river, into the Dargle and to the
Fisherman’s Pool, to see another very beautiful display
of these older Cambrian Rocks, all gracefully festooned
with ferns and creepers, where the river has carved its
way right through the solid mass of hard stone.
Well, now I am ready at last; let’s go home to break-
1 The Lower Silurian Rocks are to be found near the surface in a
narrow strip which rises from the sea at Shanganagh, and runs S.W.
through old Connaught, Ballyman, Fassaroe, Cookstown, and so on for
many miles, till it widens into a broad expanse in the neighbourhood of
Rathdrum. (Geological Survey Map.)
4
THE STONES OF BRAY


fast! But here is a puzzle for you now. If all these rocks
were originally laid in flat layers at the bottom of the sea,
and if the Lower Silurians were laid on top of the Cambrians,
how comes it, then, that they now form steep and rugged
mountains, and that you never find the Silurian deposits
on the tops of any of these mountains about here, but
only down in the lower ground, while the high knobs of
rock that stick out defiantly above the surface are always
Cambrian? Give it up? Well, just stop a minute before
you get out of sight of these cliffs, and you will see that
they tell us something about that too. You see how the
slabs or layers or strata of rock are sloping there. And
here close to the bathing-boxes you see them bent into
an arch. Afterwards, when we go round the Point to look
for Oldhamia, you will see still better at what steep angles
they are tilted up, in some places almost perpendicular.
In one place, a good long way round, you will find them
all folded and even turned back upon themselves. Of
course originally they were laid flat, one layer on top of
another. Their present positions show that at some very
ancient period these rocks were subjected to an enormous
pressure, a gigantic squeezing from the south-east and the
north-west, which pushed them up into folds and ridges,
running from north-east to south-west. And some of these
Cambrian strata, too, got altered in character, permeated
with silica and crystallised, and so changed into a much
harder and more stubborn rock, which we call quartz-rock.
Originally the ridges formed by this squeezing were much
higher and probably much more even and regular in
shape than anything you see in our scenery now. But
long ages of rain and wind and frost and sun have worn
them down to their present shapes, entirely carrying away
all trace of the younger strata of Lower Silurian Rock from


this part of the district, and removing immense quantities
of the Cambrian strata too. And, moreover, this wearing
has been irregular, because the rocks were of unequal hard-
ness. Wherever the very hard quartz-rock came to the
surface, it resisted the attacks of the weather in a way
that the slates and shales were unable to imitate. On the
other hand this quartz-rock, being so hard and stubborn,
would not bend as submissively under the great squeezing
as its kinsfolk did, but its strata became broken up into
very irregular lumps and knobs. These lumps and knobs
continue to stand out obstinately all over the district, and
their obstinacy is what has really made the most striking
features of our scenery immediately about Bray. You see,
wherever one of these strata of quartz-rock, through the
folding and then the weathering, got its broken edge crop-
ping out on the surface, there it arrested the wearing down
process, which still went on all round it, and effectually
protected whatever softer strata underlay it, and the result
was either a mountain with a rocky summit, or just a rocky
prominence out of the lower ground. One of these minor
rocky prominences is what is known among old inhabitants
as the Rock of Bray. Christ Church is built upon it, and
it can be seen cropping out above the surface in the garden
of Rockbrae, and under the Convent walls, both on the
roadside opposite to the end of the Church road and behind
the Meath Industrial School, and in other places too.
Another remarkable prominence of this kind is the Rock
of Kilcool.
But more interesting still are the mountains so made.
Bray Head has been kept where it is, instead of being all
washed down into the sea, by four tilted edges of this quartz-
rock, two of them very badly broken up. The best of them
forms the whole ridge of the mountain, as you see it looking


up from the south. Be sure and take the first opportunity
you can get of doing the beautiful walk or drive round the
top of Bray Head, starting from Killruddery gate. Then
you will be able to examine these knobs of quartz-rock
close at hand, and note the veins of white quartz running
through them, and see how, when you break them, they do
not split up in flat laminae like the slates and shales, but
leave a rough, irregularly fractured surface. And if you
examine that surface with a strong enough magnifying glass,
you will see that it is all made up of tiny crystals. And
from Bray Head you will also get a most charming view of
the other mountains which were made in the same way.
Beginning in the far distance with Howth (and Ireland’s
Eye, if you can get a glimpse of it), then let your eye
travel down to the pointed top of Carrickgollogan 1 (often
erroneously called Shankill) to the left of the great chimney
of the Ballycorus Smelting Works, and then from that to
the very similar summit of Carrigoona (sometimes called
Stilebawn), and across the Rocky Valley to Great Sugarloaf,
the monarch of them all, and then to Bray Head’s nearest
neighbour, Little Sugarloaf, with its three knobs, so like the
knobs on Bray Head itself. All these mountains were
made in exactly the same way, and the summits of all
consist of quartz-rock.
I strongly advise you to make expeditions to the tops
of all of them. Great Sugarloaf, of course, being the
highest (1659 ft.), has the most extensive view, and a very
splendid view it is. Carrickgollogan has perhaps the most
beautiful view of all. A good way to ascend Great Sugar-
loaf, if you want to examine the lie of the rocks, is to go
up the Rocky Valley about 100 -yards past the lane to
1 For the name of this mountain, see note on Chapter X, p. 114.
7
THE CAMBRIANS


Carrigoona with the letter-box at the corner, and then
turn up to the left by the road-contractor’s quarries, where
you can examine the broken stones, and see what a wonder-
ful variety of beautiful colours these ancient rocks take,
and then on upwards, keeping the great shoulder of the
mountain on your left, till you reach the neck and scramble
up the monarch’s rugged head. Looking back as you
ascend from the valley, you will see how the ridge of
quartz-rock runs right across it from Sugarloaf to Carri-
goona, defying the determined efforts of nature to wear it
down nice and smooth and cover it with a decent mantle of
turf and heather and furze. And as you go round the
shoulder you will see fine evidence of the age-long battle
between the weather and the rocks in the screes or long
slopes of fallen stones, which have come down from the
jagged edge of the shoulder, and which remind the ardent
mountaineer on a smaller scale of the great screes of Wast-
dale. Here and there, too, on the mountain side you will find
detached blocks of gleaming white quartz crystal. And
as for the views! I will leave you to find out what they
are like for yourself.
Oh! Did somebody tell you that Sugarloaf was a
vulgar Cockney name, and that the mountain ought to be
called Slieve-Cullen ? Well, if the name Sugarloaf is a
vulgar Cockney, at any rate it has passed muster in the
best Irish Society for more than two and a half centuries;
so I do not think you need be too much ashamed of having
a bowing acquaintance with it. And as for Slieve-Cullen,
that is a very doubtful matter. This is how it stands.
The ancient Irish Annals tell of a remarkable event which
happened more than a thousand years ago, and which was
a great wonder to all beholders. It was a strange eruption
of water from the side of Sliabh-Cualann, and the Annals


tell that there were little black trout in the water, 1 The
learned Dr. O’Donovan, who brought out the great edition
of the Annals of the Four Masters , states, with the usual
omniscience of annotators, that Sliabh-Cualann was the old
name of the Sugarloaf Mountain near Bray. But he gives
no reason for saying so; and I have strong suspicion that it
was only a confident guess. Big Sugarloaf certainly had a
very good right to be called Sliabh-Cualann, because it is
decidedly the most remarkable mountain in the territory of
Cualann, 2 about which I may have more to tell you another
day. But it is not at all credible that an eruption of water
with black fishes in it should have occurred there. Such a
thing might very easily happen in a limestone country,
with caves and underground lakes, in which fish sometimes
live and are usually black or very dark in colour. Such a
lake might burst out through the side of a hill, and cause
great astonishment. But Sugarloaf is quite the wrong kind
of geological formation for such an occurrence as that. It
is indeed a fact that since Dr. O’Donovan’s time, on the
night of the great Bray Flood, 3 there was a sudden out-
burst of water on the side of Big Sugarloaf, which cut a
great scar down the face of the mountain, which was visible
for two years after, and carried down with it rocks of very
large size. But that was only one of the many incidents of
flood resulting from the exceptional rainfall of those few
1 Annals of the Four Masters, A.D. 866; Annals of Ulster, A.D. 867.
Both Annals agree in giving the name as Sliabh-Cualann, otherwise I
should suppose that the story belonged to Sliabh-Cuilinn, which is the
ancient name of old Kilcullen Hill. It is said to have taken its name
from a man named Cuilleann. As there was a monastery there (see
O’Hanlon, Lives of the Irish Saints, vol. vi. p. 620), an exceptional occurrence
of the kind would be likely to be noted down and to find its way into the
Annals.
2 See Chapter VI, p. 47.
3 August 25, 1905. —Over 5 inches of rain fell at Fassaroe between the
morning of the 24th and the afternoon of the 25th.


days, and such a minor incident that it was not even men-
tioned in the newspapers, and would not have been at all
counted worthy of mention in the Annals. And as that
water only accumulated in a few hours in a small hollow on
the mountain side, and then burst out through a few feet
of peat that were holding it up, it would have been quite
impossible for it to contain black fishes, or any fishes at all.
So I do not think it could have been about Sugarloaf that
the old annalists told that story.
But all the same, the Sugarloafs had an older name,
as you would naturally expect. There is a curious collec-
tion of maps and notes about Ireland in the Record
Office, which is known as the Down Survey, made by Sir
William Petty in the middle of the seventeenth century.
I can give you the very words of its note about Little Sugar-
loaf—“ On Templecargie standeth a notable hill, cald by
the Irish Giltspeare, in English a sugarloafe.” 1 And on one
of Sir William Petty’s maps in his printed Atlas of Ireland,
published later on in that century, the larger mountain is
named both Gilspeare and Shugerloafe, and the smaller
Littlegiltspeare. You had heard Little Sugarloaf called the
Golden Spear, had you? Indeed that reminds me that I
have also seen the name varied by calling Big Sugarloaf
the Silver Spear. But all that seems rather silly, doesn’t
it ? It is not likely, is it, that the Irish called the moun-
tains by a name made up of two English words ? Of course
I suppose it is possible that the compilers of the Down
Survey may have translated some Irish name by Giltspeare,
but it is much more likely that the Irish called it by some
1 On the accompanying map it is marked as “ Litle Giltspeare Moun-
taine ” and on the same map Bray Head is named “ Slanehelly Mountaines.”
In Sir Wm. Petty’s printed Atlas of Ireland (1683), the latter name is
given as Shanbally. But the name “ Caput de Bree ” is at least as old as
1412, See Calendar of Chancery Rolls, 14 Henry IV, Pa. No. 8 (p. 202).


name that sounded like Giltspear. 1 Perhaps it was a name
made up of Geilt and Speir, and meant the pasture of the
sparrow-hawk. 2
1 Giltspur is still the name of a townland on Little Sugarloaf, but the
townland name of all the upper part is Barchuillia Commons.
2 For the whole subject of the Geology of this district dealt with in
Chapters I to 111, see Report of the British Association, Manchester, 1887,
p. 708 ; Handbook to the Dublin District, British Association, 1908, pp. 1-59 ;
Proceedings of the Royal Dublin Society, N.S., vol. vii. p. 169 ; Proceedings of
the Royal Geological Society of Ireland, “Some Notes on the Geology of
Bray Head,” vol. vi. p. 188 ; also an article by Maxwell Close in the same
volume, p. 28.


CHAPTER II
THE GREAT INTRUSION
So you took my advice, and you have seen the views from
Bray Head and Carrickgollogan and Great Sugarloaf? I
hope you said grace when you saw them. You know you
ought to say grace for that at least as much as for a
good dinner. And I hope you had pleasant company.
What? You are very thankful, at any rate, that I was
not there, so that you could enjoy the scenery without
the accompaniment of a prosy lecture? Oh, all right!
But I know you want me to tell you more all the same,
don’t you? Well then, what is it now? Why did I
pick out such a few mountains out of all you could see,
and say nothing about the biggest ones ? I remember
yes, I told you to look at Howth and Ireland's Eye, but
I said nothing about Killiney and Dalkey Island. And I
told you to look at Carrickgollogan and Carrigoona and the
Sugarloafs, but said nothing about all those big round-
shouldered fellows. Do you know their names? You saw
the Three Rock Mountain and the Two Rock, Glencullen
Mountain and Kippure, the Tonduffs and Maulin, the War
Hill and Dhous, 1 to say nothing of all that lies behind Dhous.
1 According to Joyce, Glencullen is probably Gleann-Cuilinn, the
“Holly Glen”; Kippure perhaps Cip-iubhair, “the trunk of the yew
tree”; Tonduif means “black backside”; Maulin means “little lump.”
Dhous or Douce is said by E. Fournier d’Albe (British Association Hand-
book, 1908) to be Beann-Damhuis, peak of Damhus. A family of the name
of Douce once lived in the district (see p. 158). Why the War Hill was so


TILTED CAMBRIAN SLATES AT
BRAY HEAD
WEATHERED GRANITE OVER
LOUGH BRAY
QUARTZ-ROCK BEHIND MEATH
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL
TWISTED STRATA OF MICA-SCHIST
AT THE SCALP


No, I said Inothing about them the other day, because, you
see, thereby hangs another tale. Another, and yet not
altogether another. It is a different tale, because these
mountains do not owe their forms (I hope you noticed
what smoothly rounded forms they were) to the upstanding
of obstinate lumps of quartz-rock. But it is not a quite
disconnected tale, because it starts from that same great
squeezing of the old Cambrian and Lower Silurian Rocks,
which lifted so much dry land above the sea, and was
the first step towards the shaping of Bray Head and
the Sugarloafs.
Of all the ridges formed by that great squeezing and
folding, probably the greatest was one which rose from
the sea at Dalkey, and ran on south-westwards in the shape
of a great hog’s back for seventy miles to the neighbourhood
of Wexford. It must have been fully 5000 or 6000 feet
high for a considerable part of its length, so that altogether
it formed a very respectable crumple on the earth’s surface.
But an interesting thing happened in the formation of that
crumple. I suppose the top strata, the Lower Silurians,
were softer and more pliable than the old Cambrians,
perhaps because the latter were stiffened by their layers of
quartz-rock; and so, while the top strata were pushed up
into this high ridge by the earth-pressure, the lower strata
would not bend so freely, and rather let themselves be
crushed and split than be folded at such acute angles; and
the result was a parting between the rocks that so long
had lain in immediate contact, and the formation of a
vacuum, or shall I rather say the danger that a vacuum
would be formed, all through the heart of this great ridge.
called is not known. Curry (Ordnance Survey Letters, 1837) refers to
“ a battle between the English and the O’Tooles 300 years ago on War
Hill.”


What a vacuum it would have been! What a titanic
cathedral with a vaulted roof! But, as we all know,
Nature abhors a vacuum, and always hastens to take steps
to fill it up, almost before it has had time to be a vacuum
at all. And so in this case. As soon, no doubt, as the
parting between the rocks commenced. Mother Earth began
to push up through the cracks and splits in the lower
strata a molten mass of rock-material from her great caldrons
down below. This molten material came up tremendously
hot, and at very high pressure, and filled up with a tight
packing every inch of vacant space between the old rocks.
And besides, being so hot, it burnt and changed the char-
acter of the rocks which came in immediate contact with
it. But then, having got up so near the surface of the
globe, it could not retain its heat long, and both it and
the rocks it had burned cooled down together. It crystal-
lised under great pressure and became granite, while the
Silurian rocks which it had spoiled became mica-schist.
And let me tell you it was a big cake that Mother Earth
cooked that time. Some people think that the Dublin
and Wicklow Mountains are pretty, but rather tame as
compared with what other places have to show; but it is
well to remember that not only does Bray Head afford
the oldest fossils that have been found anywhere in the
world, but also in this great Leinster chain of granite
mountains we have the biggest single mass of granite
in all the British Isles.
Of course, you are thoroughly familiar with the Granite.
For it is the only first-class building stone in this neigh-
bourhood, though an expensive enough stone to work. And
even if we are not all grand enough to have the walls of
our houses built of it, like those of Christ Church are, and
of the Church of the Holy Redeemer too, and like Killrud


dery and Hollybrook and Old Conna Hill, still at least
the window-sills and the doorsteps are generally of granite,
and often a good many other parts besides. You know
its rough white surface, and the little scales of mica that
sparkle here and there upon it. You are probably not
so familiar with the Mica-Schist, though it is very easy
to recognise it—it splits up so easily into thin flakes, and
wherever it splits the new surface is covered with mica.
And it is always to be found just in contact with the
granite. It appears now in two narrow strips, one on
each side of the granite mass. The strip on our side
averages about a mile in breadth on the map, that on the
Kildare side about half a mile. We may infer from that,
that the thickness of the Silurian Rock which was affected
by the heat of the molten intrusion was rather less than
half a mile, say nearly 2000 feet, and that the original
shape of the great fold of Silurian Rock, and of the granite
dome which formed within it, was not symmetrical, but
was much steeper on the western than on the eastern side.
I think you will agree that the heat must have been
considerable which burnt through nearly 2000 feet of
solid rock.
But I have not yet made it clear how it happened that
what was originally a great ridge, at least 5000 feet above
the present sea-level, formed of Silurian Rock on the outside,
with a core of granite and mica-schist concealed inside it, has
come to its present condition. If you go to examine it now,
you will find that all the upper part of the Leinster range
from end to end is granite, wherever the rock appears on the
surface, and only as you come down the mountain side below
the granite, do you find the mica-schist, and below that
again the unaltered Silurian Rocks. And, moreover, its
highest point now, at Lugnaquilla, is only 3039 feet above


the sea, and the highest point visible from Bray, the top of
Kippure, is no more than 2475 feet high. And, instead of
being a continuous ridge, it is now broken by many trans-
verse valleys into a number of separate mountains. The
reason of this is, that as we have already seen with regard
to the Sugarloafs and Bray Head, the present shape of the
mountains is due to the wear and tear of many long ages,
undei the influence of rain and wind and frost and sun.
On the exposed top of that great ridge the Silurian Rock
and mica-schist no doubt disappeared very rapidly, until the
granite was at last revealed to view. The granite, too, wore
down, though less rapidly. Hollows formed here and there,
which from century to century were deepened into valleys,
as the surface water all found its way into them and ran
down them in streams. And voild , you see the result. A
series of dome-shaped mountains, all granite along its cen-
tral axis, with the remains on its lower quarters of a shirt of
mica-schist and an outer-garment of unaltered Silurian, while
natuie has mercifully covered its nakedness above with an
ever varying velvet mantle of peaty soil, covered with purple
heather and golden furze and green, yellow, or brown
bracken, and woods of larch and fir.
Now you must really make some expeditions, and see
these things close at hand for yourself. You know the
granite very well in buildings. Go and see it at home.
You know perhaps that it is about the most durable building
stone in use. Kingstown Harbour is built of it, and looks
as if it would stand a great many storms. The Fastnet
Lighthouse was built of granite, which had to be brought
from a great distance, because no other stone would so well
stand the rough treatment which the Atlantic gives when
it really gets angry. 1 And we feel quite satisfied that
1 See History of the Fastnct Rock Lighthouses, by C. W. Scott.


the walls of our Bray churches will not crumble and want
restoring as often as the walls of most English cathedrals.
But you will find that even granite suffers severely on
the top of a mountain. Go to Lough Bray, and climb,
carefully of course, up to the great cliff which overhangs
the Lower Lake, and see how the granite there has been
split up into huge blocks, many of which have during
past ages come thundering down to the lower ground,
where they lie piled on top of one another like enormous
lumps of sugar, each as large as a good-sized room. Then
go on up to the summit of Kippure, and, as you go, look at
the floor of the ditches and streamlets in the peat, and see
how the granite has been disintegrated into a coarse white
and silver sand. And if you have a night to spare, turn
southward from Kippure till you strike the Military Road,
and go on by Sally Gap down to lovely Lough Tay, and
thence on down the river to smiling Lough Dan, and at
each of these lakes examine the beautiful silver strands, well
known to trout fishers, where the inflowing streams have
made their deltas of material robbed from the granite rocks
above. And as you will probably be tired by then, may
you have the good luck to find, or the prudence to have
written to order, a boat to meet you and take you across to
Peter Doyle’s cottage for your supper and your bed, and not
have to walk or climb all the way round to it!
And then take another expedition. Ride to Glencullen,
and from there climb up to the top of the Two Rock
Mountain, and examine the condition of the two great
lumps, which have somehow managed to continue standing
out above the general detrition of all around them. There
they stand bravely enough, but very ruinous lumps they
are! And if you go on beyond them to the actual summit,
you can look down on more of these strange excrescences on
B


that lower shoulder, which Dublin people imagine to be the
real mountain, and call the Three Rock Mountain.
And when you are returning, ride to Kilternan, and
come back through the Scalp. See how the granite has
been broken and tumbled there. Try if you can to imagine
by what means that great gap was carved through the huge
solid mass. For my part, lam not convinced by any theory
that I have heard propounded. And then, as you come out
at the Bray side, look for the point where the granite ends
and the mica-schist begins. You cannot fail to recognise
it—the difference between the rocks is so obvious. And
just after you pass by the first projections of mica-schist,
observe the piece of perpendicular rock-face by the roadside,
and see how the strata were bent and twisted in the great
earth convulsions that formed this range of mountains.
Perhaps the finest place in the neighbourhood of Bray
to see the mica-schist is at Powerscourt Waterfall. The
body of the mountain from which the waterfall comes is, of
course, granite; but for the last half-mile of its course above
the fall the stream runs over mica-schist, and the actual
cliff that makes the fall is all of that altered rock. Beware
of attempting to climb it! The greatest skill and the
coolest head would be of no avail upon that treacherous
surface. Below that cliff the rock of the deer park is
ordinary Lower Silurian, while the hills on the other side of
the deer park, opposite to Maulin and Dhous, are Cambrian,
with a top ridge, as usual, of quartz-rock.
There is something intensely fascinating about this huge
mass of granite, and I find it hard to stop talking about it.
It formed such a tremendously solid and immovable core in
the midst of the sedimentary rocks among which it had
intruded itself, that it saved our mountains from being all
rearranged on new lines when a later great earth-pressure


POWERSCOURT WATERFALL (MICA-SCHIST)
(From a photograph by B. Killick, Bray)


came from north and south, and set the ridges, or mountain
chains, in most of the rest of Ireland running approximately
from east to west. It forms the great watershed from
which nearly all our rivers start in this direction or that.
In the course of a walk of not much more than six miles,
from the N.W. side of Kippure to the S.W. side of Dhous,
you could visit the sources of the Liffey, the Dodder, the
Bray River, the Vartry, and the Annamoe River. And its
solitudes are glorious. If ever you get tired of the crowds,
and want to be alone with God’s great works, those big
moors are among the loneliest places in Ireland. You
might wander for days from where the Military Road leaves
Lough Bray, away by Sally Gap and over Gravale and Duff
Hill and Mullaghcleevaun, and past the Head of Glen-
macnass and Lough Ouler and Wicklow Gap and Lough
Nahanagan into Glenmalure, and so on to the great Lugna-
quilla; and all the time you might never see a house or hear
the voice of anything more human than a grouse cock,
unless you happened to have very long sight and good
hearing. Yes! Give me the Cambrian Mountains for
beauty, but the great Granite Intrusion for eternal strength,
and lonely grandeur, and mystic awe. 1
1 For reference to scientific treatises, see note at the end of Chapter I.


CHAPTER III
THE ROCKS THAT TRAVELLED
You mean to say, then, that you have found me out for a
rank impostor, and that all I told you about Bray Head and
the Sugar loafs being entirely composed of Cambrian slates
and shales with harder seams of quartz-rock, and about the
quite different formation of the great Granite mass, turns
out to be incompatible with the facts. Well, let us have a
look at your facts. They amount to this. You found a
few blocks of unmistakable granite high up on the shoulders
of Big Sugarloaf, and some bigger blocks half-way up the
face of Little Sugarloaf, and one near the farmhouse on the
top of Bray Head, and you feel quite sure that nobody
carried them there. And you found a lot of granite,
including some large blocks, which you are sure the sea
could not have washed there from Dalkey or Killiney, lying
among the debris at the foot of the cliffs of Bray Head.
And so you conclude that the Sugarloafs and Bray Head
are partly composed of granite too, and that all those
beautiful theories about the ways in which the different
mountains were formed fall to the ground.
Let me begin, then, by congratulating you on your powers
of observation. You did well to find the granite on Big
Sugarloaf, if no one had told you where to look for it. On
Little Sugarloaf and round Bray Head it is easy enough
to see. And I quite agree with you that it was not men nor
animals nor water that carried it to any of these places.


But for all that there can be no doubt that it was carried to
all of them, none of those mountains being its native place,
and that it was carried by a mightier power than even that
of ocean currents. But let me add a few more facts to yours.
On the northern slopes of the Dublin portion of the Granite
Range geologists have found blocks of another kind of granite,
■which never were crystallised there, but which have been
recognised as having travelled from Ailsa Craig in the Clyde.
And certainly they did not come by the Glasgow steamer.
They have also found beds of crushed marine shells,
evidently pushed up there from the bottom of the sea.
Moreover, if you examine the cliff’s of Bray Head again, you
will find that the blocks of granite there have evidently
fallen out of a layer of a very stony clay which lies on top
of the Cambrian Rocks, sometimes on the broken and worn-
down ends of the tilted strata. This clay contains stones of
various kinds, granite and limestone, and several others too,
which were not originally formed anywhere near Bray
Head; and that the stones were not carried there by water
is proved by the fact that they are not water-worn and
rounded at their edges, but still show the sharp and jagged
fractures, where they were originally broken from their
native mountain sides. And on exposing the surface of the
underlying rocks, geologists have also found a peculiar kind
of scratches, of which they well know the meaning, running
always approximately from north to south.
Now what history do all these strange writings on the face
of the country tell us ? It is another chapter in the history
of our district, the chapter of a very ancient period indeed,
but still very many ages later than the period of the Great
Intrusion, and still more incalculable ages later than the
time we first spoke of when the material of the Cambrian
Rocks was being laid here in a shallow sea. At the time of


which these errant blocks of stone and those crushed shells,
and that boulder clay, and the scratches on the rocks tell us,
all our mountains had been formed and standing for long
ages, and had already been worn down to something more or
less approaching their present shapes. And during those
intervening ages many interesting things had been happening
over the world’s surface, the records of which are to be found
elsewhere, but not here. Countless new forms of life had been
brought into existence, more and more elaborately developed.
The Carboniferous forests had grown, which afterwards were
converted into coal. Ocean floors had been covered with the
remains of little shellfish, and then lifted up high and dry to
form hills and cliffs of chalk and limestone. But at length—
at long length—came that next period of which the history
is written here, a period at which all the face of the land
was covered, not now with sea, but with snow and ice. A
time of intense cold had come; and now great snowfields
and enormous glaciers were the main features of the scenery
of all this quarter of the globe. That is what the stray
blocks of far-wandered stone, and the boulder clay, and the
shells, and the scratches all point to. They all alike tell of
Ice. Ice is the mighty carrier which transports the great
blocks of stone that fall on its surface in the far mountain
valleys from which its glaciers start, till at last it drops them
in places quite foreign to them. Ice is the great cutter and
grinder which scores parallel scratches on the surface of the
rocks over which its glaciers slowly move, and grinds down
hard rocks into fine mud, which it pushes along all mixed up
with broken pieces of stone, till at last a warmer period
comes, and the ice melts and the glaciers shrink backward,
and leave their beds covered with a layer of boulder clay.
Ice enormous, irresistible, titanic, —ice ever pushing, pushing
southward from a great Northern Continent with its slow


but never-ceasing current, —ice that carried huge rocks on
its surface, while it crushed and ground and thrust whatever
it found beneath it, —that is the mighty scribe, which has
left its story so plainly written all over this part of Ireland.
Its records tell us that at the severest part of that cold age
there must have been a huge glacier coming down from the
North, which filled up the whole bed of the Irish Sea, and
covered a great deal of the surface of the land too, even
reaching up to a considerable height on some of the
mountains, and made Ireland for the time being quite as in-
hospitable a country as Greenland is to-day. To some of
us, who, winter after winter, vainly long for a fortnight’s
skating, it may seem incredible that Bray was ever in the
grip of so deadly a cold. But you can read for yourself the
unmistakable record, and know that it is certainly true.
Gradually that age of intense cold passed away, and
after a long period there came a time when the enormous
glaciers from the North had shrunk back, and the tides
were flowing again in the Irish Sea, and the rivers running
into it as they run to-day, only probably much bigger and
more turbid in the summer months, and choked with ice
in the winter. But though the great glaciers were gone,
there were still little local glaciers of our own on the
Wicklow Mountains, like the glaciers of Switzerland. If
you want to see plain traces of one of these, go up to
Lough Bray, one of the most delightful spots on earth,
provided you escape the midges. Look and see how the
two lakes there were formed. By what means were those
two great dams of huge stones and earth heaped up, to
hold back the waters of the little streams and form those
sparkling lakes ? And go up on to the ridge between the
two lakes, and walk along it overlooking the Upper Lough
Bray. How did those enormous blocks of loose rock get


there on the top of the ridge ? They must have come down
from higher ground; but the higher ground is at the other
side of the deep hollow in which the lake lies. How did
they jump across it? Again the answer is Ice. Only a
glacier could have carried those great rocks to the places
where they now lie; and the dams which have formed the
lakes are what are called terminal moraines; in other words
they are heaps of debris, which are always to be found at
the foot of a glacier, where the ice melts into rivers, and
drops all the stones and rubbish, which it has carried so far,
in a heap, which continues to grow so long as the glacier
continues to come to an end at that same spot.
And then gradually that period of more moderate cold
passed away too, and the ice and snow melted away even
from the mountain tops, and left the hills and valleys that
we know to-day, though the hills have been worn down a
little lower, and the valleys cut a little deeper in the
thousands of years that have elapsed since then. And ever
as the ice shrank back, the vegetation advanced, and per-
haps Alpine crocuses and gentians flowered at the edge of
the snow, as they do in Switzerland to-day. And then,
no doubt, great pine forests grew, and were followed, as the
climate became milder, by woods of oak and birch. And
among the roots of the trees the sphagnum moss began to
grow, rising up year by year upon its own decayed remains,
until it built up thick bogs of peat. And in the shelter of
the trees and of the great rocks which the ice had dropped
here and there, the fauna of a temperate climate began to
increase and multiply, and to take the place of the rein-
deer and other Arctic creatures. Now the great Irish Elk
became king of the forests; and then, as his family became
scarce, the red stags assumed the monarchy, and fought one
another year by year in gallant contests for lordship and


for the allegiance of the hinds. Herds of wild oxen multi-
plied in the lower pastures, and swine abounded in the
oak-woods, and packs of wolves hunted their prey. And
another hunter, too, began to pursue the deer, using for the
chase not fangs and claws, but artificial weapons made ot
stone. For probably the Great Ice Age had scarcely passed
away before Man made his appearance in this isle. 1
1 For reference to scientific treatises, see note at the end of Chapter I.


CHAPTER IV
THE CROMLEAC BUILDERS
We began our last talk with erratic blocks of granite, and
ended it with primitive Man. And now I must tell you
that the first traces to be found in this part of the world
of the activity of primitive Man consist in the use that he
made of some of these erratic blocks of granite. The first
traces ? Well, perhaps that is doubtful. It is impossible
to date the various monuments of their occupation which
the earliest human inhabitants of the country have left
behind them ; and possibly some of the stone weapons which
have been picked up here and there, or of the dug-out
canoes which have been found preserved in bogs, may be
the oldest pieces of human handiwork in the country; or
possibly, again, some of the raths and duns which mark the
ancient habitations and fortresses of former races may really
deserve the prize for greatest antiquity. We cannot tell for
certain. But at any rate there is no definite reason for
supposing that any existing monuments of human labour
are more ancient than the Cromlechs; while, on the other
hand, there is this to be said, that in the days of St. Patrick,
when raths and duns were still occupied by the inhabitants
of the country, the cromlechs appear to have been already
objects shrouded in mystery and awe. The story of a giant
of an ancient race, that arose from a cromlech to address St.
Patrick, 1 shows that in the early days of Irish Christianity
1 For this story, taken from Colgan, “ Trias Thaum .,” Sexta Vita Pat.,
p. 83, see Wakeman, Handbook of Irish Antiquities, p. 60, where it closes
a discussion of the whole subject of cromlechs or dolmens.


a true tradition of their origin prevailed; and that
tradition never died out, as is shown by the common
peasant name for them of Giants’ Graves, though the Irish
love for legend and romance attached them to the story of
the elopement of Dermod and Grania. It was left to the
perverted archaeological ingenuity of the beginning of last
century to prove to its own satisfaction that they were
Druids’ altars. But excavation has shown that they cer-
tainly are sepulchral monuments, and that they were built
over graves, which no doubt contained the bodies of great
warriors and kings.
There are plenty of cromlechs, or, if you prefer to call
them so, dolmens, in the neighbourhood of Bray. Perhaps
the best to visit, if you want to get a good idea of what a
cromlech was intended to be, is the one at Glendruid. Hide
out on a Monday up the Dublin Road as far as Cabinteely.
Turn to the left at the cross-roads in the village, and just
after passing the corner of a lane you will come to the gate
of Glendruid House. If the same courteous permission is
still granted, as I found when I visited the Glen, you will
have no difficulty in obtaining admission on a Monday; and,
walking down to the stream and up along its banks through
a pretty little wood, you will soon come to the cromlech.
Look at it well! If you were an engineer, perhaps you
would be able to calculate how many tons that great block
of granite weighs, and no doubt you would try to formulate
some theory, how the builders managed without modern
machinery to get it up on top of the supporting stones. At
any rate we may be pretty sure that they did not bring it
there from a distance. No doubt they chose the place for
the grave, because the great stone was there, dropped long
before in that spot by a glacier. Then go to the lower
end, and look in under the great covering stone at the


rectangular chamber with its stone-paved floor between the
stones that support the roof. It is easy to recognise that
for a burial vault, with the imperishable monument of that
great granite block over it.
On your way back to Bray you can turn aside to the left
in Loughlinstown village, going down along the stream and
again turn to the left along the Ballybrack road, and soon,
in a field on the left side of the road, you will see a much
smaller, but still a very good specimen of a cromlech, though
the support of the roof stone on one side has given way.
About the biggest of all is to be seen at Kilternan. It
is out on a hillside beyond the ruins of the old church and
the dilapidated remains of a paper-mill, behind a place
called Kilternan Abbey. The hillside is all covered with
scattered blocks of granite with furze and bracken growing
round them, and one huge block has been set upon some
smaller blocks to form the monument. It has been esti-
mated that the covering stone weighs eighty tons. 1 Some
of its supporting stones seem to have subsided under their
burden, but the roof is still supported better than the little
one at Loughlinstown, and you can if you please get into
the chamber under it.
Another cromlech, in less perfect preservation, is to be
found on the side of Carrickgollogan, above Knocklinn.
The easiest way to get to it is to turn off the road to
the Scalp by the lane at Ballyman, and just after the lane
comes out on the mountain-side and turns to the right, the
cromlech will be found close to the hedge in the field under
the lane.
Another small one is to be found at Parknasilloge, just
by the drive which leads to the house through a field from
1 Wakeman, Handbook of Irish Antiquities, p. 66.


KILTERNAN CROMLECH
BALLYBRACK CROMLECH
GLENDRUID CROMLECH
GLASKENNY CROMLECH


the road. It is the steep road from Enniskerry to Glen-
cree. This one originally had a fine stone circle round it;
but very little of that is now to be seen. 1 And if you
go on through Kilmalin to Annacrivey Schoolhouse, and
there take the lane to Glaskenny, and go on a little beyond
that farm till you come to the boundary line between Glas-
kenny and Onagh townlands, in a hedge on the left of the
lane, you will there find a big cromlech, of which the great
roof stone has fallen right over on one side.
But cromlechs are not the only remarkable methods of
burial by which those ancient tribes have left their records
for us to puzzle over. Sometimes they made very similar stone
chambers covered over with granite boulders, but of rather
smaller dimensions and altogether underground. One of
this kind was discovered a few years ago in a field between
the village of Newcastle and the sea. The farmer had been
annoyed by the plough striking the ridge of a big stone
just under the surface of the ground, and determined to
remove it. But on digging round it, it was discovered to
be the lid of a cist containing a skeleton. Sometimes, too,
after building the burial chamber or chambers and roofing
over, they covered the whole with a great heap or cairn of
stones and earth. The ruined remains of two such sepulchres
may be seen, one on the townland of Ballybetagh, not far
from the lane which turns up to the west from the southern
end of the Scalp and goes on to Kilternan—the other on
the slope of the Two Rock Mountain, a little way above the
village of Glencullen. The carefully built chambers of the
1 Ordnance Survey Letters (1837). Eugene Curry describes it as “ a
perfect unmutilated cromlech in Barrnasillage (Kilgarron in Name Book)
townland . . . There is first a square enclosure 36 ft. by 18 ft. Ten of the
large stones which formed this enclosure remain. Immediately within
lies a small circular enclosure, ... in the centre of this circle is the
cromlech.”


Ballybetagh mausoleum are very curious and well worth
studying.
Another monument to be seen at Glencullen, in a field
just opposite to the gate of Glencullen House, is a Pillar
Stone, a great standing block roughly squared, and this also
most probably marked the burial place of some chieftain.
If you are not afraid of a longish and very hilly ride, I
advise you to make an excursion taking in Ballybetagh and
Kilternan and Glencullen, and then on across the valley to
Kilmalin, and after diverging to Parknasilloge, go on again
to Glaskenny, and then down into Powerscourt demesne at
the Bridge, and so home. You will then have seen a fair
variety of ancient sepulchral monuments, and some splendid
scenery besides, rather off the beaten track.
In this connection I may as well also mention that there
are in the neighbourhood two so-called “ Moats,” one of them
that of Knocksink in the pretty wooded glen above Ennis-
kerry, which is probably not at all an artificial mound, —the
other in Old Connaught demesne close to the entrance from
the Dublin Road, which is certainly not artificial. Its beds
of gravel and sand were certainly laid by natural means,
and not by the interfering hand of man. But though the
origin of this mound was quite natural, and though nothing
could possibly be said against the obvious use which has
been made of it as a gravel pit, still the tradition which
called it the Fairy Moat, 1 and which vaguely connected it
with the Dedannans or the Sidhe, was unexpectedly justi-
fied when, in cutting for the gravel, traces of human burials
were found, and the remains of great funeral feasts, close to
the surface of the mound. 2 The moral of which is that such
1 Fifty years ago it used to be called “Toole’s Moat.” O’Hanlon,
Lives of the Saints, vol. vii. p. 290.
2 See two papers by Wakeman in the Journal R.5.A.1., 1894, p. 54,
and 1895, p. 106.


traditions implied in old names clinging to particular spots,
are not to be too hastily despised. Of course in the West
of Ireland no one would dare to dig gravel out of such a
mound, or to take stones from a monument like that at
Ballybetagh. Over here we are less superstitious and timid.
Let us hope we are not also less reverent towards relics ot
the past! And who knows what secrets may still be con-
cealed in Knocksink, or in Knocknandiahab (the Devil’s Hill),
which lies in a little hollow to the right of the Calary Road,
about 100 yards after you reach the top of the Long Hill
round Big Sugarloaf ?
But, after all, who were these early inhabitants who have
left us these various memorials of their deaths ? And how
long ago may we suppose that they lived? Well, if you
like, I will tell you what the old Irish Annalists say about
them, and indeed you may rely upon it, that there was
probably some foundation of fact for the stories they told,
even if the details of those stories suffered some perversion
during long oral tradition by reason of the perfervidum
vngenium Hibernorum. The Annalists then tell of live
early colonisations of Ireland by tribes migrating from the
East. 1 First, they say, came Parthalon and his followers
from Greece, in the Year of the World 2520. One of his
followers was Brea, son of Seanboth, a man of many talents,
who founded Dun-Brea. But it was not here that that
fortress was built, but on the plain of Bregia, north of
Dublin, and nigh to Ben-Edar or Howth. 2 The descendants
of these colonists were almost entirely swept away by a
plague about 300 years later. Soon after that disaster a
second colony was led into Ireland by Nemed from Scythia.
1 For a brief summary of this legendary history, see Joyce, Concise
History of Ireland, pp. 37-39.
1 2 See Appendix IV, p. 219.


The Nemedians are chiefly remembered for their internecine
warfare with the Formorian pirates, by which, together
with the plague, their stock was in time extinguished. The
third colony was that of the Firbolgs, which came from Greece,
and after a generation was followed by another colony from
Greece, the Dedannans who are remembered as mighty
magicians. By magic they got the advantage over their
predecessors, the Firbolgs; and by magic they almost suc-
ceeded in preventing the next colony who followed two
centuries later from becoming established in the Island.
But valour and determination prevailed over magic; and
after terrible conflicts the Milesians, the ancestors of the
present real old Irish clans, such as the O’Tooles and the
O’Byrnes of our own district, gained possession of the
country. Of all these legendary tribes the one which most
laid hold of the imagination of later generations was the
fourth, the Dedannans. They came to be regarded as quite
supernatural beings, and were identified with the Sidhe, or
fairies, whose power is still much feared in ignorant parts of
the country. And to them all mysterious and awesome
antiquities were assigned, and by the fear of their wrath
such antiquities were preserved: until in more recent times
it became the fashion to ascribe everything to the Danes, —
whereas in good sooth the Danes were more given to
destroying and plundering than to erecting any monuments,
until they became settled and converted and took to build-
ing cities and cathedrals.
But from those old traditions I think we may draw at
least this much as a probable conclusion, that when our
gallant ancestors fought for the possession of this island,
they had to fight against a ruling tribe which held the still
older inhabitants in subjection by a superior wisdom and
skill in many arts which so impressed our rude fighting


forefathers as to seem to them supernatural. And very
probably it is rightly to those Dedannans that the erection
of most of the rude stone monuments of Ireland is to be
ascribed. And in that case, although the cromlechs and
other monuments which I have invited you to visit are
certainly very ancient and quite prehistoric, still they would
come a very long time after the first appearance of man in
this island, and many ages after the time when the granite
boulders that they loved to use were dropped in convenient
places for them by the glaciers of the Great Ice Age.
c


CHAPTER V
THE RATH MAKERS
Have you ever taken the lower walk round the Cliffs of
Bray Head to Greystones ? Well, I vote we take our lunch
with us to-morrow and go for a long walk, coming back that
way. Let us plan it out to-night. Here, look at this six-
inch Ordnance Sheet. We will go through Killruddery
Deer Park to the Lodge at the far end, and then turn up
that lane to the right till we reach the top of the hill; and
then we will turn to the left across the fields, following this
fence due south, till we come to that circle marked there,
where the corners of four fields meet in the townland of
Cool-na-Skeagh. I would like to show you that, for it is
rather a fine specimen of a rath for this part of Ireland.
We shall find there a high rampart of stones and earth,
enclosing a circular space 35 or 40 yards in diameter.
There is not so much architecture (shall I say?) or engineer-
ing skill shown in these raths as in the cromlechs; but still
they are interesting. If a cromlech marks the resting place
of some dead hero, it was, however, in a rath or a dun that
that hero must have lived and loved, and fought and ruled.
No traces are left of the actual houses that stood within the
rampart. Probably the house of the chieftain and those of
his retainers alike were built of wood and wattles plastered
over with mud; but the house of the chieftain would be
larger than the rest, and more decorated with paint outside,
and with woven hangings and trophies of the chase on the'


walls within. Even the famous Halls of Tara were built in
the same sort of way on a large scale. Of those great royal
palaces on Tara’s Hill not a trace remains, except the earthen
mounds by which we can trace out the ground-plan of the
whole. The buildings, no doubt, perished in a very few
years after they ceased to be inhabited, having been cursed
by St. Ruadan of Lorrha. That was the manner of building
all through the central and eastern parts of Ireland. In
some other parts, however, stone was used even in those
primitive days. They just took whatever materials came
most handy. In these parts there were woods in abundance,
and earth was the commonest thing there was, whereas stone
was not to be found in any large quantities without quarry-
ing, and so here we find earthen raths which once contained
houses of the materials that were ready to hand. If, on the
other hand, you visit such places as the Burren of Clare or
the islands off the Western Coast, you will find that trees
are very scarce indeed, and that earth unencumbered by big
stones is at almost as great a premium;—you cannot dig a
piece of ground to grow potatoes without having to spend
days and days doing nothing but lifting stones off' the
surface and piling them into great heaps or into walls five
or six feet thick all round your little patch. No wonder,
then, that in those parts you find stone forts, which are
much more remarkable things to look at than our earthen
ramparts, and beehive cells of unmortared stone still standing
where they were built long ages ago. Our raths are not so
imposing, but at any rate they are very plentiful, and they
show that this part of the country must have been pretty
thickly inhabited in ancient days. Look, for instance, on
this other Ordnance Sheet at the townland of Killegar, to
the west of the Scalp, next to Ballybetagh with its stone
sepulchre, which I advised you to visit. You can count no


less than ten raths on Killegar townland, though I may tell
you that some of them are easier to recognise upon the map
than on the ground. Partly through the action of natural
forces, but much more as a result of agricultural operations,
the old raths are slowly but surely disappearing. Look, for
instance, at this very large one with a double rampart
marked here at the other side of the Scalp on the townland
of Phrompstown under Carrickgollogan. A hundred years
ago it must have been a very remarkable feature. Now it
is quite hard to recognise the slight ridges, which are all
that remain of the old ramparts. Here again, to the north
of Carrickgollogan, on Rathmichael townland, you see a still
larger outer rampart of oval shape, with a small circular
rampart inside it. That rath crowns a round hill of mica-
schist, and was, no doubt, once a very strong fortress, though
now you have to hunt for the traces of its old defences. 1
How high the ramparts originally were, it would be hard to
guess. But, no doubt, the earthen slope was crowned by a
wooden palisade of pointed stakes, which would be hard
enough to climb, especially if a man with a stone-headed
battle-axe was waiting for you on the other side. No doubt
the first aim of an attacking force would be to set the
stockade on fire if possible, and so make a breach through
which to invade the fortress.
But, of course, the interesting question is, Who were the
makers of these raths? And that is an impossible question
to answer definitely. There seems to be no way of telling
when primitive men gave up living in caves and took to
1 Dr. D’Alton, writing about 1832, describes this as being “ perhaps
the finest rath in Ireland.” He describes the inner circle 28 yards
in diameter, a deep fosse lower down the hill, much of which was
still discernible, and “a yet wider mound and wall enclosing even
this.” He also describes the “stone circle, or rather the remains of
three concentric circles,” that lies in the hollow to the west of the rath.


building huts for themselves, and surrounding them with
circular defences of stone or earth. Did the cromlech
builders live in raths and duns ? No doubt they did. But
so did later races also right down into historic times.
So far as I know, the first definite record of the making
of a rath in the Irish Annals is in connection with the
coming of the Milesians. The legend goes that when the
Milesians had succeeded in defeating the Dedannans and
had taken possession of the country, the two brothers Eber-
Finn and Eremon divided Ireland between them, Leinster
being part of Eremon , s share. It was not long before they
fought, and Eber was killed and Eremon became sole king,
the first Milesian king of Ireland. In the same year in
which he defeated his brother, Anno Mundi 3501, the
Annals tell us that Eremon made two kingly raths, one of
which was Rath Oinn in Crioch-Cualann, now known as
Rathdown; 1 and at the same time his only surviving
brother Amergin, poet and law-giver, made a rath at
Tocher Inbheir Mor, in the territory of the Ui-Eneach-Glas
Cualan, now known as Arklow.
But that reminds me that we have been forgetting all
about the walk we were planning for to-morrow. Let me
see; we had got to Cool-na-Skeagh rath, and it was from
there we made this long digression. Well, after Cool-na-
Skeagh I think we might go on to see the site of Eremon’s
kingly rath at Rathdown. We shall have to go back to our
lane, and then down eastwards past Templecarrig House,
till we cross the main road here, and if possible we will
make our way on still due eastwards, along the stream, past
the old ruined church of Rathdown, till we come to this
1 Annals of the Four Masters, A.M. 3501, and Annals of Clonmacnoise,
p. 28. In the latter the place is called “Eathonie in the land of
Kwalann.”


spot where Rathdown Castle is marked on the map. There
is no castle to be seen there now, only a limekiln. But
when Eugene Curry was making the Archaeological Survey
of this part of Ireland in 1837, before the railway was
made, there were remains both of the castle and of the
rath to be seen. I will read you what he says in the
Ordnance Survey Letters , —here it is : “ There can scarcely
be a rational doubt that the present name Rathdown is a
slight corruption of Rath Oinn, in orthography only, for
they must be pronounced the same way; and to confirm me
in this opinion I found that the Castle of Rathdown was
built in the north side of a rath of considerable dimensions,
large portions of which remain yet on the south and east
of the castle. 1-1 You shall judge for yourself to-morrow
whether any traces of fortifications are still to be
found. As for the castle, no doubt some of the stones of it
have been used to build the limekiln, and probably more of
them to build the farmhouse close by. 1
But Rathdown, though it seems an out of the way place
now, has been an important enough place in the past;
and to this day it gives its name to what I call the finest
Barony in Ireland, half of which is in Co. Dublin and the
other half in Co. Wicklow. There is no reason to doubt
the tradition that it was one of the royal residences of the
first Milesian king of Ireland, possibly the first man that
ever claimed to be king of all Ireland. And probably it
continued to be an important residence all through the
Celtic days right down to the Norman occupation. For
in the days of Strongbow we find that Rathdown was one of
the family seats of Macgillamoholmoc, the chieftain of all
1 See also W. St. J. Joyce, Rambles near Dublin (Dublin Evening Telegraph
Reprints), 1890. Eugene Curry found walls of the castle remaining, “ say
54 feet in length on the south side and about 8 feet high : a small portion
of the north wall also remains.”


LITTLE SUGARLOAF, CARRIGOONA, AND GREAT SUGARLOAF FROM POWERSCOURT
(From a photograph by B. Killick, Bray)


this great district of Cualann, stretching from near Dublin
down to Wicklow or further south, between the mountains
and the sea. In the absence, therefore, of other definite re-
cords with regard to this district during all the centuries
from the coming of the Milesians to the coming of St. Pat-
rick, Rathdown, as the home of the kings or chieftains of
Crioch-Cualann, is the spot which it is natural to choose for
our scenery, if we want to localise the Irish history of those
centuries.
But indeed, begging the pardon of the Gaelic League
and Mrs. Stopford Green in particular, I cannot advise
you to spend much time or trouble over those early parts
of the Irish Annals. Even if the facts were more certain,
still the recital of them remains very unedifying. The chief
impression one gains from a cursory glance through them
is one of endless fighting and killing. There are indeed a
few great names handed down by tradition of men who
were remarkable in other respects than that of killing; and
it is possible to discover, in spite of the Annalists, that
there were other interests besides raiding and fighting even
in those bad old days. There was Tighernmas, who intro-
duced the art of the goldsmith; and you can see in the
the Museum at Leinster House what excellent work the
ancient Irish goldsmiths did. There was Ollamh Fodla,
the great legislator. There were great Queens like Macha
of the Golden Hair and Maive of Connaught. Maive is
said to have lived about the beginning of the Christian era.
In the first century of that era we meet with Tuathal the
Legitimate, who restored the supremacy of the Milesian
race after a disastrous rebellion of the subject races. His
name still survives in the sept of the O’Tooles, a sept which
from the thirteenth to the seventeenth century made much
of the history of Leinster. But Tuathal’s own connection


with Leinster was chiefly that he imposed upon that pro-
vince the cruel tribute of the Boroihme, in punishment for
disgraceful conduct on the part of its king, a tribute which
for many centuries was the cause of unceasing wars.
It was probably in Tuathal’s time that an Irish regulus
or kinglet, as he is contemptuously called by Tacitus, being
banished from his own country, took refuge in Britain, and
there was received by Agricola, who was meditating plans
of conquering Ireland. 1 But those plans were never carried
out. The Romans never actually invaded Ireland, It
would seem that very few even visited it in those early
centuries, although they were so near in the sister island.
They knew something about it indeed. For they must
have met with plenty Irishmen in Britain besides that
kinglet. Commerce brought some in their frail coracles
across the Irish Sea, Desire for plunder brought many
more to make raids upon their richer neighbours. Conse-
quently Roman coins have been found in various parts of
Ireland. But so far as I have been able to discover, there
is only one place at which it is known that any Romans
in those first centuries of the Christian era ever landed in
Ireland; and that place is Bray. It is not from any
records in the pages of history that that is known. Pro-
bably none of that little party of Romans ever returned
home to tell the story. It was from their own bodies that
it was learnt not a hundred years ago.
But there now ! I have been making another enormous
digression from the plans for our walk! We must get
back to the map again, and to Rathdown Castle. Well,
when we have had enough of trying to reconstruct the
ancient rath there, and to imagine some great chieftain
rallying the forces of Crioch-Cualann to go to the help of
1 Tacitus, Agricola, c. 24 (A.D. 82).


the King of Leinster in resisting the demands of the High
King of Ireland for the payment of the Boroihme tribute,
then we must turn from ancient to modern and get up on
the railway and go northwards along it, till we strike off along
this footpath that takes us round the cliffs of Bray Head,
and gives us some splendid views, with another chance of
studying the fascinating rocks of the Head. And when
we have left Bray Head Park by this gate opposite to
Fontenoy Terrace, and have gone about 90 yards along
the road, till we are opposite to the north wing of the
Bray Head Hotel, then we can stop and try to get back to
the ancient again, and turn our backs upon hotels and
terraces, and refuse to look at concrete walls, and pretend
there is nothing but sand and shingles around us and sea
and rocks before us, and imagine what happened on this spot
one stormy day nearly 1800 years ago. For as nearly as I
can ascertain, it was within a few yards of that spot that
the bodies of that one little party of Roman visitors were
found by some workmen digging for a foundation in the
year 1835, 1 having lain there for about seventeen centuries.
I have here Dr. Drummond’s description of that dis-
covery, as given before the Royal Irish Academy in 1841. 2
May I read you a few extracts from it ? He says : “ A few
years ago G. Putland, Esq., of Bray, had occasion to build
piers for a gate contiguous to the sea beach, on the north
side of Bray Head. His workmen, on digging for a
1 Lewis (Topographical Dictionary, 1837, Bray) gives this date, and
says the discovery was made “ on levelling a bank of sand near the
sea to make an approach to the demesne of Mr. Putland.” A map of
1858, belonging to the D.S.E.R., shows a path leading from Bray Head
demesne to the sea which had been cut across by the railway 200
yards south of the Putland Road Bridge. This must have been the
path, at the end of which the gate was erected.
2 Proceedings of R.1.A., vol. ii. p. 186.


foundation, were surprised to meet with the skeletons of
several human bodies, which, on further examination, they
found to be placed, not confusedly heaped together, as the
slain on a battle-field, but in graves placed regularly side
by side, and separated each from its neighbour by thin
partitions of flag or stone. On the exposure to the air the
bones crumbled to atoms; the teeth alone were more
durable, and in tolerable preservation. The most remark-
able circumstance connected with these skeletons was a
number of Roman copper coins, one or two of which lay on
or beside the breast of each. Of these coins, which were
about the size of our penny pieces, some bore the image and
superscription of Adrian, and others those of Trajan, in
clear and distinct relief. As the Romans never formed any
settlement in Ireland, the question naturally arises, how
came these coins to be placed in this locality and under such
circumstances ? The ready reply is that the bodies here
interred were probably those of mariners, the crew of some
Roman galley that had been stranded and lost on the
shores of Bray, and that some of the survivors who had
escaped performed the funeral rites. The coins, it is pre-
sumed, were the fee designed for the grim ferryman : a part
of the funeral rites of the greatest importance, and by no
means to be neglected; for the shades of those who had
not the proper fee, as well as of those whose bodies remained
unburied, were condemned to wander a hundred years on
the banks of the Styx.'”
So now you see what we shall have to picture to our-
selves as we stand in front of Mr. Bethell’s Hotel, before we
come home to tea. Shall I tell you how I see the picture ?
I see a Roman galley striving to make its way in the teeth
of a north-easterly gale, to gain the shelter of the Thorny
Island (Deilginis, afterwards called Dalk-Eye, which means


the same thing). But in spite of the gallant efforts of the
rowers, the vessel is driven backwards and shorewards by
the merciless wind until it strikes the rocks of Bray Head,
and in a very short time is broken to pieces by the thunder-
ing waves. The crew strive vainly to gain a footing on the
slippery rocks, but are sucked back by the retreating waves
and then hurled by the next breakers against the rocks,
where they are stunned or battered to death and dragged
down yet again into the raging waters. One, however, is
more fortunate, and is able to catch hold of a point of rock
and draw himself up out of reach of the waves and crawl
into a crevice, where he lies exhausted in a pool all lined
with brightly coloured sea-weeds and sea-anemones, until
the tide has receded and some strength returns to him, and
slowly and painfully he manages to climb up the rocks on
to the grassy slope above. Let me see, what shall we do
with him then? While we are imagining, we must put a
little romance into it. Yes, to be sure, he sees an Irish
maiden just coming up from Naylor’s cove, where she has
been fetching some water from the spring, l and he follows
her through the oak-woods till she comes out into a clearing
in which there is a small rath. It is the same little rath,
within which, centuries later, a church was built and a bell
rung to call the people to prayers, so that it came to be
called the Little Bath of the Bell, or Baheen na Cluig. 2
The maiden takes pity on the shipwrecked mariner, and
1 Eugene Curry (Ordnance Survey Letters, 1837) describes this “well
in a hollow on the brink of the cliff and under the very nose of Bray
Head.” The water now issues at the foot of the cliff just at the edge
of the shingle. Curry says that some called it the Church Well, but
older people Patrick’s Well. He records a “ faint tradition” that St.
Patrick, after making this well, found that the salt spray sometimes
reached it, and therefore opened another west of the church.
2 See Appendix I, p. 182.


leads him to her father, who is a saer-ceile or free tenant,
farming his share of the tribal land and living with his
family and his labourers in his own little rath. The little
lound hut into which the Roman is led is very different
from his father s stone-built house with the vines clambering
over it in an Italian village, but he finds a very kindly
welcome, and, after he has been warmed and fed, the farmer
and his men accompany him down to the beach to see
what will be washed up on shore by the returning tide.
Reverently they lift the bodies as they are washed in, and
lay them side by side, and then a wide but shallow grave is
dug, and is divided into compartments with slabs of stone:
and then after sunset the bodies are laid in these narrow
beds, and over each in turn their mourning friend calls
aloud the name of the dead and bids him a last farewell,
and lays either in his mouth or on his breast the copper
coin for Charon’s fee, and casts earth upon the body.
When the grave has been filled in, he returns to live with
the farmer at the little rath, and of course he falls in love
with the daughter,—no proper man could ever resist the
charms of the Irish girls,—and, after fighting a number of
duels with his Irish rivals, he marries her, and becomes
Hihernis ipsis Hibernior, as has always been the way, and
wins great prowess fighting in the ten deadly battles
between Conn the Hundred-fighter and Eoghan-Mor for
the supremacy of Ireland, until at last he is killed in a
skirmish and buried on the side of the Two Rock Mountain
in a chamber of wrought stone, over which a great heap of
stones is raised as his memorial, the remains of which you
may see to this day. 1
Mr. Doran, in his excellent little Guide-book to Rray
1 See Chapter IV, p. 29.


suggests quite a different story from mine. You may take
your choice if you do not prefer to invent another of your
own, and whichever you adopt will probably be quite as
historical as most of the so-called history of Ireland in those
earliest ages, until we begin to approach the dawn of
Christianity with the coming of St. Patrick.


CHAPTER VI
UI BRIUIN CUALANN AND ITS SAINTS
A Panorama from the Summit of Little Sugarloaf.
Now we can sit down and take breath. Yes, it is rather a
stiff scramble up that last bit, especially if you despise ac-
customed tracks and choose to risk your ankles over the big
lumps of sugar that have crumbled off the top of the Sugar-
loaf. That is the stubborn quartz-rock which obstinately
refuses to wear away smoothly into gentle curves. You
found it just as bad, didn’t you, if not worse, at the top of
Big Sugarloaf ? Look at him over there! Isn’t he a gentle-
manly mountain ? From whatever point of view you look
at him, he always looks a fine gentleman-just a trifle aloof
fiom the rest, as if he could not help feeling his superiority
but benevolent and friendly all the same; and never can
you catch him in a clumsy or vulgar attitude. He wears
fine clothes, too, though he has not quite so many changes
of different hued raiment for different seasons of the year,
as this smaller brother of his displays. Nor does he indulge
in three heads, like this fellow. On the whole, I think it is
more refined to have only one. Yes, this is the highest of
the three heads, just exalted enough to establish beyond all
cavil his claim to be called a mountain, 1120 feet above sea-
level. If you don’t like calling him Little Sugarloaf, you
may call him Little Giltspear or Barchuillia Commons. 1
No, not Slieve Cullen. Nobody has tried to impose that
1 See Chapter I, pp. 10, 11, and notes.


name on this mountain, only on his bigger brother. But
though I do not think the name of either of them is Slieve
Cullen, yet certainly both of them are notable Slieves in
Cualann. For here we are in the very heart of Crioch-
Cualann. Practically all the land that you can see from
here south of Dublin itself, which you can see over there
in the smoke, was in that territory of Cualann. I am
speaking now of the nomenclature of the time of St. Patrick,
or at any rate of the time of the biographers of St. Patrick.
In those days, and for some centuries later, Crioch-Cualann
was the name of the southern part of Co. Dublin and the
greater part of Co. Wicklow, east of the backbone of the
Granite Range. Professor Stokes indeed, in his admirable
Lectures on Ireland and the Celtic Church, speaks of a tribe
of Cualanni. 1 But there does not seem to be any direct evi-
dence of a tribe so called. 2 Probably the district was always
occupied by more than one tribe, though their common in-
terests may often have united the fighting “ men of Cualann,
or Feara-Cualann, in a single force. But the principal tribe,
which for several centuries held at any rate all the central
part of the district, was the tribe of the Ui Briuin, 3 descen-
dants of a Brian Leth Derg, who seems to have lived rather
more than a century before St. Patrick. And because they
lived in Crioch-Cualann, they were called Ui Briuin Cualann.
Just see what a fair territory was occupied by these
1 Stokes, Ireland and the Celtic Church, p. 52.
3 Crioch-Cualann is indeed called “ the territories of the Cuolenni,”
in one of the lives of St. Patrick in the Book of Armagh. Eugene Curry
quotes the passage from fol. 2, p. b, col. b. But as that was apparently
only an attempt to put Crioch-Cualann into Latin, it is not sufficient
evidence for the existence of a tribe of Cualanni. In the Chronicon
Scotorum, A.D. 1133, Gillemocholmoge is called “king of Kwalannmen,”
but that term includes three tribes over which he was lord.
3 Be bold, and pronounce it O’Bryan. At any rate, Lathrach-Briuin
is now called Laraghbryan, and Lochan-Briuin was anglicised Loghan-
bryne.


Ui Briuin. Look away to Dalkey Island. Its Irish name,
as given in the Annals of the Four Masters , was Deilginis
Cualann. 1 They do not actually say that it was in the
possession of the Ui Briuin; but lam sure it was until the
Danes got hold of it and changed its name to Dalkeye.
But let your eye pass a mile or so westward from there to
Killiney, nestling under its hill. That was known of old as
“ Cill-inghene-Leinin in Ui Briuin Cualann.” 2 Then look
further westward along the mountains to where you see the
top of the big chimney, just showing immediately behind the
summit of Carrickgollogan, as if it was an enormous barrel
set on the top of the mountain. You know that the flue
of that chimney comes up the hillside more than three
quarters of a mile from the smelting works of Ballycorus
down in the valley on the far side of the mountain. Well,
Ballycorus was in Ui Briuin Cualann too. 3 Ihen let your
eye travel on still westwards across the Scalp and Glen-
cullen (which by the way is probably quite another Cullen,
Cuillion, not Cualann, “ the Glen of the Holly trees”) 4 and
on again past Powerscourt, and right up into Glencree,
where you can recognise the precipitous crags over the two
Loughs Bray, and then from there trace the course of the
Dargle River away down till it reaches the sea at Bray.
The earliest document that mentions that river calls it
“the Water of Brien.” 5 In that we can easily recognise
the Water of Ui Briuin, so called because it drained all the
heart of the district occupied by that tribe. Perhaps the
original Irish name of the river was Uisce-Biiuin; and
most probably the lakes from which it takes its souice
were then called Loch-Briuin, which afterwards was changed
1 Annals of the Four Masters , A.D. 938.
2 Martyrology of Donegal. See o’Hanlon, Lives of the Saints , March 6.
3 See Appendix VI, p. 231. 1 See Chapter 11, p. 12 (note).
6 See Appendix 111, p. 209.


MAP OF CRIOCH CUALANN AND ITS SURROUNDINGS




to Lough Bray, just as the name of the river was changed
to “ Bray Water.” 1 And it seems to me very likely that
Bray Head also had originally a name formed in the same
way from the tribal name of the district, of which it was
so important a feature. 2 But look back again towards
Glencree. Look at all that lovely Powerscourt and Charle-
ville property. That district, which now forms the parish
of Powerscourt, seems to have contrived by the seventeenth
century to appropriate to itself the name of Fercullen
(Feara-Cualann), which originally belonged to the whole
territory, of which that parish may be called the heart. I
must tell you another day about the keen rivalry for its
ownership. 3 But from there let your eye pass on south-
wards by Big Sugarloaf and the Glen of the Downs to where
Delgany lies hidden from us by Kindlestown Hill. Delgany
was known in the old Annals as Deilgne-Mogorog or Dergne-
Mogorog in Ui Briuin Cualann. 4 And so look on east-
wards to the sea away south of Greystones, and then up
northwards again by Bray Head, till you come back to
Dalkey again. And do not forget to notice the rich lands
of Killruddery lying at our feet. You have seen a pano-
rama of Ui Briuin Cualann.
All this territory still bore the name of that tribe at the
time of the Norman invasion, while the rest of Crioch-
Cualaun was occupied by two other tribes, the Ui Teigh and
the Ui Ceallaigh. The Ui Teigh lay south of the Ui Briuin.
The centre of their territory was Newcastle. The Ui Ceal-
laigh were away to the north-west at the other side of
the mountains beyond Glencree. In the Norman times the
1 Down Survey, A.D. 1657. 2 See Appendix IV, p. 221.
3 For the extent of Fercullen, see Patent Polls, 9 James I, No. 37, and
compare Calendar of Plants, Henry VIII, Nos. 67, 283, 548.
4 Annals of the Four Masters, A.D. 1021; Annals of Ulster, A.D. 1021;
Annals of Clonmacnoise, A.D. 1014 ; Annals of Lough Ce, A.D. 1021.
D


districts came to be known as Obrun, Othee, and Ockelly. 1
We still have the tribal names as Bryan, Tighe, and
Kelly.
What? You always thought that the Irish tribes in
this part were O’Tooles and O’Byrnes ? Oh yes! but that
was at a later date. The O’Tooles and O’Byrnes never
really occupied this Cualann territory till they were dis-
possessed of their own still richer lands in Kildare by the
Normans in the end of the twelfth century. But indeed the
very names of O’Byrne and O’Toole did not exist as recog-
nised tribal names before the eleventh century. If you look
up Standish O’Grady’s Story of Ireland , you will find that
he points out that there are two great name-forming epochs
in Irish history. The first coincided with the Roman
occupation of Britain. The second was in the age that
succeeded the battle of Clontarf. The names formed in
the first period lasted to the second, and those formed in
the second have lasted ever since. Ui Briuin Cualann
belongs to the former period, O’Byrne and O’Toole to
the second. Brian Leth Derg, the ancestor of the Ui
Briuin, lived about the end of the third century a.d.,
more than a century before St. Patrick came. Bran Mut,
from whom both the O’Byrnes and the O’Tooles were de-
scended, lived fully two centuries after St. Patrick. 2 His
son or grandson Murchadh Mor had three sons Muiredach,
Duncadh, and Faelan. Their immediate descendants were
known as Ui Muiredaigh, Ui Dunchada, and Ui Faelan.
But in later days the Ui Muiredaigh called themselves
Ui Tuathal after Tuathal, a great chieftain of the tribe,
who lived about the middle of the tenth century; and
1 See article by Mr. James Mills on “The Norman Settlement in
Leinster,” Journal of R.5.A.1., 1894, pp. 170-172, and map on p. 160.
2 Bran Mut is said to have died in a.d. 689.


the Ui Faelan took the name O’Byrne from their great
ancestor Bran Mut. 1
But that, you see, is taking us down to much later
days. In the early Christian days of which I was think-
ing, it was the Ui Briuin that lived in the raths of all this
part of Cualann. But before we go down from this point
of vantage, let me just point out to you some spots which
became really important during the age of the Ui Briuin,
though I daresay the warriors of the clan were little aware
of their real importance. For certainly the most import-
ant movement that took place in those centuries, and
the most fruitful in far-reaching results, was not the end-
less succession of tribal wars, but the quiet growth of
Christianity. Unquestionably the greatest turning point
in Irish history was the coming of St. Patrick, with the
wonderful advance in the Christianisation of the island
which dates from the commencement of his mission. The
spot, therefore, at which St. Patrick first landed on his
mission to make disciples of the Irish nation, has an intense
historical interest attached to it. You can see that spot
from here. Perhaps you do not know that some historians
of former days, including the learned Editor of the Annals
of the Four Masters , Dr. O’Donovan, supposed that Bray
was that spot. 2 But now all scholars seem agreed that
the river Dee in Cualann, at the mouth of which St. Patrick
1 Keating, in a Topographical Appendix to his History, makes the
mistake of confusing the O’Byrnes, “who took their name from Brann,”
with the “ Hy Briuin Cualan.”
2 See Annals of the Four Masters, O’Donovan, vol. i. p. 130, note.
The great Archbishop Ussher also maintained that St. Patrick visited
Bray ( Primordia , pp. 845, 846), not, however, identifying Bray with
“ostium Deas,” but with a place called Rath-inbheir, which the Saint
is said by the author of the Tripartite Life to have visited after leaving
the harbour of Dea. Rath-inbheir means, of course, a fort at a river’s
mouth; and Ussher says that perhaps it was “ Old Court or Vetus


landed, was not the Bray Water but the Vartry, and there-
fore it is not Bray but Wicklow that bears the honour,
or shall I rather say the reproach, of having given such a
bad reception to the Christian Apostle that he was obliged
to leave it after a short sojourn, and to seek for a more
fruitful soil in which to sow the good seed farther north.
It had treated his predecessor Palladius in the same way
before. \ou see Wicklow Head and its lighthouse away
down there? And can you make out the town, just where
the headland breaks out from the line of the coast P That
is where the mouth of the river is. There St. Patrick
landed in the year a.d. 432, but apparently met with the
same opposition by which the work of Palladius had been
thwarted. A story is told in the Annals of Clonmacnoise ,
that one of the Saint’s companions was struck in the mouth
with a stone, with the result that he lost all his front teeth,
and was thenceforward called Mantan or the toothless. 1
Apparently we are to suppose that he took a real Christian
revenge, returning good for evil, and chose the scene of
his injury to be the place where he became a hermit mis-
sionary ; for that place came to be known as Cill-Mantain,
until the Danes seized it, as they did all the good harbours,
and called it after themselves Wykynglo. So let us imagine
St. Patrick bidding farewell there at the mouth of the
Vartry, early on a summer’s morning, to his toothless friend,
so doggedly determined to hold the fort for Christ in
Crioch-Cualann, and then sailing away north by the help
of a steady south-westerly wind, right along past here,
Curia at the mouth of the little river of Bray.” Ussher was no doubt
misled by maps of the seventeenth century, e.g. Speed’s map, of about
A.D. 1610, and a map in Pacata Hibernia, a.d. 1633, which erroneously
mark Old Court at the mouth of Bray River.
1 O’Hanlon, Lives of the Saints, March 2; Dr. Joyce, Irish Names of
Places, vol. i. p. 109.


and up through Dalkey Sound, and then across Dublin
Bay and round the Point of Howth, and past Ireland’s
Eye, which we cannot see, and on to Lambay, which you
can see showing beyond the Point of Howth. He would
keep between that island and the mainland, and then on
past that piece of low coast-line which you see in the far
distance across the neck of Howth. That is the neighbour-
hood of Rush; then it was all part of the great plain of
Bregh. And so he went on a few miles farther to a little
island that is barely out of sight, just outside Skerries;
and there, as dusk was falling, he ended that day’s
journey of some forty-two miles fair sailing. And because
he honoured that little island by landing and resting there
for a while, it has ever since been known as Inispatrick.
So, then, St. Patrick did see the fair territory of Ui
Briuin Cualann, though I do not think he ever set foot
on it. He must have been impressed by its beauty, for
it is a most wonderfully beautiful view that you get of
these mountains and of the rich basin of the Water of
Brien, as you sail up the coast from the south. I am
sure that he prayed earnestly as he passed along for a
rich blessing to rest upon this fair land. And meantime
the clansmen of the Ui Briuin saw his ship pass by along
those sparkling blue waters, but had no idea how rich a
treasure it bore. No doubt they watched it with curiosity.
There were not so many ships passing in those days as
there are now. Perhaps some of them even climbed to this
summit to watch its course, and see where it would come to
shore, and still strained their eyes to follow it till it passed
quite out of sight, bearing its glad tidings to the north.
But it was left to other missionaries to bring the light
of the Gospel to the Ui Briuin Cualann. WBo they were
we know not. No history of their apostolate survives.


Only we have the names of certain saints attached to places
where their memory was preserved by grateful hearts.
Probably in most cases the saint had made his little cell in
that spot, and had built a tiny chapel near it, and had
found and blessed a spring of pure water, from which he
drew his daily supply. In later centuries a stone church
was built on the spot, and dedicated to his memory for the
glory of God. Most of these churches have been in ruins
for generations past, but the names still remain to excite
our curiosity.
For instance, do you see the tower of Crinken Church over
there, standing out among all that rich foliage? Just half
a mile beyond that is the site of the ancient Church of
Kiltuck or Celltuca. There are only a few stones to be
seen there now, and a little cross, which is perhaps 600
years old. 1 But the name goes back to a very much older
time than that. We cannot be certain who this Tuca or
Toca was. At least two saints of the name are commemo-
rated in the Irish Calendar. Possibly one of them may have
been “ Toca son of Aedh son of Senach, chief of Crioch-
Cualan in Leinster,” whose death is recorded in the Annals
of the Four Masters a very few years after the death of St.
Patrick. 2 There is no proof of it; but it is quite probable
that this chief’s son may have been one of the early converts
of St. Patrick’s mission, and that he may have adopted a
hermit life and lived in a cell in that spot, and have been
one of the very first quietly to spread the light of the Gospel
among the Ui Briuin Cualann.
And then look down right beneath us at Kilmacanoge
1 Journal of the R.5.A.1., 1901, p. 246, in article by P. J, O’Reilly,
Of the two crosses then at Kiltuc, the one described and pictured
belonged to the lane near Eathmichael Church, and has since been
restored to its proper position. See Chapter VII, p. 68.
2 Annals of the Four Masters, A.D. 472.


here. It is quite possible that it took its name from St.
Canoe or Mochonoc, 1 the son of another Irish prince,
though born in Wales, who founded monasteries both in
Ireland and Wales, and whom we may imagine about the
time of St. Patrick’s death preaching here between the
Sugarloafs to the Ui Briuin Cualann.
Another holy man who came from the other side of the
water rather more than a century later was St. Mochorog,
who is said to have been the grandson of a king of Britain.
It was from him that St. Kevin of Glendalough received
the last rites of the Church when he died. 2 It was pro-
bably he that lived and taught and left his name at Deilgne-
Mogorog, or Delgany, just south of us there.
But the saints were not all men. You see the granite
towers and battlements of Kilcrony down there. A short
distance from the house there is a very interesting old
church with a most remarkable doorway. Petrie took it to
be one of the oldest churches in Ireland ; but I am not sure
that he proved his contention. “ St. Croine, virgin, of Kill-
Crony ” came of the family of Niall of the Nine Hostages,
and was therefore a kinswoman of St. Columba. 3 But I
can tell you no more. We can only fall back on our lively
imaginations to picture this saintly noblewoman living in that
most beautiful spot on the brink of the gorge of the Dargle,
and devoting herself there to good works, like St. Brigid at
Kildare, and teaching the women and children, and striving
1 Dictionary/ of Christian Biography, s.v. Canoe; O’Hanlon, Lives of the
Saints, Feb. 11.
2 Dictionary of Christian Biography s.v. Coemgen. St. Kevin died
a.d. 618.
3 O’Hanlon’s Lives of the Saints, Jan. 27 ; and Dictionary of Christian
Biography, s.v. Croine. Some writers, however, have taken Kilcrony
to be the Church of St. Cronan. There were innumerable saints of
that name; but the best known was the Abbot and patron of Roscrea.
His day is April 28.


by her holy influence to raise the whole tone of life and
character among the wild tribesmen of the Ui Briuin.
Another virgin saint was St. Begnet of Dalkey. Have
you good enough sight to make out her little church on the
farther end of Dalkey Island? You certainly cannot see
her holy well. There is another ruined church in the
town of Dalkey, which is also dedicated to her. She is said
to have been descended from someone of the name of Aedh,
so may possibly have been related to St. Toca of Kiltuck,
but I would have you notice I only say “ possibly.” 1
Can you imagine a lady establishing a hermitage on the
Thorny Island ? Sanctity used to find expression in those
days in ways that seem strange to us. But I have no doubt
that the example of her self-denying devotion greatly im-
pressed the rude clansmen of Cualann and did much to lead
them to God.
Not far from her at Killiney, or Cill-inghen-Leinin,
which I have already pointed out to you, were the five holy
daughters of Leinin, who are supposed to have lived about
a century after the time of St. Patrick. 2 Their memorial
is an exceedingly interesting ruined church, above Killiney
station. Architecturally I think it is decidedly the most
interesting of all the old Churches in Ui Briuin Cualann,
and I advise you to pay it a visit.
But we must leave the rest of those churches and saints
to another day; for their name is Legion, and we shall
catch our death of cold if we sit talking on the top of the
mountain any longer.
1 Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901, p. 158, in article by P. J. O’Reilly.
2 Their names were Druigen, Luigen, Luicell, Macha, and Riomhtach.
See O’Hanlon, Lives of the Saints, March 6. See also Appendix I, No. 24.


GRAVESTONE AT ST. BEGNETS
CHURCH IN DALKEY
KILLINEY CHURCH
Doorway, Chancel Arch, and East Window
ST. BEGNET’S CHAPEL ON
DALKEY ISLAND
RATHMICHAEL
The Gateway of the Rath, and ruins of the
Church behind modern cemetery wall


CHAPTER VII
RATHMICHAEL
A Rendezvous at the Old Church.
Here you are ! Now this is a place which ought to stimu-
late the imagination ! What ? You would like a little less
imagination and a little more of the strict and sober facts ?
But you see, where facts are very scanty and very bare, one
has to apply imagination to them, in order to find in them
living and intelligible history. Of course there is all the
difference in the world between the instructed imagination,
trained to know what is probable by the study of parallel
history, and the mere guesses of ignorant dreamers. But I
must try and remember not to give too much rein to my ima-
gination to-day. It is rather a pity, though; for as I was
waiting for you—sitting on the wall up there and looking at
the beautiful view across to Killiney,—l was conjuring up a
splendid scene, a kind of pageant, of Aengus Mac Tail, the
great-great-grandson of a King Aengus of Munster, solemnly
handing over his strongly fortified rath as a gift to the
Church, that a monastery might be founded safe within the
shelter of its encircling wall or cashel, and a church built
in the centre of it for the glory of God. He was coming
down the slope here in princely vesture surrounded by his
retainers, to meet St. Moling, who was just entering the
gate of the cashel down there in his episcopal robes, fol-
lowed by a procession of clergy chanting a psalm, one
carrying a great cross, and others carrying sacred relics


and other treasures for the new monastery. St. Moling was
returning this way to Ferns from Tara, where he had just
achieved his great victory, and the prayers of all the saints
in Leinster had been answered; for he had succeeded in
inducing Finachta Fleadhach, monarch of Ireland, to remit
for evermore the terrible tribute of the Boroihme, He had
crossed the Liffey at the hurdle-bridge of Ath-Cliath, where
Dublin now stands; and one of those who had met him
there to hail him as the saviour of their province, was
Aengus Mac Tail, who begged the holy Bishop to visit him
here on his way south; for there were no other hands into
which he would so fain deliver his pious thank-offering for
God’s mercy to Leinster. And so St. Moling had arrived to
receive for the Church the lawful possession of the great Bath
of Mactail; and Aengus, after handing it over in due form in
the presence of notable witnesses, left the rath in possession of
the ecclesiastics, and retired himself with his retainers to his
second rath, with the double rampart, which I pointed out to
you on the map the other day, up there on the top of the hill.
What did you say ? Oh, yes, I beg your pardon; I
have gone and given you a full dose of it after all! Yes,
all that was pure imagination, except that there really was
such a person as that Aengus Mac Tail, and it is thought
probable, by competent archaeologists, that it was from
him that both Rathmichael and the vanished Church of
St. Michael le Pole in Dublin got their names; and he
may very likely have been a contemporary of St. Moling
of Ferns, who really did obtain the remission of the
Boroihme tribute; and it is quite as likely to have been
in the way that I described as in any other that this old
rath came to be the site of an ecclesiastical establishment. 1
1 Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901, pp. 152-154, in article by P. J. O’Reilly,
who gives the date of Aengus Mac Tail, at a rough calculation, as being


You can see, can’t you, the lie of the circular forti-
fication ? 1 These furze-covered mounds beside which we
are walking are the remains of the more ruined part of
it. Up there the wall stands bare, a great thick wall of
loose stones. It is an exceptionally large enclosure, being
about 350 feet in diameter. Here we come to the gateway
of the cashel. These two great upright stones were evi-
dently the bottom stones of one side of the gateway. The
other side has entirely disappeared. 2 Just leave your
bicycles here, while we see what there is to be seen. But
before we go in to look at the church, just come this
way to see a relic of pre-Christian times. It is only a
few yards just to that exposed bit of rock. Now you see
that cup-like depression cut in the rock ? That is called
a Bullan. “Very like a pot-hole in the bed of a river?”
Yes, it is somewhat similar; but by no stretch of the imagi-
nation can you suppose that a river ever ran across here.
You must admit that this is the work of human hands.
“ What did anybody make it for ? ” Oh, there you have
me. There are abundance of these bullans to be found
all over Ireland, and indeed I may say all over the world,
wherever you find megalithic monuments. Most commonly
they are of this shape, an inverted cone, but sometimes
other shapes. Sometimes they are in the living rock, other
times in detached stones. But nobody knows in the least
what they were intended for. Some say they were mortars
about A.D. 654. St. Moling is said to have been made Bishop of Ferns
in A.D. 632. The remission of the Boroihme tribute is dated about
A.D. 690. But evidently the exact dates are very uncertain.
1 A plan of Eathmichael is given in Dr. Elrington Ball’s History of
County Dublin , vol. iii. p. 90. (The friends addressed in this chapter
are supposed to have just come up the lane, between Shankill Castle
and Shankill House, and to have been met at the south of the enclosure.)
2 The gateway will be easily recognised, nearly due east of the
church.


for pounding corn. This would be a very bad shape for
that purpose! Others say they were receptacles for food
and drink for the spirits of the dead. But against any
of these theories that they were intended to hold anything
there is the fact that some of them are found cut into
the perpendicular face of rocks or boulders. So many of
them, however, have been found in connection with places
ot burial, that it is thought they must have had some
connection with funeral rites. Their origin is no doubt
pagan, and probably goes back to the age of the Cromlech
builders; but I have read that there is evidence of some
bullans having been used in Christian times as fonts for
Baptism or as receptacles for holy water. And, perhaps,
the smaller cupmarkings which we find on gravestones, in
some of the earliest Christian graveyards in this district,
may have some connection with the sepulchral use of bullans. l
But come into the rath now, to the graveyard, and
I will show you some of those very ancient stones, perhaps
really the very earliest Christian stone monuments in the
country as ancient as this wall which we must cross is
modern, for the graveyard has been enlarged quite recently.
Oh, do not be too eager to find fault! But certainly I
must admit it is sad to see so holy a spot so terribly
neglected ! lam afraid we must wade right through these
nettles to get to the first stone I wanted to show you. I
know it is just about here, a few yards due east of the
chancel. Here it is! I will trample down the nettles
and grass. Now can you see the cupmark and the three
ciicles round it, and the radiating lines from the outer
circle? Probably there is another similar design under-
ground and perhaps even a third. Now let us make our
1 See Wakeman, Handbook of Irish Antiquities , pp. 50-53: and cf.,
e.g., Duncan Mackenzie, Palestine Exploration Fund Annual, 1911, p 14,


way on to the inside of the chancel. Some of the ancient
stones have of recent years been moved from their old
positions and placed here for safety. But others that
were described by antiquarians some years ago cannot be
found now. You see that one in the corner, with something
of the same kind of markings as we saw outside? And
then look at this stone in the centre, with a hole right
through the top of it. 1 Holed stones more or less like
this are found in all parts of Ireland, and to many of
them very curious superstitions are attached. But I have
never heard that any particular virtues were ascribed to
this stone.
Well, yes! It is possible that these may have been
pagan stones preserved, and perhaps used over again in
this Christian graveyard. They certainly reproduce pre-
Christian forms of ornament. But as a matter of fact
that particular form of gravestone, of which the one outside
and that one in the corner are specimens, has only been found
in Christian graveyards, and, I believe, only in this district,
the north part of Crioch-Cualann; and there is nothing
corresponding to them attached to any of the known places
of pagan burial in the same district. The probability there-
fore is that they are the very earliest Christian gravestones
in Ireland. There are interesting specimens to be seen
at Tullow, and at Killegar, and at Kilbride, and one at
Ballyrnan, which was used by the builders of the stone
church there, probably about the thirteenth century, as
the lintel of a window. Of course it must already have been
very old, and the family which erected it forgotten, when
it was so used. And there is a specially fine one at Dal key
in the old churchyard in the middle'of the town, on which
1 For drawings of a number of these stones at Rathmichael, see
Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901, pp. 135-140.


the ornament of cups with circles round them is combined
with the design of a Latin Cross in a circle. Perhaps
that is the latest of them, unless the cross be supposed
to be an alteration of the original design, made at a later
date by someone who was using this fine old stone over
again. Personally, however, I think it is part of the original
design. 1
So, you see, we shall not be putting too much strain
upon the imagination if we suppose these stones here to
have been cut by those first religious men to whom Aengus
Mac Tail handed over his rath, and laid by them flat upon
the graves of their most revered leaders, as one by one they
were called away from their austere life here; and perhaps
one of them may have been laid upon the grave of Aengus
himself. The cells or little huts in which those good men
lived, and the church in which they worshipped God, were
no doubt built of the same perishable materials as all other
buildings of those days in this part of the world. It is no
wonder, therefore, that they perished utterly, and no trace
of them is now to be found, especially when we remember
the very stormy times which fell upon all parts of Ireland
that were at all accessible from the sea, and especially upon
all ecclesiastical establishments, only about a century after
the date of the remission of the Boroihme tribute.
For it was in the year a.d. 795 that the watchmen,
looking out to sea from the upper rath at the top of this
hill, must have seen rising over the Hill of Howth, and
floating out along the horizon, the smoke of the burning
homesteads of Lambay Island. It was the first descent
upon the shores of Ireland of that dreaded whirlwind from
1 For all these see article cited above by P. J. O’Reilly on “ Sepulchral
Leacs and Free-standing Crosses” in the Journal of R.5.A.1., a.d 1901
pp. 134-161, and 246-258.


the North, the Danes. And in the centuries that followed,
fleet after fleet of these ruthless plunderers came swooping
down on this unhappy island. All the best harbours round
the coast they took and held for their own. Very likely
Dalkey was one of the first, so that it was not long before
they were within two or three hours 1 march of Rathmichael.
Dublin, too, they held, and Wicklow and Arklow and Wexford
on this eastern coast of Leinster. And from these points
of vantage they made their cruel raids, chiefly directing their
attacks upon the monasteries and churches. In this they
were animated partly, no doubt, by religious spite, partly by
the attraction of easy plunder. Glendalough was burnt and
plundered for the first time in 830. Probably the turn of
Rathmichael came before that. Glendalough was plundered
no less than ten times within a century, in spite of its retired
and defensible position among the mountains. 1 So you may
be sure there was not much left that was worth having in
Rathmichael, so close to Dalkey. Before the Danes came,
the sanctity of the monasteries and churches was quite
sufficient protection for them. The fiercest warriors would
at least think twice before they incurred the wrath of God
and of the Saints by raiding consecrated ground. But now
their sanctity was a chief cause of their danger. No longer
were their cashel walls sufficient protection for their
treasures. Even underground chambers and passages were
of little avail. And it was a never-ending business rebuilding
the wattled and thatched buildings which were so easily
burnt down. And so for urgent reasons more and more they
built their churches of stone, and meantime, for defence
both of their treasures and of their lives, and also for high
crows 1 -nests from which to look out for the coming of the
1 For a handy summary of the records of Glendalough, see Chapter II
of the 6d. Handbook on Glendalough, by Rev. M. Hogan, C.C.


enemy, and also for lofty belfries from which to summon the
brethren to church in times of peace, as well as to warn
them in times of war, they evolved the idea of the Round
Towers. The stone nave of this church was probably built
some time during those centuries. You see the south wall
of it still standing there. Some of the masonry is of a
massive and probably an early type. The chancel here was
added on at a much later date.
But what is most interesting is the Round Tower. Oh ! I
am not surprised that you sat down during that lecture; but
come along now round here, and look at the tower. A mere
stump ? Yes, certainly. What has become of the rest of it ?
Well, for my part, I do not believe there ever was any rest of
it. I daresay the Danes disapproved of it, and put a stop
to it as soon as it got to be high enough to show what it
was intended to grow into. You see Dalkey was so very near.
Or perhaps the fact was simply that the builders were so
impoverished that they found themselves unable to carry out
so ambitious a design. But so much of it as there is, here it
stands as a memorial to us of those stormy days of the
Northern Scourge. Miss Stokes, in her classification of Irish
Round Towers, according to their styles of masonry, puts
this into the first group, which, as I gather, she would date
as having been built about the end of the ninth century
during a temporary lull after the first hundred years of the
Danish invasions. l
Why were the Irish so weak before their enemies ?
Chiefly because they were disunited. It has been the per-
petual curse of Ireland, internal strife. The various tribes
and kingdoms were always at war with one another, and
could not make an united stand against their well-organised
foes. If there had been a powerful central king that could
1 Margaret Stokes, Early Christian Art in Ireland, Part 11, p. 51, &c.


have pulled all his countrymen together, the Danes would
never have got the footing that they did. As it was, when-
ever a strong army of Irishmen was got together under a
good leader, they showed themselves quite the equals of the
Danes in fighting qualities. Oh, no! The Danes did not
always have it their own way. For instance, in the middle
of the tenth century the Irish attacked and destroyed the
Danish city of Dublin. 1 And then there was a sight for
the poor remnant of monks left at Rathmichael to see!
They must have been very good Christians if they did not
exult with a vengeful joy, when they saw the northern sky
black with the smoke of the burning city, and then saw the
arrival at Dalkey Island of ship after ship loaded with
miserable refugees driven from their comfortable city homes
by fire and sword and battle-axe, to take shelter where there
was no shelter from the rage of the elements, but only the
defence of the stormy waters from the hatred of man. One
shelter indeed there may have been, if the very ancient
Church of St. Begnet the Virgin was already standing there.
Strange irony, if it so happened that the only refuge for
the wives and children of these proud haters of Christianity
was the humble Christian church ! And then, of course, you
know how in the very end of that tenth century and in the
beginning of the eleventh Brian Boru succeeded in making
himself master of most of southern Ireland, and Malachi
got a real control of nearly all northern Ireland, and how it
twice happened that these great rivals patched up their
private feuds and joined together against the common foe;
and the result was two great defeats of the Danes, the first
at Glenmama and the second at Clontarf. 2 Don’t you think
those must have been great days of joy and exultation in
1 Annals of the Four Matters, A.D. 942.
2 A.D. 1000 and 1014.
E


Ui Briuin Cualann? But alas, no! It was the other way
round. Even in those great battles the Irish were not
really united. The men of Leinster were on the wrong
side. In fact, it was their king Mailmora who on both
occasions, in his jealousy of the great Brian, instigated the
Danes to fight against his own kindred. He fell at Clontarf,
as he deserved, and so it was mourning and not joy that
those two great victories brought into the homes of Crioch-
Cualann. Let us hope, however, that among the clergy of
Rathrnichael there were some who cared more for Ireland
and for Christianity than they did for the petty jealousies
of Leinster, and who, though sorry for their king, yet could
be thankful for the issue of the battles!
Were the Danes, then, grateful to the Leinstermen for
fighting on their side ? Not a bit of it! Only two years
afi,er Clontarf we find their raiders under Sitric plundering
Glendalough again. That, however, seems to have taught
the Leinstermen a lesson, for, when the Danes tried the
same game again after another four years, they were met by
Owgaire and the Leinstermen at Deilgne-Mogorog, and there
defeated with great slaughter. 1 Yes, that was Delgany; it
is a peaceful-looking place enough now! And then a few
years after that again, a king of Ui Briuin Cualann was
killed fighting against the Danes in Meath. 2 But time
brings its queer reversals, and only a century later we find
the Danes most zealous Christians, and great builders of
churches instead of being their plunderers. Indeed it was
only a quarter of a century after the battle of Clontarf that
a second Sitric made a pilgrimage to Home, and brought
back with him the first Bishop of Dublin, and began the
1 Annals of the Four Masters , A.D, 1021, and other Annals cited on
p. 49, note 4.
2 Chronicon Scotorum, p. 267. A.D. 1025.


building of Christ Church Cathedral. 1 And that at any
rate must have brought great joy to Rathmichael ? Well,
indeed lam not so sure, I think it must have been a mixed
joy, however. For, you see, these bishops whose consecration
the Danes procured for their cities round the coast, though
mostly Irish by birth, derived their orders and their sym-
pathies from England or Rome, and had no patience with
the manners and customs of the Celtic Church, which seemed
to them intolerably irregular; and I am afraid there was a
good deal of what we may call strained relations. But
gradually, of course, the stronger organisation prevailed, and
by the middle of the twelfth century Synods had been held,
by which the Celtic character of the Church of Ireland was
completely altered, and it was all reorganised on the Roman
system, and brought into line with the rest of the Western
Church. Then we find Rathmichael become part of the
very extensive possessions of the Archbishopric of Dublin;
and no doubt under the Archbishop’s hands it became a far
less independent but a much more prosperous establish-
ment—having a definite parochial district assigned to it,
and collecting its revenues, of which the greater part went
to swell the wealth of the See, while a small part was
used for the stipend of a curate of the parish. When St.
Laurence O’Toole was Archbishop, in the days of the
Norman Invasion, Rathmichael was among the possessions
confirmed to him and his successors by a bull of the Pope
Alexander. 2 His successor Archbishop Comyn, who con-
verted the little Irish church of “St Patrick’s on the
Island ” into a great collegiate church, which afterwards
became St. Patrick’s Cathedral, handed over Rathmichael to
1 A.D. 1040.
2 Preserved in Crede Mihi and Liber Niger Alani. See Analysis of the
United Dioceses of Dublin and Olendalough, by Bishop Reeves.


be the endowment of one of its prebendal stalls; and so for
over seven centuries there have been Prebendaries of Rath-
michael in St. Patrick’s Cathedral, the majority of whom,
in the last couple of centuries or more, were also Vicars or
Rectors of Bray. 1 How long is it since the church here
was used for Divine service ? Oh, the greater part of three
centuries. Just before the Commonwealth it was being used.
The chancel was then in ruins; the much older nave was in
good enough repair for service to be held there, but not in
decent order, and the congregation numbered eight persons
besides the parson’s family. 2 After that it was allowed to
go to ruin. The Round Tower, however, is, I imagine,
practically unchanged since its builders gave up working at
it perhaps a thousand years ago. It used to be called the
Skull-hole. If you had visited it before its interior had
become so choked up with brambles as it is now, you would
know why.
But now I think we have been standing Jong enough
among the nettles, while these old stones have sent our
thoughts ranging over long periods of history; and I must
be thinking of returning home, while you two continue your
ride. Just come up with me to the high bit of the old
cashel wall up there; 1 left my map with my cape on it,
and I will show you the route that I think you will find
interesting. By the way, did you notice the old cross in
the lane, as you came up between Shankill Castle and
Shankill House ? It has only quite recently been restored
to that position, from which, as it appears, it was removed
many years ago by a former owner of the modern Shan-
ganagh Castle, and placed, I suppose for greater safety,
among the few stones that mark the site of the ancient
Church of Kiltuck. The large base stone, however, always
1 See Appendix VII.
2 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report, 1630.


remained in its old position, but curiously enough, though
quite evidently the socket of a cross, it was marked on the
Ordnance Map as a cromlech. Mr. Patrick O’Reilly is bold
enough to make the statement that the date of the cross
is not earlier than the fourteenth century. 1 But whenever
it was made, the interesting question is why it was set up
in that particular spot in the lane, and not in the church-
yard. You will come across other instances of the same
thing. I mean that you will find crosses erected in lanes
which represent ancient roads leading to old churches, at
varying distances from those churches. For instance, there
is the big cross which you will see this afternoon at Tullow.
One of the crosses at Kill o’ the Grange is in a very similar
position. And perhaps the old cross at Fassaroe may have
belonged in a similar way to the Church of Ballyman, down
in the valley. I think it is just possible that these crosses
were thus set up on the roads leading to the churches to
mark the limits of sanctuary. Once the criminal, fleeing
from justice, succeeded in reaching and passing this cross,
he would be under the protection of St. Mac Tail; at
Tullow, he would be under the powerful guardianship of
St. Brigid; at Kill o’ the Grange, in the keeping of St.
Fintain; at Ballyman, under the protection of St. Kevin.
So you see there is material for making up quite a pretty
romance, if you like, about that little cross in the big
socket. I think it is quite probable that it had a longer
shaft originally, but that when it fell, the head was broken
off the shaft, and then the shaft disappeared—perhaps it
is doing duty as a gate post somewhere—and that is how
the cross has so truncated an appearance. lam quite sure
that something of the kind happened to both the crosses
at the Kill.
1 Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901, p. 246.


But now look at the map. I suppose you will go up
first to have a look at the rath on the top of the hill here,
and have your lunch up there. 1 Then, when you come
back to your bicycles, you must follow the lane on north-
wards past the bullan, till it brings you down into the
Ballycorus road. Then you see where this other lane leads
off that road northwards across the Heron Ford (now a
little bridge), at the head of Bride’s Glen. St. Brigid’s
Glen, of course, that is. A hilly and twisty mile of that
lane will bring you to Tullow Church. It was known long
ago as “the Church of St. Bridgid of Tyllaght.” But it
is rather uncertain what St. Brigid it is among whose
memorials you will be wandering. It is not likely that
the great St. Brigid of Kildare ever visited this neighbour-
hood herself. But it is possible that another Brigit, one of
the seven daughters of Leinin, whose five sisters lived at
Killiney, as I told you the other day, may have had a cell
here. On the other hand, there is a curious record connect-
ing this place with St. Brigid of Kildare, not, however,
as having been founded by her, but as being the site of an
ecclesiastical establishment already in her lifetime. For an
old legend preserved in the Boole of Lismore tells of a visit
paid to St. Brigid at Kildare by seven bishops “of Ui
Briuin Cualann from Telach-na-nEpscop in particular.”
And Telach-na-nEpscop, or the Hill of the Bishops, is
what we now call Tully or Tullow. 2 So there were already
bishops here in the time of St. Brigid of Kildare, and that
implies a very ancient sanctity for Tullow. But when we
hear of bishops, you must not infer dioceses to correspond
or any functions of government. The office of a Bishop
was a purely spiritual office in the Celtic Church. He had
1 See Chapter V, p. 36.
2 See Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901, p. 155.


EAST CROSS AT TULLOW
BASE AND BROKEN HEAD OF CROSS
IN LANE AT KILL
WEST CROSS AT TULLOW
SHAFT OF CROSS AT DELGANY


no diocese to rule over, but was generally himself under the
rule of some abbot or head of a religious establishment, the
coarh or successor of some great saint, in whose hands the
real power of Church government lay; or it might be of
an abbess like St. Brigid herself. The Bishop was only
consecrated to perform the holy episcopal functions of
ordination and confirmation, and the like. So, then, Tullow
was the Hill of the Bishops. You will find considerable
remains of the old Church there, clothed with ivy, and in
the churchyard, not far from the gate, one of the very
ancient gravestones, ornamented with three groups of con-
centric circles and a herring-bone design. But what will
interest you most is to examine the two large crosses, one
of which you probably know well already, as it appears
from the railway, standing out on the skyline, as you go
in the train between Shankill and Carrickmines. Yes, that
is the one which, as I suggested, may have been a cross
to mark the bounds of sanctuary. The road on which it
stands has been cut down several feet, all except the spot
on which the cross stands, so that now it is perched upon a
curious lofty pedestal. Mr. O’Reilly supposes it to be work
of about the tenth century; and the other still more in-
teresting one, which is in a field to the west of it, quite
close, but not visible from the excavated road, he supposes
to be about a century younger. 1 Look carefully at the
figure on the east side of that cross. It is said to be a
female figure, and it grasps in its hands an object which
Mr. O’Reilly, at any rate, takes to be a crozier. If so,
then it must represent St. Brigid of Kildare. For Ido not
think there is any other woman upon whom it is alleged
that episcopal orders were conferred; but it is told of her
in that same Book of Lismore. You see the Celtic Church
1 See Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901, pp. 247-250.


took great freedom to itself in making, and probably also
in breaking, its own laws and customs; and it is not
altogether to be wondered at, that when foreign-trained
ecclesiastics were introduced by the Danes, and afterwards
still more by the Anglo-Normans, they were greatly shocked
by the irregularities which they found.
When you have seen all these things, you must return by
the way you went to the Ballycorus road, and then go
westwards past Ballycorus with its smelting works, till you
come into the road from Dublin to the Scalp. Ride
through the Scalp, and be sure and notice the line where the
granite ends and the mica-schist begins, and go on to a
point just a mile south of the Scalp, where the road
forks. There turn up a lane to Monastery Farm House.
Leave your bicycles there, and go straight on through the
fields to Killegar Church, which you will see at the top of
the hill before you. I think you will be able to find close
to the ruins two specimens of the ancient gravestones
adorned with cupmarks and concentric circles and rays;
and not far from them a later gravestone with cupmarks at
the points of a cross. Killegar is probably the Church of
Edgar. May we not suppose that some earnest Saxon
convert of St. Aidan and his band of Irish missionaries was
seized with the desire to live and die in that Isle of Saints
from which the light of Christianity had been brought
through the monastery of lona to illumine the darkness of
his heathen people, and that so an Edgar came to have a
cell here in Ui Briuin Cualann ? 1
When you return to the fork in the road, keep to the
east along this road that leads to Old Connaught, until you
come, just outside Ballyman, to a square stone chamber by
the roadside. That is a Vartry water-meter. Leave your
1 See Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901, pp. 146 and 157.


bicycles there, and go down across the field on the opposite
side of the road into the County Brook Valley, which in
ancient times was known as Glenmunder. There you will
find an ancient church covered with ivy, and not far from
it, just at the other side of a fence, and down close to the
County Brook, a Holy Well, festooned with rags, which
bears the name of St. Kevin of Glendalough. It is quite
possible that St. Kevin may at some time have sojourned in
that very retired spot, and may have used and blessed that
little spring, and that the church may have been built
where he had his temporary cell. But, on the other hand,
there is also a Bishop Sillan, whose name is connected with
Glenmunder, and with a church in Ui Briuin Cualann in
ancient documents. 1 But then, again, Bishop Sillan’s church
or Cill-escoib-Sillean, may have been another which over-
looked the Glen about half a mile further up. It is called
Annahasky Church on the Ordnance Map, but that is only
a townland name and has nothing to do with its dedication.
You will have passed quite near its site riding along the
road, but it would not be worth your while to turn aside to
visit it, as there is really nothing left to see. But the most
interesting thing to see in Glenmunder, besides the Holy
Well, is the ancient gravestone used as the lintel of a
window in the south wall of the church. 2 You have to go
right up to the wall and put your head into the window
opening and look up, and then you will see that it is
inscribed with a design very similar to the one at Tullow.
1 “ Sillan of Glenmunire,” Martyrology of Tallaght (cf. also “ Sillan
of Dunmore in Ui Briuin Cualann,” Calendars of Gorman and Donegal).
See, for a discussion on this point, Journal of 8.5.A.1., 1901, p. 156
(P. J. O’Reilly). O’Hanlon (Lives of the Saints) gives St. Sillan or Siollan,
Bishop of Glendalough, under Feb. 10. The name is, perhaps, an Irish
form of Silvanus. See also Appendix I, No. 20, where I give reasons
for dissenting from both the suggested derivations of “ Ballyman.”
2 Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901, p.,145.


Sir Thomas Drew dated that church about the thirteenth
century; but, as I said before, the use of the old gravestone
in the building of the church may be taken as evidence
that there was a churchyard there centuries before that
stone church was built.
That will probably be enough archaeology for you for
one day; though indeed you will pass Old Connaught
Church on your way home, and, if the gate is unlocked by
any chance, you might go in and look at it. But Ido not
think it has any specially interesting features, and there is
no evidence of its having been at all as ancient a church as
any of the others you will have visited. Indeed, the first
mention of it in any diocesan list of churches is as late as
1615. But Archbishop Alan, who wrote an interesting
account of the diocese, known as the Repertorium Viride,
in 1530, appears to have discovered in some document
concerning the year 1349, that there was then a Rector of
Konagh, whose name was Thomas. 1 Ido not know what
other Connaught he could have been referring to; so
perhaps that church is as old as the fourteenth century
anyhow.
Of course there are a great many more ruins or sites
of ancient churches in the district. I think I must have
mentioned most of them to you at one time or another.
The best worth visiting, besides those you will have seen
to-day, are Killiney, and the two Dalkey churches, one on
the island and the other in the town, and Kill o’ the Grange
which used to be called Clonkeen. And then there are also
1 Hepertorium Viride, under “ Ecclesia de Killcowil.” (See Appendix I,
No. 17.) A number of references to “Old Connaught” in the thirteenth
century are given in Sweetman’s Calendar. But they all have to do
with the Cantred of Oconagh, which was not in this part of Ireland
at all. As a Cantred was a large district, supposed to contain about
a hundred villages, the term would be hardly applicable to Old
Connaught.


Kilgobbin, which is rather far off, but has an interesting
cross; Kilternan, which has not much to show; Kilcrony, of
which the great feature is its doorway; Killarney (originally
Kilsaran or Killescopsaran) at the top of Fairy Hill, with
an interesting old cross marking its site; Kilbride, the site
of which has only very recently been identified, but where
some interesting ancient gravestones are to be seen that
were dug up a very few years ago; Raheenacluig, on the
side of Bray Head, a picturesque ruin : and then, down
southwards, Rathdown and St. Mary’s of the Glen of the
Downs, and Delgany old church, and Kilcool and Killa-
dreenan, and I don’t know how many more. 1
But I wonder whether to-day’s expedition will help you
at all to picture to yourselves what life was like in Ui Briuin
Cualann in those early centuries, and especially during the
long struggle with the Danes. You must not be thinking
of any town of Bray in those days. Probably there was
nothing but a little Oratory or Dear-teach, the humblest
possible little edifice, standing where St. Paul’s Church is
now, with just a few cottages round it, near the principal
ford over the Uisce-Briuin. The Danes seem somehow to
have failed to seize the opportunity of making a magni-
ficent harbour of the mouth of that noble river, and it was
left to the next tide of invaders, the Anglo-Normans, to
create the town of Bray. But I must tell you about that
another day. If we talk any longer now, you will not be
able to get round that ride and be home before dark. So
good-bye.
1 For notes on most of these churches, see Appendix I.


CHAPTER VIII
KILLRUDDERY
Now, I think, we have been all round. You have seen the
house and the conservatory, the garden and the pleasure
grounds, the fountains and the ponds, the beech-hedges
and the yew-hedges, the theatre and the bowling green, the
Wilderness and the Deer Park. But I have not showed you
any old stones that could teach you anything more about
ancient times ? Well no, perhaps not. The greater part of
the present house is comparatively modern. It was built in
1820. William Morrison was the architect; and a very
fine specimen of his work it is. That was a better period
for house-building than for church-building. As for the
lessons which are to be learnt of a very remote past from
the fine granite with which most of it is faced, or those of
a still more remote past to be learnt from the great bluff
of quartz-rock from which we looked down across the
pleasure grounds, a bit of one of the Bray Head ridges, we
had great talks about them before. But although what
we see of the house from here is less than a century old,
still it represents a very old house indeed; and probably
most of the old stones are built into it somewhere out of
sight. And before we go home, look here at this little
cross beside the avenue. It is quite a modern erection, but
it has a story to tell of ancient times. For it reminds us
that Killruddery is not a mere fancy name, but the place
really did take its name from a church that once stood


here, probably quite close to this spot, round which the
inhabitants of the little village of the same name found
their last earthly resting place. No trace of the church
itself remains. But when this new avenue was made, well
within my own recollection, part of the ancient graveyard,
unknown till then, was touched by the excavation, and any
bones that it was found necessary to disturb were carefully
and reverently reinterred under this cross. 1
Who was Ruddery ? Oh, Ruddery is not a personal name;
it represents the Irish word ridire, which means a knight.
The earliest form in which we find it in any document is
Kilrethery. But I think there are nearly a dozen different
ways in which it was spelt in old times, besides being some-
times called Ballinrodrach, the townland of the knight,
instead of the church of the knight. 2
So here again we find scope for the imagination. Who
was this knight ? Shall we think of him as a later follower,
in the age of St. Patrick, of the traditions of Concobar
Mac Nessa and his Red Branch Knights of Emain Macha ?
Like Arthur’s Knights of the Round Table at Camelot, they
were pioneers of chivalry, long before Chivalry took a capital
letter to itself, so to speak, on the Continent. Did, then,
this gallant horseman perhaps meet the great British
Apostle of the Irish somewhere in the North ? Now do
just curb your impatience, and let me have a short flight.
He had gone on pilgrimage to visit the ruins of Emain
Macha, the erstwhile home of chivalry, which had been de-
stroyed more than a century before by the Three Collas.
1 Eugene Curry ( Ordnance Survey Letters, 1837) also records that in 1820
bones were found “at the north side of the house, where the clock is
now.”
2 In bull of Pope Alexander, A.D. 1179. Bishop Reeves (Analysis
of the United Dioceses of Dublin and Glendalough) states that this is
Killruddery. See Appendix I, No, 9.


After brooding mournfully over the great Ring Fort, part
of which still remains to mark the spot where “ Emania the
Golden ” once stood, he passed with a curse the palace of
King Daire, the descendant of one of the Collas, and rode
over a couple of ridges till he came to the hill known as
Ard Macha, where his attention was arrested by building
operations, which had something remarkable about them.
It was St. Patrick and his companions building their
monastery on the site which King Daire had been persuaded
to grant to them. Within the usual circular rampart of
earth they were erecting the Great House in which the
monks were to dwell, the kitchen and the little oratory,
which in later centuries grew into the great Cathedral of
Armagh. 1 Of course the knight came under the influence of
St. Patrick, and was converted, and, after being baptized,
went on his way filled with the desire, like St. Christopher,
to do some great feats of arms for his new Master, Christ.
But like St. Christopher, he learnt that it was rather by
humble acts of love that his new Master must be served;
and so he laid aside his sword, and turned out his beloved
horse to pasture, and built himself a little cell in this beauti-
ful spot, and settled down to live a hermit’s life. He never
told the simple people round about the name by which he
had once been famous as a warrior, and so he was just
known among the Ui Briuin Cualann as the Knight. A
few others of like spirit with himself, attracted by his
sanctity and his personal charm, came and built cells for
themselves round his cell; and then others also who were
in trouble or in difficulties came and raised rude huts, that
they might live under the protection of the holy knight, and
so the little town of Kilrodri or Ballinrodrach was formed.
“ What is in a name ? ” Well, at any rate you see you can
1 Professor Bury’s Life of St. Patrick , pp. 156-159.


get a great deal out of a name, if only you allow free enough
play to your imagination in the process.
Thank you for being so patient. Now we will get on to
documentary facts. The next thing that we know about
Kilruddery is that in the twelfth century it was one of the
family properties of the MacGillamoholmocs (grand name,
isn’t it ?) who were then the chieftains of all this district of
Cualann. Besides their lordship over the whole district,
these chiefs had large properties in their own hands, among
which were Hathdown, where they appear to have had a
residence on the site of Heremon’s kingly rath, Kilruddery,
Glencullen, and others nearer Dublin.
The notices which we have of this family give some inter-
esting glimpses into the exceedingly lively times that reigned
in Ireland both before and after the Norman Invasion. 1
I 1 or instance, in the middle of the eleventh century we find
that one Manchadh, who was then Lord of Ui Faelain, was
slain by the MacGillamoholmoc of that day, who was Tanist,
or presumptive heir to the chieftainship of the Ui Dunchada.
As the Ui Faelain (afterwards O’Byrnes) and the Ui Dun-
chadha (afterwards O’Donoghues and O’Kellys), were alike
descended from Bran Mut, these two gentlemen were con-
nected by blood-relationship; but that does not seem to
have made much difference. The grandson of that Mac-
Gillamoholmoc, whom for shortness we will call Murty, 2 is
described in the Boole of Leinster as the benefactor of the
people and the Church of Feara Cualann, because he delivered
them from heavy and arbitrary exactions to which they had
been subjected by the Danes of Ath-Cliath or Dublin. His
benefactions, however, did not win him a peaceful death, for
I 1 or an account of the Gillamocholmog family, from which much
of what follows is taken, see Gilbert’s History of the City of Dublin , vol. i
pp. 230-235.
2 The full name is Muircheartach.


he was slain by the Ui Niall. One of his sons had the
distinction of killing the royal heir of Tara, and being him-
self killed in revenge. Another of Murty’s sons, himself
also a Murty, was treacherously blinded a few years later
by the notorious Dermot MacMurrough. 1 A pleasant sort
of customer that Dermot MacMurrough was! He had
then been seven years on the throne, and he was destined to
do a great deal more mischief, before he died more than
thirty years later. This was not the only case of his blind-
ing a subordinate chieftain, in order to prevent his becoming
a rival to the throne of Leinster. He did the same thins
twenty years later to O’More the lord of Leix, “against the
guarantee of laity and clergy.” 2 That was just after his
most notorious exploit of abducting Dervorgil, the wife of
King Tiernan O’Rourke, whom he carried off, not, as it
appears, in any sudden fit of uncontrollable passion (both
the lady and himself were fairly well advanced in years),
but deliberately planning the deadliest insult that he could
invent by which to inflame the wrath of that very inflam-
mable and not at all amiable person, O’Rourke. The lady
returned next year to her husband, who probably did not
care very much whether she came or went, so long as he
could be revenged upon Dermot; and afterwards she
became a great benefactress of the Church, making costly
gifts to the two beautiful abbeys of Clonmacnoise and Melli-
font; and forty years later she died at Mellifont in her
eighty-fifth year and the odour of sanctity. Tiernan got
his revenge after fourteen years, when Dermot was expelled
1 Chronicon Scotorum, p. 192, 1138. “Hee killed O’Faylan, prince
of Leinster, and Murrogh O’Twahaile (O’Toole), and did execrably putt
out the eyes of Gillemocholmoge, king of Kwalannmen, which brought
all Leinster under hand.”
2 Annals of the Four Masters, A.D. 1153. For the whole history of
Dermot, king of Leinster, see Chapters II to VI of Ireland, under the
Normans, by G. H. Orpen.


from Ireland. Of course you know the story, how Dermot
went to Henry 11, and how the result was the invasion of
Ireland, first by an advance guard of Anglo-Normans in 1169,
and then by Strongbow in 1170. You ought to read Mr.
Orpen’s new book, Ireland under the Normans. It gives the
best account you can get of those stirring times.
But we must get back to the MacGillamoholmocs. The
head of the family and chieftain of Feara Cualann at the
time of the Norman invasion was Donald. You would not
have expected to find him forming alliances with the man
who treacherously put out his uncle’s eyes. But, bless you,
he thought nothing of that, and he took to wife Dermot’s
daughter, another Dervorgil. It does not, however, in the
least follow from this that there need have been any friend-
liness between Dermot and Donald. As likely as not, they
hated one another like poison.
It must have been hard for Donald and his men of
Cualann to make up their minds which side to take, when it
became known, in September 1170, that the Norman knights
had been induced by Dermot to march north from Wexford
upon Dublin. Not that I imagine Donald to have been
torn asunder between patriotic indignation at the invasion
of his country and the ties of family affection. I do not
suppose that either national sentiment or love for his father-
in-law influenced him in the least. But he naturally wanted
to be on the winning side ; and it was not yet very apparent
which side was going to win. It must have been a very
exciting time in these parts. By what route would the
foreigners march upon Dublin ? The ordinary route lay on
the west side of the mountains, and would leave the Cualann
district quite untouched. But then the Irish army, under
Roderick O’Connor, was lying in wait right across that
route at Clondalkin, Perhaps in order to avoid that army
F


Strongbow would come all through Donald’s territory,
either over Calary and through Enniskerry and the Scalp,
or along the coast road through Windgates, right between
Donald’s two estates of Rathdown and Killruddery.
Roderick was prepared for that also, and had taken steps to
make the passes impassable. How, then, would the Normans
come, and where would the great battle be fought ? After
all, old Dermot was too clever for them. He knew his
country well, and he was bold enough to avoid every road
that would have been thought possible for an army, and to
lead the Normans by what must have been an exceedingly
difficult route over the mountains from Glendalough, per-
haps the way that the Military Road now runs, by Sally
Gap and Glencree and Killakee, till he brought them down
safely to the woods of Rathfarnham. So it was only just in
the last stage of their march that the invaders entered
Donald’s territory, and that too at a point where nobody
was expecting them ; and, as Dublin then fell into their
hands without any fighting worth speaking of, it would
appear that MacGillamoholraoc and his men were saved the
trouble of ‘deciding which side they would join on that
occasion. But Dermot MacMurrough died next spring,
leaving his kingdom to his son-in-law, Strongbow, who had
been married after the capture of Waterford to Donald’s
sister-in-law, Eva, This quite unconstitutional passage of
the crown of Leinster was too much for the feelings of the
Irish tribes, and Dermot’s nephew Murtough incited them
to rebel. Roderick O’Connor lent his aid, summoning the
Irish of all Ireland to join in expelling the foreigners, and
in the summer of 1171 a great army invested Dublin by
land, while a fleet of thirty Danish ships prevented any
assistance from coming to the invaders by sea. On this
occasion Donald was found in the Irish investing lines ; and
no doubt the Ui Briuin Cualann and the Ui Teigh, as well


as his own tribe the Ui Ceallaigh or Ui Dunchadha, were
at his back. The O’Tooles and O’Byrnes are also named as
having been there. But, after all, they did no fighting.
They sat there till Strongbow and his garrison were nearly
starved out. Then Strongbow called a council of war, at
which Walter de Ridelesford (don’t forget his name) and
other famous knights were present, and they decided to ask
O’Connor for terms of peace. The saintly Archbishop,
Laurence O’Toole, was one of the envoys sent on this
embassy of peace. But the haughty Roderick would have
none of Strongbow’s terms, and threatened to assault the
city the next day. The little garrison, however, determined
not to wait for that full-dress performance, and made their
own assault at once before anybody was ready for them, and
while Roderick was enjoying the pleasure of a bathe in the
Liffey. The result was that the great besieging army simply
disappeared, and Strongbow was set free to see about secur-
ing the possession of his inheritance; and no doubt Mac-
Gillamoholmoc went home to brood over the question
whether he had not made a great mistake in joining the
Irish host. At any rate, now that the Normans seemed
firmly established in Dublin, he thought it better to make
peace with them, and he gave hostages to Miles de Cogan,
whom Strongbow left in command of the garrison. But
then he found himself in another awkward dilemma; for
Haskulf MacThorkil, the former Danish governor of Dublin,
decided on a determined attempt to retake the city, and
collected a large fleet with which he sailed into the Liffey,
and landed a formidable army on the south side of the
river, perhaps about where Tara Street is now. If Haskulf
succeeded in defeating the little garrison, as looked quite
likely, and Donald was found fighting .on the Norman side,
that would be very awkward for Donald. On the other hand,
Miles de Cogan had his hostages, besides which these Norman


knights had a surprising way of winning battles when all the
odds were against them. So Donald was at a loss to know
what to do. But Miles de Cogan was also at a loss to know
what to do with such a half-hearted ally as MacGillamo-
holmoc, who might perhaps change sides in the middle of the
battle. So he made a very acceptable proposition to our brave
chieftain of Cualann, just inviting him to sit on the fence
till the battle w r as decided one way or the other, and then
throw in his lot with the winning side. This suited our
friend down to the ground. So Miles gave him back his
hostages, while he solemnly promised to stand aside and
take no part in the battle until one side or the other was
overthrown, and then he was to join with the victors in
cutting the defeated army to pieces. Accordingly Donald
and his brave men of Cualann took their stand on the high
ground now occupied by Grafton Street and St. Stephen’s
Green, while the battle raged below them all about the
site of Dame Street and College Green. Miles de Cogan
won the victory by sending his brother Richard round
secretly with a small force to attack the Danes in the rear,
while he engaged them from the east gate of the city in the
front. Prodigies of valour were performed both by Normans
and by Danes, one of the knights who most distinguished
himself being Walter de Ridelesford. I asked you before to
remember his name, because he was afterwards the founder of
Bray. But when the Danes found themselves attacked both
in front and in the rear, they broke and fled for their ships.
That was the signal for the men of Cualann. “Up now, brave
sirs ! ” Donald shouted to his men, “ let us aid the right-
ful English ! Up now quickly ! To good Richard and Miles
we shall bring aid ! ” And they did so, quite effectually. 1
1 For the full story of this battle, see Ireland under the Normans,
G. H, Orpen, vol. i, pp. 242-244. The chief authorities for it are


The next event was the arrival of King Henry II
himself, in October of the same year; and after that there
was no doubt which was the strong side, and Donald and his
family became very loyal supporters of the English Crown,
and made as much alliance as they could with the Norman
families, and dropped their sesquipedalian surname, which
must have been rather a mouthful for their new friends,
and in every way made themselves as un-Irish as they could.
You think I am prejudiced against the MacGillamohol-
mocs, because I told you that one of them killed one of the
Ui Faelain, who were my ancestors? Not in the least!
One cannot keep up blood-feuds of that kind in Ireland,
If we did, it would be almost impossible for a descendant
of any old Irish family to find any other old Irish family
with which he would not have to be at enmity. There was
such a powerful lot of killing done in those queer old days!
But to return to our friend Donald. When Henry II
arrived, he lost no time in making his submission to that
monarch, along with Faelan MacFaelain and the O’Toole,
and their example was followed by practically all the chief-
tains of Eastern and Southern and Central Ireland. But
when the settlement was made, Donald no longer retained
his chieftainship, for his territory was now taken directly
into the hands of the English King, Strongbow had, indeed,
been confirmed in his lordship of Leinster, having done
homage to King Henry for it, so that he now held it as
tenant-in-chief of the English Crown. But from the grant
to Strongbow Dublin was excluded, and also two cantreds
south of Dublin, just the territory over which MacGilla-
moholraoc had formerly ruled, and these were reserved
The Song of Dermot and the Earl, 11. 2255, et sqq., and Giraldus Cambrensis’
Expugnatio Ilibernica, lib. i. cap. xx. (in the sth vol. of Gir. Cambr, pp.
263 et sqq.).


as the King’s own demesne. Donald just subsided into
the position of an important landholder, retaining the
estates which had been the property of his family in the
district. His principal seat of Liamain, near Newcastle
Lyons, was not left to the family long, being soon found
to be wanted for the royal manor there. But Rathdown
continued to be a seat of the family, until the fifteenth
century at any rate, a rent of two otter skins yearly being
paid to the Crown ; and we find Donald and his descendants
acting as head landlords of Killruddery and Glencullen for
many generations. 1
Glencullen was leased to St. Mary’s Abbey in Dublin, of
which Donald and his wife Dervorgil are said to have been
the founders —at any rate they endowed it largely. 2
Killruddery also came into monastic hands, but not
by a direct lease from the MacGillamoholmocs, Dermot,
the son of Donald, leased it to Richard de la Felde, who
in turn sublet it to the new Norman Abbey of St. Thomas,
founded in honour of the victim of King Henry’s sudden
passion, Thomas a Becket. 3 The monks, however, did not
use it themselves, but again sublet it to various tenants,
of whom one was Ralph de Nottingham, 4 another Hugo,
Bishop of Meath. 5 There are several interesting references
1 See “ Norman Settlement in Leinster,’' by Mr, James Mills (Deputy
Keeper of the Records), Journal of R.5.A.1., 1894, pp. 161, 162.
2 e.g. Ghartulary of St. Mary's Abbey , Nos. 4,5, 6, 7. In the last
cited they are named “Douenaldus Gillemoholmoc et Dervorgil Inien
MacMurchada.”
3 Register of St. Thomas' Abbey, pp. 149, 150. Also see Sweetman’s
Calendar, 1171-1251, p. 175, Nos. 1149 and 1166, where Nicholas de la
Feld seeks to recover land at Kelredheri against the Abhot and Canons
of St. Thomas. As these documents are dated 1223 and 1224, Richard
de la Feld’s grant to the Abbey must have been made at an early
date.
4 Register of St. Thomas' Abbey, pp. 175, 179.
5 Register of St. Thomas' Abbey, p. 178. Hugh de Tachman was
Bishop of Meath from 1250.


KILLRUDDERY
(From a photograph by B. Killick, Bray)


to Killruddery in the Register of St. Thomas’ Abbey. One
of them describes some boundaries of the estate; but the
only recognisable name among the bounds is “the royal
road which is called le Windgates.” 1 Another enumerates
some of the contents of the estate or manor, which included
houses, and a mill, and a garden, and a grove, and the walls
and ditches of the court. 2 A head rent of four shillings
a year was for a long time reserved for the descendants
of Donald, who, however, soon ceased to be distinguished
by their long name beginning with Mac. Donald’s own
son, indeed, called himself Dermot the son of Gillamoholmoc.
Imt his son called himself John, son of Dermot, 3 and so
they went on till we get Ralph, son of John, son of John,
son of Dermot. I think the last mentioned of the family is
another John, son of Dermot, at Rathdown in 1408.
Who built the houses and the court, and made the
garden and the grove, does not appear. Some people give
the Abbey all the credit for making the place. But it
seems to me very probable that it was already a residential
estate when Dermot leased it to Richard de la Felde.
Whether the monks ever gave up letting it to tenants, and
made a country retreat of it for themselves, is just a matter
for conjecture. The late Canon Elliott, in an excellent
paper on the Abbey of St. Thomas the Martyr, 4 describes
Killruddery as the resort of the fraternity for health and
recreation, and speaks of the fish-ponds, and bowling-green,
and sylvan theatre, and labyrinth, and the ace of clubs
pond as being remains of their handiwork. You must
excuse me if I am a little sceptical about assigning quite
so old a date to these works of elegance. And not only
1 Register of St. Thomas' Abbey, No. 2, p. 4.
2 Ibid., ccx. p. 175.
3 Chartulary of St. Mary's Abbey, Nos. 8, 9, 10.
4 Journal of R.5.A.1., 1892, pp. 25-41.


do we find the Abbey subletting this estate in the earlier
days of their possession of it; but for the last century
and a half of that ownership, which ended with the dis-
solution of the monasteries by Henry VIII, 1 we find Kill-
ruddery occupied by the Archbold family, 2 which was a
leading family in the district in that period. The same
family still claimed a right to the town and manor of
Killruddery after the dissolution of the monasteries, but
now they found it necessary to send a representative over
to England to interview Sir Anthony St. Leger and obtain
a lease from the Crown. 3 At that time the house here
was called a castle, and the little church or cell of the
unnamed knight appears to have been still in existence.
But stormy times were to follow; and in the reign of
Elizabeth all this country was swept by fire and sword
in the ruinous warfare carried on between the English
troops and the O’Tooles and O’Byrnes. The Archbold
family seems to have fallen on bad times, and to have
failed to maintain their title to their properties; and greedy
eyes were cast upon such choice spots as Killruddery by
the English officials. So we find James Stanyhurst, Recorder
of Dublin, making petition to the Privy Council for various
1 For the surrender of all the possessions of St. Thomas’, including
Kilrodry, see Calendar of Patent and Close Rolls, Henry VIII, p- 56,
July 25, 1539.
2 In an arbitration dated 1538, in the possession of the Earl of
Meath, one of the parties was “ Gerrot Ashepole, son and heyr to
Patricke Ashepole, son and heyr unto Richarde Ashepole, late of
Kilrodery.” Ashepole is the same name that was usually spelt Archbold.
As far back as 1399 we find “Donald Archebold de Kylrothery.”
Chancery Rolls , p. 157, No. 69 ; 1 Henry IV. In 1479 the custody of
the manor of Kylrothery, with that of Bree, was committed by the
Crown to the Abbot of St. Mary’s Abbey (see Appendix V, p. 226).
How that happened, while the Archbolds held the same manor from
St. Thomas’ Abbey, does not appear.
3 Deed of agreement between Tibbot, James, and Oliver Archbolde,
A.D. 1553, in the possession of the Earl of Meath.


little plums which he found to be wanting an owner, among
which was the tithe of Killruddery. And a little later
on we find no less a personage than Sir Henry Harrington
making petition, first to Burghley and then to the Queen,
to be given the town and lands of Killruddery, along with
some other desirable estates; but it does not appear that
he ever obtained his petition. 1 In the end of that century
a certain Captain Lee fell into bad odour with his brother
officers by being too friendly with the enemy. One of
the charges brought against him was that he accepted a
present from Brian Reogh of nine of the beeves which
Brian took from Killrodderie three days before, and which
he gave to Captain Lee for his supper. The article of
accusation does not go on to say how Captain Lee felt
after that generous meal. A few months after that
Killruddery itself and some other towns with it were
burnt and spoiled. 2 But it is a long lane that has no
turning, and better things were in store for Killruddery.
In 1618, James I made a grant of the castle, town, village
or hamlet, and lands of Killruddery to Sir William
Brabazon, eldest son of the newly created Baron of Ardee,
and grandson of another Sir William Brabazon who was
Lord High Treasurer and Lord Deputy of Ireland in the
reign of Henry VIII. 3 The rent which he had to pay was
£B, 6-y. B d. per annum, lawful money of Ireland, and also
to find and maintain two proper foot-soldiers of the English
nation, sufficiently armed and trained for the defence of
1 Calendar of State Papers {lreland), A.D. 1572, Jan. 4; A.D. 1583,
Nov. 14 (p. 478); A.D. 1585, Nov. 24 (p. 586).
2 Calendar of State Papers {lreland), A.D. 1598-9, pp. 1 5, 103.
3 Calendar of Patent Rolls, James I, pp. 435 (cxxix.) and 447 (xix.).
Kilrothery was part of a grant of lands from the Crown to Thomas,
Lord Cromwell, and was assigned by him to Sir W. Brabazon in August
1618, and then granted by the King to Sir William in the following
month.


the kingdom. A few years later the new owner of Kill-
ruddery succeeded to his father’s title of Ardee, and very
shortly afterwards was created the first Earl of Meath.
For nearly three centuries, therefore, Killruddery has
been in the hands of the illustrious family which has tended
it so lovingly and adorned it so skilfully, beautifying what
was already naturally beautiful by the highest arts of the
landscape gardener and the architect, and thus producing
those perfectly charming effects over which you have been
so enthusiastic this afternoon.


CHAPTER IX
DE RIDELESFORD
Yes, this is the old Church of Bray. It looks rather new,
of course. All that cut granite is new, and the plaster is
new, as the church was restored as lately as 1911. But the
walls of the nave are old. How old ? Well, that would be
hard to say. We do not really know when the church was
first built. We can trace the history of the building pretty
well from 1630 on to the present day. But before that we
only know that there was a Church of Bray, and there can
be no reasonable doubt that it was on this spot. Lewis
states in his Topographical Dictionary that the church was
built in 1609. But he gives no proof or authority of any
kind for this statement, and hitherto I have failed to
discover any record to explain it. No doubt he had some
reason for it; and we may infer that some building was
done here in 1609; but whether a quite new edifice was
erected here then or no, at any rate there certainly was
a church, and it must have been here, centuries before that,
right back to the time, and even before the time, when Sir
Walter de Ridelesford built his Castle of Bre. It was not
called Bray or Bre before that. Indeed, Ido not suppose
there was any town or church of that name until the castle
was built and called Bre, and the town grew up round it.
But there was a little church or oratory here called
Dearteach, with a few cottages near it; 1 and when the
castle had been built close by, and the town of Bre had
1 See Appendix 11.


grown up and become a place of some importance, then the
little oratory developed into the Parochial Church of Bre
and the principal church of a large rural deanery, the
Deanery of Bre, which extended from Monkstown and
Still organ in the north to Newcastle and Killadreenan in
the south, a little more than the district of Ui Briuin
Cualann. 1 Unfortunately, we have not got the whole of
the ancient name of the church. If we knew it, we might
perhaps be able to tell from how far back the sanctity
of this spot has come, and to whom we owe its first
consecration. For no doubt the word Dearteach was
originally followed by the name of some Saint, who built
himself a little oratory here. We find such names else-
where. For instance, we read in the Annals of the Four
Masters of Derthach-Aedhain, or the Oratory of Aidan,
and some other names of the same kind too. The word
in itself means a Tear-house, or House of Penitence. But
unfortunately we do not know who the penitent saint, or
shall we say the preacher of repentance, was; for the old
name has only come down to us through Anglo-Norman or
through Roman clerks or scribes, who never by any chance
could get our Irish names right. In this case they did not
attempt the name of the Saint at all. They thought
Dearteach quite enough for one mouthful; and even that
they stumbled over, and disguised it in various forms.
First we find it in various documents of the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries as Derdach, of course with varieties of
spelling. Then we come across it in a Papal letter as
Dirrhi, where one Donald Flanagan is described as per-
petual vicar of Dirrhi and Bree. Then a great antiquarian
of the early sixteenth century tells us that the ancient name
of the Parochial Church of Bree was Derichat. But under
1 See Appendix I,


all these forms we can recognise the simple oratory of an
unremembered Saint, erected in a hitherto unnamed spot,
probably known to a very narrow circle in those old days,
but visited by a few simple folk, who came to say their
prayers here, and who brought their dead to lay them in
the consecrated acre round its humble walls. 1
But then came Sir Walter and the beginnings of
Bray. He was the same Sir Walter de Bidelesford, who
distinguished himself so much in the great battle on the
strand of Dublin. 2 In fact, he is said to have killed the
gigantic Dane, John the Mad, in that battle, and to have
saved the life of Sir Miles de Cogan. In the Norman-French
song of Deimot and the Earl he is belauded as a great and
noble warrior. 3 Well, he was rewarded by being given
great territories. And one of his grants was the lordship of
Brien—that is of the tribal territory of the Ui Briuin
Cualann. You remember how Donald MacGillamoholmoc,
the former lord of this territory, behaved himself in that
same battle, and how I told you that, in the settlement
which followed the coming of Henry 11, Donald was
politely dispossessed of all except his family properties, and
just became a country gentleman. What he had been in a
1 See Appendix 11.
2 Giraldus Cambrensis, vol. v, p. 263 —Expugnatio Eihernica, lib. i.
cap. xx. Regan, however (Song of Dermot and the Earl), says that
Miles de Cogan himself killed John the Mad.
3 Song of Dermot and the Earl (ed. Orpen), 1. 1803 :
De ridelisford iuint water I And Walter de Eidelisford came
Barun noble guerrer. | A brave and noble warrior.
The grant to de Ridelisford of Brien is not mentioned in the poem—
but Bree is mentioned at 1. 3093, to define the position of Wicklow,
given to Fitzgerald :
Si li donat wikinlo He gave him also Wicklow
Entre bree e arklo : Between Bray and Arklow :
Co fud la tere de kylmantan ' This was the land of Kilmantain
Entre ad cleth e lochgarman. Between Athcliath and Loch Carman.


Celtic way over Ui Briuin Cualann, Sir Walter was now
made in an Anglo-Norman way. At least that seems to
have been the original intention. But it is a curious and
rather puzzling business altogether. His first grant was
very vague. 1 It was given by Strongbow in the name of
the King, because this was part of the territory which had
been reserved by the King as his own demesne, when he
gave the rest of Leinster to Strongbow. But apparently,
when it was given the lawyers did not quite know what
land there was to be had. So the charter conveyed to Sir
Walter “Brien and the land of the sons of Turchil, with all
appurtenances, so that within the appurtenances of those
lands he shall have the fief of five knights, if it shall be
there; and what shall be wanting there, I shall make good,
as near as possible, on either side of the water of Brien.'”
I have studied that grant so much that I know the first
part of it by heart! But the district of Brien included
large Church lands, such as Killiney, Shankill, and many
others. It also included Donald’s own properties of Kill-
ruddery and Glencullen. Sir Walter does not seem to have
exercised any lordship over these. In fact he never got his
five knights’ fees at all. It was altogether an unsatisfactory
charter, at least so far as the Brien part of it was concerned ;
and Sir Walter got it renewed many years after by Prince
John, whom Henry II had made Lord of Ireland. This
time he got a very definite document, giving the names of
the places granted to him and roughly stating their acreage.
But now he seems to have only got about half the value in
this district of Brien that the first document professed to
give him. At any rate he was only bound to render half
the amount of service for it. Instead of a general grant
1 For a discussion of these grants and the whole subject of Sir
Walter de Ridelesford’s estates, see Appendix 111.


of a district called Brien yielding five knights 1 fees, for
which he was to render two knights 1 service, he now got a
holding of only two carucates called Bren, and another of
the same size called Derdagh, with a few more, amounting
altogether to some fourteen carucates, for which he had to
render one knight's service.
There can be no question where the four carucates of
Bren and Derdagh lay. Derdagh, of course, took its name
from the old church here, and Bren or Bre took its name
from the Castle of Bre, which Sir Walter had by that time
built close by here on the brow of this steep cliff, which no
doubt the Irish people called “ the Bri 11 or, as the Scotch
would say, “ the Brae. 11 So you may take it that the spot
where we are standing was about the centre of those four
carucates. A carucate was a very variable kind of measure-
ment ; 1 but if we suppose the carucate in this case to have
represented roughly something like 100 acres of our modern
measurement, then perhaps the four carucates of Bren and
Derdagh might have extended from the sea to the little
stream that runs into the river under Crowbank, opposite
to the end of the People's Park, and from Bloody Bank (or
Sunnybank as we euphemistically call it) to the Town Hall.
The other holdings confirmed to de Ridelesford by John's
Charter in the Ui Briuin district are hard to identify.
The place-names have been very much altered; and besides
those Anglo-Norman clerks made terrible hash of the Irish
1 A carucate or ploughland varied in measurement according to the
nature of the soil and many other circumstances. Du Cange says,
“ Sexaginta acris constabat carrucata apud Anglos,” and similarly in
Fleetwood’s Survey, 1654 (see Desiderata Curiosa Hibemica) all the
measurements are calculated at 60 acres to the ploughland; but a more
usual standard was 120 to 180 acres, and it might run to 200 or 300
acres (see Murray’s Dictionary s.v. Carucate and Ploughland). As the
acre also varied very much in size (see same Dictionary), it is impossible
to say just what is meant by ancient statements of land measurement.


names. But one of Sir Walter’s holdings, Balibedan, can
be proved to have corresponded to the townland now known
as Ballybrew, adjoining Glencullen. You see that mountain
right away over there? It lies just under it. So you see
he did get some land in the more distant parts of the Ui
Briuin district, as well as the immediate surroundings of his
castle. But the rest of Ui Briuin Cualann seems to have
been taken back into the King’s own direct control, the
rents being collected for the Crown and accounted for by
the sheriff; and it was called Obrun, 1 another English
attempt to represent Ui Briuin.
What is the matter ? Have I puzzled you now ? Oh,
the other day I talked as if the name Bray represented the
old tribal name Ui Briuin, and now I seem to be deriving it
from the Irish word for a hill ? Well, I was talking then
about Lough Bray, and Bray Water, and Bray Head, wasn’t
I? Yes, I certainly do think that they were originally
Loch-Briuin and Uisce-Briuin, and so on. We know there
was a Lochan-Briuin, somewhere not far up the valley,
which has been drained out of existence now. And I have
just been telling you how Bray Water was called the Water
of Brien in de Ridelesford’s first charter. But though Bray
in those names represents an older Brien, it does not neces-
sarily follow that Bray is derived from Brien. That may
indeed have been the case; but on the whole it seems
more probable that the ordinary derivation of the name of
the town from the Irish hri is right. Probably this cliff’, on
top of which the Dearteach stood was already called na hri.
And when de Ridelesford built his castle on it, he called it
the Castle of Bre, and the town which followed was called
the town of Bre, or villa de Bre, and then the name was
extended to the whole manor which was administered from
1 See Appendix VI.


this castle, and which was called the manor or honor or
barony of Bre. For instance, Balibedan over there was in
the honor of Bre, although far away in the heart of the
Brien district. And in later times, when the old tribal
name of the district was quite forgotten as such, it was very
natural that in many cases the compound names in which it
occurred were assimilated to the familiar name of the prin-
cipal town of the district, and so Loch Briuin became Lough
Bray, the Water of Brien became Bray Water, and the
Head of Briuin, Bray Head. Oh, no, I certainly do not
think that it was from Bray Head that the town took its
name. The Head is a great deal too far away from the
little town, as it was then, to give it its name. And there
was no need. Just look down there at the bridge. Imagine
the time when there was no bridge and no elevated road.
Think of having to take a loaded cart across the ford of the
river—it was just where the bridge is now —and then
having to get it up to this level from there. It would not
be surprising, would it, if the carters talked rather loudly
about the Bri ? It would have been quite appropriate if
the ford had been named Ath-na-bri. So I think you can
understand now, can you not, why it is that I take the word
Bray, as the name of this town, to be the old Irish word
Bri, meaning a very steep place; but at the same time hold
that, with regard to the Lakes, the Biver, and the Head, it
has really taken the place of the old tribal name of the
district. 1
But you have another difficulty? You have been
puzzled by the conflicting statements as to where Sir
Waiter built his castle? Yes, to be sure, Dr. Elrington
Ball follows Lewis and other writers in stating that the
1 For a further discussion of the name of Bray, see Appendix IV.
For Lochan-Briuin, see Appendix V, p. 225, note 2.
G


little building at the far end of Castle Street represents it. 1
Professor Armstrong, in his powerful poem, 2 identified it
with Old Court Castle, and has been followed by other
writers. And here am I talking of it as being close to the
church here! But Professor Armstrong’s identification was
pure imagination—a poet’s licence. He never pretended to
have any historical reasons for it. And if Dr. Elrington
Ball s investigations had not been limited to the county
°f Dublin, he would certainly have discovered that de
Ridelesford s castle was on the south and not on the north
of the river. Oh, no! there is no doubt about it at all.
The exact position of the old Castle of Bray, or Great Bray
Castle, is determined by a deed of partition of Great Bray
between Edward, Earl of Meath, and Oliver, Earl of
lyrconnell, dated 1666, and by two maps preserved in the
Pembroke Estate Office, dated 1692 and 1762, and is con-
firmed by one of the maps in the Down Survey of 1657,
which marks Old Bray, Little Bray, and Old Court Castles,
each in its proper place.
But come back again here to the northern boundary
wall of the churchyard, and see for yourself. There you
see Little Bray Castle. Of course those brick turrets are
new, but the walls below are probably five or six centuries
old. Somebody did build a castle there, certainly, once
upon a time. But can you imagine the great Norman
knight with all Ui Briuin Cualann before him choosing that
particular spot to build his castle ? People say he built it
to command the ford. Yes, but where was the ford? Just
where the bridge is now. Was that the spot to command
it from ? It is the weakest possible place, down there on
1 History of the County of Dublin, part hi. p, 99.
2 “The Wraith of De Riddlesford’s Castle,” Stories of Wicklow
pp, 292-351.


low ground, commanded by high ground on both sides.
Whatever later builders may have done, the Norman warriors
did not choose such sites for their castles. If they could not
find suitably commanding eminences to erect them upon,
then they built up artificial ones of earth and stones, which
we call Motes. Dr. Elrington Ball states that de Ridelesford
built at Bray a great feudal castle, which must have been, in
his time and in that of his descendants, one of the chief
fortresses of the County Dublin. 1 Where, then, would you
expect him to build such a castle, so as to be strong against
attack, and so as to command the ford ? Yes, just here
where the church stands. But then, you see, this spot was
already occupied. The Dearteach was here, and the graves
of the country folk. It was consecrated ground. And,
moreover, just to the west of this place, over there where
you can see the Dispensary House, there was a rounded
rocky knoll, an outcrop of the quartz-rock, just suitable for
the keep of a Norman Castle, while the courtyard or fortified
enclosure could extend down to the very edge of the pre-
cipitous cliff which overhangs the Electric Light Works
there. That, then, was where he built his castle, and the
keep of it was still standing there, where the Dispensary
and Clonmore now stand, till the middle of the seventeenth
century. Are there no remains of the castle to be seen
now ? No, practically nothing to see. But I have no doubt
that most of the stones of the old castle were used in the
building of that big house there next to the churchyard.
It was built before the end of the seventeenth century as a
barrack for soldiers, 2 and I feel sure it was then that all
traces of the old castle disappeared. But after a few
1 History of the County of Dublin, part iii. p. 99.
2 It is shown in the 1692 Map in the Pembroke Estate Office. See
Plate 11.


minutes we will go round to the back of the Dispensary to see
what remains visible of the escarpment of the rock on which
the keep stood. When the first Ordnance Survey was made
in 1837, 1 it was an oval-shaped eminence with escarpments all
round. But the making of the Herbert Road and the building
of houses and laying out of gardens, have obliterated most of
its outline. And then we will go down to the Electric Light
Works, to see what a bold cliff it really is over which the
castle was built, and then on to see the mill-wheel, in the
very place where Sir Walter built his mill, and the mill-
stream, which he first created so many centuries ago.
But before we leave this spot, just try and imagine what
all this place was like when Sir Walter first visited it and
selected the site for his castle. Perhaps he came and stood
just here, as we are standing now, in the graveyard of the
little oratory. What was there to see ? Probably there
were a few cottages close round the graveyard and on the
steep slope down to the river. 2 But there was no bridge,
and there were no stone-faced embankments to the river to
keep it in its proper course. Probably the exact course of
the river varied a good deal from time to time. You may
be sure he did not look down on rows of roofs and chimneys,
as we do, on the other side of the river. That flat, oft-
flooded, marshy ground was no doubt gay with yellow irises
and pink giant willow-herbs among the tall bulrushes. The
road from Dublin came down Bloody Bank and across the
flat by the line of what is now called Back Street, and then
crossed the river by the ford, just where the bridge stands
now, and then ascended on this side by what must have
been a terribly steep scramble, most difficult for a loaded
1 See diagram, facing p. 142.
2 “ The Cottages of Derdach,” for which rent was paid in 1284
(Sweetman’s Calendar, 1252—1284, p. 560), may have been a survival
of what existed before the town of Bre was made.


cart. That was just the place for robbers—an easy place,
too, for even a small party of wild tribesmen, however poorly
armed, to resist the advance of any army that it might be
found necessary to send southwards from Dublin. Yes, it
would be important to have a garrison on the south side of
this ford. And then, again, a feudal knight in those days
had not only to think of his natural enemies, such as the
hostile Irish tribes, but also to be prepared to defend his
personal rights against the exactions of his overlord. And
besides, who knew but that the Danes might seize Dublin
again, or might land at Dalkey ? Well, he could make a
splendid defence on this cliff overhanging the river against
any army coming down from the north. And so we can
picture him examining the ground both to east and to west
of the little consecrated spot, and finally deciding upon that
outcrop of quartz-rock which afforded a knoll conveniently
near the steep cliff—so steep that, with a little easy cutting,
it could be converted into a precipitous face of rock. So
he makes up his mind, and marks out the lines of defence,
and gives the necessary orders for the building of the castle.
And then he goes down to the river bank, and walks a little
way up the river, watching the salmon leaping, and mean-
time roughly estimating the levels, until he chooses a good
spot for making a weir, and discusses with his bailiff the
course of the mill-stream, and fixes upon the place where
his mill is to be built, close underneath the castle.
Sir Walter had not much time to spend in Bray himself.
For he had another still more important castle to build at
Tristeldermot (now Castledermot in Co. Kildare); and he
had valuable property to develop both there and also at
Dovenachbrok (or Donnybrook) and in the Vale of Dublin. 1
1 See Appendix 111.


All these cares must have kept him fully occupied in the
brief intervals when he was neither on active military service
nor compelled to be in attendance upon the King in England. 1
But no doubt he did come to Bre from time to time with his
retinue; and then the castle courts hummed with busy life,
and the blacksmith had more work in a week than at other
times in six months, and the miller had to give in his
accounts, and the sick children from the cottages of Derdach
were brought up to see Master Alexander the Doctor, 2 and
the little church clanked with steel as armed men came to
kneel before its altar, and instead of an occasional visit of a
priest from Rathmichael, it was served by Roger the Chap-
lain. 3 And then, as Sir Walter came out from the little
church, and stood here by himself and thought of his sins,
and thought of the claims of Mother Church, again and
again he felt moved to make some new offering. To what
ecclesiastical foundation should he make a gift, and what
should he give ? There was his own convent which he had
founded near Tristeldermot, the Convent of St. Mary at
Grane. He would give it another endowment, the bene-
fice of this little Church of Derdach; —it was beginning to
be worth something, now that a little town was growing up
round it; —and that would be killing two birds with one
stone too, for in that way he would provide for the proper
serving of this church, as the parochial church of a rising
town; for the convent would have to provide a vicar to
serve here perpetually. And while he was about it he
would add to the benefice the tithes of his Mill of Bre.
And, moreover, he had the gift of two more benefices also
1 See, e.g. Sweetman’s Calendar, 1171-1251, Nos. 576, 577, 589, 590,
654, 1204, 1402, 2253, 2254, 2255.
2 History of the County of Dublin, part iii. p. 99.
3 Ghartulary of St. Mary's Abbey, p. 388. “ Rogero capellano de
Kilca.” Kilca (Kilkea) was one of de Ridelesford’s properties in Kildare.


ST. PAUL’S CHURCH IN 1907
CROSS IN THE LANE AT
FASSAROE
THE CHURCH AT RAHEENACLIG
CROSS IN CHURCHYARD OF
KILLARNEY


in connection with his Lordship of Bre (though how they
came to be connected with it does not now appear), one of
Kilmohud or Kilmacud near Dundrum, the other of Killes-
cosather or Killescopoge near Wicklow: he would throw
them also in with Derdac to make it a good offering. 1 Or
again another time he looks across the river at the unoccu-
pied marshy land on its northern bank. The best chance of
having anything made of that land was to give it to one
of the religious houses. They would be glad enough to
have even a small piece of land in the new town, if only to
give them a footing for trading purposes. He calls his
steward, and crosses the ford and paces out the ground.
Yes, he will give 84 feet frontage along the river just oppo-
site to the castle to St. Mary’s Abbey of Dublin, with a
depth of 10J perches. 2 And that leads on to another gift.
For a new Abbey is founded in Dublin, and dedicated to the
new and popular saint, Thomas a Becket. And there are
apt to be jealousies between the two great Abbeys. So
St. Thomas’ Abbey has to receive a similar holding to the
east of St. Mary’s, opposite to the churchyard, with less
frontage, only 50 feet, but a depth of 30 perches, and with
enough arable land thrown in to make up a total of two
acres. Full rights of burghers are attached to the gift, and
1 Sweetman’s Calendar , 1171-1251, p. 53, No. 355. Rotuli chartarum
in Turri Londinensi, p. 172, An. 9° Johann., A.D. 1207. For the
identifications of Kilmohud and Killescosather, see Archbishop Alan’s
Repcrtorium Viride , a.d. 1530. Kilmacud, then called Kilmehud, in the
Deanery of Taney, and Killescopoge, in the Deanery of Wicklow,
were then still in the hands of the Convent of Grane. About the
latter Alan says, “ incorporate Monialibus de Grane ex dono Walteri
Riddelford ffundatoris earundem. Qui hanc collocari fecit sub matrice
Ecclia de Bree, ut supra.” Perhaps, however, it is more probable that
Killescosather was really Killarney Church on the top of Fairy Hill,
and that it was subsequently exchanged for Killescopoge. See Appendix I,
No. 3. p. 182.
2 Chartulary of S. Mary’s Abbey, p. 29.


licence to bring boats up the river and to trade for firewood
or anything else that the Abbey might need from this
district. 1 And so gradually the ground is occupied, 2 and
the town develops. A weekly market is established by royal
licence on Thursdays. 3 From this Sir Walter gets his
dues, and he draws his rents from the burghers, and his
profits from the mill, while on his part he has to render
the service of one knight to the King for his possessions
in what was sometimes called the barony, sometimes the
manor, sometimes the honor of Bre.
How long the original Walter de Ilidelesford lived we
do not know. He seems to have been succeeded by a son
of the same name, who died in 1244, and had two daughters,
but no sons. 4 The heiress of his estates in these parts, his
granddaughter, Christiana de Mariscis, was at his death an
orphan between two and three years of age. The interesting
but youthful heiress was promptly betrothed to Fulk of
Newcastle, to whom the custody of her lands as well as of
her person was given. s But he did not keep either for
long; for four years later, when she was six and a half
years old, we find her described as the wife of Ebulo de
Geneve, who then was granted the custody of this desirable
charge. 6 But the end of these youthful betrothals was that
she lived to be an old maid, an intimate friend and faithful
companion of Eleanor of Provence, widow of Henry III;
and in 1280, being granted lands in England, she gave up
1 Register of the Abbey of St. Thomas, p. 170.
2 He also gave a tenement in Bre to the Hospital of St. John of
Tristeldermot, to which we find references in the Calendar of Fiants,
Elizabeth, Nos. 879, 2954, 3709, and in Pembroke Estate Deeds, No. 45.
3 Rotuli Litterarum Patentium, p. 102. An. 15 Johann., A.D. 1213;
Sweetman’s Calendar, 1171-1251, p. 76, No. 471.
4 Dr. Elrington Ball, History of the Go. of Dublin, part ii. p. 3.
5 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1171-1251, Nos. 2689 and 2693, A.D. 1244.
6 Ibid., 1171-1251, Nos. 2947, 2972, A.D. 1248.


all her Irish estates to the Crown. 1 The income of these
estates four years later was about £IBO, of which about <£*2o
was derived from the rents of Bray. One of the largest
rent-paying tenants at that time was the Master of the
Templars, who held a tenement in Bray as well as having
possession of Glenmunder or Ballyman. Robert the Baker
had a tenement under the castle, which would seem to have
been conveniently close to the mill. Sir John, the father,
who must have been the Vicar appointed by the Convent of
Grane, followed apostolic precedent by being a fisherman as
well as a pastor, and rented a fishery from the Crown. One
wonders whether he made a good profit from the sea trout
for which Bray used to be famous. 2
At that time, a little more than a century after the
first foundation of the town, Bray seems to have been a
fairly prosperous place, little affected as yet by the wars
which were devastating many parts of Ireland. Perhaps its
castle was too strong for attack. But other parts of Ui
Briuin Cualann that were nearer to the mountains, were
not so fortunate ; and still less happy were the neighbouring
districts of Ui Teigh and Ui Ceallaigh. And Bray’s im-
munity was not destined to last for long. De Ridelesford
had prepared a scourge for his manor of Bre, when he
took possession of his other manor of Tristeldermot and
Kilkea. For up to the time of the Norman invasion the
best lands of Kildare had been occupied by the O’Byrnes
and the O’Tooles. When the Norman invaders chose to
take unto themselves these rich lands, their rightful owners
were driven out of them, and took refuge in the Wicklow
mountains full of bitter dreams of revenge. And they did
not dream for nothing. The trouble began to be really
1 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1252-1284, No. 1798, A.D. 1281.
2 Ibid., No. 2340, A.D. 1284.


serious about 1275. Soon after that we find large districts
of the King’s reserved lands in “ Obrun, Othe, and Okelly ”
lying “ waste because of the war with the Irish.” 1 Thirty
or forty years later we find even Bray itself in ruins. But
that story I must leave for another day. For to-day let us
think of the little town of Bre in its first pride, when its
castle seemed impregnable, and under its shelter the
miller ground his corn, and Robert the Baker heated his
oven, and the reverend fisherman landed his salmon, and
the various monastic gentlemen drove their bargains at the
Thursday markets, and all snapped their fingers at the talk
of war, as though that were a calamity that could never
come to their pretty town of Bre.
1 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1252-1284, No. 2329, a.d. 1284.


CHAPTER X
NEWCASTLE AND SHANKILL
Get your chair near the fire and make yourself comfortable.
A fire is pleasant enough on an autumn evening. There
are the matches. Now I will put the map here where you
can see it, and we can have that talk about the Castles.
There are plenty of them anyhow. It will take a good
many pilgrimages to visit them all, and to recall at each
the turbulent times which it experienced in the days of old.
To begin with, we saw this afternoon the site of Walter
de Ridelesford’s Castle of Bre. There are two other castles
within reach, whose story takes us back to about the same
date, though we cannot say that the ruined buildings which
are to be seen now are as old as all that. One of these
is Newcastle MacKynegan, to give it its full name. You
see it there, about half-way between Greystones and
Wicklow. It is not really in the district we are supposed
to be studying, the territory of Ui Briuin Cualann. That
was the district of Ui Teigh. All the same, it is worth
your while to pay it a visit; and when you do so you
should also look in at Killadreenan Church, just under
the great Consumptive Hospital. There is just one direct
connection of these antiquities with Bray, and that is that
in old times the Churches of Novo-Castro (as Newcastle was
called in the dog-Latin documents) -and of Killauchdeeny
(or Kylladreeny or Cellachaich Driegnig) were included in
the Rural Deanery of Bray, being in fact the most southerly


parishes in it. Dr. Petrie makes special mention of Killa-
dreenan Church in his famous book on the Round Towers
of Ireland. He considered it to be very ancient, being
specially struck by a course of herring-bone masonry, which
you will find in its south wall. lam afraid your impression
will be that Killadreenan must have been a very insignifi-
cant place. But for all that, it seems to have been given a
good deal of trouble to his Holiness of Rome, sundry Papal
letters being concerned with its affairs. 1
As regards the castle, we are not permitted to think
that the walls which you will see there were built in the
time of Henry II or of King John either. But the round
platform or mote, on the western edge of which that old
fortified house was built at a later age, was no doubt the
Norman mote on which the original royal castle was built,
probably in the reign of King John, and very likely of
wood. You remember that this was part of the district—
part of the two cantreds south of Dublin—reserved to the
Crown. And no doubt this castle was intended both as a
centre for the government and the defence of the little
district of Ui Teigh, or Othe, 2 as it is called in the State
documents, and also for the protection of the important
road from Dublin to Wicklow and Arklow. Its history
for many centuries is simply the story of the incessant war-
fare between the English governors of Ireland and the
embittered tribes of OToole and O’Byrne. I told you
this afternoon that before 1284 Ui Teigh and Ui Briuin
and Ui Ceallaigh were generally laid waste. But it was
not until 1295 that the raiders ventured to attack and
burn the royal fortress of Newcastle. From that time on
1 See Appendix I, p. 192.
2 Or Othech. In Sweetman’s Calendar Othe is wrongly identified with
Howth.


to the reign of Queen Elizabeth it had very few intervals
of peace.
All that is known of the history of Newcastle McKynegan
you may read for yourself in an article by G. H. Orpen in
the Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland.
Here it is. 1 I will just read you his closing paragraph,
which sums it all up.
“ Such then,'” he says, “ are the dry facts that I have
gleaned from the records about Newcastle McKynegan.
If we could pierce the gloom of the centuries, we should
see, somewhere probably about the year 1200, the King’s
officers selecting a site for a castrum to guard the littoral
between Bray and Arklow. We should see them convert-
ing a natural ridge into a fortress, isolating its western
end by a fosse and vallum, scarping its sides to a steep
slope, and : erecting wooden palisades and the necessary
houses and defences. We should see it become the centre
of a manor, with its court and market, a busy mill by the
stream, and a little hnrg growing up close at hand. The
times are comparatively peaceful, and the manor is let to
farm, bringing in to the treasury some i?3l a year. About
the close of the long reign of Henry HI its troublous history
commences. The regions ruled by Irish law and custom
have become more and more circumscribed. The Irish of
the mountainous districts and the inaccessible glens to
the south, protected by their primaeval forests, owe allegiance
to none except to their tribal chiefs. From time to time
they burst forth in a wild raid of plunder and burning.
Armies are sent to punish them, but without any per-
manent effect. The old wooden defences at Newcastle
suffer, and are replaced by strong stone walls embracing a
stone keep and other buildings ; and constables, experienced
1 Journal of R.5.A.1., 1908, pp. 126 sqq.


in warfare, are appointed. Even these strong walls are
attacked and injured more than once, and as often repaired.
For about a hundred years more the attempt is made to
hold the district, and then the castle is destroyed and its
garrison slain. Richard II marches by with his knights
in full panoply, but, crestfallen at his failure to capture
Art MacMurrough Kavanagh, the real king of the district,
he learns that this was once a royal manor, and he vows
that it shall be so again; but before he can accomplish
his vow he loses both his kingdom and his life. His
successor, Henry IV, appoints a custos for the castle; but
it is unavailing, and for a century and a half the O’Byrnes
are supreme in the district. At last they yield to the
milder policy of Henry VIII; the manor is restored to the
Crown, but it passes into the semi-private hands of the
seneschal of the district, and a ‘Tudor Strong-house’
whose ruins we see to-day, takes the place of the mediaeval
fortress.”
So much for Newcastle! That little summary gives
you a fair idea of the history of all this part of Ireland,
from the Anglo-Norman Settlement until the times of
Good Queen Bess.
The other castle of early date is nearer to Bray, and
is also of greater interest. It is Shankill Castle. You
remembei, you passed it on your way to Rathmichael
Church, the day I met you there. In the time of Walter
de Ridelesford the Archbishop of Dublin had a manor
house at Shankill, at which he and his successors used fre-
quently to reside; and their seneschal used to hold a court
there for the trial of crimes even of the first magnitude.
We have records of three trials for murder held there
during the time of Archbishop Luke, in the second quarter
of the thirteenth century, and of sundry trials for theft.


In two of these the action was decided by the ancient test
of a duel between the plaintiff and the defendant. In one
case the defendant was beaten, and was promptly hung on
the Archbishop’s gallows. In the other the plaintiff was
killed in the duel, of course an incontestable proof of the
defendant’s innocence. 1 The manor, which was administered
at Shankill, included considerable properties in the town
and port of Dalkey, and important estates in the direction
of Powerscourt, as well as the lands immediately surround-
ing Shankill, 2 Dalkey had been bestowed by Henry II
upon Hugh de Lacy; but he made it over to the See of
Dublin. It was then the principal harbour of Dublin,
and a very important place, and under the rule of the
Archbishops it flourished greatly, developing in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries into a strongly fortified town, with
seven castles. But at the end of the sixteenth century
Ringsend became the principal port of Dublin, and Dalkey
began to decay. 3 But lam thinking now more of the first
half of the thirteenth century. Then the manor of Shankill
was one of the most valuable possessions of the See of
Dublin. Such a prelate as Archbishop Luke was not only
a spiritual overseer of his diocese, but also a great land-
owner and temporal lord. And his lordship of this manor
of Shankill brought him in very fine revenues by rents and
tolls. 4 The prosperity of the district during his tenure
of the See may be inferred from the fact that the value
of the neighbouring prebend of Rathmichael, which was
1 Historic and Municipal Documents of Ireland (Gilbert) pp. 147 sqq.
2 For an important Extent of the Manor of Senekill (1327), see Liher
Niger Alani, pp. 743-748 (Bishop Reeves’ copy). It mentions two parks
and a garden, &c., at Shankill, a watermill (probably in Bride’s Glen), and
many appurtenances of the manor from Dalkey to Powerscourt.
3 Dr. Elrington Ball, History of the County of Dublin, part i. pp. 74-76.
4 Ibid., part iii. p. 83, and authorities there quoted.


20 marks when he became Archbishop, rose to 50 marks
before 1280. 1
Now I am going to ask your permission again for a little
flight of imagination, but founded, if it is possible for a
flight to have foundations, upon facts. lam going to select
the year 1244: and I want you to picture to yourself Arch-
bishop Luke, that mighty prelate, travelling in state with
all his retinue from his castle at Tallaght to take up his
residence for a while at his manor house of Shankill. He
is received at the entrance gate, hard by the little ancient
church, by his seneschal, Geoffrey de Elme, accompanied
by his clerical assistant Andrew, who acts in his absence
as vice-seneschal, 2 and by all the officials and workmen of
the manor that could be gathered together. After Vespers
sung by Andrew in the little church, 3 a sumptuous banquet
of all the good cheer that the well-cared farm could produce
is laid out in the great hall of the manor-house. Next
morning is devoted to business. First reports have to be
received as to the execution of justice. Andrew has to
report upon a case that has come recently before him, in
which a charge of theft was proved against a Dane, who
bore the name of Macduel and lived at Rathmichael, the
plaintiff* being an Englishman named William. Macduel
was outlawed. Then the seneschal has a still more recent
case to report, in which an Englishman, Robert Passevant,
suffered sentence of outlawry for the murder of one of the
Lawless family, known as Long William, near Kilmacberne,
which was a village near Powerscourt. 4 After these sentences
have been duly ratified, the bailiffs of the various farms come
1 “ Crede Mihi,” see Appendix I, p. 180.
2 Historic and Municipal Documents of Ireland (Gilbert), pp. 147 S qq.
The church, of which no trace is left, was at the left hand of the
gate leading to the castle, see Appendix I, No. 21,
1 Historic and Municipal Documents of Ireland (Gilbert), p. 147.


SHANKILL CASTLE
LITTLE BRAY CASTLE
ONE OF THE DALKEY CASTLES
PUCK’S CASTLE


in with their accounts; and then audience is given to the
Provost of Dalkey. Among other interesting news from
the harbour of the important personages that have come and
gone, and of the increase of exports and imports, the bailiff
has a titbit to tell of ships just come in from Chester
bringing eighty head of deer from the Royal Forest there,
twenty bucks and sixty does, to stock the King’s park at
Glencree, which are to be landed that afternoon. 1 That is
too good sport to be missed. So the Archbishop closes his
court as early as possible, and rides over with the Provost
and with a goodly company to see the fun. And sure there
is great bowing and doffing of caps when the worthv Arch-
bishop and his company are seen approaching the crowd
of the good townsfolk of Dalkey, who have flocked to the
cliffs to see the unusual sight of so many wild deer leaping
out of the ships into the water and swimming, between lines
of boats that prevent their breaking away up and down
Dalkey Sound, to the shore, and scrambling up the rough
blocks of broken granite that form the foreshore, and then
driven on between lines of roughly clad, yelling, dancing
boys and men armed with stout blackthorns, into an
improvised corral, where they are all to be collected for
the night, before starting on their journey to Glencree.
Great is the laughter when a boat that is towing a refractory
stag by a rope cast round his horns is upset, and the poor
boatmen are frightened out of their wits, finding themselves
in the water among the wild animals, or when a too zealous
beater gets a prod in the side from a many-branched antler,
and rolls howling over the rocks. The Chief Forester is too
busy to give more than a word or two of greeting to the
Archbishop, who when the fun is all over honours the
1 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1171-1251, No. 2671, quoted by Mr. T, P. Le
Fanu, Journal of R.5.A.1., 1893, p. 270.
H


Provost by taking some light refreshment at his house, and
pays a brief visit to the little Church of St. Begnet, l before
riding back to Shankill.
A few days later he determines to visit his estates at
Kilmacberne; but as it is beautiful weather, he need not
hurry, and he decides to take two or three days and pay
some visits on the way. So he begins by riding round the
north side of Carrickgollogan 2 to Ballycorus, the estate of
his Archdeacon Geoffrey de Tureville, whom he finds at home
and nothing loth to join his merry company. 3 From there
they go on to Kilternan to visit the Abbot of St. Mary’s at his
manor-house. 4 The Abbot receives them with right monastic
entertainment, and they go no farther that day. Over the
table the Archbishop tells the story of the landing of the
deer; and the three dignitaries make up their minds all to
ride on together early the next morning as far as Glencree,
to inquire whether the deer have safely arrived. So in the
morning they pass through the Abbot’s lands of Glencullen,
and cross the little river of Clodach, just below the point
where the Glasnabrockey falls into it, into the lands of
Balibedan, 5 which belonged to the rival monastery of St.
1 See Appendix I, No. 25.
2 What was the original form of the name of this hill ? In Liber Niger
Alani, p. 765 (Bishop Reeves’ copy) we read that Fromundus le Brun
assigned “ Deo et Beate Marie ... 4 marks of income &c. from Carrik-
dolgyn-juxta-Shenkill.” Elsewhere, in anote on the Extent cited on p 111
Alan mentions Carrikalgan, commonly called “the hunting heath ” which
he says is “a retro” {i.e. behind Shankill ?) and contains more than 965
acres, J. O’Donovan (Ordnance Survey Letters, a.d. 1837) said that the
name was “known in the mountain district as Carrig-Ollogan, never as
Catty- Gallangh er.
3 Journal of R.5.A.1., 1894, p. 166.
* Dr. Elrington Ball, History of the County of Dublin, part iii. p. 74.
See ChartuLary of St. Mary's Abbey, vol. i. pp. 387, 388, 389 for the
boundary line between Glencullen and Balibedan. The little streamlet
which is now the county boundary dividing the townlands of Brockey and
Ballybrew, was then called Glasnabrockey, and the Cookstown River, into


Thomas. Then passing over the shoulder of Glencullen
mountain, before long they reach the fence enclosing the
Royal Park of Glencree. 1 This was forest land, which, you
must understand, does not mean that it was all covered with
trees, as most people nowadays seem to imagine. Some of
it indeed was wooded, as the names of its townlands tell us,
but a good deal was open heath, A forest was—well, what
a deer forest in Scotland is now —a large extent of land set
apart for the preservation of beasts of the chase; and all
who lived within the limits of a royal forest were subject to
a special code of forest laws, by which their rights as free
subjects were so seriously curtailed that even in those feudal
days these laws were felt to be very burdensome. 2 Probably
there were few, if any, tenants living at that time in the
Glencree Valley. But a short while before a much larger
area of the mountain district of what is now Co. Wicklow
had been similarly reserved for the chase; and as most of
that land happened to belong to the archiepiscopal see,
not only did the grievances of the poor tenants come loudly
to the Archbishop’s ear, but also the value of his possessions
was greatly reduced. Archbishop Luke therefore had exerted
himself vigorously in the matter, until at length he prevailed
upon the King to disafforest his estates, 3 a proceeding which
which it runs, was called Clodach. (The same river is called “ the water
of Cladoghe ”in Pembroke Estate Deeds, No. 267). Ballybrew was called
Balibedan, and Brockey was included in Glencullen. Glencullen sub-
sequently had a “ffaire stone house,” of which “only the walls” were
standing at the time of the Down Survey, 1657.
1 Long stretches of a mound and ditch, which probably were part of
this fence, are still to be seen on the mountain side in the townlands of
Anacrivey and Curtlestown, and probably might be found farther on also.
See Journal of Jt.S.A.I., 1913, p. 185. And for an interesting paper on
the “ Royal Forest of Glencree,” see Journal of R.5.A.1., 1893, pp. 268 sqq.
2 See Manwood’s Forest Laws, a.d. 1598, a quaint and interesting book.
3 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1171-1251, No. 1757, and Liber Niger Alani,
(Bishop Reeves’ copy), pp. 237 and 368-9. The boundaries of the district
disafforested are given. It included “ St, Kevin’s Land,” i.e. the Glenda-


has been strangely misunderstood even by historians of repute,
' v ho have represented him as having obtained permission to
cut down all the trees on his estates, in order to replenish
his coffers by the sale of the timber, and accuse him of having
destroyed, whereas he really greatly increased, the value of
the properties. 1 For the disafforestation meant that they
were released from the reservation, and set free from the
forest laws, and the tenants were at liberty to reclaim and
till the lands in a proper manner. However, Glencree still
remained as a great deer park, and a very beautiful one it
must have been. So we are imagining the Archbishop and
the Archdeacon and the Abbot as entering the confines
of the forest on a beautiful summer’s day of that year 1244.
And if then it so happened that their dogs caught the scent
of a hare, or even of one of the precious deer, and gave
tongue and went on the chase, and if the three reverend
gentlemen had to follow the dogs, because they would not
come back when called, and if their retinue followed them,
lough district, “Fertir,” the district drained by the Vartry River, and
*' Coillach,” on the Blessington side of the mountains. It was bounded
on the east by the King’s reserved territories of Obrun and Othe (Ui
Briuin and Ui Teigh) on the south by a line running from Wicklow by
Lugnaquilla to the Glen of Imaile, on the west by the barony of Naas,
and on the north by a line running from Rathmore in that barony by
Saggart and Balachlise at the head of the Dodder Valley (see Appendix
111, p. 213) along the brow of the mountains to the bounds of the Arch-
bishop’s estate of Shankill. The Archbishop had to pay a “ fine” of 300
marks for the disafforestation. See Patent Rolls, 1225-1232 14 Henry HI
pp. 316, 329,
Ware made this mistake. In his Bishops of Ireland, writing of Arch-
bishop Luke, 1228—1255, he says that in order to defray the heavy charges
of his election as Archbishop, he disafforested a forest belonging to his
See, for which he was in the year 1230 called to account and fined 300
marks, &c. Whereas, the fact was, that he paid “ a fine” of 300 marks
to the king as an inducement to the King to set free those territories from
their burden. Professor Stokes (.Ireland and the Anglo-Norman Church,
p. 218), follows Ware’s lead, and attributes the absence of trees on Calary
bog to Archbishop Luke’s urgent need of money!


and all had a jolly burst across the open glade of Cloon,
and down into the valley where there was need to ride
more cautiously between the oaks of Lackandarragh, and
so on round Knockree till they overtook the hounds again
that had killed near Onagh,—mind I do not say that the
good ecclesiastics did do this, but if they did, —then who
should blame them ? Certainly not the Chief Forester, jolly
old soul, who was glad enough to join in the fun when he
found what good company was engaged in it. It was a
different thing half a century later, when a surlier forester
accused the then Abbot of St. Mary of habitually hunting
in that forest with nets and other engines, and with grey-
hounds, and of taking the wild game, to the King’s hurt and
damage. 1 Such elaborate and deliberate poaching as that
was hardly playing the game. But even so no doubt there
was some personal quarrel that prompted the accusation !
But to return to our party, —such an unexpected diversion,
and the rest and refreshment needed after it, have not left
much time for business. And so it is but a hasty and
perfunctory inspection that is possible of the archiepiscopal
estates at Kilmacberne. And then, after a moment’s delay
at the spot, which a peasant is very eager to point out,
where Robert Passevant killed Long William Lawless, and
after a longer delay at Killegar, where inquiries have to be
made about a man that stole a horse and then fled to the old
church there for sanctuary, 2 the tired riders make their way
homewards slowly through the Scalp, and reach Kilternan
late indeed, but not too late for another night’s sumptuous
entertainment.
Yes, those were jolly enough times; but after all they
1 Chartulary of St. Mary's Abbey, p. 4 ; Journal of R.5.A.1., 1893,
p. 270.
2 Historic and Municipal Documents of Ireland (Gilbert), p. 149.


did not last for long. In the latter part of that century
the O 1 ooles and O’Byrnes became a serious menace, and
caused a great deal of loss to the possessions of knights and
of ecclesiastics alike, to the north as well as to the south
of Bray. You remember it was just at the end of the
thirteenth century that they ventured to attack and burn
Newcastle. In the very beginning of the fourteenth century
we find the value of the prebend of Rathmichael suddenly
fallen from fifty marks to five marks “because waste”; the
vicarage of Bree worth nothing on account of war; the
Church of Shankill entirely impoverished for the same
reason; and so on all through the Deanery. 1 In those days
the Archbishop cannot have got any profit from his manor
of Shankill. And so things went on from bad to worse,
until Bruce’s invasion, in the second decade of the four-
teenth century, emboldened the disaffected Irish tribes more
than ever; and now even Bray Castle fell, as well as Arklow
and Newcastle, and all the towns thereabout. 2
But here is some coffee now; and I think it is time I
took breath.
1 Taxation of the See of Dublin, Christ Church Deeds, No. 150, dated
circa 1294, in the printed Calendar, but about A.D. 1304 by Dr. Lawlor.
2 Carew MSS.: The Book of Howth, p. 134.


CHAPTER XI
THE RUINED CASTLES
Perhaps you have had enough for one evening ? No ? Do
you really think you could stand another dose ? You had
better light another pipe, then, for this will be a nasty dose.
Nothing but fighting and killing and covetousness, and
hatred and misery, from year to year, and from century
to century ! Of course I am not saying that nobody was
ever happy, that there were no romantic lovers and no
jolly children, no jovial huntsmen and no peaceful students,
nor yet do I deny that there were devout and holy servants
of God, striving to serve Him faithfully, to convert the
wicked, to comfort the sorrowful, and to strengthen and
encourage the chivalrous to noble deeds. But the records
tell us nothing, or next to nothing, of such things as these.
They seem to be entirely taken up with the horrors.
And as for the stones that tell us most about those cen-
turies, they are not the churches, very few of which pro-
bably were built after the thirteenth century, nor any
remains of lowly cottages or fair ladies 1 bowers, suggestive
of love and peaceful family life, but just the ruins of those
forbidding and comfortless castles or fortified houses with
which the whole country is strewn, and whose whole story
seems to be of war, pillage, and murder.
Well, yes; I think you are right. I suppose that all
the misery in these parts was directly the outcome of the
unscrupulous dispossession of the O’Tooles and O Byrnes


from their rich lands in Kildare. Still Ido not think it
is fair to lay all the blame upon the Anglo-Normans.
were not the first people to introduce killing and
robbing into Ireland. To be honest, we must look further
back to the constant fighting of the Irish tribes with one
another and with the Danes, The Norman settlers were
just thrown in as a new element of disturbance into the
seething mass. And, indeed, to their credit we must say
that the district immediately about Bray had probably
never before enjoyed so peaceful and so prosperous a cen-
tury as the first century after the coming of Walter de
Ridelesford. Still, of course, it was the insatiable wrath of
the O’Tooles and O’Byrnes, impoverished, and condemned
to live a hard life in their mountain fastnesses, that made
any peace or prosperity impossible for three centuries to
follow. During all that time it was a recognised fact that
the King’s writ did not run in the Wicklow Mountains.
And during that time Bray was an outpost hardly held for
the Crown, and a starting-place of expeditions against the
mountaineers, which generally failed. I hate this part of
the history, and do not care to dilate upon it; but I will
just give you a rough catalogue of some of the chief records,
which I have put down in a sort of index here.
To begin with, you remember that I told you that
Bray Castle was, apparently for the first time, taken and
destroyed during the time of Bruce’s invasion. l It was,
however, too important a point to be left undefended, and
probably the castle was soon rebuilt. If the first castle,
which the records tell us was burnt, was built chiefly of
1 Lewis {Topographical Dictionary) gives the date of the fall of Bray
Castle as the 16th April 1316, and states that on the same day the
O’Tooles and O’Byrnes, who had destroyed it, were attacked and defeated
by Edmond le Boteler. See also Carexc MSS., The Book of Howth, p. 134.


wood, the new building was probably of stone. The first
Constable of Bray Manor after Bruce’s invasion was Sir
Hugh de Lawless. 1 Five and a half years after his appoint-
ment, being summoned to give account of the profits of
the manor, he asserted that he had got nothing out of it
during that time, except two salmon of very small value;
the lands having not yet recovered from the burning and
devastation which they had suffered in the invasion. A few
years later we have an inquisition into the state of the
manor of Shankill, which shows the country to have been
still lying quite waste, buildings everywhere burnt down
and in ruins, pastures and meadows and parks all valueless,
even some of the land close to the walls of Dalkey still
uncultivated. 2 Go on a few years more, and we have
another record of Bray in 1334. Then the manor of Bree
was leased to one Geoffrey Crump at a rent of £ 6, Is. B|-cZ.
per annum; but because the land was on the marches, so
that hardly anything could be got out of it, two years’
rent was remitted, on condition of the castle being repaired,
the castle in this grant being named Robelescourt, possibly
a corruption of Ridelescourt, or some such name. 3 After
this we find a regular garrison maintained at Bray for the
defence of the marches against the O’Byrnes and O’Tooles.
There are various records relating to this garrison. One
of them, dated 1349, tells that the Abbot of St. Mary’s,
a successor of that naughty poacher, undertook to provide
at his own cost, but without prejudice to his successors,
two “ covered horses ” or chargers, and six “ hobillers ” or
1 Appointed July 30, 1314. Historic and Municipal Documents of
Ireland (Gilbert), pp. 456-462. Lawless proved his case, and was let
off the rent due to the Crown, viz. £l5, Bs. id-
-2 Liber Niger Alani (Bishop Reeves’ copy), pp. 743-748. “ Inspeximus ”
of an Extent of the Manor of Senekill made 14th March 1327.
3 Calendar of Chancery Rolls , 8 Edward 111, No. 79 (p. 39).


light-horsemen, to aid the King’s garrison in the district
of Bree in resisting the malice of Obryn and Otohill and
their accomplices. 1 Ihen, again, to pass over some other
records, 2 we find in 1377, the year in which Edward 111
died and Richard II came to the throne, rewards given
to Roger Power of Shankill and his son John, in com-
pensation for the great losses they had sustained in de-
fending the marches. 3 In the next reign—that is, the reign
of Henry IV, and in the year 1402—a great battle was
fought near Bray, in which John Drake, Lord Mayor of
Dublin, defeated a strong force of the Irish and killed a
great number of them (Dr. D’Alton says 4000; Dr.
Llrington Ball, 500); 4 in honour of which achievement
the Corporation of Dublin received the privilege of walking
behind a gilt sword. 0 In Henry Vi’s reign, and in the
year 1429, an army was collected at Bray for service against
the O Byrnes. No less than 1100 men were assembled,
and 100 carts, loaded with provisions and victuals for six
days, were provided. 6
It was in the same reign that Old Court Castle was
built by an English knight, named Sir Thomas Mulso, who
obtained a grant of land there in what was then called
the marshes of Co. Dublin, on condition of reducing it to
1 Chartulary of St. Mary's Abbey , p. 302.
2 Calendar of Chancery Rolls, 29 Edward 111, pa. Nos. 29, 35, 133
(pp. 55-57) ; 51 Edward 111, c. No. 13 (p. 100); 9 Richard 11, pa. No. 86
(p. 124); 14 Henry IV, pa. No. 8 (p. 202),
3 Calendar of Chancery Rolls , 10 Henry VI, pa . No. 11 (p. 252);
1 Richard 11, c. No. 25 (p. 103).
4 In Dowling’s Annals the number is given as 400. He puts it under
the date 1401, but his dates are not reliable. “ 1401. Johannes Drack
major Dublin cum suis civibus interfecit 400 de Hibernicis inimicis juxta
Bree.”
6 According to the Four Masters the killing was usually on the other
side. See Annals, A.D. 1396, 1398, 1413, 1431, 1442.
6 Calendar of Chancery Rolls , 9 Henry VI, pa. No. 20 (p. 249).


a state of order and obedience to the English government.
He succeeded in taking possession of the land and building
the castle, which he called Mulso’s Court. But he is said
to have been killed afterwards in a skirmish, and the
castle passed into other hands. 1 Shanganagh Castle was
built a little earlier in the same century by Thomas Law-
less, who held the land from the vicars-choral of St.
Patrick’s Cathedral. 2
The next century, from this reign of Henry VI to
the early part of the reign of Henry VIII, was one of
the worst parts (it would be hard to say which was the
worst part) of all the wretched history of amazingly stupid
attempts to govern Ireland, which only resulted in miser-
able anarchy. It was the period of Poyning’s Law and
of the building of the Pale, confessions of the utter failure
of England so far either to draw Ireland into an organic
union with itself or to control it as a conquered country.
But during this period Bray seems to have had a breath-
ing time. Apparently the O’Tooles and O’Byrnes were
too much taken up with quarrels among themselves, to
have time or energy for raids upon the English settlers
near the coast. 3 By the way, you may be interested to
1 Dublin Penny Journal, Oct. 19, 1833. The same account is given
in the Parliamentary Gazetteer (1846). I have not been able to discover
from what sources this information was drawn, but I know of no reason
to doubt its substantial correctness. There is, however, this difficulty,
that in the Pembroke Estate Deeds , No. 140, there is mention of Oldcourte
in connection with the Earl of Ormond’s manor of Bree, implying that
Old Court, as well as that manor, then belonged to the Earl; and that deed
is dated in the 11th year of Henry VI. I cannot find any other mention
of Sir T. Mulso, but there was a Sir Edward Mulso who had a “ shope ” in
Cork Street, Dublin, in Henry Vi’s reign. Calendar of Chancery Rolls, 28
Henry VI, p. 265.
2 Dr. Elrington Ball, History of the County of Dublin, part iii. pp.
84, 86.
3 See, e.g., Annals of the Four Masters, A.D. 1488 and 1523.


know who some of those settlers were. We have their
descendants among us now. At that time they were the
Englishmen who looked upon the Irish septs as their
natural enemies, for whose defence the Pale was made, and
in whose interests such laws as the Statute of Kilkenny
were passed. But it was their descendants that in the
seventeenth century were the leaders of rebellion against
the English Parliament and the Protestant form of re-
ligion. I have already mentioned the Lawless family,
which occupied Shanganagh. They also held lands in
Old Connaught and Shankill, and also in Bray, of which
you remember one of their ancestors had been Constable
of the manor in the previous century. 1 The other principal
landowners in Bray itself and at Killruddery and Kindles-
town and Newcastle were the Archbolds. 2 Old Court came
into the hands of the Walsh family, 3 which held a large
amount of property, not only at Carrickmines, where their
piincipal castle was built, but all through the district,
taking the place of the Lawlesses at Old Connaught and
Shanganagh, and gradually getting more and more of the
lands under their name. Then there were the Barnewalls 4
who occupied Shankill, renting it from the Archbishop,
who no longer held court there himself. There were also
Harolds at Old Connaught and Cork (now Corke Abbey),
and Goodmans at Loughlinstown. s Those are all I re-
1 Calendar of Chancery Rolls, 10 Henry IV, pa. No. 58 (p. 190); 10
Henry VI, pa. No. 11 (p. 252).
2 Calendar of Chancery Rolls, 1 Henry IV, pa. No. 69 (p. 157),
3 lor the history of the Walsh family see an article by Dr. Elrington
Ball in the Journal of R.S.A.I. for 1901, pp. 195 sqg. Besides Carrick-
mines, Shanganagh, Connagh, Corke, Old Court, there were Walshes at
Phrompstown and Kilcroney. Prerogative Wills of Ireland, 1607 1612 5
Diocesan Index of Wills, 1663, &c.
4 For a number of lands in the district held by Barnewalls in the reign
ot Henry VI, see Calendar of Chancery Rolls, 30 Henry VI, pa. No. 3 (p 266)
5 See Chapter XII, p. 145. '


member. They were the builders of the castles, some of
which we see in ruins now, while some have disappeared
to make place for modern mansions. l
But let us glance at the records again in the latter part
of the reign of Henry VIII, and at the date of the Reforma-
tion. Bluff Hal was a strong King, and had a firm seat on
his throne; and when he began seriously to take Irish
matters in hand, a dawn of hope seemed to be rising for this
distracted country. What she has always wanted to make
her prosperous and happy is a really strong, and, because
strong, therefore a really impartial government. But un-
fortunately he died too soon. However, to come to the year
1536. The King’s advisers in Ireland saw very clearly that
one of the first necessities was to deal with the O’Tooles
and O’Byrnes. A letter written in the very beginning of
that year, from Lord Ossory to Crumwell, states that the
Pale is broken up by the practical dominion of the sea
coast between Dublin and Waterford by the Byrnes, Tholes
and Kavenaghs. A despatch from the Lord Deputy and
Council of Ireland to the King in June of the same year
recommends the conquest of “ McMurho, Omurho, Obyrne,
Othole and theire kinsmen, which inhabit between your
subjects of the counties of Kilkenny, Karlogh, Kildare,
Dublin and the sees side, next to your realm of England.”
One of the signatures to that document is that of William
Brabazon, who was then Treasurer of Ireland. Another
letter of the same year, from Patrick Barnewall to Crumwell,
tells how “ Master Tresorer ” was exerting himself for the
defence of the country, and in particular was building the
castles of “ Powere’s Court and the Fassagh - Rowe.” 2
1 A number of these families are mentioned in Christ Church Deeds,
No. 333, 27th March 1482.
8 State Papers, vol. ii., Henry VIII Correspondence, pp. 297, 339, 359.


These two castles with their manors, and that of Rathdown
also, were shortly afterwards made over to Peter Talbot, a
vigorous defender of the Pale, at a rent of forty shillings
Irish. 1 The whole idea of the Government in Ireland was
to treat the Irish clans as the King’s enemies, and to conquer
them and break them up, and, if not to exterminate them,
at least to anglicise them so that they should no longer
be recognisably Irish. But King Hal had an idea that
O’Byrnes and O’Tooles ought to be his subjects as well as
the English settlers, and that they were worth having for
subjects, and that to conciliate them was a better policy than
to destroy them. And in 1540 he sent over as Lord Deputy
a man of sense known as Sir Anthony Sentleger, who be-
haved like a gentleman to the Irish chiefs, who by this time
were fairly sick of warfare and ready to be friends if they
were given a fair chance. The result was a general sub-
mission. The O’Tooles in particular, led by their chieftain
Turlough, tried the experiment of being loyal subjects of
the Crown; and to be sure they took care to see that loyalty
should pay. They claimed to have an ancient right to
Powerscourt and all the surrounding district of Fercullen, 2
and Turlough had a great desire to possess that fine castle
which Master Treasurer Brabazon had built, and which had
been granted to Peter Talbot. Under the circumstances it
may have seemed rather much to ask for; but conciliation
was the word, and so the Lord Deputy was told to send for
Peter Talbot and to persuade him “in gentle sort ” to hand
over Powerscourt to Turlogh O’Toole. 3 And of course he
1 Calendar of Patent and Close Rolls, Henry VIII, p. 38, No. 28. These
lands were all formerly in the estate of Eichard Fitzgerald, forfeited on
his attainder.
2 Inquisition, Wicklow, Charles I, No, 17, April 21, 1636.
3 Journal of R.5.A.1., 1893, p. 278.


had to do it, and to be content with Fassaroe and all his
other winnings, which indeed were large enough !
So for the last few years of Henry VIIFs reign there
seemed to be some faint hope of peace and good sense pre-
vailing. But no sooner was he gone, and the youthful
Edward VI upon the throne, than the fat was in the fire
again. The O’Tooles and O’Byrnes were in arms in 1547. 1
They were defeated indeed, and Turlough was killed; but
it showed plainly enough that the reconciliation had not
had time to become more than skin-deep. For part of
Elizabeth’s reign things were quieter, owing largely to the
good influence of Captain Wingfield, who was put in charge
of the country of the O’Tooles and O’Byrnes. Sir Henry
Sidney travelled through the district during one of his terms
of office as Lord Deputy; and in describing his experiences
afterwards he said that he had found all these Irish people
living as loyally as any people in the shire ground. There
was no waste land, but, as they termed it there, it bare corn
or horn. He wrote that account several years after his
journey; 2 but when he wrote it things were in a very
different condition. For after his last deputyship, when he
caused great discontent by his harshness, hostilities broke
out again worse than ever, culminating in the great disaster
to an English army in Glenmalure in the year 1580. The
leader of the Irish in that battle was the great Feagh
Mac Hugh O’Byrne. 3 One marvels at the crass stupidity
of the Viceroy, Lord Grey de Wilton, and his military staff,
which included such well-known officers as James Wingfield
and the Earl of Kildare, in marching an army of heavily
armed troops into the heart of that valley, where they could
1 The History of the Clan O'Toole, p. 274.
2 Viz., in A.d. 1583 ; Carew MSS., 1575-1588, p. 354.
3 For a highly coloured description of this battle, see History of the
Clan O'Toole, pp. 301-310.


only scramble painfully over screes of tumbled rocks on
slopes exceeding steep, without even sending out scouts to
see where the enemy were lying in ambush. But alas, it is
not the only time that English battles have been conducted
on those principles. lam not sure that Lord Grey did not
well deserve the beating which my ancestors gave him that
day; but one could wish that he had been the person to
suffer himself, and not all those poor soldiers who were
driven like sheep into a slaughter-house !
At that time Sir Henry Harrington was Captain of the
Olooles’and the O’Byrnes’ country, and although he had
not been able to avert the outbreak which ended in that
disaster, still he was successful in reconciling the disaffected
tiibes very soon after it; and indeed he took great credit
to himself for bringing in the sept of the O’Tooles and
reconciling Feagh Mac Hugh O’Byrne, of whom he enter-
tained good hope that he would be honest. As a reward
for his services he suggested that he might be given a
lease of Baltinglass, and also a further interest in two other
parcels, one of which was Killruddery. 1 What is more, he
got Baltinglass, but Killruddery had a different destiny in
store for it.
The state of peace which Sir Henry was so proud to
have achieved did not last for long. Of course you know
the romantic story of Hugh Roe O’Donnell—the treacherous
manner in which he was kidnapped and thrown into the
Bermingham lower of Dublin Castle, and his two daring
escapes. The first time he succeeded after terrible hardships
in getting across our mountains as far as Houndwood, where
Phelim O’Toole of Castlekevin came to his rescue, but too
late, so that he could see no other course but to give him
1 Calendar of State Papers (Ireland), 1574-1585, pp. 478, 586. See also
Carew MSS., 1575-1588, p. 426 and passim.


up again into custody. The second time, after still more
terrible sufferings, he was got safely to Glenmalure, where
Feagh Mac Hugh O’Byrne, who had sent the guides that
helped him to escape, received him at last in safety, and
kept him there till the Earl of Tyrone sent a messenger to
bring him back by another very adventurous journey to his
home in the North. 1 This was in the beginning of 1592,
and probably it may have been at least partially the reason
for the renewal of hostilities between the Government and
the O’Tooles and O’Byrnes. At any rate things came to
such a pass again that in 1595 two warlike expeditions were
made to Glenmalure against Feagh Mac Hugh by Lord
Deputy Russell, whose diaries give us a pretty full account
of what happened. The first of these expeditions started
from the camp at Bray. 2 For the second the leaders met
at Old Court, where they spent one night, and marched
as far as Rathnew the next day and to Rathdrum (which
the diarist erroneously calls Rathdown) the third day.
There the Deputy began to fortify the church, intending
to make it his headquarters, but subsequently proceeded to
Ballinacor in the lower part of Glenmalure Valley. One of
the party that met at Old Court for this expedition was
Maurice Wingfield. 3 Both of these expeditions entirely
failed of their object, which was to capture Feagh Mac Hugh
O’Byrne. But what could not be done by honourable warfare
was effected by the treachery of one of his followers; and
the redoubtable chieftain was caught and killed in 1597.
But the loss of their great leader does not seem to have
daunted the clans, for they continued to give trouble, and
1 See Joyce, Concise History of Ireland, pp. 155-160.
2 Calendar of State Papers (Ireland), 1592-1596 ; Feb. 2, 1591-5, letter
from camp at Braye.
3 Calendar of Garew MSS., 1589-1600; Diary of Lord Deputy Russell,
p. 249.
I


inflicted a very serious defeat on Sir Henry Harrington
between Rathdrum and Wicklow in 1599; and the army of
Lord Essex had trouble with them near Arklow a month or
so later. During these wars a raid was made upon this
district, in which Killruddery and other towns about it were
burnt and spoiled. 1
But there! that is the end of the sixteenth century!
We have waded through blood far enough for one evening!
I am not surprised that you are looking tired of it. But
now I will tell you how to see the monuments of those sad
times that are within easy reach. I will recommend you a
good walk and a good bicycle ride. For the walk, I should
suggest starting by train to Shankill Station, and then
taking the Killiney road from there as far as the gate of
a house called Beechlands, just before the road crosses the
little stream that comes down from Loughlinstown. The
ruins of Shanganagh Castle are in the garden of that house :
and I am sure you will have no difficulty in obtaining per-
mission to visit it. Oh, no, it is not the place that is now
called Shanganagh Castle on the Dublin Road. That is
indeed also in the townland of Shanganagh, but on the
southern border of it, whereas the old castle which Thomas
Lawless built, and which was afterwards held, and probably
enlarged, by the Walshes, is right on the northern
boundary; and almost exactly opposite to it, on the other
side of the little stream and Loughlinstown Commons, the
castle of Loughlinstown used to stand. One side of the
keep of Shanganagh Castle is left, if we may use such
grand terms of these old fortified houses. The rest has
fallen. You will see some of the usual features the
enormous fireplaces (though why there are two of them just
1 Calendar of State Papers (Ireland), 1598-9, pp. 102 sqq., and 1599-1600
P» DO. ’


alongside of one another here I do not know), the staircase
in the thickness of the wall, the remains of a stone barrel
roof to the ground floor. You would think that whatever
might injure a building of this kind, at any rate it would be
fairly safe from fire. And yet it was by fire that this
castle was destroyed in the year 1763. 1 Of course the rest
of the building was more inflammable than what I call the
keep. Attached to it there was a large hall, which, at any
rate in the seventeenth century, was roofed with thatch.
Ihere were also an orchard and a garden and some plan-
tations belonging to it. 2 Shanganagh remained in the
hands of the Walsh family, with a short break at the time
of the Commonwealth and the general confiscation, until
the middle of the eighteenth century, when it passed into
the possession of the Roberts family, which is now repre-
sented by the Rialls of Old Conna Hill. 3
When you leave Shanganagh, I should suggest your
taking the road up the stream, to have a look at Loughlins-
town House, if you can get permission, and going on from
there, by the road which passes under the high railway
viaduct, to the old Glebe House of Rathmichael, just
behind a house called Cherrywood. I will tell you some-
thing about both of them another day; it is too late
to start on that story now. Then come south past the
new church of Rathmichael, a very pretty piece of Irish
Romanesque architecture, by the way, and with a beautiful
modern Celtic cross in the churchyard, and go on to
Shankill Castle, which you have seen before, but which is
worth a proper visit, for which I am sure permission will be
given. It is in better preservation than Shanganagh, and
1 Dr. Elrington Ball, History of the County of Dublin, part iii. p. 89.
2 Fleetwood’s Survey, 1654.
3 Dr. Elrington Ball, History of the County of Dublin, part iii. p. 89.


it is very interesting to go upstairs and see the sort of place
in which our forefathers lived three and four centuries ago.
It is tempting to imagine the Archbishop of Dublin holding
court in that room; but the similarity of the manner in
which it is built to the many castles of the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries makes it much more probable that it was
built by the Barnewalls. The old manor-house of the
Archbishops seems to have been quite destroyed in the
devastation at the beginning of the fourteenth century. 1
From Shankill you might go on up the little lane with
the cross in it, which, you remember, leads up to the old
Bathmichael Church. But when you get out on the
mountain side, do not turn round to the right towards the
church, but go on straight ahead till you see Puck’s Castle
in front of you. Why “ Puck’s Castle ” ? Oh, I suppose
because it has a lonely eerie sort of look about it, suggestive
of fairies or ghosts or something of the kind. Certainly
there is nothing suggestive of homely comfort about it.
No, I do not know any legend about it, except the usual
legend that James II slept here on his flight after the
battle of the Boyne. There is no record of any family ever
having resided at it. Probably it was never much more
than a kind of blockhouse, where a company of soldiers
could be posted and keep a look out for raiders. Most of
it still stands there for you to see; and you are at liberty to
exercise your imagination as freely as you please in con-
cocting a story for it. Dr Elrington Ball suggests that it
was one of the castles built by Peter Talbot and the
Walshes, with Government assistance, against the O’Tooles
about 1537. 2
1 Liber Niger Alani (Bishop Reeves’ copy), pp. 743-748. “ Inspeximus ”
of an Extent of the Manor of Senekill made 14th March 1327.
2 History of the County of Dublin, part iii. pp. 85-87. As regards King


After you have inspected it, you might follow the lane
which passes close to it round Carrickgollogan, inspecting
the Carrickgollogan Cromlech by the way, and come down
the Ballyman lane, and go straight across the road down to
St. Kevin’s Well and Church, as you were too late to visit
them on your expedition through the Scalp; and then go
on down Glenmunder till you reach the ancient highway,
now a rough lane, that leads to Fassaroe. You will be able
to examine the very curious cross —in some respects I think
unique—that stands beside the lane ; 1 and then, passing the
entrance gate of Fassaroe, the lane leads on to a gate which
gives entrance to Fassaroe Castle. It would be well to
write beforehand to ask leave to visit it, as it is rather
a long walk up to the house. I told you how Master
Treasurer Brabazon was engaged in building this castle at
the Fassagh Rowe, as well as that at Powerscourt, in 1535 ;
and how Peter Talbot was permitted to retain this one,
when he was persuaded in gentle sort to give up Powers-
court to the O’Tooles. It remained in the hands of the
same family until the confiscation at the time of the
Commonwealth in the middle of the next century. Tradi-
tion has it that the castle was destroyed by Cromwell, and
the riven condition of the walls is pointed to as a sign of
the effects of artillery, though it would rather point to an
explosion from within, if any such violent cause is needed
to explain their ruin.
Then coming home down the valley of the Bray Water,
you might visit Little Bray Castle before going home. I
do not know about going inside; I have never been so bold
James, Dr. D’Alton (1832) says: “Puck’s Castle, where King James is
reported to have passed a night, while his army was encamped at Lough-
linstown.”—D’Alton’s History , p. 925.
1 Barely noticed in Journal of R.S.A.L, 1901, pp. 141-2. The projection
from one point of the circle is quite unique and very difficult to explain.


as to do that myself; but you can see most of what there is
to see from the street. The brick battlements on top are,
of course, quite modern; but the walls beneath them, with
the projecting dripstone ledge and the loophole in the south-
east angle, and the small square window in the west wall, are
probably ancient enough. The small carved head that
projects from the east wall near the loophole (probably a
portrait) is a peculiar feature of one of these very unde-
corated Irish castles, but has a parallel at Bullock Castle. 1
Why a castle was built in so poor a position, it is hard
to see; but probably it was built in the fifteenth or the
beginning of the sixteenth century. At any rate it was
already in ruins in the middle of the seventeenth century,
and Cromwell was under no necessity to knock it to pieces.
It was then described in Fleetwood’s Siirvey as “ one castle
wall, the old castle valued by the jury at five pounds.” In
the same survey the castles or dwelling-houses of Ballyman
and Old Connaught were both valued at £%O.
Then you may go home. Yes, that will be a good
tramp, just about ten miles’ walking, besides standing about
the castles.
And now for the bicycle expedition in the opposite
direction. First, to Old Court Castle. 2 That is not very
far. I have already told you something of the history of
this castle—how it was built by Sir Thomas Mulso in the
reign of Henry VI, probably just in the middle of the
fifteenth century; how afterwards it passed into the hands
of the Walshes of Carrickmines, some of whom held it till
the rebellion of 1641; and how it was the rendezvous from
1 For an account of Little Bray Castle, by E. R. M‘C. Dix, M.R.5.A.1.,
see The Irish Builder, 1898, p. 133.
2 William Walsh held Old Court in 1548; Calendar of Fiants, Edward VI,
Nos. 265 and 1104. For its occupants from 1592-1620, see Inquisitions,
County Wicklow, James I, No. 20, 20th May 1620.


which one of Lord Deputy Russell’s expeditions started
against Feagh McHugh O’Byrne in 1595. In the Down
Survey (1657) it was described as “ a castle repaireable.”
After the Restoration it was granted to the Edwards family,
who held it till the latter part of the nineteenth century,
when, fortunately for its preservation, it fell into the careful
hands of the Earl of Meath. Here, again, all that now
remains is what we will call the keep, but that is in
excellent preservation. It is now so well-clothed with ivy
that you cannot see, on its south-west side, the lines of the
high-pitched roof which abutted against it, when a large
wing was built against it there, containing, no doubt, all
the comfortably habitable part of the house. The castle
is drawn on a map of the Down Survey, with this wing
attached to the square tower. The opening by which you
can now enter the tower was originally an entrance from
the upper floor of this wing. You will also notice the
gateway of the courtyard, with the ruins of the two small
round towers that defended it. When you are there you
must not fail to visit the Wishing Well, and also the carved
base of an ancient cross which is by the stream. It is an
interesting problem to make out the subjects of the sadly-
worn sculptures. 1 This base is not in its original position.
It seems originally to have stood by the roadside just where
now there is a bit of wall between the gateways of Newcourt
and Rockbrae; that is to say, if we may trust the story told
by old John Lawless of Old Court to Eugene Curry in 1837.
He said it had been taken from that spot to be placed near
the castle more than fifty years before. If you want to
attach some blood-curdling romance to the castle, read
1 Eugene Curry (Ordnance Survey Letters) discusses these sculptures,
giving rough sketches of them as they appeared to him in 1837, as well as
telling at length the story of the moving of this stone.


Professor Armstrong’s poem The Wraith of de Riddle sfor
Castle. But, as I told you before, it is pure imagination,
and cannot at all be fitted to the true history. 1
After you have seen Old Court thoroughly, ride on over
Windgates as far as Bedford; and remember, as you ride
between Killruddery and Rathdown on a castle-hunt, that
Killruddery House used to be called a castle in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, and that on the other side of
you Rathdown had its castle too—“ a ruined castle ”in
1657. 2 At Bedford, scene of a bloody battle in the days
of old, turn to the right, and go on till you come to the
ruined castle of Kindlestown, or Kenliston, or Ballykenle,
as it is in the old documents, with many varieties of
spelling. There is what you may call “ one wall of a
castle” there, but of a tremendously massive kind. I
cannot tell you much about it, except that it belonged
to the family of Archbold, or Ashbold, or Ashepole all
through the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, but passed
with other Archbold properties into the hands of the
Earl of Meath in the seventeenth. 3 But because it be-
longed to the Earl of Meath, who was no “ Irish rebel,”
it was not forfeited at the great confiscation, and therefore
we have no account of it, any more than of Killruddery, in
the Down Survey. Killincarrig House, however, to which
you must go on next, riding round by Delgany, is drawn
on the Down Survey map, although unforfeited, and is
1 See Chapter IX, p. 98.
2 Down Survey.
3 John Archebold held Kenleyestoun as early as A.D. 1399 (see Calendar
of Chancery Rolls, Henry IV, pa. No. 69, p. 157). In Pembroke Estate
Deeds we find Archeboldes dealing with it under the name of Balikinle
from A.D. 1518, and in deeds in the possession of the Earl of Meath we have
“William Ashepole of Kenlyeston,” in 1538, and many others till the
first quarter of the seventeenth century. Patrick Archbold held it in
1608. Calendar of Patent Rolls, James I, p. 153, No. xliv.


described as “ the most remarkable building in this half
barony,” and said to have been “garrisoned during the
time of the late wars.” It is not called a castle, and
you will see that it is quite a different kind of building
from the square castles, but larger and more imposing
than most of them. It was probably only built in the
beginning of the seventeenth century, and may be called
an Elizabethan house. But I must tell you what is known
of its history another day. 1
If you are still full of energy, you might ride on due
south from there, to see Newcastle McKynegan and Killa-
dreenan Church and St. Catherine’s Well, and catch a train
back from Newcastle Station, if there happens to be one;
which indeed very rarely happens.
But that is enough for the present, at any rate. You
certainly have had a double dose of it this time. I wonder
you kept awake at all! Oh, but just before you go, here
is a rather quaint, though sad, account of the condition
of the country in the sixteenth century, quoted by Dr.
D’Alton from some manuscript, which must, I suppose, have
been earlier than 1576, as it describes Co. Dublin as ex-
tending from Balrothery to Arklow. Co. Wicklow had not
yet been cut out of Co. Dublin. The writer names the
various gentry of English descent, including Barnewalls,
Walshes, Wingfields, and Archbolds. Then “the mere
Irish ” are thus stated: “ O’Byrnes, O’Tooles, Pheagh
McHugh.” Then he adds; “Most parts of the Irish are
worn away, their heads being removed, so as they now
run wandering and straying about the country in companies
having no certain abode.” The same record included Bray
among the “walled and good towns-” of the county. But
this may have been a mistake, for a description of Ireland
1 Chapter XII, p. 153, and Chapter XIII, p. 170.


in 1598, which carefully classifies the contents of the county,
does not include Bray even among the unwalled towns, but
puts it among “ the best villages in this county.” 1
But there now! I must let you go! lam sure you,
like the mere Irish, must be worn away, your head being,
at any rate, addled ! So good-night.
1 The Description of Ireland in 1598. Edited by Hogan.


CHAPTER XII
SOME COUNTRY HOUSES
W ell, I see, you have quite a collection of At Home cards !
At any rate, you did not come off badly for invitations
during your three months in Bray! Dear me! What a
pity that I was not with you at some of those old places, to
tell you about their historic associations! Oh, you don’t
think it was a pity—don’t you? Well, of course, I suppose
there are times when lawn tennis or roses or sweet pea or
the Woodbrook concerts are more seasonable topics than the
ancient history. But all the same, you must admit that you
have found the whole neighbourhood, and especially its
rocks and stones, all the more interesting for knowing some-
thing about how they came to be where they are, and what
sort of events the places which are now so pleasant and
so peaceful have witnessed in the past. Quite so! We
appreciate their beauty none the less for taking an interest
in their story as well.
Just let me have a look at the cards again. Corke
Abbey; yes, Corke is a name that takes you a long way
back—right back to the Norman invasion. Woodbrook—
the palace of music and cricket—its interest is of the
present, not of the past. Hollybrooke—its story is inter-
esting indeed, and is it not a lovely spot ? But its history
only goes back to the time of Robin Adair, and the present
beautiful house is not a century old, though it may contain
older portions. It is another of William Morrison’s designs.


I doubt if he ever did anything better. Old Connaught—
yes, Connagh is an old name, and there was a house there
too in the olden times. Ah, Killruddery ! well, I was there
with you, and we have discussed its history. Shanganagh—
again an interesting house, but not ancient itself, though in
its grounds lie the very ancient ruins of Kiltuck Church;
but, as I told you before, the original Shanganagh Castle is
some distance to the north. Powerscourt—indeed there is
history there as well as art and unmatched beauties of
nature. Old Conna Hill—again a most beautiful place and
a noble house—and are not the gardens a dream ? But we
cannot pretend it is ancient. Violet Hill, the Aske, Kil-
larney Wood, St. Valerie, Kilcroney, Palermo, Wingfield-
well, certainly it would have been your own fault if you had
not enjoyed your visit to Bray. And there are so many
more, too, really beautiful places. What a Paradise it all is,
to be sure !
But, oh dear, oh dear ! How different it all was three
centuries ago ! There were the same mountains, to be sure,
and the same sea and sky. But very little else was the
same. Let us just try and think, if you had come for a
visit to Bray in the early part of the seventeenth instead of
the twentieth century, what invitations you would have
been likely to receive then. Suppose we fix on a date, and
imagine that you were invited all round the country houses.
Shall we say 1630, five years after the accession of
Charles I. ? 1 Poor Ireland ! Ah, well! I suppose it is as
bad in Macedonia nowadays. Perhaps even worse.
Let me see then ! To begin with, you might have been
1 Most of the facts in this chapter, where other references are not
given, are taken from Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report (1630), Fleetwood’s
Survey (1654), and the Down Survey (1657). The values of houses and
estates are taken from Fleetwood’s Survey; they are values of the vear
1640. J


asked to Old Connaught. It was simply Connagh then.
Your host would have been Mr. James Walsh. I think you
would have found him an open-handed hospitable man.
The house was a large one as things went then. I suppose
the present Old Connaught House would have been reckoned
for a palace in those days, though assuredly no prince or
lord in Ireland would have ventured to live in a building
so undefended against attack, and with such large windows
near the ground. As it was, we know from the Hearth
Money Roll that it was a house of five chimneys. I suppose
there was a kitchen and perhaps two sitting-rooms and two
bedrooms in which you could light fires. From Fleetwood’s
Survey we know that its value in 1640 was supposed to be
<F2O, and that it was a thatched building. The Down
Survey describes it as “ a very fayre castle,” and gives a
little picture of it, which represents a rather low building,
with a tower rising out of it near one end. The tower has
a pointed top, and was probably thatched as well as the
rest of the building. 1 There was an orchard and a garden
plot attached to this residence, and also a grove of ash trees.
Hard at hand was the little town of Connagh, with its
church, which was already in a ruinous state. A few years
later it could only be described as “ the walls of a parish
church.” But in 1630, although both church and chancel
were ruinous, service was still held there by the curate,
whose name was Thomas Davis, and who served the two
churches of Connagh and Kilmacanoge. The service,
however, was attended only by fourteen poor labourers.
The rest of the people were all Roman Catholics, and went
1 Dr. D’Alton, writing about 1832, in the time of the first Lord Plunket,
said that “ part of the old mansion of the Walshes stood upon the Lord
Chancellor’s demesne, until a short period before his acquiring it.”
—D’Alton’s History, p. 915.


to Mass in the big house, where Mr. Walsh maintained
both friars and priests to attend to their spiritual needs.
And perhaps, if he took a liking to you, Mr. Walsh might
have taken you on a warm morning like to-day to the
shady side of that grove of ash trees to find all the Roman
Catholic children of the village being taught their lessons
by Garret Warren, the schoolmaster, whom he protected,
and probably supported too. James Walsh held Corke
along with Connagh, and part also of what was then called
Little Bray, now the townland of Ravenswell. 1
Oh, no! There was no Corke Abbey then. Corke or
Corcagh was just a valuable estate; but there was no resid-
ence upon it in those days of sufficient importance to be
mentioned in Fleetwood’s Survey. Some sort of a house,
indeed, there must have been there all through the latter
half of the sixteenth century, for we find several gentlemen
of the name of Walsh described as being “ of Corke.” 2 The
first of these is a William Walsh of Cork, who is carefully
described as being a gentleman, and that seems necessary,
for otherwise we might have been disposed to question his
gentility. All that we know of him is that, with the assist-
ance of a kern, he stole from an Irish widow at Glencullen
a brass pan, two gallons of butter, three sheep, a night-
gown, two gowns and a cloak; and that when he was
1 The lands of Connagh and Corke were said to contain 500 acres,
all profitable land, of which 400 were arable land, 80 pasture and 20
meadow, the whole being valued at £2OO. By modern measurements the
present townlands of Old Connaught, Cork Little and Cork Great, amount
to 1104 acres. In “ Little Bray,” Walsh had 20 acres of arable land, and
three of meadow, valued at £lO.
2 William Walsh of Cork and Edmund Walsh of Cork (1566), Calendar
of Fiants, Elizabeth, No. 856. Walter Walshe of Korke, in the marches of
Dublin (1590), Christ Church Deeds, No. 1391. Among Prerogative Wills
of Ireland, in the Record Office, occur Edmond Walsh, Cork, Co.
Dublin, 1590; Edmond Walshe, Cork, County Dublin, gent., 1599 ; Edward
Walsh, Cork, Esq., 1793.


DRAWINGS FROM SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY MAPS




arrested at Old Connaught, and was being taken by the
subsheriff and his men to Dublin, a rescue was successfully
effected near Shanganagh by his friends, John Walsh of
Shanganagh, James Goodman of Loughlinstown, Edmund
Walsh, also described as of Cork, and a lot more. But
Corcagh has more reputable records than that. Going back
past the fifteenth and fourteenth centuries, when it was held
by Lawlesses, right back towards the beginning of the thir-
teenth century, we find short leases being made by the King
of “ his manor of Corcah towards Bre 11 or of “ Cork near
Bren” or of “Corkagh in the fee of Hubrim,” And the
latest in date of these were to the Prior and Canons of the
Holy Trinity, Dublin, now Christ Church Cathedral. 1 The
description of the holding as “Corkagh in the fee of
Hubrim ” suggests that it was originally included in the
first grant to Walter de Ridelesford as being part of the
territory of Ui Briuin or Hy Briuin, though subsequently
withdrawn into the King’s own hands, when that grant was
reduced. But Eugene Curry, the delightful author of the
Ordnance Survey Letters which described the antiquities of
this part of Ireland in 1837, ventured to go a great deal
further back than that. The place had already been given
the name of Corke Abbey when he wrote, and when he was
told that it was built on the site of an ancient abbey, and
shown the site of an old burial place south and west of the
house, where it appeared that headstones and bones had
often been dug up, he inclined to the belief that there had
been an ancient Celtic monastic establishment there, and he
dug up from the Irish Calendars a saint called Curcach of
1 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1171-1251, No. 129, Fulk de Cantilupe has
Corkagh in the fee of Hubrim ; No. 322, Cork near Bren committed to the
hands of a clergyman named Bartholomew, 1207 a.d. ; Nos. 1753, 2123,
the King commits his manor of Corcah or Corchan toward Bre to the
Prior and Canons of the Holy Trinity, a.d. 1229 and 1234.


Cill-Curcaighe, venerated on July 21st, and so he supposed
Cork Abbey to have been originally Monister-Curcaighe.
But there! We have got a terrible long way off from
1630, and the houses you were to be invited to. It was all
d propos of the fact that Corke was then held by James
Walsh along with Connagh, and there was probably no
important house upon it, corresponding to Corke Abbey or
Woodbrook or Cork Farm, for you to be invited to. But
Shanganagh—that is, of course, the old Shanganagh Castle
which you went to see the other day—was there ; and you
would no doubt be invited to it, especially if you had made
friends with James Walsh, for it was held by his kinsman,
John Walsh. 1 It was a nice enough place, but I think I
have described it to you before, with its castle and large
hall thatched, apparently a better house than Old Con-
naught, for it was valued at dC3o—with its mill down by
the little stream, with its two orchards and a garden plot,
and a small grove of ash trees set for ornament, I suppose
they were very proud of their little groves of ash trees. It
was a wonderful thing to have a tree at all that was not cut
down or burnt down. Just think of the contrast! Just
think of all those richly timbered lands of Corke and
Shanganagh and Old Connaught, as one looks at them now
across the valley, say from King Edward Road or from
about Christ Church. Just try to imagine what they will be
like in a few weeks in all their autumn glory of brilliant
colour. And then picture them to yourself all bare of trees,
except for two or three orchards and a couple of groves of
ash trees.
But we must be getting on. Perhaps you might be
1 For the property of the Walshes of Shanganagh, see Inquisitions,
Dublin, James I, No. 16, October 10, 1609 ; Charles I, No. 73, January 24,
1643.


asked to Loughlinstown, 1 or Loughnanstown, as it was then
called. Your host there would be James Goodman—not a
very charming man, I should think—a man who, if you
were obnoxious to him, would not think much of murdering
you in cold blood ! He succeeded his forefathers of several
generations back in his occupancy of Loughlinstown. But
apparently they were only tenants, and not owners. The
first Goodmans held it from the Talbots. James seems
to have held it from the Dean of Christ Church. The house
must have been a pretty good one, a thatched castle, valued
at <£2o, and it had a garden and an orchard; and there was
the mill and the little town below it by the stream, which
was described as “ a fair pleasant river.'”
Then, again, you might have been asked to Shankill by
Robert Barnewall. You have visited Shankill Castle, have
you not? You have inspected that large upstairs room, in
which your host would probably have entertained you to a
good substantial meal in the middle of the afternoon, not
at all like our afternoon teas. Grace would have been said
by Teige O’Murroghowe, a friar whom Barnewall, being a
devout Roman Catholic, maintained, and who regularly said
Mass for the people of that neighbourhood in the castle.
You would also have met your host’s sister, Mary Barnewall,
who was a professed nun, but appears to have lived with her
brother to help the friar in pious work among the women
and children. Can you not picture all the scene in that old
room ? I think of it as a scene of substantial comfort, but
at the same time of quiet decency and simple piety —very
different from what I should fancy your experience would
have been at Loughlinstown.
1 For the history of Loughlinstown, see an article by Dr. Elrington Ball
in the Journal R.5.A.1., 1901, p. 68 sqq., also the same author’s History of
County Dublin , part i. pp. 87 sqq.
K


And then, perhaps, you would have been invited to
Fassaroe by Bernard Talbot. You remember how his fore-
father of a century before received Fassaroe and other lands
as being a staunch defender of the Pale. Ah, but a few
years after your visit the Talbots, like the Walshes and the
Goodmans and the Barnewalls, would all be written down
Irish rebels, or at least as Irish Papists, which was accounted
to be pretty much the same thing! Already, indeed, it was
an offence against the law to refuse attendance at the re-
formed services in the parish churches, and the newly
appointed justices, Viscount Ely and the Earl of Cork, were
now exerting themselves to enforce the laws against the
Roman Catholic religion, so that every Roman Catholic was
at any rate in so far hostile to the Government, that he was
a passive resister of the law. But that is by no means the
only grievance under which you would have found these
Anglo-Irish gentlemen of the Pale smarting. The Stuart
kings were always badly off for money; and money was ex-
torted from the unfortunate landholders by every sort of
blackmail and tyranny. TLheir titles to their properties were
questioned and upset. They were promised all sorts of con-
cessions or “ graces on condition of their making large
subsidies to the King, but, although the subsidies were paid,
the promises were never fulfilled. There was no security for
anyone either of life or property. Anybody who had any-
thing to lose was in danger, Protestants as well as Roman
Catholics the families that had poured out their blood in
the effort to establish English rule quite as much as the
O’Tooles and O’Byrnes who had stubbornly fought against
it for so many centuries. Indeed, you would have heard
plenty of grumbling and angry abuse of the Parliament and
of the King’s Ministers at Fassaroe and the rest of those
country houses, and yet all through it strangely enough a


dogged loyalty to the Crown. But for all their grumbles,
you must not suppose that you would have had a miserable
and gloomy time among those gentlemen. Probably you
would have found them as ready as their bankrupt suc-
cessors of two centuries later to mock at dull care, and to
put in far more gaiety and enjoy much better sport than
you would have supposed their battered fortunes could
afford. You may be sure young Bernard Talbot gave a
very lavish dinner, with good wines, and had the best of
horses and dogs and hawks. Very likely he would have
lent you a beautiful horse to ride, and would have taken
you over for a day’s hawking to his estate of Rathdown
on the southern slopes of Bray Head, which was still part
of the Talbot property, though the castle there was now
in ruins. l
Or if it turned out a bad day for sport, then you might
have ridden on with him to Templecarrick, to visit the
Archbolds. There I am sure the good cheer would have
been none the less hospitably and merrily pressed upon you,
though you heard greater grumbling than ever about those
inquisitions into titles and all the other grievances. For
the Archbolds had had great losses. Formerly they had
held among them the manors and castles of Bray, both
Much Bree or Great Bree and Little Bree, and also of
Killruddery and Kindlestown, together with Coolegad and
Temple-Delgany and Newcastle too, as well as Templecarrick
and Raheenaclig. Now they had only the two last. Temple-
carrick, you remember, is south of Windgates. We passed
1 It was probably in ruins then —certainly at the time of the Down
Survey, 1657. Bernard had come into possession of it at the death of his
father, Peter, August 25, 1622. It contained 1 castle, 10 cottages, and
300 acres, and Coolnaskeagh was attached to it. Bernard was thirteen years
old at his father’s death. Inquisitions, County Wicklow, James I, No.
24, April 1623.


it on the way from Coolnaskeagh to Rathdown. The
property, however, was large, and included Little Sugarloaf.
Raheenaclig is on this side of Bray Head, where the old
ruined church stands, and Bray Head House. With all
the rest of their properties they had had to part. Probably
in some cases they had been unable to prove their titles, and
so the Crown had just confiscated the estates. At any rate
there were repeated investigations made into their titles. 1
But other estates they had been compelled by poverty to
sell. Edward Archbold, who was a minor, had recently
made over his interest in the manor, castle, town and lands
of Biay to the Earl of Meath, for divers good and valuable
causes and considerations him thereunto moving. One of
the considerations was that the Crown disputed his title;
but the chief moving cause was that his father Patrick had
left the estate hopelessly mortgaged. At any rate the Earl
of Meath made it worth Edward’s while to part with
the manor, and set him free from what would probably
have always been a burden instead of a profit to him.
But it was a very expensive business for Lord Meath before
he finally got a thoroughly satisfactory and indisputable
title for himself and his descendants. He also obtained
possession of Kindlestown and Temple-Delgany and Coole-
gad; and no doubt the Archbolds got some “ valuable con-
siderations from his Lordship for their interests in those
holdings too. 2 But lam inclined to think that those Arch-
bolds of the seventeenth century were like a good many Irish
families of later days—great troops of sons, all of whom
1 e.g., in IGO7, 1609-11, 1629, &c. Documents in possession of the
Earl of Meath, See also Exchequer Order Book, Memorandum, 1609
January 30.
2 See Appendix V. With regard to Kenliston in 1621, &c., its castle
and watermill and 400 acres, see Inquisitions, County Wicklow, James I.
No. 23, 16 April 1623, and Charles I, No. 19, 14 September 1636.


must live as gentlemen, dividing up the family income
among them, but never thinking of doing anything to
increase it, except going to Jaw with one another and
with their neighbours—unless, perchance, they went on a
hunt for rich wives. And probably the valuable considera-
tions for which they parted with the old properties did not
do much to arrest the downward course. Killruddery had
apparently passed out of their hands some time in the
previous century. It, too, was now held on a lease from the
Crown by the Earl of Meath. Ido not know, indeed, what
sort of houses they were that remained as the homes of the
remnants of the Archbold family at Templecarrick and
llaheenaclig; but at anyrate they were not large enough
or important enough to be worthy of a place on the maps
of the Down Survey}
Another house to which you would surely have been
invited was Old Court. It then belonged to Theobald
or Tibbald Walsh, a young man twenty-seven years old; 2
but it was occupied in 1630 by a widow, Joan Eustace. I
think I have told you before what it was like. The square
tower, which still stands there, had a wing attached to it,
forming the opposite side of the courtyard to the gate with
its two flanking turrets. There was also a watermill and
sixty acres of arable land. Mrs. Eustace was probably
the widow of Nicholas Eustace, who a few years before
had some interest in the Castle of Bray. 3 She, too,
1 For Killruddery, see Chapter VIII, p. 89. At the time of the Down
Survey, James Archbold held “ Rahanacligge,” and Tulbeyd Archbold
“ Templecargie,” including “ Sugerloafe.”
* Inquisitions, County Wicklow, James I, No. 20, May 20, 1620; Theo-
bald Walsh’s property of Ouldcourte, in County Wicklow, containing one
castle, one watermill, and 60 acres of arable soil.
3 There was a lawsuit in 1625 with regard to repairs of the Castle of
Bray between Edward Walsh and Sir Wm. Brabazon, Sir H. Pierce, and
Nicholas Eustace.


was a recusant, and maintained a priest named Dermott
Byrne, who celebrated Mass in her mansion-house. Oh,
a recusant means a person who refused to accept the
doctrines of the Reformation and to attend the services
in the parish churches. All these families, you see, that
we have thought of you as visiting were recusants. All
of them, too, though of English descent, had become, as
always happened, Hibernis ipsis Hiberniores, and, like true
Irishmen, were of course “agen the Government.”
But there were also one or two real Irish families whom
you might have visited, though perhaps that would have
been rather dangerous for a susceptible young man like you.
Yet I like to think of you being invited by my ancestor Art
MacTeige O’Byrne to Ballygannon. There you would have
had real Irish entertainment, and very warm and hospitable
it would have been, lam sure. I daresay its character
would have been very little different from that of the
Walshes or the Barnewalls. But I wonder whether you
would have returned a bachelor, or would have succumbed
to the charms of some Rose or Kathleen O’Byrne, as Hopton
Scott succumbed to the charms of Randalia, daughter of
Thady O’Byrne, in 1692.
What? Were there not any gentlemen of the opposite
party that might have asked you to their houses ? Well,
let us see now who there were, that were supporters of
the Government, and that still adhered to the Church of
Ireland when it accepted the Reformation. Of course
there was the Earl of Meath, to begin with. Probably
he was already residing at Killruddery, and perhaps you
might have received an invitation to some great reception
there. At any rate he had had possession of Killruddery for
twelve years. I told you about all that before. But suppos-
ing that Lord Meath did ask you, you must not imagine that


you would have found quite such a noble house, or such
palatial terraced gardens as you saw there a few weeks ago.
The present house, as I told you then, was built in 1820.
The pleasure grounds have all the appearance of having
been laid out in the latter part of the seventeenth century.
Probably the designer of them was familiar with the work
of Andre le Notre, who laid out the Tuileries Gardens at
Versailles in the reign of Louis XIV, and of Debrosse,
who made the Luxembourg Gardens in the same century.
But although they were not the present forms, still we know
that there had been gardens and orchards and woods of
some sort round the Castle of Killruddery for ages before it
came into the improving hands of the Earls of Meath.
And there was also another very distinguished person, to
whose great mansion-house you might have received an
invitation. That was the first Viscount Powerscourt. In
the beginning of the century, towards the end of the reign
of Elizabeth, Sir Richard Wingfield, who had been made
Marshal of Ireland in reward for his great services to the
Throne, applied to the Queen for a grant of Fercullen,
including the manor of Powerscourt. His application was
resisted by the O’Tooles, who, however, spoilt their claim
by quarrelling among themselves which of them had the
title to it. 1 Their title was also, of course, vitiated by their
having committed so many acts of rebellion since Turlough
received the grant from Henry VIII. At any rate, the end
of it was that in 1609 Sir Richard received from James I a
grant of the lands of Fercullen, and in 1618 he was created
Viscount Powerscourt. 2 The compilers of the Down Survey
1 See Calendar of State Papers (Ireland), 1588-92, pp. 401-3.
2 See A Description and History of Powerscourt (by the late 7th
Viscount Powerscourt), Appendix, pp. 122 sqq., where the deeds are given
in full. Cf. also Muniments of the Ancient Saxon Family of Wingfield , by
the same author.


evidently did not think much of what he got. They
described the land as being mostly mountainous and stony,
and the castle as ruinous. Whether they meant that
the castle was ruinous when he first got it, or that
it was again in ruins at the time of the Survey, I am
not quite sure. But probably both interpretations are
true in fact. It is not likely to have been in at all
good condition when he took possession of it. But you
may be sure he lost no time in setting it to rights and
adding to it, so that, instead of being a mere fortified
castle, like Fassaroe or Shankill or Shanganagh or Old
Court, he converted it into a great mansion-house. So
at any rate it is described in an inquisition taken at
the death of his successor, three years before the rebellion
of 1641. But in that rebellion it was destroyed again by
fire. Sir Richard must have been getting on in years in
1630. He had been Marshal of Ireland for thirty years,
and had lived a strenuous and successful life. But he had no
children to brighten his old age—no son to whom he might
hand down his title and his honours and estates. Per-
haps, however, you might have met there his cousin and
heir, who succeeded him in the next year as Sir Edward
Wingfield and owner of Powerscourt, but not as Viscount.
Powerscourt must always have been a very beautiful place.
Its noble position and the magnificent views which it com-
mands hardly needed the art of the landscape gardener
to paint the lily. I am sure a visit to the fine old
Marshal there would have been a great privilege. The
old castle is incorporated in the present house, as is shown
pretty plainly by the great thickness of the walls in one part
of the building.
And then perhaps Edward Wingfield might have invited


you to his own castle at Ballyman. l lam not quite sure
indeed whether he was living at Ballyman in 1630, but it
seems most probable. He had a thatched castle there with
two chimneys, and a garden plot and a good deal of land.
Some people called the place Ballimany, others Hanymunder
or Ballemunder. You remember that the glen in that
townland was called Glenmunder. My own belief is that
the original names of the glen and the townland w r ere Cloon-
money and Ballymoney, shrubby meadow and shrubby
townland. Well, there you might have met Edward’s two
sons, Richard and Lewis. Richard was destined to succeed
his father in the manor of Powerscourt, but to be killed in
the civil war soon after. Lewis was the ancestor of another
Richard, in whom the title of Viscount Pow 7 erscourt was
revived in the middle of the eighteenth century.
And there was still another house to which you might
have been invited, which appears to have been occupied by
supporters of the Government, though what family it was I
have not the least idea. But it was one of the most im-
portant, and w r as probably the most modern in style, of all
the country houses in the neighbourhood. I mean Killin-
carrig House. 2 My reason for thinking that it belonged
1 Inquisition, 14 Charles I, No. 24, September 17, 1638. Fleetwood’s
Survey states that Edward Wingfield of Powerscourt was possessed of
the premises as his inheritance, anno 1641. But as Sir Edward died in
1638, this was inaccurate, unless his grandson Edward had already as an
infant come into the inheritance. At the time of the Down Survey,
(1657), Ballyman was occupied by Colonel Ponsonby, The castle was
valued in the Fleetwood Survey at £2O and the estate at £5O. Dr D’Alton,
writing about 1832, says : “ The Castle of Ballyman survived until within
the last three years, when it was pulled down to supply materials for
a modern edifice. It was situated near Mr. Morres’ present resi-
dence.” D’Alton’s History, p. 917. For the name, see Appendix I,
No. 20.
* Killincarrig House is not one of the fifteenth century castles, but
an Elizabethan house. Eugene Curry (Ordnance Survey Letters) said : “It
is not a castle, though I would take it to be as old as Elizabeth’s time. The


to some one of the Parliamentary party is that it was not
forfeited in the general confiscation at the end of the war.
Moreover, you may read in Mr. Joyce’s new book on the
Neighbourhood of Dublin that, in the beginning of the
troubles in 1641, troops were quartered in a temporary
barrack in Killincarrig village to protect the property of
residents. Probably it was some influential resident in the
big house that got those troops stationed there. But in
spite of the troops he evidently could not maintain his
position in Killincarrig. For in the end of the war we find
the house held by a garrison of soldiers of the confederate
army, who, however, hastily abandoned their position on the
approach of Cromwell marching from Drogheda to Wexford.
But that is a later story; 1 and the fact remains that Ido
not know who lived in Killincarrig House in 1630, or
whether you would have been likely to get an invitation to
it at all.
But whether that invitation were forthcoming or no, at
any rate I think you must admit that I have found you a
very fair amount of hospitable entertainment among the
nobility and gentry of the district in 1630.
Down Survey gives a drawing of it as a big house of two stories and
attics, with three gables in the front. It states that it was “ unforfeited,”
and also that it was “ garrisoned during the late wars.”
1 See Chapter XIII, p. 170.


OLD COURT CASTLE
KILLINCARRIG HOUSE
KINDLESTOWN CASTLE
CARRIGEEN
The old Glebe House of Rathmichael


CHAPTER XIII
THE OLD GLEBE HOUSE
But there was still one more house to which I can imagine
you being invited—a house of quite a different kind. If you
would not dignify it with the name of a country house, at
any rate it was a house in the country. You are not a
stranger at Bray Rectory as it is, nor, for that matter, at
Rathmichael Rectory either. So why should you not have
been invited in 1630 to the Glebe House of Rathmichael,
which then did duty for both parishes P No, Bray had no
glebe house. It had glebe land—the two fields by the
Killarney road, just to the south-west of old Killarney
Church, at the top of Fairy Hill. It was called College
Close. 1 But there was no house on it until one was built
there quite recently, when the quaint old name was
abandoned for a strange Dutch appellation. But there was
a newly built Glebe House at Rathmichael, not where the
present rectory stands, but close beside Cherrywood House.
You went to see it the other day, didn’t you, when you
were doing your grand tour of ancient castles ? Its name
1 Partition of Great Bray between the Earl of Meath and the Earl of
Tyrconnell, a.d. 1666, in Meath Estate Office and Pembroke Estate Office.
This deed gives much interesting information as to the roads, fields, and
buildings in and about Great Bray in 1666. Eugene Curry (Ordnance Survey
Letters, 1837) says that “the place now called Kilbride was then known as
the College.” D’Alton says, “ there is a glebe of about 6 acres at a spot
called ‘ Monastery ’”; but probably that is just a confusion of memory.
“ College Close ” is also marked on a map of A.D. 1692 in the Pembroke
Estate Office, and “ Glebe ” on the Ist edition of the 6-inch Ordnance
Map, A.D. 1838.


was Carrigeen, or Karrekine. 1 It was built by your sup-
posed host, who stated that it had cost him <£loo to build,
and therefore claimed compensation to the amount af £lOO
when it was damaged. As we know that the principal
castles of the neighbourhood were valued at £2O or £3O at
the most, it is a little surprising to find a small glebe house
valued so highly. Perhaps, like President Kruger, he was
thinking chiefly of moral damages. But I have not yet told
you his name. It was Simon Swayne. He was vicar both
of Bray and of Rathmichael, and was also curate of Tullow
and of Kilternan and of Clonkeen, which we now call Kill.
So you see he was a bit of a pluralist. But you must not
think that therefore he was unable to attend to his
parishioners, or that he was battening on enormous
revenues. For his total stipend for the five cures amounted
to £33, and the number of parishioners among them all that
accepted his ministrations and attended the Church services
was forty-eight, besides his own family. 2 Ah, yes, it was a
shockingly sad state of affairs, and there is no use in trying
to make out that it was not really so bad. The Church of
Ireland had simply become divorced from the people of
Ireland. The Church officially had accepted the Reforma-
tion, taking it full-grown from England. But the Irish
people, Celtic Irish and Anglo-Irish alike, were quite un-
prepared for it. Just the few who were in touch with
English thought and learning—that is, the majority of the
Bishops and clergy, with their theological training, and such
of the laity as were really English in their sympathies and
habits were ready to welcome the Reformation, and to find
m the Book of Common Prayer the best possible expression
of their faith and devotion. But for the great mass of the
1 Depositions of 1641.
2 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.


people the Reformation simply meant that they were ordered
by law to make great changes both in their beliefs and in
their forms of worship, for which they were absolutely un-
prepared, and which they were very far from desiring.
Naturally they refused, and deserted the old parish churches,
so that in 1630 only sixteen went to church in Bray, four-
teen poor labourers at Old Connaught, eight besides the
Vicar’s family at Rathmichael, and none at all at Tullow or
Kilternan, while all the rest of the people went to the for-
bidden services held in the country houses. At Powerscourt
alone in this neighbourhood, or Stagonill, to give the parish
its Irish name, was there a decent congregation, about 200,
that usually frequented divine service. l That may have
been the result of the strong influence of the curate of that
parish, George Leisley, who was a Master of Arts and a
preacher, or possibly of his predecessor, Master Brinny, whom
Sir Richard Wingfield brought there as his chaplain, when
he first came into possession of Powerscourt in 1609. 2 He was
also a preacher, which most of the clergy in those days were
not. It is possible that these two more learned and perhaps
more earnest clergymen may have so instructed and influenced
their Irish parishioners, that they accepted the doctrines of
the Reformation. But I hardly think that many of the
sept of the O’Tooles ever embraced the reformed faith; and
it seems to me more probable that the plantation of the
district of Fercullen with those English families of tenant
farmers, some of which have lasted there to our own day,
had already been carried out by Sir Richard before 1630.
1 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.
2 Archbishop Jones’ Report, 1615. “ Stagonie—Curatus ibidem magister
Brinny capellanus Mariscalli, minister et praedicator.”
3 Eugene Curry (Ordnance Survey Letters, 1837) says that the Protes-
tants of Powerscourt “ appear to me to be the descendants of some of
Cromwell’s followers, and of the retainers of the Wingfields, who settled


But, dear me ! how I have digressed again ! We were
supposing you to have met the Reverend Simon Swayne,
perhaps at Killruddery, and to have been invited by him to
Carrigeen. Would it be too great a strain upon your sense
of probability, to imagine yourself so far a persona grata
with the cloth, that you might have been admitted to a
gathering of the clergy of the Rural Deanery of Bray, met
to discuss the manner in which they should answer all the
inquiries which were being made as to the condition of their
churches and parishes by Archbishop Bulkeley ? 1 Perhaps,
as rather important matters were involved, the meeting
might have been attended not only by the resident clergy
who served the cures in the various parishes, but also by
such exalted gentlemen as the prebendaries of Rathmichael
and Stagonill and the parson of Delgany. The preben-
daries, of course, had their stalls in St. Patrick’s Cathedral,
and no doubt lived in Dublin, but drew their income from
the tithes of their prebendal parishes. The prebendary of
Rathmichael was William Lloyd, and of Stagonill, Ambrose
Aingier. Where the parson or rector of Delgany lived, and
how he employed himself, I do not know. His name was
Thomas Gilbert, and he was a Master of Arts and a
preacher; but Ido not think he troubled himself to preach
in Delgany, where the church and chancel were down, as
the Archbishop’s Report tells us, and there were only four
people that came to hear Divine service. Mr. Gilbert
enjoyed a small income out of the tithes, the greater part
of which were leased to a Justice Maynard, but the work of
the cure was done by William Cornwall, who was curate of
both Delgany and Kilcool as well as being vicar of
here in the reign of James I. The family names are chiefly Walker
Luttrell, Burton, Evans, Buckley, Douce (now extinct), Winders, Quigly,
Miller, &c.”
1 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.


Newcastle McKynegan. As both Delgany and Kilcool
Churches were in ruins, probably the four worshippers from
Delgany and the two he had from Kilcool came to Newcastle
Church for their services, for there was at any rate a chancel
there with a roof still over it, though indeed it was not
decent within, and the rest of the church was down. He
only got J? 4 a year for the cure of Delgany ; but his total
clerical income amounted to JP24. 1 Mr. Cornwall was, so
to speak, the father of the Deanery, for he had been doing
the same work for at least twenty years, and none of the
other clergy had been nearly so long in this Deanery. 2
And when the subject of the Archbishop’s inquiries was
discussed, no doubt he would have much to say of his
memories of similar investigations made by Archbishop
Jones in 1615, and of the visitation by Royal Commissioners
which followed in the same year, and also of an earlier
visitation in 1610. Rut though the rest would listen to
him with politeness, no doubt, on account of his seniority, he
would hardly carry much weight among them —for he was
not a preacher, only a “ reading minister.” Thomas Davis,
the curate of Connagh and Kilmacanoge, would also be
present, but probably would not have very much to say for
himself. He at any rate, poor man, did not hold a brilliant
position. He had only eighteen souls that accepted his
ministrations, two quite ruinous little churches, and an
income of £l4> per annum. 3 On the other hand, George
Leisley, the curate of Stagonill, of whom I have spoken
before, although only a curate still, probably took quite a
leading position among his brother clergy, for he was a man
of education and ability, and in all probability a member of
1 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.
2 Visitations of 1610 and 1615. See list of authorities at end of
Appendix I, p, 200.
3 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.


an eminent family in ecclesiastical circles. 1 But I must not
weary you with accounts of any more of these clergy.
Their discussions, I am afraid, you would not have found
exhilarating. Ruined churches, and no money to repair
them—recusant parishioners —miserable incomes—the open
hostility of all but a very few of the local gentry —such was
the story from every part of the deanery except Powers-
court. But at least one can be thankful for the contrast
now. The sad cleavage between Roman Catholic and
Protestant still remains. The ancient Church of St. Patrick
has never regained the allegiance and affection of the great
mass of the descendants of those among whom St. Patrick
preached. Only one fourth of the population of these
parishes now attends the services of the old Church, and
only a very small proportion of that quarter bears the old
Irish names. But if the religious division is as strong as
ever, at any rate one hopes that the personal bitterness and
hatred which then accompanied it, is now passing away,
provided that political disturbances do not galvanise it into
life again. And instead of ruined churches for the Pro-
testants and none whatever for the Roman Catholics, who
could only practise their religion at all under fear of severe
legal penalties, we now find the whole district more than
amply provided with churches and other religious buildings
splendidly built and adorned and beautifully kept for the
glory of God, so that anyone can freely and fearlessly join
in public worship of God according to his own conscientious
beliefs. Surely it is proof, if any proof were needed, of the
divine life of the Church of Christ, that it should have
survived at all such a time as the seventeenth century in
Ireland, and should have so renewed its strength, that
1 Leslies seem to have been eligible for bishoprics in the seventeenth
century.


although still divided, it is now in all its branches in our
land probably more vigorous and more fruitful in good
works of every kind than it ever was before.
When the clergy dispersed, some of them having a good
distance to ride home, your host would perhaps offer to ride
back to Bray with you, and to show you his churches of
Rathmichael and Bray, and to tell you something about the
town of Bray. Of course Rathmichael Church was the old
church on the hill. It was then in good repair, so far as
the nave was concerned, which was the oldest part; but the
chancel was falling into ruins, and you would have been
shocked at the condition of the church inside. No doubt
the vicar would have told you that the prebendary was to
blame for not putting the chancel in repair; for he got the
great tithes, amounting to about dC2O a year, whereas the
vicar only got £8 for that cure. 1 And after accepting his
hospitality, politeness would prevent you from suggesting
that even he might perhaps have spent a few pounds less on
his new glebe, and done something for the decency of the
house of God. At Bray Church you would have found
things a little better. It is probable that some rebuilding
had been done there twenty-one years before, and so the
church had not had time to fall badly into disrepair. 2
But no real care was being taken of it now, and some
serious damage had been done by a recent great storm,
which had also injured Simon Swayne’s other churches of
Tullow and Clonkeen, but nothing had been done to repair
the damage. Again, no doubt, the Vicar would excuse himself
from any personal responsibility on the score of poverty.
In this case the great tithes, which represented the bene-
fice granted by Sir Walter de Ridelesford to the Convent
1 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.
2 See Appendix 11, pp. 201, 204.
L


of Grane, had been confiscated by the Crown at the dis-
solution of the monasteries, and were now in lay hands.
The Rector therefore of the parish was a layman, William
Plunkett, Esq., of Dublin, and his income from it was £65
per annum. The Vicar only got the small tithes, which
amounted to £B. And at any rate he could point out to you
that the chancel here was “in reasonable good repaira-
cion.” 1 The church was a plain oblong building, probably
just the present nave from the west door to the first pair of
pillars of the arcade. It does not seem to have had any
tower at the west end, or any external chancel at the east end.
To reach the church you would, of course, have had to
pass through Little Bray, past Little Bray Castle, which was
probably already in ruins, along what is now called Back
Street, because Castle Street did not then exist. When
you were coming down Bloody Bank (now euphemistically
called Sunny Bank), perhaps your reverend guide might tell
you the tradition of how it got its name. It was said that
a great battle was once fought upon Calary Moor between
the O’Byrnes and O’Tooles, in which the O’Tooles got the
worst of it, and were driven in flight as far as Bray; but
that when they reached this bank they turned on their
pursuers, and the battle was renewed on Bray Commons,
but ended in the total defeat of the O’Tooles. 2 Then, as
>ou passed Little Bray Castle, he would no doubt tell you
its history, which I cannot do; but at any rate he would
tell you that it and the surrounding land, over which you
were passing, had in the beginning of the century belonged
to Lord Fitzwilliam, but now belonged to William Wolver-
ston of Still organ, 3 for whom, I am afraid, he had no love.
1 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.
g tradition related Eugene Curry, Ordnance Survey Letters.
Wolverston held it in 1654 (Fleetwood’s Survey), but probably not


because, as he would put it, Wolverston was a Papist and
a great abettor of priests and friars, and kept a mass-priest
in his own house. 1 The land to the east of that, as far as
the sea, now sacred to the ancient game of golf, belonged to
another of his hetes noirs, James Walsh of Connagh;
while that to the west, which was afterwards Bray
Commons, including the old tenements of St. Mary’s and
St. Thomas’ Abbeys, was partly in the hands of the Earl of
Meath and partly in those of Lord Fitzwilliam, who also
held half the town and lands of Great Bray on the south
side of the river. 2 There were probably ten or twelve
houses in Little Bray. The river you would have had to
cross by the ford, because the bridge was not built till about
thirty years later. 3 The ford was all right in fine weather ;
but it was considered “ a very large difficult passe over the
water after any greate raine.” 4
After visiting the church, you would go on to the castle
just beyond it. How much of the castle was standing
then I do not know, but at any rate there was a tower
standing on the knoll of rock, where the dispensary is
now. A few years before it had been in bad repair, and
one of the Walshes who had a lease of it was under covenant
to repair it; but he failed to do so, and a very complicated
really so early as 1630, for in 1627 it was still held by the Fitzwilliam
family. (Inquisition, Dublin, Charles I, No. 15, Sept. 26, 1627.)
1 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.
2 Inquisitions, 1602, Richard Fitzwilliam; 1636, No. 18, Thomas Vis-
count Fitzwilliam.
3 It was not built at the time of the Down Survey (1657), but it was
built before the time of the Partition cited above (1666), because “the
Piers of Stonebridge ” make one of the landmarks in that Partition. It is
said that James II left a troop to defend the bridge against pursuers in
his flight after the battle of the Boyne. The first bridge was wrecked by
a flood in 1741. The present bridge is the third, having been built in
1856.
4 Down Survey; another part of the same Report states that “the
wares on Bray Water are very profitable for salmon fishing.”


lawsuit arose out of the matter, which ended in the Earl
of Meath obtaining a decree for <£*3o against Walsh to
pay for the necessary repairs, as well as £ls costs. 1 From
the castle you might climb down again to the river bank
to visit the mill. The old steps down from the castle to
the mill are still there, though the right of way over them
was closed nearly twenty years ago, and they are now
so overgrown, that it is not easy to see that they exist.
Or, instead of going down to the mill, you might have
gone on in the other direction, past Thomas Ellingsworth’s
house and garden, to the fields which lie beyond the great
ditch which is now the boundary of St. Paul’s School
grounds. Those fields were then parks in which, no doubt,
you would have found the townspeople disporting them-
selves in the evening. One part was known as the Mill
Park or the Night Park, the other part as Bolston’s
Park. 2 They extended as far as the Glen and the little
stream between Mount Herbert and Crowbank. And, let
me see, what else was there for you to see? Well, there
must have been some sort of a Court-house, though it
was not the present building, nor exactly on its site.
For the lord of the manor had the privilege and duty of
holding from time to time by his seneschal a Court Baron
and a Court Feet within his manor of Great Bree. And,
no doubt, as you looked at the Court-house, the Vicar
would have told you how the town of Great Bree claimed
to have an ancient corporation, with many privileges and
immunities. The question had been investigated just in
the previous year : but the records had all been lost owing
to the continual wars. And then, again, there must have
been a market-place, for there was a market every Tuesday,
1 A.D. 1625, Jan. 24 ; Sir Wm, Brabazon, Kt., v. Edward Walsh.
2 Partition, cited above.


and fairs twice a year, on St. Martin’s Day and on May
Day. Yes, and your nose would soon have warned you
that there was something else to be seen in Bray, or at
any rate to be smelt there—something of the nature of
an industry, which was expected to bring a commercial
prosperity to Bray, which, alas! never came. For King
Charles had recently given authority to the lord of the
manor “ to erect several tanpits for the tanning of leather
in the town of Great and Little Bray, that it may be
a place for all time to come for the tanning of leather.” 1
Much as one regrets the lack of manufactures or any large
industries to give regular employment to the people of Bray,
still one can hardly be altogether sorry that King Charles’
pious intention failed—that Bray should be a place for all
time to come for the tanning of leather !
Well, so much for Bray and its surroundings in 1630.
It was the country houses, was it not, that started us on
these reminiscences of the days of Charles I ? Of course
those country houses have a great deal more to tell us of
later days. But I only undertook to tell you something
about ancient times; and I do not call anything less than
two and a half centuries back, ancient; so lam not going
into those more recent histories. However, 1630 is not a
convenient stopping place to leave you stranded at. I
w6uld rather take you on to exactly two and a half
centuries ago, when really a new era began in this part of
the world after the Restoration of the monarchy in 1659,
and the Act of Settlement in 1661. So we must just briefly
glance at the terrible events that intervened between 1630
and (say) 1666. Oh, no, I am not going to discuss the
1 Calendar of State Papers (Ireland), 1625-1632, pp. 321, 434, 555. Some
of the documents are given more fully in Calendar of the Patent and Close
Rolls (Ireland), Charles I.


whole history of the rebellion and of Cromwell’s vengeance.
All the history books do that, and I need not repeat
what you can easily read for yourself. All you want me
to tell you about it is how it affected Bray and its
neighbourhood.
Well, to begin with you know how Wentworth was sent
over by the King in 1633 to carry out his policy of
“ Thorough ” and to trample upon every one, English or
Irish, Protestant or Roman Catholic, that dared to have
any opinion of his own at all. You know how by his
tyranny the anger and disaffection which was bitter enough
in 1630, was intensified a hundredfold, till all was ripe
for rebellion and civil war. You remember how he was
recalled in 1640 and beheaded in May 1641. Only five
months later the rebellion in Ireland began, and quickly
developed into a most brutal and savage war, strangely
called civil war, between Protestants and Roman Catholics.
It is a most hateful history to recall. You could hardly
find any more sickening stuff to read than what are called
the depositions of 1641. I will just give you a very few
instances with regard to this neighbourhood.
Our friend Simon Swayne had evidently given special
offence in some way to his Roman Catholic neighbours, and
they took the occasion of the rebellion to satisfy their
hatred of him. He and his son John, and two women of his
household, gave sworn evidence of an attack made upon his
glebe house of Carrigeen on the night of the third of
December 1641 by a number of rebels, several of whom
were recognised by the women as being Shankill men, one
of them being a member of the Barnewall family. The
Vicar himself was away from home, to the disappointment
of the attacking party, who were heard to declare <e that they
had rather than a horseload of gold and silver that they


had found Simon himself.” But he claimed that they had
despoiled him of his household goods and provisions to the
value of i? 100, and of cattle and corn to the value of J?6O,
besides injuring the house he had built and causing him
severe loss in other ways. We may be sure he did not
underestimate the damages. But at any rate he seems to
have found it necessary to give up living in Carrigeen,
either because it was too much ruined, or more probably
because he dared not live in a house that was not fortified.
And so in 1642 we find him living in Loughlinstown Castle,
though how he got possession of it from James Goodman
does not appear. Possibly the Dean of Christ Church found
some means of evicting Goodman when he joined the
rebellion, and took Swayne as tenant instead. If so, that
may partly explain the increased ferocity with which the
Vicar was now attacked. For another deposition tells us
that on the 6th of October 1642, about ten on the clock in
the night, Simon and a number of others who were living
with him in the protection of the fortified house, were
besieged and beset by a party of rebels, which they esti-
mated at about a hundred, James Goodman the younger
being one of their chief leaders. After an exchange of many
shots the attacking party found means to set the castle on
fire. Five of the defenders were killed, and one burnt to
ashes. Simon himself barely escaped with his life; one of
his eyes was burnt out of his head, and he was also fearfully
burned in his hands, haunches, and legs, insomuch as he was
almost burned to death. So he described his sufferings;
and he complained, moreover, that he and his company were
opprobriously reviled by the rebels, being called Parliament
Rogues, and that they had specially -threatened himself,
saying that they would have his heart’s blood. Howbeit
God had delivered his person from them that night. And


he claimed that on that occasion they had despoiled him of
property to the value of <P2OO. The fact that Simon and
his friends were reviled as Parliament Rogues reminds us
that the party whom the Government called rebels counted
themselves to be loyal supporters of the King against a
rebellious and traitorous Parliament. It was just in this
same month of October 1642, that the Confederation of
Kilkenny was formed to unite the old Irish and the Anglo-
Irish Roman Catholics, who hitherto had acted without
concert, to make common cause theoretically in standing up
for the King against the Puritans. &
But I must tell you of a still sadder story, told in
another pair of these depositions. One of them is only
given as second or third hand information; so let us hope
the story is not all true, though I fear it is not improbable.
But first I must tell you two things. One is about Powers-
court. The first Viscount Powerscourt and his heir, Sir
Edward Wingfield, had both died before the rebellion, so
that in 1641 Powerscourt was in the hands of Edward’s
son Richard. But in the rebellion his house and his goods
were burnt, probably by the O’Tooles, who were sure to
take this excuse for wreaking their vengeance on the family
which had supplanted them in the possession of Fercullen.
And apparently Luke O’Toole now took up his residence
m some way, at Powerscourt. The other thing has to do
with the clergy. Sometime between 1630 and 1639, Simon
Swayne resigned one of his cures, that of Clonkeen or Kill
o’ the Grange, where, by the way, he had his largest con-
gregation—no less than twenty-four, half of his grand total. 1
This cure was then undertaken by a clergyman named
Joseph Smithson. Stillorgan was then included in the
parish of Clonkeen, 2 Well, now for the depositions. In
1 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report. « Visitation Records , 1639.


the first place, Smithson deposed that the rebels carried
off his wife, and brought her across bogs from his house
to the house of William Wolverston, one of the leading
Anglo-Irish gentlemen, at Stillorgan; and that, although
Wolverston desired them not to hang her on his own lands,
he took no steps to prevent them doing so at Powerscourt.
The other deposition was made by one John Hayes, late of
Bray, who was informed by Katherine, the wife of Lawrence
Sherlock, late of Bray, that Mrs. Smithson was brought by
the rebels to Powerscourt, where apparently she was put
under the custody of Luke O’Toole. Luke’s daughter did
her best to protect Mrs. Smithson, begging her father to
spare her life. But on the arrival of a letter from Wolver-
ston, which was brought by his own man, Mrs. Smithson
was carried away in a very unseemly manner from Powers-
court to Kilmacanoge, and there both she and her maid
were put to death. 1 One can hardly believe that it was
entirely political and religious partisanship that prompted
such acts of ferocity as these. There must have been some
bitter personal grudges or hatreds, for the gratification of
which the rebellion gave free rein. And it was not only
the clergy and their families that suffered. For instance,
one of the depositions was made by Ellinor Birne alias
Cullen of Connagh, relating the murder of her husband,
Cahill O’Cullen, by the O’Tooles. 2 Perhaps he was one
of the fourteen poor labourers that frequented Divine service
in Connagh Church in 1630.
During the war that followed between the Parliamentary
forces and the Confederates, Bray itself was held by a body
of Confederate troops under the command of one of the
O’Byrnes. They were instructed by the Confederate Coun-
cil to commit all acts of hostility against the enemy, being
1 Depositions of 1641. 2 Ibid.


provided with powder and match by the gentry and in-
habitants of the county of Wicklow. The county was also
to maintain them, and, if unwilling, should be compelled to
do so. But apparently this plan did not work well, and
we find the officers in command at Bray having great
difficulties for want of money to pay their men, as well as
on account of the divided counsels and bad generalship by
which the Confederate cause was so much weakened. Among
these officers we find a Toole, a Talbot, and a Barnewall, as
well as some of the Byrnes. 1
You know how the war dragged on until at last a kind
of peace was signed in January 1649, just a fortnight before
King Charles was beheaded. But the peace did not last
more than a month; and then war broke out again, this
time definitely as a war between the Royalists and
Cromwell; and by August of that year Cromwell himself
was in Ireland, the worst terror that Ireland had yet known.
Between the day when he took Drogheda and massacred its
whole garrison, and the day just a month later when he
began the cannonade of Wexford, Cromwell passed through
the Bray district. Rumour has it that he besieged and
battered to pieces the castle of Fassaroe, 2 and that he slept
for several nights at Killincarrig House. 3 It is quite
probable that the Cromwellian troops did at some time
during the war knock Fassaroe Castle to pieces; and it is
also quite probable that the stern man himself may have
spent one night at Killincarrig on his way south; but it is
not likely that he allowed that journey to be delayed a
moment longer than necessary in this district. As well as
we can gather from his own concise letter to the Speaker of
1 Calendar of State Papers (Ireland), 1633-1647, pp. 540, 606. 613, 614,
637, 639.
2 Lewis’ Topographical Dictionary, under “ Bray.”
3 Eugene Curry, Ordnance Survey Letters.


the English Parliament, and other contemporary documents,
he marched direct from Dublin to Killincarrig, where he left
a company of soldiers to hold the house—which had been
hastily abandoned by the Confederate garrison as soon as
they heard that Cromwell was coming—while he with the
rest of the army pressed on to Arklow. 1 The little garrison
that he left at Killincarrig seems to have been besieged and
pretty hard pressed there. But about three months later it
was relieved by a force of 1500 recruits, which had newly
arrived at Dublin from Liverpool and Chester. 2 Meantime
Cromwell, either before or after he took Arklow, in going
through “ them straight passages ” which were the delight of
the O’Tooles and O’Byrnes, lost many of his horse. And in
particular, Cromwell’s own proper horse and furniture was
carried from the camp by Christopher, son of Luke O’Toole,
and was thenceforth ridden by Luke, who refused to give it
up again, though my lord Cromwell offered him oPIOO for
it—a big price in those days. 3 But in spite of such little
incidents as that, it was a very thorough crushing which
Cromwell inflicted upon his enemies in Ireland—so thorough
that they had no power or spirit left to resist the terrible
act of confiscation and banishment passed in August 1652,
by which all the Roman Catholic gentry were dispossessed
of their estates, and were ordered to transplant themselves
across the Shannon, into Connaught and Clare, where small
1 A letter from the Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland to the Hon. Wm.
Lenthal, Esq., Speaker of the Parliament of England (printed in London,
1649). See also A Contemporary History of Affairs in Ireland, ed. J. T.
Gilbert, vol. ii. p. 283 ; vol. iii. p. 159.
2 A Contemporary History, & c., vol. iii. p. 160 (Killummacarrick).
For a story about Donagh O’Doyle of Killecarrow (which has been
supposed to be Killincarrig), see Daniel O’Connell, A Memoir of Ireland,
Native and Saxon, p. 263.
3 Ibid., vol. ii. p. 54. The story is given wrongly in Cromwell in
Ireland, by Denis Murphy, S.J., p. 142.


allotments were to be assigned to them. Out they all had
to go, not only O’Tooles and O’Byrnes, but Walshes and
Goodmans and Barnewalls and Talbots and Archbolds
too. Naught did it avail them that their forefathers had
held the Pale for England. They had fought for the monarchy
(a very bad one indeed), against the tyranny which
masqueraded as democracy; and so they must go. Mrs.
Barnewall, for instance, of Shankill Castle, a lady of gentle
birth, sister of the seventh Baron of Trimlestown, and used
to a quiet luxury, was now a widow with five children. At
Shankill she was surrounded by devoted retainers, whose
l° v * n o sei *vice softened the pain of her bereavement. But
off she and her children must be driven, in desolation, into
the comfortless wilds of Connaught. It was a terrible
vengeance for the wild acts of 1641. But it was not the
mass of the Irish people that suffered. Do not imagine that
for a moment. They were not disturbed from their homes.
Probably they were in the end much better off under the
new regime than under the old. It was only the landlords
that were driven out. Who would be an Irish landlord if
he could possibly help it ? The measures used by Cromwell
were indeed severe to the degree of cruelty. But the peace
and prosperity which have made Bray and its surroundings
the garden of Ireland, may be said to have first begun from
the time when Cromwell put down an iron heel upon the
continual raiding and warring which had devastated the
district ever since the end of the twelfth century. But
Cromwell died in 1658, and the monarchy was restored in
1660, and in 1661 a Parliament was held in Dublin which
passed the Act of Settlement. By that Act, Cromwell’s new
settlers were to be confirmed in their holdings, and at the
same time any of the dispossessed landlords who could prove
Dr. Elrington Ball, History of County Dublin, part iii. p. 88.


that they were innocent of any complicity with the rising of
1641 were to be reinstated. The settlement of all the claims
that then arose was, you may be sure, no light and easy
task. The Irish Attorney-General, Sir William Domvile,
found his work cut out for him. He probably did that
work very fairly and honourably. I say that, not only
because he was a man of fine character, who would be sure
to do so, but also because in the end he was equally abused
by all parties for not having favoured their interests. For
himself Sir William obtained possession of Loughlinstown.
It was quite impossible for the Goodmans to prove inno-
cence. Indeed, James Goodman had been implicated in
almost every crime committed in the neighbourhood in
1641, and had been executed under the Commonwealth for
one of them—the murder in cold blood of a tenant of his
own, named Boatson, who was brought in as a prisoner to
the camp at Bray, and whom Goodman insisted on seeing
hanged. One of Cromwell’s settlers, a Mr. John Lambert,
then got the forfeited estate of Loughlinstown; but he was
not able to make good his claim at the Settlement, and in
the end the lands were granted to the Attorney-General,
He built a country house upon them, probably using the
remains of the old castle as a quarry, and his building
now forms the back portion of the present Loughlinstown
House. 1
The Barnewalls and the Walshes were restored to their old
possessions of Shankill and Shanganagh 2 and Old Connaught
and Cork. A Walsh also became a tenant of Ballyman,
Fowerscourt and all Fercullen, of coux-se, remained in
the hands of the Wingfield family, and Killruddery and
1 See Articles referred to in note on p. 145.
2 Shanganagh seems to have escaped injury in the war, for in the Down
Survey we read, “In Shanganagh there stands a ffaire Castle and a Come
Mill in Repaire.”


much besides in the hands of the Earl of Meath. Great
Bray was divided by a Partition agreed upon in 1666—a
very interesting document—between the Earl of Meath
and the Earl of Tyrconnel, who before the Restoration
had been known as Lord Fitzwilliam, or the Lord of Merrion
and whose successor in the present day is Lord Pembroke. 5
Little Bray was probably again divided between a Walsh of
Connagh, a Wolverston of Stillorgan, the Lord of Merrion
and the Earl of Meath. The two latter did not forfeit their
estates, for although the Lord of Merrion is described in Fleet-
wood’s Survey as an Irish Papist, he contrived to keep clear
of the rebellion all through. The Walsh and Wolverston
estates were forfeited, but the Walshes got back their pro-
perty m Little Bray as well as Old Connaught, and as James
Wolverston, William’s son, succeeded in establishing his
innocence, and Stillorgan was restored to him, it is pro-
bable he may have got back his moiety of Little Bray
too. The Walshes, however, did not get back Old Court,
nor did the Archbolds recover Raheenaclig, nor the’
lalbots Rathdown. All those estates were granted to
Richard Edwards, Esq., a Welsh gentleman, and Eliza-
beth his wife. 1 His family continued to hold Old Court
until the middle of the nineteenth century, and their
memory is preserved by a very large burial enclosure at
St. Paul s Churchyard.
But there I am now trespassing on the modern, not
the ancient, history of Bray; and it is really time that
stopped talking, and allowed you to get on with your
packing. What? Have you not had enough? Oh-
the Vicar of Rray? I have just arrived at “good King
Charles s golden days,” and then stop without telling you
the real facts about the one notability of Bray, whose
1 Grant dated August 16, 1666.


fame everybody knows! Is that the grievance? Well
the first real fact is that the famous Vicar of Brav
never had anything to do with this Bray at all. It is
about the Bray in Berkshire on the Thames that the old
proverb arose, “ The Vicar of Bray will be Vicar of Bray
still.” The second real fact is that the Vicar of the song,
who is supposed to have held his vicarage from the reign of
Chailes II to that of George I, which of course he might
easily have done, was, however, only an imaginary person.
Ihe proverb, on which the song was founded, was already
an old one when Charles II came to the throne. The
original changeful vicar held his living under Henry VIII,
Edward VI, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. Thomas
Fuller tells us about him in his History of the Worthies
of England. He says that the Vicar had seen some
martyrs burnt two miles off at Windsor, and that he found
the fire too hot for his temper. And when he was taxed by
some one for being a turncoat and an inconstant changeling,
his reply was, “ Not so, for I always kept my principle,
which is this, to live and die the Vicar of Bray.” One
cannot pretend to admire the character of the man who
could so easily change his convictions on the most important
subjects, in order not to be disturbed from his comfortable
position. But at the same time I must confess to a kind of
sympathy with him in one way. For if the parish of Bray
in Berkshire was in the sixteenth century anything like
as delightful a parish as Bray in Co. Wicklow is in the
twentieth century —if its surroundings were anything com-
pai able for beauty and interest—if its parishioners were at
all so lovable, —then I can well understand his feeling
strongly that he could not possibly cjanceive of any other
earthly lot being so happy and so altogether desirable as to
live and die the Vicar of Bray.




APPENDIX I
THE DEANERY OF BRAY
In D Alton’s History of the County of Dublin the rather startling
statement is made : “ In 1152, Bray, previously the seat of a rural
bishopric, was by Cardinal Paparo annexed to the see of
Dublin.” As there are no traces of any such town as Bray
having even existed before 1170, one is curious to know why
we are to suppose it to have been a Cathedral City before 1152.
However, the source of D’Alton’s statement can be traced back
through Dansey’s Horae Decanicae Rurales to Wakefield’s
Account of Ireland, and from that to Ledwich’s Antiquities of
Ireland. Ledwich was, I think, the first to state that Bray
must have been a rural see, and his reason is as follows. Simon
de Rochfort, Bishop of Meath (a.d. 1216), set down for the
benefit of posterity the Constitutions ordained by Cardinal John
Paparo, the Pope’s legate at the Synod of Kells in 1152. One
of the changes in the Constitution of the Church of Ireland
which he relates is that it was decreed that as the chorepiscopi
and bishops of small sees passed away, their places should be taken
by Archpresbyters to be constituted by the Diocesans, and that
their sees should be made into so many heads of rural deaneries.
From this Ledwich inferred that every rural deanery of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries represented a rural see of
the same name before 1152. But this seems to be too large an
inference. In the first place, there was no strictly diocesan
system in the Celtic Church at all. The first attempt to intro-
duce such a system was at the Synod of Rathbreasil in 1118.
Moreover, it is a disputed point whether the chorepiscopi were
always bishops or not. Probably in many cases they were only
presbyters, who were coarbs of monasteries, and so had a kind
of headship over a group of clergy. (See Haddan’s article on


“ Coarb, in the Dictionary of Christian Antiquities .) Stilly of
course, in a certain sense you might call all such centres at which
either a chorepiscopus or an inconspicuous bishop was stationed a
“ rural see. But it is not probable that the rural deaneries,
which were strictly territorial and part of a regular diocesan
scheme, ever exactly corresponded to those loosely organised
Celtic arrangements. And even if it had been possible to make
them so correspond, it is very doubtful whether, after the great
changes brought about by the Norman Settlement, the Norman
bishops, who were practical, business-like men, would have
allowed themselves to be tied down to an organisation which
had grown out of an entirely different social order. No doubt
they arranged their rural deaneries to suit practical convenience
in the organisation of their Dioceses, making those places heads
of deaneries which in their day were important and con-
venient centres. However, to come back to Bray, there is this
much to be said in support of the theory that its rural deanery
represented an older Celtic ecclesiastical district, that it was
almost, though not exactly, conterminous with the ancient tribal
territory of Ui Briuin Cualann. To that we may add two facts
for whatever they are worth—(l) that once we find the Deanery
called Obree {“Liber Niger Alani,” Bp. Reeves’ copy, p. 202, a.d.
1531) ; (2) that among the bishops present at the Synod of Kells
there was a bishop of Ui Briuin. Keating, however, from whom
I glean this latter fact, says that Ui Briuin there means Brefni.
Whether he is right or wrong Ido not know; but at any rate
one cannot confidently assume without any evidence that Ui
Briuin means Ui Briuin Cualann. And even if we suppose
that the rural deanery of Bray did represent an old ecclesiastical
district, still it would not necessarily or even probably follow
that Bray had been the head of that district in prae-Norman
times. It was probably just because Sir Walter de Ridelesford
made Bray an important centre of the district by building his
castle there, that it was then chosen to be the head of the rural
deanery which occupied the territory of Ui Briuin Cualann.
This happened at any rate before 1280 a.d. For in the interest-
ing collection of ancient documents known as “Crede Mihi,”
we have a list of all the parishes in the Diocese of Dublin,


which Dr. Lawlor dates within a year or so of 1280. The list is
arranged in rural deaneries, and the following is the list of the
Deanery of Bray. It is interesting as showing what churches
were in existence in these parts in the end of the thirteenth
century. All of them lay within the territory of Ui Briuin
Cualann, except Newcastle and Killadreenan, which were in the
territory of Ui Teigh, and possibly Kilcool and Kilfernoc too.
There may be doubt also whether Stillorgan and Monkstown
are not beyond the northern boundary of that territory.
Nomina Ecclesiarum Decanatns Identified with
de Bre.
Ecclesia de Bre .1 . 1. St. Paul’s, Bray.
Ecclesia de Dervau >- . 2. Church on Bray Head ?
Capella de Killosarn j . 3. Killarney (Fairy Hill).
(Monialium de Grane in pro-
prios usus.)
Archiepiscopus Patronus —
Ecclesia de Stachgonyll 'k . 4. A church in Powerscourt parish.
Ecclesia de Kilbride J . 5. Kilbride (site near the new
(Rector Simon filius Walteri church),
ex collatione Regis, sede
vacante.)
Ecclesia de Karric . . .6. Templecarrig.
Ecclesia de Glynkapyl . . 7- Temple Glencapp (St. Mary’s of
the Downs?)
Archiep. Patronus —
Ecclesia de Delgeuey . . 8. Delgany (old church).
(Dominus Johannes Patrick
Rector non praebendalis.)
Ecclesia de Kilrethery ) .9. Killruddery.
Ecclesia de Kilcrony j . 10. Kilcrony.
(Pertinent ad Ecclesiam de
Stagonyld.)
Capella de Stamoling . .11. Kilmalin.
Ecclesia de Kilmehonoc . .12. Kilmacanoge.
Ecclesia de Glasmolyn . . 13. Glasnamulleu.
Ecclesia de Kilmacber . . 14. Kilmacberue (site unknown).
Ecclesia de Novo Castro . 15. Newcastle.
(Ista monialium de Gratia
Dei in proprios usus.)
Ecclesia de Killauchdeeny . 16. Killadreenan.
Ecclesia de Kilcowyl . .17. Kilcool.


Nomina Ecclesiarum Decanatus Identified with
de Ere.
Archiep. Patronus —
Capella de Kilfernoc . . 18. (?)
(Ista Ecclesia praecentoris
Sancti Patricii non tamen
pertinet ad praecentoriam.)
Dominus Archiep. Pair onus —
Ecclesia de Killatheger ) .19, Killegar.
Ecclesia de Clumine j . 20. Glenmunder (Ballyman).
(Johannes de Maneford filius
Domini Laurentii Rector.
Valuit XX Marcas : nunc
nihil vel parvum.)
Archiep. Patronus —
Ecclesia de Senekil . .21. Shankill.
(Dominus Rex contulit ipsam,
vacante sede, cuidam Ca-
pellano. Nihil valet.)
Archiep. Patronus —
Ecclesia de Rathmichel . . 22. Rathmichael.
(Praebenda in Ecclesia Sancti
Patricii, Dublin. Valuit 1
marcas, sed modo parvum.
Dominus Rex ipsam con-
tulit Domino Adae de
Wethenale, sede vacante.)
Ecclesia de Tylach . 'j .23. Tullow,
Ecclesia de Kilemyn . 24. Killiney.
Ecclesia de Dalkey - . 25. Dalkey.
Ecclesia de Clonken . 26. Kill o’ the Grange.
Ecclesia de Stachlorgan . 27. Stillorgau.
(Istae sunt Priori* et Con-
ventus Sanctae Trinitatis
Dublin in usus proprios &c.)
Ecclesia de Karrachbrenan . 28. Carrickbrennan in Monkstown
(Monachorum Sanctae Ma- parish,
riae Dublin ordinis Cis-
tercianae.)
In the ‘ Ecclesiastical Taxation of Ireland,” of which the
probable date is 1302, Kilternan is included in the deanery
and also Belgrave, but the latter was probably an error. In


the seventeenth and following centuries, Kilternan and Kil-
gobbin and Leperstown are included.
1. For the history of this, the head church of the rural
deanery, see Appendix 11.
2. This name on the original “ Crede Mihi ” parchment was
first written Derau; but a later hand afterwards wrote a v
above the line between the r and the a, making it Dervau. I
think it is probable that on the earlier document, from which
the scribe of “ Crede Mihi” was copying, the name was Derran.
That at any rate is how it was read by Archbishop Alan in
1530. In the “ Repertorium Viride ”he gives it as “ Capella de
Derran, alias Ecclesia de Harghain.” And in support of that
we find in the “Ecclesiastical Taxation of Ireland ” (circa 1302)
the name Terran. There we find as the first denomination
under the Deanery de Bree “ Dernauth Terran. The church
de Dernauth with the Chapel.” Dernauth I believe to repre-
sent Derthach, a very natural mistake in copying. (See Appen-
dix II.) Terran probably stands for Derran. I should imagine
that the words on the original taxation sheet were u Derthach
and Derran. The Church de Derthach with the Chapel (de
Derran).” It is also quite possible, though on the wdiole I
think it less probable, that the word Dirrhi in the Papal Letter
of 1403, where we read of the “ Perpetual Vicar of Dirrhi and
Bree,” may have been Derran. I have stated in Appendix II
that I think it more likely that this is one of the corruptions of
Deartach, the old name of the Parish Church. As Derran was
only a small chapel subsidiary to what was then the important
church of Bree, it would not be likely to be named first of the
two. When Archbishop King made his first Visitation of this
Diocese in 1703, he evidently took great pains to get the names
of all the old ruined churches as well as the extant parish
churches, and he gives the chapels of Killosseran (see below)
and Doran, alias Hargain, as belonging to Brey. Some later
Visitations, e.g. those of 1729 and 1746, give “ Killosseran and
Doran, otherwise Hartain,” as belonging to Delgany. From all
this we may gather that there were -two small churches or
chapels within the district claimed by the parish of Bray, but
probably near the Delgany (or Kilmacanoge) border of it, which


had no separate clergyman attached to them or tithes belonging
to them, one of which was called Derran or Doran and also
Harghain or Hartain. Where was this church? The only
possible place seems to be Raheenaclig, on the side of Bray
Head. There is no other name on the list of churches to
correspond to that ruin, and there are no traces of any other
church in the Bray district to fit the name.
3. The name “ Capella de Killosarn,” which is copied by
Archbishop Alan in the “ Repertorium Viride,” appears, how*-
ever, in Archbishop King’s Visitation as Killosseran. Long ago I
conjectured that (a) Killarney (the old church at the top of
Fairy Hill), (6) Killosarn, and (c) Killescosather (one of the
benefices which Sir Walter de Ridelesford gave along with
Derdac, as belonging to his barony of Bre, to the Convent of
Grane), might all three be the same place. My suggestion was
that the original form of the name might have been Kil-Escop-
Saran, the Church of Bishop Saran. The short form of that,
dropping the episcopal title, would be Kilsaran. (For episcopal
saints named Saran see O’Hanlon, Lives of the Saitits, Jan. 13
and March 1.) Killescosather would be quite a possible mis-
reading of Killescosaran, and the shorter form in the “ Crede
Mihi,” &c., certainly suggests Kilsaran, Quite recently I have
come across an unexpected confirmation of this conjecture in
some of the Pembroke Estate Deeds (Nos. 83, 137, 210, 242),
where the townland of Killarney is named Kylmasarny, Kil-
lespykesarne and Killesbuikesarne, On the other hand, there
is this difficulty about Killescosather, that Archbishop Alan in
the “ Repertorium Viride ” states that Killescopoge, a church
somewhere near Wicklow, was the third benefice which Walter
de Ridelesford bestowed upon the convent of Grane, and from
which it was drawing revenues in his day (see Chapter IX,
p. 103, note 1). It is however possible that there was some
connection between Killescopoge and Killarney, both perhaps
being originally founded by Bishop Saran and called Killes-
copsaran, which might be the reason for Sir Walter’s com-
mand of that distant benefice; or again it is possible that an
exchange was made in early days, which was not known to
Archbishop Alan, Killarney perhaps having fallen into ruin


and its benefice become worthless, and the convent receiving
Killescopoge in its place. As regards the site of the church
there cannot be any reasonable doubt that it is the old church
at the top of Fairy Hill, of which the foundations can still be
traced in the middle of the old churchyard there, with a curious
rude cross standing just beside them. It is true that the
Ordnance map includes that churchyard in the townland of
Kilbride and not of Killarney. But we learn from the
Ordnance Survey Letters that it was not known at the time the
survey was made, in which townland it ought to be included.
Common sense, after a look at the map or the ground, would
say Killarney, of course, for that gives a natural straight
boundary between the townlands. But I suppose the surveyors
argued that there must have been a church on the Kilbride
townland, for churches were built everywhere in honour of
St. Brigid, and they could not find any other unmistakable
churchyard on that townland; whereas Killarney might simply
have been named after the famous beauty spot in Kerry. And
so they made the boundary line wander round the very ir-
regular northern outline of that churchyard. However, recent
excavations have discovered the ancient churchyard of Kilbride,
with some interesting gravestones characteristic of the very
earliest Christian burial-grounds in this barony, only a short
distance from the modern church of Kilbride. And so now
there can be no doubt that Killarney or Killesbuikesarne or
Kilosarn stood in that old graveyard at the top of the hill.
4. The original form of the name, which in the “ Crede
Mihi ” is given first as Stachgonyll and afterwards as Stago-
nyld, and which now is usually spelt Stagonill, was either leach
Gonaill or Teach Conaill, the House of Connell. In Papal
bulls of 1216 or so, it is called Tachgunnild and Tachgunill.
I do not think anything definite is known of St. Connell.
Which of the many churches in the parish of Powerscourt was
on the site of Connell’s dwelling, it would be hard to say.
Perhaps the most likely is that which is called Churchtown,
about half a mile nearly due south, of Powerscourt House.
On the other hand, Archbishop Alan, in a note on the name
Stagonill, occurring in the Extent of the Manor of Senekill


in the Liber Niger Alani (pp. 743-8 of Bishop Reeves’ copy),
cited so often before, says “ egregie et longe a Poweriscourt.”
If this really means that Stagonill was a very long distance
from Powerscourt, then we would seem to be wrong in looking
for a church near the house. On the other hand, it may
be that the good Archbishop had been told that when he
reached Powerscourt he would find Stagonill Church quite
close at hand, and that arriving at the house tired after a long
journey by Killegar and Stamoling, that extra half-mile over a
steep hillside seemed to him a very weary addition. This
might seem to explain the otherwise apparently uncalled-for ex-
clamation in the note. The first Powerscourt church which took
the place of Stagonill as the parish church, was the ruin close
to the house. It was no doubt built by the first Viscount
Powerscourt soon after 1609. Archbishop Bulkeley, writing
in 1630, still calls the parish Stagony, but begins his report
of it thus : “ The church and chauncel of Powerscourt, where
the parishioners visit now, are in very good repair and decency.”
It is evident that the parishioners had only recently given up
the old church of Stagonill to go to the new church of Powers-
court. In the eighteenth century we find the parish called
sometimes “ Powerscourt, alias Stagonill,” other times “ Stago-
nill, otherwise Powerscourt.” Now the old name is dropped
as regards the parish, but still retained for the prebend in St.
Patrick’s Cathedral. Curiously enough, Archbishop Alan tells
us that in his day when the parish was known as Stagonill,
the prebend was commonly called Temple Becan.
5. For the position of Kilbride Church, see the discussion
of Killarney above. The exact site is beside the stream, just
200 yards higher up the glen than the new church. Which
Brigid is commemorated by this Kilbride, it is impossible to
say. Colgan gives a list of fourteen distinct Brigids, and there
are at least five Irish saints of the name, of whose history
we know something. So it is not safe to assume that every
Kilbride was connected with the great Abbess of Kildare.
One of the known Brigids belonged to this district of Ui
Briuin Cualann, being a sister of the five holy daughters of
Leinin, who are commemorated at Cill-inghen-Leinin (Killiney).


But no doubt some of these many Brigids were named after
the “ Fiery Dart,” the great daughter of Dubtach, and were
trying to make her their pattern. And so perhaps every
Kilbride may be supposed to have a secondary if not a primary
flavour of the special sanctity of Kildare about it.
In 1280 Kilbride was attached to Stagonill. But in 1530
Alan describes it as one of four or five chapels annexed to the
rectory of Delgany. So also it is assigned in the Visitation
lists of the eighteenth century. But in spite of that, the
townland of Kilbride was in the parish of Bray, and part of it.
College Close, was the Bray Glebe land. When the modern
parish of Kilbride was formed in 1874, portions were taken
out of Bray, Old Connaught, Kilmacanoge and Powerscourt
parishes to make it up.
6. “ Ecclesia de Karric ” reads like a translation into Latin
of Templecarrig. There is no trace of a church there now.
But Eugene Curry in the Ordnance Survey Letters (1837),
wrote : “In the Townland of Templecarrig they show an
uncultivated spot in a field, which they call the churchbank.
The hollow in the bank, where the church is said to have
stood, measures 30 feet from east to west, and 18 from north
to south. Mr. Massy’s (the proprietor) father saw people
buried at this place, and part of the church walls standing.”
Killincarrig is also a name suggestive of a little church of
Carrig, but Curry stated that in his time there was no recol-
lection whatsoever of any church or burying-place having been
there. Again, the close connection of Ecclesia de Karric with
Ecclesia de Glynkapyl in the list, might suggest that possibly
there was a church on Karrickkevan, or St. Kevin s Rock,
which was the old name of one of the townlands in the terri-
tory of Glencap. But probably Karric was Templecarrig.
Archbishop Alan tells us that in his time Carrik, like
Kilbride, was attached to Delgany. His words are “Verum
haec est secunda capella sub Temple Delgeny. (Temple
Delgenn, Tampuldelne, &c., are forms of the name of Delgany
which occur in deeds of the seventeenth century.)
7. Inquisitions with regard to the territory of Glencapp in
the early part of the seventeenth century, show that territory


to have been practically co-extensive with the parish of Kil-
macanoge as now shown on the Ordnance Maps. (See especially
Inquisition, ninth year of James I, Co. Wicklow, No. 8.) One of
the denominations on it was Temple-Glencapp; or rather, if I
interpret it rightly, the denomination is in the first part of the
document called Kilmurry and Templeglencapp • but in the
summing up at the end, the same denomination is called simply
Kilmurry. Kilmurry, of course, means the Church of St. Mary.
I do not know of any trace of a church on the present town-
lands of Kilmurry North and South. But only a short distance
south of Kilmurry we have the notable ruin of St. Mary’s of the
Downs. It seems to me probable that this is the real Kilmurry
and Templeglencapp, the Ecclesia de Glynkapyl of our document.
In Alan’s list the name is Glancapill, but he has nothing to say
about it except that it belongs to Delgany. In the visitation of
1703 the name of Glencapill is changed to Glanrace and in later
lists to Glangrow.
8, Delgeney, in the Annals Deilgne-Mochoroc or Dergne-
Mogorog, &c.; in a letter of Pope Innocent 111 (1199) Dergni-
Bergi; in other documents of the same period simply Deirgin;
in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries Delgenny
or Temple-Delgenn, with variations of spelling, now known as
Delgany. The church is in the village, a short distance from
the modern building which supplanted it in 1789. For St.
Mochorog, see p. 55. In the end of the fourteenth century the
patronage of Delgany was exercised by the Crown. For in the
Papal Registers, a.d. 1403, 4 Kal. June, we read of the collation
to that parish of William Payn (“ if found fit in Latin ”) to succeed
Thomas White, deceased, Payn having been presented by the
patron, the late King Richard, and instituted by the Arch-
bishop of Dublin. But subsequently the archbishops got the
patronage. For Archbishop Alan says of Delgeny ; “ This is a
Rectory and a Mother Church with its five chapels, and a more
principal church in the whole Barony of Rathdown; and we
have the right of patronage of it.” The five chapels appear to
be Kilbride, Garrick, Glancapill, Kilmacber and Glasmolyn.
Under the heading of Kilbride he had said that there were
four or five of these chapels. Perhaps he should have said five


or six; for besides these five, which were old churches found in
the “ Crede Mihi,” and which were still accounted as annexed to
Delgany in the eighteenth century, he also mentions, in the
paragraph about Kilbride, another, which he seems doubtful
about enumerating among the churches, viz. Rathdown.
Perhaps it was a recently-built private chapel belonging to the
castle there. What Alan actually said was that the castle of
Richard the son of the Earl of Kildare in the town and Barony
of Rathdown was included under that chapel. That is very
hard to understand. The meaning that seems to be wanted,
but it cannot be got out of the words, is that the castle chapel
was included under the rectory of Delgany, of which he had
been speaking just before. Rathdown Church, of which the
walls still stand near the site of the ancient castle, is not
mentioned in the 1280 list, probably because it had not yet been
built. Eugene Curry calls it the little cell of St. Crispin,
It may have been so dedicated; but if it was, that of itself
would make it improbable that it dated from Celtic times.
9. For Killruddery as the site of an ancient church, see
pp. 76-8. In a bull confirming his possessions to the Bishop of
Glendalough in the year 1179, Pope Alexander named among
those possessions Balinrodrach. Bishop Reeves, in his Analysis
of the United Dioceses of Dublin and Glendalough, identifies that
with Killruddery. Archbishop Alan calls it the Chapel of
Kilrothery, alias Killraly. In his day, as in 1280, it belonged to
Stagonill. If Kilbride belonged to Delgany while Killruddery
belonged to Powerscourt, the boundaries of the parishes must
have been rather mixed. In 1722 the townlands of Killruddery,
Ballywaltrim, and Ballymorris were transferred from the parish
of Stagonill to that of Bray. But strangely enough we still find
it stated in a Visitation Record of 1746, that “Kilrothery
belongs to Stagonill.”
10. About Kilcrony Archbishop Alan stated that according
to the ancient Register ( i.e . the “ Crede Mihi ”)it as well as
Kilrothery belonged to Stagonill, but that it had recently
been occupied by the monks of St. Mary’s Abbey, Dublin.
Afterwards it was included in the parish of Kilmacanoge,
and therefore attached to Delgany, until in 1874 it was trans


ferred to the new parish of Kilbride. With regard to Kil-
crony Church and its dedication, see p. 55.
11. Stamoling is a later form of Teach-Moling, St Moling’s
House. I think there can be little doubt that this is the
same as Kilmalin. The townland of that name lies three-
quarters of a mile from Powerscourt House, and St. Moling’s
Well, which now supplies water to the house, is close beside
it. The actual site of the church is now lost; but Eugene
Curry, writing in 1837, said that the place of Kilmoling
Church and graveyard was then shown, but that not a vestige
of either remained. The old church had been levelled and
the graveyard rooted up and planted as an orchard about
seventy years before by one of the descendants of Cromwell’s
followers, named Douce. Some ancient yew trees had remained
in the orchard, but by the time of his visit they and the
orchard and Douce and all his descendants had disappeared,
and there was nothing to be seen but the ruined and desolate
walls of Kilmelin House. Now the spot is occupied by a
charming little village of labourers’ cottages. In Archbishop
Alan’s Liber Niger there is a copy of an “ Extent of the Manor
of Shankill,” made in 1327. In it we find that the heir of
Eustace le Powere held one carucate of land at Stamellin,
Archbishop Alan has added a note “ Hodie 1531 Jacobus
Fitzgarrard istam occupat, et appellatur vulgo Powerscourt,
quod semper notabis.” Another note, which is very difficult
to understand, seems, however, for one thing to say that
Killegar and Stamelin are on different mountains. That is
of course the case if Stamelin be identified with Kilmalin,
for the Cookstown valley, anciently the valley of the Clodagh,
lies between them. For the Fitzgeralds as owners of Powers-
court before a.d. 1535, see p. 126, note 1. Sir James Fitz-
gerald of Leislip was son of the Earl of Kildare and closely
related to “ Silken Thomas,” His daughter was married about
that time to Shane O’Toole of Imail.
12. For St. Mochonoc, the probable founder of Kilma-
canoge, see p. 55. Kilmacanoge was in early times one of the
possessions of the Bishop of Glendalough, until that see was
merged in Dublin. The name occurs in documents of the


end of the twelfth century, as one of a group of churches “in
the territory of Macgilleholmoch" belonging to Glendalough.
The others of the group were Killegar, Glenmunder, Delgany,
Killmacberne, and another named Tegdeloge, which I cannot
identify. The name is spelt Kelmahenoc and Cellmochenoc.
Another document of that period quoted by Bishop Reeves in
his Analysis of the United Dioceses of Dublin and Glendalough
mentions Ballinfind between Balinrodrach (Killruddery) and
Techugonaill (Stagonill in Powerscourt parish), and Bishop
Reeves suggests that possibly Ballinfind is Kilmacanoge.
There does not seem, however, to be any reason for the sug-
gestion except the position; and, considering the number of
churches in the district, that hardly seems sufficient ground
for an identification. In 1430 ( Papal Letters, vol, viii. p. 177)
Cornelius Obruyn was rector of Cillmocna in the Diocese of
Dublin (which is supposed to be Kilmacanoge), the value of
his benefice being not more than four marks. In 1610 and
1615 Kilmacanoge was under the same Irish-speaking pastor
Moris Burne, with Bray, Connagh, and Killiney. In 1630 we
find Kilmacanoge and Connagh separated from Bray, but
united together under a curate, Thomas Davis. In 1639
Kilternan also was added to his cure. From 1703 on we
find Kilmacanoge perpetually united to Delgany; but in 1874
a large slice was taken out of it to be put into the new parish
of Kilbride. The old church is the ivy-covered ruin in the
graveyard opposite to the modern Roman Catholic Church.
13. Glasmolyn means St. Moling’s streamlet. A very pretty
little rivulet it is that flows into the Vartry River from Douce,
and just below the spot where the road from Charleville to
Roundwood crosses it, on a farm called Broomfield, there is a
small spring discharging into it, which is known as St. Kevin’s
Well, So the little burn is doubly consecrated by memories of
St. Kevin of Glendalough and St. Moling of Ferns. It is stated
in O’Hanlon’s Lives of the Saints, that St. Moling frequently
visited Glendalough. No doubt it was the fame of the great
Saint Kevin, who had lived nearly two centuries before his
time, that attracted him to Crioch Cualann; and he would not
be satisfied only to visit St. Kevin’s “ desert ” and his bed and


his monastery, and all the rest at Glendalough. He must visit
also the little springs which the Saint had blessed and made
into Holy Wells, one here under Douce, another in Glenmunder.
And lingering about those beautiful regions, which the earlier
Saint had loved so well, he came to have his own holy well and
his little temporary dwelling at Teach-Moling; and the stream-
let from which he loved to drink, and in which he loved to
bathe, was called Glas Moling. Now the name is Glasnamullen.
As for the church, its foundations are still to be seen, with the
basin of an ancient font, among a group of fir trees between
a farmhouse, which has the name Singleton’s View on its
gate-posts, and the road. It is the first crossroad between
the two long parallel roads that run down Calary Moor to
Roundwood,
14. I do not think anyone has discovered either the exact
position of Kilmacberne Church or the identity of Macßyrne.
Dr. Elrington Ball, in describing the Archbishop’s manor of
Shankill, says that “in the country towards Powerscourt the
Archbishop owned a village called Kilmacberne, which con-
tained the same number of tenements as Shankill.” It is
mentioned again and again in documents of the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, as Cell Maccabinru, Cellmacabire, Kilmaka-
burn, Killmabernin, as well as Kilmacberne and Kilmacber. In
the eighteenth century lists it is called Killmcßurr or Killmcbirr.
It was one of the chapels annexed to Delgany in 1530, which
would seem to imply that it must have lain to the far side of
Powerscourt from Shankill; but it is impossible to fix it.
There are indeed two more sites of ancient churches marked on
the Ordnance Map in the Fercullen district, though in neither
case can any trace of a church now be found on the spot. One
of these might possibly be Kilmacberne and the other
Cellcrithaich, which is mentioned in a Papal decree of 1179,
and of which Archbishop Alan says “ quae est Powerscourt in
pede montium; ” but I do not suggest that the identifications
are even probable. One is near the foot of the Waterfall, the
other on the townland of Lackandarragh.
15. The name is enough to show us that Newcastle Church
was not built until after the erection of the fortress of Newcastle


McGynegan, for which we have accepted from Mr. Orpen a
date of about 1200. Naturally, therefore, we do not find any
trace of this church in the twelfth century documents. In the
1304 Taxation it is named Novo Castro Makyngane. In later
documents the last part of the name is spelt in all sorts of ways,
which it is not worth detailing. Archbishop King or his
registrar in 1703 seems to have got confused over it, for he
gives McKingham as one of the benefices united to Delgany,
and then adds Novo Castro by itself with no remark about it at
all, evidently not knowing what to make of the name. The
rectory of Newcastle was impropriated, as stated in the 1280
document, to the Cistercian convent of Grace Dieu. Archbishop
Alan tells us that this was done “ex fundatione Johannis primi
Archiepiscopi Dublinensis.” John the first must be John Comyn,
who was Archbishop from 1181 to 1213. This therefore gives
us a posterior limit for the foundation of the church, so that we
see it must have been built between 1200 and 1213. The
rectory being impropriate, the cure was served by a perpetual
vicar. After the suppression of the convent, the rectory came into
lay hands. It was worth .£l5O per annum. In 1615 it was held
by Sir Henry Harrington, who seems to have been rather a
smart picker-up of unconsidered trifles, in 1630 by John
Wolverston. Jhe vicar then was William Cornewall, a reading
minister, who received £ls or £l6 for his services. In 1615
the church and chancel Avere in good repair, but in 1630 the
church was down, the chancel covered, but not decent within.
Cornewall held the vicarage at least from 1610 to 1639, and with
it he held the curacy of Kilcool, and for most of the time the
curacy of Delgany too. In 1703, as stated above, McKingham
was said to be united to Delgany, but Novo Castro was put
down separately. Probably it never was included in the union
of Delgany; for in 1746, when Francis Corbett was rector of
Delgany, George Derry was vicar of Newcastle, and held with
it Killadreenan and Stamoling and Down. His connection with
Stamoling was probably purely nominal, though possibly it
brought him in a small increase of income. What or where
Down was, there seems to be no evidence. Possibly it may be
St. Mary’s Church of the Downs turning up under a new name,


though in the same list occurs Glangrow as one of the chapels
belonging (as is asserted) to Delgany; and Glangrow, as I have
said above, seems to take the place of Glynkapyl, which I have
proposed to identify with St. Mary’s Church. But it is quite
evident that the Archbishops or their registrars who drew up
these lists in the eighteenth century were not themselves certain
about the identification of all the churches, but were determined
not to leave out the name of any church that ever had been on
the rolls of the Diocese. And as Newcastle appears as two
churches on one of these lists, so might St. Mary’s Church too.
16. Killadreenan was the old church of the district,
before Newcastle was built. It seems probable that the two
were at once united as one benefice. The earliest of all the
many forms in which we have the name of this church is
Cellachaich-Driegnig. That is in a bull of Pope Alexander,
in 1179, in which it is stated that this was one of the
possessions of the Archbishop of Dublin. Bishop Reeves,
though admitting that the name apparently represents Killa-
dreenan, finds a difficulty in the Archbishop having a posses-
sion so far south. But Archbishop Alan, in the “ Repertorium
Viride,’’ shows that the Archbishops had in early days had con-
trol of Killadreenan. For he says not only that Archbishop John
the first gave this chapelry along with the church of Newcastle
to Grace Dieu, but also that it was Archbishop Luke that
first instituted a perpetual vicarage there, and that Archbishop
Saundford, Luke’s successor, confirmed that provision under
three seals.
The right of making the appointments to the vicarage was
granted to the convent, as well as the tithes. For we read
in Papal letters of 1427 that the presentation to the perpetual
vicarage of Killachdrynyn belonged by ancient custom to the
Cistercian Abbess and Convent of Gracedieu. In one of these
letters which have to do with the appointment of Philip
Standun to succeed his brother Maurice Standun in that
vicarage, the parish is called “ Kyllachdrynyn, alias de Castro
Novo,” which shows that at any rate before that time Killa-
dreenan had ceased to be a separate parish, and had been
merged in Newcastle. At St. Peter’s they seem to have


preferred the ancient Irish name, whereas in Dublin the
modern Norman name was given the preference. (See Papal
Letters, vol. vii. pp. 235, 520.) With regard to the ruined
church, see p. 108. The origin of the name of this church it
would be hard to determine. I have heard that some anti-
quaries suppose it to be a corruption of Kill-Katharina; but
it would be a monstrous corruption, and, moreover, that does
not seem a probable Celtic dedication, though indeed there
is St. Catherine’s Well close beside the church. O’Hanlon
(Lives of the Irish Saints, vol. viii, p. 265) tells of St. Ernan of
Rathnew and Killadreenagh, sixth and seventh centuries,
whose tongue was blessed by Columkille on a visit to Clonmac-
noise.
17. Kilcool or Cill-Cuile means the Church in the Corner.
St. Lughaidh of Cill-Cuile was venerated on the 9th March,
and O’Hanlon thinks it is probably this Kilcool. But little
or nothing is known of that Saint. There is also a mention,
in the Annals of the Four Masters, of Cill-Cuile-Dumha, the
Church of the Corner of the Mound, which O’Donovan identi-
fies with this place. As the church of Kilcool lies at the
corner of the big mound made by the Rock of Kilcool, on
which the village is built, the name seems appropriate.
Archbishop Alan tells us that Kilcool was formerly a parish
church, because in an old inquisition about the patronage
of the vicarage of Wicklow, he had found mention of a
presbyter named Hugo, who was rector of Kilcool in 1349.
It was apparently in the same document that he found the
priest Thomas, rector of Connagh. After their deaths he
had found no mention of anyone else being canonically insti-
tuted to either of those rectories; but both of them belonged
to the Archbishop’s “ mensa ” in his day. That being so,
it is curious that he does not make any other mention of
Connagh in the “ Repertorium Viride.” However, he says that
Kilcool was accounted a Mother Church and had four chapels
under it: Kilfernock, Kilfedder (now Kilpedder), Kilpatrick,
and Ballyennan. The last name is what is now called Bally-
gannon. The ruins of a church are marked on the Ordnance
Map in the fields close to the sea about half a mile north of
N


Ballygannon House. Kilpatrick and Kilfemock I cannot
identify. Kilpedder is well known; but Ido not think there
is any trace of a church there. Alan adds “ Sub qua haberemus
lx acras terrae vocatae Ballyronan.” Ballyronan lies between
Kilpedder and Kilquade. In Sir Wm. Petty’s map of Co.
Wicklow, a.d. 1683, Kilpedder and Ballyronan and Ballienan
are marked, but not Kilpatrick nor Kilfemock.
18. Kilfernoc was only a chapelry attached to Kilcool,
and therefore the note that the Archbishop was patron must
have been intended to apply to both, and not to the chapelry
alone. Alan makes it clear that the Archbishop was patron
of both. The note that the church belonged to the precentor
of St. Patrick’s, but not to the office of precentor, is repeated
by Alan, who explains that it was given to a former precentor
for his lifetime only, but never belonged to the dignity. But
he states that the Cathedral held some land close to Kilfemock,
called Tirnennick.
19. The earliest form of this name is Celladgair. This
was corrupted in two ways, Killatheger and Kyllegre. The
latter form is the one that has survived as Killegar, with the
accent on the second syllable. Probably it was the cell of
some Saxon hermit named Edgar. It is mentioned, always
with Glenmunder, in twelfth century documents among the
churches in the land of Macgilleholmoch that belonged to
Glendalough. In 1280 and 1530 we find the two still united ;
but neither of them is mentioned in any of the later lists of
churches, which is singular, as both have walls still standing
to remind the curious of their former importance. Probably
soon after the Reformation Killegar was included in Powerscourt
Parish and Glenmunder in Connagh Parish. And it is likely
that by Alan’s time the churches were already in ruins, and
the emoluments not much greater than in the time of John
de Maneford. For the archaeological interest of Killegar
Churchyard, see p. 72. With regard to the Archbishop’s
patronage of this benefice, Alan has a note telling that Henry
de Loundres presented it to the Chancellorship of St. Patrick’s,
but that after a time it returned into the Archbishop’s hands.
20. Clumine, which was wrongly copied by Alan as Dumine,


unquestionably stands for Glenmunder. In the list of possessions
of Glendalough dated 1173, we have it coupled with Celladgair
as Glenn Muneri. In a corresponding list of 1199 if is either
Cleuinmiare or Cleununiare. Perhaps the original Irish name was
Cluain-muine, pronounced Cloonmoney (the shrubby meadow).
If so, the very divergent forms the name has taken seem to be
intelligible, some having followed the appearance, others the
sound of the name. In the 1304 Taxation, it is Glenmondyr,
in 1302 Clumore. In the seventeenth century (see p. 153),
the townland was called by some Ballemunder, by others
Ballimany, which again seems to point to the derivation from
muine, and whence we get the surviving designation of
Ballyman. Eugene Curry took Ballyman to be Baile-na-
Manach, the townland of the monks. Another derivation,
which is adopted by Dr. Elrington Ball, is Baile-na-mban, the
townland of the women, Mr. P. J. O’Reilly says that Baile-
na-manach is quite certainly right. Still I venture to think
that both are wrong, and that all the names of the place have
the same origin, the hollow where the church stands being
Cluain-muine and the whole townland Baile-muine. In the
thirteenth century these lands were held by the Knights
Templars, and in the fourteenth century by the Priory of St.
John of Jerusalem at Kilmainham. But apparently the Arch-
bishops held the tithes all the time, as well as the patronage,
for Ballyman was one of the places of which Archbishop King
gave up the tithes, to improve the incomes of the clergy serving
the cures (see p. 234).
21. It seems to be well established that the ancient name
of the vanished little church of Shankill was Cell-Comgaill.
The name appears in a list of the possessions of the Archbishops
of Dublin, in a bull of Pope Alexander, next after Rathmichael.
Archbishop Ussher (1595-1613), writing about St. Comgall,
says, “ab eo Cell-Comgaill ad Dublinensem spectans archiepis-
copum, nomen olim accepit, quern hodie Saynkill appellamus.”
Bishop Reeves and O’Hanlon accept this statement without
hesitation. I do not know that there .is any reason to think
that the great abbot of Bangor ever came as far south as this;
and unless it was some other Comgall that founded this church,


we must suppose it to have been founded by some admirer in
is memory. The old church is said to have stood on the left
hand of the gateway leading to the castle. But there is no
trace of it there now. For the history of Shankill as a posses-
sion of the Archbishops, see pp. 110-2. The words “vacante
sede m the notes both on Shankill and Rathmichael refer to
the vacancy in the archiepiscopal see between John de Derling-
ton and John de Saundford, who was not appointed till 1284.
22. For the probable early history of Rathmichael, see
pp. 57 sqq. In Pope Alexanders bull (1179) we fin it among
the possessions of the Archbishop of Dublin. It was made into
a prebend of St. Patrick’s Cathedral not later than 1227, The
Archbishop retained the patronage, but, as the note in the
“Crede Mihi ” list tells us, Adam de Wethenale was appointed
by the Crown during the vacancy of the see. The cure of
Rathmichael parish was served by a vicar, who in many cases
was also Vicar of Bray. But in the last two centuries before
Disestablishment, in most instances the prebend and the two
vicarages were all held by the same person. (See Appendix VII,
p. 2 35.) When the Cathedral was suppressed (1546-1554) this
prebend was held by Sir Anthony St. Leger, who leased it to
William Walsh of Carrickmines at a rent of £22,— Walsh to
find a fit chaplain for the church. (Calendar of Fiants,
Edward VI, No. 214.) Some notes on Rathmichael are given
m William Monck Mason’s History of St. Patrick’s, pp. 65 et seq.,
including an inquisition, giving an extent of the rectory or
prebend in 1547. “ J
23. The old name of Tullow, as it appears in Pope Alex-
ander’s bull, ds Tulachnanephscope, or in the Book of Lismore
Telach-na-nEpscop in Ui Briuin Cualann. It means the Hill
of the Bishops. For the church and its dedication to St. Brigid,
see p. 70. The theory propounded by Ledwich in Grose’s
Antiquities, and followed by D’Alton and Lewis and O’Hanlon
that “ Tully was founded by the Ostmen (or Danes), and dedi-
cated to their favourite saint, Olave,” has no foundation except
a confusion of the name Tully with Tulloch, supposed to repre-
sent Olave. This church and the following four others all
belonged to the Priory of the Holy Trinity, which was after


wards converted into Christ Church Cathedral. (See Christ
Church Deeds, Nos. 6, 44, 51, 364.) The cure was served by a
curate, who in 1630 received £ 5 , the tithes then being worth
about £64 per annum. In 1610 the cure was vacant. In 1615
Owen Ellis was curate of Tullogh and Clonkeen and Dalkey.
Ihe church and chancel were then in good repair. In 1630
Simon Swayne held the cure along with Bray and Rathmichael
and Kilternan and Clonkeen. The church was then somewhat
ruined by recent storms, the roof of the chancel being nearly
down. In the eighteenth century the name of Tullow had
disappeared from the visitation lists. The parish had been
united to Monkstown. But it was revived when the new church
was built at Carrickmines.
24. For the old church of Cill-inghen-Leinin, and the five
ladies to whom it owes its foundation, see p. 56. There is
indeed another place, Killininy or Kilnanaughnin, near Boherna-
breena, which disputes with Killiney the claim to have been
the real Cill-inghen-Leinin. (See O'Hanlon's Lives of the
faints, March 6.) But the place called after these ladies was
“ Cill-inghene-Leinin in Ui Briuin Cualann," and there is no
doubt that Killiney was in Ui Briuin Cualann, but it is very
doubtful whether Bohernabreena can have been in that district.
More likely that was the territory of Ui Ceallaigh. And at
any rate there is no doubt that the ancient name of Killiney
was Cellengeni Lenin, w r ith of course many varieties of spelling.
1 hat is made certain by the lists of property belonging to Holy
I rinity in the collection of Christ Church deeds. Besides the
long forms of the name, it also appears as Kylleni, Kilemyn,
and with several other spellings. While the tithes belonged to
the Priory, afterwards the Cathedral, the services at Killiney
were conducted by a curate who in 1630 was paid £6 per
annum. In 1587 Morgan Byrne was granted the curacy of
Killenyn and Dalkie, with the manses, glebelands, and fishings
belonging thereto, during his life, grantee administering Sacra-
ments to the parishioners, building and keeping the manses in
repair and discharging all the charges affecting said cures. In
1610 and 1615 Maurice Byrne was curate of Killiney, along
with Bray, Kilmacanoge, and Connagh. He was reported by


Archbishop Jones as a resident minister on all these cures! In
1639 Maurice Lloyd was curate of Killiney, Dalkey, and Monks-
town. In 1639 John Wilson was curate of Killiney and
Dalkey. In 1746 Thomas Heany, M.A., was curate of “ Killeny
otherwise Killeen, KillmcCudd, Stillorgan and Bullock, Clon-
keen otherwise Kill, Dalkey, Mount Town otherwise Monks-
town, and Carrickbrennan.” As Monkstown then included
Tullow, he held the curacy of all the possessions of Christ
Church Cathedral in the Deanery. Subsequently Killeeny was
included in the Union of Monckstown formed by Act of
Council. Now instead of being a sixth part of an Union, it
contains two separate parishes within its own limits. See also
Dr. Elrington Ball’s History, part i. pp. 95-7.
25. For Dalkey and the churches of St. Begnet, see
Chapter VI, p. 56. In some of the Christ Church deeds it
appears as Kilbekenet. I have nothing further to add with
regard to the history of Dalkey to what has been set down by
Dr. Elrington Ball in his History of Co. Dublin, part i. pp.
71-83, and Mr. P. J. O’Reilly, Journal of R.5.A.1., 1901,
pp. 147-149, 158-161.
26. Again, with regard to the church of St, Fintan of
Clonkeen or Kill of the Grange, I cannot do better than refer
to the same volume of Dr. Elrington Ball’s History, pp. 47-
51 and 67-9. The name Cluain Caoin is spelt in many
different ways in the old documents. One is Klunken, another
Glyntclyn. Sometimes it has the alias of Grange, sometimes
of Kill. For the sad experiences of its curate, Joseph Smithson,
see p. 169.
27. Stachlorgan of course stands for Teach Lorcan or Tigh
Lorcain, the House of Lorcan or Laurence. We find the name
in Christ Church deeds under the forms of Stachlorgan and
Tachlorgan. One would like to connect it with St. Laurence
O’Toole, but it is more probable that it is called after some
early chieftain. Not, indeed, that the name appears before
the time of the great Archbishop. So far as I know, the
earliest occurrence of it is in a deed of 1216, some thirty-
five years after his death. But names of that form are likely
to be a good deal older in their origin than the twelfth


century. Quite an interesting problem is afforded by these
Irish names beginning with Sta. We have three of them
in this document —Stachgonyll, Stamoling, and Stachlorgan.
Others are to be found in the counties of Louth, Meath, and
Kildare. Dr. Joyce mentions one also in Kilkenny and one in
Down. For Stach is not true Irish, Dr. Joyce’s suggestion is
probably right, that this is a Danish corruption, found in
places where Danish influence was strong. “In all the northern
languages,” he says, “ there are whole classes of words com-
mencing with st, which mean habitation, place, &c.” And so
it seems probable that just as the Danes in many cases changed
the Irish inis into the Danish eye — e.g. Deilginis into Dalkeye
—so too, they changed Tach or Tigh into Stach or Sta. For
the history of this church and parish I must again refer to
the first part of Dr. Elrington Ball's History , pp. 130-1, only
mentioning here that the present church was built in the time
of Archbishop King upon the site of the original church.
Later on in the eighteenth century Stillorgan and Kilmacud
were united to form a parish for that church, but were severed
from the deanery of Bray. Kilmacud or KillMcCudd is the old
church of Kilmohud, of which the benefice belonged to de
Ridelesford’s “ honor ” of Bre, and which he presented with
those of Derdac and Kilescosather to Grane. (See “ Reper-
torium Viride,” note on Kilmehud, under Deanery of Tachney.)
28. The rather complicated history of Monkstown parish,
commencing with the ancient church of Carrickbrennan, the
remains of which are still to be seen opposite Monkstown
Castle, is fully told in the volume so often quoted above,
pp. 41-6. It belonged from the beginning of the thir-
teenth century or earlier, as our list in the ,f Crede Mihi
tells us, to the Cistercian Abbey of St. Mary. But already,
before 1280, the spiritual care of it had passed out of the
hands of that Abbey into those of the priory of Holy trinity,
through its being united to Clonkeen, and St. Mary s only
received the tithes. After the dissolution of the monasteries,
both the tithes and the patronage were in the hands of laymen,
but in course of time the Dean of Christ Church succeeded in
regaining both. We have already seen, under Dalkey, how


large a group of churches was served by one curate, appointed
by the Dean of Christ Church as rector, in the middle of
the eighteenth century. In the beginning of the nineteenth
century we find the Union of Monckstown, consisting of the
following curacies, Monckstown, Kill, Dalkey, Killeeny, Bullock,
and Carrickbrennan, united by Act of Council. Now that
Union has been distributed again into about a dozen separate
parishes.
Authorities consulted for this Appendix :
“ Crede Mihi,” pp. 142, 143, in Gilbert’s edition.
“ Repertorium Yiride.”
“Liber Niger Alani,” Bishop Reeves’ copy in T.C.D. Library, pp.
72, 139, 143, 151, 192, 226, 231.
“ Taxation of the Diocese of Dublin,” probably circa 1304. In
Christ Church Deeds, No. 150. (Dated circa 1294 in the Calendar.)
“ Ecclesiastical Taxation of Ireland,” probably circa 1302. In Sweet-
man’s Calendar, 1302-1307, pp. 240, 241.
Visitation of 1610. T.C.D. Library, MS. 566. (E. 3. 14, f. 33.)
Royal Visitation of 1615.
Archbishop Jones’ Report, 1615.
Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report, 1630.
Visitation and other Diocesan Records, some in the Record Office,
others in the Diocesan Office, 43 Kildare Street.
And others, specially cited in the Appendix.


APPENDIX II
ST. PAUL’S CHURCH
Although it involves some repetition of parts of Chapters
IX and XIII, still it may be found convenient to have all the
history of the old Parish Church put together in one statement.
In Lewis’s Topographical Dictionary (1837) it is stated that the
church was built in 1609, and the statement is repeated in the
National Gazetteer (1868), and in Mr. Doran’s Guide Book.
On what authority Lewis made this statement, I have as yet
been unable to discover. Doubtless he had some evidence, and
we may assume that some building was carried out at that date.
Probably the present walls of the nave may have been built
then. But it is very improbable that it was an entirely new
church on a new site that was erected in 1609. The antiquary
Eugene Curry, who visited Bray in 1837, formed the opinion
that some kind of church must have stood in the same spot be-
fore the time of the Reformation, partly from the great antiquity,
even in 1837, of the old yew tree near the south entrance, and
partly from the existence of Roman Catholic gravestones, dating
as far back as 1708, in the churchyard, whereas it was unlikely
that Roman Catholics would have been buried in a Protestant
graveyard established since the Reformation. (See Ordnance
Survey Letters .) But Curry was unaware of the documentary
evidence of the existence of the Church of Bray, or Bree or Bre,
centuries before the Reformation. As far back as 1280 we find
mention of a Church of Bre, which already then was the centre
of a rural deanery, to which it gave its name, an arrangement
which continued until the time of Archbishop Plunket. (See
Appendix I.) And though there is no trace of the name
further back than that as the name of a church, yet we have
traces of the same church under another name. For after Sir
Walter de Ridelesford had been granted the Manor of Bray,


and had built his castle on the brow overhanging the river,
immediately west of St. Paul's churchyard, he began to make
grants from his property to the monasteries. Among others, he
presented to the Convent of St. Mary of Grane all benefices of
churches and chapels in his barony of Bre, of which the first
mentioned is “the Church of Derdac.” But when we look on
to the time of Henry VIII, just before the dissolution of the
monasteries, we find among the properties of Grane no longer
any mention of the Church of Derdac, but of the Church of
Bree. And in addition to this, we have the statement of Arch-
bishop Alan, a great antiquarian, who held the see of Dublin
from 1528 until the Reformation, that the Church of Bree was
anciently called the Parochial Church of Derichat. Probably
both Derdac and Derichat are corruptions of the same Irish
word Dear-Teach, or Derthach, which means a House of Peni-
tence, or Oratory. And it is likely that originally the word was
followed by the name of some saint, as in the cases of Derthach-
Aedhain, Derthach-Mochua, and Derthach-Mhaoiliosa-Ui-Bhrol-
chain, of which we read in the Annals of the Four Masters, a.d.
804,919* and 1116. The name also occurs in a list of rents
paid from Bray to the Crown on the estates of Christiana de
Mariscis, a descendant of Sir Walter, in the year 1284. There
we find “the cottages of Derdach,” coming next before “a
tenement under the Castle.” In a list of the churches of the
Diocese dating from about 1280, and contained in the “ Crede
Mihi,” and again in a taxation of the Diocese of Dublin of about
a.d. 1304, the church is called Bre or Bree. But in another
taxation of about 1302, it is called Dernauth, evidently a scribe’s
mistake for Derthach. What is probably another corruption of
the same name is found in the “ Papal Registers ” under the date
1403, where one “ Donald Olanagam ” (or “ Clanagam,” perhaps
O’Flanagan) is called “ perpetual Vicar of Dirrhi and Bree, in
the Diocese of Dublin.”
We start, then, with the simple oratory of an unremembered
Saint, erected in a hitherto unnamed spot. It was by no means
the only church in the district, as will easily be seen by a glance
at Appendix I. Probably until 1173 it was one of the least
important of all the churches in Ui Briuin Cualann.


But then came Walter de Ridelesford, and built his great
castle close to the little Dear-Teach ; and soon there grew up
a town around the oratory under the shelter of the castle, and
the once quiet and lonely little building became the important
mother church of the district, and its tithes and dues began to
be of value. Then early in the thirteenth century Sir Walter
presented the benefice of this church to the Convent of Grane,
the convent being bound to provide a vicar to serve there.
During that century all was quiet and prosperous enough in
Bray. But then there followed a long period of war and
tumult, during which we may be sure nothing was done to-
wards enriching or beautifying the church, if indeed it was
kept in repair at all. In 1302 the Church of Derthach and the
Chapel of Derran (Appendix I, No. 2) were taxed at 21s. 4>d.,
and the vicarage at 4s. But only two years later, if the dates
are right, the church indeed was still taxed at £l, but the vicar-
age was said to produce “ nothing on account of war.” Then
came the fall of Bray Castle, destroyed by O’Tooles and
O’Byrnes in 1316. But it was soon rebuilt, and Bray was for
a long time continually a station for garrisons to defend the
English settlements against the O’Tooles and O’Byrnes, and a
starting-place for expeditions against them, and during these
centuries the congregations attending the old church must have
been largely military.
Then, coming on to the sixteenth century, we have, in 1530,
an account of the church by Archbishop Alan, who states that it
still had a vicar presented by the nuns of Grane, and also in-
forms us that close to it there was an Augustinian chapel,
endowed by the Archbolds, who at that time held the Manor
of Brey. (See Appendix V, p. 226.) Archbishop Alan’s note
in the “ Repertorium Viride ” may be translated as follows :
“ Church of Bree. Is impropriated to the Nuns of Grane with
the chapels annexed, by appointment of Walter de Riddelford
by force of his right of patronage : and has a perpetual vicar
presented by the Nuns : and is situated, both in the honor of
Bree, and near the church or chapel of the Augustinian friars
endowed by the family of the Archbolds (as they say): and is
itself otherwise called anciently the Parochial Church of


Derichat with chapels depending on the same and all pertinences
thereof, as may be learnt from the bull of Pope Gregory X, of which
I have written above concerning the Church of Kilmehud.”
A very few years after Archbishop Alan wrote that, came
the dissolution of the monasteries, the result of which was
that the rectory of Bray became the property of the King, and
no longer of a convent. The King then let out the rectory at
a rent to a lay rector, who gathered in the tithes for himself,
and just paid what were called the lesser tithes to the vicar.
It was only in the reign of George I that the Crown began to
appoint the vicar as rector also, and to give him all the tithes.
For instance, in 1630, William Plunkett, Esq., of Dublin, held
the tithes, which were worth £65 per annum, and paid <£B per
annum to the vicar. At that time there were only sixteen
persons that attended divine service in the parish church,
while fourteen poor labourers went to church at Connagh (Old
Connaught), all the rest of the population being Roman Catholics.
So the church was large enough for the congregation that at-
tended it, though it only consisted of the present small nave.
This may have been newly built, as I have already said, in
1609, and it is possible that it was not built in the exact
position of the old church, though within the old churchyard.
For in the recent repairs of the church it was found that the
soil beneath the floor of the nave was as full of human bones as
all the rest of the churchyard. In 1610 we have the testimony
both of Archbishop Jones and of the Royal Commissioners who
conducted what is called the Regal Visitation, that the fabric of
the church was then in good repair, and that service was con-
ducted in it in Irish by its Irish vicar, Moris Birn. In 1630 the
church had been damaged by recent storms ; and probably it had
to wait a good while for repairs ; for the period of civil war which
so soon followed was not favourable for church improvements.
In 1692 we have a rough drawing of the church, on a map
belonging to Lord Pembroke (see opposite p. 142), showing a
plain oblong building with no tower, but with what might be
either a chimney or a bell turret at one end. There is nothing
to show how the church was fitted up then, but in the middle
of the eighteenth century we know that it contained sixteen


of the big square pews of that day. Between 1765 and 1770,
the church was repaired, the expense being estimated at about
£2OO, and at the same time new pews were put in at the ex-
pense of the various parishioners to whom the use of them was
assigned. Perhaps the tower may have been built then. In
1775, £ll, 7s. 6d. was expended on raising the steeple. This
probably means the erection of a small pointed spire, which is
shown in the picture of Bray in the eighteenth century which
forms the frontispiece to this volume, and is mentioned in
D Alton’s History of County Dublin. The spire seems to have
lasted till 1833, when it was removed, and the present battle-
ments and pinnacles were substituted. Meantime, in 1779, a
gallery was erected in the church to meet the increasing demand
for accommodation. In 1806 there was talk of another gallery;
but in 1816 larger plans were adopted, and a pair of transepts
with central space between them were added on at the east of
the old church, leaving the building in the form of aT. In the
following year, the old part was newly slated and dashed to
correspond with the new. A loan of £IO2O was obtained from
the Board of Firstfruits for carrying out this enlargement, and
when the pews were put into the new part, they were disposed
of by auction to the highest bidders.
The restorers then did their work in what evidently was
considered the very best style in that day. Fourteen years
later Dr. D’Alton, in his History of the County of Dublin,
described it as a “ convenient, comfortable edifice.” But
fashions change, and modern taste would not altogether
approve of what was then thought admirable. Every age
has its fads on the subjects of ventilation and heating. And
the particular fad which prevailed with the builders of the
new end of Bray Church in 1816 was that, in order to
ventilate a public building perfectly, the level of the fire-
places ought to be above the heads of the people. Accordingly
two large fireplaces were made high up in the east wall,
one on each side of the three-light east window. Between
them, immediately in front of the .window, was the high
three-decker arrangement of pulpit, reading desk, and clerk’s
desk, which in the early part of the nineteenth century


was thought to be the proper way of furnishing a church.
Beneath that was the Communion Table, with a semicircular
rail to enclose the sanctuary. The whole arrangement has
been described, by some who remember it, as giving the
effect of a grotesque face of a monster with fiery eyes. It
was the duty of the sexton during the Litany to march up
into the sanctuary with a coalscuttle and ladder and stoke
the two fires. Once at least, when an east wind blew,
such a plentiful rain of smuts descended upon the person and
the book of the officiating clergyman, that he had vigorously
to blow the page clear after every sentence, to be able to read,
and that his ablutions on returning home after service were no
mere formality. The vestry was then what is now the western-
most bay of the south aisle. (During the recent alterations the old
wallpaper of the vestry was brought to light again.) Instead of
the present south entrance to the church there was a kind of
hall door with steps down into the church, where the organ now
stands. There were large galleries in both transepts besides the
west gallery in which the organ and choir were placed.
But all this was changed in 1869. The east wall was
then pierced with three arches, and the present chancel,
vestry, and organ-chamber were added, while the old vestry
was converted into an entrance porch, and the whole church
refurnished, at an expense of about <£1460. The new work
was dedicated on All Saints’ Day, 1869, and the church was
then given the name of St. Paul’s. In 1892 the chancel
was improved by rebuilding the chancel arch and the arch
enclosing the east wundow in cut stone. The plan of the
church then internally was cruciform, and the character of
the east end was Gothic, of an Early Decorated style. But
the rest of the church had no pretensions to beauty. It had
a ceiling coved from the walls and flat in the middle, and
round-headed windows with wooden sashes and ordinary panes
of glass muffed on the south side and plain on the north.
In 1910 it was found that the rafters of the roof, as well
as the wooden window sashes and parts of the floor, were so
rotten that a very extensive restoration was necessary. Plans
were prepared by Messrs. Orpen & Dickinson, and the work


was commenced in 1911 and finished early in 1912. As the
roof had to be entirely taken off the whole building, except
the newest additions at the east end, the opportunity was
taken for such alterations in construction as would be a real
improvement to the church. The two transepts were ex-
tended westwards by throwing into the church on the south
side the little square apartment which had been first a vestry
aud then a porch, and adding a corresponding piece on the
north side. These extended transepts were changed into
short side aisles by an arcade of Bath-stone of three bays on
each side, which divided them from the central aisle, and
which enabled a continuous open timbered roof to run the
whole length of the church. A new triangular porch was
built to the west of what had been the old porch. The
round-headed windows with their wooden sashes were re-
placed by beautiful windows of cut granite in a slightly later
Decorated style than the east windows, filled with leaded
lights of delicately tinted cathedral glass. New methods
of heating and lighting were introduced. The work was
finely executed by Messrs. Bolton & Sons, and the granite,
which is of a beautiful quality, was exquisitely cut in Maguire’s
quarry at Glencullen. The church was re-opened on February
17, 1912. Within the next eighteen months the chancel
was beautified by gifts of new steps of Portland stone at
its opening and of red marble in the sanctuary, and of new
mosaic pavement throughout. One thing more must be added
about the history of this old church: When Christ Church
had been built and consecrated on St. James’s Festival, in
1863, the old church ceased to be the Parish Church, and
became only a chapel of ease to Christ Church. The counsel
of some at that time was to take its roof off and let it go
to ruin. But fortunately wiser counsels prevailed, as the two
churches were soon found to be none too large for the
increasing population, and no church could be better loved
than St. Paul s Church has been all these years by its
congregation, even in the days when it could neither be
called beautiful nor, according to modern ideas, comfortable.
May it never cease to be equally beloved!


APPENDIX III
SIR WALTER DE RIDELESFORD’S ESTATES
IN CRIOCH CUALANN
The grants of land to Sir Walter de Ridelesford in the King’s
two reserved cantreds south of Dublin, afford rather a curious
and difficult problem. There are several things which make
the problem difficult. In the first place, the Norman lawyers
never could get the Irish names right. In the second place,
some of the documents are in such bad condition that it is
impossible to be sure what they actually wrote. In the third
place, hardly any of the ancient place-names in this district
have been preserved. In the fourth place, John’s grant to
Sir Walter was certainly not at all equal in extent, so far as
Ui Briuin district was concerned, to what had previously been
bestowed upon him by Strongbow. I have stated the general
conclusions to which I have come with regard to the Brien part
of the grants in Chapter IX, pp. 93-6. I will attempt in this
Appendix briefly to show' reason for those conclusions.
First, with due acknowledgments to Mr. H. F. Berry, of
the Record Office, I give his translation of the “ Charter of
Earl Richard made to Walter de Ridelesford ” (about a.d. 1173).
The Latin is to be found on page 4 of the Calendar of
Chancery Rolls, where it is printed from a roll known as
“ Antiquissime Litere Patentes.”
“ Earl Richard, deputy of the lord the King of England in
Ireland, to all who shall see or hear these letters, greeting.
Know ye that I have given and granted, on behalf of the lord,
the King of England, to Walter de Ridelsford, Brien and the
land of the sons of Turchil, with all the appurtenances; so
that within the appurentances of the said lands, he may have the
fee of five knights, if it shall be afforded there; and what
may be w'anting there, I shall provide him as near as possible


on the one side and the other of the Water of Brien; and
Duvenalbroc and Ballymagreue with the appurtenances, which
are six carucates of land ; and Tachchonicde and Chilmechatd,
with the appurtenances, which are two carucates of land; and
Balimelise, which is one carucate of land ; and Clohlun with
the appurtenances, which is one carucate of land. These ten
carucates of land he shall have for a knight’s fee, to him and
his heirs, of the lord the King of England and his heirs, freely
and quietly and honourably, in land, in sea, in wood, in plain,
in mountains, in mills, in waters, in fishings, in markets, in
ways, in paths and in all liberties. To have and to hold in fee
and hereditarily by the free service of three knights to be
rendered at Dublin, namely for the fee of five knights of
Brien further from Dublin, the service of two knights; and for
ten carucates of land nearer Dublin the service of a knight he
shall do. And inasmuch as I have given to him on behalf of
the lord the king aforesaid the house and messuage of Cristin
the Ostman without the gate and wall of Dublin by grant of
the said Cristin his host. Wherefore I will and firmly
command on behalf of the said lord the King of England,
that the said Walter and his heirs may hold his whole tene-
ment as freely and quietly of the lord the King of England
and his heirs as well as anyone has held of them hitherto in
Ireland.
Witnesses ; Ranulph the Constable, &c. &c.”
Four different estates are described in this grant—(l) a
large but indefinite quantity of land in Brien and the land of
the sons of Turchil, i.e. in Ui Briuin Cualann; (2) six carucates
of land in the Donnybrook and Merrion district; (3) four
carucates in what is in a later deed called the Vale of Dublin,
i.e. the Valley of the Dodder; (4) a small holding at Dublin.
For (2) and (3) together, making up ten carucates of very
valuable land in the neighbourhood of Dublin, Sir Walter was
to render the service of one knight. The estate in Ui Briuin
was calculated to be worth twice as much, for he had to
render the service of two knights for it, but inasmuch as it
was less valuable land, being further from the city, its extent
must have been intended to be much more than twice as great.
o


At the very least he must have been intended to have thirty
or forty carucates in Brien and the land of the sons of Turchil;
or even fifty carucates, if the fee of five knights means that
amount of land for which, under more favourable circumstances,
the service of five knights would be rendered.
Well, now, let us see what he actually got, when his estate
in Brien was exactly defined in the later charter. With regard
to this second charter, it must be understood that there is
special difficulty in determining the exact forms of the names,
as the parchment is in very bad condition. I have studied two
readings of this document. The one which I have followed, as
it seems to me to give the most probable readings, is printed
in the Calendar of Chancery Rolls, as one of the “ Antiquissime
litere patentes” (p. 4, No. 53). The other is a manuscript copy
in the National Library in Dublin (MS. Harris, “ Collectanea de
rebus Hibernicis,” 1. p. 19)- But of the first sixteen names in
the charter, there are only four that are exactly the same in
the two copies. However, following the printed copy, although
we cannot be certain about the exact forms of the names, still
we shall be able to learn a good deal about the lands which
actually formed Sir Walter’s estates.
The first part of that charter may be translated as
follows :—“ John, son of the lord the King of England and
Lord of Ireland to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls,
Barons, Justiciaries, Ministers, and all others his leal and
faithful subjects, French and English and Irish, greeting.
Know ye that I have given and granted and confirmed by my
present charter to Walter de Riddelsford for his homage and
service, and to his heirs, Bren to wit two carucates of land, in
Derdagh two carucates, in Balimelgeverid one carucate, in
Bali Enemogedan two carucates, in Balimagve four carucates,
in Baliatonch one carucate, in Baliolleveran one carucate, in
Culkel four carucates, in Balimaclituan one carucate, in Bali-
venedan one carucate, in Balinakelli one carucate, in Teach-
muld one carucate, in Belachclict one carucate, in Balimaelis
one carucate, in Athkorki one carucate, in Cnoclin one caru-
cate, and his burgages and guesthouses which he has at Dublin,
to be held by the service of two knights for the whole service.”


The charter then goes on to confirm to Walter his estates in
Co. Kildare, Tristildermod & Grane, &c. &c.
How, then, does this charter compare with the first ? It
will be most convenient to work backwards through the more
northerly estates, and see what is left for the estates in Ui
Briuin Cualann. And it will be found helpful to refer to the
comparative table annexed, in which the names in these two
chapters are tabulated together with lists of names in a few
later deeds dealing with Sir Walter’s estates. With regard
to Dublin, then, we have ff burgagia et hospitia apud Divelin ”
to correspond to “ domura et messuagium Cristini Ostmannici
extra portam et murum Dublin.” Then for the estates in
the Vale of Dublin, to correspond with the four carucates
of Tachchonicde, Chilmechatd, Balimelise and Clohlun, we
have five carucates, Teachmuld, Belachclict, Balimaelis, Ath-
korki and Cnoclin. It is evident that Teachmuld is a wrong
reading of Teachchonicde, and Balimaelis a variant spelling
of Balimelise, while Cnoclin is probably the right name, cor-
rupted in the first charter into Clohlun. (In later documents
we find it in the forms Cnncflin or Knocflin, Clonhliny, which
indeed is more like Clohlun, and Cnoctalafintyn.) The other
two denominations, Belachclict and Athkorki do not exactly
correspond to the one carucate of Chilmechatd. But probably
Belachclict was closely associated with Chilmechatd, so that
either one name or the other or both together might be used
to denote that carucate of land. For in the 1284 document tabu-
lated below, Kilmakethe and Balaclich are named together
and in the 1281 document Kilmatheh and Baliculan, evidently
corruptions of the same names. The insertion of “ Athkorki,
one carucate” here is probably a clerk’s mistake; for in 1226,
as by the first charter, we find Walter holding from the King
four carucates and not five in the Tascony and Kilmakech estate.
Then for the Donnybrook estate, in the first charter we
have Duvenalbroc and Bullymagreue, six carucates. Ballyma-
greue also occurs in John’s charter, containing four carucates,
and before it Bali Enemogedan, with two carucates. The
presumption is very strong that Bali Enemogedan corresponds
to Duvenalbroc.


What, then, have we left to correspond to the forty or
fifty carucates which Walter ought to have had in Brien
and the lands of the sons of Turchil ? There are just four-
teen carucates left, and we do not even know for certain that
all of them were in that territory. Indeed a first glance at
the charter might lead us to think that he only got five
carucates in Ui Briuin, because we have only Bren, Derdagh
and Balimelgeverid, before we are taken away to the Donny-
brook estates. But not only does there seem to be no other
place left for the six denominations that follow Balimagreue,
but, moreover, we know the last of them, Balinakelli, or Bally-
mackelly, to have been “in honore de Bre.” It was one of
four townlands which Sir Walter leased to Richard de Cogan
in 1215, and part of which he sublet again to the Abbey of
St. Thomas. (See “ Register of the Abbey of St. Thomas ”).
And moreover, we know just where that land lay; for one of
the townlands was Balibedan, which corresponded to the
modern Ballybrew, between Kilmalin and Glencullen. I infer
therefore that those fourteen carucates were all in Ui Briuin
Cualann.
Neither of the two charters bears a date. But the first was
probably granted about 1173, after Henry II had departed
from Ireland, leaving “Earl Richard” Strongbow to act as
his deputy there. The second charter one would at first sight
date 1185, when John as Lord of Ireland was sent over by
his father Henry II to administer the country from which he
took his title. But the MS. copy of it in the National Library
has in the margin on one side “ Anno 4 Rich. I,” and on the
other side “a.d. 1191,” corrected in red ink to 1192. John
was, of course, then no longer son of the reigning King of
England. But probably that would not prevent his still being
entitled “ filius Regis Angliae,” and he still was “ dominus
Hiberniae.” It is probable that the date 1192 was arrived at
by an examination of the names of the witnesses to the
charter. The first of them is the great William Marshall. If
it can be proved that he and others of the witnesses were not
in Ireland with John in 1185, then clearly that cannot have
been the date.


SIR WALTER DE RIDELESFORD’S POSSESSIONS IN CO. DUBLIN
(INCLUDING CO. WICKLOW)
Strongbow’s
Grant, 1173.
John’s Grant
1192 {?).
W. DE R. LEASES TO
R. DE COGAN, 1215,
IN HONORE DE BRE.
King to W. de R.,
1226, &C., IN THE
Vale of Dublin.
Estates of Christiana de Mariscis,
Heiress of W. de R.
Brien and land
of sons of
Turchil up
to the fee of
five knights.
Caru-
cates
1. Bren
2. Derdagh
3. Balimelgeverid
6. Baliatonch
7. Baliolleveran
8. Culkel
9. Balimaclituan
xo. Balivenedan
ii. Balinakelli
Caru-
cates
2
2
I
1
I
4
1
1
1
2. Fenebo
1. Balisenechil
4. Balibedan
3. Balimackelli
1281.
x. Bere
2. Balimachinan
1284.
1. Bre ) 4
2. Derdach f car.
Duvenalbroc 1
Ballymagreue )
6
4. BaliEnemogedan
5. Balimagreue
2
4
5. Donenachbrok
4. Caocro
3. Knocro (including
Hecche and Thorne-
chastel)
Tachchonicde
Chilmechatd
Balimelise
Clohlun
I
I
I
I
12. Teachmuld
13. Belachelict
14. Balimaelis
15. Athkorki
16. Cnoclin
1
1
1
1
1
3. Tascony
1. Kilmakech g
p
•i
0
2. Kilnenien
4. Cnocflin
9. Little Tattom
7. Kilmatheh
8. Baliculan
4. Ballimolys
6. Kylleymen
3. Cnoctalafintyn
10. Brun
( 5. Little Thachony
( 7, Great Thachony
8. Kilmakethe
9. Balaclich
6. Balimolis
4. Killiney
12. Brun
[House and messuage
of Cristin the Ost-
man,]
5 knights’ fees and
xo carucates, for
which service of 3
knights was re-
quired.
[burgagia et hospitia apud
Divelin]
25 carucates for which service
of 2 knights was required.


Some further investigation of the three rural estates seems
to be called for. With regard to Brien and the land of the
sons of Turchil, I have so far assumed that that whole ex-
pression denoted Ui Briuin Cualann. Hitherto, however, that
has not been the usual explanation. Mr. James Mills, in his
masterly article on the Norman Settlement in Leinster, in the
Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, 1894, pp.
163-4, takes Brien as representing Bray alone, as, of course,
Bren does in the second charter, and supposes all the rest of
the five knights’ fees to be provided by the land of the sons
of Turchil, which, he therefore says, must have been of great
extent in the neighbourhood. But Mr. G. H. Orpen, another
very careful student of that Settlement, in his History of
Ireland under the Normans, vol. i. p. 369, adopts the view for
which I had been arguing for some years—though probably he
arrived at it quite independently—that “ perhaps * Brien ’
stands for Ui Briuin Cualann, which included Bray.” But
then how about the land of the sons of Thorkil ? Well, we
know that some sons of Thorkil had lands in Ui Briuin
Cualann. To quote Mills’s article: “In the curious charter
which names the donors of the lands of Christ Church, there
appear among them three sons of Thorkil, The land given
by one of them is, under the form of Achatillagh nuneascoib,
easily recognised as Tulach na escob, now Tullagh, near
Cabinteely; the lands given by his brothers, though their
names are quite obsolete, are grouped with lands in the same
neighbourhood.” And we know otherwise that Telach-na-
nEpscop was in Ui Briuin Cualann. (See Appendix I, No.
23). But why then should their land be separately mentioned ?
I suppose there must have been some reason that a question
was likely to arise as to Sir Walter’s claims to any of the
Thorkil estates remaining in the territory. The charter, of
course, was very vague about Brien, and evidently the lawyers
did not know what land there was to be had in it. But at
any rate, they wished to make plain that any lands in it be-
longing to the Thorkil family, which had not been already
given away to the Church, were intended to be included in
Sir Walter’s manor or “honor” there. Perhaps the sons of


Thorkil were specially disfranchised from holdimg any lands
from the King, in consequence of Hasculf MacThorkil’s attack
upon the English in Dublin. Lewis (Topographical Dictionary,
i.v. “ Bray ”) falls into an' anachronism in interpreting this as
being a grant of the “ Manor or Lordship of Bray with all the
territories of the O’Tooles,” for the O’Tooles had no terri-
tories on the east side of the mountains in those days.
But while Strongbow’s original intention was that his friend
de Ridelesford should have a general lordship over a large
territory, all that he actually got possession of was a matter
of four carucates around the little Deartach over the ford
across the Water of Brien, upon which he built his castle and
founded the town, which was called Bre or Bren, and some
ten carucates more in the valley of the Water of Brien, most
of which we cannot place at all, but part of which was in the
lovely district between Glencullen and Glencree. As regards
the name Bren, it should perhaps be mentioned that in the
MS. copy of the charter in the National Library, this name is
given as Urien. The same hand that so copied it also copied
the earlier charter and there gave the corresponding name as
Brien, which, however, was altered by another hand to Urien.
However, both Mr. James Mills and Mr. H. F. Berry, each
of whom has carefully studied the original roll of the first
charter, tell me that there is no doubt about the word Brien
there; and as the printed copy of the later charter seems
generally more trustworthy than the other, we may safely
follow it in reading Bren.
For the very valuable estate obtained by Sir Walter at
Donnybrook and Knockro or Thorncastle, see the first few
pages of the second part of Dr. Elrington Ball’s Histoiy of the
County of Dublin.
With regard to the third group, beginning with Tachcho-
nicde and Chilmechatd, I found it very hard to abandon the
conviction that these must be Taney and Kilmacud, which lie
together just south of the Donnybrook estate, considering
that Tachchonicde occurs afterwards as Tachony and in other
similar forms, while Taney in old documents is Tachney, and
that Kilmacud was one of the churches of which Sir Walter


had the disposal of the benefice. However, the evidence is too
strong against this tempting theory. We know that Taney
was held, not by de Ridelesford, but by John de Clahull, who
gave it to the Archbishop of Dublin (or was it to the Priory
of Holy I rinity ? see Mr. Mills’s article above cited, p. 167,
and “ Liber Niger Alani,” fol. 108). Kilmacud indeed pro-
bably belonged to Sir Walter, being in some way connected
with the manor of Knockro. (See same art., p. 167, note.) But
a number of later deeds, one of which is quoted in the above
table under the date 1226, show that Tachony and Kilmakethe
belonged to a group of lands, of which one was Killininny,
near Bohernabreena (Kilnenien, Kylleymen and Killiney in
the table); and if we then follow Mr. Mills’s very probable
identifications of Balimelise or Balimaelis with Ballymaice,
north of Ballinascorney, and of Cnoclin with Knocklyon in the
parish of lallaght (called Knocklyne in “ Calendar of Patent
Rolls, James I,” p. 422), and of Kilmakethe with Killakee,
then we shall find that we have a group of lands, of which
Tachony alone is not identified, all lying in the Valley of the
Dodder. Moreover, in Crown Receipts of 1235 ("Pipe Roll
19th Henry III”), we find Ballyoculan and Kylmacheoth
bracketed with “ rent of the betaghs of Ockelly,” which points
to the same locality. The above-mentioned deed of 1226,
which commits over again to Walter de Ridelesford four
carucates of land in Kilraakech, Kilnenien, Tascony and
Cnocflin, is accompanied by another deed executed on the
same day, which grants to the same Walter free warren in
his manors in Bre and Kylka (in Co. Kildare) and in the
Vale of Dublin. No doubt the Vale of Dublin was the Valley
of the Dodder, in which these four carucates lay.
X-B. —There is an erroneous statement in Dr. D’Alton’s
History of the County of Dublin, that “In 1215 de Ridelesford
demised to the Abbey of St. Thomas all his lands in the
‘honor’ of Bre.” All he then did was to ratify or join in a
grant to the Abbey of those lands which were held from him
by Richard de Cogan in Balibedan and its neighbourhood.
(See Register of the Abbey of St. Thomas, pp. 145, 153, 156.)
Richard de Cogan leased the lands to the Abbey for a yearly


rent of 3 marks and a fine of 60 marks. The same error is
repeated in Lewis’s Topographical Dictionary (1837).
As the word “ honor ” as a synonym for the “ manor ” of
Bre may be found puzzling, it may be well to explain that
the word “ honor ” was applied to exceptionally important and
valuable feudal manors. Du Cange thus defines the English
use of the word : “ Honor, apud Anglos, significat feudum vel
manerium aliquod nobilius, quod regalibus exornatur, et multa
inferiora sibi servitutem debentia habet.”
Besides the documents already cited, the following have to
do with the subject. Sweetman’s Calendar, 1171-1251, Nos.
143, 355, 469, 471, 478, 679, 1036, 1079, HO9, 1394, 1396,
1641, 1852, 2200, 2970; 1252-1284, Nos. 1798, 2340; Christ
Church Deeds, Nos. 490, 501, 502 ; Chartulary of St. Mary’s Abbey,
vol. i. p. 30, No. 3; Register of St. Thomas’s Abbey, p. 170;
Registry of All Saints, Dublin, pp. 67, 68.


APPENDIX IV
THE NAME OF BRAY
Something further may be added here to the discussion of the
origin of the name of Bray given in Chapter IX, pp. 96- 7.
In Dr. Joyce’s famous work on Irish Names of Places, vol. i.
p. 390, we find the following statement:—
“ Bri (bree) signifies a hill or rising ground, the same as the
Scotch word brae." And he adds; “ Bray, which is the name
of several places in Ireland, is another form of the same word.
Bray in Wicklow is called Bree in old Church Records and
other documents; and it evidently received its name from Bray
Head, which rises abruptly 793 feet over the sea. In the
Dinnsenchus there is a legendary account of the origin of the
name of this place, viz., that it was so called from Brea, son of
Seanboth, one of Parthalon’s followers, who first introduced
single combat into Ireland. ... At the head of Glencree in
Wicklow is a small mountain lake, well known to Dublin
excursionists, called Lough Bray, whose name was, no doubt,
derived from the rocky point—a spur of Kippure mountain—
which rises perpendicularly over its gloomy waters.”
Let me discuss the points mentioned by Dr. Joyce in this
passage. And first let me take the quotation from the
Dinnsenchus.
Dr. Joyce has followed Eugene Curry (Ordnance Survey
Letters) in referring this to Bray. The said Eugene Curry was
a delightfully versatile and humorous antiquarian, to whose
observation we owe much, —but he was not always reliable.
For instance, he confused Dalkey (Deilginis) with Delgany, and
in order to explain the difficulty that the notices of Deilginis
in ancient authors clearly implied that it was an island, he
succeeded in unearthing, with the aid of some obliging inhabi-
tant of the district, a truly wonderful story of Delgany once


having been an island which was engulfed in the sea, after
which the name was transferred a mile or two inland ! Similarly
it seems probable that he has confused Bray with Bregh or
Bregia, the low-lying plain to the north of Dublin, which
extends from the Liffey to the Boyne, and from the south-east
corner of which the Hill of Howth rises (see Gilbert’s History of
the City of Dublin, vol. i. p. 456, note). That was the district
occupied by Parthalon’s followers. The passage occurs under
the head of Benn Edar in Howth, and runs as follows (I give
Eugene Curry’s translation) : “ Dun Brea why so named ? I
will tell. It was Parthalon that brought with him Brea, son of
Seanboth, the first man who made a house and a cauldron and
single combat; and it was he that built Dun Cearmna or Dun
Brea and Inbhear Nucud, and it was there he was buried.”
If we had this prose statement alone, I should have no
hesitation in saying that Dun Brea was close to Howth, in the
district inhabited by Parthalon and his followers, and that the
plain of Bregia might well have derived its name from it, but
not Bray.
But the prose account in the Dinnsenchus is immediately
followed by a poetical version, which seems to imply that Dun
Brea, where Brea was buried, was in Crioch Cualann, and Crioch
Cualann is generally supposed to have been all south of the
Liffey. If, then, lam right in thinking that Dun Brea was near
the Hill of Howth, either Crioch Cualann must, in the time of
that poet, have extended further north than is generally sup-
posed, or the Leacht of Brea must have been in a different place
from his Dun. In favour of a northerly extension of the district
of Culaann in early times, it may be noted that Dublin
itself was known as “ Ath Cliath i Cualu.’’ (See British Associa-
tion Handbook, 1908, p. 280). This is the poem :
“ I will testify unto you in mild conversation
Without reluctance and without sorrow
The soft mysteries of the history
Of each free Dun, of each free hill.
Parthalon, who inhabited in the East
Until he became famous in the chase,
(Had) Brea son of Both of perpetual valour


As his protector, as his avenger at arms.
Single combat, bad the custom,
Was instituted by the precious son of Seanboth,
And the construction of the Finian vessels (i.e. household vessels ),
The iron vessels of occidental blackness.
Brea, the son of Seanboth, of the spears, got
A Dun, a River, and a high Sea.
He was the jealous (man) meantime
Who was the first man to occupy them.
There precisely did Brea die
With all his children together.
His Leacht {cairn) with a host {an army) assembled round
In Crioch Cualann I have seen.”
I do not think the last line gives us sufficient reason for ascribing
the name of our town to the first man who built houses and made
black cooking pots, and who instituted the bad custom of duelling.
So, then, we may reject the suggestion that Bray is to be iden-
tified with Dun-Brea. But are we then to accept Dr. Joyce’s
theory that it takes its name from the steepness of Bray Head ?
I formerly maintained that Bren, Bre, Bree, Brey, Brea, and
Bray, the various forms in which we find the name of the town,
were all a corruption of Brien, the earliest anglicised form of
Ui Briuin. But there can, I think, be no doubt that as early
as the latter part of the fourteenth century the inhabitants
understood the name of their town to be a descriptive one, for
they called it “ the Bree ” or “le Bree.” But it was only the
town itself that was so called. Tenements that were in the
town were said to be in « the Bree,” while others in the imme-
diate neighbourhood, but outside the little town, were said to
be “in the parish of Bree.” “ Pembroke Estate Deeds,” No. 83,
a.d. 1394, No. 137, a.d. 1426; document of 1419 in possession
of the Earl of Meath; “ Christ Church Deeds,” No. 54, note,
date unknown). It seems to me therefore to be pretty plain
that they at any rate understood the name as describing the
exceeding steepness of the town as you entered it from the
river. And it seems probable that they may have been right.
Sir Walter de Ridelesford very likely found that the hill on which
the little Dear-teach already stood, and on which he decided
to build his castle, was popularly called the Bre; and so he


gave his castle the name of Bre, and the town came to be called
by the same name as it grew up, and the church also in course
of time, though the old name of the church was for a time
preserved as a denomination of land, part of the land on which
the town stood being called Bre and part Derdagh. And
then all the manor or honor that was administered from this
centre was called the u honor of Bre.” And so the places in
that manor or its neighbourhood, which were formerly called
by the tribal name Ui Briuin, in course of time changed their
names from Briuin or Brien to Bray. I take it therefore that
the Head took the modern form of its name from the town,
and not the town from the Head. (We read as early as 1412
of the Caput de Bree). And similarly I maintain that Lough
Bray got its name, not from the steep brow that overhangs it,
but from its situation in the Ui Briuin district, to which the
name of Bre was afterwards in this manner extended. The
names Logh Bray and Bray Water are first found in the Down
Survey, a.d. 1657.
From the beginning of the sixteenth century on, we find
the two parts of Bray north and south of the river distinguished.
That on the south side is called at first Myche Bree, Moche
Bree or Muche Bree ; then Greate Bree or Great Bray, and
more recently Bigg Brey; that on the north side Little Bray,
wdth many varieties of spelling.
Other attempts of the Anglo-Norman lawyers to represent
Ui Briuin, besides Brien, are Obrun and Hubrim. For Obrun,
see Appendix VI. In one document (a.d. 1295) it is spelt
Obren. Hubrim occurs in a deed about Corke. Sometimes
we find Corke described by its propinquity to the town; e.g.
in one document (a.d. 1207) it is called “Cork near Bren,” in
another (a.d. 1229) “ Corcah towards Bre,” and in a third
(a.d. 1234) u Corchan towards Bre.” But there is also one deed
in which it is called “ Corkagh in the fee of Hubrim.” That
is plainly an attempt to_ write Ui Briuin. (Sweetman s Calendar,
1171-1251, Nos. 129, 322, 1753, 2123). Obree is also found
once as the name of the Deanery of Bree, which was almost
co-extensive with the old district of Ui Briuin. (See Appen-
dix I, p. 178.)


APPENDIX V
THE MANOR OF BRAY
For the grant of this Manor to Sir Walter de Ridelesford in
1173, see Appendix 111. When the second Sir Walter de
Ridelesford 1 died in 1244, the Manor was inherited by his
infant heiress, Christiana de Mariscis. She resigned it to the
Crown in 1280. 2 After that complications appear. It seems
that the Manor must have been divided; for on the one hand
we find the Butler family, Earls of Ormond, holding the Manor
at least from 1290 to 1432, while on the other hand at the same
time we find the Crown collecting rents directly from tenants of
the lands of Christiana de Mariscis in Bree, or committing the
Manor of Bree now to Sir Hugh de Lawless and again to
Geoffrey Crump, without any reference to any claim of the
Butlers, and, moreover, we find that in the fourteenth century
some tenements in “ the Bree ” were on the land of Ormond, and
others were not. But both parts alike seem to have been called
the Manor of Bree, and that was probably the cause of the
difficulties which were finally settled in the middle of the
seventeenth century.
The notices I have found of the Butlers’ lordship of the
Manor are as follows. In 1290 3 Theobald de Botiller held of
the King land in capite named Bree, in the county of Dublin, by
the service of finding an armoured horse at the gate of the
Castle of Dublin, when required. Theobald complained, how-
ever, that “the Treasurer of Ireland had converted his service
into money, viz. 40 shillings, where no money was ever given, no
demand of money made, and his ‘ ancestors ’ had ever rendered
the service in the form aforesaid.” I quote this from
1 See Chapter IX, p. 104.
2 Sweetman’s Calendar , 1252-1284, No. 1798.
3 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1285-1292, p. 315.


Sweetman’s Calendar. If Sweetman rightly represents the
original document by the word “ ancestors,” then it would seem
that the Manor must have been divided long before, and that
Butlers must have held it concurrently with the representatives
of de Ridelesford. But probably he was referring to his
predecessors in the Manor, and not to his ancestors. It was
not, however, the case that this commutation of the liability for
military service into a money payment was a quite recent
innovation, for the change had been generally made by the
middle of the thirteenth century. 1 Forty shillings were charged
for each knight’s fee; and in a list of such payments for the
year 1272, 2 we find that “Walter de Rydelysford,” which of
course must mean his heiress, Christiana de Mariscis, was charged
“ £4> for two services, for Bre.” In that statement “ Bre ” must
be used in a large sense to include the manor of Donnybrook and
that in the Vale of Dublin, for those as well as the holdings in
Ui Briuin Cualann were included in Sir Walter’s fee of two
knights. 3 But it was for the Manor of Bree in the stricter
sense that Theobald was charged his £2, or one knight’s
service ; or rather, as it seems, it was only part of that manor
that he obtained. After Theobald we find, in 1297 and 1299*
Joan la Botylere being charged 10s. or 20s, for “the service de
la combre ’’ in regard of Bray. 4 Then again we have a list of
“ lordships, manors, &c., appertaining to the Butlers, ancestors
to the Earl of Ormond, in the reigns of King Edward the First
and King Edward the Second ( i.e . between 1272 and 1327) as
by a book of extent written in those days.” 5 This list includes
Bree Manor. Next we have a lease in 1352 to the Vicar of
Bray of “ one burgage and a half in the town of Bree, viz. in
1 Journal of R.5.A.1., 194, p. 173.
2 Pipe Roll, 1 Edward I, quoted on the page cited in last note.
3 See Appendix 111.
4 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1293-1301, pp. 209, 222, 305. What was
“ service de la Coinbre ” ? Combre, according to Godefroy’s Bictionnaire
de I’ancienne langue represents some sort of weir or dam made
of wooden stakes, &c., for the purpose of catching fish. Probably this
payment was some sort of a royalty on the fishery.
5 Carew Manuscripts, Miscellaneous, p. 353.


the lordship of James le Boteler, Earl of Ormond.” 1 Then in
the year 1382, D’Alton states that “on the demise of the Earl
of Ormonde, the estates of Arklow, Bray, and 26 other lordships,
were taken into the King’s hands during the minority of the
heir, and seneschals were appointed by the crown to manage
and preserve their revenues.” 2 Again, in a document dated
1419-20 in the possession of the Earl of Meath, James le
Bottiler, Earl of Ormonde, is stated to be “ Tenant and Occupier
of the Lands and Tenements which were of Walter Rydesford
in le Bree.” A charge was being levied against him for back-
payments due in lieu of military service ; and now, probably by
mistake, the whole of de Ridelesford’s liability for his two
knights’ fees was being charged against the Earl, who had only
really got a part of one knight’s fee ; for <£l2 was demanded of
him, in respect of three years, 1368, 1371, and 1377. Lastly, in
1432, we find James le Botiller, Earl of Ormond, granting to
Patrick Archepoll a rentcharge of 4 marks yearly “out of
grantor’s manor of Bree, with appurtenances, and Old Courte,”
until the sum of 21 marks be paid. 3
Meantime, on the other hand, we find the Crown dealing
directly with Bray Manor in the following ways. In 1296,
we find William Fox paying rent to the Crown for “ lands of
Christiana de Mariscis at Bre.” Six years later we find the
same tenant again, and also one Thomas Comin, paying
“rent of Bray.” 4 After that, in 1314, we find “all the
lands and tenements of the king at Bree, together with the
fishery and the perquisites of the king’s own court there, com-
mitted to Sir Hugh Lawless,” who is called “the farmer of
the manor.” 5 Again, in 1334, the king granted to Geoffrey
Crump all the lands, &c, in his manor of Bree, for a term
of twenty years, at a rent of <£6, Is. B^d. 5 Then in 1391,
nearly a century after the first William Fox, we find another
of the same name granting to the vicar, Adam de Mareys,
1 Pembroke Estate Deeds, No. 45.
2 D’Alton’s History of the County of Dublin, p. 909.
3 Pembroke Estate Deeds, No. 140.
4 Sweetman’s Calendar, 1293—1301, p. 154 ; 1302-1307, pp. 8, 27, 39.
t 6 See Chapter XI, p. 121, and authorities there quoted.


u a messuage with a stone house in the town of Bree on
the south side of the water,” which is bounded on the east
by the high road (i.e. the Main Street) and on the west by
the land of Ormond. 1 Three years later the Vicar granted
to another member of his family all his lands in the Bree, be-
sides some other holdings in the parish of Bree, one of which
was Killarney. The same lot of holdings was granted in 1426
by another clergyman, William Went, to the same Patrick
Archeboll or Archepoll, to whom the Earl of Ormond granted
a rentcharge on his Manor of Bree. 2
Thus we find the Archepoll, Ashepole, or Archbold family
obtaining an interest before the middle of the fifteenth
century in both parts of the divided Manor of Bree. And
about the same time another name comes into prominence in
this connection; for in 1423 a certain Philip Higdon granted
to William Fitzwilliam of Dundrome all his messuages and
lands in Bree, Co, Dublin. 3 Archbold and Fitzwilliam were
the two families between which nearly all transactions with
1 Pembroke Estate Deeds, No. 81. This is the same Vicar who was
granted the lease in 1352 “ in the lordship of James le Boteler, earl of
Ormond ” ; so he must have held the vicarage for over forty years. That
former messuage was bounded by the high road (“a strata via regali”)
on the west and by the land of the house of St. John of Tristildermot on
the east. From this it appears that the land held by the Earls of Ormond
was partly on the east side of the Main Street, and partly to the west of
an intermediate block lying on the west side of the Main Street, while the
land occupied by the tenants who paid rent to the Crown was partly
in the block between the two sections of the Ormond property, and
partly in the townlands of Killarney and Kilbride, &c. In other words,
the Ormond property may have roughly corresponded to what was
assigned to the Earls of Meath, and the Crown property to what was
assigned to the Earl of Tyrconnell, in the Partition of 1666, for which see
below, p. 229.
2 Pembroke Estate Deeds , Nos. 83, 137. Killarney in these documents
is called Kylmasarny or Killespiksarne (see Appendix I, p. 182) and is
associated with Balymacrynau and Loghanbryne. Balymacrynan drops
out in later deeds, and is replaced by Kilbride and Aellevore. Loghan-
bryne or Loghanbruyn is of course Lochan-Briuin, or Little Lough Bray,
and was probably some widening of the Bray Water, perhaps in the little
flat between the Dargle Bridge and the St. Valerie Bridge, which is now
part of Kilbride townland.
3 Pembroke Estate Deeds, No. 131.
p


regard to the Manor of Bray took place from the middle of
the fifteenth to the end of the sixteenth century. The
Butler family seems to have dropped out altogether. It is
true indeed that, in the year 1611, Patrick Archbold, in making
petition for a search for his title to the Manor of Bray,
claimed that his ancestors had for more than 200 years held
that Manor from the Earl of Ormond. 1 But he could not
show any deeds or records; and it is probable that his
statement only represented a vague family tradition that
their connection with the Manor had first come through the
Earls of Ormond. At any rate there seems to be no evidence
that the Ormond family exercised any rights with regard
to the Manor after the middle of the fifteenth century.
Meantime the Crown did, at any rate on one occasion,
assert its right to the Manor. For in the reign of Edward IV,
in the year 1479 or 1480, we find the King granting the
custody of the manors, lordships, and castles of Bree and
Kilrothery to Walter, the Abbot of St. Mary’s Abbey, for
ten years, at a yearly rent of twelve pence in silver, to be
paid in equal portions at Easter and Michaelmas at the
Exchequer in Dublin. 2 Even if the Crown had a claim to
dispose of the Manor of Bree, yet how it came to deal likewise
with the Manor of Kilrothery, which was then held by the
Archbolds from St. Thomas’ Abbey, does not appear. But
perhaps it was during the minority of some youthful heir
to the Archbold estates.
It is not necessary to trace out the complexities of the
transactions between the Archbold and Fitzwilliam families,
but the outcome of them was that the Archbolds, though
asserting some hereditary claim to the Manor, were content to
hold it as tenants from the Fitzwilliaras. Just one deed is
quaint enough to be worth quoting. Walter Archepole of the
Brey agreed, in 1527, to pay, as tenant to Richard Fitzwilliam of
Baggotrath and his heirs, “a fresh salmon every Sunday in
Lent; if salmon cannot then be taken, it shall be given at some
1 Document in possession of the Earl of Meath.
2 Memoranda Roll of Exchequer, 19 Edward IV, mem. 18.


other time; the salmon to be delivered at the court of
Baggotrath at cost of tenant. Fitzwilliam shall have the nest
of falcons which breadeth within the lordship of Brey, the
tenant to preserve them ‘ in the moost lowingist maner that
they cane yerly ’ for the use of Fitzwilliam. Fitzwilliam to
have custody of the body and lands of Archbold’s successors, if
minors. Archbold shall once a year, at a convenient time and
on a month’s warning, give Fitzwilliam and his servants a night’s
supper and lodging with meat and drink, which by the custom
of this land is called a coydhye.” 1 The provision with regard
to custody of minors fell through; for Walter apparently died
very shortly after this agreement was made, without male issue,
and was succeeded by his brother Patrick, who again died
within two years, leaving as his heir a boy named Gerald, who
was only nine years old. But his wardship was undertaken by
the Crown, until he came of age in 1538, when livery of his
estates, including the manors of Muche Bree and Little Bree,
was granted to him by Henry VIII. 2 The transactions between
Archbolds and Fitzwilliams go on till the end of the sixteenth
century. 3 At the beginning of the seventeenth we have an
Inquisition, dated 1602, finding that Richard Fitzwilliam, late
of Merryonge, Esquire, was seised of the Town of Bray and
50 acres, worth by the year beyond reprisals 405., held of the
Queen in capite, but by what service unknown. 4 On the other
hand, immediately after that we find disputes going on between
the Archbolds and the Crown as to the title to the Manor of
Bray. The Crown case, as set forth in 1610, was that on
November 1, 1603, the Manor and Lordships of Bray were the
property of the King, and that Patrick Archbold was a tres-
passer since then. 5 Patrick’s claim was, as mentioned before,
that his ancestors had for more than 200 years held the Manor
1 Pembroke Estate Deeds, No. 210. The word “coydhye ” represents the
Irish coinmed (coiney). This was an ancient Irish custom, of which the
Anglo-Irish system of “Coyne and Livery” was a corrupt abuse.
2 Deed in possession of the Earl of Meath.
3 The latest in the Pembroke Estate Deeds is dated A.D. 1589, No. 282.
4 Attested copy of Inquisition, in the possession of the Earl of
Meath.
5 Copies of Exchequer Memoranda, ibidem.


of Bray from the Earl of Ormond, though the deeds and
records were lost. 1 Patrick failed to establish his claim, and
James I granted the Manor to Sir Henry Pierce for a term of
21 years at a rent of £7, Is. B±d. 2 But in 1620, Pierce put in a
petition, stating that he had only recovered 60 acres of the
Manor ; and accordingly he got his rent reduced. Two years
later he assigned the remainder of his lease to the sister of Sir
William Brabazon for £65 ; and she again assigned it in 1624-
to Sir William himself. Shortly after this Patrick Archbold
died, leaving to his youthful son, Edward, a title which had
been declared invalid to estates which were heavily mortgaged.
In 1626 a new Inquisition was ordered into the Archbold titles, 3
the result of which appears to have been that the Archbolds
were found to have a title to the estates, but that the lands
were all in the hands of mortgagees. However, Sir William
Brabazon, who had now been created the first Earl of Meath,
came to the rescue, and saved the Manor of Bray from falling
into hopeless bankruptcy. He had already purchased Sir
Henry Pierce’s interest. Now he bought up the mortgages,
and squared matters with young Edward Archbold, so as to
eliminate that claim. Next he had to settle with the Crown.
For although on March 31, 1628, Charles I sent a letter author-
ising the Governor of Ireland to make a grant to the Earl of
Meath of the Lordship and Manor of Bray, 4 still the Crown had
not abandoned its claim to the possession of the Manor. Its
claim was based on the leases of the Manor made in ancient
days by the Crown to Sir Hugh de Lawless and others, 5
whereas the counterclaim of the Archbolds was based upon the
title of the Earls of Ormond. Accordingly, to satisfy the claim
of the Crown, the King’s letter of March 31, 1628, was cancelled
in the next year, and the Manor was granted de novo to George
Kirke, one of the grooms of the King’s bedchamber, who had
exerted himself in finding out the records and establishing the
1 Document in possession of the Earl of Meath.
2 Patent Polls , 7 James I, No. Ivi.
3 Documents in possession of the Earl of Meath,
4 Calendar of the Patent and Close Rolls, Charles I, pp. 338-341.
6 Same Calendar, p. 456.


King’s title, and he conveyed it again to the Earl of Meath;
for which the Earl gave him the nice little sum of £2OO. The
Assignment was dated January 10, 1630, but the final Deed of
Conveyance was only completed on October 22, 1636. 1 But
still after all this there remained difficult points to be cleared
up as to the boundaries between the lands granted to the Earl
of Meath and those held by Lord Fitzwilliam in the town and
fields of Greate Bray. 2 These were finally settled by a Deed
of Partition made in 1666 between Edward, Earl of Meath, and
Oliver, Earl of Tyrconnell, in order “to end all disputes con-
cerning the lands of Great Bray alias Bree, in the county of
Wicklow, part of which lie in common and undivided.” By
this deed it was defined that the middle of the town of Great
Bray belonged to the Earl of Tyrconnell, and also a considerable
extent of land in the townlands of Killarney and Kilbride ; but
that the castle and the grounds immediately about it and the
church, and all the lands between the Main Street and the sea,
and the mill and the parks which lay to the west of the great
ditch, which is now the boundary of St. Paul’s School grounds,
and a good deal more besides, were to belong in right of his
Manor of Great Bray to the Earl of Meath for ever. 3
The Lordship and Manor of Bray, thus granted to the
Earls of Meath, carried with it the right to hold a Court-leet
and a Court-baron, and licence to hold a market every
Tuesday and two fairs yearly; also a Court of piepowder,
and a grant of all wrecks, waifs, and estrays ; also a patent
to erect and use tanpits, that the town and land of Bray
might in all times become a place for the tanning of leather.
As recently as 1791 we find mention of the manorial courts;
1 Calendar of the Patent and Close Rolls, Charles I, pp. 456 and 491;
and Calendar of State Papers, Ireland, 1625-1632, pp. 321, 434, 555, &c.;
and documents in possession of the Earl of Meath.
2 Case in Court of Chancery between Earl of Meath, Gerald Archbould,
and Thomas Lord Viscount Merryon, 1638. See also Inquisitions, Co.
Wicklow, Charles I, No. 18, September 14, 1636. Thomas Fitzwilliam
seised of half the town and lands of Greate Brea, containing six messuages
and 150 acres of land of every kind, valued at 10s. per annum.
3 Deed in possession of the Earl of Meath, and Pembroke Estate Deeds,
No 321.


foi in that year William, Earl of Meath, appointed Thomas
Sotheren of Big Bray (who five years before had been elected
churchwarden), to be seneschal of the Lordship and Manor
of Bray, and to hold all Courts and Court-leet belonging to
the said Manor, as the same had been accustomed to be held,
receiving fees, &c., during the Earl’s pleasure. l
1 Document in possession of the Earl of Meath.


APPENDIX VI
OBRUN
Obrun was the name given to the residue of the Ui Briuin
territory, which was kept in the King’s hands after Sir W alter s
grant had been limited, and was leased by the King to a
tenant in chief, who paid a rent to the Crown. From 1222
to 1228, and again in 1237, Geoffrey de Tureville held the
lands. At first he is called “ parson of Obrun” or simply
“clerk.” From 1228 on he is Archdeacon of Dublin. He
paid £22 rent for it. In 1237 he had a dispute with Walter
de Ridelesford about a wood called Garfloun, which appa-
rently Walter claimed as part of his property; but a royal
mandate was issued to the justiciary of Ireland to delare that
it was the King’s wood, belonging to the forest and land of
Obrun, and another to Sir Walter, to permit the Archdeacon
to hold it in peace.
Towards the end of the century the rent of Obrun fell very
low, only about £2 on an average. In 1284 we find the
statement (see Sweetman’s Calendar ), “ Obrun was wont to
render £sl, Os. 1 3d. a year; now part of it remains waste
on account of the war with the Irish; William le Devenys
has by the king’s charter three carucates and forty-five acres
of land for ten marks a year, payable at the exchequer afore-
said ; Ralph le Marshall is enfeoffed there by the king’s charter
of [ ].” The name of Ralph’s holding is apparently lost in
this document; but we know it by the grant given to him
on March 26, 1283, and rents paid by him in subsequent
years ; for it was Balimaccorus or, as we now call it, Ballycorus,
which marked the extreme northern limit of Obrun. The rent
he paid for it was 70s. 10rf.
References to Obrun are found frequently in Sweetman’s
Calendars of the thirteenth century. But Sweetman has


made the mistake of confusing Obrun with a place called
Browns town, which has no connection with it. (See Mr.
James Mills, “Norman Settlement in Leinster,” Journal of
R.5.A.1., 1894, pp. 171, 172). The vill or townland of
Brun, which is sometimes mentioned in connection with the
inheritance of Christiana de Mariscis, seems to have been in
“ the Vale of Dublin” (see Appendix III). There was also a
Brun (“the church of the vill of Brun ”) in the diocese of
Meath (see Sweetman’s Calendar, 1302-1307, pp. 253 and 262),
These must not be confused with Obrun.


APPENDIX VII
THE VICARS OF BRAY
There is, of course, no Vicar of Bray now. Since Disestablish-
ment all real vicarages have come to an end in Ireland. The
word Vicar means a substitute, and ecclesiastically the title
Vicar is given to the clergyman who is appointed to take the
spiritual charge of a parish, where the Rectory has been
appropriated. The rectory or benefice of Bray was given by
Sir Walter de Ridelesford to the Convent of Grane. The
Convent therefore was the rector and took the tithes, and
appointed a vicar to serve the cure, who was paid a small
proportion of the whole value of the benefice. We have only
five names of vicars so appointed to Bray, and one of those
is uncertain. At the suppression of the monasteries the
rectory came into the disposal of the Crown. In 154-2 it was
granted to Sir Anthony St. Leger along with the other pro-
perties of the Priory of Grane. In 1548 he was granted a
licence to alienate it to ten persons. 1 In 1592 an attack was
made on Archbishop Loftus, in which it was alleged that he
bestowed upon his son-in-law, among other things, “ the most
of the tithes of benefices from Bray to Arcklow ” belonging
by rights to the Chaloner family. 2 In 1630 the Rectory of
Bray was held by William Plunkett, Esq., of Dublin, and was
worth £65 sterling per annum: the small tithes, amounting to
£B, being allowed to the vicar. 3 In 1725, in the reign of
George I and the episcopacy of the great Archbishop King,
the Crown seems to have got the rectory back into its own
1 Calendar of Patent Rolls, 1547, p. 163, No. 75. Calendar of Plants
Henry VIII, No. 304, 1542, and Edward VI, No. 157, 1547-8. Liber Niger
Alani (Bishop Reeves’ copy), p. 203.
2 Calendar of State Papers (Ireland), 1588-1592, p. 535.
3 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.


hands and bestowed it upon the parish. For in that year
Benjamin Iredall, who had been vicar since 1706, was made
rector too. 1 However the emoluments seem to have dwindled
strangely. For in a letter written at Iredall’s death by Arch-
bishop King to the Primate, on May 15, 1728, we read of
“a small rectory fallen void by the death of Mr. Iredall, a
clergyman of this diocese. It is in his Majestie's gift. It is
reckoned worth about £5 per annum. The vicarage with
some curacys annexed to it are in my gift, and are worth about
the like value. There is a church, and a congregation be-
longeth to it. The name of the parish is Bray.” Dr. Lawlor,
who sent me this extract, put a query against the £5.
So perhaps the amount was not really so small. From that
time on to Disestablishment the same arrangement continued.
Every incumbent of Bray was presented to the Rectory by
the Crown and to the Vicarage by the Archbishop. In the
same year, 1728, Archbishop King added to the income of
the vicars by giving up the tithes of Old Connaught, Fassaroe,
and Ballyman, which from time out of mind had belonged
to the See of Dublin, and granting them in trust for whatever
persons should have the actual cure of souls in those parts. 2
The Rector of Bray still benefits by this grant in respect of Old
Connaught and Ballyman to the amount of £l2 per annum,
and the Rector of Kilbride in respect of Fassaroe. All the
vicars held some other cures besides Bray itself. Thus in 1610
Kilmacanoge, Connaught, Carrickbrennan (Monkstown), and
Killiney were united with Bray under the same vicar; in
1630, Rathmichael, Tullow, Kilternan, and Clonkeen (Kill):
in 1703, Rathmichael, Powerscourt, Connaught, and Kilternan;
after that generally Connaught and Kilternan, and sometimes
Rathmichael as well, 3 until in 1824 Kilternan was separated
from Bray by Act of Parliament and united with Kilgobbin
to form a new benefice. In 1826 part of Rathmichael parish
was annexed to Bray, because there was no church in the
1 Firstfruits Returns : Liber Munerum.
2 D’Alton’s History, p. 917.
3 Visitation Records of the Diocese of Dublin.


parish fit for Divine Service. 1 But the parish of Rathmichael
was reconstituted in 1872. Several of the vicars also held
the prebend of Rathmichael (which in 1630 was worth £2O
per annum). 2 All the vicars that held the prebend are
marked with an asterisk in the following list:
lu 1284 we find “ Sir John the father.’’ 3
~ 1294-6 ~ “ William, Vicar of Bray.” 8
~ 1352 ~ “ Sir Adam de Mareys, Vicar of Bree.” 5
„ 1391 „ “ „ „ chaplain.” 6
„ 1401 ~ “ Donald Olanagam, perpetual Vicar of Dirrhi
and Bree.” 7
„ 1426 ~ “ William Went, chaplain.” 8
~ 1610,15,, “ Moris Burne, a reading minister.” *
~ 1630, 41, 2, 5, 7we find Simon Swayne, M.A. 10
From 1666 to 1693 *John Burton.
„ 1693 „ 1695 *John King.
„ 1695 „ 1703 ♦John Hinton.
„ 1703 „ 1706 *Christophilus Jenney, S.T.D. 11
1 Title Books of the Diocese of Dublin.
2 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report.
3 Sweetman’s Calendar , 1252-1284, p. 560 (1284).
* Ibid, 1293-1301, p. 69 (1294); p. 113 (1295); p. 127 (1295-1296).
5 Pembroke Estate Deeds, Nos. 45, 81, 82, 83, 137. Adam de Mareys
is called “Vicar of Bree ” in the first deed (1352) and “chaplain” in
the later deeds (1391). William Went is called “chaplain” in 1426
and deals with the same lands with which Adam de Mareys dealt
in 1391 ; and those lands include the portion which in later centuries
was the glebe land of the parish of Bray. We may therefore infer
that William Went was probably Vicar of Bray.
8 Ibid.
7 Papal Registers {“ Papal Letters ”), vol. v. p. 342. Donald Olanagam
or Clanagan [or Flanagan ?] was then made Archdeacon of Leighlin.
The appointment was confirmed by the king in 1403, See Cotton s
Fasti.
8 See Note 5, above.
9 Visitation of 1610 (T.C.D. Library, MS. 566 (E. 3. 14), f. 33). Royal
Visitation, 1615, Record Office (Bishop Reeves’ copy, T.C.D. Library, MS.
1066). Archbishop Jones’ Report (MS. copy at St. Patrick’s Cathedral).
10 Archbishop Bulkeley’s Report. Depositions of 1641. Title Books.
11 Jenney continued to be prebend of Rathmichael till 1713.


From 1706 to 1728 Benjamin Iredall. 1
„ 1728 ~ 1730 William Candler, A.M.
„ 1730 „ 1746 John Bushe, A.M. 2
» 1746 „ 1764 *John Lyon, D.D. 3
» 1*64 „ 1767 *Hon. Wm. Beresford, D.D. 4
a 1767 „ 1773 *Thomas Leland, D.D., F.T.C.D.
» 1773 „ 1774 *Benjamin Domville, D.D. 6
„ 1774 „ 1776 *Thomas Cradock, A.M.
n 1*76 „ 1791 * Thomas Torrens, D.D.
„ 1791 „ 1796 *William Henry Barnard.
„ 1796 „ 1800 * James Wilmot Ormsby,
~ 1800 ~ 1803 * Edward Mangin, A.M.
„ 1803 „ 1811 * James Wilmot Ormsby. 7
„ 1811 „ 1817 *Hon. Edmond Knox. 8
„ 181* „ 1825 *Hon. Charles Knox. 9
„ 1825 „ 1857 William Conyngham Plunket. lo
1 Iredall was assistant curate to Jenney from 1702. When Jenney
resigned the Vicarage, Iredall was appointed, and also received one-
third of the prebendal tithes for his maintenance. Cotton is wrong
in saying that he became prebendary in 1707, and also wrong in the
spelling of his name.
2 Bushe “ died the 26th Aug. 1746 at his House at Corke.” He
“was buryed at the E. End of the Church of Brey.” The south
transept of the church was built over his grave in 1819. But the flat-
stone, with inscription, is still under the floor of the choir seats.
3 Contemporary and friend of Dean Swift. Is said to have erected
the glebe house which still stands at Carrigeen. Probably Swayne’s
house had fallen into ruins. Was also a minor canon of St. Patrick’s.
4 Son of Marcus, Earl of Tyrone. Became Bishop of Dromore in
1780, and subsequently of Ossory and Tuam. Created Baron Decies
in 1812.
5 Historian of Ireland. Said to have planted the trees at Carrigeen.
6 Formerly Dr. Barrington, Dean of Armagh; he took the name of
onmle when he succeeded to the Loughlinstown estate, and resigning
his Deanery became Vicar of St. Ann’s, and afterwards Rector of Bray
and Prebendary of Rathmichael. Dr. Elrington Ball, History of the
County of Dublin, part i. pp. 93-94.
7 Ormsby got into money difficulties. The benefice was sequestered
m 1809. Ormsby resigned in 1811.
8 Seventh son of the first Viscount Northland. Was made Dean of
Down, 1817; Bishop of Killaloe, 1831; Bishop of Limerick, 1834.
9 Sixth son of Viscount Northland.
10 Son of the Chancellor, Lord Plunket, and uncle of Archbishop
Plunket. e


From 1867 to 1862 Edward William Whately. 1
„ 1862 „ Disestablishment *James George Scott, A.M. 2
1 Son of Archbishop Whately.
2 The last Vicar of Bray, He continued to be Rector until 1910,
and died in 1912. He became Prebendary of Rathmichael in 1866 on
the death of Rev. John Hunt, who had held the prebend since 1825.
He resigned the prebend in 1904, when he was made Chancellor of
the Cathedral. He undertook the charge of the parish in 1862, but
was not instituted until 1863.




INDEX
Adair, Robin, 189
Aedh, 54, 56
Aellevore, 225 n.
Agricola, 40
Aidan, St., 72
Ailsa Craig, 21
Aingier, Ambrose, 158
Alan, Abp., 74,103 n., 181,182,183-
194, 202, 203, 204
Alexander, Pope, 67, 187, 192, 195,
196
Alexander, the Doctor, 102
Amergin, 37
Andrew, Vice-seneschal of Shankill,
112
Annacrivey, 29, 115 n,
Annahasky, 73
Annamoe, R., 19
Archasan Rocks, 2, 3
Archbold, Ashbold, Ashepole, &c.,
88, 124, 136, 137, 147-9, 174, 203,
224—8
Archpresbyters, 177
Ardee, Baron of, 89, 90
Ard Macha, Armagh, 78
Arklow, 37, 63, 118, 130, 171, 224,
233
Aske, the, 140
Ath Cliath, 58, 79, 219
Augustinian Chapel in Bree, 203
Back Street, 100, 162
Balachlise, Belachclict, &c., 116 n.,
210, 211, 213
Balibedan, Ballybrew, 96, 97, 114.
212, 216
Balimaelis, Balimelise, &c., 210,211,
213, 216
Ballinacor, 129
Ballinascorney, 216
Ballinrodrach, 77, 78, 187,189
Ballinfind, 189
Ballybetagh, 29, 30
Ballybrew. See Balibedan
Ballycorus, 7, 48, 72, 114, 231
Ballygannon, Baliennan, 150, 193,
194
Ballykenle. See Kindlestown
Ballymackelly, Balinakelli, 210, 212,
213
Ballymacrynan, 225 n.
Ballymagreue, 209, 211, 213
Ballyman, Glenmunder, &c., 61, 69,
72, 73, 105,133,134,153,173,180,
189, 190, 194-5, 234
Ballymorris, 187
Ballyronan, 194
Ballywaltrim, 187
Baltinglass, 128
Barchuillia, 11, 46
Barnard, Wm. H., 236
Barnewall family, 124,125, 132,137,
145, 146, 166, 170, 172, 173
Barrington, Dr. See Domville, Ben-
jamin
Beechlands, 130
Begnet, St., 56, 114, 198
Belgrave, 181
Ben Edar. See Howth
Beresford, Hon. Wm., 236
Bigg Brey. See Great Bray
Birn, Moris. See Byrne, Maurice
Bloody Bank, 100, 162
Board of Firstfruits, 205
Boatson, 173
Bohernabreena, 197, 216
Boroihme, the, 40, 41, 58
Boyne, Battle of, 132
Boulder Clay, 21, 22
Brabazon, Sir Wm„ Lord High
Treasurer, 89, 125, 126
Brabazon, Sir Wm., first Earl of
Meath, 89, 228
Bran Mut, 50, 79
Bray Bridge, 100, 163
Bray Castle, Bre, Bren, 91, 95-103,
118, 120-1, 147, 148, 163-4, 203,
221
Bray Church. See St, Paul’s Church
Bray Commons, 100, 103, 163


Bray Head, 1-7, 20, 21, 34, 41, 49,
97, 148, 182, 218, 220, 221
Bray Honor or Manor, 96, 97, 104,
121, 147, 148, 201, 208-17, 222-
30
Bray River, Water of Brien, &c., 19,
48, 49, 97, 209, 215, 221
Bray Town, Bre, Bree.Brey, &c., 75,
91, 96, 104-6, 137-8, 148, 162-5,
177, 220, 221, 227
Bray in Berkshire, 175
Brea, son of Seanboth, 31, 218-20
Brefni, 178
Bregh, Bregia, 31, 53, 219
Bren, 210, 213, 214, 215, 220
Bri, 95, 96, 97
Brian Boru, 65, 66
Brian Leth Derg, 47, 50
Brian Reogh, 89
Bride’s Glen, 70
Brien (Ui Briuin Cualann), 94, 97,
208, 209, 221
Brigid, St„ 55, 69, 70, 71, 183, 184-
5, 196
Brinny, Master, 157
Britain, 40
Broomfield, 189
Brownstown, 232
Bruce, 118,120
Brun, 213, 232
Buckley, 158 n.
Bulkeley, Archbishop, 158, 184
Bullans, 59, 60
Bullock, 134, 198, 200
Burial Chambers, 29
Bnrne, Moris. See Byrne, Maurice
Burren of Clare, 35
Burton, 158 n.
Burton, John, 235
Bushe, John, 236
Butler, le Botiller, &c., Earls of
Ormond, 123 «., 222, 223, 224,
225, 226, 228
Byrne, Dermott, 150
Byrne, Maurice, 189, 197, 204, 235
Byrne, Morgan, 197
Cabinteely, 27
Calary, 31, 82, 116 n., 162, 190
Cambrian Rocks, 2-8, 13
Candler, Wm., 236
Canoe, St., 55
Carrickbrennan, 180, 198, 199, 200,
234
Carrickgollogan, 7, 28, 36, 48, 114,
133
Carrickmines, 124, 197
Carrigeen. See Glebe House
Carrigoona, Stilebawn, 7
Carucates, 95
Castlekevin, 128
Castle Street, 98, 162
Catherine, St., 193
Celladgair. See Killegar
Cellachaich-Driegnig, 192
Cell-Crithaich, 190
Cell-Comgaill, 195-6
Cell-Macabinru. See Kilmacberne
Celltuca. See Kiltuck
Celtic Church, 67, 70, 71, 72, 177-8
Chaloner, 233
Charles I, 140, 146, 165, 166, 170,
228
Charles 11, 174, 175
Charleville, 49, 189
Cherry wood, 131, 155
Chilmechatd. See Killakee
Chorepiscopi, 177-8
Christ Church, 6, 14, 144
Christ Church Cathedral, Priory of
Holy Trinity, 67, 143, 145, 180,
196-7, 198, 199, 214
Christiana de Mariscis, 104, 202,
213, 222, 223, 224, 232
Church of the Most Holy Redeemer,
14
Churchtown, 183
Cill-Cuile. See Kilcool
Cill-escoib Sillean, 73
Cill-inghen-Leinin. See Killiney
Cill-Mantain. See Kilmantain
Cillmocna, 189
Clahull, John de, 216
Clodach,ll4,lBB
Clondalkin, 82
Clonkeen, Cluain Caoin, &c. See
Kill o’ the Grange
Clontarf, 65
Clumine,Cleunmiare, Cluain-muine.
See Ballyman
Cloon, 117
Cnoclin, Clohlun, &c. See Knock-
lyon
Coarbs, 177-8
Cogan, Miles de, 83, 84, 93
Cogan, Richard de, 84, 212, 213,
216
Coillach, 116 n.
Coiney, Coyne and Livery, 227 n.
Colgan, 184
Colla, the Three Collas, 77
College Close, 155, 185


Columba, St., 55,193
Combre, 223 n.
Comgall, St., 195
Comin, Thomas, 224
Commonwealth, the, 131, 133
Comyn, Abp. John, 67, 191, 192
Conchobar Macnessa, 77
Confederation of Kilkenny, 168,
169-
Confiscation of Estates, 171, 172
Conn the Hundred Fighter, 44
Connagh. See Old Connaught
Connell, St., 183
Cookstown, 188
Coolegad, 147, 148
Coolnaskeagh, 34, 37, 147 n.
Corbett, Francis, 191
Cork, Corkagh, Corke Abbey, &c.,
124, 139, 142-4, 173, 221, 236 n.
Cork, Earl of, 146
Cornwall, Wm., 158, 159, 191
Corporation of Bray, 164
Courts in Bray, 164, 229-30
Cradock, Thomas, 236
Crede Mihi, 178-200
Crinken, 54
Crioch-Cualann. See Cualann
Crispin, St., 187
Cristin the Ostman, 209, 211, 213
Croine, St., 55
Cromleacs, cromlechs, 26-33, 69,
133
Cromwell, Oliver, 133, 154, 166,
170-
Cronan, St., 55 n.
Crosses, ancient, 68, 69, 71, 75, 133,
135
Crump, Geoffrey, 121, 222, 224
Crumwell, Thomas, 125
Cualann, Kwalann, 9, 37, 39, 47,
49-51, 54, 79, 81, 189, 208-17, 219,
220
Cuillin, Cuillean, 9 n.
Cullens, 169
Curcagh of Cill-Curcaighe, 143-4
Curry, Eugene, 143, 201, 218
Curtlestown, 115 n.
Dairb, King, 78
Dalkey, Kilbegnet, 56, 61, 63, 74,
111, 113-4, 180, 197, 198, 199,
200
Dalkey Island. Deilginis, 12. 43, 48,
56, 65, 74, 218
Dalkey Sound, 53, 113
Danes, 32, 52, 62-7, 79, 82, 83, 84,
196
Dargle, 4, 55
Daughters of Leinin, 56, 184
Davis, Thomas, 141, 159, 189
Dea, Dee R., 51, and see Vartry
Deanery of Bre, 92, 118, 158, 177-
200
Dedannans, 30, 32, 33
Delgany, Deilgne, Dergne-Mocho-
rog, Temple-Delgany, &c., 49, 55,
66, 75,147,148,158, 159, 179, 181,
185, 186, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192,
218
Depositions of 1641, 166-9
Derdac, Dearteach, Derichat, &c.,
75, 91, 92, 95, 99, 102, 181, 182,
199, 202, 203, 204, 210, 212, 213,
220, 221
Derlington, Abp., 196
Dermod and Grania, 27
Dermot and the Earl, 93
Dermot MacMurrough, 80-2
Dernauth Terran, 181, 202
Derran, Dervau, Doran, 179,181, 203
Derry, George, 191
Dervorgil, wife of Tiernan O’Rourke,
80
Dervorgil, wife of Donald Mac-
Gillamoholmoc, 81, 86
Devenys, Wm. le, 231
Dhous, Douce, 12, 18, 19, 188, 189,
190
Dinnsenchus, 218, 219
Dirrhi, 92, 181, 202
Disestablishment, 231, 237
Dissolution of Monasteries, 88
Dodder, R., 19, 116 n., 209, 216
Dolmens. See Cromleacs
Domvile, Sir Wm., 173
Domvile, Benjamin, 236
Donnybrook, Dovenachbrok, Duve-
nalbroc, 101, 209, 211, 213, 215,
223
Down, 191
Down Survey, 10, 98, 135, 141, 151,
221
Drake, John, Lord Mayor, 122
Drogheda, 154,170
Dublin, 63, 65, 79, 82, 83, 84,
85, 128, 188, 209, 210, 211, 213,
999
Duff Hill,-19
Dun Brea, 31, 219-20
Duncadh, 50
Duvenalbroc. See Donnybrook


Eber Finn, 37
Ebulo de Geneve, 104
Edgar, St., 194
Edward IV, 226
Edward VI, 127, 175
Edwards family, 135, 174
Eleanor of Provence, 104
Ellingsworth, Thomas, 164
Ellis, Owen, 197
Elizabeth, Queen, 88, 109, 127, 151,
175, 227
Elme, Geoffrey de, 112
Ely, Viscount, 146
Emain Macha, 77, 78
Enniskerry, 29, 30, 82
Eoghan Mor, 44
Eremon, 37
Ernan, St., 193
Erratic blocks of granite, 20-4, 26
Essex, Lord, 130
Eustace, 149
Eva, wife of Strongbow, 82
Faelan, 50
Fairs in Bray, 165
Fairy Hill, 75, 179, 183
Fassaroe, Fassagh Rowe, 9 69,
125-6, 133, 146, 170, 234
Fastnet Lighthouse, 16
Felde, Richard de la, 86
Fera Cualann, Fercullen, 49, 79, 81,
126, 151, 157, 168, 173, 190
Fertir, 116 n.
Finachta Fleadhach, 58
Fintan, 69, 198
Firbolgs, 32
Fitzgerald, Fitzgarrard, Sir James,
188
Fitzwalter, Simon, 179
Fitzwilliam family, 162, 163, 174,
225-9
Fleetwood’s Survey, 141, 142, 174
Flood in Bray, 9 n.
Formorians, 32
Fox, Wm., 224
Fulk of Newcastle, 104
Fuller, Thomas, 175
Garfloun, 231
George I, 204, 233
Giants’ Graves. See Cromleacs
Gilbert, Thomas, 158
Giltspear, Giltspur, &c., 10, 11, 46
Glangrow and Glanrace, 186, 192
Glaskenny, 29, 30
Glasmolyn, Glasnamullen, 179, 186,
189, 190
Glasnabrockey, 114
Glebe Land, Bray. See College
Close
Glebe House, Rathmichael, 131,
155-6, 158, 161, 166-7, 236 n.
Glen of the Downs, 49, 75
Glencap, Glynkapyl, Temple Glen-
cap, 179, 185-6, 192
Glencree, 48, 82, 113-7, 215, 218
Glencullen, 12,17, 29, 30, 48, 79, 86,
94, 114-5, 142, 207, 212, 215
Glendalough, 55, 63, 66, 82, 187,188,
189, 190, 194
Glendruid, 27
Glenmacnass, 19
Glenmalure, 19, 127-8, 129
Glenmama, 65
Glenmunder, Glenraunire. Sec Bal-
ly man
Glynkapyl. See Glencap
Goodman family, 124, 143,145, 146,
167, 172, 173
Grace Dieu, 179, 192
Grane, 102, 105, 162, 179, 182, 199,
202, 203, 204, 233
Granite, 14-9
Gravale, 19
Gravestones, ancient, 60-2, 71, 72,
73, 75
Great Bray, Great Bree, &c., 98,
147, 163, 164, 165, 174, 221, 227,
229,
Gregory X, 204
Greystones, 1, 34, 49
Harghain, Hartain. See Derran.
Harold family, 124
Harrington, Sir Henry, 89,128, 130,
191
Hayes, John, 169
Heany, Thomas, 198
Henry 11, 81, 85, 86, 108, 111,
212
Henry 111, 109
Henry IV, 110
Henry VI, 122, 123
Henry VIII, 88, 89, 110, 123, 125-7,
151, 175, 202, 204, 227
Higdon, Philip, 225
High Road (Main Street, via Strata
Regalis) from Dublin to Arklow,
108, 225, 229
Hinton, John, 235
Hollybrooke, 15, 139


Holy Trinity, Priory of. See Christ
Church Cathedral
Honor de Ere, 97, 104, 212, 213,217,
and see Bray Manor
Hospital of St. John, 104 n.
Howth, 7, 31, 53, 62, 219
Hubrim, 143, 221
Hugo, Bishop of Meath, 86
Hugo, Rector of Kilcool, 193
Hunt, John, 237 n.
Ice Age, 21-5
Imaile, Glen of, 116 n., 188
Inispatricb, 53
Innocent 111, 186
lona, 72
Iredall, Benjamin, 234, 236
Ireland’s Kye, 7, 53
James I, 89, 151, 227, 228
James 11, 132
Jenney, Christophilus, 235, 236
John, Sir J. the Father, 105, 235
John, Lord of Ireland, afterwards
King, 94, 108, 208, 210, 212, 213
John the Mad, 93
Jones, Archbishop, 159, 198, 204
Karric. See Templecarrig
Karrickevan, 185
Kavanaghs, 110, 125
Keating, 178
Kells, Synod of, 177, 178
Kenliston, &c. See Kindlestown
Kevin, St., 55, 69, 74, 189-90
Kilbegnet, Kilbekenet, 198, and see
Dalkey
Kilbride, 61, 75, 179, 183, 184-5,
186, 187, 189, 225, 229
Kilca, Kilkea, 102 n., 105, 216
Kilcool, 6, 75, 158-9, 179, 191, 193
Kilcrony, 55, 75, 124 n., 140, 179,
187-8
Kilcullen, 9 n.
Kildare, Earls of, 127, 187, 188
Kilemyn, &c. See Killiney
Kilfernoc, 179, 180, 193, 194
Kilgobbin, 75, 181, 234
Kill o’ the Grange, Clonkeen, 69,
156, 161, 168, 180, 197, 198, 199,
200, 234
Killadreenan, Killauchdeeny, &c.,
75, 92, 107, 108, 137, 179, 191,
192, 193
Killakee, Kilmakethe, Chilmechatd,
82, 209, 211, 213, 215, 216
Killarney, Killosarn, Kilsaran, Kil-
lescopsaran, Killescosather, 75,
103, 155, 179, 181, 182-3, 199,
225, 229
Killarney Wood, 140
Killegar, 35, 61, 72, 117, 180, 184,
189, 194, 195
Killescopoge, 103, 182
Killincarrig, 136-7, 153-4, 170-1,
185
Killiney, Cill-inghen-Leinin, 12, 48,
56, 74, 94, 180, 189, 197, 198, 200,
234
Killininy, 197, 213, 216
Killruddery, 14, 34, 49, 76-9, 82,
86-90, 94, 124, 128, 130, 136, 140,
147, 149, 150,151,173-4,179, 187,
226
Kilmacanoge, Kilmehonoc, &c., 54,
141, 159, 169, 179, 181, 185, 187,
188-9, 197, 234
Kilmacberne, 112,117,179,186,189,
190
Kilmacud, Kilmohud,&c., 103, 198,
199, 204, 215, 216
Kilmalin, Stamoling, 29, 30, 179,
184, 188, 190, 191, 199, 212
Kilmantain, Cill-Mantain, 52
Kilmurry, 186
Kilpatrick, 193, 194
Kilpedder, 193, 194
Kilquade, 194
Kilrethery, Kilrethran, Kilrothery,
&c. See Killruddery
Kilternan, 18, 28, 29, 30, 75, 114,
117, 156, 180-1, 189, 197, 234
Kiltuck, 54, 68, 140
Kindlestown, Kenliston, Ballykenle,
&c., 124, 136, 147, 148
Kingstown Harbour - , 16
King Edward Road, 144
King, Abp., 182, 191, 195, 199, 233,
234
King, John, 235
Kippure, 12, 16, 17, 19, 218
Kirke, George, 228
Knocklinn, 28
Knocklyon, Cnoclin, &c., 210, 211,
216
Knocknandiahab, 31
Knockree, 117
Knockro, 213, 215, 216
Knocksink, 30, 31
Knox, Hon. Edmund and Honj
Charles, 236
Kwalann. See Cualann


Lackandaeeagh, 117, 190
Lambay Island, 53, 62
Lambert, John, 173
Laurence O’Toole, 5t.,67,83,198,199
Lawless family, 112, 117, 123, 124,
130,135,143
Lawless, Sir Hugh de, 121, 222, 224,
228
Lee, Captain, 89
Leinster, Kings of, 40, 66, 80-2
Leisley, George, 157, 159
Leland, Thomas, 236
Leperstown, 181
Liffey, 19, 58, 83, 219
Little Bray, 142, 147, 162-3, 165,
174, 221, 227
Little Bray Castle, 98, 133-4, 162
Lloyd, Maurice, 198
Lloyd, Wm., 158
Lochan-Briuin, Loghanbryne, &c.,
96, 225 n.
Loftus, Abp., 233
Long Hill, 31
Lough Bray, Loch-Briuin, 17, 19,
23, 48, 97, 218, 221
Lough Dan, 17
Lough Nahanagan, 19
Lough Ouler, 19
Lough Tay, 17
Loughlinstown, 28, 124, 130, 131,
143, 145, 167-8,173
Loundres, Henry de, 194
Lower Silurian Rocks, 4, 13, 15, 16
Lughaidh, St. of Cill-Cuile, 193
Lugnaquilla, 15, 19, 116
Luke, Abp„ 110-7, 192
Lyon, John, 236
MacGillamoholmoc, 38, 79-87,
93, 189, 194
Macha, 39
Mac Tail, Aengus, 57, 62, 69
MacThorkil, Haskulf, 83, 215
Mailmora, 66
Main Street. See High Road
Maive, 39
Malachi, 65
Mantan, St., 52
Maneford, John de, 180, 194
Mangin, Edward, 236
Mareys, Adam de, 224, 225, 235
Markets in Bray, 104, 106, 164
Marshall, Ralph le, 231
Marshall, Wm., 212
Mary, Queen, 175
Maulin, 12
Maynard, Justice, 158
Meath, Earls of, 90, 98, 135, 136,
148-9,150-4,163,164, 174, 225 n.,
228-30
Merrion, 209
Merrion, Lord of. See Fitzwilliam
Mica-schist, 14-8
Milesians, 32, 37
Military Road, 17, 19, 82
Mill, Bray, 100, 101, 102, 164
Mill, Loughlinstown, 145
Mill, Newcastle, 109
Mill, Shanganagh, 144, 173 n.
Mill, Shankill, 111 n .
Moats, prehistoric, 30, 31
Mochonoc, St., 55, 188
Mochorog, St., 55, 186
Moling, St., 57, 58, 188, 189-90
Monastery, 72, 155 n.
Monkstown, 92, 179, 180, 197, 198
199, 200, 234
Morrison, Wm., architect, 76, 139
Motes, Norman, 99, 108, 109
Much Bree, Myche Bree, &c. Sec
Great Bray
Muiredach, 50
Mullaghcleevaun, 19
Mulso, Sir Thomas, 122-3, 134
Murchadh, Lord of Ui-Faelain, 79
Murchadh Mor, 50
Murtough MacMurrough, 82
Naylor’s Cove, 1, 43
Nemed, 31, 32
Newcastle M'Kynegan, 29, 49, 92,
107-10, 118, 124, 137, 147, 159,
179, 190-1, 192
Nottingham, Ralph de, 86
Novo Castro Makyngane. See New-
castle
Obrbe, 178,221
Obrun, 50, 96, 106, 221, 231-2
Obruyn, Cornelius, 189
O’Byrnes, Ui-Faelain, 32, 50, 51, 79,
83, 85, 88, 105, 108, 110, 118,
119, 120-30, 137, 150, 162, 169,
171 172,203
O’Byrne, Feagh Mac Hugh, 127-9,
135, 137
Oconagh, 74 n.
O’Donnell, Hugh Roe, 128-9
O’Doyle, Donagh, 171 n.
O’Kelly, Ockelly. See Ui-Ceallaigh
Olanagam, Donald, 202, 235
Olave, St., 196


Old Gonna Hill, 15, 131, 140
Old Connaught, Connagh, 30, 74,
124, 134, 140, 141-2, 144, 157,
159, 169, 173, 174, 185, 189, 193,
194, 197, 204, 234
Old Court, 51 n., 98, 122-3, 124,
129, 134-6, 149, 174, 224
Oldham ia Antiqua, 3
Ollamh Fodla, 39
O’Murroghowe Teige, 145
Onagh, 29, 117
Ormond, Earls of. Sec Butler
Ormsby, James W., 236
Ossory, Lord, 125
Othe, Othee. See Ui-Teigh
O’Tooles, 32, 39, 50, 83, 85, 88, 105,
108, 118, 119, 120-30, 132, 151,
157, 162, 168-9, 170, 171, 172,
188, 203, 215
Owgaire, 66
Pale, the, 123, 124,146, 172
Palermo, 140
Paparo, Cardinal, 177
Parks in Bray, 164
Parknasilloge, 28, 30
Parthalon, 31, 218, 219
Patrick, John, 179
Patrick, St., 26, 43 n., 51-3, 78, 160
Payn, Wm., 186
Pembroke, Lord, 174, 204
Petty, Sir Wm., 10
Phrompstown, 36, 124 n.
Pierce, Sir Henry, 228
Pillar Stone, 30
Plunket, Wm. Conyngham, 236
Plunket, Abp., 201
Plunkett, Wm., 162, 204, 233
Power, Roger and John, 122
Powere, Eustace le, 188
Powerscourt, 49, 111, 112, 125-6,
140,151-3, 168-9, 173,183-4, 190
Powerscourt parish. See Stagonill.
Powerscourt, Viscounts. See Wing-
field family
Powerscourt Waterfall, 18, 190
Poyning’s Law, 123
Puck’s Castle, 132
Putland, 41
Quaetz-ROCK, 5-8, 76
Raheenaclig, 43, 75,147,148,149,
174, 182
Rathbreasil, Synod of, 177
Rathdown, Rath Oinn, Rathonie,
37, 40, 75, 79, 82, 86, 87, 126,
136, 147, 174, 186, 187
Rathfarnham, 82
Rath-inbheir, 51 n.
Rathmichael, 36, 57-69, 112, 118,
131, 156, 157, 161, 180, 196, 197,
234
Rathmichael, prebendaries of, 68,
158, 180, 235-7
Raths, 26, 34-8, 59
Rathdrum, 129, 130
Rathnew, 129
Ravenswell, 142
Rebellion of 1641, 166-9
Rectors of Bray, 162, 233-7
Bedford, 136
Red Branch Knights, 77
Reformation, the, 150, 156-7, 201
Repertorium Viride, 181-94,199,203
Restoration, the, 135, 165, 172
Rialls, 131
Richard 11, 110, 122, 186
Ridelesford, Walter de, 83, 84, 91,
93-105, 143, 161, 178, 182, 199,
201, 203, 208-17, 220, 222, 223,
224, 231, 233
Ringsend, 111
Robelescourt, 121
Robert the baker, 105
Roberts family, 131
Rochfort, Simon de, 177
Rock of Bray, Rockbrae, 6, 135
Rocky Valley, 7, 8
Roderick O’Connor, 81, 82, 83
Roger the Chaplain, 102
Romans, 40-44
Round Towers, 64
Roundwood, 128, 189, 190
Royal Visitation, 159
Ruadan, St., 35
Rural Deaneries, 177 sqq.
Rush, 53
Russell, Lord Deputy, 129, 135
Sally Gap, 17, 19, 82
Saran, Bp., 182
Saundford, Abp., 192, 196
Scalp, the, 18, 29, 72, 82, 117
Scott, Hopton, 150
Scott, James George, 237
Senekil. See Shankill
Settlement, Act of, 165, 172-3
Shanbally. See Slanehelly
Shanganagh, 68, 123, 124, 130, 131,
140, 143, 144, 173


Shankill, 68, 94, 110-2,118,121,122,
124, 130-2, 145,166,172, 173, 180,
188, 190, 195-6
Sherlocks, 169
Sidhe, 30, 32
Sidney, Sir Henry, 127,
Silken Thomas, 188
Sillan, Bp., 73
Singleton’s View, 190
Sitric, 66
Skerries, 53
Slanehelly, Shanbally, 10 n.
Slieve Cullen, Sliabh Cualann, 8-10,
46, 47
Smithson, Joseph, 168, 198
Sotheren, Thomas, 230
Sta, 199
Stagonill, Teach-Gonaill, &c,
(Powerscourt Parish), 157, 158,
179, 183, 184, 185,187, 189,194,
199, 234
Stamoling. See Kilmalin
Standun, Maurice and Philip, 192
Stanyhurst, James, 88
Statute of Kilkenny, 124
St. John of Jerusalem, Priory, 195
St. Kevin’s Land, 115 n.
St. Leger, Sir Anthony, 88, 126, 196
St. Mary’s Abbey, 86, 103, 114, 117,
121, 163, 180, 187, 199, 226
St. Mary’s of the Downs, 75, 186,
191, 192
St. Michael le Pole, 58
St. Patrick’s Cathedral, 67,123,180,
184, 194, 196, 236 n., 237 n.
St. Paul’s Church, 75,91-3,161,174,
179, 201-7, 236 n.
St. Thomas’ Abbey, 86-8, 103, 163,
212, 216, 226
St. Valerie, 4, 140, 225 n.
Stilebawn. See Carrigoona
Stillorgan, Stach lorgan, Teach
Lorcain, &c., 92, 162, 168-9, 174,
179, 180, 198, 199
Strongbow, 81, 82, 94, 208, 212, 213,
215
Sugarloaf, Great or Big, 7-10, 20,46
Sugarloaf, Little, 7,10,11, 20, 46,148
Sunnybank. See Bloody Bank
Swayne, Simon, 156, 158, 166-8,
197, 235
Swift, Dean, 236 n.
Tachchonicde, Tachony, &c., 209,
211, 213, 215, 216
Tacitus, 40
Talbot family, 126, 132, 133, 145
146-7, 170, 172, 174
Tallaght, 112, 216
Tanpits in Bray, 165
Taney, Tachney, 199, 215, 216
Tara, 35
Teach-Gonaill, &c. See Stagonill
Teach-Moling. See Kilmalin
Tegdeloge, 189
Telach-na-nEscop. See Tullow
Templars, the Knights, 105
Temple Becan, 184
Templecarrig, Templecargie, Karric,
10, 37, 147, 149, 179, 185, 186
Temple-Delgany. See Delgany
Thomas k Becket, St., 86
Thomas, Rector of Connagh, 193
Thorkil. Sec Turchil
Thorncastle, 215
Three Rock Mountain, 12, 18
Tiernan O’Rourke, 80
Tighernmas, 39
Tirnennick, 194
Toca, Tuca, 54
Tocher Inbheir Mor, 37
Tonduff,l2
Torrens, Thomas, 236
Trimlestown, 7th Baron of, 172
Tristeldermot, 101, 102, 105, 225 n.
Tuathal, 39, 40
Tullow, Telach-na-nEscop, Tyllaght,
&c., 61, 69, 70, 71, 156, 157, 161,
180, 196, 197, 198, 214, 234
Turchil, Thorkil, 94, 208, 209, 214,
215
Tureville, Geoffrey de, 114, 231
Two Rock Mountain, 12, 17, 29
Tyrconnell, Earl of, 98, 174, 225 n.,
229
Tyrone, Earls of, 129, 236 n.
Ui-Beiuin-Cualann, 47-56, 83,92,
94, 96, 105, 107, 108, 143, 178-9,
184, 196, 197, 202, 208, 209, 212,
214, 221, 223, 231
Ui-Ceallaigh, O’Kelly, Ockelly, 49,
50, 79, 83, 105, 106, 108, 197, 216
Ui-Dunchada, 50, 79, 83
Ui-Eanach-Glas-Cualann, 37
Ui-Faelan. See O’Byrnes
Ui-Muiredaigh, 50
Ui-Teigh, Othe, Othee, 49, 50, 83,
105, 106, 107, 108,179
Ui-Tuathal, 50
Urien, 215
Ussher, Abp., 51 n,, 195


Vale of Dublin, 101, 209, 211, 213,
216, 223, 232
Vartry R., Dea, 19, 52, 116 n„ 189
Vicars of Bray, 68, 105, 156, 162,
166-8, 174-5, 223, 224, 225, 233-7
Violet Hill, 140
Walsh family, 124, 130, 131, 134,
137, 141-3. 144, 146, 149, 163,
172, 173, 174, 196
War Hill, 12
Warren, Garret, 142
Water of Brien. See Bray River
Went, Wm., 225, 235
Wells, Holy, 54, 73, 133, 137, 187,
189, 190, 193
Wentworth, 166
Wethenale, Adam de, 180, 196
Wexford, 63, 81, 154, 170
Whately, Edward W., 237
White, Thomas, 186
Wicklow, 52, 63, 130
Wicklow County, 137, 170
Wicklow Gap, 19
Wilson, John, 198
Wilton, Lord Grey de, 127, 128
William, Vicar of Bray, 235
Windgates, 82, 87, 136
Wingfield, 140
Wingfield family, 127, 129, 137,
151-3, 157, 168, 173
Wolverston family, 162-3, 169,174,
191
Woodbrook, 139, 144
Wykynglo, 52
THE END
Printed by Ballantyne, Hanson 6* Co.
at Paul’s Work, Edinburgh








