

f »* %
fAw
THE COMPETITIVE SYSTEM IN INDIA.
VIEW OF LORD MACAULAY.
It is intended to introduce the principle of competition in the
disposal of writerships; and from this change I cannot but
anticipate the happiest results. The civil servants of the Company
are undoubtedly a highly respectable body of men ; and in that
body, as in every large body, there are some persons of very
eminent ability. I rejoice most cordially to see this. I rejoice to
see that the standard of morality is so high in England, that
intelligence is so generally diffused through England, that young
persons who are taken from the mass of society, by favour and
not by merit, and who are therefore only fair samples of the mass,
should, when placed in situations of high importance, be so seldom
found wanting. But it is not the less true that India is entitled to
the service of the best talents which England can spare. That
the average of intelligence and virtue is very high in this country,
is matter for honest exultation. But it is no reason for employing
average men where you can obtain superior men. It is proposed
that for every vacancy in the civil service, four candidates shall be
named, and the best candidate selected by examination. We
conceive that, under this system, the persons sent out will be
young men above par, young men superior either in talents or in
diligence to the mass. It is said, I know, that examinations in
Latin, in Greek, and in mathematics, are no tests of what men will
prove to be in life. lam perfectly aware that they are not in-
fallible tests; but that they are tests I confidently maintain. Look
at every walk of life, at this House, at the other House, at the
Bar, at the Bench, at the Church, and see whether it be not true
that those who attain high distinction in the world, were generally
men who were distinguished in their academic career. Indeed,
Sir, this objection would prove far too much even for those who
use it. It would prove that there is no use at all in education.
Why should we put boys out of their way ? Why should we force
a lad, who would much rather fly a kite or trundle a hoop, to
learn his Latin Grammar ? Why should we keep a young man to
his Thucydides or his Laplace, when he would much rather be
shooting ? Education would be mere useless torture, if, at two or
three and twenty, a man who had neglected his studies were
exactly on a par with a man who had applied himself to them,
exactly as likely to perform all the offices of public life with credit
to himself and with advantage to society. Whether the English
system of education be good or bad is not now the question.
Perhaps I may think that too much time is given to the ancient
languages and to the abstract sciences. But what then ? Whatever
be the languages, whatever be the sciences, which it is, in any
age or country, the fashion to teach, the persons who become the
greatest proficients in those languages and those sciences, will


generally be the flower of the youth, the most acute, the most
industrious, the most ambitious of honourable distinctions. If
the Ptolemaic system were taught at Cambridge instead of the
Newtonian, the senior wrangler would nevertheless be in general
a superior man to the wooden spoon. If, instead of learning
Greek, we learned the Cherokee, the man who understood the
Cherokee best, who made the most correct and melodious
Cherokee verses, who comprehended most accurately the effect of
the Cherokee particles, would generally be a superior man to him
who was destitute of these accomplishments. If astrology were
taught at our Universities, the young man who cast nativities best
would generally turn out a superior man. If alchymy were taught,
the young man who showed most activity in the pursuit of the
philosopher’s stone would generally turn out a superior man.
Speech on the Government in India.
It seems to me that there never was a fact proved by a larger
mass of evidence, or a more unvaried experience than this—
that men, who distinguish themselves in their youth above their
contemporaries, almost always keep to the end of their lives the
start which they have gained. This experience is so vast that I
should as soon expect to hear any one question it, as to hear it
denied that arsenic is poison, or that brandy is intoxicating.
Take down in any library the Cambridge Calendar. There you
have the list of honours for a hundred years. Look at the list of
wranglers and of junior optimes; and I will venture to say that,
for one man who has in after-life distinguished himself among the
junior optimes, you will find twenty among the wranglers. Take
the Oxford Calendar, and compare the list of first-class men with
an equal number of men in the third class. Is not our history
full of instances which prove this fact ? Look at the Church, or
the Bar. Look at Parliament, from the time that Parliamentary
government began in this country —from the days of Montague
and St. John to those of Canning and Peel. Look to India. The
ablest man who ever governed India was Warren Hastings, and
was he not in the first rank at Westminster? The ablest civil
servant I ever knew in India was Sir Charles Metcalfe, and was
he not of the first standing at Eton ? The most eminent member
of the aristocracy who ever governed India was Lord Wellesley.
What was his Eton reputation ? What was his Oxford reputation ?
“ Nothing can be further from our wish than to hold out
premiums for knowledge of wide surface and of small depth. We
are of opinion that a candidate ought to be allowed no credit at
all for taking up a subject in which he is a mere smatterer.
Profound and accurate acquaintance with a single language ought
to tell more than bad translations and themes in six languages.
A single paper which shows that the writer thoroughly understands
the principles of the differential calculus ought to tell more than
twenty superficial and incorrect answers to questions about
chemistry, botany, mineralogy, metaphysics, logics, and English
history.


“ But the youth who does best what all the ablest and most
ambitious youths about him are trying to do well will generally
prove a superior man ; nor can we doubt that an accomplishment
by which Fox and Canning, Grenville and Wellesley, Mansfield
and Tenterden first distinguished themselves above their fellows,
indicates powers of mind, which, properly trained and directed,
may do great service to the State.”
“ We hope and believe, also, that it will very rarely be necessary
to expel any probationer from the service on account of grossly
profligate habits, or of any action unbecoming a man of honour.
The probationers will be young men superior to their fellows in
science and literature; and it is not among young men superior
to their fellows in science and literature that scandalous immorality
is generally found to prevail. It is notoriously not once in twenty
years that a student who has attained high academical distinction
is expelled from Oxford or Cambridge. Indeed, early superiority
in science and literature generally indicates the existence of some
qualities which are securities against vice—industry, self-denial, a
taste for pleasures not sensual, a laudable desire of honourable
distinction, a still more laudable desire to obtain the approbation
of friends and relations. We therefore believe that the intellectual
test which is about to be established will be found in practice to
be also the best moral test that can be desired.” —Life and Letters,
by G. O. Trevelyan.
THE SYSTEM TESTED.
Extract from Report made by the Civil Service
Commissions to the India Office in March, 1875.
In the first place, whatever may be said as to the calibre of the
young men who now enter the service, there is the best evidence
to prove that it is on the whole higher than it was under the
system of nomination. The results of an enquiry on this point,
instituted by the Government of India, were thus summarised by
the Governor-General, Lord Laurence, in a Despatch dated
sth May, 1866 :
“We would observe that as the civil servants who were first
appointed under the system of competitive examination, have not
been ten years in India, and as consequently the great majority of
the servants so appointed are still holding very subordinate
positions in the public service, it would in our opinion, be pre-
mature to pronounce conclusively whether or not the Civil Service
has, as a whole, been improved by the present system.
“ We are inclined, however, to believe that it has, for it may at
least, we think, be confidently affirmed that the present system is
effective to exclude great inefficiency, which undoubtedly was not
excluded under the old system; and also that the young men who
enter the service under the present system are, as a rule, more
highly educated than those who found admittance under the former


system. Even if there should be some defects in the present system,
and we are not prepared to point to any, we are disposed to think
that they would be more than counterbalanced by the results
above-mentioned.”
Extract from Dispatch by Lord Salisbury to the
Governor-General of India, 24TH February, 1876.
“With respect to the principle of competition itself, the evidence
you have collected sufficiently shows that it cannot be disturbed
without injury to the public service. The expressions of opinion
which I have received from competent judges in England lead
me to the same conclusion. Of its success as a mode of selecting
persons fit to serve in the India Civil Service, there seems to be
no reasonable doubt. The ability which it collects is not the same
in kind as that which distinguished the service appointed under
the previous system, and there may be truth in the allegation for
which some of your officers contend, that under it instances of
the most conspicuous ability are more rare. But this difference,
so far as it exists, may be reasonably attributed to a different
cause. Great powers are developed by great occasions, and these
have been of very rare occurrence since the present limits of the
Indian Empire have been reached. On the other hand, it is
generally admitted that, if exceptional powers are rarer than in
older times, exceptions of an opposite kind have almost
disappeared.
“ Some writers speak in their reports to the physical inferiority
of the candidates selected under the new system. On this point
a conflict of testimony exists. While the evidence of actual
observers, supported by the comparative sick-leave statistics,
appears to incline to the less favourable view, there are dis-
tinguished medical witnesses in England upon the other side.
The question appears to require further examination. It is
possible that sufficient weight in the competition has not been
given to physical qualifications, but this charge, if true, would not
be an objection to the principle of competition, but rather to the
mode in which it is applied. On the whole, your Excellency’s
personal testimony, based on a wide experience of the public
service, and the prevalent opinion among the officers whom you
have consulted, sufficiently establish that selection of competition
has been successful in furnishing an efficient Indian Service, and
that whatever defects may be noted, are not such as to justify any
fundamental change of system.”
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
