





%


V
*
■*


THE DRUIDESS.
A STORY FOR BOYS AND OTHERS.
FLORENCE GAY.
Xtmfcmt:
JOHN OUSELEY.
16, FARRINGDON STREET, EC.
[all rights reserved.]


,
...


P06013
2 fc JUN 1538
PREFACE.
As this story touches upon history to a
certain extent, perhaps too much licence has
been taken with Ethelbert’s movements in
bringing him as far west as the Severn Valley.
The union between the Britons and Saxons
was suggested by the historical league formed
between the Britons and those Saxons who
revolted against the detested Ceawlin, and,
settling in the valley of the lower Severn, took
the name of Hwiccan. The date of this
league was 592 —eleven years after the destruc-
tion of Uriconium which in the following
story is placed about 578. Some liberty,
also, has been taken with the date of Ethel-
bert’s marriage with Bertha, which took place
in 584.
It seems hardly necessary to say that Banba
and Fail are old bardic names for Ireland.
And that the cities Gloucester, Cirencester
and Bath were known in Roman days as
Glevum, Corinium and Aque Sulio.
S. Kevin is known also as S. Coemgen.
The date of the Convocation at Druimceta
is difficult to discover, but must have been
during the reign of S. Columba’s friend, King
Aedh, 572-599.




Dedicated to my Nephews and Nieces.




CONTENTS
Chapter. Page.
I. From the Britons’ appeal to
Aetius —Commander of the
Roman Armies, 446 A.D. .11
1 1
11. Gleand de . . . .21
111. From the Epistle of Gildas
THE MOST ANCIENT BRITISH
Author .... 29
IV. Many a branch of the race
of Conn is in the land of
Banba of smooth grass
(Book of Lecan). . . 37
V. Why Ethne hates the
Christians. ... 50
VI. The Sacred Heart of
Hibernia .... 60
VII. Into the Arms of Moloch . 69
VIII. Ethne again as Leader . 79
IX. To the North ... 88
X. Bards of Hibernia . . 98
XI. Saint Columba . . . 114
XII. The Fair .... 122
XIII. Man and Woman . . . 134
XIV. Leader of the Kymry . . 149
XV. The Black Horse . . . 158
XVI. Ethelbert of Kent . . 172
XVII. Ethne’s Error . . . 181
XVIII. England’s First Christian
Queen .... 189


-


THE DRUIDESS.




THE DRUIDESS.
CHAPTER I.
“ The barbarians drive us to the sea ; the sea drives
us back to the barbarians ; between them we are exposed
to two sorts of death ; we are either slain or drowned."
(From the Britons’ appeal to Aetius-Commander
of the Roman armies 446 A.D.)
Upon a cold, spring morning in the year of
Our Lord 577, the closing scenes of a battle
were being fought out on the western shore
of Britain ; in that part of the country then
called Damnonia ; on a stretch of low-lying
land, between the two rivers—the Yeo and the
Axe.
On the winning side stood the Saxons with
the whole breadth of vanquished Britain
behind them —on the losing, the Britons with
but a narrow strip of land between them and
the sea ; that narrow strip of flat sea-shore


There were women on both sides. Brawny-
limbed, red-skinned Saxons with floating
ruddy hair—fighting with a strength and
valour worthy of the men beside them ; as
much at home in that scene of blood-shed as
they were by their hearths making the trews
and baking the bread of their lords and his
ceorls. British ladies reared in the refinement
and luxury that the Romans had made com-
mon in Britain ; satin-skinned and white-
handed, strangers to the lightest toil—now
forced, in dire necessity, on the battle-field ;
but, once there, waging war with the spirit
of their ancestress, Boadicea ; smaller and
slighter than their foes and untutored in the
art of weapons, they were gifted with a natural
dexterity and passion that enabled them, in
this hour of need, to be of service to their
lords and brothers.
One, in particular, had been conspicuous
in the long three days’ fight, on account of her
activity and skill. A slight, dark woman,
raven-haired and white-limbed, clad in robes
of royal saffron-colour, flashing with gold and
emeralds. Often by her side was a youth,
who bore a strong likeness to her ; and these
two, woman and boy, commanded the retreat-
ing Britons.


The boy was mounted on a beautiful Hiber-
nian stallion, of a pure jet-black, and on the
banners still drooping, here and there, over-
head was the emblem of a Black Horse in
opposition to the White Horse of the Saxons.
No leader could have shown more courage
and spirit than this youth. In this last agony
of defeat his example still inspired his follow-
ers ; he gave no sign of the almost mortal
wounds with which his body was pierced ; his
garments were red with blood, and his horse
was smeared with white, where the sweat had
lathered into foam—but on that stricken field
every valiant warrior showed battle stains,
and every jaded steed was pale with foam.
Strapped on the shoulder of the boy-leader
was a small image of the Virgin, and in the
ranks, behind him, were numerous emblems
of the Christian Faith.
This was not only a battle between Saxon
and Briton, it was also a battle between
Christian and Heathen • and yet the woman,
on the Christian side, from time to time broke
forth into the Druidical incantations of early
British days ; this she did in moments of
savage passion as she stood upright in her car
dealing forth death from the sheaf of arrows
at her side.


In one comer of the battle-field the mist-
cloud lifted wholly for a few minutes, and the
sun shone on the thinned ranks of the Britons
showing them woefully hindered in their
movements by fallen warriors and horses ;
a mere sprinkling of young and strong re-
mained ; here and there a wounded man
raised himself and still tried to use his bow.
Old men and women fought on desperately.
The war-dogs were still numerous—a veritable
phalanx armed with spiked collars and goaded
into savage rage, strangely horrible with their
red, hanging tongues and bloodshot eyes.
In the sudden gleam of sunshine the boy
saw that the woman leader was in extreme
peril. She had driven her chariot so quickly
over the grass —slippery with dew and blood—
that her horse had fallen. The boy galloped
over dead and dying to her side—as he rode
he saw a javelin, aimed at the woman, pierce
the side of the struggling horse.
At a sign from his friend, the youth, with
rare dexterity, harnessed his own horse to her
chariot, in place of hers. She pointed to a
gap in the ranks of a small band of Saxons ;
and, mounting again on his steed, the boy
galloped with her to the spot —the sharp
knives of the chariots doing desperate work


among a body of Saxon soldiers through which
they ploughed.
It was the ancient method of warfare, which
the woman by instinct had followed. At
just such a gap in the ranks of the foe as she
had chosen it was the custom to leap from the
chariot and charge on foot; but now she
remained standing in her car and, suddenly
cutting the traces, set her companion free to
charge furiously on the surprised enemy—
whilst she aided him by a quick shower of
arrows. Her artifice succeeded; the boy
bounded forward causing such havoc among
a little band of Saxons that they—taken off
their guard—turned and fled.
In the panic of the moment the enemy did
not see that the boy’s gallant horse had
received his death-wound. With a last frantic
attempt to obey his master’s onward signal,
the animal raised itself on its hinder limbs,
pawed wildly in the air, gave one long, whist-
ling breath and, with throat and nostrils
choked with blood, fell back dead —and, in
falling, fell upon his master.
It was the last act of the long, stubborn,
futile resistance. The hovering fog-cloud
swept down again upon the field as a curtain
drops at the end of a scene.


The woman stood —listening. She could
hear the steps of the retreating Saxons —but,
beyond that, was another indistinct and dis-
tant clamour ; her quick sense of hearing was
confused ; she bent and laid her ear to the
ground. She listened intently and learnt
that the main body of the Saxon host was
advancing towards them.
Flight alone remained. She looked towards
the flat sea-shore ; the water only revealed
itself for a stone’s throw —all beyond was fog
—the sea that was visible was sullen grey with
furious, crested waves of dead-white foam.
Even in that moment’s glance she saw fugitives
from her owm ranks, perish on the ocean —
w r ashed from the frail rafts they had hastily
made and set forth upon.
What of the boy lying crushed under his
war-horse —w r as he dead ?
He still breathed —but not all the strength
she could summon was sufficient to extricate
him from his position, had not a larger and
stronger woman come to her aid. From
her appearance the new r comer was Saxon,
rather than British ; she had the same blue
eyes and yellow hair, the same strong features
and heavy frame as the enemy from whom
they w'ere fleeing ! With the strength and


haste of despair the two women dragged the
dead horse from the boy’s body, and carried
off the unconscious hero.
When they reached the shore they found
a raft awaiting them ; and in a few seconds
they were being pushed off, through the surf,
by a few remaining British slaves.
They were accompanied by two or three
scores of their own countrymen; but of these
the greater number were soon washed from
their rafts and their drowned bodies cast back
again upon the beach.
In a few minutes the approaching Saxons
had reached the shore ; some of the more
blood-thirsty dashed through the water in
pursuit, but they were either drowned or
driven back by the waves.
Just as their bark had passed safely through
the surf, the two women saw a dark form
swimming swiftly towards them. The fair-
haired girl gave a cry for joy, as she dis-
tinguished the head of a great war-hound
above the water ; the animal had been often
by the side of the youth during the battle and
now love of his master drew him, bruised and
bleeding, through the waves. The smaller
woman would have beaten him off with her
oar ; but the other prevented her and aided


the animal as he scrambled on to the raft, and
threw himself beside the boy. The quarrel
over the animal was so violent that the bark
was in danger of foundering ; the dark woman
showed as much fury against the girl as she
had shown that day against the enemy.


CHAPTER 11.
/ /
Gleand de.
In the days when cells and churches sprang
up like mushrooms throughout Hibernia,
Saint Kevin had chosen as the site of one of
his monasteries that point on the eastern
shore of Leinster, where the coast is rendered
dangerous by sand-banks.
The little band of monks who dwelt there
added to their life of toil a special watch upon
the sea ; they made the rescue of fugitive
Britons their peculiar care ; feeling it a sacred
duty to protect members of the Faith, who had
been driven from their homes by the fire and
sword of the heathen. Moreover, S. Kevin,
as a child, had been under the guidance of
Petroc, a Briton, and for this reason Britons
were particularly dear to his followers.
Some days after the battle in Damnonia,
the monks, keeping their ceaseless watch
upon the sea, saw a raft among the wreckage
that the waves were bringing to the shore.


At the peril of their lives they dashed into
the water and dragged the raft safely to the
beach. On it were four unconscious beings.
A fine young chieftain with his body sadly
pierced and wounded —like a marble Antinous
from loss of blood ; bearing marks of royal
birth in his person and in his princely gar-
ments. With his head upon the young
prince’s feet was a great war-hound, hoary
with age, his hair matted with brine and
blood. A big fair girl lay with one arm round
the hound’s neck and the other clasped to her
heart a man’s sword and torques —of so rich
and rare a pattern that only a great king could
have possessed them. A little removed from
these three beings was a small dark woman
from w'hom the simple monks recoiled at first,
saying she had the air of a sorceress ; she was
clothed royally, like the boy, and w'as fair,
too, as women are accounted fair in Hibernia
—having long fine hair of ebony blackness.
It needed much care and skill to bring the
three human beings from the death-like trance
to which exhaustion and exposure had brought
them. But the monks knew' their work w r ell;
many a homeless Briton had found w'armth and
comfort at their hands; indeed, the little mon-
astery was already so thronged by castaways


that it was thought better to carry the three
poor refugees to Saint Kevin’s great monastery
at Glendalough —where the sculptured saint
may still be seen in the ancient ruin called
Priest’s house ; he is the central figure in the
triangular pediment of the doorway, bearing
on his head the crown of the early bishops of
Ireland.
Crowned with gold, he is represented to the
world ; yet, in the life he led in the wilderness,
it must have been seldom that crown or mitre
adorned his head. His monastery at Glenda-
lough was too luxurious for him, and, for years
at a time, he would withdraw himself into the
heart of the woods, sheltering in a hollow tree
or bee-hive hut ; without fire, and existing on
herbs and water. In the long trances of
prayer, into which he would fall, the beasts
rambled fearlessly around him, the birds
perched on his arms and shoulders singing
and twittering about him. At such times, he
said, the leaves and branches gave forth divine
music to him. It was the state of spiritual
ecstasy common to the early saints; who
tested to the full the efhcacy of prayer from
which they drew the spiritual power that shed
a greater influence than a life spent in ceaseless
activity.


Glendalough, or Gleand de, signified Valley
of God ; it seemed a fitting name, for there the
tender-hearted monks laboured every day
among the Britons whom they had rescued,
sharing with them their own scanty food.
Only a ragged hut of wattles with heather
beds could be spared to the newcomers ; but
the monks brought cushions of down to spread
upon the heather and begged, from the neigh-
bouring chieftains, warm cloaks and skins of
sheep and bear.
The women recovered before the boy.
When, at last they were able to sit up and
look about them, their eyes—that had closed
on scenes of bloodshed and storm —opened
on green meadows dotted with apple-trees
in full bloom and bordered by gardens filled
with herbs and fruit-bearing plants. On a
sunny slope stretched a vineyard, and in the
distance were rows of bee-hives—bees and
vines, sure sign of a monastery i Gentle-
faced monks were at work on the soil, their
songs mingling with the cheerful tinkle of
carpenters and masons at their trades, for on
the land around were being raised high, domed
churches and beautiful carved crosses. On
the breeze came the sound of silver bells.
When the wounded youth opened his eyes


and saw this scene and heard its pleasant
sound, he cried out that he was in Paradise.
“ Tir Tairgirie !” he cried ; the delirium of
weakness was upon him. “ The Saxons have
slain body, but spirits have carried my soul
hither to its resting place ! ’
He raved of Tir Tairgirie—the paradise of
every Celt, the constant theme of their bards.
Hidden from earthly vision by a cloud, full
of lovely dwellings, grass and flowers ; a place
of unending day and perpetual fagless sum-
mer —abounding in meat and apples—free
apples—free from disease or death.
As the young warrior slept the two women
watched over him.
The rain—the frequent rain of Hibernia—
came up on the wind, and beat through the
wattles of the cote and on the arms and
bosoms of the women. But they gave no
heed to wind or rain so long as their warrior was
protected—stripping their own bodies to add
to the coverings the monks had begged for
them from the chiefs around—purple cloaks,
wrought with rich broidery by Fail’s fair
daughters.
“ Go!” said one woman to the other.
We need thee not —he and I.” The speaker


had the cold, brilliant beauty of ebony and
alabaster.
“ No,” replied the other ; “he woke with
my name on his lips.”
“Ay !” said the first. “ A dream cry —
a wail of nightmare horror. Thou art his
evil star. And with thy sobs, thy hoggish
sighs and silly tears thou dost disturb his
rest ! Leave him to my care. lam sick of
thy blunders.”
“ Then will I wait on thee,” said the fair
girl, bluntly. “ Ay, though I hate thee,
Ethne of the Raven Hair. I will put all
within reach of thy hand that thou need’st.
I; will go and come at thy beck and call—for
thou hast rare skill in sickness, that I see —and
I will serve him through thee.”
Ethne watched the boy jealously. An
early training among the Druids had given
her great knowledge in Nature’s laws, and she
knew that the loss of blood which was the
warrior’s chief danger could be cured by rest
and food and air. She did not leave him
night or day. Yet, as she watched him,
there was neither love nor tenderness in her
gaze.
On the fourth day after their journey to


Glendalough he opened his eyes and looked
at her. She saw the fever had left him.
“ There, there,” she said, softly. “ Sleep
on now, and take your rest —wounds need
time to heal, and time now we have in plenty.”
The boy would have raised his head, but at
the attempt pain closed, like a vice, on his
temples ; a white arm, laden with bracelets,
held him back on his pillow of heather.
His eyes dwelt on the white arm ; he recog-
nised the royal saffron-scent of the drapery
that fell over it. With a feeble movement he
turned so that his cheek might rest against it.
“ Where is she —the Saxon —Elgiva ?” he
asked after a time.
“ She prays,” was the answer ; the boy
knew, without looking, that there was a smile
of scorn in the dark eyes and on the sneering
lips above him.
Through the openings of the wattled cote
in which he lay he had seen that the day was
dark and gloomy; the sky so purple with
coming storm that the sprays of hawthorn
aloft had a faint, pinkish tinge upon them.
The day was as dark and tempestuous as his
own sad soul.
“ She prays,” continued the scornful voice,
“ and has she not need to pray—to offer up


thanksgiving ? The Saxons smote us on one
cheek, then we offered the other—full and
grievously have we been smitten on both.
Therefore she may well be pleased at our per-
formance of the Christians’ Duty !”
The woman paused, and when she spoke
again there was rage as well as scorn in her
tones.
“ Never forget, boy, the fruit thy father’s
Christian zeal has borne ! In the shaping of
thy future life, remember always, Cormac
of Fail, that this mushroom faith has cost us
our British possessions ! ”


CHAPTER 111.
“ some to the mountains —others yielded to be
slaves because of hunger—others to the seas—singing
and sighing under the shadow of their sails.”
(From the Epistle of Gildas, the most ancient
British author.)
“ Prate to me no longer of marriage and
giving in marriage. We love each other—
that’s enough ! Perchance we’ll love others,
and a many, ere we die. Marriage, forsooth !
And this new-fangled Christian craze —one
man, one wife—’tis folly ! Fit only for maids
and striplings. Tush, boy! I have borne
with thee, and humoured thee, because of thy
hurt—but now I am weary of this madness !”
Cormac made no reply ; only gazed with
love-sick eyes at the speaker, Ethne of the
Raven Hair.
She had brought him back from death to life ;
when he lay more helpless than a babe she had
raised his head and put food between his lips ;
in hours of pain and weariness she had antici-
pated his least want. He had lost his father, his


lands, his favourite horse —all that had meant
the world to the boy —but Ethne remained,
and he loved her.
“ In a few more days,” she said, “ you wall
mount your horse again.”
“My horse !” said the boy, bitterly. “ I
have not even the power to save his bones from
the crows.”
“ There are other horses in the world,”
replied the woman impatiently. “ You shall
have another stallion, Cormac—blacker and
more beautiful than the last. When you ride
to battle again the banners shall bear the old
device. The Black Horse is not vanquished—
he is but worsted for a time—he will rise again
victorious. The Black Horse, Cormac of
Fail, the Black Horse against the White ! ”
The boy shook his head.
“ I will never fight again,” he said, mourn-
fully. “ The world is lost to me —you are my
world now, Ethne, and when you cease to love
me I shall die.”
Again his thoughts wandered gloomily on
the late events —the hideous defeat—the tem-
pestuous sea—the days of agony and weak-
ness.
They were sitting out of doors, at a short
distance from the little wattled cote the


monks had given them. The day was so
warm that Ethne had unfastened the long
gold brooch on her left shoulder and thrown
off her brat, or shawl. Her white arms and
bosom were bare, beautiful gold torques
twined her arms; a gold crescent shone above
her forehead. Her thick black hair fell
about her to her knees—round her waist was
a rich purple scarf, called a criss, fringed with
gold and embroidery. Her saffron-coloured
tunic was open at the bosom and showed an
embroidered under garment called a lann.
Her dress was that of a princess of Hibernia.
His words brought a smile to her face.
Ethne’s beauty was gone when she smiled, for
the turned back lips revealed a terrible defect—
that her eye-teeth had grown double the length
of the others and were sharp and jagged, like
the fangs of a wild beast.
“ Mere words ! ” she said, with the ugly
smile growing stronger. “If you loved me,
you would follow my wishes.”
“ I will follow you to the end of the world,”
he said. “ Only try me.”
At his words the woman turned sharply and
looked at him with glittering eyes.
“ Do you mean this ? ”
“ I do.”


Her nostrils grew large —her breath came
loud and heavy. She raised her clenched hand
upward. The boy’s spirit rose.
“ Would you to battle again ? ” he asked.
“ Where —how ? ”
“ Where ! —how i ” she screamed. “ Here
in Hibernia! Rally the men of Hibernia
around you—and take your sword and strike
at this Christianity that has cost us our home
and country !”
She had risen in speaking. Now she sat
down again and pressed her lips together ; and
she placed her hand upon her heart, trying to
subdue her passion.
She looked at him narrowly, as though half
fearing the effect of her words upon him. He
trembled from head to foot.
“ This is madness ! ” he said, in a low voice.
“ The madness of despair —and it is harder for
you than for us, for you had not Elgiva’s cause
at heart.”
“ Elgiva ! ” she hissed. “ Accursed Saxon
name ! ”
Ethne leapt from her seat again ; and, with
her face and clenched hand thrown to the sky,
let fall a hundred curses on her foes.
She had found a vent for her smothered


wrath, and the boy forgot for the time her for-
mer words.
The fear and loathing of the Saxon were
upon them both. They fell into each other’s
arms sobbing and crying out that Rome had
done this thing to them. Rome had deserted
them in their hour of need.
“ The Romans taught us to love ease and
luxury,” cried the boy, “ and to cry out for
help when we were hurt ! When we had learnt
our lesson well, they sailed away and left us.
Then that fool Vootigern did his pretty piece
of work —he made room in the nest for the
cuckoo who has kicked us out of fair Britain.”
“ There is little left of fair Britain now,”
cried Ethne. “ They have made sword-land
of half of it, the other grows smaller every
day—this last defeat has cut it in two. Dam-
nonia and Cornwall, with the precious fortress,
Tintagil, is severed from the rest. Men say,
too, towards Caledonia there is a weak spot,
where the Angles of the North are pressing
closer to the sea.”
The boy’s face grew sadder. It was mon-
strous —incredible ! The fair isle of Britain
over-run by barbarians; its gentle people
made food for vultures, bound in hideous
serfdom or hid like vermin in the crevices of


the earth. Noble lords and tender ladies
herding, like animals, in caves—and filling
their starving bodies with oak-flittern and
beech-mast of the forest ! The boy folded
his arms tightly over his heaving bosom.
In all the bitterness and shame that his
thoughts brought him —hardest of all was the
knowledge that he had not died upon the battle-
field. He had fled, he said to himself—uncon-
sciously, indeed —but, nevertheless, he had
fled! Flown before the Saxons like fire—as the
heathen themselves were wont to describe it.
“ It is late, Cormac,” said Ethne, suddenly,
looking at the shadows of the trees. “ Long
past noon, and you have need of meat and
milk. Soon, very soon, you will be well
enough to fast one day and feast the next;
but we have not finished yet our work of
making flesh and blood !”
When they entered their dwelling, the little
round building seemed all gloom and smoke.
But a bright voice greeted them and, when
they were seated, a young girl brought them
bowls of broth. She had been standing over
the smoky central fire, stirring the contents
of an iron cauldron with a ladle of yew-wood.
Her eyes were red from the smoke, and her
hands black and scorched from handling


some half-charred nuts she had been roasting
in the ashes.
Ethne and Cormac seated themselves on
some leathern cushions piled on a heap of dry
heather; the girl drew a low stool of yew-
wood before them, and laid their platters
upon it. She threw herself down, at some
little distance, and proceeded to eat the nuts
she had taken from the fire. An old war-
hound, blind in one eye and covered by half-
healed scars, dragged himself towards her and
lay down with his head resting against her
knee. He had previously feasted well from
the bones of the soup-pot; but now he took
one or two of the roasted kernels she offered
him and made a show of eating them, as
though to please her. It was the same hound
who had followed them on their flight from
Britain, whose life the girl had saved and for
whom she had received wounds from Ethne •
he was a wonderful creature still, in spite of
his age—all muscle and fire—of the breed the
Romans had admired; so tall, his head
reared itself to the height of a man’s shoulder ;
so strong he could bear a man over bog and
boulder ; his one great eye, set in a cavern,
seemed lit as by a spark of fire ; his lean


form, clothed by shaggy hair, of a weird
colour, resembling the hair-like growth of
ancient pine-trees.


CHAPTER IV.
“ Many a branch of the race of Conn is in the land of
Banba of smooth grass.”
(Book of Lecan.)
The girl rose often and attended to the wants
of her companions. Cormac’s eye fell on
her and marked the difference between her
and Ethne. The contrast was strong. The
young Saxon wore a straight robe of sack-
cloth, frayed here and there, and stained
from labour in the field and at the fire-side ;
her feet were bare ; she wore no ornaments ;
her hair, tangled and powdered with ashes,
was badly plaited, tied with rushes and drawn
round her neck. Her skin was red and rough,
her movements awkward, her hands large and
toil-worn. She was as broad and tall as a
fully-developed woman, but she had the
shapeless figure and raw limbs of a child, or
an awkward boy.
Once when she stooped over Ethne, in filling
her cup, the Celtic woman raised her hand and
slapped her in the face.


“ Ah, beast !” she cried. “ Cub of a Saxon
sire—l loathe thy very touch!”
When the meal was over, some water was
required from the spring, and the girl ran to
get it. The hound, who could not endure the
Saxon out of his sight, followed her.
Ethne sneered as she glanced after the
retreating figures.
“It will soon be time, Cormac of Fail,”
she said, “ for you to take the Saxon maid to
wife. She will make a fitting bride for a king,
in yon sack-cloth shift.”
Again she sneered —Cormac grew crimson.
“ And thou can’st have none other. Re-
member that ! One wife must suffice for a
Christian. Ha, ha !”
Cormac pushed his platter from before him
and rose.
“ Ethne,” he said, “ I cannot fulfil my
father’s commands. I cannot wed the Saxon.”
He trembled from head to foot. He had
left Ethne’s side and was gazing on the wall,
where a golden crown, torques of gold, and a
king’s sword were displayed, deeply stained
with blood. They had been taken from his
father’s body on the field of battle ; Elgiva,
the Saxon, had carried them away, and she
had placed them on the wall of their dwelling.


The boy stooped forward and kissed the
tokens, one by one. The tears streamed
from his eyes.
Solemnly he knelt down and, clasping his
hands together, looked upward as though in
prayer.
“ Father,” he cried, “ forgive me, but I
cannot fulfil thy commands —for marriage
without love is no marriage—and I loathe the
Saxon !”
The boy’s grief was touching. Ethne
watched him with the ugly sneer lifting her
lip and showing the fang beneath.
“ Well done, boy !” she cried. “ A good
Pictish chieftain needs no Saxon among his
wives.”
Both the speakers turned as a wooden pail
was cast down on the ground. Elgiva stood
before them.
“ What work is this you are at now,” she
cried. “ Ethne of the Raven Hair ?”
The girl’s broad chest, red from sun and
wind, heaved under her sack-cloth. She
frowned on both Ethne and Cormac.
“ Why do you seek to turn the son against
the father’s wishes ?”
The dog, which had followed the girl, gave
a low growl as he noticed her attitude, and


pressed closer to her side. She threw her arm
round the creature’s neck ; his one eye, red
as a coal, burned with hatred as he looked
at Ethne.
“ Child of a Saxon savage,” replied Ethne,
haughtily, “ do I render account to thee of my
doings ?”
The girl gave no heed to the taunt.
“ Nay, but he shall wed me,” she cried,
firmly, “ and fulfil the commands of his
father.”
Ethne burst into low laughter.
“ Thou wilt have a rare bride, Cormac,”
she cried. “ She will mend thy trews like
all true Saxon wives, and she will wear them,
too !”
Cormac strode forward.
Every word the Saxon uttered angered him.
He was full of shame and wounded vanity
when he looked at her ; she was so raw, ugly,
and uncouth. Her eyes were still red from
the smoke ; her mouth, naturally large, was
increased in size by half-healed scars.
Now, at Ethne’s mocking laughter, he fell
into a fury.
“ I will not marry thee,” he cried. “ Great
gaby ! Ugly blear-eyed, red-legged girl!”
In his rage he lifted his hand and slapped


her on the face. The old hound whimpered
as though his master had struck him.
Elgiva was speechless with surprise. Cormac
fell back to his old position beside Ethne.
Elgiva’s face smarted with pain ; one of
the half-healed wounds bled afresh. Cormac
had struck her —just as in the days when they
had been babes together ! Moreover, he had
said he would not marry her. Her eyes filled
with tears ; she did not care for the pain, or
for Cormac’s unkindness to her —but the
thought that he had turned so soon against
his dead father’s wishes was anguish !
“It is your fault, Ethne,” she said. “ You
have persuaded him to say this. You are
wicked and heartless! You did not love
Griffith because he would not make you his
wife. You hate me because, for my mother’s
sake, Griffith warred upon the Saxons !”
She sat down on the floor and, burying her
face in the hound’s neck, sobbed as though
her heart would break. The animal licked
her hair and shoulders. Cormac watched
her uneasily. It was unlike Elgiva to give
way to tears. The Saxon blood which flowed
in her veins—loathed by herself as well as by
her companions—had endowed her with a
stoical calm in times of ordinary distress.


He began to feel ashamed of the blow he had
given Elgiva. He had determined that he
could not marry her, but the very fact that
he was breaking his father’s commands made
him more anxious to show kindness to one
who had served that father with more than a
daughter’s devotion.
He remembered how, on the battle-field,
she had attempted to throw herself between
him and his death-blow ; and how' she had
waited on his dying moments under the
swords of the enemy.
In the midst of her grief, a new and com-
forting idea came to Elgiva. She sat up sud-
denly, ceased sobbing, and looked inquiringly
at Cormac.
“ Perhaps,” she cried, “ you have no mind
to marry ! You mean to follow the good
Saint Kevin and become a monk !” If such
were the case, Cormac’s treatment of her
was explained. Had not the holy Kevin him-
self done more than Cormac when a girl had
spoken to him of marriage ? Had he not
taken a great bunch of nettles and beaten her
with them till she was sore ? Elgiva’s warm
heart filled with remorse at her unkind
thoughts of Cormac. She knew r the dead
Griffith’s wishes too well to doubt that it


would be more pleasing to him that Cormac
should enter a monastery than that he should
become her husband.
“To enter a monastery !” sneered Ethne.
“To till the ground like a slave ! To wear
homespun and tend sick-beds ! Bah ! Cor-
mac is a warrior, and the monks have not
enough spirit to kill a slave !”
“Yet the monks drew our raft to shore at
the risk of their lives —and restored us to life,”
said Elgiva. She had risen in anger.
“ But you do not love the monks any more
than you love me,” she said.
“ I hate ye all—Saxon virgin and toiling
slaves!” returned Ethne. “Nor have I
turned slave and ploughman after their exam-
ple.”
The girl glanced down at her roughened
hands and earth-stained dress.
“ No,” she said, “ you add to their work,
instead of sharing it. Even for the saffron
robes on your back you must give the good
men trouble. You sent the poor monk,
Patrick, many a weary mile with a heavy
yew chest on his shoulders. And when the
case was opened what was it you had sent
him for ? Nothing but silk and samite —gold
torques and embroidered crisses !”


Cormac, meanwhile, had been gazing at
Elgiva with a troubled face. He was think-
ing of his dying father on the battle-field, and
of his anguish when their fight for his British
kinswoman had been in vain.
Cormac went up to Elgiva and placed his
hand roughly on her shoulder.
“ Listen, girl,” he said. “ I have told you
I wall not marry you, and it is true. But I
tell you also that I wall rescue your British
mother, or die in the attempt.”
He turned to Ethne and embraced her.
“My Ethne ! My spouse that wall be,”
he cried. “My madness is passed—l am thy
warrior once more—thy warrior with wounds
healed by thee. We will to battle again !”
“ Ahoi!” she screamed, “ Cormac of Fail—
Cormac, the Black Horse, To warriors alone
doth Ethne give her favours ! Piet, I call
thee and brother ! Prince of Hibernia and
twig from the tree of Tara ! Cormac of Fail—
sprung from the loins of gods and princesses !”
She parted her crowding locks and saluted
him fiercely. She drew back and smiled at
him, with the little tusks gleaming on either
side of her mouth. Even with that ugly
smile upon her lips the boy marvelled at her


beauty —at her smooth white limbs, her blue-
black hair, and her flashing purple eyes.
He fell back from the compass of her arms
and drew his sword, flourishing it around his
head.
“ Piet do you call me!” he cried, in the
same screaming voice. “ Ay, Piet am I, and
Piet art thou ! And we will rally Piet and
Scot around us ! We will to Britain again
and harass the Saxons, as in olden days we
harassed the Britons ! Scot am I and Scot
art thou—and the Scots brought Lia Fail
and the Ogham books to Hibernia !”
“ Fire ! ” she returned, “ and blood and
plunder ! Men we make white with fear. Our
swords drink deep of blood of maids and babes.
Ahoi—we will once more to Britain !”
She drew her lips over her savage fangs.
Once more she pressed her hot, fierce mouth
to the boy’s.—She also drew her sword and
brandished it above her head.
“ Blood !” she cried, “ and fire and sacri-
fice ! Come with me, boy, to the sacred
heart of Hibernia and I will show thee warriors
that will set the world on fire. Tell me,
Cormac, wilt thou come ?”
He was as fierce and hot as she, and he


yelled out with bloodthirsty oaths that he
would follow her to the world’s end.
Then —like all true Hibernians, in times of
excitement, they fell to calling pedigrees.
“ Hail, Cormac !” she cried, striking his
shoulder with the flat of her sword, “ Whelp
of the lion, Tuathal !”
“ Tuathal the Legitimate !” chanted Cor-
mac, proudly. “ Sib am I also to Cormac,
son of Art, to Cond of the Hundred Battles,
and Niall of the Nine Hostages !”
“ Sib art thou also to me, Cormac of Fail!”
screamed the woman. “ Through the blood
of an Ethne—Ethne the Terrible, princess
and priestess ! Mighty was she in life, tread-
ing in blood as a milk-maid in dew—and
mighty was she in death, for white oxen drew
wood and treasure to her pyre for nine days
after her death. Myrrh and amber they
brought —unguents and spices and gold.
Beasts they slaughtered by the score, and all
the earth was drenched with mead and blood.”
“ Hail to our ancestress, Ethne !” called
the boy, “ wife of Oengus—Oengus the Chris-
tian, baptised by Saint Patrick !”
“ Nay !” thundered Ethne, suddenly drop-
ping the chanting tone in which they were
speaking. “ But the wife of Oengus—she


of my race and my name, never lapsed into
Christianity ! Druidess she was, and druid-
ess she remained—and in the battle in which
she was slain her incantations struck awe into
the hearts of all that heard them !”
Then again her voice grew high and shrill
as a battle-cry.
“ Blood and sacrifice !” she yelled “ and
the secrets told by fresh-slain men !”
Suddenly she made a thrust at Cormac with
her sword, a mere feint—so dexterous that,
though it drew blood, it was a mere scratch that
might have been received from a sharp thorn.
There was a light in her eyes, like that of a half-
angry tigress playing with its whelp.
“ Ha, cub ! ” she snarled, “ thou hast been
bred in the faith of a cur but if thou would’st
have Ethne and Ethne’s aid thou must leave
all and return with me to the ancient faith
and to the Druids !”
The boy fell before her, as though he had
received a mortal wound.
“ I cannot understand,” he gasped. “ Thou
art a Christian, Ethne !”
She laughed and folded her arms.
“ I am a Druidess ! Learn that, ye two
poor white-livered Christians.”


Her glittering eyes glanced from Cormac
to Elgiva.
The distant chime of the monastery bells
came softly to their ears ; and closer at hand
the chant of Saint Patrick’s hymn, the Feth
Fiddha. The June sun shone warm through
the chinks in the walls.
For a time Cormac was unable to speak.
When he did so, his voice was hoarse and
uncertain.
“It is a foul and horrible faith. Its rites
are bloody and repulsive —there is human
sacrifice —and the burning to death of men
and women and little children ! At its best
it teaches neither love nor charity.”
She spat upon the ground.
“So much for your love and charity ! I
never heard such words till I lived amongst
fools and Christians !”
“ But thou art a Christian, Ethne !”
The woman again laughed impatiently.
“ A Christian ! ’Twas a slight thing that—
to humour thy fond old father —when in return
he gave me gold and lands !”
The boy’s eyes drooped proudly. He turned
and left the hut, and the old hound slunk after
him.
Two heavy hands seized Ethne’s shoulders


—and the Saxon’s blue eyes flamed into the
purple ones.
It was the age when primitive passions held
sway —and this young girl, reared in the gentle
faith of the Christians—now that her anger
was roused, was every whit as fierce as Ethne.
Ethne seized her knife, but the Saxon
wrenched it from her grasp and threw it to
the farther end of the hut.
“ Viper !” cried Elgiva. “ Foul woman and
false friend ! Thou art un-chaste, un-loving !
Thou hast stolen his heart, and now seek to
defile him in thy Druid rites. He shall not
sacrifice, I tell thee, he shall not sacrifice !”
Ethne was inarticulate with rage. The
two women fought like animals. Ethne tore
at the girl with her teeth, but Elgiva prevailed
—and at length threw the Celt, bruised and
bleeding to the ground.
Then she wept. Not from rage or anger ;
but from fear and the knowledge of her own
weakness. For she knew with Cormac she
was powerless.


CHAPTER V.
Why Ethne Hates the Christians.
Elgiva had spoken the truth when she had
said that Ethne had no love for the dead
Griffith, because he had not made her his wife.
As a child, Ethne had been told she should
be one of the wives of the rich and famous
chieftain, Griffith Finnfuathairt —King Grif-
fith of Erin he was called, though his kingdom
in Hibernia had been long ago cut up and
divided ; when his father, unable to resist the
dangers and excitement of a pirate’s life, had
joined in with some Piets and Scots who led a
life of adventure on the shores of Britain.
After a wildly spent youth, the pirate settled
down with his wives and retainers in Dam-
nonia; there he became the owner of a valuable
lead-mine in the Mendip Hills and, when he
died, his eldest son, Griffith, found he was
possessed of enormous wealth and vast lands
covering the greater part of Damnonia.
Ethne’s father, Brian O’Fhirgil, had been


King Griffith’s bard—as the O’Fhirgil, had
been bards in the family of Finnfuathairt for
generations. Ethne had been sent, as a babe,
to Hibernia ; where she had been fostered, and
where she had lived until she was twelve years
of age. The family, who had fostered her, had
been poor. On her arrival in Britain the
wealth and splendour of Griffith’s lands and
palaces impressed her in a way she had never
forgotten. She was enraptured by the mag-
nificence of the Roman villa where her mother
dwelt with the baby prince, Cormac. From
that day Ethne became a slave to wealth and
luxury. When she was shown the villa des-
tined for her, as Griffith’s wife, her delight
knew no bounds ; and it was arranged that
when she was sixteen she should take her place
in his household. It wanted but three months
to that date, when Griffith, who had always
been attracted by the faith, suddenly became
a Christian.
In the case of a convert of his age, with
several wives and numerous family ties—the
wives were often retained. But Griffith, with
true zeal, separated from all but the mother of
Cormac ; and the coming marriage with Ethne
was, of course, annulled.
Ethne was furious at the disappointment.


In her anger at Griffith’s decision she showed
him so plainly her real motives and fell so low
in his opinion that, when —after the death of
Cormac’s mother —he could have given her
the place she coveted, he declined to do so.
This last slight she never forgave ; although
King Griffith made her the mistress of a hand-
some Roman villa on the Mendip Hills, and
gave her much land and gold as well —this last
she only looked upon as her due, for it was the
duty of every chieftain to dower the daughters
of his bard.
She felt all the misfortunes of her life had
come to her through Christianity ; which had
robbed her, not only of her position as a king’s
wife, but also of her lands and the luxury of
Roman Britain.
In this last onslaught of the Saxons against
the Britons, Ethne felt sure King Griffith
would have escaped, had he not armed and
attacked the enemy.
After conquering the three cities of Glouces-
ter, Cirencester and Bath the West Saxons,
under Ceawlin, had driven the Britons to the
sea across a long stretch of coast, extending
from the mouth of the Severn towards the
northern bank of the river Axe. Griffith’s
territory lay on the southern bank, was strongly


defended, and the Saxons would not have
been unwilling (so Ethne believed) to have
formed an alliance with him. Alliances were
not uncommon between Piets and Saxons—
and Griffith’s father had been considered a
Piet. It was in vain Ethne reasoned with
Griffith ; he deliberately crossed the Axe, and
attacked the conquering Britons —and it was
his zeal for the Christian faith that led him to
take this step.
Many years before, in a Saxon raid upon
Damnonia, a British woman had been carried
off from Griffith’s territory. The woman
shared the fate of many of her country-women
—she was forced to wed a Saxon.
In this case the woman contrived, from time
to time, to communicate with her friends ; and
with her kinswoman, Griffith’s wife. When
her child, Elgiva, was but a few years of age,
she found means to send her to Griffith ; she
braved the wrath of her husband, rather than
the child should be bred after the manner of its
savage and heathen father.
Griffith formed many plans to rescue the
poor woman ; and in this last fight with the
Saxons he had hoped to succeed.
He knew she was with the Saxon army and
close to the army frontier. Her husband was


dead, but she was retained by his brother,
Redwald, one of Ceawlin’s most powerful
thanes ; who not only kept his brother’s wife
a prisoner, but had shown a desire to gain
possession of Elgiva, also. The woman was
able to communicate with the Britons, and aid
them in their plans. Griffith believed that,
in the tumult and excitement of the time he
could carry her off, quickly and easily re-cross
the Axe, and retire to his strong and impreg-
nable castle of Brean Down. It has been
shown how fatally he was mistaken ; how he
was slain, and his tribe driven from the shores
of Britain.
“ One reason have I to be thankful in the
midst of all my loss,” said Ethne to herself a
few days after her late interview with Elgiva,
“and that is the death of Griffith ! ”
She was wandering by herself, beside the
stream that watered the valley.
“ Griffith checked me —restrained me—
opposed me in all things. But Cormac Cor-
mac ! I shall twist him to my purpose, as I
twist my hair about my fingers.”
She was determined to link her fortunes
with Cormac’s. He was necessary to her ;
at any rate for the present, because he was the
last of a royal house —of an ancient name to


which she trusted to rally followers. To con-
nect herself with him would strengthen her
own slight connection with his family. She
felt that fortune had favoured her in the fact
that both she and he had inherited a similar
type of face and form —a type dear to Hibern-
ians, combining blue eyes and blue-black hair.
It had given her much thought to decide the
nature of the tie that should unite them in the
eyes of the world. At first she had an idea of
marrying the lad ; but finally decided that it
would further her interests to rely on the bond
of fosterage that existed between them, and
which was strengthened by the fact that their
families were related to each other. The
ancient system of fosterage was almost sacred
in the eyes of Hibernians—she and Cormac
should be known as brother and sister ; chil-
dren of the great Tuathal.
“ Hibernia shall give me warriors to regain
my lost possessions,” she cried. “ And Cor-
mac shall help me to my triumph! How soon
lam rid of him after I care not! ” She threw
her arms towards the sky. “ Why was I bom
a hanger-on of the house of Finnfuathairt ?
Why should he, and not I, be first of the royal
line ?Ye stars ! Help me to power quickly
for I am sick of clinging to the skirts of others !


All my life long Griffith thwarted me—and yet
I was forced to live on his bounty . Now
must I have this cub ever at my side, fearful
lest at any minute he should play me false and
refuse to follow me ! ”
It grew late, but still she remained, wander-
ing up and down the little glade in which she
walked. The moon rose ; and when it was
fully risen she stole away, with a soft, cat-like
tread, towards a little clump of oak trees that
stood on the fringe of the neighbouring forest.
She had not long to wait. Soon her quick
ear caught the sound of a footstep—light and
cat-like as her own. A man muffled in a
Druid’s cloak came quickly towards her.
They met in thick shadow—one or two
patches of moonlight was all that found their
way to them through the leaves, but they
showed that the man, beneath his cloak, was
clothed in shimmering white.
“It is over—you have done it! It was
propitious ? ”
It was Ethne’s voice saying these words.
She was breathless—quivering with excite-
ment.
The man was breathless also, for he had been
running.
“ No —we were disturbed—


“ What ! you have not divined ? ”
“ Listen —we were disturbed —”
“ You have not divined —you have not
divined ! What of your promises—did you
not swear, last time we met, that you would
not come again unless you had done it: ”
She tore at her flowing hair in her anger. “ I
tell you I must consult —I must know’. There
are a hundred things I want advice upon ; you
are all such dolts and thick-heads—”
“ But I tell you—it is difficult —we were
disturbed.”
“ Disturbed ! but you could wait and begin
again i ”
“ We were afraid of discovery —w r e had to
bury the body ! ”
“ You had already killed him, then—it was
a man !
“ Yes.”
“ I believe now a woman is better. Dis-
turbed ! Fools and numb-skulls—then dig
it up and begin once more.”
“ You forget—the body must still be quiver-
ing with life, if we are to read aright! ”
She stamped her foot in anger.
“ How were you disturbed ? ”
“ By the fool Kevin and his monks.”


Rage kept her silent for a minute—then she
burst forth.
“ These Christians i These accursed Chris-
tians ! Everything I set my hand to they
come and spoil! Oh, when I hold Hibernia
in my hands, let them look to themselves ! I
will burn their monasteries over their heads
as the Saxons burnt our palaces! I will
thrust them to the sea—l will throw them to
the bears ! I will cut out their tongues and
give them to my dogs. I will cut their legs
from under them, when they stretch their
hands in prayer, I will strike at them too !
Footless and handless they shall crawl in the
dust before me! ” In her rage she ground
her teeth. Then turned quickly to the man.
“ When will you try again ? ”
“I do not know ! We must wait until Bel-
tane. I told you that long ago. We shall
have more chance then of a victim ! ”
“ A victim—is that your word ? I tell you
if the ancient faith were as it should be, we
should be selecting victims—not seeking them!
What news have you in other quarters —are
our people arming themselves ? ”
“ Everywhere ! ”
“ And the first attack is to be made at
Druimceta ? ”


“ Ay, and a fitting place, too, to strike at
them —since it is there, instead of the ancient
place at Tara, that King Aedh has chosen to
assemble the princes.”


The Sacred Heart of Hibernia.
“ To-morrow —at dawn ! ” said Ethne. “Be
ready ! ”
Cormac was well and strong again ; on the
morrow he was setting forth to see the wild
plains of Hibernia —and Ethne would be at
his side.
He was once more her slave. At first he had
said that he would part from her, would never
look on her face again, if she belonged to that
foul and horrible faith.
But it was in vain he strove against a boyish
passion for a woman more than half-a-score of
years his senior—the very fury of her out-
bursts fascinated him. So it came to pass
that the old relations were established between
them, and little reference made to the cause of
their division.
Though he rose early on the following day,
Ethne was before him ; seated on a beautiful
white horse and holding by the rein a mag-
nificent black stallion.


The creature was a pure bred Hibernian
race-horse. His trappings were mounted with
gold ; a magnificent purple cloak lay across
the saddle, ready for Cormac’s use ; it was
lightly flecked with gold—Cormac saw at once
it was one of the speckled cloaks so much in
vogue amongst the Druids.
“ I told you you should find a horse await-
ing you,” said Ethne, “ and that it would be
of the true colour.”
“ But you did not tell me it would be of the
purest breed the world can show ! ” exclaimed
Cormac, as he leapt to the saddle. The
horse rose on its hind quarters and pranced ;
the colour mounted with joy to the boy’s face!
A stout hide shield was slung on Cormac’s
arm, a short, Irish sword thrust in his belt;
room was found on his horse trappings for a
tough yew bow, a sheaf of arrows bristled at
his side—some with poison lurking in their
points, others tipped with stone and of a rude
make like the arrows of ancient cave-dwelling
people. A pike supplemented his short sword,
and some half-javelins found their place at his
saddle.
He turned to Ethne, and poured out warm
thanks for the horse.
“ The gift is not from me,” said Ethne, her


long hair streaming in the wind as she rode
beside him. “Nor do I know if the givers’
names will please you, my Christian brother.”
“ Tell me ! ” said Cormac.
“ Need you ask ?” returned Ethne. “Where
can you find such fire, such strength, and
lightness, but in the horses of the Druids ?
The steed is a gift to you from my brother-
Druids.”
Cormac made no reply.
“It is a love gift, too, Cormac—for their
hearts are true to the children of Tuathal!
Though they can no longer feast at Tara, they
can pour out such poor treasures as they have
at the feet of their future lord. They are not
rich, boy —and they could have sold that horse
for its weight in gold to the Eastern merchants
who are ever seeking Hibernian racers—but
they chose rather to starve than forego the joy
of giving him to you.”
The boy breathed hard —deeply touched.
“ They shall not find me ungrateful,” he
said.
“ They ask little at your hands,” said Ethne.
“All they say is, Come and Try. Try our
mysteries, and see if they do not yield more
knowledge and certainty than the Christian
faith.”


Cormac shook his head.
“ Well, well, we will not talk of it now,”
said Ethne, lightly raising her arm as a signal
to her horse to go faster.
Ethne looked her best on horseback. She
was as lithe and active as a boy ; and could
rival a man in all the feats common amongst
the riders of the day. She could rise upon her
feet when her horse was at full gallop—could
jump from the saddle and mount again, with-
out drawing rein ; and, as she rode along,
could bend lightly down and pick the wayside
grass and flowers.
Cormac drew deep breaths of rapture as he
rode by Ethne’s side. It was good to feel a
horse under him once more, to feel the wind on
his face and hear the saddle creak beneath
him. It was pleasant, too, to ride beside
Ethne whom he loved ; to laugh and talk ; to
be sure his wounds and weakness were a thing
of the past ; to cherish wild hopes of future
war and victory—that seemed near and pos-
sible on this bright summer morning. He
was a man now, he told himself; he had left
boyhood behind him ; a man and a leader of
men—with a woman at his side. They tra-
velled quickly ; the horses, of their own accord.


broke into a gallop and carried them forward,
mile after mile, in swift, easy motion.
After Cormac’s weeks of confinement, the
long ride was bliss to him. The motion of his
horse was like the flight of a bird, he thought—
such a long, winged, untiring stroke, bearing
him on through the scented summer air. He had
no eyes for the country near at hand; his gaze
was fixed on a gap in the hills before him where
smooth and soft, stretched the waving grass of
Hibernia. In the songs which Ethne sang to
him there was so much about the wild grass of
the great plains. How it w r aved up the slopes
of the hills around, and clothed them to their
summits. How it sprang, everywhere, even
roofs of the little wattled cotes of the hamlets ;
how the bards would lie and sing their melodies
into it, and all the tiny blades would carry the
music from one to another —thus spreading
their songs over all Hibernia. There were a
thousand pretty fancies of a like kind in the
old tales and songs. Cormac noticed how
much greener and richer it was than the grass
of Britain ; unspoilt by frost, bright and fresh
from constant showers.
In the deep, rich pasture hundreds of horses
lived lives of joy—untouched by the hand of
man. In their freedom a thousand times more


beautiful and. graceful than their brothers who
knew bit and saddle. And here, in Hibernia,
thought the boy to himself, he would find war-
riors as fresh and free as the creatures of the
wilds. It was his constant wail that Rome
had caused the ruin of Britain—here he felt the
truth of his words. In the life struggle against
Jute and Angle and Saxon only fierce, wild
races could survive. Civilisation meant in-
deed destruction.
Rome ! he said to himself. ‘ ‘ Rome is
no more ! ”
A Y5 she had been gone for long—fallen prey
to Goth and Hun, but for the first time in his
life Cormac realised it ; and in doing so a
momentary weakness seized him for Roman
civilisation had played its part in his life • it
had drawn his grandfather from his fellows
the Piets and Scots, and made him Bret !
i thought Cormac, in Hibernia he
would find the ancient spirit, unknown in poor
lost Britain. Back, then, once more to Piet
and Scot ! He leapt to his feet, on his horse’s
back as they rode along ; and, brandishing his
sword around his head, uttered the wild scream
ol a war-cry.
Ethne joined her voice to his; and, as they
galloped by wnttled hamlets, by dun and


cabin, all eyes were turned on the two noble
riders and on their black and white horses.
The news spread fast that Cormac of Fail, of
the race of Finnfuathairt, had returned from
Britain. Men, women and children ran every-
where to salute them. A party soon formed
around them, mounted on horseback. When
they halted beautiful girls ran forward, offering
mead and curd to refresh them. Old men tot-
tered from sunny grianans to look upon the
face of the last of the house of Finnfuathairt.
Old women called down blessings upon them
and children peeped at them shyly from hiding
places. Slaves crept unperceived from quern
and hoe to stare upon them, open-mouthed.
Everywhere Ethne proclaimed their lineage.
“ We are the children of Tuathal the Legiti-
mate ! W 7 e trace our descent through the race
of Finnfuathairt ! Cormac of Fail, known in
Britain as the Black Horse; and Ethne of the
Raven Hair —foster sister to Cormac, and like-
wise descended from his family, through Ethne
the Terrible ! ”
Her cry was taken up far and wide ; for
Hibernians never tired of reciting pedigrees.
And, here and there, one would come forward
who remembered her in childhood ; and how


she had been sent for from Britain when her
mother fostered Cormac.
Eveiy hour the crowd around them grew
larger. From marsh and forest wild men came
forth, clad in skins with red naked limbs ■
their beards and long hair plaited, strange
devices tattooing their freckled skins. Even
from the weans beneath the earth, short, long-
armed men, dark and swarthy, scrambled out
and ran, fleet-footed, in the rear—some, among
them, leaping on the great Irish hounds, rode
m this manner amongst the throng.
Thus riding on in triumph, they left the hills
behind, and entered the great central plain of
Hibernia.
The day drew near its close ; but, as the
shadows fell, Cormac thought that the crowd
around him grew thicker. He had pictured
these wide plains desolate and uninhabited ;
and now it seemed to him they swarmed with
people and with flocks and herds—everywhere
he looked he saw lights twinkling.
Ethne had chosen for their journey the time
of the Beltane Festival.
“ U is a fitting time to enter the sacred
heart of Hibernia,” she had said to Cormac in
speaking of the two great Druidical festivals
Beltane and Santheine. “ Therefore I have


chosen it ; it is our time of joy—so hallowed by
custom that even some of the Christians share
it with us.”
There was such excitement and fascination
in these ancient festivals that the wild spirits
of the Hibernians were unable to resist them ;
when, as Christians, they wished to do so.
They entered often from mere love of excite-
ment and danger ; not realising —or realising
too late —that they were offering homage to
the sun-god of the Druids who was no other
than Baal—the Baal of the Syrians, the Phoe-
nicians, and the ancient Hebrews —the Bos-
heth, or shameful thing of the Jewish writings.


CHAPTER VII.
Into the Arms of Moloch !
All hail! all hail ! Son of the House of
Tuathal! Twig from the tree of Tara!”
These words were cried in Cormac’s ear next
evening; as he and Ethne gave their horses
drink at a running stream.
The cry was followed by a shout of victory
as a Druid the horse beneath him wet with
sweat—leapt across the stream ; his beard
and garments streamed in the wind as he
disappeared in the smoke of a circle of fires
“Behold! behold!” cried Ethne, leaning
forward and pointing to the circle of fires.
You have seen the winner !”
With a wild cry, she struck her horse—the
creature bounded forward and she disappeared
after the Druid.
A great wave of excitement passed over
Cormac. He knew enough of the rites of the
Druids to realise what this meant to Ethne.
He had seen the winner of the Snake’s Egg


—the Anguineum ; the most prized of all
druidical charms ; believed to be thrown in
the air from the frothy striving of entangled
serpents ; and eagerly sought after by waiting
Druids who stood around with outstretched
cloaks ready to catch it as it fell. The lucky
Druid who caught it would forthwith ride at
full speed on a waiting horse to gain security
by the placing of running water between
himself and the pursuing serpents —for it
was believed the vipers turned immediately
in pursuit.
As far as Cormac could see, the country
was dotted with wreaths of smoke. As the
evening fell, innumerable fires twinkled under
the smoke ; tongues of hre leapt on every hill,
on every peak and granite column ; they lit up
the tracks in the swale and heath before him.
He knew that to the Druids they were sacred
fires.
As he looked around it seemed to him that
all Hibernia was ablaze. Again the same
wave of excitement passed over him —a
strange, savage thrill as of some unknown
instinct awakening within him. As though
he, like the world around him, had been set
on fire.
Other wild spirits had taken fire, likewise.


The sight of the leaping flames worked like
mead on the Hibernians. Those who still
professed the ancient faith plunged, intoxi-
cated, into all the sacrificial rites of the Druids.
Many who professed Christianity, threw it, for
the time, aside —as they might have thrown
aside a mask; or mingled the fierce and bloody
orgies of Beltane with the rites and ceremonies
of their own Easter.
Suddenly a band of Druids, in shimmering
white robes, circled around Cormac; the set-
ting sun sparkled on their golden harps and
ornaments.
One of their number sprang forward with
cries of praise and greeting. At his call the
other members of the band grouped themselves
around the young prince in attitudes of ex-
travagant joy and homage.
“ Cormac of Fail! Stealer of men’s hearts !
Maker of ravens’ food—and shedder of blood !
Hail, then, to Banba—great son of thy fathers !”
These words were cried in the monotonous
chant of bards accustomed to attune their
voices whenever occasion required it. They
paused ; then smote a full chorus from their
harps.
“ From sea to sea, in this circle of Tuathal’s
carving, every heart is full with joy at thy


return and with sorrow at thy losses. Ahoi!”
The voices rose to a battle-cry. “Ahoi! for
Tuathal of Tara’s hosts! Ahoi, for Tuathal—
maker of Ravens’ food—Tuathal of war horses,
foam-pale! Ahoi, ahoi! We have lost the Egg
—we have missed the sacred thing—but we
have found the child of Tuathal—Tuathal from
Tara of Fail! ”
The bards paused—the earth around Cor-
mac was covered with white-robed Druids,
prone before him. The blood mounted on
the boy’s cheeks. Again they smote upon
their golden harps.
“ Welcome to Hibernia ! Welcome—thrice
welcome ! Behold us at thy feet ! We—the
mouthpiece of thy country! We offer thee all
—all that Fail hath to give! Her gold, her
honey, her white-toothed daughters, her swift
racers, her fair, spotted trout, her sloes, and
apples and brown nuts —her blood for thy
sword to drink. Take all, take all—only let us
worship thee. For art not thou from Tuathal’s
loins ? Tuathal Teachmar ? Who armed his
hosts with spears—who placed his steward over
Ceara and built wattled towers on the hill tops
to protect the land ! Tuathal from Tara of
Fail! ”
They rose to their feet; dropped their harps,


and held out their arms to him, circling about
him.
“ Come back to us, for we love thee—come
back to us ! For art thou not of us, brother
of Ethne ? Brother of Ethne, Ethne, our
Druidess ! ”
Again they broke into wild battle-cries.
Some of them, leaping on their horses, galloped
in a ring around Cormac, followed by their
great barking hounds.
Darkness was falling on the land ; but the
lurid light of the myriad fires lit it in a strange,
unearthly fashion. The noise, the glare, the
mad movement of the circling horsemen con-
fused Cormac.
The frenzy of their sacred rites was upon
the Druids. Golden sickles flashed on high.
A storm of song and shouting followed the
battle-cries. Sharp chords came, crashing from
fiercely smitten harps.
The band led Cormac, with horse and
hound, towards one of the blazing fires;
the horses shying and leaping, terrified at
the blaze, and smoke, and moving shadows ;
the dogs showed their white teeth as they
snarled with fear of the fires.
The clamour increased. Cormac’s heart beat
harder; his face burned.


On the heights above the simple folk were
driving their cattle through the fires—they
received the stir and spirit of the movement;
and, flocking forward, soon swelled Cormac’s
little band to a frenzied host. They stripped
themselves of their garments, and thrust
them before the young man’s horse.
Every step of his advance added fresh
satellites to the ring in which he moved ; as
they circled about him with wild faces and
frenzied shouts, they sprang through fire and
the mazes of sword-dances till their bodies
were singed and bleeding.
Cormac was ascending one of the hills that
dot here and there Ireland’s stretch of central
plain. From far and wide the people were
flocking to a long, sloping hill-side, leading
to the great Dun of Tlachtga that his ancestor
had erected near Athboy. It was the holy
place of the Druids where, on all great festi-
vals, the sacred fire was made from which all
the hearths in Munster were lit.
On the hill-side the flocks and herds mingled
with the people ; driven through and through
the smoke and between the fires, till half mad
with fear. A thousand beast-eyes caught
the red of the flames, and added to the glitter
of the scene ; the jagged horns of oxen


bristled in the close masses ; the wind from
their nostrils played a full accompaniment
to the babel of tongues. Night seemed
lighter than day in the full glare of the fires—
and the moving black shadows seemed full
of points of light, in glittering pike and knife.
The masses of men, women, and beasts
swayed and spread, like a sea, on the hill-side ;
and, above them, flashed like foam the white
dress and limbs of Druid and Druidess—
leaping and bounding on the stone monuments
with which the hill was dotted.
Highest of all a band of chanting Druids
was grouped, motionless, around a great white
bull breathing his last on the stone of sacrifice
—his blood staining their golden knives and
white robes and his own white skin.
Suddenly, in the midst of a surging mass,
a small hand, strong as iron, seized Cormac’s
bridle and wild eyes flashed into his.
It was Ethne ; her saffron garments torn
and singed. The white fell of her stallion
splashed with blood.
“ Choose ! ” she cried. “ Come to us, child
of the sun, and worship with us, or depart to
the saints! They will give you caves to
fester in and cold stones to do penance on—


mast and acorns for hermits’ food—go, Chris-
tian ! ”
The supreme contempt in her tones had
little sting for Cormac. He hardly heard her
words ; with all his might he was struggling
against the overwhelming desire to enter in
upon this scene of fire and danger. The na-
tural desire of a youth to join in the dancing,
wrestling, and horse-racing; and joined to this
was a fierce desire for further excitement and
danger.
The horrible fascination was growing.
In a hush, in the storm, the voices of the
chanting Druids came to his ears—silver
sweet. He could see them raise their sacred
symbols. The beatings of his heart grew
faster.
“You have the Christians’ symbol! ” he
said. “ The Cross ! ”
The Druid at his horse’s bridle borrowed
the silver tone of the sacrificial chanters.
“ We have their symbol,” he said, “ because
we have all symbols—the symbols of all
eternity—reaching to the very limits of the
darkness behind us, to the uttermost limit
of the light before us. We are the sons of the
Sacred Tree—and all knowledge is with us,
and all desire, and all ecstasy ! ”


Beside them was a group of frenzied wor-
shippers cutting their naked bodies with flints ;
their cries broke in upon the silver of the
Druids’ voices in notes of brass.
The youth upon the saddle had closed his
eyes ; he swayed a little as though he had
already drunk of the mead which the people
were spilling and drinking.
“ You are ours,” cried the voice of the
Druid, “ ours ! But you reel and sicken at our
incense as the bee, fresh from the cell, reels
and sickens at a field of clover ! ”
The young warrior opened his eyes. His
face was as white as the Druid robes around
him. He leant forward in his saddle—his
eyes were wide with hunger—the hunger of
fierce, stifled excitement. With one sweeping
glance he took in all the scene before him—
the struggling hosts that seemed to circle
to the far horizon—the smoke blending with
the dark sky above—the stars blending with
the distant fires—the distant fires that brought
the dull glitter of far bog and quagmire into
the play of universal flame. Burning flame
that added crimson to the flowing blood —
flesh to the glancing steel —gold to the
poured-out mead—and snow to the naked
limbs of the frenzied dancers.


His ears were deafened by savage yells,
screams of pipes and cries of terror-stricken
brutes.
Suddenly he leapt to his feet on his saddle—
the flame danced on his brandished sword
and on his eyes —fire seemed to fill his veins.
A battle-cry rang from his mouth. Some-
thing fiercer than love of battle came upon
him—bloodshed, and steel, and mead, and
women, and danger urged him forward into
what looked like a whirlwind of fire and
weapons.
He sprang with a savage cry to the arms
of those awaiting him. He drained the horn
of mead held to his hps. The jewelled fasten-
ings of his robe were unclasped—and seizing
sword and shield he flew, naked limbed and
quivering, into the mazes of sword and fire.


CHAPTER VIII.
Ethne again as Leader.
Just at dawn he left them —after the human
sacrifice had taken place.
He had not realised that the wild and ter-
rible night would end in such a sacrifice. And
it was only when it happened that the full
horror of the festival burst upon him. Then—
just as suddenly as he had entered upon the
scene—he turned and left it.
He went forward blindly. Stumbling, some-
times, over the prostrate bodies of bacchantes
—stupid with mead, half-dead from excess.
The day had fully dawned, the fires were wan-
ing, the air was full of smoke.
Once he hurried forward surrounded by a
bellowing herd of cattle ; and once he narrowly
escaped being gored to death by a maddened
bull. The forests through which he passed
swarmed with the sheep and oxen of Rath and
Dun—herding with the forest swine, and deer,
and bears. Weird creatures, whom he could
scarcely term men, fled at his approach ; they
had been startled from their forest-lairs and


were now returning shaggy-haired, blink-
eyed, stained with woad, and clad in skins of
sheep and bear.
Once only he stopped in his wild flight;
when he found a stag wounded fatally in an
encounter with a fellow stag ; he stayed to
plunge his sword to its heart and end its suffer-
ings. In doing so he shed tears to think of the
sufferings and terror of the animals in the night
just past.
His speed was terrific as he ran through
marsh and forest, tearing his way through
bracken and knee-holly. He fled as though
pursued ; and it was himself he fled from —his
own flesh and mind degraded by the dread
rites in which he had shared.
He threw himself upon a runaway horse and
went on, and on, and on —with ever the scene
of blood and fire before him.
A little child with a face like the morning,
passed by, singing as it went, carrying flowers
mixed with hawthorn leaves. All around lay
cultivated fields, gardens, and rows of bee-
hives ; beasts were basking in the sun.
Such was the scene upon which Cormac
opened his eyes. How long he had slept he did
not know, but he found himself lying on a mass


of dry moss beneath an oak tree. Someone
had covered his half-naked body with a sheep-
skin and he lay warm and comfortable. For
a moment he thought he was back with S.
Kevin’s monks and that the Beltane festival
was a bad dream. Then full remembrance
came, and he cowered down in the moss and
covered his face with his hands. He, a Chris-
tian, had entered into the foul and bloody rites
of the Druids.
To his ears came the soft chime of six-sided
bells. After a time he sat up and looked about
him. He was surprised to see the quantity of
hawthorn that abounded everywhere. Every
child that passed carried branches of it ; there
were fields of young hawthorn tenderly cared
for by labourers ; among the larger trees wood-
men were busy cutting it and piling it in heaps
—and others were busy carrying away the
waiting piles upon their shoulders.
Cormac rose to his feet as he realised where
he was. He knew he could not be far from
the cell of his cousin, the Princess Brigit—the
sweet girl-saint of Kildare ; who was so full of
the spirit of love and propitiation of early
Christianity that she thought it no sin to keep
one of the Druid’s sacred fires burning—con-
secrating it anew to the Christian Faith and


hoping to win the Druids over likewise. The
great fire was fed entirely on the hawthorn
wood ; in using such fuel Saint Brigit felt she
gave a truly sacred and symbolic character to
the fire, for she believed that Our Lord’s Crown
of Thorns was made of hawthorn.
In all the land around him lay the feeling of
home and peace for which Cormac’s smarting
spirit longed —but he could not stay. In this
sweet spot he felt himself unclean.
A kindly wood-cutter offered him some food,
which he gratefuly accepted. Then he turned
westward and went on once more till he had
left Kildare far behind him, and the wild plain
spread itself before his eyes.
Around him waved the long grass, and he
stretched himself at full length upon it, pluck-
ing it in handfuls ; heaping it on his face ; as
though there were something cleansing in its
cool touch —hot and sick still at the memory
of his Baal madness.
He realised, too late, that the sun-god of the
Druids was Baal. A flood of light was poured
on some of Ethne’s wild assertions —that the
Druids held the ancient faith from which the
Hebrew prophets had led the Jews away. Ay,
it was Baal, the Druids worshipped—at the
temple of the sun in the Slieve Bloom


mountains —at the place of sacred fire near
Tara —everywhere, Baal. And in their wor-
ship the very depths of iniquity were reached;
bloodshed and license went hand in hand.
He writhed anew at the thought of his shares
in the festival. He could not rid himself of
the memory of those twisting serpent dances,
leading to scenes of bloodshed, excess, and fire.
As he lay in grief and shame upon the grass,
a few hot tears dropped from his closed eyelid.
Suddenly some strong instinct caused him to
sit up and open his eyes. Before him was
Ethne of the Raven Hair.
She had ridden noiselessly over the plain
towards him, and had reined in her horse at a
little distance ; she sat motionless on her saddle
looking at him with a smile of scorn on her face.
“You ran away ! ” she said.
She was again dressed in spotless saffron
coloured robes, her long hair flowing, smooth
and glossy, under her veil, the golden crescent
glistening on her forehead ; her adornments
were richer than usual—besides her golden
torques she wore emeralds and British pearls
on the clasps of her robes; her fingers were
almost covered with rings. She was mounted
on the same white stallion on which she had
made her journey to the plains ; here and there


he showed blood-stains, and some yellow
patches where the flames had caught and
singed him.
“ And you have lost your horse,” she con-
tinued. “ I cannot find him anywhere.”
The boy made no answer. He looked at her
as he might have looked at an evil spirit.
Now that he faced her for the first time since
the dreadful festival, he could not have said
whether he hated her or not —all he knew was
that his feelings towards her had changed. He
could not forget the last dreadful scene in
which he had seen her amongst the foremost
of those who had offered the human sacrifice.
When he had seen her lift her gory knife, utter-
ing fierce incantations meanwhile, he had fled.
“ What a fool you were, Cormac,” said
Ethne, “ to leave just before we divined.”
“Let me forget!” cried Cormac, striking
his brow, as though in agony. “ Let me for-
get —I will forget ! ”
The Druidess looked at him in amazement.
His emotion was a further instance of the
work of this strange faith, Christianity.
“ Unclean ! ” he cried, and again with the
same frenzy, “ Unclean, unclean ! Oh, Ethne,
your religion is cruel —monstrous —devilish ! ”
“ Cruel—monstrous—devilish ? ” she said,


repeating his words slowly. “Why not? All
we want is the secrets of the gods—the secrets
that concern us.” She was speaking quietly
and patiently, because she had found she
could only manage him by patience. “ Why
should we not kill if it will help us to read the
future ? Is not Death the portal to the Be-
yond, and if you would have its secrets you
must enter by the only door open. We be-
lieve that when Death has just descended upon
a human being his heart and lungs and inward
parts unfold the future to us ! And ’tis better
if every passion be excited first ! ”
Cormac shuddered.
He felt he must leave Ethne ; never look
again upon her face—he would return to the
Christians. And then the dreadful thought
came that he himself had offered unto Baal—
he was unclean ! He wished to leave Ethne,
yet she still attracted him and there was a new
and horrible tie between them.
Then weakly he began to excuse her to him-
self. If she believed, as she said, did it not
make her crimes the less ? Why should he
think of fleeing from her presence—was he not
worse than she ? He, who called himself a
Christian !
She had dismounted and had thrown her


bridle over her arm. Almost unconsciously
they moved forward on the marshy bridle-path
before them.
“We have sinned,” said Cormac. “ But
my sin is greater than yours.”
The Druidess looked at him with the same
expression of scorn and wonder that she had
shown before. After a time she said :
“ Some day—not now —I will tell you the
message that the diviners unfolded to me.”
Cormac only answered by a gesture of horror,
“ We have all our work to begin over again,”
said Ethne. “You have lost your horse —
and by your foolish flight you have scattered
the warriors we had gathered about us ! You
are clad in sheepskin like a serf, or a Christian
hermit! ”
Cormac stood still.
“ Ethne,” he cried, “ I cannot go on —I can-
not, and I will not, continue this unholy
work ! ”
“ What a craven thing you are ! ” cried
Ethne. She was glad to see a flush of anger
on the boy’s face. “ And what of your pro-
mises to me—the Christians are always boast-
ing that they keep their promises—have I not
done my part, were you forced into anything
against your will ? ”


“ I do not blame you/’ Cormac said proud-
ly. “ The fault was' mine—but I will not con-
tinue.”
“ I do not know what you mean by repeat-
ing you will not continue —you will not con-
tinue. I promised to rally warriors around
you, so that you might rescue Elgiva’s mother
—and I will do it. I promise you, if you wish
it, that you shall not be led into any more of
our festivals —since you cannot resist the joy
of them ! ”
“ Have no fear of my entering upon them
again,” said Cormac.
“ I hoped to make a man of you ! ” ex-
claimed Ethne.
“ Then give me man’s work to do ! ” cried
Cormac, fiercely, “ and not the work of fiends
and beasts. Give me warriors to lead into
battle, and let me die at their head if need be !”
“You shall have them ! ” cried Ethne, with
sparkling eyes.
“ When ? ” he asked.
“ When we go North —an army awaits us
there. We will start to-morrow.”
For a time he wavered ; then consented to
go with her.


CHAPTER IX.
To the North.
They spent that night in the wattled cote
of a wood-cutter. Tamed wolves and great
hounds slept on the straw beside them,
making the air so foul that they were glad to
leave at the first streak of dawn.
A lowering sky—dark and thunderous—
shadowed the frowning wastes before him.
Patches of white bog-cotton sprang here and
there ghastly in the early light ; brimming
pools flashed like dull steel around ; the
stretches of furze and heath held a dull'crim-
son in their hue like the spent blood on a
battle-field.
A sighing hermit—from his cell in a road-
side cavern-aided them in their search for
a horse for Cormac’s use ; pointing with a
fleshless hand, to a dough in a line of low
barren hills, where sluggish runlets gleamed
silvery, in the dank soil of a peat valley.
In that peat morass,” the hermit told


them, “ a hundred stallions have been driven
—as spoil in a feud between two kings, that
is laying waste the country side. A score of
them have foundered in the bog—and, I doubt
not, will fall easy prey to any passer-by.”
There, knee-deep in slough and peat, Cor-
mac found a beautiful creature ; tired and
spent with struggling in the bog—the veins
under its satin skin netting its body like cord ;
its eyes strained and blood-shot. An animal
so black and glossy that beside it the black
peat looked as grey as ashes.
They found it a long, hard task to draw it
from the bog; and only to be done by harness-
ing Ethne’s stallion to the struggling creature,
and thus dragging it forth.
Whilst the animal rested and recovered
its full strength the woman and boy disputed
over the road they should travel on.
“ Come with me first to Tara,” Ethne said.
“ Come and see the place where our ances-
tors reigned as gods and kings. Come and
see the halls where Tuathal held his feasts—
where, every day, three hundred cup-bearers
handed golden goblets to the royal guests —
and every king in Hibernia came and paid
homage to their over-king.”
“ I will not go to Tara ! ” said Cormac,


firmly. He felt that it was too near the late
scene of horror. It was near the Druids’
sacred place of fire.
“ You will not ! ” cried Ethne, angrily.
Then a change came over her face, and she
grew as pale as death. “ No—you had
better not. You are a Christian, and even
Christians feel shame when they look on
Tara. For was not the curse that it is under
laid on it by one of your saints ? ” She
dropped her voice to sad, moaning tones like
the wind among the branches overhead.
“ Yes, the feasts are no more and the golden
roof is falling—the wind is sweeping through
the sacred halls! Tara is deserted! Tara is
accursed—and the evil was wrought by the
Christians ! ”
Then she raised her voice in a scream, and
looked at him with glaring eyes.
“ And you, Cormac of Fail, you—and I also,
forgive me, Sun in heaven—fought for the
faith that cursed the home of our ancestors ! ”
Cormac looked at her with a frown for a
time. Ethne’s sudden transports of emotion
had enchanted him. Now he felt he could
never look at them without conjuring up that
dreadful scene when she had helped in the
human sacrifice.


She read his thoughts and her fury increased.
She knew that the last few days marked an era
in Cormac’s life ;he had passed, like lightning,
from boyhood to manhood ; in doing so the tie
between them had changed —she had no longer
the same power.
He had slipt upon the black stallion’s back,
without saddle and without bridle, one hand
grasping the creature’s tangled mane, the
other urging it forward. The horse bounded
and leapt furiously, but Cormac sat firm a
picture of youthful skill and ease.
“ To the North ! ” he said, glancing back at
Ethne. “To the North —where you have
promised me warriors ! ”
So they went on day by day —over rich loam
and peat and chalky marl —towards the wilds
of the North.
To the steep and savage hills and cliffs of
Tir Conall’s coast, to Tir Conail’s broad and
treeless waste of moor and bog —everywhere
and always the wild sea thrusting fierce arms
into the jagged land ; till Cormac felt there
was less of land than of water in his path ; for
the rains of autumn had commenced —tarn,
river and mountain stream were brimming.
Far North they went, until the Ultima Thule of
Hibernia—lnnistrahul —lay before them. And


then they turned westward ; where the troubled
sea, beating under beetling cliffs, sprang higher
in the air than the highest tower of Hibernia.
The bittern and the white stork—coot and
heron—were thick in the marshy land around
him ; from moor and heath came the weird
cries of curlews, and the fallows were strewn
with their egg-shells.
Here he discovered tribes that were sib to
him in the country off Tir Conall. When the
two sons of his ancestor, Niall of the Nine
Hostages, made sword-land of so much of Ul-
ster they gave to the northern lands
the country of The Waters, the names of Tir
Eogan and Tir Conall—that is to say Tir Eogan
or the Country of Eogan, and Tir Conall, or
Country of Conall.
He found a warm welcome and many follow-
ers amongst his kith and kin; the young war-
rior, on his matchless steed, took the Hibernian
hearts by storm. Hoary chieftains, weary of
warring on each other, came at the call of
one who bore the ancient name ; huntsmen
left the chase and armed their great wolf-
hounds for war ; youths from schools and
monasteries left parchment and vellum and
took up pike and battle-axe again. And Cor-
mac found smiles and favour from the daughters


of the land ; as he passed they would run
and offer him mead and milk and apples ;
many a king’s daughter, in her sunny grianan
with her carved work-box before her, busied
herself embroidering saffron coloured crisses
for the black-haired youth ; many a maiden
of less degree offered him simpler love-tokens ;
but, if here and there he dallied, he was never
drawn from the great object of his ride —to
gather warriors to do his father’s bidding.
From Druid and from Christian alike the
same tale met his ear :
“ The greater part of the noble youth of
Hibernia become missionaries and monks—
wandering often to the very limits of the earth.
Of those left behind, the idle and careless join
the bards ; the rest turn pirates—plundering
their own people as well as the Britons and
Saxons. We need such as thee, Cormac of
Fail, to strike once more the ancient chords,
and rally our men around thee ! ”
All agreed it was among the bards he was
to find warriors—that great and numerous
company, comprising two thirds of the men
of Hibernia—could he but rouse them from
the enervating spirit that pervaded them.
Ethne smiled to herself, well pleased, for it
was from the bards or Filid, she herself had


decided they should find followers ; for, al-
though Druidism was not always openly
avowed by them, she knew at heart they re-
tained the ancient faith she trusted to revive
in Hibernia.
Hibernia needed him, Ethne told him often ;
and her words encouraged the wild hopes he
cherished. Hibernia—with her gold and her
learning, her intellect, her enterprise, her high
spirit —might she not be mistress of the world,
could she but send forth warriors as she sent
missionaries ?
The Christian zeal Ireland showed was the
wonder of the age. Daily, from her shores, she
saw her children depart to spread the gospel
in the world. Kings and scholars —ardent
and dauntless —bare foot and clothed in sack-
cloth going forth to spend their lives in wattled
cote by barren sea-shore, or to freeze in Alpine
heights, or in open boats on the ocean. Giving
their lives up gladly, that they might spread
the Light in a world of darkness. There were
others, spending lives of prayer, fast-bound
in gray stone walls —fasting and lying in cold
stone —and others again spending lives of toil
in the monasteries, making copies of the gos-
pels and the pentateuch for the use of men ;


covering coarse Irish vellum with hand-writing
of the greatest beauty.
The two faiths—Christian and Pagan—were
strangely mingled in these northern lands.
Monastery rose within sight of Druid circle—
cromlech and cross side by side; the Christian
crosses often owed their beauty to the druidi-
cal symbols with which they were wreathed.
One night Cormac would lodge with a Druid
in the shadow of an ancient tower —on the
next he would crouch on the cold clay of a
hermit’s cave. At Derry, or the Place of
Oaks, he stayed with the monks who were
building the great monastery Columba had
founded then he passed to the palace of
the northern kings and joined in its revelry;
in the day-time sitting and watching the feats
of the juggling Druids—and at night listening
to their tales as he sat with the hounds and
man by the hall fire. The spirit of early
Christianity w r as to work by degrees amongst
the heathen ; it was difficult to wean the people
entirely from the ancient superstitions ; often
the priests were content, for the time, if they
could but abolish the cruel and evil rites of the
Druids.
And Cormac —with a boy’s hopeful out-
look —began to trust Ethne in a state of


transition from the pagan to the Christian
faith ; for she ceased to speak to him of the
Druids and their religion ; no longer seemed
desirous of turning him towards it.
Cormac and his followers rode on —through
boundless forests, marshy wilds, and high-
lying pasture -lands ; through a land without
cities ; over broad, unbridged rivers that they
crossed at fords and shallows on their swim-
ming horses, or by the aid of stepping stones
and hurdles ; by unpaved roads and bridle-
paths ; galloping through scattered hamlets
of w r attle and wicker-work ; scaring the cot-
ter’s children at play among the marsh mal-
low's ; sometimes slackening their speed amid
pastures gray with sheep. Now pausing to
exchange a word with some half-crazed swine-
herd ; now bursting into wild Hibernian songs ;
and for days meeting no living creature save
red-deer, wild boar, and swine.
Upon a wet and windy afternoon they
reached the Rath of Cormac’s great kinsman,
King Aedh, son of Ainmire —the friend and
anointed of Saint Columba ; and, like Columba
of the tribe of that Conall Gulban, who had
given its name to the land of Tir Conall.
In the marchland that now stretched before
them lay a large village of wicker cabins.


Through these buildings and their accompany-
ing midden-heaps, they threaded their way
till they reached the dun of the chieftain
King Aedh ; a collection of cabins surrounded
by a double wall with a ditch between the two
walls. These cabins, although considerably
larger, were built after the same pattern as
the other bee-hive shaped dwellings of the
village —by interweaving wattles on either
side of a clay wall and thatching the conical
roofs with rushes. A rude church in the group
had hewn oak mingled with the wattled walls.
Just upon the rampart —to escape the shadow
thrown by other buildings, the sun-chamber
or Grianan of the chieftain’s wife, was always
placed; formed of white wattles —often polished
and sweet scented.


CHAPTER X.
Bards of Hibernia.
Cormac wished to present himself to King
Aedh at once ; but this he found impossible as
the great chieftain lay sleeping in his hall;
wearied out with a skirmish of the previous
day upon a neighbouring king w T ho had refused
to pay him tribute.
The whole of Ireland was in a state of fer-
ment over the boroim, or cow-tribute, which
King Aedh insisted on exacting from his tri-
butary kings. Cormac knew that in Leinster
Saint Kevin had inveighed against it, and that
the great Saint, Columba, was at present on a
visit to Aedh endeavouring to arrange matters
peaceably between him and his fellow-kings.
And Cormac knew also, with a sense of pride,
that Columba had another matter at heart —
the welfare of the bards. It pleased the youth
to think that the great man was so deeply
interested in the men whom he hoped to make


his followers. King Aedh had proposed to
banish them, looking upon them as a set of
swaggering idlers ; but Columba was doing his
utmost to prevent such a sentence being car-
ried out.
As Cormac looked about him he saw he was
in time to take part in the convocation which
Columba had assembled in Druimceta to dis-
cuss these troublesome matters —for all around
the country was littered with tents and hastily
built wattled huts ; the grass was bruised and
broken by the feet of many herds, and scorched
and charred by camp-fires lately quenched by
the rain. In the distance he could hear the
shout and din of a multitude.
With the greatest difficulty he found a shel-
ter for the night for himself and his followers.
He and his foster-sister were forced to enter
an over-crowded house. There was scarcely
room to move ; the air was foul; the wattled
walls black with smoke and filth, in place of
being polished and sweet-smelling ; on the
stale straw beneath the hounds were eating
the refuse of past days.
As he gazed about him from the crowded
hearth, Cormac could see, by the great brew-
ing-vat in a comer that he was in the hall of a
Flaith or nobleman—noblemen alone having


the right to brew. The chief himself was sleep-
ing in the gloom of an alcove —and was doubt-
less an ally of King Aedh’s and had taken part
in the same skirmish, for the space in front
of the building was all littered by spoil the
victorious warrior had taken from an enemy —
vats of good malt, purple cloaks, horse-trap-
pings, honeycomb, and hogs’ flesh.
A hush had fallen now on the great hall —
after long feasting ; but the steam and smell
of flesh remained. Some of the feasters had
fallen asleep with half filled platters beside
them. The cauldron from which they had
eaten still simmered over the central fire ; in
the great pot was thrust a long ladle of yew-
wood —from which had been served the flesh
of boar and deer stewed with leeks and hazel-
nuts.
A flickering light aloft, strove with the
gloom and smoke ; the light fell from a molten
pool of raw bee’s-wax held in a high vase or
bowl of bronze and carved yew. The air was
full of the long, deep breath of slumber ; for
on the floor around the bed of the sleeping
chief lay his warriors, slaves, and hounds —
sleeping also. Nearly all the hall slumbered
except two or three bards playing chess before
the fire, some wretched hostages in fetters,


and two men of the chiefs or king’s body-
guard who stood with hand on upright pike,
on either side of his great bed. The bed was
all gloom except when the fitful light gave
momentary flashes of the gold with which the
limbs of the king were twined—and of the
great torque that encircled his waist.
A look of disgust had passed over Ethne’s
face when she entered the foul air of the great
room. She sighed, more than ever, for the
luxury and refinement of her Roman villa in
Britain. She looked at the smouldering, cen-
tral fire with its surrounding ashes and refuse
of days long past ; the earthen floor strewn
with stale straw, gnawn bones, and spilt meal;
the rough dressers laden with wooden platters,
drinking horns, and vessels of yew and bronze ;
the gaping chests and cupboards which held
meal, and clothes, and skins.
Yet there was a barbaric splendour in the
great size of the circular room ; in the horse-
trappings and arms of the king upon the walls ;
in the row of suspended shields belonging to
the warriors, slumbering around their chief.
Cormac was soon asleep stretched on a long
leathern cushion covered by a sheep-skin. He
was tired with his long day’s journey and glad


to follow the example of the warriors around
him.
He did not wake again until long after
dawn —when he was roused by the noise and
uproar about him. There was scarcely room
to move, the hall was so filled with a medley of
jesters, horse-boys, clowns, and bards.
A slave was busy at the fire baking oat-cake;
trying, at the same time, to stir the soup-
cauldron and keep the greedy hounds at his
elbow in order. A bard, accompanying him-
self on a noisy timpan, was reciting a story;
there was such a jangle of sounds that Cormac
could scarcely hear his own voice or those of
some jugglers at coarse conjuring tricks.
A piercing howl from one of the hounds sud-
denly silenced for the moment all other uproar.
The distraught slave at the fire, wofully hin-
dered in his work, had dealt an inquisitive
beagle a sharp blow from a scalding ladle.
A general commotion at the hearth ensued.
The owner of the beagle had been lounging
before the fire munching brook-lime and hazel-
nuts ; he now rose and seizing a besom of birch-
twigs, dealt the slave a blow that laid him full
length on the ground. In falling the slave w T as
throwm against a couple of chess-players —
upon whose play a party of idlers had been


laying wagers ; all of these turned savagely at
the interruption of their pastime. The fall,
also, disturbed some drunken revellers asleep
on the floor ; and they too started up with
drawn swords. More than a score of dogs
rushed forward and added their clamour to
the uproar.
“And all this spoil-sport and foolery over a
cursed hound ! ” cried one of the chess-players.
“ The cursed hound of a cursed bard ! ”
“ Hound! Hound, sayest thou ? And this to
a bard —a Flaith, and son of a Flaith! Hound
thyself—beguiled and doting tool of a king —
and would thy tongue were slit for thy heresy
towards us ! Take thee, will I, by the apple of
thy throat and cast thee forth ! ”
The owner of the beagle was a long-armed
Hibernian Piet clad in bards’ dress; druidical
symbols tattooed his naked arms and legs ;
his beard was plaited and his long hair con-
fined at the back by a conical spiral of bronze
and gold ; his garments were ragged and filthy
—from sloth and not from poverty, for he was
verily covered with costly ornaments and
amber beads. His mouth was still full of
brook-lime and nuts —in his hand was a raw
onion, which he had been about to eat.
“Ye cursed beggarly bards! Botch and blain


of Hibernia! Paupers and panderers all! Para-
sites on our folly and vanity! Living by flat-
tery, and eating us out of house and home in
return ! Take me, wilt thou, and cast me
forth ! ”
The bard was too angry to reply. His gold
ear-rings danced with the rage that shook him.
“ But wait ! A few more hours, and you
and your stallions, your beagles and false
tongues will be banished for ever ! Take me,
wilt thou, and cast me forth ! ”
The bard stuffed the waiting onion in his
mouth and seizing the besom with both hands
took up a threatening attitude.
“ Peace ! ” said an old man, stepping for-
ward. A sombre figure in his Irish monkish
dress, cowled garment of brown frieze, book-
wallet and leather-flask slung on shoulder,
thick knotted stick as sole weapon.
“ Is this the spirit you discuss grave matters
we have followed Columba all the leagues from
lona to ponder and pray upon ? It is not
meet that ye brawl over such things as ye
brawl over your chess and your horse-racing! ”
He turned sternly on the chess-player. “Know
you not that Columba has taken the bards
under his protection ? ”
“ Ay, that do I know well; and I know


better that our Christian spirit of forbearance is
ill-suited to them —and I know too that some
of them make a cloak of Christianity, when at
heart they belong all to one faith —fire and
blood ! Fill they term themselves and half
our men are turning Fili. And why not ?
Tis an easy life—for we must keep them and
their mares and their stallions —their grey-
hounds and beagles ! Grow barley for their
winter fodder, and dower their daughters when
they marry ! Drones they are, and like rooks
for flocking—ever in hordes —see how they
crowd on us now winter is coming—swaggering
to our firesides to idle and brag there all the
winter and tell their idle tales ! ” The speaker
paused, turned about and wildly waved his
sword. “ Away with them —away with them.
Neither grist nor gold do they bring us!
Greedy gules they be, swilling and guzzling
all! And now, forsooth, must the Church —
the Church—maintain their horses for them !
Away with them, I say, away with them ! I
am aweary of warring against them with
tongue and book —let us to work and settle
the question with pick and knife ! ”
The quarrel spread like wild-fire in the hall,
till everyone had taken his place on the two
sides that were glaring at each other. It was


a marvel how the scene had arisen from the
simple accident. Cormac found himself in the
angry ranks with his hand on his knife. There
was a sudden rush to the open air to gain room
for combat.
No sooner were they outside than they were
driven back by a long line of galloping horse-
men. There were shouts of “ Back ! Back ! ”
and “ Make room ” ; a great procession was
passing through the village.
The heralds had already gone by ; carrying
trumpets twelve feet in length, with deep,
vibrating notes like the roar of lions. Pipe, and
harp, and clash of battle-axe accompanied the
war-songs of the warriors as they rode past in
the rain; prancing stallions often added their
notes to the din. There was a continual glitter
of sword, pike, and javelin ; a glare of saffron
robes and purple cloaks —woaded limbs and
faces. Here and there bronze lance-heads
and bronze axes showed themselves, mingled
with primitive, leaf-shaped swords of bronze,
stone hammers, and hide-covered shields of
wicker. Horse and man bristled with tough
yew-bows and sheaves of arrows ; some of the
darts had poison lurking in their tips and
others were tipped with stone after the rude
manner of their cave-dwelling forefathers.


Many bronze shields could be seen ; some were
heirlooms —all bossy and gleaming with rich
ornament. There was little order in the pro-
cession ; it was a perpetual jostle between
horse and woman and man ; great Irish hounds
slipped in and out among the crowd.
In one part of the procession a note of som-
bre colour and the sound of hushed music pre-
vailed, where a thousand chanting monks from
lona followed their leader Saint Columba.
Suddenly the glare of saffron and purple
streamed brighter, the clash of battle-axe grew
sharper ; King Aedh passed by, followed by
the kings of Munster, of West Munster, of
Leinster, and of Ossory; and many other
kings, amongst whom was Aidan, son of
Gabran, one of the kings of the Alban Piets.
Cormac found himself on his black stallion
carried away in the fringe of the procession ;
down a steep hill-side to a barren stretch of
moor, where a race-course had been mapped
out, and race-horses by the score were being
entered for a contest.
Ethne suddenly appeared beside him mount-
ed on her white horse.
“You are ready Cormac, to fight for your
bards—on the side of the saint, Columba ? ”
“ Ready ! Ay, more than ready ! ” cried


Cormac, raising himself in his stirrups with a
war-shout.
“So ! Then —be wary, and wait till I give
the signal! ”
She left his side and passed, at full gallop,
into the mazes of an ancient Druidical temple
that adjoined the racecourse.
The savage hills around gave a wild setting
to the temple or winding avenue of stone
columns into which she passed. As she rode
through the circle, in which the rude pillars
were arranged, she uttered Druidical incan-
tations in a low, piercing voice. The place
was thronged with bards and their steeds and
beagles—they were riding and walking through
the two long avenues and the great central
circle ; a group in white robes were assembled
around the stone of sacrifice —one of these ran
to Ethne’s side as she reined in her horse.
“ Fortune favours us !” she said, in a low
impressive voice. “ You fight for your liberty
not only under Cormac of Fail, but under the
protection of the saint, Columba ! Remem-
ber ! ”
Cormac meanwhile, looking proudly around,
saw the place was thronged with his followers.
There were bards horse-racing and making
wagers on horse and hound; bards as


jugglers, sorcerers, and minstrels ; bards at
sword play, ball-tossing and serpent-playing.
Ethne, also, cast her eye over the assembled
bards, as she looked out on the race-course from
the temple. And she recognised them all as
Druids —both those within the columns and
without.
Chief among them was the bard who had
quarrelled over the hound so short a time be-
fore ; he was riding races on a swift white mare,
and outstripping all who rode with him.
At the height of the revelry it was this man
who headed the mead-drunk bards as they
circled round Cormac—on their lips cries of
“ Ethne ! ” " Tara ! ” “ Cormac of Fail! ”
“ Cormac, The Horse —the Black Horse ! ”
They flocked around him on their matchless
Hibernian horses —creatures all quivering from
the race-courses, their bodies flecked with the
foam and blood of their own rivalry. Some
of the animals had been freshly driven in from
the plains and wastes —roped with difficulty,
and throwing one after another of their nimble
riders. In the ranks about Cormac many
startled, riderless creatures strove towards
him, as though seeking his protection—this
sight appealed to his followers, who renewed
their cries of “ The Horse —the Black Horse ! ”


The sight alone of those beautiful creatures,
with their scarlet nostrils and flowing manes,
was enough to quicken a young man’s blood.
Cormac pressed forward, so proud and elated
that he was scarcely aware of the words that
were cried around him ; only hearing shouts
and battle-cries.
“ Fire and Sword! Piet and Scot! ” cried the
bards, surging round him. “ Men we make
white with fear ! Babes and women feed our
swords. Ahoi ! Come, Cormac, brother of
Ethne! Ethne daughter of Druids! Come,
Brother and Druids ! ”
They danced savage, prancing dances —
rough, red limbs tossing and twirling. With
broad, expanded nostrils they uttered scream-
ing Pictish war-cries.
“ Away with the Christians ! ” they yelled.
“ Away with cave-dwellers, fools, and fasters !
Hibernia shall have men and warriors—not
saints and hermits ! Away with monks and
virgins ! ”
Cormac dashed forward with Ethne by his
side. Where he was going he did not know.
He only knew that he was fighting for the
liberty of his bards, and that Columba was on
his side. Once the strange cry against the
Christians came to his ear; that it concerned


his own undertaking he did not, for one mo-
ment, realise—but it angered and puzzled him.
Then it seemed to him they were charging
full upon the long procession that had passed
through the village a few minutes before :
But there was no time for thought or conjec-
ture then ; for, on a sudden, they were in the
midst of their enemies and his men began to
fall around him.
He was conscious that the attack he was
leading was weak ; that his followers fought
badly ; that Ethne, wildly and angrily, was
calling upon them to do better —to be men,
not cowards !
Then he knew that disaster had befallen
them, because his men were fleeing.
Afterwards, in trying to recall the swift
attack and defeat, he could remember nothing
clearly, except the strange shock and tumult
of the moment when he saw his bards put to
flight by warriors in monkish dress !
Long afterwards, in his life, he was haunted
by vague memories of that disastrous flight—
that proof of his bards’ cowardice—that end
of his hopes and dreams. For long it would
suddenly come on him at times as a nightmare
of shame.
The greater number of his Druid followers


were taken prisoners ; some were killed, a few
escaped to the sea-shore.
Cormac fought on bravely, determined to
die rather than yield.
A sword-gash across his temples filled his
eyes with blood ; he dashed his hand across
them ; and saw, before him, a tall figure moun-
ted on one of the half-tamed Hibernian horses,
so numerous everywhere. The animal had
met its master now, for it tried in vain to un-
seat the man who rode without saddle and
with only a rough bridle of hemp about the
creatures head ; he urged it forward to meet
Cormac ; it advanced, rearing on its hind-
quarters.
Cormac saw the face of the rider towering
above him —a beautiful face, pale as marble
with large, flashing brown eyes.
Cormac advanced also holding his sword
ready to strike. He had a sudden strange
presentiment that his life was within the power
of the man before him, who had the invincible
air belonging to one of Nature’s own warriors.
Suddenly the untrained horse swerved to
one side and bounded away. In an instant
its rider had slipped from its back and ad-
vanced towards Cormac, a tall thin figure in
the dress of a monk, with the front of the head


shaven after the manner of the Hibernian ton-
sure. Then the blood from the young war-
rior’s wound came and blinded his eyes once
more. All was darkness.
He felt sick and giddy from pain and con-
fusion of thought—why was he fighting against
the lonian monks ?
A hand closed on his like a vice of iron a
strong arm was thrown about him. He was
from his saddle and forced to render
up his sword.
Someone wiped the blood from his eyes.
He looked up and saw again the white, beauti-
ful face and flashing eves that had faced him
on the battle field.
Who are you ? ” he asked.
“ I am Columba ! ”


CHAPTER XL
Saint Columba.
“ Treachery somewhere,” said Columba, when
he had heard Cormac’s story. ‘ 4 Treachery that
has brought bloodshed and loss upon them and
well-nigh cost them their leader.”
The holy nran had borne Cormac tenderly
from the battlefield to the little wattled cote
in which he preferred to live rather than m
the great hall King Aedh had prepared for
him. He had washed the wounds of the youth,
and kept constant watch by his bedside.
It was now the afternoon of the second day
after the fight. Cormac lay on his bed, and
Columba sat at the open doorway.
The little circular dwelling was the simplest
of its kind, without furniture, the earthen floor
devoid of rushes. There was no convenience
for either light or fire. In one corner was the
bed of the saint—a stone flag with a smaller
stone for a pillow; in another a cup of wood
and a larger bowl of earthenware. Cormac


la Y > warm and comfortable, on a pile of heather
covered by a bear-skin. The seat on which
Columba sat was of stone ; he wore a coarse
cassock and hood of undyed homespun wool
drawn over an under-dress of linen ■ on his
feet were sandals.
Cormac’s eyes were fixed on the saint’s
lace. He felt he could never tire of looking
at the wonderful white face and the great
brilliant eyes. Nights of prayer and days of
lasting had given Columba a strange unearthly
pallor and thrown purple shadows round eyes
and mouth. The great eyes shone out all
Ai?J n ° re brilliantly for their dark setting.
AH that is beautiful m eyes seemed united in
those of Columba—they were fearless and
bright as a child’s, piercing as an eagle’s soft
as a dove s ; to gaze into them made it easier
to understand how Columba could be—at the
same time saint, poet, warrior, and states-
man ; to gaze into them made Cormac’s
difficult story an easy one to tell—he told
it as a child would have toid its parent, never
doubting he would be understood and for-
given.
A favourite horse had come and lain its
head on Columba’s shoulder ; at his feet was a
hound he had saved from a bear; beside the


hound was a lamb. A tamed sea-gull nestled
its head in the saint’s neck —it had been dis-
covered by Columba, broken-winged on the
seashore; he had bandaged the wing and
cherished the little creature, and ever since the
bird had hovered near him. From the half-
closed hand lying on the sack-cloth robe the
tinv head and bright eyes of a little wren were
peeping. As Cormac gazed at the great man
he realised what was meant when men said
that Columba lived in a kingdom of love.
Yet he was a wild and fearless warrior, too,
gaining repute on the isles and mainland of
savage Caledonia.
The saint suddenly addressed the young
“ You are better, my son. Your wounds
were slight, though they were many—you
will soon be at the head of your bards again.
Cormac frowned.
(t N ever again ! I will lead men not cow-
ards and deceivers.”
Columba turned, so that he might face his
guest ; putting up his hand as he did so to
soothe the fluttering bird at his neck.
He seemed about to speak when suddenly a
change came over his face. He fell on his
knees ; his eyes closed —then opened again,


with the rapt gaze of an ecstatic. Columba
prayed. He prayed with his whole being—
with that power of prayer peculiar to those
Hibernian saints who did so much in spreading
the Faith in Europe, and whose lives bear wit-
ness to it for all time. Passionate, almost
involuntary, prayer ; in which in their com-
munings with their Maker their very souls
seemed drawn from their bodies. A state in
which prayer was as natural as thought,
and from which Columba seemed to derive
that almost supernatural power by which he
confounded the tricks of the juggling Druids
at the court of Brude, the Pictish king.
After a time he asked Cormac softly :
Will you leave your work ? ”
(( work ? ” repeated Cormac.
Ay, your work—you alone are able to
work in that vineyard. Cormac of Fail, my
warrior from over the seas, chosen redeemer
of my bards, you have a noble work before
you.”
W hen they told me,” he continued slowly,
of Cormac of Fail, and how he was gathering
my bards around him, I hardly dared to be-
lieve it. Such news was too good to be true!
I had heard of your father—King of Dam-
noma we called him in the North—and I knew


that the son of Griffith Finnfuathairt could
lead warriors in a noble cause only when I
heard all this, I tell you that I felt the saviour
of my bards had come.” He paused again.
“ My bards,” he murmured, in a tone of in-
finite tenderness. “My bards ! ”
The last words were said to himself, half un-
consciously.
“ I know the tales men tell of them—how
they swagger, and idle, and brag by the fire-
sides of their chiefs—and how bragging leads
to brawling, and brawling to worse things.
It is true ! But it is not given to- all men to
lead lives of prayer—there are others who must
go out into the world and fight; and if they
cannot, they will stay and idle at home. All
they want is a noble cause —and then we shall
have noble warriors and noble men ! ’
Columba’s eyes flashed, and Cormac re-
membered the war-like deeds of the saint’s
father, Feidilmid. He had come from a race
of warriors, the Kings of Conall, bred in the
dark wolf-haunted mountains of the North,
where life meant perpetual warfare, with beast
as well as man. At that time, and for centur-
ies after, Hibernia rang with the exploits
of the great Conall Gulban of the same race—


he after whom the north-west of Hibernia was
named, Tirconnall.
“ My son, you have a noble work before you
to redeem the youth of Hibernia ! ” The
saint held out his hands in entreaty. “ I
ask you, I entreat you to give them a trial.”
Cormac’s cheek burnt with pride and shame
that the great Columba should treat him as a
friend and equal. It was even more surpris-
ing than that he, one of the greatest men of
the day, and the ruler of forty churches,
should live the life of a peasant.
Cormac had pictured him in robes of state
in the great chair of a king, with the body
guard of a king around him ; and on his head
the golden crown common to the bishops of
Hibernia. Or, if indeed he had thought of
him in sack-cloth, as was the custom amongst
so many of the saints —he had imagined him as
austere, and glorifying in his humility, with
ashes on his head and his sack-cloth in rags.
“ Take time,” said Columba, “ and gather
your men about you—then cross the sea to
Gwynned— to North Wales, and you will find
men there in plenty to unite against the
heathen ! ”
Cormac was silent. A few hours ago he had
felt the utmost fury against his late army.


They had come that morning before the cote
in which he lay and had sung a lament on the
late event —a wild Hibernian wail telling
of defeat and disaster, of the swift flight of
horses pursuing and pursued, of the falling in
trenches slippery with blood, of a black bog
and hungry war-dogs, of showers of javelins
and darts and the loss of gold and silver and
fair women. The refrain ran :
“ Mead we drank —yellow, sweet, ensnaring !
And under its bane fell prey to the foe —
Raining our red life-wine, in streams, in the valley !
They sang with mock tears, artfully tremb-
ling voices. Cormac, under the care of the
man against whom they had conspired,
writhed in shame as he heard them.
After a time, under Columba’s pleading,
he felt his heart soften to the bards. But,
when he thought of Ethne, he grew like stone
—for he knew hers was the treachery of which
Columba had spoken.
He remained obdurate when, later on, she
implored him to allow her to accompany him
to Wales. She protested that she was inno-
cent, that she also had been deceived by the
bards ; but Cormac remained firm in his re-
fusal to allow her to accompany him ;he


could run no risks in this second undertak-
ing.
He remained, for a time, in the little wattled
cote ; sharing the simple life of the saint who
slept on a stone slab with a stone pillow be-
neath his head.
Columba helped him to gather soldiers
around him ; and, his powerful aid, made
all the necessary arrangements for transport-
ing his men to Wales.
“ Go, my son,” said the saint, as he gave
him his blessing on his departure, “ and God
help you to restore the lost mother to the
maid. But never think that, with the sword,
the Saxons are to be conquered. The Cross,
and not the Sword, will subdue them ! ”
They were the prophetic words of one who
had spent his life in converting a people al-
most as savage and invincible —the Piets.


CHAPTER XII.
The Fair.
More than a year had gone by since his flight
from Damnonia when Cormac found himself
once more in Britain. Following the advice
of S. Columba, he landed in Northern Wales ;
and, leaving the body of his warriors to follow,
made haste to the great Fair on the banks of
the Conway, in connection with the ancient
assembly—the Gorsedd, from which arose,
a little later, the Eisteddfod.
He was almost unattended. He wished to
mix, as a stranger, with the crowd at the Fair,
believing in this manner he would more easily
become acquainted with the people from whom
he wished to gather warriors.
Long before he arrived at the scene of the
Fair he found the country scattered with the
mares and stallions of the visitors, who had
journeyed there before him. As he rode down
a rich glade the clang and clash of barbaric
music came to his ears, a quaint city rose in


sight, backed by wild and glorious hills. The
walls of the city were shaped into a triangle ;
they bristled with spear and pike-point,
standard and pennon. The one and twenty
towers, rising from the walls, were hung with
quaint scrolls written with the weird charac-
ters of the Ogham language, bidding all the
world make merry in the assembly that Aedd
the Great had founded centuries before Julius
Caesar had landed in Britain.
The scent of mead came to Cormac’s nostrils
as he entered the crowded labyrinths of the
Fair. Great vats of it were piled just near the
entrance ; some of the vats had been broken
open, the mead spilt upon the ground, its pun-
gent sweetness filling the air—the famous
Pictish mead brewed from heath honey, and
so fragrant that Boetius believed it was brewed
from flowers themselves. Beside the spilt
mead some drunken Caledonian Piets were
sleeping in the sunshine; their wares lay
around them —brooms, brushes, and beds of
heather, and soft bales of yellow heath-dyed
wool, bound together by hempen ropes.
Passing through a place of barter Cormac
found himself amongst booths and work-shops.
On every side was a continuous crush of musi-
cians, merchants, snake-charmers, bards, and


law-givers. Spinners, potters, carpenters,
workers in gold and silver cried their wares.
Everything was offered to the passer-by,
from an ingot of gold to roasted cow-flesh on
spits. Now came a blinding flash from sun-lit
metal, and a sword was thrust in Cormac’s
face. Gold and silver-smiths were proclaim-
ing their work. “An Excalibur ! An Ex-
calibur ! ” they chanted. “ Without trouble
of crossing the lake and suing unto Morgan le
Fay ! Young men and warriors ! An Ex-
calibur ! ”
Other marvels of their work they showed;
delicate thread of pure gold as fine as hair,
and sword handles of such miraculous work-
manship that a square inch of mosaic held on
its surface more than two thousand points of
gold.
Cormac made his way, with care, through
mazes of pottery —art brought from Rome.
There was precious Samian ware ; red, satin-
glazed and wrought with fairy-like ornament
—fit for daintiest lady, and so highly prized
that when broken it was delicately mended
with rivets of bronzed lead; plain biscuit
ware, shaped into lamps, and other common
vessels of black Roman pottery. He stopped
and watched the play of the potter’s wheel —


as hundreds have done before and after him—
to see the clay, rising birdlike, to the potter’s
hand ; receiving there, as it were, his life and
thought—created, not made. Poets sang of
its dance of joy upon the wheel; bards sym-
bolised its play in their music. Homer had
compared the rhythm of its rise and fall under
the potter’s hand to a dance.
Then he lingered, fascinated, before the work
of the Gaulish bell-casters. Fair and noble
ladies knelt before the furnace and cast therein
their ornaments of gold and silver ; a joy and
penance—both —that they should add to the
golden tongues that called the folk to prayer;
some of the little four-sided bells bore upon
them that mystic form of the cross—the
Fylfot.
Sheltered by hempen awnings lay the book-
stalls, with a large display of plain, waxed
tablets, made of birch, elm, and the inner
bark of ash ; scribes were busy among them
with reed and stylus. Towering above were
some ancient papyrus rolls, fifteen cubits in
length—reed-written with ink of gum-water
and soot, and there were many plain boc-fell
folios such as Cormac’s countrymen wrote
on by day and night in tower and monastery,
with red cinnabar and cuttle-fish ink. There


were a few Hibernian bindings, splendid and
massive, with clasps, hinges, and bosses upon
them, that might have been used upon an
abbey-door. But it was a poor collection after
former days of Roman splendour—when be-
jewelled diptycha of gold and silver had been
common —now people contented themselves
with coarse birch, joined by common wire.
Leaving the book-stalls behind him, Cormac
made his way through many cubics’ length
of earth covered with basket work of every
shape and size—the famous wicker-work of
ancient Britain. Marvels, too, he saw of
British wool —which the Romans had taught
them to spin so finely it was likened to spiders’-
webs.
At every point he was assailed by eager
vendors. At length he sat down, tired, upon
some felled trees where a group of diviners,
with their dice and knuckle-bones were loung-
ing ; close to a booth where a fluttering pennon
announced that a two-headed cow was on show
within.
From his position on the fallen tree, Cormac
caught glimpses of the stone chair of the Bre-
hon or Judge, which was placed on the great
burial mound around which the Fair centred.
On his right-hand stretched the race-course


and wrestling rings; on his left the sea
gleamed in the distance.
It was not long before Cormac became aware
that a woman formed one in the group of
people around him. Although half-hidden
by the foliage of the tree, she was quite close
to him —so close that her flowing lenn almost
brushed his knee, and the saffron fragrance
of her robes was quite distinct to him.
It was a strange thing to see a fair and
delicately-dressed woman amongst these rude
jugglers. Cormac was full of wonder. He
wished he could see the girl’s face. Every
moment his wonder increased; was she some
high-born Druidess, mated by caprice with
one of these low serpent-charmers ? No,
the ring on her hand would never be worn by a
Druidess; he could see her hand, plainly
with the ring upon it —bearing the monogram
of Our Lord, the bezel ornamented with a dove
within an olive branch.
What power in the loosely-lying hand and
arm ! White and delicate, but of a strength
to wield a battle-axe. And the wide sloping
shoulders and snow-white column of her
throat, gleaming like marble through the
meshes of her hair—such women,
surely, stood before the southern sculptors


when they chose their images to bear the
weight of temple and palace!
Where had he seen such women ? Not amid
the nervous fiery creatures of his own race,
not among the beautiful fragile ladies of
Roman-Britain. A faint dislike, a sudden
shuddering sense of disaster came upon him —
he knew now where he had seen such great, fair,
goddess-like women ! But they had not been
thus clothed in delicate raiment, glossy-haired,
perfumed, and dainty —but dishevelled and
gory with hair streaming in the fore-ranks of
the Saxons.
Every moment his wish to see her face grew
stronger.
He could see she made her replies unwillingly
to the man at her side ; and evidently wished
to remain silent and unnoticed. Indeed,
there were strong reasons why she should
desire to escape notice, for at these great fairs
men and women were kept apart under fear of
death.
Cormac looked with rage at the girl’s per-
secutor. Every minute he was attracting
attention her; others besides Cormac
had turned their eyes on the pair.
Cormac was powerless ; to interfere was to


attract more notice to the woman. Her per-
secutor was one of his own countrymen • of a
low, juggling order with a Pictish accent of the
coarsest kind—a snake-charmer with gold
rings in his ears and a speckled cloak such as
the Druids wore. He had ringed himself
round with hissing serpents —on arm and
ankle, round neck and trunk.
Cormac could see that the girl looked on the
serpents with horror. The snake-charmer
thrust his hands, out-spread, towards her
and contemptuously cracked every finger-
joint in her face. With a brutal movement
he came a step nearer, so that the vipers thrust
their tongues almost in her face—and then,
with a dexterous movement slipped one of the
serpents from his arm to hers. The girl
had stood her ground bravely and uttered no
sound ; but at this outrage she sprang back-
ward and came with some force against Cor-
mac, who threw one arm around her ; and,
with the other, cast the serpent in the char-
mer’s face.
“Fool and meddler • ” cried the snake-
charmer, angrily. “ Leave my business alone.
You shall pay for this ! ”
He recovered the viper ; and folding it to-
gether with its fellows, slipped them into his


breast. There was an angry glitter in his eye,
and he withdrew from the spot, muttering
ominously.
Cormac feared for the girl’s safety. He
looked around for some place of safety for her
there was none. All that could be done was
to draw her into the shadow of the felled trees.
He turned towards her, and for the first time
saw her face.
It was Elgiva, the Saxon !
They stood gazing at each other. They
must have remained in this position for some
moments when they were startled by screams
of wrath —that which Cormac had dreaded
now happened.
An angry mob, headed by the snake-
charmer, surrounded them a murderous,
screaming crowd which grew larger every
moment ; serfs drew their whittles and joined
in—stragglers and rude horse-boys, armed
with clubs and yew-staves, came at the call.
“ A woman —a woman ! ” The angry cry
spread like lightning a woman a woman
in the Men’s Airecht ! Deliver her to jus-
tice ! ”
Cormac planted himself in front of his com-
panion ; he had thrown his cloak around her,


to hide her dress. Now he forced her into the
leaves and twigs of the fallen tree.
“ Ay and a Saxon woman, too ! ” screamed
the snake-charmer, “ a Saxon, a Saxon ! ”
There was a further howl of wrath from the
crowd ; and Cormac’s body would have been
hewn down instantly, but that the slaying of
a man at a Fair meant not only death, but a
curse after death on the spirit of the slayer.
Cormac was parrying blow after blow • men
were climbing towards the woman along the
trunk of the hewn tree, and some were trying
to set on fire the dried leaves and twigs.
A Saxon ! a Saxon ! ” they yelled “If
a man do but enter the airechfof the women
deaTh !’ ’ 6 6t h6r dlo alS ° ! Let her die the
Them enemies pressed closer upon them—
ke P t 1 J at ba v by Cormac’s sword. Some
of the wildest m the mob took up stones and
began to stone them. Cormac and the girl
retreated more and more under the thick
ohage. Suddenly their retreat was cut off
tw n U J^ ed U f° n a § reat rock against which
the felled trees had been massed.
For a minute they were left in peace.
Then Cormac saw a flame of fire run along


a withered branch towards them. A stone
struck him on the shoulder.
“ Cravens !” he said, they will stone or
bum us! ” , , ,
Elgiva was examining the surface of the rock
against which they stood ; drawing her hand
over it through its veil of thick leaves. She
gave a little cry of joy as she entered a crevice
in the stone, and drew Cormac after her.
The passage was so narrow he was forced to
leave his shield behind him. They pressed
onward for a few feet, hand in hand, until the\
felt they were in the heart of the rock.
“ On ! ” cried Cormac, “ on ! ” and slipping
his arm around the girl forced her forward-
till the light behind them had disappeared
and the rock on either side had given place to
damp earth.
“ This path leads to the cliffs ! exclaimed
Elgiva. And then she gave a sudden cry.
“ I slip ! I fall! ”
Their path descended with terrible rapidity,
but she did not fall, for Cormac’s arm preven-
ted her.
“On ! ” he cried, “on ! Though escape
lead us to a second death ! ”
They were almost running now ; pitch-dark
around them; a slippery and treacherous


foothold beneath ; thick about them a sudden
swarm of startled bats.
Day seemed, in a strange manner, to be
dawning from beneath them.
The quick movement, the strange flight,
and weird surroundings brought cries and
laughter both from Elgiva’s lips—the first sign
of weakness she had shown.
“ Ah me ! ” she cried, “ we have flown from
the pikes and knives of men to the awful
dwellings of gnomes and mermen. I can stay
my feet no longer—l faint, I fall! ”
Full daylight flashed upon them \ a rush
of earth and stones accompanied them, as they
slid, suddenly, into a shell-strewn cave.
They found themselves in the heart of a
grotto ; a ledge in the steep cliff-side with the
wild sea below ; inaccessible, save by the sub-
terranean passage through which they had
entered.


CHAPTER XIII.
Man and Woman.
Now that the danger was past and they felt
themselves secure from attack, Cormac and
Elgiva had no thought save for each other.
Their eyes met, and there was a long silence ;
neither spoke ; then Elgiva turned, blushing,
and tried to smooth into order the long,
tangled masses of her golden hair ; she shook
the sand and dust from her dress and veil.
“ You are changed, Elgiva ! ” said Cormac.
Throughout the excitement of the attack
and the tumult of their escape, he had been
conscious of the girl’s beauty.
“ Changed ! ” said Elgiva. “In one short
year —is that possible ? ”
Changed —of course she had changed. It
was the same fair, blue-eyed face. But she
was no longer ungainly and awkward. Her
skin was smooth, her hair glossy ; her dress as
fragrant and dainty as Ethne’s. Now as she
moved about the cave he saw that the frame


had softened into curves of womanly beauty.
Cormac stood struggling with a thousand
varied feelings.
“ Changed—ay, changed ! Thou art grown
beautiful—a woman—but thou art Saxon ! ”
Then, with one of the swift changes natural to
him, he suddenly grew furious. “ Curse thee,
thou art as Saxon as any Saxon among them—
and shall I wed a Saxon ? ”
The girl was startled by his sudden fury ;
she answered proudly.
“ Have no fear of that, Cormac of Fail.
Thou did’st refuse to do thy father’s bidding.
The Saxon would have wed with thee to obey
those commands, but now she will abide by thy
words.”
“ Ay, shall I harden my heart against thee—-
shall I hate thee, as never maid was hated
before ? ” Suddenly his voice broke. “Shall
I not hate thee because thou art Saxon ? Ay,
and in hating thee, love thee more—with a
love that has smitten me, like the lightning
smites the oak ! ” He had drawn near to
her.
“Saxon, alas, I am,” said Elgiva, “andthou
art true Celt, to talk of love and hate to-
gether.”
He looked at her softly.


“ Yet I find in thee the old Elgiva, in spite
of thy womanhood and beauty.”
Then he remembered, in some bewilderment,
that he had not thought of Elgiva’s appearance,
at all, in the years gone by. And when he had
thought of her at times, in the last few months,
he had a vision of her as he had last seen her—
the swollen features, the smoke-bleared eyes
and mouth surrounded by half-healed scars.
He remembered how he had struck her, and
set those half-healed scars bleeding afresh.
The remembrance came on him like a blow.
Elgiva’s thoughts, too, had gone back to
that last scene. She remembered how she
had blurted out that he must wed her, and
that he should wed her. With the remem-
brance came the wish that she had bitten out
her tongue before the words were said.
“ Why are you in Britain ? ” he asked.
“ How did you come here ? ”
She had come with Ethne of the Raven Hair,
she told him, and they had travelled purposely
to the place of the Fair, as Ethne hoped to
meet him there ; and trusted he would join
his army with one she had brought with her
from Tara.
At this Cormac fell into a rage.


“ Never !” he cried, immediately. “ I will
fight no longer with Ethne. I stand alone,
I will not see her face.”
“ But how came you—you two who hated
each other—how came you here together ? ”
Elgiva’s colour rose.
“ Because we love each other,” she said.
“You tell me that I have changed—but I tell
you that Ethne has greatly changed ! She
is not the same woman ! It is a long story
how she came back from Druimceta and lived
and worked amongst us at Glendalough—
she won all hearts. She has gathered many
warriors around her to help towards the rescue
of my mother. Ah ! ” Tne girl’s eves soft-
ened. “We no longer hate each other, as
you say we did once. She loves me and I love
her ! ”
“ Loves you ! ” exclaimed Cormac, looking
at the girl pityingly. “No, no, poor fool,
she deceives you ! ”
Tears came into the Saxon’s eyes.
“ She does not deceive me —I am dear to
her as a sister. She is never happy if lam
out of her sight. She is a Christian.”
He laughed and tears came into her eyes.
“ I hoped it would have pleased you that I
had learnt to love her.”


Her bosom rose and fell with a long, quiver-
ing sigh. Cormac looked at her with a new
light in his eyes. He came a step nearer to
her.
“ And do you wish to please me, Elgiva ? ”
he asked.
“ Why should I wish to please you ? ” she
asked, pettishly. Then a quick blush swept
over her face ; knowing, as she did, that a wish
to find favour in his eyes had been the desire
of her life ever since they had parted. She
had sobbed herself to sleep the night after he
had struck her. And then, as the months
passed by and womanhood began to dawn on
her, she realised how uncouth and ugly she
must have appeared in his eyes —and she had
done all in her power to improve the comeli-
ness that was really hers, but in her raw youth
had hardly shown itself.
Cormac, in thought, had again gone back
to their parting scene; he longed to ask
for her forgiveness, but a strange shyness and
restraint came upon him.
“ And how did you get into the Men’s
Airecht at the Fair ? ” he asked, after a time.
“ I lost Gelert,” said Elgiva, with a new look
of trouble in her eyes. “ I missed him sud-
denly and ran at once to look for him. I could


not find him, and when I came back to the
place where I had left Ethne and our women,
they were gone ! I went about looking for
them, and wandered in my confusion without
noticing—into the Men’s Airecht.’’
“ Are you sure Ethne had left the place
where you had last seen her ? ”
“ I am certain, because it was marked with a
wooden cross—the only wooden cross on the
grounds. I could not be mistaken.”
“I know the place,” said Cormac, “and all
the paths from there lead into the Men’s
Airecht ! You could scarcely fail to wander
in ”
He considered for some minutes —then a
strange bitter expression crossed his face.
“ I see it all! ”he exclaimed. “It was a
design on her part—she left the place purpose-
ly. She knew, if you wandered about at all,
you could not fail to wander in there—it
was a trick to be rid of you, once and for
all.”
The girl looked at him in horror.
“ Cormac, we are Christians, and our Chris-
tian boast is Love and Charity. Yet you have
not sufficient charity to grant the conversion
of one poor soul. I tell you Ethne is changed
—she is a Christian ! ”


Cormac was frowning, pacing up and down
the cave, scarcely listening to his companion.
He gave no thought to Ethne —all his thought
was for Elgiva. He paused.
“ You are beautiful, Elgiva—and you, I
know, are as virtuous as only a Christian maid
can be. I will not take you back to a woman,
vile, infamous and treacherous as a serpent.”
“ Then will I walk back alone—ay, through
a thousand daggers ! ” exclaimed the Saxon.
“ Ethne is not vile and treacherous, and she is
as a sister to me —as desirous as I myself
of rescuing my mother. You are ungenerous,
Cormac of Fail —unworthy the name of your
father. Ah! I wish I had men and warriors—
I wish I had an ancient name to which to rally
followers—and that I might go and rescue
my mother without your help.”
Cormac stared at her.
“ Why—why did I leave Ethne’s side to-
day, and why could not some other come and
rescue me instead of you ? ”
It was seldom Elgiva gave way to tears.
Now she threw herself down on a heap of
stones and sobbed.
Cormac turned and walked up and down the
cave with frowning, averted eyes. She dis-
liked him, of course, and he deserved it, he


said to himself but he did not deserve
this !
Elgiva soon controlled her sobs. Furious
that she should behave like a child
on their first meeting—when she had deter-
mined to be a woman for Cormac’s sake.
She stole one or two glances towards him
as he passed and re-passed her.
After the British manner his hair was parted
in the middle and floating freely about his
neck ; it was as black as night with a gleam
on it like steel, where the ends curled into rings,
his blue-black eyes were deeply set and fringed
with black lashes. Under the bronze of his
skin his cheek was pale and thin, showing the
lines of the muscles beneath. The alert
carriage of the small head, the play of the mob-
ile nostrils, reminded the Saxon irresistibly
of some untamed mountain horse. When
Cormac was a child these characteristics had
been noticed by Griffith—in particular a cer-
tain movement by which he tossed back his
black locks as a horse throws the mane from
its eyes —and he had given the boy the title of
The Black Horse. A horse had in generations
past been the totem of Griffith’s family. The
old chieftain had hoped to see the day when
the Black Horse should be pitted against the


White Horse of the Saxons—he had seen the
day, and died !
Cormac had ceased to walk up and down the
grotto. He approached Elgiva —threw him-
self down beside her.
“ Oh, Elgiva/’ he cried, “ wife that will be—
beautiful, adored ! Forgive, forgive all—l
mean at Glendalough. Come with me in
safety from Ethne —at dawn the priest can
unite us. Gift of my father to me—my be-
loved—my spouse ! ”
She had recovered from her passion and was
quite calm.
“My wife, my spouse! ” she repeated.
“ The last time I heard such wnrds from your
lips they were addressed to Ethne, not to me !”
“ That evil woman ! ” he said. “ Name
her not with thyself ! ”
“ She is my sister,” returned Elgiva. “ And
tell me, Cormac, have you no sin that you
should thus cast stones at Ethne ? ”
His head drooped.
“I am not fit for thee,” he said. “ I have
sinned often ; above all, at the place of Fire —
but ’tis past —I repent ! ”
“ Ay, yet you deny repentance to Ethne ! ”
“ I speak not of Ethne now—only of thee.
Come with me, my father’s darling, and I


will soon teach thee to love me ! ” She hid
her face. “ Come with me and leave Ethne ! ”
“ I will return to her. And when you have
forgiven her you may speak of love to me.”
“ That will never be,” said Cormac, rising.
“ Yet will I do as I am asked, and take thee
back.”
The grotto filled with shadows. Evening
was falling. Cormac suggested that it was a
fitting time to escape from the cave and make
their way to Ethne’s house. Elgiva thought
that his voice sounded harsh and cold. She
turned without a word to the steep ascent
that led them to the open ground above.
The upward, winding tunnel was dark and
difficult ; but a few minutes’ climbing brought
them to the top and to the scene of the tumult
of the afternoon.
They stole, unperceived, from the shadow
of the great Monolith that marked their exit,
and found themselves in the stir of the multi-
tude still assembled on the spot. All around
them were horses and cattle with their accom-
panying horse-boys and cow-herds. On every
side camp-fires twinkled. It was a fine night
and the stars shone. A rich dim scene spread
itself before their eyes —moving herd and
glittering camp fires, long lines of tents and


newly-built wattled cotes, ancient temples
looming in the distance, and sumptuous
Roman villas dotting the valley; a white
Roman road gleamed in the darkness of the
forest beyond, and close at hand was a light
tapering minster that was being built by Greek
workmen.
Mingled with the murmur of the sea and the
tumult of the flocks, and their attendants,
was the sound of monks’ chant, the clash of
swords; and the shrieks and brawl of mead-
drinkers and revellers.
On the way they paused in a little wood
and bowed themselves at a mossy shrine,
where a hermit filled the priestly office for
some kneeling Christians.
Once, from a hollow oak-tree, the beautiful
face of a girl-hermit looked at them ; her white
hands, clashed on a robe of sack-cloth, had
bloody marks upon them, like the print of
nails ; she spoke to them, as she spoke to every
passer-by, in a voice clear and pure and high
like the final peal of a hymn of praise.
A little further on were masons working
by torch-light at a wayside cross ; twenty feet
in height, and all wreathed with scroll work
that was carved, not for money, but for love
of God and beauty.


The banners of the festive town danced
gaily as they entered the city walls. Cormac
obtained directions from a watchman. Their
road led them to a magnificent Roman villa ;
built almost on the walls, and overlooking the
rushing stream that flowed from the surround-
ing mountains.
It was difficult to gain admittance even to
the outer courts of the dwelling. They were
obliged to wait, standing in a recess of a tri-
angular bridge which formed part of the walls
and spanned the torrent beneath. A deep
dyke separated them from the forest ; in
whose depths they could plainly hear the
gnarling of wolves and scream of swine. The
forest grew from the very edge of the dyke
and the trees, overhanging the stream, swept
the side of the arch on which they stood. As
they stood waiting a dark disordered mass
came towards them along the river banks.
The light broke on lance and javelin, and here
and there, on the white face of a horse. A
reckless party of jostling race-horses, crying
beagles, and huge hounds came into view,
and galloped towards them along the rough,
pebbly path that skirted the torrent.
The leader of the party was bare-headed,
his beard streaming in the wind ; he flourished


a mead-horn in his hand from which he drank
repeatedly; at times he rose to his feet
on the bare back of his stallion, and played at
cup and ball as he rode along—by means of
the end of his drinking horn and a handful of
pebbles he had dexterously swept from the
ground over which he galloped. As he drew
nearer the light showed a gruesome object
swung on the neck of his horse.
“ A Druid, a juggling Druid ! ” cried Cor-
mac, pointing with scorn and horror at the
rider. “ The sorcerers have been at their
vile rites —they have slain their victim and
have been divining by his entrails.”
The man and woman drew closer into the
niche in which they stood —for the wild party,
leaping a small creek, swept up the approach
and on to the bridge. The great portals
swung open. The wind from the horses
nostrils, the clamour of men and hounds
swept by them, and the w r hole party passed
into the outer court.
Cormac thought he distinguished the light
form of a woman on one of the foremost of the
race-horses.
“ Ethne ! ” he exclaimed in angry-excite-
ment. “ Ethne ! She has gathered her horde
around her even here ! ”


“ Ethne—it was not Ethne ! ” exclaimed
the Saxon. “ And even so—because you see
the body of a dead man carried on the saddle
of a bard, why should you believe he has been
the victim of unholy rites—are dead bodies so
uncommon in these days ? But it was not
Ethne, I tell you ! ”
“ It was Ethne ! ” returned Cormac.
“ Then she has been searching for me,”
cried Elgiva, in tones of conviction.
“ Ah, poor fool, you will believe she loves
you,” said Cormac, contemptuously. “As
though Ethne loved anything in the world
save her lost possessions in Damnonia.”
“ You are a stone, Cormac. Ethne has told
me how harsh and unforgiving you were to her
at Druimceta,” said Elgiva. “ Now you will
not believe, though I tell you again and again
that Ethne loves me.”
“ If Ethne loves you,” said Cormac, with
the same contempt, “ then indeed she hath
changed, and my opinion may change also.”
At that moment admittance w r as given them
to the vestibule of the mansion. Passing
through the atrium they were ushered into a
large court; with clustered pillars and fres-
coed w’alls—otherwise it resembled one of the
ordinary halls of the Britons, for it was hung


with wicker shields and rude pikes —a fire of
yew-logs blazed in the centre. The big room
was full of people ; thronged with Bret and
Piet and Scot —monks and warriors. There
were minstrels, harpers, jesters, clowns with
them, their accompanying creatures —beagle
and hound and dancing bear; everywhere
hopped tame wrens and, here and there,
spreading their dark wings on the arms of
soothsayers were talking ravens. The usual
places of honour were being given to workers
in gold and silver, to master-carpenters, and
to the healers of mankind —the leeches.
The room was so full that the entrance of
Cormac and Elgiva closely cloaked was un-
noticed.
Upon a slightly raised platform they could
see Ethne standing among her waiting women.
They could see her plainly, and hear her voice
distinctly. She had but just lately alighted
from her horse. Her hair was dishevelled
with the wind, and her purple riding cloak
was still around her.


CHAPTER XIV.
Leader of the Kymry.
Cormac had never seen Ethne in anguish
before ; for anguish was the only word to ex-
press the condition in which he now beheld
her.
Her grief and tears appeared to him so un-
natural that for a few seconds he had looked
and listened without comprehending the scene
before him.
“ I have lost her ! ” Ethne was saying. “ I
have searched everywhere and’ I cannot find
her. Neither seer nor soothsayer can aid me —
I have lost her whom I would not have lost
for all the world ! ”
Her grief was quite unfeigned. Her limbs
trembled so much that she could not stand.
Her face was white as death.


Cormac’s heart beat fast. The remembrance
of his words to Elgiva came back to him.
He saw Ethne wring her hands in despair.
She gave one mournful cry, “ Elgiva! Elgiva! ”
and fell fainting into the arms of her women.
Cormac had a strange, choking sensation.
The old passionate admiration for Ethne
stirred in his heart once more, mixed with a
flood of remorse and shame and doubt.
Elgiva had flown from his side. She had
torn her way through the crowd. He could
see her kneeling beside Ethne, holding her
in her arms and calling upon her by name.
Ethne had recovered from her momentary
faintness, but was still so weak that Elgiva
was obliged to support her. The two women
laughed and cried together. There was a wild
scene between them —Elgiva explaining, Ethne
expostulating. Cormac could see that Ethne’s
present joy w r as as unfeigned as her past grief.
The Saxon helped Ethne to her seat, and
then knelt at her feet, holding one of the small
white hands in a tender grasp. At sight
of the two women a murmur of applause came
from the people assembled in the hall.
Cormac stole up quietly and stood behind
Elgiva, his sparkling eyes fixed on Ethne’s
face ; her face looked soft and gentle with the


traces of grief still upon it. She looked up at
him, not surprised at his appearance —having
just heard from Elgiva that he had rescued
her.
Ethne held out her hand.
“ You would not let me go with you,” she
said, gently, “ but I have followed you.”
He said nothing in reply; but bending down
knelt on one knee before her and placed her
hand upon his head.
It was the very scene to appeal to the hearts
of the people. Cormac was recognised, in
spite of his shrouding cloak. Cry after cry
to his honour rang through the room. Weapons
flashed, and clashed aloft.
“ The Black Horse ! ” they cried, “ Cormac
of Fail! Cormac and Ethne ! Children of
Tuathal! Twigs from the tree of Tara!
All hail! All hail! ”>j J i■ 1 \jii h H \
They were the same battle cries, in the same
Hibernian voices, as those which had greeted
him when he rode through Ireland with Ethne
many months before.
Cormac stood upright and threw aside his
cloak. One of Ethne’s slaves drew a scented
saffron robe around him, another placed a
golden hoop on his head.


The applause grew louder. Trumpets and
timpans almost deafened the people. Cor-
mac’s eye flashed, his cheek glowed.
He walked up and down the raised plat-
form ; smiling and responding to the people,
“ The Black Horse ! The Black Horse ! ”
they cried. “ The Black Horse against the
White ! ”
Then an old man —so old men had forgotten
the of his birth—rose and asked for a few
minutes’ silence, that he might be heard.
“ I call on you all to witness this thing,”
he piped, “ that one has come among us from
over the seas mightier than Hengist or Horsa.
Here is the Avenger! Here is the Black
Horse ! And though Britain lies white with
the cold ash of the White Horse she shall be
blackened, in time, by the scorch of the
Black ! ”
The tumult was so great, after this, that al-
though Cormac was seen to speak, his voice
could not be heard.
Again he walked up and down with the easy,
spirited motion that reminded Elgiva so irre-
sistibly of the fleet mountain steeds. Often
had she seen such springing, quivering move-
ments as she had watched them, eager for the
race.


In the confusion of sounds, Cormac’s quick
ear detected the first chords of a war-dance
struck from the harps around him ; and re-
sponding to the music, he leapt forward and
broke into the first movement of the beloved
sword-dance.
A half-halo of light glanced round him as he
drew his sword like lightning from its sheath.
A band of warriors immediately gathered
about him and joined with him in the mazes of
the dance.
Elgiva w'atched him with a beating heart.
She realised now'’ the truth of what Ethne
had told her —that Cormac drew men around
him as a flower gathers bees. Who could
resist him, this darling of the people ? He had
the grace and fire of an untamed animal, as
he responded, with voice and limb, to the
music. More than mortal he seemed. His
feet w r ere winged, surely ; they did not hurry,
but went on ever, swift and light and even.
To watch him—with a battle-song on his lips
and sword and feet ever in time to the music—
was to see the very personation of youth and
fire.
Once, as he passed by her seat, he paused for
an instant ; then w r ove one of the figures of
the dance around her. The spirit of mischief


shone in his eyes. Bending towards her, as
though in the measure of the dance, he whis-
pered teasingly :
“ Do you remember your words to me at
Glendalough ? Tell me, Elgiva, are you as
ready now as then to wed me ? ”
The dance carried him away from her before
she could reply. She flashed a look at him.
A ripple of teasing laughter came to her ears
in return.
Again when he passed her —his eyes chal-
lenged hers. It was new to her this wild
assertive mood of his. She watched him with
a vague wonder—this personification of her
mother’s race who turned so easily from one
note to another in the scale of human passion
and played upon its gamut with the ease their
fingers played upon the harp.
Who could resist him, she asked herself,
this darling of the people ?
Ethne watched him, well-pleased ; knowing
that, to these simple people—children of the
soil—a stronger appeal could be made by dance
than by speech.
“ Ahoi ! Ahoi! ” came Cormac’s battle cry
once more. He tossed his locks from his
gleaming forehead ; his thin nostril quivered ;


his sword shimmered constantly in a half-arc
of light. Swifter and swifter flew his feet,
as sword and shield gleamed in the warrior
dance. He chanted as he sang :
“ Dance on ! dance on : let us dance on I
Dance on for aye ! Till sword, and foot,
and tongue doth yield. The magic sense from
rhythm bom i Dance on : dance on : let us
dance on ! ”
Warrior after warrior fell out and gave place
to others in the charmed circle of the sword-
dancers —either too fatigued or too confused
and giddy to observe the figures of the dance.
But still the light, swaying figure of the young
chieftain flew on —till the eyes of the whole
assembly filled with wonder at him.
All present were so intent upon him that,
for a time, they were unconscious of uproar
and confusion outside the hall.
Suddenly every entrance was flooded by a
sea of white, agonized faces.
The faces, for the greater part were those of
old men and women and children, but amongst
them were warriors’, blanched with fear;
they looked more ghastly because of the flaring
torches they carried. A confused murmur
accompanied them —not the voices of men,


but rather the passionate sighs of those whom
fear had turned to mutes.
The leader of the dance continued though
all around the attention was falling from him,
and men were gazing upon each other in grow-
ing excitement—knowing the tumult must
mean battle—but not knowing the quarter
from whence it came.
In the moment of suspense Bret and Piet
and Scot were stirred to the very depths of the
fount from which they drew their war-passion.
Hands leapt to knife and pike and Roman
blade as, with paling faces, they turned in-
voluntarily towards each other. Shrill voices,
at length, broke yelling into the assembly.
“ The Heathen—the Saxons —are upon us !
They close in upon us from either side ! ”
The leader of the sword-dance had halted —
the flashing marvel of shield and sword and
winged feet had stopped, statue-like, for a
minute.
And then again he was leader of men—not of
revellers.
Suddenly at the head of every warrior,
every chief in the hall—as they banded them-
selves together in passionate devotion to him.
In a moment of time he became chief and


leader of all about him. Not, as it were, of his
own free will, but of some power that emanated
from him mysterious intoxicating. All
flocked towards him. The popular cries of
Cunedda and Kymry were yoked with those of
Cormac and The Black Horse. Men’s hearts
kindled anew —Bret and Piet and Scot vowed
brotherhood for aye ! But when they went
forth, it was to confront rumour of battle
instead of battle itself !
The wild alarm that two bodies of Saxons
were closing upon the Fair, had arisen at the
news that two bands of men, in the darkness,
were approaching on either side. Panic often
seized the people, at the least cause, since that
fearful day when the Saxons had burst on the
southern plain like an angry sea ; and, beating
around the walls of Sarum, had at length
overcome the mighty fortress.
The approaching men proved to be serfs
and herdsmen of Celtic race ; but they were
the bearers of ill tidings.
From two directions came the grave news
that the Roman city, Viriconium, had fallen
into the hands of the Saxons, under the two
dread brothers—Cutha and Ceawlin ; that its
inhabitants had been put to the sword, and
its buildings to the flame.


The awful tidings seemed to inspire Cormac
with new hope and courage.
“To the South ! ” he cried. “To the
Saxons! ”


CHAPTER XV.
The Black Horse.
Cutha was slain ! The Saxons were defeated !
These were the magic words that men were
repeating to each other.
Cutha was slain, the Saxons were defeated—
these were the two first acts of the Black
Horse —cried the followers of Cormac ; the
rest would follow, and Britain would soon
be again in the hands of its own people.
Cormac’s great army settled down to rest
and make merry in the peaceful valley of the
Severn. His soldiers recked not that they
were shut off from retreat by hill and forest;
that they were dangerously easy of access
to the West Saxons, and to those fierce Angles
—the men of the Merce.
South-south-east they had journeyed. They
had swept, triumphantly, across the land as
though the victories they sang of were already
behind them. Their leader, they said, was


to take all before him and drive the Saxons
from the shores. Revenge was to be taken
at last on the J utish conquerors who had been
the first of the savage stock to set foot in Bri-
tain ; the two brothers bearing the strange
titles signifying the Horse and the Mare —
Hengist and Horsa, who had left the emblem
of the White Horse as a sign of conquest.
But it was the Black Horse now against the
White. On all sides the emblem of a black
steed was displayed —on samite, and on coarse
flax, and hemp ; this was to put utterly to
shame, to destroy entirely, the dread sign of
Hen g ist - w-^ . i
The popular cry of the Black Horse appealed
to all men. On all sides chieftains had flocked
forward to fight under the boy-leader—among
them Brochmael, Prince of Powys, who had
united with him in defeating the Saxons,
And, just as on Southern slopes, the Saxons
cut their white horse on the chalk soil —so
Cormac’s hosts burnt their hostile symbol
black on moss and heather.
The Severn valley was scorched in many
places with the forms of sprawling monsters
that bore no more resemblance to a horse
than to any other quadruped. A huge banner,


bearing the same device, flapped over Cormac’s
tent on the left bank of the river.
The wreck of a princely Roman mansion
had been hastily fitted for the reception of
Ethne and her maidens. Ruined though it
was, it was a fitting palace for the splendour-
loving Ethne. Gilt bronze mingled with the
oak shingles and stone of the roofs; and
in the nobler portions of the house, were tiles
of gilt bronze ; the baths were of a size for
royal use, and the walls were richly gilt, or
lined with sheets of brilliant glass. Glass
in place of mica or shell filled the windows,
and brilliant glass was inlaid, jewel-like, in the
walls and in the mosaic of the floors ; the rich
metal-work was b}' Byzantine workmen.
Ethne herself was clad, royally, in purple
and ermine ; bare arm and brow and neck
clasped by Celtic torques. For ornaments
she seldom wore the amber, rock-crystal and
coloured glass with which most women were
content, and now the long brooch that clasped
her brat flashed with encrusted emeralds,
set in by cunning Roman workmanship.
“ Here let us winter,” she said, one brilliant
autumn day as she sat in state on a carved
golden chair. Above her, like a baldichino,
hung an embroidered peplos of great worth


and beauty —so old it had once decked the
shrine of a temple to Apollo.
The marred walls about her had been
hastily patched by fresh-hewn oak and beech
from the surrounding forests ; the gleaming
trunks and red autumn leaves showed, side by
side, with walls covered by sard and jasper
and amethyst.
As protection from the wind skins of sheep
and goats were hung around, mingled with
tapestries that might, in their beauty, have
been woven at the loom of Penelope ; they
were embroideries from Egypt —that country
so lavish in her embroideries, that they worked
on the sails of the galleys she sent to Tyre !
“ Winter here ? Not a doubt of it,” said
Elgiva, bluntly. “ And the crows will winter
likewise. They will feast the winter long upon
our flesh, and our blood will warm the winter
rain.”
She was sitting on a low stool beside Ethne
of the Raven Hair ; with the old hound,
Gelert, stretched at her feet. The creature
scarcely left her side —night or day. He had
never wavered in his devotion to her since
the day she had saved his life. And just as
much as he loved Elgiva, he detested Ethne ;
and though at Elgiva’s command he would try


and curb his hatred, he would burst out into a
low snarl if, by chance, Ethne touched him,
or her draperies passed over him. Elgiva
tried hard to break him of this habit and to
teach him to love Ethne —but without avail;
nor was he to be gained over by any advances
that Ethne would make to him.
The affection between the two women
seemed to increase each day ; Ethne now pro-
fessed Christianity, and declared she owed her
conversion to Elgiva.
Cormac’s suspicions against Ethne had van-
ished ; he took her advice on all points. It
was upon her suggestion that he had chosen
the Severn Valley as a camping-ground.
During the campaign Elgiva, with her more
sober judgment, had opposed the descent into
the plains. Nor could she see that it aided
their plans—for Redwald and his men, it was
believed, lay further to the south and the
west.
She pointed gravely to the hills beyond.
“ Forests and mountains stretch between us
and our refuge,” she said. “We have crossed
the barrier that earth herself has built between
us and our enemies.”
“ Fair mother-earth helped us in our need
with hill and forest,” said Cormac. “ Then


were we the vanquished, now are we the vic-
tors. Is not Cutha slain and Ceawlin loathed
and detested by the Saxons themselves ? ”
He was smiling and triumphant, as his eye
swept the scene of the river-banks before him
—the motley array of Kymry, who owned him
for their leader. British legions, still manifest-
ing the polish and discipline of Rome, woad-
dyed savages, blue on the russet landscape ;
bands of Hibernian Fili —their sleek race-
horses, slight and frail, beside the stout
cavalry of the Romanised Brets ; Piets from
boundless Caledonia —the swing of their sheep-
skin garments never ceasing in their restless
masses ; and warriors also from weems and
caves with arrows tipped with stone, or bear-
ing leaf-shaped swords as in days of old. Near
at hand were workers inspecting and repairing
the scythe-edged chariots of early days—
ever the pride and stay of the Britons. From
peak and wind-swept down came the hum
and shriek of bagpipes. Above all, great
swarms of kites hovered in the air—for the
hosts of the great army yielded rich store for
nest and maw.
On the hills beyond—sinister background
for the reckless warriors—burnt black on ling
and heather was the conquering symbol, the


Black Horse. To Cormac’s ears came in un-
couth, primitive verse a weird refrain, sung
continuously in his honour, a battle song
that had been in his family for unknown
generations, descended from that dim past
whence sprang the origin of his forefathers’
totem, the Horse. A vague, formless kind of
verse, difficult of translation and, when trans-
lated, shaping itself into words akin to these :
“ In days of Eld, when men choose birds and beasts
around them,
To bear their name and race and station,
I sought and chose the swift, free horse !
Into his silken, mobile ear my lips have slipt their
whisper.
Bear me away—away with the wind and the lightning
and storm.”
“You say we have crossed the barrier be-
tween ourselves and our enemies,” said Ethne,
in reply to the Saxon’s words. “ But I tell you,
my Elgiva, that we need no barrier against
friends.”
“ You speak in riddles,” said Elgiva, looking
in wonder at the bright-eyed and smiling
woman.
“ I speak in riddles, say you ? And I can
show you a riddle, too, as well as speak one.
Behold ! ”


At a sign from her some slaves drew apart
two great pieces of tapestry that covered a gap
in the ruined walls ; they saw that a great
feast was under preparation.
Not a flower-crowned banquet such as Ethne
had loved to spread before her friends in her
Roman villa in Damnonia —but a feast of the
rudest fare. Rude in its fare and rude in its
abundance —hogs and oxen, roasted whole,
mingled with cakes of meal as big as shields ;
hogsheads of cheese and curds, and stacks of
onions. Such a feast as would have gladdened
the roughest of the Piets and Scots ; or have
laden the board of their enemies—the rude
Saxons.
“ Shall I aid you both to the reading of my
riddle?” said the smiling Ethne, “when I tell
you that to-morrow morning we feast not with
our warriors but with our enemies—not indeed
with our enemies, but with our allies ? That
side by side the servers lay wine-cup and
bottomless drinking-horn ! ”
There was silence, whilst Cormac and Elgiva
grasped the meaning of these words. And
then a torrent of words from both assailed
Ethne’s ears.
“ We feast with the Saxons ! ” cried Elgiva.
“ Remember Vortigern, and how he feasted


with them, and beware ! How when Bret
and Saxon were drinking side by side Hengist
cried, ‘ Draw your daggers ! ’ and each Saxon
smote the Briton at his side and slew him.
“ We are allied with the Saxons ! ” cried
Cormac. “ Without my knowledge ? How ?
When ? ”
“ What matter if we knit our noose our-
selves ! ” continued Elgiva, scornfully. “ Bet-
ter die meadful and feasting than in drought
and famine on the battle-field. Curd and
flesh to-day cow-berry and toad-stool to-
morrow ! ”
Ethne clapped her hands lightly to her
ears.
“ Listen ! Listen ! ” she cried, smiling.
“ For I have wonderful news to tell you !
“ Great news, indeed ! ” exclaimed Cormac,
with rising fury, “ that we should be the allies
of that villain, Ceawlin and Wessex ! No,
Ethne ”
“ Ceawlin of Wessex —never ! ” cried Ethne,
interrupting him. “ But what do you say to
Ethelbert of Kent ? ”
“ Ethelbert of Kent ! ”
Cormac’s face changed. An alliance with
the Kentish over-lord was entirely different,
for it was said his wife was a Christian —


Bertha, daughter of the Frankish king, Chari-
bert.
“ Yes, we are allied with him against
Ceawlin ! ” cried Ethne, with sparkling eyes ;
while Cormac breathed hard, and gazed at her
between friendly anger and admiration. “It
is a thing of years ago, the feud between the
two ; since Ethelbert was woefully beaten
at \\ ibbesben by Ceawlin. Ethelbert was
but a stripling then, but he means now to have
his revenge ! ”
She paused, smiling.
I will show you,” she said, “ the pathway
there is to be cut among our enemies. There
is discussion among them, and one Saxon wars
upon another. Last night, and the night
before, when you little dreamed of what I was
doing, I had secret interviews with one of the
most powerful of the Saxon thanes, and I
soon learnt that Redwald is no longer with
Ceawlin, but has left him and gone over to
Ethelbert. That a thane should leave his
chief is one of the most terrible things that
can happen among the Saxons —but Ceawlin
of Wessex, as these Saxon dogs have named
this side of Caesariensis, is hated by his own
people as well as by his enemies, and some of
our allies, the Hwiccan, are part of the West


Saxons. Ethelbert, king of erstwhile Cantii,
has come round by Mercia to join us here
and has seized upon the moment to unite
with the Hwiccan, as well as with us and the
Mercians ; he wishes to depose Ceawlin and
place himself in power. To reward us for our
support, he will ” She turned, without-
stretched hands to Elgiva. “He will force
Redwald to deliver up your mother to us ! ”
Elgiva fell, with a low sob, at Ethne’s knee,
and placed her lips on the hands that held
hers.
“He knows, then, where Redwald is ? ”
said Cormac.
“ Redwald is, at this moment, in Ethelbert’s
camp. By this time to-morrow Elgiva and
her mother will be together.”
Cormac stood before his foster-sister with
bowed head, looking at her with soft, grave
eyes. For a moment his gaze wandered to
the great motley army, basking in the autumn
sunlight, and then returned to her. For the
time his wild hopes of dominion over the Sax-
ons were nothing to him, before the fact that
his father’s last injunctions were about to be
fulfilled—and through Ethne !
He might have fought twenty battles and
yet been as far as ever from the chief object


of the campaign—here, at the very beginning,
Ethne had accomplished it.
“ Do you blame me now that I kept the
thing secret from you ? ” asked Ethne, softly.
“ When so much depended on it, it seemed
cruel to rouse your hopes until I was certain.”
For a time he could not answer ; speech
failed him as he remembered his words to
Elgiva against Ethne.
At last he murmured in broken tones, as he
knelt before her :
“ I can never repay you, Ethne —I am un-
worthy even to thank you.”
He turned to Elgiva and said :
“ It is finished, Elgiva —my father’s wishes
are fulfilled. You remember, in the grotto,
you said you wished you might owe your
mother’s rescue to another rather than to me.
You have your desire now.”
The girl made no reply.
“ And yet —in spite of all my gratitude to
Ethne, I should have liked you to have owed
it all to me. It is sweet to fight for those —
we love ! ”
A quick blush flamed on Elgiva’s face.
Her eyes met Cormac’s. Her hands fell into
his outstretched to her.


Ethne threw her arms round both.
“ How say ye, my love-birds ? Shall we
have feast first and marriage after ? Shall
the priest at eve join ye two in wedlock ? ”


CHAPTER XVI.
Ethelbert of Kent.
The day of the feast had dawned. Ethne
had long left her bed, and was now surrounded
by her women at her toilet-table. She slipped
the bronze case from her mirror and looked at
herself attentively. The days of warfare and
anxiety had left no impression upon her ; the
wdiite skin w r as as fair as ever, the lips as red,
the hair as glossy in its blue-blackness. Fresh
from the bath, satin-like from delicate un-
guents, never had the fair and beautiful
skin appeared to greater advantage—this she
believed she owed to the elaborate system
of bathing Roman Britain had taught her to
love, and which she could now' enjoy to the ut-
most ; for she had put the baths of the villa
into order after much trouble. In her bathing
she was a true Sybarite—luxuriating in hot air
and vapour, and in summer in sun-baths —
spending much time in passing, by almost
imperceptible degrees, from cold to the utmost


degree of heat she was capable of enduring;
after which she plunged into new milk, or was
anointed with costly and perfumed oil. She
could endure hardship and privation, but her
love of luxury and wealth was a passion with
her. The toilet table at which she sat was scat-
tered with accessories of the most perfect
kind. The silver unguent vases, filled with
Celtic spikenard, were in the form of the sacred
lotus-flower; the caskets and mirror-cases
were ornamented with beautiful honeysuckle
pattern, and her own portrait was supported
by cupids of priceless workmanship.
Ethne’s magnificent toilette was almost
completed—one woman was tying some dusky
British pearls about the throat, and another
was staining the fingers with henna when
Gelert rushed into the room searching and
sniffing into every corner and behind every
hanging ; whining piteously meanwhile. He
pushed against the tiring-woman engaged on
painting the fingers, and the vase of henna
was thrown on Ethne’s robe.
Ethne flew into a rage immediately; she
rose and kicked the creature so savagely that
it became necessary to change her embroidered
shoe as well as repair the damaged robe.
“ Ah, brute! ” she cried. “ Always at


hand to annoy me—why did you not follow
your mistress ? ”
Contrary to his usual custom, the hound
showed no ill-feeling to Ethne, in spite of her
treatment of him ; and stretched himself on
the ground beside her, although she tried to
beat him off. When she rose to leave the
room he still hung about her ; when her women
would have driven him away he snarled and
bit at them savagely.
He had been seeking for Elgiva and, unable
to find her, was determined to remain by
Ethne’s side, where he hoped his mistress
would, sooner or later, return.
There was no time for delay ; the candle-
bearers stood waiting outside the door —for
Ethne, doing all things in royal state, had
ordered that a great candle, six feet in height,
should precede her in the procession.
She knew that all was in readiness. The hall
of the feast was swept, and garnished, and
sprinkled with vervain-water ; ivy wreaths to
ward off the effects of drinking were ready for
each feaster. The door opened, the great candle
shed its rays on her, the procession waited—
she rose and followed.
She glanced exulting over the scene as she
sank into her seat of honour.


The leaders of the party, both Briton and
Saxon, occupied an elevated position; the
dishes and plates from which they ate were
of pure gold ; all fashioned, as Roman taste
had demanded, from ancient and beautiful
Greek models. The stage on which they sat
had once been an upper chamber of the Roman
villa, but its walls had suffered in the Saxon
destruction, and it now stood open to the halls
and courts below. From her position Ethne
had a view* of much of the great banquet she
had prepared. The half-ruined mansion had
lent itself readily to her purpose. In their
ravages the heathen had thrown down so
many of the walls that the lower rooms and
halls formed, with the outer courts, an almost
continuous apartment; in many places there
was no roof at all, but this proved an advantage
in the eyes of the rude chieftains on either side;
in the open air they found greater space for the
hounds and body-slaves it was their pleasure
should attend them. Clad in skins of goat
and sheep, hot with mead and gluttony, the
warriors gave no thought to autumn gust
and passing raindrop ; and cared not that
wasp and bee mingled with the viands before
them.
Ethne’s eye travelled proudly over the scene


before her. To her feet the throng of feasters
swept ; and on through broken courts and
halls —branching off here and there to fill un-
seen side-aisles—and on again to the great
opening arch where their figures showed clear
against the distant dusk of the forest. A
mighty feast even in those days. Where it
overflowed into the outer air it gained a fringe
of slaves, with here and there a favourite horse
called by his master to partake of Roman
pulse or oaten cake ; to the uproar would be
added the shrill neigh of some Hibernian racer,
or the deep note of a Saxon war-horse.
But in the midst of her triumph Ethne was
moved to disgust. In days gone by she had
entertained her guests—polished Greeks and
Romans —at flower-strewn tables to the music
of singing maidens ; the air sweet from per-
fumed fountains and the wine-flagons gar-
landed with roses. Now her guests fought
with their food as animals with their prey;
they scrambled together for the possession
of tit-bits, and swallowed great junks of flesh
with the ease and rapidity of the hounds at
their feet ; to the perpetual discord of dirk
on platter there was a harsh, pervading
accompaniment of men munching their food as
animals munch their corn. Like animals,


too, she thought they looked, clad wholly in
sheep and goat-skins —even their trews of
hide ; their yellow hair swart from neglect,
their fine skins chafed and roughened by sun
and air; with grass and hay bound round
their feet. And to these savages she must
sue ! Filthy, unwashed, barbarous feasting
in the ruins they had made.
“ A goodly sight, O King ! ” she said, turn-
ing to the Anglo-Saxon in a seat of honour at
her side. “ These fine warriors are the admir-
ation of the Britons, even on our only meeting-
ground, the battle-field—therefore, a thousand
times more at festival! ”
“ And yet I thought but just now, from
your manner of looking at them, and from
your nostrils’ twitching that you would sooner
my warriors were at battle-distance than with
you at cup and meat ! ”
Many of the Saxon thanes at the upper table
had added a unique ornament to their appear-
ance —the waving length of a peacock’s
feather. For when the servers had entered
bearing aloft these dainties with their gorgeous
tails outspread—a wild scramble had ensued
that each might obtain one of the feathers.
“ Now, indeed, O King, you wrong me ! ”
returned Ethne, in her sweetest manner, “ and


for your words you must needs at once pledge
me in this loving-cup, and pledge me in the ale
you love so well.”
From a beautiful slave she took a golden
bowl that glittered with emeralds, and drink-
ing from it first, held it herself to the lips of her
companion.
But he took it coldly into his own hand,
turning it with particular care that he might
drink from the very spot which her lips had
pressed. He returned it to the slave —spill-
ing clumsily the remainder on Ethne’s sweep-
ing robes.
A sound between a chuckle and a grunt
escaped him.
“ I drink from the same spot with you,”
he said, “ but I give you no fair words, but the
truth, as my reason. You look at me so
honey-sweet and mouthe your - words so
smoothly—and I have heard full many tales
of sweet words and poisoned cup ! ”
Ethne sighed audibly ; she leaned towards
him with seductive grace.
“ Let us continue, then, as we have begun,
O King Ethelbert ! Give me the truth only,
or what you deem the truth —and leave me to
find the sweet words myself.” She smiled
and her ugly tusks showed themselves.


He had seized upon a dish of rosy apples
and was devouring them, shredding the floor
and her dress with pip and core. His eyes,
narrowed with the relish of the fruit, glanced
sideways upon her—half-contemptuously, half-
suspiciously. He knew it was through this
woman, and not through her foster-brother,
that the alliance with the Kymrv had been
formed. To his stern Saxon mind it seemed
a meaningless prelude to the business in hand,
thus to bandy what seemed to him baby
speeches. Ethne’s beauty also was not al-
together to his liking ; her small and slender
proportions, the blue-black of her hair, and
the ivory pallor of her skin were far removed
from his ideal of womanly beauty ; and to
him her delicate manner and bird-like appe-
tite were unnatural. He glanced from her to
the scene below, at the Saxon women—large,
fair, and feasting bravely.
His Thor and Odin religion of terror sup-
plied him with a host of elves and sprites—
pale, dark-haired, bright-eyed—and he could
not dissociate the thought of them from this
small, dark woman at his side. Instinctively,
he said a charm to himself, and muttered incan-
tations between each mouthful.
As to Ethne, she was experiencing some


disappointment in this meeting between her-
self and the great Ethelbert of Kent.
She looked on him with more favour than
he on her. He had not yet grown coarse from
overfeeding and drinking ; and his figure had
the majesty of the gods, to whom he traced his
origin. His long hair and golden beard spark-
led, almost as brightly as the massive rrown
upon his head. Much of his dress was of a
splendour Ethne had seldom seen surpassed;
but through the openings of his upper garments
she could see that, under rich robes embroid-
ered and jewelled, he wore the close-fitting
dress of sheep-skin that was the garb of the
meanest serf ; the thongs, which bound the
sandals together, were pointed with jewels and
gold, and gold formed every fastening of his
garments.


CHAPTER XVII.
Ethne’s Error.
Cormac’s seat at the banquet had been placed
at some distance from Ethne. This he thought
strange, for Ethne, so anxious to identify her-
self with him, generally insisted on sitting
beside him; it was her custom to lavish atten-
tion upon him, but now she showed herself
indifferent to his presence.
He could not overhear her conversation
with Ethelbert, had he wished—he had no
desire to do so He trusted to her to make
all necessary arrangements —his whole mind
for the time was given to love and Elgiva.
It had been a disappointment when Ethne,
meeting him at the entrance to the hall, had
told him that Elgiva would not appear at the
feast. He marvelled greatly why she had
absented herself and why the old hound
Gelert had not stayed with her.
The time wore on slowly. The Anglo-Saxon


minstrels broke into coarse, jigging tunes ;
their fellows feasted more heartily when thus
accompanied; beating time with wagging
heads and shouting between their mouth-
fuls to the jerky numbers. The Celtic pipers
joined in—the wild Hibernians adding their
piercing note ; the hounds followed with dis-
mal howls. The smell of sheep-skin clothing
was strangely mingled with the steam of the
coarse feast.
The great Bretwalda addressed Ethne sud-
denly.
“ And your warriors lady, I hope are ready
to march with me at this week’s end ? ”
In a moment she was upright, smiling.
“ Ah ! ” said she, “it is time we spent a
minute in these troublesome matters. Our
aid is ready at any moment against this villain,
Ceawlin of Wessex. And the conditions I ask
will not, I think, be hard ! ”
The Bretwalda paused with his whittle in a
mass of goats’ flesh.
“ The conditions ! he repeated. “ The
conditions ! ”
“ Yes, the conditions, my liege,” she said,
still smiling. “Is it strange we ask aught in
return ? ”
“ Aught in return ! ” again he repeated her


words, “ aught in return! ’’—half in contempt,
half in anger. What right, he wondered, had
women to do anything but stitch trews and
bake bread, and lend a hand occasionally in
battle ? He went on eating his goats’ flesh.
Ethne felt sick at heart. She took a draught
of her favourite Greek wine. Then turned on
him a smiling face.
“ You remember, O King, my conditions ?”
He said nothing —only looked, far off,
through an arched opening past the dusk and
blue of the low-lying forest to where the cattle
strayed upon the hills; the hills that separated
them from mountainous Cambria.
Then he pointed silently to the heights with
one hand, and with the other grasped his long
rune-covered sword.
“ My lord ? ” she questioned, with paling lips
but with an attempt at mirth. “Your ges-
tures, I doubt not, are deemed most eloquent,
but I would fain have speech as well ! ’ ’
“ Those hills, lady,” he said, looking at her
steadfastly, “ are the chain wherewith you
and your warriors are bound to me —this
sword is the fate that awaits those who refuse
to allv with me against Ceawlin of Wessex !
Ethne half rose to her feet. A fit of rage
seized her which she could scarcely repress


but she kept silent, although two vivid spots
of colour suddenly showed on her white cheeks,
and her eyes glittered strangely.
Ethelbert helped himself to some virgin-
honey from the board; and as he ate it con-
tinued to gaze on Ethne.
With these strange glittering eyes the Celtic
woman was dangerously akin to sprite and
elf. The fear came upon him that she might
beguile him. Such haunting fears were Ethel-
bert’s throughout his life —in his meeting with
Saint Augustine he bargained that it should
take place in the open air, for he believed the
danger from incantation was greater within
four walls. He recalled the scene in which he
had seen her on the battle-field ; in the din
and heat of the fight with men falling like
leaves around her, her charioteer had rushed
upon the dying Cutha whilst she stood up-
right, uttering incantations in a piercing, un-
known tongue.
Again Ethelbert muttered a charm ; and
this time, as a further precaution he made the
sign of the cross, as he had seen his Christian
Bertha do.
“ I must remind you, noble Ethelbert,"
said Ethne, with forced calmness, “of the
terms of our agreement. To begin—it is not


necessary to tell you of the value you set upon
the services of Ceawlin’s former thane, Red-
wald ; nor of Redwald’s great desire to obtain
possession of my companion, the Saxon maid,
Elgiva ! And can you deny that the compact
between you and me was that you should
cede my former possessions in Damnonia to
me for our services against Ceawlin, and the
restoration of Elgiva to her Saxon kinsmen ? ”
Ethelbert turned with some dignity to his
companion.
“ You forget one thing, lady,” he said, “ of
great importance —and that is that your nego-
tiations were not with me at all, but with
Redwald. He is my best soldier, but I cannot
recognise any wild promises he may have made
to you even should Damnonia fall into my
hands. I am willing enough that he should
obtain the maid and thank you, queen, for
your kindly gift to him.” Ethne here bit
her lip until the blood appeared. “ But it
seemed to me you were over-anxious to part
with the fair Saxon. So anxious that you
could not wait for the reply of my emissaries.
Ha, ha ! Wit you have, in plenty, and fine
speech —but you are hot and hasty like all
Welsh—and heat and haste err oft ! ”


Ethne continued to control her wrath. She
tried to smile.
“ I cannot tell you all the difficulties that
beset me/’ she said, “ but I ask you to think
of me as less witless than I seem. My plans
concerning the maid demanded the greatest
secrecy even from mv own councillors ! ”
•/ */
“ Tut, tut,” said the blunt Saxon. “ What
care I for your plans and your councillors —•
and I come not here to bandy words over
maids and their quarrels with their kinsfolk !
I come here to direct you, and yonder stripling-
chieftain about our plans for our next week’s
campaign ! ”
Ethne became as pale as death in her effort
to control herself.
“ You are over-sure of your claims upon us,”
she said, in a slow, trembling voice. “ What
of Ceawlin ? He may, perhaps, offer fairer
conditions for our aid against you.”
Ethelbert laughed shortly, and swore scorn-
fully.
“ By Thor and Odin and the tail of the mare
of Hengist—these Welsh outfool themselves.
Know you not that I lie betwixt your host and
Ceawlin ? ”
Ethne laughed also —a weak, forced laugh.


“ a jest—a jest, Sir King ! Pardonable,
surely, at least and merry-making ! ”
“A jest! ” repeated Ethelbert. “ And if
one be pardonable, likewise a second. What
then of Ceawlin ! He also might find my terms
easier if I ask his aid against you.”
“ Well said, King Ethelbert ! Your jest
hath given mine its death-blow. Men do
belie you Saxons when they call you witless.
A very subtle wit, indeed, you seem to me to
have.”
She laughed —again the same forced laugh-
ter.
Then suddenly she broke down —she burst
into one of her paroxysms of rage, as some
women burst into tears. The pent-up wrath
escaped.
“ You Jutish churl! ” she shrieked. “Do
you treat us like slaves —to be used and then
cast off like clouts ? Fight we will —but
against you, not with you. I will not rest till
your bloody head be brought me and I have
hacked out your sneering tongue myself.”
Her angry voice rang through the hall. She
could be plainly seen, as she stood upright in
her glittering robes. She drew her sword from
her girdle and it flashed above her head.
She had feared a bloody break-up to the


banquet—and now she herself had brought it
about.
The brawl spread, quick as lightning. With-
in three minutes after Ethne’s voice had rung
through the hall, ten men were slain and thirty
wounded. The alarm was sounded on both
sides —and within an hour a desperate battle
between the Kymry and Saxons was in full
course. Before nightfall Ethne and Cormac
had been taken prisoners.


CHAPTER XVIII.
England’s First Christian Queen.
fV
The foster-brother and sister were imprisoned
in one of the rooms of the Roman villa, in
which the feast had been held. They were
not fettered, but were carefully watched by a
strong body of soldiers. They were to be put
to death upon the following day. Their
great army had scattered in every direction ;
a great number of prisoners had been taken
by the Saxons. The Black Horse had failed !
The man and woman sat as far from each
other as the room would allow. Cormac sat
with his face buried in his hands. Ethne
crouched like a wild animal caught in its lair ;
her body still quivered with the war-passion
of the evening before; her face was swollen
from the blows she had received ; her beautiful
hair was matted with blood, and blood stained
her white skin and her tattered finery.
Cormac could not bear to look at her. He


knew now the part she had played with Red-
During the long night she had told
him everything told it him fiercely with
wild, heathen oaths. In her despair and rage
there was still some pleasure in letting him
know" of Elgiva’s fate.
In all the tumult and distress of Cormac’s
mind Elgiva’s loss seemed scarcely harder to
bear than that Ethne should prove so treacher-
ous and vile.
“ We shall die together,” said Cormac, tak-
ing his hands from his face and looking at
Ethne solemnly. “It is fitting —that I who
tied mvself so blindly to you in life, should not
be parted in death ! ”
Ethne made no reply.
“ And yet,” he said, after a time, as though
continuing some thought aloud, “ I could
have sworn at the Fair that you loved Elgiva
and lamented her loss.”
“ Lamented her loss ! ” repeated Ethne,
gloomily. “ Ay, her loss meant all lost in
those days —long ago I promised you should
hear what the diviners told me at the Beltane
festival, and now you shall hear it. They told
me I should gain my lost possessions m Dam-
nonia, in exchange for a Saxon maid. Now


you know why I brought the great, fawning
wench with me to Britain.”
She started up, raging again.
“ Did the stars tell me right ? Did they
divine aright ? Ah ! ” she turned on Cormac,
“ it was your silly calf-love for the Saxon
gawk that stood in the way ! I feared to delay
lest you should discover my plans and prevent
them—then I acted too quickly, and lost every-
thing. I should have kept her with me until
I was certain that Ethelbert would do as I
wished.”
Her rage was horrible to witness.
As she stormed up and down the chamber
there was a rustle in one of the corners, and
the hound, Gelert, ran into the room.
Ethne rushed upon him immediately —here
was something on which to vent her fury.
The creature crouched down in supplication
before her —but she kicked and trampled him
underfoot.
“ Beast! ” she roared. “ You haunt me
like an evil genius ; why did you not go with
your mistress ? Ah ! curses upon her she
is safer now than I ! ”
The animal shrank under her blows, with a
strange moan that was almost a murmur
of expostulation. After all he had gone


through, and the battles in which he had
fought, there was something almost human
about the old hound.
It was strange how, in his grief and search for
Elgiva, he seemed determined to control the
deep resentment he had always nursed against
Ethne. He endured all her ill-usage patiently
in the hope that, by her means, he might yet
find Elgiva. He whimpered now like a whipt
child.
Cormac rose and thrust Ethne away from
the creature. Gelert was now specially dear
to him because of the lost Elgiva.
Ethne turned on her foster-brother. In her
rage she was a mad-woman —forgetting that
the Saxons had bereft her of her weapons
she sprang backward, fumbling at her girdle
for her dagger ; her face horribly distorted,
showed to their full her beast-like tusks.
The hound, looking on, understood the
familiar action. He had lived too long among
fighters not to know that she sought her sword ;
and that sword, he knew, was to be used against
his master. He was an old warrior, well-
trained in his work —many a man on the battle-
field had received his death-wound from
Gelert. With one spring his whole weight
was hurled on Ethne ; one short snap of his


iron jaws and his old fangs had torn a fatal
wound in her thin white throat.
The next moment all was tumult in the
chamber. Several of the soldiers, who were
on guard, rushed in on hearing Ethne’s death-
cry. Cormac was seized by the soldiers,
who believed he had been attacking the
woman. Ethne was carried into an adjoining
room.
Gelert gave a loud bark of joy, and rushed
forward to meet two women who appeared
at the door, accompanied by a Saxon who
wore the dress of a priest.
To Cormac's entire bewilderment, Elgiva
stood before him.
“ You, too ! ” he moaned. “ Are you to
suffer also for all this sin and treachery ) Your
life, I hoped, was safe.”
“ And yours, too, Cormac,” she answered,
solemnly. “ You owe it to a fellow-Chris-
tian ! ”
Then, after a time, she told him what had
happened to her after her departure from
Ethne’s side on the preceding morning.
When Cormac had heard her story, he re-
membered the words of Saint Columba—the
Cross and not the Sword will subdue the
Saxons!


Elgiva said that at dawn on the day of the
feast, Ethne awoke her saying that her mother
was on her way to the British camp, and
that Elgiva was to ride with some waiting
Saxons to meet her. Elgiva set forth imme-
diately, and rode some distance before she
discovered Ethne’s treachery, and that she
was being taken, as a prisoner, to Redwald.
She endeavoured to escape, but found it use-
less. She then appealed to the men who
accompanied her ; and in her explanations and
expostulations, she discovered that one of them
had a wife who had lately adopted Christianity,
and was now in the service of Queen Bertha.
She persuaded this man to let her see his
wife.
The interview she craved brought her more
than she had dared to hope. Her mother’s
story and long resistance to Paganism had
already reached Queen Bertha’s ears; she
now prevailed on ~Ethelbert to allow her to
purchase the liberty of both women from Red-
wald —a difficult matter to arrange, even at
the great price she offered; but Redwald
was loath to refuse anything to the wife of the
king to whom he had just vowed fealty.
“ And so, Cormac,” said Elgiva, “I am
sent back to you, and my mother with me,


on the one condition that we depart to-morrow
at dawn.”
Afterwards they looked down on the body
of Ethne of the Raven Hair. The mother of
Elgiva gently closed the staring eyes and
said :
“ Judge not, that ye be not judged ! This
woman was a Druidess, and a daughter of
Druids, and they are reared in vice and
cruelty. Their mothers are naught to them ;
when they marry it is not with one man, but
with many ; the children they bear are sent
at once to the foster-mother. Love and hon-
our are closed books to them.”
THE END.
William J. McKenzie, The Devonshire Press, Torquay.


Mr. JOHN OUSELEY’S NEW BOOKS.
OUSELEY'S POPULAR
NATIONAL
IRISH LIBRARY
6d. EVERY MONTH.
the field of English literature, both Classical
and Modem, has been fully exploited, that of Ire-
land—which to the student of the world’s national and
political history means so much—has been quite over-
looked. It is safe to say that the literature of Ireland is
perhaps richer in historical and academic lore, and we
shall say more absorbing, too, than that of her sister na-
tion, for she was the seat of learning as far back as the
nth century, yet her literature lies hidden, unknown,
almost obscure, in Great Britain, her political mistress.
We feel, therefore, that in deciding to publish her
son’s best books in a popular form—one every month—
we are going to do something that wall receive the ap-
preciation of the general public and the imprimatur of the
student.
The first volume is now in the press and will be pub-
lished shortly.
(Special designed and ornamental cover. Demy 8vo.)
16 Famngdon Street, London, E.C.


Honour—or Not ?
(Crown Bvo., 2/-; cloth),
MARIAN ALMA.
The Qirl Behind
(Crown Bvo. f 1/- net; red cloth, white foil).
SARA DREW.
Our Mrs. Parks
(yin. by pocket size, 100 pp.; 6d. ; green and white
strong paper cover),
RAY KNOWLES.
Ann : A brief tragedy
(Crown Bvo., 1/- net; green cloth, gilt lettering),
(By the Author of “ Miss Molly.”)
Two Husbands
(Crown Bvo., 6/-; green cloth, design, gilt lettering),
J. B. COLLIARD.


Oddities of the Law
(Crown Bvo., 2/6 net; blue cloth, white foil),
ARTHUR N. HEYWOOD.
New Poems
(Crown Bvo., 2/- net; floral design cover, gold lettering),
A. G. SEWARD.
.Songs of a Soul
(A New and Striking Poetical Work),
By ALBERT C. WHITE.
The Disappearance of
Nicholson
(Crown Bvo., 2/- ; cloth, gilt),
By CYRUS AINSWORTH.


Mr. John Ouseley’s Charming New Books.
Condemned to Death
(Crown Bvo., 6/- ; cloth, gilt),
JOHN EYRE.
(Author of “The Lion and the Frog,” etc., etc.)
For King and Love
AND OTHER STORIES.
(Crown Bvo., 3/6; green cloth, black and gilt, with
frontispiece),
By W. BOURNE COOK
(Author of “ Madam Domino,” etc.)
Held to Honour
AND OTHER STORIES.
(Crown Bvo., 3/6; salmon cloth).
By ELLA NAPIER LEFROY.
(Author of “The Man’s Cause,” etc.)
A Winning Loser
Crown Bvo., 3/6 ; cloth, gilt),
ETHEL BALFOUR.


The Druidess
(Crown Bvo., 3/6 ; cloth, gilt),
Charming story for Boys and Others,
By FLORENCE GAY.
Which ?
(Crown Bvo., 3/6; cloth, black and gilt lettering),
EDITH NOWELL.
A Noble Vagabond
(Crown Bvo., 3/6; 264 pp.; cloth, gilt).
MILTON POLLITT.
Shadowed
(Crown Bvo., 6/- ; cloth, gilt).
By BARBARA GLYNN.
The Red God
(Demy Bvo., 2/= net; red cloth, white foil),
By HUGO AMES, B.A. (Oxon).




s ■' :• - n
‘ * *
%
%
/




