

GEORGE MERRICK LONG
A MEMOIR
THE DEAN OF NEWCASTLE


M SYDNEY GAZETTE TRESST


'


.
I


GEORGE MERRICK LONG


V w
i . W
4B9I *
B 5* §U
S» , S* y
■HnR "m , * .
lilMIBlMlliu '• f." *
■ f | Jjjf • :
y§!§> iP


THE RIGHT REVEREND
GEORGE MERRICK LONG
M.A V D.D., LL.D., C.B.E V V.D.
Lord Bishop of Bathurst 1911 —1928
Lord Bishop of Newcastle 1928 —1930
A MEMOIR
by
The Very Reverend W. LI. Johnson,
8.A., TH.L.
Dean of Newcastle
MORPETH
THE s. JOHN'S COLLEGE PRESS


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by William Dunbar
at The S. John's College Press, Morpeth, New South Wales
and
Registered at the General Post Office, Sydney, for transmission
through the post as a book.


CONTENTS
EARLY YEARS 9
HOPES AND DISCOURAGEMENTS 12
COLLEGE DAYS 15
ORDINATION 19
HOLY TRINITY, KEW 22
HEAD OF TRINITY 25
BISHOP OF BA I HURST 30
NATIONAL WORK 33
CALL TO NEWCASTLE 38
BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE 42
MIND AND PERSONALITY 47
FAITH AND CHURCHMANSHIP 57
APPENDIX A
AN ENGLISH TRIBUTE 67
APPENDIX B
GEORGE MERRICK LONG
AND JOHN FRANCIS STRETCH 70




PREFACE
This brief memoir first appeared as a series of articles
in 'The Newcastle Morning Herald'. In acceding to the
request to publish it in book form, I am taking the op-
portunity of adding several items of interest and im-
portance.
In addition to his description of the Bishop which I
quote in chapter eleven, I am appending an article
written for 'The Morpeth Review' by the Reverend
E. H. Burgmann. I feel that in this article the Warden
of S. John's has made a valuable contribution to the
study of Bishop Long's character, land I thank the
editors of the Review for their courtesy in allowing me
to reproduce it.
I also thank the editor of 'The Church Standard' for
granting me the privilege of reproducing a letter writ-
ten to his paper by Mr Albert Mansbridge.
I am most grateful to the printer, Mr William Dun-
bar, of The S. John's College Press, for the care he has
devoted to the production of this work, and to the Rev.
R. S. Lee for correcting the proofs.
The proceeds from the sale of this booklet will be
used:—
(1) To provide a window, containing the likeness of
the Bishop, to be placed in the Tyrrell Chapel in New-
castle Cathedral, in keeping with the windows which
commemorate Bishops Tyrrell, Pearson, Stanton, and
Stretch.
(2) For the work of the Children's Homes in the dio-
cese of Newcastle.
The cost of the window will not be great, but, in view
of the relations that existed between the Bishop and my-


self, I would dearly love to meet it from the sale of this
small work which has been a labour of love. As for the
Children's Homes, I need hardly remind my readers of
the Bishop's keen interest in them, and of his deep love
for the children.
The Deanery
Newcastle.
W. Herbert Johnson.
The Feast of the Transfiguration
1930.


CHAPTER ONE
EARLY YEARS
GEORGE MERRICK LONG was born at Carisbrook,
near Maryborough, in the western district of
Victoria, on November sth, 1875. As is recorded
of so many great men, his mother exercised a great in-
fluence on him in his early years. She was an English
woman, a niece of Lady Greenly, and was a woman of
very beautiful character, deep affection, and firm re-
ligious convictions. His father also came from England,
and was a strong man of decided views and forceful
personality. He was eager that George, who was the
youngest of six children, should be an engineer. The boy
was therefore sent to school with instructions that he
should specialise in mathematics. But if the father was
determined, so too was the son. His interest so far as
his studies were concerned was in languages, history and
literature, and his desire was not to be apprenticed to
some engineering firm, but to enter upon an avocation
that would give him time to pursue his literary studies in
the evenings. With this end in view, he applied for a
position in a bank. In three weeks he prepared himself
for the examination, passed with honours, and entered
the bank. His father was dismayed and did not give him
much encouragement. However, it was not long before
he realised that George had chosen aright, and he lived
to be very proud of his son's development and achieve-
ments in later years. It is to be deeply regretted that the
father died just before his son was made a bishop.
But to return to our story. Fortunately, Maryborough
at the time had a very wise and lovable vicar in Canon
Harris. This is the Archdeacon Harris who is now living
in retirement in Rose Bay, Sydney. While George was
still a lad a Mission was conducted in Maryborough by


the Rev. J. F. Stretch, who afterwards became Bishop
of Newcastle. The vicar noticed that this Mission had
made a profound impression on George, who was al-
ready a teacher and secretary in the Sunday School.
He was prepared for Confirmation by the Canon and
also attended the teachers' classes conducted by Canon
Harris. These classes deepened the impression that the
Mission had made on him, and one night after the in-
struction was finished George opened his heart to the
vicar and told him that he could not be content to re-
main in a bank doing mere routine all his life, but that
he saw no way out as he had not the advantages of edu-
cation. The vicar encouraged him and told him that if
he were eager to go on with his education a way would
be found for him to do so. At the same time there were
some who suggested to him that he was cut out for
politics. This is not to be wondered at, as he undoubtedly
had gifts that would have made him a great statesman.
But this idea did not appeal to him. The idea that did
appeal to him was put to him by Canon Harris and
that was the idea of the ministry. He was nineteen
years of age at the time, and on the vicar's advice he
joined an evening class for young men which was con-
ducted by Mr William Lacey. After he had attended
the class for a short time Mr Lacey told the Canon 'lf
that young man has application he will make a name for
himself. He is brilliant.'
George Long never forgot the tremendous debt he
owed to the influence and advice of Archdeacon Harris.
This is shown by the following letter which he wrote to
the Archdeacon at the time of his election to the Bishop-
ric of Bathurst.
Trinity Grammar School,
Kew, 7th Sept., 1911.
My Dear Archdeacon Of the hundreds of congratu-
lations that poured in upon me none gave me greater
pleasure than that of my old vicar, and the man who
first opened the door of the ministry to me. The memory
of that first Saturday you spoke to me of it is as clear
now as the day it took place. I can never forget all you


did for me in those early days. Your training me to
read, your interviews with Bishops Thornton, Cooper,
and Goe and all the other kindnesses which smoothed
away the early difficulties. I hope I shall not bring dis-
credit on your early training. With kindest regards to
Mrs Harris and your good self, Yours very sincerely,
G. Merrick Long.


CHAPTER TWO
HOPES AND DISCOURAGEMENTS
After the events related in the previous chapter
George Long entered upon a new course of studies with
a view to matriculation and then ordination. Canon
Harris, proud of the progress that he was making, wrote
to the Bishop of Ballarat, Dr Thornton, and told him
of this promising young bank clerk, and suggested that
it might encourage the youth if the Bishop could find
time to see him. Dr Thornton immediately wrote to
young Long and invited him to Bishopscourt. The
day appointed was a Saturday, and Long arrived at
Bishopscourt punctually at three o'clock. To his great
discomfiture he was told that the Bishop was out. The
maid, noticing the youth's disappointment, went and
spoke to Mrs Thornton. Mrs Thornton was most kind
and explained that the English cricketers were playing
in Ballarat that afternoon and that the Bishop had gone
to see the match. As Long was always an enthusiastic
cricketer himself he felt no grudge against the Bishop
for keeping him waiting four hours. But subsequent
events were such that he could not help wondering if
the defeat of the Englishmen had given the Bishop, who
was an Englishman, a pessimistic outlook for the time
being. However that may be, on the Bishop's return
at seven o'clock it was decided that Long should stay the
weekend at Bishopscourt. When a telegram had been
despatched to his people, Long was given an examination
by the Bishop in which there were questions on the
Bible, on the Prayer Book, and the authors he had read.
At eleven o'clock he retired to bed. Next morning the
Bishop told him that he had read his answers to the
questions he had set him, and that he was disappointed


at his ignorance regarding Rogation and Ember days,
and that he did not approve of his enthusiasm for the
poet Shelley.
At eleven o'clock that morning the Bishop was en-
gaged to preach at the church in Wendouree and as the
theological student who was to have taken the service
was ill, the Bishop asked Long to read the service. Long,
who had never yet spoken in public, was dismayed, but
obeyed the Bishop's instructions. He was so nervous
"that, after the General Confession, he stood up to say
the Absolution, but fortunately the Bishop broke in
and saved him from that disastrous mistake. The psalms
were read verse and verse about and Long felt his heart
going out in genuine sympathy to the psalmist as he
read 'Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in
Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of
Kedar'. In the evening the Bishop was to preach at
S. Peter's Church, Ballarat, and again he took Long
with him. S. Peter's is a large church, and Long's dis-
comfiture was complete when the Bishop informed
him that he must read the lessons. In the vestry the
youth, in his nervousness, resorted to the vicar, for ad-
vice and instruction. But, to his dismay, he discovered
that the vicar was deaf, and that it was impossible to
make him hear without attracting the Bishop's atten-
tion, and so revealing his ignorance and disconcerted-
ness. The vicar was the Reverend Canon Slaney Poole,
who is now living in retirement in the parish of S. Cuth-
bert's, Prospect, South Australia, where Bishop Long
conducted a Mission in 1916, and where I was rector
for nine years before joining Bishop Long in Newcastle.
Canon Poole remembers Bishop Long as he was in
those far-off days and often used to speak to me of the
friendship that sprang up between Long and his own
son at the Melbourne University. That son became a
great Judge, while Long became a great Bishop. Another
coincidence, which is a very sad one, is that both of
them have died just when they seemed to be at the
height of their power and usefulness. But I am antici-
pating my story. At the stage I have reached Long


found his hopes shattered, for Bishop Thornton, at the
end of that eventful Sunday, advised him not to enter-
tain the idea of ordination, as he lacked the qualifi-
cations needful for public speaking!
It was a sad and disappointed youth who returned to
report these things to Canon Harris. But the Canon
refused to accept Bishop Thornton's verdict as final.
To encourage Long he told him of a certain John Kirk-
land who, also through the guidance and inspiration of
Canon Harris, offered himself for ordination to the
priesthood. He, too, encountered great difficulties and
discouragement, but by force of character he won
through and became one of the most beloved and in-
fluential priests that the Church in Australia has had.
This is the John Kirkland, who was Vice-Dean of New-
castle Cathedral and later Rector of Singleton. Many
who will read these words have reason to thank God
for that great and good man John Kirkland. The
facts which I have written here about him were told to
me by Bishop Long after a service at which he dedi-
cated a window in memory of John Kirkland in New-
castle Cathedral. It takes little imagination to realise
what that ceremony must have meant to the Bishop.
To him it was an opportunity to offer thanks to God
for one whose courage and perseverance had been an in-
spiration to him at a time when his own youthful hopes
were well nigh shattered.
So inspired, Long determined to proceed with re-
doubled energy, and Canon Harris determined to seek
an opening for him elsewhere. Meanwhile Bishop Thorn-
ton changed his mind. He realised that, having made a
mistake about Long's age, he had looked to find iii him
qualifications and developments to be expected only in
one eight or ten years older. He wrote to Canon Har-
ris, explaining the position and stating that he was
sending the Archdeacon to talk the matter over. But
it was too late, for when Dr Thornton's letter arrived
Long had been accepted as a candidate for holy orders,
by that good and kindly man, Dr Goe, Bishop of Mel-
bourne.


CHAPTER THREE
COLLEGE DAYS
In the previous chapter it was related that Dr Thorn-
ton, Bishop of Ballarat, told George Long that in his
opinion he did not possess qualifications needful in one
who was to be a public speaker, and that he advised him
to abandon the idea of seeking to enter the ministry.
Canon Harris urged his student not to be deterred by
this experience, as he knew a mistake had been made.
He pointed out to the youth that he had been rejected
for his reading without it being taken into account that
he had never read in public before. The good Canon
therefore, in addition to coaching him for matricu-
lation, set to work to train him in elocution and public
speaking. As I write these words there is staying with
us at the Deanery a cousin of Bishop Long, Miss May
Long, who on the death of her father was adopted by
her uncle, Bishop Long's father. In this way Miss May
Long was brought up in the family with George, and she
tells me that she well remembers how vigorously George
threw himself into the effort to develop his voice and
to cultivate the art of public reading and speaking.
Every morning in the week without fail, in the presence
of the Canon, George read matins. Those of us who
have known Bishop Long since the days that he became
prominent as Headmaster and as Canon of S. Paul's
Cathedral, Melbourne, appreciate the fact that his in-
fluence and impressiveness as a preacher and as a public
speaker were due in some measure to his rich and reson-
ant voice. In this respect we can be sure that the Bishop
owed much to the careful training which he had re-
ceived from that good man Canon Harris, who himself
had a beautifully trained and cultured delivery.


But we have to hear of still another wise move on the
part of Canon Harris a move which had an incal-
culable effect upon George Long's career. As soon as he
heard Dr Thornton's verdict Canon Harris set out to
visit Dr Goe, Bishop of Melbourne. Bishop Goe listened
intently to Canon Harris' story and then replied
'I am very interested in this case, and if this young
man is all you say he is I would like to have him.
I will certainly see him.' Before visiting Bishop Goe,
Long matriculated. He secured honours in English
and History, and a pass in Arithmetic, Algebra, Euclid,
Latin and French. Within a few weeks he had been ac-
cepted as a student for holy orders by Bishop Goe. The
Bishop told him that he was to go to Trinity College,
the Anglican college affiliated with the University of
Melbourne; but asked him whether he would be pre-
pared to go first to assist Archdeacon Herring in the
Upper Murray country, where in a certain district a
man was needed for four months. Young Long's reply,
which was typical of him, was as follows 'My Lord,
I have made a vow that if I am accepted as a candidate
for the priesthood I will always obey orders from those
in authority'. The result was that Long was sent to the
country for the four months. The place to which he
was sent was Tallangatta. While he was there Arch-
deacon Llerring showed him great kindness and en-
couraged him to make his studies his first concern. It
will interest Newcastle people to know that while
George Long was in Tallangatta the Secretary of the
Church was the bank manager, Mr W. M. Coverdale.
Today, Mr Coverdale is the Church Warden and Sec-
retary of Newcastle Cathedral. So it has eventuated
that Mr Coverdale was with him at the beginning of his
ministry as Secretary of the Church to which he came
as a student, and at the end of his ministry as the Sec-
retary of the Cathedral of the Diocese of which he was
the distinguished and beloved Bishop. On his return
from Tallangatta, he entered Trinity College.
The Reverend H. M. R. Rupp, Rector of Weston,
in the Diocese of Newcastle, who has known the Bishop


since 1894, has very kindly supplied me with some inter-
esting facts about his university life. Mr Rupp writes:
'I remember well his coming to Trinity College, a tall,
well built youth with a moustache. His character, his
social gifts, that magnetic personality, which was even
then in evidence, made him a general favourite. In
1896 I had a nervous breakdown which prevented me
from taking that year's examination, and in the leisure
which I then had, I amused myself by editing a stylo-
graphed College leaflet, which consisted largely of scur-
rilous comments on the personalities of our community.
To this edifying journal George Long contributed the
following—
"When has grown ecclesiastic
His conscience then not so elastic
He bans the fair by measures drastic
Performs with rubrics feats gymnastic
Shuns with ire the light fantastic
And advocates the life monastic."
In May, 1896, Browning's "Stafford" was performed
by the students of Trinity in the St Kilda Town Hall.
I smile now at the irony of the fact that while I was al-
loted the task of John Pym, G. M. Long was bracketed
with several others as mere Presbyterians!'
At the end of 1896 Long passed his first year Arts
and won the Ruperts Wood Resident Scholarship of
fifty pounds a year, tenable for five years at Trinity
College. In 1897 he passed second year Arts with Classic
honours, and proxime accessit to the Hastie Exhibition
in Inductive Logic and Mental Philosophy. He was
awarded Professor Harrison Moore's medal for Oratory,
on the vote of the students, and gained second class
honours in the Theological School in Biblical Exegesis
and Homiletics. In 1898 he passed third year Arts and
gained second class honours in the Theological School in
Ecclesiastical History. Elected Prelector of Trinity Col-
lege and President of the University Christian Union he
represented his College in 'University United' debates.
In 1898, he was appointed speaker on behalf of the Uni-
versity in connection with the federation movement.


In 1899 he gained second class honours in the final ex-
amination in the School of Logic and Mental and Moral
Philosophy. He took first class honours with special
mention in Christian Apologetics, second class honours
in Dogmatics and passed in Biblical Greek. On one oc-
casion as Prelector he delivered an address on 'The Mor-
ality of Imperialism' in the presence of his Excellency,
Lord Brassey. His university career was a remarkable
one and he was considered to be one of the most brilliant
students the University of Melbourne had had. He also
took a keen interest in the sport of the University and
each year played for his College in the intercollegiate
football matches.


CHAPTER FOUR
ORDINATION
George Long had now qualified for ordination, and,
together with other students, he went to Bishopscourt
for a retreat in the preparation for ordination. It is the
custom of the Church that, before a man is ordained,
he must have a title in other words he must have
been accepted definitely for some curacy or other ap-
pointment. On this occasion all the candidates had re-
ceived their titles except one, and that one was Mr Long.
Two nights before the ordination, Bishop Goe called him
into his study and told him that Archdeacon Langley
wanted him to be deacon-in-charge of Newport; that
Archdeacon Armstrong wanted him for Gippsland; and
that Canon Hindley wanted him as curate of Holy
Trinity Church, Kew. The Bishop, on asking Mr Long
what his wishes were, received the reply; 'I have no
wishes, my Lord, I will obey orders.'
The Bishop found it difficult to make up his mind, as
the claims of the three different positions were put to
him with equal urgency. The extraordinary result was
that Mr Long was ordained without a title. It was not
until they returned to Bishopscourt after the ordination
on May 28th, 1899, that Bishop Goe sent for him and told
him he was to go to Gippsland, to a place called Foster.
No sooner had this arrangement been made than the
Chaplain of Trinity College arrived on the scene. The
Chaplain was the Reverend Reginald Stephen, who sub-
sequently became Bishop of Newcastle, Bishop Long's
immediate predecessor in the see. Mr Stephen came
with the suggestion that as Mr Long was such a brilliant
student, he should be given the chance of doing a post-
graduate course at Trinity College. There can be no


doubt that Mr Stephen's suggestion was a wise and
tempting one, but nevertheless it must be admitted that
Mr Long's experience of bush life during the three years
he was at Foster must have helped considerably to
fit him for the great work to which he was called twelve
years later in the wide bush districts of the Diocese of
Bathurst.
So, to Foster he went. Foster had just been through
the experience of appalling bush fires. The church,
the vicarage, and most of the homes had been destroyed,
and the people were left in poverty. Consequently, on
his arrival as deacon-in-charge, Mr Long found a de-
plorable state of affairs. As nearly every house had been
destroyed by the fire, he experienced great difficulty in
securing a place in which to live. But soon he began to
realise that if he could be said to live anywhere, it was
'in the saddle', as the district was so wide and the people
were so scattered that he had to spend most of his time
on horseback as he sought to shepherd his flock. But his
greatest difficulty and disappointment came from the
lack of response on the part of his people, as he sought
to encourage them to undertake the task of rebuilding
the church and vicarage. As his persistent efforts yielded
no result he decided to call the people together. They
came, but when he pleaded with them they remained
stubbornly silent. At last he begged them to explain
their silence, and their lack of response. After some
hesitation one of the men was asked to explain for the
rest. His explanation was as follows: 'There's no use in
it Mr Long. A man of your gifts will only be here a few
months, and then things will fizzle out.' Immediately
Mr Long suggested a bargain lf he were to promise
to remain there for three years would they promise to
rally round him? At once there was an enthusiastic res-
ponse, and so there followed a three years ministry the
influence of which was such that he is still remembered
and loved to this day in that district. Under his leader-
ship both the church and the vicarage were rebuilt.
In 1900, while he was in charge of Foster, Mr Long was
ordained to the priesthood by Bishop Goe on June 10th.


Also while he was at Foster he was married to Miss Alex-
andra Joyce, the youngest daughter of the late Mr Al-
fred Joyce, of Maryborough, Victoria. Their first son
was born in Foster. This son, Mr Gavin Long, is now on
the staff of the Melbourne 'Argus'.
Writing of this period of Bishop Long's life, the Rev-
erend E. Ffoward Lea, rector of S. Mark's, Darling
Point, who was a close friend of the Bishop for many
years, says: 'At Foster the beauty of the bush and its lone-
liness, the triumphs and the defeats of the settlers, their
courage and their perseverance, made an impression on
him which he was to carry all his days. His energy,
ability and dauntless courage, won him many friends.
Life among those ranges over thirty years ago had its
own difficulties. On one accasion he was called to travel
into a lonely district to see a woman who was dying. As
he approached the house, to his surprise, he saw the hus-
band standing on the verandah with a gun. The whole
appearance of the man showed him to be distraught
with sorrow. The man cried 'Go back; I shoot if you
come nearer'. The young minister calmly reasoned, but
without apparent result. Then he quietly told the en-
raged man that it was his duty to come, and come he
must. Suiting his action to his words he walked steadily
forward, the gun was dropped and the man stood aside,
the sick room was entered, the ministry was abundantly
blessed and happiness restored to the home.


CHAPTER FIVE
HOLY TRINITY, KEW
Mr Long had promised to remain in Foster for three
years. He fulfilled his promise and would have been
content to remain there longer, but others were watch-
ing him, and were determined that he should have a
bigger scope for his ability and energy.
Immediately the three years were up, the Bishop of
Ballarat, the Right Reverend Dr Arthur Vincent Green,
Dr Thornton's successor, offered Mr Long the parish of
S. Peter's Church, Ballarat. This was the most impor-
tant church in the diocese of Ballarat, and there is irony
in the fact that whereas Dr Thornton had rejected him
as a candidate for the ministry because of the way he
had read the lessons in S. Peter's Church, Dr Thornton's
successor invited him to become rector of that church
at the unusually early age of twentyeight. He also re-
ceived offers of positions in Wangaratta and Townsville,
and two of these posts carried the office of Archdeacon.
But at the same time there came a communication from
Canon Hindiey, Vicar of Holy Trinity Church, Kew.
Canon Hindiey had just been appointed Archdeacon of
Melbourne and needed a senior curate at Holy Trinity,
who would be vicar in all but name, so that the Arch-
deacon could be free for work in the diocese. This post
the Archdeacon offered to Mr Long. While the other
offers appealed to him very strongly, Mr Long felt that,
as the diocese of Melbourne had given him his training
and ordination, he should elect to serve that diocese. He
wrote to Archdeacon Hindiey and told him this, but
added that before the matter was finally settled he
wished the Archdeacon to know that when he was
nominated for the new Bishopric of Gippsland he, Mr


Long, was one of the clerical members of the board of
electors and that he had opposed his nomination and
secured his rejection. In view of this he said that he felt
it would be anomalous for him now to become Archdea-
con Hindley's chief of staff. The Archdeacon replied in
a very generous letter. He said that he was fully aware of
this fact, and that he was not in the least swayed by any
personal feelings in regard to it, as he knew Mr Long
had been actuated by only one desire, namely, to serve
in the best possible way the wider interests of the
Church. He ended his letter by renewing his offer of the
position at Holy Trinity Church, Kew. Mr Long ac-
cepted Archdeacon Hindley's offer, and there followed
one of the happiest and most successful periods of his
iife. Archdeacon Hindley is still living. He resigned from
the position of Archdeacon of Melbourne a few years
ago and is now living in retirement. To the end of his
iife Bishop Long entertained feelings of real affection
and admiration for him.
The relationship between them at Holy Trinity, Kew,
was one of unusual mutual understanding and confi-
dence. Mr Long won the affection and support of the
people of Kew in a way that would have provoked a
man with a smaller heart and mind than Archdeacon
Hindley's to jealousy. But the Archdeacon was proud of
his curate and showed only pleasure and satisfaction at
his success.
About the time that Mr Long came to Kew the dio-
cese of Melbourne was beginning a vigorous forward
movement in the matter of education. Ihis was a policy
that appealed tremendously to the young curate of Holy
Trinity, and after he had been there for eighteen months
he urged the Archdeacon to start a Boys' Grammar
School in Kew, as many families were leaving the dis-
trict because there was no provision for their sons' edu-
cation, while facilities for travelling to the Melbourne
Grammar School were very inadequate. The Arch-
deacon took the suggestion up with great enthusiasm,
and with little delay called a meeting of the laymen to
discuss the proposal. Among those who attended, in


addition to Archdeacon Hindley and Mr Long, were
Dr E. M. Inglis, Dr H. O. Cowen, Dr Kent Hughes,
the Hon. J. K. Merritt, Mr M. Henty, and Mr W. J.
Roberts. The meeting was an enthusiastic one, though
almost immediately a storm of opposition broke. Friends
of the Melbourne Grammar School were antagonistic
to the project, while others considered that it was unfair
to two private schools which had for many years faith-
fully served the needs of the district, though it was
generally conceded that they had outlived their useful-
ness. When this storm of opposition broke, the Arch-
deacon was away, and Mr Long had to weather it by
himself. A compromise was arrived at, and it was de-
cided that the Church should start a primary school for
boys up to twelve years of age. However, it was soon
discovered that this compromise was unsatisfactory, and
the school was thrown open to boys of all ages.


CHAPTER SIX
HEADMASTER OF TRINITY
Trinity Grammar School was now definitely estab-
lished, and an acting Headmaster was appointed for
twelve months. At the end of that period it was evident
that the venture was destined to be a success if the right
Headmaster could be found. Every effort was made to
find a man for the position. The weeks slipped by; many
meetings were held; much correspondence was con-
ducted; but still the Council could not find the man.
At last one evening, after a very prolonged meeting,
the Archdeacon threw his pencil on the table and ex-
claimed: 'Gentlemen, I am going to cut my own throat.
The man who will make this school a success is sitting
there.' His finger was pointing at Mr Long. This pro-
nouncement took the meeting by storm. The Council
was unanimous in its support of the Archdeacon s ver-
dict, and within a few minutes, in the room there and
then, the position of Headmaster of Holy Trinity
Grammar School was offered to Mr Long. Upon this
being done, the meeting was closed, and Mr Long was
asked to give his reply in three days' time. Outside, Dr
Inglis waylaid him and took him to his surgery, where
for hours he endeavoured to persuade him to refuse it.
Dr Inglis said he knew it would be the best thing that
could happen to the school, but that for Mr Long it
would not be in his own interests, because he had al-
ready made a reputation in the diocese, which made it
certain that very soon he would be elected as vicar of
one of the most important parishes in Melbourne.
Mr Long returned home, to find Dr Kent Hughes
awaiting him in his own study. Until three o clock in
the morning he urged that it was his duty to undertake


the task, and that he possessed the ability and personality
that would enable him to become a great Headmaster.
True to his vow, Mr Long submitted the matter to
the Archbishop of Melbourne, the Most Reverend Dr
Henry Lowther Clarke. The Archbishop was away in
the country, and on receipt of Mr Long's letter im-
mediately wired back; 'Mr Long must become Head-
master'. Archdeacon Hindley released him at once, and
three days later he entered upon his work as Headmaster
of Holy Trinity Grammar School. In that position, with
remarkable rapidity, he earned a reputation in the edu-
cational world of Australia, and it very soon became
evident that in his loyalty to the men who had placed
him there it would be necessary for him to exercise
strong determination and self sacrifice in the face of
tempting invitations to more lucrative positions else-
where.
After he had been head of the Grammar School for
six months he was offered the position of Warden of
the new diocesan college for the training of theologi-
cal students S. John's College, Alma Road, East St
Kilda. Mr Long refused on the grounds that it would be
easy to find a man with the necessary qualifications to
accept the position of Warden of so secure an insti-
tution as a 1 heological College, which had the diocese
behind it, while experience showed that it was very diffi-
cult to find a man to be headmaster of a Grammar
School which was still more or less of an experiment. It
is interesting to note that the priest who was appointed
Warden of S. John's College was the Reverend Reginald
Stephen, who later became Canon, then Dean of S.
Paul's Cathedral, Melbourne, then Bishop of Tasmania,
and in 1919 Bishop of Newcastle.
Though Dr Long had refused this invitation he was
from that time on disturbed at regular intervals by of-
fers of work in other parts. One by one some of the
most important parishes in Melbourne were offered to
him. He refused them. Then in 1911 the Headmaster-
ship of the Geelong Grammar School fell vacant. Mr
Long was urged to apply for the position, which is one


of the most important posts in the educational world of
Australia. He was greatly worried as to what he ought
to do. The Archbishop and many of his friends were
eager that he should apply, but before he had decided
what to do, Archdeacon Hindley sent a hurried message
that he wished to see him. The Archdeacon told him
not to do anything about Geelong 'because of this Bath-
urst affair'. Canon Long, as he now was, was at a loss to
understand the meaning of the Archdeacon's words.
The Archdeacon's reply was 'go home and see'. He ar-
rived home to find an urgent telegram, 'You have been
unanimously elected Bishop of Bathurst'. Canon Long
was dismayed. He sought out his wife and handing her
the telegram, sat on the kitchen table dangling his
legs, and looking the picture of complete dejection. He
was thirtysix years of age. He had no idea of becoming
a Bishop, as he had decided that his life was to be spent
in educational work. Besides, the stipend which he
would receive as Bishop of Bathurst was considerably
less than that which he received as Headmaster of the
School of which he had made such a conspicuous suc-
cess. This was an important consideration as he now had
a family of small children.
However, his vow was 'to obey orders'. He went im-
mediately to the Reverend Canon George Sutton who
had succeeded Archdeacon Hindley as Vicar of Holy
Trinity Church, Kew. The Bishopric Election board had
consulted Canon Sutton before offering the Bishopric
to Canon Long, though Canon Long did not know it,
and Canon Sutton's reply was one of the factors that
determined their decision. In his letter he wrote to the
effect that for the position there was no one more suited
than Canon Long, but he added 'Though in saying this,
I am fully aware that I am cutting off my right hand'.
Canon Sutton urged, and so did Archdeacon Hindley
and Archbishop Clarke, that it was his duty to accept
the invitation to become Bishop of Bathurst, though
they all warned him that it would involve a work of
enormous responsibility that would tax all his energy
and ability.


It was the challenge involved in this warning that
decided him. He wired his acceptance, and so there
closed a period of his life which was conspicuous for the
remarkable success he had made of Trinity Grammar
School, which, under his leadership, had grown in num-
bers from a couple of dozen to three hundred boys.
But much more important than that was the profound
influence which he exercised as Headmaster on the lives
and characters of the boys who were in the school.
As I write these words, the morning post brings me a
letter from one of his old boys, Reverend Robert Es-
mond Sutton, Vice-Principal of S. Francis College, Nun-
dah, Brisbane, and eldest son of Canon Sutton of Kew.
Mr Sutton says in his letter; 'ln every way from the hu-
man point of view the death of Bishop Long is utterly
calamitous. For his diocese, and for the whole Church in
Australia, it is a tragedy, and for us who love him as
our "guide and own familiar friend" it is an incalculable
loss'.
While he was Headmaster of Trinity his influence
was felt far beyond the school. He played an important
part in several diocesan committees, and was in demand
as a preacher all over the diocese. For a time he was ap-
pointed special preacher at All Saints', S. Kilda, and the
Archbishop frequently called upon him to preach on
special occasions in the Cathedral. In 1910 the synod of
the diocese elected him to be a Canon of S. Paul's Cathe-
dral, Melbourne. But during this period he was distin-
guished, as I have said above, mainly as a great Head-
master. It is impossible here to give an adequate account
of his work as such. But I am glad to be able to give the
testimony of some who were in very close touch with
him during that period of his life.
The late Dr Vance, one time Dean of Melbourne,
wrote in regard to his work as Headmaster as follows:
'He is excellent both as a scholar and teacher, and his
moral and spiritual influence over his pupils is as power-
ful as it is good. His boys have a great affection for their
master, while their parents show an entire confidence in
his ability and his methods. In the diocese he is regarded


as one of the most able preachers, and one of the ablest
and most learned of its clergy.'
The Right Reverend Dr Reginald Stephen, formerly
Bishop of Newcastle, writing of his work before he be-
came a Bishop, says 'At Trinity College he was one
of the ablest students of his day, and exercised a very
strong influence on his fellow students. He was singu-
larly successful in every position that he occupied as
curate, as parish priest, and as head of Trinity Grammar
School. He had high ideals of teaching and full know-
ledge of modern methods of education. He was a sound
scholar, with a mind inclined to philosophy; at Kew he
gained the confidence of the parents and affection of the
scholars.'
The following generous tribute comes from a father
whose sons were pupils at Trinity Grammar School
'I had so much regard for his method of teaching and
his manner of dealing with his boys that I sent my boys
to him at considerable inconvenience, in preference to
nearer schools. In addition to the necessary qualifications
of a successful teacher, which he possessed in an eminent
degree, he had the mysterious gift of personality which
excites the personal devotion and enthusiasm of the
boys. He had dignity without stiffness, and a very ap-
proachable friendliness of manner without familiarity.
Above all, he had the power of inspiring his boys with a
hatred of everything mean and insincere. I may add,
too, that Bishop Long belonged to a school of Church
thought which is not my own, but that I had a pro-
found respect for the sincerity of his convictions, his
broadminded tolerance, and his real spirituality.'


CHAPTER SEVEN
BISHOP OF BATHURST
Canon Long was consecrated Bishop of Bathurst in
St Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney, by Archbishop Wright,
on St Andrew's Day, November 30,1911, and enthroned
in All Saints' Cathedral, Bathurst, a few days later. At
his consecration the preacher was Dr Stretch, Bishop of
Newcastle, whose mission in Maryborough 23 years be-
fore had made such a deep impression on him. No
attempt can be made yet to appraise his great work and
influence as a bishop. As the years roll by we shall real-
ise more and more how much the Church owes to him,
not only in the dioceses of Bathurst and Newcastle, but
throughout Australia. All that I can attempt at this
early date is to record some of the important events and
features of his great episcopate, and some of the out-
standing impressions of him as a bishop.
Canon Howard Lea, who was in the Diocese of Bath-
urst, and a member of the Bishopric Election Board,
when George Merrick Long was elected Bishop, tells us
that his great personality made an impression on the
diocese immediately he entered upon his work. As in
the days of his diaconate and priesthood, so in the days
of his episcopate, the bush had a very strong appeal for
him. He immediately set out to visit every parish, never
sparing himself in the least. He went where no other
bishop had ever been, visiting not only the headquarters
of the parishes, but also the outlying districts. When he
arrived in the diocese, motor cars were only just coming
into use, and for the first years of his episcopate all his
travelling in the outback places was done in buggy or
sulky. In the black soil plains he had experiences which
would have tested the strength and endurance of the


strongest of men. But he was never daunted, and many
of the journeys that he accomplished and hardships that
he endured entitle him, as Canon Lea says, to rank
among those whom men call pioneers. He gave unstint-
ing support to the great work of the Bush Brotherhood
of the Good Shepherd, which served the great western
areas of the diocese. Under his leadership and with his
vigorous encouragement the work of the Brotherhood
was developed and extended. A scheme was formulated
by which any young Australian who felt a call to the
ministry could be tested, and when he passed the test,
provision was made by the diocese for his preparation
for ordination at a theological college.
But one of the outstanding works that he accom-
plished in the diocese was to place the finances of the
whole diocese on a secure foundation. Bishop Long had
many remarkable guts. Not least among those gifts were
financial acumen and a legal nund. At his instigation
the funds and ordinances of the diocese were overhauled
and revised. Canon Lea tells that at the time of his arrival
in the diocese the Church's work was irritated and ham-
pered by obsolete ordinances. Under his leadership, and
frequently as a result of his own drafting, new ordi-
nances were introduced and passed, which made it poss-
ible for the activities of the Church to be fostered,
concentrated, and controlled.
All this was done with remarkable ease and absence of
friction. Again I quote Canon Lea, who says, that to be
a member of the Bathurst Synod was to be a part of a
real brotherhood. Another oustanding feature of his
episcopate in Bathurst was the extraordinary success
which attended the erection and establishment of edu-
cational institutions and hostels throughout the diocese.
All Saints' College for boys at Esrom, and the Marsden
Boarding School for girls, were institutions in which he
took a very keen interest and delight, and the splendid
success of these schools is in no small measure due to his
inspiration, encouragement and practical leadership. Be-
sides these schools there are seven hostels in the diocese at
strategic points, and these care for an average of 300


boys and girls every year. In the matter of building, the
most extensive undertaking to which he set his hand was
the erection of a new cathedral in Bathurst. This venture
was undertaken as a memorial to those who served in the
war, and the foundation stone was laid by Sir William
Birdwood. The portion completed comprises the choir,
sacrarium and vestries, and already it is evident that
when finished All Saints' Cathedral, Bathurst, will rank
among the most striking of our Australian cathedrals.
But in addition to the building of this part of the new
Cathedral, a Cathedral Hall was erected between the
Cathedral and the Diocesan Registry Buildings. Many
other achievements might be recounted, such as the
building of several new parish churches of fine dimen-
sions and architecture, a substantial increase in mission-
ary contributions, and the building up of a super-
annuation fund amounting to £13,000. But it is imposs-
ible to give anything like a full account of the work
accomplished during his episcopate in Bathurst. How-
ever,the short record given here is sufficient to show that,
under his leadership, the diocese of Bathurst experienced
a very remarkable expansion and development in its
life and work.


CHAPTER EIGHT
NATIONAL WORK
While he was Bishop of Bathurst Dr Bong undertook
many tasks beyond the borders of the diocese which
were of national importance. He was elected first Nat-
ional President of the Church of England Men's Society,
and while he occupied that position he travelled exten-
sively in every State in the Commonwealth. This work
afforded him a remarkable scope for the exercise of his
great gifts, and indications are not lacking that, as he
moved up and down Australia, his influence was felt
more or less by every section of Australian manhood.
But an opportunity for exercising an even greater
and more concentrated influence on Australian manhood
came during the war. In 1917, he went to the front as
an ordinary chaplain. The intention was that he should
help the chaplains in the A.I. F. in their difficult work.
But it was not long before greater tasks were selected
i or him, not by himself, but by others. General Birdwood
and others pressed him to undertake the task of organ-
ising the opportunities for education and civil training
for the men of the A.I.F. So in May 1918 he took over
the position of Director of Education in the A.I. F.. His
work was to organise as far as possible vocational and
civil training for 200,000 men. The full scheme was not
carried out owing to the unexpected collapse of the
Germans and the signing of the armistice in 1918.
Nevertheless, a work of immense value was achieved.
His first duty was to ascertain from the men them-
selves on what lines their special needs would require
vocational instruction and development. Education fell
under four main headings. The first and largest group
consisted of those men seeking training in trades, crafts,
and industries. The next largest group was of those who


were asking for training and instruction in land pursuits.
The third comprised men wishing to receive commercial
and business instruction, and the fourth in point of
numbers was of those concerned in university courses
and professional studies. Bishop Long was able to get
together at Cambridge 110 men of all ranks, who had
had expert training in the four main groups. A kind of
educational staff college was formed. In the meantime
the armistice was signed, but in spite of the continued
diminution owing to demobilisation, the numbers at-
tending the educational classes in France and England
rose, until in France there were about 22,000 men doing
definite class work, and 45,000 men in attendance at
lectures. In England there were rather fewer than 15,000
enrolled in classes, and 39,000 in attendance at lectures.
The whole of the educational activities were entirely
subordinate to the general task of demobilisation.
When he undertook this work he was given the rank
of Brigadier-General, and in 1919 he was given the title
of C.B.E. Other distinctions he received were the degree
of D.D. conferred by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
degree of LL.D. conferred both by the University of
Cambridge and the University of Manchester.
It was while he was Director of Education in the
A.I.F. that he had a very severe illness in London.
Nevertheless he remained at his post, but when he
returned to Australia in July, 1919, it was evident that
his physical strength was considerably weakened. Flow-
ever, he returned to his diocese and entered again upon
his work with his old eagerness. In 1920, despite the fact
that the Archbishop of Canterbury did all in his power
to persuade him to attend the Lambeth Conference,
the Bishop remained in his diocese. The West had suffered
considerably from drought, and he felt that it was his
duty to remain and help the diocese through a very
difficult period. Fie worked with indefatigable energy,
and although his friends were anxious about his health,
he himself protested that he was perfectly fit and refused
to spare himself. However, in 1927 assistance was given
to him, and it was assistance that gave him great joy and


satisfaction. His devoted and trusted friend, the Rev.
Arnold Lomas Wylde, Principal of the Brotherhood of
the Good Shepherd, was consecrated Coadjutor Bishop
of Bathurst. There were few events in his episcopate
which brought him more real happiness than the con-
secration of Bishop Wylde, for in him he knew that he
had a colleague who had won the love and admiration
of those amongst whom he ministered.
Besides giving him some relief from travelling in the
wide reaches of the western portion of the diocese, the
appointment of a Coadjutor Bishop afforded him more
time to devote to a very important project on which his
great mind had been working for many years, and that
was the drafting of a new constitution for the Church
of England in Australia. He was convinced that if the
Church were to be in a position more faithfully to fulfil
Her Lord's commission, and to take her proper place in
the national life of Australia, it must have a greater
freedom than the present order of things allows. To the
work of preparing a new constitution he bent all his
energies and he and Professor Sir John Peden drafted
the Constitution which was presented to the Convention
of the Australian Church in 1926. With infinite tact and
extraordinary forbearance he piloted it through the
convention. Obstacle after obstacle was surmounted,
prejudice after prejudice removed, but unfortunately
finality was not reached, as, when it was submitted to
the diocesan synods for approval or rejection, while every
other diocese approved it, the Sydney diocese asked for
the acceptance by the other dioceses of certain additional
provisions to the Constitution. An arrangement was
made that the bishops should meet to discuss the matter
in London, prior to the Lambeth Conference, in 1930,
and so it has happened that the last fortnight of his life
was devoted to the task of striving with his fellow
bishops to arrive at a settlement that would be likely
to bring the issue to an unanimous conclusion after the
General Synod of 1931.
This work of drafting the new constitution of the
Australian Church is undoubtedly the greatest work of


his life the work with which his name will be im-
perishably identified. The Primate acknowledged the
debt that the whole Church in Australia owes to him in
this matter in the following words: 'lt is only those who
were behind the scenes who know the enormous labour
that he devoted to it, or who realise fully how much the
result is due to his ability of conception and interpre-
tation, and to his knowledge of men and things.' But
there can be little doubt that the strain of it all told on
his health. That this was recognised as far back as 1927
is shown by the fact that a friend naively remarked: Tt
is better to have a bishop with a constitution than to
have a constitution without a bishop.'
Another work beyond diocesan boundaries that the
Bishop was keenly interested in was the work of S. John's
College, Morpeth. I wrote to the Warden for certain
information in this regard and his reply is such that I
feel that I could not do better than quote it in full.
My Dear Dean, You have asked me for an account
of the relation of Bishop Long to S. John's College,
Morpeth. The space you allow me makes possible the
briefest outline only. Few things were nearer to the
Bishop's heart than the supply and training of men for
the ministry. The diocese of which he was Bishop always
sent the largest number of men into college. He attracted
young men and took care in their selection. He watched
their development closely and required that they put
their best into their work. He felt strongly that the
future of the Church largely depended on attracting the
right type of young man to offer for the work of the
priesthood and then to provide an adequate training.
When it became clear that S. John's College, Armidale,
could no longer supply the needs of the dioceses which
had been drawn to it for the training of ordinands,
Bishop Long, then Bishop of Bathurst, was among the
first to respond to the suggestion that a new college be
built on an interdiocesan foundation. He worked loyally
and enthusiastically with the other country bishops of
New South Wales and in due time as a result of a fine bit


of team work S. John's College, Morpeth, came into
existence. He always regarded the college as important,
not only for its educational work, but also because it
became a meeting ground for the country bishops and
an institution which drew the dioceses together. He
became young again at each Reunion and some of us will
remember the happy way in which he conducted the
episcopal choir in the singing of 'John Peel' at the last
Reunion he attended.
When he became Bishop of Newcastle his relations
with the college grew in intimacy and keenness. He
readily caught the vision of it becoming a university
college for the Hunter Valley and we had laid plans for
increasing the staff in that direction when he had re-
turned from Lambeth. Only a day or two ago I received
a letter from Dr Albert Mansbridge, the great English
educationist, with whom the Bishop had been staying in
England. A sentence from it will show how the Bishop
remembered the college in his travels: 'I promised the
Bishop of Newcastle, who is as keen on S. John's, Mor-
peth, as on anything else in existence, to help all I possibly
can.
The Bishop realised fully the urgent necessity of a
reform in the curriculum and was working to that end.
He also agreed that the Church must build up a centre
of learning which could hold its own with secular
scholarship. With his powerful backing these things
would have come into existence at Morpeth at no very
distant date. I am, Dear Dean,
Yours very faithfully, E. H. Burgmann.


CHAPTER NINE
THE CALL TO NEWCASTLE
In the 1927 Christmas number of 'The Church Stan-
dard', the Bathurst correspondent wrote:'We will not
have a happy Christmas. We are to lose our Bishop.'
On December 7 the Right Reverend George Merrick
Long, D.D., LL.D., C.8.E., V.D., was elected Bishop of
Newcastle in succession to Dr Stephen.
It came as a shock to Bathurst, as it was well known
that he was devoted to his diocese and on several oc-
casions had refused nomination elsewhere. I remember
in 1919, when we were still in the A.1.F., he showed me
a cable which contained the information that he was to
be nominated, among others, for the see of Newcastle,
which had been rendered vacant by the resignation of
Dr Stretch. He was very worried, as he felt that it
would be entirely unfair to Bathurst if he were to leave
it immediately on his return from the war. He told me
that he had just been to seek advice from the Archbishop
of Canterbury (the late Dr Randall Davidson). He said
that the Archbishop displayed an amazing and almost
uncanny knowledge of the situation. He spoke of New-
castle, the diocese and its needs, as though he had lived
there all his life, and he told Dr Long that he was the
very man that Newcastle needed, and that if he were
elected he must certainly go. However, he was not
elected on that occasion, and it is well for Bathurst that
he was not, for some of his best work in Bathurst,
especially in educational matters, was done after his
return from the war. Then in 1927 came his election
to Newcastle.
When the news became known, Bathurst was thrown
into consternation. Leading churchmen hastily gathered


in conference, and leading men of the denominations also
insisted in having their say. The Mayor convened a
public meeting at which a strong resolution was passed
appealing to the Bishop to remain in Bathurst. This
resolution, to quote 'The Church Standard' of December
16, 1927, 'was moved by a pillar of the Methodist
Church and seconded by one of the most ardent Roman
Catholics in the city'. Many fervent speeches were made,
the burden of which was that the departure of the
Bishop would be an irreparable loss not only to Bathurst
but to the whole western district of New South Wales.
Leading articles in the western newspapers made earnest
appeal to 'that spirit of service which had dominated
the Bishop's life' as a reason for him to remain among
the western people, who honoured him and needed him.
Telegrams and letters poured in from every part of the
vast diocese to the same effect. The diocesan council
hurriedly convened itself without the Bishop's know-
ledge and added its affectionate appeal. To them the
Bishop explained the position as set out in weighty letters
from Newcastle, and from leading churchmen in all
parts of Australia. As these were read apprehension
slowly deepened into certainty that they must surrender
their chief. Next day a deputation of leading laymen of
the Roman Catholic, Presbyterian and Methodist Chur-
ches, with others, waited on the Bishop, and made an
appeal as citizens of Bathurst. One speaker said: 'I have
lived in Bathurst for 72 years, and I am convinced that
no man has done so much for the community as Bishop
Long.' However, all knew that the Bishop would go or
stay as his sense of duty demanded. After careful con-
sideration he came to the decision that he must go. The
news was hailed with gladness in Newcastle. The Dean of
Newcastle, the Very Reverend Horace Crotty, who was
subsequently elected to succeed Bishop Long as Bishop of
Bathurst, in a statement to the Newcastle press, said:
'Newcastle may well be proud of its new Bishop. He is a
great Bishop, and the outstanding figure in the whole
Anglican communion. He is a man of great spiritual
force. He has great intellectual gifts. He is a born ad-


ministrator. He is a leader of men. He is a powerful
preacher. His personality is strong and lovable. He will
draw you with the cords of a man and with bands of
love. The Church has never made a greater gift to
Newcastle. His is a name to rank with John Francis
Stretch as the two greatest men the Australian Church
has yet produced, and we may well ring the bells at the
prospect of his coming.'
On May 2, 1928, Bishop Long was enthroned by the
Administrator, the Venerable Archdeacon Woodd, as
Bishop of Newcastle. The Primate, the Most Reverend
Dr J.C.Wright, Archbishop of Sydney, was the preacher.
In the course of his sermon the Archbishop said:
'The privilege of being the preacher here tonight
comes to me by the special, personal request of your
new Bishop, who is a friend of long standing. He asked
me to perform a similar office for him when he was
enthroned as Bishop of Bathurst more than sixteen years
ago. If the privilege was great then, it is greater now.
Our friendship was young then. I consecrated him
Bishop of Bathurst on St Andrew's Day, 1911. I had
first made his acquaintance and learned his value at the
General Synod of 1910. Since the date of his con-
secration, we have worked together with ever-increasing
knowledge and ever-increasing fellowship in different
departments of the work of the Church. I have seen
him in the work of his diocese grappling effectively
with problem after problem. I have seen the clergy and
laity rallying round him with ever-growing confidence
in his initiative, in his sane judgment, in his courage, in
his perseverance, in his readiness to listen as well as to
lead. The result was a diocese so closely knit to him that
they were most unwilling to let him go. That is the most
potent and cogent diocesan testimonial that you could
wish.
I have seen the clergy discovering in him a true
father-in-God, counselling them in their difficulties,
providing by legislation and administrative measures as
far as possible for their different needs; inspiring them to


discharge their spiritual office with vision set upon the
truest and sanest ideals. They found in him a Bishop
whom they could trust, a man in whom they could
confide. He has knit both clergy and laity together as
heirs of a great heritage, as fellow-workers with the Lord.
Furthermore, I have seen your new Bishop in the
Councils of the Church in the work of our General
and Provincial Synods, in the meetings of the Australian
Board of Missions. His was a judgment to which men
readily deferred. He was able to lead men to discriminate
between the essential and the passing. He knew when to
stand firm, and when to yield. He was able to take wide
views and to save the Church from losing a great ulti-
mate ideal by handicapping itself with smaller details
which were only of temporary significance. These were
the gifts of a statesman devoted to the service of the
Church.
Never were these gifts more marked than in his most
recent great work in formulating the new Constitution
for the Church of England in Australia. It is only those
who were behind the scenes who know the enormous
labour that he devoted to it, or who fully realise how
much the result is due to his ability of conception and
interpretation, and to his knowledge of men and things.
So he comes amongst you with his great heart full
of fellowship, which has so often won the hearts even of
those who differed from him, with his statesmanlike
power and organisation, with his tried and proved know-
ledge of diocesan affairs, with his powerful intellect,
with his grasp of the Scriptures of truth, with his zeal
for the ministry of souls, with his love of our Divine
Master, with the profound conviction, "Neither is he
that planteth anything, neither he that watereth, but
God giveth the increase".'


CHAPTER TEN
BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE
Dr Long was enthroned as Bishop of Newcastle on
May 2, 1928. On the same day he delivered his first
charge to the synod of the Diocese of Newcastle. This
charge is important, as it gives us the vision with which
he came to his new work. The following are extracts
from it:
'First let me express to synod my deep appreciation of
the invitation given to me to become Bishop of the
Diocese of Newcastle. I am duly regardful of the honour
conferred upon any man in being asked to lead a diocese
which has filled a great place in the history of our
Australian Church. I realise the heavy responsibility
of following in the line of five great bishops who have
adorned the Australian episcopate by their characters,
attainments and achievements.
It was in no way because I was insensible to the
greatness of the call you had given me that I experienced
much difficulty in mind and conscience in accepting
the call so emphatically given. Rather was it because I
felt that I was so deeply engaged in undertakings for the
good of the Church in a sister diocese that I should not
abandon my post there, and also because I thought that
some other one might readily be found more competent
than myself for your work, and one whose appointment
would less disturb the steady carrying forward of the
Church's undertakings in the Province.
However, let me assure you that, when once the way
of duty was made clear, I came wholeheartedly and
unreservedly to offer whatever powers I possess in de-
votion to your service.


Since, therefore, in the province of God, it was my
duty to resign a see I loved and would fain have con-
tinued to administer until the close of my ministry, it
has been no small comfort to feel that I am coming to
one wherein I have been early assured of friendly wel-
come and loyal support in my office.
I think you will always find me frank and clear-
spoken about my own opinions and policies. It is not in
my nature to be subtle, mysterious, temperamental or
variable. I like other people with whom I work also to
be frank and open. Such capacities as I possess are of
the very ordinary type of directness of approach, and a
grasp of the realities of a situation as it is seen by the
plain man.
A bishop is called to be both a father-in-God and a
steward of the Household. Of the former function, only
his life and actions can speak. Suffice it to say that I
set that ideal first before myself in my life among
you as a bishop.
As a steward of the Household I shall try to keep
before me the duty of intelligent and energetic adminis-
tration of the complex affairs of a great diocese. No
diocese is soundly administered which is regarded merely
as a large business concern, but neither should its govern-
ance violate the principle of sound business, generously
interpreted in the light of the Church's character as
a Society of the Faith.
I confess I am somewhat impatient on the one hand of
policies of excessive caution, which neglect clear calls
to service, and betray the opportune hour, and, on the
other hand, ill-considered recklessnesss which counts
not the cost, but blindly trusts to muddling through.
On the whole, the Church has lost more through fear
masquerading as caution than from other causes.
In personal relationships, my hope is that you will find
me sympathetically just and justly sympathetic.
With such large and engaging institutions in the dio-
cese as S. John's College, the Boys' and Girls' Schools, the
Children's Homes, and other enterprises, you will realise
that my time will be very fully occupied. I count upon


your patience until I can make myself familiar with
the needs and opportunities that will beset me in these
early months. I prize very greatly these institutional
agencies, and will find much joy in association with them.
But it is in the battlegrounds of the parishes that the
general campaign of the Church is lost or won. The
strength and reality of Church life in the diocese is
determined by the life of the parishes. If our parishes
are well staffed and well worked victory follows along
the line of advance from the parishes. It is the day by
day steady, persistent stroke of the parish priest upon
which the Church primarily depends. I do not under-
estimate the importance of bold undertakings and big
challenges, but it is to my brother faithfully fulfilling
the pastoral office in the cure of souls entrusted to him
that my heart turns first. He is the soldier who alone
can win the battles of the Lord. He vitally needs
spiritual and material reinforcements in his exhausting
life work. His health of soul and mind must ever be
our chief concern. If S. John's College will help us to
find and equip worthy successors to the priestly office
and will further aid with the spiritual and mental re-
invigoration of work-worn priests, it will justify abun-
dantly all that we have done or can do on its behalf.
Given faithful and competent parish priests we need
have no serious fears. Without them we can do nothing.
If we were convinced that S. John's College could supply
that need it would be wise economy to sell all that we
possess and give to the College if by so doing the Church's
greatest need were met. But would we receive that pearl
of great price in exchange for our possessions? I am
not advocating a policy so devastating to the laymen,
but am merely suggesting to their startled minds that
material possessions, divorced from spiritual power and
reality, condemn rather than protect a Church; that
spiritual force and reality attracts possessions adequate to
its energy and devotion; that it is to personalities in-
flamed with love of God that we turn for the expression
of spiritual force and reality.


Therefore, let us put the fine soldier of Christ, the
faithful parish priest, in his rightful position of honour
in the life of the Church, and let us do all we can to sec-
ure an honourable and honoured succession to this most
ancient and most worshipful office.
Brethren of the clergy, count it my heart's desire
to be to you an affectionate father-in-God and faithful
brother-in-arms.
To the clergy and laity alike I appeal for unity and
co-operation so that we may not too unworthily dis-
charge our common tasks.
Without it we must fail in our specific obligations
and fail in the example we should be setting to a dis-
tracted world.'
Though the Bishop in leaving Bathurst felt very deep-
ly the breaking of old ties of peculiarly close affection,
he found at once in Newcastle that he was surrounded
by sympathy and friendship. He made no secret of the
fact that from the very day of his arrival in his new
sphere of work he was genuinely happy. With remark-
able rapidity he gained the confidence of the whole
diocese, and won the affection of the people in every
parish. The task that confronted him was one that
would have tested the ability and energy of the strongest
of men. The financial situation in the diocese pre-
sented grave problems, and these were intensified by the
fact that during the first year of his episcopate the com-
munity was plunged into the most serious economic
crisis of its history. But the members of the Synod and
of the Diocesan Council were filled with confidence
and encouragement by the remarkable and rapid way
in which he penetrated to the heart of the problems of
the diocese, and by the wise and practical schemes which
he began at once to formulate for the solution of those
problems. Furthermore, every section of the commun-
ity realised that the Bishop was outstanding in his grasp
of the economic and industrial situation, and it was to
be expected that with his vision, understanding, and
sagacity he would play a very prominent part in every


phase of the life of this city which interested him so
intensely and won his allegiance so swiftly.
But this was not to be. For, no sooner had he risen to
a position of unrivalled prominence and influence in
the community, than the end came. In March,l93o,
when he had been in the diocese just twenty-two
months, he sailed for England to attend the Lambeth
Conference. His friends were intensely glad that he
was to have a period of relaxation during the sea voyage
and were confident that with his matured thought
and constructive statesmanship he would make a valu-
able contribution to the Lambeth Conference. On
the day on which the conference met at Lambeth Pal-
ace a letter from him reached me in which he wrote
at length the impressions he had gained since his arrival
in England of the English bishops, of Church life, and of
the situation generally in the Old Country. On the
second day of the Lambeth Conference, Tuesday, July
18, after he had taken a vigorous part in the conference,
as cable news states, he was taken ill. He was transferred
to S. Thomas' Hospital, where he died the next day of
cerebral haemorrhage. The body was taken to the Lam-
beth Parish Church, where a number of Australian
bishops kept vigil during the Wednesday night. On
Thursday morning the Archbishop of Canterbury cele-
brated the Eucharist in the presence of three hundred
bishops. The Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop
of Bathurst (the Right Rev. Dr Horace Crotty) then
began the burial office. The remains were cremated at
Golders' Green where the remainder of the service was
taken by the Archbishop of Sydney the same Arch-
bishop who had consecrated him eighteen years before in
S. Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney.


CHAPTER ELEVEN
HIS MIND AND PERSONALITY
Tall, commanding and dignified in appearance, vital,
robust and keen in temperament, Bishop Long was,
as Rev E H. Burgmann, Warden of St. John's
i orpeth, has said, a personality of special significance
in the life of Australia. No words could describe him
better than the following, written by Mr. Burgmann,
who has kindly given me permission to quote him:
It could be said of him, more than of most men, that
he was a fine incarnation of the best spirit of this young
nation He was born, brought up, and educated in
Australia, and the influences which gave the setting
to his character were those of a nation in making. The
broad spaces of the land gave width and perspective to
his vision. The hard facts of pioneering life gave him
a sureness of touch and an alertness of mind, a grasp of
detail and a soundness of judgment, which are all
marks of the constructive thinker and the creative per-
sonality. The clear air and the sunlight were reflected
in the lucidity of his speech and the buoyancy of his
soul.
He was ever good company. He would pass from the
ig and transient to an enthusiastic discussion of the
last test match, and the prospects of the next, and then
on with equal ease to questions of national or inter-
national politics, and to problems in philosophy and
i e lgion. He had a large range of interests and a vast
amount of accurate, well remembered information. He
would throw the whole force of his personality into dis-
cussion or debate with evident enjoyment, and the
weight of his presence and arguments always counted.


He was a good student. He could quickly tear the heart
out of a book and lay hold of the points that mattered.
But he was not primarily a man of the cloister or
study. He was of the open air; a man who loved to look
abroad on life and study the movements of men. He
studied social problems in the lives and thoughts of the
people who were living in the world. He could enter
quickly into conversation with anyone and learn their
point of view. He knew what questions to ask and how
to appraise the answers, and because he could enter
naturally into other people's interests he made friends
wherever he went. He knew his people; few men knew
the people of Australia better than he did, and therein
lay one of the secrets of his strength.
And yet it is likely that he was not very conscious of
his knowledge. It was so much part of himself, his
natural outlook and manner of life, that he acted on it
with a sureness of intuitive insight. This is what helped
to make him such a representative leader of Australian
natonal life. He was at home among people of all creeds
and classes. There was nothing of the narrow ecclesiastic
about him, and he was too human to be class-conscious.
In this again he stood for the fresh outlook of a new
nation, ready to leave behind the quarrels and antago-
nisms of the old world. His eyes were on the future.
In Australia almost everything is yet to be built. The
nation's soul is in process of being formed. Personalities
like that of the Bishop of Newcastle lead the way, and
show us what our manhood is to be.
In addition to the influences of the Australian en-
vironment, the other forces realising themselves in the
soul of Dr Long came from the religious and racial
tradition and culture to which he belonged. The Church
of England gave him a religious tradition, in which he
was ready to consecrate his life to a high purpose. At
the same time in the Church of England he found
plenty of scope for his natural love of freedom, and on
the other hand, for him British history was a living past,
ever emerging into the present, and pressing on into the
future. He was a philosopher of no mean order, but


his philosophy grew out of his observations on history.
He could handle the abstract, but his love was for the
concrete and living.'
He was of the open air! How true this is! How true
also it is that the broad spaces of the land, the clear air
and the sunlight were reflected in the broadness of his
vision, and the buoyancy of his soul. A beautiful il-
lustration of this is found in a letter which he wrote to
the first issue of the journal of Marsden Girls' School,
Bathurst. He was asked to suggest a title for the school
magazine. This is what he wrote:
Dear Editor You have asked me to suggest a name for
your Marsden journal, and I have found it very difficult
to escape from the banal and hackneyed titles, common
to many similar magazines. I have hesitated whether
even to mention one title that has occurred to me, be-
cause I think its significance to my mind may be too
obscure for general use. Perhaps you may care to know
why it occurred to me, and the answer to that may fur-
nish the little contribution you have asked me to make.
When we first planned the school we took as our
motto, 'I lifted up mine eyes unto the hills', the opening
words of Psalm 121, 'the exquisite psalm', which we call
our own school psalm. There were many things in our
mind when we made that choice. It was a psalm of the
open air. We wanted to found a school where girls
would have happy years in touch with Nature, we wan-
ted them to feel 'the strength and beauty of our land', to
thank God 'for summer sun and winter frost, for bracing
wind and quickening rain, for the changeful glory of
sky and sea, of mountain, plain and river'. We wanted
them to hear the songs of the birds, know the smell of
the sweet earth, the pomp and majesty of clouds in clear
sky, and constantly to lift up their eyes to the chal-
lenging hills.
But much stronger than this was the desire to give
zest and purpose to the lives of our girls in the quest of
things that are joyous and beautiful to make them


want to climb mountains. We want their eyes to be
upraised from low levels and not only to see that there
are high levels to be reached, but to long to reach them
and to know the means by which the ascents may be
made.
In our Bible this psalm is marked as one of the Psalms
of Ascents. Such were the songs of the Pilgrim Jews
as from far countries they journeyed to the Holy City
to keep the Great Feast. Already to their longing eyes,
when yet a great way off, the Mountains of Zion seemed
to rise upon their vision. They were impatient of the
low-level plains, they were eager to set their feet upon
the holy hills. Question and answer in the psalm were
sung alternately by groups of pilgrims as they journeyed.
One group with the inspiring vision. Another hints at
the toilsome travail yet before them 'Whence shall
my help come?' The reply rings out in assuring faith and
hope 'My help cometh from the Lord.' It is a brave
and touching song of pilgrimage. There has ever been
a glamour about pilgrims' songs and pilgrims' tales. I
have often heard you sing at Marsden a quaint pilgrim
hymn by dear old John Bunyan, who wrote the noblest
of all pilgrimage books —
He who would valiant be
'Gainst all disaster,
Let him in constancy
Follow the Master
Though he with giants fight
He will make good his right,
To be a pilgrim.
It also happens that upon the school Coat of Arms
there are the special symbols of the pilgrim the Scal-
lop shells, the Cross, the staff and stars of the open road.
Pilgrims are fascinating folk. They are of the open
air, resourceful, eager, joyous, with songs on their lips
and song in their hearts. They know they are going
somewhere, and they know where they are going. Too
many people nowadays do not know if they are going


anywhere or where anywhere is; they have lost their
way because they have never had a way. They have
never had an address to make them think of getting
on their way.
Pilgrims are not futile and aimless like that. They
know it is joyous to travel, splendid to have a quest.
Mud flats will not suffice. Mountain peaks are not the
lure of living souls. Thus, a purpose that is symbolised
in the Marsden motto is that every Marsden girl should
have a pilgrim's soul. She should have a vision of strength
and beauty and want to make the pilgrim's ascent to
the holy hills.
Sir Berkeley Moyniham, the great English surgeon, in a
recent noble address as President of the Royal College of
Surgeons, put the same thought in these moving words—
'ln due time, and in accord with ancient precedent, this
country of ours, the fruitful mother of so many gifted
sons, shall raise up in our schools the youth who shall go
forth to conquer a crown. They must be prepared
for self sacrifice; for arduous discipline They will
not travel alone. Armed with the sword of the spirit,
and the breastplate of faith, they will remember that the
happiness of life lies in its responsibilities, that true joy
is found in the quest for what may prove unattainable
God counts not results, but effort.'
It is always to be remembered that the end of the
journey is by no means the all in all to the pilgrim, but
the fun and sparkle itself of the pilgrimage counts tre-
mendously.
While you girls are with us at Marsden you are in a
sense pilgrims on the way to womanhood. We hope and
believe you are going to be splendid women, but we are
more concerned still that you should be splendid child-
ren while you are our pilgrims. And now, I fear I have
written too long, and I expect you have all guessed,
that the title I have in mind for your journal, and which
I am so diffident about that I can only mention it at the
very end, is, 'The Pilgrim'.
Levari oculus in monies G. M. Bathurst.


Mr Burgmanti speaks of the Bishop as a representative
leader of Australian national life. How true this is we
will see if side by side with Mr Burgmann's description,
we take, for instance, these extracts of a speech which he
delivered in Newcastle on 'Australian Citizenship'. As
we read them it must be remembered that in this address
he was speaking mainly of our geographic isolation as
one of the dominating factors in Australian destinies.
Nevertheless they give us, especially in the closing sec-
tion, something of his vision for Australia. These are his
words
'ln Australia we have a land of wonderfully varied
productivity, with rich soils, great mineral wealth, splen-
did forests, teeming seas; a land of scenic beauty and
health-giving climate. We hold it for the present as a
small British enclave, sundered from all civilisations of
kindred culture and traditions. Our nearest neighbours
are millions upon millions of people of utterly alien his-
tory and conception of life. The fact of our possession
and development of Australia is due to certain historic
factors: (a) the absorption of some nations in other
interests or anxieties; (b) the backward development of
others; (c) the British mastery of the oceans for the
century following Trafalgar; (d) racial instinct and
capacity for colonisation. Some, if not all, of these fac-
tors have passed away never to return. We are here by
grace of these facts. Whether we shall remain in con-
trol when they no longer persist should provoke serious
thought on our part. The sensible Australian citizen
will never forget the isolation of the Commonwealth,
and will exercise his citizenly influence with due regard
to that pregnant fact.
Last Thursday night I was present at the opening of
the Civic Theatre in Newcastle. After the opening
ceremony Talkies were immediately introduced. Three
things struck me as most significant: 1— A sober and
anxious speech from a harassed-looking Prime Minister
(Mr Scullin); 2 lmmediately followed by a mag-
nificent burst of infectious laughter from two delightful


kookaburras; 3 Thousands of Chinese soldiers
marching in good order in columns of four, clad in
khaki, with rifles at the slope, and every free arm swing-
ing rythmically.
The juxtaposition of these items was doubtless pure
chance, but none the less, they were a telling parable.
1 The first depicted the inescapable anxiety of all
thoughtful leaders of Australia's destinies; 2 The
kookaburra is aptly emblematic of too large a proportion
of our Australian citizens who seem to imagine that a
good laugh is a solvent of all menaces; 3 The tramp,
tramp, tramp of those Chinese legions with their rhyth-
mically swung free arms is graphically portentous of the
swift change of the mighty East, wherein lies our geo-
graphic neighbourhood.
We simply must develop this great continent if we are
to maintain our right of occupation in the face of all
the nations of the world. Let us not just talk blindly,
but intelligently consider, as citizens, how it is going to
be done, lest our disillusionment be disastrous. Real
citizenship in Australia in order to accomplish our
national ideals is going to demand higher qualities than
we are exhibiting at present perhaps higher than in
any other country.
The good Australian citizen is he who expands his
views, whose vision is not limited by local affairs, not
circumscribed even by Australian boundaries. He must
be world-regarding if he is to be a capable Australian.
He must have the right approach of mind, free from
prejudice and passion generated by mere class and sec-
tional consciousness, and realise that the good of all is
only attainable through the good of each, and the good
of each through the good of all. That sounds like easy
platitude. But platitude that is just plain, blunt com-
monsense needs to be constantly reiterated until it over-
comes the frantic nonsense that is too absurd ever to
become platitudinous. It is a truly perilous undertaking
to maintain our Australian citizenship at the standard
we desire, in our geographic isolation, with our obvious
economic handicaps of heavy transportation costs.


If we are not wise and united we shall bring the whole
edifice down about our ears in a sad ruin of general suf-
fering. Thus I want my final emphasis to fall upon the
word Australian. We must learn to think as Australians,
that is, as those who cannot be truly prosperous, happy,
and secure in our own local trade, profession, city or
State, unless the whole complex of Australian citizen-
ship is sanely directed to co-operating ends. There is a
great, though difficult, opportunity before us within a
spacious land, free from the inertia of immemorial pover-
ties, to make a splendid home of human fellowship. But
it can only be done by real co-operation and intelligent
co-citizenship on a nation-wide basis. The deadliest
menace to Australian destinies is in the forces that set
Australian against Australian in destructive internecine
strife.'
These words give us more than his vision for Australia.
They show us that there was a catholicity about his life
and interests. He was in touch with every section of the
community, and with every phase, not only of Church,
but of national life. There was, as Archdeacon Forster
has said, nothing, whether it might be of national con-
cern, or civic, or educational, or diocesan, or parochial
concern, that did not engage his sympathetic spirit. He
was essentially a man, virile, vital, robust, and keen.
He was very direct in expressing his opinions, he was
never afraid of being in a minority, and never afraid
to stand to his guns.
As an example of his direct and fearless manner of
speech I would quote the following. At the time that the
novel 'This Side Idolatry' was published, the Bishop ad-
dressed a men's gathering in the Newcastle Cathedral
Hall. He pointed out the derogatory view that the novel
gave of Charles Dickens, and then said 'The opinion
seems to be current in these days that if people are to
be clever they must be denunciatory. This gentleman
who has written of Charles Dickens shows himself to
be a child of his age when he attempts to depreciate
that great soul for Dickens was a great soul. It seems


most amusing that the same writer has written a most
rhapsodic book about Lord Birkenhead. Now Lord
Birkenhead is one of the most brilliant minds and shal-
lowest souls of the age. This man, a pusher, a swaggerer,
but one of wealth and position, is held up for admira-
tion. In striking contrast is Charles Dickens, for who
reads Charles Dickens can recognise his rollicking mirth
and his gaiety of heart, and love him for them.'
On the same occasion, referring to Dr Barnes' re-
marks about S. Francis of Assisi, he said 'Dr Barnes
tells us that S. Francis knew nothing about modern sani-
tation, and has therefore to be deplored. It is true that
S. Francis walked about in a dirt-spotted robe, but his
soul was singing within him. I love him, and I am not
going to be deterred by Dr Barnes from seeing that S.
Francis had a white and radiant soul.'
During the prolonged trouble in the northern coal
fields of New South Wales he delivered many weighty
utterances which revealed a masterly knowledge of the
situation. After the trouble had dragged on for over
twelve months he delivered the following appeal
'The coal trouble drags along its wearisome way. Every
approach to settlement is barred by one or other of the
forces with a blank "Non possumus". If we go on in this
way we shall reduce our proud national title of "The
Commonwealth" to shame and derision. Peace and co-
operation is the only wisdom. There will be no "wealth"
left and no "common" heritage if we do not banish the
unreason of ceaseless strife. Many months ago I gave
the warning that the next five years were going to be
among the hardest and sternest economic years Aust-
ralia has ever known. Instead of making ready for the
difficult days that were obviously coming, we have dis-
astrously deplenished our resources and weakened our
national morale. The poet has adjured us to let the ape
and tiger die, that we may find our way from the primi-
tive jungle to a saner and sweeter state of society. But
it has been pertly and pertinently asked "What about
letting the donkey die?" I am afraid the bray of the
donkey is still heard in the land, and that it overpowers


voices more harmonious and more reasonable. "What
fools these mortals be!" Let us quit folly and find wis-
dom! Let us be decent Australians, building up a united
commonwealth, and spurning those who would separate
us into warring factions, filled with hatred and ill will!
We are told that a referendum is to be taken for abo-
lishing the States, and uprearing the sovereign Com-
monwealth. I would like to see a referendum pledging
the people of Australia to abolish foolish warring fac-
tions, to abolish the tribal warfares, which are a vastly
greater menace to our common welfare than the sove-
reign States. If that were done, we could make Australia
a commonwealth that would be a glory on the earth.'
Yes, he was a great Australian, and he loved Australia
with all the affection of his big heart.


CHAPTER TWELVE
HIS FAITH AND CHURCHMANSHIP
As we have seen, Bishop Long was an outstanding
leader of Australian national life. As a bishop he was
also an administrator and organiser of remarkable ability,
wisdom and energy. He had extraordinary business
acumen, and a legal mind which enabled him to render
most valuable service in the drafting of the new con-
stitution of the Church in Australia, as well as in the
drafting of many ordinances which made for the more
efficient working of the Church in the dioceses of Bath-
urst and Newcastle.
Many have borne testimony to these facts as the out-
standing features of his life and work, and every paper,
religious and secular, in speaking of his death, has de-
plored the great loss to Australia of a national leader,
and to the Church of a great administrator and consti-
tution builder. But it is not of this aspect of his life and
work that I wish to speak in this closing chapter. I wish
to speak of his churchmanship.
Our age is one in which men and women who think
and read are perplexed and baffled by innumerable ques-
tions. For many, scepticism has clouded the horizon of
thought and has forced them into an antithesis between
faith and reason. Others, after tossing on a sea of doubt,
have sought refuge in a rigid traditionalism, refusing to
think outside the limits of their conventional system.
George Merrick Long had a mind that was sensitive to
all these perplexities, but he set himself to find and ar-
ticulate a philosophy of religion and life which would
recognise the truth and reality of experience and would
stand four-square, however destructive the results of
science and criticism might be.


What I have read of another somewhere is true of him.
He had a growing mind; he lived during years when
human thought was moving quickly; but in his early
days he laid the foundation of his thought so amply and
truly, and with such prophetic insight, that he never
had to relay them. In his intellectual development there
was an organic unity; the accent was modified, the tone
mellowed, the emphasis was changed, fresh ideas were
grafted on, but from student days until the day of his
death it was the same stock.
On November 29, 1929, he gave a characteristically
thoughtful address before the Workers' Educational As-
sociation in Newcastle. The title of his address was
'The Meaning of Life's Quest', and in it we find some
little expression of his philosophy of religion and life, as
the following extracts show.
'ln the condition of human knowledge today there
is the alternative of seeking an advance upon a narrow
front in the work of investigation, and of seeking to
catch the meaning of the whole. These are not neces-
sarily exclusive alternatives. It is clear that the specialist
is essential who will concentrate on a small area. So we
can say roughly that there are two areas the area of
scientist concentrates on the facts or phenomena, and
seeks to find some new relationships between them,
while the philosopher is interested in what is behind this
experience of facts, and seeks to find the meaning of the
whole the relationship of the one to the many. Now
Lord Balfour is right when he says that a creed of some
sort of religion or irreligion is a vital necessity for all,
and not a spiritual luxury for a few. A creed is the
general inference one makes from all life's knowledge
and all life's experiences as distinct from the particular
inferences from the interrelationship that specialists may
discover. We might say that we are atheists, but to do so
is to declare that we have a creed, a creed which declares
the final unintelligibility of things. Others find their
creed in theism. Today the spacious battleground is be-
tween materialism and idealism. Is the universe and all


that is in it capable of being interpreted as mechanism?
Is the universe one gigantic accident, consequent upon
an infinite succession of happy flukes? Of all the strange
beliefs that men have cherished, none flaunts a paradox
so staggering as that. Mechanism is a useful myth up to
a point in scientific work, but only up to a point, and
that point is being left further and further behind in
the modern advance. But apart from mechanism and
the realm of quantity, there is the factor of quality,
which can be appraised, but not measured. It has to do
with values as expressed in religion and art. Those who
regard the mechanical theory not only as an abstract
summary, but as presenting full-orbed reality, be-
come involved in hopeless inconsistencies. Mechanism is,
by definition, an absolutely closed question, determinate
in all its movements, down to the minutest details.
Mind, according to this theory, is to be interpreted as an
impotent and shadowy concomitant of brain, which is
itself but part of the mechanism. It is impossible for this
theory to interpret the meaning of life, because it does
not allow for quality, for the values which are found in
the mind and spiritual nature of men. These spiritual
values are essential to the meaning of life, and they
form the beautiful triad beauty, truth and goodness.
These can only be expressed in terms of personality, and
personality is the logical category of reality. The end
of man is not just to live, but to live as nobly as
he can. We must seek to interpret life by its highest
forms and not by the lower, and surely the highest that
we know is personality. So from this highest category
of experienced life we come to the conception of Divine
Personality.'
These words give us some idea of the strong foun-
dation that was beneath his robust grasp of the Christian
faith. There was no shadow of doubt about his creed,
and that creed was the creed of the Christian ages. His
strongest conviction was that 'God shined in our hearts
to give the illumination of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ'. And what his convic-
tion about, and his vision for, the Church were, he told


us in a striking charge which he delivered to the Synod
of the Diocese of Newcastle in 1929. The following are
extracts from that charge:
'What is it that we stand for? First, we are united in
a fellowship for the fuller knowledge of God in Jesus
Christ; for the worship of the everlasting Godhead;
for the reasonable service we would fain offer to the
Almighty Father. Next, we hold ourselves to be a fellow-
ship indwelt by the Divine Spirit; we are of that Church
which is the creation of God in the Gospel, not man-
invested, nor man-controlled, but formed and informed
by the divine energy revealing and manifesting the
purposes of God in human life. We are thus not the
conscious constructors of a league or union or society,
but are members caught up into that mystic union
which is betwixt Christ and His Church. The Church
is His, not ours.
In all our plans, policies and labours we find ourselves
not as devisers, but rather as those who are seeking
to learn the weaving of the divine pattern revealed, and
continuously being revealed, of the operation of God
in His Church by the Spirit. This does not mean that
we debar ourselves from creative constructive work
within the limits of the Divine overruling, but that we
strive to learn to do things after the pattern revealed on
the mount. It is our high commission to be creative
interpreters of the Divine fellowship in the Church,
ever remembering that there are canons of the art of
churchmanship, just as there are canons of any truly
creative natural art.
Then we reflect that this fellowship of worship and
discovery of God; of service to Him and of the pro-
viding of a body to be indwelt by the Divine Spirit, is
to be of service to the world of men. I am not going to
repeat the trite saying that the Church is not a cult for
the sanctified, for I hold that we must not overlook the
essential activity of the Church in the culture of
sanctified lives. But the mystic fellowship in Christ has
a commanding mission from the Lord of the Church,


which must not be disobeyed. The Church which over-
lays this 'Mission' of Christ with minor engagements is
in the way to lose the spirit of Christ.
The Christ imperative is "Go ye into all the world".
We have a mission. The world is our sphere. We at-
tenuate our mission if we interpret our sphere the
world merely in terms of geography or nationality.
I deprecate the adoption of this Christ imperative as
if it were an exclusive charter for what we term foreign
missions. Wheresoever in the world, in industry or com-
merce, in international rivalry or imperialism, in sex-
relationship, in public probity, in social inequalities,
in individual passion or temper, in intellectual error or
moral obliquity, there is aught that is alien to the mind
of Christ, there is our 'world' The Christ-impelled
Church must ever be moving from the strong base of
a realised fellowship in the things of Christ onward and
outward to the capture of the Satanic strong-posts
which deny His truth and defy His rule.
I would deduce therefore that the Church's first duty
in order of precedence, if not of importance, is to con-
centrate upon the work of helping our own people to
a truer apprehension of the Being and Character of God,
and the worship that is due to His Holy Name.
There is an amazing amount of mental debris to be
cleared from the minds of many of our people. They
have not reached to anything like an adequate thought
of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
I revert again to the conception of the Church as a
fellowship in quest of the God of Eternal Truth. We
have the idea of a Divine Society upholding the sublime
ethics of Jesus; exhibiting a life of devotion, sacrifice and
love; officered by men who have put aside other earthly
occupations to give themselves wholly to this ideal;
unflinchingly true to all the revelations of God in Jesus
Christ, and operating within the general environment
of human society for the illumination of that environ-
ment, 'reflecting as a mirror the glory of God' (2 Cor.
111., 18), for 'God shined in our hearts to give the il-
lumination of the knowledge of the glory of God in the


face of Jesus Christ' (2 Cor. IV., 6).'
In explicit terms he told where he stood in the matter
of churchmanship. In his first address to the Synod of
the Diocese of Newcastle, he said: 'I expect it is gener-
ally known among you where I stand with regard to
some of those matters of churchmanship which at times
disturb and distract our Church. I have never had any
inclination to partyism. I have always been able to
enjoy with untroubled equanimity the jibes of the ecs-
tatic party men directed against a plain churchman like
myself. I find the Church of my fathers a spacious and
beautiful spiritual home, and am happy without reser-
vation of any kind in that home. To say that one is
happy in the Church is not to say that one is always
happy about the Church. The Church of idea and
the Church of fact do not necessarily coincide in
all particulars. Whenever I am unhappy about the
Church you may be sure of hearing frankly about it;
but that does not affect in any way my happiness in
the Church. One's real difficulty is with the vast dis-
tances that stretch between one's unworthy life and
and ministry, and the fineness and grandeur of this
Church which we know as the Church of England.
I could not be thus happy in the Church if it were not
for her compelling and majestic catholic history and in-
heritance; nor without her wise and liberal spirit, nor
without her evangelical witness. It is because of this
that I am just a plain undistinguished churchman un-
decorated by the sparkling orders of any party.
With so gracious a spiritual home to inhabit I have
little inclination to shut myself up in either the base-
ment or the attic. Least of all have I any sympathy with
those who call each other names up and down the stairs.
Her unwalled pleasaunces with entrancing views from
her broad and open windows delight one's mind with the
freedom of the moving air and the sunlight of truth
this roomiest Church in Christendom.'
He was in the genuine sense of the word a Catholic.
This was due not to any shallow sentiment, but to his
strong historic sense. In discussing matters of ritual and


ceremonial he would say 'Wh;at we must abide by is
what seems good not to this or that individual bishop
or priest or congregation but t® the Church'; and to
him, as we have seen, the Churcch was not man-made
or man-controlled, but formed and informed by the
divine energy. Together with tliiis strong historic sense
there was a real evangelical note in his religion. This is
what made him a great missionier.
On the eve of his departure fior England, a farewell
social was held in his honour in tlhe Newcastle Cathedral
Hall. At that gathering speeches were delivered in
which mention was made of the jgreat work that he had
accomplished for the Church im Australia. When the
time came for him to reply, he; rose slowly and spoke
very quietly. He made, not one tof his vigorous, stirring
appeals, not one of his weighty,, carefully-reasoned ut-
terances, but a very personal, sirmple and humble speech.
His concluding words were
'I do not wish to be rememberecd just as a great admini-
strator or a great organiser. I waint to be remembered as
a simple man who tried to do ssome little good in the
world, who tried to help on life's difficult way,
who tried to be a faithful follower of the Lord Christ.'
With these words in mind, leet us take our farewell
of his great soul; let us enshrine hiis memory in our hearts
and his spirit in our lives, as wee set ourselves to carry
on the work which he has so well! begun!
erratum p. 46, for July 18 read July 8




APPENDIX A




AN ENGLISH TRIBUTE
[The following letter from Mr Albert Mansbridge,
appears in 'The Church Standard' for August 15th,
1930, and is reproduced here by kind permission of
the editor.]
May I say a few words on behalf of those English
churchmen who knew, admired and loved George Mer-
rick Long, Bishop of Newcastle? During his stay over
here towards the end of the war, he made such an im-
pression in England particularly in Cambridge, where
he was in charge of the English Army Education School
—that both the Universities of Cambridge and Man-
chester conferred upon him the degree of Doctor of
Laws. There are many Australian soldiers who will re-
member the admirable sermon he preached in King's
College Chapel at Cambridge, as though he were used to
its traditions, yet at the same time expressing the out-
look and ideal of Australia itself. This sermon so im-
pressed the University authorities that they asked him
to preach the Advent sermon before the University.
He had hardly had time to see his old friends on this
visit. He was settling down so eagerly to face and deal
with the problems before the Lambeth Conference,
feeling the responsibility of the secretaryship of one of
its important committees to which he had been ap-
pointed. It will interest some of his friends in Australia
to know how he spent his last public Sunday. He came
to Welwyn Garden City, a new town twenty three miles
north of London, and there talked to the dwellers in that
place of the meaning of true citizenship in such a way
as to compel their earnest attention and admiration.
People said to me independently of one another: "Here
is a big man with a big view". He had a marvellous


power indeed of adapting himself to any audience, be-
cause of his inherently simple faith set in a simple nature
which rose to meet all kinds of needs and occasions. In
the evening he went to preach in a schoolroom to a small
congregation setting about the task of building up their
church. We were all strangely moved by the beauty of
his sermon based on the text, 'Lazarus, whom thou
lovest, is sick'. It was the expression of the simple beauty
of the love of Christ told in moving words in tones
which, alas, we shall hear no more. We mourn for the
Church in Australia, but we are confident that the enor-
mous labour he put into problems concerning the con-
stitution for the Australian Church will not be with-
out its fruitful effect on the life of the Church to come.
The last ten years must have been a very heavy work
for him. We remember him in the young, bright eager-
ness of his almost boyish nature, and we saw him when
he came to England prematurely aged aged in fight-
ing the good fight as a warrior unafraid.
Albert Mansbridge.
Herts., England.
July 10th, 1930.


APPENDIX B




GEORGE MERRICK LONG
JOHN FRANCIS STRETCH
[This article appears in The Morpeth Review for
September 1930 and is reproduced here by kind
permission of the editors.]
Two bishops who have passed from us have left vivid
and living impressions upon the Church of England in
Australia. Both were Australian born and both became
Bishops of Newcastle. Both hailed from Victoria and
both were graduates of Trinity College, Melbourne Uni-
versity. Both were men of fine physique and manly
presence. Both had intellectual gifts far above the aver-
age and both were men of a healthy vigorous religious
faith. They were John Francis Stretch and George Mer-
rick Long. The former was impressive for a natural
majesty of bearing and a fine eloquence, the latter for
a commanding personality and a wide statesmanlike
grasp of affairs. Both of these men have left their mark
particularly on the younger men who came under their
influence. When one got close enough to them he found
a vigour and forcefulness of mind which could never
be ignored and from which there was seldom any desire
to escape.
It is possible also that another consideration will link
these two names together. They were both incarnations
of what might be called the spirit of a nation in the
making. Their Australian birth was significant and de-
terminative in the making of their characters. They
looked Australian. It is not easy to define what an
Australian look is, but a sharp eye can feel the distinction
even if language fails to express it. The finished appear-


ance of a cultured Englishman is not an Australian pos-
session. The Australian at his best seems to be taking a
somewhat different route in seeking the form of the art
of living. There is a restraint and severity of discipline
in the Englishman which bespeaks his intense and age-
old culture as well as his exacting climate. The English-
man at his best commands the respect of the world.
The Australian has not yet made a national culture
but he is beginning to feel the need of it. He has not
yet settled the form of his best manners, and he is not
willing to borrow them unchanged from his ancestors
of another clime. In these matters the Australian is at
a transitional and experimental stage and it does not yet
appear clearly what he will become. The sun and the
wide spaces will have their influence on his manner of
life and the form of his character. He cannot become
an Englishman if he remains organic to his Australian
environment and there is no reason at all why he should.
Bishop Stretch and Bishop Long might well be re-
garded as pioneers in the making of the Australian char-
acter. There was in the first place a freedom about them
which contrasts with the general conception of the
Englishman. It would not be easy to picture an English
bishop exchanging headgears with a casually met British
Hussar on an English railway station. Yet this is reported
of Bishop Stretch and, even if it is not true, it is be-
lievable and imaginable to those who knew him. One
would not expect Bishop Long to go quite as far and
here perhaps we may note our national growth towards
restraint and form of our own. Bishop Stretch was
almost a generation earlier than Bishop Long and the
younger man early in life had felt the influence of the
older.
The freedom manifested in the characters of these
two might well be an earnest of one of the best qualities
in our national ideal. It had passed far beyond the
boisterousness of undisciplined youth or the carelessness
of the untrained mind. It stood for a mobility of energy,
a frankness of outlook, a quickness of insight, a readiness
of sympathetic approach, a sense of humour, which


enabled them to handle men with understanding and
generosity and things with ease and efficiency. In mat-
ters of the mind also freedom was a dominant note in
both these men. This did not arise from any lack of
conviction, but was rooted in a conviction that free-
dom was the right of every man. 'The pure apostles of
toleration', says Lord Acton, 'are not those who sought
protection for their own beliefs, or who had none to
protect; but men to whom, irrespective of their cause,
it was a political, a moral, and a theological dogma, a
question of conscience, involving both religion and
policy.' Both these bishops loved freedom with a large-
hearted confidence. It enabled them to work happily
with men whose methods were not their own, and their
attitudes in such cases brought a sense and atmosphere
of honesty and sanity. Further the fact that both these
bishops were loved and trusted by men of all schools
of ecclesiastical and political thought and commanded
the respect of the best thinkers of their day goes to show
that their faith in freedom was not misplaced. In them
we see a type of character in process of formation and
definition and perhaps its clearest note is freedom.
But freedom by itself is not enough. A man shows
his freedom in action and both Bishop Stretch and
Bishop Long were men of action. They showed a capa-
city for work which marked them out as men of excep-
tional ability. They worked with ease and power and
therefore accomplished much. Bishop Stretch left be-
hind him a well organised diocese where a fine spirit of
comradeship was the mark of its community life.
Bishop Long did the same thing in Bathurst diocese
and was enabled to go further in setting up educational
institutions of first rate importance. Both men showed
a vigour and forcefulness of mind which gave their love
of freedom the charm of style in accomplishment. 1 hey
went forward to do things with grace and dignity. They
blazed a track in character building for Australian
youth to follow. Both men remained young in heart
and mind. They were of the spirit of a nation in its
youth, a nation that has not yet rreached maturity in any


department of life, but a nation which loves freedom
and will pay the price for it, a nation which will learn
to work with energy and confidence as its national ideal
becomes clear and compelling. Australia has yet to
find a way to express her soul in art. Her music, litera-
ture, and architecture are still seeking a form of ex-
pression which will be distinctive of the landscape and
sunlight, the clustered timbered coastlands and the
empty endless plains. The noises of the bush must stand
over against the speaking wondrous silence of the empty
spaces before Australia does her work in making her own
full man. George Merrick Long more than most had
listened with an understanding ear to the music of the
silent western plains. He had felt its calm, its haunting
presence, and it had told him something of the secret
of its peace. Here John Francis Stretch remained more
of an incarnation of the tumultuous coastlands but he
also knew long and lonely roads; the companionship of
faithful horses on journeys through flood and drought.
If he never listened to the voice of the silent plains and
remained in this measure untamed by stillness, he never-
theless had looked into the face of the storm and wind
and had caught the spirit of their majesty. The figure
of Bishop Stretch will be the model for the 'Noble Ro-
man' in the imagination of many men who were in-
spired by him in their youth. The writer of this article
came to know Bishop Long much later in life when the
ready plasticity of youth had largely disappeared and
the age of hero worship had passed its zenith. Still in
contact with Bishop Long many of the emotions in-
spired by Bishop Stretch found a ready revival. There
were striking similarities in the impressions made by
these men.
And yet they were different. Still it is hard to say
whether the difference felt and noted is not a difference
of outlook between the youthful and older observer.
To the youthful observer Bishop Stretch was a majestic,
impressive and lovable figure; to the more mature ob-
server Bishop Long was a man who counted, a force to
be reckoned with in all plans and projects, a wise and


sympathetic counsellor, a man to be trusted and loved.
It remains to speak in a little more detail about a few
things in which the writer was brought into close re-
lations with Bishop Long. The first was in the training
of men for the ministry. 'No portion of my pastoral
care in the diocese weighs more heavily upon me than
does this duty of finding, proving and providing for
vocations to the sacred ministry' he wrote in a letter
to his clergy in 1922. True to this declaration he was
always alert for recruits and the diocese of which he
was bishop always sent the largest number of candidates
into college. He did not hesitate to require the best from
the men he selected, but he was too wide awake to facts
to believe that examinations were an infallible guide to
fitness. He kept a close eye on the progress of his young
men and had a remarkable facility for remembering de-
tails of results and reports. His aim was to find young
men of real strength and vigour. 'I do not care a rap
about party,' he once wrote, 'but I do care about men.
If a man is not giving the best that is in hirn and if that
best is not going to be of real service to the Church,
he should be told to serve the Church as a layman. If
we do not watch this, the sacred ministry of the next
generation will become an ambulance for the infirm.'
And again, 'What I desire is that Morpeth should build
a reputation for hard work, thoroughness, and high
standards of effort and character'.
As one of the bishops who established S. John's College
at Morpeth he was interested and active in the concerns
of the college from the beginning. The college aims at
becoming a university college where men may read
for degrees in arts, divinity, economics, and, perhaps,
music. Bishop Long listened patiently and sympatheti-
cally to the unfolding of this scheme and was eventually
caught by the vision. Lie hoped to move in the direction
of its fulfilment when he returned from Lambeth and
striking testimony of his interest came to the writer
in a letter from England from Dr Albert Mansbridge,
the great leader in the work of adult education. Writing
a few days before the Bishop's death Dr Mansbridge


says: 'I promised the Bishop of Newcastle, who is as keen
on S. John's, Morpeth, as on anything else in existence,
to help all I possibly can'.
Bishop Long agreed that one of the most urgent needs
of the Church in Australia was a School of Divinity
where the best secular scholarship could meet with the
best religious thought of the day. Such an institution
could give light and guidance to the rank and file of
the clergy and also help to present the Church's faith
to the world of thought. It appealed to him as a work
of national importance and his powerful influence
would have been in the movement to build up such a
school at Morpeth.
The enthusiasm of the Bishop for promising adven-
tures and his underlying caution were well illustrated in
the reception he gave 'The Morpeth Review'. The first
number came out as 'A Review of Life and Work'. The
Bishop wrote 'I received a copy of 'Life and Work' and
liked it very much. I am wondering whether your
venture won't crash financially though. I know that is
the rock on which many of these publications find ship-
wreck'. The second number, however, dispelled his fears.
He wrote 'Bravo! I have just read the Morpeth Review
from cover to cover. It is admirable and gallant. It
is admirable and gallant. It must be kept going and de-
veloped The College Press turned it out re-
markably well in spite of occasional inking defects. .
I enclose my cheque towards the enterprise.' His interest
never waned. At a later date he wrote again 'I am tre-
mendously interested in the Review, and we must keep
it going'. He promised to write an article for the Re-
view on 'The Significance of Lambeth'. That cannot
now be done by him, but in his ever fresh and coura-
geous mind, his forward look and confidence in the fu-
ture, his warm hearted affection for friends, and his
large hearted kindliness to all, those who had the privi-
lege of knowing him well will feel that they found in
him the pattern of a man.
E. H. Burgmann.


IN
If
I Jfe


rati* .'0*0
|
■
.




-.v;* : .:¥V ' 'v ■■■ ; vr'T .
I & & ■** g# ..,- | "" ■-.
- "- ... £*\
•' V y , ; • . ' ■- • .'... ■ :
