

REPRESSION OF VICE GENERALLY.”
A LECTURE
DELIVERED TO MEN ONLY
IN THE
AUGUST 4th, 1885,
KEY. CHARLES OLDEN,
TOGETHER WITH
AN INTRODUCTORY ADDRESS
BY THE CHAIRMAN, THE
TO BE HAD OF THE PRINTERS,
Messrs. J. L. Holmes and Co., 315 Pitt Street.
Ft 3
“ THii PROTECTION OF GIRLS AND
SyCOUNG WOMEN and THE LEGISLATIVE
PROTESTANT HALL, SYDNEY,
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES SOCIAL
PURITY SOCIETY, AND PUBLISHED AT THE SOCIETY'S REQUEST.
Right Rev. Dr BARRY, Primate of Australia.
PUBLISHED BY THE N. S. WALES SOCIAL PURITY SOCIETY.




“ THE PROTECTION OF GIRLS AND
YOUNG WOMEN and THE LEGISLATIVE
REPRESSION OF VICE GENERALLY.”
A LECTURE
DELIVERED TO MEN ONLY
IN THE
PROTESTANT HALL, SYDNEY,
AUGUST 4th, 1885,
KEY. CHARLES OLDER,
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES SOCIAL
PURITY SOCIETY, AND PUBLISHED AT THE SOCIETY’S REQUEST.
TOGETHER WITH
AN INTRODUCTORY ADDRESS
BY THE CHAIRMAN, THE
Right Rev. Dr Primate of Australia.
§Hmeij:
PUBLISHED BY THE N. S. WALES SOCIAL PURITY SOCIETY,
TO BE HAD OF THE PRINTERS,
Messrs, J. L. Holmes and Co., 315 Pitt Street,




NEW SOUTH WALES SOCIAL PURITY SOCIETY,
CONSTITUTION.
I. That this Society be called the “New South Wales Social
Purity Society.”
11. That the Society be composed of Annual, Life, and Honorary
Members, who shall, at a General Meeting to be held in September of each
year, elect a Committee of Management of not less than twelve, including
President, two Vice-Presidents, Secretary and Treasurer, such Committee
having power to add to their number ; three to form a quorum.
111. That any person subscribing yearly a sum not less than five
shillings shall be a Member, and that any person making a donation of not
less than three guineas be a Life Member ; and that Honorary Members be
appointed by the Committee.
OBJECTS.
I. To promote true morality and to discourage immorality in all
relations of social life.
11. To advocate and promote amendments in the laws relating to :
1. The protection of young females.
2. The establishment of the paternity of illegitimate children.
3. The support and education of such children, and the responsi-
bilities of their parents.
4. Seductions and civil actions thereon.
5. The harbouring of fallen juveniles.
111. To promote social and moral improvement by
1. The circulation of pure literature.
2. The suppression of impure literature.
3. The delivery of social lectures.
4. Petitions to the Legislature.
5, Efforts to reel the erring, especially juveniles.
The duty of every Member of this Society will be to promote the
objects herein specified, and to further the suppression of vice and the
advancement of virtue.


Patron :
COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT.
Vice-Presidents :
Committee :
The Rev. J. JEFFERIS, LL.D.
~ J. D. LANGLEY
~ CHARLES OLDEN
„ ROBERT STEEL, Ph.D., D.D.
„ W. G. TAYLOR
~ WILLIAM TAYLOR
„ T. B. TRESS
~ samuel Wilkinson
J. F. DECK, Esq., M.D., M.R.C.S.FL
CRAIG DIXSON, Esq., M. 8., M.R.C.S., F.R.C.S.E.
H. W. JACKSON, Esq., L.R.C.P., Edin., M.R.C.S.E.
WILLIAM DEANE, Esq.
J. H. KNAPP, Esq.
THOMAS ROWE, Esq.
WILLIAM RUSSELL, Esq.
RICHARD TEECE, Esq.
DONALD VERNON. Esq.
DAVID WALKER, Esq.
J. P. WALKER, Esq.
W. E. WILSON, Esq.
Hon. Treasurer
BENJAMIN SHORT, Esq.
Hon. Secretary :
JOSEPH PALMER.
THE RIGHT REV. ALFRED BARRY, D.D., BISHOP OF SYDNEY
AND PRIMATE OF AUSTRALIA.
President :
The Very Rev. W. M. COVVPER, M.A., Dean of Sydney.
EBENEZER VICKERY, Esq., J.P. | WILLIAM NEILL, Esq., J.P.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
The Committee of the Social Purity Society gratefully
acknowledge their indebtedness to the Rev, C. Olden for valuable
aid he has rendered to this Society. His first lecture, delivered
in the Protestant Hall to 1200 men, entitled, “Immorality : Its
Fascinating Temptations, its Awful Consequences, and the Way to
Avoid it,” has borne good fruit, and has passed through its second
edition.
The Committee are placed under further obligation to the
rev. gentleman by his delivery of a second and admirable lecture,
on the “Protection of Girls and Young Women, and the
Legislative Repression of Vice generally:” the objects of which
were to expose the weakness and inconsistencies of the penal laws
of this colony relating to the protection of females, particularly
of girls of tender age; to advocate immediate legislation to
remedy anomalies of existing enactments ; and to secure the passing
of an Act that shall aid the Committee the better to carry out the
proverb, “ Prevention is better than cure.”
The Committee were gratified by the presence of the Primate,
the Lord Bishop of Sydney, in the chair, and by the support on
the platform of various members of Parliament, clergymen
representing the different churches, and gentlemen of influence,
as also by the attendance of over 1000 men, whose rapt attention
and repeated acclamation of applause (together with the absence
of the slightest expression of disapproval) warrant the Committee
in believing that all who listened to Mr. Olden’s manly and heart-
stirring address, not only went away better instructed on the
subject discussed, but strengthened in purpose to do the right,
and aid this Society in the noble work it has in hand ; namely,
to make it more difficult for the immoral to pursue a course of
wrong doing, and easier for the innocent (but weak and unwary)
to escape the clutches of the tempter.
The Committee, in sending forth the publication of this
lecture, earnestly recommend all lovers of morality to assist them
to give it the widest circulation.
At the conclusion of the Lecture, it was proposed by Colonel Goodlet,
seconded by Mr. William Russell, and unanimously carried—
“ That this meeting cordially approves of the alterations of the
Law recommended by the lecturer, and promises to support
the Social Purity Society in endeavouring to have them
enacted by Parliament.”
The alterations referred to will be found printed on pp. 3 to 5 of the
lecture.
A cordial vote of thanks was then passed to the lecturer on the motion
of the Rev. R. F. Hills, seconded by the Rev, William Taylor.
A vote of thanks to the Primate for presiding was also carried, on the
motion of the Rev. W. G. Taylor, seconded by Major Rowe.


P R E F A C E.
I have found the preparation of this Lecture no easy matter.
The present law in New South Wales contains many wise provi-
sions for the repression of vice, and the penalties are sufficiently
severe. It however appeared to me that there are many appalling
omissions, and that I needed competent legal assistance in order
that I might know exactly what the law is. My thanks are due
to Mr. Wm, Russell, of Sydney, who spared neither time nor
trouble gratuitously in assisting me on the legal points of my
Lecture, and whose help has been most valuable.
At the same time, I needed to go where the shot strikes, in
order to see for myself how the present law works. It was
gratifying to find so many good men and excellent women able
and willing to help me. I visited some of the Refuges, and in
suitable company I went to the Dancing Saloons, and other places
which need not be named here. Not a fact has been narrated
without what appeared to me and to others to rest on undoubted
evidence. As the result of the most careful observations it has
been in my power to make, I assert that our laws for the Protec-
tion of Young Women and the Repression of Vice generally are
grossly inadequate, and that this inadequacy directly tends to the
abounding vice and immorality of Sydney. Many friends helped
me whose names are not inserted here. I hope they will accept
this expression of gratitude. I have also obtained some help from
books, and gratefully acknowledge it ; but the Lecture is the
result of a careful study of the existing laws of N.S.W., interpreted
by facts drawn from the life history of men and women, most of
whom are now living, and with some few of whom I have con-
versed. In nearly every case where I have not seen the parties
referred to, they were, or had been, personally known to my
informants.
The sins and sorrows of Sydney afford a sphere of observation,
a depth of misery, opportunities of kindness and mercy, and
individual cases of sore oppression and of cruel wrong. Who will
take up this matter 1 There is need for someone who will go
through the painful ordeal of sifting it in all its repulsiveness and
to its lowest depths, and who will be fearless and uncompro-
mising in his denunciation of wrong doers. There are also many
things the Christian Women of the colony can do to save their
younger sisters. What good women will take the lead in this
work 1
CHARLES OLDEN.
Bowral, N.S.W.


INTRODUCTORY ADDRESS OF THE CHAIRMAN—
THE BISHOP OF SYDNEY AND PRIMATE OF AUSTRALIA.
The Chairman said that he had come to listen, not to speak, and that
he therefore would make but two remarks before calling upon the
lecturer to address them. In the first place he wished to explain
the very deep interest he felt in the prosperity and efficiency of
the Social Purity Society. It was of course absolutely impossible
to exaggerate the virulence of the evil which the Society was
established to combat—an evil which was creating quite as much
havoc as intemperance—an evil which, as he heard with deep
regret, was at least as rife in this city as in any of the cities of the
old world. Believing that there was a phase of this warfare which
should be carried on by quiet personal influence, best exerted through
the organization of the various Christian churches, they of the
Church of England had recently inaugurated a Purity Society as
part of that Church’s regular pastoral work. He hoped it would
be understood that this argued on their part no want of sympathy
with the more general, and, if he might use the term, more
impersonal work which this Society desired to do. Speaking for
himself, and for all his brethren in the ministry of the Church of
England, he assured them that it would always be their pride and
pleasure to do whatever they could to further the interests of the
Society. The other remark he wished to make was that, the older
one grew, the more one learned to understand the real, though
secondary, position of law in fighting against evil. No one
supposed that spiritual evils could ever be destroyed except by
spiritual weapons. No one supposed that law could make a man
chaste or temperate. Only one power could do that—the power
of the Holy Spirit of God. But there was undoubtedly a function
for the law, not to supersede, but to guard the higher action of
the spirit—to stand for the individual between his higher and
his lower self, and to stand between the weaker members of
society and those temptations which society brought home to them.
This he understood to be the function of the law in fighting against
such evils as they had in view that evening. He had ventured
to say elsewhere that there was no greater fallacy than the well-
worn clap-trap that no man was made sober by Act of Parliament.
The same barren truism might be applied to sensuality and
impurity; but the fact would remain that law could step in to
save us from outrages on public decency, and that it might inter-
fere, and ought to interfere, to guard the young. He had always


thought that the young of both sexes should be protected by law
against temptation presented to them by those who were fuller
grown and more hardened in vice than themselves. To-night,
while trusting for the soul of purity to the strength of Christian
principle, the lecture would insist on the duty of a great Christian
community in the outward function of law. He prayed their
earnest and sympathetic attention to this most important subject.
—Sydney Morning Herald.
5? ®(s^>


LECTURE.
It will be admitted that in rising to address you on the Protection
of Girls and Young Women and the Legislative Repression of
Vice generally, I have accepted a most difficult task. The
difficulty arises from a variety of causes. To begin with: the
subject has an objectionable, not to say a repulsive, side. I shall
be compelled to use words with a repulsive ring about them, and
a still more repulsive association. It will be impossible to deliver
this lecture effectively unless there be a most honourable and
thorough understanding between the audience and the speaker.
If, therefore, 1 promise to combine the greatest plainness of speech
with the utmost delicacy of expression, I want you to let me feel
that the confidence which I have in the fair play of this audience
is not misplaced, and that if I should be so unfortunate as to make
a slip of the tongue on this most difficult of subjects you will help
me out of the trouble. Another difficulty arises from the deep-
seatedness of the evil which confronts us. I have not come on to
this platform under the impression that this foul thing is to be
bowed out of the community by a mere wave of the hand. Far
from that, I know that it is the most deep-seated, wide-spread, and
ruinous curse that afflicts humanity. There is yet another
difficulty, viz., that of suggesting a remedy. It is easy to point
out an evil, but try to mend it and your difficulties begin.
But while realising the difficulties of the position, I am not in-
sensible to the honor and responsibility of pleading the cause of out-
raged womanhood. If any one of us had the honour to be a member
of the bar, and if we were called upon to defend the reputation,
liberties, and life of a beautiful, high-minded, and virtuous girl,
how should we rise to the occasion ! How much more would our
enthusiasm be enkindled if that girl were an orphan, and had been
committed by a dying mother into the hands of the very man who
was now seeking her ruin ! With what intense satisfaction should
we bring forward link after link in the unbroken chain of evidence
that would establish her, innocence! How the most appropriate
words would leap unbidden to our lips ! How we should tear into
rags and tatters the false accusation that had been brought against
her, and pour the vial of our fiercest indignation upon the head of
her false accuser! With what pleasure should we see the jury
acquit her of the charge, and with what unqualified satisfaction
should we see the high-minded and virtuous girl leave the court
without a stain upon her character ! There is not a man here but


would be glad to fill such a position as that. But what is that
position to yours and mine to-night 1 ? We hold a brief for ten
thousand helpless women. Ten thousand ? Bor untold millions !
For we‘propose to put a law upon our Statute book which shall
benefit every woman, that in distant bush, in lonely hut, on
solitary road, in crowded city or stately mansion, shall breathe our
air or tread our soil to the end of time.
THE PRINCIPAL PROVISIONS OF THE LAW IN FORCE IN NEW
SOUTH WALES FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND THE
SUPPRESSION OF VICE.
The following extracts, numbered 39 to 49, are from the
“ Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1883 ” :
39. Whosoever commits the crime of rape shall be liable to suffer death
And the consent of the woman if obtained by threats or terror shall be no
defence to the charge And whosoever attempts to commit or assaults any
female with intent to commit the crime of rape shall be liable to penal
servitude for fourteen years.
40. Whosoever by any false pretence false representation or other
fraudulent means or by the use of any intoxicating drug induces or procures
a woman to have illicit cai'nal connection with a man or by any such means
has such connection with a woman and whosoever has carnal knowledge of
a woman with her consent under the belief induced by the language or con-
duct of the accused that he was her husband shall be liable to penal servitude
for fourteen years.
41. Whosoever carnally knows any girl under the age of ten years shall
be liable to suffer death and whosoever assaults with intent carnally to know
any such girl or attempts to have such knowledge shall be liable to penal
servitude for fourteen years.
42. Whosoever unlawfully and carnally knows any girl of or above the
age of ten years and under the age of fourteen years shall be liable to penal
servitude for ten years and whosoever assaults with intent unlawfully and
carnally to know any such girl or attempts to have such knowledge shall be
liable to penal servitude for five years And the consent of the girl shall be
no defence to any charge under this or the preceding section.
43. Whosoever being*a schoolmaster or other teacher unlawfully and
carnally knows any girl of or above the age of ten years and under the age
of sixteen years being his pupil and whosoever being a father carnally knows
any girl between such ages being his daughter shall be liable to penal servi-
tude for fourteen years And whosoever being such schoolmaster or teacher
or father assaults any such girl with intent to have such knowledge or by
any means attempts to have such knowledge shall be liable to penal servitude
for seven years And the consent of the pupil or daughter shall be no defence
to any charge under this section Provided that nothing in this clause
contained shall prevent such schoolmaster teacher or parent from being
prosecuted under either section forty-one or forty-two of the Act.
44. Whosoever indecently assaults any girl under the age of fourteen
years whether with or without her consent shall be liable to penal servitude
for five years And whosoever indecently assaults any female of or above
the age of fourteen years shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years.
45. Where a woman of any age has an interest in property or is a
presumptive heiress or next of kin to any one having such interest whoso-
ever from motives of lucre takes away or detains such woman against her


will with intent to marry or carnally know her or to cause her to be married
or carnally known by any person shall be liable to penal servitude for four-
teen years.
46. Whosoever fraudulently allures takes away or detains any female
under the age of twenty-one years out of the possession and against the will
of any person having the lawful charge of her with intent to marry or car-
nally know her or to cause her to be married to or carnally known by any
person shall be liable to penal servitude for seven years And no offender
under this or the last section shall be capable of taking any estate or interest
in any property in her right and if any marriage has taken place the pro-
perty of the wife shall be settled in such manner as the Supreme Court at
the suit of the Attorney-General may appoint.
47. Whosoever by force takes away or detains against her will any
female of any age with intent to marry or carnally know her or to cause her to
be married to or carnally known by any person shall be liable to penal servi-
tude for fourteen years.
48. Whosoever unlawfully takes or causes to be taken any unmarried
girl under the age of sixteen years out of the possession and against the
will of any person having the lawful charge of her shall be liable to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years.
49. Whosoever by force or fraud leads or takes away entices away or
detains any child under the age of twelve years with intent to deprive any
person having the lawful charge of such child of the possession of such
child or with intent to steal any article upon or about the person of such
child to whomsoever such article may belong—and whosoever receives or
harbours any such child knowing the same to have been so led taken enticed
away or detained shall be liable to penal servitude for ten years
Provided that this section shall not extend to any person who shall in good
faith have claimed a right to the possession of such child.
If a man make a woman insensibly drunk and has carnal connection
with her, he is guilty of rape according to the Common Law.
PRINCIPLES THAT UNDERLIE THE PRESENT LAW.
1. That a woman’s personal purity is as dear to her as life itself, and
therefore rape is a capital crime.
2. That obtaining carnal knowledge of a woman by false pretences or
drugs is a great crime, and may be punished with 14 years’penal servitude.
3. That infancy is so sacred that the penalty of death may be inflicted
On a man who by any means has carnal knowledge of a girl under 10.
4. That a girl under 14 is so incapable of judging of her own actions
that her seducer cannot plead her consent to an act of indecency.
5. That pupils need protection from their teachers, and daughters from
their parents, up to a greater age than they need protection from any one
else.
6. That indecent assault upon any female is a very serious crime in the
eye of the law, but it is a far greater crime when committed on a girl under
14 than upon a female of any greater age.
7. That girls having property, and still further, having parents or
guardians, are entitled to more protection than those who have none.
8. That under certain circumstances (vagrancy) young people need
the protection of the law till they are 18.
PROPOSED ALTERATIONS IN THE LAW.
1. That girls should be protected up to 18 in the same way
as that in which they are now protected up to 14.


2. That pupils and daughters shall be protected from their
teachers and fathers up to 21 in the same way in which they are
now protected up to 16.
3. That governesses, servant girls, and female employees
generally, be protected from their employers up to 21 years of
age.
4. That some provision be made for the punishment of the
seducer.
5. That any parent, guardian, relative or friend of a girl
under 18, if he believe she is allowed to visit or remain in or
upon any premises for immoral purposes, may give evidence on
oath, before two Js.P., and if he shall convince the said Js.P. that
he is acting hona-fide in the interests of the girl, and that there is
reasonable ground of belief that she is harboured in the said
premises for immoral purposes, the said Js.P. may issue a search
warrant to extend over one month. This search warrant shall
give power to a police officer to enter the house, by force if
necessary, and with any assistance he may need, and bring before
the said Js.P. any female found upon the premises of whom the
offence is alleged, and bind her over to give evidence at the trial
of the keeper or owner of the house.
6. That any person male or female, who is guilty of procuring
or of endeavouring to procure any woman to become a prostitute
within or without the colony, may be punishable by law.
7. That any person, male or female, who shall procure or
endeavour to procure any woman to an act or acts of immorality
with any male, or shall induce or endeavour to induce any woman
to enter a brothel for immoral purposes (she not knowing the
place to be a brothel) may be punishable by law.
8. That the owner or occupier or manager of any premises
who shall allow any boy or youth under 16 to visit the said
premises for immoral purposes shall be punishable by law.
9. That the law for the detection of brothel-keepers, whether
such brothels be licensed hotels or not, greatly needs amendment.
10. That the offence commonly known as street-walking be
punishable; also that it shall be a misdemeanour for a man to
offer any woman persistent solicitation,
11. That there is great need for an Act for the proper
supervision of factories where men and women are employed.
12. That all dancing saloons shall be under proper super-
vision, and that all immoral dancing saloons be closed.
13. That we need a more just and righteous affiliation law,
14. That the practice of sub-letting bars in hotels be abolished.
15. That it shall be unlawful to employ women in the capa-
city of barmaids.
16. That the process of law for the punishment of vice be
reed from its present encumbrances; and that the police be as


free to act in the detection of keepers of disorderly houses and
the suppression of vice, as they are in the detection of theft and
other crimes.
17. That just and equitable penalties shall attach to the breach
of the proposed legislation.
ADMISSIONS.
1. There are some girls and women whom no repressive
legislation would save. They would break out of Paradise to
pursue a course of impurity. Some of these women are seducers
as much as any men are ; and we need to protect boys and youths
as much as we do girls and young women. But we claim that the
vast majority of girls who are led astray, had no sympathy with
such an evil life. They were led into it by the cowardice of men,
and through the neglect of the law to protect them. Repressive
legislation will assist in saving virtuous girls who at present are
unprotected by the law.
2. The Social Purity Society does not rest its case on any
one of the proposals now made. The aggregation of the whole is
to be taken. There are also many things that the law cannot do,
but that philanthropic effort and other means will accomplish.
In this lecture, however, the case is confined to its legal aspects.
PROTECTION OF GIRLS UP TO EIGHTEEN.
At present the punishment for having carnal knowledge of a
girl under ten may be death. The punishment for an indecent
assault upon a girl under ten may be penal servitude for fourteen
years. To have carnal knowledge of a girl over ten, and under
fourteen, is punishable with ten years’ penal servitude. Anyone
making an indecent assault on a girl of those tender years, may
receive a sentence of five years’ penal servitude, and in neither
case can the girl’s consent be pleaded in defence. In the eyes of
our law-makers a girl under fourteen is incapable of consenting
to an act of indecency ; and should any man by promises, presents,
or persuasions secure her consent, he cannot plead her consent
in his defence. So far so good. The Social Purity Society
accepts this view of the case so far as it goes; but it does not go
far enough. We say the law should protect girls and young
women up to eighteen. The only difference between the present
law and the demand of the Committee is one of detail. We are
both agreed on the principle that there is an age up to which a
girl is incapable of consenting to her own ruin.
My immediate task is to show that fourteen is too low a
limit, and that eighteen is not too high. Under the present law,
as soon as a girl attains her fourteenth birthday she may consent
to her own seduction. If any man seduce one girl of that age, or


a dozen, or a score, and they be consenting parties, he has com
mitted no offence in the eye of the law, and there is no means of
punishing him for the seduction. In the face of such a law as
this, do not be surprised that there are so many young girls led
astray. Bad as our moral condition is, it is a wonder it is not
infinitely worse.
The following reasons are advanced why the age should be
raised from fourteen to eighteen :
1. A Girl op Fourteen is Totally Incapable of under-
standing the Frightful Consequences of her own
Immorality.
“ This frightful incapacity to judge of her own actions in
relation to sexual intercourse is not only true of ignorant little
girls of thirteen or fourteen, who sell themselves for the offer of a
few shillings or a pretty dress, but such moral incapacity belongs
to all youth. From the age of sixteen to eighteen thoughtless
ignorance or blind impulse of physical sex are generally stronger
than the intellectual and moral faculties. Youth at that age is
quite unable to weigh or comprehend the very grave and powerful
reasons which make early debauchery so destructive to a nation.
At that age they have not acquired habits of sexual self control,
unless they have been surrounded early by exceptionally wise
human influences. Our youth until the age of eighteen most im-
peratively require the guardianship of law and custom. It is the
most cruel injury that we can do to childhood and youth to allow
the vicious adult to trade upon impulsive inexperience, or to suffer
corrupt age to plead that ignorant youth tempted it to evil.” —Dr.
E. Blackwell.
Let the fathers and brothers present think of their own
daughters and sisters who are about fourteen years of age. The
very thought that it would be no crime for a designing man
to seduce those particular children is simply revolting. You
know that they are utterly incapable of consenting to their own
ruin.
2. It will be Objected that many Girls of Fourteen or
Fifteen are Women, Physically Considered, and are
THEREFORE QUITE CAPABLE OP TAKING CARE OF THEM-
SELVES.
I admit the fact that many young girls appear to be women,
physically considered, but I utterly deny the inference that they
are, therefore, capable of taking care of themselves. The inference
assumes that in early life mental capacity corresponds with
precocious physical development; whereas “ the true physiological
doctrine is that precocious physical development hinders mental


development rather than helps it. Consequently, the earlier the
physical possibility of becoming a parent in a boy or girl, the
more carefully law and education should protect that important
parental function from early abuse and ruinous exercise.” Many
present will call to mind girls of 14 or 15, or 16, who are women
in body, but who, in mind, are only children, and not over wise
children at that. “ The physical plea urged in opposition to the
protection of young women is false, for the physical woman is a
moral child in the great mass of minor girls.”
Half-Witted Girls.
In speaking of half-witted girls a totally new aspect of the
case presents itself. Immediately above I have dealt with young
females who are not destitute of the intellectual faculty, but in
whom, because of their tender age, prudence, foresight, and self-
control, are not yet developed. I now speak of young girls who
are deficient in intellectual power. In other words, half-witted
girls. The law affords them no special protection, and the seducer,
lost to every noble impulse, finds them an easy prey to his
passions. It is an awful thing to ruin such a girl ; yet men do
it for the sake of present gratification, and the law declines to
defend them.
3. It is Absurdly Inconsistent for the Law to permit a
Girl to consent to her own Moral Ruin at Fourteen,
when it so Jealously Guards her Interests in rela-
tion to Property and Marriage up to Twenty-one.
A girl may have a million acres of land, but the law will
not permit her to sell a yard of it until she is 21. The same thing
applies to an annuity which she may possess. She cannot sell
it. Nor can she draw a cheque on a bank. The law also takes
the most jealous care of her in relation to the act of marriage.
She cannot marry under 21 without the consent of parents or
guardians ; and if she has none, the law steps in to protect her,
by giving to certain magistrates power to give consent in such
cases. It is perjury for a minor to make a false declaration of
age before a minister or registrar ; and if a minister or registrar
marry a minor without proper consent, knowing her to be under
21, he is liable to a fine of £5OO, or 5 years’ imprisonment, or
both.
It is a crime for a man to marry a girl under twenty-one
without proper consent, knowing her to be under twenty-one,
though he pledges his name and property, and takes a solemn
oath to love and protect her, and forsaking all others to cleave only
to her so long as they both shall live. But it is no crime for him
to seduce that girl, and then desert her and leave her to die of a


broken heart, as many do ; or to go upon the streets to her own
shame and misery, and to the injury of society.
I do not say the law is too severe in reference to the pro-
perty and marriage of minors ; but it is absurdly inconsistent to
take such care of her in relation to these matters, and to leave
her so grossly unprotected in reference to seduction and pros-
titution.
4. In the Opinion op those best able to judge, the age
OUGHT TO BE EIGHTEEN.
The Select Committee of the House of Lords for the Protec-
tion of Young Girls, examined some of the most competent
men in England to give an opinion on this question. I only
remember that one or two of them refused to advise over sixteen.
Most of them urged eighteen as the age up to which girls should
be protected.
Mr. C. E. Howard Vincent, Director of Criminal Investi-
gations at Great Scotland Yard, stated before the Committee
that the prostitution of young children is peculiar to London as
compared with Continental cities, and he attributed it to the fact
that in England girls are only protected up to thirteen. In his
opinion they ought to be protected up to eighteen.
Sir James Ingham, Chief Magistrate of the Metropolitan
District and a Police Magistrate altogether for thirty-one years,
urges eighteen, as the age from sixteen to eighteen is one of
special temptation.
Medical men have uttered the most solemn warnings against
the early use of the procreative faculties in precocious marriages,
as being most injurious to the parties immediately concerned, as
well as to the coming generation. How much more injurious
is juvenile prostitution !
All persons, without exception, who are engaged in the
Christ-like work of rescuing women from a condition of infamy,
urge the protection of girls to a greater age than that provided
for by law. Very many of the girls that come into their hands
would never have gone astray if the law had protected them up
to a greater age.
There is an agitation in England to protect girls up to
eighteen.
All the police officers in Sydney whom I have consulted
urge a higher limit than fourteen. They tell me most emphati-
cally that in the Industrial Schools Act the age should be raised
to eighteen. At present, if a vagrant child shall be brought
before two Js.P., and if such child shall appear to the justices to
be under the age of sixteen years, they may send her to an
Industrial School until she attains her eighteenth birthday. Let


us see how this works. A young girl is arrested for being in the
company of thieves or common prostitutes. She appears to be about
fourteen or fifteen years of age. She knows that if she says she is
under sixteen she may be sent to Biloela for a couple of years,
but if over sixteen she can only be sent to Darlinghurst for a
short sentence. She is cunning enough to say she is seventeen,
and often the magistrates give her the benefit of the doubt. You
will say, Why not search the records for the registration of her
birth 1 How can you 1 Most likely the girl is there under a
false name, and she won’t tell you where she was born. The
police tell me that if it was eighteen they could act, whereas at
present they are baffled at every turn.
I may here refer to my own change of mind on this question
of age. The Social Purity Society asked me to plead for sixteen.
But at every turn I am told sixteen is not sufficient. The
matrons of Benevolent Societies, Christian workers engaged in
rescuing fallen women, police officers, and parents whose
daughters have been ruined, all tell me that the age should be
raised to eighteen. That while sixteen would be better than
fourteen, sixteen would not cover the difficulty ; and that sixteen
is an age of peculiar danger. It is true that some men of mark
object to raising the age. But, by a fortunate coincidence, within
a few days of the delivery of this Lecture, public opinion in
England has compelled the House of Commons to accept the
thrice-repeated proposal of the House of Lords to raise the age
to sixteen. Three years’ increased protection is a great step in
advance.
5. If we could Protect the Young up to Eighteen we
SHOULD GET RID OF MOST OF THE PROSTITUTION BY WHICH
WE ARE SURROUNDED.
It is true that some adopt this life after they are of age, but
the statistics of the London Rescue Society, for a period of seven-
teen years, viz. : from 1861 to 1878, show how large a number
are led astray very young. During the seventeen years the
Society received 7827 girls and women. The following statement
shows the ages at which the girls were seduced: —Led astray at
five years, 11; at six years, 2; at seven years, 32; at eight
years, 20 ; at nine years, 77 ; at ten years, 174 ; at eleven years,
127 ; at twelve years, 553 ; at thirteen years, 409 ; at fourteen
years, 717 ; at fifteen years, 989 ; at sixteen years, 1209 ; at
seventeen years, 1014 ; at eighteen years, 813 ; at nineteen years,
569; all ages above nineteen, 1111. This list shows us that if
the girls had been protected up to eighteen, out of 7827, 5334
would not have fallen. In other words, that 68 per cent, might
have been saved. For every hundred girls walking the streets,


there would only have been thirty-two. The remaining sixty-
eight would have been left to fill honorable positions in society.
It will be noticed that the figures are higher at sixteen than at
any other age—at sixteen they are 1209 ; at seventeen, 1014,
i.e., 195 less; at eighteen they are 813, or 396 less than for six-
teen ; at nineteen they are 569, or 640 less than for sixteen ;
while for all ages over nineteen, they are only 1111 out of 7827.
These figures prove conclusively that it is the young who are led
astray ; and that as far as these 7827 cases are concerned, six-
teen is the most dangerous age. We can easily imagine that at
that age passion is strong, and mature judgment, and self-control
have not yet come to the rescue. It is quite true that there are
still 2493 whose fall would not have been prevented by raising
the age to eighteen. But it must be remembered we have other
suggestions to make to meet their case ; and that we frankly
admit that there are some girls that no legal provisions will save.
According to the published annual reports of the Benevolent
Asylum in Sydney for the last seven years, the accouchements
there during that period numbered 1573, comprising 346 married
women and 1227 single women, thus throwing 1227 illegitimate
children, or, as they are legally termed, “ bastards,” upon the
community. Of the total number of all the births there during
that time, no less than 945 of the mothers are classified as natives
of New South Wales,
To save one poor girl from a life of infamy by preventing
her fall is a work so great and good that we are bound to listen
to the man who can show us how to save one in a hundred : but
when we point out how you might save sixty-eight out of
every hundred, we do not ask your attention—we demand it.
6. The best way to Protect the Boys and Youths is to
Protect the Girls.
The reason of this is obvious. The law would deter youths
from seducing women, and there would be fewer dissolute women
to tempt youths.
7. Special Reason for Protecting Young Girls.
The physical consequences are more disastrous to a young
girl than to a woman. That noble woman, Miss Elice Hopkins,
when she was before the Committee of the House of Lords, said:
“It (juvenile prostitution) is a point on which I have been
consulting with some of the most eminent medical men of the
day, those who are great authorities on this question, and I have
brought a number of letters from these eminent men, unanimously
speaking of the extreme risk to public health in allowing these
young girls to dispose of themselves in prostitution, that the


immature frame of a young girl is far more liable to physical
taint, and she is also more contagious.”
In my search for information for this lecture, I find that
those brought into contact with the work of helping the fallen are
quite of opinion that syphilis is specially injurious to young girls.
I have come across the track of one very young girl who was
sold by her own sister to a bookmaker at the races, and who soon
died of this horrible disease.
The Rev. J. W. Horsley, Chaplain of Clerkenwell Prison,
spoke of a belief, popular amongst country lads in England, and
especially so in Oxfordshire, that if a lad suffer from syphilis, an
act of violation committed on a young child will cure him. Mr.
Horsley says this heliej is a fallacy, but it is very common in
some parts of England nevertheless.
“ In eight years, in three London Hospitals alone, 27,000
children, between the ages of eleven and sixteen, have been treated
for a terrible disease.”— Sentinel , July, 1885, p. 442.
A few years ago a man was tried in this city for an act of
indecency committed upon a young girl. By the time the trial
came on the disease had developed itself in the child. I distinctly
remember the well-chosen words in which the judge spoke to the
prisoner of the frightful wrong he had done the child by diseasing
her body. He went on to say :—“ It remains to be seen what
harm you have done to her, morally and socially.” Oh, let us
save the bodies of the young from the frightful ravages of
disease, and their moral nature from that taint that must come
with acts of seduction and immorality.
8. Prevention is Better than Cure.
This sounds much like a truism, but it is necessary to discuss
the point lest the words fall upon our minds like drops of rain
upon the surface of a lake, and make but a fleeting impression.
Oh, the difficulty of rescuing some fallen women ! When to the
course of impurity they add the love of drink it is almost
impossible to save them. Did you ever try to save a friend who
was an habitual drunkard ? You found it a most difficult under-
taking. At one time you have seen him weep bitterly, and sign
the pledge with his own blood, A short time after you have
found him as drunk as ever. Many a drunkard tries to give up
the drink and fails. It is far harder to save a fallen woman who
is at the same time an habitual drunkard. In her there is the
love of drink in its most fascinating form. It has given her the
oblivion in which she has drowned the recollection of home, the
memory of her innocent girlhood, her disgust for the present, and
her dread of the future. But you have not only to save her from
the love of the drink. You have to save her from the deeper


hell of impurity. There are women who love impurity. When
these two evils meet in a woman it is almost impossible to save
her. There are those who realize the difficulty most vividly, viz.,
men and women who are engaged in rescue work. lam most
reluctant to speak lest I should appear to say a word which
might discourage such noble workers. But ask them what success
they have met with, and they will tell you. They will tell you
of women rescued from impurity and drunkenness and restored to
purity and to society. But they will tell you of cases of bitter
disappointment. You will hear of women who wept and prayed
and tried to amend their lives—women who made effort after
effort, but who failed at last.
9. It is objected that such a Law would expose Immoral
MEN TO FALSE CHARGES, AND TO EXTORTION FOR CONSORTING
with Girls under Eighteen.
In other words a girl who had been a party to an act of
indecency might turn on the man and say, “ I am under eighteen,
and therefore you are liable to a severe penalty.” She might thus
extort hush-money.
To this I reply—
(а) It is not the duty of the State to protect men in wrong-
doing. It is the duty of the State to protect the man who keeps
the law, and to punish the man who breaks it; and thus make
virtue the best course to follow, and vice the worst. If the age at
which a girl maj> be sent to Biloela were raised to 18, and if you
accept a suggestion, to be made later on, that solicitation in the
streets shall be punishable, you would effectually prevent a girl
under 18 from extorting hush-money.
(б) The same danger already exists. Any girl under four-
teen might bring a charge against the men who visit her. There
are girls under fourteen on the streets of this city, though it
would be difficult to bring such proof as would satisfy a court of
law.
(c) The same thing applies to abduction when the girl is
under sixteen. The fourth edition of Wilkinson’s Australian
Magistrate , page 3, says:—“ Anyone dealing with an unmarried
girl, does so at his peril; and if she turn out to be under sixteen,
he is liable under this section.” So we say that any man having
immoral dealings with gixds under eighteen must do so at his own
peril.
( d ) The law in reference to indecent assault. The penalty
for indecent assault is a very serious one, and the charge may be
brought against any honorable man. A false charge of indecent
assault may be much more easily brought and be far more diffi-
cult to disprove than a charge of seduction, or the parentage of


an illegitimate child, or an act of immorality; yet all honorable
men submit to the danger for the well-being of society.
This is the point that will test the sympathy of honorable
men. It seems impossible to protect defenceless girls, unless men
of blameless character will accept the risks of the increased pro-
tection. In view of the tremendous interests involved, we ought
to accept this extra risk. What is the good of the sympathy that
costs nothing ?
(e). Further ; Will those who raise this objection plead for a
continuation of the present wrong ? Are our daughters and
sisters to be unprotected at the most dangerous period of their
life for fear some treacherous and diseased fornicator, whose whole
life has been a curse, and whose history is a record of seduction
and infamy, should have to pay hush-money to some girl under
eighteen, because of his act of sin with her ? Are we to allow
him to plunge defenceless girls into misery here and hereafter,
and are we to refuse to strike a blow in her defence lest this
paragon of excellence should have to smart? You cannot pro-
tect such a man from the consequences of his wrong doings; it is
a most cowardly thing to plead that such a man must be protected
from a young girl whom he has solicited to sin. Then you must
make your choice whether you will protect the bad man or the
virtuous and defenceless girl. Every principle of honour says—
Protect the innocent girl and let bad men take the consequences.
THE PROTECTION OF PUPILS AND DAUGHTERS
UP TO TWENTY-ONE.
The present law provides that any schoolmaster or teacher
who shall have unlawful carnal knowledge of his pupil who is
under sixteen, or any father who shall have carnal knowledge of
his daughter who is under sixteen, shall be liable to penal servi-
tude for fourteen years. Any teacher or parent who shall assault
such pupil or daughter with intent, is liable to penal servitude
for seven years, and the girl’s consent shall be no defence in
either case. It will at once be seen that pupils and daughters
have two years more protection from their teachers and their
fathers than they have from anyone else. It is an admission of
the fact that in some relationships of life fourteen is not high
enough a limit of protection.
The Social Purity Society accepts the present law as far as
it goes, but urges that girls be protected from their tutors and
fathers up to the age of twenty-one.
PUPILS.
The reason for the increased protection for girls in such a
position is obvious. A pupil is thrown so constantly into the


company of her teacher; he is older in years than she is, and
disastrous consequences have sometimes followed.
Here we are confronted with a shocking omission. As soon
as a pupil is sixteen, if she be a consenting party, her seduction
by her teacher is no crime.
To have charge of the education of a young woman is a most
sacred trust. She is then at her most impressible age, and her
entire future depends on her maintaining her moral purity. And
we contend that the law should protect her from her tutor up to
twenty-one, and treat her as being incapable of consenting to an
act of indecency with him till she attains that age.
THE CASE OF DAUGHTERS.
In the eye of our law it is no offence for a father to cohabit
with his own daughter if she be sixteen years of age and a con-
senting party. If our law is not grossly inadequate I should like
to know what is. We ask that daughters should be protected
from their own fathers up to twenty-one. Indeed we ought to
have a law of incest that would make cohabitation of this kind
criminal at any age, and after twenty one I would make the
daughter punishable as well as the father. Excepting clause
forty-three of the Criminal Act , which protects a girl up to six-
teen, we have no law of incest in the colony.
A few weeks ago I saw a girl who is walking the streets of
this city. She has been on the streets six or seven years, and is
now twenty-two. A gentleman who got the story from that
girl’s own lips told me that she was violated by her own father
when she was fourteen or fifteen, and at a time when her mother
was lying at the point of death. That was her downfall.
A few years ago a poor girl was sent by Christian friends to
a place in this city for protection, and to await her confinement.
This poor girl was always dejected, and constantly prayed that
she might not survive her approaching sorrow. She died a little
time after the birth of her child. She was in great distress at
the time of her death. A friend said, “If you tell me your
sorrow you may get relief,” and she opened her mind to her friend.
This is her story. She was in a situation in a town in New
South Wales, fifteen miles from her home. Her mother died,
and her father sent for her to come home to take care of the
children. She went. One night he came home drunk and
violated her. He threatened to kill her if she told of his treat-
ment of her, or if she ran away. Some time after he came home
drunk again, and treated her in the same way. Later on in the same
night she ran away from home to the place where she had been
in service. Her brutal father followed her four miles through
the bush, but she escaped. Can you wonder that poor girl
wished to die 1


By the laws of New South Wales it is no crime for father
and daughter to cohabit as soon as she is sixteen, if she be a con-
senting party. These laws are grossly inadequate, and directly
tend to the increase of the immorality of the colony.
BROTHERS AND SISTERS.
It is no crime for brother and sister to cohabit with each other as
soon as she is sixteen and a consenting party. I say sixteen to be
on the right side. I think I have ground for saying as soon as
she is 14. But surely we have not such a foul thing as that kind
of incest in New South Wales. Have we not 1
A few years ago I saw in this colony an incapable imbecile.
I was told he was the offspring of an incestuous union between
brother and sister. A friend has recently supplied me with the
following information: —lt is to the effect that a brother and
sister are living together, and that there are seven or eight
children of weak intellect, and in most cases more or less misshapen
and deformed. The daughters, at least, have little, if any, moral
perception, and have given birth to illegitimate children. The
parentage of these children, on the father’s side, is shrouded in
mystery, of which the less said the better.
I put this question to an officer of the Police Department:—
“ What could you do if you knew of such a case ?” He said, “We
should be shocked as you would, but we could do nothing.”
So grossly inadequate is our law that it is no crime for
brother and sister to cohabit together, and to bring into the world
a family of more or less helpless imbeciles, unable to fill well any
position in society, and with their moral perceptions blunted from
the earliest period of their life.
GOVERNESSES, SERVANT GIRLS, AND FEMALE
EMPLOYEES GENERALLY.
GOVERNESSES.
A large number of young women who are well educated,
refined, and respectably connected, are compelled to earn their
living by teaching. Some of them never expected to be placed in
such a position, but some disaster has fallen upon them, and, like
sensible young women, they go out into the world to earn their
own bread. All honour to them ! Not a few governesses find
themselves in very desirable circumstances. They are treated
with the utmost kindness and consideration, and enjoy advantages
which their own home never afforded them. But others are
placed in circumstances of peculiar peril. They go to live amongst
total strangers. They are in a position of dependence; they move
on the same level with the family, and mingle with the visitors


who are received into the house. Their exposure to moral danger
is manifest. Some of them are cruelly ruined, and they have no
redress. If consenting parties, they are totally unprotected, and
there is in general no remedy in the Courts for them. There
have been many instances in which the master has been the
guilty party, or the son, or some visitor at the house. It is a
burning shame that our law does not properly protect young
women in such circumstances.
See how this works: Some years ago there was a case before
the Courts of this colony. The young lady had been ruined by
the master of the house in which she was the governess. She
died within one month after her confinement. But for the
special circumstances which I will state, her father would have
had no power to sue her seducer. For reasons, to be given when
discussing the case of servant girls, he could not sue for the loss
of her services. It so happened that the young woman had left her
situation, and her master had induced her to go back to it. It was
the enticing or alluring that made it possible to recover damages
in an action for seduction. But it took so long to get a verdict
that the defendant went to another colony under a false name.
He was followed and discovered, and it was found that he had
seduced a young lady there, and he had to fly from that colony
in consequence. The father got little or nothing of the £lOOO
which the Jury awarded. Fancy the evil this man did, and yet
the law could not punish him, but left him free to ruin a dozen
other young women. A leading Q. C. of this city was engaged on
the above case, and he said to the solicitor who was instructing
him : “ The law is so lax that a man may seduce his own governess
or servant with impunity.” The incident related occurred before
the passing of our Criminal Consolidation Act, which partially
provides a criminal remedy.
Servant Girls,
The Servant Girl question is one of the most serious social
questions of the day. The difficulty largely arises from the gross
inadequacy of the law; for the servant girl is unprotected as soon
as she is fourteen years of age. Indeed, the case is so bad that
the fiction of law by which a father may sue his daughter’s
seducer for loss of her services fails in her case, and, like herself,
her own father is powerless to interfere. This is how it comes
about: The master or employer of a servant girl stands to her in
the relation of guardian; and if the girl be led astray during
such service he is the only person who can sue for loss of her
services. If the employer, or his son, or a friend be the seducer,
it stands to reason that he will not take steps to expose and punish
himself or them. If on the other hand, the girl be led astray by


an outsider, the employer is the only person who can sue for
loss of her services. A case in New South Wales recently
occurred in which a master sued for the loss of his servant’s
services, got substantial damages, and used the money for his own
benefit.
So that the law of New South Wales not only refuses to give
that additional protection to the governess and the servant girl
which their peculiarly perilous circumstances demand, but by
making her master or employer her gtsasi-guardian, and by giving
him alone the power to sue for loss of services in case of her
seduction (though he may discharge her, or she may leave his
services at a week’s notice), actually deprives her of the protection
that her own father would afford. So that governesses, servant
girls, and females in similar situations out of their parent’s homes,
are practically without remedy for compensation.
The peril to which many young respectable servant girls are
exposed is obvious. Many of them are in far more dependent
circumstances than governesses. They are exposed to solicitation
on the part of the head of the family, or the sons, or lodgers. In
some cases their sleeping apartments afford them no protection
from intrusion. As a consequence, young women in these, cir-
cumstances often fall into the snare that is laid for them, and
what is called seduction is often really rape. A still greater
number are led astray by men who have no association with
the homes in which the unfortunate girls reside. Ruined in
character, in a condition that both unfits them for work and
disqualifies them for returning home to their friends, and, deserted
by their seducers, they are met by an affiliation law that is so unjust
in its operation that it is extremely difficult and often impossible
to get support for their child. The result is they take to the
streets to get bread, lam convinced in my own mind that this
is one of the chief causes why there are so few servant girls
available ; for I have been credibly informed that the majority of
single women that seek refuge in the Benevolent Asylum for
accouchement are servant girls. I have also frequently met with
rumours, statements, and undeniable Jacts, that many who now
walk the streets of Sydney were once respectable and efficient
servant girls. It is cant to bewail the want of servant girls when
we refuse to protect them, and it is folly little less than crime to
import girls from the villages of England, Ireland, and Scotland,
and then refuse to enact laws for the protection of their purity
equal to those in force for the protection of their property. It is
absolutely necessary to protect governesses, servant girls, and
female employees generally from their employers until they are
twenty one years of age. The absence of such a law has directly
increased the vice and immorality of the city.


ACCORDING TO OUR LAWS SEDUCTION IS NO
CRIME.
It is a very grave charge against the laws of this country
that in New South Wales seduction per se is no crime. It is only
punishable under certain circumstances. If a girl be fourteen and
a consenting party, and if fraud, force, and certain other circum-
stances be absent, seduction is no offence. It is true, as already
explained, that a young woman may sue for the maintenance of
her child; or her father, by a fiction of law, may sue for the loss
of her services, but in neither case is the action for seduction
alone.
It is an indisputable fact that seduction is one of the most
cruel injuries that can be inflicted on a young woman. In
thousands of instances it leads her into misery and ruin. It is
also one of the greatest evils that can come upon a family. The
heart of many a father and mother has been broken in this way.
We know families that have been completely scattered by it. It
is an evil to society, for the seducer turns the young woman,
who would have been a blessing to the community, into a terrible
curse. She injures the national health, wastes its resources, is a
burden to the State, and increases national crime. The seducer’s
conduct is characterised by cowardice, deception, cruelty and
wrong. All these things are true. The law does not provide
.any adequate remedy against him, and society treats him as if he
were an honourable man.
Let us see what a cruel thing this is. Some years ago a
young man of social standing, in another colony, brought a
singularly beautiful girl to this city, and they took rooms at one
of our largest hotels, and for some time lived together as man and
wife. The young gentleman (?) grew tired of his companion, and
after paying his account at the hotel, left the young woman to
look after herself. She had been a governess, was an accomplished
musician, and well educated. In her desertion she took to the
streets. Five years later she was found in a house in Phillip
Street. She was dying of disease and a lack of the necessaries of
life. No entreaties could induce her to enter any one of the
Homes of Refuge. She died in misery, disease, and poverty, but
her seducer had committed no crime. It is the neglect of the law in
allowing bad men to seduce confiding women and young girls and
half-witted girls, and then desert them, which supplies the streets
with prostitutes. Many girls are driven to it—driven to it by the
•cowardice of bad men who are unrestrained by law.
W hat do we propose then to meet this aspect of the case ?
We propose the passing of an Act similar to the Bill brought in
by Mr. David Buchanan in 1882, the main provision of which is
to give power to any woman who has been seduced to maintain


an action for seduction, and to recover damages in respect of the
wrong done to her individually ; and in any such action the jury
may award her exemplary or substantial damages, as now to a
plaintiff parent for loss of services.
There are some men who are totally destitute of generosity.
The only way to reach them is through the pocket, or by im-
prisonment. Our present law is grossly inadequate in relation
to seduction, and not until we punish the seducer can we hope
for a decrease of the outrage.
It has been announced that I will show the direct connection
between the gross inadequacy of our laws for the protection of
women, and the abounding vice and immorality of Sydney. I
claim to have made good the promise. There is the most insepar-
able connection between the fact that seduction is no crime and
the abounding vice of this city. It is a standing disgrace that the
man who seduces a child of fourteen, or a woman of full age,
commits no crime, and cannot be punished by law.
SEARCH-WARRANTS TO LOOK FOR GIRLS UNDER
EIGHTEEN.
I. What the Section Means.
Its object is to reclaim any young woman under eighteen
years of age who has been decoyed away from her home to live
an immoral life. To do this we ask for power to obtain a search-
warrant, extending over one month, during which time a police
officer may enter a suspected house—with force if necessary ; and,
upon finding the woman there, bring her before two Js. P., and,
if they think fit, bind her over to give evidence at the trial of the
owner, or occupier, or manager of the house. Also, to arrest such
owner, occupier, or manager, and commit him to take his trial.
11. How this Section is Guarded.
Aware of the gravity of the proposed legislation on this
point, the section is guarded from abuse at every point. It is
only a parent, relative, guardian, or other person who shall
convince two Js. P. that he is acting bona-fide in the girl’s
interests. Such information is to be given on oath. Further, the
Js. P. are to be convinced that there is reasonable ground to
suspect that such offence has been committed.
We Australians cannot object to the search-warrant per se.
That instrument is already in existence amongst us. If I have
reason to suspect that my stolen property is concealed in any
house, or that any house contains explosive materials for unlawful
purposes, or that it contains dies or other instruments for
fraudulent purposes, I may get a search-warrant to have the


premises searched. If it be said that the power we ask is liable
to abuse, so is the power to search for stolen goods. Nor is that
power guarded as we propose to guard this. Any credible
witness can give evidence in the one case. In the other it is
only parents, relations, guardians, or other persons who shall
satisfy two Js. P. that they are acting hona-fide in the interests of
the girl, and that there are reasonable grounds for believing that
the offence has been committed.
Surely if we submit to the search-warrant for property, we
ought to do so in order to look for daughters who are under
eighteen.
111. The Necessity for such a Law.
I believe we have at present no law by which we can compel
a girl over sixteen and under eighteen to leave a house of ill-fame.
She may defy her mother, and say, I prefer to live here, and that
mother has no power to take her out of such a house.
The present state of the law baffles the efforts of those who
desire to rescue young girls at the beginning of their evil course.
The most agonising letters are received in this city from parents
in the country, or in other colonies, requesting Christian people
to rescue a young daughter known to have run away to Sydney.
We may know where that girl is, but we have no power—at least
not sufficient power—to go and look for her and to take her away.
When such unhappy girls are looked for and found, they are often
spirited away before a second visit can be paid. Oh ! the agony
of mind that some parents pass through when their daughter
has been enveigled into a life of sin and shame ! Our object
is to help such a case as this. What a number of heart-broken
parents and friends could give evidence of the truth of my
assertions !
IY. How such a Clause would tend to Decrease Vice and
Immorality.
If we could go and take the unfortunate girl out of the midst
of her evil surroundings at the time she was waking up to her
sin and misery, and before she had become hardened in vice, it
is very probable we should restore her to society. If we do not
get her soon we shall never get her. She will go on the streets
of the city. We should get at the occupier of the house, and
punish him, and the fear of punishment would deter men from
harbouring runaway girls.
We are a strange money-loving people. We are wide awake
to look after money and property, but as blind as bats about
higher, nobler, truer wealth. We search a house from top to
bottom for instruments of forgery, and, having found any such
implement, we give the possessor ten years’ penal servitude. We


have also the swiftest process of law by means of which judgment
comes upon the thief and other offenders like a thunderbolt. But
when a man allows a young girl to resort to his house for immoral
purposes, it is almost impossible to get a conviction against him
PROCURERS.
This aspect of the case has attracted much attention because
the Report of the Select Committee of the House of Lords for the
Protection of Young Girls has proved, beyond a doubt, that a
trade in young English girls has been carried on for years between
England and various cities of the Continent. These young women
found themselves in a foreign country, totally ignorant of the
language, prisoners in every sense of the word, and heavily in
debt to their owners. The first item charged against them was
the £l2 that had been paid to the men and women who had
inveigled them into ruin. Fancy that a girl should be compelled
to pay the price of her own body and soul !
It was the publication of facts like the above that led the
House of Lords in three successive sessions to pass a measure for
raising the age of protection.
Procuring Girls for New Caledonia.
I wish I could give definite information on this point, but I
cannot. Some assert that virtuous girls have been enveigled to
New Caledonia, and then placed in French brothels there.
Others admit that girls have been taken from Sydney to Noumea
for immoral purposes; but they say they were immoral girls in
this colony, and were aware of the intentions of those who
engaged them. It is a pity we have not accurate information on
the subject.
But while the question is most interesting when discussed
from the stand-point of New South Wales, yet the record of the
development of vice in an old country like England must have
value for us. So sure as English girls have been induced to go
to brothels in Belgium, or to go into houses of ill-fame in Eng
land, under false pretences, so young New South Welsh girls are
in danger of being decoyed to New Caledonia or some other
foreign places; or induced to enter brothels in New South Wales,
under the impression that they are going to fill respectable situa-
tions. And the Social Purity Society asserts that it is the
bounden duty of the legislature to enact a law, speedy in its
operation, and severe in its penalties, for the punishment of the
man or woman who induces, or endeavours to induce, any
female of any age whatever to enter a brothel, she not knowing it
to be a brothel, whether it be situated within or without the
colony.


Nor do we ask for a law simply to punish the person wha
uses false pretences. We say that the law should punish the
person who induces, or endeavours to induce, a woman to become
a prostitute under any circumstances.
The difficulty of punishing procurers is very great. The
unhappy girls themselves are often procurers. I have crossed
the path of one young girl who induced no less than three to go
upon the streets, and one of the three was her own sister. She
spoke of herself as a “gay girl,” living a much happier life than
they did who had to work for their living. Her only object
seemed to be to obtain companions in her evil life.
Not long ago a servant girl who was out of her situation
was looking for lodgings. She asked a young woman whom she
met in the street if she knew of a respectable lodging-house.
“ Oh, yes.” She took her to one of the worst houses in Sydney.
You see the difficulty of the position. You can only meet diffi-
culties like these by raising the moral tone of the community.
But you can prevent the other modes of procuring by enacting a
law.
The. exact ground taken in relation to procuring girls by
false pretences for an evil life in New Caledonia or other places is
simply this —l do not know. It may be so or not. The rumour
is that it is so. I shall not rest till I sift the thing to the bottom.
THE DETECTION & PUNISHMENT OF THE KEEPERS
AND OWNERS OF DISORDERLY HOUSES.
There are a great many houses of ill-fame in Sydney, and as
the law is at present, it is almost impossible to detect them. This
is what the Sydney Daily Telegraph of June 3rd says about
them ;—“ Here, in our own city, there are social sores hardly
less horrible than those which brought down the Divine vengeance
upon Sodom and Gomorrah. As far as the suppression of vice is
concerned, our laws are a simple mockery. It is a well-known
fact that, in spite of the supposed stringency of our licensing law,
there are hotels conducted in Sydney which are detestable com-
pounds of drinking-shops and brothels. The people know them,,
the police know them, and both are powerless. Many an
unsophisticated young man has entered one of these places to
meet what was practically the beginning of his doom. It is a
fact that certain hotel-keepers in this city sub-let their premises—
part of them—to women of ill-fame, at exorbitant rates, with the
privilege of supplying them with their liquors at a frightfully
extortionate cost. There is more than one hotel in the principal
streets of Sydney which unites the characteristics of an ( assignation
house and a drinking shop.”


There are houses and houses given up to immorality. The
police know it, the public know it, and yet we cannot close these
houses. Why h It seems very easy to close the licensed houses,
for the police have power to enter at any hour, by force. I said
to an officer of the police, “ why do you not close such houses,
seeing you have such powers under the Licensing Act V’ He said,
“We cannot. In the first place, we must see these persons under such
circumstances that can only be explained on the supposition that
their purpose is an immoral one. When we knock at the door
and demand admittance, there is an alarm all over the house that
the police are at the door, and the key is lost. By the time we
enter we find a remarkably well-conducted lot of people in the
house. It has thus become impossible to get the only evidence
that will help us.”
In London the usage is for information to be given to the
police that a certain house is believed to be disorderly, A
constable is appointed to watch that house three nights in
succession, and to note down the number of women of known bad
repute who go in and out in company with men. That evidence
is sufficient for the Courts in London : but here the Courts require
evidence that it is almost impossible to obtain, and that can only
be obtained in a way most demoralising to those who have to
get it.
The Owners op Houses used for Immoral Purposes.
The Social Purity Committee not only asks for a clause to
get at the owner, who knowingly allows his house to be visited
by young girls for immoral purposes, but also the man who allows
his house to be used habitually for immoral purposes by any per-
son whatever.
In preparation for this lecture I came across properties let
to women of ill-fame, by landlords of whom I had hoped better
things. No honourable man will knowingly let his house to
people who turn it into a brothel ; and when men who profess to
be Christians regularly draw rents which they know to be the
wages of prostitution, they prove their own hypocrisy and
seriously injure the cause of religion. Public opinion should
compel them to change their tenants, or give up their pretensions
to Christianity.
As soon as the owners of houses that are used for immoral
purposes are informed by the police of the character of their
tenants, they should be required to take steps for the ejectment
of such tenants. Failing that, they should be proceeded against.
Solicitation by Men.
It is not known generally to what an extent young and
virtuous girls and women in positions of dependence are exposed


to fierce and unremitting solicitation on the part of men. It will
be said that as soon as immoral proposals are made to a young
woman she should avoid the company of the man who has made
the evil advances ; and so she should if she can. But many a
poor girl is in such a position of dependence that she cannot
escape. She is placed in circumstances that make it a serious
thing for her to throw up her situation.
It is an iniquitous thing that a man may offer, and continue
to offer, persistent solicitation to a defenceless girl, without any
breach of the law. He may continue to use the arts of the seducer
month after month ; and many a poor girl has yielded to the
persistency and pertinacity of these solicitations,
A friend of mine was standing waiting for a ’bus in Sydney
a year or two ago. A very nice-looking young woman passed.
A respectably dressed man said to another, “ I watched that
young woman home every night for months, but she would never
look at me.” He went on to intimate that his purpose was her
seduction. My friend turned on him and said, “ I wish I were
her brother, I’d wring your neck for you.” I wish there could
be a little more neck-wringing and horse whipping on the part of
big brothers towards the would-be seducers of their sisters. The
act of watching a girl home for three months was mild treatment
compared with what some girls have to submit to. But solicita-
tion is not an offence known to the law.
That fact proves what we say—that the law is grossly
inadequate, and directly tends to increase the vice and im-
morality of the city.
Solicitation by Women,
It is no offence for a woman to solicit prostitution in the
streets of our city. A constable cannot arrest her for that. She
must loiter, or act in a disorderly or indecent manner, before she
can be arrested.
Let us suppose that some gentleman here to-night has a son
sixteen or eighteen years of age. You have bright hopes for his
future. He is met in the street by one who is fashionably
dressed, and who has the flattering tongue of the strange woman.
That night your son begins a course of life which will blight his
life, and destroy your hopes for his future career. Yet that woman
has done no harm in the eye of the law, and you cannot punish her
for her action though it has destroyed the peace of your home.
There are thousands of men who have been ruined
who would never have thought of visiting an immoral
house if they had not been solicited to it on the street.
In this respect our law is grossly inadequate, and a blind man
can see that its inadequacy directly tends to the abounding vice
and immorality of the city.


Street-walking has been put down in Glasgow, and ought to
be put down here.
SUPERVISION OF FACTORIES.
There is abundant evidence that factory life in Sydney,
where men and women work together without proper supervision,
greatly tends to demoralization. So far as I can ascertain, some
of the factories in this city greatly differ from others in reference
to morality. In some of them there is proper supervision, which
is totally lacking in others. The case is so serious that a searching
inquiry is immediately demanded. Some of these girls hand
themselves over from one paramour to another, if not with
indifference, at least with the utmost ease. I have not been into
one of these factories, but I have received information from such
unquestionable sources that I am perfectly satisfied of its
accuracy.
What have we to propose ! The same that was proposed by
“ Givis ” in his letter to the Herald a few months ago, viz,,
separation of the sexes in factories, the appointment of a suitable
matron or forewoman, who should have the oversight of the girls,
and be responsible for their good conduct, and the appointment
of a competent Government Inspector of Factories and other
establishments where men and women are employed. We all
desire to see native industries flourish. We hope to see our
factories increase in number and extent, and supply work to tens
of thousands. Proper supervision of these factories will be
beneficial to employer and employed, and will do good to the
community at large.
DANCING SALOONS.
At present the dancing saloons of Sydney are doing incalcul-
able harm, and they are largely out of the reach of the arm of
the law. Anybody can open a dancing saloon in any part of the
colony where he can hire a room. The greatest larrikin in the
city, or the most dissolute prostitute, if she can pay the rent of
the room, and hire a concertina player, may enter into the dancing
saloon business.
In the nature of things there are dancing saloons and dancing
saloons. Some are worse than others. Some of the proprietors
require references before admitting new members. Others exclude
larrikins who wear a “ muffler,” and will only admit a gentleman
who wears a necktie ; as if the muffler made the larrikin, or the
putting on of a necktie would turn a seducer into a gentleman.
Others again will admit anybody and everybody.
In company with others I visited one low-class dancing
saloon in Sydney, Several young women were pointed out to me


as being notorious prostitutes. There were fifty young men and
as many young women present. My companion assured me that
there was not a girl present but was on the high road to ruin.
Some of these saloons are near hotels, and frequent adjourn-
ments are made to the bar. When drink is in, wit is out, and
sometimes fights take place, in which blows are struck, and
the most shocking language is indulged in. The neighbours get
up in the morning to find young ladies asleep on the verandah.
Many of the girls who appeal for admission to Homes of Refuge
attribute their fall to the dancing saloon.
Mr. Fosberry, Inspector General of Police, reports that these
dancing saloons are a prolific source of immorality in the city, and
that scenes of immorality and obscenity take place there nightly.
He justly complains that we take no notice of his solemn
warnings.
It is true three householders can get up a petition to have
the place closed ; but all this takes time. Annoyance must be
suffered before it can be reported, and the very night after the
saloon has been closed, the proprietors may open another a little
distance off. Thus the vicious class are playing a game of hide-
and-seek with the constables and public, who come off second-
best.
We say the law is grossly inadequate in relation to dancing
saloons, and that these saloons are turning decent girls into
prostitutes by the score. Is it not high time that something was
done ?
WE NEED A MORE JUST AND RIGHTEOUS
AFFILIATION LAW.
The present law is most unjust to the mother. She is not
allowed to prove the paternity of the child until she has recovered
from her confinement. In many instances by that time the
father of the child has absconded. If it can be proved that any
other man has had criminal commerce with her about the time of
her conception, her case breaks down. There have been instances
in which young men who had never seen the girl previously have
taken a false oath that they have had immoral intimacy with her.
By so doing they get their friend off. Give us a law which
would make every man who had immoral commerce with the
mother about the time of her conception liable for a portion of
the maintenance, and we should not have another false oath of
this kind till doomsday. For these and other reasons it is
extremely difficult for the mother to succeed in getting mainte-
nance for her child.
Mr. Saunders, Recorder of Bath, has published a book “ The
Law and Practice of Affiliation in England.” From this book it


appears that the Affiliation Law of England is altogether before
Australian legislation.
On Bth May, 1845, a new Affiliation Act was passed. This
Act introduced a new and just principle, calculated to relieve the
public of much expense, and also to operate effectively for the
prevention of seduction. By section four of the above Act a
single woman, being pregnant, may summon the alleged father
before the magistrate, and may take the oath of affiliation. The
magistrates being satisfied of the truth of the affiliation, then
adjourn the case till after the birth of the child, when they may
make the maintenance order.
The new Act re-enacts and strengthens the above power to
affiliate before the child’s birth.
The new Act of 1872 (for there have been three Acts dealing
with this question during the reign of our Queen) also introduces
three new principles of extreme importance : —l. If proved to be
the father, the defendant shall pay the woman’s legal expenses.
2. The education of the child shall be taken into consideration in
the maintenance order. 3. The father shall pay the medical and
other expenses of the child’s birth. By the same Act, section 5,
the father’s liability for maintenance is raised from thirteen till
the child is sixteen years of age.
Any one can see how an unjust affiliation law increases the
vice of our city. Many a poor girl would turn with disgust from
prostitution, if she had ss. per week to keep her child. The law
will not compel the father of her child to pay her this sum. She
goes on the streets in order to get a living. This is directly and
immediately a case for the Legislature to take up. The Govern-
ment has to support a large and expensive establishment like the
Benevolent Asylum, with its Lying-in-Hospital and other
surroundings. Where are the men who ought to pay these
expenses, and support these women and children ? They are
“ doing the block ” in George Street, and occupying more or less
lucrative positions in the mercantile houses and workshops of
Sydney. Every year the Legislative Assembly has to vote a
considerable sura of money to meet these expenses, and decent
people have to pay it. When will our Legislature learn wisdom,
and give us a law which will be just in its operation to the
mother, the child, and the State, by compelling the father to
support his own offspring? It is as demoralising as it is unjust
for the country to be taxed for the support of illegitimate children,
when a just and righteous affiliation law would compel the immo-
ral fathers to support their own children. Such a law would
deter many men from an immoral life, while it would save many
an unhappy mother from ruin.


THE PROCESS OF LAW SHOULD BE AS SWIFT AND
CERTAIN IN THE DETECTION OF VICE AS IT
IS IN THE DETECTION OF THEFT AND OTHER
CRIMES.
At present it is not so. There are all sorts of facilities
given to vice, and encumbrances put in the way of its detection
and exposure. The police have no power to touch the seducer ;
they cannot detain the father of the unborn child that will become
a burden to the State, and whose mother will be thrown upon the
streets. They have altogether insufficient power to close a dancing
saloon, though it be a scene of immorality and obscenity. With
a Licensing Act which gives them power to enter hotels at any
hour, and if necessary by force, they are hampered by the require-
ments of the law which demand such evidence as it is almost
impossible to obtain, and that can only be obtained by accident
or stealth, and is most demoralising when it is obtained. They
pass the house where father and daughter, or brother and sister,
are living in concubinage, and are bringing into the world helpless
imbeciles, and they are absolutely powerless to interfere. They
are continually exceeding their powers in the hope that the end
may justify the means, though in many such cases they are liable
to serious consequences for their action. In fact, the police are
the bulldog that we have chained up in our yard to look after
our property. His chain gives him space to protect our goods
and chattels, but when he makes a leap to seize the scoundrel who
destroys our children, just as he is closing upon the man, he finds
his chain is too short, and the evil-doer escapes. We plead for the
addition of a few more links to his chain.
REASONS WHY THE STATE SHOULD REPRESS VICE
AND PROTECT THE YOUNG OF BOTH SEXES.
It is readily admitted that the State has often been asked to
do by Act of Parliament that which can only be done by the
voluntary action of the people ; but at the same time it is urged
that while voluntary effort is requisite in promoting Social Purity,
Legislation is absolutely necessary for the repression of vice.
Boys and girls must be protected from their own ignorance and
folly in this as in other matters ; and bad men and women who
are dead to every principle of honour must be restrained by the
strong arm of the law. Than this, there is no more legitimate
sphere for the operations of law.
Nor is there anything narrow or sectarian in this appeal,
which is based upon the broad lives of our common humanity.
Sometimes in making a law the statesman has to weigh rival
interests, being determined to bring about the greatest good to


the greatest number. But in this case every honourable man and
woman, and every defenceless child will be directly benefited.
It is only the vicious, the selfish, and the heartlessly cruel that
will suffer, and they ought to suffer. It will be for the best,
highest, noblest, and farthest-reaching interests of the State, if the
Legislature give us the laws we ask.
The following arguments for the suppression of vice and the
protection of the young are most respectfully brought under the
notice of the legislators and electors of the colony.
I. There is an Inseparable Connection Between Vice and
Crime.
As a rule, criminals are immoral men. Not only so, but their
crimes of theft, violence, and mui’der are often directly associated
with, and spring out of, their associations with immoral women.
You may take the notorious Jack Sheppard as a type of his class.
His first burglary was committed at the instigation of an immoral
woman, and another immoral woman was his constant accomplice in
crime to the bitter end. It is more or less the case all the world
over. It is certainly the case in Sydney. Many young men in
New South Wales have been totally ruined by their embezzle-
ments and other crimes committed on purpose to find funds to
support immoral women. Their character is lost, their future
is blighted, their father’s name dishonoured, and all this is the
result of their associations with vice. I say, without fear of
contradiction, that nearly all the hardened criminals of Sydney
are immoral.
Vice is the prolific parent of almost every kind of crime.
Robbery and embezzlement are resorted to by men to pay the
expenses of debauchery. Fallen women commit acts of theft on
those that visit them. The deepest feelings of the heart are
aroused, and violence, murder, and suicide are the result. Most
of the men who have recently been found guilty of the Colling-
wood Bank robbery were arrested in the houses of dissolute
women, and some of these women are in gaol for complicity in
the crime.
A police officer in Brussels, where vice is legalised, was asked
officially whether he would advise that a few large or many small
houses of ill-fame should be established. He replied, “ A few
large ones, for then it would be easier to find criminals who were
wanted by the police.” The inference is obvious. Eighteen
months ago, when the recidiviste question was to the front, it was
publicly announced that some of the men from New Caledonia
were in Australia living on the wages of prostitution. There
are many of these men in Paris called Soutenirs. They are a
dangerous and a criminal class. They are to be found in London,


and wait about in certain places in order that the unfortunate
women may bring to them their ill-gotten gains.
A few weeks ago I came down to Sydney to learn what was
going on here, having previously resolved to call attention to the
danger of a criminal class springing up, to live on the proceeds of
prostitution, and increase the crime of the city. Imagine my
surprise to find the whole thing in full blast here. We have
already a large class of criminals who are kept on the wages of
prostitution. These men do not support the women. The
women support them.
Let us see how this works. A criminal comes out of
Darlinghurst. He gets what he calls a “rise,” dresses pretty
well, and puts flash rings on his fingers, and has a roll of notes
in his pocket. He visits a house of bad repute and represents
himself to be a rich squatter. Next day he refuses to leave. He
becomes part of the establishment. He is the man who crawls from
under the bed and rifles the visitor’s pockets. He assists in the acts
of robbery, accompanied by violence, that are committed in dark
streets and darker chambers, amid immoral surroundings. He
offers to his paramour a sort of rude protection, but he comes in
for the lion’s share of the gains.
Let me give you one case more. I saw a young woman
whose “ cove ” or “ pal ” was under committal for a serious crime
for which he was likely to get five years. My well-informed
companion said to me, “ That young woman will prostitute her-
self to every man she meets, in order to get money to fee a
barrister at her “ cove’s ” trial.” And thus we have a large criminal
class of the very worst character, who are living on the wages of
this foul thing. There is the closest and most inseparable
connection between vice and crime ; and if there were no more
sacred interests to preserve than those associated with property,
that would be enough to demand the immediate attention of our
law-makers. It is the most solemn duty of the State to repress
an evil, the direct and certain result of which is to turn honest
men into rogues; to create and support an ever increasing
criminal class, and to vastly augment the crime of the Colony.
11. The Personal Purity of our Sons and Daughters is of
more Value than the Odds and Ends of our Property.
We wish to give all credit to our law-makers for the
provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1883, for the
protection of women, as far as those provisions go. There are
some very wise and just laws in that Act. But we complain that
there are not so many safeguards as we require. If the measure
had only been as jealous of the protection of youths and maidens
as it is of the odds and ends of our property, the Social Purity
Society would be perfectly satisfied.


I find in that Act that the utmost care is taken to guard our
property. Crimes are most carefully defined, and the punish-
ment specified in the most explicit terms.
Thus : If a man steal a tree, or a plant, or the rail of a fence ;
or if a homeless wanderer take a piece of firewood out of a paddock
to make a camp fire, and if any one of these things be worth
more than a shilling, he is liable to a fine of £5 ; and for a second
offence, £lO or more. The man who steals an apple or a peach grow-
ing in an orchard or garden is liable to a fine of £2O or six months’
imprisonment. For branding another man’s beast he may get
six months in gaol. For stealing a dog he may be fined £2O;
and for having in his possession the skin of a dog, knowing it to
have been stolen, he may be fined £2O. For stealing £5 worth
of property from a house he may get seven years, and if he after-
wards use threats and menaces in connection with the theft, he
may get fourteen years.
If a man deface the Queen’s image on a copper coin he may
be imprisoned for two years, but the man who by seduction defaces
the image of God in a young woman may escape punishment.
Do we say the law is too severe in its protection of property 1
No, not at all. But if the law is so jealous of our property, what
sort of care does it take of our children ? That is the question.
What punishment does it mete out to the man who leads astray
a girl of 14 years'? We say the law is very inadequate in this
respect.
We contend that the law ought to protect youths and
maidens. Our sons and daughters are of more value to us than
are the odds and ends of our property. Let every farthing we
have be stolen, and we shall be rich compared with one whose
daughter had been ruined by a designing man, or whose son had
been led into vice by a dissolute woman. The demoralization of
our children is the greatest sorrow and evil that can come upon
us. As it is the greatest sorrow that can come upon our families,
so it is the greatest disaster that can fall upon the State.
Terrible as it would be to open the gates of Darlinghurst and
to turn all house breakers, horse stealers, and thieves, loose
upon society, they could not do the harm that is being done by
men in this city, who walk the block in George-street, and carry
their heads very high ; and others in far less conspicuous places,
who lay their traps for the ensnarement of innocent girls.
Yes, we are a great and prosperous colony. Our wealth
excites the admiration of the British Empire, the envy of Europe,
and the cupidity of Russia ; but there are more things in heaven
and earth than wool, and tallow, and hides, than roads and
bridges, railways and trams, stocks and stations. There is the
moral purity of our men and women It is the people who are
the true wealth of the country. It is the utmost folly to take


such care of property and to allow precious humanity of both
sexes to be trodden upon in the gutter.
It is the bounden duty of the State to take as much care of
the moral purity of our sons and daughters as it does of the odds
and ends of our property • at present the law does not do this.
111. Widespread Immorality will eat out the vitality of
a People, and lead to National ruin.
It is a fact that the fall of the great Roman Empire was
preceded and largely caused by the almost universal immorality
of the people. It has been true of other great empires. History
repeats itself. If impurity be allowed to extend in Great Britain,
her days will be numbered. So with New South Wales. It is
morning with our colony, and a bright and happy morning it is.
May this morning be the forerunner of a bright and gladsome
day, whose sun shall never set ! But if immorality get the upper
hand, Longfellow’s picture will be fulfilled :
“ As if in a morning of June, with all its music and sunshine
Suddenly paused in the sky, and, fading, slowly descended
Into the east again, from whence it late had risen.”
It is easy to see how vice destroys a people. It diminishes
the population, shatters the public health, wastes the national
resources, tramples on the weak, breaks up the sacredness of
homes, robs men of honour and women of virtue and purity, and,
while benumbing all the finer sensibilities of our natur6, brings in
a reign of cowardice, deception, fraud, rapine, selfishness, drunken-
ness, idleness, and pusillanimity, and thus saps the very foundation
of the State.
Because vice will ruin the nation if allowed to run riot, the
Legislature ought to repress it.
IY, Repressive Legislation is necessary, because philan-
thropic EFFORT, UNLESS ASSISTED BY THE STATE, CANNOT
DO THE WORK.
We need philanthropic effort, and cannot do without it. We
most heartily commend the White Cross Union and all such
efforts. Rescue work is most Christ-like in its character. But
there are many women who will not help to lift a fallen sister, and
many men who are unmoved by any appeal to their generosity.
Deaf to the voice of conscience and hardened by their own evil life
they will go on in the work of destruction as long as they are able.
Despite the high position, or the low position, or the no position
of these men, we shall have to put the strong arm of the law
between them and their victim. There are men amongst us so
bad that not until some of them, as warnings to the rest, are


severely punished will there be any hope for the diminution of the
sighs and groans of outraged womanhood. Rescue work will not
meet the whole case. The rescuers are overmatched. They pick
up the fallen at the foot of the precipice in ones and twos, while
the law of the land, in shameful and wicked neglect, allows bad
men to push over at the top of the precipice confiding women and
helpless children by the hundred.
If the State ought to help anyone, it ought to help those
noble workers who are trying to rescue the fallen, and to prevent
the innocent from going astray.
Y. The Homes of the Poor are as Sacred as the Homes of
the Rich.
The law of this Colony does not say so. Clause 45 gives
special protection to the woman (of any age) who has property
that it does not extend to the poor.
My point is that the interests of both should be equally
sacred in the eyes of the law. Not a word is said to create class
distinctions, We do not propose a process of levelling down, but
of levelling up. The wealthy young lady has not too much
protection; but the poor girl has too little.
Par from levelling down it will be seen that nearly every
alteration in the law suggested will benefit the rich daughter as
much as it will the poor, and that is just as it should be. And
the rich have as much right to demand this increased protection as
the poor have. Have the homes of the rich never been desolated
by the seducer 1 Is it not a fact that daughters have come from
wealthy homes to swell the tide of prostitution, and sink to the
lowest depths of fallen womanhood ? May God protect the
daughters of the rich; but at this moment lam speaking in the
interests of girls in humbler positions.
A girl who is poor, or has to get her own living, needs more
protection than those who are removed from the circumstances of
necessity ; though it is true that industry is one of the greatest
protections a girl can have. But still the seducer is always a
sneak and a coward He dare not ruin the daughter of a man of
influence for fear of certain consequences. He looks for the girl
who has no father to protect her, and no big brother to horsewhip
him. Such a girl has to work for her living; she is sometimes
placed in a position of dependence upon the man who is plotting her
ruin; she is compelled to be under his roof and in his company. She
has to be out late at night, and has few friends on earth to
advise her. That is the girl that the law ought to protect. All
honor to the young women who in any honest way are earning
their own living. Many of them have sensibilities as keen,
affections as deep and true, aspirations as high, and hopes as


bright as the rieh, and infinitely beyond Tennyson’s “ Lady Clara
Yere de Yere.”
It is the solemn duty of the law to protect these honest,
industrious girls. At present it is our disgrace as a community
that the law does not protect them. Such a girl is often the light
of her father’s home, and her mother’s hope is bound up in her.
If that girl be ruined there is no hope left for those who love her
so much. Many a poor man’s home is a sacred spot. It is to the
highest and best interests of the community that such homes be
protected from the seducer and destroyer. The rich are safe and
the country is prosperous when love, plenty, and safety reside in
the homes of the poor. It is the duty of the State to afford the
most ample protection to such homes.
‘ And if a Caitiff, false and vile,
Dares but to cross that garden stile—
Dares but to fire that lowly thatch—
Dares but to force that peasant’s latch—
The thunder peal the dead will wake,
Will bid his craven spirit quake;
And a voice from people, peer, and throne
Will ring in his ears, Atone ! Atone ! ! ”
YI. Woman is the Barometer of Society, and whatever
Elevates Her Elevates the Nation.
It is plain to all that the character of the mother must be
stamped upon the unborn child. The training of the child is
principally in the hands of the mother. The influence of woman
on man is tremendous. The man who associates with immoral
women becomes like them, while the man who moves in the
society of educated, refined, pure and virtuous women is ennobled
by their society. A good sister benefits every brother in the
family. How much more does a good wife elevate and ennoble a
man ? If we enact wise laws for the protection of women, and
if those laws be wisely administered, we must rise in the scale of
nations.
But the law is not just to woman. A husband can obtain a
divorce from his wife upon proof of her adultery. But in his
case adultery must be accompanied by desertion or cruelty. That
is an injustice. Adultery is as immoral in a man as it is in a
woman. The law of affiliation, as already shown, is unjust
to woman, and the evil recoils on the State. The age up to which
girls are protected is unjust to woman, and ought to be raised.
The fact that seduction at any age is no crime is a great injustice.
How can we expect an ennobled community when we treat women
in this unjust manner ?


YII. Righteousness Exalteth a Nation.
A good old book—the strongest and best book in the world—
says, “ Righteousness exalteth a nation.”
We are old-fashioned enough to believe in the divinity of
the origin, and in the universality of the obligation of the Ten
Commandments. The Seventh says, “ Thou shalt not commit
adultery.” Woe to the man or woman, or the community that
breaks the Seventh Commandment. Sooner or later the judgment
of Almighty God will fall upon the offender just as certainly as the
blessing of God will rest upon every man, of every class and of
every creed, who lives a life of purity.
Very little is said in this lecture from a religious standpoint,
for it deals with the legal aspect of the case. But all true law
rests primarily on the basis of the Ten Commandments, and it
would be a much better world if everybody kept them in their
entirety. No country can be happy and prosperous that ignores
any one of them, while the Seventh is specially valuable in
relation to domestic life.
CONCLUDING APPEALS.
It now remains for me to make my closing appeal.
All parents ought to support the proposals of the Social
Purity Society, for they will be a protection to the children.
Unmarried men should support them; for however wild a
young man may be now, when he comes to marry he will look
for purity in his bride, and protection for his offspring.
Every woman should join in this holy warfare, for she and
her sisters will reap the largest share in the benefit. It is almost
impossible to conceive of a virtuous woman remaining neutral
in this conflict.
Ministers of the Gospel and all Christian workers ought to
take a deep interest in the protection of the young. They have
spent years in training the young, who have been ruined in a
single day for want of that protection for which we now ask. A
most solemn responsibility rests upon the Pulpit. Young people
are brought to church for years, and rarely or never hear a word
of warning on the greatest danger of their whole life. Certainly
this is wrong. There is no need to make undesirable utterances
to mixed audiences. Surely the male portion of a congregation
can be addressed in an honourable and chaste manner on this
question. And it would be a libel to say there are no good
women amongst us who could gather their younger sisters together
for counsel and advice. It is a wicked thing to send sons and
daughters into the world unwarned, and consequently unarmed.
A few words, with God’s blessing, would save them.


'I it MO
fit me?
Ki CC4 u
T
It is certainly the duty of the legislator to enact laws for the
protection of the people. Such frightful consequences to the
individual and to the community arise from the present state of
the law, that the Government of the colony ought to take,
immediate action.
The electors of the colony have an important duty to perform.
No immoral man is qualified to take a seat in our Parliament.
No matter what may be his social standing, or his intellectual
abilities, the man who associates with immoral women has his
keener sensibilities blunted, and his best judgment must be
darkened and biassed in a way that will hinder him from fulfilling
the high function of making laws for his country. It is the duty
of the electors to send men of honourable character into Parlia-
ment.
There is true chivalry in Australia. We saw that in the
departure of our troops for the Soudan, That was knight-
errantry in a noble cause. There was not an enemy to Great
Britain but felt the significance of our effort. You are r now
called upon to gird on your armour for a mightier but not
less honourable struggle. It is to contend for the Protection
of Helpless Women and Children. If any one of us knew
that a woman or child was in peril, and we could save her, we
should set aside food, and even sleep, and fly speedily to the
rescue. There are hundreds of women all around us in misery
and woe; and there are thousands of helpless children in danger
of destruction. Oh ! for a noble chivalry that is prepared to
make any effort and any sacrifice that may be necessary to rescue
them from woe, or that may save them from ruin.




