

CHRISTMAS STORIES.
THE
TRIAL
FOUR
BY
“ K U Z."
M'CABBON, BIRD AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.




“THE TRIAL FOUR.”
SHORT STORIES.
Se passer le temps.
BY
“K U Z.”


PREFACE.
With unblushing impudence, becoming only in one hardened
by contact with the world's many “bitter sweetsI throw
this little volume into the leviathan arms of a generous public,
thoroughly persuaded that if merit is due it will be bestowed;
and should the verdict prove adverse, why, “Grin and bear ”
must be the consoling motto of the
A UTHOR.
Hawthorn, December , 1873.


ONLY DOTTE.
Chapter I.
Be it hereby understood and thoroughly known, that I am one of
those poor devils designated as a city clerk. I have been in
Cranshaw’s Bank for the last six years, and my annual income
does not exceed the delightfully unsatisfactory and anything but
extravagant amount of one hundred and fifty pounds. Three
months ago I was unanimously voted by all, the joiliest fellow
in the Bank; invariably at my post in business, and never failing
to combine pleasure with duty. But it was after office hours
that my long pent-up feelings used to explode their six hours’
condensing, and I then became as free and easy as —as —well, as
on organ grinder’s monkey. “Pray pardon the simile; though
useful, it is anything but appropriate or flattering.” In fact, my
excitable feelings caused me to receive the characteristic mis-
nomer of the “Mad Marquis.” N.B. —My fellow clerks
generously bestowed this appellation on me, considering my
striking likeness to the Marquis of Beversbrooke —for whom I
was ofttimes taken —was sufficient warranty for the liberty. But
my real name, I’ve always been led to believe, is Richard


Wilson. The foregoing extra superfluous information is expressly
intended for those of my readers who may unfortunately be
afflicted with a largely developed bump of inquisitiveness. Please
excuse this interruption, but I will not again transgress. .. .
Now, if there is one particular failing or weakness that holds greater
sway over the more intellectual portions of my body than another,
it is that all-absorbing fiend, the green-eyed monster, jealousy.
From the soles of my feet to the roots of my hair (and farther if
possible), I am one compound mixture of jealousy, and yet my
infirmity has caused me to go so far astray as to be married.
Yes, sad though be my tale. No, stop; I don’t mean that, I
should say “the world” has, after due consideration, charitably
burdened me with a “wife;” I having misguidedly joined the
Holy—(what a farce to call them “Holy”!) —Bonds of Matri-
mony, and become the proud possessor of my dear little “Dotte.”
The confession of how I managed to saddle myself with the
extravagance of a partner for life, I think had better be reserv ed
for another chapter, so will at once proceed, and turn over.
Chapter 11.
Undoubtedlv one of the best fellows in our Bank was Fred
Wallace, my inseparable companion.
We had been for many years educated at the same school, and
were now, as we had always been, firm friends, in the truest
sense of the word. It being close on the time allotted for Fred to
take the usual summer holiday, he, in course of conversation,
suggested that I should ask leave to take mine at the same time
as he took his, and that we should both run down and stay with
an aunt of his, living at Eulac. He felt sure she would be delighted
to see any friend of his, and would be certain-to greet us with a


most hearty welcome. After a deal of persuasion Fred prevailed,
and I went. Mrs. Barden, Fred’s father’s only sister, was a lady
decidedly in character with bye-gone days, but, nevertheless, a
sociable, dear old body, whose unceasing energies were entirely
devoted to taking the largest possible amount of trouble in order
to insure comfort and happiness. Fred’s aunt had staying with
her a sort of companion in her loneliness (for she had been a widow
nearly twenty years), a daughter of an old friend and schoolmate,
a pretty little interesting young lady, aged about seventeen, and
with a complexion as dark as a gipsy’s. Her name I found on
being introduced was Sallie Parker, or, as she was more generally
called, on account of her diminutiveness, “ Dotte.” Thanks to a
varied number of croquet parties, tea-fights, strolls by moonlight,
&c., and doubtless in no small degree owing to my being the sus-
ceptible age of twenty-two, I committed myself most gravely by
falling a willing prey to the wily arts, or darts, of that arch-fiend
Cupid, and fell over head and ears in love with “ Dotte.” It was
very foolish of me, I know, considering the fickle nature of the
young ladies of the present day, and I can truly assure you I did not
intend to act so unwisely, but like many a wiser fellow I could
not help myself, and the result was that at the expiration of my
seventeen days I left Eulac madly in love. On returning to town,
I at once made a confidant of Fred, and told him of the passion
that possessed my whole nature, preventing my having any rest by
day or night. For my information he very generously dubbed me
a fool, and I received the extremely gratifying intelligence that
Miss Sallie was the greatest flirt for miles round Eulac, and, added
he, “ I believe she is shortly coming to town, you will then be able
to prove my words, at the same time see what ‘sport for idle
pleasure’ she will make of you.” Now, cutting as those words
were to my feelings, yet, with the true characteristics of a fool, I
never ceased to long for the time when I should once more be
held firmly by “ silken cords,” and become thoroughly intoxicated


with the elixir of love. In due course to town Dotte came, and if
my love became food for her amusement, certainly the game turned
from “gay to grave,” for on my proposing for her hand, &c., she
very considerately accepted me, and I went so far as to allow that
even flirts can be sincere sometimes.
Chapter 111.
As all things must have an end, so had our honeymoon, and back
to town we came, I to continue the routine of office duties, and
my little Dotte to superintend the management of the household
affairs. Every morning at nine my hat was neatly brushed, and
I never failed to receive a loving kiss at parting, with a strict
command to return home as soon as possible. Thus-our connubial
happiness was complete, but as the course of true love never did
run smoothly, a shadow cast itself across our pathway, for one
morning when I had traversed nearly half the distance to the
Bank I suddenly remembered having left my keys behind, so
hurried back, thinking as I went how pleased and yet surprised
my dear little wife would be to see me.
Before marriage I always carried the batchelor’s companion,
“the latch key,” but now such an appendage I did not consider
necessary; so, on arriving at the front door, gave a mysterious
knock, which not being replied to I repeated, and this time more
loudly than before, for I did not much appreciate standing in the
excessive cold of the depth of winter. Eventually the door
opened, and in an instant my wife’s face told me something was
wrong. I asked the question, but could not receive a satisfactory
answer, so passed on into the dining room and there noticed the
window was open, a most unusual thing considering the extreme
state of the atmosphere, and more especially as it was the room
recently occupied by my wife, previous to her opening the door


to admit me. Without more ado I closed the window and seated
myself before the fire to instil into me a little warmth; when, for
the first time, fancied I distinguished the smell of tobacco, in fact
felt sure I did, so asked if anyone had called ? No ! no one, was
my wife’s unhesitating reply. What could be the meaning of it ?
I was fairly bewildered, and in a minute the green-eyed monster
had possession of me. All the way up to town jealous thoughts
haunted me, but I at length came to the conclusion that it must
have been my mistake, so on returning was more than usually
attentive and kind, likewise Dotte seemed additionally loving;
then all shadow of jealousy fled from my mind, but only till the
next morning though, for then she seemed to pay double atten-
tion and care to all my little wants. How frail is human nature!
her very kindness aroused my suspicions, so I determined on
fathoming the supposed mystery, and endeavour, if possible, to
see if anything was absolutely going wrong.
Off I started as usual, and after walking about for a quarter of
an hour, returned; not to the front door, as on the previous
morning, but took the precaution of stealing round the side
entrance which opened into the garden, then approached the
window carefully, and on looking in, Oh ! what a sight met my
eyes. Fancy yourself, reader, in my position, and then use your
best powers to imagine the following: At first I could only see
my wife, so looked again, and there, seated in the arm-chair with
feet on the fender, coolly smoking a cigarette, looking perfectly
content and happy,—
Oh! reader, how shall I tell you ? —it was
“ Only Dotte.”


THE GRAVEDIGGER’S FRIEND.
It wasn’t warm, it was hot, decidedly hot. Past nine o’clock at
night, not a breath of wind stirring, and the thermometer at 86.
Such was the state of the evening a few nights ago r when longing
to do an indefinable something totally beyond the power of my
languid faculties to discover, and feeling too lazy to read, too
stupid to write, and thoroughly unable to cope with anything
requiring exertion, I immediately taxed my bodily members to an
extent far from necessary, by preparing to start for a stroll; being
an action the least likely to produce the desired effect of making
me cool.
Having succeeded in rounding the first corner without feeling
disposed to return, I managed to proceed along the now straight
road without encountering any further difficulty than a strong
growing desire to let myself quietly down in the extremely dusty
road and there remain, trusting to fate to preserve me from harm •
but having still sense enough left to consider this step unwise, I
doggedly pursued my onward course. On looking up to the sky
I noticed it was cloudy, and having nothing better to employ my
time with, I began to speculate as to whether the moon —now
hidden by a passing cloud —would continue shaded, or kindly
favour me with her appearance. Having at last adversely decided


the knotty point in question, I looked about me with the avowed
intention of discovering where I was, when my attention was
directed to a man. Yes, to all outward appearances, he was
nothing more than a mere ordinary specimen of humanity; but it
was not the individual himself that caused me particularly to
notice him, it was his position. In height I should imagine he
stood five feet nothing, minus his socks, and his figure strangely
resembled a beer barrel, large in the middle and tapering gra-
dually off at each end.
This “object” was standing some hundred and fifty yards in ad-
vance, in the middle of the road, with his back towards me, hands
on his hips, and legs apart, evidently looking intently for an invisible
something or somebody, and failing to discern its approach. Quick-
ening my pace, I noticed he never moved until I was within ten
yards of him, then with a sigh, as if of relief, he changed his
attitude, turned round, and familiarly said, as if expecting and
knowing me, the mysterious words —“It’s coming!” I stopped,
looked at my companion, then looked into the distance; but as
both were blanks to me, I politely requested to be informed
“what was coming.” With a look of astonishment, he exclaimed,
“Don’t you know?” To which I assured him of my ignorance,
when he immediately remarked, “The coffin!” As the words
fell from his lips a shudder passed over my frame, and uninten-
tionally my eyes wandered in the direction where I had seen him
gazing, when I noticed a long distance off an apparently dim
light, but totally beyond my ability to discern what it was. In
the interim my companion had been silently marching with slow
measured steps between the middle of the road aforesaid, and a
large double iron gate standing a little way off the road on the
right, and which I afterwards found to be the entrance to the
Cemetery. As the man slowly approached, I advanced, and
opened the conversation by asking, “Who was in the coffin?” and
instantly received the laconic reply, “A man!”


Astonished with the shortness of the answer, but not daunted,
I again spoke, and this time inquired “ What man ?” Without any
hesitation and with equal abruptness he replied, “ A felo de se.”
It was the most intelligent answer I had yet been favoured with,
for it explained everything.
Evidently what was slowly approaching in the distance was a
torchlight procession, the funeral of a man who had committed
“self-murder.” My curiosity was now fairly roused, and I felt a keen
desire to prosecute my inquiries further. My strange companion
was again standing in the middle of the road watching the dark
mass as it neared the last resting-place of one who only the day
before had been endowed with full vigour of life. As I got closer
to him, the words that dropped from his lips showed me that
under that rough manner there was a heart that felt, for I over-
heard him say, “Poor fellow, poor fellow.” By some peculiar
feeling of sympathy the words found their echo in my breast, and
with fast increasing interest I asked him if he would kindly
explain how the dead man had succeeded in “shuffling off this
mortal coil.” After looking into my face for about the space of a
minute with a blank, meaningless gaze, he suddenly exclaimed,
earnestly, “Yes! I will, and afterwards you shall tell me if you
think he deserved the burial of a dog—without service being said
over his body.” Then drawing a deep breath, and in a voice
entirely almost soft, he continued: “ The coffin those
undertaker chaps are bringing slowly nearer at each step contains
the corpse of a man I’ve known over thirty years. We were lads
at the same school together, and the woman he married I once
thought would have been my wife. But she chose the best chap
and loved him more than she did me, and I’m sure I never bore
her ill-will for it. God bless her,” Here the old man lifted his
hat with reverence, and I followed his example. Having wiped
his forehead and replaced his handkerchief, he followed on with
“No man and wife could live a happier life than those two have


done, and no three friends could have been more constantly
together, and yet never a hard word has passed between us. His
love (pointing in the direction of the coffin) for his wife was per-
fect idolatry, and she was equally fond of him.
“ Only two short months ago the blow fell and the wife was laid
down with fever, from which she never recovered. The doctor
gave us hope at one time, and downright cruel in him it was to give
it, for in two days afterwards she was no more, and three weeks
come to-morrow was laid peacefully under yonder clump of trees.”
He pointed to two willows and some shrubs. I took particular
note of the position, for I observed the handkerchief was again
brought into requisition, somewhere below the forehead, and I
admired the silent expression of sorrow for his lost loved friend.
In a minute or so he recovered himself sufficiently to exclaim in
broken accents, “I thought poor Joe would have broken his heart
at the sad loss. During her life he always said he should not be
long in following when ‘she’ died, and I firmly believe that in
another week he would have passed peacefully and quietly away,
but rather chose to go of his own accord, so suffocated himself by
burning charcoal, leaving behind him these words —there’s the
paper, you can read them by the light of the moon.” Hastily
he pushed the valuable lines into my hand and walked a little
way off, once more finding comfort in his handkerchief.
I looked at the paper; it was an ordinary half-sheet of note,
and had six words written on it in a somewhat irregular hand. They
were these. “Parted in life, joined by death.” I found myself
exclaiming as I read them the second time, “ How simple,
yet how eloquent,” and whilst I yet pondered over the dead man’s
explanation, my companion stole behind me and exclaimed, “Tell
me, now, do you think my mate deserves to be treated worse than
a dog, without a soul to mourn his loss or follow him to the grave,
and no service to be said over his poor body? —well, well —it does
seem hard to me, but I suppose it’s the world’s Christianity. How-


ever, I must be off, for those fellows will be here directly. Look
how carelessly they jog along—what care they about the nature of
the burden they carry, so long as they are paid for it. And yet I
never turn a sod without a sigh, and a thought for the mourners.
More fool I, perhaps, but it’s a fact,” and with a shrug of his
shoulders he disappeared through the gates, to make final prepara-
tions. As the dismal cortege was near at hand, I thought I should
quietly like to see how the funeral would terminate, so followed
my late companion into the cemetery, and noticing a dim light in
a remote corner wandered thither, and took up a position behind
a clump of gum trees.
I was too far off to hear what the men said when they clumsily
shook the coffin from off their shoulders, but two of them immedi-
ately sat down on it and wiped their wizen faces. I could plainly
see the gravedigger did not appreciate this piece of sacrilege, so
hurried the men to help him lower the dead man into his last
resting place, which they very soon did, and directly afterwards
wended their way out of God’s acre. The gravedigger’s usual
duty is to cover over the coffin at once, but in this case he devi-
ated from the general rule, for leaning on his spade he looked
down on his dead friend, but it must have been too dark to dis-
cern anything, for the feeble light issuing from the lamp did not
shine so far. Whate’er his thoughts were God alone knows, but
after a few minutes I saw him quietly take off his cap, kneel down
by the side of the grave, at the same time producing a small book
from his side pocket, and aided by the flickering light of his lamp
proceeded to read the burial service over his dead friend. Thus,
faithful unto death, he performed the last rite and ceremony over
his fellow creature, who had erred so greatly in the sight of man
as to be denied a peaceful and becoming burial.
Having completed this kindly token of respect, it was with the
utmost gentleness he commenced filling in the grave, and more
than once turned his head in the direction of where his friend’s


wife lay. That night, when slowly w r andering home, I thought of
the scene I had been a silent witness to, and could not banish the
thought that the grave under the willows would ere long contain
two bodies instead of one, and the sharer be no other than Joe,
the gravedigger’s friend.


HOME DESPATCHES,
OR,
THE EVE OF THE DEPARTING ENGLISH MAIL.
The big Post-office clock was striking eight, as, after wending my
way along Elizabeth-street, I mounted the some half-dozen steps
that led me to that portion of the Post-office corridor from whence
the English mails are dispatched. My letters posted, I began to
charge my pipe, and puzzle my head as to what should be the
next thing I should do, when my attention was attracted by an
old man, who, with feeble footsteps, and clutching a small letter,
was staggering towards the large aperture, muttering as he did so,
—“God bless you, my darling! God bless you!” Then, as if
loath to part with his treasured letter, he hesitatingly pressed it to
his aged lips, and dropped it in amongst the many others that
were to take their departure by the morrow’s mail for Old
England’s shores. As he repassed me, I noticed large tears
welling up in his eyes, and I pictured to myself her who was to
receive that letter, and how dear she must be to that poor old
man, who, no doubt, well guessing that he should never see the
old country or his loved one again on this earth, could not repress


a tear at the thought of the cruel distance that so effectually-
separated them. Many a bright and happy thought flitted
through my brain, as standing in the recess of one of the arches,
I allowed my imagination to carry me to England, and how long
I might have remained lost in thought, curiously imagining the
contents of those many silent bearers of varied expressions of joy,
hope, fear, sorrow, and sympathy, is a query, had I not been
interrupted by hearing the sharp, quick step of a woman
approaching. On turning my head, I noticed she was young
and rather pretty. Before reaching the box she stopped short,
then looking round, and failing to observe anyone near her,
hastily pulled out a letter from within the folds of her dress, and,
with the quickness of thought, kissed the seal twice—instantly
after it was “lost to sight, though to memory dear.” As the
lamp shone on her face when disappearing, I saw there a deep
red tinge which told me its own tale, and I earnestly hoped that
the fellow (whoever he was) might be worthy of the honest love
that was waiting for him in the new country.
The next to add to the numbers already posted, was a gentle-
man, accompanied by two little girls, evidently his daughters, all
of whom were dressed in deep mourning; and, judging by the
long sigh the father gave as he despatched several black-edged
envelopes with their contents, those letters were going to tell a
tale of sorrow, and of the loss of her who had been his faithful
partner for many a year; and I could not help sympathising with
the remark of the younger daughter, who innocently said, “Papa,
dear, I wish I were that letter going to dear Charlie, I’m sure he
would much rather that I told him of our sad loss than read of it
in a letter.” Yes; and I thought how many more there are in the
world similarly situated, and so like that little girl’s brother.
Whilst I was following with my eye those three, as they faded in
the distance, and thinking of their lonely home, devoid of the
sunshine of a mother’s love, a sailor came lumbering up the steps


behind where I was standing. On noticing me he civilly touched
his hat, and asked which was the right letter-box for “Home;”
then added, “May be, sir, you’ll kindly tell about when this ’ere
letter will reach England?” and on my replying, “Six weeks
hence,” he said, “My old woman ’ll have to wait a main long
time then. Well, it ’ll be none the less welcome when she does
get it, that’s one comfort.” This knowledge seemed to make
him happy, for merely adding, “Thank you, sir,” he walked
quickly away, with the air of a man content with himself and all
the world beside. As the sailor passed down the steps, a young
fellow, somewhat seedily dressed, but with evident traces of a
gentleman about him, strolled up, and stood gazing at the scene
before him. Ido not, as a rule, form hasty conclusions, but lat
once dubbed this fellow a “new chum,” and I think his after
actions warranted the impression. His first act was to read the
large printed notice stating when the English Mail departed,
and having assured himself that it really did leave on the
morrow morning, next proceeded to post his letter, but here a
difficulty arose as to which was the identical box. The one
he stood opposite to was marked “ Letters for Sydney and
the neighbouring colonies,” and after studying it for a minute or
so he did not feel satisfied that that was the right place, so moved
on to the next, which, as it stated in unmistakable large letters,
that mails per “ ,” via Brindisi and Southampton were to be
posted there, he of course did not see, and judging by the
petulant manner he turned on his heel after reading the words
“ Town and country” on the next compartment, he was voting
the postal arrangements and Melbourne generally a sort of semi-
cannibal island, only half-civilised, when his eye caught sight of
the big words before alluded to. A ray of sunshine came over
his dull dissipated features as he made the discovery, then, after
carefully examining the space before him which was to receive his
letter, evidently with the hope of solving the mysteries attached


to the Post-office, but apparently not finding anything to repay
his trouble, despatched his letter and took himself off, only to
return a minute after to ascertain whether the valuable epistle had
not stuck on its way to the receiving board, doubtless not know-
ing that such a thing would be impossible from the construction
of the box.
The hitherto Indian file of persons now gave place to a motley
crowd, for a number of men approached headed by a celestial
commonly designated as John Chinaman.
Amongst the variety I noticed one strongly like a lawyer in
appearance and a thorough miser in manner, for he looked as if
he begrudged the ninepence his letter was costing, although well
calculating it would return him 13 s. 4d. at no very distant date.
I fancy that whilst I was observing the subject of these few
pages, I must have been under the watchful eye of a guardian of
the public peace, for as a member of that highly intelligent body
passed by he looked at me as if I were a suspicious character and
had a design on the Post-office, but as no such enterprising pro-
ject had entered my head, why, I buttoned up my coat, once more
lit my pipe, and moved - off in the direction of the Hobson’s Bay
Railway, still thinking of the past scene and those numerous and
strangely varied
“ Home Despatches.”


LOVING DESPAIR.
The numerous and varied incidents attending “everyday life”
passing as an animated panorama before the constant notice of a
keen observer, form food of a far more intellectual nature, tinged
as it is, here and there, with pleasure or pain, as the case may be,
than the finest chapter of the ablest work of fiction ever written;
and if “Chance” will only with a free and lavishing hand illus-
trate the many acts or scenes that now appear, and as quickly
disappear, there will be found no lack of interest to present itself
and mar the pleasure of the study.
The desire for amusement is invariably great, and generally
innate within us, whilst the mode of obtaining pleasure is very
fanciful and capricious. For my part, when in England, nothing
ever afforded me greater happiness on a small scale, than of a cool
summer’s evening to take a solitary row by moonlight up the old
River Thames, between Richmond and Kingston, whilst the tide
was on the flow, and then, when the current turned, allowing it
to drift me round each picturesque turn, slowly but leisurely back
to Richmond, at the same time enjoying the quietude of a pipe or
cigar, and the sombre appearance of the surrounding scenery.
Sometimes, I never so much as met a single soul on the water,


either going or returning, but, at others, a musical party, with a
girl’s sweet voice, warbling some charming air; or the sound of a
man’s powerful baritone song would break on my ear, and greatly
enhance the pleasure of my solitude, as the breeze quietly wafted
the pleasing strains along the almost still water. Evenings spent
thus were pleasure indeed to me.
To attempt to draw comparisons as to beauty of scenery
between that portion of the Thames before mentioned, and the
ever ebbing sluggish river Yarra Yarra of Australia, between
Princes Bridge, Melbourne, and the Railway Bridge, Hawthorn,
would be simply odious, for they have nothing in common, except
that one part of the Thames has a border of magnificent chestnuts,
whilst the Yarra has an abundance of dismal-looking gum-trees
overhanging its muddy surface.
The same quiet fancy of amusing myself whilst in the “old”
country has followed me to the “new,” and when many people
are preparing to retire for the night, I, guided by the friendly
light of the moon, proceed some distance along the almost always
deserted river.
For instance, the other evening, I leisurely wended my way round
its many winding bends, passing the Botanical Gardens and South
Yarra bridges by turn, though scarcely noticing anything, as there
was nothing particular to attract or distract my attention; besides,
was buried in thoughts of “ ” Well, no matter. . . . Suffice
it to say, the reflections were pleasing. Having proceeded suffi-
ciently far to thoroughly enjoy the somewhat cool breeze, I
turned my boat round, and then, as in days gone by, allowed
the current to carry me back at its will, whilst I composed myself
and lit my pipe. The stream, though always on the ebb, is never
what might be termed strong, therefore the rate I was travelling
at was slow, in fact, too slow to be comfortable, so ere long
was again obliged to take the oars. Scarcely, however, had I
resumed rowing, and passed the, to me, worst bend in the river,


when I was startled by hearing a muffled splash in the water, and
at no great distance from me. At first, thinking it could only
be a fish in search of a fly, or dog cooling himself, I was proceed-
ing onward without pulling up, when the impulse to stop rowing
seized me, and I then distinctly heard a floundering at the side of
the bank. The moon being hidden by a cloud, made me unable to
discern the object, so rowed closer to the shore, when imagine my
surprise at seeing a man about twice my own size, standing in his
shirt and trousers up to his thighs in water, but evidently trying to
lie down in it. He did not appear to notice me, so I watched
him for a moment, and tried to think what would be the wisest
course to pursue. My first conclusion was that he was un-
doubtedly attempting to drown himself, but whether he was
drunk or mad, or both, I could not tell, for he never uttered a
word. Without further hesitation I jumped ashore* drew up my
boat, caught hold of the stump of a tree with one hand, and let
myself further down the side of the bank, then laid firmly hold of
the man’s arm. He was at that instant up to his waist in water,
and making one more effort to lie down, so with a good jerk I
succeeded in bringing him sideways on to the bank. Unfortu-
nately the ground somewhat sloped at this point, therefore picture
my horror at seeing this almost inanimate body—for he had never
spoken—slowly but surely sliding down the side farther into the
water, and I, being totally without strength to stay his progress,
would in a moment or so be obliged to let go my hold or sink
with him. In body and mind my excitement and agony was
intense, for I knew there was no chance of anyone hearing me,
let me call ever so loudly. The man’s head hung on one side,
and the water had just reached up to his chin, when he suddenly
stopped sliding. He had evidently caught in something, for it
was from no effort on his part that his progress to eternity was
stayed. With the quickness of lightning I released my hold, ran
to the boat, and cut away the “painter” or tow-rope. On my


return I found the man still as I. had left him, so fastened him
with the rope to the stump that had been my support, then
knowing that he was safe, and could not sink, I fell on the ground
from sheer exhaustion and gasped for breath.
Before I had scarcely time to regain my strength, I noticed my
unpleasant companion was struggling to release himself, and that
he was uttering words, but to me inarticulate, so, rousing myself
with a powerful effort, I once more went to his assistance. He
now appeared to have partially recovered from his lethargy, and
after shaking him well as best I could, he seemed to understand
that he had done wrong, for in manner and voice he was as meek
as a child, and looking vacantly in my face he said, “ Yes! yes,
sir, I know I’ve done wrong, very wrong, but I won’t do it again—
indeed, indeed I won’t. Please, please don’t give me in charge of
the police,” His manner of pleading was so piteous that I hesi-
tated, not knowing what to do, and before I could reply he again
commenced by saying, “ It’s all along of the cursed drink, sir,”
then looking at the river, he suddenly exclaimed as he pointed to
it, “But she’s there, sir, down, down at the bottom.” As he
turned his head as if to hide out of the sight of his great temptation,
I loosened the cord and he scrambled on to the bank. Hardly
had he reached the top before a revulsion of feeling came over
him, and dropping down on the ground he cried like a child.
Looking into his face .1 read the character of the man I had
saved. It was a kind face, though rough and weather-beaten.
He had not the features of a bad man or drunkard, but it was a
face full of trouble, one that had suffered much, and if he had
drunk to excess, thereby making himself mad, it was not for the
sake of the liquor, but had taken it to drown despair. On looking
round I saw at a little distance from me a small bundle of clothes }
and on going to them found they consisted of a coat, waistcoat*
and colonial hat. In the bottom of the latter lay some money —
silver, and a silver watch and chain. There could be no possible


doubt that his intention had been to deliberately drown himself.
On bringing his clothes to him, he lifted his face, and catching
hold of my hand in both his, he, with tears in his eyes, exclaimed,
“ Thank God and you for what you have this day done. God
bless you—God bless you!” It was all he said, and the penitent
manner in which the words were uttered caused me to have
urgent need of seeing that my boat was perfectly safe ; but by
mistake I found myself walking in the opposite direction, and
with an evident cold in my eyes. After a while I succeeded in
getting him to stand up, and whilst helping him on with his clothes,
he begged earnestly not to be given into custody, promising faith-
fully never to get drunk again. His manner was so truthful and
pitiful that I could not find it in my heart to hand him over to
the police; fully believing that it was “loving despair” that had
tempted him to commit the act; so walked with him to the main
road, and saw him depart on his way home, for he was now per-
fectly steady. His fervent manner as he blessed me when parting
is still ringing in my ears. As he was disappearing round the
bend of the road a mounted constable came riding by, and think-
ing it advisable that some watch should be kept lest he might
return, I stated what had taken place and after describing the
man received for a reply; “That man, sir, whom you are speaking
of, is Richard Thompson. I know him well. 1 hree years ago
his wife was accidentally drowned about a quarter of a mile farther
down the river from where we are standing. As a rule he is
very steady, though I don’t think he has been quite right in his
mind ever since her death, but he is perfectly harmless, sir, per-
fectly. It’s only when he drinks that these fits come over him,
but he’s right enough now, sir, I’ll warrant. Good night!”
For some minutes after the constable had faded in the distance
I was still standing where I had parted with him,
Who loved his wife so well, that e’en when dead
Would have shared her fate in the river bed.


GOOD BYE.
One word before closing,
It’ll not keep you very long,
So don’t prepare for dozing,
Or think of humming a song,
f
If what you’ve read has pleased,
The author is very glad;
Should you feel yourself teased,
He can only say he’s sad.
Pleased or teased let’s be jolly,
The end of the year is near,
Forget the author’s folly—
He wishes “ Happy New Year.”
M'Carron, Bird &r Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.






CHRISTMAS STORIES.
THE
TRAIAL
FOUR
BY
"K U Z"
•I‘CARBON, Bill!) AND C<J., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.
