

TH E
EMIGRANT’S GUIDE;
WHERE, WHEN, AND HOW
TO EMIGRATE.
BY
GEORGE POTTER
: 8 8 2.
03STE lE> E IST UST Y
THOSE ABOUT TO EMIGRATE, and who require
thoroughly good Clothing, well made from REAL WEST OF
ENGLAND, IRISH & SCOTCH TWEEDS, will .save at least
25 per cent, by purchasing at
CHAS. BAKER & Co.’s STORES,
HUAI) DEPOT— 27I & 272, HIGH HOLBOBN, LONDON.
Complete Price Joists Post Free. SEE PARTICULARS. ON HACK COVER.




THE
EMIGRANT’S GUIDE;
WHERE, WHEN, AND HOW
TO EMIGRATE.
BY
GEORGE POTTER
‘1 8 8 2.
O IST jE I 3 HI 3ST IST "ST.


ORIENT LINE
DIRECT SERVICE BETWEEN LONDON AND AUSTRALIA
IN FORTY DAYS.'
The magnificent full-powered Steamships belonging to the Orient Steam
Navigation Company, Limited, and the Pacific Steam Navigation Company,
leave London every fortnight for Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney, and take
Passengers for all ports in Australia, Tasmania and New Zealand, and also for
Naples or Cape Town, according to route.
STEAMSHIPS. TONS.
AUSTRAL '>2so
CHIMBORAZO <847
COTOPAXI 4028
CUZCO 8849
GARONNE 8876
JOHN ELDER 4152
LIGURIA 4666
LUSITANIA 3825
ORIENT 5386
POTOSI 4219
SORATA 4014
These Vessels are specially constructed for longocean voyages,and are fitted
with every convenience for the comfort of Passengers.
FARES.— V irst Ci.ass, 50guineas and upwards: Second Class,3s guineas
and upwards; Third Class, closed cabins, with Two Berths, 20 guineas each:
Third Class, closed cabins, with Four Berths, 18 guineas each; Steerage, open
berths for Men only, 15 guineas each.
Managers — F- GREEN & Co., 13, Fencliurch Avenue,and ANDERSON
ANDERSON & Co., 5, Fenchurch Avenue, London, E.C. For Freight or
Passage apply to the latter firm.
COLONIAL AGENTS.—
ADELAIDE, Joseph Stilling & C 0.,; MELBOURNE, Gibbs, Bright & Co.;
SVDNEY, G. Skelton Yuill.






PREFACE.
The question of Emigration has become one of vital importance?
to the working people in this country, and wo issue this work
with a desire that it may become the means of smoothing away
many of the difficulties which those intending to emigrate have to
contend against, and that our effort to guide the emigrant to the
land of promise may meet with success.
The information contained in the following pages may be
thoroughly relied upon, and if the instructions given therein be
faithfully carried out, much suffering and inconvenience may be
avoided by those leaving England for the various fields of labour to
which their various qualifications may direct them.
To those who find it hard to make headway in England, and who
are willing to try their'fortune in another country, we should say by
all means do so, and if they are willing to work hard and face the
difficulties w’hich may beset them in a manly way, there is an absolute
certainty that they will better their position, and to those we can only
say God speed.


EMIGRATION TO THE CANADIAN
NORTH WEST.
LANDS FOR SALE.
THE
Canadian pacific il ail to an Conipann
’(Under Contract with the Dominion Government to complete and
work a Transcontinental line of railway to the Pacific Ocean) offer
Aor SALE FARMING and GRAZING LANDS in the Fertile Belt
<of the North West, along the line of Railway and its branches, to
actual settlers at 10s. sterling per acre, payable in annual instal-
ments, but subject to a rebate of ss. per acre for cultivation of one
half within four years from date of purchase.
Purchasers will have the additional advantage of paying, for these
Lands in the Land Grant Bonds of the Company, which will be
. accepted at a premium of 10 per cent, above par, and accrued interest
allowed. These bonds in Denominations of $l,OOO, bearing 5 per
, cent, interest, can at present be obtained through the Bank of
Montreal, 0, Birchin Lane, London, at the price of par and accrued
interest.
For further information respecting the country, proof of its
and stock-raising capabilities, the way and cost of.
reaching it, Ac., apply to the
' -CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY COMPANY,
BARTHOLOMEW HOUSE, LONDON, EC.


THE EMIGRANT’S GUIDE.
CANADA.
Tt can only come within the compass of a work such as this to deal
briefly yet as effectively with the subject as space will permit, and
we shall therefore endeavour to lay before our readers as clearly as
possible the best held, for their labour, and give them reliable informa-
tion regarding the best means of reaching that country which they
decide to adopt as their new fatherland.
The iirst step the intending emigrant should take after having
decided to leave the land of his birth, is to ascertain beyond doubt
the best field in which to employ his labour, and capital if he has
umy, and it is very desirable, if it is possible for him to do so, to
obtain a little money which he may utilise in his new home,
We shall, in the first place, deal with the agriculturalist as an
intending emigrant, and we feel that we are acting wisely when we
strongly recommend the Dominion of Canada as a future home for
him, offering, as it does at the present time, a vast field of easily
•acquired and comparatively easily cultivated land, requiring the
smallest amount of capital .to start with, and holding out a well-
grounded hope of an early independence to the energetic, industrious
labourer. And here be it remarked thattheßritishemigranton reaching
any port of Canada does not change his nationality, the flag which
waved over his hqpd in Old England he will still see, nor does he materi-
ally change his mode of life or companionship. TJie conditions of soeiety
.are much the same as those he has left behind in the old country, and
he does not require to renounce for ever all allegiance and' fidelity to
his sovereign before he can exercise the rights of citizenship, or hold,
land. He will be governed by laws similar to those he was taught to
respect in England, and although he may meet with many hardships
at the outset of his career, but which he is quite as likely to meet with
if lie remains at home, still will he be cheered by the fact that in all
probability a few years’ hard labour will place him in a position of
comparative independence, and secure him and liis children against
want in the future. And it is a proud position for the labourer to
occupy when he can look upon the house that shelters himself and
children and exclaim this is my own. This is the fruits of honest, God-
fearing industry in this land. No fears regarding the future welfare
of his little ones arising to dispel the pleasant vision from his mind,
for in this free, vast and fertile country there is room enough for all.


The following particulars, some of which are taken from the
colonization circular, published under the superintendance of Her
Majesty’s Stationery Office, can be thoroughly relied upon as-
givin" authentic statements regarding the nature of the country.
DOMINION OF CANADA— The Territory comprised in the
Dominion of Canada contains about 3,500,000 square miles, extending-
from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. It possesses thousands of
square miles of the finest forests on the continent ; yvidely-spread coal
fields; extensive and productive fisheries; its rivers and lakes are
among the largest and most remarkable m the yyorld, and the millions
of acres of prairie lands in the newly opened-up North-West
territories are reported as being among the most fertile on the con-
tinent of America.
Canada is divided into seven provinces 1. Quebec contains about
193,355 square miles; 2. Ontario 107,780; 3. Nova Scotia 21,/31;
4. Neyv Brunswick 27,322; 5. Prince Edward Island 2,134;
6. British Columbia 213,550; 7. Manitoba 14,340; and the North-
West Territory 2,750,000.
The several provinces have local legislatures, and the seat of the
Dominion or Federal Parliament is at Ottawa. The Government is
conducted on the same principle as that of Great Britain, y T iz., the
responsibility of the Ministers to Parliament.
The Governor-General of the Dominion by the Queen,
nnd the Lieutenant-Governors of the Provinces by the Governor-
General in Council. '
Each province is divided into counties and townships, having their
own local boards and councils for regulating local taxation for roads*
schools, and other municipal purposes.
Religious liberty prevails.
The educational system is under the' control of the various pro-
vinces. Free schools are provided and facilities are afforded to
successful pupils for obtaining the highest education.
In a country like the Dominion of Canada, extending northward
from the 44° of latitude, the climate is naturally variable, but, speak-
ing. generally, the summers are hotter than in England, and the
winters colder. However, if the climate of a country is to be
measured by its productions, then Canada, in the quality of her
timber, grains, fruits, plants, and animals, must be accorded a front
rank.
The extremes of cold, though of short duration, and the yvinter
overing of snow, have given Canada the reputation of having an
extremely severe climate, and attention has not been sufficiently
directed to the circumstance that by the yvarmth of the summer
months the range of production is extended, in grains, from oats and
barley to wheat and maize ; in fruits, from apples to peaches, grapes*
melons, nectarines, and apricots ; in vegetables, from turnips, carrots,
and cabbages, to the egg plant and tomatoes.
Snow and ice are no drawback to the Canadian yvinter. To
Canada they mean not only protection to her cultivated acres, almost


as valuable as a covering of manure, but the conversion of whole
areas, during several months in the year, to a surface upon which
every man may make his own road, equal to a turnpike, in any direc-
tion, over swamp or field, lake or river, and on which millions of tons
are annually transported at the minimum cost, whereby employment
is afforded for man and horse when cultivation is arrested by frost.
Intensity of winter cold has little effect upon the agriculture of a
• country, except the beneficial one of pulversing the soil where exposed.
High spring and summer temperatures, with abundance of rain, secure
the certain ripening of maize and the melon in Canada.
The great prairie region of Canada has a mean summer temperature
of 65°, with abundance of rain; the winters cold and dry; climate
and soil similar to that part of Russia where large cities are found.
It is free from pulmonary complaints and fevers of every type, and
the country generally is healthy.
The snow fall in the west and south-west parts of the territories
is comparatively light, and cattle may remain in the open air all
winter subsisting on the prairie grasses, which they obtain by scraping
away the snow where necessary.
There are nearly 7,000 miles of railway in work in the Dominion,
extending from the western portions of Ontario to Halifax, in Nova
Scotia, and St. John in New Brunswick, while its rivers and lakes
form a highway during the summer months from the interior to the
ocean.
It may be mentioned that Canada possesses the most perfect system
of inland navigation in the world. At the present time vessels of 600
tons go from Chicago to Montreal by way of Lakes Michigan, Huron,
Erie, Ontario, and the River St. Lawrence, a distance of 1,201 miles.
The locks on the Welland Canal (connecting Lakes Erie and Ontario),
and those on the St. Lawrence river, are, however, in course of
enlargement to 270 feet long and 45 feet wide, with a depth of 14
feet, and when this great work is completed, steamers of 1,500 tons
burthen will be,able to carry produce direct from Western Canada,
and the Western States of America to Montreal and Quebec, which
will effect a further reduction in the cost of transit of cereals and
other products.
The distance from Chicago to Montreal, (where ocean-going
steamers of 4,000 tons can be moored alongside the quays) by the
Canadian route is 150 miles less than from Chicago to New York
via Buffalo and the Erie Canal, and there are 16 more locks and 81H
feet more lockage by the latter route than by the former. It is,
therefore, expected that, upon the completion of the enlarged canals,
much of the grain from Western Canada, as well as from the Western
States of America, will find its way to Europe via Montreal, as, in
addition' to its other' advantages, the distance from Montreal to
Liverpool is about 300 miles less than from New York.
Canada possesses excellent postal arrangements, a post office being
found in almost every village, and every place of any importance is
connected with the electric telegraph.


The classes which may he recommended to emigrate to Canada are-
as follows :
1. Tenant farmers in the United Kingdom, who have sufficient
capital to enable them to settle on farms, may be advised
to go with safety, and with the certainty of doing welL
The same remark may apply to persons who, although*
not agriculturists, would bq able to adapt themselves to
agricultural pursuits, and who have sufficient means to
enable them to take up farms.
2. ' Produce farmers and persons with capital seeking invest-
ment.
3. Male and female farm labourers, female domestic servants,
(to whom assisted passages are granted), and country
' mechanics.
The classes which should be warned against emigration are females-
above the grade of servants, clerks, shopmen, and persons having no
particular trade or calling, and unaccustomed to manual labour. To*
these Canada offers but little encouragement.
The best time to arrive in North America is early in May, when*
the inland navigation is open, and out-door operations are commencing.
The emigrant will then be able to take advantage of the spring and
summer work, and to get settled before the winter sets in.
The vovage to Quebec occupies, on an average, about ten days by
steamer, and the journey to the North-West four days longer.
It is now proposed to offer a few remarks on each of the different
provinces of which the Dominion of Canada is composed.
MANITOBA AND THE NORTH-WEST TERRITORIES.—
The country now known as Manitoba and the North-West-
Territories was granted by charter to the Hudson’s Bay Company
in 1070, during the reign of Charles 11., as a hunting and trading-
oround, and was held by them and the North-West Company (these
two corporations amalgamated in 1821), until 1870, when their
rights wetb transferred to the Dominion. These facts form an in-
telligible reason why this part of the country has only recently
become known as an agricultural region, for the disturbance of the
lauds would naturally have led to the interruption of the staple trade
of the company which controlled it for so many years.
Manitoba is a province which has been made out of the North-
West Territories, and is situated between the parallels 49°: —50° 2 ' north
latitude and 90° —99° west longitude, in tlve very heart of the Con-
tinent of America. It is 135 miles long and 105 miles wide, and
contains in round numbers 14,000 square miles, or 9,000,000 acres of
land.
Roughly speaking, the North-West Territories belonging to Canada
cover about 2,500,000 square miles, and contain about 200,000,000
acres of fertile land which are now waiting settlement.
Any male or female who is the head of a family, or any person who
bas attained the age of 18 years, can obtain a free grant of a quarter _
section of 160 acres; and can also make an entry for pre-emption


l ights to the adjoining quarter section, at the Government price
from sl4 per acre upwards.
The following is an extract from the official regulations of the
■Canadian Government, for the disposal of certain public lands along
•the route of the Canadian Pacific Kailway: —
1. “ Until the final survey of the said railway has been made west
<4 the Red river, and for the purposes of these provisions, the line of
the said railway shall be assumed to be on the fourth base westerly to
flie intersection of the said base by the line between ranges 21 and 22
west of the first principal meridian, and thence in a direct line to the
■confluence of the Shell river with the river Assiniboine.”
2. “ The country lying on each side of the line of railway shall be
respectively divided into belts, as follow :
(1.) A belt of five miles on either side of the railway, and
immediately adjoining the same, to be called Belt A;
“ (2.) A belt of fifteen miles on either side of the railway, adjoining
Belt A, to be called Belt B ;
•“ (3.) A belt of twenty miles on either side of the railway,
adjoining Belt B, to be called Belt C ;
“ 4 (4.) A belt of twenty miles on either side of the railway,
adjoining Belt C, to be called Belt D ; and
- (5.) A belt of fifty miles on either side of the railway,
adjoining Belt D, to be called Belt E. ’
3. “ The eYen-numbered sections in each township throughout the
•several belts above described shall be open for entry as homesteads
(tree grants) and pre-emptions of 100 acres each respectively..”
4. “ The odd-numbered sections in each of such townships shall not
be open to homestead or pre-emptions, but shall be specially reserved
and designated as railway lands.”
o. “ The railway lauds within the several belts shall be sold at
the following rates, viz:—-In Belt A, $5 (five dollars) per acre; in
Belt B, $4 (four dollars) per acre; in Belt C, $3 (three dollars) per
acre ; in Belt I), $2 (two dollars) per acre ; in Belt E, 81 (one dollar)
per acre ; and the terms of sale of such lands shall be as follows,
• viz, : —One-tenth in cash at the time of purchase; the balance in nine
-equal annual instalments, with interest at the rate of six per ceut. per
-annum on the balance of purchase-money from time to time remaining
.unpaid to be paid with each instalment.
fi. “ The pre-emption lands within the several belts shall be sold
for the prices and on the’terms respectively as follows: —In the Belts
A, B, and C, at $2-50 (two dollars and fifty cents) per acre ; in Belt
D’, at $2 (two dollars) per acre ; and in Belt E, 81 (one dollar) per
.acre. The terms of payment to'be four-tenths of tlie purchase-money,
.together with interest on the latter at the rate of 6 per cent, per
annum, to be paid at the end of thi’ee years from the date of entry ;
the remainder to be paid in six equal instalments annually from and
after the said date, with interest, at the rate above mentioned on sach
portions of the-purchase money as may yeiqaiu unpaid, to bo paid
with each instalment.”


7. “ All payments for railway lands, and also for pre-emption lands,,
within the several belts, shall be in cash, and not in scrip or military
or police bounty warrant.”
It may be explained that a township consists of a tract of land six
miles square, which is divided into 36 sections of one square mile
each.
Intending settlers should go at once to the laud office in the district
where they intend to settle, and guides will be sent, with them, free of
charge, to point out vacant lands available for settlement.
The following is the amount of capital considered necessary for a
man with a family to start farming on a free grant of prairie land.
It has been compiled from various works that have been published on
Manitoba and the North-West Territory, and may be accepted as
reliable
$
Provisions for one year - - 200
One yoke of oxen r - - 130
One cow .... 30
One waggon - 80
' Breaking plough and harrow - - 30
Chains, shovels, spades, hooks, Ac. - 20
.Cooking stove and furniture - - 30
Seeds - . - - - 20
Building contingencies, Ac. - 60
8600 or £ 120
It is of course based upon the assumption that all payments for
goods are to be made on delivery, but as a settler could obtain many
of his requirements on credit until such time as his first crops are-
harvested, it is fair to assume that a much lower sum than that
named above would really suffice, especially as a settler and his family
who have not much capital would be able to command a good price
for their own labour during harvest time, and thus add to their
capital until they have a sufficient quantity of their own land under
cultivation to keep them fully occupied.
It may beadded that an energetic man landing in Canada with only
a pound or two in his pocket is able to look at the future cheerfully.
Many such men have taken up the free grants, and then have hired
themselves out of labour, cultivating their own land during spare
time, and employing a man at harvest or when necessary. By this
means they are able to stock and cultivate their farms in a few years,
with the results of their own labour and the profits of their harvests,
and there are many men in Canada now in positions of independence
who commenced in the way above described.
It will be understood that the figures named above do not include
the passage of the settler and his family from England to Manitoba
and the North-West.
The cost of breaking up the prairie land is estimated at three


•dollars per acre, and tlie ploughing, sowing, harvesting, and threshing
the second year four dollars per acre.
There is not so much woodland in the prairie district as in other
parts of Canada, but there is enough for the purposes of fuel and
fencing, and timber for building purposes can be purchased in the
larger towns and settlements.
The line of railway, which is to connect the Atlantic and Pacific
■Oceans, is noAV in course of construction by the Government of the
Dominion, and is expected to cost from 75 to 80 millions of dollars.
In 1882 over 700 miles will be open, extending from Lake Superior
through Manitoba and westward through the Territories to near Fort
Ellice, thus effecting a saving in the distance from Manitoba and the
North-West Territory to the ports of shipment for Europe of about
400 miles as compared with the existing route from the Western
States of America via New York. This railway will pass through
extensive coal fields, which will ensure an unlimited supply of fuel.
It may be mentioned that there are two routes by which an
intending settler can reach Manitoba from Quebec, or any othei*
Canadian port, namely, the “all rail route” via Detroit, Chicago,
and St. Paul to Winnipeg, or by what is called the Lake route, i.e.,
by railway to Sarnia or Collingwood on Lake Huron, thence by
steamer to Duluth on Lake Superior, and by rail from Duluth to
Winnipeg. The journey by the former route is quicker by about a
•day, but the latter is more economical. By either of these routes the
•settler xvill be met by the agents of American land and railway
-companies, who will endeavour to persuade settlement in the United
States as preferable to Canada ; but the settler is advised to proceed
•direct to his intended destination, and decide upon his location after
personal inspection. In 1882 a line of railway will be completed from
'Thunder Bay (Lake Superior) to Winnipeg and westward. It will
pass entirely through Canadian Territory, and its benefits both to new
rand old settlers will be very great. It may be added that most of the
rivers and lakes in Manitoba and the North-West are navigable, and
that steamers now ply during the season on the river Saskatchewan
between Winnipeg and Edmonton, a distance by water of about 1,200
miles, with passengers and freight, calling at Prince Albert, Carlton,
Battleford, and other places on the way. Steamers also run regularly
between Winnipeg, St. Vincent, and other places on the Red River.
There is also steam communication on the river Assiniboine between
Fort Ellice and Winnipeg.
Manitoba is situated in the middle of the Continent, nearly
• equidistant from the pole and the equator, and the Atlantic and
Pacific oceans. The climate gives conditions of decided heat in
rsummer and decided cold in winter. The snow goes away, and
ploughing begins in April, which is about the same time as in the
•older provinces of Canada and the Northern United States on the
Atlantic seaboard, and the North Western States of Minnesota and
Wisconsin. The crops are harvested in August. The long sunny
<days of summer bring vegetation of all sort to rapid maturity. The


days are warm and the nights cool.'
Autumn begins about the 20th of September and lasts till the end
of November, when the regular frosts set in. The winter proper
comprises the months of December, January, February and March.
Spring comes early in April. The summer months are part of May,
June, July, August, and part of September. In winter the
thermometer sinks to 30 and sometimes 40 degrees below zero, but
this degree of cold in the dry atmosphere of the north-west does not
produce any unpleasant sensations. The wea'ther is not felt to be
colder than in the province of Quebec, nor so c@ld as milder winters
in climates where the fryst, or even a less degree of cold than frost,
is accompanied with damp or wind. The testimony is universal on
this point. • •
Snow does not fall on the prairies to an average greater depth than
18 inches, and buffaloes and horses graze out of doors all winter.
They scratch the snow off the prairie, and grow fat upon the grass
they find beneath it. Horned cattle also graze out of doors part of
the winter, but in some states of the weather they require to be
brought in. Instances are, however, stated in which horned cattle
. have grazed out all the winter.
It must be noticed that, from Toronto westward, the temperature
rises during the summer months, and, as the average yield of wheat
per acre in Manitoba and the North-West is equally as large (if not
larger both in volume and in weight) as in the United States, it would
seem that, in conjunction with the fertility of the soil, this tempera-
ture is very favourable to cereal crops. The fall of snow is also less
in the western portion of the Dominion; in the first half of the year
1870 it was 2&| inches, and in the second half 29j inches, but the
snow is no drawback to the growth of the crops, which are sown in
April and May, and harvested in August and September.
The soil is a deep alluvial deposit of unsurpassed richness. It is
mostly prairie, and covered with grass. It produces bountiful crops
of cereals, grasses, roots,.and vegetables. So rich is the soil that
wheat has been cropped off the same place for forty years without
manure, and .without showing signs of exhaustion.
In Manitoba a homestead exemption law was passed in 1872, which
exempts from seizure for debt 100 acres of land, house, stables, barns,
furniture, tools, farm implements in use, one cow, two oxen, one horse,
four sheep, two pigs, and thirty days’ provender for same.
Any person, male or female, having attained the age of 18 years,.
can enter a claim for a quarter section (100 acres) of unappropriated
Dominion lands as a claim for forest tree planting, and will receive a
patent on certain specified conditions and proof of cultivation. The
fee for the necessary documents is 810. No person can take up both
a tree planting grant and a pre-emption; but either one or the other
can be secured in conjunction with the free grants.
Farm labourers can obtain from 307. to 407. a year and board..
Female domestic servants, 20s. to 245. per month with board.
Mechanics cai;n from Bs. to 12s. per day.


The following are the prices of horses, cattle, farming implements,
and commodities generally :
Horses, per pair, about 607.; oxen, per yoke, 267. to 307. ; coavs, 67.
to 77. each. Waggons, 167. to 187. each. Ox cart, 37. to 47. Breaking
plough and harrow from 67. to 87. Common ploughs about 37. 12s.
Reapers, 207. to 307. Mowers, 147. to 257. Spades, 4s. 6d., Shovels,.
55., hay forks, 35., manure forks, 4s. Beef, sd. to 7d. per lb.; pork,.
sd. per lb. Flour, 245. per barrel. Butter, Is. per lb. Eggs, Is,
per dozen. Bread, 4?fd. to sd. per 4-lb. loaf. Salt, 7d. to Bd. per lb.
Potatoes, Is. 9d. to 2s. per bushel. Tea, 2s. to 2s. 3d. per lb. Sugar,
4d. to Od. Coffee, lOd. to Is. 6d. Tobacco, 2s. to 2s. 3d. Coal oil,
Is. 9d.’ per gallon. Pails, three hoop, Is. 3d. each. Stout suit of
clotliiug for man, 27. to 37. Felt hats from 4s. Boots, Bs. to 12s.
Grey Blankets, Bs. to 12s. per pair.
ONTARIO.— Every head of a family can obtain a free grant of 200
acres of land, and any person 18 years of age may obtain 100 acres in
the free grant districts. The conditions are 15 acres in each grant
of 100 acres to be cleared and under crop in five years; a habitable
house at least 16 feet by 20 built; and residence on the laud at least
six months in each year. The patent .is issued at the end of five
years.
Uncleared lands can also be purchased at prices varying from 2s.
to 40s. per acre. # .
Cleared and improved farms Avith buildings can be bought at from
47. to 107. per acre. The money can nearly always be paid in instal-
ments covering several years.
The soil of the country varies in different localities, but a large-
proportion is of the very best description for agricultural purposes.
The climate is much the same as in some other parts of the
Dominion, but milder in the winter than in Quebec.
Cereals, grasses, and roots, produce large crops, and fruits grow in
great abundance; hemp, tobacco, and sugar beet are also profitable
crops ; maize and tomatoes ripen Avell, and peaches and grapes come
to perfection in the open air.
The province possesses excellent means of communication, both by
railways and by water through the lakes, and the River St. Lawrence,
with all parts of the Dominion and to the Atlantic ports.
The public schools are all free atid non-sectarian. All resident
children betAA’een the ages of 5 and 21 are alloAved to attend them.
There are seA r eral large cities and towns in this proAnnce, among
others Toronto, OttaAva, Hamilton, London, Kingston, Ac.
In mineral Avealth it has great resources, producing iron, copper,
lead, silver, marble, petroleum, salt, Ac. Its immense forests of pine
timber are Avell knoAvn.
Its principal manufactures are cloth, linen, clothing, leather,
furniture, saAvn timber, fiax, iron and hardware, paper, soap, cotton,
and Avoollen, goods, steam engines, and locomotives, wooden .ware of
all descriptions, agricultural implements, Ac. Cattle, sheep, and pigs,
Tlairy and agricultural produce are exported largely from th^


Province, and the trade is increasing rapidly.
The rates of wages for farm labourers are from *4os. to 60s. per
month, with board and lodging ; for common labourers from about 3s.
to 4s. 2d. a day, without board and lodging, and for female
domestic servants from 14s. to 245. per month, all found. Good cooks
get rather more.
Provisions are much cheaper than in England or in the United
States. Beef, veal, and mutton are from 3d. to 6d. per lb. ; pork, 4d.
to 5d.; bacon, 6d. to Bd.; bread (best), 4jd. to sd. per 4-lb. loaf;
butter (fresji), Is.; salt ditto, 7d. to Bd. per lb.; potatoes, Is. 9d. to
2s. per bushel; tea, 25.; sugar (brown), 4d. to per lb.; milk 3d.
per quart; beer, Is. 2d. to Is. 6d. per gallon; and tobacco, Is. to 2s.
per lb.
QUEBEC.— Upon eight of the great colonization roads, every male
colonist and emigrant being 18 years of age may obtain a free grant
of 100 acres. The conditions are that at the end of the fourth year
a dwelling must have been erected on the land, and 12 acres be under
cultivation. Letters Patent are then granted.
Crown lands can also be purchased at 30 cents to 60 cents an acre.
The province has a homestead law exempting from seizure, under
certain conditions, the property of emigrants.
The soil is of very good quality, and its productions are similar to
those of other parts of Canada.
Gold, lead, silver, iron, copper, platinum, &c., &c., are found, —but
mining in this province is only yet in its infancy. Phosphate mining
is becoming an important industry; its value as a fertilizer is
recognised in England and France, and large quantities are being
exported.
The fisheries are abundant, the yield in some years amounting in
value to $2,000,000..
The principal cities are Quebec and Montreal, but there are many
large towns.
The remarks made in the case of the province of Ontario will apply
to Quebec also.
This is afforded by railways and by the River St. Lawrence. This
province contains tlie tw r o great ports of shipment—Montreal and
Quebec, both of which have extensive -wharfage aocomodation, and
-ocean-going vessels of 4,000 tons can be moored alongside the quays.
NEW BRUNSWICK.— A grant of 100 acres may be obtained
toy any person upon the follow ing conditions :
On payment of S2O cash to aid in construction of roads and hedges,
•or labour of the value of $lO per year for three years.
A house to be built within tw r o years. Ten acres to be cleared and
.cultivated in three years. Proof of residence on the land.
The soil is fertile, and produces all the fruits generally found in
England. Wheat averages about 20, barley 29, oats 34, buckwheat
33, rye 20, Indian corn 41, potatoes 226, turnips 456 bushels to the
acre. The potatoes and fruits command good prices in the English
market. •


►Ship building is one of the staple industries of the province, but its
manufactories generally are increasing rapidly. There are manu-
factories of woollen and cotton goods, boots and shoes, leather,
carriages, wooden ware, paper, soap, hardware, &c., &c.
NOVA SCOTIA. —The quantity of land for disposal in this
province is limited. The price is §44 per hundred acres (about 91.) y
free grants, however, being given to bona fide settlers.
The soil produces good crops of cereals and roots, and large
quantities of apples are grown for export.
The value of the fisheries in Nova Scotia in 1876 was upwards of
1,000,000?. sterling, consisting of cod-fish, mackerel, haddock, herring,
lobsters, &c.,
Nova Scotia contains large' tracts of woodlaiads, which produce
timber for ship building, and lumber chiefly for export.
Gold, iron, coal, and gypsum are found in large quantities.
There are several railways in the province, giving it communication
with other parts of Canada.
Halifax, which is the chief city of the province, is the winter port
of the Dominion. It possosses a fine harbour, and is connected by
railways with all parts of the Continent.
PRiNCE EDWARD ISLAND. —Most of the lands in this
province are taken up, but improved farms can be obtained from about
41. per acre.
This island produces excellent crops of cereals, and is noted for the
good quality of its oats. Horses, cattle, and sheep are plentiful, and
the country is exceedingly well spoken of as regards the fertility of
the soil and its cheapness.
BRITISH COLUMBIA. —This province, which includes Van-
couver’s Island, is the most western of the provinces which constitute
the Diminion of Canada, its boundaries being the Rocky Mountains
on the east, and the Pacific Ocean on the west. .
It possesses many fine harbours, one of which (Burrard Inlet) will
probably form the terminus of the Canadian Pacific Railway when
completed ; and 125 miles of the line in this province are now under
contract.
Heads of families, widows, or single men can obtain free grants of
land from 160 to 320 acres, according to locality; the fee is about §7-
Surveyed lands can be purchased at one dollar per acre, payable
over two years, and improved farms cost from 11. to 81. per acre.
British Columbia has a large extent of valuable timber land, pro-
ductive fisheries, which are increasing in value yearly ; gold and coal
are also found in large quantities. The yield of gold, from 1858 to
1876, was equal to about forty millions of dollars.
Had we no other reason for- advising agricultural labourers and
farmers with capital to seek a home in Canada, the following indis-
putable facts we think ought to bear out our recommendation: —In
the year 1878 there were nearly 1,000 farmers left their homes in the
United States to seek their fortunes in the Manitobian district, and
every year this number is increasing. It may seem to those who are


unacquainted with the history and dimexisious of this vast counti*y
that if this.influx of farmers were to continue for a few years, the
country -would. soon be covered by farmers, and there would be no
space left for new-comers, but this idea could oixly creep into the
minds of those who are entirely ignorant of the extents of this
country, and when we state that Manitoba alone, which only forms a
part of the Dominion of Canada, is equal in area to that of France and
Germany combined, axid that it forms one great expanse of rich and
vei’daxit land, the most uninformed cannot but be able to compi’ehend
its magnitude, and the extraordinary field that has been opened for
capital and labour. In a few years’ time this country, which was
described by the late Loi'd Beaconsfield as an “illimitable wilderness,”
will have become one of the most fertile countries on the face of the
earth, and thei*e is not at the present time a spot where enterprise,
whether that of capital or labour, is more likely to meet with sub-
stantial reward.
AUSTRALIA.
Although we have spoken thus highly of the Dominion of Canada
as a field where the emigrant may ultimately meet with success after
the struggles which he will at first undoubtedly have to undergo, it is
not our wish to underate the other fields of emigration in which the
man of perseverance and determination may be rewarded.
Australia, United States, Queensland, New Zealand, Tasmania,
South Africa etc. all offerj more or less, inducements to the emigrant,
and although we have not space to go deeply into the characteristics
of the places mentioned, we shall endeavour to lay before our readers
a brief statement of the nature of these different fields, all of which
have many admirers, and there can be no doubt but that thrifty clear-
headed men will make their way in either of the places mentioned.
We will now lay before the reader the chief features which character-
ise the different places in Australia, viz.: —New South Wales,
Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, Western Australia, and
Tasmania.
The climate in Australia is very healthy and resembles that of
England to some extent, neither extreme heat nor extreme cold pre-
vailing at any time of the year. Thevlear atmosphere which is almost
entirely free from the fogs which so often afflicts the English people,
renders the country very healthy to live in, it is therefore more suited
for Europeans than many of the other fields of emigration.
NEW 'SOUTH WALES.— The first colony established in
Australia contains a population of about 700,000. Its area is
estimated at about three times the size of Great Britain and
Ireland, and its chief productions for exportation are tallow, wool,
and minerals. Land can be obtained here at £1 an acre, that being
the upset price, but as the public lands •are usually disposed of by
auction, it may in many cases be bought for a lesser sum. There are


also certain kinds, which may be purchased on what is termed
conditional sale, which can be had on application to the Land Agent,
•to the extent of 320 acres, and not under 40 acres, the terms are a
deposit of 5/- per aci*e, the purchaser being allowed three years and
three months to pay the balance, or he can continue possession of land
by paying 5 per cent, interest upon the sum owing, which is payable
•quarterly. This land must be a certain distance from any town or
village, and of course must not be chosen from ground which is
for gold mining purposes. The land under cultivation in
1877 was 513,840 acres, on which were grown successfully wheat,
barley, maize, oats, rye, millet, potatoes,' tobacco, arrowroot, sugar
cane, grasses for hay, and fodder and vines, and a large area was
devoted to gardens and orchards.
The average rate of wages for carpenters, smiths, wheelwrights,
bricklayers, and masons was from Os. to 11s. per diem without hoard
and lodging, and from £BO to £l2O per annum with board and
lodging. Farm labourers and shepherds received from £3O to £4O
per annum. Female domestic servants from £2O to £OO, and good
cooks from £35.t0 £52, with board and lodging.
Here, as in many other fields for emigration, there is but little
demand for those who have no trade/ and their presence here is rather
discouraged than otherwise.
VICTORIA contains an area of about 88,000 square miles, or nearly
the area of Great Britain and Wales. Three years ago three-fifths of
the land had been granted, selected, or sold. The mineral wealth of
this colony is great, and contains excellent soil for the growth of
wheat, barley, oats, and potatoes. Tobacco is also grown, and in some
parts the tea plant. .
The land in Victoria is obtainable at £1 per acre, which may be
paid by instalments, or if bought by auction at or under the upset
price of £1 per acre must be paid for in cash. A license also may be
•obtained for iand not exceeding 320 acres before it has been surveyed,
and obtain occupation for three years at a rental of per acre. The
occupier must fence the land, reside upon it for two and a half years,
and cultivate one out of every teil acres of the land, and at the end of
that time has the option of purchasing at 14s. an acre.
Should land which has been put up by auction for sale at the
«ipset price of £ i per acre not be sold, it can be bought at the
highest price bid for it. All lands near the villages or towns must be
■sold by auction.
• Crown lands, to an extent not exceeding 200,000 acres a year,
are also disposed of at auction at an upset price of not less than 20s.
,an acre. Lands exposed to auction, and not sold, may afterwards be
purchased at the upset price, or at the highest price bid at the sale.
All town and village lands must be sold at auction. Leases of Crown
lands fof 21 years, at a rent of not less than £5 a year, and for
quantities not exceeding three acres, may be obtained for the sites
of inns, stores, smithies, and other * similar buildings* in thinly -
peopled districts ; also for bathing-places, bridges, ? v i\d other
purposes of public utility


The population of Victoria numbers about 800,000. The male
population of this colony predominates over that of the female.
There is no assistance given by Government to persons desirous of
emigrating to this colony.
The current rate of wages at the end of August, 1879, was:' —For'
farm labourers, married, without rations for family, £ 7 O to £9O per
annum—with rations for family, £45 to £5O per annum ; farm
labourers, single men, with rations, 20s. to 2os. per week; ploughmen,,
with rations, 255. to 30s. The wages for artisan labour were: —
General labourers and navvies, 6s. to Bs. per day : skilled labourers,
12s. to 14s. per day. Servants’ wages were as follows:—Cooks, £35
to £6O per annum ; housemaids, £3O to =£36 ; general servants, £3O
to £4O ; farm servants, £25 to £3O.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA. —The population of this colony is about
200,000, and the extraordinary energy which has of late years been
developed has produced marvellous results.
The area of South .Australia is over 900,000 square miles, and only
a little over one per cent, of this land is alienated from the crown.
Wool, copper, and wheat are largely exported, its copper mines
giving employment to many thousands of people, and although it
cannot boast of the gold-fields which have rendered Victoria famous,
its increasing prosperity speaks well for the industry and energy of
the inhabitants.
Speaking of the progress of the colony, the South Australian
Register says: —“ Considering the limited population of South
Australia, only amounting to 260,000 persons, about a third of whom
reside in the city and suburbs, the extent of country that is profitably
occupied in farming, pastoral pursuits, wine ajul fruit growing, and
manufactures, is creditable to the enterprise of the people. The ai*ea
of land sold to. the end of December last was an average of over 35
aci - es for every soul in the community. The returns of cultivation
for 1879 are not yet issued, but taking the figures for 1878 we find
that about one-fourtli of the land alienated was under cultivation. In
1869-70, with a population of 178,722, we cultivated 850,576 acres, or
4§ acres per head. In 18 78-9 the rate of cultivation had advanced to
8} acres per head of the population. In addition, however, to
9,000,000 acres which have been alienated from the Crown, principally
for agricultural and horticultural settlement, immense tracts of
country are leased or otherwise held from the Government for pas-
toral purposes. A quarter of a cetnury ago these tracts did not exceed
5,000 or 6,000 square miles; in 1875 they had increased to 80,000
square miles ; on June 30th, 1879, the area reached the enormous
quantity of 213,700 square miles, or 136,768,000 acres of land. These
figures will serve to show what marvellous progress is being made in
the direction of pastoral and agricultural settlement in the province.”
The wages paid to all classes of artisans here are good, and vary
according to the ability of the workman. Living is cheaper than in
England, and there is an excellent opportunity to be found here for
the thrifty man who is inclined to save money. House rent is very
reasonable, the rent of three rooms being from 6s. to. 10s. per week.


Free passages are granted to the nominees of residents in the colony
-of the following classes :
Agricultural labourers, female servants, shepherds, millers, wood-
cutters, gardeners, farriers, teamsters, and ploughmen, of ages ranging
from 18 to 40, able-bodied and healthy. The emigrants pay 15s. each
for bedding and mess-kit. After two years’ residence in the colony,
each adult emigrant is entitled to select, from any unimproved rural
Crown lands open to selection, 50 acres of land, and each emigrant
between the ages of 16 and 21, 25 acres of land, not to exceed 150
acres in all for any one family. After three years’ occupation the
land becomes the property of the selector, provided certain improve-
ments have been made on it. Emigrants have to sign an undertaking
to remain in the colony for the space of three years from the date of
arrival, or in the event of leaving the colony within that period, to
pay to the Colonial Treasury the sum of £lB per adult. Passages
are granted to families which do not comprise more than three
children under 12 years old.
The colony is well provided with Schools, Banks, Telegraphs,
and Post Offices, also charitable institutions, and Friendly Societies.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.— The population of this colony
numbers about 30,000. The climate is exceedingly healthy, although
varying considerably from its northern to its southern extremity, this
northern portion of the colony being at times very hot, but is
tempered with cool and refreshing winds.
There is steam communication with England every three or four
weeks, also ample steam communication between this and the other
Australian parts. The colony is divided into 18 counties. Here have
been established homes for the poor, Workmen’s Clubs,.Hospitals for
the sick and other charitable institutions.
The exports of the island are wool, flour, grain, finest preserves, hops,
horses, sperm oil, vegetables, tanning work, and timber.
The island contains about 154 million acres of land, and the islands
connected with it (55 in number, contain 14 millions, nearly one third
of which has been either sold or granted to settlers, leaving the Crown
lands about 12,000,000 acres, a portion of which is leased for sheep’s
runs and other purposes.
This colony may be said to be in a high state of civilization, it
possesses an efficient staff of police, has its municipal councils, its main
roads are kept in excellent order, railways are making rapid progress,
and a spirit of enterprise seems to pervade the settlers here which
speaks well for the future prosperity of the colony. The lowest upset
price of Crown land fit for agriculture is fixed by Act of Parliament
at £1 an acre, and the lowest upset price of pastoral lands at
equal to 12 years’ rental, but not less than ss. air acre. Emigrants
who have been selected as eligible persons by the appointed agents in
England, are allowed plots of land on very advantageous terms,
inasmuch as if he pays the full cost of his family’s passage out, a
warrant, which will entitle the holder to receive from the Immigration
Agent in Tasmania an order for Crown land, to the value of £lB for
each member of the family above 15 years of age, and £9 for each


member above 12 months and under 15 years old; and these land'
oi'ders will be received by the Government as payment for any Crown
lands that the emigrant may buy after his arrival. The Act also
empowers the Immigration Board to permit any persons from Europe
to India, who has paid his own and family’s passage-money, to
demand, .within a year after his arrival in the colony, a certificate to*
select 30 acres of land for himself, 20 for his wife (providing he has
one), and 10 for each child.
The rates of wages in this colony are lower than in some parts of
Australia, the cost of living is somewhat less, except, perhaps, actual
luxuries for which the emigrant who is desirous of pushing his way,,
will hardly have a craving.
The average rate of wages throughout the colony, including town
and country, are : Ploughmen, 7s. Gd. to 15s. a week ; farm labourers,
7s. to 155.; shepherds, £2O to £SO ; gardeners, £2O to £40 —all with
rations, the ration being about 121 b. or more of meat, and 141 b. of
flour, 21b. sugar, jib. tea per week ;—day laboui-ers, 4s. to ss. a day ;
bricklayers, ss. to Bs.; masons, 6s. to 10s.; carpenters, ss. to 10s.
without rations —female cooks, £ls to £3O, with board ; laundresses,
£l7 to £3O, ditto; general servants, £l3 to £3O, ditto ; housemaids,
£l3 to £25, ditto ; nursemaids, £l2 to £2O, ditto.
The average price of provisions in the various towns : Bacon, 6d. to
9d, per lb.; bread, Hd. to 2d. per lb. ; butter (fresh), lOd. to 16d.
ditto; candles, 54d. ditto; cheese, Gd. to Is. ditto; coffee, Is. to
Is. 3d. ditto ; meat, 2|d. to Gd. ditto ; milk, 4d. to Gd. per quart ;
sugai*, 4d. to Gd. per lb.; tea, Is. id. to 3s. (id. ditto; potatoes, 3s. to
4s. per cwt.; flour, 12s. per cwt.; beer, Gd. per quart; rum, 3s. Gd. a
bottle; brandy, ss. ditto; coals, 17s. to 275. per ton.
TASMANIA.— Here are wanted men with capital. Agricultural
labourers, domestic servants, and such like will find immediate
employment at good wages. Farm labourers here receive from Bs. to
14s. a week, and, in'addition, a cottage, firing, and the following
weekly rations: —12 lbs. meat, 14 lbs. flour, 2 lbs. sugar, lb. 'tea
and milk, and if he is a steady, sober, industrious man he will
receive.much better treatment than he could expect to find in England.
He has a piece of ground allotted to him, and his children from eight
to twelve, or fourteen years of age will find during certain seasons of
the year remunerative employment. An energetic man here will soon
find his way to better his condition.
Domestic servants here are also in great demand, and are almost
sure to marry well if properly behaved, their wages varying from £ls
to £3O a year. There is not much demand at the present time for
mechanics.
The educational establishments of Tasmania are, and have been
for many years, such that the son pf the poorest hutholder, if the boy
possesses talent, might hope to become a member of the Legislature,,
or to fill the highest offices in the State or in the Church ; and there-
is a strong current of that Scottish feeling in the colony which
induces the parent to give a child the best education he or she can
afltord, and in 90 cases out of 100 to deny luxuries in a household,


so that a good education may be afforded to all the little ones ; many
parents well knowing that the only provision they can make for their
children is an education, coupled possibly with a small life policy.
Families in Tasmania range larger than in England or Europe, or in
the warmer Australian Colonies, the average of households being
about 5 children, whilst families of 13 or 14 are not unfrequent. But
a large family is not the stumbling block in a man s way to better his
condition here, there is not the same difficulty of providing for them
or supplying them with a good education.
* THE UNITED STATES.
Whilst we have spoken thus highly of the colonies mentioned in-
this work, we are fully aware that to many the United States of
America present a most alluring picture to many in the old world.
The enterprise which characterises the Americans and which has
made that nation so powerful, still draws many thousands yearly to
its shores, and there is still scope for the enterprising emigrant there.
With the exception of house rent living in New York is as cheap
as in England, bread and meat being sold at much the same piices,
while fruit is very cheap and plentiful. ’ •
Wages generally do not run as high as they did some years ago,
but they are still far above the usual rates paid in England; and
there is no doubt that an intelligent mechanic may still make his
way in America if he is sober and attentive to his duties.
New York, Brooklyn, and New Jersey contain a population of
1,000,600, and these'figures are yearly increasing. The working-
classes here rarely have houses of their own ; they, as a rule, live m
tenements similar to our industrial dwellings, the rents varying from
twenty dollars to thirty dollars a month. A carpenter here for his
day s labour of eight hours earns three to three and a-half dollars a
day. Bricklayers and stonemasons four to four and-a-half dollars a
day; workers in iron are not in demand here at the present time.
Buffalo is on the west of the State, and has a population of 160,000.
Unlike New York, the working classes occupy separate houses, and
in many cases they are the proprietors also. There are greater
facilities given here for acquiring property than elsewhere. Boston
has a population of 350,000, and is famous for its many splendid
buildings; the staple trade here is fish. New Bedford, which is
situated some short distance from Boston, does an extensive trade in
fish as welL alt ham, a small township in Massachusetts, is.chiefly .
devoted to watch making. Webster has a population of 9,000, and is
chiefly devoted to the manufacture of broadcloth, but does a good
business as well in cigar making. Lowell has a population of 50,000,
and does an entensive trade in cotton, woollen, and hosiery goods.
In this business there are some 16,000 hands employed. Fall River
is a town which is celebrated for its cotton manufactures ; it has a
population of 500,000, and has some fifty mills, which contain about


30,000 looms. In Pennsylvania, Lancaster holds a good position,
having a population of 20,000. Iron and coal mines abound here,
and the country is rich in agricultural products. The manufacture of
steel is an important industry here.
The State of Michigan has extensive iron and copper mines, and is
also famous for its magnificent pine forests. Ann Arbor has a
population of 12,000, and does a large trade in agricultural imple-
ments, and has extensive fiower mills at work. Mount Morris is
almost entirely devoted to agricultural pursuits. The farms here
average about 200 acres, the majority of them doing their own tillage.
Cincinnati, the principal city in Ohio, seems to be a very flourishing
place. Wages here are good, and the cost of living is not so great as
in other parts. Arbor, with a population of 11,000, has extensive
boot factories, and is a flourishing little place. In Lewiston there are
n, great'number of mills, no less than 50,000 looms being in daily use,
but here the wages are not spoken of as being good, whilst rent and
provisions are said to be high. Of the wages in the mills, pickers
and strippers get 14 dollars per day, girls 6| dollars per week. For
warp spinning on ring frames, with young class of help, 92 cents per
day ; filling mule spinning, 2 dollars per day ; spooling, warping, and
•dressing department, with English slashers, females, 1 dollar 8 cents
per day ; males, I dollar 50 cents per day ; weavers, 1 dollar 20 cents
per day. In some of the fancy-coloured, work girls can earn 2 to*2|
dollars ; but this is very hard work, and few can stand it. Board in
the corporation houses costs 2 dollars per week ; but in addition to
this the companies pay half a dollar per week, which is, in fact, an
increase of wage. Mechanics employed on the machinery in the mill
get 2| dollars per day. • Kents for workpeople living .in their own
homes, average for four rooms, 150 dollars per day. Provisions. —
•Good poultry, 20 cents per pound ; inferior, 10 cents. Sirloin steaks
sell at from 25 to 28 cents. One rump steak sells at 25 cents; round
steak, 18 to 22 cents. The back half of a fore quarter sells from 18
to 22 cents per pound. The shin is worth only 4 cents per pound.
What is termed the “chuck” averages from 8 to 10 cents per pound.
Mutton is plenty at 9to 10 cents per pound. Good Maine hogs sell
iit 10 to 11 cents. Fresh hams sell at 12 to 124 cents ; pork steak,
10 cents; spare-rib, 15 to 1(3 cents. Potatoes average 50 cents per
bushel. Onions sell at 1 dollar 25 cents per bushel. Turnips, beets,
carrots, and ordinary squash sell at 1 cent per pound ; extra squash,
1| to 2 cents. Sweet potatoes sell at 4 cents. Beans are 3 dollars
per bushel; butter, 34 cents per pound ; cheese, 15 cents per pound;
-eggs, 35 cents per dozen.
In Boston cheese and butter exceed these prices. Dexter is a great
woollen manufacturing district, but the wages do not average more
itlian 1 dollar 70 cents a day, and the female labour ranges from 1 to
14 dollars per day. Board here costs about 2 dollars a week.
Rockland, in Maine, is somewhat famous for its granite, and stone-
cutters here are well paid, rent and provisions being cheaper in Maine
than in the capital city. St. Andrews, Calais, St. George, Red Buck,
are all rich in timber and stone, whilst Houlton, which is .the capital


of the Arvostoak comity, having a population of 5,000, lias become
famous for its agricultural resources. Land here is sold at ten dollars
an acre. The climate is very healthy, "wheat, oats, buckwheat, hay,
and potatoes being grown largely. Wages are good, and during some
parts of the year run very high.
For some considerable time back Maine has had a special law by
which a settler, whether American or not, possesses the right to select
a portion of land and pay for it in labour. The State is divided into
squares of six miles each, and then again divided into lots of 160
acres. Making his selection, the settler has to give promissory notes
for 80 dollars, payable to the State, and he is allowed three years to
pay the sum, one third befng clue each of the three years.
The labour consists of road-making, for which the settler receives
.credit at the rate of two dollars a day, so that a fortnight’s labour in
each year clears otf the debt. The first crop generally covers the cost
of clearing.
In the state of Pennsylvania, Lancaster stands prominent as an
agricultural district. Its population numbers 20,000. There are
some rich mines, but wheat and tobacco are its chief products. It is
not spoken of as possessing great inducements to the emigrant, how-
ever.
Michigan is a large coal, iron, and copper producing State. It
has a population of 1,600,000. Its principal industries, however, are
connected with timber.
Wisconsin, Welworkee, does a large iron trade, the population
being about 100,000. Oshkosh, with its population of 20,000 covies,-
on an extensive trade in timber. Most men till their own farms
during harvest. Farm labourers earn from $0 to 40 dollars a month,-
with food and camp accommodation, and ip the winter these men find
employment in the North at the pineries. r l here are plenty of farms
of 160 acres for sale, with good house arid barn, 100 ft. by 40 ft., at
from 40 to 50 dollars an acre.
In the State of Indiana farming operations are conducted on a large
scale, the labourers’ wages being about 20 dollars a month with
board. It is considered a healthy State. Kansas exports a large
quantity of the meat that reaches England here, and at Netraska the
land is most fertile. The price of land is from 2 to 10 dollars per
acre. lowa, Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Northern Indiana, are
said to be the best wheat-producing districts.
Sir John Bennett, speaking at a meeting held at the Cannon Street
Hotel, said: —The subject of emigration, he considered, was of the
greatest importance at the present time. The English farmers were
losing money, and, as one of the largest food importers in the world
had told him, in England, agriculture was wiped out. It was to
America they would have to look for their food supplies in the future.
He was at Thames Haven a few days since, and he had seen a big
steamer come in, with her hold filled with wheat and maize, and with
beasts on the deck, and in forty-eight hours that steamer had dis-
charged her cargo and'was off again. It was impossible for them to
stand against such competition. Last month as many as 60,000


persons emigrated, and that rate of emigration would go on. He had
been a farmer ; he knew a little about farming, and he knew that if
he had to live on the profits of his farm (if he had not had a farm in
Cheapside), he would have had to go. The labourers would soon
shake the dust off their feet and be off, and the farmers would have
to follow. A farmer this year could get £7 an acre for his wheat, and
that would not pay rent, the exorbitant taxation, and the paltry wages
of the agricultural labourer —wages which no man ought to take, but
which were quite as much as the farmers could afford to give. The
landlords did not know what to do with the farms which were being
thrown on their hands; and the Commissioners who had been sent
out by the Government to inquire had returned with a report which
told us of the unbounded power of production of the Western States.
The Lord Mayor’s Fund.
The Lord Mayor has invited subscriptions to a fund for assisting
3; number of the unemployed to proceed to Canada, where work is
promised them on the Canadian Pacific Railway, about £6,000 being
required for the removal of 200 families, the passage-money to be
regarded as a loan repayable by instalments,, so that others may go
out subsequently. From the arrangements made, only the fittest
among them can cherish any reasonable hope of being among the
selected few. The others may, however, console themselves with the
fact that other means-will be found to aid them to emigrate'sliould
dliey desire to do so.
More than a generation ago Carlyle raised the cry for a Free
Bridge for Emigrants, a demand which has several times been unsuc-
cessfully made. In the early and prosperous years of the last decade,
•Canada, New Zealand, and some of the Australian Colonies voted
large sums for emigration purposes, and thousands of families were
•••enabled to move from their old homes on almost nominal terms, and
• the Colonies has had small reason to regret their outlay. At the
Mansion House meeting, Sir Alexander Galt, the High Commissioner
-of Canada, made an offer, on the part of the Dominion Government,
.to contribute the sum of £1 per adult towards the expense of removing
working men from London to Manitoba, but we hope, on reflection,
.that this sum will be increased.
Last year 243,002 British or Irish persons emigrated from the
United Kingdom, being an increase of 15,400 over the year 1880.
We do not count foreigners simply passing through England to make
the voyage in a British steamship, of whom there were about 149,500.
This immense emigration, of the actual people of this country, it will
be seen averages about (566 per day throughout the year witbpwt
counting foreigners.


HOW TO EMIGRATE: WORDS OF WARNING.
The emigrant, when he has finally decided where to go, should put
himself in connection with a respectable firm of shipping agents, who
will furnish him with all the necessary particulars regarding passage-
money, time of sailing, and, in fact, all that is necessary for him to
know; and by carrying out the instructions which are given him, may
save himself and family much suffering and annoyance, and likewise
save money by doing so. We earnestly warn all intending emigrants
against putting themselves in communication with agents of foreign
firms about which they cannot get anything like authentic informa-
tion. The intense sufferings which thousands of emigrants have
endured through accepting the false statements of those unscrupulous
men is beyond belief, and it has become a fact patent to all who have
any knowledge of emigration, that instead of saving money by
adopting the advice of these agents, money is lost.
We shall consider our work has not been written in vain if we
succeed in opening the eyes of British subjects leaving England to the
traps set by these unscrupulous men, who, when they receive the
passage-money from their victims seem to think they have done all
that is required of them.
In order to aid intending emigrants to select their passages we notice
the facilities afforded by some of the best Lines of Steamers.
Houlder Brothers & Co.
Those of our readers desirous of proceeding to Australia or
New Zealand, on application to Messrs. Houlder Bros. & Co., of
146, Leadenhall Street, London, will be supplied with very useful
information regarding the means of obtaining berths, fares, Ac. to
the various ports, and all other matters which is necessary for them
to know. Every attention is'paid to the passengers sailing by this
Line, the berths are well ventilated, cleanliness and thorough
ventilation being scrupulously insisted upon. The sleeping berths
in the third cabin of these splendid steamers are enclosed for married
eon pies and single women, thus securing an amount of privacy which
cannot be always obtained on board of emigrant vessels.
The scale of Dieting also is very good, and ample both in the
second and third cabins, indeed is such, that nothing can be desired
for more than is supplied.
As it is necesssry to take some things in the shape of domestic'
utensils on board, an application to Messrs. Moulder Bros. A Co. will
put anyone in.possession of all the necessary details regarding what
is wanted for the voyage, thus enabling them to calculate their
expenditure to a fraction, a very desirable state of matters at a time
when money is of such importance, and when it is above all times-
neeessarv to save every .penny.


The rules adopted by this Line of steamers are the results of long
experience, every one of which tends to the comfort of the passengers,
and we can quite believe the statement that many leave these
excellently constructed vessels with regret, the time spent on board
having passed so pleasantly away, owing to the harmony that existed
amongst the passengers during the whole voyage, and we doubt not
that when such arrangements are so rigidly adhered to, creating
universal good feeling thus friendships are of ten. found which last
through a lifetime. Particulars of the sailing of these vessels will be
found in another part of this guide. The following is the dieting scale
for the third cabin. The first and second cabin passengers of course
being supplied with a higher scale of food.
Preserved Meats
1 lb.
Butter
n
oz.
Soup and Bouilli
• i lb.
Currants, or ...
Itaisins, Valencia
X
4
lb.
Prime Indian Beef
H lb-
X
lb.
Irish Mess Pork
1 lb.
Suet...
<)
oz.
Biscuit
3* lb. .
Treacle
x
lb.
Flour
3 lb.
Pickles or Vinegar
t pint.
Bice ... . ...
lb.
Mustard
oz.
Peas . .
£ pint.
Pepper
1
4
oz.
Oatmeal
1 pint.
Salt ...
2
oz.
Sugar, raw
1 lb.
Potatoes, Fresh or
2
lb.
Lime Juice
6 oz.
Preserved ditto
X
lb.
Tea ...
2 oz.
Water
21
qts.
Coffee
3£ oz.
The Inman Line.
Messrs. Eives & Allen of 99, Cannon Street, London, will supply
all information regarding the sailing of those magnificent steamers
belonging to the Inman Line, trading between Liverpool and the
United States. These steamers are built in water-tight 'compartments,
are large and commodious, and have made amongst the most rapid
voyages across the Atlantic on record. On this Line every attention
may be expected for the comfort of the passengers. Experienced
surgeons are carried by these vessels, also stewardesses to attend to
the wants of the female portion of the passengers, and indeed, the high
standing which this Line has attained is sufficient guarantee that
every care is taken of those sailing in their steamers.
The intending emigrant should also notice, that on application to
the Inman Company, or any of their numerous Agents, tlfley will be
supplied with a special rate of railway fares which is considerably
under the usual rates charged, this and other valuable information
will be supplied them in relation to all the necessary articles which
the steerage passenger must take with them.
Steerage passengers will find their comfort and convenience care-
fully studied in every respect. They are carried upon.the same deck
as the Cabin Passengers, the sleeping rooms being inclosed,
contain a limited number in each, are well- lighted, warmed, and
thoroughly ventilated thoughout. Married couples are berthed bv
themselves. Single men and women in separate rooms, the strictest


privacy being thus secured. Matrons carried for attendance on
Females and Children. Ample space is provided for partaking of
meals and promenading. The Bill of Fare includes an abundant
supply of Cooked Provisions, served out by the Company’s Stewards.
The Tkmperley Line.
This Line conveys passengers to Canada and America direct from
London. The steamships employed are both powerful and commodious,
they sail regularly during the season from the Victoria Docks, and the
voyages, as a rule, • are rapid, owing to the splendid and first-class
character of the vessels.
Special arrangements are made by the proprietors of this Line for
Steerage passengers, who are berthed in three separate compartments ;
one for married couples with their children under 12 years of age,
one for single -women and one for single men. During the day families
can assemble together and mess at the same table. They are provided
with sleeping berths, and are allowed 10 cubic feet of luggage per
adult, freight fx'ee.
The diet is excellent in quality, and plentiful in quantity, consist-
ing of three meals a day, viz.:—breakfast at 8, dinner at 1, and supper
at 6 o’clock, all food being cooked and served out by the ship’s
servants with every possible attention. Fare to Quebec, £5 55.,
New York or Boston, £0 Os. Children, one to twelve years, half fare.
Infants, 10s.
Assisted passages from London to Quebec are granted under
arrangement with the Government of the Dominion, to agricultural
labourers and their families, who will have to pay. only £5 each
person over 12 years of age, £2 10s. each person between one and
twelve years, and 10s. each infant under one year; also to female
domestic servants who will pay £4 each. All applications for assisted
passages must be made on special forms, obtainable from Temperleys,
Carter, and Darke, 21, Billiter Street, London, where all particulars
regarding freight and passages may be obtained.
Orient an» Pacific Steam Navigation Companies.
Emigrants who intend to try their fortunes in any of our Australian
Colonies, have in the steamships of the Orient Line all that can be
desired, as they are especially constructed for long voyages, and
make the passage to Australia iii about forty days. Sailing every
fortnight.
The fares are on the most reasonable terms, especially for third-class
passengers, as will be seen from the following :
To Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney.
First class, saloon cabins, (10 to 70 guineas each First class, main
deck, 50 guineas each; Second Class, 35 to 40 guineas each; Third
class, closed cabins, with two berths (for married couples) 20 guineas
each; Third class, closed cabins, with four berths, 18 guineas each;
Steerage, 'open berths, for Men only, 15 guineas each.
Children under 12 years of age, travelling with the parent, half-


price. Infants under 12 months free.- Through tickets are also issued
to other Australian and New Zealand ports.
The comfort of the passengers during the voyage is studied by the
Companies with the greatest care, and their food is of the best
description, fresh meat being supplied throughout the voyage.
Passengers joining at Gravesend are conveyed to the ship free
-of charge, by special train, and steam tender from Tilbury Pier,
leaving Fenehurch Street Station of the London, Tilbury, and
Southend Railway on the day of embarkation. Passengers joining at
Plymouth are embarked by steam tender, leaving Millbay Pier,
Plymouth, on the day fixed for leaving Plymouth.
The Managers of the Line are Messrs. F. Green & Co., 5, Fenehurch
Avenue, and Anderson, Anderson, & Co., 13, Fenehurch Avenue,
London, E.C. ,
Other and more complete particulars can be obtained of the latter
firm, and by referring to the advertisement on the coyer of this Guide.
National Line.
The splendid iron screw steamships of this well-known and long
established Line sail every * Wednesday, from Liverpool (calling
at Queenstown.) and from London (direct from the Royal Albert
Dock), to New York, taking passengers to every part of the United
States and Canada. „
The Steerage Passage to New York, Boston, Philadelphia, and
Baltimore is £0 for adults, £3 for children under 12 years, and for
infants under 12 months 21s.
This Company is now one of the most flourishing and popular in
existence. The steamers are amongst the largest and finest afloat,
jand arc so well known to the public for safety, comfort, and
regularity, as to require scarcely any recommendation. In regard to
safety, the National Line stands pre-eminent, having enjoyed a com-
plete" immunity from accident to passengers at sea since its formation
seventeen years ago. .
They have been constructed by the most celebrated builders in
Great Britain, and are of beautiful model, enabling them to make
regular passages in all kinds of weather. They are built entirely of
iron and steel (except the merely decorative parts), and divided into
water-ti'dit and fire-proof compartments, with’ steam-pumping,
hoisting” and steering gear, and provided with fire extinguishers,
improved sounding apparatus, and generally found throughout in
everything calculated to add to their safety and to the comfort and
convenience of passengers.
The Company itself takes the risk of insurance (to the amount of
£100,000) on each of its steamers, while the most southerly routes, —
although somewhat the longest, yet pleasantest and Safest, —have
always been adopted, and fogs, ice, and headlands consequently
avoided, thus giving passengers the best guarantee for safety. The
captains and officers of the National Line are allowed a .handsome
bonus every half-year, provided the steamers are safely navigated and
accidents avoided.


The Anchor Line.
For thirty years past the magnificent steamers of the Anchor Line
have sailed from Great Britain to America. These high-class Clyde
built steamers are fitted up in a manner which secures the utmost
comfort to the passengers, and the arrangements on board are so
perfect that we cannot wonder at the high position this Line has
attained in the shipping world, and we find that they have adopted
Lieutenant Manrip’s system of separate steam lane routes for the
outward and homeward passages of their Atlantic steamers, which
reduces the chance of collision, lessens the ordinary dangers of
navigation, and ensures finer weather. By this means a feeling of
greater security is given to the passengers.
Separate services to New York are carried on by this Line from
London, Glasgow, and Barrow-in-Furness. The London steamers go
direct, those from Glasgow and Barrow call at Londonderry and
Dublin respectively, and thus all parts of Great Britain obtain direct
services.
All particulars regarding passage-money, time of sailing, &c., will
be supplied by Messrs. Henderson Brothers, 18, Leadenhall
Street, London, or 47, Union Street, Glasgow.
Passengers by the Anchor Line can be booked through to any part
of the United States, Canada, California, and British Columbia, at the
lowest rates, and can be forwarded to and via San Francisco, and to
China, Japan, Sandwich Islands, Australia, and New Zealand at
through rates.
It.is impossible within the limits of this Guide to give particulars
of all the various Steam and Sailing Vessel Lines. There are many,
however, equally good with those mentioned, affording very frequent
opportunities to passengers, and intending emigrants will do well to
appiy to Messrs. Wincott, Cooper & Co.,
3, Brabant Court, Philpot Lane, London, w hose long, experience in
Shipping Agency, and whose extensive business transactions with
the.leading Lines, eminently qualifies them for making a good
selection from those named as well as from others, and for securing
every advantage.
One of the difficulties attending the colonial settler is that of ob-
taining articles of clothing at a moderate price. The duties being so
excessive greatly increases the cost, often 30 per cent. We therefore
advise intending emigrants to purchase their outfits before leaving
England. By so doing they will experience a great saving, and get
much better value for their money.
A tide of emigration from Scotland, bidding fair to equal that of
1852, when the “ Californian gold fever ” was at its height, has re-
cently set in. In 1852, over 368,000 persons left the United Kingdom,
of w hom nearly two-thirds went to the United States; and induce-
ment being the prospect of making a fortune at the “ diggings.” In
the present instance, however, there is no such attraction. The whole
country is affected by the movement, but it appears to have taken an
exceptionally strong hold in Edinburgh, wdiere for some time the
buliding and other trades have suffered from an over supply of labour.


“I WOULD NOT GO A VOYAGE WITHOUT IT.”
The Grunt Itfnifdy for Sea Sickness, lluariarhu, Itlllonsness, »n<l Fevers.
Drs. Prout, Morgan, Turley, Gibbon, Sparks, Dowsing, Stevens, and many other Medical Men
have given unqualified testimony to the importance of the discovery and the great worth of
LAMPLOUGH’S PYRETIC SALINE
As possessing most valuable elements calculated to restore and maintain Health with
perfect vigour of Body and Mind.
It is Effervescing and Tasteless, forming a most Invigorating, Vitalising, and Refreshing Beverage,
Gives instant relief in Hcndnchr, Sra or Billons Sickness, Constipation, Indigestion.
Ijisslliiilc, Heartburn, and Feverish foists ; prevents and quickly cures the worst form of
Typhus, Scarlet, and other Fevers, Smallpox, Measles, and Eruptive or Sit In
Complaints, and various other altered conditions of the blood.
Mr. D. Harris writes “ Three years ago I crossed the Atlantic, and during that and other
voyages I found Pyretic Saline the only thing that had any good effect in sea sickness. My saloon
berth was often visited by applicants for supplies from my few bottles, and I became quite
popular in consequence.”
“ A passenger to Lima complained to me of nausea. I offered a dose of Pyretic Saline which
he accepted. 1 lent him the bottle. He now came to tell me I had made him a different man.”
—From “ To Jamaica and Back,” by Sir Sibbald W. Scott, Bart.
A sufferer from sea sickness writes :—“After using Pyretic Saline, the effect was wonder-
ful ;my appetite returned, and I again felt myself. I would not go a voyage without it."
Dr. Turley.— “ I found it act as a specific in my experience and family in the worst form of
Scarlet Fever, no other medicine being required.”
CAUTION. —Beware of Spurious Salines and Effervescing Salts containing injurious elements.
In Patent Glass Stoppered Bottles, 2s. Oil., 4s. M., 11s., and 21s. each.
To lie obtained of any Chemist or Patent Medicine Dealer, and of
11. LAMPLOUGH, 113, Holborn, London, E.C.
O-A-ÜbT-AID-A. &G -AJMIIEIR/EC.A..
“TEMPERLEY” LINE.
LONDON (direct) TO QUEBEC.
The splendid steamers of this Line sail from Royal Victoria Docks,
at short intervals during the season. Passengers booked to all parts
of Canada and the United States.
Fares to Quebec, Cabin, 13 Guineas. Steerage, 5 Guineas.
Children 1 to 12 Years, Half-fare; Infants, 10*.
Assisted Passages. —London to Quebec granted by the under-
signed, to Agricultural Labourers and their Families. Fares,
Adults, £5 ; Children, 1 to 12 Years £2 10s.; Infants, 10s. each ;
also to Female Domestic Servants, Fare, £4 each.
For further particulars apply to
TEMPERLEYS, CARTER & DARKE,
21, Billiter Street, London, E.C.


4
bsothe^
REGULAR LINE OF
Qq*.
&
STEAMERS AND CLIPPER SHIPS
TO
AUSTRALIA, CAPE OF GOOD HOPE,
S-e.
Clipper Ships of the highest class, having excellent accommodation for
Passengers, are despatched every month to the various Ports of Australia and
the greatest attention is given to the comfort of Passengers travelling by them.
Chief Cabin —
Second Class—
Open Berths for Single Men
Children under 12 Years of Age Half-price; Infants under Twelve Month * Free.
MOULDER BROTHERS & Co. are also despatching a Monthly Line of
Steamers fom LONDON to
ADELAIDE, MELBOURNE, AND SYDNEY,
And those carrying Passengers offer exceptional advantages over many of the
other Lines; the Fares taken being very moderate, as is shown from the
following particulars:—
First Saloon, including Bedding and Linen ... 45 gns.
Second Class (two in a Cabin) ... ••• ••• 25 ~
w (four „ 22 „
Third Ciass, Closed Cabins ... ... ••• •• 16 ~
Open Berths for Men only ... ... 13 „
A free table well supplied with Fresh Meat, Poultry, Ac., is kept in the
Saloon, and the Second and Third Class Passengers have a good dietary, the
provisions being of the best quality.
Full particulars can be obtained by application to the Offices,
146, Leadenhall St., E.C.;
Water St., Liverpool; or, 30, Hope St., Glasgow.


EMIGRATION TO AMERICA.
NATIONAL LINE OF STEAMERS
BETWEEN
LIVERPOOL, QUEENSTOWN, LONDON & NEW YORK.
Consisting of the following magnijicent full-powered iron-screvj steamships :
One of which leaves Liverpool for New York every Wednesday, calling at
Queenstown (Ireland), on Thursdays, and one from London (Boy a l
Albert Duds'), every Wednesday, DIRECT for New York.
£6 STEERAGE PASSAGE £6
TO NEW YORK, BOSTON, PHILADELPHIA, OR BALTIMORE.
Children under 12 years of age, half-fame. Infants under 12 months, £1 Is.
I’aKscugrrs l>ook<‘«l at through rates to all parts of tlic l ulled Slates it Canada.
Children between 12 and 5 years are charged haf-farcs.
UNDER FIVE YEARS FREE BY AMERICAN RAILWAYS.
SPECIAL FEATURES OF THE NATIONAL LINE.
Established 17 years. Never an accident to passengers since its formation !
Not insured: Bonuses to Captains and Officers for safe Navigation!
Always preferred by Her Majesty’s Government for Transports !
Loftier and more roomy Steerages than the majority of Steamers!
Separate accommodation for single women, married couples, & single men
■
Properly qualified Medical Men, Matrons and Stewards!
Lavatories separate and distinct for Males and Females !
Dietary abundant in excess of Passenger Act Requirements !
For further particulars apply to any Agents of the Company in any city or
town in the Kingdom, or to the PriijijjjniH
23, WATER STREET, LIVERPOOL, AND LONDON.


EMIGRATION TO AMERICA.
INMAN LINE
learners.
SAILING FROM
.LIVERPOOL TO NEW YORK
EVERY TUESDAY OR THURSDAY.
These Magnificent Vessels (built in Water-tight and Fire-proof
Compartments) are amongst the Largest and Fastest in the World,
and are well known for the Regularity and Rapidity of their passages
across the Atlantic.
Saloons, luxuriously furnished, and Staterooms amidships, \\htie
least motion is felts
Steerage Passage as low as by any other First-class Line.
The Comfort, Convenience, and Accommodation of all
classes of Passengers carefully studied and Provisioning
unsurpassed
These Steamers are lighted with the ELECTRIC LIGHT
throughout. _ .
Passengers Booked to EVERY STATION m the
UNITED STATES & CANADA,
AT LOWEST RATES,
The Shortest route to MANITOBA and the NORTH-WEST,
to which points Special Rates are given.
Every Information given, and Passage 'Pickets issued by The INMAN
STEAM SHIP COMPANY, LIMITED, 22, Water Street, Liverpool;
or by any of the COMPANY’S AGENTS, to be found in moM Towns
and Villages, from whom Passengers are advised to purchase Tickets
before leaving home.
Eives & Allen, 99, Cannon St., London.


CHAS. BAKER * Cm
FOR CLOTHING at TRADE PRICE.
PRICE
LIST
JTi
Ir
f -
Mg
TWEED SUITS.
Ready Made.
18/11, 24/6, 29/6, 39/6
To Order.
39/0, 44/6, 49/6.
AtL GOODS
not approved
,
or the money
returned,
whichever the
Customer
prefers.
COMP LET K
PRICE LISTS
witli Self- BOY'S
measurement KILT
Forms,*.;.. 'SUIT.
5/11, 6/11,
POST FREE. 8/11, 10/9,
12/11.
OVERCOATS.
Ready Made, for
Summer and Winter
wear, 16/11, 19/11,
24/6, 29/6, 39/6,
Also to Order.
LADIES’ JACKETS
24/6, 29/6, 34/6.
To Order,
29/6, 39/6, 49/9.
LADIES’ULSTERS
At same Prices.
FROCK COATS.
Ready Made,
19/ll"T 25/6,29/6, 39 '6
To Order,
39/6, 49/6,, 59/6.
BOY’S
SULTAN
SUIT.
2/11, 3/11,
4/11, 6/11,
BOY’S
CAPE
OVER-
COAT.
6/11, 8/11.
10/9,
8/11, 12/11. 12/11, 16/11.
MAN-o’-
WAR
SUIT.
9/11, 12/11,
18/11,
Cc&ftplete.
BOY’S | BOY’S
NORFOLK: OVER-
SUIT. COATS.
8/11, 10/9, 4/11, 6/11
12/11, 8/11,10/9.
14/11, 16/11. 14/11, 19/11 STORE PRICES
MORNING OC
SUITS.
In Tweeds,
29/6, 34/6, 39/6.
To Order,
42/6, 47/6, 54/6.
COUNTRY
PARCELS
are sent Carriage
Paid to any
Station in
England,
Ireland, or
Scotland.
HOSIERY,
SHIRTS, HATS,
&o. are now
supplied
at
CIVIL
SERVICE
tUGI-AND! MS
WEST
.
M £
|Ct3THINC
&P”!
HKAI> IJKFOT*, —
271 & 272,
HIGH HOLBORJM
CHAS. BAKER & Co.,
Head Depot— 271 & 272, HIGH HOLBORN
(CUy Side of Lhiji ol ('Oi'rt f/ote’J]
City Branch— B2, FLEET STREET.
Neiv Branch — 137 & 138, TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD
(Corner of EitHom Homlj.
(HAS. IStkKH A (». HAVE AO OTHER SUPPLY STORES.
