

The
Snowy Mountains and
Mount Kosciusko
The COOMA RAILWAY
and MONARO DISTRICT.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Climbing a Snowdrift, Mount Kosciusko (Midsummer).


How shall we save life ?
and how shall we prevent infectious
disease entering the home ?
By the use of LIFEBUOY SOAP.
Where there are dirty boards and sinks,
musty cupboards and foul smells, there
disease is surely germinating, and will
thrive. This deadly work can be stopped
4
with one bar of
LI
A I
O'Si
Mi
SOAR
It will not only remove the seeds of sick-
ness which thrive in dirt, but it will
destroy them.
Here, then, we have the means of preventing
and destroying infection. It needs only that we
put out our hands and use it.
Sold in Sydney at
PER BOX
of 3 BARS.
MANUFACTURED BY THE
PROPRIETORS OF
SUNLIGHT SOAP.
•Soap Makers to
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN.


“ And down by Kosciusko, where the pine-clad ridges raise
Their torn and rugged battlements on high,
Where the air is clear as crystal, and the white stars fairly blaze
At midnight in the cold and frosty sky—”
GOULBURN TO COOMA.
WHEN in 1889 the line was opened from Goulburn to
Cooma, one of the most important pastoral areas of the
Colony, and one of the healthiest and most romantic tracts
of country in Australia, was brought within easy reach of
Sydney. Formerly the Monaro district, with its rolling downs
and snow-capped peaks, its bracing climate and its wonderfully
extensive views, was beyond the range of the majority of
tourists. Now-a-days one can take his berth in a sleeping com-
partment attached to the Southern Mail, which leaves Sydney at
9 o’clock every night, excepting Saturdays, and arrives in Cooma
shortly before 10 o’clock on the following morning, returning
any day but Sunday by a train leaving Cooma at 5-30 p.m.,
and reaching Sydney about twelve hours afterwards. The most
interesting part of the downward journey, viz., that between
Queanbeyan (reached about a quarter past 6 a.m.) and Cooma, is
thus undertaken in broad daylight.
In spite of these facilities the Monaro district has in the past
been less the resort of pleasure-seekers than its many very great
attractions merit; and, indeed, the visit paid by Lord Jersey and
a Yice-Regal party to the Yarrangobilly Caves, in 1892, was the
means of first introducing the neighbourhood as one worthy of
inspection to large numbers of persons well acquainted with other
picturesque portions of the Colony, but totally ignorant of this dis-
(ootfA vyjwwo ‘Disr^j Cr
jfetf SO6TH W(iLES.


trict. The caves, easily accessible from Cooma, undoubtedly com-
prise some of the most beautiful caverns in the world. The
scenery of the table-land is unique, and the climate round about
Kiandra is so much colder than that prevailing in any other
inhabited portion of Australia that that in itself affords a novel,
and frequently an agreeable, experience to visitors. With
Kosciusko towering above the region of perpetual snow, and in
the winter-time the streets of Kiandra occasionally piled up with
drifts, through which the people are obliged to tunnel for egress
from their houses, whilst snow-shoes are pressed into general
service, it is hard to say whether the district is better worth a
visit in summer, when it affords a delightful change from the heat
of the low lands, or in the months of June and July, when some-
thing like the charm of a Norwegian winter attaches to it.
The construction of the line, as anyone who has travelled over
it will realise, was a costly undertaking. From Goulburn to
Cooma the steepest grade is 1 in 40, and the road is thus, from
a railway point of view, essentially “ a heavy one.” Starting
at an elevation of rather more than 2,000 feet at Goulburn,
it falls to a level of 1,900 feet at Queanbeyan, and attains
an altitude at its highest point, not far from Cooma, of nearly
3,000 feet. The country traversed is more frequently visited by
dry weather than by continuous rains. Nevertheless, floods are
occasionally a source of danger to the permanent way. When
they do occur it is without warning, and almost immediately
after the rain ceases the waters subside. Meantime streams which
one can usually ford without inconvenience have swollen into
turbulent rivers deep enough to float an ironclad, and in their
impetuous rush down the valleys between the hills have carried
along with them obstacles that have hitherto appeared well-nigh
immovable.
The route is sparsely populated, and for the greater portion of its
length traverses large estates interspersed by groups of selections.
The traveller is thus brought face to face with a totally different
set of conditions from those obtaining on the main line frontage
between Sydney and Goulburn, where years ago with few exceptions
the pastoralists found it profitable to cut their holdings up and
sell those portions adjacent to the railway in obedience to the


w BATHURST C
S*" fc,
/ ' '■'- , f W "* <^L_j!yT,DNEY ’
I m.wj i" LLON&ONC
,MlrC 0 0 TA M U N 0W\ j\ j’’IU' \^>
Jf V ) T- JjKlAM*
IT \ ||
S j 7 ? flllWulU
Wran«obiu.y caves 1 C
I KIANDRA J J Uio RUYA O'
TTV ,i k* -*]
| “?“*/ 7
VvV J
S ‘\ BOMBAU V
"-■X
(*f-u 20.36) ~
Sketch Map
Showing Railway Line to Cooma&c




varied requirements of a growing population. Many of the
estates between Goulburn and Cooma comprise large tracts of rich
alluvial soil, well watered by streams from the neighbouring
mountains. Some of them, as they converge upon the railway-
line, present quite the appearance of English parks, whilst the
dwellings of their owners, surveying in solemn dignity the broad
expanse of meadow which separates them from the timbered lands
beyond, recall the country seats of old-world magnates. The
selectors—those who Lave not sold out and gone farther afield—will
tell you that breeding sheep on small areas amongst the echoes
of such hills as skirt this line is a rough and not a profitable
job. Others, more fortunate, have acquired small areas of land
admirably adapted to the growth of lucerne, and seeing that the
lucerne from this district brings a high price in the Sydney
market, its cultivation in the neighbourhood of Cooma is likely
to receive increased attention every year at the hands of both
squatters and farmers. The goods traffic between Cooma and
Sydney is made up chiefly of station produce, principally wool
and lat stock, with the addition of large quantities of ore from
the mines at Captain’s Elat, near Bungendore.
To convey a fair idea of the scenery en route, it is as well to
remind the prospective traveller that he will see the first gleam
of dawn from an elevation of something like 2,000 feet. An hour
before midnight, when most of the passengers were dropping off
into their initial slumber, the train began to climb the table-land;
and though, apart from the gusts of mountain air that blow
through the carriage window, there is really nothing in particular
to furnish a clue to the altitude, the surroundings generally suggest
considerable height above sea-level. The scenery, without being
strikingly bold, is inclined to weirdness; the vegetation has a
tougher and more hardy aspect than that of the low lands
stunted hills convert the intermediate country into shallow basins,
and in the distance, purple ranges peer through the rising mists.
Shortly before the train reaches Tarago a momentary view of
Lake Bathurst may be had from the carriage window, and between
Fairy Meadow and Bungendore to the north-west, you get glimpses
of Lake George, and almost simultaneously views of the Bywong or
Lake Ranges.


Lake George.
No description of the railway journey from Goulburn to Cooma
would be complete that did not include a description of Lake
George. It is on many accounts the most remarkable sheet of fresh
water in the Colony. The lake is 17 miles long and 7 miles broad
at its widest point. Fed by a number of large creeks, and drained
by no outlet whatever, its depth naturally varies with the rain-
fall ; but it is a noteworthy fact that twice since 1818 has the
lake been dry. It was dry for a lengthy period between 1846 and
1849, and again for a short period in 1850. Unfortunately,
although fresh water can be obtained here and there at the point of
juncture between the lake and the creeks running into it, the bulk
of the water is brackish and unfit for drinking purposes. Picnic
parties, unaccompanied by local guides, would therefore do well to
take with them a suppdy of water.
The western shores are bounded, except at a point known as
George’s Gap, by a continuous chain of rugged mountains, pre-
sumably a branch of the Cullerin range. The eastern shores are
equally attractive, amongst the spots on that side of the lake
especially worthy of a visit being the Washpen, close to Eocky
Point, Cooper’s Bay, and Ondyong, or Honeysuckle Point, near
which a curious rock formation, called “ The Wall,” deserves
inspection. Before the advent of the white man Lake George
was an important centre of aboriginal activity, and the tribe to
which it gave its name, though now extinct, was formerly particu-
larly numerous. Many interesting relics have been found in the
neighbourhood.
Taken as a whole, the lake, when seen under favourable condi-
tions, is most picturesque and charming, and it is impossible to
imagine a more healthy location for a tourist’s camping-ground.
Add to this the marked absence of mosquitoes and noxious insect
life, and the abundance of wild fowl that frequent its waters,
good rowing-boats, a small steam launch, and an accommodation-
house, and what more could the pleasure-seeker desire, unless,
indeed, it was a greater amount of “ cover ” to facilitate his sport 1
The eastern shore is overrun by hares, wallaby are fairly numerous,


Lake George.




and fish, which once bit freely,—-but which have recently mani-
fested an unwonted disinclination for the hook, —it is hoped to
stimulate again into a sense of moral responsibility.
Lake George is 5 miles from Bungendore, and the journey can
be accomplished with ease in buggies hired at reasonable rates
from Mr. McJannet or Mr. Digham, hotelkeepers, who should,
however, be notified of projected visits. The hoarding-house
referred to is delightfully situated on the shores of the lake, and
conducted by Mr. Wakeling, and the steam-launch, capable of
travelling from 6 to 8 miles an hour, is owned by Mr. Glover,
from whom rowing-boats may also be hired. The distance from
Mr. Glover’s house, the starting-point of the launch, to Red Hill is
4-|- miles; to Taylor’s Creek, 6|- miles; to the Washpen, 7|- miles ;
and to Kenny’s Point, Picnic Point, and Ondyong Point, rather
more than 10 miles.
To those who would learn more of the beauties of Lake George
the writer commends the following interesting article, published
in a recent issue of the Goulburn Penny Post -
About 10 a.m. we were on board Mr. Glover’s steam-yaebt, the “ Star,”
and steered a south-east course. After a little over an hour’s sailing we
reached the opposite shore, a lovely spot known as “The Wash Pens.”
We entered the shore through a narrow passage lined on both sides by huge
rocks, which to look at one would imagine were placed there by the hands
of man. They are a marvel of beauty, and well worth going to view. Just
as we landed a fertile plot of land carpeted with green verdant grasses was
unveiled to us from behind the wall of rock. It appeared like a second
paradise. Here we partook of luncheon in a picnic style on the green,
shaded by the overhanging branches of wattle. After satisfying the inner
man we took a stroll down the shore, where Mr. Glover kindly showed us
many ancient curiosities of the natives, among them being a young native’s
grave, which evidently had been the burial-place of one connected with
their chief, for the grave was covered over with large flat stones, built so
as to run off the water ; also we were shown a cup-like hollow cut in the
side of a large rock, which, Judging from the manner in which it was hewn
out, must also have been the work of the natives. At length, after walking
along the shore for a considerable distance, disturbing many rock wallabies
and a couple of deer from their hiding-places, we halted and sat down under
the shade of an overspreading wattle-tree. In this place we sat for some
time gazing across the glistening waters of the lake on the magnificent
scene of the opposite shore. As far as the eye could reach lofty elevations
were open to our view, rising conspicuously above the x-egion that surrounded
them, and in many places showing along their crests narrow valleys or
amphitheatres, bound by walls of rock, while here and there deep trans-
verse valleys cross the ridges and carry the drainage far out into the plains.
It is a spectacle of which the contemplative eye is never weary, though
it is one of all others which fills the mind with the immensity of the
universe, of the tremendous power of its Creatoi’, and of the insignificance
of self. Being satiated with watching the effulgent watei's, and as the sun


was fast sinking in the west, we retraced our steps, and soon were on board
the ‘ Star once more sailing for home. It was delightfully warm, with
a cool zephyr fanning the brow. As we passed along we passed many
swans, ducks, and other wild fowl gliding lazily upon the smooth waters of
the lake. We reached shore a little before sunset, and, while partaking of
tea, shared in the pleasure of watching the setting of a glorious sun which
only a little time previous had given to the lake its attractive appearance.
As we drove along the edge of the water homeward, the moon sailing in her
monthly track among the glittering constellations gave to the waters a far
prettier aspect than even that of the sunset. Lake George is known far and
wide as being a favourite resort to pleasure-seekers. Ah ! but none, only
those who have been upon its waters, have any idea of the magnificence of
its shores. Now they are offered a great opportunity of sharing in this
magnificence.
The Journey Resumed.
Shortly before arriving at Queanbeyan, where a halt is made
for breakfast, the train crosses the Molonglo River ; and the
stream itself flows for a considerable distance alongside the line
through a deep and rugged gorge. Here indeed is a sight to
gladden the sportsman s heart! .A. wayward, headlong current,
walled in on each side by forbidding rocks—rocks tinged with
patches of vivid green—dashing over boulders, eddying round
corners, and hurrying on as though in a frantic effort to outpace
its rival, the locomotive. Obviously an ideal asylum for the
sportive trout; and trout there are in the Molonglo River, for
the Fisheries Commission, appointed by the Government in 1894,
considering it an admirable breeding-ground, stocked the stream
with ova ; and though at the time this Guide was published the
young fish had not yet begun to bite, it was regarded as only a
matter of time when, in addition to the other striking features of
the landscape, one would note the enthusiastic fisherman teasing
the waters with his hook. Eventually the river wriggles out of its
romantic surroundings, assumes an air of conscious ease, and
unites with the Queanbeyan River in the midst of a tract of rich
alluvial land not far from the town of Queanbeyan.
Queanbeyan, 194 miles from Sydney and 60 miles from Goul-
burn, is the centre of a pastoral and agricultural district. The
township, which is pleasantly situated and sheltered from the cold
winds of winter by the neighbouring hills, is some little distance
from the station. Large quantities of cereals are grown in the
neighbourhood, and English fruits are cultivated to perfection.
Here, as elsewhere on the Cooma line, deposits of gold, silver, and
■copper are found.


Leaving Queanbeyan, the traveller gets glimpses of the locally-
called Murrumbidgee Mountains to the west. The line itself
passes through some valuable station properties—broad, rich flats
running in and out among the hills, sheep in good seasons grazing
knee-deep in grass, substantial homesteads telling of the success of
many a pioneer squatter. Michelago—after passing which one
obtains a fine view of the Tindera Mountains—marks the begin-
ning of the Monaro Plains ; plains extending due south to the
Victorian Border, a distance of 120 miles, and embracing the
entire country between the Coastal Ranges on the east and the
Snowy Mountains on the west. A mile from the township the
Murrumbidgee River flows between hills rising abruptly 500 feet
from its edge, and shortly after passing Colinton platform the
railway line affords a momentary view of the magnificent gorge.
For 30 miles the river runs parallel with the railway-line ; then
it takes a sharp curve to the west to its source amongst the
spurs of the Australian Alps. The train subsequently crosses
the Bredbo River, on its way to join the Murrumbidgee, and
the Bredbo again, as the line follows it for a short distance
towards its source. Then in leisurely sequence come rolling
downs, and stony ridges, the Umaralla River, glimpses of the
distant plains, a delightful prospect of rich volcanic soils, carpeted
with green patches of lucerne, the Mettagang Yalley to the right,
and finally the spires and roofs of Cooma.
Cooma.
Cooma is the most important centre of the Monaro district,
and being the terminal point of the South-eastern Railway, forms
the connecting link between the metropolis and a score or more
of smaller townships on the plains. Cooma is situated in a hollow,
and encircled by ranges which rise tier above tier behind each
other as far as the eye can see. One hill, of considerable height,
rears its head in the midst of the little town itself, thus cleaving
it almost in halves. The streets are broad and straight, and
some of them have been recently planted with trees. The
dwelling-houses are well built, chiefly of brick, and suggestive
of internal comfort, so essential in a climate always cool when
the sun is down and in the winter months extremely cold.


There are several handsome ecclesiastical buildings in the town,
a gaol, a fine court-house, the Crown Lands offices of the district,
and some good hotels ; while about 10 miles away, on the road
to Nimitybell, there is a spring of effervescent mineral water.
From the summit of Mount Gladstone—so named by the late
Sir Henry Parkes—one can obtain a singularly fine view of
the surrounding country. This noble eminence is barely 3 miles
from Cooma, and towers 900 feet above the township, which
is itself nearly 3,000 feet above sea-level. There are, of course,
higher peaks elsewhere on the plains, but it is doubtful whether
any of them afford a prospect more typical of Monaro scenery.
Monaro, by the way, is a corruption of the word “ Maneroo,”
which in the aboriginal tongue signifies the female breast, and in
its application to the district fittingly describes the rooky pro-
tuberances that rise on every hand like gigantic mamma from
the surface of the ground. The tableland lifting its rugged
shoulders in all directions, the fertile downs, green after rain
and russet brown in dry seasons, dark shadows flying over the
vast landscape, and the whole set in a frame of purple ranges
with Kosciusko and its perpetual snow amongst the distant
peaks. Such is the panorama unfolded from the summit of
Mount Gladstone—a view the like of which is not to be had
in any other part of New South Wales, differing as it does
entirely from the scenery either of the Blue Mountains or New
England. The settlers in these parts are amongst the hardiest
of our population. When the lowland labourer, working in his
shirt sleeves, mops the sweat from his brows, the resident of
Monaro often goes about the serious business of life muffled up
to the chin, his weather-beaten face and wind-blown locks telling
a tale of endless encounter with the elements. Not that it is
always cold on the tableland. In summer-time the days are
generally hot, for the sea-breeze does not reach Cooma until the
afternoon. The children are fat and rosy. The women folk are
pictures of health. Thus, life, if it assumes a sterner aspect in
this cold country than elsewhere in sunny New South Wales,
has also its compensations.


Snowfield and Cave, Snowy Mountains (Midsummer).




The Yarrangobilly Caves.*
And now a word about Cooma as a centre of tourist enterprise.
The Yarrangobilly Caves are 65 miles—that is to say, a day and a
half’s drive—away. The road, which is as good as any in the
Colony, passes through Adaminaby and Kiandra, and the cost of
the road trip to a party of five need not amount to more than £2 per
head. If the traveller leaves for the caves upon the arrival of the
train from Sydney, he will spend the night at Adaminaby, and
arrive at his destination about 3 o’clock the following afternoon.
If, however, he spends the first night at Cooma, and makes an
early start in the morning, he will reach Kiandra that day, and
the caves shortly after breakfast on the morrow.
The Yarrangobilly Caves are described as being equal in beauty
to the Jenolan Caves, and much more extensive. Situated on
the side of a hill overlooking the Yarrangobilly River, a tributary
of the Tumut River, their points of entrance afford a magnificent
view of the neighbouring valley with its towering limestone bluffs.
One cave, the Glory Hole, has been known to residents of the
* It should be explained that there are alternate routes to the caves from
Cooma, via Kiandra, 65 miles, and from Gundagai, via Tumut, 68 miles, and
that visitors not desiring to make arrangements for special means of con-
veyance can perform the journey from the railway stations by the ordinary
mail coaches.
The mail coach leaves Cooma for Kiandra every Tuesday and Saturday on
arrival of the mail train from Sydney, and stops at Adaminaby for the night,
thence on to Kiandra the next morning. Fare—single journey, 20s. ;
return, 40s.
Special arrangements have to be made at Kiandra for reaching the caves,
distance 14 miles, which can be accomplished the same day. Two-and-a-
half days can be spent at the caves if the next mail coach from Kiandra is
taken for the return journey.
From Gundagai the coach leaves for Tumut on arrival of mail train,
distance 21 miles. Fare—single journey, 7s. 6d. ; return, 15s. The mail
coach leaves Tumut for the caves every Friday at 12 noon, arriving the next
day, and leaves again for Tumut at 12 noon the following Monday. Distance
from Tumut, 47 miles. Fare—return journey, 30s.
Special arrangements for a through trip to the caves can be made with
the local coach proprietors at Cooma and Tumut, or Thos. Cook and Son,
Tourists’ Agents, 4 Hunter-street, Sydney. This means of reaching the
caves, especially in the case of parties, will be found more comfortable and
economical than travelling by the mail coaches. It also allows visitors the
option of making the return journey at any time they may think convenient.
The inspection of the caves occupies about two days, exclusive of the time
required for the journey to and from the railway.
There is both postal and telegraphic communication with the caves.


district for the last half-century, but it was not until 1887 that
the authorities awoke to the real value of the subterraneous
wonders of this neighbourhood. Since then, six additional caves,
of remarkable extent and beauty, have been discovered. These
have been christened the Jersey Cave, in honor of the Earl of
Jersey, who was the first Governor of the Colony to visit the
neighbourhood ; the Harrie Wood Cave, in honor of Mr. Harrie
Wood, the late Under Secretary for Mines and Agriculture ; the
Castle Cave ; the Goethe Cave ; and the River Cave, so called
because of the stream of water flowing through it. Each cave has
a separate entrance, and they are all within a radius of 1|- mile.
The Glory Hole has been explored in two directions to a dis -
tance of 1,200 feet, and there are possibilities that further
passages leading to recesses still more remote may yet be dis-
covered. The caves are all, more or less, circuitous, and their
winding galleries have a downward trend from the entrance
onwards. In places there is but little space between the walls,
and the lowness of the roofs leaves barely room for the visitor to
stand upright. In other places the galleries open out into great
halls, surmounted by dome-like ceilings, and resplendent with flash-
ing stalactites and stalagmites. Some of these formations are gor-
geous beyond all dreams of eastern art. An elaborate chamber,
crowded with stalagmites resembling cathedral spires ; forests of
pillars, with basins shaped like baptismal fonts between them ;
crystalline walls resembling water falls ; fairy grottoes ; coral-like
growths, rich draperies, and combinations known as “ mysteries,”
because of the difficulty of accounting for their origin—such are
some of the strange devices hidden away in the darkness of per-
petual night amongst these snowy ranges. Nor are they less
delicate in tint than they are cunning in design. Many of the
formations are of the purest white ; others are suffused with terra
cotta ; yet others tinged with blue and green and yellow. Few,
if any, remains have been found within the caves, but near
their entrance marine fossils have been collected in large numbers.
Visitors, for whose convenience comfortable quarters are provided
in the neighbourhood, are conducted through the caves by the
keeper, and a small charge is made for the magnesium lamp and
candles necessary for the work of exploration.


Mount Kosciusko.
The Snowy Mountain trip, with. Kosciusko as its terminal point
and chief object of interest, is another excursion quite unique
among the opportunities of Australian travel. And to begin with,
it may be said that no one should undertake the journey who is
not prepared to spend five days over it. The route lies from
Cooma to Jindabyne, the valley of the Snowy River, and thence
up the mountains. To Jindabyne there is an excellent road,
flanked by very pretty scenery ; and seeing that the distance is not
more than 35 miles, that portion of the trip may be accomplished on
the day of the traveller’s arrival from Sydney. The next thing is to
secure the services of a professional guide ; and this is not difficult.
Prom Jindabyne to the summit of Mount Kosciusko is 25 miles, and
it is possible to ride the whole of the way. As previously stated, the
famous mountain rears its crest above the line of perpetual snow ;
and strange as it sounds, it is nevertheless true that in the height
of summer, parties have been snowed up there for several days.
You leave the vegetation of the plains many miles from
the summit. Thence the track lies amongst outcrops of granite,
patches of heather and tufts of mountain grass ; the top of the
mountain itself being an outcrop of granite, covered fairly well
with soil. Nothing in the Colony exceeds the panoramic
grandeur of the view that awaits the traveller’s ascent. To say
that it repays him for his trouble is but a poor compliment to the
scenery. Looking northward he peers down into the valley of the
Snowy River. Southward the panorama extends beyond the
boundary of the Colony, far into the Gippsland country of
Yictora. Away to the east stretch the Monaco plains with the
coastal ranges in the distance; and, best of all, to the west,
cradled between high mountain ranges, slumbers the peaceful
valley of the Murray.
Many interesting accounts of the locality have appeared in print,
and everyone who visits Kosciusko seems to fall in with some
altogether novel experience. In one respect, however, the
experience of tourists is singularly uniform—whatever the time of
year may be, whatever the prevailing temperature in other parts


of the Colony, they all return with wonderful stories of adventure
amid snow and ice. During the phenomenal summer of 1896,
when, in the western townships, people were dying daily from heat
apoplexy, a party of four, pioneered by Mr. L. J. Harnett, and
including Mr. Kerry, the well-known Sydney photographer, from
whose negatives the accompanying views of the neighbourhood
are reproduced, were obliged, whilst camping on the mountain
slopes, to break the ice each morning in order to perform their
toilet, and on one day at least, during their visit, the thermometer,
in the rays of the sun, registered only 34 degrees Fahr., or 2
degrees above freezing point.
The mountain slopes are partitioned off into what are known as
snow leases—that is, into comparatively small areas for the grazing
of sheep and cattle during the warmer months of the year, when
the grass of the plains is scorched. By the time the flocks and
herds arrive, the mantle of snow has begun to shrink even from the
broad shoulders of Mount Kosciusko. As it gradually dwindles
away it leaves behind a succulent crop of herbage ; and then on
Monaro, the old picturesque way of doing things is for a while
revived. Shepherds literally abide in the fields, keeping watch
over their flocks by night, until once more the return of winter
necessitates a retreat to milder altitudes. The very names of
some of these snow leases are grimly indicative of the weather
most prevalent in their vicinity. One is called the Perisher,
another the Paralyser.
Strange stories, too, are told of the fate of man and beast in
these inhospitable regions. Mobs of wild horses stampede over
the Alpine Ranges, and occasionally a group of luckless animals,
sheltering behind a ledge of rock, is overtaken by a snow storm
and so effectually barricaded in that escape is impossible. The
prisoners starve to death and when summer returns their bodies
are found in a state of remarkable preservation through contact
with the snow. Mr. Kerry obtained photographs of three wild
horses that had met their death in this way. The animals had
eaten up everything for 20 feet or so beyond the rock under
which they were sheltering and had been eventually starved out
or buried by another storm. Sheep, caught in the snow, often
seem to fare much better; indeed, from all accounts it is by.


Snowdrift on Mount Kosciusko (Midsummer).




no means unusual for a wing of a flock to remain beneath the
snow during an entire winter and at the close of the following
summer to return, for all the world as though nothing extraordinary
had happened, with the rest of the flock to their owner’s estate.
The warmth of their bodies evidently melts the snow immediately
above them, and the result is the formation of a sort of cavern in
which they roam about and feed at leisure.
There is no Alpine climbing to be done in scaling Mount
Kosciusko. The ascent begins in reality 25 miles away from the
summit, and the slope is so gradual that it may be performed
without fatigue by anyone in ordinary health. Highest Australian
mountain though it is, you can drive to the top of it. The
guides will, of course, make all necessary arrangements for your
comfort once you get there, and you will probably find your tent
pitched alongside one of the shepherd’s camps, which, it may
be interesting to note, are the only form of habitation in the
immediate vicinity. There are—-unfortunately, perhaps, con-
sidering the satisfaction to be derived in such a climate from a
roasting fire—no trees within some miles of the mountain top.
Hence firewood has to be brought from a distance. On the other
hand, gigantic mosses grow there, and wild flowers of the most
beautiful description. Loveliest of all, perhaps, are the mountain
snow-drop and the elychrisan, or everlasting flower, which in this
district has a black centre instead of the more common yellow
one.
Another interesting feature of the locality is the number of
small lakes formed by the melting of the snow in basins between
the hills. The highest of these lakes—it is the highest sheet of
water in Australia—is situated about 300 feet from the summit
of Mount Kosciusko. The overhanging snow and ice forms a
cavern occasionally 150 yards long and 8 or 9 feet high, whilst
the roof of snow is so thick and strong that men on horseback
ride over it with as little fear of sinking in as though they were
riding over solid rock. The interior of the cave is described by
those who know it as being singularly beautiful, ablaze, in fact,
with formations of dazzling whiteness transcending anything to
be seen in the Jenolan or the Yarrangobilly Caves. The name of
the lake over which this remarkable drift juts out is Cootapa-


tamba, translated, perhaps with poetic freedom, as “ the crystal
water where the eagles drink.” That the water is as clear as
crystal—up there amongst the ever-melting snow —may be taken
for granted, and that eagles condescend to slake their thirst on
its shores is vouched for by Mr. Harnett, who, oddly enough,
caught one in the act a few days after hearing the interpretation
from the lips of a local blackfellow.
There yet remains a word about the naming of the highest
mountain itself. Everybody may not know that the Kosciusko
visited by tourists to-day is not the same Kosciusko that we used
to hear about. In 1891 it was discovered that what had hitherto
been regarded as the highest mountain was some 40 feet less high
than another peak about 1| mile away. Hence the mountain
formerly known as Kosciusko was re-christened Mount Townsend
and its highest peak Mount Muller, and the name of Kosciusko
was transferred to the mountain that is in fact the highest on the
continent.
Kiandra in Winter.
"While the Snowy Mountains district will probably be chiefly
valued as a summer resort or sanatorium, it offers great attractions
also when the winter months hold the land frostbound. The
following description of a winter tour is taken from a recent
number of the Australian Star :
- It is a commonly accepted belief among Australians that their country
possesses no highlands, that the winter sport and pastimes of more frigid
regions are things to be read of but never enjoyed within the limits of this
island continent. Tobogganing or snowshoeing may be exhilarating
pastimes of wintry Canada, fashionable too, in the Alpine resorts of
travelling Europeans, but it will probably surprise many of them to know
that within twenty-four hours of Sydney they can reach a place where the
people for half the year live on snowshoes almost, and no other method of
travel is possible, and where the people live through the summer in a tem-
perature that has only once in thirty years shown 84 degrees on the thermo-
meter, sighing for the return of Father Frost, when they may revel in the
delights of racing over the snow at the pace of an express train, or enjoying
the pleasures of sitting over a fire when the snow is up to the eaves and
the thermometer is down in the neighbourhood of 50 degrees below freezing
point. Australians do not know of this place, and it has become an
ambition of Mr. Charles Kerry, of the well-known firm of photographers,
to teach them something. Last summer he came back from Kosciusko,
the summit of Australia, at a time when people were dying from the effects
of heat on the plains and low lands, to talk about everlasting glaciers and
snowdrifts, of days when the maximum temperature was Just above freezing


point; and now he has returned from an excursion on snowshoes over parts
| of the ranges that are accessible at this time of the year, and filled with
enthusiasm of the people of Kiandra for the pleasuresand pastimes of their
winter life.
Last Saturday at Kiandra was the great day of the year, the annual
snowshoe races, when from all around came into the little highland gold-
mining centre people from the snow belt and the places immediately below
to compete in or witness the races for the championship of the mountains
and other events which go to make up a day’s sport. Rising at the back
of the town is a hill, and down its face is the racing track, carefully
prepared, over which the competing sportsmen will race. The champion
course proper is 22 chains in length, and has a drop of about 200 feet
into the valley, but, unfortunately, this year the snow on'the higher level
was not safe for racing purposes, though right enough to travel over in the
ordinary way, consequently the length of the course was cut down to 13
chains. The snow is cut into a series of sharp inclines and level spaces,
and over this the racers travel at an almost incredible speed, passing the
winning post, Mr. Kerry says, on the authority of his stop-watch, at the
rate of over a mile a minute. They have to make several steps to get
fairly going. There is no pace to speak of till coming down the first
incline. Then, with bodies rigid, and slightly bent forward, down they
come, two or three in each heat, carefully guiding their way and gaining
speed with each yard they travel, till with a rush like the wind they pass
the post and pull up within 20 or 30 yards. If the race can be won
without effort there is never a move in the leading man as he sails down
the course, with eye keenly watching the best track. But if the race be
close then the competitors, by revolving their arms in windmill fashion,
and other tricks taught by practice, endeavour to force themselves forward.
The champion course of 13 chains was covered this year in 17 seconds, but
this was slow. The records of Kiandra, vouched for by the oldest inhabitants,
tell of 22 chains being traversed in 18 seconds, and the championship was by no
means the fastest race this year. In amateur races 12 chains, with the advan-
tage of starting on a steep incline, were covered in 14 seconds, and the tremen-
dous speed of champions for the longer distance in a race where the pace is
increasing every second can be realised. Beside the races mentioned there
were other events for visitors, women, girls, boys, and children, and as the
events are run off in heats the meeting lasts well through the day. Falls
on the course are by no means uncommon, but a drop on the soft snow is by
no means unpleasant. The snow is absolutely dry, and on getting up one
has only to shake oneself and it will fall off; the only unpleasantness
possible is if any gets on the face or hands and is not brushed off before
melting with the heat of the body, and that is really nothing. Altogether,
snowshoe racing, Mr. Kerry votes, is an exciting and glorious pastime, and
one in which we can understand the men of the Snowy Mountains becoming
enthusiastic. Just so was he delighted with Kiandra itself, where he
stayed several days. Everybody travels on snowshoes—even the tiniest
children going to school. In their hours of relaxation the 30 or 40
youngsters play their games, racing and running all over the place in this
way and enjoying life with all the zest of childhood, looking healthy and
chubby and bright in the keen mountain atmosphere. There is no discom-
fort, he says, in travelling on the snowshoes, and no great skill required to
use them. The sensation of travelling, when one gets used to the shoes,
he says, is delightful. The shoes, properly made, are 4 inches wide and 8
feet long, with a curved up, sharpened poiijt, and across the centre a broad
leather band to lace over the foot. It is necessary to wear gum or rubber
boots. One very quickly falls into the way of wearing these somewhat
unwieldly-looking things, and with a little care there is no danger whatever.


On an up-grade the traveller has to stejp along with toes turned out. On
the level he can push with each step, ass in roller-skating, and make about
8 feet or so with each stride. But it iis travelling down the incline that
the joy of snow-shoeing is reached. Q)n the slightest slope the snow-shoe
will slip away, and then all exertion isscover. All the traveller has to do
is to stand still, guiding himself as he goes, and if the pace becomes too
great press the brake-stick he carries im his hand into the snow with what-
ever force is requisite to reduce the speeed. If the incline is too steep then
the traveller may solidly sit on the brafee-stick, like a small boy on a hobby
horse, and he can get along at a good rrate without risk of a fall. But, all
being well, there is no exercise so fine ais going down an incline on snow-
shoes. The atmosphere is bright. Thiere is no danger of getting wet, for
the snow will shake off like dust, and tflhe cold, intense though it is, is not
felt when moving about.


A GOOD
MEMORY
PROFESSIOR IOiSETTE'S
SYSTEM OF
JMemory
Training.
ESTABLISHED - A - QUARTER - OF - A - CENTURY.
How to attend and never forget. A self-eocaehing method for all
subjects. The worst memories made good,, and the best better.
Invaluable to the Medical, Clerical, Legal, Mmsical and Dramatic, and
other Professions and Businesses, and persons cof all classes.
BOOKS LEARNED IN ONE READING!
ALSO SPEAKING WIfTHOUT NOTES I !
Founded on sound scientific principles, and is entirely opposed to
Mnemonics, and not to be confounded with sjystems which are based
upon such out-of-date methods, and which aire being offered to the
Public at a cheap rate.
Supreme Court, U.S.A. (extract of Judgment)“Thie Judgment of the Court
is that the Plaintiff (Professor Loisette), is the Author of his System for
Teaching Memory, and that the same is a NEW AfflD ORIGINAL METHOD
AND PROCESS in the Education of Memory/ and Attention.”
OPINIONS.
Dr. JOSEPH COOK, the Great Boston Lecturer and /Author, lately lecturing in
Sydney, writes:—
“ Having been a member of Prof, loisettej’s Cass for Instruction in
“Assimilative Memory, and having studied Ihis Single Book System—a
“ notable advance beyond bis former metbodls in Six Books—my settled
“ conviction is that bis System incontestably dieserves the high and estab-
“ lisbed reputation it has enjoyed for nearly aufluarfcer of a century.”
The Testimony of the late ft. A. PROCTOR, the Astnonomer:—
“ I have no besitition in thoroughly recommending the System to all who
“ are in earnest in wishing to take reasonable; pains to obtain so useful a
“ result.”
Dr. CHARLES MERCIER, England’s Brightest Psychmlogist, says:—
“ It lias enabled me to commit to memory witth ease and rapidity matters
“which were beyond my power to reniemfeer before I mastered your
*• system.”
The Hon. JUDAH P. BENJAMIN says:-
“ Professor Loisette gave me a new memory.”
The System appeals to THE INTELLECT, and improves all
the Mental Faculties.
Can be learnt by ORAL LESSONS or by (Correspondence-
Fur Particulars and Terms, } PROF.. A. LOISETTE,
apply
) BOX 12341, G. P. 0., SYDNEY.


THREE
NATURAL
FOODS.
4~
Note I
Made
Digestion
Easy
FOR
BREAD,
FOR
WINTER
r FOR '
PUDDINGS
HOVIS.
GRANUMA.
FODAH.
AND SUMMER
V porridge/
SCONES,
PASTRY,
V &C.
AND INVALIDS
FOOD
Bone,
Muscle
Teeth,
Sound
THEY CONTAIN ALL THE ELEMENTS OF WHOLE WHEAT.
~
