

READY EARLY IN SEPTEMBER
Pi idd
ike AJ)eniures csTlPnyipTßl
Written and Illustrated
By NORMAN LINDSAY


M. - 1$
READY EARLY IN SEPTEMBER, Price 2is
The Magic Pudding
NORMAN LINDSAY
With 100 black-and-white illustrations and coloured frontispiece
Size I 1 j x 8f inches, printed on art paper, and handsomely bound.
THE MAGIC PUDDING is the story of the Walks, Talks, Travels,
Exploits, Fights, Stratagems and Sing-songs of Bill Barnacle (a Sailor), Sam
Sawnoff (a Penguin), and Bunyip Bluegum (a Native Bear), told in prose and
verse by Norman Lindsay, and illustrated by him in 100 pictures (mostly full-
page) in black and white, and one in colour. Besides the Native Bear and
the Penguin the reader is introduced to a Wombat and an Opossum (the bold
bad villains of the story) and a host of others —Bandicoots, Hedgehogs,
Roosters, Flying-foxes, Dogs, Crows, Parrots, Wallabies, Kookaburras, etc.,
not to mention a Judge, a Mayor (of Tooraloo), a Policeman and other mere
humans. Norman Lindsay’s animal pictures alone would have made him
famous. This story of The Magic Pudding, although originally begun to
provide humorous situations for his illustrations, is most amusing. Mr. Lindsay
thoroughly enjoyed writing and illustrating it, and the result, as might be
expected, is a delightful book. Like “Alice in Wonderland ”it will be enjoyed
equally by young and old.
THE MAGIC PUDDING will be a larger and handsomer volume
than The Pen Drawings of Norman Lindsay, recently issued by the same
publishers. It will measure 11| x inches, will be printed on thick art paper,
and tastefully bound. Only one edition will be published, and, like The Pen
Drawings, it is sure to sell out at once. It would be well, therefore, to sign
and return the enclosed Order Form at once, and so make sure of a




JArp
LIM
3 1508 00010843


ORDER FORM.
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
Publishers and Booksellers to the University,
89 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
Please send me immediately on publication a copy of THE MAGIC
PUDDING, by Norman Lindsay, price 21/- (postage 6d.).
Name
Address
