

MEMOIRS
OF THE
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
OF
VICTORIA.
VICTORIA
DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
No s. 6-9.




CONTENTS.
N 0,6. Buffalo Mountains, by E.J.Lunn. 1908,
it 7 # peep Leads of Victoria, by S,Hunter. 19^9 •
it g. Lower Bowiett, Cape Paterson, and Inverloch
Quarter Sheets, by W.H.Ferguson. 1909*
«» 9. Geology of the Camper down and Mount Elephant
Pistricts, by H.J.Grayson & P,J.Mahony.l9lo#




MEMOIRS
OF THE
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF VICTORIA
190 8 ,
VICTORIA.
department of mines.
(E. J. DUNN, F.G.S., DIRECTOR)
ISSUED 11Y
W. DICKSON, SECRETARY FOR MINES, UNDER THE AUTHORITY
OF THE HON. D. McLEOD, M.P., MINISTER OF MINES.
No. 6.
THE BUFFALO MOUNTAINS
(WITH 53 PLATES, DIAGRAM, AND MAP),
BY
E. J. DUNN, F.G.S.
MAP OF THE MOUNTAINS, BY 0. A. L. WHITELAW.
:
3. KEMP, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
[Price ?c. 6d.] —2019.




23rd December, 1907.
Bib,
During the current year a geological and topographical survey of the Buffalo Mountains
has been made, and my report on the area, illustrated by photographs, is now completed. The
report, map, and plates should serve to bring into prominent notice the most wonderful mountain
tract within this State —a true “ Garden of the Gods ” ; and it is hoped that the marvels of this
region will draw many tourists from all quarters, and thus turn a latent asset of great value into
a most potent attraction.
Mr. 0. A. L. Whitelaw has carried out the topographical survey in a careful and minute
manner that does him much credit. He has bestowed the names of the Minister and some of the
chief officers of the Department past and present on a few of the features, and has chosen names
for some of the creeks, &c., that were unnamed.
Mr. Walcott, of the Government Printing Office, obtained most of the photographs; others
were furnished by Messrs. Foxcroft, Kenny, and Caldwell. The final plate was kindly supplied
by Mr. D. Le Souef. Mr. Wilby has ably carried out the reproductions.
The granite of this region has been petrologically determined by Mr. Mahony, M.Sc.,
and an analysis has been made by Mr. Bayly, of the laboratory.
i; I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient servant,
E. J. DUNN.
The (Secretary for Mines.




THE BUFFALO MOUNTAINS.
POSITI ON, ETC.
This mountain range is in the N.E. Division of Victoria. It lies within th_ e area bordered
nn the Nby the Ovens River, on the E. by the Buckland River, and on the W. by the <
SVer Lat 36 deg. 46 min. 42 sec., Lon. 146 deg. 46 min. 12 sec Eurobin, the nearest railway
Nation is 187% miles from Melbourne, and 827 feet above sea-level. From the railway line
o’n Waninratta and Glenrowan a magni ficent view of the Buffalo Mountains is obtam-
een T ”top Buffalo plateau 500 feet above sea-level) the distance from
Eurobin is about 6 miles. The Buffalo range o ccupies an isolated position, being about 12
N of the Divide and it towers up above the surrounding country. From N. to S. this
Grange is 7 miles long, and from E. to W. about 4 miles across at its widest part. The area
° f the We S t e ßuffialo b a°nd North BuSoMetwo offshoots that are joined to the main a
narrow neck. A deep valley, in which Buffalo Creek flows, divides North Buffalo from the
Buffalo proper.
PHYSICAL ASPECTS.
The great granitic boss which forms the Buffalo range protrudes a couple of thousand
feet above the tops of the surrounding slate and sandstone mountains (Plate 1), because the
granite offe“ V much more resistance to denuding forces than the sedimentary rocks. At
one period the highest portion of the granite m ass was covered by sedimentary beds, l ,
unless there had been a considerable capping of such rocks, granite would not have been
formed These covering rocks have been removed and the granite mass itself stripped
fornerhans thousands of feet below its original surface, and as the sedimentary rocks were
so muct more easdy affected by denuding influences the granite is left in its very conspicuous
position. j surface of the plateau is remarkable for the abundance of the tors and
granite blocks Sat are strewn over it (Plates 13, 14, 23, 26). For the most part the Mis and
slopes are extremely rocky, great and small masses abounding, and mass
sent every stage of weathering, from where they have just been freed from the paremt ma
hv the ioints (Plate 24) to such finished examples of weathering as the Egg Rocks (Plate . ).
th VhTpLteau of the main mass inclines fro'm the southern end where the to jjrto
5,645 feet above sea-level towards The Gorge 4,270 feet above wa-leyd. Bo*y h dls nM
for 300 to 400 feet above the general level, and m some cases to 600 feet (Plates /, », <
U ’ Opiates 7,8, 14, 15, 16, 17, and ridges strewn with. torsand loose
blocks (Plate 23) are quite a feature, and the general surface is extremely rugged.
Encalypts, usually Snow Gums (Eucalyptus coriacea) grow on the plateau and ?K ht ( ”P
the highest points. At the lower levels these trees range up to 50 and 60 feet in height (P ate
6) but become more stunted as altitude is gained or the position is more exposed, unt.l in
some sites the Snow Gums are not more than 6to 8 feet high (Platell3). , ~ f
Between the rooky hills are narrow plains that are bare of trees awl rema >'
from granite blocks. There is a sharp contrast between the rock-strewn hills and s P
(Plate 7) and the smooth treeless, rockless flats (Plates 5 and 6). Where tors are found
pfains it ?s evMenT that they have rolled down from the hills at a comparatively recent
Per ° The creeks and water-courses exhibit certain features that are noteworthy. For the
most part they flow along the courses of the'two sets of joints. OQO + PT .r, of the
From the edge of the plateau the mountain descends rapidly. The eastern s d
range is far more precipitous than the western slope. . , .p
The Gorge (Plates 3 and 4) is a prominent feature, and it has resumed from the
development of some of the N.E. and S.W. joints by denudation. The o
exhibits a wall of granite up to 800 feet high and half-a-mile long. The Gorge itself
sto 20 c.hlins wide (Plate P 3). Buffalo Creek valley is a still[greater by denud
ing agencies, for, in this case a mass of rock 3 miles long, from half-amnle to 1 mde wide and
from a few feet to 2,000 feet deep, has been bodily removed to form the valley, The d
of this valley corresponds with that of the N.E. and S.W. system of joint* Whether the
whole of this was granite or not is uncertain, but the direction appears to.have bee Wd
bv one set of joints for over 3 miles down the course of the creek, and at this po n
takes a sham turn to the N.W. and follows the other set of joints.
The sTarps on the S. side of Buffalo Creek, at the S. end of the mountain group along
the most eastern edge of the plateau, and on the eastern edge further seuth all ex
influence that has been exerted by tbe two sets of .lointmg ir.determining s kape '
mountain range. The creeks that flow N.W. from North Buffalo and the scarps that bound
these creeks also show the influence of the prevailing directions of the jointing.


Just as the great mass of granite towers above the surrounding less-resistant rocks,
so the harder portions of the granite mass project above the general level, as, for instance,
the Cathedral (Plate 11), the Horn (Plate 12), and numerous peaks of granite that diversify
the surface.
The principal water-course on the range is Crystal Brook, which has a total length of
5 miles before it runs through The Gorge.
Eurobin Creek is S. of Crystal Brook, and is nearly 3 miles long from its source to
where it leaves the plateau. Dickson’s Palls Creek is 2% miles long from the falls to its
source. The creeks are remarkable for their tortuous courses and the sharp bends they make
in following along the one or the other set of joints.
In some cases the dykes deflect the streams, in others the streams have flowed in one
direction, but encroachments of streams flowing in another direction have diverted them.
The Dickson’s Falls Creek just below the falls bifurcates; one portion flows to the N.
of a granite spur and the other portion flows S. of it. This is not a common occurrence.
Both branches ultimately reach the Buckland River. On the plateau the creeks flow with a
moderate inclination, meandering through extremely tortuous channels in the peaty flats, but
on reaching the edge of the plateau they are precipitated down rapids and over falls until they
reach the foot of the mountains. Eurobin Pall are far down on the N.E. slope of the mountain.
The watershed of the plateau is along its western edge, and the creeks flow eastward across
it. So that the plateau has two inclinations, one from S. to N., and the other from S.W.
to N.E.
Formerly the plateau must have been of much greater area, but the same processes
which are now in progress right round the edge of the plateau wearing down the escapement
have been at work for a vast period of time, and although the effects may be but slight for a
year or a century, they become very pronounced when whole cycles are involved.
The distance between the junction of the granite and the sedimentary beds and the steep
slope of the granite, together with the height of the top of the mountain above the sediments,
give some relative idea of the time that has elapsed since the sedimentary rocks and the granite
were cut down to one horizon, for since that time the sedimentary rocks have been denuded to
their present level below the top of the mountain, and the granite has been eaten into laterally
for 3,000 or 4,000 feet from their junction. Some idea of the stupendous changes that have
taken place in the area occupied by the Buffalo Mountains and the surrounding country can
be gained by standing on the Horn, which is the topmost peak, and surveying the endless
ridges and valleys that stretch away in all directions, and at such a depth below (Plate 2),
especially when it is realized that at one time the whole surrounding region was at a higher
altitude than even the Horn.
The sequence of events appears to have been that the ancient sedimentary rocxs were
laid down, and were subsequently bent into a series of folds; then the granite was intruded
into them from below; and while the granite was cooling the sedimentary rocks over and
around it were subjected to enormous heat for a great lapse of time, and by this means
considerable changes have been caused in them.
As the granite cooled it shrunk in bulk, perhaps to the extent of 10 per cent., and
this probably caused the. overlying sediments to collapse, and in this manner to become
much broken up. Denuding agencies removed first the sedimentary beds resting upon the
granite, and from that time weathered down both the granite and the sedimentary rocks to
their present altitude. Whether there has been an uprising of the mass concurrent with the
removal of the upper portion by denudation or not, is uncertain.
The Buffalo Mountains are incomparably grander than any others within the boun-
daries of Victoria. From their isolated position the views around are exceedingly grand and
impressive. Kosciusko towers up on the N.E., Macedon on the S.W., while to the N. one’s
view reaches far into the fertile plains of Riverina. These are points on the extreme verge
of vision. Nearer and in the middle distance are ranges that define the watersheds of a whole
river system. Still closer are the forest-clad spurs and ridges that so clearly display the
beautiful manner in which they have been carvedoutby the elements, and in the process of scoring
out the valleys, the gullies, and the dells the material has not been wasted, for the same waters
that particle by particle removed cubic miles of material from the hills transported that
material to fill up the hollows and to form the plains through which the Ovens and Murray
Rivers now flow. Wken the Buffalo Mountains were perhaps thousands of feet higher than
they are now the bed rock along the Murray River and along the Ovens River was bare. The
bed rock is now over 300 feet below the surface, and the whole of the material filling the old
valleys to that depth has been washed down from the Buffalo and other mountains, and this
process is still actively at work, and a particle of granite from the highest point of the
Buffalo may be transported within a day or two to a point far down the course of the Ovens
River, and to a depth thousands of feet below its original position.
At one period the sedimentary rocks covered the highest portions of the granite to a
considerable depth (see diagram page 9). Bearing this in mind, and then surveying the
serried ranges, spurs, and ridges that surround the Buffalo, the first impression is of the vastness
of the spaces once filled with solid rock that are now vacant. Plow many cubic miles of material
have been scooped out to form the valleys of the Ovens River, the Buckland River, and of their
affluents, as Morse’s Creek, Growler’s Creek, &c., and, again, the gullies and branch gullies that
run into these! Taking the level of the Ovens River at Porepunkah as a base line, it is evident
that mountain ranges, spurs, and ridges as great as now stand above that bench-mark have
tteen removed and the material has been strewn over the valleys and on to the plains of the
great rivers further down.


Properly to understand the former physical aspect of this region it is necessary to
,__ p : ve what the country would be like if the whole of the alluvial deposits m the valleys
were removed to bed rock and the whole of this material were filled into the upper valleys
and piled on to the present mountains.
THE “ PLAINS.”
Alone: the principal water-courses on the Buffalo plateau there are narrow treeless
. of peaty soil, locally termed plains (Plates 5 and 6). Generally there is an absence of
material in these flats, so that they contrast sharply with the rock-strewn slopes that
c+rPt'ph right down to these bare, smooth strips of country. Grass grows on the surface of
them but the soil below appears to be a mixture of peat with sand and grit These plains
fr oni 1 chain to 5 chains across, and the largest is on Eurobin Creek; they follow the
Neeles up to their sources in some cases. The creeks follow in many instances a remarkably
tortuous course through the peaty flats. Occasionally large blocks of granite are met with
standing in the plains, but as a rule they are not rocky
This general absence of prominent rocks from the plains is so marked a feature that
th pre must be some general reason for it. The absence of trees is probably due to the presence
of so much peaty material, in which the trees would not thrive, for while trees grow thickly
to the edge of the plains, none grow on them. The peat may also explain the absence
nf & rocks on these plains, for it may have a tendency to decompose the felspathic constituents
nf thp granite and, in fact, does appear to have some such action, for m the areas bounding
fhP creeks the’granite seems to be more friable than on the hills. If the peat and water exert
n decomposing influence then it is easily understood that in process of time such rocks as come
within the influence of the peat and water were slowly eaten away until the present smooth
appearance was attained by the removal of every bit of granite In some cases where granite
tines protrude in the plains the sides are worn around like a bollard on a wharf, I hat water
pharged with acids derived from decomposing vegetation does possess the property of causing
the decay and disintegration of this granite appears to be proved by the frequent occurrence
of hollows in the rock surfaces which have usually more or less vegetable matter m them, such
as sticks pieces of decaying wood, leaves, &c. (Plate 52). At first there are but shallow hollows
in which’a little water rests, and vegetable debris accumulates, but these are gradually deepened
into regular pot holes. The iron, lime, potash, and soda in the felspar of this granite are the
constituents that water charged with vegetable acids would attack.
r :-.,r ' THE BUFFALO ROCKS.
1. . .1. I •• .
The marvellous groups of rocks, the monoliths and the perched blocks, are among the
most attractive features of this region. No two groups or individuals are alike—there is
diversity in the individuals and in the character of the groups. The features exhibited at
Boulder Valley (Plate 26), where immense rounded tors 40 and 60 feet m diameter are
scattered abundantly through the forest, are quite unlike the Horn, where huge angular blocks
are still in their original position (Plate 12), being dissevered through the weathering along
the -joints, and this again differs from such a massive group as the Eagle Point (Hate 10) or
the grand group of blocks at Lyre Bird Hill, where the Grandfather an angular block of
granite 110 feet long, 40 feet high, and 20 feet thick, stands ready for being placed in some
Cyclopean temple; others nearly as large adjoin it, with long narrow galleries between them.
Then there are such granite blocks as the Kissing Stones (Plate 43), which have fa le
together, forming a natural arch, or such a magnificent example as the mighty Leviathan (1. Late
40) an enormous mass of granite rounded by the exposure to thousands of winters and
summers, and still weighing many thousands of tons or there are such
the Monolith (Fig. 1, Plate 49), or the Sentinel (Plate 46), and yet another class includes
perched blocks like the Egg Rock (Plate 50), &c„ in which the more or. less spherical
mass of granite is poised on a base so slender as to cause doubt as to its
stability. Besides all these there are the rocks and groups that have some quaint resemblance
to animals, men, &c., and groups innumerable embowered with trees that are a ]oy to the
artist Long before the Egyptian monarchs hewed granite monoliths the natural ones on the
Buffalo Mountains stood like sentinels on their lofty pinnacles. The illustrations only show
GW rocks not on i y grand, wonderful, and beautiful, but they inspire a feelmg of
awe when it is realized what gigantic forces have been employed m fashioning them
cycle has followed cycle, while their evolution was m progress. That these marvellous rocks
have been formed by hewing away all the surrounding and overlying mass of granite seems
almost incredible, but that is what has really happened. It is as though a sculptor quarried
away a whole mountain of granite to create one solitary statue.
WATERFALLS.
As might be expected in such country, there are some grand waterfalls on the Buffalo
range. The principal one is at the mouth of The Gorge, where, <J'™g heavy ranis, a consider-
able volume of wider is hurled over rapids and falls for a depth of 800 feet. These are called
the Buffalo Falls. Low down on the flanks of the range on the N.E. side, Eurobin Ore t


leaps over falls and rapids, and runs down a flat face of granite. When the creek is in flood
these are fine falls, but also dangerous. Dickson’s Falls are iy 2 miles E. of the Horn, and
after heavy rains they are very fine.
Many other waterfalls occur where the creeks leave the edge of the plateau, but the
watershed being so short in each case' there is little or no water except during rainy weather
in any of them.
FISSURING.
The principal element in determining the present features on the Buffalo Mountains is
the jointing of the granite. There are two sets of more or less vertical joints. The main set
runs in a direction about N. 44 deg. E. (Plates 3,4, 10, 12, 13, 18, 24, and 33), and the cross
joints strike about N. 43 deg. W. (Plates 9, 19 (Figs. 1 and 2), 25, 32), so that they intersect at
an angle of 87 deg. Where a smooth, clean surface of hard granite is exposed, these joints may
be noticed. In their first stage they cut through the rock and the fissure is so fine that.it
looks like the scratch of a needle point, but though so fine it cuts right through the granite
mass. In some cases the joint merely intersects tfie crystals of felspar and quartz, without
displacing them, hut in other cases there is a distinct movement shown. Although these
joints are so minute as to almost escape notice, yet the whole structure of this mountain
range, with its grand and marvellous scenery, its huge tors, monoliths, and poised blocks,
directly results from their presence. At the commencement is the scarcely visible, fissure
which has severed the granite rock down to its very roots. Buffalo Creek valley exhibits the
fuller developments of these fissures, while The Gorge exhibits an intermediate stage and the
Blow Hole a still more primitive stage. Every step in the progression from the fine joint
to the great valley can he observed in progress on this tract of country.
The fine joints are not straight lines, hut they branch in a curious manner, and on a
small scale, and while the portions of the same crystal of quartz or felspar are to be seen on
opposite sides of the joints in some cases, in others there has been much movement, and the
opposite sides of the joints are well slickensided. Whatever the cause that produced the
jointing, enormous forces must have been exercised to rend the granite mass right through
(Plates 13 and 14). The distances between the parallel joints vary widelv, in some cases they
recur at a few inches of interval, in others they are many feet apart. The whole mountain
mass is, however, jointed from end to end and from top to bottom. Possibly the great
stresses that were set up as this granite mass cooled may have been fhe cause.
The directions of the tvjo sets of vertical joints are of interest. At the Baw Baw Mountain
they bear a general resemblance to the two sets at the Buffalo, and the bearings appear to
correspond if the principal direction of the water-courses is taken. In each case the angle
at which the two sets of joints intersect approaches a right angle.
These joints generally are more or less vertical, as is well shown on the N. side of The
Gorge (Plates 3, 18, and 19,‘ Fig. 2). On the S. side of The Gorge and at the Horn they are
inclined.
Where the joints are close together (Plate 18), the granite decomposes without leaving
conspicuous blocks, but where the joints are wide apart (Plate 12), the grandest, examples
of tors. &c., exist. Some of the belts can be traced in which there are few joints, and
along their course are groups of gigantic tors and massive isolated blocks. The jointing
in many cases is so minute that weathering does not affect the blocks for long periods (Plate
35). Frequently the joints have not been developed in great granite blocks until they have
become isolated from the general mass and weathered into well-rounded tors. After all this
exposure the latent jointing is developed, and such tors are to be seen snlit right through as
in the case of the Split Rocks (Plate 23), where the granite blocks exhibit the jointing only
after an immense amount of weathering, although they must have existed from the time when
the isolated blocks were a portion of the solid mass of granite.
The first condition of these joints or fissures is as a scarcelv perceptible scratch in the
hard granite. As the weather affects this, minute fragments are detached, along the course of
the joint, and in time a groove is formed because frost and the other disintegrating elements
act more effectively and rapidly along such a fissure than on an unfissured surface. The groove
would hold water,' and this would still further help to hasten the disintegration of the rock
along the joint and the groove would become a trench, and this trench would eventuallv cut
through many feet in depth, and together with other parallel and cross joints they would cut
up the original massive granite into a number of detached blocks (Plate 34, Fig. 1).
After the joints became weathered to the width of a few inches, then all the disinteg-
rating forces would be acting on both sides of the separated rock faces and later on the parallel
joints would be acted upon and slabs would become detached (Plate 18) end would crumble
away or fall down into what would develop into a chasm, such as tbe Blow Hole. The en-
largement of such a chasm, especially by the falling awa'y of slabs from tbe sides, would
eventuate in a gorge such as The Gorge, and. the ultimate result would be a valley such as that
down which Buffalo Creek flows.
Besides the two sets of more or less vertical joints there is a third set, the tabular or
horizontal joints (Plates 20 —Figs. 1 and 2 —21. 32. 33. 34. Fig. 1). It seems rather doubtful
whether these are inherent in the rock mass, as the vertical joints undoubtedly are, or whether
the tabular joints are dependent on the surface weathering. There is much to be noticed that
favours the latter view. For instance, Plate 19. Fig. 2, shows tabular jointing only near the
general surface. The tabular joints appear to follow the general surface, and not to be actually


, • +ai fPlnte 20 Fig 1). They are infrequent compared to the other systems of joints.
ifSlhe tabular’joints appear'to result from surface influences rather than from causes
i as nrofluced the systems of vertical joints. In many cases there is no proper tabular
Sntine but irregular joints that eonnect the vertical jointing and sever the granite into
Vremilar blocks. A good example is seen near the Horn in the Wall of China (Plate 22).
In following out the development of a joint or set of joints there are many conditions
, , , . the work on. As soon as a slight depression occurs along a joint .writer lodges tl c e,
Vdtht acts T the minerals both mechanically and ehemica ly helping to break them down,
mnl water especially when living and dead vegetation lies in it (Plate 52) is active in dis-
•t,-of the constituents of the minerals. The water also penetrates into the minute fissures
un u efaJk? and frost then converts it into ice and wedges the particles away from the
and crac , v tn+ : on a j so shares in the work of destruction, for after a while a little soil
Pare miilates*along the lines of hollow which mark the joints and seeds germinate, so that lichens
accumulates along . rootlets always endeavouring to insinuate them-
and minute forms of vegetatioiMgrown grQw and exert great force> and by thls
selves “to the era . f f k Later on shr ubs take root where there is more
“Hud even S take possession and try to live (Plate 53). . Generation after generation
SO A. ” trees strive to exist, but perish, each making it easier for the next to live. At
W nerhaps after centuries of vain endeavour, a seedling grows which succeeds m getting its
iast perhaps alter ce d h fter a long and close struggle the joint is wedged
TChtlv open (Plate 51). Once this is accomplished the rest is easy, for the_force exerted by
Sf fees Sr these conditions becomes irresistible, and the rock is split right through
+ ki nrJ Then the roots quickly travel down to the earth, and with the more
(Plates 51 and 5 ). flourishes and splits the rock apart and sometimes pushes it
ge v n fl e v°d U own P a P S lope aUogetler In gmoves along the course of joints the wind also assists
away d R f disintegrated granite along the grooves, and thus ivearmg away a little
Kl lESSmta cut deep enough to become a trench water flows along
?iL th inint course in some cases, and then the work of deepening is hastened. Once a chasm is
formed all the above forces would assist in detaching the rocks forming the sides and in
widening it phvsica l features at the Buffalo Mountains are mainly due to the
• o ef the svstems of jointing This is established by the directions of the edges of some
'of re e sc°apemeX!Te diXn'of the gorge, of the Buffalo Creek valley, and of the prin-
cipal water-courses on the plateau.
The influence of the jointing in producing tors, monoliths andperrlHsl )Oc:sisver
evident for every stage of the process can here be studied, beginning at the needle-like
evident, lor e y fi na l st where sueh a perched block as
rte Egg Rock his been carved out of the solid mass, all the surrounding mass bodily removed
»dftfs heart core left Ending on a perilously small base on another mass of rock, which
itself projects many feet above the surrounding rock level.
Not onlv is the present surface contour of the Buffalo Mountains largely due to jointing
but there can be littledoubt that the stupendous operations, by which probably as much as
5 000 feet of granite rock has been removed from above the present surface, leaving theitnm-
cated wreck of a mountain as it now stands, were greatly facilitated by the systems of joints.
As to the period when the jointing took place, it was certainly after the roc a
appemfprobable thatf took pC Xl SflSn^d' during
ssar a ttswaw sjsg
wafattained may have amounted to one-tenth. As the cooling took place from the outside
inwards, unequal strains were developed, and these may a p
downward as the process of cooling extended. _ ,
Whv the jointing should run in the directions that prevail is not apparent, but there
annears to be some law involved, for at the Baw Baw Mountains, where the rock is grano-
Site the directions are very similar, and the angle between the joints much the same as
Tnst as the development of the joints can be traced on the Buffalo from the finest
needle-like scratch to the huge Buffalo Creek valley so every stage “mas™
KStf* is exposed
S e ba 2 r°el ( v Hues of » ‘
rb^n/gSnTfrl'tlrted;“aS joint completely severs the block from the parent
/pi at „ or.'. As time elapses adiacent blocks of softer nature are removed, and the_angl ,
Seven ?he hardest mTss arT truncated partly by expansion and contraction by which thick
shells of the rock are removed (Plate 46), partly bv the ceaseless removal of small 1
These processes continue until eventually a rounded tor remains above
mate 391 or a monolith projects high above its surroundings (Plate 45), or
perhaps a poised rock which has been weathered in sueh a manner as tortand
on a narrow base (Plates 37 and 38) conspicuously above the XSde”bv p* rtide vast bulks
the prodigal manner in which nature has laboured to removei T n r leaves
of hard granite, leaving only these remnants just as a contractor for removing eartn
pillars at intervals to indicate how much has been scooped out.


DEGRADING AND DENUDING INFLUENCES.
Quite a variety of forces are at work by different methods, but all tending towards
undoing the bonds that chemically bind together the elements that form the mineral consti-
tuents of the granite, to unloose the particles of matter that make up the rock, or to tear these
particles away from the mass and to transport them to more or less distant localities.
Engaged in this destructive work are heat, cold, frost, rain, streams, wind, lichens, and
mosses, shrubs, trees, decaying vegetation, &c.
During the summer season the rock surfaces become highly heated while the sun shines
on them, and the expansion that follows must cause ruptures, fissures, &c., especially near
the surface of the rocks. Just as violent as the strains produced by changes from a cold to
a heated state are the strains that occur while the rock becomes cold again. No matter how hard
or intractable the rock, alternations from a highlv heated condition to a cold one and vice
versa would eventually disintegrate it; the Buffalo granite appears to be not difficult to
disintegrate. There is an absence of those smooth, hard, apparently unweathered faces that
obtain over some other granite areas. On the contrary, it is a general circumstance that from
the surfaces of the exposed granite blocks loose and partly-loosened grains can be easily
rubbed off by the hand.
Frost is perhaps the most powerful of the influences actively engaged in demolishing
these mountains. The terrible strains set up by alternating expansion and contraction of the
granite cause rending and Assuring, and water finds its way into these minute fissures, into
cracks, joints, &c. (Plate 22). Later on the temperature falls to freezing point, with the result
that the water confined in these narrow channels expands and thrusts the walls apart, and
so all over exposed surfaces. In this manner the quantity of material being wedged away
from the main mass must be enormous. Where shallow hollows occur on flat rock surfaces
(Plate 52), the water becomes expanded into ice and detaches particles freely. For months in
the year the conditions are such that the temperature daily falls helow freezing noint, and there-
fore the changes from freezing to thawing and the converse are frequent. The sum of the
effects for a year must be very great, and when years are multiplied to cycles these moun-
tains are planed down to hills and hills to mounds.
Rain contributes its share to the work of demolition. As it falls heavily on the loosened
particles they become detached, and are borne down the sides of the blocks, and on down the
slopes into the runnels and so into the creeks, and then they are hurled over the brink of the
mountain and so are carried to the plains, where they have filled in square miles of valley to
the depth of hundreds of feet. The rain also fills the fine fissures and cracks with water which
becomes frozen, thus loosening the grains ready for the downpours to sweep away.
Streams also help. During heavy rain small rills run down the larger surfaces of
granite, and they sweep awav loose material. Lower down these little streams mingle and are
more effective in removing the debris from the granite area. Still lower creeks are formed,
and these carry off great quantities of grains from the granite right away from the moun-
tain and well into the valleys.
The air in motion shares in the toil of tearing these old granite mountains away piece by
piece, for as it whistles around the weathered blocks the loose grains are blown away from the
face, and often well helped on their way to the water-courses. In the case where hollows
exist on the rocks the grains are worn one against the other, and against the solid rock, and
always with some loss to the fragments and to the rock they come in contact with.
Lichens and mosses help the disintegration (Plate 32), and although the work of each
individual is small there are so many of them that their united efforts are colossal. Every-
where the humble lichen is to be seen covering the rocks, and wherever lichens exist the
rocks are being destroyed.
Larger forms of vegetation, such as shrubs, &c., obtain roothold on some of the rock
surfaces,, and their roots tend to widen cracks and to open fissures. The decaying portions
(Plate 52), form acids that also tend to decompose the constituents of the granite.
Seeds of the Snow Gum lodge on ledges and in cracks in the granite blocks, and ger-
minate only to die. Others struggle on for a short time and then perish; still others grow in
an extremely stunted manner for years (Plate 53), and then they succumb to adverse influences
and to want of nourishment. "When these decay another seedling begins life in the same spot
(Plate 52) and eventually after a long and hard struggle for existence the roots open out a
crack, joint, or fissure, so as to allow them to extend sufficiently, and perhaps eventually
to split the rock mass (Plates 51 and 52). Once this is accomplished, and the roots extend
into the soil beneath, the future of the tree is assured. Frequently small trees ere to be seen
on isolated blocks of granite where the roots cannot possibly reach the soil. A great deal of
destructive work is being accomplished in the splitting apart of rocks, some of large size,
by the tree roots. On the surfaces of the granite dead trunks and limbs of trees, branches,
and sticks, as well as collections of twigs and leaves (Plate 52) are found, and these decay
and the rock becomes hollowed out where they rest on it. As soon as a hollow is formed then
leaves and decaying matter accumulate, and water lodges there, and in this manner the
beginning of not holes is made. Where dead timber and dry vegetation lies on the rocks, and
a bush fire passes along, the granite is burnt and disintegrated where the fire passes over it,
and the loose grains are blown away by the wind. Vegetation in one form or another contri-
butes largely towards the breaking down of the granite on this mountain range.


METAMORPHISM.
Around the granite mass of the Buffalo Mountains the sedimentary beds (Ordovician ?)
„ rp altered in consequence of the proximity of such a great mass of heated rock This action
trteahle easterly for a quarter of a mile or more, but on the W. side of the range it
pit tends to the Buffalo River, so that probably the granite mass extends westerly for a greater
Stance near the surface than on the eastern side The production of secondary mica and
schistose character are the most salient features of this alteration. Just around the Buffalo
the sedimentary rocks do not appear to have been very rich m gold, judging from the
of tTn the alluvial deposits in the nearest creeks that dram from it. Even close
tTtoe granite the sedimentary rocks do not appear to have been much indurated, nor do
granite dykes appear to be common in the surrounding sedimentary beds.
DYKES.
The most common description of dykes is a fine-grained euritic rock, evidently segre-
■ from The ™ass of coarser granite. Such dykes (Plate 20 Fig. 1), are very irregular
ntoline they run only for short distances in one direction, and they range from horizontal
in vertical in dip A flat dyke of this character occurs on Crystal Brook, about 2y z miles
the Hospice. The colour is generally light red, and the rock breaks up into small, nearly
r 0^ n -i hlneksi There is no sharp line of demarcation between these dykes and the
rS £r“i e Over the wMe wea dykes of this character are to be found. Probably
they wefe formed just before the mass solidified. In some cases they split up into veins and
ramify through the ground mass.
This class of dykes is the oldest and the most common, but there are other dykes of
inis class _ c charaeter The best examp ie of such a dyke occurs at
C r cre e ek markfd The Wash Out on the plan. It is about 4 feet wide, and follows the course
VSTST Calcspar is associated with it. Quartz veins also crop out in several
localities and the principal sites are marked on the plan. Dykes occur m both sets o join
and also crossing them at many angles. Where a dyke of material that decomposes more
dill than eranite cuts through that rock the weathering away and removal of the dyke
rf work of breaking down the granite mass. From such a line of weakness the
hardest granite would be attacked in such a manner by the denuding forces that destruction
would be greatly accelerated.
THE BUFFALO GRANITE.
Petrological Determinations by D. J. Mahony, M.Sc.
The specimens submitted to me for examination are light-coloured granites of rather coarse
grain consisting of plentiful dark-looking quartz and white and pinkish felspar, with scattered
flakes of black mica considerably smaller than the felspars, and rarer flakes of white mica,
felspar in the hand specimen'appears for the most part to be orthoclase, but some of the
cleavage flakes show the typical repeated twinning of the plagioclases.
The specific gravities of two specimens are 2-64 and 2*63.
Under the microscope the thin slices (Nos. 1118 and 1120) are seen to have the typical
granitic structure (holocrystalline granular) and to consist of quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase,
biotite, and muscovite, with iron ores and zircon and rare apatite as accessories.
The quartz is of the usual granitic type, with numerous liquid inclusions, and very plentiful.
There are some interesting examples of the intergrowth of quartz crystals having a (liffeient
orientation, and producing between crossed nicols an effect like a graphitic
and felspar. The orthoclase (pertlute) belongs to two generations. The earlier crystals<
marked by well-defined crystal outlines, and are often surrounded by the larger
clase crystals that have been the last mineral to crystallize out except the quartz. Loth gene a
tions are twinned on the Carlsbad Law ormntwinned. All the orthoclase is more
turbid and decomposed.
Few sections of the plagioclase are suitable for giving determinative extinction angles, and
the highest angle measured in the zone 100-001 was 10° The refractive ™ d ex .when c .ompared
with that of quartz, was found to be almost identical with it, and this, together with the extinction
angle, would point to a moderately basic oligoclase. It is quite subordinate to the quartz in
abundance. Zonal structure is common, and the twinning is almost always on the Albite Law.
Both felspars occasionally form microscopic intergrowths with the quartz alon e their mar 0 .
The coloured mica is fairly plentiful, and appears light brown with a“1“
ordinary light. It is strongly pleochroic, changing from light brown to almost b lack.
inclusions surrounded by the usual pleochroic haloes are plentiful, and there l are afew small
included needles of apatite. It is decomposed in places to green chlorite The white mica is less
plentiful. It has crystallized after the plagioclase and before the orthoclase m which it is some
times included either as single crystals or as veins or strings. In some cases it, appears to have
been formed by tbe bleaching of the biotite.


The following analysis was made by Mr. P. G. W. Bayly, A.S.A.S.M., at the
Departmental Laboratory:—
per cent.
Si0 2 ... ... ... 73-30
A1 2 0 3 ... ... ... 13-84
Fe 2 0 3 ... ... ... 0-82
FeO ... ... ... 1-22
MgO ... ... ... 0-82
CaO ... ... ... 0-84
Na 2 0 ... ... ... 3-12
K 2 O ... ... ... 4-89
H 2 O + (above 110° C.) ... 0-50
H 2 O-(110°C) ... ... 0-19
Ti0 2 ... ... ... 0-20
P 2 0 5 ... ... ... 0-08
S0 3 ... ... ... nil
Cl' ... ... •.. nil
MnO ... ... ... 0-15
NiO ... ... ... nil
CaO ... ... ... nil
Li 2 0 ... ... ... nil
C0 2 .. ... ... p.n.d. (included in H 2 O + above.)
99-97
A specimen from one of the typical dykes is a fine-grained pinkish rock with granitic
structure, consisting principally of quartz and felspar with a little white mica.
Under the microscope this is seen to consist of quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase, and mica
(Slice 1148). The texture is considerably finer than that of the main granite mass, and the
structure is holocrystalline granular. The quartz is the usual granitic type, and the orthoclase is
rather less plentiful than in the specimens described above. Several measurements were made of
the symmetrical extinctions in the plagioclase felspars with albite twinning, and the maximum
angle was found to be about 15°. The refractive index appears to be practically the same as that
of quartz, so that the plagioclase felspar is oligoclase-andesine. The mica is moderately abundant
and almost all colourless. It is remarkable on account of its having crystallized out after the
felspars and quartz on which it is moulded. Biotite is represented by one or two flakes which
have been almost completely bleached, and are decomposed in part.


BUFFALO MOUNTAINS
Diagram, shewing relations of the present surface of the granite with the probable original surface
and with the sedimentary rocks that originally covered the granite dome .




Plate
Locality.
No. on
Description.
Number.
Plan.
View of Buffalo Mountains from Porepunkah. The Ovens Biver in the foreground. The
range in the middle distance is of altered sedimentary rocks (Ordovician or Silurian).
View from the top of Dickson’s Falls looking south-eastward up the Buckland Valley, show-
ing the extensive denudation that has taken place of the sedimentary rocks since the
granite mass was intruded.
Q
22
View from the S. side of The Gorge looking south-eastward up the Ovens Valley, showing
the northern wall of The Gorge. The Bogong Mountain on the horizon to the right of
the picture.
4
23
The top of The Gorge looking E., showing the manner in which it has been developed in
consequence of the N.E. jointing of the granite.
5
28
Camp Plain, N.W. of the Monolith, which stands out prominently on the left in the
picture, showing a smooth grass-covered plain, treeless, and for the most part free from
rocks. Such plains form a great contrast to the rugged rock-strewn tree-covered slopes
of the hills. The soil of these plains consists of peaty matter and granite detritus.
The small streams that wind through these have very tortuous courses.
6
20
The Long Plain. Around the margin the Snow Gums attain a height of from 40 to 60 feet.
It is proposed to build a dam across the outlet, and in this manner form a lake of 3J
to 40 acres in extent.
7
1
The Horn, looking W. This is the highest' peak of the Buffalo, 5,650 feet above sea-
level, as determined by the geodetic survey. The view is taken looking across a portion
of the Giant’s Playground.
8
31
Mt. Dunn, looking S.W., a typical rocky peak exhibiting the several stages by which
the massive granite is cut up into blocks, and how by further weathering massive tors
and perched blocks are produced.
9
31
North side of Mt. Dunn, showing jointing in the massive granite and weathered blocks.
10
40
Eagle Point, a characteristic group of tors.
11
9
The Cathedral from the north. A massive granite core.
12
1
Top of the Horn, showing cairn and the N.W. dip of the N.E. set of joints.
Le Souef’s Peak, looking W., and showing N.E. joints.
13
11
14
5
Big Gun Hill, looking E. Well weathered tors, isolated and perched blocks intersperse!
with dwarfed Snow Gums.
15
5
Big Gun Hill, looking N.
16
6
The Tombstones, exhibiting well-rounded outline due to weathering.
17
34
The Devil’s Couch. A very prominent landmark on the S. side of Crystal Brook.
18
22
N. side of the Gorge, looking N.E. A precipice 800 feet high forms the N. wall. The
N.E. set of joints is particularly well shown. The poised block on a prominent peak
is known as Queen Victoria.
19, Fig. 1
23
South side of The Gorge, showing curved jointing.
19, Fig. 2
20, Fig. 1
23
North side of The Gorge. The N.E. set of joints form the face of the cliff. The N.W.
set of joints show as vertical lines on the face of the cliffs. The tabular jointing
shows near the present surface, but is absent lower down.
Smooth face of granite, showing both sets of vertical joints and tabular jointing. Dykes
42
20, Fig. 2
also show near the lower right-hand corner of the picture, and in the principal block
in the upper part of the photograph.
24
Tabular jointing near The Gorge on S. side.
21
29
Tabular jointing resembling rude masonry, near the head of Eurobin Creek.
22
1
The Wall of China, near the Horn. A good example of irregular jointing. This precipice
and the more distant cliff give some idea of the abrupt boundary of portions of the
tableland.
23
35
The Split Bocks. A group of tors that have become isolated from the parent rock mass
by weathering. The latent joint structure has been tardily developed. The largest
tor still shows no sign of joints through its mass, the next tor to the right shows one
vertical joint. The tor on the extreme right is split in two. The right-hand tor in the
background is split in two, and the portions have fallen apart. The left-hand tor in the
background is split in three pieces, which have fallen apart. The remarkable feature
about this group of rocks is that the jointing has only been developed subsequent
to the complete carving out of these blocks from the original granite mass and their
24
25
later weathering into rounded tors.
Group of tors, showing N.E. jointing, looking E.
25
25
Same group, showing N.W. set of joints, looking N.
26
30
Boulder Valley, showing numerous well-rounded tors.
27
28
33
26
Group of large tors that have become displaced. Such sites were formerly frequented by
the blackfellows, who visited the plateau at certain seasons for the purpose of feasting
on the “ bogong ” moth, which frequents the dark passages and crevices among the
jumbled granite blocks, especially of the Horn, in marvellous numbers.
The Three Knights. Three well-rounded tors. The one in the background is split in two,
29
and one portion has fallen away.
3 |
Stonehenge. The upright block is about 60 feet high.
30
4 I
The Table and Loaves. The table is a rectangular parallelogram in form. It is about
31
• 1
39 |
60 feet long. The Horn shows in the background.
The Biscuit and Cheese, showing rectangular and spherical weathering at the same site.
The Woolpack, looking N., about 40 feet high.
32
32 l
34, Fig.’ 1
32 !
41 I
Same looking E. This group shows the three sets of jointing remarkably well.
Group of tors, North Buffalo.
The Cathedral, looking E.
Og, Gog, and Magog. Three gigantic tors on the crest of a hill. The face of the largest
is about 100 feet high, 104 feet long, and 43 feet wide. The dark lines near the figure
34, Fig. 2
9 I
35
36 '
36
are stains made by water.
21
1
The Pigeon Hole Bock. A fine poised rock standing on a bare granite floor. There are
holes underneath the mass large 'enough for a man to creep into {vide the photo!
!
1
ol feet long, 17 feet broad, and 16 feet high; greatest circumference 80 feet.
CATALOGUE OF VIEWS.
BUFFALO MOUNTAINS.


Plate
Number.
Locality.
No. on
Plan.
Description.
37
19
The Torpedo, looking S. Length, 45 feet, breadth 10 feet, height 13 feet, girth 46 feet.
38
21
The Pigeon Hole Rock, W. end.
39
18
The Pebble. Length 54 feet, breadth 42 feet, height 40 feet.
40
12
The Leviathan. Length 108 feet, breadth 70 feet, height 40 feet, girth 170 feet. Stands
on base 21 feet long, 12 feet wide.
41
2
The Bridge of Sighs.
Mahomet's Coffin. About 30 feet long, suspended by the two ends only.
42
16
*3
14
The Kissing Stones. The larger stone is 18 feet in length, and it rests on a pillar
20 feet high.
44
13
The Mussel Rock.
45
15
The Riven Rock. Height about 80 feet.
46
10
The Sentinel. About 60 feet high. The shell which has fallen from the end of this
rock is shown in black shadow.
47
8
The Whale Rock.
48
37
The Sarcophagus. The portion that overhangs its support is about 25 feet long.
49, Fig. 1
27
' ; '
The Monolith. Length 22 feet, breadth 14 feet, height 30 feet. This is the most con-
spicuous rock on the mountains.
49, Fig. 2
5
The Logan Stone. Approximate weight 60 tons. The small block on top weighs about
2 tons, and it poises the larger rock. This stone can be rocked with the hand.
50
U. i.
!.. ! n ,
Lli,U L
7
The Egg Rock. The best example of a poised rock. The base of this well weathered tor,
which weighs from 70 to 80 tons, length 16 feet, width 12 feet, is so small (7 feet by
1 foot) that a slight earth tremor would certainly displace it. Its perilous balance
testifies that for some- thousands of years no severe earthquake has affected this
locality.
51
d. Ll '
38
Snow Gums growing on granite tor. The height of the top of the rock is about
20 feet from the ground surface. The joint is where the roots of the trees have passed
down to the ground.
52
38
Top of the same tor, showing prostrate dead trees and their living successors, and illus-
trating the manner in which trees force the rocks apart along joints by means of their
roots.
53
17
A dwarfed Snow Gum growing on an exposed granite tor. It is crooked and wizened,
starved as regards nourishment, exposed to bitter cold and to fierce storms, but it still
struggles for existence.
i.;..
By Authority: J. Kemp, Acting Government Printer, Melbourne.


Plate i.
THE BUFFALO MOUNTAINS FROM POREPUNKAH.


Plate 2.
VIEW FROM TOP OF DICKSON’S FALLS.


Plate 3.
Loc. 22 on Map.
VIEW FROM SOUTH SIDE OF THE GORGE.


Plate 4.
Loc. 23 on Map.
THE GORGE: LOOKING EAST.


Plate 5.
Loc. 28 on Map.
CAMP PLAIN: LOOKING SOUTH.


V’late 6.
Loc. 20 on Map.
THE LONG PLAIN: LOOKING WEST.


Plate 7.
Loc. 1 on Map.
THE HORN: LOOKING WEST.


I'late 8.
Loc. 31 on Map.
MOUNT DUNN: LOOKING SOUTH-WEST.


Ptate. Q.
Loc. 31 on Map.
NORTH SIDE OF MOUNT DUNN.


I* LATE 10.
Loc. 40 on Map.
EAGLE POINT.


I'IATE Tt.
Loc. 9 on Map.
THE CATHEDRAL: LOOKING SOUTH.


Plate i 2.
Loc. 1 on Map.
TOP OF THE HORN.


Plate 13.
Loc. 11 on Map.
LE SOUEF’S PEAK: LOOKING WEST.


Plate 14.
Loc. 5 on Map.
BIG GUN HILL: LOOKING EAST.


Plate 15.
Loc. 5 on Map.
BIG GUN HILL: LOOKING NORTH.


Plate 16.
Loc. 6 on Map.
THE TOMBSTONES.


Plate 17.
Loc. 34 on Map.
THE DEVIL’S COUCH.


Plate 18.
Loc. 22 on Map.
NORTH SIDE OF THE GORGE: LOOKING NORTH-EAST.


Fig. 1.
Loc. 23 on Map.
SOUTH SIDE OF THE GORGE: LOOKING SOUTH.
Plate 19.
Fig. 2.
Loc. 22 on Map.
NORTH SIDE OF THE GORGE: LOOKING NORTH.


Plate 20.
Fig. 1.
Loc. 42 on Map.
TABULAR JOINTING, ETC.: NORTH BUFFALO.
Fig. 2.
Loc. 24 on Map.
TABULAR JOINTING: NEAR HOSPICE.


Plate 21.
Loc. 29 on Map.
TABULAR JOINTING: NEAR HEAD OF EUROBIN CREEK.


Plate 22.
Loc. 1 on Map.
THE WALL OF CHINA NEAR THE HORN.


Plate 23.
Loc. 35 on Map,
THE SPLIT ROCKS.


Plate 24.
Loc. 25 on Map.
CROUP OF TORS SHOWING NORTH-EAST JOINTING: LOOKING EAST.


Plate 25.
Loc. 25 on Map.
SAME GROUP AS ON PLATE 24, SHOWING N.W. JOINTING: LOOKING NORTH.


Plate 26.
Loc. 30 on Map,
BOULDER VALLEY.


Plate 27.
Loc. 33 on Map.
GROUP OF TORS.


Plate 23.
Loc. 26 on Map.
THE THREE KNIGHTS.


Plate 29.
Loc. 3 on Map.
STONEHENGE.


Plate 30.
Loc. 4 on Map.
THE TABLE AND LOAVES.


Plate 31.
Loc. 39 on Map.
THE BISCUIT AND CHEESE.


Plate, 32.
Loc. 32 on Map.
THE WOOLPACK: LOOKING NORTH.


Plate 33.
Loc. 32 on Map.
THE WOOLPACK: LOOKING EAST.


Plate 34.
Fig. 2.
Loc. 9 on Map.
the CATHEDRAL: LOOKING EAST.
Fig. I.
Loc. 41 on Map.
GROUP OF TORS, NORTH BUFFALO.


Plate 35.
Loc. 36 on Map.
OG, GOG, AND MAGOG.


Elate 36.
Loc. 21 on Map.
THE PIGEON-HOLE ROCK.


Plate 37.
Loc. 19 on Map.
THE TORPEDO: LOOKING SOUTH.


Plate 38.
Loc. 21 on Map.
THE PIGEON HOLE ROCK: WEST END.


Plate 39.
Loc. 18 on Map.
THE PEBBLE.


I’late 40.
Loc. 12 on Map.
THE LEVIATHAN.


Plate 41.
Loc. 2 on Map.
THE BRIDGE OF SIGHS


Plate 42.
Loc. 16 on Map.
MAHOMET’S COFFIN.


Plate 43.
Loc. 14 on Map.
THE KISSING STONES.


Plate 44.
Loc. 13 on Map.
THE MUSSEL ROCK.


Plate 45.
Loc. 15 on Map.
THE RIVEN ROCK.


Plate 46.
Loc. 10 on Map.
THE SENTINEL.


Plate 47.
Loc. 8 on Map.
THE WHALE ROCK.


Plate 48.
Loc. 37 on Map.
THE SARCOPHAGUS.


Fig. 1.
Loc. 27 on Map.
THE MONOLITH.
Plate 49.
Fig. 2.
Loc. 5 on Map.
THE LOGAN STONE.


Plate 50.
Loc. 7 on Map.
THE EGG ROCK.


Plate 51.
Loc. 38 on Map.
SNOW GUMS GROWING ON GRANITE TOR.


Plate 52.
Loc. 38 on Map.
SNOW GUMS GROWING ON GRANITE TOR. SHOWING TOP OF THE TOR.


Plate 53.
Loc. 17 on Map.
DWARFED SNOW GUM. GROWING ON TOP OF A GRANITE TOR.


G EOLOCICAL AND TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP
OF THE
BUFFALO MOUNTAINS
Scale—3o Chains to an Inch.
LIST OP ILLUSTRATIONS.
Locality.
No. i. The Horn
„ 2. The Bridge of Sighs
„ 3. Stonehenge
„ 4. The Table and Loaves
„ 5. Big Gun Hill
„ 6. The Tombstones
„ 7. The Egg Rock
„ 8. The Whale Rock
„ 9. The Cathedral
~ 10. The Sentinel
„ 11. Le Souefs Peak
„ 12.- The Leviathan
„ 13. The Mussel Rock
„ 14. The Kissing Stones
„ 15. The Riven Rock
„ 16. Mahomet’s Coffin
~ 17. Dwarfed Snow Gum
„ 18. The Pebble
• „ 19. The Torpedo
„ 20. The Long Plain: Looking West
„ 21. The Pigeon-Hole Rock
~ 22. View from the South Side of The Gorge
„ 23. The Gorge
„ 24. Tabular Jointing
„ 25. Group of Jointed Tors
„ 26. The Three Knights
„ 27. The Monolith
„ 28. Camp Plain: Looking South
„ 29. Tabular Jointing
„ 30. Boulder Valley
„ 31. Mount Dunn
„ 32. The Woolpack
„ 33. Group of Tors
„ 34. The Devil’s Couch
» 35* The Split Rocks
„ 36. Og, Gog, and Magog
„ 37. The Sarcophagus
„ 38. Snow Gums on Granite Tor
~ 39. Biscuit and Cheese
„ 40. Eagle Point
„ 41. Group of Tors, North Buffalo
„ 42. Tabular Jointing, &c., North Buffalo
TRANSVERSE section of buffalo mountain.
Scale,6o Chains tc an Inch.


