









THE QUEER ISLAND


BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
66 Chandos Place, London
17 Stanhope Street, Glasgow
BLACKIE k SON (INDIA) LIMITED
103/s Fort Street, Bomray
BLACKIE & SON (CANADA) LIMITED
Toronto




MaA
-
/77 j) V /
E GS3
THE SEALS? PLAYMATE
Frontispiece
Pag: 135


THE QUEER ISLAND
VIOLET M. METHLEY
Author of ? The Windmill Guides ** ? Ensign Lydia Gaff ? Bcc*
Illustrated hy D. L. Mays
BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
LONDON AND GLASGOW


BOOK
PRODUCTION
WAR ECONOMY
STANDARD
THE PAPER AND BINDING OF THIS BOOK
CONFORM TO THE AUTHORIZED ECONOMK
STANDARDS
Printed in Great Britain by BUukie & Son, Ltd., Glasgow


Contents
I. ? ?Ware Sharks!? ------ 9
11. Carol?s Moonlight Discovery - - - 19
111. The Camp at Fortune Bay - - - - 32
IV. The Storm -------44
V. Four Crusoes ------ 57
VI. And Friday -------63
VII. A Navigation Test ----- 70
VIII. The Serpent in Eden ----- 78
IX. ? Ship Ahoy!? 87
X. The ? Brick-fielder ? - - - - - 94
XI. Double Desert Islands - - - - 103
XII. Gulliver Junior among the Gulls - - 113
XIII. ? Alarums and Excursions ? - - - - 122
XIV. ? Boat Ahoy!? 137
XV. Trapped ------- 151
XVI. Savages on the Island - 161
XVII. Escape ------- - 170
XVIII. Off and On ------ 180
XIX. The Mouse-trap - - - - - -188
XX. Where a Red Light Led - 195
XXL Flag-wagging - 203
XXII. The Rocketeers ------ 210
XXIII. Finishing Off ------ 223




Illustrations
Facing
The Seals? Flatmate - Frontispiece
A Fearful Moment ------- go
The Capture of Jack ------- jfo.




THE QUEER ISLAND
CHAPTER I
??Ware Sharks!?
? Well, isn?t this as good as your Brighton, or
Blackpool, or Bournemouth??
Dorcas Wilde?s voice was just a tiny bit aggressive,
and Carol Hayes, to whom she had put the question,
hesitated for half a minute before she answered. For
she had already discovered that Australians, delightful
and hospitable as they were, sometimes seemed a little
on the defensive where their country was concerned.
? But it?s just because they?re so tremendously proud
of it,? Carol thought, and answered slowly: ? You see,
it?s all so utterly and absolutely different .?
She had turned round to face the wide crescent-
shaped stretch of Ruora Bay, and the vivid blueness
of the huge white-crested waves, which came rolling
in unceasingly, one behind the other. Real tropical
surf it was, breaking on a coral beach, such as one
read of in the Blue Lagoon and other South Sea books,
and this was Carol?s first sight of such a scene.


? How , different?? Dorcas?s tone was still rather
defiant.
? We-11, at Brighton and that sort of Enghsh places,
there?d be rows and rows of big hotels and tall houses
instead of the bungalows, and terraces, and streets of
others behind them. At Bournemouth, it would be much
the same, only more pine trees and gardens ?and huge
shops. The people on the beach wouldn?t be wearing
quite such jolly brightly-coloured things, and the sand?s
not so white, or the sun so blazing, and ?oh, there
would be nothing like that perfectly wonderful sea!?
The enthusiasm in Carol?s voice completely mollified
Dorcas at last, and she spoke in quite a different tone.
? Yes, it is fine, isn?t it? The Ruora surf-bathing
is really better even than Bondi and Coogee or Manly
?they?re all rather nearer to Sydney, you know.?
? Mother said you ought to see a real Australian
seaside place before we went off into the wilds,? the
third girl present laughed in a soft lazy way. ? That?s
why we brought you to Ruora, just for a day and a
bathe, before starting for Fortune Bay.?
This was quite a long speech for Wynne Aldred and
her voice died away luxuriously as she stretched herself
on the warm sand, closing her brown eyes, and showing
the ridiculously long lashes which almost all Australians
seemed to possess, to Carol?s great envy, since her own,
as she expressed it, were just short and stumpy. Wynne
was very pretty altogether, with her thick yellow hair,
almost mimosa-coloured, and the fair skin which never
seemed to tan or freckle. Very tall, too, about a head


??Ware Sharks!?
and shoulders taller than Dorcas, although they were
almost the same age.
? But then I?m a freak ?Ranger age and Brownie
size,? Dorcas herself declared ruefully. ? I suppose
I?ll always be more or less of a dwarf.?
An elf or a goblin, rather, Carol thought, for she
was a Puckish little person in every way, brown as a nut,
with dancing golden eyes and very close-cropped dark
hair, whilst her tiny hands and feet seemed forever busy
and on the move, alternately if not at the same time.
As for Carol, she was between the two Australian
girls in height, with what might be described as
ordinary grey eyes and ordinary mouse-coloured hair.
A pleasant-faced, jolly-looking girl, however, with a
wide smile showing beautiful teeth ; quite a good
specimen of a Guide to represent England in Australia.
The three had been great friends from the first day
they met, and Carol, a keen Sea Ranger at home, had
been delighted when Wynne and Dorcas suggested
that she should become an honorary member of the
? Captain Cook ? during her stay with two rather
elderly aunts in Sydney.
It was a splendid chance to learn something of the
ways of Australian Rangers, and Carol was more
pleased still when the pair asked her to join them in
a threesome camp at Fortune Bay, a beautiful and
lonely beach, only to be reached from the landward side
by means of the roughest of tracks through the bush.
But the three Rangers had an even more adventurous
plan. They meant to walk to their camping place along


the windings of the coast, some twenty miles, carrying
only the lightest of packs, whilst their tent and all their
heavy gear w r ere to be conveyed to Fortune Bay by
Wynne?s uncle Ted in his Ford car, and dumped there
to await the arrival of the three Rangers.
They were going to spend one night on the way, in
a cave of which Wynne and Dorcas knew, just beyond
the point which guarded Ruora Bay, and as a pre-
liminary to this first stage of the journey, here they
sprawled on Ruora Beach, and made those rather
absurd comparisons between its white and blueness
and Brighton and Bournemouth.
? There?s one thing missing, which you?d find at
every English seaside place,? Carol said, sitting up and
hugging her knees with her arms, ? and that?s a pier,
with a pavilion on it for dancing, and concerts, and all
that sort of thing.?
? You couldn?t have a pier through that surf ?it
would be washed away in the first big southerly
? buster ?, though we?ve got them at other coast places,?
Dorcas said. ?And as for the dancing, and music, and
amusements, they?re all alive and kicking in the Pleasure
Park, at the far end of the bay.?
She jerked her thin shoulder toward a big enclosure,
from which came the sounds of a band and the strident
organ of a merry-go-round. No, Carol decided ; as
far as that was concerned, Ruora was not so very
unlike England after all, even if it was ten thousand
miles away.
? Well, if we?re going to bathe, we ought to do it


soon,? Dorcas announced, clasping her toes and rocking
backwards and forwards. ? Very soon after tea, we must
start to walk round the point to the cave.?
? Oh, you?re so frightfully energetic, and I?m so
comfortable,? Wynne moaned. ? I feel too lazy even
to bathe; why can?t you lie still for a minute??
? ?Cause I like moving,? Dorcas said briefly. ? Come
on, Carol, and leave that sea-slug to lie there if she
wants to.?
But Wynne, although still lamenting, heaved up her
long length and followed them into the little bathing-
tent to undress. In a very few minutes they were ready,
Dorcas all in vivid orange, Carol in dark-blue and
scarlet-capped, Wynne in green and white, looking
rather like an up-to-date mermaid. They made three
more bright spots of colour to join all those already
in the sea or on the sands, riding through the surf, or
bestriding all manner of queer rubber beasts.
And then suddenly, before they reached the water?s
edge, Carol noticed something quite un-English.
? What?s that man doing who sits up on the top of
a sort of baby Eiffel Tower?? she asked.
? Oh, that?s the shark watcher,? Dorcas told her
carelessly.
? The shark watcher??
? Yes. He looks out for sharks, and rings a bell if
he sees one coming too near the bathers.?
? But do they come?? Carol felt rather a cold
shiver down her back.
? Oh, sometimes! Not often, when there?s such a


crowd about. They are rather cowards, really?sharks,?
Dorcas told her in an offhand way. ? They soon make
off if you splash about a bit and make a noise. We
don?t bother about them a bit, you know.?
Her fellow-Ranger?s slightly superior tone made
Carol resolve that she would not bother either, at
least outwardly. But, all the same, the goose-fleshy
feeling was still trickling down her back as they ran
down the beach and plunged, all three hand in hand,
through the surf.
She soon forgot it, though, in the excitement of that
first experience of Australian bathing, the glorious
feeling of the buoyant sun-warmed water, the contact
wdth the great curling white rollers, through which
they plunged. Carol was a strong swimmer, and was
glad of it when she saw that she had earned the approval
of her companions, who, she felt inwardly, had been
prepared to be a tiny bit contemptuous of English
methods of swimming, like others of the shouting,
laughing groups, who had instantly seen that she w r as
new to it all, that she was not Australian bom.
? Race you out to the far raft?? Dorcas said, jerking
her head towards a scarlet flag, bobbing defiantly up
and down on the waves. ? Come on, Wynne, you too.?
Off they went, all three, arms rising and falling
rhythmically, as they sped through the water. And
Carol won ?won by quite a respectable length; no
wonder that she felt puffed up with modest pride in
having upheld the honour of her particular portion of
the British Empire, as she sat on the raft with the


others, to rest for a few minutes before swimming
back to land.
The blazing sun dried them almost instantly and
Carol wriggled her shoulders.
? I?m sure I?m being fried, just like a sausage,? she
declared. ? I shall begin to crack and splutter soon.?
? Well, you don?t want to get too burnt, first off,?
Dorcas said. ? It?s so painful. Let?s take to the water
again ; it must be nearly tea-time.?
They slipped off the bobbing raft like three seals
and began to swim landwards in a leisurely fashion,
sometimes pausing to float. But they were still well
out beyond the main crowd of bathers, when, of a
sudden, Carol, on her back, rose to the crest of a smooth
wave ?and saw something.
Something very near at hand, a dark triangle moving
through the blue water and, new chum as Carol was,
there was no need for anyone to tell her what that
meant. She had read about it in books ever since her
babyhood, that black triangular fin.
? Dorcas ?Wynne ? she gasped. ? Oh, quick ?a
shark'?
She saw Dorcas?s head raised and simultaneously
remembered what the other girls had told her. You
must make a noise, shout and splash, and she began
to do so, beating up the water with her hands and
feet, calling out desperately, absurdly:
? Shoo! Get away! Shoo, you brute!?
But there was the fin again, much nearer, coming on
as though quite unfrightened, and there was Dorcas


too, bobbing up close beside her, quite unfrightened
too, for she was laughing?yes, actually laughing.
? Don?t be a loonie, Carol!? she gasped. ? Can?t
you see, he?s just pulling your leg!?
Beyond the dripping, laughing faces of Wynne and
Dorcas, Carol saw the black fin again ; but now it was
held high in the air, by a sunburnt arm, and was
revealed as just a bit of driftwood, brandished by a
grinning red-haired boy, who gave a delighted
triumphant whoop.
Coo! That was a dinkum take-in!? he shouted.
? Wynne?Dorcas?a sharkV ?
Mimicking Carol?s frightened cry, he grinned again,
then, sending the bit of wood spuming along the
surface, made off towards the beach, quick as any fish.
Carol felt her cheeks crimson, her eyes smarting,
but not with salt water. Dorcas chuckled impishly.
W hat a bonzo joke! she cried, but Carol answered
v ith choky stiffness, as she turned and began to swim
shorewards.
Really, I can?t see that it was particularly funny.?
? No, you?re right, it wasn?t.? Wynne swam up
alongside, trying, as always, to make peace. ? I call
it a mean trick?never mind, Carol, anyone might
have been taken in,?
? Only they weren?t!? ejaculated Dorcas, and Carol
felt angrier than ever as she forged doggedly through
the ttater, without another word to her companions.
Thinking it funny to deceive her because she was
new to the country ?that wasn?t very kind or hospitable.


Well, she?d take care that they didn?t do it again,
and she?d show Dorcas how beastly she thought it.
? I believe she planned it with that horrid boy,?
Carol thought. ? I do believe she Hullo! What?s
that??
Across the water came the harsh clang of a bell,
followed by shouts from landwards which grew louder
and louder. Carol glanced over her shoulder and saw
Wynne?s face close beside her, white and frightened.
? The shark-watcher?s bell?he?s seen?Carol, it?s
real this time, swim as fast as you can, and?oh,
DorcasV *
For Dorcas was a good many lengths behind, and
between them and her . . . shouting, splashing, Carol
turned and swam straight towards that grey-white
shape, stealing silent and ghostlike through the water.
Although Dorcas was splashing and kicking too, the
thing was making straight towards her ; Carol caught
a glimpse of her face, white, peaked, frightened, changed
in a second to someone so unlike Dorcas. It seemed to
make Carol forget, queerly, that there was any danger
to herself at all; arm over arm, she swam up, shouting
again, whilst from behind her came Wynne?s voice:
? There?s a boat coming from the beach!?
The splash of oars could be heard across the water,
but the shark was much nearer than any help could
be. Something must be done before the boat came,
and Carol shot between Dorcas and that long grey
shape, too breathless now to shout. She struck out
with both hands, beating at the smooth, slippery side,
(E 683 ) 2


pushing it away. Again and again Carol hit out with
her whole strength and the sinister creature slid off
through the water, then swerved to return. . . .
But at that moment came voices, louder splashing
of oars, and the boat shot up.
Gasping for breath, Carol was aware of arms
stretched out, of hands which gripped and pulled her
up over the gunwale, but she found herself in the boat
without really knowing how she got there. Dorcas
and Wynne were soon there, too, quite unhurt, although
the former was still white and peaked-looking.
She spoke eagerly and excitedly.
? Oh, Carol, you were fine\ I do believe the brute
would have had me if you?d not been there; he was
close on top of me before I knew it was real.?
? And she didn?t seem afraid of it a bit,? chimed
in Wynne. ? She simply pushed it away, shoved it
off ?
? Well, you see, I was so angry,? Carol said slowly.
? Angry with myself and ?and everybody, about the
other thing, you know. But when the shark came, I
was angriest with that ?simply furious. I suppose that?s
why I wasn?t more afraid ?then. But I am now,
horribly, and?l think I?d rather not talk any more
about sharks, please. Ugh ?it felt so horrid.?
A moment?s pause, then Carol broke her own
resolution, with the air of one who really did intend to
have the last word this time.
? Well, anyway, we don?t need to have shark-
watchers at Brighton or Bournemouth!?


CHAPTER II
Carol?s Moonlight Discovery
Even the shark adventure could not depress the
spirits of the three Rangers for long; after all, they
were out for adventures, and all was well that ended
well. They talked of everything under the sun, moon,
and stars whilst they had their tea in the Ruora Kiosk,
and by the time they had finished that excellent meal,
concluding with passion-fruit ice cream?a new and
delicious experience for Carol ?they were as cheerful
as ever and ready for the walk round the point to the
cave where they were to spend the night.
Carrying only the bare necessities for bed and
breakfast, they tramped along the beach over the
whitest and softest sand, strewn with little branchy bits
of coral and with fascinating and brightly coloured
shells, which made Carol stop every few minutes to
gather them up with exclamations of delight.
? But, my good child, you can?t carry shells about
with you everywhere,? Dorcas expostulated. ? Be-
sides, anyway, these are quite common. They?re ever
so much better at Fortune Bay, especially after a storm.
Then you really do find exciting things on the beach
?all sorts of queer beasts.?
So Carol reluctantly dragged her eyes from the too


tempting sands at her feet ?and found plenty of other
things to look at on all sides. For as they rounded the
Point, and came in sight of the bay on the farther side,
it seemed as though they had wandered into quite
another world.
Here, there wasn?t a soul in sight, none of the gaily-
dressed people, the bright sunshades, the tents and
amusement parks and marquees. Nothing but a
curving stretch of sand, with, here and there, seaweed-
covered rocks and deep pools. Inland, there \\ere
dunes where queer stiff clumps of grass-like bull-
rushes grew, and rose-pink heather with huge bells,
and yellow poppies. It was the loneliest, loveliest
place ?at least so Carol thought until she had seen
others still lonelier and lovelier.
The cave for which they were bound was quite near
now, only just beyond the point and just above high-
water mark. Such a fascinating cave, with its arched
opening facing seaward and its dry sandy floor, looking
so clean-swept.
? Lovely!? Wynne flung herself down full length
just inside the cave doorway. ? And now for tea
I?m simply panting for it.?
? Tea again ?? Carol stared.
? Why not? It?s hours and hours since we had
the last ?it?s nearly eight o?clock now. Dorcas, darling,
you?ve got the billy-can, haven?t you??
? I never saw anything like you,? Carol declared.
? Directly you stop doing anything else, you Australians
want tea. And I?m sure it?s bad for you.?


? Well, it hasn?t exactly stunted me, has it, pet??
Wynne murmured.
? It can?t be good for the digestion, it must be bad
for sleeping, as late as this,? Carol persisted, but
Wynne only blinked lazily.
? Not a bit. I?ll promise you not to lie awake a
single minute; in fact, I?ll oversleep if you like,? she
said sweetly. ? Dorcas, dear, I see some driftwood
over there, do fetch it so that we can make a fire.?
? Well, I like that!? Dorcas expostulated indignantly.
? Why don?t you fetch it yourself??
? Because I?m lying down and you?re not.? Wynne
raised large reproachful eyes. ? And besides, you
know you like fire-making; you?re much better at it
than I am.?
Dorcas, grumbling, fetched the firewood; Dorcas,
grumbling still, built the fire, lit it, boiled the billy,
made the tea. Whilst Wynne, blinking through her
lashes at the sunset over the sea, murmured sweetly:
? She does it so much better than I.?
In spite of Carol?s doubts, tea and bread and jam
and squashed fly ? biscuits, otherwise and less
expressh ely known as Garibaldis, were very grateful
and comforting, eaten by the fight of the camp fire,
for it was dark now outside.
It sso funny, Carol said. ? There?s no twilight
here; the sun just seems to bob down and go out.
That?s different to England.?
Well, pretty soon the moon will bob up and make
everything fight again; it?s a full one,? Dorcas said.


? I don?t care myself whether it?s dark or light,?
Wynne yawned. ? I?m so frightfully slee-ee-eepy?
o-oh, roll me up in my old sleeping-bag, and don?t call
me till breakfast?s ready.?
Dorcas, for all her briskness, was yawning too, and
presently all three were cuddled down into hollows
scooped in the soft sand to fit themselves, with the
flaps of their sleeping-bags drawn up well about their
ears. All their undressing to-night had consisted in
the removal of shoes, as Dorcas said they simply
couldn?t carry pyjamas as well as bathing-costumes or
extra blankets.
Perhaps it was the tea, perhaps it was the strange-
ness of it all, but Carol simply could not sleep. First
Wynne and then Dorcas dropped off, and still she lay
wide awake, not even the tiniest bit drowsy.
Not that she minded. The night was really too
lovely to waste in sleeping, she decided, especially
now that the moon had risen and turned everything
that had been gold in daytime to silver, with such
black, black shadows.
Carol?s bed-place was nearest to the cave entrance,
and through the big arch she could see the beach
sloping away down to the sea, first dry white sand,
then the wet part which looked like beaten silver, and
then the moon path on the water, stretching right
away into?oh, fairyland, that was what it looked like,
anyway! Ajid the groups of queer-shaped rocks, too,
looked somehow magical, like dragons or crouching
bears and wolves.


?You could imagine simply anything a night like
this, it?s so absolutely lovely,? Carol thought. ? Fairies
and elves and mermaids?especially mermaids. It?s
just like Hans Andersen ?fancy if the little Sea Maid
crept up, out of those fringy waves ?
Fancy! and then, all of a sudden, Carol drew a queer
little catching breath and leant up on her elbow,
staring down at the beach. One could imagine mer-
maids, she had just been thinking, but?this wasn?t
imagination. It couldn?t be.
Carol rubbed her eyes with the back of her hand.
They were wide open, and she wasn?t asleep?hadn?t
been asleep, either. But there, down by the big pool
which shone so brightly in the moonlight, something
was moving, really and truly moving. Something?
somebody?for it was not a bird or a fish, as she had
thought it might be, just for a minute. No, half hidden
as it still was in the shadow of a big rock, she could
make out that it was a ?person.
But what sort of person could it possibly be, unless
?oh, but that was impossible!
? Guides and Rangers don?t believe in ghosts and
fairies and things,? Carol told herself definitely, ? so it
can't be what you think, so it?s no use?oh, but it ts!?
For the person, the thing, had come out from the
rock shadow. It was in full moonlight now and, what-
ever Carol s common sense might tell her, her eyes
were perfectly certain that it was nothing more or
less than a mermaid.
There couldn?t be any doubt; there it was, only


about a hundred yards away, and absolutely distinct
in that silver blaze of moonshine.
A very little mermaid ?a mer-child, almost a mer-
baby, with fair hair which seemed all tangled up with
green seaweed, and more seaweed in a kind of fringy
collar round her neck, with chains of coral and pearly
shells. But all that might have belonged to a human
child. It was the tail that made all the difference ?that
real, shimmering, scaly, silvery tail, trailing behind her
over the rocks as she crept to the edge of the pool and
began to dabble in the water, flicking it up in little
sparkling fountains, and laughing.
? Yes, I can hear her laughing,? Carol thought,
rather absurdly, ?so she must be real. I wonder ?
shall I wake the others? They?ll never believe me if
I don?t when I tell them what I saw.?
But, somehow, she did not want to share her
mermaid?at least, not yet. If only she could get
nearer to it first ?talk to it perhaps ?and directly the
thought came to her, Carol began to wriggle out of
her sleeping-bag.
She did not put on her shoes; the sand was quite
dry enough for stocking-feet, and she must go very,
very softly, or the mermaid would certainly take
fright and escape. And then nobody in the world
would ever believe Carol?s story.
Tip-toeing, holding her breath, she made her way
out of the cave and down the beach, keeping as much
as possible behind the rocks which dotted the beach
here and there. It took ages, that little distance, but


Carol reached the rocks just behind the pool without
having disturbed the mer-baby at her dabbling.
It was a most exciting moment, and Carol felt more
as though she was in a fairy tale than ever when she
came out from behind the rocks and stood there
within a few feet of the real live mermaid. She
really quite expected it to disappear?but it didn?t.
There it sat, with its seaweed and its coral and pearly
chains and that marvellous gleaming iridescent tail,
and just stared ?stared with great round dark eyes,
rather like that of a startled bird?stared without
saying anything.
How did one talk to mermaids? Carol tried vainly
to think of something to say, feeling more and more
foolish every minute.
? Who ?I mean ?how?how are you?? she stam-
mered at last idiotically.
The mer-baby did not answer; it only flipped its
shiny tail up and down in the water, tucked down its
chin, thrust out a rosy under-lip, and stared at Carol
very much as a shy and sulky human baby would.
? And, of course, the poor little darling doesn?t
understand a word I?m saying,? Carol thought, and
tried to make advances by holding out her hand and
making soothing caressing noises as one would to a
puppy or kitten.
? Did?ums, then, poor ?ickle sing!? she crooned, but
the mer-baby took no notice of her advances, except
by pouting and scowling in a more and more deter-
mined manner.


? It doesn?t seem to like the look of me a bit,? Carol
thought distractedly. ? Whatever shall I do? I simply
can?t let it go ?and I?ve got nothing to give it. It
wouldn?t ?no, of course, it wouldn?t eat chocolate.
It couldn?t even know what it was.?
She produced the stick of chocolate from her pocket
all the same and held it out to the mer-child, with
rather unexpected results. For the little creature
grabbed it with its wet gleaming hand and proceeded
to smear its face and chin with brown, chocolatey
streaks, more than ever like a human baby.
? But of course kiddies do stick everything in their
mouths whether they know what it is or not,? Carol
reflected. ? I suppose sea-babies are like land-babies
in that way ?and it does seem to like it, the lamb!?
The mermaid was indeed eating the chocolate with
every sign of enjoyment, without paying any more
attention to the stranger, and this gave Carol an idea.
She simply must show her find to the other two
Rangers; otherwise they would certainly never believe
in it. Perhaps if she took it by surprise, now, whilst
it was eating the chocolate
Without further delay she acted. With a quick
movement she was round the pool, had caught up the
mer-baby in her arms, and was off up the sands,
carrying it, as fast as she could run.
But how queer it felt ?the wetness and scaliness,
and that slippery wriggling tail. Like holding a fish ?
and a very active and angry fish too, who strongly
objected to being picked up and carried away, and


who slapped and buffeted at her with two fat and
unfishlike hands.
One muffled squeal escaped from it before it began
to choke over the remains of the chocolate, a process
which lasted until Carol had reached the cave and w r as
calling excitedly to her companions.
? Wynne?Dorcas! Wake up! See what IVe found!?
? Wa-aa-ah!? bawled the mer-baby, recovering its
breath and pummelling Carol with its fists, as Wynne
and Dorcas woke and began to disentangle themselves
from their sleeping-bags, yawning and exclaiming.
? What?s the matter?? ? What?s happened?? ? What
have you found?? ?My Colonial?wha-at??
This last startled exclamation came from Dorcas,
the first of the two to be thoroughly awake, and to
take in the amazing apparition of the mer-baby, which
Carol had deposited upon the ground, through the
sheer impossibility of controlling its writhings and
squirmings any longer.
? Yes?there! P?r?aps you?ll tell me they?re quite
common in Australia?mermaids!? Carol panted exul-
tantly. It came out of the sea ?I found it.?
? M 7 goodness, a mer-kid!? No doubt that Dorcas,
for once in a way, was duly impressed. ? Well, I?d
never have believed it if I hadn?t seen it!?
? 1 knew you wouldn?t, that?s why I hauled it up
here,? Carol said triumphantly. ?It eats chocolate.?
At this information, rendered rather unnecessary by
the state of the mer-child?s tear-and-chocolate-stained
countenance, Wynne rummaged in her pack.


? Does it ?the pet?? she exclaimed. ? Surely 1
didn?t ?no, I knew there was a bit left.?
She knelt beside the mer-baby, offering it a much-
nibbled slab of chocolate, but this time it refused to
be propitiated and only roared the louder, beating
with its fists.
? Poor little darling?oh, don?t cry like that, sweet-
heart!? Wynne coaxed. ? What is it then, what would
you like, pettest??
Pettest?s only response was a swinging blow, which
made Wynne retire, rubbing her jaw ruefully.
? You wouldn?t expect a mermaid to be so strong ?
or so fierce,? she said. ? Can?t you do anything,
Dorcas ?you?re so awfully good with animals.?
? This isn?t an animal!? Carol exclaimed indignantly.
? At least, only sort of ?oh, dear, I?m afraid it?ll hurt
itself if it howls like that.?
? I expect it is cold,? Dorcas said. ? That?s what?s
the matter, as it can?t be hunger or a pin, and those are
the other things babies cry about. I?ll wrap my coat
round it.?
This she proceeded to do, with less resistance than
might have been expected, but the wails did not cease,
and the three girls looked at each other helplessly,
then back at the mermaid, with its tail showing so in-
congruously under Dorcas?s knitted blue jacket.
? I s?pose we?ll have to take it down to the sea and
let it loose again,? Carol said. ? Though it does seem
an awful pity.?
? Too true!? Dorcas agreed. ? A real mermaid?


because it is, though I can hardly believe it. My
goodness, I wish it would stop howling, though.
Anyone would think we were killing it, instead of being
as kind as we know how.?
And that someone did think so was proved next
minute.
Suddenly and without warning a fresh figure appeared
upon the scene, running up from the beach, whirling
into the cave, turning upon the three Rangers in a
fury of anger.
? Vot is zis?? the newcomer demanded tempes-
tuously. ?You ?urt ?er ?you thieve ?er ?you keel ?er!?
In her rage, the stranger had an alarming appearance,
tall, dark, with flashing black eyes and crimson flushed
cheeks. She was a girl of about eighteen, dressed in
vivid scarlet, with a black shawl round her shoulders.
Dorcas found her voice first.
? We?re not killing anybody,? she said sullenly,
? we?re all being as kind as we possibly can, only
she doesn?t seem to understand.?
? Vy you bring ?er ?ere ?vy you thieve ?er?? the other
demanded fiercely.
?We didn?t ?at least ? Carol broke off, whilst
the stranger fell on her knees beside the mer-baby,
crooning tenderly.
? Cherie, cherie, ne pleures pas. Sois tranquille, ma
p?tite?tout va bien!?
? She?s talking to it in French ,? Carol whispered to
Wynne, ? but why on earth ?
The mermaid had ceased to howl; it was clinging to


the newcomer, sobbing occasionally and glaring at
Carol with its round black eyes. But Carol, who had
spent several summer holidays in France, found
courage enough to put a question.
? Est-elle Franchise? ?Ma?mzelle ?
? Mais oui?mais oui, pourquoi pas? Moi aussi,
c?est ma petite soeur.?
? Yotre ?soeur!? Carol stared in amazement.
? Mais oui?mais oui! C?est la p?tite Marina!?
Suddenly she began to fumble in her pocket and
produced a printed handbill which Carol spread out,
the other two leaning over her shoulders to read.
?La Petite Marina,? they saw printed. ? The
marvellous child-fish from France will give exhibitions
of diving and swimming twice daily in the Amusement
Fair, Ruora ?
? Then ?then she is not a real mermaid?? Carol
faltered, and was answered by a burst of laughter from
the French girl.
? Real? Non, non ?she ?ave ze beautiful li?l feet,
my small Marie! Ze tail, it is ?er dress-up ?zat tail
eet cost vot you not believe ?zo many francs.?
? It?s a beautiful tail,? murmured Carol.
? Vous comprenez, I tell von story,? the French
girl went on briskly. ?I, Georgine Claire, I say at
ze shows zat she ees real sea-bebe, zat I find ?er in ze
pool on beach. Mais, zat ees all von big lie! She is ma
toute petite soeur, Marie ?n?est-ce pas, cherie??
All her fierceness had gone, as she cuddled and
kissed the mer-baby, and Carol managed to explain


what had happened, and to assure the French girl
that she had not meant to kidnap her little sister.
It appeared that the child-fish could be wilful on
occasion, that after the evening performance at Ruora,
she had escaped from her sister, still wearing her fancy
dress, and had swum round the point.
?For she ees laike a feesh ?she sweem ?she sweem
always, or she float. Eh, mais elle est tr&s mechanic,
la toute petite Marie!?
And it must be said that the mer-baby, chocolate
and tear-stained, half pouting still, half-grinning mis-
chievously, looked indeed a very naughty child.
Things had happened more quickly than Carol
could have believed; it was not much past midnight
when the three Rangers were once more alone and
the howls of the little Marie ?who had developed a
sudden desire to stay with her new friends ?had died
away in the distance. And even then there had been
time for a fresh brew of tea to sustain the mermaid?s
sister.
? 00-yah!? yawned Carol from under the flaps of
her sleeping-bag. ? It won?t keep me awake this time
?but it?s the funniest country. A sham shark, a sham
mermaid?l wonder what?s the next thing that will
turn out not to be real?there ought to be three.?
? Silly!? snapped Dorcas. ? Why, Australia is the
realest country in the wor?oo ?ah!?
The last word ended in another terrific yawn, but
even if Dorcas could have kept awake to finish her de-
fence of down-under, Carol was already sound asleep.


CHAPTER 111
The Camp at Fortune Bay
The camp at Fortune Bay was reached late on
the following afternoon without anything further in
the way of adventures in the least remarkable.
They found the dump, covered by ground sheets,
left by Wynne?s uncle under the shelter of some ti-
bush, tent and rugs, cooking pots and tinned provisions,
biscuits, groceries, jam, and, of course, tea! Every-
thing was quite safe and untouched, rather to Carol?s
surprise; she had not yet realized how very few human
beings during the year came near Fortune Bay.
? Of course the stuff was all right,? Dorcas said.
? Nobody would have touched it ?cept perhaps rabbits
or dingoes, and we don?t have many of them round
here. We?re not in England, you know, with sneak-
thieves about.?
?The English aren?t thieves ? began Carol,
hotly. ?At least ?
?Well, you said it yourself,? Dorcas rejoined
placidly. ? Said that camp stuff couldn?t be left to
look after itself for a couple of days, I mean.?
And Carol was obliged to confess reluctantly that
this was true.


The Camp at Fortune Bay
? But it?s only because we?re so much more crowded
up at home,? she declared. ? Here?oh, there?s such
a lovely lot of room. Yes, I must say that camping is
better here than in England?in some ways.?
? Well, I should say in all ways, judging by what
you?ve told us about the rain you had for the whole
fortnight that you were in camp last year,? Wynne
laughed.
? Oh, I don?t know! We had jolly times all the
same in spite of the rain.? Carol stood up staunchly
for the Old Country with all its faults. ? But ?this is
certainly lovely.?
She looked this way and that along the beach,
shaped just like a neat bite out of a slice of bread and
butter, with jagged black rocks at each end of the
mouthful. The sand was of a dazzling whiteness, nearly
as white as the surf which broke upon it, and strewn
all over with the most fascinating star-shaped shells,
so that it was like a sort of Milky Way. The sea was
the most brilliant blue, under a sky that was paler
and brighter, and behind the place where they had
pitched their tent the trees of the Bush grew right
down to the sand?s edge, with a fringe of rose-coloured
neath plants, such as Carol had only seen growing in
hot-houses before.
It was the morning after their arrival at Fortune
Bay, and already all manner of ingenious devices had
sprung up in and around their tent, camp gadgets
such as Carol confessed she had not learnt in her
own experience, although she had thought herself
(E 683) 3


quite knowledgeable, quite a competent Sea Ranger.
But these Australian girls seemed to know every-
thing there was to be known about camping, as well
as swimming, and sailing, and sculling, and surf-
bathing.
Carol said so, as she watched Dorcas, never idle
for a minute, even after a strenuous bathe, plaiting
green rushes into flat plates after a fashion learnt
from South Sea Islanders,
? Well, you see, we get more chances,? Dorcas said.
? We learn to swim and row when we?re just babies
?everyone does round Sydney ?and we can and do
camp and picnic all the year round, too, not only
for a few months or weeks, as you seem to in England.
That?s the why of it, I suppose.?
? I expect if we went to England, Dorcas and I,?
Wynne drawled lazily, ? we?d be every bit as silly and
helpless ?
? As I am down here!? Carol laughed.
? Oh, no! You?re quite good, considering?isn?t
she?? Wynne declared, and Dorcas allowed the faint
praise with a little jerky nod. ? And you?ll soon
learn all the tricks that you don?t know already, long
before we?ve finished this camp.?
? Oh, don?t talk about finishing it when we?ve
scarcely begun!? Carol begged. ? I?m loving it so.
You can?t get this sort of wild loneliness in England
you couldn?t really manage to be more than twenty
miles from the nearest village.?
? Only we call it township,? murmured Dorcas.


?? And I love being waked up in the morning by a
chorus of laughing jackasses, punctual as alarm clocks
?they?re so jolly and comical sitting in a row on a
bough and roaring with laughter in that ridiculously
human way.? Carol paused, breathless with en-
thusiasm.
? Once, when we were camping here, I woke up
one night and peeped through the tent flap, and
saw a real live kangaroo, grazing on that fringe of grass
in the moonlight, only a few yards away,? said Wynne.
? Oh, how thrilling! The darling!? Carol ejaculated.
? Yes, and Uncle shot it next day, and we had
kangaroo-tail soup for supper,? Wynne added pen-
sively.
? Ugh?horrid!?
? Not a bit ?delicious, isn?t it, Dorc?? Greedy
Wynne smacked her lips. ? But you won?t be quite
so keen on the beast part of it when you?ve been bitten
by a bulldog ant?it?s like fire, the little brutes.?
? And you wouldn?t talk of darlings if you?d sat
down on a log without looking, or moved the fire-
wood carelessly and a whip-snake popped out,? added
Dorcas. ? They sit in the hole where a slip-rail runs
into its socket, too, often, so you have to keep your
eyes skinned. For they?re dangerous?deadly.?
? Horrid little brutes!? Wynne said lightly. ? But
if you take care you?re all right. We've never been
bitten and we?ve got ammonia and permanganate in
case; you needn?t be afraid.?
Carol said stoutly that she wasn?t, but she was, all


the same, just a little bit. Snakes rather spoilt the
thought of rambling in the Bush, just as sharks intro-
duced a little uneasiness into the gorgeous bathing,
although Dorcas insisted that sharks were very rare
in Fortune?s Bay; it was too shallow and they didn?t
like the sandbanks across the entrance.
Still, Carol decided, nothing could really spoil such
a gorgeous camping holiday; they were only flies or
rather ants and snakes and sharks in the ointment.
? Isn?t it getting near tea-time?? Wynne murmured
plaintively.
? In the middle of the morning!? Carol groaned
protestingly.
? Of course. We always do ?tea and biscuits.
? You?re a bit of a greedy pig, Wynne.? Dorcas
plaited away busily at her rushes. ?No wonder you
grow and grow when you re always hungry.
? I don?t want to eat so much ?it?s tea? Wynne
sighed, and Dorcas laughed, jumping up and making
for their camp-fire place, which with all sorts of in-
genious arrangements in the way of grease-pits and
washing-up places was established beside the clear
stream which rippled down through the trees and across
the sand to the sea, the last touch to make this the
most ideal of all camp sites.
And when Dorcas returned with a steaming billy,
Carol?s principles, as her companions pointed out,
were not strong enough to make her refuse the tea
and a handful of biscuits into the bargain.
? But I shall take some exercise afterwards, not just


lounge about all the rest of the morning,? she said
resolutely. ?I?ll go for a walk along the beach, then
I needn?t change out of my bathing-costume. Either
of you coming??
? During the hottest part of the day?-no thanks!?
Dorcas said, whilst Wynne declared that she was very
happy where she was, and she did wish Carol wouldn?t
be so fearfully energetic.
?It won?t last!? Dorcas laughed. ? It?s just new
chumminess, Carol?s a Pommy,* you know,? a remark
which somehow rather exasperated its object, so that
she set off for her walk in silent dignity.
It wasn t really so terribly hot, for a breeze was
blowing off the sea with the rising tide, and the long
stretches of sand tempted Carol to wander on and
on as sands will. Almost before she knew it, she had
left Fortune Bay and was in the next cove, very like
it, only larger and with?halfway along the beach?the
most entrancing collection of rock-pools imaginable.
For a long time Carol poked about amongst them,
teasing the crabs and sea-anemones and brightly-
coloured little fish which darted in and out through the
seaweed thickets. Then she stretched herself in the
sun on the edge of the biggest pool, where the rock was
smooth and baked warm, and felt deliciously drowsy.
? rll J ust shut m Y eyes for a little bit, the sea?s so
dazzling,? she thought?and that must have been her
last sensible thought for quite a long while.
p *?T� 7 m ? y ?? is Australian slang for a new-comer from the Old Country.
pZmw.an appk! r � sy � heekS � f the En B Ush - Cf. French


Her next ?although perhaps not so particularly
sensible?was that she must have gone to sleep in her
bath, for that was certainly water splashing against
her foot. Carol sat up and looked round and realized
that it must be. hours rather than minutes since she
had fallen asleep. For the tide had risen and it was
the first little wave of it which had splashed on her
foot, reaching this farthest inland curve of the cove.
Already the surf was breaking, high and white,
against the rocks of the Point, so that the sand w r ay
by which she had come was cut off completely.
Of course she might swim back ?but it did not take
Carol many minutes to decide very definitely that she
wouldn?t; that, in fact, she was not at all sure that
she could, and anyhow did not mean to try.
? And in that case, I must either wait here till the
tide goes down again or cut back overland through
the Bush,? she decided.
The thought of waiting was not attractive; already
it was well past lunch-time and she was remarkably
hungry. No, the other alternative seemed best, though
it had its own disadvantages. To begin with, she did
not know the way through the Bush, but it ought to
be easy enough to keep close to the edge and so skirt
both bays until she reached the camp. The other ob-
jection Carol told herself was absurd and idiotic, but
she could not help hating the idea of walking through
the Bush in her bathing-dress.
? Don?t be such a fool, Carol!? she said aloud,
sternly. ? Why should the Bush be any worse than the


beach? but it is somehow ?and besides, it?s so thorny
and prickly with bare arms and legs and only rubber
shoes.?
Carol hugged her knees and stared dejectedly at the
bordering trees and shrubs; they certainly did look as
though they might be thorny and prickly if one was
quite unprotected. Her eyes left the Bush and reached
the beach, and what she saw there gave her an idea.
Seaweed! Long trails and swatches of dark-brown
and green seaweed, like broad flat leaves with stout
stalks.
? Good egg!? exclaimed Carol, inappropriately.
? I?ll make myself a seaweed skirt, like those things
the South Sea Island girls wear; what do they call
them ?hula-hulas. And a cape too ?I?ll be quite
fully dressed in about two minutes.?
It took rather longer than that, but in less than half
an hour Carol had really completed her costume.
From a belt of twisted seaweed fibre, broad-leafed
strands hung in a petticoat to below her knees, whilst
round her neck was a broad collar or cape of finer,
softer seaweed. On her head, and hanging down the
back of her neck to protect it from the sun as she
worked, she had fastened two big flat seaweed leaves,
and in this complete travelling dress she set out upon
her tour in the Bush.
For about half an hour she progressed well, keeping
only just inside the fringe of gum trees, ti-bush, and
scattered mimosa shrubs. But the country changed;
the bush grew much thicker, chiefly prickly, thorny


bushes matted together over masses of rocks, which
seemed as though they had scrambled up there from
the beach. Carol soon realized that this was quite
impassable; the only way was to go much farther
inland, even though this meant being out of sight of
the beach and the sea by which she had been guiding
herself.
? Still perhaps it won?t be for long,? she thought.
? I?ll keep as much in a straight line as I can and get
back to the beach as soon as possible.?
A scramble up a steep valley, or gully as it is called
in Australia, brought Carol at last to more level and
easy ground, where tall pale gum trees grew rather
far apart, each looking exactly like the next and the
one before.
Carol plodded on bravely in what she felt must be
the right direction, trying, as she had decided, to keep
in a straight line. Her rubber shoes by now were
almost worn off her feet and she was beginning to
think that it might have been better after all to wait
for the tide. And all the time she grew hungrier and
hungrier and there wasn?t a sign of anything to eat.
? I?m sure there?d be more in an English wood,?
she thought impatiently. ? Blackberries and whortle-
berries and mushrooms ?and nuts. Here there?s
simply nothing; it shows there can?t be because
Dorcas said the natives ate big grubs and caterpillars
they found under the bark of trees, and they wouldn?t
do that if there was any fruit about. I?d have to be
absolutely starving to eat horrible beasts like that.


But I don?t think there can be much farther to go.?
On and on, with every gum tree exactly like the last
and hardly a sound to be heard. That was what made
it so different to English woods, where birds would
have been chirping and twittering, and squirrels and
rabbits bobbing in and out, with the crooning of wood-
pigeons under it all. Carol?s first experience of the
silence of the Australian Bush gave her a queer creepy
feeling. It was eerie?uncanny.
It was a shock and a relief together when something
did move, making a little flutteration and shaking
amongst the leaves on a low-drooping gum tree branch
not very far away. Something alive was there?a bird,
perhaps, or possibly a snake ?in any case Carol tip-
toed nearer very cautiously.
A face looked out at her from between the leaves,
the furriest, funniest little face imaginable, with black
boot-button eyes which stared at her inquisitively, but
not a bit frightened.
? Oh, you darlingV ? Carol said under her breath.
? I didn?t think there could be such a thing as a live
Teddy-bear?but there it is.?
She ventured a trifle nearer; the little beast munched
away at a mouthful of gum leaves and took no notice
of her at all. She put out a finger and touched its soft
brown fur; it didn?t seem in the least disturbed. And
then, somehow, it was cuddled in Carol?s arms, the
cosiest roundest baby beast imaginable and she walked
on, scratching its head and talking to it ridiculously.
? Wassums Mother?s ickle baby bear ?didums


then? Wassums a duck and a lamb ?oh, dear, what an
awful idiot you are, Carol! Supposing somebody
heard you!?
Somebody had. Not twenty yards away someone
was standing, staring, with starting eyes as though
Carol were a far wilder sort of beast than the Teddy
bear which she carried. It was a boy who looked about
seventeen, a boy with a dusky yellow-brown face and
wiry black hair, dressed in a very tattered shirt and
trousers. His black eyes goggled, his mouth fell open,
but Carol?s only thought was that here was someone
who would tell her the way.
? Oh, please, I?m going to Fortune Bay,? she
began, going a little forward. ? Can you tell me if
it?s far now ?
But she got no farther. At her words and movement,
the native boy gave a wild yell of terror and began to
back rapidly. Carol also put on speed; he mustn t
escape, he must tell her
?Do just say which way ?
? Bunyip?Bunyip!? the boy broke out with a
panic-stricken howl, and turning, began to run as
though demons were at his heels, dodging amongst the
trees and still bawling; ? Bunyip! Bunyip!?
Carol ran too, but half lame as she was, she soon
realized that she could not possibly catch the swift-
footed native. She came to a breathless standstill
with another and far more terrible realization. In pur-
suing the fugitive, she had completely lost her already
rather hazy bearings, and now had not the remotest


notion which direction to take to reach the camp.
Whichever way she turned it might just leai her
farther and farther away, until she starved and dropped
down dead, after going round and round in circles, as
she?d always heard and read lost people did, especially
in the Australian Bush.
Lost ?she was lost ?but that wasn?t the word she?d
heard used in those horrid stories
Bushed, yes ?that was it
? I mustn?t lose my head,? Carol told herself
fiercely. ?I?m a Ranger and I ought to have more
sense. I must try and pick up the direction again?by
the sun or something ?
But no sun was visible at the moment, and what was
more, she found she had no real idea of the bearing of
the camp. It was humiliating and disgraceful, but
there it was.
The Bush was thicker now, mostly low trees and
shrubs, so that one couldn?t see far in any direction.
W?ould it be of any use to shout? Would anybody be
likely to hear her? Not in the least, Carol thought
despairingly; there might not be anybody for miles
and miles and she would only shout herself hoarse.
Still, perhaps she had better try.
? Coo-ey!? she cried, and thought how weak and
strained her voice sounded, remembered how her
companions had jeered at her feeble attempts at the
Australian hail. ? Coo-ey?Dorcas! Wynne! W T ynne!?
? Hullo? I say, Carol, you needn?t howl like that.
We?re only just here!?


CHAPTER IV
The Storm
Just here! And it was the voice of Dorcas, very
calm and collected.
Carol gave a little gasp and stumbled forward in
the direction of the sound. She pushed her way reck-
lessly through a dense belt of scrub and emerged?out
upon the beach at Fortune Bay, with their camp not
twenty yards away.
She stood still, gasping again, and a united exclama-
tion came from Wynne and Dorcas.
? Good gracious!? ?My goodness!? ? Whatever
have you been doing to yourself?
? j I ? Carol stammered.
? My word, if you only knew what you looked like!?
and now all words were lost in an outburst of laughter.
? i I ?l do think it?s beastly of you ? poor
Carol?s anger made her more incoherent than ever.
? When I?ve been for hours b-bushcd and and
starving and ?and ?
? Poor old thing! I say, we are rather pigs!? Wynne
sounded really contrite. ? But ?but ?
?You do look so funny V? choked Dorcas. If you
only knew how funny you look!?


? Never mind her, Carol. Sit down and I?ll give
you some tea at once. It?s all ready; we kept the billy
boiling and I made sandwiches for you ?cheese and
beef. Don?t try to talk any more till you?ve had some-
thing to eat, old thing.?
Tea and sandwiches were most comforting, and as
she cast herself down by the camp-fire to eat and
drink Carol realized that even Dorcas?s heartlessness
was only skin-deep, so to speak, since both girls had
been thoroughly anxious and were preparing to send
out a search-party.
? I was so frightfully glad to see you that I had to
laugh,? Dorcas confessed, ?or else I believe I?d
have cried, like an idiot. All the same you do look
funny ?
? I suppose I do,? Carol was ready to agree now.
? And someone else thought so too. At least, he was
frightened.?
Between bites and sups she told her adventures,
but the stream of her narrative was interrupted
halfway.
After her encounter with the native boy?for
Wynne and Dorcas both declared that he must have
been a tamed ? Blackfellow ? probably employed on
some neighbouring ? station ? or farm?the live
? Teddy-bear ? had crawled up to her shoulder un-
regarded and there attached itself amongst the sea-
weed. Now it uncurled and reappeared, yawning
adorably, amidst cries of ? darling ? and ? lamb ?.
? It?s a baby koala, a native bear,? Wynne told


Carol, ? they make the duckiest pets. He must be the
camp mascot, Carol; what shall we call him?
This led to an animated and somewhat heated argu-
ment, since Carol vetoed each name suggested.
? That blackfellow called out something when he
saw me ?I don't know w r hat it means, but I like the
sound,? she said. ? What was it?Bunyip??
? It would be! That?s just what you look like in that
rig; no wonder the poor beggar was frightened,?
Dorcas chuckled. ? A Bunyip's?oh, a kind of spooky
creature ?a goblin ?an imp.?
? Then that?s the name for the Teddy-bear?
Bunyip,? Carol decided, and Bunyip, or Bun, or Yip,
as the case might be, the camp mascot remained from
that moment.
After a good night?s rest Carol w?as not a farthing s-
worth the worse for her experience of ? bushing ? and
indeed was rather inclined to plume herself upon
having emerged from the ordeal so triumphantly.
? Because I wasn?t really lost at all, she declared.
? X found my way right back to the camp before I
shouted ?even if I didn?t know that I had.?
The next day was spent in a rambling and delicious
kind of idleness. The three ?or rather four, for Bun-
yip must henceforth be counted, just as d Artagnan
made a fourth to the Three Musketeers, Porthos,
Athos, and Aramis ?roamed inland for a few miles
until they reached a hollow or basin set down in the
middle of the encircling Bush. And that hollow was
filled and brimming over with wattle bushes in fullest


bloom ?wattle, which Europe calls mimosa, wattle
more golden than the sun itself, and sending up a
wonderful honey-sweet scent.
It was the loveliest of sights and smells, and there
in that hollow the little company of Rangers spent the
day, stretched on springy buffalo grass at full length
under the golden sunshades of the wattles, talking,
sleeping, playing with Bunyip, who showed not the
faintest shyness or wildness, and munched eucalyptus
leaves steadily.
Not until late in the afternoon did they wander
back to camp, where Dorcas, as usual, took command
of the fire, blew up the embers which she had banked
down, and produced tea, hot sausages and bread-and-
jam for their ? high supper in a miraculously short
space of time.
Later on, when the meal was finished and the
crockery washed up, Wynne was sitting up, hugging
her knees and staring at the sea.
? It?ll be bad weather to-night,? she remarked.
? Why, I thought it was only in England that there
was rain in camp! I thought it was always fine down
under, Carol laughed. ?At this time of the year,
anyway.?
?So it is?at least, we don?t have your sort of wet
weather,? Dorcas said in a lofty voice. ? But of course
we have storms, the sort of thing you simply can?t
imagine. Yes, I see what you mean, Wynne. It means
wind, anyway, that streak.?
Carol stared away at the dark blue streak along the


horizon, just where sea and sky met. It looked very
harmless, but even as they watched it there came a low
sighing in the tops of the eucalyptus trees, as though
a messenger from the wind was whispering to them.
Dorcas sprang briskly to her feet.
? We?d better get to work and make things snug,
she said. ? Extra guy-ropes wouldn?t be a bad idea,
and some big stones to keep down the tent flaps. We
ought to be pretty sheltered though; we chose a good
place. Come on, both of you, there may not be too
much time to spare.?
Even Wynne roused herself to action, and soon the
three were working busily to make everything as
secure as possible. And, as they worked, the low
whispering in the tree-tops grew to a moaning and
whining, and the dark blue streak on the horizon had
spread, whilst clouds were gathering over the grey-
blue of the sky. . ,
Darkness fell in the queer abrupt way it does m the
Antipodes, with no dusk or twilight, but before then
the three Rangers were inside their tent, with the flaps
secured, inside and out, and all snug and taut. Wynne
was busy with the little spirit-stove, making tea once
more, but the sound of the wind in the trees was now
a low roar. , . ?
? It?s going to be a big wind ?a southerly buster,
Dorcas said. ? And hark, there?s thunder!?
Thunder! Carol had never heard such thunder in
her life, as during the hours that followed, or seen such
vivid lightning. It filled all the tent with a blue glare,


and once, from somewhere quite close at hand in the
bush, came a shattering splintering crash.
? A tree struck!? Wynne cried, above the roar of the
thunder. ? Good thing it wasn?t nearer. I say, Dor-
cas, this is a storm.?
Carol could see that the two Australian girls were
nervous, and it made her all the more determined
to hide her own fears. But they were there all the
same; every moment she expected a tree to crash
down upon the tent, and she thought with regret of
the quiet little English storms, which drench the
firewood and flood out a tent or two, and make the
camp in general thoroughly damp, but didn?t often
do more than that.
� ", That � lap was farther away,? Wynne observed.
? It?s moving off, thank goodness!?
But she spoke too soon. The thunder and lightning
might be less, but, on the heels of them, came a perfect
downpour of rain and hail, which sounded like a solid
sheet of water falling from the sky, whilst the wind
howled louder than ever, and the voice of the sea under
all sounded in a low roar.
We d better stick everything into our sleeping-
bags and cover them with the ground-sheet in case
the water gets in,? Dorcas suggested sensibly, and
they began to follow her advice at once. There had
been no question of undressing and going to bed, and
all of them were wearing their waterproofs, covering
the knitted jumpers and skirts beneath which were
still their swimming suits.
( E 683 )


And then, all of a sudden, came the catastrophe.
There was a fiercer gust than before, a yelling demon
of a gust, which seemed to sweep in from the sea,
right away from the Antarctic Pole. It caught at the
Rangers? flimsy little tent, which had seemed so taut
and secure in the sunlight, and with one twist and
tug, caught it up into the air and flung it away, like
a wisp of rag, into the wet howling darkness.
Dorcas made one wild grab, but the wet canvas was
dragged from between her fingers, and there the three
girls crouched, with the rain beating down upon
them, and Bunyip close under Carol?s elbow.
? Quick! ? Wynne was on her feet, and pulling at
Carol?s arm. ?We must get into the Bush under the
trees?we can?t stay out here, we must find shelter.?
Stumbling and tripping blindly the three girls
pushed along through the wet darkness.
Wynne still held Carol?s arm, and she felt Dorcas
close beside her also, and heard her gasp.
? it?ll be all right ?you?ll find you can see better-
in a minute or two?when your eyes get used to
it,?
It was true. After a little while, the English girl
found that she could make out the blurred outlines of
tree trunks, in spite of the rain which lashed her face,
and blind-folded her eyes. Unfortunately, there are
few of what are known as ? shade-trees ? in the
Australian Bush, and the thin narrow leaves of the
blue gums scarcely made any protection from the ram.
Still, as they stumbled on, farther and farther into


the Bush, things were a little better, and the force
of the wind was broken.
Presently Dorcas came to a panting standstill and
spoke.
? Wynne??member that gully? If we could make
that?find the cave with the tree-ferns growing round
it, there?d be fine shelter.?
? Yes,? Wynne agreed, ? and it can?t be far from
here. Let?s see ?
She stopped, peering about her into the grey-
blackness, then spoke confidently.
? Yes, it?s this way, I?m pretty sure. I remember
the way the trees grew here, and there?s a gap over
there.?
? You ought to have been a black fellow,? Dorcas
said admiringly. ? And you can see in the dark like a
cat, too. Lead on, then, because I haven?t the faintest
idea where we are, and Carol has less.?
For another half-hour or so, they continued on
their weary way through the Bush, with the wet mud
squelching round their ankles and the moisture dripping
upon them from every bush and bough, as though they
were not wet enough already.
But suddenly Wynne, a little in advance, gave a
chuckle of satisfaction.
? Yes, I was right. Here we are?here?s the gully,
and the tree-ferns, and the cave ?unless it?s washed
away.?
There was a faint light from a very watery moon
now, and by the light of it Carol could just see enough


to follow her leader, to plunge down, after Wynne,
through what seemed to her like gigantic bracken-
fronds, with stems as thick as the trunks of young
trees. The fern leaves splashed at her wet face, their
roots caught at her feet, but at last they reached the
bottom of the little gorge, where a much swollen stream
was splashing along, and the yawning black mouth
of a cave. . , .
? Good! ? Wynne gave a sigh of satisfaction.
? Shelter, anyway.?
It might be shelter, but it was extremely dank and
damp, so it seemed to Carol, and an ugly slithery'
sound out of the blackness reminded her that this was
just the place for snakes.
But there was nothing to be done except make
the best of it, and be thankful for the refuge, and soon
the three Rangers were squatting together on a ledge
of rock at the back of the cave, which Dorcas had
thoughtfully reconnoitred beforehand with her pocket
torch.
? All clear,? she said, ? and fairly dry. But what
wouldn't I give for a billy of hot tea! ?
Wynne sighed heartbrokenly, and Carol felt herself
for once thoroughly an Australian. Hot tea would
have been a heavenly drink at that particular moment.
But there was neither hot tea nor hot anything else
for them during the remainder of that miserable night.
Sitting close together for warmth, although, as Wynne
remarked, she didn?t sec how three colds could make
a hot, wondering how it was that hours like this


stretched out as though they had been made of strips
of elastic, trying half-heartedly to tell each other
stories to pass the time. Somehow, they managed to
exist until the mouth of the cave turned from black
to grey, and then to a lighter grey, and then ?all of a
sudden?a splash of red-gold showed on the ground
outside, and it was morning.
The three girls stumbled to their feet, stiff and
cramped and aching?stumbled out into the patch of
sandy ground between the cave mouth and the
stream.
Between the tops of the trees which almost met over
the gully, brilliant blue sky was visible, and hardly a
breath of wind stirred those tree tops.
It was a glorious morning, calm and clear; it was
difficult to realize that there had ever been such a
thing as a storm, down there by the stream.
Dorcas gave herself an energetic shake like a dog,
and the drops of water flew from her dark hair. Then
she took off her waterproof and stretched herself in
the sunshine.
? Ah, that?s good! ? she said.
? But tea would be better still,? murmured Wynne.
? Well, we shan?t have tea brought to us here, that?s
very certain,? Dorcas declared. ? Our only faint
chance of such a thing is to get back to our camp as soon
as possible, and see if there?s anything left of it. It?s
just possible that the store-cache may have escaped,
under the rock, and if so, we shan?t be so badly off.
Anyvvay, its no use staying here ; the more we move


about the sooner we shall get rid of the stiffness, so
come on! ?
Once out of the gully, the signs of the passing of
the storm grew plainer. In one place there was a
regular track through the bush of fallen trees, %\here
a fierce gust had pressed through, throwing them down
before it. The lower bushes and small trees were
flattened to the ground, the flowering vines tom down
and crushed into the mud; the bright coloured flowers
of the bush, waratah and native rose, looked battered
and forlorn.
But the girls did not wait long to look about them ?
they were much too intent on discovering what had
happened to their camp and they hurried along eagerly,
until through the trees they caught glimpses of the
sea and knew that the beach and the edge of the bush
were near.
As they reached the camping place, Carol gave an
excited exclamation.
? Oh, look! Our tent! ? she cried.
There, sure enough, was their tent, not fifty yards
from the place where they had pitched it, tossed, in
a helter-skelter heap, by the wind into a low tree.
But when they had extricated it, it was to find that
very little damage was done, nothing that could not
be set right in a few hours.
This was better luck than they had expected, and
Wynne was even more relieved when they found
their store-cache almost intact, with tea and con-
densed milk and sugar, all uninjured. Never has a


fire been made more quickly than the one which
Dorcas coaxed into burning from a few dry twigs,
which they had thoughtfully stowed in their store-
place; never was a billy watched with more anxiety
for the first symptom of boiling.
During the process, the three girls crouched close
over the fire, grateful for the warmth, and congratulated
themselves on a certain amount of good luck, in spite
of the disasters of the night.
? After breakfast, we?ll make a big fire and dry the
sleeping-bags and everything else we can,? Dorcas
decided. ? I don?t believe the things under the ground-
sheet have suffered much. There, now it?s boiling.
Put in the tea, Wynne, and lots of sugar. Cut plenty
of bread and jam, Carol, I?m fearfully hungry.?
They settled themselves down round the fire, mugs
of steaming tea in one hand, thick slices of bread
and jam in the other, and prepared to make a good
breakfast. For the first time now they looked about
them, and saw how a huge blue-gum had fallen within
half a dozen yards of where their tent had stood.
If it had been a bit closer ? Wynne gave a
little shiver. ? I think we?d better pitch the tent a
little farther down on the beach, Dorcas, don?t you? ?
? Might be better,? Dorcas agreed, surveying the
fringe of bush. ? The storm has made a good lot of
changes. You wouldn?t think so much could happen
in a few hours, would you? The bush looks quite
different ?
Dorcas was interrupted by a gasping cry from


Carol, who had turned towards the beach and the bay.
She was staring out to sea, pointing with the slice of
bread and jam which she still held.
? Look?there?s another change! ? she cried, and
the others, turning, stared in utter bewilderment.
For there, in the blue waters of the bay, midway
between the horns of the crescent, was a small island?
an island which certainly had not been there the
evening before.


CHAPTER V
Four Crusoes
? Tell me what you see there, you others,? Carol
gasped, ? or I shall think I?m mad.?
It?s an island,? Wynne said slowly, her eyes wide
and fixed on the strange apparition. ?An island,
where there wasn?t one before.?
Dorcas sprang to her feet and shook herself resolutely.
? It?s ridiculous, it isn?t common sense,? she
declared. ? It can?t be there?or, at any rate, we can?t
be here?
Do you mean that we?re all of us dreaming the
same thing, then?? Wynne asked. ? Because I don?t
believe that?s possible.?
?No, silly?of course not! I mean this can?t be
our bay, Fortune Bay. We must have lost our way
coming from the gully; there are lots of other coves
very much alike all along this bit of coast. That's the
explanation.?
Dorcas spoke with the air of practical common
sense which was sometimes rather annoying to her
companions, her school marm ? manner as Wynne
described it. But Carol answered her quietly.
? Then how do you account for our tent and things?


They?re all here, you know; they can?t have blown
from the other bay.?
Dorcas collapsed.
? N-no, of course not ? she stammered. That
does make it difficult ?I don t see
She fell silent, staring at the island. All three stared
at the island.
It wasn?t a bit misty or dreamlike. It was a solid
small island set there in the blue of the bay, a very
green little island, with trees and shrubs, and a tiny
hill rising in the middle. There was something most
attractive about it, although all islands are attractive,
when they are small enough. Carol put the feeling they
all had into words when she said: w
? It?s a lamb, isn?t it? Such a sort of baby island
? I know what has happened!? Once again Dorcas
spoke with calm confidence. ? Of course, it must have
come there by a volcanic eruption?a sort of submarme
earthquake that forced it up to the surface. I?ve often
heard of islands appearing in that way from the bottom
of the sea?it?s quite well known that they do.?
? But not all ready made, with trees and bushes
growing on them, surely?? Wynne murmured dreamily.
? I don?t see how they could ?
?Of course not!? Carol laughed. ? No, Dorcas,
my dear, you?re a bit too clever this time!?
? Well, how did the island get there, then?? Dorcas
spoke with exasperation. ? You?re very ready to laugh
at anything I say, but you don?t make any suggestions
yourself. And it must have come somehow.


? I think it?s just plain magic?a kind of island out
of the Tempest ?Shakespeare?s, I mean, not last
night?s,? Carol declared.
Dorcas?s reply could only be described as a snort.
? Idiot!? she ejaculated. ?You sound more like a
Brownie than a Ranger!?
? Well, anyway, we can soon find out all about it.?
Wynne scrambled to her feet as she spoke with unusual
energy. ? We?d better swim over and investigate at
once, while the tide?s low, and it?s quite an easy dis-
tance. There?s no need to clear up here until after-
wards.?
Wynne took the lead, as she always did, where swim-
ming was in question; she was never lazy in the sea,
and the others declared that she must once have been
a mermaid, or a fish, a thing which really didn?t
seem absurd, seeing the way she darted through the
water, with none of the splashings and puffings of
poorer swimmers.
But in this case she was evidently right. Even Carol,
the least good swimmer of the three, saw that at
present they could reach the island quite easily. In
a few minutes more they were all running down the
sands in their swimming suits, full of excitement
at the thought of the adventure. For what could be
more thrilling than the very thought of investigating
an unknown island, which had appeared in such an
extraordinary and absolutely inexplicable sort of way?
With Bunyip clinging to Carol?s head, after a fashion
he had adopted, thinking no doubt that it was his


mother?s furry back, they were soon in the water,
the warmth of which always seemed so strange to
Carol, after the cold seas round the British coast
soon swimming side by side, out towards the little
green hillock above the sea s surface.
It grew larger and larger; they could see the
rim of sand round the edge that played at being a
beach, see how grass and flowers grew quite close down,
fringing it.
? It is a magic-looking place,? Carol puffed, blinking
the water out of her eyes, as a wave splashed at her
playfully. ? The flowers, just look at them and?^why,
there?s a parrot!?
A flash of scarlet and green flew from one blossom-
covered bush to another with a loud shriek; something
small and brown and furry peeped from the grass,
then hopped away. ?
? A wallaby,? said Dorcas. ? But why shouldn t
they be there ?it?s an Australian island ?must be!?
? There?s no must about it, when a thing appears
like this, and I don?t believe they?re ordinary parrots
and wallabies. We shall find that they?re enchanted
princes and princesses.? Carol felt sand under her feet
as she spoke, scrambled up and stood dripping in
water barely to her knees. ? I?m almost afraid to go
ashore, for fear of being enchanted too, into a frog or
something.?
But Dorcas, answering only by another snort, was
already on the rim of beach, squeezing as much water
as she could out of her swimming suit.


?We shall soon be dry, anyway, in this sun.?
Wynne emerged, shaking herself lazily. ?Oh, those
butterflies?the big blue ones on the plumbago bush.
I?ve never seen them so huge in N.S.W.?
? course you haven?t. Oh, Wynne, you?re not
going to lie down in the sun and laze!? Carol protested.
?We simply must explore.?
?There?s plenty of time. It can?t take long to
explore a tiny pocket island like this,? Wynne protested,
but she rose all the same, and the three set off on their
investigations.
It was all as Wynne said, tiny, but so lovely that
they simply couldn?t hurry. In the sunshine, the
flowering bushes of all colours were covered with
butterflies, like live blossoms, and in the taller trees,
although none were very tall, birds perched and
fluttered, like flowers larger and brighter still. From
somewhere on the tree-covered mound in the middle
of the little island came the song of another bird, a
sweet rippling trill, repeated over and over again, and
Wynne turned towards it.
? 1 do want see what the bird is like that sings so
beautifully, she said, and the others followed her.
They reached the foot of the mound, and here was
another surprise. Something like the most lovely of
rock-gardens, only the rocks were of beautiful colours,
and here and there split to show crystals inside, blue
and yellow, rose-pink and opal-coloured. And between
them grew more flowers, tiny and brightly hued, and
from out of the middle came splashing and dancing


a jolly baby stream, sparkling in the sun, and sprinkling
drops on the flowers just as though it were laughing.
It really was the most fairy-like scene possible ?the
tiny flowers and the tiny stream seemed just ready
and waiting for Titama to come for a picnic. Even
Dorcas, with all her common sense, began to wonder
if Carol were right?if the island really was an en-
chanted place.
And then suddenly she saw something which set
all her common sensibleness at work.
Just where the stream danced out of the rocks,
and made a little pool, it was edged round with golden
brown sand. And on that sand, damped by the spray
from the stream, was something which made Dorcas
give an exclamation and point it out to the others, with
a laugh.
? Look!? she cried, ? it?s all happening in a proper
Crusoe way except that there are three of us. And now
man Friday has turned up!?
? Baby Friday, I should think,? Carol said, bending
over the patch of sand.
For there, quite plainly marked, were the prints of
very small bare feet.


CHAPTER VI
And Friday
? Well, that?s something quite plain, isn?t it??'
Dorcas said briskly. ? And whoever made those
footprints must be on the island, and will be able to
tell us what it all means, probably. So the sooner
we find him, or her, the better. We?ll soon discover the
mystery.?
? I don?t know,? Wynne said. ? Seems to me it
gets more and more mysterious. Still, as you say,
we?d better look for Man Friday.?
They set off round the mound, along a little sandy
path which, as Carol remarked, looked as though it
knew quite well where it was going to, and was quite
willing to show the strangers the way to get there.
And the thing it went to was a house.
The path led them out from behind a red camellia
tree, and there it was?white, with a roof of bright red
tiles and a green front door, and a veranda, with
purple clematis and scarlet bougainvillea growing up
the posts. There was a garden in front with a white
fence all round it, and fruit trees growing there. It
was all neat and complete, but?not so very much
bigger than a large doll?s house.
Even the trees were tiny, and there was a tiny red


and white striped canvas chair on the veranda, beside
a tiny wicker table.
? Well!? Carol drew a long breath and stood staring.
? I told you that this was a fairy island, and this
proves it; there?s the fairy?s bungalow. Nobody any
bigger could possibly live in it.?
Dorcas had just opened her mouth to answer, when
something else spoke, so unexpectedly that all three
jumped. The voice came from behind the house, and
sounded plaintive and reproachful.
? Moo-oool? it said.
It was such a homely everyday voice that Wynne
began to laugh.
? A fairy cowl? she giggled. ? Let?s go and see what
it?s like.? . .
Behind the house, they discovered a red-tiled shed,
and inside it, two stalls. One of them held the owner
of the reproachful voice, a diminutive Alderney cow,
with a soft fawn coat and black face, with lovely brown
deer-like eyes. In the other stall was the tiniest Shet-
land pony the girls had ever seen, no larger than a
good-sized dog, and blinking at them through a
shaggy forelock.
� Oh, the pet!? Wynne cried, and knelt down to
get nearer to the ridiculous little beast, whilst Dorcas
rubbed the nose of the Alderney, who still looked
reproachful. . ... , ?
? Poor dear, I do believe she?s asking to be milked,
Dorcas said. ? Yes, of course she is. Never mind,
darling, I?ll do it at once.


Like most Australian girls, Dorcas was exceedingly
handy.
Carol watched with admiration as she rummaged
round, found a pail and proceeded to milk the little cow
in a most deft and businesslike way, which the Alderney
evidently appreciated, since she turned round her
pretty head and licked Dorcas?s cheek.
Meantime, Wynne had discovered that the pony
was hungry, had filled his rack with hay, and put some
grain into a pan.
? Man Friday?s a neglectful person, whoever he is,?
she remarked. ? These poor darlings might have
starved if we hadn t come. And, talking of starving,
/ am, Dorcas, That milk looks very nice.?
? You?re a greedy pig, Wynne; but I suppose we
might as well each have a drink as it?s here. Let?s look
for something to dip it out.?
Looking led them inside the house, through the
green door which was so low that each had to stoop,
and tall Wynne was almost bent double. Inside there
wa s only one comparatively big room, with a gay
coloured mat on the floor, and chairs and tables
which reminded them of those of the Little Bear.
There was a low bed, with a gay striped quilt, and a
depression in the middle.
Wynne went and laid her hand on it, then turned.
It is warm, she said, in a low mysterious voice.
? I deduce that someone was sleeping here a short time
ago, probably within the last half-hour. Do you follow
me, Watson??
(E 683)
0


? A small person.? Carol was staring at the little
hollow in the bed.
? The person the foot belonged to,? Dorcas added,
? Man Friday!?
? You amaze me, Sherlock,? Wynne said solemnly.
? Your powers of deduction are simply marvellous.
Here?s a mug, Dorcas; let?s have some of that milk,
and then go in search of Friday.?
They had not far to go. As Dorcas, at the head of
the procession of three, emerged into the sunshine
outside, through the green door, in stooping, un-
dignified fashion, she gave an exclamation.
? Here it is!?
Wynne and Carol jostled each other in the effort
to get through, the former, in her haste, almost sticking
like a cork in a bottle. But they squeezed their way
through, and emerged with ruffled hair and red faces
to see the owner of the footprints ?and presumably
of the house, garden, cow, pony and island standing
staring at them, thumb in mouth, and a very doubtful
expression upon his face.
He was, as Carol had said, a baby Friday, a tiny
boy, with bare brown legs and bare brown arms, and
a tousled mop of sunburnt golden-brown hair, to
match big golden-brown eyes. All that he wore was
a tiny sky-blue tunic, with diminutive knickers to
match, and he dangled a small and grubby Teddy-bear
by one foot, whilst wriggling his own brown bare toes
shyly in the sand.
He was very uncertain whether to laugh or cry;


that was plain, and no wonder. It must have been
alarming, to say the least of it, to see three large
strangers emerging through his own front door.
Wynne, who loved and understood children, realized
this at once, and knelt down on the little grass patch,
to make herself more the right size for this small Lord
of the Manor.
She did not speak to him at once, but began to play
with the flowers of a crimson snapdragon which grew
near, making the ? bunny ? mouths of the blossom
open and shut, open and shut.
The tiny boy stared, fascinated, then drew a little
nearer to watch. Wynne picked a daisy bud and
popped it into one of the gaping snapdragon mouths
and he laughed outright, a delicious baby chuckle, and
edged closer.
W y nne made the flower snap at one of her own
fingers the little fellow resisted no longer. Next
instant he was perched on her knee, poking his own
fat fingers into the blossoms, and talking all the time
after his own fashion, although, unfortunately, it wasn?t
in a language that anyone else could fully understand.
He s too young to talk plainly?to tell us what it
all means, that?s the bother,? Wynne said. ? He can?t
even say what his name is, though he calls the bear
Ted-Ted?. But he?s an absolute duck and lamb
all the same, aren?t you, sweetest of pets??
The sweetest of pets retaliated by trying to poke
his finger into Wynne?s mouth as he had into those of
the snap-dragon flowers. In another quarter of an


hour the three girls and the one male were the greatest
of friends, and he was chuckling and laughing in huge
delight.
A very short time made it quite plain that there
was no one else on the island, but left the whole matter
more a mystery than ever. For how could the little
boy possibly be living there alone?
? It begins to look as though something tragic had
happened,? Dorcas said. ? As though there must have
been someone else, someone grown-up, who was
drowned, or something?perhaps in the storm last
night.?
? Yes, but that doesn?t tell us how the island came
to Fortune Bay.? Wynne shook her head perplexedly.
? And that duck of a baby certainly can?t tell us?oh
dear, how muzzy-headed I feel!?
? That?s because w T e didn?t sleep a single wink
last night,? Dorcas said prosaically. ? I think we?d
better all have a little nap and then we shall feel fresher,
and more able to think what s best to be done.
??l?d like something to eat first. It seems ages since
breakfast,? Wynne said plaintively.
? Well, perhaps we can find something in the house,?
Dorcas said. ? We?d better rummage.?
The little boy saved them the trouble. Trotting in
front of them, and crooning a little song to himself,
he went in through the door, and straight to a cup-
board which they had not noticed.
On opening it biscuits were discovered, and chocolate
and a half cake in a tin, dates, too, and eggs. Altogether


a fine picnic meal, which they carried out and ate in
a delightful little mossy hollow, overlooking the sea.
?We couldn?t get ashore comfortably anyhow, at
present,? Dorcas said, gazing away at the beach of
Fortune Bay, and their own camp site. ? The tide?s
too high.?
? So we might just as well go to sleep,? Wynne
murmured lazily. ? I don?t think I can eat any more.?
? I should imagine not,? Dorcas said grimly. ?As
it is, you?ve finished the chocolate. Oh, look at the poor
kiddie; he?s sleepy too, the lamb!?
All four of the inhabitants of the island were soon
sound asleep.
For hour after hour they slept, until the sun had
sunk so low that it was almost level with their eyes, or
at least with Dorcas?s, as she sat propped against the
rock.
She woke, dazzled, and rubbed them for a moment
before looking round, wondering for a moment where
she was.
Then she remembered, and laughed.
? I was fancying for a moment that the island was
really magic?that it had disappeared again as quickly
as it came, she said aloud, and Carol, half awake,
answered with a sleepy murmur.
But Dorcas herself was wide awake?wide awake
and staring across the sea, to where Fortune Beach
had been when they went to sleep.
Had been?for it was gone! There was nothing to
be seen but sea.


CHAPTER VII
A Navigation Test
At Dorcas?s startled exclamation, the other girls
woke and scrambled to their feet, rubbing their eyes.
No need for explanations ; the sight of that lonely
sea was quite enough, and they all three gaxed at each
other blankly, finding nothing to say for a moment ?
nothing that seemed like sense.
Then Carol sprang up from the low bank behind
them, and stood staring in the opposite direction.
? There?s the coast ?I can just make it out,? she
cried. ? Fortune Bay, and the beach, on the other
side ?the WTong side ?and much farther away than
they ought to be. We ?we ?the island must have
drifted ?but how can it??
? That?s what we?ve got to find out now, at once,?
Dorcas said resolutely. ? There must be some common-
sensible explanation, unless we?re all mad, and that
isn?t likely. Come on, let?s look.?
Leaving the little boy still sleeping soundly, cuddled
up into a warm bunch in his rug, the three Rangers
set off. Scarcely a hundred yards away they came
to the beach wdiere they had first landed on the island
only the beach wasn?t there.


Wynne collapsed helplessly.
? It?s like ? Alice in Wonderland ? ?the Cheshire Cat
appearing and disappearing,? she gasped. ? Because
it was there, by the blue plumbago bush ?the strip
of sand where we sat in the sun. Aaid it?s low tide
time, so it ought to be more than ever, if things were
natural.?
? What are you doing, Dorcas? Looking for the
beach?? Carol inquired.
? No, discovering the mystery.? Dorcas spoke in
rather a muffled voice, for she was lying face down-
wards at the water?s edge, peering down. She had
wriggled over to her very utmost and plunged her arm
into the sea as far as it would go. ? I?ve found out
what it is, you two ?the island?s a raft.?
? A raft?? The others spoke in one burst, and
scrambled down to where Dorcas was lying. ? What
ever do you mean??
? R-A-F-T,? Dorcas explained patiently. ? That
explains it all, don?t you see. It?s a huge raft, and
there are some sort of great floats underneath to keep
it high in the water. What we thought was a beach
was just a sandbank, out in the bay, that was bare at
low tide, and the raft had stranded on it ?gone aground.
Then, when the tide rose the raft floated off and
drifted away again. Of course, that explains every-
thing that we didn?t understand.?
? Well?if you say so ? Wynne shook her head.
But I?ve never in all my life heard of such a thing
as an island that was a raft.?


? You?we?l haven?t heard of everything ,? Dorcas
declared. ? And even on rivers they do have huge
rafts, with houses on them, and people and animals
living there, and everything. Well, this is something
bigger still, that?s all. Of course, there?s some sort
of under structure that we can?t see, and it must be
frightfully cleverly built, but it?s no good saying that
a thing isn?t so, just because we don?t understand how
it?s done ?yet.?
? I didn?t?and I?m sure you'll understand how
to make an island directly you?ve had time to look
round, Dorcas,? Wynne said meekly. ? But all the
same, what are we going to do? I can tackle sail-boats
and row-boats and motor-launches all right, but my
navigation tests never went as far as islands ?or
rafts either.?
? And there isn?t any way to steer it as far as I can
see,? Carol chimed in.
? That?s what we?ve got to find out,? Dorcas
declared, ? and the sooner we do the better. Let?s
swim all round and look,?
A very few minutes saw them all three in the water,
and busy with under and over-water exploring. Sea-
weeds and land-plants grew so thickly all round the
edges that there was nothing of the raft itself to be
seen, but Wynne, diving dowmvards and under,
reported the vague outlines of the great floats that
Dorcas had suggested, though of what they were
made she could not tell. That the island w'as drifting
slowly along all the while w r as quite plain, but the girls


could not discover any possible means of guiding it.
? We shall just have to drift, then,? Dorcas said, as
they scrambled ashore. ? Perhaps we shall go aground
on another sandbank.?
? Perhaps we shan?t,? Wynne remarked gloomily.
? Perhaps we shall drift out to sea farther and farther.?
? Well, then we shall come across a ship of some
kind,? Dorcas said briskly. ? We must keep a look out
and put up a signal of distress. There?s nothing else
to be done, as we can?t row and can?t tow.?
? It?s a comfort that we?ve got anyone so common-
sensible as you, Dorcas,? Carol laughed. ? You
oughtn?t to mind, Wynne. Drifting?s nice and lazy.?
? I shouldn?t ?much, if I was sure that we?d get
plenty to eat,? Wynne confessed candidly. ? But I
suppose we could fish. Hullo, there?s the kiddie
crying. We must fly!?
She set off running with her long legs and reached
the little boy before the others. When they arrived,
he was almost comforted, though his cheeks were
flushed and tear-stained, and he still sobbed a little as
he sat on Wynne?s knee.
? Wan??Dud-dud-dud?Da!? he remarked chokily
with drooping lips. ? Mw? ?get.?
? He?s trying to explain that he wants something,
but I don?t know what,? Wynne said, hugging him.
?If only he could talk a little more plainly and tell us
what?s happened. I wonder how much he under-
stands of what we say??
Not much, it seemed. The little fellow grew more


and more bewildered and fretful, as the three girls
tried to question him in simple words, to find out
what he meant. He went on talking in his own lan-
guage, but they could make no sense of it until he burst
out into a roar.
? Wan? Mick!?
? Mick ?I wonder who Mick is?? Wynne speculated,
and then as the small boy made a grab for the mug,
? Oh, I see. It?s milk he wants, poor darling. Yes, you
shall have some, my lamb. We?ll go and milk the cow
at once.?
? Wan??bick!? the little boy proclaimed.
? Well, that?s plain enough too ?biscuits! Or else
I?m beginning to understand his language,? Wynne
said triumphantly. ? Look here, you two, I?ll give
him his supper and put him to bed, and then we can
get out on our own and settle what to do.?
She went off carrying the small boy, and presently
laughter and chuckles from the direction of the little
house told that he was happy again. Later Wynne
emerged, crawling, and joined the others, bearing a
large tin of rusks.
? He?s sound asleep, and I found these,? she said.
? There isn?t much else, except Ovaltine, and some
other things like that. Not frightfully satisfying,
though I suppose we shan?t absolutely starve ?but
when I think of fried bacon and sausages and baked
potatoes and everything we might be having in
camp ?
? Better not think of them,? Carol suggested.


? Look here, we oughtn?t all to go to sleep, ought we?
A ship or something might pass.?
? No, we must take w T atch and watch about,? Dorcas
decided. ? And we ought to have a light or something
to wave, if anything comes ?to make signals.?
? I saw a lantern in the cow?s stable,? Carol said.
? That would do. It?s luck it?s such a dead calm. I
can?t think what would happen to a floating island in
a storm! Do you suppose it could sink or be wrecked??
? Can?t say,? Dorcas spoke shortly. ? Well, who?ll
take first w r atch? We?d better start at ten o?clock and
make it three hours each.?
It was rather comical, only it always seemed quite a
matter of course, the way in wdiich Dorcas took the
lead in all their plans and consultations. She was so
much the smallest and looked so much the youngest
?deceptively. But then, in spite of her looks, she w?as
a born leader, and that common sense of hers, although
it might be annoying sometimes, was a very useful
quality. She produced her wrist-watch, which she
always carried inside her rubber cap wdien bathing.
? I?ll take the middle watch ?that?s really the
nastiest ?from one to four,? she decided now. ? Wynne
had better come first, and Carol take on at four?it?ll
be getting light before the end of your time, Carol,
so you?ll be able to start a fire and begin on breakfast.
You could make a sort of porridge out of the rusks.
Wynne had better take over the kiddie?she?s best at
kids.?
The others meekly agreed, and presently after what


Wynne considered a very unsatisfactory supper,
Dorcas and Carol rolled themselves up in rugs, and
lay down in the soft hollow where they had slept so
disastrously in the afternoon whilst the island began
its voyage. Wynne, on duty, sat beside the lighted
lantern, hugging her knees and scanning the dim sea.
Carol had entirely made up her mind that she should
not sleep a wink all night; consequently it was some-
thing of a surprise when Dorcas?s hand shaking her
shoulder and Dorcas?s voice in her ear informed her
that it was four o?clock, and that she had slept for
precisely six hours.
She yawned herself awake, shivered in the chill
early morning air, and regretfully watched Dorcas
tucking herself away into the warm rug and the warm
hollow which she had left. Still?it would be beastly
of her to grumble, and Carol sat down beside the
lantern and listened to the deep breathing of her
companions.
There wouldn?t be need for a light much longer ;
there was a kind of streakiness in the grey sky already,
and it wasn?t really dark. Uncanny, though?Carol
shivered again, not altogether from cold. Everything
looked so queer, the bushes and rocks seemed to be
watching her, and there were odd rustlings and little
squeaking noises. Well, of course, there were birds,
and perhaps other creatures ; they had seen a wallaby.
Probably they were all just beginning to wake up.
Carol rose and went a little nearer to the water?s
edge, looking down into the sea. It was still wonder-


fully calm, there was just a little rippling sound against
the edge of the raft, so that she could tell it was mov-
ing, although very slowly.
The water was dark grey and mysterious, but ?
wasn?t that something like a rock sticking up, a little
way out, black and jagged-looking? Perhaps they had
drifted in towards land again. Carol leaned forward,
trying to see more plainly?and then gave a sudden
gasp of surprise and fear together.
For the black thing had moved, darting through the
sea, and almost at the same instant there was some-
thing luminously white in the water, almost at Carol?s
feet, something which rose above the surface, with
a faint clashing sound.
Carol leaped back, found herself crouched in a
heap on the ground, shivering with downright fear.
A shark?it had been the black fin above the water
which she had taken for a rock, and then it had tried
to reach her as she stood at the edge, had turned over,
jaws uppermost. Of course, she remembered now the
stories of dogs being snatched right from off the rocks
on shore in Sydney harbour.
? Ugh! that was a pretty narrow escape,? Carol
shuddered.
She had recovered more or less from her fright by
seven o'clock when her watch was over, and decided to
say nothing about it. Wynne would only laugh in her
lazy vay and tell her that she had been an idiot to
take the black fin for a rock. Much better just get
breakfast ready and not to think more about sharks.


CHAPTER VIII
The Serpent in Eden
The next day was altogether too uneventful to
please the three Crusoes on their floating desert island;
as for Man Friday, he seemed perfectly contented,
so long as they gave him his meals when hungry'-, and
played with him when he wanted amusement.
The coast was still in sight, but they seemed to get
no nearer to it, and nothing whatever in the nature of
a ship had appeared on the blue sea.
? This is right off the track of steamers,? Wynne
said gloomily. ? There?s no reason for them to come
here. I should think we might drift along for months
and months and months without seeing a thing. And
by that time, we?d have eaten every blade of grass on
the island ?
? Let?s fish,? Dorcas suggested. ? Fried fish for
dinner would be jolly good, and I?m sure there must
be any number about. I?ll make some hooks of bent
pins?or we might try to catch them with that butter-
fly-net in the doll?s house. Come on, Carol.?
But Carol declined to come on. She said that
Dorcas and Wynne were quite enough to go a-fishing,


and that someone must look after the little boy and pre-
vent him from falling off the island, which was reason-
able enough. But, in reality, Carol remembered too
plainly that black fin in the grey morning light.
The four small and bony fish which the anglers
secured were better than nothing, if not very satisfying,
and at any rate, as Wynne remarked, it was a comfort
to know that they could get something to prevent
starvation.
? Oh, we?ll be able to think of other things,? Dorcas
declared optimistically. ? Sea-birds ?we might catch
them, or perhaps they will lay their eggs on the
island.?
? Perhaps they won?t!? ejaculated Wynne.
?Or turtles. There always seem to be turtles and
their eggs on desert islands.?
? I dare say. But this isn?t an ordinary desert
island, so I don?t suppose it will keep to the rules. To
begin with, there?s not a wreck to fetch things from,
and all proper Crusoes and Swiss Families expect that
as a matter of course. Bread-fruit, too ?and there isn?t
a sign of it, or coco-nuts either. No, it?s a very queer
island, and it?s no use expecting it to behave properly
and bookily,? Wynne concluded.
? Well, what can you expect with such a baby one??
Carol said. ? It?s not old enough to behave like a
proper island. You might as well think that the kiddie
could do things like the Swiss Family, poor lamb! Oh,
look what a tear he?s got in his sleeve.?
?You ought to have seen to that, Wynne, since


you?ve sort of adopted him,? Dorcas chuckled, for
Wynne?s lack of prowess with the needle was well
known to all her friends.
? ell, I would mend it if there was anything to do
it with,? Wynne declared. ? Only as there isn?t ?
ou d use fibres torn out of leaves or blades of grass
if you w r ere a proper Robinson,? Dorcas said severely.
? But there?s no need for anything like that. I saw
a work-bag in the house?so you haven?t a leg to stand
on, Wynne, or the least tiny bit of an excuse.?
? Well, next time Igo to the house ? Wynne
yawmed and stretched.
?I?m going that way now and I?ll bring the work-
bag,? Carol remarked. ? I rather want to see what
Bun?s doing. I thought it was quite safe to give him
the run of the island, but I must make sure that he
isn?t running too wild.?
When she returned, however, swinging the blue
work-bag, which Dorcas?s well-trained eyes had truly
observed, Carol spoke rather disgustedly.
? I never saw any beast so unenterprising as that
bear?and I thought he?d so much enjoy himself
roaming about. But there he is just sitting in that
small blue-gum tree by the house, exactly where I
left him, eating and eating away at the leaves.?
? And that?s all he will do, you?ll find,? Dorcas
remarked wisely. ? Koalas always just live in one
tree until they?ve eaten every leaf on it, and then they
go on to the next and begin on that. They?re very
lazy animals?almost as lazy as Wynne.?


1/ s \ '
Y'~ \ vjjjl ?
/ ''i \i Kl .^
E ( - ' ''
A FEARFUL MOMENT
Page 82


�


? I?m not lazy!? Wynne protested indignantly, and as
a sign of her great activity sat up and began to rummage
in the work-bag for needle and thread, suitable for
mending the little boy?s torn sleeve.
? Here?s some that?ll do,? she said. ? And there?s
no need to take off his coat; I can do it just as well
on him.?
? Lazy!? Dorcas jeered, but Wynne argued with
dignity that that wasn?t laziness, only a prudent
saving of time and trouble.
This hardly proved correct. The small boy was so
restless and wrigglesome that Wynne declared in
despair it was just like trying to keep an eel quiet for
five minutes. He twisted, he writhed in such a way
that Wynne?s patience was soon exhausted and the
hole cobbled up very hastily.
? There, that?ll have to do?all right, go, if you
want to, you ungrateful little wretch! And that?s all
the thanks one gets for doing a job,? Wynne said,
stretching herself out once more at full length. ?No
more mending for me!?
A lazy silence followed. Even Dorcas had given
up her fishing operations and was blinking drowsily
at the sea, hands clasped behind her head.
Only the small boy was busily occupied, poking
between the rocks with a stick, crooning a wordless
and tuneless little song to himself as he poked.
Presently his song changed, took on a scolding note,
a half-word repeated again and again.
? Nort??nort? Ugh! Nort? ?
( E 683 )


? What?s up, baby?? Wynne opened one eye lazily.
? Who?s naughty??
? He looks as if he saw something in that hole and
was poking at it,? Carol said. ? I wonder if?oh!?
For Dorcas had dashed past her with a smothered
cry, just as something darted out of the hole, some-
thing which looked like a bit of browny-green rope
flicked through the air, a live rope, striking at the
little boy?s fat arm.
But Dorcas was almost as quick. Thud! went the
stone which she had snatched up, against the rocks,
and under it lay a crushed, feebly wriggling thing.
? A whip-snake!? she ejaculated.
? Oh, what a good thing that you saw it in time!?
cried Carol, whilst Wynne, on her knees, caught the
little boy in her arms, soothing him, crooning over
him.
? But?l don?t know that I did,? Dorcas said in a
queer dull voice, which sent a chill through Carol.
And almost at the same moment came a whimper
from the child.
? P?ick me! Nort? ?p?ick me!?
Wynne had already pulled off the little tunic,
showing the round bare arm ?and on it, just above
the elbow, a tiny speck of blood coming from the
smallest of pricks.
Small, but ?the three girls stared at each other in
horror.
? No, I wasn?t in time,? Dorcas repeated, adding in
a changed voice: ? We must do something?quick!?


? What can we do?? Wynne?s face was white and
horror-struck. ? We?ve no ammonia or anything
here!?
? Make it bleed?no, I know! I?ll suck it ?hard!
Try to get the poison out that way!?
As she spoke, Dorcas was acting with equal energy,
making Carol, as she often did, feel stupid and helpless.
She fixed a tourniquet with deft hands, then held the
little arm to her mouth and sucked long and steadily,
until it didn?t seem as though there could be any
poison in that tiny pink wound.
But Carol could see that the two Australian girls
were not satisfied.
? The whip-snake?s a fearfully deadly poison,?
Wynne muttered. ? Ought we?should we bum the
place, do you think, Dorcas, as we?ve no caustic??
But Dorcas shook her head.
? No?that?s no good with snake-bite, it?s too
quick,? she said.
? The kiddie seems sleepy?do you think it?s a bad
sign?? Wynne said anxiously, as the curly head sagged
back against her arm.
? Sure to be ?it?s a poison sympton,? Dorcas
answered briefly. ? We?ve got to keep him awake?
he mustn?t be let go to sleep on any account.?
? There?s no sign of swelling, and it doesn?t seem
to be hurting him a bit, does it?? Carol ventured. ? I
thought snake bites were painful.?
So they are ?sometimes.? Dorcas?s grim tones
implied that Carol could not possibly know much


about the subject, and had better not waste precious
time in talking.
Wynne meanwhile was rousing the small boy, who
whimpered and kept repeating:
? S?eepy ?s?eepy.?
? Yes, I know you are ?but you mustn?t, lamb,?
Wynne said desperately. ? Look?l?ll make you a
mouse.?
But neither the jumping-handkerchief mouse, nor
the dancing men which Wynne made with her fingers,
nor Dorcas?s grimaces, as she did ? Little pigs went
to market ? or sang ? Waltzing Matilda ? with appro-
priate gestures sufficed to rouse the child. Carol
fetched the Bunyip, usually a sure attraction, but the
little fellow only nodded more and more drowsily.
Wynne sprang up and stood him on his feet.
? Come on, Dorcas, we must keep him walking,?
she cried. ? Have a run, baby!?
But baby most emphatically did not wish to do any-
thing of the kind. He whimpered, he wailed, he sagged
down, letting himself trail between Dorcas and Wynne,
howling vigorously, as they hauled him along.
? We must do it though,? Dorcas said. ? We mustn?t
let him go off to sleep, poor little lamb, even if we have
to behave like cruel pigs. We ought to give him hot
coffee to drink, too, only we haven?t got such a thing?
I wonder if tea would be any good!?
Carol offered eagerly to make some tea so that they
could try, and ran off to put on the kettle, leaving
Wynne and Dorcas to drag their unwilling patient


up and down, up and down, until their own faces were
crimson with heat and exertion.
It was while Carol was waiting for the kettle to boil
that her eyes fell upon the crumpled tunic of the
little boy, lying on the ground where Wynne had
thrown it, when she pulled it off to investigate the
snake bite.
Something glittered on it and Carol, stooping to
look, gave a little gasp. She picked up the tunic and
ran towards the others.
?Wynne Dorcas, I?ve found something I
wonder ? she held out the garment. ? It?s only?
I wonder could this have pricked the kiddie? Do
you think?perhaps the snake didn?t bite him at all??
Into the sleeve of the tunic a long needle was sticking,
attached to it by a short double length of cotton; close
by it w T as a tiny speck of blood.
Wynne looked from Dorcas to Carol, from Carol
to Dorcas, and her face grew slowly crimson.
?Do you think ?? she began.
? Yes, I do.? Dorcas averted her eyes uncomfortably.
? I was beginning to wonder?he?d have been much
worse by now, if the whip-snake had really bitten him
?must have been.?
? Then it?s all my fault for leaving the needle sticking
there after I?d finished the mending,? Wynne said,
and suddenly began to cry most unexpectedly, gasping
out between sobs: ? But I?m glad , it?s only my care-
lessness?because that means the poor darling wasn?t
really bitten.?


? Course it does; oh, what a relief!? Dorcas mopped
her forehead. ? Goodness, how hot it is! Yes, poor
pet, you can go to sleep now, cruel aunties aren?t
going to bother him any more. Wynne, old thing,
don?t you think you?d better take him into the little
house and put him to bed??
Gulping down her sobs shamefacedly, Wynne
eagerly agreed, and bore off the little boy, his sleep-
heavy head drooping over her shoulder. Left alone,
Dorcas looked at Carol, and Carol at Dorcas.
? So that was a snake, that was!? Dorcas said
solemnly, and both burst into laughter, much as
Wynne had dissolved into tears, and for the very same
reason.


CHAPTER IX
?Ship Ahoy!?
The next day was noteworthy for two things, or
at least, the next day and night?but to begin with
the first.
They woke on the morning after the snake-bite
incident to a sky and sea as blue and untroubled as
ever, to the same distant line of land on the horizon.
? Of course, I?m sorry that isn?t nearer,? Dorcas
jerked her head towards the coast. ? Otherwise, it?s
rather a comfort not to wake up and find too many
alterations, a new volcano, or some little trifle in that
way, for instance.?
??We ought to try to think out the food question
thoroughly to-day.? Wynne eyed the exceedingly
spare breakfast with disfavour. ? Otherwise we shall
begin starving before we know where we are.?
? Oh, something?ll turn up,? said Dorcas cheerfully.
?I?m sure, Wynne, that the Swiss Family Robinson
never gave way to despondency.?
? They?d no need,? Wynne said indignandy. ? With
a store ship to draw from, which had simply everything
on board, and an island flowing over with sugar-cane
and bread-fruit and turtles and all sorts.?


? No, that?s true, still, I?m not bothering,? Dorcas
said annoyingly and, still more annoyingly, completely
justified her optimism half an hour later.
For she came to where Wynne and Carol were
sitting with the small boy, flushed with exertion and
triumph.
? It?s turned up,? she said, ? I?ve turned it up
? What?? Wynne asked.
? The Something I said would?or at least, the
Somethings,? Dorcas explained ungrammatically.
? Oh, do say what you mean!? Wynne?s voice w r as
exasperated.
? Well, you know that sand-pit,? Dorcas said, ? the
one we thought was just for kiddie to play in??
? Yes.?
? Well, it isn?t.?
? Dorcas, of all the maddening females ?
?I?m telling you as fast as I can, aren?t I? That
pit?s quite a deep one, and it?s very nearly full of
potatoes! All stored in the sand! There?what do
you think of that??
? I think you?re angels, you and whoever put the
potatoes there,? Wynne said ecstatically. ? I adore
potatoes; I?d be quite happy to have nothing else
to eat.?
? Well, I shouldn?t. Still, we shan?t starve in a
hurry and we can cook them in lots of ways. Baked ?
? Um! Bonza!? Wynne smacked her lips.
? And roasted and mashed and fried and, of course,
plain boiled. Someone once told me there were three


hundred and sixty-five ways of cooking potatoes.?
? Then we?ll expect a different kind every day we
stay on the island, even if it?s a year,? Wynne chuckled.
? Anyway, let?s have ?em baked in their jackets to-day,
honey lamb, and big ones!?
The discovery of the cache of potatoes was certainly
a load off the minds of the marooned ones, and never
had baked potatoes tasted so good or so chestnutty,
as those which Dorcas cooked that day.
? And they?re so beautifully filling,? Wynne sighed.
? I really don?t feel as though I should be hungry
again for days.?
? I don?t wonder, you?ve eaten six,? Dorcas said
brutally. ? I shouldn?t think you could move.?
? I can?t ?and I don?t mean to,? Wynne declared
contentedly. ?I?m potato replete and so are you
others only you won?t allow it. Luckily, there?s
nothing to do, so we can just idle.?
The little boy, curled up on a bright-coloured rug,
was fast asleep. Half in the sun, and half in the shade,
the three girls lay, whilst Bunyip solemnly ate his
way through a small blue gum tree.
? And what?ll happen when he?s eaten all the gum
leaves,? Wynne speculated. ? That?s the worst of
such a limited island?that?s why we?re less lucky
than any other shipwrecked people I ever heard or read
about.?
? I don?t know ?I remember a book called Cast
away on the Auckland Isles ,? Carol said. ? A whole
crew it was, and they found simply nothing to eat


except seals?not a single leaf of a tree, and their
ship had been bashed to pieces. And the man who
wrote it said seal was beastly to eat, like fishy meat!?
? Ugh!? Wynne shivered. ? Yes, that does sound
pretty bad.?
? And it rained all the time, too, but that was a
true island book,? Carol said. ? I think I?d rather
have the untrue ones, like The Coral Island ?delicious!?
Having all read Ballantyne?s masterpiece, they dis-
cussed Ralph, Jack, and Peterkin?s adventures for
some time, and strayed on to other island books.
? There?s Robinson Crusoe , of course, but I really
like the Swiss Family better,? Dorcas confessed.
? They?re somehow so homey.?
? Yes, but have you read the sequel, Willis, the
Pilot}? Carol demanded. ? I thought not ?no one
has, and it?s priceless! You remember the Swiss
Family were all boys, of course; well, in the second
part, there?s another shipwreck and ? Willis, the Pilot ?
and a girl for each boy is cast on the island.?
? Carol?that can?t be true!? Dorcas giggled.
?It is! And they all grow up and pair off, and
marry and settle down.?
? I remember a jolly island book called Our Island
Home? Dorcas said reflectively, ? but that was
quite a proper island with a reef and everything.
Then there was one by Jules Verne, Adrift in the
Pacific, with a whole yachtful of boys.?
? Oh ?and Four on an Island ,? Carol broke in. ? I
loved that when I was a small kid, though I can only


remember a dog and land-crabs. But L. T. Meade
wrote it, I believe.?
? I used to like Leila on the Island ,? Wynne said
lazily. ?It was even homelier than the Swiss Family ,
because there was just Leila and her father and an
old nurse who looked after them, and made them
cup-custards from goats? milk. And Leila stole them ?
that?s all I remember.?
?Wouldn?t a library only of island books be fun??
Dorcas suggested. ? There?d be Treasure Island of
course, oh, and heaps of others. A library on a ship,
it ought to be; then if it did happen to be wrecked on
an island the books would give all sorts of ideas.?
? Yes, only it w r ould be sure to be the wrong sort of
island,? Wynne pointed out gloomily, which brought
them back to pretty much where they were when they
started the conversation.
About the rest of that day there is little or nothing
to record, but during the night there w r as an impor-
tant happening?and during Carol?s watch.
It was the time before moonrise and very dark, a
black velvety darkness, which seemed to hang down
from the sky and over the sea like a curtain.
Carol?s eyes felt so heavy with sleep that she could
hardly keep them open, as she paced up and down
monotonously, almost as though she were walking in
her sleep.
? And if I don?t be careful, I shall w r alk right off
the island,? she told herself, ? which wouldn?t be a
bit funny. I must keep my eyes open somehow.?


She did so, for perhaps five minutes, then they be-
gan to droop again, down, down ?until Carol stubbed
her toe against a stone and almost fell, waking herself
up thoroughly.
Only just in time; as she stumbled to her feet again,
she suddenly became aware of something looming up
through the darkness, a huge black something, tower-
ing high above her head as she stood.
The bluff bows of a steamer ?she caught a gleam
like paint, and then ?thud ?came the impact of the
collision, making the whole island quiver under her feet.
? Ship ahoy!? Carol shouted the first words which
came into her stunned head. It had all happened so
quickly. We ought to have had lights, like a ship, she
found herself thinking?then we shouldn?t have been
run down like this ?perhaps sunk.
Two figures were running towards her, and Dor-
cas?s voice called:
? What is it? What has happened? Where?s the
ship??
? It?s there,? Carol pointed vaguely into the black-
ness, then rubbed her eyes and peered, looking for
that denser darkness. ?At least, it was ?it must
have sunk. There was a collision ?didn?t you feel it?
And I?d no time to call out! I didn?t see anything till
the bow of the ship was right on the top of us.?
? I don?t see how any ship could be sunk so quickly
as that,? Wynne said perplexedly, staring like Carol
and Dorcas into the darkness. ?It wasn?t such a big
crash either ?hullo, what?s that??


The island seemed to be tilting under their feet;
they clung together to keep their foothold, and felt it
very gently subside again.
? What is it?? Carol gasped. ?An earthquake ?a
tidal wave??
Suddenly and unexpectedly Dorcas began to laugh.
? No, it?s your ship!? she said. ? Look!?
Against the lighter horizon, quite close to them a
silhouette appeared, a huge shape seen broadside on
now, tapering from the bluff head and shoulders down
to the fluked tail, as it plunged.
? A whale!? Carol cried.
? That?s it,? Dorcas nodded, ? and a big chap
too. They?re awfully inquisitive beasts, I believe;
that?s why it came sniffing about the island. But I
hope it won?t get underneath and scratch its back
again! Yes, that?s your ship!?
? It looked exactly like one!? Carol protested.
? It would,? Wynne said pacifically, ? if you only
saw the bows, the high head and shoulders, I mean.
Anyone might have been taken in. Look?it?s spout-
ing?and a good bit farther away, so I hope it?s satis-
fied its curiosity about us.?
It seemed as though that must be the case; for
although they watched diligently no more whales
appeared that night.


CHAPTER X
The ?Brick-fielder
There followed three days during which almost as
little happened as though the adventurers had been
staying in lodgings at an English seaside resort during
fine summer weather. Their bathing was undisturbed
by whales or sharks, and things w T ent on in quite a
humdrum way on the island. In fact, as Dorcas re-
marked, it was really rather dull.
The outline of the distant coast showed that they
were slowly drifting along?but very slowly.
? About the pace of a rather fast glacier,? was
another of Dorcas?s contributions to their very desul-
tory conversations. ? And I should think we?ll get
anywhere in about the same time.?
? We seem to be quite out of the way of ships too,?
Wynne remarked. ? Those that have passed were
miles away, and even if they?d been nearer I don?t
know how we should have attracted their attention.
? N-no,? Dorcas considered the question. ?We
can?t make a bonfire?there?s nothing to spare in the
way of fuel and, besides, it might spread and devas-
tate the whole island.?


? And there?s nothing to use as a flagstaff,? Carol
chimed in. ? Even if a ship came close enough to see
it.?
? They won?t,? Dorcas declared. ? Their course
is far out along this part of the coast ?that?s what
makes things rather serious if we don?t get somewhere
soon.?
But somehow, in the sunshine of that morning, it
didn?t seem possible to look at anything really seriously.
There had been a shower in the night and the whole
island looked as bright and glowing as a many-coloured
bunch of flowers, and smelt as fresh. On a day like
this it was really a magical little place and its original
population ?as Dorcas called the small boy?might
have been a fairy child, too, so pretty and good and
lovable was he, so completely and trustfully at home
with his three new friends.
? It?s a mercy he?s such a good kid,? Wynne said.
? Just fancy if he?d been like some, whining and pining
and fretful. But he isn?t, he?s just a darling, angelical
lamb, aren?t you, sweetest??
? Um!? Sweetest remarked non-committally and
made a grab for Bunyip, who was progressing with
slow deliberation from one depleted blue-gum treelet
to another which still bore edible leaves. The Bunyip,
fascinating as he was in appearance and cuddlesome
as he could be on occasion, had his limitations as a
pet. He was so entirely concentrated on the food
problem that it left him no time for dalliance.
The pair of wallabies who lived on the island were


far more oncoming, and had shown themselves most
friendly little beasts.
No more disturbing problem presented itself that
day than how the potatoes should be cooked for
dinner ?at least, not until the middle of the after-
noon.
Then, as once before, it was Wynne who sat up and
sniffed the air in a doubtful way.
? Something?s going to happen,? she said, and
Dorcas and Carol, who respected their companion?s
weather lore, gazed at her gravely.
? A storm?? asked Carol, and searched the horizon,
which did not show the dark streak of the previous
occasion, which looked indeed wholly blue and inno-
cent.
? Sort of ? Wynne frowned. ? Look the other
way ?not at the sea.?
Over the distant land hung a kind of reddish-
yellow haze and at sight of it Dorcas looked serious.
? H?m ?a ?brick-fielder?, you mean,? she said;
? beastly things too.?
? What are they?? Carol inquired.
? Winds mostly from the west or north-west,?
Wynne explained. ? Right off the deserts in the
interior. That?s why they are so beastly, because
they?re blazing hot, and generally mean a sandstorm.
If it?s a really bad one, the little house will be the
only place, eh, Dorcas??
? Yes, but horribly cramped,? agreed Dorcas.
? Let?s hope we shan?t have to.?


? Oh ?have a hope!? drawled Wynne, and proved
to be right.
Slowly the yellow-reddish haze thickened and rose?
rose until it was like a semicircular arch half covering
the sky, obscuring the sun, making a queer dull twilight.
Sea birds flew away from the land, screaming un-
easily, and that discomfort and dread seemed to spread
to every leaf and blade of grass on the island, so that
they rustled and shook, even though the air appeared
still.
Carol felt her eyes smarting and tingling, felt her
lips dry and gritty, and glancing at her companions
knew that they had the same sensations.
Wynne sprang up.
? Come on ?we must get into the house,? she said.
? We?ve hung about enough already, it?s going to be
a sure-enough buster!?
She caught up the little boy in her arms and the
other two followed, only barely in time as she had
said. For they had not gone a dozen steps before the
sand-storm had swooped suddenly down upon them,
blinding, choking, deafening.
It came with a weird, thin, whistling yell and a
stinging, blinding cloud of sand in their faces, making
them gasp and screw up their eyes. They had to bend
double to push their way along, stumbling blindly,
with everything around them blotted out by the reddish
mist.
Carol could barely see the dark shapes of Wynne
and Dorcas in front of her, and she clutched at the
(E 683) 7


latter?s arm so as not to lose touch and be lost yes,
that seemed quite possible, absurd as it sounds.
Then, at last, they had reached the little house,
they were crawling in, and Wynne was blocking up
every crack and opening possible to keep out the
sand.
It was remarkably close quarters for three full-size
Rangers, one half-size child and a native bear, and the
little boy, good as he was, began to whimper in the
stuffy darkness and to ask for ? mi?k
? I only wish we?d got mi?k or anything else to
drink,? said Dorcas. ? I feel absolutely dried up
outside and in. But it?s no good; we can?t possibly
get anything till the storm?s over, and that won?t be
yet awhile. It?s blowing harder and harder.?
There was no doubt about that; the thin whistle of
the wind had increased to an incessant roar, and now
something else began to happen.
? I hope the house isn?t going to be blown away,?
Wynne said uneasily. ?It feels as though it were
moving.?
?It is.? Dorcas sounded grim. ? But I don?t think
it?s only the house. The whole island?s being driven
along, probably right out to sea. Goodness knows
where we shall end up!?
They could all feel it now, that very slow, very
slight, yet somehow sickening sort of motion, not
springy and buoyant like the movements of a ship,
but wallowing?that is the only word which really
describes the progress of the island.


? I suppose we shan?t sink,? Wynne said doubtfully,
? op ?or break up, or turn turtle ?
? Oh, look on the bright side!? Dorcas groaned.
? We?re much more likely to be swept off?house
and trees and us and all, and if so, there won?t be
much time to bother.?
? I wish to goodness that we could do anything!?
Carol said suddenly. ? It?s so horrible just sitting
waiting for things to happen in a kind of pocket edition
of the Black Hole of Calcutta.?
? Too true,? Dorcas answered briefly, and then
for a time silence fell, at least so far as conversation
was concerned.
Then suddenly came new and violent happenings.
There was a heavy thud, then a long drawn-out
grinding crunch, repeated again and again at short
intervals, with a kind of rocking see-saw motion in
between, varied by thud after thud.
Through the gritty darkness came Dorcas?s voice.
? We?re aground ?we?ve been driven ashore some-
where.?
? And now we?ll probably be bumped up and down
and battered to pieces, pretty quick,? Wynne re-
marked resignedly. ?Oh well, we can?t do anything,
seeing that there are no boats to take to and not even
so much as a life-belt. We can?t even manage a proper
ordinary 7 sort of shipwreck. We?re like lobsters in a
lobster-pot, or ?or mice in a trap in a bucket of water,
or ?
? Oh, for goodness? sake! Quit being such a little


ray of sunshine!? Dorcas burst out. ? I know that a
Guide laughs and sings when in trouble, but you do
carry your cheerfulness to extremes, Wynne, old
thing.?
Even Wynne herself could not help laughing and
Carol began to giggle helplessly and hysterically.
Somehow it seemed absurdly to lighten the physical
as well as the mental atmosphere, for the blackness
grew a little less and the uproar of the storm began
to die down quite perceptibly.
? It?s blowing itself out,? said Dorcas. ? These
brick-fielders end as suddenly as they begin, and that?s
about the only good thing that you can say about
them.?
Gradually light began to filter in and it seemed
safe to remove the rugs and paper with which all
apertures had been stopped up. The windows were
dimmed by a coating of reddish-brown sand, and
even inside the house it had penetrated everywhere.
But it was settling now, and the air was no longer thick
with it.
Outside the wind?s howl had sunk to its first thin
whistle, and presently Dorcas gave herself a little
shake.
? I?m going out,? she announced. ? We?ve got to
know what?s happened.?
? I?m coming too!? Wynne and Carol spoke in
spontaneous chorus, and all three proceeded to crawl
out, Wynne further encumbered with the small boy
and Carol with the Bunyip.


The joy of standing upright and stretching, of
breathing air that was almost fresh, again! The sun
was showing now as a dim reddish ball through the
yellow thinning haze, and away on the seaward horizon
a dim bank of cloud showed where the sand-storm was
driving aw r ay into the distance.
Even the sea shared that khaki dun colour, and as
for the island, the reddish sand lay thickly everywhere,
on plants and flowers, and on the roof of the little
house, although here in the middle of the island
things were more or less sheltered.
But the three girls had little attention to spare for
their immediate surroundings at the moment. All
alike wanted to know the answer to the question?
? What had happened?? and they had not far to go to
find out.
The island had itself been marooned on another
island ?at least if that name could be given to the
spot where they found themselves, half sandbank,
half jagged black reef against which the surf beat as
on a breakwater.
By good luck their own island had run upon the
sandy or coastw T ard side of this island reef, and they
w r ere in almost sheltered water, protected by the reef
from the sea itself.
The outline of the mainland was very little if at
all nearer than before, but it had altered, showing
higher hills, so that they had evidently been driven
for some distance by the storm before grounding.
Dorcas stared away at the coast wistfully.


? Hopeless!? she said. ? I thought it was jus!
possible that we?d find ourselves near enough to swim
ashore, but that?s out of the question.?
? Altogether w T e seem to be about where we were
before, even though we aren?t ?oh well, you know
exactly what I mean, so you needn?t pretend that you
don?t,? said Wynne.
? Anyhow, I think it?s rather a comfort to be
stationary for a bit, don?t you?? remarked Carol.
? And I dare say there?ll be shellfish and things on that
reef.?
?Um it makes a change anyway,? Dorcas
acquiesced. ? And I don?t think much of our island
has been blown away, only covered with sand. Good-
ness, what a mess! I wonder how on earth we?re
going to get rid of it.?
??lf seven maids with seven mops swept it for half
a year, do you suppose, the Walrus said, that they
could get it clear?? ? Carol quoted, laughing. ? Sorry,
but I couldn?t help it, seeing ? such quantities of sand?.
It simply made me think of ? Alice?.?
? I know what it makes me think of,? Wynne said
slowly. ? Tea! Gallons and gallons of tea!?
And for once Carol did not disagree.


CHAPTER XI
Double Desert Islands
Tea and a bathe made the islanders feel cleaner
inside and out, and there followed a vigorous brushing
and shaking of rugs and blankets, with a rubbing up
of anything that they actually needed, to rid it of the
general grittiness.
As for spring-cleaning the island in general, that
was impossible, and, as it turned out, quite unneces-
sary. For, as sometimes happens, heavy rain came in
the wake of the brick-fielder and sleeping out-of-doors
was impossible that night.
But stuffy as it was indoors, they lay listening to the
heavy-footed downpour thankfully as it beat on roof
and windows. For not only would it give the island
a much-needed wash-down, but it would replenish the
big water-tanks and remove the fear of possible thirst
which had haunted them all sometimes, especially the
Australian girls, who knew more of the possibilities of
drought than British-bred Carol.
Everything was so newly scrubbed and shining in
next morning?s sunlight that it sent up the spirits of
the whole community with a bound. Even the grim-
ness of the new island was now considerably modified,


though it could not be called anything but extremely
desert.
? Just our luck!? grumbled Wynne. ? There might
have been bread-fruit and coco-nuts.?
? I shouldn?t wonder if there are shellfish and crabs
and things,? Dorcas remarked, with her careful eye on
the commissariat, ? and that?ll be a good thing, because
the potatoes won?t last for ever.?
? Well, I hope you aren?t expecting us to stay here
as long as that,? Wynne said, ? Now that we?re fixed
and our own island can?t run away from us, we must
set to work and do what Robinson did.?
? What?s that?? asked Carol.
? Make a boat, of course.?
? But there aren?t any trees large enough to scoop
out.?
? That isn?t the only sort of boat! We could make
a raft anyway. After all, it isn?t far to land, and if
only one of us got there it would be enough to bring
help ?wn don?t need a boat big enough for the whole
party. And we ought to start on it directly.?
? Here?s energy!? Dorcas laughed. ? Fancy Wynne
being the strenuous one!?
? Anybody would think that no one ever did any-
thing but yourself, to hear you talk!? Wynne retorted
?and such an outburst of irritation was even more un-
natural to her than energy.
It made Dorcas stare, coming from good-natured
Wynne, but her sharp tongue found a quick retort,
and there they were quarrelling, almost before they


knew it, with Carol making rather querulous efforts
at peace-making. For truth to tell, all three girls were
over-tired and over-wrought by the excitement of the
storm, in the mood when the only safety lies in holding
one?s tongue, and it is the hardest thing in the world
to be wise enough to do.
So like a cat-and-dog fight, Dorcas scratched and
Wynne snapped back and Carol railed at them both,
and finally Wynne summoned all her dignity and
marched off in high offence, right out of the map, so
to speak, on to the other island, scrambling away on
the jagged belt of rocks which hid the farther side of
it from view.
It was a fairly hard scramble, perhaps the best thing
in the world for Wynne at that moment, for when she
had reached the other side she had almost forgotten
her bad temper in the exercise and the interest of new
discoveries.
There was no sandy beach here, only stretches of
rocks and reefs with pools between, all uncovered now
since it was low tide. And these rocks w r ere all most
excitingly full of life, and noisy life too. This desert
island w T as not, as they had thought, without inhabi-
tants, although those inhabitants had most likely taken
refuge on the mainland during the storm of the day
before.
Now they w r ere home again, and to judge by the noise,
it sounded rather as though they had found their
domestic arrangements in disorder and were scolding
everybody else about it.


For the aboriginals of the island were sea-birds, a
dozen varieties and more, with as many different
voices, screams, squawks, mewings, wailings, and
screechings. They were perched closely on the rocks
or hovered and swooped overhead, gulls large and
small, cormorants or shags, as Wynne called them,
boobies, gannets, and others, and here, there, and
everywhere, on ledges or in hollows or even on the
bare rocks w T ere their eggs in twos, threes, and fours.
? Here?s a find! I should think they?d be all right
to eat, even if they?re a bit fishy,? Wynne thought
with satisfaction, visualizing omelettes, and poached,
fried, and scrambled eggs, ad lib. She decided that
she would carry back a good supply, but wait to collect
them until she had done a little more exploration,
eggs not being the easiest things in the world to carry.
It struck her that those cracks and clefts in the sea-
ward rocks were just the very places where lobsters,
crabs or large crayfish might be found. And if she
could return with a prize of that kind, as w 7 ell as the
eggs ?well, it would be some amends for that fit of
vile temper, of which Wynne was already heartily
ashamed.
She began to pick her way across the birds? nesting-
grounds towards the outer edge of the reef, and soon
found herself regarded as a most unpleasant intruder.
Birds hissed and scolded on all sides; birds rose
shrieking and darted and swooped round her, some-
times most unpleasantly close to her eyes, even beating
at her head with their wings.


If Wynne had not been of a fairly dogged disposition
when roused, she would probably have given up her
shellfish-catching plans, but that did not at all suit her
ideas.
?I am not going to be driven away by a pack of
birds,? she thought, and picked her way resolutely to
her goal, although the aggrieved inhabitants persisted
in following her even there, as she poked in clefts and
investigated likely pools.
But not a claw or a tail of a lobster or crab did she
spy; nothing more appetizing than a large jellyfish and
a fish which had been stranded by the storm and was
rather too obviously dead.
? I shouldn?t think sea-anemones are eatable,?
Wynne reflected. ? And we?ve got plenty of limpets
and mussels on the other island. Well, I?ll have a look
in that big crack over there on the very edge, and if
that's no good ?
At first, it did not seem as though the long uneven
cleft, its lips fringed wfith a moustache of seaweed, was
likely to be a happier hunting-ground than the other
cracks and holes Wynne had explored, but she per-
severed.
And that perseverance w r as rewarded after a while
by the discovery of a colony of oysters, those small
oysters which Wynne had often eaten at Sydney
Harbour picnics, fried, fresh and delicious from the
rocks.
Here was a treat! and one worth the trouble of
gathering the oysters, which w r as considerable, so


firmly they stuck to the inside of the cleft, so far back
had they established themselves. Wynne lay on her
face, stretching her bare arm to its fullest extent to
reach them, fumbling amongst the seaweed.
Suddenly, something cold touched her wrist, folded
round it, something chill and clammy and wriggling.
?An eel!? Wynne guessed. ? Ugh?get off, you
beast!?
She tried to shake it off, to free her wrist, and
found that she could not; the invisible creature only
twisted itself tighter, seemed even to be pulling at
her arm. Wynne pressed herself down flatter upon
the rock, laid her cheek flat sideways, tried to peer
into the darkness of the cleft.
At first, she could see nothing except vaguely
moving seaweed and the pale shape of her own arm.
Then round that arm she made out something which
stirred, something which looked greyish-white in the
dimness ?that dimness to which Wynne?s eyes were
slowly growdng accustomed, so that now she could
make out something beyond, something?what was it?
A face ?a kind of beak?eyes ?hideous goggling
eyes ?whatever kind of monster was it lurking there
at the back of the cleft? A crab?a crayfish ?and then,
of a sudden, Wynne knew. Something far worse than
either of those, a creature more dreaded, more terrible
?octopus, giant squid, devil-fish, each name as she
remembered it seemed worse than the last. Ices, that
was it; there was no doubt about it, and even if not
a very large or powerful specimen of the breed, it was


big and strong enough to hold her there, a helpless
prisoner.
But was it? Wynne set her teeth, determined not
to give in just from sheer terror of that beast in the
crack, with its awful, blank eyes, staring, staring
Turning over upon her side, so as to get a better
purchase, she began to tug, to wrench, to use all her
strength to drag herself free. At first, she thought
that she was going to succeed; the tentacle gripping
her arm seemed to slacken ?only to renew its hold
more firmly than before.
But Wynne continued the grim struggle, until her
arm ached agonizingly, felt as though the shoulder was
almost wTenched out of its socket, and without any
result, without being one single hair?s breadth nearer
to freedom.
Next she attempted to reach the enemy with her
other arm and wrench away that clinging feeler?again
in vain. She was lying in an awkward position; she
could barely touch the thing with her fingers, far less
use any power.
Gasping, breathless with her efforts, Wynne lay
face downwards and tried to think. What was to be
done? What could she do?
If she didn?t escape ?yes, she?d got to face it; no
use shirking?the tide was rising, would cover the
whole ledge where she lay feet deep. That was an ugly
sort of prospect.
If only she hadn?t parted from the others in such a
bad temper, they would probably have followed her to


explore the new island; as it was, they?d most likely
steer clear, hoping that she would recover herself,
unless she could shout ?make them hear. After all,
she wasn?t so very far away, even with the reef between;
surely she could call loud enough for that.
? Help! He-e-lpl? Wynne raised her voice to its
loudest. ? He-e-lp!?
She was answered at once, but not in the way she
wished. At once, as though roused by her shouts,
every sea-bird on or near the island seemed to be giving
tongue, yelling, squalling, squawking, mewing, availing,
croaking, drowning her own voice completely. And
each time that she tried afresh, it was the same; the
chorus of sea-birds joined in stridently, rising louder
and louder, more and more deafeningly.
? Oh, it?s no good\? wailed Wynne in utter despair,
burying her face in her arm. ? I can never make them
hear over those fiendish gulls!?
For a few moments she lay sobbing helplessly, hope-
lessly, then pulled herself together with an effort. No
use giving way like that! She must w T ait until the
screeching had died down and then try again?and
agam-
And on the other island the attention of Dorcas had
just been attracted by those same wild screeches, so
that she looked up from the plaiting of tough long
grass blades into braid for the making of a shady hat.
? What an awful row those birds are making!? she
said. ? Sounds as if they w r ere in a fearful rage?or
else frightened at something.?


? Wynne probably!? Carol laughed. ? She was
enough to alarm anyone in that mood!?
But Dorcas did not laugh.
? I suppose they?re not attacking her, by any chance,?
she speculated. ? They might, if there were enough of
them, and ?hullo, what?s that??
Very faintly, but distinct from the shrieks and wails
of the sea-birds came another sound, familiar, unmis-
takable. ? Coo-00-ey!? For Wynne had just realized
that this was a summons less easily drowned by gulls
and gannets than her former cries for help.
? Coo-00-ey!? came again, with a something urgent
in its note which Dorcas recognized at once.
? It?s Wynne!? she cried, and was on her feet and
running across to the other island in a moment.
Carol followed, after making sure that the little boy
was safely asleep, and the two girls went scrambling
over the rocks until they had reached the farther side
and saw Wynne, held a prisoner there on her rock,
like a new-fashioned Andromeda of the Greek story,
waiting for Perseus in the shape of her two com-
panions.
It did not take long for them to reach her and hear
her explanations; in less time than it needs to write
the words, Dorcas was investigating the cleft ?and
looking about for a weapon.
? It needs a knife and we haven?t got one here ?
where?s a sharp stone?? she demanded. ? Ah, there?s
something better still, this ought to do the trick.?
It was a big six-inch razor shell, with an edge almost


worthy of its name. In another second, Dorcas was
hacking away at the tentacles ?two of them now ?
which imprisoned Wynne?s hand and arm. And as
she hacked, she uttered fierce exclamations:
? There you are, you brute! Leave go, you vile beast
?let go, I say! Carol, stand by to help her get away.
There?s one of them cut through, but it?s waving
about a lot more. Ah, thought you?d got me then, did
you? Now , Carol!?
Carol caught Wynne round the waist and flung
herself back; Dorcas, with a quick movement, followed
suit, and all three girls fell in a heap into an adjacent
shallow pool.
? Oh-h! what it feels like to be free!? Wynne
gasped, sitting up and clasping her arm, which showed
bracelets of angry red spots where the suckers of the
octopus had attached themselves. ? But, oh, Dorcas, you
shouldn?t have, it might so easily have caught you too!?
? Well, it didn?t!? Dorcas spoke jauntily, determined
to ignore the danger which had turned her sick for a
moment. ? But perhaps this?ll teach you not to poke
into cracks ?you ought to have had more sense, \\ ynne
?as an Aussie!?
? It?ll teach me a lot of things besides that,? said
Wynne soberly, and did not find it necessary, as she
gave Dorcas?s hand a quick grip, to specify what those
things were.
? Ow ?don?t you be an octopus!? Dorcas ejaculated,
and thereby somehow conveyed that she fully
understood.


CHAPTER XII
Gulliver Junior among the Gulls
The three girls never ceased to congratulate them-
selves upon the fact that their little boy, Friday, was
such a remarkably good child. ? Angel ?, ? Lamb ?,
and ? Pet ? were the epithets bestowed upon him as a
rule, and to tell the truth, he really did deserve them,
for he was a sweet-tempered little fellow and very easy
to amuse.
Limited as was his vocabulary he could make him-
self understood pretty well, but he talked most of the
time in a kind of language of his own, which Wynne
insisted that the little bear and the cow and the pony
and the wallaby could all understand quite well.
? And I believe I would get to know it in time,? she
added. ? I wonder if all babies can talk to beasts and
flowers and things before they get spoilt by having
to learn our language. I shouldn?t wonder.?
?Well, I?ve no wish to be able to talk like sea-birds
anyway,? Dorcas said. ? Goodness, how those creatures
on the other island do screech and yell?like cats in
the backyard.?
? It?s because they?re nesting and all the families
(E 683) 113 8


seem to squabble with each other,? Wynne remarked.
? Talk about birds in their little nests agreeing?they
don?t! I?m sure they?ve got worse tempers than tigers
or lions really, only people think they?re so soft and
pretty. But I believe the kiddie understands what
they're saying too; he always chuckles and claps his
hands when they squawk loudest. Don?t you, Angel??
? Wan? mi?k!? the Angel remarked irrelevantly, and
wriggled out of Wynne?s hugging arms to reach his
mug. Perhaps they had been boasting too much of
his goodness; perhaps he considered it was time to
show them that he was not quite an angel. In any case,
the very next day, Baby Friday embarked upon his
first serious misadventure and gave his three adopted
? Aunties ? their first bad fright on his account.
It was a very hot day; after a mid-morning bathe,
all four of the human inhabitants of the island had
fallen asleep as they lay drying in the sun ?and for a
wonder it was the small boy who first awoke in the
sandy hollow where he and the koala were curled up
together, like two cosy small animals, the bear fur-
coated, the boy in a tiny yellow-brown bathing-suit.
The bear yawned and rolled over on his back; the boy
sat up, thumb in mouth, staring round him wide-
eyed, until his gaze fixed itself upon a large white and
grey bird strutting to and fro upon the edge of the
sea. That bird seemed to fascinate the little fellow;
next instant he had scrambled to his feet, stood balan-
cing on his fat brown legs, the small Teddy-bear dang-
ling from one fist, gathered up the sleepy koala


under his other arm and set off stumping sturdily
along, Gulliver Junior starting on his travels. And
not one of the sleeping girls moved a finger. It was
the lowest state of the tide, and the sand on which the
fascinating bird flapped and strutted was at the ex-
treme end of the second island, just a narrow strip
leading round the point, so that for a little time the
rocks need not be climbed, and the far side of the
island could be reached easily. On marched the small
boy straight towards the bird, who for a few moments
stood motionless, staring with a fixed yellow eye. Then,
as the intruder came too close, it rose on wide wings
and flapped away, out of sight round the rocky point,
leaving Gulliver desolate.
For a moment his mouth drooped, ready for a roar,
then he changed his mind, pulled himself together and
set off trudging along the sand, round the point in pur-
suit of the bird. Baby as he was, the small boy was not
one to be easily diverted from his purposes, as the
girls knew already. He was out of sight of his own island
now, in a new and strange world as it seemed to him,
a very noisy and exciting world too. He forgot about
the bird which he had followed, for here were thousands
of other birds, birds everywhere, screaming, yelling,
wailing, screeching, as they flew to and fro or perched
on the rocks; others made queer squeaking noises and
open wide mouths, but they were smaller and fluffier
and did not fly away when Gulliver junior came near.
The girls had soon noticed that this small boy had
been brought up to be quite without fear or nervous-


ness where animals were concerned, and he was not in
the slightest degree afraid now in the midst of the yell-
ing, screaming birds. He only chuckled delightedly as he
stared about him. ? Quack-quacks ?he gurgled.
?Boofer quackers! chookies ?boofer chookies!? The
gulls and guillemots, shags and kittiwakes yelled louder,
but the little boy paid no heed at all. Setting down the
koala and his Teddy-bear, he squatted beside one of
the hollows full of squeaking, gaping sea-chicks and
began to pat their soft fluffiness with his fat hands.
? Chookies?chookies!? he crooned, but the baby gulls
did not respond kindly to his petting. Instead they
pecked and squeaked louder whilst the parent birds
swooped down close to the little boy?s head. As a
wing struck his face and a beak scratched his finger,
the adventurer drew back and shook his head re-
provingly.
? Nort! Nort!? he scolded, ? Nort chookies!?
The birds only shrieked the more and the small boy
rose with dignity, picking up the Teddy-bear to dangle
forlornly by one foot, while he looked round for the
Bunyip. But that individual objected decidedly to
these strange surroundings. Putting on an unwonted
sprint of speed, he had departed, scurrying along the
sand by the way they had come, his whole mind fixed
on the blue-gum tree whose leaves he had only half
eaten.
He was out of sight behind a rock before Gulliver be-
came aware of his desertion and cries of ? Bun ?Bun?
Bun!? had no effect. But the small boy?s attention was


almost at once diverted from the search. His foot
slipped on the edge of a rock-pool, and ?slither ?slide?
splash!?there he was sitting in the warm shallow water
and surveying frowningly the seaweed-fringed verge
which had been the cause of his downfall. ? Nort!
Nort!? he began, and then, entirely forgetting all else,
grabbed with a shout of joy at a small green crab which
had just scuttled across his bare foot.
Here were new and thrilling adventures ?tiny, dart-
ing fishes, crabs, and shrimps, jelly-blobs of sea-
anemones to be poked, limpets to be painstakingly and
unavailingly prodded in the desire to make them walk.
The pool was a kind of Paradise, and as the nearest
nests and young birds were some yards away, the sea-
birds ceased to torment him, and any which ventured
to go near he greeted with shouts and splashed water.
Here, in this pool, was something which did not
exist in his own little island kingdom, and Gulliver, on
his travels, was determined to make the most of it.
He would probably have stayed there quite indefi-
nitely if he had not been disturbed by the rising tide
and the intrusion of a succession of gate-crashing little
waves, which tumbled uninvited into the pool, breaking
up all its peacefulness, and sending its fish and crabs
and shrimps scuttling for shelter into weed-bordered
cracks.
The small boy was deeply aggrieved once more; why
could he not be allowed to play without all this din
and disturbance, he would have asked, if speech had
then come to him. As it was, he slapped back at the


waves vigorously, scolding them meanwhile with his
invariable ? Nort! Nort!? An extra large wave, filling
his mouth and eyes with water, discomposed the child
entirely, and he scrambled out of the pool, whimpering
a little and digging his fists into his eyes. But standing
on the farther sun-baked rim, out of reach of the
waves, he soon recovered his contentment and also the
Teddy-bear who had been left forlorn on a rock, and
set off upon further explorations.
These took a form which would have terrified a
looker-on, but which most boys and girls have enjoyed
at different ages. Just as one might balance on a
curbstone, so the small boy walked cautiously, one
foot before the other, on the very edge of the rock-
ledge bordering the sea, which lapped and whispered
three or four feet below, deep here, right up to the
margin. The child?s toes clung to the bare or seaweed-
covered rock, his gaze solemnly fixed upon them, as
he balanced his way along, the Teddy-bear dangling,
head downwards, precariously over the sea.
If Wynne, or Dorcas, or Carol had been watching?
but no one was, except the sea-birds still swooping and
screaming, with cold eyes fixed upon the small in-
truder who, they felt sure, had evil intentions towards
their fluffy, squawking babies open-beaked for food.
Slowly Gulliver progressed upon his travels, and then
exactly what might have been expected occurred. He
lost his balance, tottered on those sturdy, still rather
unsteady legs of his, seemed, for a second, as though
he must fall into the sea.


But by a really valiant effort the little fellow managed
to recover his balance, to fall in a little flopped heap
on the safe side, only to stumble to his knees again
at once with a wail.
? Ba ?ba ? he murmured, crawling to the edge
and peering over. For the Teddy-bear had been less
fortunate than his master and had fallen when the grip
of the little boy?s fist had relaxed for a moment. He
was floating there, poor Teddy, draggled paws and legs
outstretched, his beady eyes staring upwards. But
only for a few seconds; next moment there was a
swish through the water, a long grey-green shape
darting up sideways and Teddy-bear had disappeared
in a swirl of sea. If only Wynne or Dorcas or Carol
had been there, to know what the grey shape, the
sudden disappearance meant exactly! Fortunately the
little boy did not; he only understood that Teddy-bear
had gone, that he couldn?t see him anywhere, stare as
he might, down into the sea, as he squatted on the
edge. And Teddy-bear did not come back, although
his master waited for several long minutes.
? Nort!?Nort! ? he said sadly, his lips drooping,
as he gathered himself up on to his feet again and
dragged away, both shoulders hunched, big tears
trickling down on either side of his ridiculous blob
of a nose. For Gulliver junior felt very lonely. Bun
had deserted him, Teddy had deserted him, and the
three strange aunties to whom he had grown so accus-
tomed had deserted him too ?for that is how it all
seemed to his baby mind.


? Nort! ?Nort! ? he muttered again, feeling
that the whole world was indeed a very naughty place,
with no mug of milk and no biscuits to be seen any-
where, although he wanted both. He was about at
the point of collapsing in a little despairing sobbing
heap upon the rocks, when something caught his
attention, something a good many yards away, at the
very farthest end, indeed, of the rocky island.
Here there were broad shelves of rock stretching
out to sea, enclosing pools which seemed just made
for bathing ?although it is not to be supposed that
the small boy noticed all this, or had any clear thoughts
about it at all. All he did see was that people apparently
were bathing there. They were partly hidden by the
rocks, but he caught glimpses of heads bobbing up
and down, heard splashing ?all a great comfort to
him in his loneliness. He did not doubt for a moment
who it was. ? Ant! ?Amt! ? he chuckled in huge
satisfaction, with visions at once, no doubt, of mugs
of milk and biscuits in the company of his ? aunties ?,
who had suddenly appeared there, somehow or other.
He screwed the tears out of his eyes with both fists,
and set off stumping vigorously over the rocks and the
patches of hard sand between, falling often, so that his
fat knees were grazed and bleeding and his round arms
marked with bruises, but disregarding such wounds,
like the gallant little adventurer that he was. Even
a slithering descent into a shallow pool, which splashed
him from head to foot, did not deter him for longer
than it took to pick himself up and stagger on, leaving


now a wet trail behind him. For he was getting nearer
to the bathing pool: he could still catch a glimpse
now and then of a bobbing head, very soon he would
reach them and the milk and the biscuits
Gulliver junior broke into a scrambling sort of trot
in order to attain that goal the sooner.


CHAPTER XIII
?Alarums and Excursions?
Meanwhile, on the other island, the three girls had
slept on for at least an hour after Gulliver junior had
started upon his travels. They might not even have
wakened then if Bunyip, the koala, had not crawled
over Wynne?s bare ankle on his nearest way to the
blue-gum tree which was his objective.
He was a distinctly disgruntled native bear: he had
been obliged to crawl for an unpleasantly long distance
over rocks and shingle in a hot sun ?which he hated ?
in order to reach what he considered to be civilisation
once more. He didn?t like it a bit, and when he actually
came within smell and sight of the gum tree, he
crawled over Wynne?s prostrate body without any
ceremony at all.
? Ow! ? Wynne woke with a start. ? Wha?s ?
Oh, its you, Bunyip ?waking me up like that ?you
little pig! And I was having such a 10-o-o-ovely
sleep!? A huge yawn waked her thoroughly. She sat
up, stretching, gave the bear a little prod in his fat
furry side to urge him on, and looked round. Looked
round ?and almost immediately realized what was
wrong. ?Dorcas ?Carol!? She grabbed at the shoulder


of the latter as she scrambled to her feet. ? Wake
up?wake up at once! The kiddie?s gone!?
That brought them both out of the deepest depths
of sleep in a moment. ? Where?? gasped Carol. ? What
do you mean}? demanded Dorcas, her quick eyes
already darting this way and that. ? How can he have
gone??
? How? ?Where? why, anywherel? Wynne burst
out impatiently. ?If he?s wandered off he may have
fallen into the sea, or ?
? Much more likely that he?s gone off to the little
house in search of biscuits,? Dorcas decided briskly.
? Come on, w T e?ll look there first ?and don?t for good-
ness? sake think of the blackest side of everything,
Wynne!? She sprang up, then bent to rest her hand
for a moment in the hollow where they had last seen
Boy Friday curled up asleep. ? Quite cold,? she said
briefly. ?He must have been gone some little while.
Come on!?
But the little boy was not to be found in any of his
usual likely play-places, neither did he answer when
they called, coaxingly, using the words ? Bik ?Mi?k??
which would generally bring him at once, best foot
foremost. The island remained hot and silent and
drowsy, there was no sign of its original inhabitant
anywhere, and even Dorcas began to look grave and
anxious.
? Idiotic for us all to go to sleep at the same time,?
she scolded herself and the others, ? we ought to have
had more sense.?


? Yes, but we didn?t ? Wynne said miserably.
? Oh, where can he have gone, poor little darling??
? That?s what we?ve got to find out,? Dorcas said
tersely. ? We?d better take different ways and walk
right round the island, looking everywhere.?
This plan was carried out, still without discovering
any sign of the lost child. They met at the point from
which they had started, and it was only then that
Dorcas gave a half impatient exclamation: ? Oh, we
are idiots! just look here!? A double track of small
bare feet showed plainly on the sand of the second
island, just beyond where their own island had stranded
upon it. In a moment all three girls were on the trail,
like so many bloodhounds. It led them on, clear and
unmistakable?then ended abruptly on the verge of
the lapping waves.
? But?oh, it looks as though he?s walked straight
into the sea,? Carol wailed in consternation, and even
Dorcas was taken aback for a moment. Then she
pulled herself together.
? No, of course he didn?t, don?t you see? The tide
is coming up fast, but the way would be clear round
the point an hour ago, and that?s the way he went.
It?s quite easy for a little bit at the lowest of the tide,
on ly ?only I do hope he won?t try to come back the
same way.?
? Oh, he wouldn?t!? Wynne declared more stoutly
than she felt, and Carol put all their fears into words
when she said slowly:
? I don?t know?he?s only a baby after all ?


? Well, it?s no good standing here thinking of such
things.? Wynne gave herself a little shake. ?We
must climb over to the other side of the island and
see ?and the sooner we do it the better, now that we
know where he is gone.?
All agreeing on this point they set off at once upon
the arduous climb across the second island, for all
their explorations had not discovered an easy path to
the farther side.
Hot and panting, they scrambled and slithered and
stood at last amongst the yelling sea-birds and their
clamorous families, more irate than ever at this second
and larger invasion.
At first they could see no trace of the little adven-
turer, for the pools and ledges at the far end of the
island were out of sight from where they stood. And
on they went, unknowingly following in his tracks,
until at last Dorcas, who was leading, came to a sudden
standstill. ?I do believe I see ?yes, he?s there ?
her voice wailed off queerly and she added doubtfully,
? But ?there?s more than him?and how can there be??
?Do you mean other people?? Carol scrambled
over a rock and clutched at Dorcas?s arm.
?Aes ?I saw several heads quite plainly beside the
kiddie?s! They were bobbing up and down. I say, I
suppose we ought to go a bit carefully in case ?I mean
we don?t know ?
? Why, who can they be? And anyway, we?ve got
to find out pretty quick.? Wynne strode forward,
taking the lead. She ran lightly across a fairly flat


stretch of rock-slabs until she reached the natural
wall which hid what Dorcas had seen in a glimpse.
Up this she climbed and peered over, though only for
a minute. Then she dropped back into shelter and
turned a laughing face towards her companions,
beckoning them in dumb-show to come forward
quietly. When they reached her, she whispered
excitedly: ? It?s all right?the kid?s there, quite safe
and playing with ?them.?
? But who are they?? Dorcas asked. ? And w r hy
have we got to be so quiet, if it?s all right, if they?re
not dangerous people??
? Ssh!? Wynne shook her head. ? They?re not
people at all, you donkey ?they?re seals.?
? Seals??
?Yes, a whole big family of seals, babies and all ?
and the kid?s crawling about with them just as though
he was a seal himself. But come up and 100k ?it?s
really great fun.?
The two others obeyed, and all the three girls were
soon peering over into the rock-guarded pools, with
the great slabs and ledges stretching out into the sea,
which were evidently a seal?s refuge. It was, as Wynne
had said, great fun; a kind of Kipling?s Jungle Book
scene, wdth Gulliver junior as a new edition of ? Mow-
gli ?, such a fat, wet, wriggling scrap of a boy, that it
was no wonder the little seal colony seemed quite to
accept him as one of themselves.
There were about a dozen grown seals, as many
babies, and one huge fellow who, Wynne whispered,


must be the big bull of the family. Most lay stretched
out on the rocks sunning themselves, but several were
in the water, swimming to and fro, or bobbing up and
down, their heads and shoulders just above the water,
looking absurdly like those of human beings at a first
glance.
? Aren?t those babies lambs!? Carol said admiringly.
? Just like furry slugs and all nearly white. I suppose
they turn dark as they grow up.?
? The kiddie seems quite at home with them,?
Dorcas laughed. ? I believe they think he is a seal.?
The small boy was rolling over, kicking his heels,
and chuckling. Suddenly he noticed his three friends
and, sitting up, grinned widely at them. ? Ba! ?Ba!?
he called out, with other remarks in his own language,
which would probably have been very interesting if
understandable. Then he cast himself down again on
his back in a manner which indicated that he intended
to ? Stay put ?, as Wynne expressed it. ? But he
can?t,? she said, ? unless we all go and join the seal-
party, and somehow, I don?t believe they?d be pre-
pared to accept us as sisters.?
** No?no,? Dorcas shook her head doubtfully. ? I
don?t by any means like the looks of old man seal?and
I don?t believe he likes us either.?
The big bull seal had lifted himself up high on his
front flappers as though to stare at the intruders, and
was doing so in a most unpleasant manner, his great
bloodshot eyes rolling, his whiskers bristling up over
the raised lips, which showed wicked yellow teeth. He


was the only one who seemed aggressive at the moment,
the other seals looked mild enough, though every pair
of brown goggling eyes was turned towards the girls
in rather embarrassing interest.
Only the cream-coloured slugs of babies went on
basking and rolling unconcernedly, too young to be
afraid or even inquisitive. ? Boy-boy!? Wynne gave
the call she had adopted to attract the child?s attention.
? Come to Wynny ?come have mi?k!? But Boy-boy
showed no inclination to obey: he merely lay on his
back, kicking his heels and arching up his fat little
body, then rolled over bumping against a baby seal,
who gaped at him with a toothless mouth. ? He s in
one of his annoying moods,? Wynne said. ? It?ll be
an awful job to make him come when he begins to go
on in that silly way.?
? Well, we?ll have to fetch him then,? Dorcas said.
? We really can?t let ourselves be frightened by a push
of seals.?
? Can?t we?? Wynne said fervently, and Carol found
herself in hearty agreement as she looked at the big
bull. She had never seen an animal she disliked more
at first sight.
?Oh, well ?I?ll go alone, if you?re afraid;? but
Dorcas, for all her resolute air, sounded a little bit
uncertain. ?We can?t wait here all night for the kid,
and?look, the little beggar?s going to sleep, Ido
believe.? The small boy had cast himself down in a
heap beside the baby seal in that instantaneous way of
sleeping that little children share with puppies and


kittens, one brown dimpled arm flung over his face.
He made a pretty picture amongst his queer play-
mates, but the three girls at the moment were not
quite in the humour to appreciate it.
? Little monkey!? Wynne ejaculated. ? I believe
he?s only pretending?Boy-boy! come here, Boy-boy?
we want you.? The object of the appeal took no notice
at all; the big seal, on the contrary, was only too
responsive. He did not seem to care for Wynne?s manner
and, rearing himself up still higher on his flappers,
he gave a loud menacing bellow, which had the effect
of making Carol release her hold upon her ledge and
go sliding down several feet. ? Goodness! I never
knew that seals roared like lions,? she said breathlessly.
? I always thought they were quiet animals.?
? This one isn?t,? Wynne said drily. ? And ?look
here, Dorcas, I really wouldn?t ?
?We must!? Dorcas stamped her foot impatiently.
? It?s all so idiotic ?I expect he?s only a bully. He?ll
probably turn tail if he sees we really mean business.?
But he didn?t. On the contrary, when Dorcas
swung herself boldly over the rocks and advanced
along the ledge towards the little boy, the big seal
began to shuffle towards her at an unexpectedly rapid
pace, snorting and bellowing in a most menacing w T ay.
It was Dorcas, not the seal, who turned tail, after
facing the oncoming beast for an uncomfortable
moment. With a little scurry and rush she was back
with the other two, furious with herself, with them,
and with the seal.
(e 683) 9


? If I only had a stick!? she cried. ?I?d soon make
him run!?
? I don?t believe you would.? Wynne shook her
head doubtfully. ? I should say he?s a seal with a very
strong superiority complex?l suppose it?s because he
has a lot of wives who give in to him.?
? Well, what are we to do? I should think wait
here until the kiddie comes to us of himself,? Carol
suggested reasonably. ? I expect he will pretty soon;
he?s sure to get hungry. Look, he?s sitting up now.
Suppose we pretend to be going away. I shouldn?t
wonder if that draws him.?
The small boy sat up and regarded them rather
dubiously. Wynne, assuming an airy carelessness,
waved her hand in farewell to him.
? Ta-ta!? she called out. ? We?re going back to tea.?
The three girls turned away and began to w r alk
slowly along the beach, but that, as Carol had expected,
was the last straw. The small boy scrambled to his
feet, with a howl of mixed anger and disappointment,
and began to trot stumblingly after them.
? Don?t take any notice,? Wynne said. ?If you
do, he?ll probably begin playing up again. Just pre-
tend to come away and it?ll be all right.?
But Wynne showed herself a very bad prophet, and
her last words were almost drowned in an angry roar
from the big seal. Now that the little boy was on his
feet and not rolling sealwise on the rocks, the beast
seemed to recognize him as a human being, and to be
disliked accordingly. Before the child had toddled a


dozen yards, the seal was between him and safety in
the shape of the three girls, roaring loudly and shuffling
with his flappers on the rock in a most threatening
way. For a moment the little fellow showed most
unexpected pluck. He stamped his bare feet, he grew
red with fury, and shouted back:
? Nort!?Nort!?
But a louder roar and a further scuffling advance on
the part of the seal was too much for the small boy?s
valiant mood. Suddenly he turned and fled, tripped
and fell headlong, lay in a little disconsolate heap,
wailing loudly and despairingly.
? Oh, poor lamb!? For the moment it looked as
though Wynne meant to fly to the rescue, regardless
of the enemy, but Dorcas caught her by the sleeve.
? Don?t be an ass!? she said. ? You can see the
brute?s really dangerous. We?ve got to think what
to do ?and I believe the kiddie?s safe enough if he
stays where he is and doesn?t try to come to us.?
? Yes, but we can?t leave him there,? Wynne pro-
tested. ? We?ve got to get him somehow.?
? Of course we have, but the question is how?
there?s no way of getting round at him from the other
side.? Dorcas was surveying the ground ruefully.
? And it?s not as if we could tell the kid wfflat to do.
How about getting some ropes from the other island ?
there are those the swing hangs on ?and trying to
lasso that old brute of a seal??
? Oh?have a hope!? Wynne ejaculated wildly. ? 1
should like to know what any one of us can do in the


way of lassoing. We should only drive the beast mad.
No, I?m beginning to think of something ?something
worth trying.?
? Well ?what is it?? Dorcas demanded impatiently.
?You always take such a fearful time to come to the
point.?
? It?s only?l?ve heard or read somewhere ?
Wynne said with provoking slowness, ? that ?that
seals are frightfully fond of music.?
? What?s that got to do with it??
? It said ?this book, or p?raps it was someone told
me: I rather think it was ?that they?ll listen for hours
and be quite sort of soothed ?the seals, I mean ?by
any sort of music.?
? Well, we?ve not got as much as a penny whistle,?
Dorcas said acidly. ?So what?s the use ?
? I can sing!? Wynne said calmly. ? And it said ?
whoever it was ?that singing was as good as anything
?if you hadn?t got a fiddle.?
?Yes, you can sing!? Carol, who had been listening
eagerly, broke out with enthusiasm. ? Oh, do try
it, Wynne ?we must do something!?
Dorcas only gave support to the proposal by a very
non-committal grunt, but Wynne, once the idea was
firmly presented to her, acted quickly. Sitting down
upon the rocks, she curled up her heels under her and
began to sing, softly and rather unsteadily at first, the
first song which came into her head, which, naturally
enough, was Kipling?s Seal's Lullaby from the
Jungle Book.


? Are bad for baby seals, dear Rat, as bad as
bad can be ? sang Wynne, and her voice grew
louder and clearer, for she could sing, as she had said;
and intended to sing still better now it was nearly
time for proper lessons and training. She skipped on
to another lullaby, somehow they seemed soothing
and appropriate. ? Oh, hush thee, my Baby, thy
Sire was a knight. Thy mother a lady, so tender and
bright ?
? Is it that great brute she?s calling a baby?? Carol
giggled hysterically. ? Somehow it doesn?t seem to fit.?
I don?t know ?I do believe he?s liking it,? Dorcas
whispered excitedly. ? Just look at his face!? The big
seal had lowered himself into a much less aggressive
attitude. He had turned away from the little boy and
was listening to Wynne?Oh, yes, quite plainly listen-
ing. ? Oh, hush thee, my Baby, sleep calm on my
breast ? Wynne sang, and forgetting the words
finished the verse in a crooning murmur, which seemed
to please the seal. He began to move his head back-
wards and forwards, as the singer started upon her
next solo. ?Oh, who is this that calmly lies, at my
heart?s gate with dreaming eyes ? sang Wynne,
and caused quite a sensation among the seals by the
? Husheen?Hush-o-o-o-!? chorus.
The whole colony was listening now, those in the
water rearing up so that their whole shoulders were
visible, their eyes rolling in ecstasy. And as for the
old man seal, Dorcas nearly choked with laughter as
she watched him, for he was moving his head from


side to side with eyes half shut in a most absurdly
sentimental manner.
? Wynne?s just like that man with the lute ?what?s-
his-name ?oh yes, Orpheus. Or the Pied Piper, only
I hope the seals won?t all start to follow her. I wonder
how long she?ll have to go on,? speculated Dorcas.
Wynne w r as wondering the same thing: the seals all
looked most comfortably soothed, and at the end of
? Hush-a-by, baby, on the tree-top,? she let the
tune croon itself aw r ay into silence ?only to discover
that she had been premature. For almost as soon
as the song ceased the big seal reared himself up again
and looked round with an angry roar, for all the world
as though he was rather annoyed with himself for
having been so sentimental.
Hurriedly Wynne began to sing again: ? Sweet and
low! Sweet and low! Wind of the Western sea ?
Once more the big seal relaxed, swaying in time to
the music, blinking dreamily.
? I believe the kiddie could get to us now, while
she?s singing,? Dorcas said, ? if he crawled round by
those rocks behind the big seal?s back.?
But although she began making signs to the small
boy, he either could not or would not understand. He
only shook his head, wriggled his toes, and stuck one
thumb farther into his mouth.
? You?ll have to fetch him, he won?t come to you.?
Her companions suddenly realized that Wynne had
changed the words to her tune: ? Go while I?m singing,
that?s what you must do?Bring him again to me-e-ee.?


? Well I suppose we?d better if we can,? Dorcas re-
marked, getting up with as little movement as possible.
? At least I'll go?one?s enough, maybe too much.?
So Carol, feeling rather useless and out of things,
watched the scene: Dorcas stealthily slipping round
towards the little boy, Wynne singing?singing, hands
clasped round her bare knees and the great seal listen-
ing. Dorcas reached the little boy, picked him up,
while Carol waited breathlessly for howls of protest.
But, somehow, Dorcas kept him silent and began
stealing back. Old man seal seemed to feel that some-
thing was happening: he stirred uneasily, began to
swing his head round?Wynne sang louder and
clearer: ? Father will come to his babe in the Nest,
Silver sails all out of the West, Under the silver moon,
sleep, my little one, sleep, my pretty one, sleep!?
Again Carol almost laughed at the seal?s silly ex-
pression. ? I do believe he thinks that?s him,? she
thought. ? Oh?but will Dorcas do it? they?re very
close.? They were, but the seal did not move. It
was only when Dorcas with her burden had reached
Carol, when Wynne, seeing them safe, left off singing,
that he again roared and began to move forward.
? It?s no good,? Wynne spoke hurriedly over her
shoulder. ? Get away as quick as you can ?I must
sing you off the premises. Oh, all right, you idiotic
beast: Tim Doolan didn?t know that his Father was
dead?And his Father didn?t know that Tim Doolan
was dead ?
Over and over, she sang those two absurd lines, to


their crooning monotonous tune, sang them until the
rest of the party were well on their way over the high
part of the Island, sang them as she herself slowly
retreated backwards, whilst still more slowly old man
seal followed, as though determined not to let her out
of his sight. But he did not enjoy the rockier ground
away from the seals? own little sanctuary. Bit by bit
he dropped back, roaring now and then, whilst Wynne
gained ground, and finally made a sprint which carried
her into safety.
They were up and over the second island, back on
their own at last, with a last long bellow from the
forsaken seal ringing in their ears, and Wynne drew a
long breath of relief.
? Well ?I feel as if I never wanted to sing again in
all my life,? she said.
? Oh, but you wer efinel? Carol said enthusiastically,
whilst Dorcas summed up more briefly: ? Um ?just
dinkum.?
Only the cause of all the trouble made no remark.
He was a great deal too much occupied with a mug of
milk and appeared quite unconscious of all the heart-
burnings he had caused. Wynne surveyed him for a
moment, then vanished into the little house and came
back with a set of gay scarlet, be-belled reins. ?In
future you wear these whenever we?re siesta-ing, young
fellow-me-lad,? she remarked. ? And I keep the slack
of them tied round my wrist. We can?t have any more
of these desert-island adventures of yours ?they?re
too wearying.?


CHAPTER XIV
?Boat Ahoy!?
On the whole it cannot be said that the second
desert island was much of a success. True, there
were eggs and an endless supply of them, so that
starvation was impossible. But eggs alone, as Dorcas
expressed it, were a wearying kind of diet.
Of course, it would have been easy enough to knock
over a gull or gannet, but when it came to killing
things, all the girls found that they drew the line at
birds, unless it was a question of sheer starvation.
Carol and Dorcas were, therefore, all the more sur-
prised when on Wynne?s second visit to the new island,
she reappeared waving in triumph a large dead bird.
? I didn?t kill it,? she explained. ? But it?s all right.
I saw it fighting for a fish with a shag and the shag
won ?so it?s not like eating a dead dead bird.?
As this argument seemed reasonable, a kind of
Christmas dinner was planned, and the sea-bird
roasted with all due care and ceremony. It smelt
delicious during the cooking process and the desert
islanders could scarcely wait until it was done before
beginning the feast, which necessitated tearing the


bird limb from limb in the absence of carving-knives.
But after a few moments of silent mastication,
Wynne looked at Dorcas, and Dorcas looked at Carol,
who shook her head dubiously.
? I should think it?s ?well, a sort of acquired taste,?
she said.
? ?Fraid I don?t want to acquire it, then!? ejaculated
Wynne.
? I don?t know which is worst,? Dorcas said pen-
sively, ? to think of it as fishy meat, or meaty fish.
Anyway, I vote we use it as bait for fishing.?
? I don?t believe that even the fish will like it,?
Wynne said with gloom, which proved to be quite
correct.
In such uneventful events, and in others even less
worth chronicling, a week passed by, a week which
left the girls feeling as though they had inhabited the
twin islands for seven years rather than seven days.
And then on the eighth day something really and
definitely happened, something which was to alter
everything for good and all.
It was a drowsy, dozy afternoon; even the sea-
birds seemed to have gone temporarily to sleep, and
the four human inhabitants of the island, after a filling
if uninteresting meal of potatoes and eggs, were mostly
more nearly asleep than awake, curled up in various
attitudes in patches of shade.
It was Wynne, rather unusually, who was the first
to become completely awake, and it was her wild cries
which startlingly aroused Carol and Dorcas.


? Ship ahoy! Sail ho! There she blows!? Wynne
shouted, making rather a wild mixture of the
phraseology of the various nautical books in which
they delighted. ? Motor-boat ahoy-oy!?
The last was a wild yell which rang away over the
smooth sea, and Dorcas and Carol on their feet now,
and nearly as much excited as Wynne, joined in the
hails when they saw what the other girl had sighted.
It was a small scarlet power-boat about a mile away,
speeding along, with a feather of white foam at its
bow ?two feathers dividing, as it dashed towards
them.
? There?s no need to make ourselves hoarse like
this,? Dorcas remarked prosaically. ? It?s coming
towards us, anyway; I expect it saw us before we saw
it. We?re so much bigger.?
? Anyhow, it?s rather lovely to be rescued,? Wynne
said, with a sigh of relief. ?I?m sick of desert islands.
But we look a funny crowd, don?t we? Rather like
Indian squaws.?
They were all three attired in blankets and rugs,
which they had found in the little house, wrapped
over their bathing suits, the only garments which they
had brought from the shore.
As the motor-boat drew rapidly nearer, they could
see that it contained two men, one steering, the other in
the bows, and neither of them, at first sight, very
attractive-looking.
? But, of course, you do get pretty oily and messy
in a motor-boat,? Wynne remarked. ? And they


match it, don?t they? One?s got such a scarlet face,
and the other such scarlet hair.?
In a very few minutes the motor-boat was close
alongside the island, and the red-haired man in the
bows stood up, holding a coil of rope.
?Just tie this round that bush there, one of you,?
he called out, and threw it ashore.
Dorcas, who was nearest to the rope, obeyed, so
deftly and quickly that the men looked at her curiously,
and then spoke to each other. Finally, the red-haired
man hauled the boat in close to the shore, and spoke
again.
? And how did you get here ?you young ?uns, I
mean?? he said, with something in his voice which
seemed to say that he was not particularly pleased to
see them, something which was very unlike what one
would expect from the rescuers of marooned islanders.
? We swam,? Wynne, to whom he had glanced as
the tallest of the three, answered. ?We were camping
ashore, and the island got stranded on a sand-bank,
and then after we were on it, it drifted away, and
along the coast, some way from our camp. Then in
a storm we got stuck here.?
? And there?s only you three here?? the red-faced
man asked, and his manner was even less pleasant
than that of his companion.
? No, there?s a tiny boy besides,? Wynne answered,
? but we don?t know who he is, or anything about
him, and he?s too young to tell us where he came
from.?


? Oh, I seel Well, that?s bonxa!? the red-haired
man said, looking more cheerful. ?We were looking
for a kiddie, see? I expect that?s him. We?ve come
along in the boat for that.?
? Then you knew about him, and the island; that?s
why you weren?t surprised to see it?? Dorcas questioned.
? Well ?we?d heard of it, y?know,? the other man
said.
? And you can tell us how it?s made and all about
it,? Carol said eagerly.
? ?Fraid we?ve not got time for that to-night?eh,
Jack?? the red-haired man said. ? Have to yam about
it another day. Where?s the kid??
? Asleep,? Wynne answered.
? Well, bring him along. The sooner we get him
ashore, the better,? the man said impatiently.
? But do you know where he lives ?where his
people are?? Dorcas persisted.
? Yes?l tell you, we know all about it. Bring
him along.?
Wynne ran to fetch the little boy, rolling him up in
the rug on which he lay for warmth, whilst Dorcas
looked round to see if there was anything more to
bring.
? We must keep on these blankets and things,? she
remarked, as they all three returned to where the
motor-boat was waiting.
But here they had a most unpleasant surprise. The
two men were talking together in low tones as the
girls approached. When Wynne was near, the one with


red hair stood up and held out his arms for the child.
? Gi? him to me,? he said, but Wynne drew back
and shook her head.
? No, I?d better keep him,? she said. ? He?s sure
to wake and howl if we shift him about. He?s not very
sound asleep.?
? Now, look you here,? the other man, who had
been called Jack, spoke in a voice which was evidently
intended to be ingratiating. ? Ben and I have been
thinking it over, and it?s best we shouldn?t take you
all at once. We?ll just run over the little kid first, and
then come back for you three, and dump you ashore,
just wherever you like ?by that camp of yours, wherever
it is. That?ll be best, won?t it??
The three Rangers looked at each other. Then
Dorcas spoke in her definite little voice.
? We?d rather all come now. We don?t mind where
we?re put ashore.?
The red-faced man scowled.
? Well, but we do mind?see? We know how many
this runabout?ll take, and the whole lot?s too big a
crowd,? he said.
? Oh, that?s nonsense!? Dorcas burst out. ?As if
one small boy could make the difference ?you?ve just
said that you?ll take the rest of us together.?
? We?d not come in this boat,? the red-faced man
spoke sullenly. ? We?ll bring a larger one.?
? Then you?d better bring the larger one for all of
us ?the little boy too,? Dorcas said firmly. ? We?ll
wait here with him till you come back.?


? You?ll do nothing of the kind!? the man blustered,
and then, changing his voice again: ? Now, see here,
Missy, why are you behaving so awkward? We?re
only trying to do the best thing for you.?
? We?ve said what would be best?and we don?t
think it?s right to let the little boy go without us. He?s
too small?he?s really only a baby; he wants somebody
who isn?t a man, to look after him,? Wynne had found
her voice now. ? You two agree with me, don?t you??
? Of course we do,? Carol said, and Dorcas added,
? It would be a wrong thing to do. I?m sure the baby?s
people wouldn?t like it.?
? Wrong, would it? Then I?m afraid you?ll have to
do something wrong for once, see??
The red-haired man sneered, with an ugly look in
his eyes, and held out his big tattooed arms towards
Wynne again. ? So hand over the kid.?
Wynne backed away, clutching the little boy tightly.
? No!? she said. ? We won?t let him go.?
? Oh, you won?t, won?t you?? The red-haired man?s
voice was as ugly as his eyes, with a kind of snarl in
it. ? Do you know what happens when folk say
they won?t do a thing??they?re made to. Same as I?m
going to make you ?
As he spoke, he was climbing over the bow of the
motor-boat, and Dorcas spoke in a queer little strangled
voice.
? Wynne?run?run! Don?t let him catch you ?
Wynne obeyed. Long-legged and light as a grey-
hound, she started off at full speed, hugging the little


boy, who was wakened and gave a fretful cry.
She was out of sight amongst the bushes before the
man w?as on shore, for he was clumsily big and heavy,
but he only laughed in a sneering way.
? Think you?re going to get away with that?you?d
have to run off the island into the sea to escape ?a
spot of a place like this. Here, Jack, you stay by the
boat; I don?t trust these kids?they might pinch it.
I?ll settle the other double quick.?
He set off after Wynne at a faster pace than the
other girls would have thought possible for a man so
large and stout, and, glancing at each other, Carol
and Dorcas followed. They must go to Wynne?they
must help her somehow. Ben, the red-haired man,
was plunging along in front of them, seeming almost
to fill up the narrow paths with his bulk.
The island wasn?t made for people like him, Carol
found herself thinking as she ran; it was such a little,
pretty place. This huge, rough creature was just like
?like an ogre in fairyland, as he smashed through the
flowering bushes, breaking off branches, trampling
them underfoot, peering this way and that in search
of Wynne and the little boy.
? Where?s the girl got to?? Carol heard him growling
to himself. ? She?d best not try to hide from me?
ril pay her out? Til let her know, if she thinks this
is a kid?s game ?wasting our time.?
Carol shivered at the fury in his voice, and looked
at Dorcas, but Dorcas did not seem to be listening.
She had a puzzled expression.


? I wonder where Wynne is?? she said in a low voice,
pausing to let Carol come up close to her. ? We?ve
been all round the island now, nearly, and I?ve not
seen a glimpse of her. I shouldn?t have thought there
was any place where she could hide with the kiddie,?
It was quite true, now Carol came to think of it.
They had been backwards and forwards along all the
little paths of the island, following the big man, with-
out once catching sight of the other Ranger. And the
trees were all so small, it didn?t seem possible that they
could really hide tall Wynne, or even the little boy,
for long. Already they had been down quite close to
the landing-beach again, and Ben had yelled with a
curse to Jack in the boat:
? Playing Hunt-the-Thimble with me, she is?but
just let her wait, I?ll catch her!?
Gasping and panting for breath now, the two girls
followed, clambering back over the hillock in the
middle of the island, pausing as the big man paused,
to stare round from that little height. Not a sign of
Wynne, and suddenly Carol whispered to Dorcas,
with a catch in her breath.
? Dorcas, you?you don?t think that she can have
fallen into the sea ?she was running so fast, she might
have slipped, and?and ?oh, Dorcas, you don?t think
she can have done that, do you??
A remembrance of a grey shape, of a black fin, had
come back to her, of the ugly glimpse seen in the
dawn of that watchful sea monster. But Dorcas
spoke reassuringly, not knowing Carol?s real thoughts.
(e 683) l 0


? No, I?m sure she couldn?t, and even if she had
fallen in, nothing would drown Wynne. You know
she can swim like a fish, she?d have been out in a
minute.?
No, nothing could drozvn Wynne ?Carol knew that.
But she shivered again and was almost ready to put
her thoughts into words, when a hoarse shout came from
the man, who had been standing a dozen yards away
peering round, and he began to plunge down the hil-
lock.
? In the house ?they?re in that house, I?ll swear,?
he yelled. ? Saw something move at the window, I
did?run to earth there, have they? Well, I?ll have ?em
out, I?ll have ?em out pretty quick.?
? Oh?how idiotic of Wynne, if she really has done
that!? Dorcas groaned as they followed. ? I never
dreamt she?d be so silly, it?s just shutting herself in a
trap, and what on earth are we going to do to help
her??
? We?can?t ?do anything!? Carol gasped dis-
jointedly, scrambling down over the mossy rocks.
?He?s there already?look!?
Big Ben looked more than ever like a fairy-tale
ogre, as he strode over to the little, pretty house,
waving his huge arms like flails and shouting:
? Here, you! you come out of that, d?you hear, or
it?ll be the worse for you. Come along out ?or I?ll
fetch you. No use pretending you?re not there ?I know
better.?
He was through the little gate, trampling down the


flowers of the garden with his clumsy feet, and suddenly
and unexpectedly a voice came from inside the house ?
Wynne?s voice, as her tw r o friends recognized at once,
although it sounded rather queer and unsteady.
? All right?come on! Come and fetch me out ?if
you dare!?
? Dare!? Ben simply roared back, with a bellow
like a bull. ? You talk to me about dare ?you ius?
wait!?
He plunged straight at the door of the little dolls?-
house place, and cursed again when he found that no
amount of stooping made him small enough to get
in. Plainly it was a question of crawling, and he
dropped on his hands and knees, thrusting his big
shaggy head through the opening?a proceeding which
was followed by a sudden wail of fear from within the
little house.
? It?s the kiddie?he?s frightened, poor little chap,
and no wonder!? Dorcas said. ? That awful man?s
enough to scare parrots, and ?
What?s that!? Carol cried, for another sound had
come from within the house, a roar far too loud to
have been produced by the little boy, a yell of rage
and fury and surprise and ever so many other things
combined, which was suddenly and most queerly
stifled and muffled.
At the same time, other strange things w r ere hap-
pening outside. It was only Ben?s head and part of
his shoulders which he had so far succeeded in getting
through the door; his legs and part of his body re-


mained without, and now they began to behave in
the strangest fashion, plunging and kicking this way
and that, whilst the stifled roars continued to proceed
from his invisible head.
? Dorcas!? Carol burst out. ? I do believe he?s
stuck! He can?t get out and he can?t get in?he can?t
move either way.?
? And something?s happened to the part of him
that?s in ? Dorcas spoke breathlessly. ? Oh,
hark ?what?s that? Listen!?
Again came the voice, Wynne?s voice, from inside
the house.
? Dorcas! Carol! Are you there? Are you any-
where? Coo-eey!?
The hail broke off short in rather a pathetic way,
as though Wynne hardly expected to be answered,
but Carol and Dorcas shouted back almost simul-
taneously:
? Yes ?we?re coming, Wynne!?
? We?re here, ?HERE!?
In another moment they were outside the little
house in the doorway of which the imprisoned legs
and body of Ben were writhing and struggling more
fiercely than ever. But plainly the big man was not
going to succeed in freeing himself easily; his shoulders
were somehow wedged crossways in the little doorway,
and kick and plunge as he might, he could not get loose.
Besides, what was it that was hampering him inside
the house? Before there was time to think came
Wynne?s voice again.


? Dorcas?Carol, are you there? Quick ?the swing!
the ropes! Tie up his legs, before he can get out ?
quick!?
Dorcas and Carol did not even wait to look at each
other. They had both seen the swing, between two
fair-sized trees close to the house, a closed-in affair,
so that it might be safe for the little boy. It hung from
twisted red and yellow cords, each of them having at
either end a stout metal hook. In a moment Dorcas
was on the cross-beam.
? Catch hold of them!? she panted. ? I?ll have them
clear in a minute?there, that?s right!?
Back they sped to the house, carrying the cords?
and paused just for an instant, as they saw the big
kicking legs. It was easy to hear that Ben had under-
stood Wynne?s orders; he was struggling more
furiously than before, and his muffled curses were
very ugly.
?\ou?touch?me ? Carol and Dorcas could
just make out. ? You?dare ?
? We?ve got to!? Dorcas muttered, and suddenly
flung herself right across the furiously plunging legs,
just between knees and ankles. Her weight held them
down for a minute, and in that minute Carol acted,
lashing them quickly with one stout twisted cord,
knotting it in the most approved Guide fashion,
without a bungle or a blunder. She secured the
ankles first, with one length of cord, then the knees,
helped by Dorcas, who had struggled, panting, into
a sitting position.


? We?d better fix his hands too,? she gasped.
?He might drag himself out with them. Quick,
Carol?the other cord!?
With the second cord they secured the clutching
hands of Ben, reducing him at last to real helplessness.
And then both Rangers scrambled to their feet and
made for the back of the house, where there was a
single window, larger than the tiny ones in front.
And, at their shout, Wynne?s face appeared framed
in it, very pale and surrounded by the wildest of hair,
but full of triumph.


CHAPTER XV
Trapped
? You?ve tied him up?? she ejaculated. ? Oh,
good! What a blessing you were there when I called ?
he?d have dragged himself out somehow, I expect ?
? Wynne, you?re a genius!? Dorcas cried admiringly.
? Did you know he would stick in the door, when you
bolted in here??
? Well, not altogether!? Wynne confessed honestly.
? In the first place I?m afraid I just made for the
nearest hidey-hole. But as I was squeezing through
the door, I did think that he might try to follow ?and
I did know that I could only just do it myself. So I
hoped for it, and got ready to receive him.?
? Got ready?? Carol asked, and Wynne gave a queer
excited little laugh.
? Oh yes, I forgot you hadn?t seen?look!? she said,
and moved away from the window so that the other
two might peer through.
As they did so, Dorcas gave a little cry of surprise.
? Wynne?you?re a wonderl?
She subsided into hysterical chuckles, and Carol did
the same, leaning against the house. For the head of


big Ben, protruding through the doorway into the
single room, was entirely hidden in a crimson sack,
which the Rangers recognized as the cover of one of
the cushions, and from which his voice still proceeded,
hoarse and much muffled.
? Yes, I pulled it off the cushion,? Wynne explained,
? and popped it over his head before he?d time to know
what I was doing. Oh, but isn?t it all mad, girls?just
like the little house in ? Wonderland ? when Alice got
bigger and Bill the Lizard tried to get in?that?s what
I?m feeling like all the time, as if it was too absurd to
be true.?
? But it is true.? Dorcas, w T ho had been laughing
like the others, suddenly grew sober. ? And ?and it
may be pretty dangerously true, when the other man
comes to see what?s happening. He will, of course,
after a bit ?p?rhaps in quite a few minutes.?
? Yes,? Carol nodded. ? I don?t think from what
they say that they want to waste any time, and when
he finds what has happened to Ben ?
They looked at each other gravely. The arrival of
the red-faced man wasn?t a pleasant prospect.
? And I can?t get out to help you!? Wynne spoke
ruefully. ? I know, because I?ve tried. The window?s
too small for me, unless the frame?s broken away, and
there?s no time to do that now. I?m trapped too ?
? We?ll see about that afterwards.? Dorcas spoke
with a sudden air of decision and her eyes were very
bright with excitement. ? We?ve got to attend to the
man, Jack, first and ?I think I see the way to do it,


or anyhow, a way we can try. It may not come off,
but we?ve got to do something. Wynne?quick, I want
some things from the cupboard. I saw them there
when we were rummaging. There?s a big mosquito
net ?I expect they hang it over the kiddie?s bed from
that hook in the ceiling. Yes, that?s it; hand it over.
And I want that tin, too. The biggest one ?and a tin
opener.?
? A tin of golden syrup!? Wynne stared.
?Yes, yes ?oh quick, Wynne, I?m not mad, or
playing ? Alice in Wonderland ?. It?s quite serious,
give it to me.?
Kneeling on the ground outside the window, Dorcas
began to open the big tin of golden syrup, as she went
on talking.
? Carol, there?s some more rope in the cow-shed.
I saw it. Fetch that, and be handy with it if I want
you ?if my plan comes off. You might hide in the
cow-shed in the meanwhile; I?m not going to be far
away. Wynne, you?ll just have to stay in the house
till we can saw you out, I?m afraid, but if you can do
any shouting in a voice that might be a man?s, you?d
be a great help. Imitate Ben?s voice as well as you
can, so as to make the other one come.?
? You want him to?? Wynne spoke doubtfully.
? Yes, when I?m ready, not before. I?ll coo-ey to
you first. What a beastly thing a tin is to open when
you?re in a hurry, but I?ve made a big enough hole,
I think. Yes, that?s right. You?d better go to the
cow-shed, Carol, and I ? She rose, hugging the big


tin. ?I?m going to that loquat tree that hangs over
the path. P?rhaps you didn?t notice.?
? No, and I can?t see ? Carol began, but Dorcas
interrupted her sternly.
? Perhaps you don?t, but there isn?t time to explain.
I?m going now. Good luck to all of us, and when I?m
ready, I?ll coo-ey, and you must yell for all you?re
worth, Wynne.?
With a nod, Dorcas departed, a queer little figure
with the mass of mosquito netting flung round her
shoulders, and the big tin carried carefully in both
hands. But all the same, there was something about
Dorcas; when she made up her mind to a thing, the
others always found themselves obeying, giving way.
Carol ran across to the cow-shed, Wynne prepared
herself to wait for the signal, the small boy, who was
the innocent cause of all the trouble, sat on the bed in
the comer, crooning to himself and sucking his thumb
quite contentedly, the man in the doorway writhed
and squirmed and cursed through his mufflings.
And Dorcas made her way to the loquat tree, with
the wide-spreading branches which roofed over the
path which led down to the house. For anyone as
agile as Dorcas it was an easy tree to climb, and the
masses of dark green leaves were good as a hiding
place. Soon she was in the fork and well concealed,
crawling out along the branch which overhung the
path, making her arrangements, which required a
great deal of care and consideration.
There was the netting to spread out between that


branch and the next, so that it hung down in a big
loop between, and could be dropped in a moment,
almost with a touch. Then there were manipulations
with the tin of syrup, and finally, pushing back her
damp hair with sticky fingers, Dorcas sent a low hail
down to the house.
Wynne was evidently all ready for the signal.
Almost immediately a most realistic shout rose on
the hot, still air.
? He-elp! Help! Jack ?Jaa-ack! Help!?
? Good old Wynne! I never thought that she could
make a noise so like a man,? Dorcas thought with
satisfaction. ? Now, we?ll see what happens.?
For a moment, nothing at all. The air remained
hot and still, the silence unbroken except by the
humming of insects, the calling of birds, the soft
ripple of the sea against the island edges. Again
Dorcas gave her signal, and again Wynne?s call rang
out, more loudly and hoarsely than ever:
? Help?Jack! Hee-elp!?
This time it was answered at once; it seemed as
though Jack must have been asleep the first time.
? Aw? ri?,? came a shout from the direction of the
boat. ? Coming!?
Almost immediately came the scrambling shuffle of
feet, for distances on the island were so very short,
after all. Dorcas had only just time to satisfy herself
that she was ready, to draw a long breath, before the
man Jack came in sight, half running along the path,
glancing from right to left as he came, in search of


his companion, much too busy in keeping a look-out
to glance overhead.
The path was rather steep just here; he came
stumbling and sliding down it. He was only a few
yards away ?only a few feet ?he was right under the
loquat tree
? Aaah! What?s that ?what ? the words ended
in a spluttering mumble, and were drowned in a
shout from Dorcas.
? Carol ?quick!?
Up from the cow-shed Carol came speeding, coil of
rope over her arm, to find Dorcas standing beneath
the loquat tree, eager and alert, whilst close beside
the path, in a tangled mass of lantana bushes, some-
one was plunging and heaving.
Dorcas?s plan had worked even better and more
completely than she could possibly have hoped; Jack
had been taken entirely by surprise when the mass of
mosquito net descended upon him, covering head and
shoulders and body, temporarily blinding him ?the
mosquito net which was sodden and sticky beyond
all words with the golden syrup which Dorcas had
poured so lavishly upon it.
In trying wildly to extricate himself, the man had
only succeeded in making the sticky folds cling round
him more closely; beating at them to free himself, he
had stumbled off the path and fallen headlong into
the bushes, as utterly helpless for the time being as
man could be.
And the two Rangers certainly did not wait to allow


him to recover his wits, or his feet. They tied his
legs together and his arms to his sides, swathing the
sticky mosquito netting round and round him more
securely, so that he was a mere bundle, with face and
hair and eyebrows and lashes all thick with stickiness.
He was not nearly so noisy as Ben had been; he
seemed almost too much taken by surprise to shout
and curse ?at any rate for the moment. He sat gasping
by the side of the path, propped up against a tree
trunk, where the girls had put him, looking so absurd
that they could not help laughing as they ran back to
the house.
? We must be quick and get Wynne out somehow
and settle what to do,? Dorcas said. ? Because if one
of those men does manage to get free ?
She left the sentence unfinished, but there was no
need to say more. They had been wonderfully success-
ful in trapping their enemies, but there was always
the chance that the luck would turn, and the sooner
they arranged some plan the better.
They talked whilst Carol fetched a saw which she
had seen in the cow-shed; they talked whilst she saw r ed
away at the window frame and the planks nearest it,
until the hole was wide enough for Wynne to scramble
through. But the talk had to be carried on in low
whispers so that the man in the doorway could not
hear, and they finished it farther aw T ay from the house,
after Wynne had lifted out the little boy and scrambled
through herself.
? We?ve got to manage one small boy?two prisoners


?one island,? Dorcas said, ticking off the items on her
fingers. ? Not to mention a motor-boat.?
? Seems to me the most sensible thing is for us to
take off the kiddie in the motor-boat and try to get
ashore,? Wynne remarked, but Carol looked doubtful.
? You mean, leave the island and the men ?sort of
marooned?? she said. ? Ye-es, but, well, I know
they?re pretty horrible and they don?t deserve much,
but we couldn?t leave them tied up, could we ?because,
of course, they might die. And if we untied them ?
? No, Carol?s right,? Dorcas shook her head thought-
fully. ? It?s a bit like the story of the fox and the goose,
and I can?t think ?
? I can!? Wynne spoke suddenly. ? I?ve thought.
We must ?
But the sentence and the thought remained un-
finished. At that same instant, they were interrupted
by a shout, not from the house behind them, but from
the other direction ?the direction of the loquat tree
and the man Jack, whom they had left there.
? Help!? came the yell, and the girls stared at each
other in amazement. ? He-elp!?
? It?s nonsense,? Carol said. ? He?s just trying to
make us undo him, it?s just a ?a sort of white flag
trick. Why, you can see him quite plainly, and there?s
no one there?not a soul.?
? Help!? the man shouted again, loudly and hoarsely,
and added one word which brought Dorcas to her feet,
white-faced with a startled exclamation. ? Help?ants!?
?Of course, I ought to have remembered ?I might


have known they'd be on the smallest island,? Dorcas
spoke over her shoulder as she dashed away. ? Come
on, Wynne ?we don?t want to be murderesses .?
? But ?ants!? Carol expostulated, as Wynne also
scrambled to her feet. ? Surely they?couldn?t ?
? You don?t know the Australian sorts,? Wynne said
briefly, preparing to follow Dorcas. ? They?d eat a
man alive. Look after the kiddie, Carol.?
Carol still felt unconvinced, as she picked up the
small boy and carried him along the path. It needed
the strange sight which met her eyes when she reached
the loquat tree to teach her another lesson in Australian
natural history. Dorcas and Wynne were already
cutting away the mosquito netting in frantic haste,
whilst the red-faced man, redder than ever, writhed
and muttered and cursed. And streaking the path,
descending the trunk of the tree, coming, it seemed,
from all directions, were columns of ants, large and
small, black and red, all moving in one direction,
steadily.
? Come and help, Carol,? Dorcas said. ? Beat them
off his clothes. It?s the syrup ?that would attract
them from anywhere, of course. Be quick!?
A strenuous quarter of an hour followed, on the
part of all three girls, before the ants were beaten back,
or diverted to swarm over the mass of sticky netting
which had been cast aside.
Dorcas worked grimly to save their would-be
victim, but she answered him grimly too, when he
demanded release.


? Cut these ropes, and I?ll get clear of the brutes
myself?l don?t want your help,? he snarled, but
Dorcas spoke firmly:
?You needn?t imagine that we?re going to let you
loose; it isn?t likely. Wynne, Carol, we?d better carry
him dow T n to that place by the water?s edge, and wash
the syrup off his face, so that there?ll be nothing to
bring them back again. There aren?t any ants on him
now.?
Between them, the three girls managed to lift the
helpless man and convey him the short distance to the
place where they had had their first picnic and their
first bivouac. Sluicings with salt water soon finished
the cleaning process, in spite of his growling protests,
and he was deposited against a rock to dry in the sun,
and possibly to recover his temper, although that did
not seem very likely.
? Now let?s come and rest;? Dorcas beckoned her
comrades to a spot out of earshot. ? Whew, I?m about
done\ But I?m glad I didn?t remember the ants before-
hand, as it?s turned out all right. I couldn?t have done
the trick nearly so well without the syrup.?
All three subsided in exhausted heaps, with the little
boy chuckling and scrambling over them, finding the
whole business a most exciting game. It was not until
they had been lying there for half an hour or more, that
Dorcas partially recovered and sat up.


THE CAPTURE OF JACK
Page 156




CHAPTER XVI
Savages on the Island
? We?ve got to stop resting and think about doing
something,? Dorcas said. ? And first ?what about
that man stuck in the door? It seems a bit cruel to
leave him there any longer.?
? Yes, I suppose it does, though I wish we weren?t
so soft-hearted,? Wynne sighed comically. ? I s?pose
we ought to haul him out and put him with the other
prisoner. Oh well, come on and let?s get it over, then.?
? It?ll take time,? Carol remarked. ? He?s very
tightly wedged.?
It did take time, for Ben?s struggles to free himself
had only wedged him more firmly. It needed the
pushing and tugging of all three girls to extricate his
big shoulder, and matters were not helped by the
sulkiness and evil temper of the man himself. But
after another strenuous period, the job was done, and
Ben deposited near his friend Jack, amongst the rocks
by the sea?s edge.'
Both of them incessantly tried to persuade and
threaten the Rangers into releasing them, or at any-
rate loosening their bonds, but if Wynne or Carol
(B 688) 161 11


would have relented, Dorcas was sternly resolute.
? We won?t untie a finger!? she told the two scowl-
ing prisoners. ?We know well enough what would
happen if we did. We have managed to get the better
of you, and we mean to keep the better.?
? Oh ?you mean to starve us to death then, I
s?pose,? Ben growled.
? No, we?ll feed you when it?s necessary,? Dorcas
told them, and added wdth a grim chuckle, ? Unless
you try to bite. If you do, then you can starve.?
? And a great nuisance it?s going to be ?providing
tucker for two great hefty men,? Dorcas grumbled,
as the girls found themselves beyond earshot of their
prisoners. ? I vote we do starve them a little bit.?
? Oh, we couldn?t,? Carol expostulated, ? it would
be sort of torturing them.?
? Pooh, you?re sloppy, Carol; it wouldn?t do them
any harm to be rather hungry. But look here; there
are heaps of other more important things to discuss.
For instance, do you two realize that we can get away
from the island any minute we like, now.?
? How?? Carol stared.
? Why, the motor-boat of course, idiot! Wynne
and I are quite used to them. Come along?let?s have
a look at her.?
A cursory examination of the scarlet power boat,
whilst Carol stood by in awed silence, told the two
experts that she seemed to be in good running order.
? Not over much petrol,? Dorcas probed the tank
thoughtfully, ? but enough to carry us to the main-


land. So that?s all right, and the sooner we go, the
better!?
? Yes, but ? Carol spoke timidly, ? what about
the men??
? We?ll leave them here, of course. It wouldn?t be
safe for all to go, not with those two lumps of men
tied up and helpless. It would quite likely capsize
the boat. And we daren?t loose them, now we have
got them safe.?
? No,? Carol shivered. ? But ?well, we can?t
leave them here tied up, either, not able to help them-
selves whatever happened. Why, if the island got
adrift and floated off again, or if for some reason we
couldn?t get back, or send help ?it would be murder.
Because, as you say, we couldn?t untie them before
we wxnt.?
? N-no, I suppose you?re right,? Dorcas allowed
reluctantly. ? But then what are w r e to do??
? One of us ?you or Wynne, it would have to be,
of course, might take the boat and fetch help,? Carol
suggested, but it was Wynne now who shook her
head resolutely.
? Wouldn?t do,? she said briefly. ? Leaves too few
on the island. Suppose the men managed somehow
to get free and it was only two to two ... No, that
wouldn?t do.?
? Strikes me it?s still all rather like the story of the
fox and the goose.? Dorcas gave a groan of exaspera-
tion. ? And in the end, we?ll have to take some sort
of risk, that?s certain.?


? Supposing I took both men ashore in the motor-
boat, then we?d get rid of them altogether?? Wynne
said.
? You couldn?t put them ashore by yourself, tied
up, and if you wztied them, they could do anything
they liked ?and anyhow, you couldn?t leave them
there, tied up,? Carol argued. ? Oh, my goodness,
it w a puzzle.?
And it was a puzzle for which they had found no
solution when night fell, although they had argued the
matter until they all felt thoroughly muddle-headed.
The ? feeding of the beasts ?, as Dorcas grimly
called it, had been rather an unpleasant proceeding,
especially as the men cursed and grumbled all the
time, complaining of the certainly scanty fare, de-
manding that their hands should be untied.
? Talk of bears or tigers!? Wynne said, when the
task was concluded, ? they couldn?t growl and snarl
worse than that. Look here, you two, we?ll have to
keep w r atch and w'atch again, won?t we? We daren?t
all go to sleep at once; can?t tell what they?d be up
to.
The others agreed, and the watches were planned
as before, after the prisoners had been provided wdth
a blanket apiece, amidst more grumblings and de-
mands for tea which were not satisfied, since on this
point Wynne was most grimly resolved.
? I did find a very little in a tin in the house,? she
confessed. ? But I?ve hidden it, and I shan?t tell even
you two where it is. That tea?s to be kept for emer-


gencies, certainly not wasted on those greedy pigs of
men.?
The island was very chilly and silent when Carol
came on watch at four o?clock in the morning. Only
a steady booming sound came from the direction of
the prisoners? bivouac, w r hich explained Dorcas?s dis-
gusted comment as Carol relieved her:
? They?re snoring like pigs!?
They certainly w T ere, but presently, as Carol paced
up and down, trying to keep warm, the snoring ceased,
to be presently replaced by a very different sound.
? Missie,? Carol recognized it as the red-haired
man?s voice, but in tones so soft and ingratiating that
he almost seemed to be purring?? Missie, come a bit
nearer, so?s we can have a word with you.?
? I don?t see any need to talk,? Carol objected, but
at the same time moving closer, for she did not wish
the others to be disturbed. ? I?ve nothing to say to
you.?
? No?it?s t?other way round,? the man gave a
laugh. ?You haven?t given us a chance to tell you
anything, you haven?t. Took it for granted that we
was all sorts of brutes and rogues ?haven?t you now??
Carol kept prudently silent and the other went on.
? Leastways, your pals have. Somehow, I think
you?re different, Missie; you?ve more of a heart, like,
if I?m not mistook. That?s why I want a word with
you.?
? I?m just the same as my friends,? Carol declared,
? so it?s no use talking.?


? Well, yes, it is use. I?m a kind-?earted man and
fond of kiddies; why, I?ve got seven of me own at
?ome. I can?t bear you to think as I mean any harm
to the little chap. No, nor Jack neither, for all he?s a
bit rough.?
? Then why were you so keen to take him away
from us?? Carol asked.
?To restore ?im to ?is ?ome, that?s all. Leastways,
an? now I?m going to tell you the truth ?it wasn?t quite
all ? the man dropped his voice confidentially.
Carol remained silent, with the inward thought that
she might as well find out as much about the whole
business as she possibly could. And the man went on
in his confidential whisper.
? You see, we?re poor men, Jack and I, and we
thought if we could make a bit out of it, if there should
?appen to be a reward for the kid ?well, we might as
well ?ave it as anyone else, eh? That?s why we may
?ave seemed a bit off?and with you, an? that?s why
we?re willing to make a fair and square offer now.
Look ?ere ?we?ll go shares in any reward there is with
you three, if you?ll let us loose ?can?t say more than
that, can I??
? There wasn?t any need for you to say as much,?
Carol retorted.
? Eh? Oh ?ah, you mean there isn?t any need for
the three of you to share, one?d be enough if that one
was the girl to let us loose, eh? Well, you?re right
there, and ?
? I didn?t mean anything of the sort!? Carol burst


out furiously. ? And you?re absolutely mistaken if
you think that I ?that any of us can be bribed, or that
we want any reward for behaving decently. Nothing
will induce me to let you loose, so there!?
? Oh, it won?t, won?t it?? the prisoner snarled in
an ugly way. ? Very well?ver-y well! But you?ll be
sorry for it, Missie, you?ll be sorry for it. Just you
wait! We?ll get loose some?ow and then you?ll be
sorry that it wasn?t you that ?elped us.?
Carol made no answer; instead she walked away
with dignity, followed by the grumbling threats of the
two men and feeling, inside herself, a good deal more
uncomfortable than she would have allowed the prisoners
to see.
She was glad when her watch was finished, when,
over breakfast, she could tell the other two of the
red-headed prisoner?s attempt to make her turn
traitor, even though they were inclined to regard it
more as a joke than a serious matter.
? He went to the wrong person when he tried to
bribe you, old thing,? Dorcas said comfortably.
? Should have thought he could have seen that prickly
conscience of yours sticking out all over you. But,
of course, they will try every possible, or impossible,
way to escape ?oh, bother! It?s my turn to feed the
animals, isn?t it? I expect they?ll try to corrupt
me?
But when Dorcas returned it was to report that the
two men had eaten their meal in sulky silence.
? And now we must tell Carol our plan, Wynne,?


she announced. ? I do think it?s the only answer to
the fox and goose problem.?
Briefly the plan was that Wynne?^who, having
possessed a motor-boat of her own for years, was their
greatest expert in that respect ?should be the one to
set out on the voyage for help, taking one of the
prisoners with her in the red power boat.
? You and Dorcas can easily look after one man,
though I simply couldn?t go off and leave you with
two in hand,? Wynne declared. ? What I must do is
to keep close in to the coast, until I see some way of
signalling to somebody. Oh, of course, it?s a clumsy
sort of plan, but it really seems the only way, don?t
you two think??
They did, although with many doubts, and Wynne
and Dorcas departed to the farther side of the island
where the motor-boat was moored, in order to give it
a thorough overhaul.
? You?d better stay here, Carol, and keep an eye on
the men,? Dorcas said. ? The kiddie must stay with
you, too; he does so get underfoot if one is trying to
do anything.?
Carol agreed to the reasonableness of this suggestion
and sat down within eyeshot of the prisoners, whilst
the little boy played round about her, and the other
two departed, talking about engines and power-boats
in a most technical manner.
For the thousandth time Carol wondered whether
she would ever be so capable and knowledgeable in
such things as the Australian girls.


? But, of course, they?ve been used to it all their
lives,? she comforted herself. ? And boats have only
been a holiday thing with me, not everyday and
ordinary. I?d learn in time, I expect ?Hullo, what-
ever is that, away on shore!?
Carol?s reflections had been pursued whilst she sat
hugging her knees and gazing away towards the dis-
tant coast. She puckered her eyes now, frowning and
trying to distinguish the precise meaning of the object
of her interest away over there, where a mist of heat
hung, pale blue-grey with a haze of grey-green barely
showing through.
And then suddenly her attention was attracted from
things ashore, by the realization that the little boy had
strayed aw?ay, and by the more uncomfortable realiza-
tion of where he had strayed.


CHAPTER XVII
Escape
The two prisoners had seemed, from the first, to
have a kind of fascination for the little fellow. He
had stood by, staring at them solemnly, with round,
unwinking eyes, whilst they were being conveyed to
their present resting-place; now he had wandered
back near them, advancing slowly and cautiously, step
by step, his thumb tucked into his mouth.
But it was not only the little boy who caught Carol?s
attention. The red-headed Ben was still huddled
sulkily on his side, looking half asleep, and taking no
notice of the child, but the other man was sitting up,
propped against the rock which was close to the sea?s
edge, and making movements with his head as though
to attract their visitor nearer.
He was speaking, too, in a soft coaxing voice,
although Carol could not hear what he was saying,
and, even as she watched, the little boy went closer,
so that he was only a few yards away from the prisoner,
between him and the sea.
? I do believe he?s trying to make the kiddie untie
him, or something,? Carol thought suddenly, starting


to her feet. ? I?m sure he?s up to no good. Yes, he?s
trying to show him something in his pocket ?a knife,
I expect. I must go and stop his idea, whatever it is?
it?s no use shouting to the child, especially as 1 don?t
know what to call him.?
She set off down the path, her rubber shoes making
no sound, so that she was close to the group of prisoners
and child before the red-faced man noticed her.
He was absorbed in his coaxing of the small boy,
and Carol could hear now what he was saying.
? You come along and feel in my pocket, kid ?you
do what I say, and I?ll give you some bonza lollies.
Jus? put your hand in and take out w T hat I tell you.?
The little boy went a step nearer, frowning in his
baby way, as though trying to understand what was
wanted, and recognizing the word lollies. He even
put out his fat little hand towards the man?s pocket,
obediently?but it was just at this moment that Jack
glanced up and saw Carol coming towards them.
His face grew dark and angry, and he snarled out
something fiercely. Then, before the girl could realize
what was happening, he made a swerve, half rolled
over in the child?s direction, knocking him off his
feet. There was a cry of terror from the little boy,
stifled in a splash as he fell into the water, and in a
louder cry from Carol, as she started forward.
Carol waited for nothing. She had reached the
edge in an instant and dived, springing straight in the
direction where the frightened face of the child
showed above the surface for a second, but he had


already been carried several yards away by the tide.
It did not take long for Carol to reach him, just as
he came up, but what was only to be expected hap-
pened. In his terror, the little boy caught at her,
clutching round her neck tightly, clinging in spite of
all she could say, for he was too young and too terrified
to understand the danger, to obey when Carol tried to
make him let go.
Half choked, gasping, Carol managed partly to
extricate herself, managed to make him loosen his
hold round her neck. But while she did so, they had
both been carried farther away from the island, and
before she could strike out to swim back to it, some-
thing appeared between her and its safety ?something
which it seemed to her she had been expecting all the
time, which she knew would come, from the first
moment that the little boy fell into the sea.
A black, wedge-shaped fin, which showed for an
instant above the blue of the sea, and then disap-
peared.
Trying to draw breath, Carol shouted at the top of
her voice, but the sound which she managed to make
was hoarse and strangled, so that she knew Dorcas
and Wynne would scarcely hear, busy as they were
with the motor-boat.
She tried again, but only made a feebler, weaker
sound than before, and, at the same moment, the
black fin reappeared, this time much closer, only a
yard or two away. . . . Carol beat with both hands
on the water with all her might, kicking with her feet


at the same time, and a grey-white shape shot past
almost beneath her, within a foot or two.
It would be back in a minute?and even if the
splashing really frightened it, she could not keep it up,
her strength was giving way, and the little boy?s weight
was pulling her down. If Wynne and Dorcas did not
come, nothing could save them?and Wynne and
Dorcas did not know they were needed.
Carol felt faint and sick with a horrible fear ?and
it w r as then that help came from a most unexpected
direction.
A stentorian shout sounded from the island, a man?s
voice, then two men?s voices yelling loudly.
? Help ?Help! Man overboard! Help!?
The shout rang over the sea, answered almost
immediately from the other side of the island by
Wynne?s voice.
? Coming ?com-ing!?
Carol redoubled her splashing, but there was a dull
roaring in her ears and a mist before her eyes, so that
she scarcely knew what she was doing. But she saw
that grey-white shape again, coming nearer
Then something?two somethings?shot between,
with a great splashing of white foam, and Dorcas?s
voice came from close by.
? Hold on, Carol?hold on, old thing! We?re here!?
But the roaring in Carol?s ears had grown louder,
the mist before her eyes darker; she did not know in
the least what had happened afterwards for what must
have been quite a long while ?a very long while indeed


it seemed to the anxious Dorcas and Wynne, after
they had got her ashore on the island again, and were
trying to bring her round.
Even when she began to struggle back to con-
sciousness, she lay very white and exhausted, and
only recovered when Dorcas lit a fire close by and
made hot tea, whilst Wynne brought blankets and
wrapped her in them. But the tea was wonderfully
reviving, so that at last Carol was able to sit up and
even laugh shakily.
? I?ll never say anything against your tea-drinking
ways again,? she declared. ? It?s saved my life, I?m
sure. Oh, but it?s good. I didn?t even know there
was any on the island.?
? I told you I found it in the cupboard, just a very
little,? Wynne said. ? Trust an Australian island to
have tea ?however small it is. But ?oh, Carol ?when
we got round the corner and saw that awful fin, close
to you!?I didn?t know there were any sharks about.?
? What happened? I know the kiddie fell in, but
how?? Dorcas asked, and Carol embarked upon a
rather incoherent explanation.
? D?you mean that the brute pushed him in??
Wynne burst in indignantly. ? A little chap like that ?
why, it was just murder! You might both have been
killed.?
? I don?t suppose he thought of sharks, either,?
Carol said. ? And p?raps he didn?t really mean to
push him in ?
? Oh, Carol, you?d find an excuse for anybody


Dorcas groaned. ? You?re weak, that?s what you
are!?
?Well, anyway, he did shout for you and I couldn?t
have done it myself,? Carol protested. ? We?d both
have been killed if he hadn?t done that, so I think we
ought ?
But Carol never reached the conclusion of her
thoughts. While talking of the prisoners, she had
glanced back over her shoulder to see if they were
within earshot, and now suddenly stumbled to her
feet, with an exclamation of fear and amazement.
? Why?why ?they?ve goneV ? she gasped.
The others were on their feet too, but nothing
could alter the bare, stark fact.
The prisoners had disappeared, vanished com-
pletely, leaving no sign except the crushed patches of
grass where they had lain and a tangle of cut bonds.
It was only too plain what had happened; the pair
had seized their opportunity whilst Wynne and Dorcas
were occupied with their two rescued companions.
? Then he did make the kiddie give him the knife,?
Carol groaned. ? He?d done it before I saw what was
happening, and he pushed him into the sea to hide it,
to distract my attention. Oh, I?ll never make excuses
for him again, the brute!?
? Well, but what?s to be done now?? Dorcas asked,
and the three stared at one another blankly.
? We?re back where we were at the beginning,
after they?d first come ?only worse,? Wynne re-
marked, her voice heavy with gloom. ? Because they


won?t be taken in again easily and they?ll be in a much
more dangerous sort of mood.?
?Oh, why was I such a fool as to take my eyes off
the kiddie?? Carol groaned. ? Why did I let him go
near the brutes??
A hopeless silence fell, whilst the three stared out to
sea as though seeking for inspiration, and the fourth
member of the party sucked his thumb thoughtfully.
It was Dorcas who spoke first, and with a certain
amount of briskness.
? Look here, the first thing to do is to put ourselves
in their places.?
? Why?? Wynne stared.
? How do you mean?? asked Carol.
? Because it?s always the first thing to do in dealing
with criminals,? Dorcas explained patiently. ?If we
can discover what they're likely to do, then we shall
know what to do ourselves.?
? H?m,? Wynne sounded dubious. ?It is one
thing to know and quite another to be able to do.
However, if you can find any way to read their
thoughts ?
? One has to imagine what one would be likely to
do if one was them,? Dorcas declared. ? And the
first thing I?d want to get hold of in their place would
be the motor-boat.?
? Yes, that?s sense,? Wynne agreed. ? And the
next I s?pose would be the kiddie, so that what we've
got to do is to guard both, which isn?t going to be
quite so easy as it sounds.?


? Why?why?why?? In the suddenness of the
inspiration which had come to Carol, she stammered
and stumbled over the effort to put her thoughts into
words. ? But surely, isn?t it ?can?t we ?why shouldn?t
we just get into the boat and take the kiddie and get
ashore, leaving the men behind us. Isn?t that the
simplest way out??
? It would be ?if it wasn?t for something which
you don?t know, which Dorcas and I discovered
whilst you were being eaten by sharks,? Wynne said.
? The motor-boat isn?t in running order; the engine
can?t be started.?
? Do you mean there?s no petrol??
? No, that?s all right. But they were too clever for
us, that?s all. Before he left the motor-boat, when we
thought we?d been so frightfully clever in trapping
him, he?d dismantled the engine, taken away a little
gadget or two which make it unworkable?so that?s
that. We didn?t find it out the first time we looked
over the boat; not till we actually tried to run it.?
Again a blank silence, still more hopeless than before.
This time it was the Bunyip who created a diversion
by descending with a thud from the little gum tree,
which he had entirely denuded of leaves. At the
sound, Carol gave a startled exclamation and glanced
over her shoulder.
? Oh, it?s only him ?I thought it was themV ? she
exclaimed. ? I wonder where they are , by the way??
? Probably on the other island,? Dorcas guessed.
? There was an extra loud noise of the birds whilst
(E 683) 12


we were busy resuscitating Carol; I noticed it without
noticing, if you know what I mean.?
? Well, I think we?d better make sure,? Wynne
rose to her feet with decision. ?We want to know
where we are, and where they are. So let?s do a little
exploring, all together; there?s safety in numbers,
more or less.?
? And leave the motor-boat?? Carol said doubt-
fully.
? Bother! No ?I suppose we can't. No, the main
body will have to stay here to guard the boat and the
boy, whilst we send out scouts to reconnoitre ?and
I?ll be the first,? Dorcas said decidedly. ? Yes, Carol,
I mill I got it out well before you did!?
Dorcas had her own way, as usual. In another
minute she had disappeared, and the rest of the party
waited anxiously, straining their ears for any sus-
picious sound. For, of course, the men might be
lying in ambush, hoping for just such a chance as
Dorcas was giving them.
However, after about fifteen minutes? absence, she
reappeared carrying a heavy load of gear of all kinds
which she dumped down before speaking.
? Yes, they must be on the other island,? she said.
? Anyway they?re not on this one; I looked every-
where. And I?ve brought this stuff as a beginning,
because I?ve thought of the only thing to be done.?
Sitting upon a pile of blankets and rugs, Dorcas
expounded her plan. They must provision the motor-
boat wdth everything that they could carry on board;


then they must tow it off to a safe distance from the
island, and there anchor until?well, until something
happened. They would be fairly safe from attack; at
least they could not possibly be surprised, and they
would have a great advantage over the enemy if they
tried to swim off to them.
? It?s not a bit easy, I should think, to climb over
a gunwale if the people on board are all waiting to
bash you over the knuckles,? Dorcas said grimly.
? And we would be ready. There?s a good solid little
anchor on board, Wynne, d?you remember, and I
don?t think there?s very deep water for a good dis-
tance away from the reef.?
? You said ?tow?? Carol put the question doubt-
fully. ? Do you mean ?swim with the tow-rope??
? Yes; a couple of us could do it easily.?
? But ?sharks?? Carol sounded shamefaced. Even
now ?or perhaps now more than ever ?sharks con-
stituted her inferiority complex.
? We?ll have to take the chance of them,? Dorcas
said briefly. ? At least, Wynne and I will; you?ve had
enough of brother Shark for the time being, old thing,
so don?t imagine for a moment that we shall let you
do the job. Well, there?s the plan; now, let?s tidy up
all the loose ends of it.?


CHAPTER XVIII
Off and On
There proved to be loose ends in plenty when the
plan was dispassionately considered. One of them
was the question of water. It would be difficult to
carry much of a supply for four persons aboard the
motor-boat. The cow, too.
? Not being an ark, we simply can?t manage her?
Dorcas said.
? But what about the kiddie?s milk?? Wynne
objected.
? That?s just it?what about it? There?s nothing
for it but that one of us should come ashore and milk
her twice a day; we must take it in turns, that?s all.?
? All!? Carol echoed grimly. ? But you?re right,
it?ll have to be done. And the next article??
? There?s a tiny oil stove for cooking on the boat
and we must get all the food we can on board?not
that we?ve very much left, except potatoes,? said
Dorcas.
? We?ll have to fish,? suggested Wynne. ?So we
mustn?t forget the tackle. In fact, we mustn?t forget
anything if we can help it, or they'll probably take it.
There?s not much to eat on the other island, remember,


and they?re sure to come foraging. So the sooner we
get ahead of them, the better.?
This being only common sense, as the others allowed,
a series of raids began, singly, so as to leave a sufficient
guard with the motor-boat. In the end there was very
little left in the way of loot for the inhabitants of the
other island; in fact, the one really weak spot was the
cow.
? And they don?t either of them look the sort of
men to care for milk,? Wynne philosophically decided,
as she made the last of the day?s journeys ashore in
the capacity of dairymaid.
So far there had been no sign of the two men since
their escape, and the night fell on apparently silent
twin islands. Before it began to grow dark, Wynne
and Dorcas took the tow-rope and swam out with
much splashing to what they thought a safe distance
from the shore. Here they anchored and set about
the evening meal, whilst the sun set and the sea became
patched with silky phosphorescence, and full of queer
murmurings and breathings.
The three decided to keep watch and watch once
more, since night was probably the most dangerous
time. They felt pretty sure that the enemy must have
been overlooking them and their proceedings from
some unseen observation post, and that they, in their
turn, would have been making plans.
? It?s like Treasure Island the Jim Hawkins
party and the Long John Silver push, and neither
knowing what the other?s plotting,? Wynne said.


? But somehow living like books isn?t such fun as
reading them, d?you think??
But that first night passed quietly and without
sight or sound of the other party; so did most of the
second day. There was something rather sinister in
this very quietness, as though everything was holding
its breath before something happened?since some-
thing must happen sooner or later. 'Whatever the
three girls were doing, they found themselves listen-
ing, glancing over their shoulders, expecting each
moment to catch a glimpse of the enemy. A few
hours of this made them thoroughly nervy; only the
little boy and the Bunyip were quite undisturbed.
They fished, they cooked what they caught, they
played with the child and the little bear, they took it
in turns to lie and doze in the sun, or at least pretend
to doze. And all the time there was that horrid feeling
of something being about to jump out at them, as
Dorcas graphically expressed it.
And the jump came that very evening, though not
quite in the way that they had expected.
Carol had gone ashore in her turn to milk the cow,
and feed her and the pony whilst the others kept
watch, prepared to warn her by whistle if they saw
any movement on or from the second island.
It was a beautiful evening with so many different
shades of blue in sea and sky, that it was like being
inside a big sapphire, Carol thought, as she made her
way towards the cow-shed behind the little house, and
everything was altogether peaceful.


The Jersey mooed softly in welcome, and Carol
thought for the hundredth time what a lovely little
creature she was, with her biscuit-coloured coat and
black face, which she rubbed softly against her
milkmaid?s shoulder as Carol brought out stool and
pail and set to work.
Leaning her forehead against the cow?s soft side
and listening to the trickle of the milk under her
fingers, Carol became almost drowsy, and sat on after
the task was finished, only to be roused from her
day-dream suddenly and startlingly.
There came no whistle, no signal of alarm from the
boat, but, all in a moment, they were there, two
clumsy ogreish shapes amongst those dainty diminu-
tive surroundings, blocking the daylight that still
came through the cow-shed door with their slouching
shoulders.
Carol, utterly taken by surprise, still sat on the
stool staring at the two men blankly, and the cow
glared back over her shoulder and fidgetted nervously
at the sight of strangers.
It was the red-headed Ben who spoke first.
? Well, Missie, me and Jack seems to have took you
by surprise?where d?you think we were??
? I didn?t know ?on the other island, we thought ??
Carol managed to say.
? Ah, and so we was, but we slipped over here in
the afternoon on the quiet like. You must have known
as we?d give you a call sooner or later, Missie;? he
grinned in an ugly way.


? Aye, and we thought we?d just as soon have a talk
with one of you girls alone, first,? the other man broke
in.
? One?s being easier to manage p?raps than three, eh,
Jack?? the red-haired man sniggered, slouching so that
his shoulders filled the doorway still more completely.
But Carol by now had more or less pulled herself
together and was thinking fast, trying to plan.
? What do you want to say to me?? she asked,
trying to sound quite calm and unconcerned.
?Ah, plenty things ?but the first thing is that you
can?t get away, so it ain?t no use your trying. We?ve
got you now and we mean to keep you, as a sort of?
what do you call it??hostage, eh? You?re our
prisoner??
? Oh, am I?? Carol ejaculated, and at the same
moment did something which, as they had discovered,
annoyed the little cow quite beyond bearing. She
simply could not bear having the inside of her velvety
ear tickled, and at the touch of Carol?s fingers there,
her already irritated nerves gave way.
Evidently she thought that somehow or other the
annoyance was the fault of the strangers, for suddenly,
and without warning, she lashed out at them with all
the force of her muscular back legs.
One black hoof caught Ben on the knee and he
started back, clasping his leg and swearing, whilst
his companion dodged to avoid the flying feet of the
thoroughly enraged little Jersey, who was now plung-
ing this way and that, snorting furiously.


Carol, meanwhile, was on her feet and out
of the door, taking an instant advantage of the dis-
traction she had created. She was bent on making
a dash for the beach and the motor-boat, but although
the doorway was clear and Ben for the moment occupied
with his knee, the other man had only retreated far
enough to be out of reach of the lashing hoofs.
Like Bunyan?s Apollyon he was straddling across
the "way, the only way that led to safety, with an ugly
sneer on his face.
? Oh now, you don?t get off that way ?not so easy
as all that!? he said derisively, and made a grab for
Carol, as she stood undecided.
That grab decided her. If she couldn?t get clear ?
well ?turning aside she made one dart for the little
house, where Wynne and the small boy had taken
refuge before, although Carol had a much narrower
margin of time in which to escape.
She did it, but only just; she was on hands and
knees in the low doorway before the men had quite
realized what she was doing, and although Jack?s
fingers actually touched her ankle, she freed herself
with a vicious, desperate kick, drew in the last leg, and
sat panting in the tiny room, safe at any rate for the
moment.
Small as the house was, it had been solidly built,
and it was of no use for the men to break down a
door or windows through which, as they knew by
experience, they could not enter themselves.
Of course they could shoot at her, and at the thought


Carol felt a chill as of cold water creep down her back.
But, after all, they wouldn?t be very likely to do that;
it would not get them anywhere, for one thing,
although quite likely they might threaten her ?as, at
that very moment, they proceeded to do.
? Here, you come out of that!? Jack?s face appeared
at one of the windows, together with a clenched hairy
fist, which was shaken vigorously in her direction.
? What good do you think you?ll do yourself by
sittin? in there? You won?t tire us out, so don?t you
expect it.?
? No, that you won?t!? Ben?s pasty face appeared
at the other window. ? You and that cursed cow of
yours?and you set her on us, that?s what you did?
breaking my knee, as good as!?
Carol made no answer; leaning against the back
wall of the house, her breath slowly returning, she
felt more than ever as though she were taking part in
a fairy-tale. And here were the two ogres?red face
and flaxen hair in one window, pale face and flaming
hair in the other, features all distorted with anger, so
that
? Fee-foo-fum!
I smell the blood of an Englishman!?
was what one quite expected them to say.
Anyway there didn?t seem to be any use in answer-
ing them, whilst they just swore and abused her and
the little cow.
? I?ll break the brute?s neck ?I?ll make cold beef


of her!? snarled Ben. ? I?ll teach her to kick a chap
like that ??ere, come ?ere, curse you!?
His face disappeared from the window and Carol
guessed, rightly, that he made a dash for the Jersey.
But a great clattering of feet and much snorting and
heavy breathing followed, which ended in the rat-tat-
tat of galloping hoofs dying away in the distance and
a heartfelt and breathless malediction from Ben.
Evidently the little cow for the moment had success-
fully eluded her would-be captor.


CHAPTER XIX
The Mouse-trap
Carol devoutly wished that she were the cow, able
to kick up her heels and canter away across the
island. As it was, she felt like a very small mouse in
a very tight trap ?and with not even a piece of cheese
to keep her company.
? I wonder how long it takes to starve to death,?
she thought, gloomily surveying an empty biscuit tin,
which, bright and shiny, sat on a shelf and winked at
her in a gleam of light through the window. For
there was not a bite to eat left in the little house.
Carol knew that only too well.
? People have lived by chewing leather boots, but
I?ve not even got she contemplated her canvas
and rubber bathing-shoes. ? Not much nourishment
in those. But I?d better stop thinking about food;
it?ll just make me get hungry quicker. Only ?I do
wish I?d had a good meal before I started off to milk
the cow, instead of deciding that I?d wait till after-
wards.?
The chase for the cow had evidently ceased; Carol
could hear the two men talking somewhere outside.


She peeped through the window; yes, there they
were only a few yards away, hot and angry-looking.
Carol drew back quickly, but the red-headed man
had noticed her and came forward aggressively.
? Look here ?we wants a word with you, Missie,?
he said. ? An? we may as well have it first as last.
You needn?t be reckoning to get away from us. The
sooner you make up your mind to that , the better.
You?re there, and there you?ll stay ?unless you come
to a fix-up with us.?
? I don?t see what good you get by keeping me here,?
Carol said, and the scarlet-faced man gave a rough
sneering laugh.
? Oh, yer don?t, don?t yer?? he scoffed. ? Well,
then, we?ll tell yer. You?re going to be an exchange?
we?re going to put it up to your pals that they must
let us have the little kid instead of you ?see??
? They won?t do it ?I can tell you that straight
away,? Carol said stoutly. ? We?ve all made up our
minds not to let you have the little boy.?
?Oh yes, I dessay. But there?s such a thing as
changing minds, and you and your pals may change
theirs when they hear what we?ve got to tell ?em,
when they know wdiat?s going to happen to you, if
they don't give up the kid.?
For all her resolution, Carol felt a shiver like cold
water running down her back. Everything she had
read or heard about hostages and brigands seemed to
flash back into her mind; she fancied Wynne and
Dorcas being confronted with one of her ears and


told that the other would follow if they didn?t give in;
it wasn?t a nice thought . . . but surely even these
brutes of men wouldn?t dare to do anything of that
sort. She tried to speak steadily.
? You?ve got to catch me first ?and besides, you?d
suffer for it later if you did anything.?
? Seems to us that we have catched you!? chuckled
Ben. ? And as for doing anything?well, all sorts of
nasty happenings comes about by accident, or appears
to. You?d be wiser to agree with what we wants,
Missie, an? make no more fuss about it.?
?I?m not going to agree to anything without speak-
ing to the others,? Carol said stubbornly.
? Well, you can speak to ?em, leastways you can
send a message by us and tell ?em how you?re fixed.
I bet they?ll see reason soon enough. ?Tisn?t as if we
were going to kill the kiddie.?
? How do we know that you?re not? Anyway, you?re
not fit to be trusted with a baby like that,? Carol
declared. ?If I send any message to my friends, it?ll
be that they?re not to dream of giving him up on my
account.?
?You might send that message; it don?t follow as
it?d be the one we gave ?em, though,? the man Jack
remarked. ? How?d you be the wiser if we told ?em
just the opposite, and said it come from you straight??
Carol could find no answer for a moment; the
words only made her realize how absolutely and
utterly helpless she was. And when she managed to
speak, her voice sounded to herself weak and shaken.


? They wouldn?t believe you?and anyhow if they
did, they wouldn?t give in.?
? Ho, wouldn?t they? Well, then, if you?re so sure,
you won?t mind if we try it, eh? just to see if they?re
all as high and mighty as you are yerself.?
The cruel sneering tones made Carol bite her lips
fiercely, made tears come smarting up behind her
eyes, although she blinked angrily to keep them back.
? You can jolly well do what you like!? she cried
angrily and rather childishly, as she could not help
feeling.
? We shall?you trust us for that!? Ben grinned,
and slouched away, followed by Jack, without further
parleying. Not far though; just out of earshot, they
stopped and talked again, then Jack strolled back
towards the little house, hands in pockets, obviously
left on guard, whilst Ben vanished in the direction of
the beach.
And I am afraid that Carol did cry for a while,
almost as she might had she been ten years younger;
the horrible feeling of helplessness overcame her
altogether, and even more the thought of what lies
might be told to Wynne and Dorcas, making them
believe anything of her.
Carol would have been consoled if she could have
heard the brief conversation being carried on at that
moment across a smooth stretch of sea.
? Hi?you over there!? Ben on the beach shouted
to the motor-boat. ? We?ve caught your pal, got her
safe and sound.?


? Well!? Dorcas glanced at Wynne, then tried to
make her voice sound quite unconcerned.
? Well ?that?s for you to say. You?ve only to give
the word and we?ll let her go, that?s what she wanted
me to tell you.?
? What do you mean? What did she say exactly??
Dorcas demanded.
? We-ell,? the man?s nasal drawl was maddening to
the little crew of the motor-boat, ? she said as you
must do as you liked, but if you wanted to save her
from considerable unpleasantness, you?d let me hev?
the boy an? no more talk about it. Then we?ll all be
satisfied, and we can think about getting the motor-
boat into running order, which yer can?t do without us.?
Wynne and Dorcas stared at each other.
? I don?t believe it!? Wynne burst out.
? Of course not ?it?s impossible,? Dorcas agreed.
? And I?ll tell him so.?
Without waiting for an answer, she shouted back
defiantly.
? We?re certain our friend never sent that message,
we won?t believe a word of it unless we see it in her
own writing.?
? She said it, and it?s right what she said too,? Ben
snarled viciously. ? She?ll suffer for it if yer don?t
give up the kid, an? then you?ll be sorry.?
? We won?t give him up without a written message
from her,? Dorcas, the spokesgirl, said doggedly.
? We know our friend better than you do ?that?s
very certain.?


Brave words which would have consoled poor Carol
if she could only have heard them, and which made
the man on the beach shout abuse at the speaker in
his disappointed rage.
? You an? she?ll be sorry for this!? he threatened.
? There?s ways of getting what we want ?and we?re
going to take ?em.?
He slouched away, and Dorcas and Wynne looked
at each other miserably.
? It?s awfully hard to know what to do,? Wynne
said. ? It?ll be frightful if anything happens to Carol
because we didn?t give in ?
? But I know she wouldn?t want us to,? Dorcas said
staunchly. ? I know she never sent that message.?
? Oh, so do I,? sighed Wynne. ? But, all the
same ?
She broke off and even Dorcas could not find any-
thing else to say. It was so horrible being separated;
if only they could be together again, things would be
so much better.
? Suppose, after dark, I went ashore?tried to find
Carol and get her free,? Dorcas suggested, her face
brightening at the thought of doing something more
energetic. But Wynne shook her head vehemently.
? Oh, Dorcas, you mustn?t ?it?s too dangerous,?
she said. ? I?m sure Carol wouldn?t wish it. There
are two of them and they?re loose, and they?d be certain
to get hold of you too ?and what good would that do??
? They mightn't ,? Dorcas persisted. ? And it seems
so cowardly to abandon Carol like this?oh, all right,
(E 683) 13


Wynne, I won?t do it at present, only we can?t go on
just sitting here for ever.?
? No, of course not ?but something must happen
some time.? Wynne tried to sound hopeful.
? And if it does, how can we be sure that it won?t
be a worse something?? Dorcas demanded pessimisti-
cally. ? The things that turn up aren?t always good
ones.?
However, after some further discussion they de-
cided to leave matters as they were for the night, not
to attempt to make any move until the morning.
Then they would hold a further council of war, and
in the meantime keep watch and watch as usual, in
case one of the men tried to swim off to the motor-
boat and make a night attack.
? I don?t think they will, though, I believe they?re
awful cowards really, much too afraid of sharks to go
into the sea,? Dorcas said scornfully. ? Otherwise
they?d have swum out here before. It?s only girls and
babies they dare fight against, and even there they?ve
not won yet.?
So the crew of the motor-boat settled down to
their night?s watch?little knowing how many things
were to happen before night came round again.
And the first of those things was already happening
in the little house on shore, which was Carol?s prison?
inside Carol?s brain.


CHAPTER XX
Where a Red Light Led
Even after less than an hour?s imprisonment Carol
was already finding her own company very boring,
and wondering what she could do to escape from it.
The light was going so fast that she could not
have read or written, even if there had been any books
or writing materials in the little house, which there
were not. Soon it would be quite dark, but Carol did
not feel in the least sleepy, knew, in fact, that she
wasn?t at all likely to sleep with so many unpleasant
things to think about.
That was the worst of it ?thinking; if only one
could completely stop doing it for a little while, what
a comfort it would be. Only one couldn?t ?Carol
tried, staring at the ceiling and making her mind a
blank as far as possible, as blank as the white ceiling.
But it wasn?t blank; it wasn?t even white. There
was a splash of bright red light on it across one corner,
like the reflection of a fire, so like that Carol looked
round to investigate.
It wasn?t a fire, of course, only the last rays of the
setting sun, shining through the bright red curtain


which partly covered the little window, but it re-
minded Carol of something, set her off thinking again
in yet another direction. What w T as it of w r hich it
reminded her? Why w r as there something fidgeting
about at the back of her mind, trying to attract her
notice, something she had seen lately, but hadn?t
thought about properly? Something
And then, of a sudden, it all came back to her.
It w 7 as that day?what a long time ago it seemed! ?
when the little boy had fallen into the sea and the
two men escaped. It w T as just before the accident,
when she had been sitting and staring away at the
mainland; she had seen something then, only all the
things that had happened directly afterwards had
wiped it completely off her memory, and it had never
reappeared until this very minute.
Even now ?what was it? Yes, of course ?the red
reflection, sunset light?light shining on ?yes, of
course ?now she remembered perfectly.
Aw T ay on the greeny-grey mainland the sun?s light
had picked out something amongst the trees, making
it shine as though on fire, gleam red for a moment,
and then fade away. For it wasn?t a fire; it was only
the sun shining on windows, reflected in the glass.
And windows meant a house, people living there,
probably a big house, for there had been many points
of light, winking at her as though signalling in dot-
and-dash Morse. Yes, that had been the other thought
which was trying to get through when the accident
happened. Signalling?if one could only attract the


attention of the house over there and signal back.
Only that seemed such an impossible thing to do. The
island ?their island ?was mostly hidden from the
mainland by the highest rocky spur of the other, and
anyhow no details as small as a human being w T ould
be visible except through a strong field-glass. And
how could one possibly make the people on land look
sea- and island-wards through glasses? One couldn?t
?and that was that, Carol decided hopelessly.
The red light on the wall had died away completely
now; Carol almost wished it had not come at all to
remind her of tantalizing possibilities that weren?t
possible. It had given her something to think about
for a few minutes though, and that was better than
just sitting in the dark, wondering what was going to
happen, and feeling more and more hungry each
second ?for she was , and there was some reason for it
too.
Carol sniffed the air like the ? stag at eve ? of
Sir Walter Scott. A delicious smell stole to her
nostrils, the most delicious smell possible. Frying
fish ?that?s what it w T as, lovely fried fish, done to a
turn, with crisp crackling skin. The smell grew
stronger; it drew Carol to the open window, and
there, only a few yards away, stood the red-haired
man, holding a plate in his hands.
No question of the origin of the entrancing odour;
Carol eyed the fish ravenously and the man held it a
little nearer, made as though he w r ere going to pass it
through the window. Carol gave a little gasp of


ecstasy; her hands went out to receive the plate, and
he drew it back out of reach, with a quick movement.
? No, you don?t!? he laughed. ? Leastways, not
without giving me something in exchange, Missie.?
? What do you want?? Carol muttered.
? Oh, jest a note from you, to say that those chums
of yours are ter give up the kiddie right away now.
They?re cautious, they are ?say they don?t feel happy
about doing it without a few words in writing from
you.?
? Well, they won?t get that, or you either,? Carol
said doggedly.
? Not if it?s a case of taking the fish away ?for
good?? the man advanced the tempting plate again,
but Carol shook her head firmly.
? No!? she said.
? No? you?ll be hungrier to-morrow, remember?
and then you won?t git the chanst of tucker, so I warn
you; though you?ll see us eating it all right, all right.?
? I don?t care. I?m not going to do it.? Carol set
her lips stubbornly.
? Oh, you aren?t, aren?t you? Well, there?s other
ways still of getting what we want. There?s what a
feller does to bees or wasps ?
Carol would not ask what he meant, and he laughed
brutally after a pause.
? Well, I?ll leave you to think out what I mean by
that?only it?s a way as?ll soon bring you out of your
hole, I fancy. Sure I can?t tempt you with this bit
o? fish, for the last time??


But Carol did not answer. Turning abruptly away
from the window, she went and flung herself down
upon the divan bed, with her back to the mocking
face in the window. For she was uncomfortably
aware that she was very near crying?and to be caught
by the enemy, crying for fried fish, was something
which she could not contemplate.
Lying there, she tried to imagine what the man
had meant by his threat, only to realize that it was not
to be left long to her imagination. A new odour was
replacing that of fried fish; something pungent, acrid,
that made her eyes and nostrils smart and tingle.
Carol sat up and looked round, became aware that
the tiny room was full of a bluish grey mist, which
was slowly growing thicker, which made her gasp and
choke.
Smoke! That was what he had meant. They were
going to smoke her out like a wasp?s nest, force her
into leaving the safety of her hidey-hole, to bolt out
into their hands, where they would be waiting for her.
Breaking into her thoughts came a rough voice
from outside.
? Get it well alight over there ?then take a squint
and see what she?s doing. I?ll attend to it here.?
Quick as thought Carol acted; she slipped from
the divan, hurriedly placed the pillows lengthways,
then threw a rug over them, glanced round, snatched
up her bathing-cap and crammed the corner of a
cushion into it, tugging, twitching it into place
Then ?behind the low screen which half hid the


back window, on her knees, listening breathlessly.
In a moment came the second man?s voice, ob-
viously from close by the front window.
? She?s there all right, lying down. Guess she?ll
soon be gettin? a move on, as the smoke gets thicker.?
? Guess she will!? An ugly laugh followed. ? The
stuff?s well alight here.?
? She?s playing up that she?s asleep ?
? She won?t keep up that long ?git back to her
window, an? don?t take yer eyes off her.?
But in that brief moment, and expecting each in-
stant to be discovered, Carol had squeezed herself out
of the very narrow back window with the speed of
desperation. She would not have thought it was
possible without the help given on the previous
occasion by cutting the frame, but she did it, and there
she was, crouching against the back wall of the little
house, wondering what to do next, which way to turn.
A quick terrified rush took her behind a clump of
lantana bushes, where she crouched down, hearing
Jack?s voice once again, just audible.
? She?s still layin? there, shamming to be asleep.?
? Chuck something in an? wake her up then ?
But Carol waited to hear no more. The way to the
beach and the motor-boat was barred to her at present;
she could only make for the other island, and hope to
be able to hide there for a little.
She dodged from bush to rock, from rock to bush,
then across the open spit of land, with her heart seem-
ing to be in her mouth and her heels at the same time.


Shelter was reached among the first rocks of the
island number two and here Carol sank down, gasping
for breath, wondering how long it would be before her
escape was discovered and the search for her begun.
Now there was time to look behind her and realize
what was happening. The little house itself was
almost hidden by bushes, but from behind that screen
smoke was rising in thick clouds, clouds which began
now to be tinged with red and flecked with flying
sparks.
And as the glare increased, there came a sharp
crackling and spluttering.
?It?s more than smoking out ?it?s burning out,?
Carol thought, as she watched. ? I do believe the
little house is on fire.?
Creeping out a little way she could see that this was
true for a certainty. A heap of brushwood and straw
had been piled close under the window, and the
sparks from this had evidently set fire to the roof,
which was already ablaze. Above the roar and crackle
of the fire Carol could hear the voices of the two men
shouting to each other excitedly, and returned hurriedly
to her hiding-place, expecting every moment to see
them appear, hard upon her tracks.
Each moment the blaze rose higher and higher, and
Carol felt sad to think of the pretty little house and its
destruction. The shrubs, too, around it were all
scorched and blackened, the whole island would soon
be spoilt, the island which had been such a fairy-story
place before the two men came, with their ugly plans.


What were Wynne and Dorcas doing, Carol won-
dered, and how could she communicate with them?
Steadily the fire grew, the flames rising higher and
higher, the red glow spreading over the sky. It must
be visible for miles, that glow, far away out at sea by
passing ships and on the land, too. . . .
? Oh!? Carol gave a little excited exclamation,
hardly realizing that she was talking out loud. ? Yes,
it would ?they could ?I do believe they will be ?oh,
I wonder if it would be possible ?


CHAPTER XXI
Flag-wagging
At anyrate the plan which had come into her mind
would be worth trying; Carol did not take long to
decide upon that point. It might be no good at all;
it depended upon so many things, but then, on the
other hand, well, there was just that other-hand
chance.
? If I lose it, I?ll be sorry all my life,? Carol in her
excitement was still thinking aloud. ? Even though
it does mean giving myself away completely. That
part of it can?t be helped and the sooner I get to work,
before the fire has time to die down, the better. So ?
here goes!?
And here, without more hesitation, she went,
scrambling over rocks, slipping and stumbling in her
haste to reach the high bluff of land which stuck out
between their own island and the mainland.
That rocky spit would be silhouetted at this moment
black against the crimson glow of the fire. Anyone
standing up on the top of it would be silhouetted in
the same way, and very plainly visible to anyone on
land who should happen to be looking through a
field-glass in the direction of the blaze.


And wasn?t it likely that people on shore, perhaps
the people in that house where the windows had
glowed in the sunlight, would be trying to make out
what the mysterious conflagration was, out at sea?
? It must look like a volcanic eruption or something
of that sort,? Carol reflected as she scrambled and
stumbled, regardless of grazes and bruises. ? Anyone
who had glasses would use them to look at it, I?m
sure ?perhaps there are coast-watchers, or something
of that kind. And if they use glasses?well, they?ll
see me as plain as print. And if they see me, they?ll
see what I?m doing, and understand ?perhaps.?
Panting for breath, Carol had reached the top.
Down below on one side of her, the little house still
blazed, and thick clouds of spark-flecked smoke rose
higher than the flames, darkening the sky, and hiding
Carol, as she realized with relief, from the sight of
anyone on that side of her high perch.
But to landward it was clear, although her dazzled
and smarting eyes could see nothing when she looked
in that direction. That did not matter though as long
as she was seen; she must stand with her back to the
fire, so that her arms and their movements would
show plainly.
Ready, now ?but how was she to flag-wag without
flags? She had not even a pocket-handkerchief,
nothing but her bathing suit and the striped rug which
she wore over it, like a South American poncho, with a
hole slit for the head, this being the fashion which
they had found most convenient.


Well, the rug must be used. Hurriedly Carol tore
a strip from one end, tearing that again into two
pieces. Then, with one of these held in each hand,
with arms extended, she began . . .
Would she remember it all? It was some time since
she had practised, although once she had been the
crack signaller of her Guide Company. Her arms and
movements and memory alike felt rusty now, but she
must remember; so much might depend upon it.
Standing there, a slim black figure outlined against
the red glow, both arms extended, the improvised
signalling flags hanging slack from her fingers, Carol
thought hastily, ran over the semaphore code in her
head.
How could she put what she wanted to say in the
fewest possible words? Because those words must be
repeated again and again on the chance that they
would catch someone?s attention.
Drawing a long breath, Carol began
? Floating island here. Child here. Come at once.
Danger.?
Over and over again Carol flag-wagged out that
message, in the semaphore alphabet of the signaller?s
code. At first, each word came very slowly, as she
laboriously spelt it, but with each repetition, she grew
more practised and the pace was quicker, until sheer
tiredness began to make her slow down again.
Goodness! How her arms ached! They felt as if
they were being jerked out of the shoulder sockets,
as though she simply could not raise and lower them


any more. But she mustn?t stop, she mustn?t give up,
whilst there was a chance of attracting anybody?s
attention. Perhaps at this very moment someone on
shore might be wondering what the fire out at sea was,
and looking for field-glasses to investigate it more
closely
? Only I shan?t know if they are ?and I don?t see
how I can keep on like this much longer,? thought
poor Carol, her arms still working like rather jerky
pistons. ? I must have repeated that message at least
a thousand times, I should think, and there isn?t the
slightest scrap of a sign that anyone has seen me. I
suppose I was an idiot to expect that anyone would,
only?oo-oh!?
It was a long-drawn excited gasp which put a full-
stop to Carol?s disjointed thoughts, which made her
tired and aching arms drop to her sides, as she stood
staring?staring?towards the direction of the land.
For something had broken the dense blackness over
there at last, something that winked and flickered in
the darkness, wavered upwards, burst . . .
A rocket!
And another ?and another ?each soaring upwards,
each breaking into one big star, to gleam for a moment
and die away. Seven rockets in all, and then unbroken
darkness again, although Carol stood straining her
eyes for ten minutes and more.
Yet surely those seven rockets were enough, surely
they were an answer to her own signals, meant that
someone had seen and understood? And, if so, surely


they?d do something to help, they couldn?t just stop
at rockets.
Anyhow, there was nothing more for Carol to do
up there; the red glow was dying down fast, so that it
wasn?t likely that she could be seen now at all from
the mainland. And she was very cold, although she
had not realized it before, cold and stiff and aching.
The sooner she got down the better, in case the
men saw her, only where was she to go, and how was
she to let the crew of the motor-boat know what was
happening.
Very cautiously Carol scrambled down to level
ground again and stood in the shelter of the rocks,
trying to hear or see something which would help her
to decide what to do.
There was no sound now from the fire, although
smoke w T as still rising from the burnt ruins of the
little house, as Carol crept back within sight of it
through the scorched bushes. But from the farther
side of the island came voices, men?s voices, and?
yes, surely that was Dorcas speaking, although she
could not catch any words clearly.
She must go nearer, and she proceeded to do so,
slithering from one patch of shelter to another, until
she was within sight and hearing of one of the queerest
conversations possible, at least from the point of view
of the hidden listener.
Down on the tiny beach were the two men and the
talk was being carried on across the stretch of water
which separated them from the motor-boat.


Dorcas?s voice came again, sounding queer and
strained.
? What do you mean? Can?t you tell us plainly
what has happened to her? What have you doneV ?
? May I be strook blind if we meant to do anythin?
at all, Missie, ?cept frighten her,? the red-headed
man whined. ? ?Ow could we tell she?d go layin?
down asleep in theer ?
?In where ?? Dorcas demanded impatiently.
? Why?the li?l ?ouse. An? she went in there ?erself
anyway; we'd nothing to do with it; all we wanted
ter do was ter make ?er come out an? see sense.?
? Yes, an? we just thought a little smoke ?d do it,?
the other man chimed in. ?We weren?t to blame if
the sparks flew that way an? the ?ouse got afire. We
didn?t go fer ter burn it down, an? why couldn?t she
come out when we called to ?er, at all??
? Do you mean that the little house is burnt down
and ?and our friend in it?? Dorcas?s voice was
queerer than ever now.
? That?s right?but it wasn?t our fault,? Jack pro-
tested sullenly. ? When we see?d ?er layin? there on
the bed, we shouted to her to come out, but she
wouldn?t move. An? we couldn?t get in ourselves ?
couldn?t git near ?er.?
? No, that we couldn?t, or we would of,? Ben
added. ? We?re not the sort to burn a gal to death.?
? But you?ve done it all the same, you brutes!?
That was Wynne?s voice, fiercely angry, fiercely
miserable. ? You?re just murderers!?


? No, that ain?t fair, Missie!? expostulated the red-
headed man. ? Not when we didn?t mean it. We
tried, but when we got near enough, it was too late.
She an? the ?ouse was all burnt together.?
But it was at this point that Carol created a diver-
sion. Suddenly she had seen what she must do and
acted upon that vision at once. From behind the rock
where she crouched, came a doleful, wailing groan,
and at the sound both men started violently.
? What?s that? Who?s there?? burst from them
simultaneously, as they peered round them, and Carol
answered by emerging from her hiding-place and
advancing slowly towards them.
She was a sufficiently wild and alarming object, her
face smoke-blackened, her hair scorched, and the
charred tom remains of the rug drawn round her.
And she increased the terror of her appearance by the
lugubrious expression which she assumed and by
another most appalling groan.
Jack gave a wild yell.
? It?s 'er\ ?Er come back ??er spook!? he gasped.
? ?Ere, let?s git out of it,? his companion whined.
? She?s ?auntin? of us ??ow, don?t you touch me ?
And with a positive howl of fear, he bolted, followed
by the other man. Their thudding, stumbling foot-
steps died away as they reached the other island and
padded off along the sand.
( B 063)


CHAPTER XXII
The Rocketeers
What Dorcas afterwards described as an awful
moment, followed.
For what seemed long minutes, she and Wynne
stared across the space of water at that ghastly figure
which stood motionless upon the strip of beach. A
faint light from the rising moon was beginning to fill
the sky, but it was only enough to make everything
look weird and uncanny without helping to show them
plainly.
And then the corpse-like figure on the beach stirred,
and a thoroughly alive voice spoke.
? Hsh ?they?ve gone! Dorcas ?Wynne ?it?s all
right. It?s me.?
? Carol ?is it you really ? Are you alive ?properly??
Wynne?s tones were shaken and uncertain.
? Yes, absolutely alive, darlings! I was only playing
up to those men and their guilty consciences?but it
wasn?t their fault that they didn?t kill me, the brutes!
I hope I have frightened them ?badly.?
? Oh, you did that, sure thing!? Dorcas laughed
unsteadily. ? And us as w T ell, but that doesn?t matter


as you?re all right. But look here ?we can t howl at
each other like this. Besides, they?ll hear what we?re
saying.?
? Oh, I?m coming over!? Carol declared recklessly,
and, next instant, had flung off the remains of her rug
and was swimming out to the motor-boat, quite re-
gardless of sharks for this occasion only. Gasping,
dripping, she scrambled on board and demanded food.
? I?m simply starving ,? she said solemnly. ? I can?t
tell you anything till you?ve fed me.?
Cold boiled potatoes and hastily made tea was the
best food available, but Carol ate and drank thank-
fully. Then, curled up beside the little boy in the
bottom of the boat, she prepared to begin her story.
? Though I?ll probably go to sleep in the middle,?
she yawned. ?I am so tired and the kiddie makes a
cosy hot water-bottle. Where was I??
? You haven?t even begun!? Dorcas protested.
? No?of course I haven?t ?well-
There followed the lurid incidents of her almost
capture by the tw T o men, her imprisonment in the little
house, the fire, the dummy figure, the escape. It was
altogether too exciting a story for her companions to
have allowed any sleepiness on Carol?s part; they
would soon have roused her had she shown any inclina-
tion to slumber, as they hung on her words, with
now and then an eager question.
And then excitement reached its climax with the
narration of the signalling and the apparent response
from the shore.


? Oh, Carol, do you really think they saw and
answered?? Dorcas burst out.
? Well, the rockets looked like it, didn?t they??
Carol answered. ? But of course, I don?t know that
they understood what I said ?made out we wanted
them in a hurry,?
? It?s to be hoped they did? Dorcas said grimly.
?If not, we?re in a pretty bad way. There?s hardly
anything left to eat, and I don?t see that we dare
forage on shore any more. The men?ll get over their
fright, and it?ll make them more dangerous than ever
?they?ll soon see that Carol?s here, alive; there?s no
place to hide her here.?
? Yes, I expect they will be rather peeved when
they see what idiots they made of themselves,? Carol
chuckled. ? And it?s to be hoped that the rocketeers
will do something, but at present I?m so tired that I
can?t even worry. I?ll do it in the morning all right.?
Carol kept that promise when, in a very chilly dawn,
the three consulted once more. The prospects were
as grey as the morning, as gloomy as the rocks of the
other island which hid their enemies. Their only hope
was in the rocketeers and somehow, at the moment, it
did not seem a very bright one. The line of the land
looked bleak and unpromising; there was no sign of
movement there, and no smoke of a steamer on the
seaward horizon.
And it was not long after the cheerless pretence of
a breakfast, which satisfied nobody, least of all the
small boy, that Dorcas?s prophecy was fulfilled.


Evidently their movements had been spied upon
from the rocks of the second island, for presently
scufflings and heavy footsteps were heard and the two
men appeared, unkempt, unshaven, as ugly in appear-
ance as in temper.
Shaking his fist in fury, his dirty face livid, the red-
headed man burst out:
?So you was foolin? us, was you? You?re not dead,
after all??
? No, I?m alive all right,? Carol answered coolly.
? Aren?t you glad??
? Glad! ? An ugly string of curses followed.
? Well, you seemed to be pretty well frightened at
the thought of having burnt me, I should have fancied
it would be a relief to find you hadn?t,? Carol declared
provokingly ?and made both men stamp and fume
upon the beach in a state of blind rage which was
almost laughable at first.
But not for long. The girls soon realized that it
was a dangerous game to rouse wild beasts of this
kind, without being quite sure that they could not
hurt you. The red-headed man snatched up a stone,
strode down to the water?s edge and flung it, striking
the gunwale of the motor-boat with a sharp thud
which knocked off a flake of paint. As the missile
plopped into the water, the three girls glanced at each
other with the same thought ?it might just as well
have been the head of one of them.
And now both men were gathering and flinging
stones, accompanying them with yells and oaths. A


good many of the missiles fell short, but two or three
reached the boat, one of them just grazing Wynne?s
elbow.
? Heave up the anchor,? Dorcas said, with that
abrupt air of command which the others always
obeyed, unquestioningly. She was already dragging
at the cable, and as the small hedge anchor swung up
to the bows, with firmly compressed lips and without
saying another word she slipped like a seal over the
side, a loop of the tow-rope slung over her shoulder.
As she began to swim steadily aw T ay, pulling the boat
behind her, a howl of rage rose from the men on shore,
when they saw their target thus removed out of range.
The last stones they flung fell harmlessly short,
although the red-headed man ran into the sea up to
his knees, with threatening movements.
? I wonder will they swim over to us,? Wynne
said doubtfully. ? If they did, we?d have rather a job
to keep them off, wouldn?t we??
? They won?t.? Dorcas, back on board, dripping
like a fish, spoke grimly. ? They?re just a pair of
beastly cowards, and they?re much more afraid of
sharks than we are of them.?
Evidently Dorcas was right, for the men made no
attempt to take to the water, and presently one of
them slouched away, leaving the other to keep guard
upon the beach. Plainly they had succeeded in catch-
ing the cow, for presently Jack returned, carrying a
tin can of milk, which they shared and drank ostenta-
tiously, with jeering grins. These were coldly dis-


regarded by the crew of the motor-boat, but, all the
same, the little boy put all their feelings into words
when he gave a piteous wail.
? I ?wan? mi?k,? he cried, and continued to wail,
in spite of all the efforts of the three girls to soothe
him.
? I do wish he?d got pride enough to pretend not
to care,? complained Dorcas. ? It isn?t as if we weren?t
all feeling like that, but I?ll die before I show it.?
? All the same, it is a pretty desperate look-out,?
Wynne said gloomily. ?Yes, I know you?re hungry,
poor kiddie, but there isn?t any ? mi?k ? to give you,
and not much else either. Girls, we?ll have to set to
work and catch some fish somehow, even if we have
to eat ?em raw. We shall soon be reduced to it, if we?re
going to be in a stage of siege?and those brutes
evidently intend it. No chance of milk or potatoes
while they?re mounting guard there.?
? Well, then, we will fish, they shan?t starve us out,?
Dorcas declared resolutely.
But somehow this tone did not seem to impress
the fish. They simply wouldn?t bite, and after three
hours not a single one had been hauled on board,
although they could be seen swimming about care-
lessly and turning up their noses at the bait.
? But we?ll get them all right in the evening,? Dor-
cas said bravely. ? WTien the sun goes down ?it?s too
hot for them now.
It was hot. The sun blazed down upon the water,
making it gleam like melted metal, dazzling the eyes.


The two men had retired to sleep in a patch of shade;
even across the space between, their occasional snores
could be heard plainly. But on the motor-boat there
was no shade whatever, except in the very bottom,
under a rug rigged from gunwale to gunwale, and
here there was only just room for the small boy to
lie, dozing, hot and flushed.
?My goodness, I?m thirsty,? Wynne said. ? What
about making some tea??
Carol broke off in her usual taunt on the tea ques-
tion as she looked into the small water cask.
? I say?there?s hardly any left,? she said.
They looked at each other gravely. This was much
more serious than any food shortage.
? We mustn?t have that tea now, then,? Wynne said
at last. ?We must wait until we need it really
badly.?
As the hot hours wore on, it seemed as though that
time would not be long in coming, if it had not done
so already. By the middle of the afternoon their lips
and tongues were so dry and parched that they no
longer even wanted to eat ?which was one comfort,
as Wynne tried to say cheerfully.
But the little boy, in spite of the cupful of water
which they had doled out to him, was still sobbing for
more, and they foresaw the time, not very far away,
when they would have to ask their enemies for milk
for him, though not for themselves.
Not one of the three said to the others what she
was thinking, but all knew that their thought was the


same, and the very idea of giving in now, after all they
had gone through, was horribly bitter.
? But we cant let the kiddie get ill with thirst ?
Wynne muttered under her breath, and rose with a
restless movement, standing upright in the little cock-
pit. ? Oh ?but I?m cramped!?
She stretched her long legs, standing tiptoe, ex-
tended her long arms above her head, then, suddenly,
dropped back on her heels with a muffled exclamation.
Standing, her height gave her a wider view over the
point of the island, and she stared intently for a few
minutes before sinking back into her old position in
the boat.
? S-sh don?t say anything don?t let them
know ? she whispered excitedly.
? Know what?? Carol questioned, and Dorcas added
irritably:
? There?s nothing to say, that I can see.?
? No, but I can ?at least, I did, just now ?
Wynne?s cheeks were crimson, her eyes bright. ? It?s
them ?they?re coming!?
? Who?? Dorcas clutched her wrist.
? Why?why ?the rocketeers! It must be them. A
motor-boat, a great big one, coming this way ?it?ll
be here directly and we mustn?t let those brutes there
get any warning of it.?
Wynne had scarcely finished that rather incoherent
speech before things happened?and quickly.
Round the point of the island came a large white
motor-boat, her bows high out of the water as she


sped along, direct as an arrow?s course, then swerving
as she arrived in sight of the little beach and the
smaller craft with its crew.
It was only a minute before she was within hailing
distance, and a voice came to the girls across the
dazzle of sea between, the voice of a tall, broad-
shouldered man who stood in the bows, leaning for-
ward like a live figure-head.
? Hi?you? The boy?is he there? Have you got
him? Is he all right??
The enquiries were gasped out with such hoarse,
strained anxiety, that Wynne responded at once.
? YES!? she shouted at the top of her voice, and
bent hurriedly to gather up from the bottom of the
boat, the warm bundle of blanket and boy, which lay
there rolled together.
She held it up, only head and flushed sleepy face
sticking out of the end of the bundle, and a kind of
cheer came from the larger motor-boat, with a shout
from the man in the bows.
? Ah ?that?s right! That?s dinkum! Sonnie ?
Sonnie!?
At once the little boy ceased his fretful grumble and
began to wriggle and chuckle in his blanket chrysalis,
bouncing up and down excitedly.
? Dad-DA!? he cried, and repeated the word again
and again as the motor-boat shot alongside, came to
a panting standstill, and lay heaving up and down close
enough to allow the big brown-faced, grizzle-haired
man to lean across and catch the child in his out-


stretched arms as Wynne held out the wriggling
bundle.
In a second the little boy was clutched close, and
there was scarcely need for the first part of the explan-
ation which the man gave a few minutes later, after he
had hugged and kissed the child in a hungry desperate
sort of way, unwrapping him from the rug and looking
him over from head to foot.
? He?s my kiddie, the only one. And I thought I?d
lost him ?didn?t I, sonnie??
? Dad-DA!? gurgled the small boy contentedly.
? Wan? choc ?
? Eh, so you haven?t forgotten ? The man de-
lightedly produced a bar of chocolate. ? There,
laddie My Colonial, when I got your signal last
night?it was one of you that signalled, I suppose??
? Yes, I did,? Carol answered, and a big brown
hand was stretched out across the gunwales.
?You did? Shake then ?and I shan?t forget in a
hurry. I?m Stephen Kelvin ?you may have heard of
?1 yy
me.
The name meant nothing to Carol, but a great deal
to the two Australian girls. Yes, of course, they had
heard of Stephen Kelvin, the millionaire owner of the
biggest sheep runs in the whole of New South Wales
or Australia, who had such a marvellous and renowned
house and garden, on a bay at Ellura, on the coast.
They had heard of Kelvin?s one little son, too ?
only they had never imagined that their treasure-trove
child could be that precious small boy.


? But ?the island?? Dorcas asked.
? Eh?the island? Oh yes, that?s mine too. I had
it made for Sonnie, ye see, because I thought it?d be
such a grand play-place for him, Mr. Kelvin ex-
plained as simply as though he had been speaking of
a meccano toy or a box of bricks. It cost a lot, of
course; I had to get men from England and gardeners
from Japan to do it properly, and a good year it took ?
but I?d spend any money on him, bless his heart!?
He pressed his rough cheek against the child s soft
hair before going on. ? The island was moored in the
bay, of course. My bay, close to my house; it was
never meant to drift about, and how it got loose ?
?Well, it was the storm, I expect,? Dorcas ex-
plained. ? There was a big blow, a southerly buster,
our camp was all knocked down and then we saw the
island in the bay, you see, all of a sudden. It had
come there in the night.?
But Mr. Kelvin shook his head.
? Couldn?t have got loose all by itself,? he said.
? It was in a very sheltered part of the bay, y?see, on
purpose. Must have been something or somebody
else ?
? Why, I expect it had something to do with ihem\ ?
Wynne exclaimed, and pointed to where the two men
still lay asleep under their bush, all unconscious of
what was happening.
Mr. Kelvin glanced towards them and his face
suddenly grew very grim.
? Aye ?that?s the explanation, no doubt of that,?


he said. ? I know ?em, and I?ll have a few words
with ?em right away. Run the boat alongside, Carey ?
aye, and give the young ladies a tow ashore too.?
Dorcas and Carol had already hauled up the kedge
and in a few moments the two motor-boats, large and
small, were lying close beside the island, and Mr,
Kelvin, giving the little boy into Wynne?s arms again,
jumped ashore.
?Just to make sure that Sonnie?s safe while I
tackle ?em,? he said. ? Not that there?s any fear with
skunks like that.?
He strode across to where the two men were just
rousing themselves, sitting up, rubbing their grimy
eyes and staring about them in a bewildered way.
Mr. Kelvin?s face and voice were very fierce as he
addressed them.
? This was a pretty game you two scoundrels tried
to play! Oh, yes, I know you well enough ?Big Ben
and Jack Keave, and a pair of dinkum blackguards you
are! I suppose you were out to kidnap the boy, eh?
And touch me for a big ransom ?eh? Yes ?I
guessed it! You cut the moorings of the island to send
it adrift, but then the storm came and carried it away
farther and faster than you expected.?
? That wa?nt our fault, Muster Kelvin,? Big Ben
whined, ? we didn?t mean fer the kid to git drifting
off like that.?
? An? we follered after,? Jack said sullenly. ?We
caught it up too.?
? Yes, for your own purposes, not to bring back the


child to me. If it hadn?t been for these young ladies-
well, it isn?t any good my trying to thank them, though
I?ll try till the last day of my life.?
He turned towards the three girls with something
very much like tears in his deep-set grey eyes, and all
of them found it just as difficult to say anything, as it
always is in such circumstances.
For what was there to say? Especially now that
everything had turned out for the best, except for Ben
and Jack, who certainly didn?t deserve a best.


CHAPTER XXIII
Finishing Off
The whole party went back to the mainland in the
large motor-boat, towing the small one behind.
And that is really the end of the island adventure in
one way, although, in another way, it hasn?t ended at
all.
For it sometimes seems to the three girls as though
Mr. Kelvin spent his whole time in trying to find
some new way to thank them, and all the more when
he had heard the whole story and the account of Carol?s
exploit with the shark.
Although they protested again and again that as
Ranger Guides they couldn?t take a reward, that it was
all in the day?s work, so to speak, to rescue the children
of millionaires, Mr, Kelvin was ?and is?very clever
at finding ways and means and, as Dorcas said, it teas
a reward, those gorgeous weeks spent at his house,
with the most wonderful of sun-bathing and riding
and all possible delights.
And the lovely little motor-boat which he gave
Carol?but then it was her birthday, of which he had
found out the date, and how could one refuse a birth-
day present, especially such a lovely one?


No, the three Rangers found it a very difficult
problem, and it looks as though they will continue to
do so till the end of the chapter.
As for the island itself, it is lovelier than ever, with
the little house rebuilt, and the burnt shrubs replanted.
And it has one permanent inhabitant now, in the shape
of Bunyip, the native bear, for he totally refused to
leave it, and has to be provided with a constant suc-
cession of fresh gum trees as he eats the last away.








