

THE PRESENT STATE
OF
MELBOURNE,
AND THE
Gold Fields of Victoria
With Statistics up to January 1, 1853.
BY R. M. THOMAS
A RETURNED EMIGRANT.
LONDON:
W. KENT AND CO., PATERNOSTER ROW,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Price Sixpence.




THE PRESENT STATE
OF
MELBOURNE,
AND THE
Gold Fields of Victoria
WITH
STATISTICS UP TO JANUARY 1, 1853.
BY R. M. THOMAS
A RETURNED EMIGRANT.
LONDON
W. KENT AND CO., PATERNOSTEIi EOW ; MANCHESTER : W.
BRKMNER, PICCADILLY ; BIRMINGHAM : W. GUEST, BULL
STREET ; DUBLIN : J. m’gLASIIAN ; LIVERPOOL : W. S.
ORR AND CO., NORTH JOHN STREET ; DUNDEE: A. M.
STEPHEN ; CHESTER : E. THOMAS, BRIDGE STREET
ROW, AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1 8 5 3.




INTRODUCTION.
In compliance with the wishes of numerous friends, anxious
to hear of Australia, I have penned the following state-
ments respecting Melbourne and the Gold Fields ; and
in bringing them before the public I do so in the hope
of informing the intending emigrant of the true state of
atfairs there—that he may not be duped by the flowery
promises held out to him through the writings of interested
parties—and that he may no longer be misled, and drawn
into the delusive hope of acquiring sudden wealth under
easy circumstances.
The end I have in view in laying these statements before
the public is to prevent, as far as lies in my power, any
more distress and misery there. For this reason I have
given quotations from private letters and the Melbourne
papers, in addition to the results of my own experience.
It is my earnest wish that the reader should compare
the following particulars and statements with the infor-
mation sent to the home government from Australia, now
published in the Blue Book, the newspapers, and the
private letters appearing in the public prints, so that
he may be convinced that they are strictly true, and not
exaggerations. "*
Crank Street, Chester,
April, 1853.




Melbourne and the Cold fields.
Upwards of Sixteen Million Pounds Sterling of Gold
have been obtained from the mines of Victoria since their
first commencement in August, 1851, to January Ist, 1853!
This may appear to many a very great sum, as really it
is; but let us examine how many there are to share it,
and how they have toiled for it. To applaud the amount
without giving credit to the miners for earning it, would
be very unjust. In many instances they have to go to
the depth of from forty to sixty feet, and at Ballarat as
deep as eighty-four feet; often without obtaining gold,
or only sufficient to pay expenses.* They have to put up with
every discomfort; wet through during the day, sleeping
in the open air, or in the tents ; enduring excessive heats
in the day, and the chilling cold winds at night. These,
together with the plague of myriads of tormenting flies
(another plague of Egypt), and the sicknesses to which
they are exposed, prove but too clearly that the gold is
hardly earned. When again we consider the numbers
that are engaged in this work, the average earnings are
tar too small to pay the multitude already there.
* “A party sunk thirty five holes at Bendigo and Ballarat
without success. Midas then favoured them with a genuine
golden shower.” —Gold Digger's Magazine, Jan., 1853.


According to information obtained by an intimate friend
of mine, from several of the Gold Commissioners on the
mines, there have been upwards of 250,000 Diggers.
Divide £16,000,000 by 250,000, and the result will
give but sixty-four pounds sterling per man, for seventeen
months’ laborious employment. Many men get much
more; consequently some have lost what money they had
when they began, and some have only cleared their
expenses, returning again to business, disgusted and worn
out with gold digging.
At the commencement of the diggings, there were but
75,000 inhabitants in the colony of Victoria:* then the gold
was principally got on the surface, without much trouble or
expense. This only lasted for a few months; no longer is
the gold to be had on the surface; deep digging and dri-
ving have to be resorted to,and now gold mining is a most
laborious employment. Several Cornish miners, who
returned to England in the same vessel with me, declared
that they would not put up with the hardships of gold
mining any longer, asserting that they were not by any
means well paid, after enduring the sicknesses, plague of
flies, and want of necessary comforts they had to undergo.
They preferred returning to work in their own native lead
or copper mines.
The old colonists finding that even what they were
getting then, did not pay them for leaving their farms,
stores, &c., returned home, and began to reap diggings
by keeping lodging houses, stores, inns, &c. At this
* The population must now exceed half a million.


time adventurers began to come from all parts of the
world, more and more every day, of all nations and
kindreds, to reap the golden harvest, and soon brought
business of all kinds once more to the colony—then it
was that wages rose to such a pitch, never before known.
Printers, Carpenters, and all useful artizans were getting
from £l4 to £2l per week, and were in great demand.
The immense emigration pouring its streams into the
colony has brought labour down to its present price ;
and unless something is done for the thousands arriving
there daily, wages will soon be as low as at home,
while house rent, lodging, and all the necessaries ot
life will be at a fearful price. Hundreds are leaving
for their various homes —thousands would, if they could ;
the shipping agents are pestered by the numerous ap-
plications from persons desirous of working their passage
home as stewards, &c. The unsuccessful emigrants are
obliged to sell their clothes, &c. to supply themselves with
food, while others, endeavouring to get employment, take
any situation that may offer. Ladies advertise as washer-
women, domestic servants, nurses, &c., and gentlemen
become as servile as slaves, glad to accept situations as
grooms, messengers, or to work as labourers; and many
professional young men, such as solicitors, and com-
mercial men of highly respectable houses in England, are
working on the roads at Bs. and 10s. per day. In short,
that side of the world is the reverse of this; there
the lower classes are the masters, and the ladies and
gentlemen their servants.


The following tabular statement, taken from the Mel-
bourne newspapers, will give an idea of the state of the
Gold Mines at present:—
Amount of Gold brought by government and private escort,
from February, 1852, to December, 1852:
During tie Month of
Ounees.
During the Month of
Ounces.
February
56,108
August
268,576
March
51,865
September
211,814
April
61,172
May
99,006
November
349,185
June
109,272
December
229,621
J ulv
296,911
Showing a decrease of
119,564
It will be seen by this table that the greater number of
ounces were brought in in November, which at £3 10s.
per ounce, would be worth £1,222,147; divide this sum
amongst 220,000 workmen, the number then at work
on the mines, and the result will be about £5 10s. per
month. The licence fee £l 10s. being deducted, there
remains £l per week per man. This is not a very
golden average.
Computing that half a million immigrants have arrived
m the colony, and that each on an average took with him
forty pounds, twenty millions have been brought by them
alone; proving that four millions of money have been
brought into the colony by immigrants alone, above what


it has yielded in gold ! I bring the above statistics to
show the emigrant that the gold has not paid those
already there.
The French unfortunate immigrants have called upon
their consul demanding a free passage to their own
country; and thousands of our own countrymen would
return if they were able. Several hundred applications
were made to the shipping office of the Great Britain, to
work their passage in her; as is the case with every
homeward bound vessel. Still emigrant ships are coming
into the bay daily, aye almost hourly, from all parts of the
world. China, and the numerous isles of the South Sea,
are contributing their thousands ; India, Africa, America,
and Europe, their tens of thousands. Still onward flows
the tide of adventurers, lured from their homes with the
bright golden vision, too soon alas to find their sad
mistake!
Many parties in favour of Australia say “ it is of such
vast extent, that it will give employment to thousands of
agriculturists, sheep and cattle farmersthis is true, but
the high price of flocks and farms will not let the million
speculate. Several of my own shipmates came out with
the intention of farming, but found they could not buy
at the present prices. Sheep and cattle are now so much
m demand as food, that cattle holders will not sell under
the killing prices, and then not without selling their
stations or runs along with them.
Land in the vicinity of the townships sells very high ;
so much so that only the large capitalist can buy. This


is the cause of very great inconvenience to the immigrants,
who are obliged to erect their tents in the environs.
Meetings were therefore held last December, to petition
the Legislative Council to divide the government ground
into small lots, at a low price, within the reach of immi-
grants ; and to suspend the sale of land in large lots ;
showing the state of things likely to ensue if it was not
done.
Captain Harrison, the Gold Diggers’ Delegate, at
one of these meetings concluded a long and very ani-
mated address by observing “that he believed His Ex-
cellency the Lieutenant Governor to be a man, who
notwithstanding his antagonistic position to a large body
of the colonists, was possessed of a generous disposition
and kind heart, and that, in his opinion, if the request
embodied in the proposed petition was well backed up,
it would be conceded by the Executive Government.”
-The following resolutions were carried unanimously:
1. “ It is the opinion of this meeting, that, owing to the
altered state of the colony, through the discovery of the
gold fields, and the immense influx of population, it is
expedient in order to prevent a great amount of distress,
which would otherwise eventually ensue, to suspend forth-
with the Imperial Land Sales Act, and late Orders in
Council relative to squattages in the colony; for the
precedents for such a proceeding refer to the appropriation
of the territorial income in payment of salaries without
the sanction of the Home Government.”
2. “ That in order to afford facilities to parties of small


capital for the purchase of homesteads, the rich agricul-
tural lands of the colony should be forthwith surveyed in
blocks of twenty, forty, eighty, and one hundred and
sixty acres, and should be sold at the public offices at a
fixed price of a pound per acre ; and in order to guard
against the evils of lan d monopoly and traffic, in purchase
of such allotments, no one be allowed to purchase from
the Government more than one lot in each parish, and
that no deed or grant be issued to any purchaser until
he has been in the occupation of the same for six months,
and that a sufficient number of surveying parties be
appointed forthwith; to prevent the ruin that may be oc-
casioned by delay, the Squatter allowed the preemptive
right to purchase his homestead, not to exceed three hun-
dred acres.”
3. “ That, in consequence of the Land Sales Act, great
numbers of newly-arrived emigrants are returning to the
mother country, being disappointed in procuring a home-
stead in the colony, and consequently will tend to the
detriment of the colony and its future progress; it is the
opinion of this meeting that the said Acts should be
abrogated or suspended forthwith to meet the emergency
of the case.”
4. “That the Chairman, and the movers, and seconders of
the foregoing resolutions form themselves into a committee,
for the purpose of drawing up a petition, embodying the
foregoing resolutions, to be by them presented to His
Excellency the Lieutenant Governor.”
Unless this is done the new arrivals will be subjected


to very great miseries and annoyances during the rainy
season.
In most of the guide books, Australia (especially Vic-
toria) is praised as being a most healthy and salubrious
country, so much so that it is called “ Australia Felix.”
On arriving at Melbourne I met with several of my own
townsfolk, who had been in the colony some years, and
I naturally asked them whether this was the case. The
universal answer was “No;” and on putting the various
works on Australia into their hands, they expressed their
surprise at the glaring falsehoods they contained, both re-
lating to the healthiness of the climate, and the easy access
to the gold. With regard to the latter, they informed
me that the bright side of the tale had only been told, and
that painted in the most glowing colours ; while the un-
fortunate and unlucky part was glossed over. This I
soon found out to be the real state of things. Living as
I was in the house of a digger, I gleaned much informa-
tion relative to the mines and miners.
These guide books, according to the ideas of old colo-
nists, have been written by interested parties. For instance,
domestic female servants were very scarce, and those that
were there demanded good wages ; hence, with the view
to get female servants, it was good policy on their part
to hold out to girls the chance of wealthy husbands. I
was much surprised to see in Melbourne more than an
average proportion of females. In the same way the
agriculturists, sheep and cattle farmers, held out good
wages for shearers, stockmen, shepherds, hut keepers


&c.; but when a new chum applies for the situation, he
is asked—how long has he been in the colony ? has he
tended sheep or cattle in the colony ? if he has not, the
employer tells him he could not think of giving him as
much as an old hand, but will give him about one half the
amount advertised, with a promise of rising wages at the
end of the half year.
The following list of wages is from the Argus , Jan. 1,
1853. The table is furnished by Messrs. M’Cormack,
Registry Office, Bourke Street: —
OCCUPATION.
FROM
TO
REMARKS.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
Married Couples
68
0
0
75
0
0
per ann., rations.
Ditto, with families
60
0
0
65
0
0
Shepherds
36
0
0
40
0
0
Hut-keepers
30
0
0
35
0
0
» 51
General useful Servants..
55
0
0
60
0
0
Bullock Drivers
2
10
0
3
0
0
per week, „
Ditto on roads
3
0
0
3
10
0
„ without „
Gardeners
60
0
0
65
0
0
per an. with „
Cook?, male
Waiters
2
0
0
3
0
0
per wk. „ „
1
0
0
1
10
0
Grooms
1
0
0
1
10
0
House Carpenters
0
18
0
1
0
0
per day, without,
Bush ditto
0
12
0
1
0
0
„ with „
Stock-keepers
50
0
0
60
0
0
per ann. „ „
Blacksmiths
1
0
0
1
10
0
per day, without,
General Farm Servants...
1
0
0
1
10
0
per wk.with „
Compositors
0
2
0
0
0
0
per thousand.
Pressmen
4
0
0
5
0
0
per week.
Shearers
1
10
0
1
15
0
per 100, with ra.
Washers
1
5
0
1
10
0
per week „
Seamen for London
50
0
0
0
0
0
for the run home.
* Ditto
14
0
0
0
0
0
per month.
Ditto for Calcutta
40
0
0
0
0
0
'or the run.
Ditto for coasting
7
10
0
10
0
0
per month.
* The highest wages given to seamen was £lO per month, and plenty to
be got at that.


OCCUPATION.
PROM
TO
REMARKS.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
Thorough k'emale Servnts
20
0
0
35
0
0
per annum.
Housemaids
25
0
0
30
0
0
Laundresses
30
0
0
35
0
0
Nursemaids
20
0
0
26
0
0
Cooks
35
0
0
50
0
0
>>
Although the foregoing are the wages as put forth at
the Registry Office for immigrants, still I am aware that
they are too high in one or two instances. The continued
stream of emigrants from all countries is gradually lower-
ing the wages of all kinds of artizans and agriculturists.
A carpenter informed me that the employers had strongly
hinted that they would be lowered in wages. Machinists,
boiler makers, and whitesmiths have been already lowered
one pound a week during the last two months.
I was very sorry to see it announced in the home
papers that the printers in the principal towns in Great
Britain had commenced an emigration scheme to send
out printers to Australia; when at the same time there
were so many who could not get employment at their own
trade, and were obliged to try some other. I met with a
compositor who had worked on the ‘ Manchester Examiner,’
and other newspapers in England, who informed me that
although the wages appeared much more than at home,
that it would not go as far, neither would it purchase
the necessary comforts.
The trade price is given byth & Argus, but at the Herald
the compositors had been lowered to 25., and then to Is.
6d. the thousand, when one and all struck, and on the


morning they walked out, fresh hands walked in, the paper
going on as usual. I was informed by a printer that there
were between thirty and forty out of employ. Sydney,
Adelaide, Geelong, Launceston, Hobart Town, &c., are
all well stocked. To be out of employ here is very
different from what it is at home ; everthing is very dear,
and destitution is a crime. Three cases of destitution came
under my notice, one, an American found dead, and two
others who were sent to gaol , there being no workhouse
here.
The various registry offices are crowded with applicants
of all kinds from morning till night, willing to do some-
thing for a livelihood. When a situation suitable for a
clerk or shopman is advertised in the papers, the place of
application is crowded with candidates waiting with eager
faces and anxious fears for their turn to inquire. Once
in Australia, they must do something for a living, and
of course are anxious to get more than that; but how
are they to get it ? Men have been seduced by the bright
side of the picture, and have taken all for truth which has
appeared in print, thinking that gold might literally be
picked up from the ground as we pick stones off the high
road. Here they find the difference : they soon see that
where one gets a few ounces, nine lose money ; they leave
the mines, work on the roads, or follow some such menial
employment, which in many cases they are unfit for. I
have seen young men of highly respectable connections,
acting as messengers in druggists’, grocers’, and other
shops ; wheeling water, selling lemonade, portering on the


quay, discharging vessels, as boatmen down at the bay,
or repairing the roads like common convicts: work to
which they had not been accustomed, and for which they
were quite unfit. Do not think that lam painting the
dark side, as others have the bright; examine the Austra-
lian papers, read the advertisements in them, read the
private letters sent by unlucky adventurers ; these will
give you an insight into the state of affairs.
I will now give you the advice of one of the monied men
of Australia, who was asked when in Liverpool, whether he
considered the Australian colonies a fit place for young
men to go to. His answer was “No, Ido not, though I
myself am an Australian, have travelled the length and
breadth of the colonies for the last sixteen years, and have
done well there; but for a young man to go out there with
the expectation of quickly realizing a fortune, is a farce;
I would say if you are content, and doing middling, stay
where you are ; but to those who cannot make a living,
you may as well try those colonies as any where else.”
Several others, who had been in Australia several years,
bore testimony to the truth of the above statement.
Much has been said in favour of its climate, a great
deal more than true. Of the summer only, I can speak
from my own observation. The general heat is much
greater than we experience in England. The difference
of temperature in the day and night is very great; the
thermometer will be as high as one hundred and twenty
in the day, and down to sixty or seventy at night. The
heat is almost unbearable in the day, while at night an


overcoat is necessary. But the hot winds, which blow
from the north are unbearable, creating annoyance to
man and beast, so much so, that they are often unable to
work. The following extract is taken from the Argus ,
January Ist, 1853 :
“After an unusual duration of comparatively cool weather,
we have had, within the last two days, a specimen of the
Australian summer in its most disagreeable aspect. On
Thursday, we had a breeze,from the north, which, with
a vertical sun in an unclouded sky, made the heat almost
unbearable, especially to new comers, and it was made
still more oppressive by the smells which evaporated from
the filthy streets and lanes. Yesterday morning the hot
wind increased to a storm, and the city was covered with
vast clouds of dust. At nine in the morning, the ther-
mometer in the shade rose to about one hundred degrees.
A gentleman recently arrived, who has resided many years
in the north-western provinces of India, and also in Afi-
ghanistan, likened the early part of yesterday to the
weather experienced in those districts, where a sirocco
blows for days, without the welcome sea-breeze with
which we are privileged, and where Europeans frequently
die under its withering influence. Towards one o’clock
yesterday, the wind having veered round to the S. W.
speedily cooled the heated earth; and so sudden was the
the fall in the temperature towards night, that warm
clothing was again required.”
Such sudden changes in the atmosphere cannot be
healthy, When it rains, it is a deluge; when it blows,
B


you are half smothered and blinded with sand; then a
thunderstorm, clearing the air for a day or two, and then
the usual routine of siroccos, dust, &c.
It may be deduced from the above that the climate is
not quite so salubrious as it is represented. Influenza,
Dysentery, Rheumatism, Bronchitis, and other diseases
were carrying off their victims. I also saw numbers
afflicted with Opthalmia. The following extracts are
taken from the Melbourne papers.
“ The Influenza.— This epidemic is not confined to
the city, but has spread all through the country districts.
Scarcely a family has escaped. It has attacked alike the
infant in its cradle, and the sturdy and powerful adult.
In fact the disease has spread through the length and
breadth of the land.”— Express, Dec. 4, 1852.
“Dysentery has already commenced its attacks here
(Mount Alexander), two instances of death having already
occurred from this cause. The blight in the eyes has
commenced its work, and it is not unusual to see a person
who was well in the morning, return at night with either
one or the tyo eyes bandaged up, or swollen.”— Argus ,
Dec. 30, 1852.
During my stay in Melbourne, I could not obtain any
authorized account of the number of deaths, but from
what I saw I concluded that there must have been up-
wards of thirty burials daily. These facts speak little of
a climate, of which it is untruly said that persons “may
sleep in the open air with impunity.”
In the guide books, under the head, “Who should


go? ” it is said “ an unlimited number of respectable girls
wanted." In the first place, girls who have any respect-
ability at all should stop at home. Morality is almost
unknown; it is not in the colonists’ dictionary; a viler
place cannot be conceived; nothing but oaths of the most
loathsome form are to be heard ; drinking and immorality
are encouraged. But what can we expect, when we
consider that the colony was first peopled by convicts
from Yan Dieman’s Land, and they still form the bulk of
the monied men there ? The colony is represented as short
of females. Once this was the fact ; domestic servants
were wanted then, and, as a bait, it was stated they would
make good specs to come over, as men wanted wives; but
now instead of there being a disproportionate number of
males, it is quite the reverse.
To the young man as well as the young woman it is
equally dangerous. The gambling and drinking practices
are carried on to a fearful extent. The only way the co-
lonists shew regard for one another is by the bottle.
Drinking, and the trying effects of the climate have been
the ruin of many. The Asylum for the insane had between
seventy and eighty inmates, brought on by drinking and
disappointment. Gambling is quite as much carried on
here, as in California. These vices run through all
these colonies.
The following extract from the Argus, Dec. 28, 1852,
will perhaps give a better insight into the practice of
gambling : — “ Gambling Houses. —Places of this descrip-
tion are, unfortunately, becoming numerous in our city,


and we believe no local law exists to suppress them. One
of these houses is situated in Bourke-street ; two others
are in Flinders-lane, and are the most notorious, as they
are reported to be frequented by persons standing high
among our traders and other members of the more re-
spectable classes, who pass muster in society as reputable
people. These hells, we hear, are not dissimilar in their
attractions, and the immense ventures staked, to those far-
famed dens in San Francisco. To check this crime in the
better ranks of life, and to suppress these vile haunts,
demands the enactment of stringent laws to punish and
expose, not only the owners of such houses, but more
especially the frequenters of them. A good clear out of
the players some night, and a public exposure would go a
great way to put an effectual stop to these dens of villainy.
In London the police have, on several occasions, surprised
the inmates while at play, and marched them through the
streets handcuffed like felons, to a police court, where they
have been summarily dealt with.”
Mr. John Fairfax, editor of the Sydney Morning He-
rald, when lecturing in this country last year, gave some
very wholesome advice. He says—<“ To the young man
of industrious and sober habits and of moral character,
whose anxiety is to pursue a course of honest perseverance
—unappalled by difficulty and danger—l say go to Aus-
tralia. To the idle, the dissipated, the drunken—he who
is reckless alike of his own peace and the sorrow he causes
to others—l say stay at home ; for if you. go to a warm
climate and persevere in your present habits, you will be


an outcast, you will die miserably, neglected by man, and,
perhaps, unpitied by God. * * * *
In England there is a large class of young men, who are
well educated, but are not brought up to any pursuits.
Many of this class make their way to the colonies. They
bring letters of introduction to respectable and wealthy
people—often to the Governor-—and imagine their for-
tunes are made- Poor fellows! Any well-instructed
colonist can see with half an eye that they are unfit for
hard work, and therefore necessarily unfit for the colony.
Often persons such as these are returned home to their
parents, like unsaleable bales of merchandise; and too
frequently, alas ! they remain to disgrace their name, to
ruin their character, and to debauch their lives. ‘ Ships,
colonies, commerce,’ is our motto, but that motto is a
foul blot upon our young empire unless it be sanctioned
and upheld by enterprise, earnestness, and unconquerable
zeal.”
Robberies are of very frequent occurrence ; scarce a
night without one or more of them ; and highway robbery
and murder are of frequent occurrence. Bushranging is
'carried on with still greater daring than ever. I quote
the following paragraphs from the different newspapers :
“ Burglaries.— On Thursday night, or early on Friday
morning, some thieves endeavoured to effect an entrance
mto the shop of Mr. Brentani, jeweller, &c., in Collins-
street, by removing a shutter. The noise was heard, and
Mr. Brentani came forward, when the men made off. The
constables on duty were intoxicated at the time. Another


burglary was effected at the house of Mr. Howard, but'
cher, residing at the corner of Stephen and Little Bourke-
streets, at three o’clock on Friday morning, by three men
armed, who succeeded in taking away property to the
amount of £4oo.”— Argus, Jan. 1, 1853.
“ Street Riot.— Last evening a disgraceful scene
took place in Queen-street, shortly before eight o’clock,
which bids fair to end seriously. It appears that a man
was taken into custody nearly opposite the Mayor’s
house, for drunkenness and furious riding, and while the
police were conveying him towards the watch-house a
mob of ruffians armed with life-preservers and bludgeons
endeavoured to rescue the prisoner, and six men were
required to conduct him to the lock-up ; when near the
Legislative Council several rushes were made at the
police, who bore some severe blows and ill-usage, with
admirable forbearance. Missiles were also thrown at the
constables, and in the affray many windows were broken.
"VVe would recommend the authorities to put a double
force on this street and its neighbourhood, as it is con-
tinually the arena of some gross outrage.’’— Argus , Dec.
81, 1852.
“ Highway Robbery. —On Wednesday evening a new
arrival, of the name of Francis Jaques, was in company
with five men at the Buck’s Head public house, who, in
consequence qf his being a stranger in the place offered
to see him home to the tent at the South Yarra Encamp-
ment. He was then led by them to some street, when
the whole party attacked him, and threw him upon the


ground, and a silver watch and guard, six sovereigns, and
seven or eight shillings were taken from his pocket. His
cries soon brought the police, who captured one man
named Isaac Seward, who was brought before the Mayor
on Thursday, and fully committed for trial.”— Argus ,
Dec. 31. 1853.
“ The Progress op Grime !—On Monday, at the
Police Court, eighty-four cases were adjudicated, com-
prising some of the most infamous and vile. The fines
received on that occasion were £llo.los. In the District
Court seventeen cases were heard, independent of actions
for wages and assault, making a general total of one hun-
dred and one criminal charges!! A. very fair day’s
work.”— Argus , Dec. 28. 1852.
“No Crime! —Last night, between ten and eleven
o’clock, the Geelong mail cart was stopped between the
flagstaff and the burying ground, by three armed and
mounted bushrangers. They ordered the driver and a
passenger out of the cart, and searched and robbed them
of their money and watches. One of the villains then
proposed to break open the letter bags, but desisted at
the desire of his comrades, who said they had not time to
wait; about a quarter of an hour after this, these same
men stopped a gentlemen riding in from Flemington, and
eased him of some few sovereigns, and a gold watch and
chain. The chief constable and a party of police started
in pursuit, but we have not yet heard with what success.”
—Argus, Dec. 24th, 1852.
“ Highway Robbery. —Last evening, between eleven


and twelve o’clock, a man was knocked down and robbed
of £2 in Flinders-street, by some scoundrels, one of whom
was fortunately captured by the police and locked up.
lie had a six-barrelled revolver on his person.”— Argus,
Dec. 14, 1852.
“ Gross Outrage.— At three o’clock on Monday after-
noon, about a dozen ruffians came out of the Royal Oak,
in Queen-street, and attacked a poor man, whom they
knocked down and ill-treated, and afterwards left appar-
ently lifeless. There being but one constable near at the
time he could render no assistance, the perpetrators then
walked quietly off. The poor fellow was conveyed to the
hospital.”— Argus, Dec. 14, 1852.
“No Crime. —Our readers will be shocked to notice
the report of the frightful outrages committed in the
neighbourhood of the Ovens Diggings as narrated in the
communication of our correspondent there. It appeal’s
as if one or more bands of bushrangers were abroad,
deliberately murdering nearly every one they 'robbed.
Amongst other outrages we have the following detailed
in a letter from the sufferer, dated from Seymour, on the
Goulburn :
I may mention to you that I am travelling over-land from
Sydney, with a number of horses and cattle : that on my arrival
at this place I was openly attacked by a band of armed ruffians,
who took four valuable horses, bailed up the party, and robbed it
of every article of value they could carry away—altogether to the
amount of £l3O exclusive of £2O in cash. You are perfectly at
liberty to publish this for the information and caution of future


travellers, and as a small illustration of the reception they are
likely to meet with on arrival in Victoria.
One of the gang has been captured in the punt, and is now in
charge of Mr. Clarke, publican.
It is certainly singular that no police force is stationed within
twenty-five miles of a place of so much importance as Seymour.
I remain, Sir, your most obedient servant,
W. HINDMABSH.
What lengths is a community not justified in going to,
in an endeavour to arrest such frightful deeds! And how
tenaciously ought we to cling to the Convicts’ Immigration
Prevention Act; how rigidly ought we to enforce its
provisions, to prevent the introduction amongst us of a
set of demons who are cutting our throats like dogs.”—
-Argus, Deo, 14,1852.
“ Gallant Capture of Two Bushrangers.—Yester-
day the police heard of two notorious bushrangers, who
have lately committed several robberies at the Diggings,
being at St. Kilda, holiday-making. Accordingly the
Chief Constable, accompanied by Detectives O’Neill and
Doyle, rode along the beach and watched their prey until
their return to town, when they followed them at a dis-
tance until reaching the Prince’s Bridge. When the men
perceived they were chased, they goaded their animals on
at an increased pace, quickly followed by Mr. Bloomfield,
the Chief Constable, who came up with them at the corner
°f Swanston and Collins-street, and, with the assistance
of the two detective officers, succeeded in capturing them.
Cne was driving a gig, and the second was on horseback.


This occurred about seven o’clock in the evening. Shortly
after Mr. Jackson, of Elizabeth-street, recognised the
men as being the same who entered his store at Fryer’s
Creek, about the 11th of November last, and robbed him
of between £7OO and £BOO. A third man was appre-
hended yesterday on the beach, on suspicion of being
concerned in some of the late highway robberies.’’—Dec.
27, 1852.
“ The late Bushranging Outrages.— On Thursday
night last, shortly before the robbery of the Geelong mail
near the burying ground, two men of the name of Wall
and Webb were attacked and robbed by the same party
of bushrangers, about 200 yards from that spot, and a
few shillings and a pistol taken from them. The whole
of Thursday night and Friday, twenty or thirty of the
mounted police were scouring the bush between Mel-
bourne and Flemington, but without success, although
they were continually hearing of the depredations of
these men in their very neighbourhood. During Friday
morning, several individuals were attacked and robbed
on the Flemington road even to as late an hour as two
o’clock in the day. All the points of ingress to the city
were guarded on Friday, to prevent the villains entering
Melbourne unperceived; at length, about half-past three
o’clock, a party of detective police, headed by Sergeant
Fenning, saw three horsemen making for town, in the
direction of the gaol, and from the description they had
received of the men, little doubt was left in the minds of
the officers that they were the bushrangers in question.


On entering La Trobe-street, detective O’Neill rushed at
the first man, who was heavily armed, and knocked him
off his horse ; detective Murray then seized the second,
and succeeded in dragging him from the saddle to the
ground, While the third robber was pursued by Sergeant
Fenning and the other constables up Little Bourke-street,
amidst the cries of ‘ the bushranger !’ but although fol-
lowed through Collingwood, he eluded his pursuers.
This man, it is supposed, is the ringleader, and is in the
possession of the spoil of their depredations, as upon the
persons of the other two only a few shillings have been
found. One of the men captured is about thirty years of
age, and the other about twenty-one. They gave their
names as Edward Heed and Thomas Shaddock. On their
being searched at the station-house, Wall’s pistol was
found upon one of them, and the men have since been
identified by several individuals as having stuck them up
and robbed them, The police deserve the thanks of the
community for the vigilance they have shown in so
speedily bringing to justice this gang of desperadoes ; and
front the pursuit of the third man occurring in broad day-
light, a good view was had of him, which will enable the
officers to recognise him wherever he may be seen.”—
Argus, Dec. 28, 1852.
“Bushbanging on the Ovens Diggings Road.—Se-
veral daring highway robberies have been committed
during the past week on the road to the Ovens River
Diggings, by three armed and mounted bushrangers.
It appears that on Wednesday last, the 22d instant, a


man named James Evans was driving a cart down from
the before mentioned gold fields, and when at a place
called Ferguson’s Road, near Seymour, and about fifty-
four miles from Melbourne, he was accosted by three
armed men, who asked him had he seen any horses being
driven on the road ; and on being answered in the nega-
tive, one of the villains presented a pistol at his head and
ordered him to get out of his cart, when he was searched,
and £29 in money taken from him; the cart was
afterwards ransacked, and a fowling-piece taken there-
from. An old man who was coming down to the hospital
for advice was next rifled and £l taken from him, but on
their remonstrating with their robbeis £1 each was re-
stored. They then made off. The same day a Mr.
Sutton and a Mr. Boyd were attacked and robbed at
about the same locality, and £l9 taken from them, the
usual threats were uttered, and proceedings taken in this
as in the former case; Mr. Sutton, however, rode to
Kilmore, and gave information of the circumstances to the
police. A carter named James Maidley, on his way to
town with his teaip from the Ovens, was attacked* the
same day by three men, about four miles beyond Fergu-
son’s public house, who threatened his life if he did not
stop instantly. One of the bushrangers in this case held
the horses’ heads while the other searched Maidley and
his dray, but only found some tobacco, which they took
away with them. He was then asked if he had any gold,
and answered in the negative. One of the men then said,
‘lf you say you have no gold, and I find any upon your


dray, it will go all the worse for you.’ Nothing however
was found, and they rode off. Mr. Sutton came to town,
and was at Liardet’s Pier on Sunday afternoon, and
pointed out to Sergeant Darker and some constables, a
young man, whom he recognised as being one of the bush-
rangers on the Ovens road. The man was immediately
apprehended by the police, when an attempt at rescue
was made by a mob that collected, many of whom were
ta ken into custody, and fined by the Mayor. The pri-
soner was brought up at the District Court on Monday,
where he was fully identified by all the individuals before
mentioned, as being the leader of the gang who robbed
them. He gave his name as Richard Rowley, and ap-
peared not more than twenty four years of age. He was
fully committed for trial. Rowley is stated to be a ‘ticket
of leave holder’ from Pentridge.”— Argus, Dec, 26, 1852.
There is also a great deal of bushranging in the vicinity
°f Geelong and Ballarat.
“ Stick-ups,” or street robberies, as the following para-
graph will show, are of such frequent occurrence, that
little notice is taken of them.
“Robbery, with Violence.— One of these disgrace-
ful outrages, now so little thought of because so common,
occurred last night, at ten o’clock, in La Trobe-street.
A poor man, proceeding towards Elizabeth-street, was
knocked down and robbed by two ruffians, who were
Seen shortly afterwards standing near the place where
tlle y had left their prostrate victim, waiting for some
coming prey. A gentleman in the neighbourhood, pos-


gessing more mettle than common sense, assisted the poor
man, and was treated harshly by the marauders. Pro-
ceeding to Elizabeth street, our informant met two of
the police force supporting themselves under a lamp-post,
and complaining to them of his sufferings, was politely in-
formed that their beat did not go further than Elizabeth -
street, and that the superintendent had not placed any
police in La Trobe-street. A good recommendation this
for our future police-officer!”— Argus , Jan. 1, 1853.
The following letter, written by an English resident in
Canada, to the Editor of the Globe , Toronto, North
America, will give an insight into the gold diggings, &c.
Murdering Flat, Friar’s Creek,
Mount Alexander, Dec. 20, 1852.
Dear Sir, — I see the steamer “ Great Britain” is adver-
tised to sail for England about the first of next month,
and I suspend the rocking of my cradle for awhile, to send
you by her what details are at present at my disposal,
concerning this place and my present occupation, viz.
that of a gold digger.
On my arrival at Melbourne the climate seemed to be
everything I had heard it was, for there were a few fine
days, which I appreciated the more for having just got off
shipboard, after the tedium of the voyage, but from what
I have since seen of it I am exceedingly astonished how it
can have got the reputation for salubrity and beauty it
seems to have in other countries. For instance, this is the
summer season here, and while we have the thermometer
usually between 90 and 100 in the day-time, it turns so


cold at night that an overcoat heavy enough for an Upper
Canada winter is by no means superfluous- I have seen
the glass up to 120 in the shade in the day, and in the
evening of the same day down to 62.
There are many frequent hurricanes of hot winds, that
bear about with them clouds of hot sands and dust, so in-
jurious to the eyes that all who are obliged to be out have
to wear veils of gauze to protect them. We have had one
of these usual tornadoes in this neighbourhood the other
day, which to those in its path was not only frightful but
mischievous, carrying away tents, trees, &c. I have seen
heavy dray horses brought to a stand-still on their journey
by the force of these winds ; and it is not unusual to see
parrots and other birds screaming and gasping on the
branches of the trees, and dropping on the ground lifeless,
with the intense heat. The only one thing this climate
can be recommended for, is, that in winter time there is
so little frost and snow ; but from the information I have
gleaned relative to the seasons, the tremendous rains are
still more uncomfortable and unhealthy than our good
Canadian snow falls. I have met a number of Canadians
an< l Americans out here, not one of whom likes this cli-
mate in comparison with that of North America.
The part of the country through which I have travelled,
Vlz - north and north-westward, from Melbourne to the
Slack Forest, and Mount Alexander ranges, has no parti-
tal, attractive features. Some sheep walks of conside-
rate extent look rather handsome, but as for beauty I
have not seen any yet.


The country on the whole is very badly watered in
summer, and very much flooded in winter.
Melbourne is well laid out with wide streets, all either
parallel or at right angles to each other, but as a city it
has a poor miserable odd-fashioned appearance, the shops
being nearly all small, often of wood, with small doors and
windows; the public buildings exhibit very little taste;
the style of building, if style it can be called, is generally
the plainest and cheapest. The three articles, stone,
brick, and wood are used, and there are now in course of
erection several iron and zinc houses.
The population of Melbourne, previous to the gold
diggings, was about 25,000, and now it is estimated to
contain 150,000 ; many thousands are in tents on the
south side of the Yarra Yarra, and the outskirts of the
town.
Crime may be said to abound fearfully in it. Rob-
beries, waylayings, and the many other offences springing
from intemperance, are of frequent occurrence, notwith-
standing the vigilance of a large police force, mounted
and foot.
The population i 3 of course composed of contributions
from all nations and provinces, but the greater proportion
are English ; and one particular, quite visible as a feature
of the mass, and worth remembering, is that a consider-
able number are the scourings of the old country’s gaols,
known by the name of old lags, who either are or have
been convicts, escaped from Yan Diemen’s Land, or hav-
ing served their years of banishment, too often continue


in their native practices here, to the terror and annoy*
ance of the peaceable and honest.
Comfort commands a very high price in Melbourne:
the cheapest kind of what are called cheap hotels , charge half
a sovereign a day, the fare for that being no better than a
labouring man in your city commands ; and to sleep in a
small room with from eight to twelve others, stowed as
close as possible. Such accommodation as a man will get
in Toronto for three dollars per week [about thirteen
shillings], will cost in Melbourne twenty-five shillings per
day. A house of thirty pounds per annum in your city,
will rent here for five hundred pounds, and all others in
like proportion ; but of course these extraordinary prices
are occasioned by the increased influx of adventurers, and
it is commonly supposed that a reaction is soon about to
take place.
The gold districts or diggings are extensive, but it is a
great error of some interested writers to say it will take
centuries to exhaust them, for already they are considered
to have yielded their richest stores ; the quantity of gold
produced is not at all keeping pace with the rapidly in-
creasing number of those in quest of it; and in fact search-
lng for it has even now become emphatically a poor busi-
ne &s, especially, when compared either with what it was
ten or twelve months back, or with the prospects many
ieft to come to it.
Having taken some trouble to ascertain the population
of the various diggings, I can say with confidence that
250,000 men have dug, and that there are now at work fully
c


220,000 ;* although the Melbourne editors who were pre-
paring articles for the home markets, per steamer “ Sid-
ney,” a week or two ago, stated it not quite 100,000, in
order to make the comparison between the number of
workers and the quantity worked out were more profit-
able, and consequently shewing a more pleasing counten-
ance, thereby inducing the continuance of the present
emigration mania. When you look at the amount of gold
produced and at the true number who toiled for it, you
will see at once that the business is not so exceedingly
attractive; some of these statistics you will see in the
accompanying papers. The average weekly productions
of the great body to which I now belong is under half an
ounce per week per man, and that at seventy shillings the
ounce, the present and highest price, shews the digger’s
average luck of thirty-five shillings per week, for labour
scarcely second in severity to any extant. And yet there
are 220,000 of us at the business working for this average,
—the expenses of living being about twenty-five shillings
per week to come out of that, and the fare for that price
being very inferior.
True indeed that many get more than that. There are
several instances of men returning from the diggings worth
from £250 to £500; we hear occasionally of large nuggets
being found, of men doing what is called “ the good
stroke or “ taking the trick,” —fortunes being made in a
* This was obtained from the Commissioners on the diggings;
although there are 220,000 digging, not more than one half pay
licences, owing to the bad arrangements there.


very short time ; and although there are some such cases,
yet it is to be regretted the editors of papers neglect to
shew the other and lamentable side of the picture. I
have seen men here taking eight ounces per day. I knew
a man get thirty-four pounds weight in one day, and se-
veral instances of similar striking successes, but as such
cases have been written up sufficiently, and printed over
and over again, it is useless for me to add to the flashing
accounts already brought before the notice of the tracta-
ble public, through the magnifying lenses of interested
parties, for no great perception is required to see that the
large numbers of the unfortunates must be very pitiable.
Just calculate how many poor fellows must go without
any, and the length of time they must go without wages
to let one man get thirty pounds weight in a day. The
following table, based on the most respectable authority,
will exhibit in a concise shape the present lottery nature of
gold seeking:—
250 of every 1000 leave the diggings having made nothing.
100 lost money.
400 a living or a little more.
100 £SO.
75 £IOO.
50... £250.
4 £BOO.
1..."!!.!!.*.,!. £iooo.
There is also a great disproportion between the length
of time men remain at the diggings, and the amount of
the reward is not always according to the time spent.
About twelve months back the proportion was better of


the latter three numbers, and of course much smaller of
the former three. Few came here without making at
least a living, but now it is quite different, and is repre-
sented with reputed accuracy in the above list.
To give an expressive description of the appearance of
the diggings, and of the manner and customs of the order
of the Blue Flannel Shirts and Mudded Yellow Trousers
would far exceed the limits of my present time and space,
but as I have gone on to another sheet of paper, I had
better fill it up with something on that subject. The
gold districts and mountain ranges running in all direc-
tions, intersected with numerous deep ravines or gullies,
and occasional flats, are grown over in various degrees-of
closeness with the Gum, Stringy Back, She Oak,Bed Cedar,
Peppermint Trees, all of the crookedest, ugliest, and most
miserable timber you can well imagine. On the steep
sides of the gullies, the primary rock sometimes projects
as it were edgeways from the earth; in some places
lengthways with the course of the gully, and in others
across it. Some of the hills to the very tops are strewed
with quartz, and generally the rich spots abound with
that rock, although in many instances the reverse. In a
few of these valleys there are small creeks, the mud of
which (I can’t call it water) winds its way sluggishly on-
wards. The prevailing description of the place (the mines)
may be said to baffle description, dug as it is nearly all
over, in countless holes of different sizes and depths, with
heaps of yellow earth encircling each, and the greater
number deserted. Here and there may be seen the ex


hausted spots in full operation, hundreds of windlasses
and swinging poles, the same as used in Canada for wells,
worked by the profession as near as eight feet square to
each party will allow, while the sides of the nearest creek
are occupied by their respective cradles, searching the
washing stuff, brought to them in drays, or, as it has often
to be, on the able shoulders of the fraternity in sacks.
The holes vary from six to upwards of eighty and even
more feet in depth, and are undermined, or what is termed
here “ drafted,” to distances often more various. It
often happens that having chosen a spot to sink, and hav-
ing done so to a good depth the digger all of a sudden
drops through into his neighbour’s old “drift,” and if he
escapes unhurt, there ends his trouble and his profit too
with that hole, as the substrata must be reached to test its
quality, and that having been done by his predecessor,
he of course drafted the whole vein out. In such cases
quarrels not unfrequently arise. We once in a while
hear of a drift caving in, and burying those in it, who are
rarely extracted, remaining entombed in the work of their
own hands. In wet places the underground part of the
occupation is different, we have to form pools for the
trickling water to collect in, and only one bucket of earth
can be got out to every five or six of water. These wet
drifts are the most dangerous, for the earth being porous,
and abounding in fissures and large boulders, it is difficult
to keep the roof propped up. The tents are pitched in
places where it is not supposed gold lies, or else where it
18 impossible to seek for it in consequence of being too


wet. Immense numbers of these dwellings in endless
variety of shapes and sizes, each with its uproarious dog
—its designating flag waving—its big log fire burning
and some of its unshaven and savage looking inhabitants
squatting in front—all combine to make up a sight har-
monizing exactly with the trees I have before mentioned.
But it is when night has spread her sable mantle over the
whole, the scene presents quite another appearance; then
each dwelling of the vast canvas city, rendered almost
transparent by the lights inside—the sparks and flames
from the dying log fires driven along the ground by the
wind —the howling of the canine domestics the lusty
snoring of the sleeping digger distinctly heard through
the vicinity—the uncultivated powers of the vocalists,
squatting to windward of the fires—keep up their varied
ridiculous carols, and half reveal their grotesque features.
Another favourable practice carried on for most of the
night is the incessant discharge of fire-arms, resounding
over the whole, altogether making a continuance of sights
and sounds, that bring to mind our school-boy notions of
a Pandemonium, or of some of Milton’s ideas of an en-
camped host of fiends.
The prevailing fashion in the dress line are moleskin
pants, blue flannel shirt, worn outside like a coat, and
leather belt round the wdst, containing knife, &c.; heavy
hobnailed shoes, and a cabbage tree hat, with a green
or blue veil to keep off the tormenting flies.
The diggers’ habit is, in the morning at an early hour
to go to the nearest creek for a bucket of water, which


only at this time deserves the name, owing to the rest it
has had from the washers during the night; with this
the universal breakfast of mutton chops, tea and damper
is prepared, and having discussed it, the parties start for
their respective claims, shouldering their picks, shovels,
buckets, cradles, windlass, roller, and other implements of
the art, (which have to be brought to the camp every
night for safety,) and not forgetting a bucket of tea for
drink; thus loaded, they proceed to their place of opera-
tion, sometimes as much as half a mile from the camp.
The chief provisions used here are, mutton, beef, tea
and damper or hard bread ; vegetables or fruit are not to be
had now; and butter, cheese, potatoes, ham, or eggs are
luxuries only comeatable by the extra-lucky folks. The
present price of eggs is 2s. 6d. each; and from this you
may guess the prices for the other articles.
The government regulations, assisted by a stud of
efficient police, do good service here. The gold commis-
sioners grant licenses, and arrange disputes. Laws of self-
defence exist among the diggers to this effect; —if a
person is seen straggling in a suspicious manner about a
camp after dark, and cannot account for himself in a
satisfactory manner, he is liable to be shot at once. Also,
if any one be discovered in another’s claim at night, he is
liable to the same summary punishment. This system of
theft, called fossocking, is often perpetrated, so that when
a man finds out a hole to pay, he has to work it by day
and watch it by night.
The general state of society in the diggings is much


more peaceable than you would imagine; but when you
are informed that the sale of intoxicating drinks within
the limits of the digging districts is prohibited, you can
easily anticipate an otherwise unexpected degree of quiet-
ness in such a community as we have here. The penalty
for selling any article of that nature, £SO first offence,
£IOO second, and £2OO third; and such is the price of
liquor when sold, that some have been known to make
money at it, and occasionally pay the legal fines. There
is a good deal of robbery going on on the roads to cities,
where the bushrangers attack travellers. But when we
go in parties, armed, they seldom attempt it. These
depredators prowl about the forest passes, in gangs of
eight or ten, all mounted and armed; they are for the
most part men who have had their passage here at the
expense of their country, or, commonly speaking, old lags.
I cannot say that the mining districts are naturally un-
healthy ; but severe work, exposure to the changeable
climate, continuance of the same diet without vegetables,
sleeping in the tents on the ground, and altogether the
comfortless dirty manner of living and things, induce
among the diggers influenza, dysentery, rheumatism,
optlialmia, varicose, felons, festering sores, and baldness,
are the prevalent ill consequences, I have been informed
by medical authority that the climate, whether at the
diggings, or elsewhere, is particularly trying to persons of
a bilious constitution. I have noticed in burying grounds
in Melbourne that there are very few inscriptions of death
at a later age than forty years, although many at about


that age. It is indeed rare to see a man who has been
here any length of time without having evident signs
of injury to his constitution.
Melbourne is by far the most profitable field for opera-
tion, the merchants there are nearly all reaping fortunes,
but particularly the tavern keepers and spirit dealers. I
have spoken with several who are taking advantage of the
present climax of prices, selling out, retiring with com-
petency, and returning to England or their other native
countries from this disgusting climate. I have made
acquaintance with a man who has been here ten years;
he sold out a few days ago, and now possesses £20,000
all made within the last nine months at keeping a tavern.
I could add some instances of success throwing even that
in the shade, but I will mention a little of the reverses I
have seen here, knowing that the attractions of the place
have been more than sufficiently held up to public gaze,
while the facts I now mention have not been exhibited
enough. I have seen hundreds of fine men toiling here
who have been at the diggings for months and barely
making a living at it—men who have dug from the
commencement of the discoveries and only paid expenses—
men who came here with means, now ruined—men who
left salaries of £2OO to £SOO a year in England, brought
their families here, and are now living in actual destitu-
tion—men who left lucrative employments, and all the
comforts of the English gentlemen, who now are doing
labouring work on the public roads, and endeavouring
(alas! perhaps in vain) to save the price of their passage


to their homes and families again—men driven to despair
and real insanity on account of their misfortunes here ;
and allow me to say, that although I have seen such cases
in immense numbers, I believe only a few of them have
been occasioned by imprudence, further than the impru-
dence of coming here at all.
I have seen the lucky digger returning with £1,500, the
result of about a twelve months’ work, but a miserable
object of pity from loss of health. It may well be said
that a man who works here for a couple of years will
often, or nearly always, make as much as will support him
the rest of his life. I know of a few young men from
Canada, who start for Melbourne to-morrow, to get their
passage for their work before the mast to an American
port sooner than stop here. I have seen the young
Canadian here curse the day he determined to come, and
speak most seriously of suicide as the only remedy for his
sorrows; and I can assure you, the number whose am-
bition is to make enough to carry them back is indeed
very great; and I hesitate not to avow myself of that
number; and trust, from a few little nuggets worked out
lately I shall not be far behind this letter, although partly
on account of ill health.
You cannot impress too much on your readers how
serious a thing it is to leave a country like Canada to go
gold digging. Let every man who thinks of it ponder
the matter over well before he concludes to take such a
step. Let a man, for example, dig a hole 5 feet diameter
and 40 feet deep, in soil as hard the whole way down as


. we ll beaten McAdam road, then undermine to a distance
of 50 feet all round at the bottom of the hole, and after
doing all the labour of carrying and washing the stuS
taken, found no gold; then commence again, like a
philosopher, pay license, and spend £4O or £SO, and three
or four months at sea, for the privilege of connng to the
spot.
Extracts from the despatches of Lieut. Gov. Latrobe,
Oct. 28, 1852. (From the Blue Book on Gold.
U The next subject of natural anxiety to which pub ic
attention is at this time directed, viewing the enormous
emigration poured into the colony, is the supply of the
necessaries of life. As to meat (flesh meat) there is un-
doubtedly for the present, abundance in these colonies tor
all necessary use, though the difficulties in the way of a
regular supply, commensurate with the growing public
wants, -if this is looked for from distant stations, -and
the wages of labour, may greatly enhance the current
price. It is certain that, without special allusion to the
prodigal destruction of animal food entailed in the ‘ boil-
ing down’ system, there is no civilised country m the
world where there has existed such lavish and unjustifi-
able waste in its ordinary use of animal food as in these co-
lonies ; and it would be well if under any circumstances
this practice should be checked.
“ With regard to flour, it must be at once conceded


that the colonial supplies, even under more favourable
circumstances, will be held insufficient to meet the de-
mand, seeing the great increase of the population ; and in
the present state of the whole group of the Australian
colonies, affected as they all are by the gold discoveries in
New South Wales and Victoria, the produce of the year
will unquestionably be totally inadequate to meet one
tithe of the demand.
“I am, therefore, for my own part strongly disposed to
conclude that neither the British nor the Transatlantic
merchant will view the vast contemplated addition to the
population of these distant and isolated colonies, and their
limited means of supply, without recognising the advan-
tage of following or accompanying that emigration with
abundant supplies of the main necessaries of life, and as
far as Her Majesty’s Government may have had proper
opportunity of indicating the necssity of this course, I am
sure it will not have been neglected. The fact is that,
viewing our present prospects, every third vessel sent to
these colonies ought to be a provision ship, every fourth
freight with building material of ready construction, gal-
vanized or corrugated iron, canvas, felt, slates, flooring-
boards, &c.
“ I am called to describe a state of things which may
never have been witnessed in any British colony, but it is
one with which it is quite necessary that Her Majesty’s
Government should be fully made acquainted, if the posi-
tion of the people and of the Government placed over it
are to be fairly and fully understood.”
*****


Extracts from Letters, s•<;., written by Emigrants.
From the Times , March 1, 1853 :
Melbourne, Oct. 20, 1852.
After speaking of the high prices of provisions at the
Diggings, the diseases prevalent there, and the hard work
for which so many are unfitted, he observes :—“ Hence
there are so many failures, and many are met coming
down again in perfect dejection and destitution
But what must be the amount of distress when the num-
ber here is augmented by the tens and hundreds of thou-
sands coming from America, Jamaica, England, and the
Continent. I perceive a considerable number of French
and German here already. It begins now to be an opinion
that in a few months, such is the swarm of people pouring
in, there will be plenty of labour of all kinds, and then
things will speedily find their level, to the astonishment
of those who have purchased houses and land at the pre-
sent exorbitant prices. In a while the colony will absorb
them all.
“ William Howitt.”
From the Cork Constitution of March 26, 1853 :
“ Swanstown and Melbourne.
“ All the passengers of the Surrey went to the Diggings,
and are come back, with the exception of six, after losing
all they had The water is very bad, and the sand
fly gives the sand blight, and often causes blindness ; so
they have to come down to town every three months at


furthest, and spend a month here to recruit, when the
more money they have the more they spend Great
numbers lose their lives All sorts of wages are com-
ing down very fast at Melbourne There is not a
house or a shop to be had When there is no wind
the sun is so hot as to be almost unbearable The
grass is full of large ants which run over a person and
sting frightfully if they are touched I have to shake
my bed-clothes every night before lying down. The floors
are covered with tracks of snails, and snakes occasionally
come in -The price of goods is coming down very
fast There are no beggars here, and the only persons
to be felt for are respectable families newly arrived and
accustomed to comfort at home. Gentlemen that came
out here as cabin passengers are on board yet, starving.
They have not money to bring them home, and cannot get
situations to suit them here ; it is a shame for the papers
to encourage such parties to emigrate; no one has any
business here that cannot work at anything Business
has been duller for the last few days than any time since
I came, as it greatlv depends on the Diggings, which are
beginning to be overworked.
“ Geelong, Nov. 7, 1852.
« (At Melbourne,) many who have not that con-
venience (a tent) are obliged to form a room with their
luggage, and cover themselves with their blankets ”
v “ Geelong, Dec. 6,1852.
“ Influenza has been raging very much of late,
both here and at Melbourne.


“We pay thirty shillings for one horse load of wood,
which will last about three weeks; and eight shillings a
load for water.’’
Letter from Mr. Brogden, brother of the Editor of the
Lincoln Chronicle , copied by the Chester Courant, April
6, 1853.
“ Melbourne, Nov. 24, 1852.
“ In this letter he describes the hardships of a digger’s
life. He has first to walk 100 or 200 miles over a dread-
ful road, with a heavy weight on his back. ‘ Often over
the knees in heavy mire ’in wet weather; and in dry ,
1 clouds of dust with millions of flies,’ and the absence of
drinkable water torment the way-farer. Green leaves
and twigs form his bed. At the diggings, comfort is
unknown. Privations place many under the care of
the Surgeons.”
He says the excessive rents at Melbourne, make it
nearly as expensive as at the diggings; the rent of a
two-roomed brick cottage being £4 or £5 a week; and
that of a two-roomed wooden one, two miles from Mel-
bourne, 30s. a week. “ Every trade is most frightfully
over-stretched except Sawyers and Carpenters ,” whose
wages are reduced from 30s. to 15s. Clerks are a perfect
drug. Some offer their services for their board alone.
During the last three months he says, the climate was as
changeable, as in April in England; “ sometimes exces-
sively hot in the middle of the day, with chilly evenings.”
The climate of England is superior to that of Australia.


A situation of £IOO a year in England, is better than
£SOO in Melbourne, especially to a married man. He
observes that labouring men might better their condition
by working on the roads, getting Bs. or 10s. a day, and
saving 30s. or 40s. a week.
“ That this colony is on the eve of a great change I feel
confident, and that great individual suffering will ensue
therefrom ; but still I think that when things have come
to a more healthy level, the true prosperity of the colony
will begin.” His impression is, that in the course of a
year there will probably be a fearful fall in wages ; that
rents and provisions will come down in proportion ; and
that surplus labour will be absorbed in the construction
of houses, gas and water works, railways, canals, roads,
and market gardens ; that the facilities thus provided for
the conveyance of farm produce, will be the means of
establishing hundreds of farms in place of gloomy forests,
leading to steady agricultural and commercial prosperity.
From the Times , April 6th, 1853 —
“ Melbourne, Jan. 1, 1853.
“Of crime there is a great amount to deplore,
and which usually has its cause in the same source, viz.,
intemperance , both in the assassin who chooses stolen
lucre rather than industry, and the poor digger, who
shows his glittering wealth, and then drinks until he
becomes a listless prey to the spoiler Land, houses,
shops, and warehouse property have advanced many
hundred-fold in value; and although building progresses


at a magic pace, it is impossible to find roofs for the
multitudes daily arriving A two-roomed wooden
house-shed lets readily at forty to fifty shillings per week,
and a warehouse to contain 400 tons of merchandise,
£1,200 per annum
“ Occupation for all strong manual labourers is readily
found
“O n Dec. 31st, 1852, the thermometer stood at 102
degrees in doors, and 128 degrees in the sun, with a
violent gale of blinding, burning dust, as bad as a
Nubian desert, and ere sunset the temperature fell 40
degrees. This is a frequent occurrence during the sum-
mer months Dysentery has been a prevailing complaint
among all classes, of all ages, and in many instances
rapidly fatal The climate is more adapted to vigorous
constitutions, than to those labouring under infirmity.
“ C. T.”
hrom the limes , April 9, 1853. Letter from Wm.
Howitt, Dec. 15th, 1852:
“We are now among the Ovens Ranges, and are
approaching the diggings The bare granite begins to
show itself here and there and around us we see
mountains stretching in different directions. The trees
on these hills look shattered and weather beaten The
foliage gets bluer and bluer Many of the trees have
perfoliate leaves on their lower branches, while all above
are white willow-sliaped leaves ....
“ Singular groups pass us continually on the road. Here
are five or six diggers on splendid horses Here again


career along diggers of a more work-a-day description.,,
in nothing but dirty cabbage-tree hats, shirt, and trowsers,
and belt round waist, with a tin pannikin hanging behind.
There again goes a train of bullock teams the property
of one man, who travels from one digging to another with
stores —sugar, flour, cheese, &c. See, they come to a
creek. All halt A fire is made, and the kettle set on,
and the frying pan brought out. But there again. See
what a train ! It is like the retainers of some feudal baron.
First rides a man in a cloth cap with a gold band and
scarlet mantle They belong to officers of the mounted
police
* * * *
“ OVENS DIGGINGS.
“At length we, have reached this point, after our te-
dious and eventful journey of nearly two months, over
nearly 250 miles of ground. But such ground!
Beaching the brow of a hill we see a broad valley lying
below, and white tents scattered along it for a mile or
more. The tents right and left glance out of the woods
on all sides We descend the hill. There stands a
large, wide, open tent, with a pole and a handkerchief
twisted round it. That is a store or shop. We go on.
Huts, dusty ground all trodden, trees felled and withering
in the sun, lean horses grazing on a sward that a
goose could not lay hold of; hole after hole where gold
has been dug for and now abandoned horrid
stenches from butchers’ shops All the ground is
perforated with holes round or square some dry,


some full of water ; but in very few of them does work
seem to be going on. They have flitted to other holes.
All between the holes the hard clay-coloured sand lies in
ridges. Stores after stores, tents and booths, and bark
huts like a fair. There is a creek or little stream
thick as a clay puddle, and rows of puddling tubs standing
by it, and men busy washing their earth in tins and cra-
dles If you could see our pots, pans, pannikins,
our tin dishes, our bags of sugar, rice, flour, &c
our lantern at night suspended from a string in the tent
with the beds spread out broad over the floor,
covered with grey rugs ; the tent hung round with pieces
of dried salt beef, straw hats with veils round them, caps,
and so on; our guns standing in a corner, with books,
and writing cases and portfolios—you would say it was
a scene at once curious and comfortable looking
“I have taken a roundamong the diggings One man
had, after pouring off the sand and water from his tin-
dish, a pound weight; another had five or six ounces,
and so on The creek, a considerable brook, is di-
verted out of its course, and the whole of the old bed dug
up, and holes sunk as thick as they possibly can be to
leave room for the earth that comes out Out of these
of course the earth has to be drawn up by buckets, and
some have rudely constructed windlasses, others blocks
and pulleys. They ascend and descend, the diggers them-
selves, by holes cut in the side, holding by a strong rope
or strip of bullock’s hide. To-day many of these holes
are nearly filled with water from a deluging thunder


storm of last night; for we find, so far, that about three
days of broiling heat runs into a thunder storm, and
then there is often cool weather for a while, with nights
as cold as winter. So it was last night
* * * * * *
There was a great hurrahing at a hole Before I
could reach the spot, I met a man who was saying, “ Well,
I’ve sold the nugget and my hole for a good round sum.”
There was a nugget, no doubt, but it had been put
in by this man, an old Bendigo miner, in order to sell his
hole at a good profit”
[Selling the hole to a “ new chum” is a common every
day affair. The storekeepers know a bettertrickthanthat;
when business is dull, and they have a heavy stock on
hand, they remove their goods a few miles off, erect their
tent, commence digging, throwing gold into the soil before
it comes out of the hole; they then inform their acquain-
tances that they have found a good spot—got so many
ounces, and show a few fine, specimens. One tells his
friend, and another his friend, until numbers hear of it: all
flock to it, and in twenty-four hours several thousands will
be digging there ; of course they must want food, the
storekeeper sells his goods at an enormous profit, and leaves
them to it. This is a common occurrence.]
“The season has been frightfully unhealthy, and the
journey to the gold fields has been fatal to many Gen-
tlemen, who have been in India, China, and over the
whole Continents of Europe and America, say that this is
the worst climate they know. Without any apparent


cause people are every where attacked with dysentery,
rheumatism, cramp, and influenza The grass seeds in
summer which pierce your legs like needles, and actually
run through the sheepskins into the flesh of the sheep and
into their lungs and kill them (but this is more particu-
larly the case with the seed spikes of a wild geranium,
which act like corkscrews), the dustwinds, and the violent
variations of the atmosphere—often not less than 100 de-
grees in a day—these are the miseries which ought to be
well known The better classes are so exceedingly
kind and hospitable, and considering their isolated lives,
not deficient in general information But for bush kind-
ness I should, perhaps, not have been writing this.
Dec. 23. The thunder and hail is terrific. It is quite
cool—often cold.”
From the Illustrated London News , April 9, 1853.
From a workman of Skene’s surveying party, 30 miles
from Geelong, 35 from Melbourne :
“ I sailed in the ship Nepaul on the Bth of July
making the passage in 14 weeks landed on the 2nd of
Oct Two things which attracted our observation
were, the great number of bullock-drays fully employed,
and the number of men riding up and down the streets
furiously, merely for the sake of amusement Never did
I witness such sights of drunkenness as I have seen here.
and I have heard of men spending £IOO per week, and of
others worth £llOO or £I2OO going to a public house,
and never leaving it till all was gone The publicans
D 2


are the best gold finders No fine clothes are worn,
no chimney-pot or bell-shaped hats I left Melbourne
for Geelong on Nov. 13 The country is thickly co-
vered with timber, little of it fit for building purposes;
the soil black in many parts, alluvial, free from worms
and grubs, and covered with long grass up to your waist.”
From the Times, April 11, 1853.—Hints for Emi-
grants :
“Melbourne, Nov. 5, 1853.
“Your outfit should consist of two or three blue serge
shirts, two or three flannel singlets, ditto stockings, one
warm jacket, three pairs of trousers, one pair of strong
high-low boots, a strong walking pair, and a pair of
strong soled shoes for using on board ship. Many bring
slippers, but if you are up early in the morning, and like
your salt-water bath, as you ought, the deck will be wet,
and strong soled shoes have many advantages Your
clothes should be dark, as otherwise they soon get soiled.
They should be useful for strong work; one suit may
be a little lighter in texture for the ship A light
scrubbing brush is useful, being the usual mode of clean-
ing clothes on board.
“ In bedding, two pairs of sheets, a small blanket, and
a blue blanket —the latter will answer for a rug when lying
on deck
“ Your cooking utensils should be of strong tin make
them fit into each other ; a pannikin, a hook-pot to hold
If pint, and a small saucepan to hold soup, will be suffi-
cient for one person, not joining a party (but on board


parties are formed, with messes of from three to nine),
wash-basins, and small baking dish ; for flour or rice get
small bags made
“ A knife and fork and spoons; a few tools to enable
you to put up shelves, &c nails, hooks, &c.; a flask
of oil, one quart; and a lamp with globe, which will cost
3s. 6d. A small zinc filter, and a strong tin case for hold-
ing water.
“You have to walk to the diggings from 35 to 200 miles,
and carriage varies from £4 to £lO per cwt. Here all
they take—the miners-is a rug, a small double calico tent,
{canvass tents purchased in England are useless, when
required to be carried, being too heavy,) a change of
clothes, a large pannikin, and a brace of pistols. °Picks
and shovels they buy at the diggings, at from 15s. to 255.
each, and very bad ones ; yet you can’t carry them up...
“ Get a knapsack made that will carry the articles I
W named Take a berth not too near any of the
hatchways, as they are generally open to get up provisions,
&c.; see that she be not an old ship; and examine your
ticket that it be filled up for the ‘ wharf at Melbourne,'
3 * many P assen S ers bad to pay, some £3 to £5, for getting
themselves and traps on shore
“Your provisions on board ought to suffice ; don’t
spend your money on spirits, &c.”
From the Times, March 24th, 1853
“ The Ovens Diggings, Nov. 30th, 1852.
[Nineteen diggers started from Melbourne, Oct. 16th,


for Spring Creek, which flows into the Ovens Paver, 200
miles from Melbourne.]
......“We started with four carts, seven horses. My
party,—W and C and self— provided a horse
for a leader, and so we got things carried up.
« After the two first days out of Melbourne we found the
road very good, and made 26 and even 30 miles a day, so
that we accomplished the journey in eight oi nine days.
«We made only 10 miles the day we started, as the
roads near Melbourne were terrible, and one of our carts
was turned head over heels
“We camped just before sundown a little off the road,
Our first job was to tether the horses to some neighbour-
ing trees, then light a roaring fire, and put our kettles on
for tea, and then pitch our tents for the night all round,
with the carts and valuables in the centre. Three kept
watch,' each provided with a revolver and a double bar-
relled gun.”
[Next day they started before sunrise (very cold).
During their journey a tree of a cart-wheel broke, but a
neighbouring farmer sold them a strong spring cart for
the old one and £4o.] “We made 15 miles that day,
and camped on the plains of Kinlochue How the wind
roared over the plains —and so cold !
“ The next day we camped within a mile of Kilmore,
45 miles from Melbourne. Going through Kilmore, one
of our carts overturned.” [The repairs cost £ls.]
“From Kilmore onwards the country is one superb
forest, .but no civilization.”


[They camped a few miles off the Diggings, and spent
one day prospecting, turning over the ground, to discover
its value for working : then they camped on the Diggings.]
“The rockings of the hundreds of cradles produces an
incessant din the banks all honey-combed. The whole
place is a succession of gravel pits. [They worked three
days, realizing one ounce of gold.] Some of our neighbours
made eight or ten ounces a day for a week. The bed of
the creek has proved the richest spot yet, but eight strong
men of the ‘ navvie’ breed have sometimes failed in keep-
ing up the shored walls and baling out the water. When
they have, they have in some instances taken out 17 lbs.
weight for seven days running. One hole produced 16
lbs. in one day, but the great majority are pretty content,
if they can make an ounce a day per man. [They then
sunk three holes higher up.] In the two first w*e found
nothing, but the third produced us 6J ounces, and then
failed. [They then rushed to another part of the creek,
four miles off] We tried one hole and were beaten out
by water My digging friends were sick of it, and re-
solved to go back to Melbourne. The day our friends
left was exactly four weeks from our arrival.
“ Ist Dec,, 1852. What myriads of people are arriving
in the colony to be sure ! Australia will soon play a
prominent part in the world. The diggers, a new aristo-
cracy, mutter ‘ independence .’
[The other day some diggers refusing to pay the
license fees, armed police, sent to apprehend them, were


booted and laughed off the ground. So was the Commis-
sioner, with the addition of sticks and stones.]
“ Gentlemen diggers cannot stand the work We
have two military men, a captain, a lieutenant, an
Admiralty clerk, two barristers, an unripe surgeon, a
civil engineer, two sons of an Indian magistrate, &c.
“ Our lieutenant was well known at the west end,
and ran a career of extravagance He sold out, and his
friends shipped him off here ; now he lights fires, cooks
dampers, and washes up greasy tin plates, &c. for his
‘ matestwo of whom are common working men, but
they have more bone and sinew, and so are ‘ better men.’
One of our barristers may be seen in corduroys, up to
his knees in mud, bespattered all over, and working like
a hedger and ditcher
“ Certainly the diggings is the Dorado of the labouring
man. Hone can fail to earn £l sterling a day. Gentle-
men diggers are not satisfied to work for that sum
work upon speculation, get disgusted, and away they
go.”
From McPhun’s Australian News, March, 1853.
“ A medical correspondent from Bendigo diggings, 100
miles N. W. of Melbourne, says, he and his friend started
from Melbourne for Bendigo, ‘ equipped with a pair of
blankets, a stock of medicine, a rifled carbine, brace of
pistols, and long knife or tomahawk ’ [for chopping fire
wood, &c.] By the third day they had passed through
the Black Forest, and encamped near the bush, 40 miles


from Melbourne Broken drags, dead horses, and dead
bullocks, presented an appearance like that of the retreat
of a defeated army. The ninth day brought them to
Bendigo.” [Failing in gold digging, he commenced prac-
tice as a surgeon, “ bought up an emigrant’s medicine
chest,” and “ began to make his fortune.”]
From the Liverpool Journal , 16th April, 1853.
“ The facts we know are undoubted: first, that there is
an abundance of gold in Australia; and secondly, that
the vast majority of those who seek it are miserably dis-
appointed. The return vessels bring us the gold, and
fearful details of the sufferings of some of the emigrants.
The gold is there. Eighteen months have realized
£16,000,000. The least productive month yields
£1,000,000. All this wealth is got in a scramble; there
is no superintendence, no system, no acknowledged plan ;
individuals dig into holes; one digger gets a little for-
tune ; ten individuals get nothing. There is no legiti-
mate provision made for application, food, lodgings, or
health: an utter disorganization prevails, and nineteen
out of twenty seek in vexation and poverty the small
comfort that overstocked Melbourne affords. Home
would they come, but cannot; and saddened spirits, bad
lodgings and worse food, superinduce disease.”
The following is a list of provisions and necessaries
in Melbourne Kent of two roomed cottage per week,
from £2 10s. to £3 3s. Mutton and Beef 6d., and Pork


10d. to Is. per pound. Bread is variable, from sd. to 9d.
per lb. Cheese and Ham 2s. 6d. per lb. Salt 2d. Butter
3s. Wood per load £3 (about a ton). W ater ss. the load.
Milk Is. per quart. Vegetables and fruits of all kinds are
both poor and dear. Potatoes 4d. per lb. Cabbage and
Cauliflowers from Is. to 2s. 6d. per head. Lettuce 6d. per
head, and Onions, Radishes, Rhubarb equally dear.
Gooseberries Is. 6d. per quart. Cherries 4s. and upwards
per lb. Arples 2s. to 4s. per lb. Oranges 9d. to Is. each.
Eggs 6d. to 9d. each. (At the Diggings 2s. 6d. each.)
Washing 12s. per dozen. Spirits and wines Is. per glass.
Horse bait for the night 15s. On the road and at the Dig-
gings articles are doubled in price.
From the foregoing letters, &c. we learn the difficulties,
sicknesses, want of comfort, and insecurity of [person and
property, which emigrants to Melbourne and the Gold
Fields of Victoria have now to encounter. As long as
the Colony remains in this disorganized state, and until
the numbers already there have turned their minds to the
cultivation of the soil, it is to be feared that many who
emigrate thither in the hope of bettering their condition
will meet with much disappointment and many severe
privations. il
,11. THOMAS, 3RIDGE CHESTER.




THE PRESENT STATE
OF
MELBOURNE,
AND THE
Gold Fields of Victoria
With Statistics up to January 1, 1853.
BY R. M. THOMAS
A RETURNED EMIGRANT.
LONDON:
W. KENT AND CO., PATERNOSTER ROW,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Price Sixpence,
