

«/6X SUNDAY SCHOOLS
•X;,,/. SUNDAY,
29th JUNE, 1902,
Being the FIRST SUNDAY after the CORONATION OF THEIR MAJESTIES
King Cdiuard $ Queen Alexandra
T. W, COURTNEY, J] i\ S. CREATON,
Church of England Sunday School J V Congregational Sunday School Coin-
Association, Diocese of Melbourne. ' mutee.
W OOTCTJA’RT' A. bk MATHEWS,
’ Baptist Sunday School Committee.
Presbyterian Sunday School Com- a „
mittee. ? ARCHd. JACKSON,
• Victorian Sunday School Union.
G. B. DUFF. i
• F W FRY
Methodist Sunday School Union. • ’ - Hon- sec of Committee.
Copies may be obtained from Sunday School Union, 272 Little Collins St.; Diocesan Book
Depot, Swanston St.; or Wesleyan Book Depot, Little Collins St., Melbourne.
Arbuckle, Waddell & Fawchner , Print2o McKillop St., Melb.


Doxoiogp.
Tune —Old Hundredth.
Praise God from whom all blessings flow,
Praise Him all creatures here below,
Praise Him above, ye Heavenly Host,
Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Amen.
Invocation.
(To be repeated reverently by all .0
Let the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts, be
acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord, our Strength and our Redeemer. Amen.
Psalm xix. 14.
RpilllK
Tune—M iles’ L\ne.
ALL hail the power of Jesu's name !
Let angels prostrate fall;
bring forth the royal diadem,
And crown Him Lord of all.
Let ev’ry kindred, ev’ry tribe.
On this terrestrial ball,
To Him all majesty ascribe,
And crown Him Lord of all
Oh, (hat with yonder sacred throng
We at His feet may fall !
We’ll join the everlasting song,
And crown Him Lord of all.
General draper.
Followed with the Lord’s Prayer ; or (at the option of the Leader),
Cbis Citanp.
(To be said by the Leader and Scholars kneeling.)
O God the Father, of Heaven : have mercy upon us miserable
sinners ;
Z
0
0)
i
D
O God the Son, Redeemer of the World : have mercy upon us
miserable sinners :
O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son :
have mercy upon us miserable sinners :
O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God :
have mercy upon us miserable sinners :


Leader. —Remember not, Lord, our offences, nor the offences of our
forefathers ; neither take Thou vengeance of our sins : spare us,
good Lord, spare Thy people, whom Thou hast redeemed with
Thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us forever.
Scholars. —Spare us, good Lord.
Leader. — We sinners do beseech Thee to hear us, O Lord God ; and
that it may please Thee to rule and govern Thy Holy Church
universal in the right way ;
Scholars. —We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Leader. —That it may please Thee to keep and strengthen in the true
worshipping of Thee, in righteousness and holiness of life. Thy
Servant Edward, our most gracious King and Governor ;
Scholars. —We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Leader. —That it may please Thee to rule his heart in Thy faith, fear
and love, and that he may evermore have affiance in Thee, and
ever seek Thy honour and glory ;
Scholars. —We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Leader.-— That it may please Thee to be his Defender and Keeper,
giving him the victory over all his enemies ;
Scholars. —We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Leader. —That it may please Thee to bless and preserve our gracious
Queen Alexandra, George Prince of Wales, the Princess of Wales,
and all the Royal Family ;
Scholars. —We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Leader. —That it may please Thee to bless and keep the Magistrates,
giving them grace to execute justice and to maintain truth ;
Scholars. —We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Leader. —That it may please Thee to keep all Thy people ;
Scholars. —We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Leader— That it may please Thee to give to all nations unity, peace
and concord ;
Scholars. —We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.


Leader. —Son of God, we beseech Thee to hear us.
Scholars. —Son of God, we beseech Thee to hear us.
Leader. —O Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world ;
Scholars.—Grant us Thy peace.
Leader.—O Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world ;
Scholars. —Have mercy upon us.
Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy
kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us
this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation ; but
deliver us from evil, for Thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the
0
(0
z
D
Z
for ever and ever. Amen.
fipnuu
Tune— St. Ann.
OGOD, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come :
Our shelter from the stormy blast.
And our eternal home :
Under the shadow of Thy throne
Thy saints have dwelt secure ;
Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
Bears all its sons away ;
They fly forgotten, as a dream
Dies at the opening day.
O God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come ;
Be Thou our guard while life shall last,
And our eternal home.
Responsive Readings*
(All standing)
. Leader. —I exhort, therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers,
intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men.
Scholars. —For kings and all that are in high place, that we may lead a
tranquil and quiet life in all goodness and gravity.
Leader. —This is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour,
Scholars. —Who willeth that all men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth
Leader. —Honour all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honour
the King.
Scholars.—By Me kings reign, and princes decree justice.


Leader.—Mow, therefore be wise, Oye kings. Be instructed, ye judges
of the earth,
Scholars —Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
Leader.—Blessed is that nation whose God is the Lord.
Scholars. — Blessed are all they that put their trust in Him.
Leader.—Kings of the earth, and all people, princes, and all judges of
the earth.
Scholars.—Both young men and maidens, old men and children.
Leader and Scholars. —Let them praise the name of the Lord, for
His name alone is exalted. His glory is above the earth and
heaven.
Che Apostles’ Creed.
(To be repeated by all—standing.)
I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth ;
and in Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead, and buried, He descended into Hell ; the third
day He rose again from the dead, He ascended into heaven, and sitteth
on the right hand of God the Father Almighty ; from thence He shall
come to judge the quick and the dead.
I believe in the Holy Ghost; the Holy Catholic Church ; the
Communion of Saints ; the Forgiveness of sins ; the Resurrection of
the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.
RpilltK
Tune —
Bateman’s,
CHILDREN of Jerusalem
Sang the praise of Jesus’ name,
Children, too, of later days
Join to sing the Saviour’s praise.
Hark ! while youthful voices sing
Loud hosannas to our King.
We have often heard and read
What the royal Psalmist said,
Babes and sucklings’ artless lays
Shall proclaim the Saviour’s praise.
Hark ! while youthful voices sing
We are taught to love the Lord ;
We are taught to read His Word ;
We are taught the way to heaven
Praise for all to God be given !
Hark while youthful voices sing
Loud hosannas to our King.
Parents, teachers, old and young,
All unite to swell the song :
Higher and yet higher rise,
Till hosannas reach the skies.
Hark ! while youthful voices sing
Loud hosannas to our King.
i Loud hosannas to our King


Responsnx Reading.
Psalm 72
1. Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto
the king’s son.
2. He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with
judgment.
3. The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little
hills, by righteousness.
4. He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children
of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.
5. They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure,
throughout all generations.
6. He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass : as showers
that water the earth.
7. In his days shall the righteous flourish ; and abundance of peace
so long as the moon endureth.
8. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river
unto the ends of the earth.
g. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him ; and his
enemies shall lick the dust.
10. The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents : the
kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.
11. Yea, all kings shall fall down before him : all nations shall
serve him.
12. For he shall deliver the needy when he crieth ; the poor also,
and him that hath no helper.
13. He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of
the needy.
14. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence : and
precious shall their blood be in his sight.
15. And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of
Sheba : prayer also shall be made for him continually ; and daily shall
he be praised.
16. There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of
the mountains ; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon ; and they of
the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.
17. His name shall endure forever : his name shall be continued as
long as the sun : and men shall be blessed in him : all nations shall call
him blessed.
18. Blessed he the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth
wondrous things.
19. And blessed be his glorious name for ever : and let the whole
earth be filled with his glory ; Amen, and Amen.


Declaration.
(Then shall the Leader say unto those present, all standing),
declare unto you that EDWARD, the Son of Her Majesty the
late most gracious Queen Victoria, is now our undoubted
King.
The King and Queen are Anointed and Crowned in the manner follow-
ing : —First His Majesty takes the Oath pertaining to his high office,
to govern the people of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, according to the
Statutes in Parliament agreed on, and to the respective laws and
customs of the same ; to cause law and justice, in mercy, to be
executed in all his judgments ; to the utmost of his power to
maintain the laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel, and
the Protestant Reformed Religion. Then His Majesty is solemnly
anointed, as Kings, Priests and Prophets of old were thus made and
consecrated to teach and govern the people of Israel. He then is
girded with the Sword of Justice ; invested with the Imperial
robes ; presented with the Orb, the Ring, the Sceptre of the
Cross, the Sceptre of the Dove, the Ensigns of Kingly Power and
Justice. Then His Majesty is Crowned in the ancient chair of
St. Edward. And being crowned, he is presented with the Holy Bible,
the most valuable thing this world affords, wherein is Wisdom,
wherein is the Royal Law, wherein are the lively oracles of God.
After the Coronation of the King, the Queen also is Anointed and
Crowned. And finally the King receives the homage of the Peers
and Bishops, who have been summoned for that purpose.
Offertorp,
NOTE. —The Committee suggests the Offertory be forwarded to the Hon.
Treasurer, Mr. J. H. Maddock, care of Sunday School Union. Little Collins Street.
Melbourne, and be devoted to the following charities : —“ Hospital for Sick Children,’
“ Eye and Ear Hospital,” “ Deaf and Dumb Asylum,” and “Blind Asylum.” In these
institutions children are specially interested.


Rptinu
T une —
SOV’REIGN of all! whose Will ordains
The powers on earth that be,
Bv whom our rightful Monarch reigns,
Subject to none but Thee.
Lo ! in the arms of faith and prayer
We bear him to Thy throne ;
Receive thy own peculiar care,
The Lord's anointed one.
Concerted
Any C.M.
To those who Thee in him obey,
The Spirit of grace impart ;
His dear, His sacred burden lay
On every loyal heart.
Still let us pray, and never cease,
“Defend him, Lord, defend :
'Stablish his throne in glorious peace,
And save him to the end !”
Prayer.
Almighty and Everlasting God, King of kings, and Lord of lords,
we beseech Thee, this day, that Thou wonkiest look upon Thy servant
EDWARD, our King, that it may please Thee to rule his heart in Thy
faith, fear, and love, and that he may ever trust in Thee and seek Thy
honour-and glory. Enrich him with the gift of Thy Spirit, and grant
him daily to advance in every virtue, both in the sight of God and of
man, and that as He has undertaken the government of this great
Empire, of which we form a part, so he may be defended from all
enemies, and may long reign over the peoples whom Thou hast committed
lo his charge, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
ftptim*
Tune— Dakwell.
DEJOICE ! the Lord is King !
b Your God and King adore ;
Mortals, give thanks and sing,
And triumph evermore :
Lift up the heart, lift up the voice :
Rejoice aloud, ye saints, rejoice !
Rejoice ! the Saviour reigns—
The God of truth and love ;
When He had purged our stains,
He took His seat above :
Lift up the heart, lift up the voice ;
Rejoice aloud, ye saints, rejoice !
He all His foes shall quell,
Shall all our sins destroy ;
And every bosom swell
With pure seraphic joy :
Lift up the heart, lift up the voice :
Rejoice aloud, ye saints, rejoice !
Rejoice in glorious hope !
Jesus, the Judge, shall come,
And take His servants up
To their eternal home :
We soon shall hear the archangel’s voice ;
The trump of God shall sound : Rejoice !
Address.
Rational Anthem.-" God Saue the King.”
GOD save our gracious King,
Long live our noble King,
God save the King !
Send him victorious !
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us,
God save the King !
Thy choicest gifts in store,
On him be pleased to pour,
Long may he reign.
May he defend our laws,
And ever give us cause,
To sing with heart and voice,
God save the King.
Benediction.
