

THE
PERSECUTIONS IN TONGA.
NARRATED BY ONLOOKERS,
NOW TAKING PLACE,
1886.




THE
PERSECUTIONS IN TONGA,
NARRATED BY ONLOOKERS,
NOW TAKING PLACE,
188 G.


LONDON:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


INTRODUCTION.
Tonga, better known perhaps as the Friendly Islands, is
situated in the South West Pacific. It has a King, Parlia-
ment, and Cabinet, but no Opposition. It rejoices in a
Constitution, and claims to rank among the civilised and
Christianised kingdoms of the earth. But its famous King
George is now an old man, considerably over eighty years ot
an-e, and his intellectual powers have been decaying for some
time, and he is completely under the sway ctf his Premier.
This is what a former missionary in Tonga, the Kev. W.
Stephenson, says on the subject“ With regard to the state-
ment about the King’s dotage ... I may state that before
leaving Tonga, justly or unjustly, chiefs of high rank, in-
cluding Governors and the King’s late son, expressed with
bated breath the same to myself on many occasions ; and i
am very sure that David Uga (the said son) gave me as a
reason for his remaining so much with his lather, that the
decay of his intellectual powers was such that he was now too
easily moved upon by ill-advisers. If a similar statement is
made more than ten years after, we need not wonder. (bee
Weekly Advocate, April 17th, 1886.)
As regards the Premier, the Hon. S. W. Baker, the first
extract will show what the present Acting High Commissioner
thinks of him. In proof of his being himself the real King o
Tonga, the following summary of his powers will suffice. He
is Premier, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Minister of 1 oreign
Affairs, Minister of Lands, Minister of Education, and Auditor-
General. He has three natives associated with him in the
Cabinet, but nothing can be done without him, and he
appoints all the Government officials, including his colleague*
assistants, mayors, and policemen. All salaries come through
him, and I believe there is not a single member of 1 arbament
who is without a salary. . ,
The Parliament consists pf sixty members; half appointed


by the King ( i.e . Mr. Baker?), and called “nobles”; these all
receive salaries as “ nobles.” The other half is supposed to be
elected by the people, but they understand nothing about it,
and are easily and always led to return without opposition the
nominees of the Premier. Mr. Baker has thus got but one
check upon him—the Wesleyan Mission : and it is his desire
to be absolute in Church and State that led to his starting, in
January, 1885, a Church of his own, and christened by him
the “ Free Church.” A peculiarity about this Church is that
everybody is “ free ”to join it, but not to reject it. Finding
that his Church had no chance otherwise, Mr. Baker at once
resorted to force and violence. He filled Tonga with threats
of confiscation of lands, expatriation, and even hanging, and
banishment was actually carried into effect in many cases. He
began in other ways to fiercely persecute the Wesleyans : all
Government officials of that persuasion were dismissed, losing
the pay due to them ; Church property was seized wholesale ;
the Law Courts were filled with injustice ; and finally, laws
were enacted, patterned on the Act of Uniformity, whose plain
and undisguised object is to crush our Church. These were at
once put into force ; and at the present moment scores of our
churches are closed, some of our ministers ejected, and the
people have to remain in their homes without divine service.
But the details of the story are set forth in the following
extracts from newspapers. And these extracts, though neces-
sarily somewhat disjointed, have the merit of revealing outside
opinion; and the blemish of the style is more than outweighed
by the greater gain of presenting the testimony and opinions
of those not directly connected with the Mission; tor, with few
exceptions, they are written by those who might have kept
silence, and pleaded it was no business of theirs. This is not
the “Wesleyan” account; that has already been given to the
world in a pamphlet entitled The Secession and Persecution in
Tonga. Some of tho writers from whom these extracts are
taken would never have written a line if they had studied
merely “business.” This is the story as told by outsiders in
various newspapers, and gathered up here into one, as far as
possible, connected whole. I have been simply the “ scissors-
and-paste” man.
But I must add a word or two of caution: —
1, —This narrative is defective: some very bad cases of perse-


cution are wholly passed over. So that this is far from
a complete narrative. Neither is the official account, for
it hardly touches 1886, and gives very few of the unjust
trials, which now number more than one hundred and
fifty.
2. —Of course Ido not hold myself responsible either for the
views of the writers or their descriptions. Yet, if these
extracts are compared with the official account already
referred to, it will be at once apparent that the two are in
thorough agreement; and that the testimony of these
independent witnesses shows that the official pamphlet
errs, as was to be expected, on the side of mildness.
3. —The political importance of this struggle to thrust out the
Wesleyan Church is purposely kept in the background.
And I would add two words of entreaty; —
I.—Read this pamphlet through. It will not take long, and
an eighteen months’ story is not to be gathered from,
or judged by, merely a couple of these .extracts. Unfor-
tunately we are too far off from England to be able
to answer promptly any inquiries, but the Rev. Ur.
Moulton, of Cambridge, who is thoroughly conversant
with the whole matter, will be able to furnish the fullest
information.
2. —Please help us. Pecuniary aid will be welcome, but that
is not the object of this publication. We want perse-
cution ended, and a full recognition of our rights; and
we want this at once. For some reason or other the
English authorities out here have hitherto failed to gain
us either. The reason I have chiefly confined myself to
extracts has been the hope that English sympathy and
help would be the more readily and speedily granted
than if this pamphlet had been simply the missionaries’
version. We therefore appeal to you to call public atten-
tion to this persecution, and to use your influence on our
behalf.
E. E. Crosby.
Tongatabu, June 28th, 1886.


ADDRESSES OF THE OFFICES OF THE PAPERS
QUOTED FROM:—
Auckland Weekly News, Auckland, N.Z.
Evening Star, Auckland, N.Z.
Freeman’s Journal, Auckland, N.Z.
New Zealand Methodist, Auckland, N.Z.
Fiji Times, Levuka, Fiji.
Daily Telegraph, King Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
Weekly Advocate, George Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
Spectator, Lonsdale Street East, Melbourne, Victoria.
Age, Melbourne, Victoria.
Argus, Melbourne, Victoria,
St. James’s Gazette, London.
Methodist Times, 125, Fleet Street, London.
Methodist Recorder, 161, Fleet Street, London.
Christian World, 13, Fleet Street, London.


THE
PERSECUTIONS IN TONGA.
1. —The following is an extract from a Blue Booh relating to
New Guinea and the Western Pacific Islands.
On December the 19th, 1883, Sir William Des Yoeux,
writing to the Earl of Derby, enclosed a letter from the Hon.
J. B. Thurston, dated Suva, Fiji, December Ist, 1883. The
following is an extract from that letter: —
“ Your Excellency has at present under consideration the
case of a number of Tongans, who have been imprisoned,
fined, and treated otherwise with gross injustice by the Rev.
S. W. Baker, an ex-Wesleyan missionary, who is in everything
but name the king of Tonga, The offence of these Tongans
was that they ventured to address a petition to Her Majesty,
praying for the removal of this tyrant from Tonga.”
2. —Extract from a leader in the New Zealand Methodist,
March 7th, 1885.
“The communication which appears in another column from
the Rev. J. E. Moulton will only deepen the pain already felt
with regard to the disastrous secession from our Church in
Tonga. The loss of so large a portion of the fruit of half a
century of missionary toil is, under any circumstances, serious
enough ; the evil of the case is immeasurably aggravated by
the acts of tyranny and persecution with which it has been
accompanied. We do not forget that Mr. Moulton’s is an ex
parte statement, and, for the credit of humanity, to say nothing
of religion, we hope that in some of the facts he alleges, there
is thrown in the deeper shade of an unintentional exaggera-


tion. We have, however, long been aware of what extraordi-
nary things can be done by the King and Prime Minister of
Tonga, in carrying out a project on which they have set their
hearts; and we are afraid there is too much truth in what Mr.
Moulton says respecting some of the methods employed to
secure adherents to this so-called ‘ National Church.’ Con-
cerning the King it should be remembered in extenuation of
the share he sustains in this deplorable secession, that he is far
advanced in years. His conversion took place more than fifty
years ago, and at that time he was famous as the most powerful
chief in Tonga; so that now he is probably more than eighty
years old. If this secession were in any sense the result of
the aged King’s independent action, a charitable explanation
of the case would be at once forthcoming; it would be looked
upon as a freak of dotage. But there is a power behind the
throne, in the person of Mr. Baker, which will be held prima-
rily responsible for what has taken place; it will be looked
upon as a case in which the King, robbed by the infirmities of
old age of the power to act for himself, becomes but a tool in
the hands of his astute Premier.”
3. — Extract from Fiji Times, March 11th, 1885.
“Elsewhere appears a notice of the secession from the
Wesleyan Church in Tonga, and of the starting of a ‘ National
Church,’ engineered by the Eev. S. W. Baker, and headed by
the Eev. J. B. Watkin. A Tongan correspondent, whose letter
is unavoidably crowded out of this issue, graphically describes
the outrageous extent to which pressure and persecution have
been resorted to in the endeavour to force this movement on the
Tongan people. Since writing the paragraph first referred to,
it has transpired that, in the laudable effort to carry the war
into the enemy’s camp, a deputation has arrived in Fiji with
the object of inducing the Tongan members of the Wesleyan
Church to secede and give in their adherence to the new move-
ment. The deputation is appropriately headed by the notorious
Semisi Fifita, whose barbarous treatment of the native Eoman
Catholics of Yasawa, when in 1861 he and his Tongans lorded
it in Fiji, is forcibly described by Consul Pritchard in his
‘ Polynesian Eeminiscences,’ Chapter XIV. For the atrocities
he then committed he was afterwards deported by Captain
Lcveque of the French corvette Cornelie, and taken to New


Caledonia. Now this unmitigated scoundrel returns as the
emissary of the Eev. S. W. Baker to stir up, if possible, further
religious strife in Fiji. It is, of course, devoutly to be hoped
that the Fijians will not so far forget the ethics of Christianity
as to ride him on a rail out of the colony, but if, in the event
of a chance offering, the Waia people were to attempt it, there
could be a lot of excuses made for them.”
A.—Extract from a letter in the Fiji Times, March 14 th, 1885.
i various times you have devoted considerable space to
longan affairs, you will scarcely be surprised to learn that the
rupture between the Church and the State, so long threatened
by the Premier, has at last been carried into effect. It is
notoiious that Mr. Baker has long been preparing for a seces-
sion, and that a church has been building on the King’s
premises which would not be under the control of the Con-
ference. While Mr. Moulton was absent-at the General
Conference the Premier tried to commence his movement at
the island of Eua, but without success; only some half-dozen
attending the service then instituted. But at the beginning
of this year he took advantage of some discontent that pre-
' ; hlcd at the principal church at Haabai—a discontent arising
from the resentment of a number of trustees who had been
outvoted on a question—and resolved to try again. This time
he was more successful; a goodly number attended the services.
Government officers were immediately sent out to write down
the names of those who were willing to join. All sorts of
stratagems were resorted to to win the people over. The
general form in which the question was put was, 4 Do you love
the King?’ Of course the answer was in the affirmative.
Sometimes it was, ‘Do you love the King or Mr. Moulton
best ? ’ or, 4 Will you be in the Free Church or the Enslaved
Church ? ’ 4 Are you willing that the Church money should
go to Sydney, or stay in Tonga ? ’ In this way many names
were put down for the new Church, although the individuals
had no wish to leave the established Church. Nbr was this
all. One of the local preachers states that, when the question
was put to him, he answered that he should remain in the
Church he was in to the end of his life. The officer imme-
diately said, 4 Then you wish to fight the King ? ’ The man
replied, 4 1 don’t wish to fight against the King, I wish to keep
B 2


to my own Church.* The officer then went away, and shortly
afterwards a summons was served upon him for having said
that he wished to fight the King. It is true he was acquitted,
but it is such a terrible thing here to be arraigned on a charge
like that, that the bare possibility of it is sufficient to deter
the people from speaking their minds. Nor were all the
threats as harmless as this: one of the most devoted local
preachers, who refused to join, has been tried for saying that
the land belonged to Jehovah as well as the King. He has
been sentenced to two years labour and banishment.
“ It has been announced that any Government official who
declares himself a Wesleyan will be dismissed, and this has
been uniformly acted upon. Three heads in Haabai who
nobly refused to change their lotu (i.e. religion) have been
dismissed, and several more in Tonga; how many I have not
yet ascertained. Caleb Yalu, one of the Judges, when the
question was put to him, answered that he loved his King and
country, and prized his office and name, but he could not give
U p the Church of his father. He was immediately dismissed.
These dismissals are harder to bear, inasmuch as the victims
lose all the arrears of pay : a most iniquitous custom which
has lately been introduced. Money and place are as dear to
the Tongan as any people; but lam told that numbers
yesterday took most joyfully the ‘spoiling of their goods.’
Some have lost their lands, and one chief and his people were
told that they would be ‘ salted and fried ’ if they did not
turn; a phrase which would only provoke a smile with us, but,
as every old missionary knows, is fraught with terrible import
to a Tongan man. What makes it harder for the chiefs to
bear is the recollection that, when King George was forsaken
by all his island, they clung to him and fought for him, and it
was by their help that he regained his power. As the chief
pathetically exclaimed : ‘ My forefathers died of exposure and
wounds in sailing about to establish this Church, and I am not
going to forsake it now.’ It must be remembered that all this
Ts directly contrary to the Constitution, which accords perfect
freedom in religious matters; and it is also an infringement of
the treaty with Great Britain, as Roman Catholics, who are
looked upon as under • the protection of France, suffer no
disabilities on account of their religion.”


s. —Extract from a letter of “ Our Oven Correspondent ” in the
Fiji Times, March 21st, 1885.
“ About three weeks ago Mr. Moulton had occasion to go to
Haabai to hold a Circuit meeting. He returned suddenly with
the startling news a that the oft-threatened secession from
Wesleyanism had taken place and a new Church started, and
that several Wesleyan ministers had joined, and most of the
people. It appeared the Premier had made no stir at Vavau,
but selected Haabai on his return, as the place best suited for
the opening of the campaign. His means to get converts
were diverse. First, some parsons were secured and their
former salaries doubled, and trebled in some cases. Then
threats of royal vengeance were circulated, and when things
were considered ripe the people were asked, ‘ Have you love
for your King ? ’ and the reply was, ‘ Yes.’ The next question
was, ‘ Then you will join his Church ? ’ Whsn the answer was
in the affirmative, the name was entered by one of the clerks
or policemen who went round with paper and pencil to record
the converts to Bakerism. The punishment of several men
of course had its weight on the public mind. One man was
convicted of treason and sent to a distant island for two years
for asserting that it was not treason to the King to say that
the islands belong to God. Others were convicted for equally
trivial things. The Governor and some of the King’s family
would have nothing to do with the new Church, and a vessel
was sent, with the leading chiefs who had joined, to inform
King George of what was taking place, and ascertain whether
it was being done really by his orders, as stated. They went
to Vavau and saw the King, and told him what had occurred.
The King flew into a great rage, and told the chiefs to go
back and tell the Premier to ‘ fly ’ to him and give an account
of himself for ‘ turning the Church upside down—the Church
which first started here, and which has caused the country to
prosper.’ The vessel returned to Haabai on the morning that
Mr. Moulton was coming on to Tonga. The new religionists
pulled very long faces, and the Wesleyans were jubilant at
their supposed triumph. Mr. Baker started to see the King,
and Mr. Moulton came to Tonga to get a supply of missionaries
to take to Haabai to re-convert the Bakerites. On the receipt
of the news in Tongatabu, meetings were held in the principal


churches, and the knowledge of the fact of the King being
angry caused the long-shut mouths of the Tongans to
open and give a more forcible than civil expression of the
estimate in which they held the leader of the Government.
On the 26th (?) January the Premier returned. He had, as
was expected by those who knew the state of mind of the
King and the artfulness of his adviser, succeeded with but
little difficulty in getting his action endorsed. The Yavau
people were assembled together, and were told by the King
that he had changed his mind on the subject of religion, and
those who had love for him would worship in the way he
intended to. I have been told that he added, ‘ All those who
do not join the new Church must go on board those vessels
(pointing to the ships in the harbour), and find a place to live
in,’ The whole of Yavau nominally joined the new Church.
I say nominally, because they have left the Wesleyans in
obedience to orders; but they do not care about Bakerism as
a substitute, and the result is that the bulk of the people do
not go to church at all. It has been found upon inquiry that
the success of the new religion in Haabai was much exaggerated,,
and that many of the islands are still holding out, noticeably
those the chiefs of which took an active part in assisting
King George in his fighting to establish Wesleyanism.
Different tactics are being used to convert Tongatabu. The
Premier brought letters to all the leading chiefs from the
King, in which he begs all who love him to join his Church.
This in itself is in Tonga a threat but thinly veiled. He
tells the chiefs that for years he has been trying to establish
a Tongan Church, and has written letter after letter to the
Conference without result, and the treatment his last letter
received has determined him to have a Church of his own,
and that he is tired of having the Church controlled abroad,
etc. Government officials have been told that they will be
dismissed if they do not leave the Wesleyans, and hints
thrown out about stoppage of pay still due to them.
“On the evening of the 27th of January seven policemen
went round Nukualofa, and told the people that the first
service of the new Church would be held on the following day.
A sparse congregation, composed of Government officials, some
Haabai and Yavau people, and the gang of prisoners, was-
mustered, and a sermon preached to it by the ex-Eeverend


J. B. Watkin, who deserted his Church when the Yavau
people turned. The smallness of the congregation indicated
that the conversion of Tongatabu was not going to be quite
so easy as our most reputable Premier imagined from his
previous successes would be the case, and he has in con-
sequence been showing his teeth. Reports have been care-
fully disseminated as to the dire effects that will ensue if the
people do not join the Church. Haabai and Yavau are to be
brought to give the Tongans a lesson in obedience, etc. On
Saturday night a crier went round the town and told the
people to attend a meeting on Tuesday, and that those who
did not go in time would be thrashed. The answer to this was
that the Wesleyan church was crowded with the largest con-
gregation ever known to assemble in it at morning and after-
noon services. The dignified sight was seen of the Premier
sitting in a room which commands a view of the church,
carefully watching the proceedings through a pair of binoculars.
If the mail does not close before the meeting to-morrow, I will
add an account of what takes place.”
6. —Extract from a letter of the Vavau Correspondent of the
Evening Star, April 20 th, 1885.
“No doubt you will have received news by the Aurora from
Tonga of the harsh and unnatural treatment the native
adherents of the Wesleyan Church received at the funeral of
the King’s grandson. I hear from Tonga that a considerable
number there have joined the French Catholic Mission; they
are afraid of remaining in their old faith, and they are deter-
mined not to join the new Church, and, I may add, they know
that any arbitrary measures brought to bear, upon that mission
would immediately bring about French interference and pro-
tection. England has been publicly described as a grasping
country, and the people have been urged to get rid of every-
thing connected with England.
“ The crusade against the Wesleyans and everything else
supposed to be British is now taking a very serious shape.
Yesterday the King had a gathering of all the people in Yavau ;
they were requested to prepare to accompany him to Tonga, to
be present at the opening of his new church. All were com-
manded to take with them weapons of some kind—guns, axes,
large knives, etc. —anything in the shape of a weapon they might


be able to collect. I would rather not make any comment
upon this, but prefer waiting to see what the meaning of this
command may be. One thing lam quite sure of, it cannot be
intended to suppress a rebellion. No Tonga chief in my
opinion would be foolish enough to think of one. Immediately
after the funeral ceremonies of the Prince were over, Mr. Baker
despatched a small German vessel to Samoa. The natives say
a chief went to establish the new faith amongst a few Wesleyan
Tongans there. Most Europeans think the object was to let his
German friends know as speedily as possible the course events
were taking here. I have just heard that a very high chief has
said she was sent for arms.”
6a. —The following is an extract from another letter in the same
paper.
“ By the Aurora you will also doubtless have learnt the ter-
rible persecution the Wesleyan Church is undergoing. The
cruelties towards many of the poor inoffensive members of that
Church will hardly obtain credence, and these cruelties are
perpetrated simply because the consciences of these people will
not allow them to leave the Church of their fathers to join the
sham of a Church set up by Messrs. Baker and Watkin. These
gentlemen say, and would have the natives believe, that the two
Churches are the same, and that therefore, as it is the King’s
will, they must desert the Wesleyan and come over to the Free
Church —as it is in mockery called. When substance and
shadow, light and darkness become convertible terms, then, and
not till then, will these Churches be the same. This is evinced
by the spirit of persecution displayed by those holding posi-
tions of authority in the Free Church. Women are torn from
their husbands, children and homes, and banished to uninha-
bited barren islands, to starve or live as they may. Old bed-
ridden women are dragged from their houses, and ill-used until
they consent to go over to the new Church. In one town all the
people were called out and the Wesleyans commanded to sit
in the full glare of the sun, the Free Church members being
placed in the shade. There the Wesleyans were kept from
early morn till late in the afternoon. The chief of the town,
who held with them, was taken away that they might not be
encouraged by his presence, and after his departure they were
threatened with all kinds of ill-usage; a few fainting thought


they would have to give in, but to the number of sixty or seventy
they stood out, and afterwards came into the Wesleyan Mission
here in Nukualofa to report their cases to the Kev. Mr. Moulton.
These are not mere assertions at random on my part, but are
borne out by affidavits made before the gentleman representing
the British Consul here, but, unfortunately, without his power.
Within the last few days I have seen dozens of such docu-
ments, and in one of them it is stated that the people in Yavau
and Haabai have instructions to arm themselves, and provide
themselves with ammunition, in order that they may be prepared
to come on with the King, at the end of May, and put down
any remnant of the Wesleyan Church that may remain firm.
Mr. Baker says that he is not answerable for all that is doing,
or all that has been done; but I should think that the man
who puts the quickmatch to the combustible is answerable for
the conflagration and its consequences. Mr. Baker, when called
upon to put a stop to these inhuman proceedings, refused; and
sheltered himself under the assertion that his functions are
administrative and not judicial. It is to be hoped that British
power may speedily step in to protect these unfortunate
people.”
7. —Extract from a leader in the (New Zealand)
Freeman’s Journal, May Ist, 1885.
“Attention is directed to the letter from Tonga which
appears in another column. Of the truth of the statements
made by our correspondent there is no doubt. Their circum-
stantiality precludes even exaggeration. Being a Catholic, he
is not called upon to abjure his faith, and writes to us to see
if we can aid in any way the poor people sought to be con-
verted by force to the Free Church. It is in this manner that
the Freemans Journal was written to
«< What have we to do with the Methodist body or con-
nexion ? ’ some, perchance many, will say. And that was the
first question which arose after reading the letter; but the
answer came swift as the thought. Everything! Because
the duty of the Press is to aid all those who are in sorrow or
fear, danger, necessity, or tribulation. That, at least, is the
duty of the Catholic press, without regard to creed or caste, to
country or to colour. To look at all things in a white light
even if the absence of glare causes us to compare one bad man


with another, and thus make two enemies instead of one-
And this we can do, as our paper is not run on what is called
commercial lines.
“We had a very strong suspicion that something or other
was much amiss in Tonga, when we saw the long and laboured
explanations in the daily papers published in this city con-
cerning the rent in the Methodist following in the Friendly
Islands. And the suspicion was deepened when we heard or read
that Mr. Shirley Baker had something to do with the new sect.
How we heard of it we know not; but it read as quite familiar
when our correspondent’s letter came to hand. Whenever a
parson, who has cast off, or left off, or has had his gown torn
oft, is mixed up in any affair which causes scandal, it is almost
a safe thing to say that the gownless man is a main cause of
the mischief. . . . All that we know of Mr. Baker, and for that
matter all that we want to know, is that he was a Methodist
parson, sworn to serve the King on High, whose service he
left for that of the King of Tonga. Mr. Shirley Baker may be
the most estimable of men, and many doubtless think him so,
and perhaps truly; but the gentleman only comes in our way
for an incidental notice.”
7 a. —The following is the letter referred to in the above.
“ March 31st, 1885.
“ Few people have the chance, as we have had here lately,
to see how history does repeat itself. I mean that in a com-
munity like this, religious history repeats itself in an exceed-
ingly short space of time; so that unprejudiced bystanders
resident here can judge for themselves, if they take the
trouble to do so, of the stability or otherwise of Protestant
sects.
“ The Friendly Islands are composed of three groups—Tonga,
Haabai, and Yavau. The King, owing to certain political
difficulties, has been resident for the last three years at the
latter and most northerly group. He has a supposed, but only
a supposed, grievance against the principal Wesleyan mis-
sionary here; and I must in parenthesis tell you that the
latter gentleman has been from the beginning in the right.
I have known him for many years.
“ The poor old King, who is ninety years old and perfectly
senile, is, it is said, led to act as he is doing by his chief adviser.


an ex-Wesley an minister. From causes to me unknown, this
gentleman, before leaving the religious body with which he was
connected, got hold of this fatuous old chief—that is, the King—
and became his Premier, his Minister of Lands, of Foreign
Affairs, of Education, of goodness only knows what, drawing a
very considerable salary, and last, but not least, being the
Minister of Finance. The King, whether or not through this
man’s influence I cannot say, held out some time ago a threat
that he would secede from the Wesleyan body if it would not
withdraw the chief missionary here—a gentleman who, accord-
ing to his Protestant lights, has always, I most firmly believe,
acted in a straightforward and honourable manner. Of course
the Conference supported their missionary, and took little or
no notice of the complaints that the King laid before it. The
Premier has now undertaken the somewhat arduous task of
cleansing out a Church of a somewhat Augean type, the dirt
in which, however, if there is any, was nearly all accumulated
when he was chairman of it; and we all think that he is
hardly the one that should take upon himself the task of
cleansing.
“It would be as wearisome for you to read, as for me to
write, all that has been taking place in these little spots on
the world’s surface, or to show in detail how an adventurer,,
under the cloak of religion, can, under certain circumstances,
get hold of these poor Polynesians and start inquisitorial pro-
ceedings equal in thoroughness to all that the most rabid
Protestant of the present day would dare to allege against his
bugbear, the Church of God. It would indeed be only a St.
Dominic, as seen through Protestant spectacles, that could do
what is being done here.
“ To cut matters short, King George has determined to throw
over the Wesleyan connexion, which for good or bad has
worked among his people for fifty-nine years, and start a new
Church of his own. When the present Premier was Chairman
of the Wesleyan Mission here, he got £17,000 (seventeen
thousand pounds) out of the group in one year; and this and
other matters coming under the notice of Her Majesty’s Consul-
General and High Commissioner for the Western Pacific,
enabled the latter to influence the Wesleyan Society to send
up a deputation, which eventually resulted in his resignation
of all posts held under the Wesleyan body. Owing, however,.


to the power that he had acquired over the King when a mis-
sionary, he was able to continue to be, when no longer a minister
of a religious sect, the Premier of the country.
“It would be sad if it were not laughable, and laughable if
it were not sad, to review the present state of these little islands
in both a religious and political sense. Of the political aspect
I will say nothing, save that it is as bad as it can be. The
religious situation, however, deserves more than a passing
comment. The Catholic Church and Wesleyan sect are both
here, the former in a decided minority, and it has, in its day,
been persecuted to such an extent that it is only the vitality
which is an inherent faculty in the Church of G-od that now
not only enables it to exist, but to flourish.
“ If was thought by some that the people were much attached
to their religion, and that their avowed hatred of Popery was
a sign of how much they loved the Wesleyans.
“ But hocus-pocus, the poor King, governed, it is said, by his
Premier, the ex-Wesleyan minister (now goodness knows of
what denomination), orders them to turn, and holds out offers
of double salary to all ministers who will leave the Wesleyans
and be received into his own fold. The Premier, lam told,
even ‘ lays hands ’ on the heads of some, so as to admit them,
I presume, into holy orders; and very many of those that were
thought to be the staunchest Wesleyans (ordained Native
ministers) have left the Connexion. To the credit, however,
of the people, they hold out in general. The chiefs and
officials with few exceptions have, owing to their salaries being
always in arrear, turned over (though not with fervour); and
why ? If they do not (fervour or lukewarmness immaterial)
they and the people are threatened with having their lands
taken away, and are told officially that all who will not turn
are to go to another country —‘Britain or to Fiji, which is
British ’ —but that they must not remain here. They have been
told that they will be flogged, that their noses will be slit—in
tact, confiscation, banishment, corporal punishment, and muti-
lation, are held out as threats to all (Catholics excepted) who
will not turn from the Wesleyan connexion to a spurious
offshoot therefrom.
“Some have turned Catholics as their only relief, and, of
course, once being that, their religious principles will take a
shape sufficiently definite and unalterable to withstand the


shocks given them by even more powerful persons than a senile
Polynesian King and his evil counsellors.”
“ Good Friday.
« Since writing to you on the 31st ult. persecution has been
rife, though it would perhaps be more correct to say that since
I wrote I have got definite proof of it. Last Monday, March
30, a fono (enforced meeting of the people) was called in this
town, Nukualofa, the chief one in the group. Present (besides
all the chiefs resident in this town): the Buie {i.e. Mayor) of it,
the Chief Justice (name David Ahomee), and the King’s
brother (name Junia). The people by these dignitaries were
addressed as follows: —
“ ‘ The King has ordered us to read you this letter which he
has sent. (Letter read and speeches made to the following-
effect.) He (the King) will be down here from Yavau and
Haabai towards the end of May. All people who are still
Wesleyans on his arrival will be reckoned with. There will
not be a rotten boat left in Haabai (meaning' that there would
not be a boat so bad as not to be filled with warriors to enforce
his will). You talk about obeying the Bible (the speaker
tapping a book that lay beside him). If you did obey it you
would do as the King says. All who will not turn to the Free
Church must leave the country. They can go to Britain, or
to Fiji, which is British, but the King will have no Wesleyans
left here. All who are left will be cut into pieces. Are you
fools that you will not turn when your King tells you to ?
Here is the Bible; if any one can show that the Free Church,
as started here, is not the same in doctrine as the Wesleyan,
let him speak.’ Here a wonderfully plucky native, Joshua
Lolohea, got up and said he could prove the difference.
Ordered to sit down again or he should be flogged, and the
meeting went on again in the same sickening manner for
about an hour.
« On March 30, at a town called Ahau, a fono (i.e. enforced
meeting) was held by a chief Lasike who is a judge, and a
Government official called Tevita Taumohamoa. King’s letter
read, two women flogged, and one man forcibly turned out of
the town by two policemen. The policeman (Tevita Taumo-
hamoa) said : ‘ The King has said in a letter that in a little
time Mr. Moulton (the chief Wesleyan missionary) shall be tom
into shreds and thrown into the sea.’


“On March 31, at a town called Bea, a fono was held by
Lasike, a judge, and the same official. One woman seized
twice by her arm and thrown into the mud or earth (kelekele),
nevertheless would not turn. Her husband seized, a rope
produced to tie him up, and a stick as thick as three fingers
cut to thrash him. He got frightened, and turned, but he was
not released till he lifted up his hand to Heaven and swore he
would not be a Wesleyan again. Taken down from his wife to
Nukualofa for shipment to Yavau, and an affidavit got from
him that he had turned of his own free will. His name is
Baula Letele.
“At a town, Yaini, on March 30, Jione Fetokai held a
fono. They must all turn over to the Free Church. If not,
Yavau and Haabai had bought needle rifles and fowling-pieces,
and would come down and shoot all Wesleyans like animals.
Were there any vessel now in port they would be shipped off
at once. When the vessel came down with the King the
Wesleyans through the land would have to bring ‘ umutoho ’
(i.e. very large quantities of food), and the Free Church please
themselves, or bring very little. At Neiafu a fono was held by
a chief called Ulu, I think on March 30. He said those that
still remain Wesleyans will have their noses shorn off, and will
be banished or thrown into the sea.
“At Haatafu a fono was held by a chief called Gain
Haatafu. Same as above as to noses and banishment; also
that there would be no trials; the King is the law; all
Government people have turned to the Free Church, so how
can there be trials about it ? (The above is hard for you to
understand, and must appear incredible ; but it shows the idea
of law and justice here.) Your religion is a lying religion
{I should be very sorry to differ from this expression of
opinion, but the speaker spoke the truth perhaps without
knowing it), and the King will not protect it. If the King says
one must die, he must.
“On March 30 a fono by Halaholo, chief of the island of
Eua. Present: all Eua people who happened to be over
in Tonga; held in Nukualofa. ‘No Wesleyans who are
in Tonga shall sail for Eua. lam going shortly to Eua, and
I will hold a fono there, and will turn out all Wesleyans there
and send them to Tonga to be dealt with. The King told me
when I was in Haabai that I could please myself in Eua. I


have already given away all the yam patches (mala) and your
property to the Yavau people, who will come and take it.’
Yesterday (April 2) fonos were held at FohihaandNukuhitulu
by a chief called Lavaka. All the inhabitants (save Catholics,
who compose about a third of the town, which is the third
largest in the island) assembled. Free Church told to sit
under the spreading branches of a banyan-tree, which afforded
refreshing shade. Wesleyans told off and made to sit in the
scorching sun, and kept there from early morning till 5 p.m.
A terrible amount of wrath displayed. Letter from the King
read, as at all fonos. ‘ You shall not remain here if you will
not turn. The Constitution (this has always been a puzzle to
the people, who have little definite idea of it; some wonder
whether it is a thing in a box or a part of a wharf) was given
by the King, but is now dead. You must leave this town
to-night. lam going to the next town (Nukuhitulu) to hold a
fono ; if I come back to-night and find any Wesleyans here,
the police shall throw you and your property into the sea, and
your houses will be left me to please myself with, whether I
set fire to them or not. You say you want to turn Catholic.
It is too late. If you do so now it shall be no protection to
you, for it will only show your spite against the King.’ A few,
however, saved themselves in this way by proving that they
had previously given their adhesion to the Marist Mission.
“ The fono at Nukuhitulu was of the same type. Con-
sequently they all packed up their portable belongings, came
down in a body last night, put themselves under the protection
of the missionary, and I am afraid are to-day spending a very
sad Good Friday. I could go on multiplying cases like this,
but it is a painful subject, and one about which it is difficult
to write in cool blood. God knows I would be the last to do
anything to help the Wesleyan sect as a sect, but I think a
Catholic, above all others, must give both pity and admiration
to all who individually deserve it, independent of creed ”
“April 9, 1885.
“ Since writing the above I have nothing more to add, save
that things have become worse and worse. Trade is at a stand-
still. All that I previously told you is well within bounds.
I may have made a mistake as to a date or two, but the facts are
the same, and are, I am glad to say, already sworn to in affidavits.


Besides, bedridden women have been dragged out of their
bouses, old women pulled by their legs, suckling babes on
their mother’s backs, who were forbidden to put up umbrellas
to protect them, have been kept in many towns all day in a
scorching sun, and allowed no refreshment, etc.; and it is
announced that these meetings will take place every Monday.”
B. —Letter of the Vavau Correspondent to the Evening Star,
May 20th, 1885.
“ The evil work of persecution rages here more fiercely than
ever. The Constitution, law, j ustice and humanity are trampled
on in the determined effort that is now being made to destroy
the Wesleyan Mission Church. If I had the space I should
feel afraid to lay bare all the abominable things that have been
done in these islands to compel the people to join the new
Church. Women have been banished to a solitary island with-
out food or a place to cover them, and their relatives and friends
were denied the right to visit them or feed them. Some have
been exposed a whole day to a tropical sun, kept there, and
bullied and threatened, with the object of inducing them to
desert their faith. Others have been driven from their homes
and plantations, and made to go and seek shelter and food from
the Wesleyan missionary.
“ The land is in a complete state of unrest; Mr. Baker alone
is responsible for it. Blood may be shed any day. People’s
passions are roused. All the old feuds the ‘ Lotu ’ had buried
long since are now being revived. Island against island, and
chief against chief.
“ The King’s church is shortly to be opened in Tonga, and
instead of gathering at the opening ceremony as of old, in the
spirit of peace, love and unity, the people of Haabai and Yavau
are ordered to go armed—not to suppress a rebellion, for no
one has ever thought of such a thing; nor is it to put down
an evil, unless it is wrong to refuse to desert the faith of your
fathers. The object is to overawe the faithful ones, and put
out the last spark of liberty the people are supposed to
possess. It may reasonably be asked, What object can Mr.
Baker have for encouraging such a desperate game? To
Englishmen who live here, and to natives, friend and foe alike,
it is quite clear. It is an effort on his part to induce the
natives to drive out every English influence. At the ‘ Fono >


or compulsory gathering held at Yavau to establish the new
Church, the natives say that Mr. Baker, in his address, accused
England of being a grasping country (nima malohi), and
assured them that he was the only Englishman in Tonga that
was endeavouring to prevent their country being taken from
them by the English Government. It is owing to these and
similar misrepresentations, and the disturbing elements arising
from them, that we are now cursed with the present unhappy
state of things.
“ Mr. Watkin, another ex-missionary and old friend of
Mr. Baker’s, has been through the group collecting the quar-
terly subscriptions from the new Church members. The
native missionaries and others connected with him had for
the most part previous to his visit abstained from making free
with Wesleyan Church property; he has now told them in
public that they are free to use the churches and other pro-
perty. It is true that in some instances he has qualified his
statement a little, after a truly Jesuitical style, by saying, ‘ I
am a foreigner, therefore I do not say take possession; but if
it is your wish, you may do it.’ This was said in Yavau, at a
church-meeting on a Monday evening. On Tuesday the
principal Wesleyan church was cleaned and prepared. On
Wednesday Mr. Watkin and the members of his church made
use of the building; the following Sunday every Wesleyan
church in Yavau was taken possession of by Mr. Watkin’s
followers. lam not a Wesleyan, neither do I profess to have
any knowledge of Wesleyan laws of discipline; but I cannot
help but think that they have the same rights as other reli-
gious bodies—the Catholics, for instance. If so, the Wesleyan
Church property should certainly be as sacred as their pro-
perty, or the property of any private individual.”
9.— Letter of the Vavau Correspondent to The Evening Star,
May 21 st, 1885.
“News is just to hand from Tongatabu that the bulk of the
chiefs and people there are determined to resist the compul-
sory change of religion and Mr. Baker’s despotic rule. If
that is true, there is sure to be trouble, as the King is equally
determined to keep him, and be guided by him in all things.”
“Later.—The King received letters last night by native
schooner from Mr. Baker, requesting him to go to Tonga at


once to hold the Parliament or meeting of chiefs, and assist
him there with his presence to put down the disaffected
people. It was intended that the King should return at one©
with as many of his fighting men and followers as he could
take with him; but lam thankful to say better counsels pre-
vailed. A leading chief earnestly and energetically protested
against it. He ridiculed the idea of any one wanting to fight
the King. He said they only wanted to choose their own
religion, and maintained that they had a right to do so. He-
then begged the King not to comply with Mr. Baker’s request,
and asked him instead to remain in Yavau and send a chief to
inquire into the matter, promising if he did a peaceable settle-
ment. To-day the vessel leaves for Tonga with friends and
a message of peace, instead of armed men and a message of
war.”
10. —Extract from The Evening Star of Maij 21 st, 1885,
taken from the Fiji Times.
“The Southern Cross returned from Tonga on Sunday
morning, having on board the deputation of reverend gentle-
men nominated by the Wesleyan Conference to accommodate,
if possible, the difference between the Church and the Govern-
ment. Virtually the mission failed. The state of the country
is described as deplorable in the extreme. The most rigorous
persecution is being carried on to compel the people to accept
the new Church. Native ministers, and even women, have
been flogged for refusing, and in one case a rope was placed
round a minister’s neck, and instant hanging was threatened if
he did not turn. In another case a party of women were
marooned for refusing acquiescence to the King’s commands.
The contention is increasing in the fierceness of its character.
The old heathen spirit is being evoked, and Tonga seems to be
fast drifting back into irreligion, anarchy, and bloodshed.”
11. —From The Evening Star, June 4dh, 1885.
“ ‘An Englishman ’ writing from Tongatabu under date
May 18th, says:—
“ ‘ The principal news in connection with the establishment
of the ‘ Free Church ’ is the removal of over one hundred
Wesleyan men, women and children from an Haabai island,
and placing them on an uninhabited island called Kao, there


to pick up a living as best they can on seabirds and shell-fish.
Supplies of food have been sent by the Wesleyans of Ton-
gatabu, but no news is to hand whether the Government
officials have intercepted it or not. A native ordained minister
was dragged out of service while conducting a service, and
his congregation forcibly expelled by a Government official.
Another minister has thrice had a rope put round his neck to
hang him. Several others have been dragged about and other-
wise maltreated for refusing to join the Government Church.
A Government official at a town eight miles inland ordered
the Wesleyans to go to Nukualofa, so that they could be taken
next day to Huga, a barren rock some thirty miles from Tonga.
JLhe poor wretches killed all their pigs and had a farewell feast
and came down, but the Premier disallowed the action of his
official.
On the loth instant about 120 men and children were
expelled fiom their homes by their chief. -They are now in
Nukualofa, and declare they will remain until the King comes,
and let him do his worst to them. The Premier has offered to
send them back, but the chief who drove them away says that
they shall not return; that he did not want to quarrel with his
people and lose them, but has been forced to do so by the
Government, which now wishes to publicly reprove him for
doing what they privately told him to do.
Dxiving individual natives from their homes and depriving
others of their lands is an everyday occurrence, and from every
district news is being brought in of the lawlessness of the
Government officials.’ ”
11a. —From the Vavau Correspondent.
“ Vavau, May 7th.
“ Quit® recently Englishmen were universally respected
amongst the native races, but now things are somewhat altered,
thanks to neglect on the part of our own Government, combined’
with the anti-British policy of the Premier. From respect we
got to insults and sneers; next the Wesleyan Church property
was seized, in spite of the protests of the missionaries; and when
they appealed to the law, they were treated with contempt and
told their complaints would not be noticed.
. ow another step has been taken; an Englishman has been
seized by the throat, ill-treated, and knocked down by a Tongan
o 2


official, and when he reminded him that he was under the
protection of his Government, he was called a fool for his pains,
and told it was true what their Premier stated, when he said the
English were a grasping people.
« We have had the Southern Cross here with the deputation
from the Conference. They tried to make peace, but that was
impossible; then they tried to get a promise of protection from
the Government for those who still remain faithful to the
Wesleyan Church ; it is said that the reply was that it could
not be given. The report has come on here from Haabai that
over a hundred Wesleyans have been banished from their
homes to a solitary volcanic island for no other crime than
that of refusing to follow Messrs. Baker and Watkin in their
new Church. These things are so thoroughly sickening and
disgusting to every honest man that I should be afraid to pub-
lish them, fearing it would be thought there could not be any
truth in my statements, were it not that I felt sure that the
account of this persecution will be confirmed on all hands by
the reports of others.
“Perhaps Mr. Baker will say that these things are being
done without his knowledge or consent, and plead that he is
not accountable for the excesses of the natives. If such is his
plea, no one here will accept his excuse. He controls every-
thing. All are afraid of him; he rules by terror. If a native
speaks of him it is with * bated ’ breath, first looking round to
see if any one is near. Natives of importance dare not visit the
houses of marked foreigners ; they are watched. It was only
the other day that a leading chief of this island —a young man
of about twenty-three —was told that he must not take food
with, or enter the house of, an Englishman, the oldest resident
and oldest trader here.
“We are anxiously asking what the end of all this will be.
This English Premier has already destroyed Tongan indepen-
dence; he is now trying to stamp out everything British.
There, I believe, he will be mistaken. I have too much
confidence in the pluck and determination of my countrymen
to think he will ever succeed in accomplishing it.”
12.— Extract from an article in The (Melbourne) Age,
June 6th, 1885.
“ The correspondent of the Otago Daily Times writes as


follows with reference to the recent remarkable secession from
the Wesleyan Church in Tonga, the bare facts of which
appeared a short time ago in our telegraphic columns :
“ ‘ The reverend gentlemen who went over as a deputation
of the Wesleyan General Conference returned to Levuka from
Tonga on May 10. The deputation has come back without
the satisfaction of having accomplished what it hoped,
and from various accounts that are given by those who went in
the steamer, the mission has been anything but pleasant.
The whole state of Tonga is indeed the reverse of peaceful,
secure, or happy. A more unfortunate state of feeling could
scarcely have existed in that little bit of a country since its
becoming historical. The whole place seems upset, and may
possibly be much more seriously upset yet. The truth is that
the new secessionist establishment of Tonga, styled the “ Free
Church,” is a misnomer, and a very rank misnomer.
“ ‘ The King had issued an edict—a Median and Persian
decree or ukase—that all his loving subjects are to join the
Church of his Premier’s creation, and this is well understood
to be under pain of sovereign displeasure. The Christians of
Tonga are asked to secede for the love of the King, and if they
won’t do that, for the fear of him—secede they must. The
only alternative course open to them is to enter the Koman
Catholic Church. Not that either King or Chancellor can be
supposed to have Papal leanings, but the Marist Fathers are
French, and past experience and the traditions of Tonga render
the authorities very chary of exciting in any way the wrath of
those most polite foreigners, the captains of French corvettes.
Some disagreeable and painful details have been already
published of the compulsory courses pursued to establish the
Free Church, but even worse cases are now to be heard of, and
on good authority, since the return of the steamer. But without
going into these I might give you some extracts from a letter
written by a Tonga man to a friend of his in another part of
the world, and which, arriving before the steamer, fell into my
hands this week. The writer of that epistle little imagined
that it would ever find its way into print, and all he says
is corroborated by divers testimonies, and is illustrated by
a number of very grievous details that have come to my ears
from other sources. Writing under date of April 29, the
Friendly Islander thus unbosoms himself and expounds the


situation:—“ This land had once a fair reputation, and was
even as the Garden of Eden or the Paradise of God. But now
it is Capernaum. Mr, has started a new Church, and
this new Church is created by force, the manner of which is
terrible.” After stating that public gatherings were held, in
which announcements were made as to the new Church, he
goes on:—“ The people were frightened by such utterances as
these : If a chief be in the Civil Service, and does not leave
the Wesleyan Church, he shall be deposed; any man—chief
or commoner—who does not join the Free Church shall be
deprived of his own piece of land, and shall be deported to an
uninhabited island ; any one who speaks against the Free
Church shall be punished, and severely. The heads of villages
were then sent to gather their people together and influence
them into the Free Church. Chiefs and their secretaries were
despatched to interrogate individuals :—l. Do you love the
King, or side with Mr. Moulton ? 2. Whom will you worship
with—the King or Mr. Moulton ? And these proceedings are
carried out in a high-handed manner. Those who have not
turned have been deposed, all of them. . . . Police have been
sent, and adherents of the Free Church, to each house and
every evening to detect any unfavourable speaking, and men
have been brought before the Courts and been punished heavily
for the words they have let fall. In one part of the kingdom
a teacher who spoke some words about some local chiefs at a
missionary meeting was had up and fined a hundred and ninety
dollars; crime— ‘ speaking evil of dignities ’; money paid
under protest, and sentence appealed against. Another
teacher for his remarks at a meeting was sentenced to two
years’ hard labour. But it is not easy for me to speak of what
has been done, for we are as slaves, watched in all we say
or do, and ever liable to punishment. The spies are going
about Many have joined the Free Church for fear of
persecution. . . .We Tongans habitually follow our chiefs, and
in everything. We cannot act outside of their wills. Numbers
have seceded through fear; their bodies are in the Free
Church, but not their souls. Many have gone there weeping.
*Tis the saddest thing I have seen in my life, this going of
men against their will to the new Church. Some Native
ministers have been attracted with a bait by Mr. to join
the secession. ... I am glad to find that many of the people


■wish to die in their old Church. They have volunteered to
face all persecution. But we are in a pitiable case. ... I have
long waited for a chance to tell you of these things, but have
not had a safe opportunity. I can trust you that you will not
get me into trouble. Ido not fear ; but if it is known that I
have written these things, the punishment that will fall upon
me will be very severe.” Such is the statement of the F ree
Church doings by a Tongan himself (not written to your corre-
spondent, but shown to him), and by leaving the description
at this point I leave the atrocious persecution that has been
actually going on in various parts of the kingdom of Tonga
considerably understated. The thing is a scandal and disgrace
alike to the name of government and religion, and any white
man connected therewith must be, in the minds of ordinary
Englishmen, a fit subject for either contempt or execration.’ ”
13. —Extract from a letter in The (N. Z.) Freeman s
Journal, June 12th, 1885.
“Had what has taken and is now taking place occurred
under any regime even nominally Catholic, how our Protestant
friends would each and all have expatiated on the persecuting
spirit which is inseparable from the Church of Rome, and, over-
looking the idiosyncrasy of the individual, would not so much
have blamed him who caused the mischief as the Church of
which he was a member. Here, however, all execrate the
individual, and attach no blame (perhaps rightly) to the system
that made him possible.
“ Since I addressed you on the 9th April last, one hundred
people have been banished from their homes to a volcanic
desert (an island called Kao) because they would not join the
Free Church. I cannot, or rather have not time to give such
exact dates as I did in my former letter, but all I now relate
lias since occurred.
« A man, Akabusi, a Wesleyan minister, has had a rope put
three times round his neck to be hanged because he would not
turn to the * Free Church. Protestants never persecute !
“ The plucky native, Joshua Lolohea, whom I mentioned in
my former letter as having got up in a public meeting to say
lie could prove from the Bible that the ‘ Free Church was not
the same as the Wesleyan (how he could have proved his state-
ment, poor fellow, I don’t know), was preaching at a town


called Talafoou, in the Wesleyan chapel, and some ruffians
broke into the building and maltreated him by the order of
the representative of the Government. These Protestants
never persecute!
“ A local preacher named Haabai was flogged yesterday at a
town, Mua—ninety-five lashes with a buggy whip ! After the
severe discipline he received he was taken to the Catholic
sisters resident there for his wounds to be dressed. The one
who is the doctress lifted up her hands and said it was murder,
that the man would die, and she could do nothing for him.
Charity, however, prevailed, and she dressed his wounds.
Mr. Moulton told me this himself. Protestants never persecute 1
“ About three weeks ago, at an island called Haano, three
women resisted the pressure that was put upon them; it was
considered desirable to separate them, and two were taken in a
boat to an uninhabited island (Kao, before mentioned, but pre-
vious to the exile of the one hundred), on the side where there
is nearly always an appalling surf, and were told to jump on
shore. Had they done so they would have perished. They
became members of the ‘ Free Church.’ The remaining woman
(Susannah) left at Haano was unmercifully flogged several
times, and the last news we heard of her was that her
recovery was doubtful. She was dragged out of the church by
her hair! Protestants never persecute!
“I could mention many similar cases, but I think I have
already sufficiently illustrated the situation. On the first of
May a deputation from the Christchurch Wesleyan Conference,
composed of Messrs. Langham, Rabone, and Watsford, arrived
in the steamer Southern Cross , via Fiji, and I think were
thoroughly convinced of the delinquencies of their late brother.
What they did, what they intended to do, or will do, of course
I cannot say, save that I believe they will do all in their power
(which I hope is great) to support Mr. Moulton. I think it is
manifestly more advisable in the interests of good order to
support a recognised sect, subject to a beneficial control, than a
new one about which no one knows anything, save that it will
be composed of our dark brothers, who are so very amenable to
the influence of certain white men, that these latter, if they
have control of the funds, which doubtless they would have,
would milk our dark brothers and sisters quite dry, both
materially and spiritually.


«I cannot close my letter without giving you the substance
of the fono (meeting) held by His Majesty at Yavau. ‘Any
man stronger than this (here an old man named Lika was
exemplified) must come with me when I go to Tonga. No
women must be taken. You must go to the bush and cut
clubs.’ Clubs specified one-handed (kolo), double (bovai),
also bows and arrows (gahau). ‘ You must also buy axes (toki)
and broad axes (falevatu), and as many guns with ammunition
as possible.’
“From that time to the present, traders, Englishmen
included, have done a large trade in axes, and the Germans
have disposed of a large number of guns—a trade forbidden to
British subjects by an order of the High Commissioner
“ Sunday, May 17tb.
“ I have kept my letter open as long as possible so as to add
any news that might come to hand, for iniquities occur heie
at present so rapidly, that barbarity practised to-day is eclipsed
in one’s mind by what happens to-morrow.
“ Last Thursday, the 14th inst., over one hundred persons
came down here to Nukualofa from a town called Kolovai, to
claim protection from the chief Wesleyan missionary, who has
put a building here at their disposal.
“ Now this circumstance supplies a good fulcrum on which
to support my assertion, made in a former part of this letter,
that the chief delinquent responsible for these atrocities is
endeavouring to put himself right on paper.
“Last Sunday, the 10th inst., Mr. Watkin, now a ‘Free
Church’ parson, late a Wesleyan one, went to preach to the
few Free Churchmen at the above town, and .... told the
chief there (Ata) that Mr. Baker had had a letter from the
King to say that there must be no Wesleyans left in his town
when he (the King) came here. Ata said he was tired of
talking, and could do no more than he had already done; he
must now, however, have found a means of doing something
more effective than he had done already (he had previously
dragged two men about by their hair), for all the Wesleyans
are now banished from their homes men, women, and
children
“ Now having set the stone rolling, the Government, which
is synonymous with the Premier, sent up word to them that


they were not to leave their homes (which the people however
did, as for months their lives have been made a misery to them),
and it (Mr. B. or the Government) will shortly publish some
tin-pot ‘white book’ (they used to be blue), in which there
will be some sententious effusion, saying how the Government
are doing all they can to stop these persecutions, and how all
men can please themselves, etc.
“ This man Ata is a nobleman (?) and a very great chief in
this grouj) (take a chart and measure the size of it), and about
three weeks ago coming into my house, got confidential and
told me that the persecutions he was committing were perpe-
trated under orders. He yesterday said he was tired of being
egged on to persecute, and then sending (getting ?) letters by
Government officials to stop the persecutions; whether he will
get into disgrace for thus letting the cat out of the bag,
goodness knows.”
14. —Letter of British Consul to President of New South Wales
and Queensland Conference.
“ British Consulate, Tonga, July 15, 1885.
“ Rev. Sir, — I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt
of your letter of 11th June, enclosing a copy of a resolu-
tion of the Committee of Privileges of the New South Wales
and Queensland Conference of the Wesleyan Church, re-
questing me to take such measures as may seem to me to be
necessary to put a stop to the persecution of the members and
adherents of the Wesleyan Church in Tonga by authority of
the Government of Tonga.
“ In reply, I would beg to convey to you my assurance that,
as far as may be consistent with my position in this country,
I will exert myself to obtain the desired result as expressed in
the resolution.
“ I have the honour to be, etc.,
(Signed) “Henry F. Symonds,
“Her Majesty’s Vice-Consul.”
14a.
[The above letter is the beginning and end of the Consul’s
help, though doubtless he has striven to carry out the
promise therein contained. But whatever the efforts made,


they have been futile. Yet this is hardly to be wondered at;
the only apparent result of the Acting High Commissioner’s
visit in September, 1885, was a decided impetus to the perse-
cutions. And this was two months after that letter! It is
now almost a year since it was written, and yet not a week
passes but Wesleyans are treated with grossest injustice, and
are cruelly persecuted by the officers and emissaries ol the
Tongan Government, i.e. Mr, Baker.
The Acting High Commissioner visited us last September,
and by word of mouth undertook our case; but though doubt-
less he has striven to help us, he went away into an unbroken
silence of nine months, after leaving the impression that he
would have returned last November. He will not be surprised
to hear that this seeming ignoring of us has been most
damaging to our cause, and has borne bitterest fruit; especially
as we know he has been in communication with Mr. Baker.
His visit, instead of bringing relief, added fuel to the already
hot fire of persecution.
Having thus appealed in vain to the good offices of
England’s representatives in these seas, we are constrained to
appeal direct home. We ask England to use her influence to
put an immediate and full end to the persecution, and to cause
our rights—as guaranteed by treaty —as British subjects to
be forthwith acknowledged and observed. We want active
sympathy, and not empty pity. Who will help us?]
15. — Extract from a leader in The (Melbourne) Argus,
June 6th, 1885.
“ Within the last three months the whole of the chiefs and
people have been forced to abjure Wesleyan Methodism, and
to conform to Mr. Shirley Bakers ‘Free Church. Ihe word
‘ Free ’ is, according to the best testimony, quite misleading,
because the 2000 Tongans who have refused to be thus con-
verted en masse are being persecuted in the most brutal and
savage manner by the King’s orders. Old men and young
women who courageously refused to abjure Wesleyanism
have been beaten, tortured, or transported to lonely islands
where there was neither cocoa-nuts nor fresh water. The
churches and mission station under Mr. Moulton s charge
have been seized, and the students expelled. During all
these i dragonnades ’ Mr. Shirley Baker has put forward an


ecclesiastical figure-head in the shape of the Eev. J. B,
Watkin, who now rules the new ‘Free Church,’ and is practi-
cally primate of the Tongan group. Some of the persecuted
Wesleyans have already sought the protection of the British
Consul, and others have escaped by temporarily embracing
Catholic faith. There is a Marist Mission in one
of the islands which is supposed to be under the protection of
French ships of war, and the latter might make things
unpleasant for King George.”
16. —From Sydney Daily Telegraph, September 14 th, 1885.
“The following interesting sketch of affairs at Tonga is
from the Tongan correspondent of the Fiji Times, under date
Nukualofa, August 6 :
“ ‘ Much of interest has occurred in this tinpot realm since
I last wrote. The deputation of Wesleyan ministers has
already been noticed in your paper. Much good was effected
by the members during their visit, and they were able, as is
shown by their conduct on their return to Sydney, to realise
the extent to which Baker was persecuting the Wesleyans,
and to learn on the spot that Baker’s plea, so constantly urged,
that the persecution was the result only of the natural irrita-
tion of the chiefs, was all humbug, and that the chiefs were
misusing their people by his instigation.
“ ‘ The return of the Consul about the same time was a
slight restraint upon the Premier, but not sufficient to prevent
active persecution being used up to a short time after the
King’s arrival. Even at the present moment our amiable
Premier continues by every means to induce the Wesleyans
to believe that their only relief from petty injustice, inflicted
by the law courts, local chiefs, and Government officials, will
be their joining the new Church.
“ ‘No attempt has so far been made to redress any of the
injuries inflicted on either the people or the Wesleyan Society.
No chiefs have been punished, or tax lands restored. Church
property, with the exception of one church broken open and
seized since the King’s arrival, is still in the hands of those
who, in defiance of treaty obligations, forcibly seized it. Some
instances have occurred of chiefs not caring to have the blame
cast on their shoulders for seizing churches, and giving over
using them, but they have been too much afraid of their


Government to restore them to the people who have peaceably
occupied them for the last fifty years.
“ ‘ Some four Aveeks ago people Avere startled in their sleep by
the sound of cannon, the signal of the King’s arrival at Fafa,
the quarantine island three miles off. During the night boats
kept sailing in close to the shore, and their occupants amused
themselves by firing off rifles against the Avharf before going
to the place of rendezvous. For some time previously the
Avhole of the inhabitants of Tonga had been ordered doAvn to
Nukualofa, nominally to attend a festival, really to be submitted
to a system of intimidation which, if I was to detail, people
who did not know the state of society obtaining here Avould be
inclined to think Avas, from its outrageousness, impossible.
Baker kept the King at Fafa from the Friday night he
arrived until the folioAving Monday. During the interval his
emissaries, the Government officials, made most strenuous efforts
to stamp out Wesleyanism. House-to-house visitation took
place, and last appeals and supposed to be final meetings
betAveen relatives took place. At ten o’clock all Tonga Avas
hunted on to the beach, to be present Avhen the Haabai and
Yavau people landed. Looking from the Church hill, from
which, by-the-by, policemen drove all natives away, the sight
Avas a very pretty one—the sailing in from Fafa of the fleet of
sixty-eight vessels and boats. A printed programme Avas
issued, and a portion of it was an order for the King’s party to
Are off all their guns and rifles as soon as the King landed.
Of course Mr. Baker will say that the intended discharge Avas
a sign of rejoicing, and not the insult to the Tongans he
intended it to be. The good sense of a chief in the King’s
confidence prevented this being done, and directly the fleet
dropped anchor he Avent round in a dingy with an order that
not a gun Avas to be fired. After the King had gone to his
house the Tongans were allowed to leave, and the Haabaians
and Yavauans came on shore. Every rusty old firearm that
■could be made to work Avas brought, and a nice collection
of firearms, from flintlock up to Martini-Henry rifles, Avas
forthcoming. I took the trouble to look at a number, and
they were all loaded. Clubs were another promising feature.
Curiosity buyers have pretty well drained the island of old
ones, though I noticed a few, and most of those brought
have been manufactured in obedience to the King’s orders


publicly issued some time ago at Haabai and Yavau,
American axes, however, were the weapons preferred, and a
profusion of them, decorated with fan ribbons, were forth-
coming. The trade for axes in Haabai and Yavau must lately
have been good, for I am told that every man was ordered to
bring three. This seems like an exaggeration, but I have
several reasons for knowing that a number of the men brought
more than one axe each. Everybody was on the tiptoe of
expectation as to what was next to happen, but nothing of
moment occurred until the usual Wesleyan Church service was
held on the Wednesday morning. A crowded congregation
attended, and the rowdy element of the visitors got up a
counter demonstration, and continually discharged their guns
while the service w r as going on. On Thursday evening public
criers went round with orders that the Wesley ans were to goto
the King on the Friday morning. Greater or less brutality
was displayed by these men, who, by the way, are directly
responsible to the Premier. I have heard from reliable people
that the orders were given in different forms. I have heard
myself that any person who had died that day, and was still
unburied, was to be taken. The Wesley ans all met before day-
light on Zion Hill, and held a special service, and it was one
of the most impressive sights that have been seen for some
time. The church was crowded, and the brow of the hill on
which the church stands was covered by kneeling supplicants
for help from above, for strength to submit to the ordeal which
they expected to undergo. From three thousand to four
thousand persons attended. After an address, which brought
tears into the eyes of the hearers, from the two Wesleyan
ministers, the people left in a body to go to the King, and were
then told that nothing like fighting or massacring would occur,
but they must join the new Church. This they steadfastly
refused to do, and as they numbered so many, and evidently
were not to be intimidated, it was considered inadvisable to
drive them to extremities, but, recognising that discretion is
the better part of valour, the rage of the adversaries expended
itself in harmless threats. So matters now stand, and the
sitting of the Parliament, shortly to be held, is looked to as
the event from which may be expected the next important
development.’ ”


17 —Extract from The Fiji Times, September 30 th, 1885.
“ TONGAN TROUBLES.
“ The s.s." lona returned to Suva from Tonga on the 21st
instant, having an board His Excellency the Assistant High
Commissioner, and the Secretary to the High Commission.
“ The lona arrived in Tongatabu on the 14th after a passage
from land to land of forty hours against a heavy sea and a
strong trade wind. The return passage only occupied twenty-
four hours. The object of the Assistant High Commissioner
in proceeding to Tonga was to make personal inquiry into the
complaints of the Wesleyan Mission established there, that the
lands and churches held by it under certain leases from Kino-
George Tubou had been violently taken possession of by
the Tongan Government, or by persons acting with its tacit
consent.
“ Also, that the native adherents of the Wesleyan Church
were suffering great persecution from the adherents of the
Wesleyan Free Church lately established there.
“It is understood that His Excellency found the first com-
plaint established, but that the Tongan Government had already
set about restoring to the local representatives of the Mission
the churches and land wrongfully appropriated. The Govern-
ment, at His Excellency’s request, entered into a formal
arrangement that the restoration should at once be fully
carried into effect through all the islands.
“ The Assistant High Commissioner found much excitement
existing among natives of all classes upon the Church
question; party feeling on both sides ran high, and it appeared
to His Excellency that the Government had in a laro-e
measure lost control of the people.
“In consequence of some unauthorised and indiscreet utter-
ances, the Tongans, at the arrival of the Assistant High
Commissioner, were expecting the daily appearance of a
British ship of war to resume by force of arms the possession
of lands held in trust for the Wesleyan Church, on the ground
that it was * British ’ land, and at their own request to remove
to Fiji all Tongans who remained attached to the Wesleyan
Church.
“ It was the knowledge of these indiscretions and expecta-


tions that induced the Assistant High Commissioner to visit
Tonga in a private steamer instead of a man-of-war.
“King George had been so incensed by the implied or
direct threats of removing the people, that he had congregated
a large number of them at various spots to await the arrival
of the ship of war or other vessel sent to embark them.
« On the day following his arrival, His Excellency informed
the Tongan Government that the unauthorised and so-called
threats of interference from Great Britain were entirely
unfounded, and that Her Majesty’s Government had no
intention of interfering, except by the exercise of its good
offices between the King and Government and Tongan subjects.
His Excellency pointed out that His Majesty had been mis-
informed as to the nature of the letter written to the Assistant
High Commissioner by the Rev. J. E. Moulton, and that,
owing to a misapprehension as to this letter, his Majesty had
given orders that the adherents of the old Church should
assemble on the coast ‘until a. reply from Her Majesty’s
Government had been received.’
“ It was explained by the Assistant High Commissioner that
the Rev. Mr. Moulton, believing from reports brought to him
that King George had publicly ordered the banishment from
his kingdom of all adherents of the Wesleyan Church who did
not turn over within two months, had written asking whether the
Government of Fiji would give the banished people shelter and
protection in the event of such a calamity taking place. King
George had been led to believe that Mr. Moulton’s request was
not conditional upon the alleged threat of banishment being
carried out; hence the cause of His Majesty’s displeasure. His
Excellency informed the Tongan Government that, inasmuch
as Mr. Moulton believed that the threat of banishment had
been made by the King, he (Mr. Moulton) had made an inquiry
which was justified by prudence and consideration for his
flock. The Government at once accepted this view of the case.
« Much difficulty was caused by the prevalence of, to use
the Fiji term, ‘ veikauyaJci vosa’; the utterances and doings
alike of the King, his Government, and of the Wesleyan
Mission being greatly distorted.
“ His Excellency having, as stated above, pointed out the
real nature of Mr. Moulton’s letter, then requested the Tongan
Government, as an act of friendship to Her Majesty, to allow


the adherents of the Wesleyan Church to return to their
homes, and permit them to follow in all questions of religion,
in perfect freedom, the bent of their own inclination.
“ King George was unfortunately absent at Haabai, and time
did not allow the Assistant High Commissioner to wait for his
return. The Tonga Government, however, pledged the King
to grant this request, and expressed a conviction that His
Majesty would comply with it immediately on his return.
“ The Assistant High Commissioner’s task in removing wrong
impressions from both sides was rendered more difficult than it
would otherwise have been by the meddlesome interference of
persons having no direct interest in the questions in dispute.
These persons have been warned to cease such conduct; and
in November, when His Excellency proposes to again visit
Tonga, it is hoped the late and still existing strong feeling
will have toned down, and that all matters at issue will be
arranged.
“ So far as was possible in the limited time at his disposal,
His Excellency made personal inquiries into the truth of
certain charges of cruel treatment of the people who had been
moved from their homes to Nukualofa, and was pleased to find
that, beyond the one great fact of wrongful interference with
their liberty, there was no great cause for complaint. They
carried on their own worship, and had perfect freedom to visit
Mr. Moulton and his church, the British Consul, or any one
else in Nukualofa. The number of these people had been
stated to be about three thousand; but a census having been
taken at His Excellency’s request, it appeared that the true
number was 767. At Haabai 294 people had also been moved
from their homes, and at Yavau three. These people are also
to be allowed to return to their several towns. It having been
officially reported as an instance of persecution that some
of the people in Nukualofa had been made to camp on ground
that had been the ‘ common cesspool of the neighbouring town,’
His Excellency visited the spot complained of in company
with Mr. Symonds, the British Vice-Consul, and Mr. Collett,
the Secretary of the High Commission, when it was found
there was no foundation for the report. His Excellency also
visited all the other encampments in Tongatabu, and found
them, without exception, to be on good sites. The people
were in fact residing in temporary houses or ‘ boothies that


had been built for the accommodation of visitors at the Kato-
anga, or native festival, held some three or four months ago.
“ Although the King was absent, the Assistant High Com-
missioner had frequent interviews with Tungi and other-
leading chiefs and officers of Government, who, speaking Fijian
freely, were able to explain their views of the situation without
the intervention of an interpreter.
“ The Assistant High Commissioner, or a Deputy Commis-
sioner on his behalf, will proceed to Tonga in H.M.S. Opal”
(The above] gives an utterly garbled and false idea of the
actual state of affairs, and is probably from the pen of one who
is interested commercially with Mr. Baker.)
18. — From letter of “Our Own Correspondent ” in The Fiji
Times, December 1 6th, 1885.
“ Whoever your correspondent may be who wrote the paper
‘ Tongan Troubles,’ and which appeared in your issue of the
30th September, he managed during his stay in Tonga to get
hold of a curiously jumbled idea of the state of Tongan affairs.
His letter contains numerous inaccuracies, and I advise him
if he again visits Tonga to seek more reliable sources of
information. If His Excellency really received the assurances
mentioned in the letter of your correspondent, there is no
doubt they ought long ere this to have been carried out.
Tugi’s people, it is true, have all gone to their homes, but
they live in hourly expectation of being sent back. The
remaining Wesleyans are either at Nukualofa or temporarily
absent by permission of the Minister of Police, Public
feeling is as excited as ever, and persecution is rife in the
land. Accounts are being brought from the north of heartless
barbarities—the lashing up of forty men, women and children,
and exposing them to the sun at Niua. Two incidents are
related which are worth reporting. A man was too ill to
attend the meeting, and was being carried to it; on the way
the man died. A woman with a suckling babe was among
those who were bound, and the babe was removed from the
mother’s breast. The ordained native minister at Nina was
confined at the prison-house. The native minister at Haabai
is working out a sentence of six months’ imprisonment for a
trumped-up charge. The Haabai Wesleyans were not collected


together when the Assistant High Commissioner arrived in
Tonga, but immediately after his departure,
“ They are at the present time kept in vigorous confinement
in the Mission premises at Lifuka. The full details of all the
Haabai people have suffered are of the most harrowing
description. In Tongatabu yesterday a native minister was
dragged out of the church at Bea, and struck and ill-treated by
the chief of the town. The chief was only appointed a few
days ago, and possibly is anxious to obtain Government favour.
There is no doubt but that he, like the other persecuting
chiefs, will get it. It is rumoured that a Free Church
minister was the instigator of the outrage.
“ The worst feature of the recent persecutions is that it is
distinctly traceable to the visit of the Assistant High Com-
missioner. The diplomatic commonplaces which he is reported
to have uttered have been so distorted by Baker, that the King
-and his Government really believe that the express object of
the visit was to sympathise with them in the line of conduct
they have been pursuing. A letter was picked up in Haabai,
a copy of one sent by Baker to the King during the stay of the
lona. It will probably be published. Baker informed the King,
among other things, that the Assistant High Commissioner
had arrived, and had said that the King could do as he liked
with his own people; that the Chairman of the Mission was
to be removed in consequence of what he had done; and the
Deputy Commissioner had also got himself into a mess. The
.same sort of thing has been sedulously given out by the
officials and Free Church ministers. No one believes for a
moment that the Assistant High Commissioner, with the
information which he must have obtained while here as to the
condition of affairs, would willingly add fuel to the flames;
but the fact remains that the interchanging diplomatic
courtesies with a people incapable of understanding them has
been —not by any means for the first time—the means of
inflicting grievous injury on innocent people without obtaining
any public benefit. The present case is somewhat analogous
to Sir Arthur Gordon’s negotiations relative to the Mua men.
The Mua men, by-the-by, are anxious to obtain some redress
for the ill-usage they received, but seem fated not to be
allowed fair play as regards Baker.
“ The letter I have mentioned was read out by the King at


a meeting held by him at Haabai, at which he gave orders
for all the Wesleyans to be brought from their homes to
Lifuka. A copy was carried round by the official who visited
the different islands to carry out the King’s order. All
twaddle was dispensed with about the people being brought
together to wait for men-of-war, which no one but Baker ever
heard of, excepting perhaps the Assistant High Commissioner,
according to your correspondent. Her Majesty’s Government s
assurance that the King could do as he liked with his own
subjects was sufficient for this fresh crime.
« The King successfully stamped out the reported reaction
at Yavau by insisting on all suspects taking an oath that they
did not belong to the old Church, nor would they do so, and
other intimidatory measures. The method of dealing with
the ministers is to try and starve them out. I hear it is a
penal offence to give food to them, and I know that they have
been supplied with food by white men, one of whom has been
outlawed for doing so. He is an Englishman, and, I under-
stand, intends to lay a complaint.
“ The Parliament has held its sittings and will be closed
to-morrow. No official intimation of its doings has been given.
Humours of a few sops being thrown to the British Govern-
ment are prevalent. I will define them in my next letter.
The Premier had so much opposition in the 1882 Parliament
that he took precautionary measures, and packed the present
one with paid Government officials. The only member who
would have spoken out was excluded. I need hardly say he
was only elected by a fluke. The chief in question, Maealiuaki,
publicly denounced Baker as a rogue, some nine months ago,
and he was brought before the Police Court, charged with
slander. The case was referred to that of the Supreme Court.
The accused has always courted trial, but nothing was done
until he was ordered to appear for that purpose before a
Committee of the Parliament. He was not allowed to produce
any evidence, but he repeated the statement that Baker was
a rogue, and he was prepared to prove so. He was told that
he was guilty, and that his sentence was exclusion from
Parliament. The inference drawn by many persons is, that
the accused had damnatory evidence, and that therefore his
trial was deemed inexpedient.


19. — The following are extracts from the document referred to in
the foregoing letter as having been found in Haabai. A copy
of it was forwarded to the Consul, but no notice has been
taken of it, though some of its statements are known to be
false ; e.g. the statement that the High Commissioner assem-
bled and addressed the Wesleyans. The King used it as
gospel , and it led to a terrible increase of persecution :—
“The Governor of Fiji has arrived in a small steamer, not
in a man-of-war.
“ 1. He is very angry indeed with Mr. Moulton and the
Europeans for talking about a man-of-war. He says a man-of-
war will certainly not come and enquire into these things.
“ 2. He is exceedingly grieved with the Consul for his per-
petually scolding me and the Government, and he informs me
it is not at all the wish of England or his own; and he is tired
of telling (Mr. ?) Symonds (the Consul).
“4. His help to me has been very great in good matters.
“ 5. Especially as regards the letter to England, in which I
brought charges against Mr. Symonds; he says it is hard for him
to speak about it, as it has been remitted to the Home officials.
But it was clear to me that Mr. Symonds must fall into a pit.
“6. One thing will rejoice Your Majesty ; Mr. Moulton
must go. The Governor says it is right he should go, and he
will so inform the Conference in Sydney.
“8. As regards the request for land, Mr. Moulton has denied
it, and says he did not ask for land, but his message was that,
should the Wesley ans be expelled, would England allow them
to go to Fiji and dwell there. What a twisting of language!
But never mind. This is an age of lies, and who marvels any
longer at the lies that are told ?
“He gave orders to assemble all the Wesley ans; and the
Government officials were also present. The Governor spoke
as follows: —
“ ‘ There is a matter I wish to speak to you about. You
know that this vessel is not a suitable one for me to come in,
as it is a wretched collier. The vessel I ought to come in is a
man-of-war. But you see how trivial the matter is—it is not
of importance enough to England for me to come in a man-of-
war. A man-of-war will not come to Tonga. Nor will there
be an investigation; for you are the people who are the cause


of all the disturbance in the land. And Mr. Moulton, the
minister, will be taken away, and you will fall into a hole. And
when I go from here, it is for Tubou (the King) to please himself
in his own land. And your talk about the coming of a man-of-
war and of an investigation is a great disgrace to England.’ ”
(The above document was used by the King, and was circu-
lated everywhere as true, and greatly disheartened the Wes-
leyans; yet the High Commissioner has taken no public notice-
of it, though well knowing it to be false.)
20. — The following is from The Auckland Weekly Mews,
November 14 th, 1885:
“ The correspondent of the Fiji Times writes :
“ ‘ Tongan affairs have now reached a stage which must
speedily produce decisive results. When I last wrote a com-
parative lull existed in the Church dispute. I have neither
time nor inclination to relate all the measures taken to sup-
press Wesleyanism, but will mention a few. All the Wesleyans
are compelled to live at Nukualofa, and from 3000 to 4000 of
them have, for the last three weeks, been living in wretched
huts, built on land which reeks with the filth which the accu-
mulated people engendered during their long stay for the
festival of which I wrote formerly. Mo one is allowed to leave
the town without a written order from the Minister of Police.
Permission to go and look for food is only granted for one
clear day. Working for white men is prohibited. A case
occurred a few days ago of a woman being detained here from
her sick husband living twelve miles off, a Free Churchman.
The man died without seeing his wife. Another very painful
case happened last week. The child of a young Wesleyan
couple was slightly indisposed. The parents urged the sick-
ness of their child as an excuse for not coming to Nukualofa.
The excuse was not accepted, and, in being brought down, the
child caught a fresh cold which produced complications and
death. The number of deaths which can be directly traced to
the compulsory accumulation of the people at Nukualofa
is, I have been informed by an undoubted authority, nearly
one hundred. The Wesleyans have been informed officially
that their lands are all taken from them; that the crop
of yams is all that may be touched by the owners. Threats
have been, and, indeed, are being, constantly held out that


even the food supply will be stopped. Every person with an
hereditary name has been disgraced. Many prosecutions have
occurred for alleged libel and slander. One of them is
especially ludicrous. An old Wesleyan woman dreamt that
she saw a deceased Free Church parson walking about without
his clothes. Thoughtlessly the dream was related to some
other old woman, and it came to the Premier’s ears. The
judgment of the Court was that she was to pay thirty dollars
to the Tongan Government, which she did.’ ”
20a. —The letter from which the above is taken continues as
follows :—
“ ‘ The excuse which the King has given for detaining the
Wesleyans from their homes is, that Mr. Moulton has asked
the Fijian Government for a grant of land in case the King
carried out his threat to banish the people, and that he should
keep them until the vessel arrived with the reply. If no
vessel arrives he will settle the matter himself. The Govern-
ment officials persistently inform the Wesleyans that either
hanging or banishing will be the settling in question ; hang-
ing for some, and banishing for others. Wesleyans are not
allowed to work for Englishmen.
“ ‘ Another thing which Mr. Baker has stuffed into the foolish
old King’s head is, that a petition is in secret progress, having
for an object annexation to New Zealand, and many of the
Wesleyans have been compelled to swear that they have not
signed it. No one here ever even I believe dreamt of
such a petition, and the natives would have been only too
delighted to sign anything of the kind if they had been
afforded an opportunity. Last week a large number of Free
Church people turned Catholics, and many more are expected
to turn. The French man-of-war now in harbour has prevented
them from being bullied, and the knowledge by the Government
that several more French war ships are shortly to arrive will
ensure immunity to those who are certain to turn from the so-
called Free Church, to which they were only nominally attached.
‘“The state which the country is in is absolutely inde-
scribable, and society is thoroughly disorganised. The laws,
though nominally still existent, are utterly disregarded. News
is to hand that the Wesleyans have commenced again to hold
services at Yavau, and Mr. Baker sent King George yesterday


to stamp out the revival. My next letter will inform you how
he succeeds. The King is expected back on the 16th instant.
No one knows when the Parliament is to be held, or the King’s
church opened. Subscriptions are being made to buy food for
those Wesleyans who are in distress through scarcity of food.’
“ (It is not a little singular that so wide a difference should
exist between our correspondent’s account and that recently
given as the result of the Assistant High Commissioner’s visit
to Tonga.—Ed. F. T.) ”
21 .—Letter in The Auckland Weekly News, October 3rd
1885.
“The Religious Contentions in Tonga.
Sir, My attention has been called to a communication
from 4 Our Special Reporter with the Janet Nicoll,’ under the
above heading, which in my opinion is so utterly inaccurate
in its principal statements, so calculated to mislead your
Wesleyan readers especially, that I must ask your permission
to reply thereto. Permit me first of all to say that I have
been intimately acquainted with Mr. Baker for nearly thirty
yeais, and with Mr. Moulton for about seventeen years,
and have frequently corresponded with both during those'
peiiods; that I have many Tongan friends, on whose judgment
and testimony I can fully rely; that I was a member of the
General Conference held in South Australia in 1881, and of
the same Conference held in your colony last November, when
I was appointed a member of the deputation to Tonga to
inquire into the unpleasant state of things existing there for
some time past; and that I (with the Revs. Messrs. Watsford
of Victoria, and Rabone of New South Wales) visited Tonga
last May, and had the fullest and freest conversations with
Messrs. Baker, Watkin, and Moulton, as well as with many of
the Tongans friends of mine and others. I mention these
facts, sir, to show that, having these facilities for acquiring
information, and being a friend of all the parties referred to by
youi repoiter, I am as likely to form an accurate opinion upon
the state of things existing in Tonga as, may I not say, your
reporter. Your readers, however, must judge for themselves.
lour reporter says: ‘The issue to be decided between
the Tongan Government and the Sydney Wesleyan Conference


is as to the government of the Tongan Church, and that this
means, Who shall handle the funds? and the New South
Wales Conference wishes to stick to the bag.’ That yuur
reporter is entirely wrong will be clearly seen from the follow-
ing resolution of the General Conference, passed in 1881;
4 That the Friendly Islands District shall have its own district
funds, as is the case with Queensland District.’ , . . ‘ That the
Friendly Islands District, which has since 1875 been respon-
sible for the support of the native departments of the work,
shall hereafter from January Ist, 1882, undertake the entire
responsibility of the entire work in that district, so as to relieve
the Board of Missions.’ Another resolution, passed by the
same Conference, shows, not the anxiety of the Conference to
‘ stick to the bag,’ but to assist the Friendly Islands District in
the not improbable event of its not being able to meet all its
liabilities from hurricanes and other disasters, and is to the
effect that the deficiencies in the allowances of the ministers
may be paid by the Mission Board.
“ I may add, sir, that during the whole of the deputation’s
communications with Mr. Baker last May no word was spoken
—as indeed from the foregoing circumstances it was impossible
there could be—about any funds whatever. Your reporter
emphatically denies that ‘ virtuous, God-fearing Wesleyan
Christians have been called upon to renounce their religion,
or suffer stripes, starvation, murder, banishment.’ Omit the
word murder, and I affirm that your reporter is again entirely
wrong; and Mr. Baker, sir, is my authority. Both he and
Mr. Wakin admitted to the deputation that the people had
been persecuted because they were Wesleyans, and pleaded
that the chiefs who persecuted were irritated against Mr.
Moulton. On our way to and from Yavau to see the King
we passed the Island of Kao, whither some Wesleyans had been
deported, because they had refused to join the (sic) ‘ Free
Church of Tonga.’ I called Mr. Baker’s attention to the fact
of this outrage having been committed, the people having been
banished to an uninhabited island, there being no houses nor
food there, solely because they would not join the Free Church.
He replied : £ Oh, there are lots of nuts and wild yams on the
island; they won’t fare badly; and they will not be long on
the island, as I have to-night written a letter to the King, and
they will soon be released ! ’ I asked him if he had heard of


three girls being deported because they refused to abandon,
the Wesleyan Church. He replied that he had not heard of it.
I then told him that a letter had been received professedly
from the King, ordering these girls to be deported to the above
island, and that they were taken there. On the way they were
told that they would not be landed, but be pitched into the
sea, where it was very rocky, and therefore dangerous to land.
At this point Mr. Baker interrupted me by saying : ‘ Oh, no,,
they were not taken to the island ; they had only got half-way
across when the girls recanted, and were thereupon taken back
to their own island! ’ These, sir, are Mr. Baker’s own words
to me, and spoken in the presence of Eev. J. Watsford, ex-
President of the Wesleyan General Conference.
“Another case was that of seven women banished to an
uninhabited island, where they remained for twenty one days,
solely because they refused to renounce Wesleyanism. Many
other cases of gross cruelty practised upon Wesleyans because
of their adherence to Wesleyanism might be given, but the
above will' show the value of the information furnished to your
reporter in Tonga.
“Your reporter contends that the seizure of Wesleyan
Church properties by the Tongans is perfectly justifiable, or
at all events that the legality thereof is a question which
should be decided by the Tongan Courts, and not by the
Commissioner’s Court, as Mr. Moulton has no status in the
latter. The simple answer to this is, that the Treaty between
Great Britain and Tonga provides for any case, in which
British property is concerned, being tried before the Commis-
sioner’s Court; and that Mr. Baker virtually admitted to the
deputation that the seizure of these properties was illegal, by
handing to it an application addressed to the President of the
New South Wales Conference, asking permission to occupy
these very church properties, assuring us also that he would
take action to have them restored to the Conference. I may
add that one of the recommendations made by the deputation
was: ‘ That our churches, where we have no people, be lent for
the present to the new Church, on application being made to
the chairman of the district.’ Your reporter says further:
i The numbers of Roman Catholics in Tonga have increased by
about three hundred in the last two or three years, not, mind,
on account of the squabbles.’ But Mr. Baker and Mr. Watkin


stated to the deputation that a large number of Wesleyans
had gone over to the Eomish Church altogether on account
of these squabbles. And others also made the same statement,
adding that, so soon as the people abandoned Mr. Moulton,
whether to join the Romish Church or to abstain from
church-going altogether, they were freed from persecution.
“Your reporter also says that some of his (the reporter’s)
party were informed by the Wesleyan (Moultonite) Mission
that ‘ the chiefs of the Wesleyan (Moultonite) section had issued
instructions to their followers to sharpen axes, and be ready
for war before the arrival of the King.’ I need hardly point
out the absurdity of such a statement in the presence of your
reporter’s figures. He says ‘ that out of a population of some
23,000 less than 4000 support Mr. Moulton, and that this
small number is steadily decreasing.’ From my own personal
knowledge of some of the leading members of the Wesleyan
Church in Tonga I should not hesitate to denounce this state-
ment as a gross slander, and as a matter of fact I have in my
study at this moment one of the leading Church officials in
Tonga, a chief of high rank in Fiji, who is fully informed on
Tongan matters, and who is thoroughly trustworthy, and he
assures me no such instructions were given. Further, he tells
me that the King had arrived in Tonga before he himself left,
had summoned all the Wesleyans to appear before him ; that,
after assembling together on Church Hill, and praying together,
and exhorting each other to stand firm, even if they were to
die, they went to the King, I need hardly add without ‘ axes ’
or any other weapon, and listened to his address to them,
conducting themselves with the utmost propriety. He says,
further, that if such instructions had been given, they would
have been traced to the author, who would have been in prison
long ago. The King’s address is also proof of the falsity
of this charge. He said: ‘ I hear it has been reported that
lam come to hang and club you. This report is not true. Do
not believe it. * I was no manslayer in the olden days, nor am I
intending to be one now.’ Mr. Baker told me that the King was
coming to Nukualofa, and that ‘ on his arrival those who follow
Mr. Moulton will be treated as rebels and hanged or banished ! ’
“ I must apologise for taking up so much of your space, but
in justice to the Wesleyan community in Tonga, and to the
Conference, so grossly misrepresented, as well as for the infor-


mation of our Wesleyan friends in New Zealand, I could not
write less than I have done; indeed, I could have presented
an even stronger view of the question.
“ I am, etc.,
“Frederick Langham,
“Chairman of Wesleyan Missions, Fiji.
“ Bau, September 2, 1885.”
22.— The following article is taken from The St. James’s
Gazette, October Bth, 1885.
“ A SOUTH SEA INQUISITOR.
“In England we live so much according to rule and prece-
dent, so restricted to the paths of decent behaviour by our
fellows, that we are apt to think that the days of the old-
fashioned, heavy-handed, callous-hearted sort of adventurers
are no more. This is a mistake. The days of buccaneering
may be over, but there are other more sneaking and more safe
methods of carrying on a similar game. By selecting a field of
operations remote from Europe, by conforming in some ways to
‘ the spirit of the times,’ and by a change in the old tactics,
the business of adventurer may be worked as freely and
prosperously as ever.
“ There is in the South Pacific a race of gentle, quiet, peace-
ful people, who for years have been in possession of the
so-called advantages of civilization, and who for fully two
generations have been not only ‘professing Christians,’ but
practical ones as well. They may not always be—what is
the phrase ?— ‘ consistent in their walk,’ but they are regular
church-goers (being fined for non-attendance), and possess the
spirit of loving-kindness, charity, and unselfishness to an
extent which is unusual amongst Christians of longer descent.
“ In an evil hour for this happy people a certain person from
a small township of Australia, finding all other means of
livelihood to fail him, resolved to adopt the title of Reverend
and the profession of missionary ; and did so. He cast his eyes
over the islands of the South Pacific, and had (for himself) the
good luck to select or to be selected for the charge of the islands
of which we write. And thither, many years ago, he sailed.
“ Now it must be acknowledged that this man is a person
of exceptional mental power ; he is very clever, and he has a
strong will. On arriving at those beautiful reef-protected


islands, he found the people in an almost Arcadian state of
content, and at once saw the opening he required for his own
enrichment and aggrandisement. The principal chief—King,
as he is called—was even then no longer young, and over him
the missionary (we regret having to use the word in connection
with this person) at once gained an almost complete ascendancy,
originally, it is believed, by some knowledge of medicine,
which the superstitious and half-savage being ascribed to some-
thing like witchcraft. From that time to this our adventurer
has been paramount in the little nation. Nominally a Minister
of the King’s, he is in reality tyrant of the group.
“ His salary as Minister is but a small one, but he is believed
to have amassed a large fortune. It is his boast that, whereas
when he arrived in the island the King was without a penny,
now he receives £I2OO a year from his people, and that the
revenue of the country is 100,000 dollars. This clever fellow
has gratified the vanity of the foolish old King by instituting
ridiculous imitations of European Court etiquette ; has bought
him a throne and a crown; has built him a palace; and pur-
chased him European furniture, numerous most absurd and
expensive articles, many of which now lie about rotting and
unused, and all paid for by gross unnecessary taxation. Before-
times the King lived in a patriarchal way amongst his people,
and was always easy of access ; now he is separated from them
by absurd forms of ceremonial, and his Minister, who has
established courts, tribunals, punishments, and prisons, always
comes between the people and their head. ... As was to be
expected from such treatment, the frankness of the people is
being changed to an unnatural reserve and deceit. All the old
joyous dances and recreations having been forbidden—of course
under heavy fines —the true morality of this people, which was
high, has steadily declined.
“ . . . Since then the body to which this man unworthily
belongs has cast him out. One would have thought that from
that time our adventurer’s power would have ceased. No such
thing. He has retained his self-instituted posts of Prime
Minister and First (and only) Lord of the Treasury, and,
notwithstanding the efforts of our humane and energetic
Consul to get him removed, has been as mischievous as ever.
“ Having since his expulsion from his Church lost some of
his influence over the people, he determined to make a bold


stroke to regain his old ascendancy. He has therefore one
can hardly help admiring his readiness of resource—calm y
thrown over the authority of the Society and Church whose
servant he once was, and is now trying to force down the throats
of this unhappy people what he calls a ‘ Free Church, of which
he has declared himself the head. The King, who is nearly
ninety years of age, and in his second childhood, has been
converted of course ; what is more, he prepared to support the
new Church with fire and sword—as once before, fifty or sixty
years ago, he established the one he is now endeavouring to
subvert! According to my latest reports from the Pacific, the
country is in a most unhappy state.
“ The new prophet opened his campaign in the most northerly
island of the group. He appears to have terrified and cajoled
the people there into acquiescence, which state of affairs was
assisted by the behaviour of the missionary stationed there,
who, threatened with dismissal, accepted the new ‘ Free Church.
In the other parts of the group it was very different the
natives utterly refused to leave the Mission, and the Minister
immediately began a system of persecution. His plans were
well laid. First of all he seized upon all Church property in
the name of the King. His next step was to give their conge
to all officials of the Government who would not turn, and to
refuse payment of the arrears of their salaries. Bribes were
offered to the chiefs to apostatize, and threats were made to
them when they refused to do so. But through all this they
held out. Then began a fearful time of ill-treatment for this
suffering people, whose only fault was their steadfastness to the
faith they had been taught and in which they had lived al
their lives. Those who refuse to go over are driven from their
lands and their possessions are confiscated. In some instances
the people have been seized, carried from their homes, and
placed on desert islands, of which there are several m the
group The old people have been shamefully abused, and old
and young alike have been tortured and beaten to the point of
death. ‘ And all this,’ as my correspondent adds/ because they
will not subscribe and bow down to the Prime Minister. Tru y
my heart bleeds for this my poor people who suffer these
things. In spite of all this the people hold out splendidly
«My informant adds that the British Consul has worked
night and day to help the people; he has insisted upon the


persecutions being stopped, and upon the restoration of the
Church property, but so far his representations have been of no
avail. It is believed that he has now written to the British
Government for instruction and assistance. Meanwhile the
Minister evidently feels secure in his position. The latest news
is to the effect that the King has collected an armed force in
the north, with which he purposed descending upon the other
islands with intent to kill all Avho still held out against his orders.
“ Surely our Government will not permit a British subject to
go on in this way. If it has not already done so, it ought at
once to telegraph instructions to one of the several men-of-war
on the South Pacific station to proceed at once to support the
action of our Consul. The man who has been a curse to the
islands for years should be ordered away from them. This was
done in the case of a similar despot in the Navigator Islands,
with the utmost benefit to the inhabitants of that group. He
would probably endeavour to conceal himself, Jbut very little
time would assuredly bring him forth, for, to my personal
knowledge, the man is loathed by every man, woman, and child
on the islands.
“ But the scene of these persecutions is far off; the people,
though of our faith, are not of our colour; and amidst the
great interests which absorb public attention in England, little
wrongs —or rather, the great and crying wrongs of a little
people—fail to make themselves heard. It is a far cry to the
islands of the South Pacific; but hearts can suffer anguish in
the torrid zone as keenly as in the temperate ; brown bodies
are as sensitive to suffering as white; and a Polynesian may
writhe beneath injustice, cruelty, and oppression, with despair
as deep as ever did a European.
“Alfred St. Johnston.”
23 —From The Methodist Times, November sth, 1885.
“THE TONGA SECESSION.
“Persecution of the Wesleyans.
“A Painful Narrative.
“ {From a Special Correspondent on the spot.)
“A copy of the Methodist Times having found its way
to the Friendly Islands, I venture to think that some of
your readers will be glad to hear of what has been taking


place in this remote part of the world, and to receive some
particulars of the extraordinary cession from the Wesleyan
Church which has recently taken place here.
“KING GEORGE.
“ Tonga is governed by a King and Parliament. This latter
body is of very recent origin, having been only a few years in
existence. The King, George Tubou, now about eighty-five
years old, has been a remarkable man. By his own right arm,
strong will, and tenacity of purpose, he succeeded in making
himself King of the whole group, and for many years has ruled
supreme, his word being law, and none daring to dispute it.
Some years ago a constitution was framed, which provided for
just government and full religious freedom for all, and by this
the King swore solemnly to abide. But autocrat he has been,,
and autocrat he is still, in spite of constitution and all; but
unfortunately his mind is now feeble, and he is an autocrat
badly advised. His adviser is one who should know better,
Mr. S. Baker, an Englishman, now holding the position of
Prime Minister of Tonga. It is with pain we must state that
this gentleman was formerly a Wesleyan missionary here,
until requested to resign by that body. He then became a
Tongan politician, and seems to have determined to drive his
old Church out of the island. The Mission here was being
conducted by three English missionaries, Mr. Moulton and
Mr. Crosby in Tonga, and Mr. Watkin at Yavau.
“HOW THE SECESSION AROSE.
“Early in January Mr. Baker left Yavau, where the King
was residing, to go to Tonga, but suddenly put in at Haabai,
where a large meeting of all the principal chiefs was called.
Mr. Baker explained to them that the King was desirous of
having a Church of his own, a Tongan Church, and not a
British Church. He then put a resolution so craftily con-
structed, asking all who loved their King and would join the
new Church to hold up their hands. Of course all the men were
forced to hold up their hands, for your readers will at once see
that, if they voted against joining the new Church, they declared
that they did not love the King, and laid themselves open to
punishment. This, then, was the origin of the Free Church


movement, as it is now called, which has led to the great
cession.
“The King on being informed of what had taken place,
asked Mr. Baker to become chief minister, but he declined,
preferring to hold the lucrative position of Prime Minister,
and three or four other offices in the Cabinet. He, however,
went to Mr. Watkin, and asked him to come over and join
the new Church, in which he should have full control of the
ministers. It is difficult to imagine one ex-minister asking
one still a Wesleyan minister to desert his own flock, and take
a prominent part in the formation of a new Church, whose
object is to drive the Wesleyan Church out of Tonga, and it
is still harder to have to relate that Mr. Watkin at once
accepted the position. The only excuse we can offer is that
he has been led away by a mind and will stronger than his
own, and that at that time he could not foresee the hardships
and persecution that the Methodist natives 'have had to
endure.
“THE FREE CHURCH.
“ In this manner the Free Church in Tonga was inaugurated.
Meetings, at most of which either Mr. Watkin or Mr. Baker
attended, were held in the different islands, at which similar
resolutions were put and carried. In no case was any discus-
sion of an unfavourable character allowed, although men tried
to get a hearing. Without waiting to be relieved at his post,
Mr. Watkin left the Wesleyan Church and Mission-house to
look after itself, and at once became a Free Church minister.
Who can wonder that the natives in Yavau, after the example
set by their minister, obeyed the command of the King—a
command always regarded as sacred by them—and joined the
new Church almost in a body ? In Tonga, where Mr. Moulton
was, and at Haabai, where there is a splendid native minister
(who also was offered a high appointment in the new Church,
but who indignantly refused to have anything to do with a
religion founded in such a way), many of the natives stood firm,
and refused. Even in Yavau there were some men of finer cha-
racter who refused to recognise the right of the King to rule
their conscience, and here the new Church received its first
check. The Government were, however, determined, and now
set about what appears to me to have been a deliberate attempt
at persecution.


“PERSECUTION OP THE METHODISTS.
“All Government officials who still remained Wesleyans
were dismissed from the service, many of them without re-
ceiving the full amounts due to them for pay. The reason
given for this was not that they were Wesleyans, but that
they were unable to obey the King’s wishes in regard to the
new Church, and so must be dismissed. It is a significant
fact, however, that not one Roman Catholic Government
official, to whom the same reason would apply, was interfered
with in any way. Threatening language began now to be used
by the chiefs and Government officials, and as these passed
unchecked by the Premier, and the people still held out,
threats soon gave way to deeds. Thrashing became common ;
one man received ninety-seven lashes, but remained firm to
the end, although he was all but killed. Some houses were
burned, and horses and cattle belonging to Wesleyans were
seized and maimed or killed. In three or four towns in Tonga
all Wesleyans were driven out, only being allowed to take
what they could carry away with them. In fact, there seemed
to be a tacit understanding that a man could do what he liked
with a Wesleyan without any fear of being punished. At one
place seven women were sent off alone to a small island which
was almost barren. No men were allowed to accompany them,
although they begged the Government officials to allow them.
All the chiefs who remained faithful to us have been degraded,,
their names and plantations have been taken from them, for no
other reason than that they are Wesleyans and refused to join
the new Church. Then began the seizure of the churches,
which has been carried on with great zest wherever there was
not a white man to look after the place. These, of course, are
British property, and will eventually have to be restored, as
the High Commissioner of the Pacific has been informed of
the fact. To the natives this seemed a great blow, however,
and under this continued persecution of course many went
over. I could give you many instances of cruelty and perse-
cution, but will simply relate what has been one of the most
heartless cases, but one which also shows how nobly these
people have borne their sufferings for His sake. The scene
was in Lofanga, one of the small islands. The people there
were most resolute in their adherence to the old Church, and


no threats could shake their determination not to leave the
Wesleyan Church. Matters reached a climax on April 27th,
when the following letter was read from the King at a public
meeting of all the people: ‘ Whoever will not turn over, take
them in boats to Kao, and they shall not again see Lofanga.
And if Francia goes, take his title away and give it to some one
else, say Faliauli; and if not, give it to one of your children,
and divide out their (i.e. the people who go) plantations.’
Kao is an extinct volcano, rising sheer out of the sea to the
height of 5000 feet; there is no flat land, and very little
vegetation, no one living there on this account. The only
water supply is a lake on the top of Kao, in the old crater.
“THE REMAINING FAITHFUL.
“ Every man in Tonga has his plantation. The loss of this
would almost amount to starvation to him. The response of
the people to this terrible command was indeed noble, and
must have astonished the King himself. More than eighty
still remained faithful, and resolved to go to Kao and endure
all the hardships of punishment on a desert island, where
they had to live on a few cocoa-nuts and roots. While in
banishment and distress, a Government police boat visited
them, with the news that the deputation had come from New
Zealand and arranged matters. Mr. Moulton was to leave the
island, and there was to be but one Church, the Free Church,
so they had better all say they would join and come back with
them. This ruse was frustrated by a trader who happened to
hear the boat was going, and sent them a message not to
believe anything they heard, as nothing particular had
happened; and so the people chose to remain. This shows
how every artifice has been used to gain converts by fair
means or foul. After about a fortnight the poor people were
cheered by a visit from the Wesleyan Mission boat, which
also came with a supply of provisions, which were sadly
wanted, but they were soon exhausted, and for another month
they had to get along as best they could. On June Bth
they received the welcome news that they could return. This
release was brought about by the intercession of a high chief,
the governor of that part of the group. They returned, however,
to find their church taken, but soon found a house in which


they could worship God, and praise Him that they were
counted worthy to suffer in His cause.
“MR. baker’s responsibility.
11 When these facts are fully known, perhaps it will not be
hard to understand how this cession has been so great, but a
knowledge of these facts must arouse indignation and disgust
in the hearts of all. The Government, of which Mr. Baker is
the head, has in a most deliberate manner sanctioned these
persecutions by not punishing a single official w r ho has com-
mitted acts of cruelty against the Wesleyans. Their attention
has been called to these cases time after time, so that they
cannot plead ignorance. Yet they have done nothing. Whilst
five or six chiefs have been degraded and dispossesed of their
lands simply because they are Wesleyans, not one chief has
been degraded for acts of cruelty and persecution. Can we
wonder, then, that the chiefs think they are doing a good
service in thus persecuting our Church ? Mr. Baker’s
influence is so powerful here that one word spoken by him
would have stopped these scenes, but that word was not
spoken, and upon him rests the responsibility.
“A TOUCHING SCENE.
“ Every cloud has its silver lining, however, and that old
saying is very true in this case. The heroism and Christian
spirit shown by some of our natives in the midst of persecution
and ridicule is wonderful. I could give you many examples,
but one will suffice. An old man was ill in his hut in Tonga
when he was told that the King had arrived in Nukualofa,
and had already begun to hang some of the Wesleyans. He
immediately arose, sick as he was, and came down to the town.
Of course he was recognised there, and asked why he had
come down when he was so ill. His answer was very simple:
‘ They told me the King was hanging the Wesleyans, and
I did not want to be too late for hanging! ’ What noble men
these are who stand like this for conscience’ sake, and how
impossible it is to try and crush a Church containing men
like this. If ever Tongan history should come to be written,
these poor natives now suffering for their Church will take the
place of the Pilgrim Fathers in our own history, and men will
be found to have taken the same position as the Pyms and


Hampdens of our own country. In such a cause it behoves
all lovers of freedom, whether of our own denomination or
belonging to other Churches, to give them a hearty support.”
24. —From The Fiji Times, November 4th. Extract of Letter
signed Marcus F. Hamilton.
“ The whole of this persecution is in direct opposition to the
Constitution of Tonga, which provides for liberty of conscience
in all religious matters, and which constitution King George
has sworn to observe. It is also in direct contravention of the
English treaty with King George; by which England enjoys
—or rather, I should say, is supposed to enjoy—equal treaty
rights with other nations. Now by the French treaty no
Catholic suffers disability on account of his religion ; he cannot
be deposed from position in the Government, nor can his rank,
if he has any, be taken from him; in short, as far as his
religion is concerned, he is perfectly free. Why then should
the English Wesleyan Church and its members be subjected
to such vile treatment ? Certainly the British Government
will see to it, that, as regards subjects of England, France,
and Germany, there shall be no differential treatment on
the part of the Tongan Government in religious or any other
matters.”
24a.
(After November, 1885, the Auckland papers were closed
against us. It is reported that the Tongan Government,
unable to reply to the statements that had from time to time
appeared on our behalf, and wishing to prevent further
disclosures, threatened the proprietors with an action for
libel.)
25. —Extract from a leader in The Sydney Weekly Advocate,
January 1 6th, 1886.
“A number of laws have been promulgated by the late
Tongan Parliament which . . . are evidently directed against
our Church, and which, indeed, may be effectively used so as
to make our work among the Tongan people almost impracti-
cable. They were framed, so the preamble states, ‘to prevent
the disturbances which spring from the ecclesiastical arrange-
ments of the present time.’ But if we enquire what these
disturbances are, or who has caused them, the fact will appear


that the so-called disturbances are only those which are caused
by the agents of the lawmakers themselves ; by men, indeed,
who are simply acting under their positive instructions. They
are disturbances which the Government itself has principally
caused, and which it can, at any moment, stop by granting to
the Wesleyans of Tonga the privilege of free and unrestricted
worship, which is guaranteed to them by the Constitution of
Tonga, and which is actually enjoyed, without let or hindrance,
by the Eoman Catholics there. In order to understand the
meaning and intention of these laws, let it be remembered
that we have in all the villages of Tonga lands, houses and
churches secured to us by leases, and held in trust by the
Conference for Church purposes; that in many, if not in all, of
these villages are numbers of people who have been compelled
by persecution or by fear to join the so-called Free Church,
but who would gladly rejoin us and worship with us were
it safe to do so ; that the maintenance of our services in those
villages, and the residence of one of our agents in them when
practicable, is not only necessary for the protection and pre-
servation of the properties, but for the support and comfort of
our faithful people, and for the recovery of the faint-hearted
ones who have left us, and it will be at once apparent what
laws Nos. 1,2, and 4 really mean. It is unnecessary to state
that all of them are directly opposed to the spirit and also to the
letter of the Constitution. The first law is intended to prevent
any duly authorised preacher from preaching in any village
where there are fewer than six (6) adults, natives of the town.
This virtually means that there shall be no preaching whatever
in such a village, as the words ‘ natives of the town can be,
and, indeed, have been, held to exclude a man who had been
there for twenty-five years, and another, whose father and
grandfather were residents of the place, and who had no land
granted to him anywhere else. They, however, were not con-
sidered as natives, and therefore had at once the alternative of
conformity or exile put before them. Then by law No. 2 our
ministers are forbidden to send any of our agents to reside in
a town where there are fewer than thirty (30) people. There
is no such restriction placed upon a trader; he can send a man
to reside on any of his stations to take charge of his property ;
but our missionaries are not allowed the same privilege and
right. The effect of this iniquitous law, if carried out, would


l)e to compel us to withdraw our ministers and teachers from
all the Yavau group, and from many of the towns in Haabai.
Another effect would be to give the Government a pretext for
resuming possession of the lands leased to us, as there is
a clause in all the leases providing that these lands, when not
used for religious purposes, shall revert to the Government.
Whether such a clause could be acted upon in a case where
we had been prevented from so using the lands by the direct
legislation of the Tongan Government, is a question which we
■think admits of but one answer. The King himself, however,
has, we believe, so far acted upon the law as to order the
forcible removal of one of our agents under this law, and the
Premier assured Mr. Moulton that he had acted in accordance
with the law of the land in so doing. Law No. 3 is aimed
directly at Tubou College, which, as our readers know, is under
the loving care of Mr. and Mrs. Moulton, and is intended to
cripple or prevent the good work which is done there, and also
in all our Circuit training institutions. All the Tongan young
people are compelled to attend the Government schools unless
they are released from attendance by certificate. The Roman
'Catholics have no difficulty whatever in getting these certifi-
cates, and in the past they were freely granted to those who
attended our own institutions. Afterwards it was difficult for
u Wesleyan to get these permits, so that many of the young
people, who desired to enjoy the advantages of the College life
and training, were compelled to attend the Government schools,
and pursue their studies after school hours under Mr. and Mrs.
Moulton’s care. The present law is framed to prevent even
this. We may form some idea how repugnant this law would
be to us, if we think of a young man, desirous of improvement
in any branch of knowledge or of qualifying himself for our
ministry, being compelled to attend, say, the Fort Street
Public School, but forbidden to reside in Newington College
or to receive additional theological or general tuition from its
President. The practical effect of the fifth law, if carried out,
would be to place the itinerancy of our recognised agents, as
well as the residence of our pupils in training institutions,
under the absolute control of the Government. Much more
might be said on these iniquitous laws, but we have said
enough for the present, at all events, to show that the men
who framed them and caused them to be passed are determined


to use all means in their power to crush the remnant of our
people, and to make our work in Tonga practically impossible.
. . . The fact that such laws appear on the Statute book of
Tonga is a disgrace ; their enforcement would be an outrage
against which we should most certainly protest, and which we
should be compelled to oppose by every lawful means. . . .
The publication of such laws as those which w T e have com-
mented upon will do much to strengthen Mr. Moulton’s
position before the Conference, and will ensure him the most
hearty sympathy and help. ... We are well assured that no
man has a grander record to show of earnest faithful work
done for God in that group ; that no man has more faithfully
done that which he considered to be his duty to the Methodist
Church; that no man deserves more the love and esteem
of the King and people of Tonga, as being one of their best
and truest friends; and that no man in our ministry has
a better claim to the loving sympathy and determined help
of his brethren and the whole Methodist Church, than has the
present Chairman of the Friendly Islands District in this time
of sore trial and great sorrow to us all.”
25a. —The following are the laws referred to in the 'preceding
extract.
“ In order to prevent the disturbances which spring from
the ecclesiastical arrangements of the present time, the King
and Tongan Parliament enact as follows:
“ 1. It is forbidden to a religious body to preach a sermon in
a town where they have fewer than six (6) adults in all,
men or women, natives of the town; any one breaking this
law shall on conviction be fined 20 dollars.
(Of course this law is used only against the Wesleyan
Church. To be a ‘native of the town,’ the judge has
ruled that a Wesleyan must be able to prove that both
father and grandfather were ‘ natives of the town ’! The
mother’s side does not count.)
“ 2. It will not be allowable for any one to go and take charge
of a Church in any place where there are fewer than
thirty (30) adults in that Church, according to the Con-
stitution. And those allowed to go and take charge of
a place are ministers, probationers, and hired local
preachers, whose names are on the Church Eoll. On


breach of this law, it will be allowable for lords-of-the-
manor or town-rulers to expel him and take his land (or
plantation) and give it to some one who has none, although
a tax-payer.”
(“ According to the Constitution ” is utterly misleading.
The clause in the Constitution here alluded to only for-
bids the future granting of leases in such places. But
we are accustomed to such misstatements in Tonga.)
The other laws remarked upon are as follows:
“3. While any one is still at the Public (Govt.) Schools, not
having been released from attendance by certificate, it
will not be allowable to attend another educational esta-
blishment without a Government permit.
(Wesleyans are told there are no such permits!)
“4. If there is a stranger residing on a piece of land belonging
to a chief, whether he has come into it by marriage or in any
other way, not being a ‘native’ of the town-or estate, the
lord-of-the-manor or the Government may do what they
please with his piece of land, and may decide whether to
allow him to continue there, or send him to seek a piece
of ground in the place he came from.
(The word “ stranger ” includes not only all foreigners, but
also all non-“ natives.” See above law, No. 1.)
“5. Lords-of-the-manor and town-rulers are hereby empowered
to order any who have tax-lands (plantations) in their
districts to come and live in their own towns, unless they
have permits from the Government to live elsewhere;
and if any one disobeys, it will be lawful for the lord-of-
the-manor or the town-ruler to take away his tax-land
(plantation) and give it to some one who is a tax-payer
but Las no tax-land (plantation).”
26.— Extracts from an article in The (Sydney) Daily
Telegraph, February ls£, 1886.
“By the decisive vote of seventy-two to thirteen the Wesleyan
Conference, after an exhaustive discussion, has refused to in-
directly censure the Rev. J. E. Moulton by withdrawing him
from Tonga. If we are to accept the extraordinary story of
persecutions, Mr. Shirley Baker has more to answer for than
most Britons would care to take upon their souls. A revival
under an ex-Wesleyan missionary of the intolerant spirit


which, it was thought was such a moral impossibility in any
part of the world where Britons reside and British influence
prevails, comes as a severe shock to our self-complacency.
We fear there is little room for doubting the substantial truth
of the statements as to the treatment endured by the non-
secessionists in Tonga, and the perplexing problem that now
awaits solution is the practical one of doing wdiat is best for
the natives of the group. Mr. Shirley Baker is master of the
situation. Tonga is not a British territory, and Mr. Baker is
a ‘naturalised ’ Tongan. So long as he does not stretch out
his aggressive hand against Mr. Moulton personally, no physical
argument can be brought to bear upon him, and moral per-
suasion is evidently wasted upon a man of his hardened nature.
The Conference has wisely rejected the proposal to retire its
faithful servant and send another man who has not yet had
the misfortune to become obnoxious to the Tongan ‘ Premier.’
Mr, Moulton might consent to make the sacrifice which in that
case would be demanded from him, but the Conference would
have dishonoured itself.”
It seems to us that, having in view all the circumstances
which have come to light, the Conference could do only one of
two things—either stand by Mr, Moulton and fight out the
battle with Mr. Baker to its bitter end, or abandon the Mission
altogether. For the latter alternative much could be alleged.
. . . On the other hand, a policy of abandonment might prove
a serious blunder. It is to be remembered that the natives are
dominated by an unscrupulous intriguer, whose aims and
objects may be only half disclosed. The Conference has
decided to continue the struggle, and the issue will be awaited
with general interest.”
27.— Article in The Christian World, February 11th, 1886.
“ A correspondent from Tonga writes to us regarding the
secession from the Wesleyan Church which has taken place
in the Friendly Islands during the past twelve months. He
•challenges some of the statements given in our Sydney corres-
pondent’s letter in the Christian World of May 21st, and puts
the case in a way far from favourable to the character of
Mr. S. W. Baker, an ex-Wesley an minister, and now Prime


Minister of King George of Tonga. We have read through a
vast pile of papers, in which the proceedings of Mr. Baker and
the Rev. J. Watkin, who joined him as ‘ first minister ’ of the
Free Church, are recounted from the point of view of the
opposite party, led by the Rev. J. E. Moulton (a brother of
Mr. Moulton, M.P. for Clapham) ; how Mr. Baker stirred up
King George to found a Free Church in revenge for Mr. Baker’s
practical dismissal by the Conference from the office of
Wesleyan minister; how jnessure, which grew into persecution,
and only stopped short of bloodshed and probably of massacre,
was continuously brought to bear upon those who adhered to
Mr. Moulton and Wesleyanism; and how the struggle was still
going on at the end of November with the advantage on the
side of Mr. Moulton, so far as numbers and succcessful resist-
ance were concerned. It is of course impossible for us, from a
one-sided statement, to pass any final judgment in the matter,
but we may say that the charges made against Mr. Baker are
so grave and apparently so well supported as to demand a
strong case to refute them.”
28. —Two articles in The Methodist Recorder, March 12th,
1886.
“ Misrepresentation, unfortunately, still continues rife con-
cerning the history of the recent troubles in Tonga. The
letters which appeared in our issue last week, addressed to the
Rev. Thomas West, were gratifying so far as they referred to
Mr. West’s labours in the translation of the Bible. But the
incidental references contained in Mr. Baker’s letter with regard
to the secession from the Wesleyan Methodist Church are, to
put it mildly, decidedly misleading, Mr. Baker’s method of
controversy appears to be that very easy and elementary one of
styling an opponent’s statements * a lot of rubbish.’ Without
pausing a moment at the ‘ retort courteous,’ he goes at once to
the 1 counter-check quarrelsome,’ not to say ‘ the lie direct.’
He accuses Mr. Moulton of printing ‘ misstatements ’ and
* native reports ’ without waiting to see whether there was a
shadow of truth in them. This cannot be permitted without
protest. It is not our part to enter in detail into this contro-
versy, but we cannot allow such a charge as is made by Mr.
Baker against the Rev. J. E. Moulton, the faithful representa-
tive of Wesleyan Methodism in the Tongan Islands, to appear


m the Recorder without a cautionary word. There is
abundant evidence, contained in carefully-compiled official
documents which we have seen, to prove the accuracy of Mr.
loulton s statements about the violent persecutions to which,
lor some time our people were exposed in Tonga. The ‘ Tongan
Blue Book,’ to which Mr. Baker so confidently refers as an
authority, may probably contain few allusions to this subject
lor obvious and sufficient reasons.”
A recent number of the Sydney Weekly Advocate is
belore us, which supplies an appropriate comment upon the
language of the Tongan Prime Minister. Prom this it appears
that, while the violent persecution against loyal Methodists
has not ceased, a system of petty persecution has begun, and
a series of laws has been passed, evidently intended to cripple
our work, and crush out the remnant who have not joined the
so-called ‘ Free ’ Church of Tonga. These laws are conceived
precisely in the spirit of the Five-mile and Conventicle Acts,
and others such as persecutors have in all generations known
how to draw up. By forbidding preaching in certain villages,
and the residence of any missionary agents in towns of a
ccitain population, the Wesleyan Church will be prevented
Bom carrying on its work in certain districts; and then
anot er law provides that chapels and lands, not being actuality
used for ecclesiastical purposes, shall revert to the Crown. If
this is not legalised robbery, it would be difficult to say what
is. Another law is aimed at Tubou College, where Mr. and Mrs.
i loulton have laboured so long and successfully, and would
prevent even attendance at our College after school hours to
those who are studying at Government schools. It appears
that Roman Catholics have freely obtained Government
certificates, permitting free attendance at their own schools,
which have been refused to our students. Surely there is
matter in these flagrant violations of the Tongan Constitution
which the High Commissioner should be instructed to see to.
We cannot pursue the subject at present; but in the
interests of truth and fairness we have felt compelled to
diaw attention to facts. Readers can draw their own
conclusions.”


29. —Extract from letter, signed Reuben Hall, in The
(Melbourne) Spectator, March 12 th, 1886.
“The secession might have been condoned if the people
had been left to their own free choice whether to join it or
not, and if it had not been followed by such wicked perse-
cutions, which remind one of the times when the Inquisition
was in full swing. We may well exclaim, Surely the ‘ sun has
gone back on the dial of Ahaz ’ to the Middle Ages again!
When those who wished to be loyal to the Church which had
brought the blessings of Christianity and civilisation to their
■country, homes, and hearts, were treated, for no other reason,
as felons, it naturally excites feelings of indignation. Those
in Government employ were dismissed from their situations,
their property confiscated, themselves driven from their homes;
all were forbidden to engage in public worship according to
the dictates of their consciences, some deported to a desolate
island to die of starvation, so far as the authorities were
■concerned, for the ostensible purpose of terrifying the obsti-
nate minority into submission. I have not learned from any
source that Mr. Watkin has publicly protested against these
persecutions, and, therefore, he must be held morally responsible
for them.
“ There are two facts which will strike the careful observer
of these important events in Tongan history—viz., that while
there have been some adherents of our Church there whose
Christianity was a very thin veneer overlaying their old
savage nature, there are others who have developed a type of
Christianity equal to anything in the apostolic age.”
30. — Extract from letter in Fiji Times, March 2H/q 1886.
“I learn from your issue of September 30th that His Excel-
lency the Assistant High Commissioner, on his recent visit to
Tonga, ‘ requested the Tongan Government, as an act of friend-
ship to Her Majesty, to allow the adherents of the Wesleyan
Church to return to their homes, and permit them to follow, in
respect of all questions of religion, in perfect freedom, the bent of
their inclination.’ I learn also from the same apparently
official report that * The Tongan Government pledged the
King to grant this request, and expressed a conviction that
His Majesty would comply with it immediately on his return.’


It is quite evident from the whole of the report that Hi&
Excellency treated the Tongan Government with the greatest
consideration, and afforded Mr. Baker a way of escape from
his very false position. But he had not the tact or the grace
to avail himself of it
“ Did Mr. Baker put himself to the least trouble to redeem
the pledge he gave on behalf of the Tongan Government ?’
No, indeed ; he at once sent off messengers to the King that
he could please himself as to what he did with the Wesleyans r
and the consequence was that King George collected all the
Wesleyans in the Haabai group and shut them up, hundreds
of them, in the Mission premises in Lifuka. It is a wonder that
it was not another ‘ Black Hole ’ affair. They were not allowed
to go out of these premises, not even for food, without first
obtaining four signatures from different officials to the permit.
In many cases where three signatures only could be
owing to the absence of the fourth official, the parties so
offending (save the mark!) were most brutally thrashed in
the evening by the said official, a common policeman, who
informed his victims that they were given into his hands to
do with as he might think proper. Here in Tonga the
law courts were used to oppress and rob the people, and the
worst of all tyranny—a tyranny of legal forms—set up and
enforced by a magistrate, a man who, body and soul, is a
creature of Baker’s. Many who left the new Church for the
Wesleyan had all their lands and houses in the towns taken
from them. Six houses belonging to the Wesleyans . . ,
were fired. The people were not sent to their homes, as Baker
promised. He will, I suppose, say that it is the King’s
matter. No such thing. Baker is King, Government and
all; he had but to speak the word and the thing was done.
“When he called the Parliament together—particulars of
which, and some of the laws passed, I will furnish you in a
future letter—he caused laws to pass so restrictive in their
nature, that eventually, if allowed to stand in the Statute
Book, by their means he would be able to stamp the Wesleyan
Church clean out. Your readers can now judge how Mr.
Baker has kept his pledge to His Excellency.
“Now what about Mr. Watkin ? In a few words, he is
worse than Baker; without his treachery Mr. Baker would
never have attempted to commence this vile work. Accord-


ing to all accounts, it was owing to the Jesuitical advice given
by Mr. Watkin in Yavau, that all the Wesleyan churches were
seized in that place; and if he endeavours to shuffle out of this,,
he at all events cannot get rid of the fact that he himself used
those churches during the ensuing week, and therefore made
use of stolen property, well knowing it to have been stolen.
“Further, Mr. Baker is content with ill-treating the
Wesleyans whilst they are alive. Mr. Watkin has a turn at
them after they are dead. To give an instance. At Lifuka,
an old lady, a Wesleyan, died; she was a friend of Charlotte’s
(the King’s sister, also a Wesleyan), who ordered her to be
buried in the Wesleyan burial-ground. On Mr. Watkin’s
arrival in Lifuka he heard of the matter, and caused an infor-
mation to be laid against the Wesleyan Minister, the Rev.
David Tonga, for stealing a cemetery. Rather a grave charge
that. The minister pleaded on his trial the instructions
received from the Rev. Mr. Moulton, and the magistrate,
rather puzzled with so novel a charge, found the minister
‘ not guilty,’ but told him not to do it again.' Mr. Watkin
came on to Tonga, and the King sent orders that the corpse
should be exhumed and buried elsewhere, all which was done
to satisfy Mr. Watkin. After this, no wonder that a few weeks
later on, a chief of an adjacent island spoke thus to a young
girl on her death-bed: ‘ Now if you don’t turn, you will not
be buried on this island; your body when dead will be cast
into the sea.’ The young girl, one of the victims of this vile
persecution, who had been sent to, or half-way to, Kao, and had
suffered other cruel treatment, was deaf to all such threats,,
and died a Wesleyan. Whether the threat was carried into
execution or not, I am not aware.”
31. —Extract from a letter in The (Melbourne) Spectator,
April 2nd, 1886. The writer, the Bev. John Watford ,
was a member of the Deputation that visited Tonga in
May, 1885 ; and the persecution is still going on in June,
1886.
“ Dr. Watkin says: * The deputation had no time to hear
both sides of the question; ’ but I say we did hear both sides.
We heard Mr. Baker, and he did not deny these persecutions.
He tried to explain some by saying the people were impudent,,
or they were following Mr. Moulton, and Mr. Moulton was the


King’s enemy, and so on. We heard Mr. Baker and Rev.
J. B. Watkin together, and they could not deny them. I said
to Mr. Baker :‘We want to meet the chiefs and teachers of the
new Church ; may I ask Mr. Watkin to call a meeting ? ’ Mr.
Baker at once replied : ‘ I have called a meeting for Monday.’
On Monday we went to the place of meeting; we waited about
for some time; at last Mr. Baker came, and we went into the
hall. Mr. Watkin never came near. A good number were
assembled together, but Mr. Baker said it was their wish not
to say anything till they knew the King’s mind. He then
told one to move a resolution to that effect, and another to
second it, and wanted that to end the meeting, but I begged
to be allowed to speak to the people. Mr. Baker did not
approve, but when I continued to press it, he consented, and I
told them how anxious we were to heal the breach, and how
well it would be for Tonga and the Church if this could be
accomplished. I expressed the hope that our people would not
be persecuted, but no word was said in reply.
“We then went to Yavau to see the King, but he merely
repeated what Mr. Baker had said. I begged him, in the
presence of Mr. Baker, to say that he would cause the perse-
cution to cease, and allow our people to worship God according
to the dictates of their own conscience, as the Constitution
provided; but although I urged this again and again, he
would make no promise.
“ Now surely, after all this, it ought not to be said that we
did not hear both sides.”
(For the Report of the Deputation, see page 79 of the official
pamphlet, entitled The Secession and Persecution in Tonga.)
32.— Letter in The (Sydney) Weekly Advocate of April
10th, 1886, signed Marcus F. Hamilton.
“ Sms,—Since the Rev. J. E. Moulton’s departure hence for
Sydney the religious atmosphere has been as disturbed as ever.
“ A law was forced through the last Parliament to the effect
that no sect should hold any public service in any town unless
they numbered at least six, and these six persons were required
to be actual residents and holders of ‘ abis ’ (plots of land)
in the town, and the Buies (i.e. Government-appointed
Mayors) of the towns were appointed to act under the law,
and to proceed against all offenders.


“ Now at a small town—Haakame —here in Tongatabu, the
Wesleyans numbered eleven, certainly more than six holders
of property; the Bakerite Church numbered only six, the
Catholics forming the bulk of the inhabitants. The Police
Magistrate of Nukualofa is the Buie of Haakame, and, belong-
ing body and soul to the Premier, he saw his way clear to work
a very great and cruel wrong to the Wesleyan Church.
“ As Buie of the town he issued summonses on the Wesleyan
minister and twelve of the people, and charged them with
holding and attending a religious service in his town, there
not being the required number of properly qualified Wesleyans
in that town. The service was a Sunday-evening service, and
was attended by a great number of Wesleyans from other towns.
“The various trials were held here in Nukualofa—l was
present at them all—and as this man could not act very well
both as judge and prosecutor, he vacated the bench for the
time, and the vacant (so-called) seat of justice was filled for
the time by a man who had been attending the Court for the
last few weeks learning to be a magistrate. This man found
no difficulty in allowing the Buie to have everything his
own way; and on his (the Buie’s) ruling that they, none of
them, belonged to his town —-being on the wrong side of the
road, or some other equally paltry quibble—found them all
guilty of an infraction of this precious law, and sentenced
them to fines amounting to upwards of three hundred dollars,
or to four mouths’ hard labour each. The minister, Caleb
Yalu, was fined with the rest.
“ These people may be seen any day, for weeks and months
to come, doing the hardest labour allotted to prisoners in
this place; they are employed on the beach carrying heavy
stones to build walls, repair the wharf, etc. In order to enable
them to do this work they receive from the Tongan Govern-
ment but one meal a day (at noon), and that meal consists of a
modicum of half-boiled indigestible hard bananas, and some-
times, if they are fortunate, they may be favoured with a
drinking nut. lam speaking now from personal observation.
There was one old lady amongst them, and as the Government
were afraid that she might be killed by such labour, she is
allowed to work out her sentence in her own house, mat-making,
or some other similar work. . . .
“ Sirs, let your readers ponder over the fact that some of these


people, thus unjustly treated, have received at the hands of
Messrs. Baker and Watkin the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper.
“ With reference to this particular case, I have not yet told
the worst; permit me in a few words to do so. Tongans, when
summoned to Court to answer charges, may appoint persons
to represent them, and in the Haakame case several of them
appointed one of the (native) Wesleyan ministers to appear
and answer the charges against them ; this he did to the best
of his ability, and during the trial he told the Buie that, if
these people did not belong to the town, then neither did he
(the Buie) himself belong to it. Now although this minister
was acting as counsel, the Buie forced a charge upon him, and
had him tried to-day—l was present at the trial—for defama-
tion of character, and, of course, it goes without saying that he
will be found guilty, and sentenced to some very heavy fine,
which in his case will mean so many months’ hard work. The
case was postponed this evening till next week, for the autho-
rities are aware that the steamer leaves this early to-morrow,
and that information of their sentence would soon reach the
colonies. Many other cases were postponed to-day, doubtless
for the same reason.
“ With reference to this tyranny—a tyranny most terrible,
because disguised in legal formulse —I cannot do better than
quote the Rev. Mr. Moulton’s words in your issue of November
21st, in which he says : ‘ The laws, in fact, seem to exist only
to be used against us; the most weighty clauses of the Con-
stitution, when on our side, are ignored, while the minutest
regulation is brought down upon our people with sledge-
hammer force,’ It could not be better put —it is true, every
word of it. Of course the very principle of the law under
question is bad, and therefore this vile enactment cannot and
will not be allowed to stand, but must before long, with many
others, be expunged from the Statute Book.”
33.— Extract from The (Sydney) Weekly Advocate,
September 19 th, 1885.
(The following extract and letter have been reserved to this
point because they concern the subject of the Church property
rather than the persecution):—
“ After the prominent part which Mr, Baker had taken in
obtaining the Model Deed and bringing the various leases
under its provisions, it is difficult to say how it was that he


did not exert his authority to prevent the seizure of our
churches, and also how it was that Mr. Watkin, who knew all
about the leases, did not disavow such arbitrary proceedings.
According to the report of the Deputation, the trustees who
took possession of some of our properties at Yavau were mem-
bers of Mr. Watkin’s church; yet he entered no protest
against their act, administered no censure on them for what
O '
they did, but, on the contrary, endorsed their action by preach-
ing in the churches on the following Sunday, and was prepared,
with Mr. Baker, to defend the seizure, when the Deputation
pointed out the illegality of what had been done. After several
interviews and conversations on the subject, Mr. Baker at last
admitted to the Deputation that he now saw they had acted
illegally, and he would take action to have the churches
restored.
“ Before the Deputation reached Tonga, Mr. Moulton, as wo
have already remarked, had written to the Acting British Con-
sul requesting him to afford that protection in the use of our
property which was provided by treaty-engagement; but, pre-
vious to his taking action in the matter, H. F. Symonds, Esq.,
H.M. Vice-Consul, returned to Tonga. Having received a
communication from the Premier, lie addressed to him the
following letter :
“ ‘ British Consulate, Tonga, May 3, 1885.
“ ‘ Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of May Ist relative to the complaint, made by the
Chairman of the Friendly Islands District, that certain pro-
perties of the Sydney Conference have been forcibly and
illegally taken possession of by certain subjects of the King
of Tonga.
“‘With reference to your statement, in reply to Mr.
Moulton’s complaint to you, that “ if he considered his rights
had been infringed there were law courts established in Tonga
for the purpose of taking cognisance of such complaints, and you
must, therefore, refer him to the same,” I cannot but disagree.
“ ‘ The treaty between Great Britain and Tonga provides
that all civil cases against British subjects shall be tried
before Her Majesty’s High Commissioner’s Court. The pro-
perty in question was in the possession of a British subject,
and if the Buie Kolos, who, you state, claim the property, had
desired to obtain possession of it, they could have done so in a
F 2


legal and proper manner by proving their claim before the
High Commissioner’s Court.
“ 4 This was not done. On the contrary, forcible possession
was taken, I am informed, and thus the British subject was de-
prived of his right to have had the claim against him decided
by that tribunal provided for by treaty. I cannot but think
that the Chairman of the Friendly Islands District is quite
justified in the course he had adopted in bringing the matter
under my notice. Indeed, I do not see how, in the interests
of his Conference, he could have acted otherwise, and, on
behalf of that body, I must ask the Tongan Government to
take steps to fulfil their treaty obligations, and cause the
claims of the Buie Kolos against the Conference to be brought
forward in the proper manner, and at once to have the
properties restored to the representative of the Conference.
“ 4 1 have, etc.,
44 4 Henry F. Symonds,
44 4 H.M, Vice-Consul.’
44 At Mr. Moulton’s request the Consul deferred further pro-
ceedings, so as not to interfere with the work of the Deputa-
tion ; but though more than four months have elapsed since
Mr. Baker admitted the illegality of what had been done, and
promised to take action to have the churches restored, the
promise remained unfilfilled at the date of our last advices. In
fact, as stated in our last paper, several other churches have
been forcibly taken possession of, though in one instance the
act was overruled.”
(In August, Mr. Baker wrote as follows to the Consul) ;
44 1 have been requested by His Majesty to inform you that
His Majesty has been pleased to issue instructions that all
churches now occupied by the Wesleyan Free Church of
Tonga in Tongatabu, Haabai, and Varan, which have been
built on sites duly leased by His Majesty King George to the
Wesleyan Church in connection with the New South Wales
Conference, and registered in the archives of the Tongan
Government, after the second Sabbath in September next
ensuing are to be given up to the Wesleyan Church in con-
nection with the New South Wales Conference, and no longer
used for services in connection with the Wesleyan Free
Church of Tonga.”
(This is the only restoration the Government lias made,


and does not cover more than half the property illegally
taken away. The Rev. J. E. Moulton, writing the Consul
on this matter, says):—
“I am glad the Tongan Government have recognised,
though only partially and tardily, our rights ; but would
point out that there is no mention of the churches in Nina
Foou and Tobutabu, nor of the bells, houses, abis (i.e. plan-
tations), and other property which have been taken away.”
(The churches in Nina Foou were not given back to us till
April of this year. Some churches have been retaken from
us in Tonga this year, and have not yet been restored to
us. See next letter.)
Here the story, as taken from the newspapers, must end. Not
because there is nothing more to add, but simply because we
have not yet seen any papers of later date recounting the more
recent cases. I therefore add a copy of the last letter ad-
dressed to the President of the Conference, giving a very con-
densed account of the persecutions that have taken place this
month (June, 1886), and can assure my readers that the gap in
time between the newspaper quotations and the following letter
has to be filled up with similar or worse persecutions in each
month. In fact, this month has been a comparatively mild one.
“ Tongatabu, June 2Gth, 1886.
“ To the President of the New South Wales and Queensland
“ Conference.
“ Rev. Sir, —You will be glad to hear that the thirty prose-
cutions and convictions under the law about the ‘ six rightful
natives of the place,’ and which have been already reported to
you, have not been added to during the present month. We
have managed to escape any further trials under that law ; but
it has been only by ceasing services in every town throughout
the group but ten. In some thirty out of the thirty-five
inhabited islands of Tonga —the name of the whole country —
we have no services! And yet we have most valuable property
in them all; property that is going to rack and ruin through
the gross injustice of the Tongan Government, who for eighteen
months has persistently refused to keep the Constitution to
which it is sworn. But the Law Courts are still being used to
make the fortunes of Messrs. Baker and Watkin. A fortnight


ago one of our hired local preachers was sentenced to two
years’ labour, £7 costs, and £2O (twenty pounds ) to Mr, Baker.
His crime was slander, and his summons says the slander
consisted in saying that ‘ Mr. Baker went to New Zealand and
became a Wesleyan.’ There was positively nothing else
brought against the accused, and yet he was sentenced as
above, Mr. Baker being here at the time. It is true that the
statement was slightly false, and therefore, of course, he deserved
such a heavy penalty. He ought to have said Mr. Baker went
to New Zealand and tried to be a Wesleyan, but was ostracised
by the Wesleyan Church. The preacher is working among
the criminals, repairing the wharf; and though it is our winter-
time, and the people feel the cold very keenly, he has had to
sleep at nights on an open barge moored to the end of the
wharf. The result is he is ill.
“ The school law has again been strained against us, and a
girl has been fined £3 10s. (seventy shillings) under the
following circumstances. The law requires school children to
get a permit from the Government before they may attend
any classes at the College. While Mr. Baker, who is Minister
of Education, was away in New Zealand, the Assistant
Minister and the Inspector of Schools both said that this girl
might attend the College, as the late Prince had told her to
do so. I then applied for a permit, not only for her, but for
all our girls, and got a written answer from the Assistant
Minister that there were no such permits in existence ! We
were innocent enough to rely on the spoken permission, and
our innocence has cost us £3 I Os., and another girl is to be
tried next week. It was not denied that we had had such
spoken permission.
“ In spite, or because, of Mr. Baker’s visit to the Acting
High Commissioner, the old threats have been revived, and
their seeming connection with Fiji has given them no little
weight. We know that Mr. Baker will not hang the Wesleyans
—ho wants their taxes too badly ; but the Tongans are igno-
rant of Budgets, and are easily persuaded into believing these
horrible reports. Of course there are hundreds on whom these
rumours are lost, but there are also hundreds of weak ones on
whom these cruel threats act as deterrents from rejoining the
Church of their choice and their conscience. Moreover, it is
being publicly proclaimed that the Acting High Commis-
sioner has, after undertaking our case, thrown it over and


gone in with Mr. Baker. And one proof thereof is the sudden
tit of loyalty that has come over our Premier. He has actually
observed the anniversary of Her Majesty’s Accession this year;
and Tonga can suggest only the above solution.
“ More than five months ago I appealed to the Consul to
use his good offices with the Tongan Government and get
from them what they have constantly refused me—an explana-
tion of the law about holding services. I wished to know
whether it applied to prayer-meetings, class-meetings, and
family worship, as some of the Government officers were using
it to stop such services. He declined to render me such
assistance, and consequently we had to give up such services
wherever the Government officials ordered us to do so. On
Mr. Baker’s return appeal was made to him, and he referred
us to his fellow Cabinet Minister, who has declined to give us
the desired information.
“Some of our ministers are being expelled from their
circuits, and the unconstitutional and persecuting efforts to
crush us are as unremitting as ever. The College is now
being favoured with the Premier’s special attention, and the
result is that thirty-seven (37) College men have been called
out as soldiers. But not one has been called from the Govern-
ment College.
“It is but right to say that, before Mr. Baker came back
from New Zealand and Fiji, the Free Church had just begun
to pay some semblance of respect to the ‘ Public Worship ’
Act, and had given up sermons and taken to addresses in
some of the towns where they could not possibly, with all their
cunning, count six. But the Premier’s return soon removed
their fears and qualms of conscience, and they resumed their
services, without making any pretensions to the having the six.
“ The notorious police magistrate has lately given an im-
portant ruling—viz., that a white man’s evidence cannot be
admitted in the Court on behalf of a Tongan. The Tongan
law forbids a white man (Mr. Baker excepted, as he has
become a ‘ naturalised ’ Tongan) to represent a Tongan in the
courts; and the judge ruled that to give evidence in a man’s
favour was the same as representing him.
“The Wesleyans of the important island of Eua have just
been officially informed that their plantations are once again
taken from them.
“ None of the Church plantations, though in our possession


for years and years, have yet been restored to us. Even those,
with one exception, that belong to the European ministers,
and have been attached from the first to the different Mission
houses, have been taken: two of them since Mr. Baker’s
return from Fiji. We have but one left to us in the whole of
Tonga, and our ministers and paid agents have to get food as
best they can. One cannot but think that if we had been
traders we should have been afforded both relief and compen-
sation long ago. I need scarcely remind you that some of our
leased property was re-seized six months ago, and has not yet
been restored to us. In this matter also the Consul declined
to interfere, as the High Commissioner ‘ has expressed his
intention of again visiting Tonga,’ and he therefore suggested
I should ‘ postpone any further action until that event.’ But
that event was to have taken place last November, and this is
the end of June, and we have heard nothing from His Excel-
lency. The last case of our leased property being forbidden
to us took place this month in Nomuka.
“ Coincident with the visit of Mr. Watkin to Haabai and
the return of Mr. Baker, the officials in the Haabai group
began to bestir themselves, i.e. as far as Wesleyans are con-
cerned; and they seem to have made an experiment to see
how little food one of the Wesleyan prisoners could live on.
“ In Yavau and the Niuas the King’s edict has again been
announced and enforced, that he will have no Wesleyans in
those lands, but that all such are to be forthwith deported
to Haabai. Three or four weeks ago we sent a man to Yavau
to help the native minister to look after our property. He
has been deported. There are thirty-six places on some
twelve islands in Yavau, and His Majesty and the Premier
kindly allow us to have a native minister and three paid
agents there to take charge of the whole of the property, and
to clean up the lands every week. And they are not allowed
to live each one in a central town, but have all to reside in
the chief town. An attempt is being made to shut them in
on the Mission premises, and they have been told they are not
to go outside the grounds without permission. This order has
been issued this month.
“ In Niuas the Homan Catholics, who before 1885 had no
footing in either of the islands, are becoming quite numerous.
In Niua Tobutabu they have some fifty adherents; in Niua
Foou over seventy. They are safe from persecution and


deportation. The one remaining Wesleyan in Ninas, an old
lady, is to be deported, and the ministers are threatened with
the same fate. In both islands they have been kept in the
strictest confinement on the Mission premises. In neither
island has all our Church property been restored to us. The
law about cleaning up the grounds weekly is being used most
oppressively againt our ministers there. In Niua Foou some
former Wesleyans, taking pity on them, helped them. The
Governor rated these people soundly, and has ordered them
to be brought before the Police Court. At Niua Tobutabu
there is a small island, about ten miles away. As our native
minister found it impossible to cross over weekly in a native
canoe, he agreed to pay a certain sum to a resident in the island
to clean up our ground every week. The Government officials
interfered, and forbade the man to do it. The result is our
preacher is being constantly fined for that land ; and he cannot
go over and live there, because no one dare give him any food.
“In conclusion, it is hardly necessary to say that the
number of petty annoyances and little tyrannies is legion,
and to detail these one would become tedious; but they are
none the less real, and are often very grievous to be borne.
“ I have the honour to be, Rev. Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Rev. R. Sellers.”
“ E. E. Crosby.
SUPPLEMENTARY.
I. The fifth clause of the Constitution of Tonga is as follows:
“ All persons are perfectly free to worship and serve God
as they list, and as conscience dictates; and to
assemble for worship in the places they appoint
thereto. But it shall not be lawful to use this liberty
to work things that are wicked and vile, and count
as worship things that are not consonant with the
Law and Peace of the Land.
2. Clauses two and three in the French Treaty:—
2. La religion Catholique est declaree libre dans toutes
les iles soumises au Roi des lies Tonga. Les
membres de cette communion auront tons les pri-
vileges accordes aux Protestants.
3. Tons les indigenes des Iles Tonga, exiles ou dej)ouilles
de leurs biens pour cause de religion, seront fibres


de rentier dans leurs foyers, leurs biens leur seront
rendus, et ils pourront exercer lenr culte en toute
liberte.
3. Articles two and three in the Treaty with Great Britain,
dated November 29th, 1879 :
2. His Majesty the King of Tonga engages to grant to
no other Sovereign or State any rights, powers,
authority, or privileges in Tonga, in excess of those
accorded to Her Britannic Majesty.
The subjects of Her Britannic Majesty shall always
enjoy in Tonga, and Tongan subjects shall always
enjoy in the territories of Her Britannic Majesty,
whatever rights, privileges, and immunities they now
possess, or which are now accorded to the subjects of
the most-favoured nation ; and no rights, privileges,
or immunities shall be granted hereafter in Tonga
to the subjects of any foreign State, which shall not
equally and unconditionally be granted to the
subjects of Her Britannic Majesty.
3. (d.) Every civil suit which may be brought in Tonga
against any subject of Her Britannic Majesty in Tonga
shall be brought before, and shall be tried by, the
Court of Her Britannic Majesty’s High Commissioner.
(The foregoing, as will be apparent, is but one clause
in the third Article; it is the only one with which
we are now concerned.)
And now it is with the reader to draw his own conclusions.
We turn from the lawlessness of the Tongan Government, and
the seeming helplessness or indifference of our English officials,
to England herself. Has not Tonga suffered long enough and
severely enough at the hands of her English ruler ? or is she
to be left in misery, unable to rid herself of this man’s yoke,
and unaided by the country which alone can deliver her?
England has made a “ Treaty of Friendship ” with Tonga.
Now, in her hour of sorest need, will England show her friend-
ship, and do what all Tonga, except Mr. Baker, will thank her
for—viz., cause Persecution to cease, and Justice to reign ?
LONDON: PRINTED BV WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMFORD STREET
AND CHARING CROSS.




