

A SHORT HISTORY OF
THE PRIMROSE LEAGUE
B 2d of the Staff




THE PRIMROSE LEAGUE.


THE
PRIMROSE LEAGUE.
ITS RISE, PROGRESS, AND
CONSTITUTION.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
ORIGIN AND PROGRESS I
REVISED STATUTES AND ORDINANCES . . .23
MODEL BYE-LAWS FOR HABITATIONS . . .29
MODEL BYE-LAWS FOR DIVISIONAL COUNCILS . 40
CORRUPT PRACTICES ACT (1883) . . . .43
Appendix-officers of the League . , 45
ORDINANCES OF THE LADIES’ GRAND
COUNCIL 51
PRECEDENCE AND BADGES OF THE LEAGUE . 54
RESOLUTIONS 56
STATUTES IN 1883 56
INDEX 63


The Marquis of Salisbury has said: ‘ Political organizations
have a wonderful power in bringing men together who before
were not aware of their agreement with each other, and
cheering up and exciting to exertion numbers who, in their
isolation, were beginning to despair.’




THE PRIMROSE LEAGUE.
3|pg|/ HE Primrose League may be de-
V scribed as a national society with
a programme simple and com-
prehensive, a product of the age
and antidote to the Caucus. Four
friends, Lord Randolph Churchill, Sir Henry
Drummond Wolff, Sir Algernon Borthwick,
and Sir John Eldon Gorst, met together
at the Carlton Club on the 17th of Novem-
ber, 1883. Sir Henry Drummond Wolff
propounded a scheme, by means of which
new life might be infused into the Conserva-
tive cause. The meeting was unanimous,
and it was resolved that a new political or-
ganization, under the style and title of the
Primrose League, should forthwith be founded.
It had long been an open secret to many of
B


the Tory party that the educational advance-
ment of the masses required a more popular
form of individual representation of political
opinions. The iron was hot, the mould was
ready, and the Primrose League was the shape
of the work. An office was opened on the
second floor of No. 20 Essex Street, Strand ;
and in the immediate ready response of the
youth of England was realised the truth of
Lord Beaconfield’s expression that ‘ the
youth of a nation are the trustees of posterity.’
At last that inherent quality of patriotic
Englishmen, called pride, was properly recog-
nised. The dormant energies of the great
Conservative cause were roused to maintain
the union of the Crown, the Constitution, and
the country. This creation of a Tory demo-
cracy was raised from the spirit of emulation
and honour of all classes of the genuine
English volunteer type known to our fore-
fathers as chivalry. Hence the Primrose
League was formed on the basis of the old
orders of knighthood.
The first habitation of the Primrose League
was ‘The Strand,’ No. 7, and the original
members were: —The Marquis of Aberga-
venny, Lord Randolph Churchill, Sir Algernon
Borthwick, Colonel F. G. Burnaby, Sir Alfred


Slade, Sir H. Drummond Wolff, Mr. Dixon
Hartland, Sir Henry Hoare, Mr. W. Hard-
man, Sir John E. Gorst, M.P., Messrs. A.
Hopkinson, F. Seager Hunt, Percy Mitford.
It was no satin shoe that replaced the old
Tory boot which had begun to let the water
through in 1883. Business men were at the
helm, and business was good. Lord Beacons-
field’s patriotic Imperial policy at home and
abroad foreshadowed the principles adopted by
the Primrose League in his memory, and gave
practical shape to the veneration of his name.
When Lord Beaconsfield made the character-
istic remark after the elections of 1880,‘I
shall now have leisure to see the primroses at
Hughenden,’ he little thought he was making
history, or that his favourite flower would give
its name to, and become the badge of, the
greatest political association of the times.
Like magic, on his death, the primrose be-
came the symbol of the man, and the Queen
was one of the first to give colour, warmth
and form to the observance of the 19th of
April, the anniversary of his death, as ‘ Prim-
rose Day,’ by sending a wreath of primroses
to be placed on his tomb.
A cardinal point of the Directorate of the
League was that it existed merely as an


auxiliary volunteer force to aid the regular
established associations with the same objects
in view. Personal influence and liberty of
action rose superior to discipline, and the
moral force of parole d'honneur showed that
loyal attachment and willing co-operation
was the newly discovered imperative duty of
those who had the Imperial interests of the
country at heart. The tact and discretion of
the Executive in introducing branches of the
League in the country succeeded in sur-
mounting difficulties and avoiding friction.
Strange as it may seem the first intention of
the founders of the Primrose League was to
confine membership to the superior sex, but
the question of including ladies soon decided
itself; applications from duchesses down-
wards poured in, and a special branch was
invented for them in the spring of 1884. .The
preliminary operations of the League were
necessarily secret, inasmuch as it was an un-
dertaking entered into without the counten-
ance of the chief representatives of the Tory
party, and being a new departure in political
organization was an experiment of a very
speculative nature. But the seal of success
soon showed its genuine stamp, the protection
of disguise was discarded and its proceedings


declared to the world. The motto of the
League, ‘ Imperium et Libert as,’ was taken
from a famous speech delivered by the Earl
of Beaconsfield on foreign affairs in 1879, in
which he related how, when ‘ one of the
greatest of the Romans was asked his politics,
he replied, Imperium et Libertas ’ (Power and
Freedom). This grand motto embraces a
combination of power and freedom, neither of
which can exist without the other, and is at
once, in few words, the true principle of Con-
servatism. The recognition by the League
of ladies as a political factor proved a power-
ful instrument for election purposes. The
small section of ‘ advanced ’ Radical ladies
before the public paled into insignificance on
the debut of the Dames of the League. Lord
Beaconsfield’s last novel contained decided
expressions of opinion on the subject of ladies
mixing in politics: all his good women under-
stood political questions, and devoted their
lives and energies to the cause espoused by
their husbands and brothers without fee or
reward other than the satisfaction of having
succeeded. The primrose, as a flower, recom-
mended itself to ladies in that it eminently pos-
sessed the characteristics attributed by Burns
to the daisy of being both ‘ wee and modest.’


There was no political association open to
ladies in the country with such high aims and
strict integrity placed before it. The main-
tenance of religion and honour especially ap-
pealed to the sympathies of the women of
England. The approval of ladies from time
immemorial has been the prized guerdon of a
knight. Approval by a Dame of the League
was to mean more than the favour of a gra-
cious smile. Appreciation was shown by
deeds, not words, as Dames shared with
knights the toil of the day. The softening in-
fluence of woman was thrown into the scale
against the wild teaching of the Radical de-
magogue. The countenance accorded the
noble enterprise of the League was, above all,
hearty, zealous help. Thus the Primrose
League became the bridge which opened free
communication between class and class.
The actual progress of the League may be
traced from the course of political events
which occurred after 1883. In a measure,
the serious political crisis which existed when
the League was started was advantageous;
there was plenty to catch hold of as the hill
of opposition was climbed. All the burning
questions of the day were of the very essence
of the fundamental principles of the League.


Religion, honour, Imperial ascendancy, were
suffering under the Liberal regime. In South
Africa Mr. Gladstone had dropped the Trans-
vaal, picked up Zululand, and entered into a
disgraceful convention with the Boers. The
garrisons in the Soudan were to be inhumanly
abandoned to the mercy of the rebel Mahdi,
and that true Knight, General Gordon, was
to be left to his fate at Khartoum.
Under these distressing circumstances, it
was only natural the feelings of the people
revolted against the guilty, staggering policy
of Liberalism, and turned to the active sup-
port of the League as an institution which
would give effect to their views, and act up
to the courage of conviction with energy. It
was generally resolved that if these miserable
things were to be done they should not be
done in the dark without the people’s know-
ledge, but in the face of the light of a deter-
mined opposition. As if such humiliation
abroad were not enough, there was yet the
ignominy of the Bradlaugh episode at home
to insult all Christendom, and throw a
lengthening shadow on the Church. But
the inviolability of sacred religion was not
assailed with impunity by this sinister home-
thrust. The public stomach rejected the


unwholesome Atheist with disgust, and the
blow recoiled with damaging effect on the
heads of the supporters of the unbeliever.
Still confusion was worse confounded as the
remarkable correctness of Lord Beaconsfield’s
prescience was daily terribly vindicated in
Eastern and Irish affairs. Mr. Gladstone had
withdrawn from Candahar and abandoned
the railway designed by Lord Beaconsfield
to connect our Western Indian frontier with
Afghanistan. And four years after, the
Russians were at Merv and the Government
of India had resumed the construction of the
railway to Candahar.
Again, speaking on Irish affairs in 1880,
Lord Beaconsfield warned his hearers: ‘ I
fear you are postponing the consideration of
a question which, in my mind, will force you
to action.’ Yet coercion was withdrawn
from Ireland by the Liberals, with the result
that, after suffering a reign of terror, they
were driven to adopt measures of threefold
severity. Thus Lord Beaconsfield’s policy
had proved itself, and, being brought home
to the minds of the people, gave great
impetus to the League as an Association
established for the propagation of his prin-
ciples. At this juncture men easily found


a peg to hang their hats and coats on,
and stepped into the arena of constitu-
tional agitation to do battle as Primrose
Knights against a Government bristling with
enormities.
The first annual banquet of the Primrose
League was held in commemoration of the
third anniversary of Lord Beaconsfield’s
death at the Freemasons’ Tavern, on Satur-
day, the 19th of April, 1884. The Earl of
Egmont presided, and besides some 400
Knights and many Dames of the League,
there were present: The Earl of Limerick,
Viscount Curzon, Lord Colchester, Lord
Glentworth, Lord N. Vane Tempest, Sir A.
Borthwick, Sir Reginald Beauchamp, Sir
Samuel Wilson, Sir Alfred Slade, Sir Henry
Hoare, Sir Astley Cooper, Sir John Shelley,
Mr. Marriott, Q.C., M.P., Mr. Coleridge
Kennard, M.P., General Brownrigg, Colonel
F. G. Burnaby, Colonel Malleson, Colonel
Fitz George, the Flon. and Rev, Llewellyn
Irby, The Hon. S. Hylton Jolliffe, The Hon.
Claud Hay, Mr. Wm. Hardman, Mr. Seager
Hunt, Mr. Ponsonby Moore, Capt. Fellowes,
Mr. Percy Mitford, and Mr. Edwards.
The Chairman proposed the toast to the
memory of the Earl of Beaconsfield, which


was drunk in silence, the whole company
standing. A letter was read from Lord Ran-
dolph Churchill, apologising for his absence
on account of a severe cold caught at Bir-
mingham, Mr. Marriott, Q.C., M.P., and Sir
Algernon Borthwick, M.P., dealt with political
affairs, Lord Beaconsfield’s policy and memory,
and the objects of the Primrose League. Col.
F. G. Burnaby made a spirited speech de-
nouncing the Government for deserting General
Gordon. It was announced that habitations
had been formed in Birmingham, Liverpool,
Bradford, Blackpool, Brighton, Portsmouth,
Exeter, Taunton, Bristol, Southampton,
Paisley, Dublin, Cork, Tenby, Wednesbury,
South Devon, Northumberland, Yorkshire,
The Strand, Crystal Palace, Westminster.
The League had now outgrown the offices at
No. 20 Essex Street, and removed, on the
24th of June, 1884, to more commodious pre-
mises at St. Margaret’s Mansions, Victoria
Street, S.W.
At this period dynamite in the air, outrages
in Ireland, mobs in the streets and parks, did
not induce confidence in the administration of
the Government. The attack on the land
interest, especially represented by the House
of Lords, and the attempt to smuggle through


the Franchise Bill without a preceding Redis-
tribution of Seats Bill necessary to allow of
the reform working fairly to both parties, all
tended to create apprehension of what would
come next in the Liberal programme. Owners
of property and law-abiding citizens in self-
defence joined the Primrose League as a
united band pledged to guarantee to every
man his own, and the maintenance of the
estates of the realm. The first meeting of the
Grand Habitation of the Primrose League
took place at the Westminister Palace Hotel,
Victoria Street, on July the 16th, 1884. Lord
Randolph Churchill presided. Influential dele-
gates from many Habitations of the League
throughout the country presented addresses
censuring the Liberal Government, and de-
manding an expedition to be sent to rescue
General Gordon at Khartoum. Lord Ran-
dolph Churchill delivered a short, pithy
address warmly approving the course of
opposition taken by the League, and referring
to various means of rendering further assistance
to Conservative organizations. . The number
of members who had joined the League at
this time were 370 Dames and 35°° Knights
and Squires (or as the latter are now termed
‘ Associates’).


The feature of the first year of the Prim-
rose League was one of exceeding political
activity. The critical character of the times
was such as to remind those ordinarily in-
different to politics that momentous issues
were being settled without their concurrence.
People rightly perceiving the dangers ahead
to be the atheistical and revolutionary ten-
dencies of the day rallied round the standard
of the Primrose League in defensive alliance,
as the best means to check the growth of a
reckless Radicalism. Thus the political free-
masonry grew apace, and by the end of the
year the unprovoked aggression of the pro-
letariat found a solid army of Knights and
Dames confronting and frustrating their
knavish tricks at every point. The Habita-
tions of the League gave the enemy no rest;
resolutions of confidence and encouragement
were showered on the Conservative leaders.
A meeting at Lord Salisbury’s house resulted
in the accession to the League of both Con-
servative leaders in either House of Legis-
lature and stamped the Association with the
fullest imprimatur of orthodoxy.
Disaster upon disaster in the Soudan, the
fall of Khartoum, the death of Generals
Gordon and Sir Herbert Stewart, Colonels


Burnaby, Stewart, and Lord St. Vincent, in-
augurated the second year of the League’s
existence. The Liberals had filled the cup
of bitterness to the brim and were forced to
drink to the dregs their own mixture. The
evidence of the incapacity of the Liberal
Government to deal with emergencies was
complete and pointed with overwhelming
testimony to the righteous cause of the
League’s crusade against their criminal, time-
serving policy. The League now gained ad-
herents by hundreds daily; its loud voice
of protest had penetrated the most distant
parts of the country. The special counte-
nance of the National Union of Conserva-
tive and Constitutional Associations was
extended to the operations of the League;
the Chairman, Sir M. Hicks-Beach, issued a
circular calling upon all Conservatives to
join the Primrose League. A monster meet-
ing and commemorative banquet took place
at St. James’s Hall, Piccadilly, on the 19th
of April, 1885 ; Lord John Manners presided
and 700 Knights and 200 Dames attended;
Lord Randolph Churchill made a speech
of thirty - five minutes’ duration, and his
trenchant review of the Government policy
in Egypt and the East was cheered at


every point to the echo. The members of
the League at this date consisted of 8071
Knights, 1381 Dames, 1914 Associates, with
169 Habitations, giving a total of 11,366
of all grades. On June the Bth, 1885, Mr.
Childers’ proposals in his Budget to increase
the beer and spirit duties were rejected by
the House of Commons by twelve votes.
Mr. Gladstone resigned office on June 12th,
and Lord Salisbury took office on June 24th.
Parliament was prorogued by Royal Commis-
sion on August the 14th. A grand demon-
stration of the metropolitan and provincial
Habitations took place at the Albert Palace
on Saturday, October the 22nd, 1885. There
was a vast concourse of enthusiastic Tories
present. A series of addresses was given by
the Conservative candidates from different
parts of the country. Mr. Marriott, Q.C.,
M.P., spoke from the Central Platform, Sir
A. Borthwick, M.P., addressed 1150 guests,
after a banquet in the Connaught Hall, and
Lord Harris and Lord Henry Bruce delivered
speeches. A Patriotic Concert was given
and assisted in by Viscountess Folkestone.
Among the distinguished company were Lady
Randolph Churchill, Lady Dorothy Nevill,
Miss Nevill, Isabella Countess of Wilton, Lady


Charles Beresford, Viscountess Folkestone, the
Hon. Mrs. Gerard, Mrs. Hardman, Sir J.
Thornhill, and Mr. and Mrs. Seager Hunt.
A General Election came on in the autumn,
but there were no very definite issues before
the country other than the blunders of the
Liberals in the East and Egypt. This was the
prime occasion, when the power and worth
of the Primrose League was felt. High and
lowly volunteer canvassers did their utmost to
expose the fallacies of the Disestablishment
of the Church, free education, and the im-
practicable schemes of peasant proprietorship
advocated by the Liberals. Success was with
the Conservative cause, mainly owing to the
energy displayed by the Primrose League.
The newly-enfranchised electorate were led
away by the Liberals with false promises of
proprietorship in the land, and no doubt Con-
servatives had hoped better of their power of
discrimination between friend and foe. Early
in 1886, on the reassembling of Parliament,
owing to the bad faith of the Irish Members
who were pledged to support them, the Con-
servative Government was defeated on Mr.
Jesse Collings’ amendment to the Address on
the question of agricultural allotments.
Again, by an artful piece of chicanery, Mr.


Gladstone obtained office. Soon after Mr.
Gladstone had assumed power it leaked out
that he had in view a gigantic bribe for the
Parnellites in a scheme of Local Government
and Land Purchase known as Home Rule.
All England was up in arms, and the Primrose
League found itself called upon to renew
with redoubled vigour the campaign against
such a surrender to outrage and the disintegra-
tion of the Empire.
On the 19th of May, 1886, the annual meet-
ing of the Grand Habitation of the League
(which had been deferred a month on account
of the 19th of April falling on a Sunday) was
held in Her Majesty’s Theatre. The theatre
was crowded from floor to ceiling, and 1500
delegates from Habitations were present.
The Grand Master of the League, the Marquis
of Salisbury, presided. The report for the
year was read by the Chancellor, Mr. Hugh
H. Riach, and the figures of the number of
members told their own story, showing there
were 32,645 Knights, 23,381 Dames, 181,257
Associates, and 1,200 Habitations. Exclusive
of Scotland, which now had a Central Office
of the League to itself at 122 George Street,
Edinburgh, with 8663 members and 70 Habi-
tations, making a grand total of 245,936


members with 1270 Habitations. The Mar-
quis of Salisbury, in moving the adoption of
the report, acknowledged the efficient services
of the League, and reviewed its objects and
future, and subsequently addressed the dele-
gates in a powerful speech against the Irish
Home Rule Bills.
Mr, Gladstone, being defeated by a crushing
majority on his Irish measures, resigned, and
a general election came on in July on the
Irish question. Here was a grand opportunity
which the Primrose League was not slow to
take up. Home Rule for Ireland meant vir-
tually the repeal of the Union of the King-
dom, and therefore assailed the dearest prin-
ciples of the League. On the 15th of June
the Primrose League, ever in the van, had
issued a Precept to all members, urging upon
them prompt action to secure the return of
Members of Parliament pledged to maintain
the Union, and also enjoining strict compliance
with the provisions of the Corrupt Practices
Acts. The movement for the separation of
the United Kingdom was supported by two-
thirds of the Liberal party led by the most
powerful politician of modern days. Yet the
combined forces of the Conservative party
were able to themselves alone defeat the
C


Separatist throng. Conservative candidates
all over the country conveyed their warm
thanks for the patriotic assistance of the
Primrose League at the Elections, while many
a seat was won against fearful odds through
its instrumentality.
During the elections the League was busy
day and night furthering the Conservative
and Unionist cause. At one time organizing
meetings, providing speakers, and dispensing
literature ; at another canvassing the electors
and looking up out-voters. After the General
Election the League again removed to more
suitable and larger premises at No. i Prince’s
Mansions, Victoria Street, where it continues
its labours with a punctuality and assiduity
equal to a Government office. At this stage
the business of the League had become stu-
pendous, and it was therefore resolved to
reorganize the whole system on the lines of
decentralisation in order that the Habitations
might be placed in more direct communion
with electors. The Executive of Habitations
had shown a keen appetite for work, tem-
pered by tact and discretion unequalled in
the history of kindred associations. Divisional
Councils or local head centres were instituted,
consisting of the officers and delegates of


affiliated Habitations in the district, who met
with the object of exchanging views on local
organization, settling differences, and gene-
rally taking counsel together, while still hold-
ing themselves amenable to the paramount
authority, the Grand Council of the League
at head-quarters. Political education of the
agricultural population the late election had
shown to be a matter of the highest import-
ance, and Knights and Dames particularly
directed their efforts to the conversion of
the newly enfranchised electors. Everywhere
the result of this attention was the same
astounding success as had previously fired
the zeal of the pioneers of the Primrose
League. To further advance this campaign
in the country and maintain the high standard
of success achieved, in September the Grand
Council of the League prepared a scheme to
establish District Agencies for organizing
purposes. Each province was placed under
a District Agent, whose services were at the
disposal of Habitations in the neighbourhood
for lecturing, and generally sustaining the
weak, and furthering the objects of the
League. The country was subdivided into
eight divisions as follows :—(1), Northumbria;
(2), Cumbria; (3), Gallia or Wales; (4), Mercia;


(5), East Anglia ; (6), East Saxon ; (7), South
Saxon ; (8), Wessex.
The extent to which the League had now
increased may be gathered from the num-
bers in October, 1886, which showed there
were 41,598 Knights, 31,601 Dames, Asso-
ciates 325,258, giving a total of 398,457, with-
out 17,611 Scotch Members. Since the above
date the League has steadily increased, and
musters to-day considerably over 500,000
Members all told, with 1600 Habitations.
Foreign policy has always been a Tory
strong point. Our Colonies recognised the
advantages of Imperial Federation to the
extent of showing, as they did without ex-
ception in the Suakim Expedition, that they
would loyally stand by the mother country
as long as she agreed to stand by them.
Primrose Leaguers were the main supporters
at home of the Imperial ascendancy of the
British Empire; and it followed as a matter
of course that although their sphere of useful-
ness abroad was limited to fostering the high
principles of the League, and encouragiag
friends at home, branch Habitations now
flourish abroad wherever the Union Jack
flies. There are now three Habitations in
India, one in Australia, one in Canada, and


one in South Africa and Malta, while others
are in process of formation.
The Primrose League exists to-day as the
enduring monument of the love of a people
for the Knight who was their friend. Under
the touch, as it were, of a ‘vanished hand,’
chords of sentiment in the hearts of thousands
in perfect harmony give forth no uncertain
sound.
In conclusion, it may be well to reflect that
the Earl of Beaconsfield said in 1872, ‘The
three great objects which are sought by
Toryism are the maintenance of our insti-
tutions, the preservation of our Empire, and
the improvement of the condition of the
people.’ Long may the Primrose League
prosper, to carry on this patriotic programme
of the great national Conservative Party !
‘ Labor ipse voluptas.’


REVISED
STATUTES AND ORDINANCES.
FOR THE YEAR 1886-1887.
1. This organization shall be called ‘ The Prim-
rose League.’ Its motto shall be ‘ Imperium et
Libertas,’ its seal three Primroses, and its badge an
Imperial Crown, encircled by Primroses.
2. The objects of the League are the mainten-
ance of Religion, of the Estates of the Realm, and
of the unity and ascendancy of the Empire.
3. The League shall consist of (a), Members;
( b ), Habitations ; (c), Divisional Councils; ( d ),
Grand Habitation; ( e ), Grand Council; (/), Grand
Masters.
4. Those persons only shall be enrolled as Mem-
bers who are prepared to promote the objects of the
League, consent to abide by the statutes and or-
dinances of the League, and subscribe the following


declaration, as set forth by order of the Grand
Council: —
‘ I declare, on my honour and faith, that I will
devote my best ability to the maintenance of
Religion, of the Estates of the Realm, and of
the Imperial ascendancy of the British Empire;
and that consistently with my allegiance to
the Sovereign of these Realms, I will promote
with discretion and fidelity the above objects,
being those of the Primrose League.’
5. The Members of the League shall consist of
Knights, Dames, and Associates. Knights and
Dames shall be admitted by the authority of the
Grand Council, and shall pay an entrance-fee of
half-a-crown, and an annual tribute (due on the
19th April) of half-a-crown, to the Grand Council—
(the annual tribute may be compounded for by a
single contribution of eight crowns). Any person
may be admitted as an Associate by any Habitation
of the League duly constituted as hereinafter men-
tioned, upon such terms as such Habitations may
from time to time determine. No entrance-fee or
tribute is payable by an Associate to the Grand
Council of the League. Every Knight when first
admitted shall be a Knight Harbinger, but after
one year’s service may, if specially recommended
(in accordance with the regulations issued by the
Grand Council), be elevated to the dignity of a
Knight Companion; and in a similar manner a
Dame may be elevated to the Order of Merit,


and an Associate to the dignity of a Knight
Harbinger.*
N.B. —Knights, Dames, and Associates, enjoy
equal privileges.
6, Every Knight, Dame, and Associate, on being
enrolled, shall be furnished with a diploma, and
shall be entitled to wear the Badge of the League,
or the distinctive enamel of his or her grade, as
regulated by the Grand Council from time to time.
The Badges shall be worn at all meetings of
Habitations, or other appropriate occasions, and
on April 19th all Members are expected to wear a
bunch of Primroses.
7. The Central Office of the League shall be in
London.
* The Grand Council decided to institute from time to
time Clasps for arduous and special services, to be attached
to the Badges (Habitations being informed of the particular
occasions). The attention of Habitations is accordingly drawn
to the issue of a Clasp for arduous and special services
rendered in 1885, and a Clasp for arduous and special
services rendered in 1886. The Grand Council desire it
to be understood that the recommendation for this honour
rests with the Habitations, and must be approved at a
General Meeting by a majority of at least three-fourths of
those present. The name and qualifications of the proposed
recipient must then be forwarded on the proper form to the
Grand Council for consideration and approval, and in every
case the cost of the Clasp must be provided by the Habita-
tion that recommends. {Precept, August 6th, 1886.)


8. Habitations may be established in any part of
the British Empire, by warrant from the Grand
Council, on the application of thirteen Knights or
Dames of the League. The warrant constituting
each Habitation shall contain the names and
registered League numbers of the Knights or
Dames forming the Habitation, shall be stamped
with the seal of the League, shall bear upon it the
mark of the Grand Council, and shall be testified
by the Registrar, Each Habitation shall have a
number and name assigned to it by the Grand
Council, by which it shall always be designated;
it shall be governed by a Ruling Councillor and
Executive Councillors, to be annually elected by
the Habitation, who shall regulate the admission of
its Members, and conduct the business of the
Habitation, assisted by such Committees and
Officers as the Habitation may appoint. A fee
of four crowns must accompany the application for
a warrant. The Grand Council may withdraw the
warrant of any Habitation, and by a vote of not
less than two-thirds of those present at a Council
specially summoned expel any person from the
League.
9. Every Habitation may make Bye-laws for the
conduct of its business, so long as they are in
direct harmony with the Statutes of the League,
and have received the sanction of the Grand
Council.
10. The Habitations shall confine their work to


the objects of the League or to matters in direct
harmony therewith.
n. Habitations within any defined District may,
for the purposes of consultation and united action,
apply to the Grand Council for a warrant to form a
Central Council for such District. This Central
Council shall be called_ Divisional
Council, and shall consist of the Ruling Councillor
and two Delegates from each Habitation in the
District, to be elected annually. These elected
Members may increase their numbers by co-opting
other Members on to the Divisional Council, pro-
vided such co-opted Members shall not exceed
in numbers one-half of the elected Members.
Divisional Councils may appoint their own Officers,
and shall appoint a Secretary, who will be the
medium of communication with the Grand Council
in London.
12. Every Precept or communication from the
Grand Council to a Habitation or Divisional
Council shall bear the seal and motto of the
League, the mark of the Grand Council, and
shall be testified by the Chancellor. Every com-
munication from a Habitation or Divisional
Council to the Grand Council shall be termed
a ‘ Representation,’ whether originating with the
Habitation or in answer to a Precept. On the
receipt of a Precept a meeting of the Executive of
the Habitation or Divisional Council shall be sum-
moned as speedily as possible, for the purpose of


considering it, and returning an answer to the
Grand Council, and as far as possible complying
with its requirements.
13. The Grand Habitation shall consist of the
Grand Masters, one of whom shall preside at
its meetings (or, in their absence, such Grand
Councillor as they may appoint to preside), the
Members of the Grand Council, and two repre-
sentatives from each Habitation. It shall be
summoned once a-year by the Grand Council,
and shall meet in London, on, or as soon after, the
19th of April as convenient. It shall elect the
Grand Council. The Grand Habitation may meet
at other times if summoned by the Grand Council.
14. The Grand Council shall consist of thirty
Members, elected by the Grand Habitation at its
annual meeting, together with four Trustees and
a Treasurer as hereinafter mentioned, and such co-
opted Members (not exceeding fifteen in number)
as it may elect, and shall have power to fill up
vacancies arising during the year. It shall appoint
the Officials, elect the Grand Masters, conduct the
business, and have control over all matters relating
to the organization of the League, and have power
to make Bye-laws and regulations for the admission
of Members, issue warrants for the establishment
of Habitations, and take all steps necessary for the
promotion of the principles of the League and the
furtherance of its objects. It shall also have the
control and expenditure of the Funds of the


League. All motions for Grand Habitation must
be submitted to Grand Council, for approval, at
least fourteen days previous to the meeting. At
all meetings of the Grand Council five shall form
a quorum.
15. The four Trustees and Treasurer shall be
appointed by the Grand Council, who shall remain
in office until death or resignation, or until the
Grand Council shall think proper to remove any
of them, and elect other Trustee or Trustees, or
Treasurer, in his or their room; and all securities
shall be taken, stocks purchased, and purchases
and investments made, in the names of any two
of such Trustees and the Treasurer; the property,
the subject-matter of the trust, to be nevertheless
subject to the disposition of the Grand Council;
the orders of which, signed by the Chairman of
the day, and attested by the Chancellor, shall
be obligatory upon, and a justification to, the
Trustees and Treasurer, as to any such purchase,
sale, investment, or disposal. The Trustees and
Treasurer shall be ex officio Members of the Grand
Council.
16. A Knight, Dame, or Associate, who shall at
any time be convicted of any offence against the
laws relating to Parliamentary Elections, shall ipso
facto cease to be a Member of the League.
17. These statutes can be altered or added to
by the Grand Council, subject to confirmation by
the Grand Habitation.


MODEL BYE-LAWS
FOR
HABITATIONS.
1. This Habitation shall be styled the ‘
Habitation of the Primrose League,’ No.. . It
shall consist of Knights, Dames, and Associates
(male and female), who shall be equally eligible for
all offices and enjoy the same privileges.
2. The Officers of the Habitation shall be,—a
Ruling Councillor, Treasurer, and Secretary, and
not less than five other Executive Councillors, all
of whom shall be elected annually at the General
Meeting of the Habitation.
3. The Officers of the Habitation shall hold
their respective offices for one year only, but shall
be eligible for re-election. If any vacancy occur in
any of the above-mentioned offices it shall be filled
up at the next ordinary meeting of the Habitation.
4. The Ruling Councillor shall be entitled to
p-eside at all meetings of the Habitation, and shall
aave me general superintendence of its affairs 3 and


he may at any time summon an Extraordinary
Meeting of the Habitation. In his absence, his
duties shall devolve upon one of the Executive
Councillors, in order of seniority, but in the event
of none of the said Councillors being present, the
meeting shall elect its own Chairman. (Statute 8.)
5. The Executive Councillors shall, in concert
with the Ruling Councillor, have the management
of the property and funds of the Habitation, the
conduct of its business, and the general control of
its political action.
It shall be the duty of the Executive Councillors
to subdivide the district allotted to the Habitation
by the Grand Council; to assign the various sub-
districts among the different Members of the
Habitation, direct their labours, receive their re-
ports, and furnish to the Habitation, when neces-
sary, an account of the progress of its political
work.
They shall also assist in the arrangements of
public meetings and other assemblies in which the
Habitation may be directly interested.
The Executive Councillor whose election to the
Habitation is earliest in point of date shall have
the seniority.
6. The Treasurer shall have charge of the funds
of the Habitation, and shall keep its accounts in
proper books to be provided for that purpose; and
at each Annual Meeting of the Habitation he shall


present an audited account of all pecuniary trans-
actions during the year past.
If he resign his office he shall also cease to
be a Member of the Executive Council of the
Habitation.
All orders for the payment of money shall be
signed by the Ruling Councillor, or his deputy,
and countersigned by the Secretary.*
7. There shall be two Auditors, who shall be
appointed at the Ordinary Meeting immediately
preceding the Annual Meeting, and they shall hold
their office for the year only.
8. The Secretary shall have charge of all the
property of the Habitation, except its funds; he
shall summon and attend all meetings of the
Habitation, and of the Ruling Council or Com-
mittees thereof, and take minutes of the same in a
book provided for that purpose; he shall also
keep, in another book, a Register of the Officers
and Members of the Habitation, and furnish a
return of the Members of the Habitation to the
Grand Chancery yearly, on or shortly after the 19th
of April, and shall collect dues and hand them to
* On all entrance-fees and first tributes received on account
of the Grand Council, 20 per cent may be deducted towards
the expenses of the Habitation. The same allowance is also
made on all tributes, provided the same are remitted to the
Grand Chancery of the League within three months of the
19th of April, on which date they are due. —(Circulars of
March and May, 1886.)


the Treasurer; he shall further make a half-yearly
report to the Grand Council of the work and pro-
gress of the Habitation; and at its meetings shall
assist the Chairman in the performance of his
duties. He shall also, in the absence of the
Ruling Councillor, have power, at the request of
two Members of the Council, to call meetings of
the Council for- the transaction of special business.
9. Every person desirous of being admitted into
the Habitation shall be proposed by some one of
its Members, who shall inscribe in the book pro-
vided for that purpose, or otherwise furnish to the
Secretary, the full name and address of the person
so proposed; and such proposal may be brought
forward at any Ordinary Meeting of the Habitation,
but the name of the Candidate shall not be sub-
mitted to the meeting unless the Statutable Form
of Declaration, duly signed and filled up, together
with the fees specified below, shall have been at
the same time transmitted.
. Candidates who are already enrolled as Members
of the League shall be required in like manner to
forward the League number, together with their fee.
10. Every Candidate, not being already a
Member of the League, shall pay on election
the fees following, viz. ;—(Statute 5.)
Knights and Dames.
Entrance fee and first year’s tribute to the
Grand Council 5/-
First year’s subscription to the Habitation *


Associates.
Entrance-fee and first year’s subscription
to the Habitation (to include enamel
badge) *
Candidates who are already Members of the
League shall pay only the Habitation dues.
In every year after the first the Members shall
pay:—
Knights and Dames.
Tribute to Grand Council 2/6
Subscription to Habitation *
Associates.
Subscription to Habitation *
The annual tribute of Knights and Dames is due
on the 19th of April.
New Members joining on or after January Ist
will not be required to pay a second tribute to the
Grand Council for the financial year (April 19th to
April 19th) then next ensuing.
Any Knight or Dame may compound for the
annual tribute to the Grand Council by a contribu-
tion of 2/.
Any Member of the Habitation whose fees shall
be in arrear for one whole year shall thereby cease
to be a Member, subject, however, to replacement
at the pleasure of the Council, if the arrears are
paid up, and a satisfactory explanation given.
11. Badges should be worn at all meetings of
D
* Such sum as the Habitation may determine.


the Habitation, and at all public meetings and
assemblies, and other suitable occasions. They
can be procured at the Offices of the League only,
or may be thence obtained through the Honorary
Secretary of the Habitation.
12. When circumstances permit, every elected
Member, having duly paid the fees above men-
tioned, and signed the Obligatory Declaration as
provided in Rule 9, shall be introduced by his (or
her) proposer or some other Member, to the pre-
siding Officer at some meeting of the Habitation,
and the presiding Officer, having caused the newly
elected Member to subscribe his (or her) name in
the Register of the Habitation, shall formally
receive him (or her) as a Member of the
Habitation, with such ceremony as the Habita-
tion may determine.
13. The rank of Knight Companion or Dame
of the Order of Merit is conferred for long or
meritorious service; all Members of twelve months’
standing are eligible.
The proposal for elevation may/be made at any
Ordinary Meeting of the Habitation, and, if agreed
to by a majority of three-fourths of those present
and voting, a recommendation shall be forwarded
by the Ruling Councillor to the Grand Chancery
of the League, together with a statement of the
services which, in the judgment of the Habitation,
have rendered the said Member deserving of
advancement.—(Statute 5.)


(See also precept, August 6th, 1886, page 24.
Every Member whose advancement to the rank
of Knight Companion has been approved by the
Grand Council, shall be duly admitted to that rank
by the presiding Officer, and formally invested
with the badge, at some Ordinary Meeting of the
Habitation.
The Grand Council having decided to give from
time to time, for arduous and special services,
clasps to be attached to the badges (the Habita-
tions being informed of the particular occasions),
the proposal, recommendation, approval, and in-
vestiture, will be as above in the case of Knights
Companion or Dames of the Order of Merit,
except as regards length of service. A Member
having received one clasp may receive others on
future occasions.
No fees are payable on advancement to the rank
of Knight Companion or Dame of the Order of
Merit. The badge shall be provided by the
Members elevated.
No Member may wear any badge to which he is
not entitled under a fine of to go to the
funds of the Habitation.
The clasps for special service will be provided
by the Habitation.
Associates may also be advanced to the rank of
Hon. Knight or Dame subject to the same regula-
tions, and they will be furnished with a diploma
free of charge, and will not be chargeable with
tribute to the Grand Council.


14- Every Member of this Habitation, unless
engaged at the time in other political duties, shall
be willing to place himself, as far as possible, at
the disposal of the Council, for the execution of
political work, especially in actively and ener-
getically canvassing any sub-district to which he
may be appointed, so as to acquaint himself per-
fectly with the social position, influence, and
political movements within the district, and shall
at all times be especially watchful of the organiza-
tion and proceedings of the opposite party, and by
every lawful means shall endeavour, to the best of
his ability, to promote the objects of the League.
Every Member shall make himself acquainted,
as soon as possible, with the most efficient means
of political organization.
Every Member shall endeavour to see that all
adherents in his district are placed on the Register
of Voters, and shall furnish a list of such persons
to the Secretary or Ruling Councillor of the
Habitation.
Every Member, if required, shall report, either
in person or by letter {as may be most convenient
to him), the results of his labour and observation.
Every Member is expected to give his attendance,
or report by letter, at one or more of the meetings
of the Habitation in each year, and any Member
failing to do so for a whole year, shall be liable
to have his name struck off the Register of the
Habitation.
During the progress of a contested Election it


shall be the duty of Members to use the most
urgent efforts to bring up voters to the poll. They
must be most careful not to violate the provisions
of the Corrupt Practices Act; upon any violation
of which, ipso facto , a Member ceases to belong to
the League.
Members who reside in the provinces, or any
Member when travelling, should be willing to
render personal aid in any locality where it may be
considered desirable by the Grand Council to form
new Habitations, or to assist any special effort con-
nected with the general opinions of the League.
Members shall notify any change of residence
to the Secretary.
15. The Ordinary Meetings of the Habitation
shall be held on the in each month
at p.m.
Special Meetings may be summoned either on
the sole authority of the Ruling Councillor, or on a
written requisition addressed to him by not less
than five Members of the Habitation. Such
meetings shall be convened by a particular sum-
mons addressed to each Member, one week at
least before the day appointed for the meeting;
this summons shall also specify the business to be
discussed at such meeting, and no other business
shall be brought forward.
In case of objectionable conduct, political or
otherwise, on the part of any Officer or Member,
a Special Meeting may be called on the requisition


of any five Members for taking such conduct into
consideration. And such meeting, by a majority
of two-thirds present and voting, shall have power
to strike such Member’s name off the list, re-
porting the same to the Grand Council,
The Annual Meeting of the Habitation, for the
Election of Officers, the reception of the Treasurer’s
Accounts, and the Secretary’s Report, shall be held
on or about the 19th of April.
Of this meeting one week’s notice, at least, shall
be given to each Member, and no other business
beyond that specified shall be transacted, unless the
same length of notice shall have been given to the
Secretary, and the nature of the business par-
ticularly stated.
During the progress of a Parliamentary Election,
within the electoral district in which it is situated,
the Habitation should act only under legal advice,
and should not meet from the date of the issue of
the Writ until after the Election is over.
At all Meetings, whether Ordinary or Special,
five Members shall form a quorum.
16. No Visitors, except Members of the League,
shall be permitted at any meeting, and these only
by the special permission of the presiding Officer.
17. The election of the Officers of the Habita-
tion shall be effected by means of voting papers.
Voting on all other questions shall be by show of
hands, and the Chairman shall have a casting vote.


18. Any alteration in, or addition to, these Rules
must be duly proposed and seconded at some
Ordinary Meeting of the Habitation ; but the pro-
posed alteration or addition shall not be discussed
or voted on till the next meeting after that at which
it was introduced. Such alterations must receive
the sanction of the Grand Council of the League.


MODEL BYE-LAWS
FOR
DIVISIONAL COUNCILS.
N.B.—Only those Habitatio7is which may apply to
form or join a Divisional Council will be con-
sidered as Affiliated.
1. This Council shall be called the
Divisional Council, No.
2. The Council shall consist of the Ruling Coun-
cillor of each Affiliated Habitation in the District,
and two Delegates from each such Habitation, to
be elected annually.
3. The Council may also co-opt annually mem-
bers to serve thereon, provided that such members
belong to Affiliated Habitations within the District,
and do not exceed in number one half of the Mem-
bers elected by Habitations.
4. The Officers of the Council shall consist of a
President, a Secretary, and Treasurer. The Secre


tary will be the medium of communication with the
Grand Council in London. Such Officers shall be
elected annually. The Council may also, annually,
elect two Vice-Presidents.
5. The Council shall in all cases conform to the
Statutes and Ordinances of the League.
6. Meetings of the Council shall be held at least
twice in each year.
7. The Annual Meeting of the Council shall be
held as soon after April 19th as possible, and the
election of Officers shall be made at such meeting.
All Officers shall be eligible for re-election, and in
the event of a vacancy occurring, it may be filled
up at any Ordinary Meeting, fourteen days’ notice
at least being given.
8. Special Meetings of the Council may be
summoned by the President, or in his absence
by (not less than three) members
of the Council, but no business shall be transacted
at any such meeting, except that for which the
Council has been specially summoned.
9. The Divisional Council shall exercise a
general supervision over, and receive reports
from, the local Affiliated Habitations as to the
work done by them, and submit the same to the
Grand Council.
10. All questions relating to the re-arrangement
of boundaries of, and differences between, local


Affiliated Habitations, shall be settled by the
Council, subject to an appeal to the Grand
Council.
11. The Council shall report from time to time
to the Grand Council as to the formation of fresh
Habitations within the District (if necessary), and
generally as to the best means of promoting the
objects and work of the Primrose League within
such District.
12. Each Affiliated Habitation shall contribute
annually out of its funds the sum of £ to
defray the necessary expenses of the Council.
13. No alteration can be made in these Bye-laws
except at a Meeting of the Council, notice of such
proposed alteration being given to each Member
and to the Secretaries of the several local Affiliated
Habitations at least twenty-one days before the
meeting, and no alteration should be valid until
the consent of the Grand Council of the League
has been officially applied for and granted.
14. At all Meetings of the Divisional Council
(but not less than five) shall form a
quorum, and the President, or in his absence the
Chairman, shall have a casting vote in addition to
his own.


CORRUPT PRACTICES’ ACT,
1883.
This Act was passed for the prevention of illegal
and corrupt practices in connexion with Parlia-
mentary Elections, and has the general effect of
therefore making most of the work of the Election
of a purely voluntary character. Members of the
Primrose League are particularly advised to attend
to the following points :
(a.) —During the time of a Parliamentary Election,
or as soon as a Conservative Candidate has
been declared and accepted, the Habitations
must act only under the advice of the Can-
didate or of the Election Agent appointed
by him.
(A)—-The Election Agent of the Candidate, if
accepting the assistance of the Members
belonging to any Plabitation, will sanction
the expenditure of such small sum as he
may consider necessary for calling together
the Habitation during the Election, such as
hiring a suitable room for the purpose of
meetings, and for postages, stationery, &c.
The place in which the Habitation meets


should not be a public-house nor any Ele-
mentary School. No money whatever must
be spent during the Election by the Ruling
Councillor or the Habitation on these objects
in excess of the amount originally authorised
by the Agent without his written sanction.
(c.) —The Ruling Councillor should communicate
with and take instructions from the Election
Agent or Candidate as to the employment of
those Members of the Habitation who are
willing to act as canvassers.
(d.) —The new Act makes it illegal for any money
to be paid for bands of music, flags, banners,
ribbons, or other marks of distinction. It is
also illegal for electors to pay for the hiring
of carriages or other vehicles, but they can
lend their own, or borrow and use those of
their friends for the purposes of conveying
electors to the poll, provided no money be
paid for the hiring, and no carriage nor horse
be employed which is usually let for hire.
Carriages, carts, and vans, which do not pay
any tax, when used without payment for the
conveyance of voters to or from the poll are
not liable to duty for such service.


APPENDIX.
OFFICERS OF THE LEAGUE.
The League was governed'in 1884 by a Ruling
Council. The President of the Council was called
the Grand Councillor, and he was assisted by
three Executive Councillors, elected annually.
The Marquis of Abergavenny was the first
President of the Council and Grand Councillor
of the League. In 1885 the Marquis of Salisbury
and Sir Stafford Northcote were appointed Grand
Masters of the League, superseding the Grand
Councillor in rank. The Grand Council for the
year 1885 comprised the following:—
A. Akers Douglas, Esq., M.P.
Sir Michael Hicks Beach, Bart., M.P.
Lord Charles Beresford, M.P.
E. Birkbeck, Esq.
J. Brindley, Esq.
Robert Bourke, Esq., M.P.
F. D. Dixon Hartland, Esq., M.P.
Sir W. Hart Dyke, Bart., M.P.
Lord Elcho.
Captain Fellowes, M.P.
J. T. Agg-Gardner, Esq., M.P.
Lord George Hamilton, M.P.
Sir William Hardman.


Lord Harris.
Sir Henry Hoare, Bart.
F. Seager Hunt, Esq., M.P,
Lord Arthur Hill, M.P.
Colonel E. R. King-Harman, M.P.
The Earl of Limerick.
Sir Massey Lopes, Bart.
The Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
W. T. Marriott, Q.C., M.P.
Lord John Manners, M.P.
J. Blundell Maple, Esq.
Maurice Mocatta, Esq.
Ponsonby Moore, Esq.
F. D. Thomas, Esq.'
Dr. Tindal Robertson.
Sir Alfred Slade, Bart.
William Vaughan, Esq.
C. E. Howard Vincent, Esq., M.P.
H. H. Wainwright, Esq.
Sir H. Drummond Wolff.
Sir Samuel Wilson.
The Grand Council for the year 1886 were :
The Earl of Amherst.
H. H. Bemrose, Esq.
Lord Charles Beresford, C. 8., M.P.
Sir Edward Birkbeck, Bart., M.P.
T. G. Bowles, Esq.
The Viscount Bury.
The Viscount Cranborne, M.P.
R. Dawson, Esq.


A. Akers Douglas, Esq., M.P.
Sir W. Hart Dyke, Bart., M.P.
Viscount Folkestone, M.P.
Captain Philip Green.
Lord F. Hamilton,
The Lord Harris.
Sir William Hardman.
The Hon. Claud G. Hay,
The Lord Henniker.
Staveley Hill, Esq., Q.C., M.P.
Sir Henry Hoare, Bart., M.P.
The Earl of Kintore.
The Earl of Limerick.
Sir Massey Lopes, Bart.
Colonel G. B. Malleson, C.S.L
J. Blundell Maple,
W. F. Marriott, Q.C., M.P.
H. Matthews, Q.C., M.P.
Sir F. G. Milner, Bart.
Maurice Mocatta, Esq.
Ponsonby Moore, Esq.
K. Murchison, Esq.
The Duke of Norfolk, K.G.
H. Cecil Raikes, Esq., M.P,
Dr. Tindall Robertson.
F. D. Thomas, Esq.
William Vaughan, Esq.
C. E. Howard Vincent, Esq., C. 8., M.P.
H. H. Wainwright, Esq.
C. A. Whitmore, Esq., M.P
The Lord Wimborne.


The Trustees of the Funds of the League in
LBBS were: —
The Earl of Egmont.
Lord Randolph Churchill, M.P.
G. Sclater Booth, M.P.
Sir Algernon Borthwick, M.P.
In 1886 :
Lord R. Churchill, M.P.
Sir A. Borthwick, M.P.
Sir Alfred Slade, Bart.
Sir John E. Gorst, Q.C., M.P.
The successive Registrars of the League have
been:—
F. D. Thomas appointed Jan. 1884,
Arthur Edwards ... „ June, 1884.
Captain G. Power... „ Nov. 1884.
W. Peachey Shearer „ May, 1885.
William Haigh „ July, 1886.
The Registrars particularly attended to the
duties of registration of members and granting
diplomas.
The two principal Political Secretaries in turn
have been The Hon. Claud G. Hay and T. B.
Cusack Smith.
The Treasurer of the League is F. D. Dixon
Hartland, Esq., M.P.
In 1886 Mr. Hugh H. Riach was appointed the


head official on the staff of the League, with the
title of Chancellor. Mr. Hugh H. Riach resigned
the Chancellorship at the end of the year 1886.
The Auditors of the League are Messrs. Ford,
Kemp, & Co., of Wallbrook, E.C.
The Grand Council meets once every month,
and carries out the intermediate work by weekly
Committees of General Purposes and Finance.
The Ladies’ Grand Council consists of some one
thousand members, each paying a yearly subscrip-
tion to their funds of 1/. ir,, exclusive of the yearly
tribute to the Grand Habitation of 2 s. 6d ., as well
as Habitation fees. The funds of the Ladies’
Branch go towards the expenses of their particular
office, and the surplus is given to the League to
provide literature, &c. v
The office-holders of the Ladies’ Grand Council
are:—
The Marchioness of Salisbury.
The Duchess of Marlborough.
The Countess of Iddesleigh.
(Pice^re^ftettteu
The Lady R. S. Churchill.
The Baroness Bolsover.
The Lady Wimborne.
Lady Borthwick.
E


e cErecutitie Committee*
The Duchess of Norfolk.
The Marchioness of Londonderry.
The Countess of Jersey.
The Countess of Romney,
The Lady Gwendolen Cecil, Hon. Treasurer.
The Viscountess Folkestone.
The Lady Dorothy Nevill.
The Lady Charles Beresford.
The Lady Stanley (of Preston).
The Hon. Lady Campbell, of Blythswood.
The Hon. Mary Henniker.
The Hon. Mrs. Armytage.
Lady Knightly.
Lady Hardman, Hon. Secretary.
Mrs, Akers-Douglas.
Mrs. Bischoffsheim.
Miss M. Nevill.
The following Gentlemen act as the Consultative
Committee:
The Viscount Cranborne, M.P.
The Right Hon. W. T. Marriott, Q.C., M.P.
Sir Frederick Milner, Bart.
Colonel Malleson, C.S.I.
C. A. Whitmore, Esq., M.P.


3omt literature Committee*
The Viscount Cranborne, M.P.
The Right Hon. W. T. Marriott, Q.C., M.P.
Sir F. Milner, Bart.
Colonel Malleson, C.S.I.
C. A. Whitmore, Esq., M.P.
The Baroness Bolsover.
The Countess of Jersey.
The Lady Gwendolen Cecil.
The Hon. Lady Campbell, of Blythswood.
T. B. Cusack Smith, Secretary,
Secretary to the Ladies ’ Grand Council:
Arthur Warren, appointed June 1885.
ORDINANCES OF THE
LADIES’ GRAND COUNCIL.
There shall be a Ladies’ Grand Council of the
Primrose League.
There shall be Presidents of the Ladies’ Grand
Council and Vice-Presidents; a Secretary and a
Treasurer.
The Presidents and Vice-Presidents shall be
appointed by the Grand Council of the League.


The Presidents and Vice-Presidents shall hold
office during life, or until resignation. A retiring
President or Vice-President may be appointed by
the Grand Council of the League to be an Extra-
President or Vice-President.
The Ladies’ Grand Council shall appoint an
Executive Committee, which shall meet at the
time appointed, at the house of one of the Presi-
dents or Vice-Presidents, or, in case of need, at
the house of one of the Members, as settled among
themselves. One of the Presidents or Vice-Presi-
dents, or, in their absence, one of the Members
elected by those present, shall preside at the meet-
ings. Meetings shall be summoned by the Presi-
dents or Vice-Presidents, or by a requisition signed
by six of the Members.
The Executive Committee shall have the power
of making all appointments pending the meeting
of the Ladies’ Grand Council.
The Presidents and Vice-Presidents of all
Habitations composed exclusively of Dames,
created prior to April, 1885, shall be members
of the Ladies’ Grand Council ex officio.
The Ladies’ Grand Council shall meet yearly,
or oftener if proved necessary.
The Executive Commitee shall pay money into
the Special Fund of the Primrose League, in such
sums, and at such intervals, as shall best suit the
convenience of the Committee and the require-
ments of the Central Office of the League. A
receipt of the money thus paid to the account of


the Special Fund shall in each case be delivered
and entered upon the minutes of the Executive
Committee. A copy of all reports or financial
statements having reference to the Special Fund
shall from time to time be supplied to the Execu-
tive Committee.
There may be a joint Literature Committee,
consisting of five Knights and four Dames, and no
Member of the Ladies’ Grand Council shall issue
any circulars, leaflets, or other publications with
the imprint of the League which have not been
submitted to and approved by the said Joint
Committee.
All subscriptions to the Ladies’ Grand Council
are considered to be due on the rst January in
each year. The subscriptions of new members
paid during the last three months of any year are
held to be valid until the 31st December of the
year following.
In all matters not herein mentioned, the Ladies’
Grand Council shall conform to the rules laid down
for the guidance of the League.
The Executive Committee may, with the consent
of the Grand Council of the League, alter or add
to the present Statutes.


PRECEDENCE AND BADGES
OF THE LEAGUE,
THE GRAND MASTERS.
The Grand Councillor. The Grand Council.
RULING COUNCILLORS OF HABITATIONS.
S. d.
Badge 5 6
KNIGHT COMPANIONS.
Full dress badge 5 6
Distinctive enamel primrose and crown ... 2 6
EXECUTIVE COUNCILLORS.
Badge 2 6
WARDENS.
Badge 20
KNIGHTS.
Full dress badge 5 6
Distinctive enamel stud 2 o
MEN ASSOC I A TES.
Full dress badge 1 o
Distinctive enamel stud ... o 3
THE PRESIDENTS, VICE-PRESIDENTS,
AND DAMES OF THE GRAND COUNCIL.
DAME PRESIDENTS OF HABIT A TIONS.
Badge 5 6


DAMES OF THE ORDER OF MERIT.
S. d.
Full dress badge 5 6
Crown and primrose distinctive enamel ... 2 6
DAME EXECUTIVE COUNCILLORS.
Badge 6
DAME WARDENS.
Badge o
DAMES.
Full dress badge 5 6
Distinctive enamel brooch 2 o
WOMEN ASSOCIATES.
Full dress badge 1 0
Distinctive enamel brooch o 4
The Executive officers of the Ladies’ Grand
Council have no grade badges, but members of
the Ladies’ Grand Council wear a handsome
exclusive badge of their own, specially designed
by Mr. Henry Lewis, of Bond Street, price 2 s. 6d.
It may be interesting to Primrose Leaguers, as
showing how future circumstances can alter and
develope primary ideas, if there are here set out
verbatim the resolutions of the first meeting of
the Council, held November 17th, 1883, together
with the original statutes then promulgated.


RESOLUTIONS.
1. That a political Society be and is hereby
founded under the title of the ‘Primrose Tory
League.’
2. That * * * * constitute the Ruliug Council
of the League, and have power to establish
branches in all parts of the British Empire.
3. That the objects of the League are the
promotion of Tory principles viz. the main-
tenance of religion, of the estates of the realm, and
and of the ‘ Imperial Ascendancy of Great Britain.’
4. That * * * * be the first Grand Councillor,
and that in the event of any vacancy in that office
the Ruling Council have power to fill the same.
5. That the form of admission to the League
and the powers of the various branches shall be
determined from time to time by the Ruling
Council.
6. That the motto of the League be ‘ Imperium
et Libertas ,’ the seal ‘Three Primroses,’ and the
badge ‘An Imperial Crown encircled by Prim-
roses.’
ORIGINAL STATUTES.
I. The League will be governed by the Ruling
Council. In case of any vacancy the Ruling
Council within the space of three months shall
select a fresh Councillor.


11. The President of the Council will be called
the Grand Councillor. His appointment will last
for three years. He will be assisted by three
Executive Councillors, to be elected annually.
HI. There shall be a Central Office for com-
munications, with a Registrar.
IV. In every town and district in the United
Kingdom where there are thirteen Knights of the
League a Habitation can be established by a
warrant from the Ruling Council. The warrant
shall be marked with the mark of the Grand
Councillor, stamped with the seal of the Order,
and testified by the Registrar. Every Habitation
shall have a number assigned to it by the Ruling
Council, by which it shall be always designated.
V. Every Habitation shall be governed by a
Ruling Councillor and three Executive Coun-
cillors, who shall regulate the admission and
initiation of Knights. It is not necessary that
the Ruling Councillor of a Habitation should be
a member of the Ruling Council. Every Member
of the League shall have a number at the time of
enrolment, which shall appear on his warrant.
VI. Every Habitation shall keep a roll of its
Members. The name of every Member initiated
shall be immediately sent for enrolment to the
Registrar in London, together with a fee of one
crown, which shall include the tribute for the first
F


year. A Diploma of Knighthood shall thereupon
be sent to the Ruling Councillor of the Habitation
containing the name of the new Knight, marked
with the mark of the Grand Councillor, stamped
with the seal of the League, and testified by the
Registrar.
VII. The annual tribute of each Member to the
funds of the League shall be half-a-crown, payable
on the 19th April (Primrose Day). This amount
will be remitted by the Ruling Councillor of each
Habitation annually to the Secretary. Each
Habitation will regulate the local tributes of its
Members. The Diploma of each Knight shall be
stamped annually by the Ruling Councillor on
payment of the tribute.
VIII. Every Knight shall pay his own tribute,
and shall himself pay for any refreshment con-
sumed by him in the Habitation, whether occa-
sional or at a banquet.
IX. The Knights shall be divided into two
c l ass es Knight Companions and Knight Har-
bingers. After probation of one year a Knight
Harbinger may be promoted by the Ruling Coun-
cillor of his Habitation to the rank of Knight
Companion, and his warrant shall be stamped
accordingly. Members in holy orders shall be
designated Knights Almoners. Knights Almoners
shall rank with Knights Companions. Seniority of
Knighthood shall govern the precedence of Knights
in the several grades.


X. In all towns and districts under a Habitation
one or more Knights shall be assigned to sub-
districts. Such sub-districts shall not contain
more than one hundred houses. It will be the
duty of such Knights to promote to the best of
their ability the doctrines of the League through-
out their sub-district, to obtain information as to
the views and position of each inhabitant, details
useful for registration, and to make reports on
these and other subjects of importance at the
meetings of the Habitation. During any public
■election the Habitation will meet every evening,
each Knight bringing a report of his proceedings
during the day. Monthly reports of the Habita-
tion, and during election time daily reports, shall
be forwarded by the Ruling Councils of the Habi-
tations to the Registrar.
XI. Every Knight shall be entitled to wear the
badge of the order attached to a ribbon. The
ribbon of a Councillor shall be all primrose; of a
Knight Companion or Knight Almoner, primrose
and violet ; of a Knight Harbinger, primrose centre
with violet borders. The badges must be worn by
Knights at all meetings of Habitations. On Prim-
rose Day all members of the League shall wear a
bunch of primroses.
XII. Any Knight or Councillor who during an
election has been found guilty of any corrupt or
illegal practice shall be degraded and expelled


from the League. His name shall be erased from
the roll of the Habitation and from the roll of the
Ruling Council, and the reason of such erasure
shall be entered on the books. The same course
shall be adopted in the case of any Knight or
Councillor divulging the secrets of the League
or acting in a manner unbecoming a Knight or
gentleman.
XIII. No Knight not a member of a Habitation
shall be admitted to any meeting except on the
responsibility of two Knights, members of the
Habitation. There shall be no strange guests at
any banquet, and stranger Knights shall be re-
quired equally with members to pay for their own
refreshments.
XIV. The Ruling Council may withdraw the
warrant of any Habitation.
XV. Every communication from the Ruling
Council to the Habitation shall be called a Pre-
cept. It shall be headed by the word ‘ Precept, r
shall bear the seal of the order, the mark of the
Grand Councillor, and shall be testified by the
Registrar, Every communication from a Habita-
tion to the Ruling Council shall be termed a
4 Representation,’ whether originating with the
Habitation or in answer to a Precept. It shall
bear the stamp of the local seal, which shall be
the same as the seal of the Ruling Council, to-
gether with the number of the Habitation. On


the receipt of a Precept a meeting of the Habita-
tion shall be summoned within two days, for the
purpose of considering it and returning an answer
to the Registrar, and as far as possible complying
with the requirements of the Precept.
XVI. Every Member on his initiation shall
make the declaration hereto annexed, and signify
his adhesion to the bye-laws of the League by
subscribing his signature to a copy thereof. He
shall also sign his name in a book to be kept for
the purpose.
‘Form of Declaration.
‘I, A. 8., declare on my honour and faith that
I will devote my best ability to the maintenance of
Religion, of the Estates of the Realm, and of the
Imperial ascendancy of Great Britain; that I will
keep secret all matters that may come to my know-
ledge as a Member of the Primrose Tory League;
and that, consistently with my allegiance to the
Sovereign of these Realms, I will obey all orders
coming from the constituted authority of the
League for the advancement of its objects.’
This obligation may be administered to any
person by a member of the Ruling Council or
by a Habitation, which shall be responsible to
the Ruling Council for his fitness.
XVII. The Ruling Council and the Habitation


shall conform to all the requirements of the law
regulating societies of this character.
XYIII. Gentlemen wishing to become Knights
of the League must, until further steps be taken,
apply in writing to the Registrar, accompanying
their application with a fee of a crown and a
reference. They will announce their readiness
to subscribe to the statutes and ordinances, and
to take the declaration. No applicant can be
accepted except upon the approval of the Ruling
Council. In case of non-approval the fee will be
returned. No application will be received by the
Registrar from any town or district where a
Habitation has been constituted, but the applicant
■will be informed to whom he can apply in the
town or district of his residence. The Ruling
Council may reward either by Diplomas of
Honour, or the presentation of special badges or
clasps, any distinguished services rendered by
Knights.
XIX. The Ruling Council shall be entitled to
receive monies both from the Habitations and
from individuals, to be spent for the advance-
ment of the purposes of the League. An account
shall be kept of receipts and expenditure, and
such account shall be annually audited by char-
tered accountants. Any Ruling Councillor of a
Habitation may at any time have access to the
Auditor’s report. These rules can be altered or
added to by the Ruling Council.


INDEX.
AGE
Associates 2 3, 33
Badges 54. 55
Clasps 24
Corrupt Practices’ Act 37. 43. 44
Dames 23
„ of the Order of Merit 23, 34
District Agents 19
Divisional Councils . 26
~ Bye-laws 4°
Diploma ......... 24.
Executive Councillor ..••••• 3°
Fees 31. 32
Funds . 27, 28, 30
Grand Council 27
„ Habitation 27
Habitation 25
~ Bye-laws 29
„ Officers 29, 30
Knights 23
„ Companions 23
Meetings 37
Members ........ 22, 32
Promotion 34. 35
Ruling Councillor 29
Statutes . . 22
„ Original 56
Tribute 33
Work 36, 37




S6OTT. AQI E
STREET.
REGENT
sse
t
■■■■
.
A
ff-
‘ The Clunes is a tight-fitting short coat in Beaver cloth, with a most
effective trimming in front.’— Lady's Pictorial.
Waterproof Travelling Cloaks, Walking Gowns, and Jackets.
CARRIAGE RUGS, MAUDS, PLAIDS, &c.
SCOTCH TWEEDS and HOMESPUNS FOR GOWNS.
BOYS’ HIGHLAND SUITS IN ALL THE CLANS.
PATTERNS FREE.
SCOTT ADIE,
)t Eoj?al &cotci) SflHareijoiwe,
115 and 115 a REGENT STREET, W.


‘ KINGS LOVE KIM THAT SPEAKETH RIGHT.’
NATIONAL SONG.
Inscribed to the-Knights and Dames of the Primrose League-
Written and Composed by
JAMES G-ASKELL.
4- 2s. Nett. 4*
POST FREE FROM COMPOSER:—
2 CLYDE VILLAS, SWINDON, WILTS.
Primrose Flags and Banners,
FOR FETES AND MEETINGS,
ON SALE OR HIRE. APPLY TO
BENJAMIN EDGINGTON, Limited,
2 DUKE STREET, LONDON BRIDGE, S.E.,
t£ent attn jflaff to iper SlSajesitp tlje SEXuectt
anD Ip.3R.ip. tl)e prince of CSJales.
HIGHEST AWARD AT LIVERPOOL EXHIBITION,
GOLD MEDAL FOR TENTS, also GOLD MEDAL FOR FLAGS.
habitmtonT^lnners,
Richly Emblazoned and Mounted.
MARQUEES and TEMPORARY ROOMS on HIRE.
Note. —Benjamin Edgington decorated Her Majesty’s Opera House for
the Annual Meeting of the League in May last.
N. HANDSOME GIPT-BOOK.
EVERY GIRL’S ANNUAL for 1887.
Edited by ALICIA AMY LEITH.
Royal Bvo. fully Illustrated, cloth elegant, js. 6 d. Containing :
Serial Stories by Sarah Tytler, Katharine S. Macquoid,
and The Author of ‘ The Atelier du Lys,’ &c.
1 Has decidedly improved since it passed into the hands of Messrs.
Hatchard. The illustrations are better, and the letterpress shows greater
literary ability.’— Athenceum.
London: HATCH ARBS, 187 PICCABZBCT, W.


4 In this series the public have the means of acquiring a great deal of in*
formation which it would be difficult to find in so convenient a form,
elsewhere. — St, James's Gazette,
Now Ready , in Crown B vo, price 3s, 6d, each ,
Cbe (SngUsf) Citizen:
A SERIES OF SHORT BOOKS ON
1118 EIGHTS EESPOHSIBILITIES^
Edited by HENRY CRAIK, M.A. (Oxon.), LL.D. (Glasgow).
The following are the Titles of the Volumes :—
Centra! Government. H. D. Traill, D.C.L.
The Electorate and the Legislature. Spencer Walpole.
Local Government. M. D. Chalmers, M.A.
Justice and Police. F. W. Maitland.
National Budget : the National Debt, Taxes, and Rates. A.J. Wilson*
The State in its Relation to Education. Henry Craik, M.A., LL D
The Poor Law. Rev. T. W. Fowle, M.A.
The State in Relation to Trade. Sir T. H. Farrer, Bart.
1h p a g e ln Rela Hon to Labour. W. Stanley Jevons, LLD., M.A.,
The State and the Church. Hon. Arthur Elliot, M.P.
the Land Laws. Professor F. Pollock.
Foreign Relations. Spencer Walpole.
Colonies and Dependencies Part I. INDIA By J. S. Cotton, M.A.
'tv, P -D rt- THE COLONIES. By E. J. Payne, M.A.
fte Fu n ish ment and Prevention of Crime. By Colonel Sir Edmund
Du Cane, K.C.8., R.E. [Other Volumes tofollow.
Twenty- fourth Annual Publication (Revised after Official Returns) of
THE STATESMAN’S YEAR-BQOK. A Statistical and Historical
T? n /- Ula , 1 States of the Civilised World for the Year 1887.
Edited by J. Scott Keltie, Librarian to the Royal Geographical
Society. Crown Bvo. ids. 6d. [ lmmediately.
A Jubilee Book by Charlotte M. Yonge.
THE VICTORIAN HALF-CENTURY. By Charlotte M.
Yonge, Author of The Heir of Redclyffe,’ &c. With a new Portrait of
the Queen. Crown Bvo. paper cover, 15-.; cloth binding, is. 6rt.
OUR NATIONAL INSTITUTIONS. ByANNABuCKi.AND. iSmo.i^
ANNALS OF OUR TIME. A Diurnal of Events, Social and Political,
Home and Foreign, from the Accession of Queen Victoria to the Peace
of Versailles, 28th February, 1871. By Joseph Irving. 6th Edition,
revised. iSs. '
■ ~ SUPPLEMENTS. From February 1871 to March 1874. as. 6d.
From March 1874 to July 1878. Bvo. 4s. 6d.
NOW PUBLISHING.
‘A Magazine which has no rival in England.’— The Times.
€be ®nglisfi illustrated sgatjajine:
Single Numbers price 6d., by post Bd. Yearly Subscription, post free. Bs.
The English Illustrated Magazine is designed for the enter-
tainment of the home, and for the instruction and amusement of young and
old, and it will be conducted in the belief that every section of readers, in
whatever direction their tastes and interests may tend, are prepared to de-
mand and to appreciate the best that can be offered to them.
MACMIIIAW AND CO., LONDON.


Published by MESSRS. HATCHARD.
NEW POLITICAL PAMPHLET.
THE OLD PARLIAMENTARY HAND.
A Letter addressed to Lord W —v —n on the
Recent Crisis.
By the Author of ‘ Letters to my Son Herbert/
London: HATCHARDS, 187 Piccadilly, W.
THE GREAT NAVAL WAR OF 1887.
Partially reprinted from the St. James’s Gazette.
With Plan of the ‘Battle of Flamborough Head/
Fcap. Bvo. 6d.
‘ Unlike many books written with a purpose, this work
will be read with interest by everyone. It not only gives a
graphic forecast of the exciting episodes and startling events
which will probably occur in the next naval war, but these are
•characterised by an air of reality which makes it difficult to
believe that the historical details are wholly fictitious.’
Army and Navy Gazette.
‘ The whole pamphlet has the air of reality which character-
ised the “Battle of Dorking,” of which it is, mutatis mutandis ,
a successful imitation ; and like that famous work, it is meant
to be something more than a clever skit.’ — Si. James’s Gazette.
London: HATCHARDS, 187 Piccadilly, W.


Published by MESSRS. HATCKARD,
By Rev. James King, M.A., Author of
‘Anglican Hymnology. 5
NATIONAL ARMS of the UNITED KINGDOM.,
Containing an Account of the Charges on the Royal
Shields of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
■ Impl. i6rno. with 23 Coloured Illustrations, 3s. 6d.
‘ Mr. King traces the history of the National Arms in a-
pretty little book. “No picture,” he rightly observes, “is-
more familiar to us than the Arms of the United Kingdom,
and yet, strangely enough, there are few subjects of which
Englishmen display greater ignorance.” ’ —Saturday Review.
‘ It was pretty conclusively shown at the last General Elec-
tion that many persons have a somewhat hazy notion as to the-
subject of this little work, which, therefore, may be expected to
have a useful career in dispelling ignorance. The well-executed
colour illustrations of shields, flags, crests, and coronets, make
the book a sumptuous one.’ —Literary World.
‘Will offer no little attraction. The author has brought
together a great deal of curious information in reference to the
various charges in the Royal Shields of England, Scotland, and
Ireland.’ —John Bull.
THE POLITICS OF EDUCATION.
The Problem of Free Education Considered.
By the Author of‘Brain Pressure in Elementary Schools,”
‘ The Abuses of School Board Expenditure, 5 &c.
Crown Bvo. in coloured wrapper, 6d.
‘ A very able treatment of the question from a Tory-Demo-
cratic point of view, and as such should be read by all anxious,
to thoroughly master the whole subject in its various aspects. 5
Nonconformist .
London: HATCHARDS, 187 Piccadilly, W.


Published by Messrs. HATCHARD.
By KATHARINE S. MACQUOID, Author of ‘Patty,’ &c.
JOAN WENTWORTH.
With Illustrations by Gordon Browne. Crown Bvo. 6s.
‘ An admirable study of girl life.’ — Athenceum.
‘ It is a real pleasure to come across so thoroughly bright and piquant
a girl’s book. The story is very charming, and we feel sure will prove a
source of great enjoyment.’— Literary World.
1 One of the best stories for young girls that has lately appeared.
Graphically and profusely illustrated.’ — Morning Post.
1 There is a decided improvement in the novelettes for girls in their
teens ; take, for instance, “Joan Wentworth,” full of incident and ad-
venture without exaggeration, and presenting a thoroughly natural un-
affected heroine.’— Graphic.
By the Author of ‘ The Atelier du Lys,’ &c.
A CHILD OF THE REVOLUTION.
With Illustrations by C. J. Staniland. Crown Bvo. 6r.
‘ As charming a novelette as any girl will enjoy this Christmas.’
Graphic.
‘ The author of “ The Atelier du Lys ” always writes with refinement
and grace. Thejwriter’s present story has the same seducthe style and
pleasant attractiveness.’— Academy.
‘ This author’s works are always charming, and the Child of the
Revolution,” who is by birth and at heart an aristocrat, in one of her
most attractive creations.’ — Athencziun.
1 The author at once commends attention by the singular accuracy
with which she delineates places, people, and the state of affairs. The
book will charm and profit those who know something of French and
France.’— Queen.
By the Author of ‘ The Heir of Redclyffe,’ and others.
ASTRAY : a Tale of a Country Town.
By Charlotte M. Yonge, Mary Bramston, Christabel
Coleridge, and Esnfi Stuart.
With Frontispiece by Gordon Browne. Crown Bvo. 6s.
‘ Charmingly told. . . . The weaknesses, the ridicules, and also the
good points of a small country-side community, are here portrayed with
a keenness of observation and a vivacity of style that place this “ Tale
of a Country Town” much above its peers.’ —Morning Post.
‘ A very agreeable and wonderfully successful experiment in joint
authorship. ’— A cademy.
‘ Told, as far as may be, in the fashion in which Miss Yonge has told
so many popular stories.’— Saturday Review.
London ; HATCHARDS, 187 Piccadilly, W.


Published by Messrs. HATCHARD.
By MRS. MOLESWORTH, Author of ‘Carrots,’ &c.
SILVERTHORNS.
With Illustrations by F. Noel-Paton. Crown Bvo. s*.
,®° yS and ? irLs , ali , ke w ! n b ® charmed by “ Silverthorns.” Nothing-
could be more simple than the plan of this story, yet the interest is deeo
and sustained from first to last .'Saturday Review P
h , eartil ? recommend this story. The heroine is delightful,
and the family ana school life to which the story introduces us is very
well drawn. It is a hook that may be read with real enjoyment by any-
grown person of good tast e.'—Guardian. y y
By the COUNTESS OF JERSEY.
THE SLEEPING BEAUTY.
A Metrical Version for performance by Children. Fcap. Bvo. 6 d.
‘ Most happily adapted to the purpose. ... All the romance of the
story is retained, and a little humour added ; and Lady Jersey’s Verse
is easy, bright, and flowing.’— St. James's Gazette,
KING ROUGHBEARD ; or, The Scornful
Princess, A Play for Young Children.
Adapted from Grimm by ‘Vera.’ Fcap. Bvo. 6d.
By Mary E. Hullah, Author of ‘ The Lion Battalion,’ &c.
PHILIPPA.
With Frontispiece by Gordon Browne. Crown Bvo. 5,5-.
‘ Miss Hullah has all the characteristic merits of the best young
Novelists, together with a fresh and vivid observation of character, and a
faculty of writing natural and appropriate dialogue. ’ —Saturday Review.
‘ After much weary reading of the numerous works provided in such
quantities by the publishers at this season of the year,
the reviewer is strongly tempted to overpraise a work so fresh, artless,
and finished, as Miss Hullah’s “Philippa,” The clever authoress is a
delightful story-teller, and her present volume is equal to anything she
has written. For originality of treatment, quiet sense of humour, and
literary style, “Philippa” rises far above the mass of mediocrity
flooding the book-market.’— Public Opinion.
London : HATCHARDS, 187 Piccadilly, W.


Published by Messrs. HATCHARD.
By JOYCE DARRELL, Author of ‘ The Sapphire Cross,’ &c.
THE HOUSE of the LITTLE WIZARD.
A Story of Two Young People and Two Old Ones.
With Illustrations by E. M. S. Scannell.
Small crown Bvo. 3r. 6d.
! A charming little book. The numerous Illustrations, which are
beautifully executed, will go far towards winning the attention of its;
young readers.’ —Court Journal.
' A really charming idyllic tale of German peasant life. . . . The
tale is very pretty, and it is well conceived. ’—Public Opinion.
‘ The story is prettily written, with excellent local colouring.’
Manchester Guardian..
By ISMAY THORN, Author of ‘ Spin and Podgie,’ &c.
STORY OF A SECRET, AND THE
SECRET OF A STORY.
With Illustrations by A. W. Cooper. Leap. 4to. 3-r. 6 d.
‘ Original and well told ; the book may be fairly said to be among
the best of the Christmas gift-books.’— Morning Post.
‘ The sympathy and skill of Ismay Thorn’s studies of children are
once again convincingly demonstrated in “ The Story of a Secret.”
The Author’s unswerving fidelity to the moods and speculations of
childhood is admirably shown in every incident and in all the dialogue
of this simple story.’— Saturday Review.
‘ Ismay Thorn undoubtedly knows how to describe amusing children.”
Graphic .
By ISMAY THORN, Author of ‘ Pinafore Days,’ See.
SPIN AND PODGIE.
With Illustrations by T. Pym, Fcap. 4to. 2s. 6d.
‘ The art of writing stories for very young children is intimately
connected with the skill required to tell a story effectively. The easy
colloquial style that attracts children distinguishes “Spin and Podgie."
. . . Charmingly told . . . delightfully natural.’— Saturday Review.
‘ The pretty pictures, simple languages, and novel incidents, combine
to make it a good book for the nursery.’— Queen.
‘ The book is in all ways beautiful.’— Western Morning News.
London : HATCH ARDS, 187 Piccadilly, W.






