



1906.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
BULLETIN No. 24.
The Laverton, Burtville, and Erlistoun
Auriferous Belt,
MT. MARGARET GOLDFIELD,
BY
GHAS. G. GIBSON, B,E.,
Assistant Geologist.
Issued under the authority of the Hon. H. Gregory,
Minister for Mines.
WITH 13 GEOLOGICAL AND MINING MAPS, 7 FIGURES,
AND 26 PLATES.
PERTH;
BY AUTHORITY : FEED. WX. SIMPSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1906.






PREFATORY NOTE.
f HIS Report makes another of the special series dealing with
the different mineral fields of the State,
The report and accompanying maps represent the results of
Mr. C. G. Gibson’s investigations in a portion of the Mount Margaret
Goldfield, and include descriptions of the mining centres of Laverton,
Burtville, the Erlistoun district, together with an account of the
Cosmo Newberry Ranges, Mounts Shenton, Venn, Warren, and
Gumming, and the Ulrich Range.
The field work upon which Mr. Gibson’s observations are based,
was commenced on the 15th of May and completed on the 26th
of November, 1905.
In addition to this officer’s own work, Mr. Gibson’s report in
eludes a brief apergu of the labours of the other official observers
in the district, and is accompanied by a series of geological and mining
plans, which make the descriptive portions of the report intelligible.
The rocks of the district comprise a complex of crystalline rocks,
identical with that which forms the auriferous series in other portions
of the State, and therefore need no further reference in this place.
A. GIBB MAITLAND,
Government Geologist-
O
Geological Survey Office,
Perth, 27th July, 1906.


CONTENTS.
Page-
Prefatory Note 3
Boundaries of the Field .. .. .. .. .. 7
Centres examined and mapped 7
Early History of the Field 7
Previous observations on the Geology of the Field II
Laverton .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. j;»
General Geology .. .. .. .. .. .. ~
The Mines *
Statistics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. og.
Burtville .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2y
Geology and General .. .. .. .. .. .. 29*
The Mines 34
Statistics .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. . 4 44
Erlistoun District 45,
Mt. Varden .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 45.
Geology and General 46
The Mines .. .. .. .. ... .. .. 47-
Kirkpatricks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
Erlistoun .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 52
Geology and General 52
The Mines .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . _ 52
Duketon .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... ~ 56
Geology and General .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
The Mines 57
Mulga Queen .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. $1
Geology and General .. .. .. .. .. .. gl
The Mines 62
Statistics 66-
The Cosmo Newberry Ranges 67
The Country at Mt. Shenton and Mt. Venn .. .. .. .. 71
The Country at Mt. Warren and Mt. Gumming .. .. .. 73
The Ulrich Range 74
Appendix I.—List of Specimens .. .. .. .. .. .. 78
Index to names of Places, Mines, Reefs, etc. .. .. .. 81
LIST OF FIGURES.
Page-
1. Diagram showing mode of occurrence of the Lancefield Lode,
Laverton .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18-
2. Diagram showing mode of occurrence of the Augusta Reef,
Laverton .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 18
3. Section of the workings of the Augusta G.M., Laverton
4. Diagram showing mode of occurrence of the Little Doris Reef,
Erlistoun .. .. 22
5. Section of the workings of the Little Doris G.M., Erlistoun .. 50
6. Section of the Workings of the Rose of Persia G.M., Duketon .. 51
7. Section of the workings of the Mulga Queen G.M. .. .. 57
8. Diagram showing mode of occurrence of the Mulga Queen No. 1 62
South Reef .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. 64
9. Section of th© workings of the Famous Blue G.M. .. .. 64


LIST OK PHOTOGRAPHS.
Page.
1. Laterite Hill, Laverton .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
2. Lancefield G.M. and plant, Laverton .. .. .. .. 18
3. Cyanide Vats, Lancefield G.M., Laverton .. .. .. IS
4. Craiggiemore G.M. and plant, Laverton .. .. .. .. 20
5. Ida H. G.M. and plant, Laverton 24
6. Typical Granite “ break-a-way,” Burtville .. .. .. ~ 29
7. Savage Captain G.M., Burtville .. 34
8. State Battery, Burtville .. .. .. .. .. .. 44
9. Quartz Reef, Erlistoun 46
10. Quartz Reef, Erlistoun .. .. .. .. .. .. 47
11. Little Doris G.M., Erlistoun .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
12. Mistake G.M., Erlistoun 53
13. 1 ,auriston G.M., Duketon .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 58
14. Golden Spinifex Battery, Duketon .. .. .. .. ~ 58
15. Mulga Queen G.M., Mulga Queen .. .. .. .. 62
16. Famous Blue G.M., Mulga Queen .. .. .. .. .. 63
17. Weathered Granite, near Mt. Warren .. .. .. ~ 72
18. Weathered Granite, near Mt. Warren 73
19. Granite Rocks, near Cosmo Newberry 67
20. Rock hole in weathered granite, 30 miles S.E. of Cosmo
Newberry 76
LIST OF MINING PLANS.
Page.
A. —Underground plan of Lancefield G.M, (scale 100 ft. to lin.) .. 19
B. —Underground plan of Craiggiemore G.M. (scale 50ft. to lin.) ~ 21
C. —Underground plan of Ida H. G.M. (scale 100 ft. to lin.) .. .. 25
D. —Plan showing position of the Mistake Reefs .. .. .. 54
E. —Plan showing position of the Mulga Queen Reefs .. .. 64
F. —Plan showing position of the Famous Blue Reefs .. .. 64
LIST OF PLATES.
Locality Map of Mt. Margaret Goldfield (scale 25 miles to lin.) .. Frontispiece.
Plate L —Geological Sketch Map of Laverton (20 chains to lin.) 28
Plate ll.—Geological Sketch Map of Lancefield (20 chains to lin.) 28
Plate lll.—Geological Sketch Map of Heaphy’s Find (Ida H.) (20
chains to lin.) 28
Plate IV.—Geological Sketch Map of Burtville (scale 20 chains to lin.') 45
Plata V.—Map of the Auriferous Reefs of Duketon (scale 40 chains
to lin.) 60


THE
Laverton, Burtville, and Erlistoun Auriferous Belt,
MT. MARGARET GOLDFIELD.
Boundaries of the Field.
The Mount Margaret Goldfield, which was previously included
in the North Coolgardie Field, was declared, by proclamation,
gazetted on the 12th March, 1897, to take effect from the Ist April
of that year ; its boundaries were amended by a further proclama-
tion, gazetted on 28th March, 1902, taking effect on the 2nd April,
1902, so as to embrace an area of 42,252 square miles.
The boundaries, as defined by the authorities, are as follows ;
“ Bounded by lines starting from a point about fifteen miles East, and about
“ thirteen miles North from the summit of Mount Ida, and extending
“ North about thirty-five and stehalf miles ; thence East about sixty-
“ seven and a quarter miles, passing through a tree marked A.N. 33,
“at Doyle’s Well; thence North about fourteen miles ; thence East
“ about seven miles; thence North to the 26th parallel of South
“ latitude; thence East to the 125th meridian, East longitude; thence
“ South to a spot due East of a tree marked B. 82, at Brickey’s Soak ;
“ thence West through the said tree to the starting point, _ Excluding
“ all townsites and fee simple lands within the boundaries.”
Mining Centres examined and mapped. —The centres examined
and reported on were Laverton (including Lanoefield and Ida H.),
Burtville, Erlistoun, Duketon, Mulga Queen, and the country at
the Cosmo Newberry Ranges, and in the vicinity of Mounts Shenton,
Venn, and Warren, as well as the reported new find situated in
the Ulrich Ranges, 60 miles north-east of Duketon. Of Laverton,
Lanoefield, Ida H. (Heaphy’s Find), and Burtville, geological sketch
maps have been prepared on a scale of 20 chains to one inch; while
of Erlistoun, Duketon, and Mulga Queen, black and white maps
have been made showing the positions of the principal lines of reef.
Early History of the Mount Margaret Goldfield. —The earliest
mention of the Mount Margaret district is found in the journal of
Sir John Forrest, when he was in command of the West Australian
Expedition in search of the remains of Dr. Leichardt and party
in 1869, and the history of the district may. therefore,, be said to
start with the following extracts from his diary of the expe-
dition :
“June 20th, 1869 Saw a high hill beaiing M. 81° 30" E.,
“ mag. and about twenty-five miles distant, which I named Mount
“ Leonora, and another bearing N. 67° E„ mag. about twenty-five miles
“ distant which I named Mount George. Intend proceeding to Mount
"Leonora to-morrow
“June 21st. Steering towards Mount Leonora over some tolerably grassy
“ country, we reached it at sundown and camped . . . . . . jn
“ South latitude 28° 53' by meridian of Lyrse (Vega) and
“ Aguilae (Altaic) and in longitude about 121° 21" East


“ June 23rd . . Passing Mount Leonora we steered N. 81°
“ 15° E. mag to a table hill, which I called it Mount
“ Malcolm . . . Saw a remarkable peak bearing N.
“ 65° E. mag. distant about 20 miles which 1 named
“ Mount Flora . . . . . . and from which I obtained a round
“of bearings. Saw a high range bearing about N. 106° 15" E. mag.
“apparently about sixteen miles distant, towards which we travelled
“ till after dark
“June 24th. Saddled at dawn and preceded to the range, which bore N.
“ 93° 30" E. mag. about five miles distant, on reaching which 1 ascended
“ the highest point and named it Mount Margaret From
“ the summit of Mount Margaret the view was very extensive. There
“ was a large dry salt lake to the southward as far as the eye could reach,
“ while to the Bast and North-East there were low trap ranges lightly
“ grassed. A high table hill bore N. 73° E. mag
“July Ist Reached the table hill, which I ascended, and
“ took a round of angles. I have since named this hill Mount Weld,
“ being the farthest hill seen eastward by us.”
Prom that date but little further knowledge was gained of the
country, or, indeed, little attention was paid to it for more than
twenty years; and it was not until 1894 that the Mount Margaret,
or Lake Carey, country began to be regarded as a rising and pros-
perous district.
At the end of 1895, the population of the whole of the district
amounted only to 730 ; there were 3,400 acres held under mineral
lease, and two ten-stamp batteries were erected at Mount Margaret.
During 1896 numerous new finds were reported, principally
at Mount Margaret, Mount Malcolm, Mount Leonora, and- Murrin
Murrin, whilst an important discovery of copper was made six miles
to the east of Princess Alex. (Murrin Murrin); townships also
sprang up at these places.
It was not until Ist April, 1897, that the Mount Margaret was
constituted an independent goldfield, formed by separating portions
of the North Coolgardie and East Murchison Goldfields. It had
at this time an area, of 19,166 square miles, and was divided into
the districts of Mount Margaret, comprising an area of 17,150
square miles, and Mount Malcolm, with an area of 2,616 square
miles.
Apparently at the time, the centre of Mount Malcolm gave
promise of being the most important, and the Warden’s office for
the transaction of the departmental business of the new field was
opened there on the 10th May, 1897. On the 24th December, in the
same year, the area of the Mount Margaret district was increased
to 39,638 square miles, by the inclusion of a portion of the East
Murchison Goldfield.
In this year, the Westralia Mount Morgans Gold Mines was
registered as a local company, and on 3rd March following the Sons
of Gwalia, Ltd., which gave great impetus to the mining centres
of Leonora and Morgans, these two mines being the chief producers
of the field. The Under Secretary for Mines in his Annual Report
for 1898, refers to the developments of the field during that period
as being little short of phenomenal.
8


District.
Popuiation.
Production.
Fine ozs.
Mount Malcolm (including Leonora) ..
2,741
78,171.96
Mount Morgans
1,114
51,092.42
Mount Margaret
2,170
57,554.60
The population at the end of 1898 was 1,725.
In 1899 the boundaries of the districts were further amended,
so that the Mount Margaret district comprised an area of 39,510
square miles, and the whole field an area of 42,154 square milts.
Daring this year, a public battery started operations at Leonora,
and further copper deposits were found and furnaces erected at
Anaconda, in the vicinity of Murrin Murrin, where similar ores
has been previously located. The yield of gold for the year amounted
to 5 per cent, of the total production of the State. Developments were
almost equally satisfactory in the following year (1900), especially
in the vicinity of Mount Margaret, and to the east and south-east
of Laverton, and 4,539 tons of copper ore were treated at Anaconda.
The gold yield rose from 5 per cent, to 9.(5 per cent, of the State’s
total production, a proportion which increased to 10.3 per cent,
in 1901, when the copper output from Murrin, valued at £40,738,
amounted to rather more than half the State’s total. The Warden
of the field reported at the end of 1901, that progress was marked
more by attention to legitimate development of prospecting shows
and mining at a depth than by the opening up of new country;
remarks which also apply to the following year when, however,
the yield of copper showed a falling off, the output being only valued
at £(5,852. During this year (1901) a State battery was started
at Leonora.
During 1902 the gold production maintained its satisfactory
increase. Two new townsites were declared at Burtville and Euro,
and a State battery was erected at Laverton. A slight alteration
was made in the administration of the field by the creation of the
new district of Mount Morgans, the centres being Malcolm, Morgans,
and Laverton, and the area of the field 42,252 square miles; the
Warden’s head-quarters were removed to Morgans, which thus
became the administrative centre. The relative importance of the
three centres during this year is shown by the following comparative
statement; —
During this year the railway from the coast was opened
as far as Leonora.
In 1903, the North Erlistoun district began to attract attention,
and the railway was opened from Malcolm to Laverton. The gold
production rose to 9.31 per cent, of the State’s total.
In 1904, State batteries were erected at Burtville and Duketon,
and the gold output rose to 9.59 per cent, of the State’s total.
9


o
X
§
o
cc
05
l>
8
rH
I>
rH
CJ
05
CO
05
00
ho
cc
CO
rH
Cq
CD
0
8
05
CD
cq'
cq
rH
CO
05
t>
HO
00
rH
o
rH
HO
l>
S3
HO
l>
HO
rH
O
cq
rH
o
HO
rH
t>
GO
t>
05
rH
o
HO
CD
cq
CO
oT
S
00
CO
rH
cq
05
o
rH
iO
rH
TjH
rH
d
05
HO
o
rH
CO
o
rH
°q,
rH
cq
t>
X
£
CO
t>
rH
t>
05
CO
rH
rf
3
05
ci
05
cq
ho
05
o
rH
CD
CO
cq
tJ?
CD
05"
1—
T--
CD
00
8
t>
cq
cq
00
rH
CO
rH
CO
rH
rH
CD
X
C5
CC
oT
cq
CO
-<*1
rH
X
8
CO
t>
X
1897,
CD
t>
CO
rH
HO
O
HO
05
CD
S3
rH
id
rH
rH
t>
05
CD
O
rH
O
cq
X
8
rH
I s -
i>
3
s
05
00
CD
cq
00
cq
.2
CO
=u
d
a
45
e8
bo
t*
0
"3
"e3
«e
b£
eS
3
O
a
a
a
H
d
d
d
d
d
d
o
o
0
a
a
a
1904.
1905.
Total.
Mount Morgans ..
45,280.33
25,877.33
Fine ozs.
282,109.22
Mount Malcolm ..
94,300.27
105,897.45
618,388. 44
Mount Margaret
43,992.65
56,937.93
269,366.92
Total
183,523.25
188,712.21
1,169.864,58
The following table shows the gold returns in fine ounces from
the areas covered by the three districts of Mount Morgans, Mount
Malcolm, and Mount Margaret up to the end of 1905 :
10


Previous Observations on the Geology of the
Mt, Margaret Goldfield.
In a report on the Interior Gold Region of Western Australia, *
published in 1894, Mr. S. Goczel, describing the country passed
over on an expedition from the Ninety Mile ” to Lake Carey,
mentions the Lake Raeside depression which he crossed some miles
to the south of Mount Leonora, and which forms the drainage area
of the southern portion of the field. He noted the position of the
large outcrops of granitic rocks which rise as a range of bare hills
to a height of 200 feet a'bove the surrounding country, and form,
with a width of about five miles, the divide of the water-shed of
Lakes Raeside and Carey. Mr. Goczel further stated that a long
stretch of country situated at the junction of this gneissio granite
on the west and the greenstone on the east had already been proved
auriferous, and he mentions the “ Red Castle ” line of reef, and the
“ Goose’s Puzzle,” and stated that though rich finds had not been
made up to that time, a number of reefs offered chances for profitable
mining enterprise. Farther east, on the range of which Mount
Margaret forms the highest point, he referred to alluvial gold deposits
at Red Flag, Hawk’s Nest, and other surface workings—the Hawk’s
Nest being the richest.
Since this date no detailed official reports on the district appear
to have been made until 1904, when Mr. C. F. Y. Jackson, then
Assistant Geologist, issued a detailed report on and map of Leonora,!
following this up next year with a similar report and map of Mount
Morgans. J
In the same year, 1904, the State Mining Engineer (Mr. Mont-
gomery) published a short report on the Erlistoun and Duketon
districts, § in which he says :
* The country between these two places (Laverton and Duketon) appears to
* be favourable throughout for the occurrence of gold, a large number
“of auriferous reefs having been found at intervals throughout it. It
“ is mostly the usual greenstone of our goldfields, often schistose, while
“ the surface is plentifully strewn with concretionary ironstone, and
“ often with white quartz. Bars of black jasperoid quartz and out-
“ crops of white quartz occur frequently ”
“ The Erlistoun and Duketon districts are yet in quite
“ the first stage of development, and require a great deal more prospect-
“ ing and opening before their importance can be justly estimated.
“ Even a flying visit is, however, sufficient to show that the reefs are
" numerous, and have prospects of gold sufficient to justify high hopes
“of their future. The impression gained by me was that there was a
“ very valuable district to be exploited.”
According to Mr. Jackson’s observations, the fundamental rocks
of Leonora consist of a complex of crystalline schists, which form
the continuation of that group which is so largely developed in other
portions of the Eastern Goldfields ; these schists comprise both basic
* Annual Report of the Department of Mines for 1894, Perth: By Authority: 1895.
t Geology and Auriferous Deposits of Leonora, Mt. Margaret Goldfield. Perth: By
Authority: 1904.
$ Geological Features and Auriferous Deposits of Mt. Morgans, Mt. Margaret Gold-
field. Perth: By Authority: 1905.
§ Annual Report of the Department of Mines for 1904. Perth : By Authority: 1905.


and acidic rocks. Some of the basic rocks (the greenstones) have
been converted into schists which are largely developed along the
outer margin of the main belt, whilst the centre portion is occupied
by the more or less massive rocks ; these schistose and massive rocks
.are merely portions of one and the same mass which has suffered
more or less dynamical metamorphism. All the important ore
deposits are confined to the greenstones and their derivatives. The
greenstones have been invaded by granitic rocks, which are both
massive and foliated, and evidence seems to prove that these are
of two distinct ages, (a) an older, traversed by zones of secondary
shearing, possibly associated with auriferous quartz reefs, and {b) a
much newer and comparatively unmodified granite, which is repre-
sented by the felsite dykes, which are found intersecting the green-
stones in the vicinity of the Leonora Gold Blocks. Speaking of
the Mount Morgans centre, Mr. Jackson remarks that the staple
formation consists of a series of basic and acidic rocks of the geological
age, of which the district affords no direct evidence, though in all
probability it forms part of the same series as that so largely developed
in other portions of the Eastern Goldfields, and invariably assumed
to be Archaean. The basic rocks, the greenstones, are essentially
hornblendic, and have to a considerable extent been converted into
schists, these being most prominent along the junction of the green-
stones with the granitic rocks. The acidic rocks consists chiefly
of quartz and felspar porphyries, and appear to be intrusive into
the greenstones ; like the latter they have been subjected to con-
siderable local mechanical deformation, and have been converted
into what may, for convenience, be best described as granitic schists.
The ore deposits of the Mount Morgans district Mr. Jackson
separates into two main divisions, —
(a.) Lodes which are genetically similar to the banded
and hematite-bearing quartz reefs, which form
such conspicuous features in the Murchison and
Mount Margaret Goldfields; and
(6.) Gold-bearing quartz reefs of the ordinary type.
The banded quartz lodes form a series of bold outcrops on the
summit of the main Mount Morgans ridge, and have been traced
across country for about four miles, occurring along the main
junction fine between the greenstones and the porphyry. They vary
much in size, and are very irregular ; their chief characteristic is
that of a solid body or pipe of lens section, the main axis of which
dips to the south at an average angle of about 45 degrees. The
ore chutes also have a marked trend to the southward.
The second division, the normal quartz reefs, are found almost
entirely within the greenstones to the eastward of the main dividing
ridge. It will thus be seen that there is a great similarity in the geo-
logical features and mode of occurrence of its ore deposits
between this centre and that of Laverton.


Laverton.
(Including Ida H. and Lancefield.)
(With three Geological Sketch Maps, Plates I., II., and III.)
Topoqraphy. —The townsite of Laverton, which forms the present
terminus of the Eastern Railway, is situated on the eastern side,
and near the northern edge of a low, irregular ridge of hills trend-
ing in a roughly north and south direction for some four miles or
so. Easterly from here, the country consists of level plains extend-
ing for about six miles, when another low ridge makes its appearance,
also trending north and south through Ida H. and Cock of the North ;
easterly from here the country consists of alternating low green-
stone ridges and loamy plain for many miles. Westward of the main
ridge of hills, the country also consists of alternating low ridges
on flats for some half-a-dozen miles, when extensive sand plains come
in, extending as far as Mount Morgans.
Northerly from the townsite are extensive flats extending for
many miles, and broken only by the ridge of bills, of which Mount
Crawford forms the highest point, and which extends for only a
couple of miles : beyond this again, the plains continue indefinitely.
General Geology.
Broadly speaking, the formations of Laverton can be divided
into two classes, the greenstones and the granites. Of these, the
greenstones occupy by far the larger area, and are of by much the
greater importance, as it is within them that the extensive H.B.
quartz lodes and other auriferous deposits occur. These green-
stones are of the types usually found in the West Australian gold-
fields, and comprise both massive and foliated varieties as well as
occasional small areas of schist, these latter being usually found in
close proximity to the granitic rooks. These granitic rocks occupy
a comparatively small area, chiefly in the neighbourhood of Mount
Crawford, and to the West of the Augusta G-.M. They are apparently
intrusive into the greenstones. The greater part of the area under
examination is covered by a varying thickness of recent detrital
deposits, which render accurate mapping almost impossible. There
are also a few small areas of laterite throughout the district occurring
as the cappings of greenstone hills ; they are, however, of small
•extent and inferior quality.
The Recent Deposits. —These cover by far the greater portion
of the area under examination to depths varying from a few inches
to probably 50 or 60 feet, and consist of the accumulated detritus
from the older greenstones and granites; where overlying and
derived from the former they are of a fine red clayey nature, but
when derived from the granite, they are much looser, more sandy
and lighter in colour, this difference in appearance being often the
■only guide as to the nature of the underlying rocks. The boundaries


between these superficial deposits and the outcropping rocks, as
shown on the map, are for the most part only approximate, as the
point at which the former cease is very indefinite, and is generally
purely arbitrary.
The deposits of ironstone gravel (laterite) which form so con-
spicuous a feature on most of the Eastern Goldfields are not de-
veloped to any large extent in this district; a few small isolated
patches occur as the cappings of low weathered greenstone hills,
principally towards the southern portion of the area examined,
but they are, as a rule, of inferior grade. As to the origin of these
laterites, it is generally agreed that they have resulted from the
gradual concentration and deposition of iron oxide resulting from
the weathering of the older basic rocks in situ. Almost the only
high-grade deposit in the district occurs as the capping of a low green-
stone hill about half-a-mile south-east of the old Mount Barnicoat
G.M. (Photograph 1.)
The Granitic Rocks. —These vary through felsites, felspar por-
phyries, and granites, and are found as intrusive dykes and masses
in the greenstones, being most largely developed in the northern
portion of the district near Mount Crawford, and also to the westward
of the Augusta G.M., where they are evidently portions of the extensive
mass lying to the east of Mount Morgans. A specimen [6535],
from the eastern side of the main body east of Mount Crawford,
near G.M.L. 12(i, is a dark massive variety very closely resembling
a coarse-grained quartz diorite in appearance; under the microscope,
however, a section shows it to be a fairly typical granite, consisting,
in addition to quartz and felspar, of both biotite and hornblende,
both considerably weathered and altered, the latter into a green
chloritic material, and the former partially into hornblende- Going
westerly this has the appearance of passing gradually through all
stages from a dark hornblende granite, or quartz diorite, to a light-
coloured quartz porphyry. Sections of specimens [6534, 6533 J,
of these show them to be practically the same rock, the only differ-
ence being that the hornblende is less in quantity in the more
western variety. In the vicinity of the Augusta G.M., the pre-
vailing type is a fairly coarse-grained rock, ranging from an
aplite to a quartz porphyry; the smaller dykes, however, are
usually of fine grained, compact felsites and rocks not unlike
quartzites.
The Greenstones- —The group of rocks to which the general
term greenstone has been applied is of by far the greatest economic
importance of any in the district, as it is almost solely within them
that the auriferous ore bodies are found. These rocks occupy by
far the greater portion of the area examined, and consist of both
massive and foliated varieties, though it has not been possible to
separate the two on the map. It is also possible that there may
be more than one variety of basic or ultra-basic rock, but no more


PHOTO. 1.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo,, C. G. Gibson. Govt, Photo. Litho .
Laterite Hill, Laverton.


than structural distinctions can be observed —a coarse-grained, a
fine-grained and a schistose variety being most prominent ; the areas
occupied by each are not sufficiently well-defined for separate map-
ping, rior is there any satisfactory evidence with regard to the
geological relation of the several varieties, and it has been assumed,
ns on the other goldfields, and probably correctly, that they are
merely local variations of one and the same basic or ultra-basic rock ;
sections of them show them to be essentially hornblende rocks,
ranging through almost typical cliorites to a fine-grained rock, con-
sisting almost entirely of hornblende ; in the coarser-grained speci-
mens [6527] the hornblende is a very pale to colourless variety
(tremolite), and in the fine-grained it is a light to dark green variety
(actinolite).
These greenstones are for the most part considerably decom-
posed and weathered, such weathering being greater on the eastern
side of the district, along the Ida H. and Oock of the North line of
country, where- there has been considerable north and south folia-
tion and a large and well-defined development of the remarkable
banded and hematite-bearing quartz lodes, together with the accom-
panying leaching of the surrounding rocks. This line of country
apparently marks a main line of jointing extending over a width
of half-a-mile or so, and extending roughly north and south through
the Ida H., Cock of the North, and Scotland Yet leases for seven
or eight miles.
About two miles west of Ida H. is an outcrop of hard, massive
hornblende rocks apparently closely allied with those forming the
auriferous series and differing from them only in their hard and
unweathered appearance; they form a ridge of low, bare hills occupy-
ing a comparatively small area and rising to a height of 30 to 50
feet. An analysis of this rock [6540] made in the Departmental
Laboratory is as follows : —
Silica .. .. .. .. .. .. 59.35
Carbonic anhydride .. .. .. .. .06
Titanium dioxide .. .. .. .. .78
Combined water .. .. .. .. .83
Soda .. .. .. .. .. .. 3.38
Potash .. .. .. .. .. .. .90
Magnesia 4.58
Lime .. .. .. .. .. .. 6.43
Manganese protoxide .33
Iron protoxide .. .. .. .. .. 1.76
Iron peroxide .. .. .. .. .. 5.41
Alumina .. .. .. .. .. .. 15.83
„ ( iron .03
Pynte3 [ sulphur 04
Hygroscopic water .. .. .. .. .07
99.78
Specific gravity 2.86
15


The greenstones are traversed by occasional dykes of newer
greenstones, these can seldom be followed on the surface, but are
met with in the mine workings; one [6556J cut in the workings
of the Ida H. G.M. is some 20 feet in thickness, and runs approxi-
mately east and west, being almost vertical in its dip ; there is a
moderately coarse-grained, dark massive rock, a section of which,
seen under the microscope, shows it to be an augite dolerite, showing
phenocrysts of augite in a holocrystalline ground mass of small
lath-shaped felspars and granules of augite and magnetite.
These dykes are newer than the quartz reefs and hematite-
bearing quartz lodes which they cut through, but without dis-
placing them to any extent.
Ore Deposits. —These are conveniently divisable into two
classes :
(a.) Lodes which are genetically similar to the banded
and hematite-bearing quartz lodes, which form so
conspicuous a feature of the Murchison and Mount
Margaret Goldfields.
(i b .) Quartz reefs of the normal type.
In this respect they exactly resemble those of Mount Morgans,
which have already been described by Mr. Jackson in Bulletin 18
of the Geological Survey.
The former are most highly developed immediately to the west
of the town along the main ridge, where they occur in a series, of
bold outcrops extending for several miles. They are identically
similar to the hematite-bearing quartz lodes (“ quartzites ”) of the
Murchison Goldfield, where they extend as roughly parallel bars,,
often continuous for many miles in length : they are usually from
one to three chains in width, and outcrop in the form of rough
serrated ridges. These bands are merely quartz reefs or lodes of
a peculiar type, and vary'in composition from almost pure quartz,
through varieties of banded jaspers, often of great beauty, to prac-
tically pure banded hematite. * They have already been described
in detail in earlier Bulletins (Nos. 8 and 14) —
“as old fault or joint lines along which the greenstones have been highly
foliated and by a gradual lode forming process converted into-
their present state.”
At Laverton they are found in all gradations, from banded
qjuartz and hematite, through pure banded quartz to bands of prac-
tically unaltered schist. They are all more or less auriferous, but
onlv in very few cases are they sufficiently so to pay for working.
Examples of this type of deposit are being worked at the Craggie-
more, Lancefield, and Great Bedford (Cock of the North) gold mines.
These particular deposits will be more fully described when dealing
with the individual mines. They usually have a more or less.
• Bulletin No. 16, p. 25.
16


lenticular form on the surface, these lenses varying in length
from a few chains to half-a-mile or more, and having an average
width of from 20 to 100 feet. The deposits along the Ida H.
and Cock of the North line have this form to a very marked
extent, and on this line they show a greater variation in
their appearance and composition than elsewhere, varying
from banded ferruginous quartz to a soft ironstained weathered
schist, usually silicified and hard near the surface, and often with
a capping of hard siliceous limonite.
A good example of non-ferruginous type is seen in the belt form-
ing the ridge of which Mount Crawford is the highest point; there the
main bar which forms the apex of this hill has a width of from 2
to 3 chains, and consists of almost pure compact blue and white
quartz. This belt extends fairly continuously for about a mile and
a half, but becomes a good deal more broken and irregular at its
northern end; it also becomes much more ferruginous here.
Quartz reefs of the normal type are often associated with these
hematite-bearing lodes, being as a rule small, and usually running
along either foot or hanging wall; they are evidently of later forma-
tion than the lodes, and are often found cutting across them and
sometimes longitudinally through them. Reefs of this type are
being worked at the Ida H. and Augusta G-.M.s.
Not many reefs of the second class, i.e., normal quartz reefs,
are being worked in this district; a fair number occur, some of them
being of very fair size. Some of the best types of this class are found
at the northern end of the district on Cr.M.L. 1291 and 1095, near
what was originally known as Crawford’s Patch. These reefs
occur in massive greenstone, and are of white, somewhat
ironstained quartz; they are of fair size and can be traced
on the surface for some distance; several small leaders run
into these main lines of reef, and it has been in these and at their
junction with the main lines that the gold has been got, the stone in
the leader at the junction being usually “ dollying ” stone. The
main reefs themselves, though fair sized and well defined as far aS
tried, are too poor to pay for working.
There are also a fair number of large sized quartz reefs occurring
along the junction of the granites with the greenstones ; these are.
however, for the most part, short and irregular, and are apparently
very low in their gold contents, as little or no work has been done
on any of them.
Alluvial Gold. —Not much alluvial gold has been got in the
district. A little was got on the western fall of the main ridge near
the old British Blag G-.M. The gold in this case was probably derived
from small quartz leaders associated with the hematite-bearing lodes.
Most of the alluvial has been got, however, at what was known
as Crawford’s Patch, half to three-quarters of a mile south-east of
17


Mount Crawford. Here a fair amount of dry-blowing has been done,
but the gold appears to be nearly all worked out. It was got mostly
at a depth of only a few inches, and has probably been derived from
small quartz leaders both in the greenstones and the granitic rocks
and from leaders associated with quartz reefs in the greenstones,
such as those worked on G.M.Ls. 1291, 1095, and 1601.
I \ater. —Water is fairly plentiful throughout the district, and
the supply is generally fresh, the town depending upon wells for its
supply for domestic purposes.
Timber. —Timber of good quality is not plentiful, and is rapidly
becoming exhausted.
The Mines.
The Laxcefielu G.M.L. 806, etc.—This is the largest and most
important mine in the district, and is situated some five miles north
of Laverton townsite. At the time of my visit, the mine was equipped
with a 50-head stamper battery, concentrators, and leaching and
filter press plants. (Photographs 2 and 3). Owing, however, to
difficulty in ore treatment, the use of the present plant is to be dis-
continued and a dry crushing and roasting plant to be installed
in its place. This, it is hoped, will prove highly successful and give
an impetus to mining generally throughout the district.
The workings are on a large banded quartz lode (Fig. 1) trending
about north-east and south-west, and dipping at an average angle
of about 40 degrees to the south-east. From an examination of the
mine plans (Plate A.) it will be seen that, though a very considerable
amount of stone has been taken out, the mine is still in its infancy,
having only been opened up to a depth of 300 feet on the underlay.
The ore body consists of banded and hematite-bearing quartz, pre-
senting in the upper level almost the appearance of a normal quartz
reef with a strongly marked laminated structure, apparently with
fairly well defined walls, though the country is too decomposed and
rotten to see much here. As the unoxidised and unaltered zone
is reached it is seen that there are no hard and faist walls to the lode,
but that it is encased on both sides by about 30 feet of greenstone
schists, which, in places, approach in appearance very close to the
lode proper. In the 300-feet level, the lode consists of alternating
bands of quartz and altered schist, carrying a large percentage of
arsenical pyrites, usually arranged in roughly parallel zones with
the quartz. As a rule the quartz largely predominates, often to
the complete elimination of the schist, having in these cases a banded
dark grey appearance, frequently seamed with small veinlets of
calcite ; in other cases the schist predominates over the quartz,
18


PHOTO. 2.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Lancefield Gold Mine and Plant, Laverton.


PHOTO. 3.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Cyanide Vats, Lancefield Gold Mine, Laverton.


FIG 1.
FIG 2.


FIG. 3.


H. J. Pether, Government Lithographer, Perth. W. A.


Lancefield G.M. Co., Ltd.,
G.M.Ls. 806, etc.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Bate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1899
6,110.00
2,056.67
.33
1900
11,701.00
5,639.75
.48
1901
16,847.00
6,256.55
.37
1902
20,781.00
7,780.60
.37
1903
21,928.00
7,068.29
.32
1904
25,154.78
10,733.91
.42 ■
1905
47,693.00
15,373.32
.32
Total
150,214-78
54,909.09
.36
in which case there is no defined limit between the lode proper and
the enclosing schistose greenstone; the gold contents, too, usually
drop somewhat in these cases, being as a rule highest where there is
most quartz present. The lode, generally speaking, has an average
thickness of about 17 feet, though it varies a good deal on
either side of this, being as much as 25 feet in places in the bottom
level, while again in the north face of the 200-feet level, it is down
to three feet; this, however, is exceptionally small. The gold contents
right through the workings are remarkably uniform, and the shoot
has been proved for over 1,000 feet in length, and its exact
limits are not yet known. A reference to the accompanying plan
(Plate A.) will show the sizes of the lode at the different levels. (The
width at the 100-feet level and the surface being taken from old
reports, are only approximate.) The zone of oxidation stops a little
above the 200-feet level, there being a small percentage of sulphide in
the stone from this level; below this the sulphides come in very heavily,
and consist for a great part of arsenical pyrites, this being the chief
difficulty in the treatment of the ore. A little graphitic schist is
occasionally found on the walls of the lode, but it is very limited
in extent. The original water level was probably the first (100 feet)
level, being a vertical depth of about 60 feet. The supply is fresh.
One or two faults cross the lode in a general east and west direction ;
these, however, do no bar \ their throw being only a few feet. In
the south end of the workings, in the 200-feet level, the reef is cut
off and broken by the intrusion of a granitic dyke ; there is no sign
of this in the 100-feet level, but it will probably be met with in the
bottom workings.
It will be seen, on reference to the accompanying plan (Plate A.),
that there is still a very large quantity of stone available, even above
the 300-feet level, and when the large amount of backs for every
100- feet ofj sinking is taken into consideration, it can easily be seen
that, should the difficulty of satisfactory ore treatment be overcome,
there must be a long and prosperous future before this mine.
19


Craiggiemore, G.M.L. 592—As can be seen from the accom-
panying plan (Plate B.) of this mine, a large amount of work of
a somewhat irregular nature has been done. (Photograph 4). In
all three different ore bodies have been worked, known respectively,
as the Eastern, Middle, and Western; of these, the Eastern and
Middle, in the bottom level, are apparently one and the same; the
Western lies a chain or so farther to the west. These so-called
separate lodes are apparently merely shoots of pay ore in the
one large lode, the whole country here over a width of 150
to 200 feet consisting of a very much crushed and altered
greenstone, carrying more or less gold throughout. Portions
of this zone are more highly altered than others, and on the surface
have the appearance of the usual hematite-bearing quartz lodes;
a little below the surface, they become soft and consist apparently
of weathered bands of schist and ironstone with more or less quartz ;
in some cases, when the quartz largely predominates, these bands
assume a solid well defined character, in others again they are of
a very sintery nature. Occasionally these bodies take the form of
the typical compact banded hematite-bearing quartz lodes, in which
cases their gold contents are usually slightly lower; as a rule, the
best values are obtained in the sintery bodies. As may be expected,
there are no hard and fast walls between these pay shoots and the en-
closing schists, the wlHe being, as before stated, practically one large
lode formation. At present there has not been sufficient work done
to determine the exact size and relationship of the pay shoots, they
are, however, very irregular; the western one has been proved
for about 100 feet south and 200 feet north of the shaft, and is still
going north ; the extent of the other makes is not known.
The values in these shoots varies a good deal, a lot of the stone
not being good enough to take out, and the workings are very
irregular on this account, the stone simply being extracted where it
has been found rich enough to pay for working; in the upper levels
the stopes vary from 15 to 30 feet in width on all the ore bodies;
in the lower level all the work is at present being concentrated
on the western lode, which is being stoped out for a width of
about 15 feet. The country and the ore bodies dip almost vertically,
but the latter pitch fairly flat to the nortlnvard. The whole country
is very soft and rotten all through the present workings, and just
begins to get hard and settled at the 300-feet level, at which point
a fair amount of sulphide begins to make its appearance in the stone.
The ore bodies worked on this property are in every way similar
to the hematite-bearing quartzites occurring all along the main
ridge through this lease to Laverton, and it seems not unreasonable
to presume that there are other payable bodies of stone along this
line a's yet undiscovered. Other bodies along the line have been
worked on the British Flag lease, and also one or two other leases
between Craggiemore and Laverton, but so far with not very satis-
factory results.


PHOTO. 4.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo, Litho.
Craiggie More Gold Mine, Laverton.


H. J. Pether, Government Lithographer Perth. W. A


Graiggiemore Proprietary,
G.M.L. 592t, etc.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Average.
Tons.
Fine ozs.
ozs. per ton.
1.30
1897
10.00
13.01
1898 -
205.00
171.93
.83
1899
1,020.00
296.53
.29
1900
9,260.00
3,641.24
.39
1901
14,200.00
5,070.67
.35
1902
14,000.00
4,652.08
.32
1903
13,700.00
4,382.42
.32
1904
14,769.00
3,958.60
.27
1905
18,152.00
*7,640.44
—
Total
85,31600
29,836.92
.35
* Includes 3,297*09 by cyanide.
Augusta, G.M.L. 371.—This lease is situated about four miles
to the west of Laverton, and was once the property of the Gulden
Rhine G.M. Co. ; it was abandoned by them after a good deal of
work had been done on it, and recently taken up again by the
present owners, who, up to the present time, are doing very well
out of it. The workings are on a quartz reef of the normal type,
which runs alongside and through a band of highly altered green-
stone schist (Fig. 2), in which, on or near the surface, alteration
has gone on so far that it has been converted into a typical handed
hematite-bearing quartz lode. At the surface the reef is on the foot-
wall of this band, but cuts through it at about 240 feet and then
runs on the hanging wall. The country on both sides of the reef
is greenstone schist, all in a more or less altered state ; at about
250 feet, the belt of altered schist which forms the footwall of the
reef gets extremely hard, and continues so to the bottom of the
main shaft (300 feet); this is evidently the continuation in depth
of the hematite-bearing quartz lode seen on the surface, being here
in merely a half-formed state, consisting of greenstone schist highly
charged with infiltered hematite and quartz. The country sur-
rounding, the schists is, at the 300-feet level, very hard and massive,
and consists of a fine grained greenstone [6ssß]> a section of which,
seen under the microscope, shows it to consist essentially of pale
green hornblende and triclinic felspar in small irregular lumps and
grains, the hornblende occupying the greater part of the section,
and in addition numerous small scattered grains of magnetite.
The reef itself is not at all regular, and varies in thickness from
a mere thread up to as much as six feet, which is its thickness in the
north face of the 300-feet level; it has no well-defined walls, and
merely fills irregular cracks and hollows in the schists, it dips,
with the schists, at an angle of about 45 degrees to the east and
strikes a little to the west of north ; it does not, however, keep a very
straight course, buttwists about a little. Agood deal ofgraphitic schist
21


Augusta, G.M.L. .'571, late Golden Rhine G.Ms. G.M.Ls. 371 (777*
764, 1249).
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1897
50.00
167.20
3.34
1898
391.50
1,099.99
2.81
1899
1,774.00
1,904.07
1.07
1900
630.00
496.64
.78
1901
8,091.00
5,121.30
.63
1902
3,711.00
1,838.62
.49
1903
850.00
430.93
.53
1904
—
—
—
1905
834.00
1,659.43
1.98
Total
16,331.50
12,718.18
.77
is found on the foot wall of the reef in the 300-feet level ; this only
occurs over a length of about 20 to 30 feet, and can be traced right
to the surface, having an average thickness of 12 to 18 inches. The
quartz is very clean and white, and very hungry looking ; in places,
however, it shows fairly coarse gold freely.
The present owners are working a rich shoot of stone near the
north end of the bottom drive (Fig. 3). This shoot has been followed
down by means of a winze to a depth of about 40 feet; the average
width of the reef in this winze is about two feet and it shows coarse gold
and telluride freely over a depth of about 25 feet; in the bottom of
the winze it is smaller and much split and broken up. This shoot
of ore at present being worked was cut in the 300-feet level, and
here had a length of about four feet, this being just the top of the
shoot, and dips to the north at a fairly flat angle. Some of the stone
taken out was phenomenally rich, and showed, in addition to free
gold, a thin white telluride, which an examination in the Depart-
mental Laboratory proved to be Altaite (telluride of lead). This
occurrence is interesting from the fact that this is one of the very
few places in Western Australia, outside Kalgoorlie, from which
an authentic discovery of telluride has been reported.
Water is not too abundant; it is, however, drinkable, and is
also used for the boilers.
The mine is equipped with a 10-head battery.
The sketch section (Fig 3). showing approximately the amount
of work done, is prepared from figures supplied, from memory, by
the present manager, the existing underground plans not being
available.
Bindan and Cornucopia, G.M.Ls. 1588, 1601. —These leases
are situated about three and a-half miles north of Laverton town-
site, and consist of two six acre-blocks, situated on a well-defined
line of lode running about north-west and south-east. This line


FIG. 4.


of lode consists of a belt of highly foliated greenstone schists some
15 to 20 feet in width, and dipping steeply to the south-
west. Through this belt of schist, numbers of irregular quartz
leaders run in all directions ; these vary in size from 1 to 12 inches,
and some of the smaller ones often carry a big percentage of gold ;
the majority of them, however, are barren or close to it ; small
patches of rich stone are, often found at the intersection of the small
leaders, or at points where they coalesce with the larger ; these
are invariably dollying stone, but not much more than a few ounces
is usually obtained from them. On the Bindan lease an open cut
has been made on this band of schist over practically its entire width,
to a depth of about 12 to If feet, and for a length of some fiftv yards,
for the purpose of working out the rich leaders and pockets, but
no work of any importance beyond this has been done. On the
Cornucopia, especially near the southern end, there are two well
defined fair sized lines of reef running through and parallel with
this formation ; these are of white quartz and are as much as two or
three feet in places ; they intersect near the centre of the lease and die
but a chain or so farther on. A little work has been done in these
but they were too low grade to be of any use ; a small rich pocket
was obtained at the junction, one or two small pockets have also
been obtained at the jwints at w'hich small leaders run in these reefs ;
as is the case on the adjoining lease, most of the gold on this block
has been obtained from small leaders, and has been obtained at a
depth of less than 12 feet from the surface, this being the depth
at which most of the gold-bearing leaders cut out. A few chains
to the east of G.M.L 1588 is a similar belt of schist traversed by
numerous small quartz leaders ; a little work has also been done
on these, but they do not appear to have been as rich as those in
the western belt. A fair amount of dry-blowing has been done in
the vicinity of these leases, and the gold has undoubtedly been shed
from small leaders in these and similar belts of schist-
During 1905, the crushings from this lease (Cornucopia, G.M.L.
1601) were 15.00 tons for 39 08 ounces, giving an average of 2.60
ounces per ton.
Ida H., G.M.L. 829, etc. —Next to the Lancefield, this is the
most important mine in the district, and, as can be seen from the
accompanying section (Plate C.), a very considerable amount of
work has been done upon it. The workings are on a fair sized but
irregular quartz reef, which runs in and parallel to a belt of highly
altered greenstone schists. This belt of schists on the surface has
been partly altered into a solid hematite-bearing quartz lode, which
can be followed for a considerable distance ; this, however, is merely
a surface formation, as at the 100-feet level it has entirely disappeared,
and the schists are of a soft decomposed and iron-stained appearance
with occasional small seams of ironstone running through them.
These schists are found on both sides of the reef and in close proximity


to it, often carry a small quantity of gold, but not sufficient to be
payable. Small quartz leaders up to a couple of inches in thickness
are often found traversing the schist, usually running parallel to
them; these, though often auriferous, are usually too small and
irregular to be of any value. In the lower levels these schists carry
a considerable quantity of sulphide ore, and at the 300-feet level are
several bands of solid massive pyrites up to two or three feet in thick-
ness running parallel to the reef, one along the footwall and two others
some 8 and 20 feet respectively to the east of it. These sulphide
lodes are apparently merely replacements of the schists, and evidently
correspond with the “ ironstone bands ” in the upper oxidised zone ;
they carry a little gold but not sufficient to render them of any value.
One or two augite-dolerite dykes cut across the reef and the
surrounding schists in an east and west direction ; the largest of
these is about 600 feet north of the main shaft and some 20 feet
in thickness, and is vertical. The reef is merely cut in two by
these dykes and not thrown or displaced in any -way; the stone,
however, is usually of a little better grade in proximity to the
dykes.
The reef itself is of clean white quartz, and, as can be seen from
the accompanying section (Plate C.), has been followed for nearly
1,600 feet; it runs in a nearly north and south direction, and dips
at an angle of about 60 degrees to the eastward ; in size it is some-
what irregular, being as much as six feet in thickness in places,
while in others it dies out to nothing, the quartz being replaced
by schist which is practically identical with that forming the walls ;
this schist is itself of no value, but it is often seamed with small
quartz veins, in which case it is usually sent to the battery ; taking
the reef right through, its average thickness is about two feet.
The gold contents are not uniform over the entire length, the
extent of the pay shoots being shown on the accompanying section
of the workings; it will be seen from this section that the
developments at the 400-feet level tend to prove the continuance
at a depth of the northern shoot, and should the 500-feet level,
when opened up, prove its further existence, it will mean a period
of renewed prosperity for this mine.
The stone in the lower levels carries only a small amount of
sulphides, these beginning to make their appearance at the 300-feet
level; the limit of oxidation is not regular, being deeper on the north
side of big greenstone dyke ; there was also a much heavier supply
of water on this (northern) side of the dyke. In the 400 feet level,
a little zinc blende is found in the quartz, the gold contents being
usually higher where this occurs. The water in the mine is salt,
and water for boiler and cyanide and domestic purposes is obtained
from a well at Mount Barnicoat, about two-and-a-half miles north.
The mine is equipped with a ten-head battery and cyanide plant.
{Photograph 5.)


PHOTO. 5.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. 6. Gibson. Govt, Photo. Litho,
Ida H. Gold Mine and Plant, Laverton.


H. J. Pether, Government Lithographer, Perth. W.A.


Table showing the total gold yield from the Ida H. G.M., G.M.Ls.
829, 846, 1219, KUO. 838.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
ozs.
ozs.
1899
81.00
235.37
2.90
1900
30.00
49.76
1.66
1901
1,858.00
1,817.08
.97
1902
11,319.00
12,346.65
1.09
1903
13,017.00
12,856.44
.91
1904
14,610.00
12,369.91
.84
1905
16,713.00
11,902.52
.71
Total
57,628.00
61,577.73
.89
Table showing the Yield of the White Horse Beef.
Gold
Bate
Total.
Average
there-
from.
Tear
Name and Number of Lease.
crushed.
per
ton.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
therefrom.
rate
per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1902
White Horse, G.M.L. 854 ...
67 00
36*97
*55
1903
Do. do.
61*50
35*27
*57
1904
Do. do
29*00
22*04
*75
157*50
104*28
*66
1902
IdaH. Consols, G.M.L. 1632 (1249)
late Ida H. North Extended, 1249
111*00
164*81
1*48
1903
Do. do.
226*50
183*80
*81
1904
Do. do.
52*00
14*90
*29
1905
Do, do
35*00
7'77
*22
*64
424*50
271*28
Total
582'00
375 56
Ida H. Consols, G.M.L. 1623.—Three shafts have been sunk
on this property, one vertical and two underlay, all to a vertical
depth of 130 feet; an underlay winze has been sunk to a further
depth of 40 or 50 feet; the reef has been worked out from the 130
feet level to the surface for a length of about 110 feet, commencing
from a point some 20 feet south of the south underlay shaft. A
little work was being done at the north end of the bottom workings
at the time of my visit. The reef, which runs along the hanging
wall side of an “ ironstone bar ” hematite-bearing quartz lode, strikes
about north and south and dips to the eastward at an angle of about
60 degrees; it is of clean white quartz, and averages from 6to 15
inches in width; at the south end of the bottom workings it has
pinched to a mere thread, but makes again farther on, as it has been
worked on the adjoining property, the White Horse, to a depth of
1 30 feet, and apparently a good deal of work has been done on it
here ; these workings were, however, inaccessible at the time of
my visit.
The country consists of greenstone schist, and is very soft
and rotten. The water level is at about 130 feet vertically below
the surface.


Great Bedford, G.M.L. 1042 (late Cock o’ the North). —An
extensive belt of greenstone schists runs on a bearing slightly west
of north and east of south through this property and the adjoining
ones, portions of it being altered into the typical hematite-bearing
quartz lodes ; these vary in width, on the surface, from a couple of
feet to nearly a chain, and run with the schists, dipping with them
at a steep angle to the westward. These lodes present on the surface
a somewhat lenticular form and are very hard and compact, often
rising in the form of low rough ridges, which can be traced across
country in a more or less interrupted line for over a mile.
This hard silicified form does not generally extend to any
great depth, being to a great extent only a surface alteration,
but at a comparatively shallow depth gradually gives place to
soft altered and sometimes ironstained schist with occasional
thin seams and stringers of quartz running through it •
there is, however, one well defined hematite-bearing quartz
lode continuing in depth ; this is met with in the northern workings
where it has a thickness of about 30 feet. All the workings on the
lease are in this belt of schist, which in reality forms one immense
lode, some parts of which have undergone greater alteration than
others, and are higher in their gold contents. The workings con-
sist of a main shaft, which at the time of my visit was sunk to water
(200 feet), and from which a few feet of driving had been done at
about the 100-feet level on a small body of quartz running parallel
to the lines of foliation of the schists ; several of these quartz leaders
were cut in the shaft, and some of them carry very good values.
Most of the work, however, has been done towards the north end
of the lease, where several shafts have been sunk on the side of a large
outcrop of hematite-bearing quartz. The shaft from which work was
being done at the time of my visit was down 75 feet, and a drive
had been put in at this level westerly for a distance of 140 feet; 60
feet in from the shaft a winze lias been sunk a further 30 feet; this
is on the western side of a hard compact hematite-bearing quartz
lode (“jasper lode ”) where there is about eight feet of fairly good ore.
consisting of schist highly impregnated with quartz in veins and
masses, the quartz often being the full width of the ore body. A
similar ore body, four to five feet wide, occurs on the eastern side of the
“jasper lode,” both being very similar to the main lode, differing
only in the fact that they contain more clean quartz and less oxide
of iron. A small amount of work has been done on both of these
ore bodies.
The western portion of the main drive is in soft, much iron-
stained schist with a good deal of quartz coming in near the end,
and carrying very fair values in places. The whole of this drive is,
carried through one big lode consisting, as stated before,
of more or less highly altered greenstone schist, portions of which
fpve undergone greater alteration and ar.e more highly impregnated
With quartz than others,-and it is-in-these portions that the best


Great Bedford , G.M.L. 1042 {late Cock o'
the North).
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1902
37.00
91.09
2.73
1903
33.00
14.79
.44
1904
—
—
—
1905
82.00
24.87
.30
Total ..
152 00
130.75
.86
Cock of the Walk, G.M.L. 1663 {late
Scotland Yet, G.M.L. 1253).
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
OZS-
1902
115.00
47.72
.41
1905
45.00
15.29
.34
Total
160.00
63.01
.39
values are obtained, though the formation carries a little gold through-
out its entire width.
The mine is equipped with a Huntingdon mill and winding
gear, but at the time of my visit was handicapped by an inadequate
water supply ; this difficulty, however, would probably be overcome
by the deepening of the main shaft.
The continuation of the Great Bedford line of lode is traceable
in a fairly continuous line for over a mile northerly, and in one or two
places a little work has been done on it with fair success. On the Scot-
land Yet (Cock of the Walk), a good deal of work appears to have
been done on a large banded quartz lode, but, at the time of my
visit, the workings had been abandoned and were inaccessible. A little
surface work was being done, and a small parcel of stone crushed
with very satisfactory results.


Name and Number of Lease.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
therefrom.
Rate
perton-
tons. ’
fine ozs.
ozs.
Aerasia, G.M.L. 1616t.
14.00
9.85
.70
Ajax, G.M.L. 828t (790t)
57.00
67.43
1.00
Alma Mater, G.M.L.
631.00
! 680.92
1.07
Augusta, G.M.L. 37It
16,331.50
12,718.18
.77
British Admiral, G.M.L. 723t
10.00
18.43
1 .83
British Empire, G.M.L. 1431t (1396t) ..
199.50
120.83
.60
British Flag, G.M.Ls. 1302t (358t)
93.00
*514.35
Broken Pledge, G.M.L. 1513t
20.00
4.17
.20
Cock of the Walk, G.M.L. 1663t ..
160.00
63.01
.39
Cornucopia, G.M.L, 1601t
15.00
39.08
2.60
Corio, G.M.L. 1439t ..
7.00
4.08
.58
Craiggiemore Proprietary, G.M I.s. 592t, etc.
85,316.00
29,826.92
.35
Dream, G.M.L. 825t ..
210.00
t 592.12
Emerald, G.M.L. 1486t
34.00
22.09
.64
Enniskillen, G.M.L. 14S3t ..
96.00
17.09
.18
Federal Flag, G.M.L. 985t
20.00
10.17
.50
Flintlock, G.M.L. 1192t
123.00
69.88
.56
General Wabash, G.M.L. 838t
100.00
288.72
2.88
Golden Pinnacle, G.M.L. 1459t
211.00
55.28
.26
Great Bedford, G.M.L. 1042
152.00
130.75
.86
Great Britain, G.M.L. 563t
10.00
9.26
.92
Ida II. G.M., G.M.Ls. 829t, etc. ..
57,628.00
51,577.73
.89
Ida H. West G.M.Ls. 1394t (1006t)
503.00
358.44
.71
Ida H. Consols, G.M.L. 1632t (1249t) ..
424.50
271.28
.64
Just in Time, G.M.L. 1159t
50.00
62.35
1.24
Kiora, G.M.L. 902t (793t) ..
366.00
357.09
.97
Kuranin Reefs, G.M.L. 1308t
20.00
39.82
-1.99
Lady Beatrice, G.M.L. 1615t
91.00
34.57
.38
Lady Hopetoun, G.M.L. I098t
Lady Julie, G.M.L. 1605t
7.00
2.68
.38
8.00 •
16.00
2.00
Laneefield, G.M., G.M.Ls. 806t, etc.
150,214.78
54,909.09
.36
Laverton, G.M.L. 1490t
39.00
11.69
.30
Lights of Home, G.M.L. 1339t
1.70.50
214.23
1.25
Lloyds, G.M.L. 929t ..
21.00
11.05
.52
Lord Hopetoun, G.M.L. 1095t ....
25.00
2.86
.14
Little Queen, G.M.L. 1506t
18.00
46.07
2.55
Maryboro., G.M.L. 1161t
20.50
17.44
.85
Mystery, G.M.L. 1067t
145.00
145.78
1.01
Menzies Golden Rhine, G.M.s,, G.M.L.s.
475t, 660t, 718t, etc. ..
652.00
359.12
.55
Nous Verrons, G.M.L. 1214t
176.50
157.33
.89
Pat's Find, G.M.L. 1468t
10.00
21.97
2.19
Rescue, G.M.L. 1518t
10.00
3.40
.34
Rose, G.M.L. 1373t
643.50
505.61
.78
Sons of Toil. G.M.L. 1309t
138.00
92.50
.62
St. Alban’s, G.M.L. 1479t
171.00
95.02
.55
Sunny Hill, G.M.L. 1082t
87.00
72.52
.83
Toby, GALL. 1426t
9.50
42.07
4.43
Warrior, G.M.L. 1424t (1159t)
30.00
34.33
1.14
Westella, G.M.L. 1476t
30.00
45.52
1.52
Wooloomooloo, G.M.L. 1368t
17.00
69.07
4.06
White Horse, G.M.L. 854t
157.50
104.28
.66
Sundry Claims
963.00
708.22
.73
Laverton State Battery .. .. ..
46.50
346.19
District Generally
t 58.71
—
Total ..
316,702-78
155,987-93
.49
• Includes 2C7.-32ozs. dollied and specimens. f Includes 68.9Sozs. dollied and
specimens. + Alluvial. § Exclusive of alluvial.
The following table, compiled from the official statistics, shows
the total gold yield from the leases in that portion to the Laverton
district mentioned in the accompanying report, up to the end of
1905;


PHOTO. 6.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Typical Granite “Breakaway,” Burtville.


Burtville.
(With a Geological Sketch Map, Plate IV.)
This centre is situated twenty-four miles south-east from
Laverton, and a cleared surveyed road connects the two places.
The country passed over by this road is mostly flat, with occasional
low ridges of massive greenstone of the usual type, and one or two
fair-sized outcrops of hematite-bearing quartz similar to that occur-
ring behind the townsite of Laverton. At Burtville itself the country
is flat, with the exception of a few greenstone ridges at the north
and south ends of the area examined and the broken edge of the
granite tableland a few miles to the east. The greenstone ridges
are most numerous towards the northern end of the district, but are
mostly low, and at best occupy only a comparatively small area.
In the neighbourhood of the townsite, and to the east, south-east,
and south of it, the country for several miles, is practically a dead
level plain covered with a varying thickness of recent superficial
deposits, and it is on this plain that most of the working shows are
situated ; the only breaks in it are in the neighbourhood of the Rock
of Ages, Carib, and Mikado leases, where there are low ridges of
greenstone and greenstone schist.
The rocks of this district consist of both greenstones and granites*
the former being mostly massive and consisting of a hornblende
series of the usual type, one specimen [6546] of which is, seen under
microscopic examination, to be a holocrystalline rock, consisting
essentially of hornblende and triclinic felspar in about equal pro-
portions, together with a little ilemnite, this latter being for the
most part altered into leucoxene; the felspars are mostly in the
form of long prismatic crystals and are considerably clouded from
the presence of alteration products; the hornblende is in large
irregular flakes and lumps somewhat chloritised in parts, and con-
sists of both tremolite and actinolite.
There appears to be a considerable development of schists near
the junction of the greenstones with the granite, but owing to the
cover of recent deposits which overlies the greater part of the district,
the extent of these cannot be ascertained, and they can be seen out-
cropping only over one or two small areas, principally in the neigh-
bourhood of the Carib lease. These greenstones are also traversed
by one or two small belts of banded and hematite-bearing quartz ;
these, however, are usually of no length or continuity, the largest
development of them is at the Rock of Ages and just to the east
of the Carib.
The granitic rocks appear to be of two distinct ages, and consist
of the main body forming the great sandy tableland commencing
four or five miles east of the townsite and continuing easterly
indefinitely; the western side of this tableland generally has more
or less vertical cliff faces (“ breakaways ”) (Photograph 6) rising 50


to 100 feet above the plain ; the junction with the greenstones is
usually half to one mile west from these breakaways, and appears
to run on a general bearing slightly west of north and east of south.
The second body of granite is situated to the east of the townsite*
and occupies a roughly circular area of about a mile in diameter ;
with the exception of one small area on the Maori Chief lease, it
is entirely hidden beneath a varying depth of recent detrital deposits.
Prom the scanty evidence available it would appear that this body
of granite is intrusive into the greenstones which surround it on
all sides, and it appears to have been subjected to the same stresses
and strains as these rooks, the foliation, when such occurs, in the
two classes being the same and the reefs generally parallel and some-
times continuous from one class to the other. A section of this
granite shows it to be a biotite variety too much altered and -weathered
for satisfactory examination ; the biotite, which is not very abundant,
is in small flakes throughout the section, and is mostly altered to
talc and a greenish chloritic material; the felspars are in large
crystals and plates, but are clouded and altered almost beyond
recognition.
These granitic rocks are occasionally intersected by basic
(dolerite 1) dykes, which are met with in the workings and not
being visible on the surface ; one cut in the workings of the Prior
Right, G-.M.L. 1536, is said to have carried a little gold.
Considerable weathering and alteration has taken place both in
these rocks and in the greenstones, and they are very soft and easily
worked even for some distance below water level.
Several fairly extensive deposits of laterite (ironstone conglome-
rate) are found overlying the greenstone in places ; one of these, a
little to the east of G.M.L. 1423 (Eureka), though small, is apparently
of very high grade.
It is within the area of granitic rooks that most of the payable
quartz reefs are found, and it is in this respect that Burtville differs
from most of the other known mining centres of Western Aus-
tralia.
The quartz reefs are almost invariably small, but they make up
for this by often being of exceptional richness ; they are usually
of clean white—sometimes blue—quartz, and generally vary from
6 to 12 inches in thickness, often extending longitudinally, however,
for a considerable distance. They are fairly numerous both in the
granitic area and in the greenstones, but throughout the greater
part of the district, owing to the covering of recent detrital deposits,
are seldom found outcropping; they are found by picking up
“ floaters ” on the surface and subsequent deep costeening or sinking
and cross-cutting across the supposed line of the reef, the soft nature
and good standing quality of the country generally rendering the
latter method the more satisfactory.
30


The occurrence of gold throughout the reefs is not regular,
neither are the reefs themselves uniform in size, often pinching
out to a mere thread and then making again into a body of stone
12 or 18 inches in thickness, these bunches usually being richer
than the narrow parts of the reef, which are often almost free from
gold; as a rule also, these bunches carry their size down vertically,
the pinching being only lateral.
The richness of the reefs and the soft easily workable nature
of the country render the district an ideal one for the prospector,
but the reefs are too' small to be of any value to large companies ;
a large number of them which are yielding good profits under present
conditions, i.e.. above water and in soft country, will probably fail
to do so when hard country is reached as, though the reefs appear
likely to live to a considerable depth, the values are almost certain
to drop considerably as soon as the hard settled country below water
is reached, and in the case of many of the six-inch reefs at present
worth two to three ounces, this fact is likely to prove fatal, for a six-
inch two ounces reef in soft “ auger ” country is a very different thing
to the same reef in hard, solid granite; however, as one or two of
the reefs have already been worked to a depth of 150 feet without
the country becoming uncomfortably hard, there is, at the worst,
still a good length of life in front of mining the Burtville reefs.
The district as a whole is well watered, the supply being
plentiful and of excellent quality except at the extreme south end,
where it is unfit for drinking purposes.
Timber is still fairly plentiful, but consists only of Mulga, some
of it, however, of very fair size.
The following is a brief description of the principal mines work-
ing, as they appeared at the time of my visit (Oct., 1904).
The Mines.
Wanderer and Wanderer South, G.M.Ls. 1011, 1413.—A good
deal of work has been done on these leases and the workings were
the deepest in the district, the main shaft being down 200 ' feet
vertical with north and south drives at this level; these workings,
however, were abandoned at the time of my visit and were inacces-
sible. The reef worked was of white quartz, and was said to have
averaged about two feet and to have been very bunchy; the shoot
of gold had an average width of about 50 feet and dipped at a fairly
flat angle to the south ; the gold is said to have given out altogether
a few feet below water level, i.e., at about 150 feet, though the reef
itself is still going down strong in the lower levels.
At the date of my visit (October, 1905) a little prospecting work
was being done near the north end of the reef ; a shaft is here being
sunk on the reef, which is about 2| feet in thickness but of low grade;
it is hoped in this shaft to pick up the continuation of a small rich
shoot which had been worked on the surface. The reef is fairly
31


Wanderer South, G.M.L. 1011.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1901
180.00
410.89
2.27
1902
207.75
419.35
2.01
1903
420.90
938.47
2.22
1904
242.00
93.38
.38
1905
72.00
58.10
.80
Total
112.265
1,920 19
1.71
Wanderer, G-M.L. 1413.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Eate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1904
65.00
69.91
1.07
Treble Handed
G.M.L. 1634x (1350t) (1108t).
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Hate per ton.
, tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1900
7.00
44.67
6.38
1901
27.00
93.57
3.47
1902
35.50
233.04
6.56
1903
65.50
531.90
8.12
1904
29.00
68.20
2.35
1905
21.00
61.17
2.91
Total
185.00
1,032.55
5-58
well defined, and can be followed on the surface through the two
leases for a distance of 10 or 12 chains ; it runs almost due north and
south and dips at an angle of about 75 degrees to the east. The
country is a fairly fine-grained massive greenstone, very soft and
rotten down to water level, but getting hard and settled in the
bottom of the old workings.
Treble Handed, G.M.L. 1634. — 0 n this lease a good deal of
work has been done on a small but exceptionally rich quartz leader
running about north and south and clipping to the west at an angle
of about 80 degrees. Several shafts have been put down on it, and
the leader stoped out from the 150-feet level (water) to the surface
for a considerable length; these workings were, however, inacces-
sible. The present owners are sinking a new main shaft with the
intention of working the leader below water, they are now down
185 feet. The leader is said to have averaged not more than two
inches, but to have been very regular and to have maintained its
value well. The country is greenstone, and is very soft and rotten
even at the bottom of the present main shaft. The water supply
is fresh.
32


Tempus , O.M.L. 1068.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1901
180.00
769.07
4.26
1902
132.50
495.83
3.74
1903
235.00
611.99
2.60
1904
270.00
364.75
1.35
1905
170.00
1,000.76
5.88
Total
987.50
3242.40
3.28
Tempos, O.M.L. 1068.—The main reef on this property runs
about 5 degrees east of north and dips at a steep angle to the west ;
it is of somewhat ironstained quartz and very irregular, having
an average thickness of 6 to 8 inches, but often pinching out to
a mere thread ; the larger makes of stone are not regular and
frequently pinch out vertically as well as laterally ; in the bottom
level it is fairly continuous and regular, varying from 6 to 8 inches,
and appears to be going down well underfoot. The most irregular
portion of the reef is close to the main shaft, where it is much broken,
and for a short distance runs almost flat, and takes a fairly sharp
turn to the westward for a short distance. A couple of chains south
of the main shaft, a second reef comes in from the eastward and
joins the main one. Not much work has been done on this, but
as far as opened up it is exactly similar in character to the main
one. There is no definite shoot of gold in the reef, the values being
fairly regular ; the best stone was, however, obtained from the stopes
above the bottom level below water, this stone yielded about lOozs.
per ton. The country is a fine-grained massive greenstone, but
is very soft and decomposed even in the bottom workings.
Water was met with at 100 feet vertical depth, and is fresh
and drinkable; the supply is not very heavy, and comes in
principally along the walls of the reef.
The principal workings consist of a main vertical shaft sunk
to a depth of 160 feet, at which level drives have been put in along
the reef for 160 feet south and 110 feet north, and the whole of this
block stoped out to the surface, with the exception of the last 30
feet of the north drive, from which the stopes were only carried up
30 feet, when the reef cut out. Several underlay shafts have also
been put down on the reef to water, and a little work has been done
from them, but they are not in use now.
Nil Despekandum, G.M.L. 1044.—A considerable amount ol
scattered work has been L done on this lease; a number of shafts
have been sunk near the north-east corner and a good deal of work
done on a number of small quartz leaders, some of which were said
to have been exceptionally rich; these workings had, however,
been abandoned and were inaccessible at the time of my visit. The


Nil Desperandum, G.M.L. 1044 (760).
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1897
15.00
14.14
.94
1899
6.50
33.41
5.13
1900
24.00
90.35
3.76
1901
22.50
63.82
2.83
1902
70.00
379.48
5.42
1903 .. ..
167.00
401.03
2.40
1904
160.00
377.07
2.35
1905
510.00
1,158.94
2.27
Total
975.00
2,518.24
2.58
present workings are situated near the centre of the lease, and are
on a small quartz reef running almost due north and south and
dipping steeply to the west ; on this a shaft has been sunk about
50 (!) feet, and drives put in 110 feet north and 40 feet south along
the reef, and the whole of this block stoped out to within about 30
feet of the surface. The reef, as usual, is “ bunchy.” varying in thick-
ness from a mere thread up to nearly two feet, the average being
about 10 or 12 inches; the lenses vary, one being over 60 feet
in length, and having an average thickness of nearly two feet, but
carry their size well vertically; they pitch slightly towards the south.
The footwall is very good and well defined, the hanging wall not being
so regular, and it is the irregularities of this wall that cause the
pinchings in the reef. A new main shaft is now being sunk to water
level a chain or so north of the present workings, and a party of
tributers are doing a little prospecting work about five chains
farther north.
The country is a soft rotten granite, very , easily worked and
good standing ground.
Away from Home and Savage Captain, G.M.Ls. 1041, 1089.
(.Photograph 7). These two leases are in the hands of the same
owners, and are working on what is practically the one line of reef.
Most work has been done on the Away from Home lease, where
three makes of stone have been worked ; these consist of separate
parallel lenses, each looking northward, lying to the westward of the
other, the southern end of one block apparently lying directly
across from the northern end of the other, and may be different
reefs or may be the same reef faulted over, there not being sufficient
work done on any of them to definitely decide this point ; it is more
probable, however, that they are separate parallel reefs. The most
southern block appears to have been worked right out. and was
abandoned. On the next block the present working shaft is down
100 feet, and a drive 50 feet in length has been put in at this level,
and a block 20 feet high stoped out along its whole length; a block
15 to 20 feet long has also been stoped out from the 60 feet level


PHOTO. 7.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Savage Captain Gold Mine, Burtville.


Away from Ho
me Leases, G-M.Ls . 1041, 1087.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1900
45.00
432.13
9.60
1901
279.50
1,177.09
.42
1902
31.00
59.11
1.90
1903
215.00
229.65
1.06
1904
386.00
966.20
2.50
1905
461.00
656.58
1.42
Total
1417.50
3520'.76
2.48
Savage Captain, G-M.L. 1089.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1901
84.00
282.25
3.36
1902
134.00
440.51
3.28
1903
394.70
1,598.90
4.05
1904
494.50
1,340.82
2.71
1905
408.00
1,043.55
2.30
Total
1515-20
4706 03
3.10
to the surface. On the next make of stone the shaft is down 100 feet,
and 50 feet to (10 feet of driving have been done at this level, but
little or no sloping. On the northern shoot, which is on the Savage
Captain lease, the main vertical shaft is down 140 feet. At the 100
foot level, a block of stone 130 feet in length has been stoped out,
north of the shaft, up to the 100 feet level, and the level continued
another 40 feet north, while it has also been carried 65 feet south
of the shaft. Water level in these workings is 100 feet, and bailing
is being carried on from the bottom level at the rate of about 1,200
gallons per day, the water being fresh. The size of these shoots
varies from a few inches up to a little over two feet; they underlie
steeply to the west and pitch slightly to the south ; the quartz is
clear and white and somewhat glassy in places. The country rock
is granite, and is very soft and easily worked down to water level,
but below this in the northern workings it is commencing to get
very hard and settled.
Maori Chief, tI.M.L. 1048. —The main workings on this
property are at a depth of 180 feet; this being the greatest depth
to which work has been carried within the granite area. Some
very rich stone is said to have been taken out of these workings,
but they had been abandoned owing to the decreased values of the
reef in the hard country in the bottom workings. The workings
were flooded, and were, therefore, inaccessible at the time of my


Maori Chief, G-M-L. 1048.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
torft.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1900
24.00
116.75
4.86
1901
50.00
261.69
5.23
1903
99.60
676.52
6.79
1904
88.00
257.30
2.92
1905
73.00
372.22
5.10
Total
334.60
1684.48
6.03
visit; the country was soft and easily worked to water, but below
this began to get very hard, and in the bottom workings consists
of a very hard compact massive granite.
At present a little prospecting work is being done at the south
end of the block, and a shaft is being sunk with the hope of picking
up a second rich shoot; this shaft, however, was only down about
ten feet at the time of my visit, and had not got through the surface
capping of recent deposits.
These are the only workings down into the hard settled country
in the granite area, and the fact that the gold values become too
poor to pay in this hard country, though not conclusive, is certainly
a point against the long life of the Burtville reefs.
Prior Right, G.M.L. 1536. —The original workings on this
block were at the north end of it on a small quartz leader running
nearly due north and south and dipping at an angle of about 80
degrees to the west; . this leader has been worked out to a depth
of about 80 feet to the point at which it was cut off by a basic dyke,
which runs about north-west and dips south-west across the leader
at a comparatively flat angle.
This dyke has weathered into a soft reddish “ pug/’ which is said
to carry a little gold over its full thickness, about fourteen feet,
while its values in close proximity to the point at which it is struck
by the leader are said to have been pretty high ; so far no attempts
have been made to work this dyke, as owing to its “ puggy ”
nature it is not amenable to ordinary battery and leaching treat-
ment. The main leader is said to have been from ] to 3 inches in
thickness, and to have carried very high values ; it is faulted off
at the south end and has been worked completely out above the
dyke, but no efforts were made to pick it up below ; the workings
on it were abandoned and were inaccessible. At the time of my
visit a little work of a prospecting nature was being done some three
chains to the east of the. old workings, where a shaft had been put
down about 50 feet, and had cut through the dyke ; a couple of
small leaders were cut in this but they were not good enough to
pay. There are a number of small leaders through the lease, but
they are mostly too small or too poor. The country is a very much
weathered granite, and is very soft and easily worked.


Table showing the
Yield of the Golden Bell Beef.
Year.
Name and Number of Lease.
! Ore
1 crushed.
i
Gold
there-
from.
Rate
per
ton.
Total.
Average
rate
per ton.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
therefrom.
1 tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
tons.
fine ozs
Ozs
1904
Golden Bell, G.M.L, 1653t
48-00
223-52
4-65
1905
Do. do.
1 930-50
3,342*66
3-59
—
978-50
3,566-18
3-64
1904
Golden Bell North, G.M.L. 1566t
92-50
34183
3-59
1905
Do. do.
i 232-75
3677'5
1-58
325-25
709-58
2’15
Total
1,303'76
4,275-76
3-29
During 1905, this lease crushed 14.00 tons of ore for a yield
of 5.09 fine ounces ; being at the rate of .3(5 ozs. per ton.
Golden Bell, G.M.L. 1553.—The reef on this property is about
the best defined and most continuous of those so far worked within
the granite area ; it runs almost due north and south, dipping at
an angle of about GO degrees to the west, and has been proved for
a length of over 20 chains. Like all the reefs in the district, it is
lenticular and “bunchy,” varying in size from a mere thread in
places up to as much as two and two and a-half feet, and averaging
about 10 inches right through ; the lenses of stone vary in length
from 20 to 50 feet, and run pretty well vertically and carry their
size down well; the stone is fairly uniform in its gold contents
throughout the whole length of the workings, and, if anything,
is slightly better at water level, where it also carries a fair percentage
of pyrites. The walls of the reef are clean and well defined ; the
country is a very soft decomposed granite, very easily worked, and
standing well, and is still soft in the lowest workings (water level).
Water was met with at 100 feet, and is fresh and drinkable. Near
the south end of the lease, the reef appears to have been cut off by
a large fault running north-east and south-west, and no traces of
it have been picked up south of this.
A good deal of work has been done on this block, and several
shafts have been sunk to water level ; from the presnet working
shaft, about 220 feet of driving has been done north and 30 feet
south at the 120 feet (U.L.) level—loo feet vertical ; sloping has
been carried along the whole length of the north level to within
about 30 feet of the surface, no sloping has been done to the south.
In addition to these workings, a s mall party of tributers are sinking
a prospecting shaft somewhat nearer the southern boundary.
On the adjoining block to the north (the Golden Bell North,
G.M.L. 1566), a good deal of work has also been done on the same
reef down to water level. In these workings it has exactly the same
characteristics as in the Golden Bell lease, an I averages about the
same size.


Cremtr tie,
G.M.L. 1592 (1491), -(1034).
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine oz.
ozs.
1900
70.00
228.61
3.26
1901
58.50
108,11
1.84
1904
52.50
34.58
.65
1905
7.00
10.49
1.50
Total
188.00
381.79
2.04
Cremorne, G.M.L. 1592 (1494). —This property is situated
about half-a-mile north-east of the Golden Bell, and on it a large
amount of work has been done in the past, on a quartz reef running
north and south and dipping to the west. This reef appears to be
on the junction of the granite with the greenstones; there are no
outcrops, the whole locality being covered with a considerable thick-
ness of recent deposits, and the stone in the dumps is too rotten and
decomposed to form any definite conclusion as to what it has been,
but the north end of the reef appears to be in greenstone, while the
south is in granite. The reef is said to have been larger and the
average to have yielded some very rich stone. There was a ten-head
battery on this lease at one time, but it -was removed about eighteen
months ago; this being the only lease in this district besides the
Sons of Westralia on which a battery has been erected.
Maxim, G.M.L. 1384. —This property is situated about a mile
and a-lialf north-east of Burtville townsite, and is outside the granitic
area; the country rock being a fairly fine-grained massive green-
stone very much decomposed. The reef runs a little north of north-
west, and dips to the west; it is traceable for about twenty chains,
and appears to have been considerably larger than those in the
granite. Several shafts have been sunk, and a good deal of work
has been done on the property, but it was lying idle at the time of
my visit. Up to the end of 1905 164.90 tons of stone had been
crushed from this lease for a yield of 141.81 fine ozs., being at the
rate of . 86ozs. per ton.
The Brothers, G.M.L. 1064. —The workings on this lease are
also situated in greenstone country, but the reef is small and has
exactly the same characteristics as those in the granite, consisting
of a series of lenses of varying length, all pitching to the south at a
fairly sharp angle; these lenses are generally connected by a small
vein of quartz, but often there is only a “ face ”; they vary a good
deal in size, those at the south end of the workings being almost two
feet in one or two places, though the average size is about eight inches.
The general trend of the reef is eight degrees east of north, and it
has a dip of about 75 degrees to the west; at the south end there is
a second parallel leader about 14 feet to the west, this however, being


The Brothers> G-M-L. 1054-
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton-
tons.
line ozs.
ozs.
1<J00
28.00
73.89
2.64
1901
82.00
292.37
3.56
1902
260.50
342.75
1.31
1903
108.00
156.83
1.45
1904
13.00
6.66
.51
1905
24.00
50.55
2.10
Total
616.50
923.05
1.79
only a short length ; both reefs are crossed by a third small east and
west leader which yielded small pockets of rich stone at its junction
with the others, and in the part of it between them. The country
in proximity to the reef is a very soft rotten greenstone schist, foliated
parallel to the strike of the reef, but turning into a massive variety
20 to 30 feet to the west of it. It seems not unreasonable to presume
that, if a little more cross-cutting was done across this belt of schists,
other makes of stone parallel to the present line would be picked up.
A good deal of work has been done on the lease, and a number
of shafts have been sunk to water (70ft. v.d.) between which level
and the surface a block 400 feet in length has been worked out. The
present owners are now working below water level, and have got
their main shaft down 140 feet; a drive has been put in south along
the reef at the 125 feet level for a distance of 140 feet, but little or
no stoping has been done; the shoot of gold worked Jin the upper
levels is dipping slightly south, and this bottom level is being pushed
on to pick it up; so far the values in it are not too good.
The water comes in principally along the footwall of the reef
and also very strongly along a fault some 12 to 15 feet to the west of
the reef; it is somewhat brackish but is good stock water.
Mystery, G.M.L. 1C64 (15G3). — On this lease a good deal of
work has been done on a small quartz reef which runs north and
south, and dips at a fairly steep angle to the westward. This reef
consists of a series of small irregular lenses of stone varying up to 30
feet in length, and having an average thickness of about 8 inches;
these lenses have a decided pitch to the north but do not carry their
size too well; the distance between them varies, but their is generally
a small vein of quartz connecting them. The country rock is a green-
stone schist, very soft and rotten but a good deal of siliceous ironstone
occurs on the footwajl, mostly in irregular bunches, and is very hard
and compact and, so far, practically free from gold.
Water was struck at a vertical depth of 70 feet, and is salt.
Several underlay shafts have been sunk to water (90 feet ILL.), and
a good deal of irregular disconnected work has been done on the reef
both on this lease and on the adjoining one on the north.


Mystery . G-M.L ■ IGG-t (15(53).
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs
ozs.
1904 .. ..
126.00
193.83
1.53
1905
28.00
25.38
.70
Total
154.00
219-21
1.42
Karridale, G.M.L. 1010.—Two lines of reef have been worked
on this property, but most of the work has been done on the southern
one which is by far the richest, and also the more regular. The
northern reef, which runs on a bearing of 240 degrees and dips at a
fairly flat angle to the north-west, is very irregular in size, varying,
within a few feet, from a few inches up to two or three feet in
thickness; the shoot of gold worked is said to have been about 50
feet in length and to have cut out at a depth of 60 feet. Work is now
proceeding on this reef at a depth of 70 feet, where a drive is now
being put in southerly along the reef in the hopes of picking up
another shoot. The reef at the south end runs on a bearing of 220
degrees, and dips at an angle of about 60 degrees to the north-west;
it is a little more regular than the other, but is smaller, its average
size being about twelve inches, getting smaller towards the southern
end. Two shoots of gold have been worked ; the northern shoot
was about 90 feet long at water level, and ran out to a point a few
feet below the surface; the reef in this was bigger than usual,
being from two to three feet six in one place—near the surface;
these big makes of stone were not much good right through, the
best values being obtained on the footwall side, the reef is smaller
and more regular along the bottom level, being from 8 to 12
inches. The southern shoot, which is the one being worked at
present, is about 100 feet in length at water level, and tapers to a
point at the surface the same as the other ; it has been worked out to
within about 30 feet of the surface, and the best stone was got along
water level; the stone is much smaller in this shoot, being from
Ito 12 inches, the lenses or “ makes ” of stone being very irregular ;
the footwall is clean and regular, the bunches being caused by
irregularities, principally in the hanging wall; the reef appears to
be going down well under foot at the water level, where it also carries
a considerable percentage of pyrites. As the two shoots are only
separated by a few feet of blank stone at water level, and are making
towards each other, there should be a good length of pay ore when
the next level is opened up. The country is greenstone schist, very
much weathered and decomposed; the reefs run and dip with the
foliation of the schists ; on the footwall of the reef, these schists have
been very highly altered over a width of four to six feet, and con-
verted into a band of siliceous ironstone, mostly very hard and
compact, locally known as “ jasper ”; this band occasionally carries
a little gold, but not sufficient to make it payable.


Karrid%le< G-M-L ■ 1010-
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
OZS.
1900
59.00
241.02
4.08
1901
143.00
398.35
2.78 .
1902
166.00
387.33
2.33
1903
687.33
711.93
1.03
1904
282.25
1,000.26
3.54
1905
291.00
2,143.71
7.36
Total
1,628.58
4,882.59
2.99
A second of these bars runs ona north-westerly bearing across
about the centre of the lease, probably marking an old line of fault,
which, on the surface, appears to have cut off the southern reef, and
it may be that the northern one is merely the extension of this reef
faulted over. Water was struck in the workings at about 80 feet
(v.d.) and is salt.
The extension of the southern reef is also being worked on the
north end of the adjoining block on the south (the Castlereagh,
G.M.L. 1598) where a good deal of work has been done on it to water
level.
Bond’s Find, G.M.L. 101 9.— A1l the work on this lease has been
done at the north end on a small irregular quartz reef striking about
north-north-east, and dipping at a very flat angle to the westward.
A number of shafts have been sunk on this reef to depths varying
from 40 to 75 feet, and a good deal of irregular and disconnected work
has been done on it. The reef dips westerly at an angle of about 15
degrees, but turns over sharply and forms several sharp sigmoidal
curves northerly, and, altogether, is very irregular and broken.
The size of the reef varies considerably, the average being only
a few inches, though bunches up to 18 inches have been worked,
whilst again it will pinch into a mere thread for some distance.
The length of the shoot of gold worked was about 200 feet, but the
stone was not quite uniform over this length, some of it being very
good whilst some was rather poor, The country is decomposed
greenstone, and appears to be intruded by several greenstone
dykes, though it is so rotten and weathered that it is almost
impossible to definitely recognise the presence of these, y j J
Xo work has been done below water level (75 feet v.d.). |j j j J
A similar class of reef to this has been worked on the adjoining
lease to the east, the Eoscommon.


Bond ’
s Find , GM-L ■ 1019-
Year.'
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
OZS.
1899
11.50
34.04
2.96
1900
47.50
112.62
2.37
1901
123.00
342.84
2.78
1902
129.00
500.67
3.88
1903
278.00
377.83
1.35
1904
194.00
219.84
1.13
1905
285.00
344.29
1.20
Total
1,068.00
1,932.13
181
Rock of Ages . G M-L • '1338-
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
ton.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1902
49.00
151.30
3.08
1903
293.50
713.49
2.09
1904
224.00
299.94
1.33
1905
—
—
—
Total
566.50
1,164.73
2-05
Rock of Ages, G.M.L. 1338. —Tw0 or three fair sized hematite-
bearing quartz lodes run through this lease on a bearing of 186
degrees, dipping at an angle of about 75 degrees to the west; along
the hanging wall of the best defined of these, runs a small white
quartz reef, on which a fair amount of work has been done down to
water level. The reef is somewhat irregular, but it was impossible
to see much owing to most of the block having been sloped out and
to no development work being done; it is said to have averaged
about two feet, but is, however, very small in the north face. The
country is very soft, and consists of a decomposed, somewhat
schistose greenstone; water was struck at 130 feet, and is said to be
fresh and drinkable. The property was idle at the time of my visit.
Sons of Westralia, G.M.L. 934. — This property is situated a little
over four miles to the south of Burtville townsite. The workings
are on a fair-sized quartz reef, which runs on a bearing a little east of
north, and dips at a fairly steep angle to the westward; this reef is
said to have been from three to five feet in thickness all through the
workings, and to have carried good values right through. It has
been worked to a depth of 140 feet (v.d.); from the 100 feet level
to the surface, a block from 400 to 500 feet in length has been sloped
out, and at 140 feet about 150 feet of driving has been done on the
reef, but no sloping. The reef is said to have averaged about four feet
along this drive, but owing to the workings being flooded I was
unable to make an examination of them. Near the surface in one


Sons of
Westralia ,
G-M.L 934-
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Hate per ton.
ton.
fine ozs.
OZS.
1899
35.00
187.50
5.35
1900
90.00
669.70
7.44
1901
243.00
665.78
2.74
1902
748.00
1,826.39
2.44
1903
103.00
422.61
4.10
1904
130.00
143.73
1.10
190.5
—
—
—
Total
1,349-00
3,915.71
3-90
place the reef is about four feet thick, and has good clean walls, the
footwall being especially goad ; a little chloropal (a silicate of iron) is
associated with the quartz near the surface on this wall, giving it a
characteristic green colour, and is also found on the wall itself.
The country is greenstone, very soft and rotten, as far as opened
up. Water was met with at 100 feet, but is salt.
Mikado, G.M.L. 943.—The accompanying plans show the
amount of work which has been done on this lease. Several lines of
reef are being worked, but the majority of the work has been done
on what is known as the Mikado reef. This reef can be traced on
the surface in a roughly north-north-easterly and south-south-
westerly direction for a distance of about 20 chains, the outcrop
towards the south end being 8 to 10 feet in thickness, and very con-
tinuous ; in the workings—which are to the north of the big out-
crop, which is apparently no good—it is very irregular, varying in
a short distance from a solid body of quartz two to three feet thick,
to a string of mere threads, these, in turn, sometimes cutting out
almost entirely, and at other times making again into a fairly solid
body ; there are a number of small leaders on both sides of the main
line, these are mostly very small and consist of a series of irregular
lenses with narrow threads of quartz connecting them; they are
very small as a rule, and often only extend for a few feet, and are often
run much flatter than the main line, and run into it. At the 110
feet level, three lines of reef have been opened up, but insufficient
work has been done on two of them to get an accurate idea of their
extent or relationship. A little to the north of the main shaft an
east and west fault dipping to the south cuts across the reef, which
is thrown about six feet to the east and very much broken. This
fault is evidently the continuation of the shear line seen on the
surface near the north-east corner of the lease, and marked on the
surface by a fair-sized hematite-bearing quartz lode. The workings
were only accessible to the 110 feet level, being full of water below
this; the country is very soft and easy to work and shows no signs
of becoming hard even at the 140 feet level; it consists of greenstone
schists, the foliation running slightly east of north, and dipping


Mikado, GM L-
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1900
62.00
38. 93
.63
1902
145.00
90.45
.62
1903
135.00
76.76
.57
1904
60.00
42.00
.70
1905
622.50
648.79
1.04
Total
1,024.50
896.93
.86
Name and Number of Lease.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
therefrom.
Rate
per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
Away from Home Leases, G.M.L. 1041t,
1087t
1,417.50
3,520.76
2.48
Banker, G.M.L. 139 7t
229.50
349.80
1.52
Baron Clive, G.M.L. IIOOt
89.00
126.38
1.42
Black Swan, G.M.L. 940t .. ..
Black Swan Proprietary, G.M.L. 940t j
1,310.50
1,731.37
1.32
Bond’s Find, G.M.L. 1019t
1,068.00
1,932.13
1,81
Brothers, G.M.L. 1054t
515.50
923.05
1.79
Blue Moon, G.M.L. 1666t
17.00
33.73
1.98
Castlereagh, 1598
25.00
40.06
1.60
Carib, G.M.I.. 944t
497.00
460.99
.92
Climax, G.M.L. 1369t
8.00
2.47
.31
Cremorne, G.M.L. 1592t (1494t) ..
188.00
381.79
2.04
Edinboro’Castle, G.M.L. 271t
210.00
503.61
2.39
Edinboro’Castle, G.M.L. 811t
478.00
911.02
1.91
Edinboro’Castle North, G.M.L. 1012t
136.00
204.88
1.50
Edinboro’ Castle South, G.M.L. 809t
31.00
166.10
5.35
Edith Hope, G.M.L. 841t
565.00
301.75
.53
Eldorado, G.M.L. 1112t
47.25
43.42
.91
Eureka, G.M.L. 1423t
14.25
5.18
.36
Exchequer, G.M.L. 1345t
343.00
109.64
.32
Enterprise, G.M.L. 15511
96.00
36.78
.38
Floater, G.M.L. 1234T
* 3.44
.63
Fortunatus, G.M.L. 1493t
4.50
2.84
Golden Bell, G.M.L. 1553t
978.50
3,566.18
3.64
Golden Bell North, G.M.L. 1566t
325.25
709.58
2.15
Golden Flat, G.M.L. 1104t
50.65
191.03
3.77
Golden Fleece, G.M.L. 1164t
44.00
30.42
.69
Golden Orbit, G.M.L. 1398t .. )
1,188.50
2,192.75
1.84-
Golden Ring, G.M.L. 801t .. i
• Specimens.
steeply west, and it is parallel to these lines of foliation that the reef
occurs. A fairly good supply of water was struck at 110 feet, but it
is salt; it is, however, being used for boiler purposes with satisfactory
results.
State Battery. —A State Battery ( Photograph 8) has been
erected at Burtville, and since starting operations in October, 1903,
the mill has crushed, up to the close of 1905, 10,869 tons of ore.
yielding 27,9070z5. of gold, or an average of a little over 2jozs-
for every ton crushed.
The following Table, compiled from the official statistics, shows
the total gold returns from the leases at Burtville up to the end
of 1905;


PHOTO. 8.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibbon. Govt. Photo. Litho.
State Battery, Burtville.


Name and Number of Lease.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
therefrom.
Rate
per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
Golden King - Last, G.M.L. 1037t
12.75
24.57
1.92
Gabberwock, G.M.L. 1457t ..
13.00
38.47
2.96
Hard Lump, G.M.L. 1411t
25.00
28.03
1.12
independence, G.M.L. 1293t
12.00
7.95
.66
Karridale South, G.M.L. 1400t
13.00
11.81
.91
Karridale, G.M.L, IOIOt
1,628.58
4,882.59
2.99
Killarney, G.M.L. 1 287t (1062t) ..
46.00
36.04
.79
Lady Kate, G.M.L. 1261t
12.00
11.81
.98
Lady Myrtle, G.M.L. 1609t
70.00
57.94
.82
Leviathan, G.M.L. 944t, etc.
203.75
83.39
.40
Maori Chief, G.M.L. 1048t
334.60
1,684.48
5.03
Maori Chief Extended, G.M.L. 1114t
118.00
506.49
4.29
Marion, G.M.L. 1647t
12.00
4.67
.39
Maxim, G.M.L. 1384t
164.90
141.81
.86
Maxim North, G.M.L. 1404t
15.05
9.06
.60
Meantime, G.M.L. 1635t
7.00
10.49
1.49
Merry Pilgrim, G.M.L. 1314t
Mikado, G.M.L. 943t
81.00
86.48
1.07
1,024.50
896.93
.86
Mo i Ami, G.M.L. 1434t
128.00
311.59
2.43
Moimt Jirown, G.M.L. 1265t
31.50
25.70
.81
Mount Weld, G.M.L. 673t
67.00
31.08
.46
Mount Weld Consols, G.M.L. 1105t
266.50
117.06
.44
Mount Wilga Proprietary, G.M.L. 833t ..
296.00
412.25
1.39
Mystery, G.M.L. 1664t (1563t)
154.00
219.21
1.42
Nil. Desperandum, G.M.L. 1044t
975.00
2,518.24
2.58
Nil Desperandum North, G.M.L. 1286t ..
134.30
348.06
2.59
Nonpareil, G.M.L. 1436t
22.00
22.10
1.00
Oldfield, G.M.L. 1292t
76.40
156.27
2.04
Ophir, G.M.L. 1217t
41.00
24.61
.60
Ophir No. 2, G.M.L. 1389t
60.35
42.68
.70
Pluck Up, G.M.L. 1307t
13.50
20,39
1.51
Prior Right, G.M.L. 1536t
14.00
5.09
.36
Queen of Hearts, G.M.L. 131 7t ..
15.00
26.08
1.66
Queen of the North Extended, G.M.L. 47St
60.00
139.11
2.32
Red Rover, G.M.L. 1331t
30.50
11.62
.38
Riddle, G.M.L. 1057t
378,25
852.49
2.25
Rise Again, G.M.L. 1337t
8.40
10.90
1.29
Rock of Ages. G.M.L. 1338t
566.50
1,164.73
2.05
Roscommon, G.M.L. 1417t
577.00
377.80
.65
Sailor Prince. G.M.L. 781t
3,891.00
4,408.15
1.13
Sailor Prince No. 1 South, G.M.L, 852t ..
64.00
32.21
.50
Savage Captain, G.M.L. 1089t
1,515.20
4,706.03
3.10
Silistrea, G.M.L. 1631t
12.00
5.10
.42
Sons of Westralia, G.M.L. 934i
1,349.00
3,915.71
2.90
Surprise, G.M.L. 1461t (853t)
72.00
203.28
2.82
Tattersalls, G.M.L. 1668t
5.00
10.24
2.05
Tempus, G.M.L. 1068t
987.50
3,242.40
3.28
Third Attempt, G.M.L. 1169t
8.00
y. 3 i
.92
Tired Feeling, G.M.L. 1024t
125.00
166.89
1.33
Tower Hill, G.M.L. 1325t
8.00
10.62
1.33
Treble Handed, G.M.L. 1634t (1350t) ..
185.00
1,032.55
5.58
True Blue, G.M.L. 1464t
83.00
147.41
1.77
Try Again South, G.M.L. 1412t
Turn Over, G.M.L. 1466t ..
33.00
36.55
156.69
17.83
4.74
.48
Wanderer, G.M.L. IOIIt
1,122.65
1,920.19
1.71
Wanderer South, G.M.L. 1413t
65.00
69.91
1.07
Waihine, G.M.L. 1116t
10.50
11.13
1.06
Wee Macgregor, G.M.L. 1605t
18.00
36.28
2.01
Sundry Claims
541.65
426.50
.78
At Burtvilie State Battery
17.00
• 896.33
—
Burtville Cyanide Works .. .. }
11,551.29
Burtvilie Ore Reduction Works .. S
Trig Hill Battery
t 949.53
Total
29,534-28
67,764.18
1.95
•Includes 888.73 ozs. by cyanide. f By cyanide.


Erlistoun District.
The road from Laverton to Duketon for the first twelve miles
passes over plains covered with recent deposits and broken here
and there by outcrops of low greenstone ridges, and then over a
couple of miles of granite similar to that at Mount Crawford, after-
wards over loam flats and sand plains to a point about two miles
beyond the Cork Tree Hotel, where the granite again outcrops, having
been apparently continuous the whole way, beneath the sand plains.
This granite occupies the country for about another six miles,
when it gives place to greenstones of the usual type, traversed by
several very persistent bands of hematite-bearing quartz, and extend-
ing on past Mount Yarden and on towards Erlistoun and Duketon.
This area of granite appears to be different from the main body
farther east, and though it is probably part of that to the west of
Baneygo, it is similar to that of Crawford, and appears to be newer
than and intrusive into the greenstones.
The greenstones of the Mount Yarden belt occupy a very con-
siderable area, having a width known to exceed 10 to 12 miles, and
extending northerly as far as Duketon; a considerable portion of
this area is, however, hidden beneath a great thickness of recent
detrital deposits; the mining centres of Mount Yarden (King of
Creation and Little Doris), Kirkpatrick’s, Erlistoun (Mistake), and
Baneygo are all situated on this belt, Duketon appearing to be about
the north-western limit of it. The eastern boundary of the belt
is the large body of granite which lies some four miles east of Mount
Yarden, and apparently runs continuously from Burtville on north-
erly past Duketon ; the western boundary is not known from actual
personal observation, but near the north end it is formed by a belt
of granite lying some half dozen miles west of Baneygo, and
apparently continuous with that crossing the road between Craw-
ford’s Well and Cork Tree.
Mount Varden.
The district officially known as Mount Varden lies about
3G miles to the north of Laverton; as before stated, the
rocks comprising the auriferous area consist of greenstones of the
usual type traversed by several very persistent parallel bands of
hematite-bearing quartz, and here, having a width of about ten miles,
they are mostly of a massive and foliated variety, and are consider-
ably weathered and decomposed. Three main lines of hematite-
bearing quartz lodes traverse these greenstones running on a bearing
about 15 degrees west of north ; these are very persistent and can
be traced across country for several miles, usually in the form of
low rough ridges and isolated hills, often of considerable height.
The most easterly of these lines is the one of which Mount
Varden forms the highest point; this belt is several chains in width.
46


PHOTO 9.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Quartz Reef, Erlistoun.


PHOTO. 10.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Lithe.
Quartz Reef, Erlistoun.


and consists of altered greenstone schist and hematite-bearing quartz,
being very similar t t the belt at Cock of the North, Laverton ; it
runs on a bearing of about 243 degrees, dipping steeply to the west,
and can be followed both north and s mth for several miles ; several
fair sized lenticular reefs are associated with it, an'd one or two of
these are being worked with fairly satisfactory results. The second,
or middle line, is about two miles to the west of this one, the highest
point on it forming the hill known as Nolan’s Trig. (22); it runs
on a bearing about 15 degrees west of north, and dips at an angle
of about 80 degrees to the west. At Nolan’s Trig, it is over a chain
in width and consists of almost pure banded blue and white quartz,
a little farther both north and south, however, it is of the usual
hematite-bearing type ; from the top of this hill, the belt can be
seen extending in the form of low isolated hills for several miles
both north and south. The third line lies about a mile to the west-
ward of this, and is similar to it in all respects, but its extent appears
to be more limited.
With the exception of the hills formed by these belts the greater
part of the country is flat and covered with recent detrital deposits,
especially to the west of the middle belt; eastward of this there is
a greater extent of rock outcrops, these consisting of massive green-
stones traversed by a few small hematite-bearing quartz lodes, and
also by several north and south belts of schists within which the
normal quartz reefs are usually found.
Eastward of Mount Varden, the country is more hilly, and
consists of greenstone hills and ridges capped with ironstone con-
glomerate (laterite), these extending east for four or five miles till
the main granite belt is reached.
The quartz reefs of this district are of two classes ;
(a.) Lenticular quartz reefs associated with the hematite-
bearing quartz lodes ; and
(b.) Quartz reefs of the normal type, occurring entirely
in the greenstones. {Photographs 9 and 10.)
Class {a) is represented by the Spes Unica, City of Auckland,
.and King of Creation reefs, and class ( b ) by the Little Doris and
Buiigarra.
The principal mines working in this district at the time of my
visit were the King of Creation, Spes Unica, Bungarra, and Little
Doris.
The Mines.
King of Creation, G.M.L. 1382.— A wide belt of hematite-
bearing quartz and altered greenstone schist (the continuation of
the Mount Varden belt) runs through this lease, on a bearing
slightly west of north; associated with it are veins and lenticular
masses of quartz, the latter often of large size; these usually run
4 7


a few points more westerly than the.schists, and overlap each other
slightly, dipping with the schists at a steep angle to the west.. These
lenses are of white,. glassy quartz, generally strongly laminated,
and vary considerably in their gold contents, the best stone usually
being found in the centre portion of the lens. In addition to these
large makes of stone a number of small leaders are associated with
the schists, usually running parallel to them ; these, though small,
are sometimes exceedingly rich.
Several shafts were put down on the property by previous
owners, but little or no work was done from any of them, and they
have since been abandoned ; the deepest of them, wTiich is about
5 feet below w'ater level and still in soft country, is now being used
as a water shaft, the water being fresh and drinkable. From this
shaft, which is on the west side of the main belt of schists towards
the north end, two crosscuts have been put in easterly under the
outcrop’of a couple of large quartz masses, one at 50 feet and one
at w'ater level (110 feet); of these the former is in about 100 feet,
the whole length of it being in what is practically one large lode,
consisting of highly altered greenstone schist highly impregnated
with quartz in veins and gashes ; running through and with this
lode are five fair-sized quartz reefs, ranging from two to five feet in
thickness, and about 10 to 20 feet apart. No work, how r ever, has
been done on any of these, though they are all said to carry gold;
the bottom crosscut is in 40 feet, the first thirty of which are in
practically solid quartz and the remaining ten in schist with seams
of quartz ; it is not in far enough to cut all the makes of stone met
with above. A few tons of stone were crushed from a seam near the
centre of this big make of stone, with very satisfactory results, but
no further work has been done upon it. At present the only work
being done on the property is in a large irregular opencut a little
to the north of the water shaft; stone has been taken from this
to a depth of about 30 feet, and is now being broken at about 15 to
20 feet from the surface ; the reef in this cut averages about 6 feet
in thickness, and is pretty low-grade, the best results being obtained
as a rule near the centre of the reef. Two bulk crushings from this
opencut are said to have averaged 14 dwts. and 18 dwts. respec-
tively.
Towards the south end of the Lease, a small quartz leader run-
ning alongside a body of hematite-bearing quartz has been worked
to a depth of 30 or 40 feet; this leader was only an inch or two in
thickness, and w r as very short, but some exceptionally rich stone
was taken out of it.
There is a large body of low-grade gold-bearing stone on this
property, which seems well worthy of more systematic prospecting
than has been given to it so far.


King of Creation, G.M.L. 1382.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1904
34.00
48.44
1.42
1905
109.00
46.78
.43
Total
143-00
95:22
•66
Spes Unica, G-.M.L. 1391. —Situated about half-a-mile south
of the King of Creation, and on the same line of schist and hematite-
bearing quartz lodes, which runs right through the centre of the
lease. These so-called hematite-bearing quartz lodes, which are
merely local alterations of the schists, vary from banded quartz
and hematite through blue and white banded quartz to a merely
slightly silicified ironstained schist. Associated with these, and
running and dipping with them, are several fair-sized lenticular
quartz reefs, these sometimes being up to four feet in thickness,
but of no great length or regularity. The present workings are
on one of these reefs on the western side of the main belt of schist,
and consist merely of a vertical shaft sunk to a depth of 100 feet,
at which point drives have been put in 90 feet north and 25 feet
south along the reef, and a little sloping done from the north drive.
The reef is from two to three feet on the surface, but in this drive,
is very irregular and consists of a series of broken lenses, varying
a good deal in length and apparently pitching to the south ; occasion-
ally the quartz dies out altogether and its place is taken by schist,
which usually carries a little gold ; the best stone is where the quartz
makes and fills the whole space between the walls of the lode.
Insufficient work has, however, been done on this reef to give
a, definite idea of its exact size or possibilities, but the work has proved
that the quartz lenses are very irregular, and that they do not carry
their size vertically.
In addition to this work, a second shaft has been sunk to a depth
of 50 feet on a fair-sized lens of stone in the same line of reef some
80 feet farther north; this shaft was inaccessible, but the lens,
which was some 3 feet wide on the surface,, appeared to be cutting
out rapidly.
The belt of schists is full of these lenses of quartz, varying from
a couple of inches up to two or three feet in thickness and
apparently all carrying gold, but being too short and irregular to
be of much value. The schists themselves carry a little gold, but
not sufficient to make them payable.
During 1905 this lease crushed 58'00 tons for a yield of 27 - 18ozs, s
giving an average of AGozs. per ton.


Bunjarra, G.M.L. 1480.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1905
39.00
292.72
7.51
Bu.vgarra. G.M.L. 1480.—Situated about half-a-mile north-
east of the King of Creation, The reef occurs in a narrow belt
of crushed greenstone, with massive greenstones on either side,
which is still fairly soft in the lower workings, while the massive
variety is very hard and solid. The work done consists of a main
vertical shaft down 100 feet; at 30 feet a drive has been put in
northerly al mg the reef for 110 feet, and this block sloped out to
the surface, and in addition about 25 feet of driving has been done
southerly at this same level; at the 100 feet level drives have been
put in along the reef f >r 95 feet north and 20 feet south, and a little
sloping done from the north drive just beside the shaft. The reef,
which runs on a bearing of 345 degrees, and dips steeply to the west-
ward, is very small and irregular, varying from a mere thread up
to as much as 12 inches, and averaging about 6 inches ; these larger
makes of stone are mere bunches and do not carry their size for
any distance, either vertically or horizontally. So far the best stone
has been obtained from the bottom level, the last crushing from which
is. said to have given an average of nine to ten ounces.
Little Doris, G.M.L. 771 {Photograph 11).—The class of de-
posit in this property is similar to that in the Bungarra, consisting
of a small irregular quartz reef enclosed in a narrow belt of green-
stone schists some 30 or 40 feet in width and bounded by hard com-
pact massive greenstones. (Fig. 4). This belt of schist is full of
small irregular quartz veins, most of which carry fair gold, all run-
ning with the foliation of the schists and dipping with them to the
west. The main line of reef being worked is very irregular and
bunchy; at the south end in the old workings it was about five
feet in thickness, but in the present workings its maximum is about
three feet, it varies from this down to a mere thread, often pinching
out in a few feet; the bunches of stone are very irregular, and do not
carry their size for any great distance either laterally or vertically,
neither are they all uniform in their gold contents. The reef has
been traced on the surface for some 800 feet on a bearing of about
345 degrees, and carries gold for the whole of this length, though,
as before stated, the values vary a good deal; the stone carries a
good deal of carbonate of copper, this rendering treatment some-
what difficult.
Water level is about 70 feet, the water being salt; it is being
pumped from the bottom level at the rate of about 15,000 gallons
per day.


SECTION SHEWING THE APPROXIMATE AMOUNT OF WORK DONE ON LITTLE DORIS G.M.L.771. ERLISTOUN M T MARGARET G. F.
SCALF 100ft TO / INCH.
FIG. 5.


PHOTO. 11.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Little Doris Gold Mine, Erlistoun.


FIG. 6.


LittVe Doris, G.M.L. 771.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
.tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1898
60.00
140.93
2.35
1899
100.00
131.92
1.31
1900
40.00
26.19
.65
1901
88.00
176.52
2.00
1902
16.00
28.70
1.79
1903
160.00
239.94
1.49
1904
235.00
252.75
1.08
1905
150.00
207.72
1.31
Total
849.00
1,204 67
1.41
The country in the vicinity of the reef (the schists) in the lower
workings is still pretty soft, but the massive greenstones enclosing
the schists are very hard and solid. The accompanying sketch
section (Fig. 5) shows, from figures supplied by the manager, the
approximate amount of work which has been done on this
property up to the end of August, 1905.
Kirkpatrick’s or Little Battery.
This centre is situated about seven miles north of the King
of Creation, on the Duketon road; it is in the same belt of green-
stones, but the banded quartz lodes are absent from this particular
they re-appear again farther north at Baneygo and
Erlistoun. The country consists of greenstone schists foliated about
north and south, and within these occur auriferous quartz reefs,
running with the schists, and dipping with them to the east.
These reefs are lenticular in habit, and mostly small, seldom
exceeding a foot in thickness. Several of them have been worked
with varying results, the most important being that known as
Kirkpatrick’s, on which a good deal of work has been done to a
depth of 120 feet; this reef averages about a foot in thickness,
but is very bunchy, often going from 18 inches to almost nothing
in a few feet. A three-head battery is erected on the property
and a good amount of gold has been won from it, the returns
being as shown below. The water level is about 65 feet, the
supply being salt and unuseable. In addition to these small north
and south reefs several very large ones are found in this locality;
these run in a general east and west direction, and are frequently
20 feet or more in thickness, outcropping for distances of 10 to
20 chains, and often forming razor-backed hills 40 to 50 feet in
height; they are of white hungry-looking quartz and apparently
carry no appreciable amount of gold.


Erlistoun.
Erlistoun lies about seven miles north of Kirkpatrick's, on
the continuation of the same belt of greenstones. A townsite
was lai 1 o it here i i th? early days, but the only sign of it at
the present time are the allotment pegs and one small hotel ; the
two localities where mining operations have been carried out
are better kno.vn as the Mistake and the Baneygo, taking
their names frin lh>, prneipil mines. Tne M stake is situ-
ated about half-a-mile east, and Baneygo two miles north-
west of the surveyed townsite of Krlistoun ; this latter locality was,
however, practically abandoned at the time of my visit; a large
number of leases were taken up here and a lot of work done on them
in the past. The country here is greenstone schist traversed by
several very persistent belts of hematite-bearing quartz, one of which,
about a mile to the west of the Baneygo, can be seen extending across
country in a series of low hills north and south for several miles;
another belt runs through the leases south of the Baneygo for over
a mile, and, in addition, there are several other smaller belts all
running pretty well north and south. Quartz reefs are associated
with these belts, usually running alongside them, and though small,
are said in some cases to have yielded very good results.
The Mines.
Baneygo.Lease (G.M.L. 725).—0n this propeity a good deal of
work has been done on a quartz reef running about north and
south and dipping fairly steeply to the east. A main shaft has been
sunk about 40 feet below water level (90 feet), and a little work done
here; above water the reef has been stoped out from the 40 feet
level to the surface over a length of 400 feet. These workings
had been abandoned for some time past and were inaccessible.
The reef is said to have been as much as six feet wide in places,
but was very irregular and patchy ; the shoot of gold is said to have
cut out below the 40 feet level. On the adjoining block to the south
the workings were also inaccessible ; two parallel reefs have been
worked here, and on the eastern one a block 800 feet in length has
been taken out down to water level (85 feet). This reef dips west,
does not come to the surface, except at the south end, but turns over
and dips away easterly, the cap of the turn pitching to the north at a
fairly flat angle; this eastern leg does not go down very far, and is
not of such good grade as the western leg ; the reef was small and
very irregular, especially in the lower levels ; the second reef lies a
couple of chains farther east, and has had a good deal of work
done on it; it is exactly similar to the eastern reef in all respects,
except that it is somewhat smaller. This reef is partly along the
junction of the greenstone schists with an intrusive mass of
granite, and partly apparently, in the granite itself, though owing to
the irregular nature of the old workings and the rotten nature of
the country, it is very hard to get an exact idea of its mode of


PHOTO. 12.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Mistake Gold Mine, Erlistoun.


B%neygo Li
ases, G.M.Ls. 725 (720),
1313.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
OZS.
1898
85.00
149.48
1.75
1899
100.00
258.93
2.59
1900
612.00
839.97
1.37
1901
157.00
180.11
1.14
1902
1,329.00
1,769.78
1.33
1903
1904
200.00
120.41
.60
1905
200.00
129.31
.65
Total
2,683.00
3,447.99
1.23
occurrence ; the body of granite is o ily of limited extent, as
shown by the other workings, but it is, undoubtedly, to the
presence of this and other similar bodies that the quartz reefs
owe their contorted nature. There is a ten-head battery erected
at the Baneygo, and at the time of my visit it was employed in
crushing a small parcel from a prospecting show about six miles
to the south-east.
Between the Baneygo and Mistake Hill (half-a-mile south-east of
Erlistoun townsite), the country is greenstone schist, mostly flat
and free from the occurrence of hematite-bearing quartz lodes;
the greater part of it is covered with quartz rubble, resulting from
the gradual breaking down of small quartz reefs in the schists ;
several very large quartz reefs occur here, one in particular about
three-quarters of a mile west of Mistake Hill being some 30 feet
in width and outcropping for 5 to 8 chains, and rising in one place
fully 30 or 40 feet above the surrounding country; this, and most
of the other large reefs, runs east and west; it is of white glassy
quartz, and its gold contents appear to be nil.
Mistake Hill is a low rough ridge formed by a wide belt of
banded and, occasionally, hematite-bearing quartz, running on a
bearing slightly west of north, and traceable across country for some
distance. The Mistake mine is situated on the flat about a quarter
of a mile east of this hill; the surrounding country is a greenstone
schist foliated in a general north and south direction.
Mistake, G.M.L. 1414 {Photograph 12). With the exception
of one or two small prospecting shows a few miles to the east, this
was the only property on which any work was being done at the time
of my visit. A large well-defined quartz reef runs through the
lease and the adjoining ones on a bearing slightly east of
north, and is easily traceable on the surface for a distance of nearly
a mile. The reef is somewhat lenticular in form, being as much as
six feet thick in some places and pinching to two in others;
at the south end, in the present workings, it is much smaller and a
good deal broken; most of the work has been done at this end, that


Table showing the Yield
of the Mistake Beef.
Year.
Name and Number of Lease.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
there-
from.
Bate
per
ton.
Total.
Average
rate
per ton*;
Ore
crushed.
Gold
therefrom.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1899
Mistake, G.M.L. 1414 (796)
220-00
15119
•69
1900
Do. do.
596*00
313-24
•52
1901
Do. do.
96-00
52-44
•53
1904
Do. do.
361-00
162-47
•45
1905
Do. do.
273-00
404-26
1-48
1,546-00
1,083-60
•70
1899
Mistake North, G.M.L. 795
293-00
223-02
•76
1900
Do. do.
300-00
156-54
•52
593-00
379-56
-61
1900
Mistake South, G.M.L. 968
72-00
243-99
3*38
1901
Do. do.
33-00
202-13
6-12
105-00
446*12
4*25
Total
2,24400
1,909-28
■88
towards the north end consisting merely of a few opencuts, and
several shafts sunk to about water level; the largest of these
opencuts is some four to five chains in length, and 20 feet in
depth, and shows the reef to be of white laminated quarts,
here about six feet wide, and dipping at an angle of about 45
degrees to the west; farther south the dip is much steeper.
On the Mistake lease the reef is split up a good deal, there
being three distinct lines here near the surface all uniting into one
reef at water level. These reefs are small and irregular, varying from,
a couple of inches to nearly two feet in places ; a considerable amount
of work has been done on these reefs at about the middle of the lease,
where a main vertical shaft has been sunk to a depth of 150 feel,
although most of the work done has been from the 90 feet level to
the surface ; these workings were flooded, and therefore inaccessible
at the time of my visit, and it was impossible to ascertain the extent
of them. Work at the present time is being carried on near the
south end of the block, where the reef has been opened up to water
level (40 feet) for a length of, roughly, 250 feet, and the greater
part of this block sloped out to the surface ; two lines of reef are ex-
posed in these workings, meeting at water level, and of these the
western is the better defined, and it is on this that most of the work
has been done. These reefs are bunchy, and vary from a mere
thread up to 18 inches, the average thickness being about 8
inches, The bunches are not regular and do not carry their size
far, either longitudinally or vertically ; along the water level the
stone is more regular and continuous, but is still small, averaging
from 6to 8 inches. These south workings are apparently right
on the end of the reef, as in a couple of prospecting shafts sunk
two chains farther south no sign of it was found. The country
is a greenstone schist, very soft and rotten down to water level,
and said to be still soft and easy to work at the bottom of the main
shaft (150 feet). Water level is about 40 feet, there being an
abundant supply, but it is salt.
The accompanying plan (Plate D.) shows the positions and
size of the main lines of reef.
The mine is equipped with a ten-head battery.


H.J. Pether, Government Lithographer. Perth. W.A.


Westralia Tasmania (Dwyer and Party).—This is a lease re-
cently pegged exit some three and a-half miles from the Mistake,
and on which, at the time of my visit, prospecting work was being
vigorously carried out on a large white quartz reef running north
and south through a belt of much altered greenstone schist. A
vertical shaft is being put down on this reef and is down to a depth
of about 100 feet, but so far no opening out has been done from
it; the reef as exposed in this shaft is vertical, and about six feet in
thickness, widening out near the bottom to nine feet; it can be traced
on the surface for nearly five chains riorth of this shaft, but is out
off (on the surface) a short distance to the south; about five chains
away in this direction is a large white quartz “ blow ” which is
probably a continuation of the reef.
In sinking the shaft, from two to three feet of stone were taken
from the west side of the reef, and this gave, at the Baneygo battery,
an average return over the plates of 15 dwts.
About three chains west of this reef is a second fair-sized parallel
quartz outcrop, but no work has been done on it, and again a few
chains to the east is a well-defined but smallish reef running north
and south alongside a hematite-bearing quartz lode, and dipping
at an angle of 60 degrees to the east; this reef can be traced on the
surface for about ten chains, and appears to average from one to
two feet; it has been opened up in two places to a depth of from
20 to 30 feet, and in each of these is about 18 inches in width; no
work beyond this has been done on it, neither has any stone been
crushed. The country is greenstone schist foliated north and south,
and traversed by numerous small but persistent hematite-bearing
quartz lodes, these being more numerous on the adjoining block
on the south; in the bottom of the shaft these schists are still very
soft and easily worked, and, so far, there is no sign of water, this
being because the property is situated on high ground.
Since visiting this locality I hear that the owners have aban-
doned this lease; this seems rather a pity, as the reef struck me as
being one which was well worth further prospecting, especially as
the bulk crushing from the shaft gave such satisfactory results.
On the block adjoining this on the south (Cox’s) are a number of
short lenticular quartz reefs running alongside the hematite-bearing
lodes (“ ironstone bars ”), and a little work has been done on a couple
of these. One lens two to three feet wide at the surface was worked
for a length of about 30 feet and to a depth of about 20 feet, at which
point it cut out on the side of the “ bar,” which was then followed
down for another 50 feet, but without meeting with the reef again.
A second lens a little farther south on the same bar was then opened,
up ; there is here two to three feet of stone but so far very little
work has been done on it. The “ ironstone bars ” on this lease are
fairly numerous, but they are considerably faulted and contorted,
and the quartz lenses are, as a rule, very irregular and of no length,
and, though a few small parcels of stone may be taken out of them,
they are not likely to prove of any permanency.


Duketon.
(With a Map showing the position of the Auriferous Reefs. Plate V .)
From Erlistoun to Duketon the road passes for the whole
distance over country which is almost, without exception, dead level,
and covered with a considerable thickness of recent deposits, anil
pretty thickly timbered' with mulga, often of fair size. Owing to
the thickness of these deposits, it is impossible to determine what
the staple formation is, but.it appears to be greenstone, though
about six miles from Duketon there is a small outcrop of schists
apparently, similar to the granitic schists occurring at that place. '
At Duketon the country is all dead level, and mostly devoid of
rock outcrops except at Pinjie Eda Hill, about two miles south of the
townsite, where there is a low ridge of hills trending southerly for a
mile or so, and consisting of a fairly soft and weathered granitic
schist, the lines of foliation of which strike about north-north-west
and dip to the west.
This is the only reck outcrop of any importance in the
neighbourhood, and the country in the vicinity of the workings is.
so decomposed and rotten that it is very difficult to form a definite
opinion as to what it really is, but it seems to me that the main line
of reefs is situated along the junction of granitic and greenstone
schists, being sometimes in the former and sometimes in the latter.
The country west from here, and out towards Mulga Queen,
consists of granitic schists, while to the eastwards are the greenstones
extending for about six miles, when they give place to sand-plains
which overlie the main eastern granite belt and extend inland for
at least fifty or sixty miles. The junction of these two formations
(the granitic and greenstone schists) runs on a bearing slightly west
of north and oast of south, and, though it is hidden beneath the
covering of recent deposits, is approximately indicated by a series of
very regular quartz reefs and by the workings on these reefs; these
reefs have been followed for a distance of about five miles in a broken
line, the greatest length of actual outcrop followed being from three
quarters to one mile at the north end, and the greatest break in the
line being about a mile; further systematic prospecting would
probably reveal other reefs along this line, as they are almost entirely
hidden beneath the surface covering and are undoubtedly more-
nearly continuous than shown by present developments. Most of
the principal mines are situated along this line of reef, but there are
other reefs in the schists, mostly small, and the greater part of the,
country is covered with quartz rubble, resulting from the gradual
breaking down of quartz reefs and leaders.
At the time of my visit very little work was being done in this
district, and most of the properties had been abandoned, principally
owing to the fact that they were all low-grade and would not pay to
work below -water level, this, in some parts of the district being not


FIG. 7.


jnore than 12 feet below the surface ; the only properties in fact
that were actually carrying on active mining operations at Duketon,
were the Golden Spinifex (Lauriston), Rose of Persia, and the
Wallaroo ; others on which a good deal of work has been done in the
past but which are now abandoned, are the Monowai, Water Melon,
and Morialta ; all these are on reefs following along the main junction
of the granitic schists and the greenstones. One or two other
properties have also been worked a few miles to the westward but
these had all been abandoned for some time, and the workings were
inaccessible.
The Mines.
Monowai, G.M.L. 810.—This lease is situated at the extreme
south end of the main line and is said to have been one of the first
leases worked in the district, it was originally equipped with a ten-
head battery, and a lot of work was done on it, but it is abandoned
at the present time.
The reef has been proved through this lease and the adjoining
ones to the north for a length of over half-a-mile, and what are possible
continuations of it have been picked up for another half-mile : it
runs on a bearing slightly west of north and dips at a steep angle to
the westward ; as exposed in a small opencut it is about two feet in
thickness, and this appears to have been about its average size. The
country in which the reef is found is a very decomposed and altered
greenstone schist, but the granitic schists appear to come in a couple
of chains farther west, while about half-a-mile north from here they
are found forming the walls of what is probably the continuation of
this same reef. The water level on this south block is 65 feet, but
it gradually becomes shallower, proceeding northward.
Rose of Persia, G.M.L. 1447.—1 n this lease the reef appears
to be following right along the junction of the granitic schists with
the greenstones, but no crosscutting has been done, and the country
in close proximity to the reef is so rotten and altered that it is very
hard to say what some of it is ; the reef is rather bunchy, reaching a
thickness of nearly six feet in one or two places, the average right
through the workings being, however, about two feet; these big
makes of stone are, as a rule, poorer than the smaller portions of the
reef. The length of reef, or rather reefs, as there are two at the north
end a few feet apart, proved on the surface in this and the adjoining
leases is about thirty chains and, as can be seen by reference to the
accompanying plan (Plate V.), it runs a little west of north and is in
direct line with the Monowai and Golden Spinifex reefs; its dip is here
about 75 to 80 degrees to the east. The accompanying sketch (Fig. 6)
shows roughly the extent of the principal workings on the lease, and
in addition to this there has been a little work done from a shaft
about five chains farther north. The stone in the main workings


Rose of Persia , G.M.L. 1447.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1903
133.00
198.68
1.49
1904
197.00
263.62
1.34
1905
106.50
81.15
.76
Total
436-50
543.45
1.24
is not uniform in value and the shoots are not regular, but they all
have a decided pitch to the south. Water level is about 63 feet, and
the supply is fresh and drinkable, this being the case all through the
district.
Golden Spinifex and Lauriston, G.M.Ls. 1046, 1049.
(. Photographs 13 and 14). —These leases, which were originally worked
as separate properties, are now amalgamated, and all work is being-
done on the Lauriston lease, A main vertical shaft has been sunk
on this lease to a depth of 140 feet, and at the present time driving
is being carried on along the reef at the 120 feet level; a good deal of
work has been done above this, but the bottom level was the only
one from which any work was being done at the time rf my visit ;
the reef, as exposed along this drive, averages about 18 inches in
width, being somewhat bunchy ; in one place at the north end of
the drive it is about five feet, but its values here are no good. Two
other parallel makes of stone were cut in the crosscut from the shaft
a few feet from the main line, these, however, were no good where
cut, and no further work has been done upon them ; the values of
the main reef were not very good in the bottom level, the best being
obtained at the south end, where it is expected that the Spinifex
slioot will shortly be met with. Throughout the old workings the
average size of the reef was about two feet, some bunches up to eight
and nine feet being met with in the Spinifex lease ; these, however,,
were as a rule, not much good, the best values being obtained in the
smaller parts‘of the reef ; the quartz is clean and white, and in places,
is strongly laminated. Down to the 30 feet level the reef dips to
the east, but below this it takes a turn, and in the bottom workings-
is, if anything, dipping to the west; it nowdiere comes to the surface
on these leases, being covered by a deposit of surface “ cement," vary-
ing in thickness from 10 to 15 feet; the general trend of it, like all
the others on this line, is about north-north-west.
On the Spinifex lease a lot of work has been done, and a block
about 500 feet in length has been taken out from the 60 feet level
to the surface, in addition to which two vertical shafts were sunk
to depths of 95 and 145 feet respectively, both of which were lost in
the soft “ running ” ground met with below water ; all these work-


PHOTO. 13.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Lauriston Gold Mine, Duketon.


PHOTO. 14.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Golden Spinifex Battery, Duketon.


Table showing the yield of the Golden, Spinifex
Beef.
Year.
Name and Number of Lease.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
there-
from.
Rate
per
ton.
T
Ore
crushed.
□tal.
Gold
therefrom.
.
Average
rate
per
ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1901
Golden Spinifex, G.M.L. 1046
110-00
200.40
1-82
1903
Do. do.
776-00
494-70
•63
1904
Do. do.
1,405-00
785-73
•55
1905
Do. do.
324-00
246-04
•72
—
2,61500
1,726-87
*66
1901
Lauriston, G.M.L. 1049
75*00
61-45
0-81
1903
Do. do.
22500
43407
1-92
1904
Do. do.
272-00
327-10
1*20
1905
Do. do.
22-00
22-91
1-04
594-00
845 53
1-42
Total
3,209'00
2,572-40
•80
ings were inaccessible. The reef in these leases is in granitic schists
and runs parallel to their foliation, which is, however, not very
strongly marked; these schists are very soft and rotten, especially
at and a little below water level ; and in some places below water
owing to the large development of kaolin the country “ runs " very
considerably, and this, as above stated, has caused the loss of two
main shafts on the Spinifex lease, and also necessitates the use of
heavy timbering in the workings. The natural water level is about
30 feet, the supply being fresh and suitable for domestic purposes ;
at the present time it is being pumped from the 1 20 feet level on the
Lauriston at the rate of 5,000 gallons per 24 hours.
Wallaroo, G.M.L. 1455.—This property is situated about a
mile and a-half north-north-west of the Lauriston, and is apparently
also on or close to the junction of the granitic schists with the green-
stones, though in this case the reef itself is well within the green-
stones ; it has been opened up to a depth of 65 feet, and a block about
1)0 feet in length has been taken out between this level and the sur-
face, or rather, between this and the bottom of the “ cement” which
covers the country round here to a depth of about 12 feet. Over
this block the reef is said to have averaged about two feet; in the south
face of the bottom drive it is nearly six feet and of pretty fair grade,
while in the north face it is about two feet; the quartz is clean and
white, and in places shows considerable lamination; it is crossed every
few feet by a series of joints or “ floors ” which cut off the gold con-
tents, the usual habit being, it is said, alternate makes of good and
poor stone, these being defined by the above-mentioned floors. In
the bottom level a good deal of sulphide is coming into the stone and
in a short winze sunk from this level it is said to be pretty heavy.
The country is a very soft, rotten greenstone schist foliated
parallel to the strike of the reef, which is between north-west and
north ; water is very abundant and comes in principally along the
walls of the reef; its original level was from 13 to 14 feet.


W allaroo, G.M.L
1455.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1904
77.00
155.93
2.02
1905
485.00
213.24
.44
Total
562 00
369.17
.65
Table showing the Yield of the Morialta Reef.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
Rate
Total.
Areragi
tate
per ton
Year.
Name and Number of Lease.
there-
from.
per
ton.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
therefrom.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
tons.
fine ozs.
OZB.
1903
1904
Morialta, G.M.L. 1236
Do. do.
300.00
163.00
275.95
228.00
.92
1.40
463.00
179.00
503.95
135.59
I
1903
1904
Water Melon, G.M.L. 1451
Do. do.
105X0
74.00
71.68
63.91
.68
.86
*
Total
642.00
639.54
4
Morialta and Water Melon, G.M.Ls. 1236, 1451. —These
leases are situated at the extreme north end of the line, and a good
deal of work has been done upon them in the past, though they are
both at present abandoned. The reef is traceable on these and the
adjoining blocks for a distance of about half-a-mile ; at its south end
it is in greenstone schists and at its north in granitic schists ; at this
end there are two well-defined parallel reefs about two chains apart,
both apparently in the granitic schists. The main line of reef appears
to have had an average thickness of about three feet, though, like
all those on this fine, it is somewhat bunchy, being in some places
as much as six feet, and in others again down to not more than one.
None of the workings were accessible owing to their being flooded,
the water level being only about twelve feet below the surface ; this
fact naturally greatly handicaps the prospector at this end of the
field, more especially as there is frequently as much as ten or twelve
feet of “ cement ” overlying the cap of the reef, which is thus placed
right at or close to water level, and pumping has to be resorted to
before any stone at all can be taken out. The water is fresh and
suitable for domestic purposes.


H. J. Pether. Government Lithographer, Perth. W.A.


Mulga Queen.
(With a plan showing the position of the Mulga Queen Reefs,
Plan E.)
From Duketon to Mulga Queen the country is practically
all dead level and covered with a varying thickness of recent deposits,
the only rock outcrops of any extent being at Inji Jingi Hill and at
Mount Maiden ; both these outcrops are very much weathered
and altered, but at both places the rock appears to be a granitic
schist. Mount Maiden is a large flat-topped hill 80 to 100 feet in
height and half-a-mile or so in length, trending about north-west,
and formed of very much weathered granitic schists capped by a
few feet of hard compact quartzite and quartz conglomerate, this
latter being only of limited extent; both these (the quartzite and
conglomerate) are undoubtedly formed in situ, the former being
merely a local concentration of silica from the decomposition of the
underlying schists, and the latter a cementing together of the quartz
rubble with which the hill and the greater part of the country are
thickly covered, the cementing material being the fine-grained
quartzite. This quartz rubble undoubtedly owes its origin to the
gradual breaking down and weathering of small quartz reefs in
the schists, both may be described as residual deposits.
At Mulga Queen the country is a greenstone schist, the junc-
tion of this with the granitic schists being apparently between Mount
Maiden and the townsite and in the near neighbourhood of the Famous
Blue mine. Everywhere the rocks are very rotten and decomposed
as far as opened up, and as the granitic schists are mostly fine-grained,
it is very difficult to discriminate between the two classes owing
to the amount of alteration and kaolinisation which has gone on
in each of them.
Quartz reefs occur in both classes of rock, and are, as a rule,
of fair size, but somewhat irregular and lenticular, this being a
characteristic of nearly all the reefs in the Erlistoun district. Taking
the district all through the reefs are essentially low-grade, and when
the stone has to be carted six or ten miles to the battery there is
not much profit left in it for the prospector.
The water level varies from 40 to 70 feet, the supply being in-
variably fresh and suitable for domestic purposes.
Good timber is fairly abundant, mulga of good size being obtain-
able anywhere, while white gum of good quality can be obtained
from Erlistoun Creek, six to eight miles distant.
This centre is of comparatively recent discovery, and mining
operations and btisiness matters generally were pretty brisk at the
time of my visit. The principal mine is the Mulga Queen, from
which the town takes its name; this property is equipped with
a ten-head mill, rock breakers, cyanide plant, and all accessories,
and was the first mine in the district to erect machinery.
61


Midga Queen, G.M.Ls. 1517, 1550.
Year.
Ore crushed-
Gold therefrom.
Kate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1904
2,910.00
2,560.48
.88
1905
2,117.00
1,811.86
.85
Total
•
5,027.00
4,372.34
.86
The Mines.
The following is a brief description of such of the mines us were
working at the time of my visit :
Mulga Queen, G.M.L. 1517, (Photograph 15). Situated from
half to three quarters of a mile west-north-west of the township.
A good deal of work has been done here, as can be seen from the
accompanying sketch section of the main workings. The reef, which
has been proved through this and the adjoining north block (Plate
E), for a distance of over half-a-mile, runs On a bearing of 525 de-
grees, and at the main shaft dips at an angle of about 30 degrees
to the south-west (Fig. 7); both to the north and south of this its
dip is considerably steeper; taking it right through, it is pretty
regular in size, averaging about two feet; it is somewhat lenticular,
but this is not so marked as in some of the reefs in this district, the
biggest bunch being only about four feet, while it seldom goes below
one foot; in one or two places towards the south end it is a little
broken, where it appears to have gone through a harder belt of
country, but this is only for a few feet. The stone carries a fair
amount of sulphide at the north end close to the surface, but through-
out the main workings there is little or none, though the stone is
a good deal ironstained, and there are numerous vughs from which
the sulphide has been leached out, these often showing fine gold
on the walls. As a rule the gold is well in the stone and very fine,
and the values of the reef so far have been fairly uniform right along
its entire length. The country rock is a foliated coarse-grained
greenstone with a little schist along the walls of the reef; it is very
soft and rotten even in the bottom workings.
Water level is 69 feet, and the supply is fairly plentiful; it is
fresh and makes good boiler and cyanide water.
Mulga Queen No. 1 South, G.M.L. 1522.—The main work-
ings on this property are situated on what is possibly the south-
easterly continuation of the Mulga Queen reef, though there appears
to be a considerable break in it in the intervening lease. Here
(Mulga Queen No. 1 South) the reef is somewhat more irregular
and lenticular, and, on the average, is slightly smaller, being only
about eighteen inches; as far as it was possible to see in the old
62


PHOTO. 15.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., G. Gr. Gibson. Govt. Photo . Litho .
Mulga Queen Gold Mine, Mulga Queen.


PHOTO. 16.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Famous Blue Gold Mine, Mulga Queen.


Mulga Queen No. 1 South,
G.M.L. 1522.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1905
472.50
351.31
• 74
workings it seems to consist of a series of long lenses of various
depths, the beginning of each lens lying on the hanging wall of the
“ tail ” of the one above it, as shown in the accompanying diagram
(Fig. 8); this lenticular habit appears to be only vertical and not
longitudinal; the quartz is white and glassy, and, so far, free from
sulphides. The general strike of the reef is 320 degrees, and its dip
about 45 degrees to the south-west; it has been proved for a length
of about fifteen chains, and may continue northerly for some dis-
tance farther; at the south end it appears to have out out com-
pletely.
A good deal of work has been done on the lease, and several
shafts have been put down to water level (40 feet) and the reef
opened up for a length of about 450 feet at this level, and the greater
part of this block stoped out to the surface. At the present time
the owners are putting down a main vertical shaft, and have started
to crosscut to cut the reef at 100 feet.
The country here is very soft and rotten, and consists of a fine-
grained much kaolinised greenstone (?), which is difficult to work
in below water owing to its running nature, and necessitates heavy
timbering.
The greater part of the eastern portion of this lease is covered
to a depth of twelve to fourteen feet with a fine-grained quartzite
similar to that forming the capping of Mount Maiden ; this probably
is overlying an area of granitic rocks ; the remainder of the lease,
and, in fact, the whole of the country round about, is covered with
the ordinary surface “ cement ” to a depth of ten to fifteen feet.
Famous Blue, (I.M.L. 1509 (Photograph 16). —Several lines
of reef run through this property (Plate F.), but only one of them
is being worked, this being a large well- defined quartz reef running
about north-north-west, and dipping at a fairly flat angle to the
eastward. As seen on the workings this reef has an average thick-
ness of about four feet, but is somewhat irregular, varying from
a minimum of 18 inches to a maximum of from 6to 7 feet; it con-
sists of a series of overlapping lenses coming in in the hanging wall,
and having an average length of about 100 feet and pitching at
a very flat angle to the south. The quartz is white and glassy, and
the gold in it is very fine, occurring principally in vughs left by
the oxidisation and leaching out of pyrites. The average size of the reef


Famous Blue , G.M.L. 1509.
ifear.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Rate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1904
55.00
66.10
1.20
1905
2,357.10
1,303.06
.55
Total
2,412.10
1,369.16
.57
along the bottom level and the amount of work done on it can be
seen from the accompanying diagrams (Fig. 9). This reef is in a foliated
and highly decomposed greenstone, apparently close to its junction
with what appears to be a belt of granitic schists extending easterly.
Several other quartz outcrops occur in these schists a few chains
east of the main line; som 3of these are of considerable size but
no length ; they run slightly more westerly than the main line,
and one near the main shaft runs almost due east and west; these
large outcrops appear to be merely surface makes, as a vertical shaft
has been put down near the largest of them and a crosscut put in
under it wi hout cutting anything. Near the eastern boundary
of the lease is a better defined reef running approximately parallel
to the main shaft; it is, however, comparatively smell, and no work
of any description has been done upon it.
In the main reef some very rich stone was taken out from a
large open cut; this shoot however has apparently cut out; the
stone in the bottom level is somewhat patchy, some being very good
and some the reverse ; the shoots are smill and not regular.
Water was struck at 78 feet (v.d.), and is fresh.
On the adjoining block on the north a little work has been
done on the same reef, which here averages about four feet in thick-
ness and has the same properties as in the main workings. It
probably extends a good deal farther northwards, but is hidden
beneath the recent deposits.
This property is equipped with a Huntingdon mill and rock
breakers.
Famous, G.M.L. 1508. — A large irregular quartz reef runs
through this property on a bearing slightly west of north, dipping
at an angle of about 30 degrees to the west, and appears to be along
or close to the junction of the greenstones with the granitic schists.
Very little work has been done on it, and not much can be seen
on the surface owing to the covering of recent deposits. The old
workings are down to about forty feet, and the reef bas been worked
out in an irregular way down to this level for a length of about fifty
feet; very little could be seen, but in the faces the average of the
64


H.J. Pether. Government Lithographer. Perth. W.A


H.J. Pether. Government Lithographer. Perth. W.A.


FIG. 8.
CROSS SECTION SHEWING MODE OF OCCURRENCE OF REEF ON MULGA QUEEN NO 15TH G.M.L 1522
FIG. 9.


Famous, G.M.L. 1508.
Year.
Ore crushed.
Gold therefrom.
Uate per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
1904
20.00
54.95
2.75
1905
89.00
231.68
2.60
Total
109.00
286.63
2-63
reef was about three feet, the stone being white and glassy, some
of .it showing coarse gold; some pockets of very rich stone were
taken out of these workings, and the whole of it is said to be of pretty
fair grade; only picked stone was crushed however.
The present owners are at present sinking a new main shaft
and are crosscutting at the 100 feet level to meet the reef, and if
developments are then satisfactory it is their intention to erect
machinery.
About half-a-mile east of the Famous, a small party of men
are engaged in dryblowing, this being the only alluvial patch worked
in the district, with the exception of Frost and Baker’s patch eight
miles south-east; there is only a very small area of pay dirt, and very
little gold is being got, the biggest piece so far being about 14 dwts.
There is from 6 to 10 inches of dirt before reaching bottom; the
gold appears to be shed from small quartz leaders which run through
the country in all directions, and probably occurs principally at
the points of intersection of these. The whole locality is covered
with quartz rubble resulting from the gradual breaking down of
similar and larger quartz reefs, and there seems no reason why other
and larger alluvial patches should not be found in this locality.
There are several other shows in addition to those mentioned
working in the district, principally in the neighbourhood of
Erlistoun Creek, some of which are said to be looking very well,
and altogether at the time of my visit the place seemed very
flourishing, which is more than could be said of the rest of the
Erlistoun district.


Name and Number of Lease.
Ore
crushed.
Gold
therefrom.
, Hate
j per ton.
tons.
fine ozs.
ozs.
Al, G.M.L. 152It
46.00
54.48
1.18
Baneyg-o Leases, G.M.Ls. 725t (720t), 1313t
2,683.00
3,447.99
1.28
Battler, G.M.L. 159 It
35.00
35.92
1.02
Battlers, G.M.L. 1409t
212.00
454.06
2.14
Ballantraye, G.M.L. 1599t ..
44.00
30.36
.69
Bungarra, G.M.L. 1480t
39.00
292.72
7.51
Caledonia Leases, G.M.Ls. 1300t, 1322t ..
1,000.00
1,559.07
1.56
City of Auckland, G.M.L. 1450t ..
43.00
139.95
3.25
Commonwealth, G.M.L. 1627t
83.00
24.50
.29
Connemarra, G.M.L. 1552t
96.50
29.91
.31
Crescent, G.M.L. 754t
4.00
*66.03
—
Easter Gift, G.M.L. 961t
50.00
35.27
.70
Erlistoun Proprietary, G.M.L. 543t
Erlistouu Proprietary G.M. Co., G.M.Ls.
80.00
84.50
1.56
795x (796t, 1185T)
1,138.00
641.36
.56
Erlistoun Queen, G.M.L. 1583t
4.50
11.55
2.56
Ethel, G.M.L. 15G8t
23.00
31.87
1.38
Eureka Eeward, G.M.L. 1594t
31.00
9.70
.31
Famous, G.M.L.
109.00
286.63
2.63
Famous Blue, G.M.L. 1509
2,412.10
1,369.16
.57
Germania, G.M.L. 1660t
102.50
83.90
.81
Gladys, G.M.L. 1539t (762t)
42.25
72.04
1.70
Golden Boulder, G.M.L. 732t
23.00
55.94
2.93
Golden Spinifex, G.M.L, 1046t
2,615.00
1,726.87
.66
Golden Star, G.M.L. 1533t
20.00
8.57
.42
Idaho, G.M.L. 726t
97.00
121.73
2.25
King of Creation, G.M.L. 1382t ..
143.00
95.22
.66
King of Erlistoun, G.M.L. 797t ..
104.00
78.60
.75
Lanriston, G.M.L. 1049t
594.00
845.53
1.42
Lady Bella, G.M.L.-1460t
55.00
41.38
.75
Lady Ethel. G.M.L. 1355t
53.00
57.25
1.08
Little Dorris, G.M.L. 771t
849.00
1,204.67
1.41
Marmont, G.M.L. 1491t
60.50
17.62
.29
Mount Maiden Reward, G.M.L. 1432t ..
376.50
171.65
.45
Mistake, G.M.L. 1414t
1,546.00
1,083.60
.70
Mistake North, G.M.L. 795t
593.00
379.56
.64
Mistake South, G.M.L. 968t
106.00
446.12
4.25
Morialta, G.M.L. 1236t
463.00
503.95
1.08
Mulga Queen, G.M.Ls. 1517t, 1550t
5,027.00
4,372.34
.86
Mulga Queen No. 1 South, G.M.L. 1o22t
472.50
351.31
.74
O’Connor’s Howard, G.M.L. 1510t
39.50
45.28
1.14
Parramatta, G.M.L. 1684t
35.00
38.66
1.10
Perseverance, G.M.L. 1593t
116.50
71.19
.61
Reccaboni, G.M.L. 1643t
24.00
43.33
1.8P
Rosa Kathleen, G.M.L. 1241t
87.00
80.29
.92
Rose of Persia, G.M.L. 1447t
436.50
543.45
1.24
Rose of Persia No. 1 South, G.M.L. 1516t
18.00
15.50
.86
Ruby, G.M.L. 1611t
Salt Bush Eeward, R.C. 5t
97.50
55.18
f 22'95
. 56
Spes Unica, G.M.L. 1391t ..
58.00
27.18
.46
Sweet Nell, G.M.L, 1537t
51.50
t 161.08
—
Sydney Mint, G.M.L. 144t
31.00
59.84
1.93
Two Jims, G.M.L. 976t
8.00
22.82
2.85
Wallaroo, G.M.L. 1455t
562.00
.369.17
.65
Watermelon, G.M.L. 1451
179.00
135.59
.75
Sundry Claims
Duketon State Battery
451.90
448.09
§ 24.60
.99
District generally
t 1,099.43
Total
i
23,66975
1122,485.08
.95
•Includes 45.96ozs. dollied and specimens. f Alluvial. tIncludes 56.92ozs.
dollied and specimens. §By cyanide. H Exclusive of alluvial.
The following Table, compiled from the official statistics, shows
the total gold Returns from the leases in the Erlistoun district, up
to the end of 1905:


Cosmo Newberry Ranges.
Frontispiece.)
The track to the Cosmo Newberry Ranges leaves the main
Laverton to Duketon road at a point about half-a-mile north of
Kirkpatrick’s Well and runs almost due east from point for
about 45 miles until the Ranges are reached. For the first two
or three miles, the country consists of greenstone ridges covered
with ironstone conglomerate, then red loamy plains covered with
a heavy growth of mulga, these continuing for another three miles,
when the main body of granite makes its appearance and runs
continuously out to the ranges, the greater part of it being
covered by sand plains and spinifex, the granite outcropping
through these occasionally as low rough ridges and -‘breakaways.”
As shown on the latest issue of the Lands Department’s State
Map, these ranges are situated about 60 miles to the north-east of
Laverton townsite. They consist of a series of low hills and ridges
trending in a general north-north-west and south-south-east
direction, and having a maximum length of about ten miles, and a
breadth of from three to five miles. At their south end they split
into two distinct arms, the more westerly of which runs nearly
north and south, and extends several miles farther south than
the other. Surrounding this belt of hills on all sides are extensive
sand plains covered with spinifex, these being the remains of an
old granite tableland. The rocks forming the hills themselves
consist of massive and foliated greenstones of the type usually
found on the Eastern goldfields; intruded into them are dykes and
masses of acidic rooks, which vary from a typical coarse-grained
granite to fine compact quartzites and felsites. At Split Rock,
which is situated near the western limit of the ranges, there is a
considerable extent of granitic rocks outcropping over an area of
about a square mile and apparently entirely surrounded by the
greenstones, which, however, are for the most part hidden to the
westward by a shallow depth of recent detrital deposits. This body
of granite dies out about thirty chains north of Split Rook, but a
series of acidic dykes run on in a general northerly direction for
two or three miles, gradually becoming fewer as they go north.
These dykes are found running in all directions, though their more
usual trend is roughly north and south; they vary in thickness
from a few feet to over a chain. The greenstones are as a rule con-
siderably foliated close to their junction with them, the foliation
being parallel to the trend of the dykes; quartz veins and masses
are often associated with them, occurring along their junction with
the schists, they are, however, seldom of any great size or regu-
larity.
From Split Rock to t.ie Government Well—a line across about
the centre of the ranges —a traverse shows the granite extending for
67


about a mile, then hali-a-mile of greenstone schists intersected by
numerous granitic dykes, and then massive and foliated greenstones
extending to the well, where the schists make their appearance again
and continue for half-a-mile or so to the junction with the main
eastern body of granite. This eastern junction runs very regularly
on a bearing almost due north-north-west and south-south-east, the
granite, however, only outcropping here and there over small areas,
being for the most part hidden beneath sand plains resulting from
its gradual weathering.
About four miles west of the well is what is known as the ‘ kind, *
this being the first (?) lease worked in this district. The country
here consists of foliated greenstones intersected by a few granitic
dykes, these being the northern end of the series extending up from
Split Rock. Northwards from this line —from the well to the Find—
the hills extend for three or four miles, the rocks being mostly massive
whilst the acidic dykes are few and far between. The greater part
of the hills and ridges over this area are capped with ironstone con-
glomerate, this being especially the case on the eastern side of the
ranges. South from the same line, there are no deposits of this
conglomerate, the rocks outcropping on the surface and being very
hard and -practically unweathered.
In addition to the acidic dykes, a few basic (diabase) dykes
intersect the greenstones, one of these towards the southern end of
the hills being upwards of a chain in width, and traceable in a north
west and south-east direction for over a mile. The greenstones on
the whole at the south end of the ranges are more massive than those
at the north, and are also intersected by a number of acidic dykes,
these usually being a very fine-grained felsite, and on the surface
often having very much the appearance of quartz reefs.
Throughout the greenstone area occur numerous quartz reefs;
these are for the most part small and very irregular, they are found
principally in the schists, in which they occur as lenticular gashes,
or series of gashes, running with the foliation and having no defined
course and seldom any great length, though occasionally the lenses
are of considerable width. The quartz, as a rule, is white and glassy
and generally very low in gold contents, although some of the smaller
leaders occasionally carry good values. Quartz reefs and masses
also often occur in association with the acidic dykes, being usually
found along the junction of these latter with the greenstones; they
are often of considerable thickness, but are very irregular and seldom
extend for more than two or three chains in length, and their gold
contents, as far as it was possible to test them, are generally from
nil to a little better than traces. The district appears to have been
pretty well prospected, and almost every quartz reef in the place bears
marks of the pick.
68


Several leases have been pegged out and applied for at did'erent
times, but so far no applications have been approved, and with one
or two exceptions little or no work has been done on them, neither
has any stone been crushed, nor were any of them being worked at
the time of my visit. The following, however, is a brief description
of the class of deposit on those leases on which any work at all had,
been done.
About twenty chains west of Split Rock, several potholes have
been put down on a line of reef running on a bearing of about 350
degrees, and apparently dipping steeply to the eastward; these
potholes, the deepest of which is only four or five feet, show the reef
to consist of white glassy quartz which is strongly laminated; it is
about four feet in thickness at the south end and about two at the
north, and can be followed in a very regular line for about fifteen
chains; it is in a narrow belt of greenstone schist which is enclosed
between tw r o acidic dykes and runs parallel to the foliation of the
schists. It is about the best defined and most regular reef (on the
surface) seen in the district, but is too low grade to pay under existing
conditions. A number of samples were taken by myself, and these
gave by dish assay results varying from traces to two or three dwts.
Some sixty chains north-north-west from Split Rook a little
work has been done on a lease which I was informed had been pegged
and applied for under the name of the Kensington. The country
here consists of greenstone schists intersected by numerous granitic
dykes and masses and is very hard right on the surface ; several
fair sized irregular lenses of quartz occur alongside these dykes but
appear to be of no value ; several small quartz leaders also occur in
the greenstone schists, and on one of these, occurring in a narrow
belt of the schists, a little work has been done. This work consists
of two or three potholes sunk to a depth of a few feet, which show the
leader to be of an average thickness of about two inches, varying
from a mere thread up to five or six inches at its biggest, and running
with the foliation of the schists and dipping with them at a steep
angle to the eastward ; it can be followed on the surface in a not too
regular course for only about two chains and, as the best results
obtained from it by dish assay were about thirty dwts., some of the
samples giving but little better than traces, I do not think it is likely
to prove of much value under present conditions, more especially
as, from its mode of occurrence, it is likely to cut out at any minute.
Four miles west of the well and about three and a-half miles
north-north-west from Split Rock are the leases recently held under
option by the Curzon’s Syndicate, but at present lying idle. These
comprise two twenty-four acre blocks, the Cosmo and the Lord
Kitchener, on both of wfifch a little work has been done. The
country is mostly greenstone schists intersected by numerous granitic
69


dykes, these being more numerous in the southern block. On the
north block, a vertical shaft has been sunk to a depth of
thirty feet on a couple of quartz leaders, two or three feet apart ;
these, as seen in the shaft, are from 8 to 12 inches in thickness, and
run about vertically ; the quartz is white and glassy, and a series of
•amples taken by myself gave by dish assay results varying from
traces up to ten or twelve dwts. ; these not being good enough to
render the proposition a payable one under existing conditions.
These leaders run about north-west and south-east, and are only
traceable for a short distance on the surface ; they appear to me to
be merely the fillings of small gashes in the greenstone schists and
not likely to be permanent in depth. About half-a-chain east of the
shaft is the outcrop of a large white quartz reef running about north
and south; this reef is traceable on the surface for a distance of
about twenty chains, but is somewhat irregular, and to the south is
broken here and there by intrusive granite dykes ; its gold contents,
as far as tested, appear to be nil.
On the adjoining block on the south several potholes have been
put down on a quartz leader which appears to be following the
junction of a granite dyke with the greenstone schists, and is trace-
able on the surface for a distance of about two chains. At the north
end, a hole has been sunk on it to a depth of about twelve feet ex-
posing a reef twelve inches wide of white glassy hungry-looking
quartz, while about a chain to the south of this, a second hole shows
it to have pinched to a mere thread. Several samples were taken
from it and the best of them only gave results equal to a few dwts.,
whilst others never gave a trace of gold. The country here is very
hard right to the surface, and in view of this fact these small leaders
would have to be exceptionally rich to pay to work, especially with
the nearest battery forty-five miles away.
There are also one or two other reefs in the locality on which
a pothole or two have been put down, but the above are the most
important.
Taking the district all through, the reefs are, generally speaking,
small and irregular, and so far the best of them have not proved of
sufficient size or value to pay for working, and moreover, I am of
opinion that very few of them would prove so even under the most
favourable conditions.
As regards the water supply of the district, there is a Government
well on the eastern side of the range, the supply from which is, how-
ever, very limited, and during the dry season is not more than t wenty
gallons a day ; the well, in order to be of any permanent use, requires
to be sunk another twenty feet. Three miles south-south-east from
tins well is a good soak in a small creek running eastward through
the hills; judging by its appearance at the time of my visit, after a
protracted dry season, this soak should be, if not drawn too heavily
70


upon, practically permanent; we were compelled to resort to it to
water our darnels during our stay at the Range as there was not a
sufficient supply in the well for our own use and theirs. In addition
to these supplies, there is a large rock-hole at Split Rock which is
capable of holding several hundreds of gallons, and which lasts for
some weeks after rains.
There is also a second Government well on the road out, about
twenty miles from Kirkpatrick’s; this well, a shallow one, had a
good supply of water in it at the time of my visit—there had been
good rains a few months before—but is said to occasionally give out-
after a prolonged dry season.
The Country at Mount Shenton and
Mount Venn.
Mount Shenton, situated about eighty miles slightly to the east
of north-east of Laverton, and thirty miles east of the Cosmo Newberry
Ranges, forms the highest point of a range of hills running nearly
north and - south for several miles and rising abruptly out of the
sand plains which surround them on all sides. The main axis of this
range is formed by a large belt of hematite-bearing quartz often a
chain or more in width and dipping at an angle of about GO degrees
to the east; this is often considerably contorted and foliated and
varies a good deal in its composition, parts of it being almost free
from iron, whilst others again appear to be exceptionally rich. The
surrounding rock is greenstone schist, and appears to be a crushed
and altered quartz diorite.
The full extent of the range is some three miles in length by
about half-a-mile in width, the highest point being roughly 250 feet
above the surrounding sand plains. The southerly extension of the
belt is Mount Grant, a large hill some 250 feet in height about three
miles south to south-east of Mount Shenton, formed by a similar belt
of hematite-bearing quartz a chain or more in width and dipping at
an angle of about 60 degrees to the east ; intermediate between the
two hills, the belt outcrops in one or two places in the form of low
hills and is apparently continuous right along, though the greater
part of it is hidden beneath the sand plains.
There appear to be no quartz reefs in the Mount Shenton green*
stones, neither are there any associated with the main hematite-
bearing quartz lode, and this, as far as tested, appears to be practically
free from gold.
71


Eastward from Mount Shenton, the sand plains continue for a
distance of about three miles when there is a fairly extensive outcrop
of granite, the plains then extending on eastward indefinitely ; this
outcrop is in the form of low bare hills and ridges, the general trend
of which is about south-south-east and which extend almost con-
tinuously to the neighbourhood of Mount Venn, where there is a
much more extensive development of them than at the north end.
This granite is a coarse-grained pink coloured variety and appears
to be newer than and intrusive into the main body of granite which
occupies the greater portion of the eastern half of this State, and the
denudation of which has resulted in the formation of the great sandy
tablelands of the interior; there is, however, no direct evidence on
this point either one way or the other, but there is, near Mount Grant,
a considerable area of granite porphyry which appears to be closely
allied to this body of granite, and which is undoubtedly newer than
both the main body of granite and the greenstones.
These granite hills form the eastern boundary of the green-
stone ranges of which Mount Grant and Mount Venn are the highest
points, the generaj trend of this junction being about south to south-
east ; the hills, however, die out just before Mount Venn is reached
and give place to sand plains extending easterly and south-easterly
indefinitely.
The length of the range of hills which includes Mount Grant
and Mount Venn is roughly some seven miles, but its lateral extent
is very irregular, varying from a maximum of about five miles down
to half-a-mile, and having an average of less than two miles. The
rocks comprising them are greenstones intersected by masses and
dykes of acidic rocks, these latter being largely developed a little
to the south-east of Mount Grant, where there is an area of them
over a mile in extent consisting of a fairly coarse-grained quartz
porphyry apparently closely related to the large body of granite
a little farther east; southward of this, towards Mount Venn, are
numbers of felsite and granitic dykes often of large size running
in all directions through the greenstones. These greenstones
are both irfassive and foliated, the latter variety being most largely
developed at the northern end, where it is a crushed diorite similar
to that of Mount Shenton. In the vicinity of Mount Venn, the rocks
are entirely massive and consist of a coarse-grained augite rock
very different to the usual type of greenstone ; a section of this
rock [6569] shows it to consist of augite and plagiodase felspar in
about equal proportions, the former being the typical colourless to
light brown variety in large flakes and masses some times showing
alteration into pale green fibrous uralitic hornblende ; the felspars
are principally labradorite, and have a strong tendency to idio-
morphism, with columnar and occasionally tabular habit; twin
lamellation occurs on both the albite and pericline laws, the latter
only occasionally, however; a few small crystals of magnetite are


PHOTO. 17.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo. C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Weathered Granite near Mount Warren.


PHOTO. 18.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Weathered Granite near Mount Warren.


also present. The rock is very little altered and is extremely hard
and solid right to the surface, this being characteristic of all the
rocks in this district.
Quartz reefs are few and far between, what there are being
mostly towards the northern end of the belt, and these are small and
of no extent, being merely the infillings of small gashes in the green-
stones ; the quartz is white and glassy and, judging by the results
obtained from dish assays of a large number of samples taken by
myself, is extremely low in its gold contents, most of the samples
giving blank results, and the best of them only a few dwts.
This belt of country (from Mount Shenton to Mount Venn) is
very poorly watered. Three miles from Mount Shenton, on a
bearing of 6 7 degrees from it, is a soak at the north end of a bare
granite hill; this, although it was dry at the time of my visit, after an
exceptionally dry season, could, after a fair season, be generally
depended upon to contain water during the greater part of the year,
but the supply would be very limited. Another soak is situated
amongst some low granite ridges about 5 miles on a bearing of 132
degrees from Mount Shenton and i : : £ to 3 miles on a bearing of 46
degrees from Mount Grant; as we obtained a small supply of water
here, after sinking about twelve feet, this soak may be considered
almost permanent, but the supply is small, except after good seasons.
These appeared to be the only two soaks of any importance in the
locality.
Mount Warren and Mount Cummings. —These hills are situated
about 30 miles north-east of the Cosmo Newberry Ranges and 90
miles north-east of Laverton. They form the two highest points of
a range of hills running about north-west and south-east and occupy-
ing an area about five miles in length by three in greatest breadth,
and rising to a height of some 200 feet from the sand plains which
surround them on all sides, and are known to be continuous from
Cosmo Newberry and Mount Shenton to Mount Warren and north
and easterly as far as the eye can reach, being only broken by
occasional low rough granite ridges. The rocks forming this range
of hills consists of fairly coarse-grained greenstone (diorite) and are
mostly massive, a little foliation being noticeable on the eastern and
north-eastern sides where they come in contact with the main body
of granite which underlies the surrounding sand plains.
As far as I was able to ascertain in a brief examination, owing
to the scarcity of water, there appear to be no quartz reefs whatever
within this area of greenstones, the only reef seen being a large white
quartz contact reef along the junction of the greenstones with the
granite on the north-eastern side of the hills ; this reef is over a chain
in width in places and is traceable on the surface for over half-a-mile
so far as tested its gold contents are nil.
The locality is badly off for water, there being only one soak in
the neighbourhood and that not a particularly good one; during


my visit there, being short of water, we sank on this soak to a depth
of about twelve feet but, obtaining only a few pints of water, were
compelled to leave it and return to Cosmo Newberry. After u fair
season, however, I think this soak could be depended on for a fair
supply, but the locality is a good one for prospectors to keep away
from.
The above localities, together with the Ulrich Range, are the
only areas of possible auriferous country within the district examined,
a district extending from thirty miles or so south of the Cosmo
Newberry to as far north as the south end of Lake Wells and easterly
to twenty miles beyond Mount Shenton. The whole of this area,
with the above exceptions, is occupied by broken granite tablelands
and sand plains, the former often being found with weathered
vertical cliff faces 50 feet and more in height, locally known as
“ breakaways ”; the sand plains represent the denuded and
weathered remains of similar tablelands and occupy by far the
greater part of the eastern portion of this State.
The Ulrich Ranges.
In addition to the localities already described, a short visit was
paid to the reported new find at the Ulrich Range on the south-east
side of Lake Wells and about 60 miles east-north-east of Duketon,
and a report made as to its extent and probable resources.
The workings are situated on the north-eastern side of a low
rough ridge of greenstone hills, trending in a general north-west and
south-easterly direction for five or six miles, and having a maximum
width of a little over a mile, tapering to nothing at either end ; these
hills are entirely surrounded by sand plains and spinifex. The rooks
which comprise this ridge consist of fine to coarse-grained massive
and foliated greenstones (amphibolite), similar to those usually found
forming the auriferous series of the Eastern fields ; these are traversed
by a large number of acidic dykes, varying from a coarse-grained
granite to a fine, compact, quartz porphyry, the latter type being
by far the more prevalent. These dykes vary greatly in size, anjl
run in all directions, though the majority of them have a general
north and south trend ; they also appear to be newer than the quartz
reefs which they frequently cut through; the greenstones are
usually considerably crushed and foliated in close proximity to them.
The north-eastern fall of the hills is into a long narrow arm of salt
lake—probably part of Lake Wells —lying from about two miles
away.
74


This lake runs past the north-western end of the hills, and then
turns and runs southerly, being crossed by the road about six miles
west of the ‘'find."
The present workings are situated on a small gully running
down the eastern fall; this has been worked at irregular intervals
for a length of about 20 chains, and a good deal of work has been
done. Most of the gold has been got in the wash ri'ght in the bed of
the creek at a depth of from two to four feet from the surface, and
usually at points where the gully is crossed by the granitic dykes
which form natural rifHes on the bed of the gully. No, or very
little, gold has been got on the fall of the hills into the creek ; and tips
fact, viz., that all the gold has been shed and carried into the bed
of the creek, militates against the chance of any rich leaders being
found. So far most of the gold found is pretty fine, the largest piece
obtained being less than 10 dwts. No specimens have been obtained,
but one or two pieces of gold were found with small pieces of iron-
stone attached, which would show that the gold has been shed from
a small ironstone leader, or leaders, in the greenstones, which has
been completely denuded away. There are several other gullies in
the hills, and these have all been tried for alluvial, and so far with
negative results ; the sides of the hills and the flats at the foot of
them have also been tried in numerous places with similar results.
At the time of my visit there were seven men at the “ find,” one of
whom was employed in carting water from the soak 20 miles distant
by road, the remaining six were engaged in alluvial working, and
had obtained amongst the lot of them between 15 and 18 dwts. of
gold as the result of a week’s work. These men professed themselves
as very dissatisfied with the district, and gave it as their intention to
leave the place within the next few' days. On my way into Duketon
I passed another party of five on their way out to the “ find ”; this
will make quite a sufficient number of men to thoroughly test the
locality, if that has not been done already.
While at the “ find ” I saw' several runs put through the shakers,
and all of them with very disappointing results, mostly only a couple
of small “ colours.” A party of four who were at the “ find ” some
weeks before the present party, obtained Bozs. 7dwts. of gold as the
result of six w'eeks’ w'ork ; while, in addition to this, one man got
from 28 to 30dw'ts., but I was unable to ascertain how long it took
him to get this amount.
This district w'as originally prospected by H. Swincer, who is
said to have obtained a little alluvial gold here about four years ago ;
a couple of years later, Kirkpatrick and party, as the result of several
weeks’ work, obtained a few ounces of alluvial gold ; 1 was unable to
ascertain the exact amount, but it was said to be somewhere about
lOozs.


As regards the reefing possibilities of the district, I do not think
anything of importance is likely to be found in this line. Quartz
reefs are certainly fairly numerous, but they are small and very
irregular, being for the most part merely short lenses or gashes
running with the foliation of the greenstones, and are, I think,
not likely to live to any great depth ; they are also much broken
and distorted, owing to the intrusions of granitic dykes. The quartz
is white and glassy, and, as far as tested, very low in its gold con-
tents ; a large number of samples were “ dollied ” by myself, and the
best result obtained was only slightly better than a trace, most
of them being blanks. There is, however, one fairly well-defined
line of reef—or, rather, line of lenses—traceable on the surface in
a north and south direction for a distance of about 10 chains, the
largest continuous length of quartz being about 60 feet, and having
a maximum width of about three feet; it is, however, broken in
several places by granitic intrusions, and the lenses of stone are
likely to behave just as irregularly vertically as they do longitu-
dinally.
The stone in this line is the typical white glassy quartz, and
near the north end has a considerable quantity of carbonate of copper
associated with it, as well as occasional small pockets of galena.
This line was carefully sampled by myself, and a large number of
samples dollied, the best prospect obtained being equal to about
Ito 2dwts. per ton. A few of the samples gave traces of gold, but
the majority of them were blanks.
Almost every one of these reefs show signs of having been
sampled several years back, and the area of possible auriferous
country is so restricted that two or three men could thoroughly
prospect it, from a reefing point of view, in a couple of weeks, and
lam of opinion that this has already been done. The country rock
is extremely hard right on the surface, and under existing con-
ditions, i.f., with the nearest battery 60 miles away, and over heavy
sand at that, reefs would have to be exceptionally rich to be of any
use to the prospectors, and I do not think there are any reefs of this
description in the locality ; and, in my opinion, even if the reefs-
were of fair grade, there is nothing of sufficient size or regularity
to warrant even the thought of erecting a battery on the spot.
With regard to other possible finds in the vicinity, from per-
sonal observations, there is no auriferous country to the south until
the Cosmo Newberry Ranges are reached; none south-easterly till
Mount Warren —and this is an exceedingly poor belt; and none-
westerly or south-easterly till the Duketori-Erlistoun belt. To the
north and north-east, beyond Lake Wells, low granite ranges and
sand plains extend as far as can be seen, and these are said to extend,
in this direction for practically an unlimited distance.


PHOTO. 19.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt. Photo. Litho.
Granite Rocks near Cosmo Newberry.


PHOTO. 20.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY. Bulletin 24.
Photo., C. G. Gibson. Govt, Photo. Lit ho.
Rockhole in Weathered Granite, 30 miles S.E. of Cosmo Newberry.


As to the water supply of the locality, a well has been sunk
on the eastern fall of the hills, about a mile and a-half from the lake,
in which water was struck at about 30 feet. This water is, however,
too salt to be of use even as stock water. If a well was put down
on the other fall, I think the chances are that this would probably
be salt too, as the lake runs round this side of the hills as well, though
at a somewhat greater distance —about six miles. I do not think
a permanent fresh water well is likely to be found in the locality.
The present water supply is from a soak in a small creek eighteen
direct miles from the “ find ” along the Duketon road; water has
to be carted from here to the “ find ” over heavy sand, and the supply
is only very limited, and unless replenished by rain is not likely to
last many more weeks. Bet ween this and Duketon there is no water
except at a rock hole six miles from the soak ; this, however, is most
probably dry by now as there were only a few gallons of water in
it early in November.
I am hardly of opinion that the “ find ” is of sufficient promise
to warrant the Government going to the expense 'of putting down
wells along the road, but if tnese are sunk, almost tne only
places where they could be put -would be (1) on the cork tree fiat,
16 miles from Duketon, and (2) on the creek, a lictle below the
present soak, and 1 am not in great hopes of a supply being
obtainable at either place, especially at (1) —that is in shallow wells.
If these wells are put down —and this applies to all shallow
wells in the out back country —I would very strongly advise that
they should be sunk in the summer season, for if a supply is
met with, then it can fairly safely be relied upon as permanent,
whereas if they are put down in the winter —usually the wet season
—a fairly heavy supply of soakage water is often met with which
goes dry, or nearly so, before the dry season is over, and this is often
a very serious matter in that part of the State. The Cosmo New-
berry Government No. 2 Well is a case in point; this well is now
only making a tew gallons of water per day, and that only after
it has been sunk another five or six feet by private parties.
CHAS. G. GIBSON, B.E.
Assistant Geologist.
77


Registered
Registered
No. of
No. of
Description of Specimen.
Locality of Specimen.
Remarks.
Specimen.
Micro-slide.
6526
692
Hematite-bearing: quartz
£ mile west of Enniskillen, Laverton
6527
Massive amphibolite
i mile south-west oi Enniskillen, Laverton
6528
693
Massive greenstone (diorite)
G.M.L. 777, Laverton
6529
694
Eelsite
G.M.L. 777, Laverton
See page
6539
Graphitic schist
300 feet level, Augusta, G.M.L. 371, Laverton
6531
Quartz with free gold and telluride
Augusta G.M., Laverton
See page
6532
695
Banded quartz ..
Mount Crawford, Laverton
6533
Granite
N.W. peg, G.M.L. 126, I.averton
6534
696
Granite
S.W. peg, G.M.L. 127, Laverton
6535
697
Granite
East side of G.M.L. 126, Laverton
See page
6536
698
Granite
i-mile S.E. of Mount Crawford, Laverton
6537
699
Greenstone
G.M.L. 1098, Laverton
6533
700
Quartz porphyry
60 chains N.N.W. of Mount Crawford
6539
. 701
Sulphide ore
300 feet level, Lancefield G.M., Laverton
6541
Altered greenstone
Two miles west of Ida H. G.M., Laverton
Analysis. See page
See plate
6541
Laterite
10 chains S. of G.M.L. 1128, Laverton
6542
Schist
300 feet level, Ida H. G.M., Laverton
6543
702
Sulphide ore
300 feet level, Ida H. G.M., Laverton
6544
Granite
Maori Chief G.M., Burtville
6515
703
Laterite
20 chains east of G.M.L. 1423, Burtville
6546
Massive greenstone
20 chains west of G.M.L. 1011, Burtville
6547
704
Quartz, coloured with chloropal
Sons of Westralia G.M., Burtville
See page
6543
Massive greenstone
Bungarra G.M., Erlistoun
6549
705
Greenstone schist
G.M.L. 1444, Erlistoun
6559
6551
6552
Granitic schist
Do. ....
Do, ; ;;
2J miles S. of Duketon
Do. do.
Lauriston G.M., Duketon
See page
See page
6553
Pine-grained quartzite
Mount Maiden
See page
Appendix I.
List of rock specimens collected in the Mount Margaret Goldfield.


6554
Quartz conglomerate
Mount Maiden
6555
700
Granite
16 miles N. of Laverton
6556
707
Dyke rock (dolerite) ..
300 feet level, Ida H. G.M., Laverton
5557
Opaline .. .. ..
400 feet level, Ida H. G.M., Laverton
6558
708
Schist
300 feet level, Augusta G.M., Laverton
6559
Hematite-bearing quartz
Surface. Augusta G.M., Laverton
6560
709
Ho. do.
100 feet level, Augusta G.M., Laverton
6561
710
J tematite-bearing schist
300 feet level, Augusta G.M., Laverton
6562
711
Granite
20 chains west of Augusta G.M., Laverton ..
6563
Granitic schist
Cosmo Newberry Banges
6564
712
Greenstone schist
Mount Shenton
6565
713
Massive greenstone
1 mile east of Mount Grant
6566
Banded quartz
Summit of Mount Grant
6567
714
Quartz porphyry
4J miles east of Mount Grant
6568
715
Massive greenstone
miles S.E. of Mount Grant
6569
710
Ho.
Mount Venn
6570
717
.Foliated greenstone
Mount Gumming
See page


Page.
A1
66
Acrasia ...
28
Aotinolite
15
Ajax
28
Alma Mater
28
Altaite ...
22
Anaconda
9
Augusta
13,14,17, 21, 28,78, 79
Away from Horne
34,44
Ballantraye ... ... ... ... .
66
Baneygo
46,(52, 66
Banker ...
44
Baron Clive
44
Battler ...
66
Battlers...
66
Bindan ...
22
Black Swan
44
Black Swan Proprietary
44
Bins Moon
44
Bond's Find
41, 44
Boundaries of the Field
7
British Admiral
28
British Empire
28
British Flag
17, 20, 28
Broken Pledge ...
28
Brothers, The
38,44
Bungarra
47, 50, 66, 78
Burtvitle
7, 9, 22
Burtville Cyanide W orks
45
Burtville Ore Reduction Works
45
Burtville State Battery
9, 44, 45
Caledonia
66
Carib
29,44
Castlereagh
41, 44
City of Auckland
47, 66
Climax ...
44
Cock of the North
13,15,16,17,26, 47
Cock of the Walk
27,28
Commonwealth
66
Connemarra
66
Corio
28
Cork Tree
46
Cornucopia
22,28
Cosmo
69
Index of Names of Places, Mines, Reefs, etc.


Page.
Cosmo ITewberry Ranges
7, 67, 79
Craggiemore
16, 20
Craiggiemore Proprietary
28
Crawford’s Patch
17
Crawford’s Well
46
Cremorne
38,44
Crescent...
66
Curzon’a Syndicate
69
Dream ...
28
Duketon
7,11, 56
Duketon State Battery
9, 66
Easter Gift
66
Edinboro’ Castle
44
Edinboro’Castle North
44
Edinboro’ Castle South
44
Edith Hope
44
Eldorado
44
Emerald ... ... ... ...
28
Enniskillen
28, 78
Enterprise
44
Erlistoun
7, 11, 46, 52
Erlistoun Creek
61, 65
Erlistoun Proprietary
66
Erlistoun Proprietary Gold Mining Co
66
Erlistoun Queen
66
Ethel
66
Eureka
30,44
Eureka Reward
66
Euro
9
Exchequer
44
Famous ...
/34, 66
Famous Blue
61, 63, 66
Federal Flag
28
Flintlock
28
Floater ...
44
Forrest, Sir John
7
Fortunatus
44
Gabberwock
45
General Wabash
28
Germania
66
Gladys
66
Goczel, S. ... ... ...
11
Golden Bell
37, 44
Golden Bell North
37, 44
Golden Boulder
66
Golden Flat
44
Golden Fleece
44
Golden Orbit
44
Golden Pinnacle
28
II


Pag-e.
Golden Rhine G.M. Co.
21
Golden Ring
44
Golden Ring East
Golden Spinifex
Golden Star
Goose’s Puzzle ...
11
Granites
13
Great Bedford ...
16, 26, 28
Great Britain ...
28
Greenstones
13
HardLump
45
Hawk’s Nest
11
Heaphy’s Find
7, 13
Ida H
7, 13, 15, 16, 17, 23,
28, 78, 79
Ida H. Consols ... ... ...
25, 28
Ida H. North Extended
25
Idaho
66
Ida H. West
28
Independence ...
45
Ingi Jingi Hills
61
Jackson, C. F. V
11, 12, 16
Just-in-Time
28
Karridale
40, 45
Karridale South
45
Killarney ... ...
45
King of Creation
King of Erlistoun
66
Kiora ... •
28
Kirkpatrick and party
75
Kirkpatricks
46,51
Kuranin Beefs ...
28
Lady Beatrice ...
28
Lady Bella ...
66
Lady Ethel
66
Lady Hopetoun
28
Ladv Julie ... ... ... ... ... . .
28
Lady Kate
45
Lady Myrtle
45
Lake Carey
8, 11
Lake Raeside ...
11
Lancefield
7, 13, 16, 18. 28, 78
Lauriston
57, 58, 66, 78
Laverton
7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 28
Laverton State Battery
9, 28
Leichardt (Dr.)
7
Leonora
9, 11
Leonora Gold Blocks ...
12
III


Pa^e.
Leonora State Battery
9
Leviathan
45
Lights of Home
28
Little Battery
51
Little Doris
46, 47, 50, 66
Little Queen
28
Lloyds
28
Lord Hopetoun
28
Lord Kitchener
69
Maori Chief
30, 35, 45, 78
Maori Chief Extended
45
Marion ...
45
Marmont ... ... ... ...
66
Maryboro’ ... ... ... ...
28
Maxim ...
38, 45
Maxim North ...
45
Meantime
45
Menzies Golden Rhine
28
Merry Pilgrim ...
45
Mikado ...
29, 43, 45
Mistake ...
46, 53, 54, 66
Mistake Hill
53
Mistake North ...
54, 66
Mistake South ...
54, 66
Mon Ami
45
Monowai
57
Montgomery, A.
11
Morialta
57, 60, 66
Mount Barnicoat
14
Mount Brown ...
45
Mount Crawford
13, 14, 17. 18, 46. 78
Mount Cummings
73, 79
Mount Flora
8
Mount George ...
7
Mount Grant ...
71, 72, 79
Mount Leonora
7. 8
Mount Maiden ...
61, 78, 79
Mount M aiden Reward
66
Mount Malcolm
8, 9, 10
Mount Margaret
8, 9. 10, 11
Mount Morgans
9, 10, 11, 12, 16
Mount Shenton
7, 71, 79
Mount Varden
46
Mount Venn
7, 71,79
Mount Warren ...
7, 73
Mount VVeld
8, 45
Mount Weld Consi ds ..
45
Mount Wilga Proprietary
45
Mulga Queen ..
7,61,62,66
Mulga Queen No. 1 South
62,66
Murchison Goldfield ...
16
Murrin Murrin ...
8,9
Mystery ...
28, 39, 45
Nil Desperandum
33, 45
Nil Desperandum North
45
IV


Fuse.
Ninety-Mile
ii
Nolan's Trig.
47
Nonpariel
45
North Erlistoun
9
Nous Verrons
28
O’Connor's Reward ... ... ...
66
Oldfield
45
Ophir
45
Ophir No. 2
45
Parramatta
66
Pat’s Find ... ... ... ...
28
Perseverance
66
Pinjie Eda Hill...
56
Pluck Up
45
Princess Alex
8
Prior Right
30,36,45
Queen of Hearts
45
Queen of the North Extended
45
Eeccaboni
66
Bed Castle
11
Reg Flag
11
Red Rover
45
Rescue ...
28
Riddle
45
Rise Again
45
Rock of Ages
29, 42, 45
Rosa Kathleen ...
66
Roscommon
41, 45
Rose
28
Rose of Persia ...
57, 66
Rose of Persia No. 1 South ...
66
Ruby
66
Sailor Prince
45
Sailor Prince No. 1 South
45
Salt Bush Reward
66
Savage Captain.:.
34, 45
Scotland Yet
15, 27
Silistrea ...
45
Sons of Gwalia, Limited
8
Sons of Toil
28
Sons of Westralia
38, 42, 45, 78
Spes Unioa
47, 49, 66
Split Rock
07
St. Albans
28
Sunny Hills
28
Surprise ...
45
Sweet Nell
66


Page.
Swincer, H.
75
Sydney Mint ...
66
Tattersall’s
45
Tempus ...
33, 45
The Brothers ...
38, 44
Third Attempt...
45
Timber ...
18, 31, 16
Tired Feeling ...
45
Toby
28
Tower Hill
. 45
Treble Handed
32, 45
Tremolite ... ... ... ...
15
Trig. Hill Battery ...
45
True Blue
45
Try Again South
45
Turn Over
45
Two Jims
66
Ulrich Ganges ...
7, 74
Wainine ...
45
Wallaroo
57, 59, 66
Wanderer
31,45
Wanderer South ...
31, 45
Warrior ...
28
Water
18, 22, 24, 31, 33, 35,
.37, 39, 41, 58, 61
Water Melon ...
57, 60, 66
WeeMaogregor
45
Westella
28
Westraiia Mt. Morgans Gold Mines
8
Westralia Tasmania ...
55
White Horse
25, 28
Wooloomooloo ...
28
By Authority: Feed. Wm. Simpson, Government Printer, Perth.


H.J. Pether. Government Lithographer. Perth. W.A.


H.J. Pether. Government Lithographer. Perth. W.A.




H.J. Pether. Government Lithographer. Perth. W.A.




H.J. Pettier. Government Lithographer. Perth. W.A.
