

THE
H. M. S. “SHANNON”
Times and Maregraph:
WEEKLY JOURNAL DURING VOYAGE
FROM
SYDNEY TO GRAVESEND,
IN APRIL, MAY and JUNE, 1888.
Editor - - Mr. S. R. GROOM, P.R.G.S.
Price 2s. 6d.
' LONDON:
WATERLOW BROS. & LAYTON,
24 & 26, BIFvCHIN LANE; 28 & 29, LIME STREET; BROKEN WHARF; AND
42, UPPER THAMES STREET, E.C.
1883. *V




The “Shannon” Times and Maregraph.
No. I.] April, 1883.
LIST OF OFFICERS.
J. S. MURRAY, Captain.
C. R. HEPPLETWHITE, Ist Officer.
E. C. HARLEY, 2nd Officer.
S. H. BETHOM, 3rd Officer.
W. H. HAUGHTON, 4th Officer.
R. A. LINDAU, sth Officer.
W. B. MARSH, Doctor.
W. C. WALKER, Ist Engineer.
F. POWELL, Purser.
“ The Maregraph and Sea Hews ” wall be issued every Saturday
morning’. Passengers are invited to make communications to the
Editor upon any matter of interest to sea-travellers, such as remarks
upon steam and sailing ships, incidents of sea travel, verses upon
nautical subjects, the natural phenomena of the ocean, suggestions
for consideration of the Committee of Amusement, &c., &c.
The P. & 0. S.S. Shannon was built by Messrs. Harland & Wolf, of
Belfast. This firm also built the steamers of the world-renowned
White Star Line. A brief description of the Shannon may not prove
uninteresting. She has three decks, two masts ; is brig rigged, of
clincher build, with an elliptic stern. The framework of the Shannon
is of steel. She has two pairs of compound engines of the tandem type.
Her gross tonnage is 4,198T8, less a per contra of 2,026‘87, leaving a
registered tonnage of 2,162 31. Her name in flags is W. F. L. P.,
and her official number 83,934; registered date, December 31st, 1881.
The length of this ship between perpendiculars is about 410 feet,
and her main breadth to outside planks nearly 43 feet. Her depth in
hold is about 32 feet. The length of the engine-room' is nearly
30 feet, and her effective horse power 4,000.
The phosphorescence of the ocean is a phenomenon which strikes
all who behold it with wonder and admiration. It prevails largely
through the whole extent of the tropical seas, and proceeds from a
great variety of marine organisms—some soft and gelatinous; some
minute Crustacea’, such as the noctiluca miliaris, and others. They
mostly shine when excited by a blow or by agitation of the water, as
when a fish darts along or oar dashes, or in the wmke of a ship as the
water closes on its track. In the latter case are often seen w hat
appear to be large lamps of light, rising from under the keel and
floating out to the surface, apparently of many inches in diameter.


JOTTINGS BY OUR OWN “FLANEUR.”
The biggest swell in the world is the swell of the ocean.
The sailor’s favourite wine—port.
The line is not used by mermaids to dry their clothes upon.
The captain’s gig is not a four-wheeler.
Rolls of the ocean and chops of the channel make a very fair
breakfast for a sailor.
[The remaining portion of the first number was appropriated by a passenger,
name unknown; and could not be recovered.] —Editor’s note.


The “Shannon” Times and Maregraph.
No. 11. May, 1883.
The sea! the sea ! the open sea,
The blue, the fresh, the ever free.— Proctor.
Thou glorious mirror, where the Almighty’s form
Glasses itself in tempests; Byron.
“THE METEOR FLAG OF EHGLAHD”
Is an inspiration, a providence. The blended crosses have waved
their thousand years and more, and wherever the Union Jack flies
gloriously, there is to be found freedom and prosperity. The cause of
this is not far to seek. Religion is at the heart of the nation that, in
the outcome of centuries, has chosen three crosses for her cognisance,
and righteousness directs her policy.
Whether it be in the colonisation of a Continent, or the mere
occupation of a crater to guard the way to it, prosperity and well-
being surely follow the unfurling of the glorious flag.
The inhabitants of other countries must seek in vain the inspira-
tion necessary to fight for three stripes, which, placed horizontally,
may mean Teuton, and vertically, the antagonistic Latin race.
Our Flag differs from all others in being a development. “ St.
George for merrie England ” is a fancy far back in the Middle Ages,
and highly favoured was beloved Scotland when, after centuries of
contest and training in the science of freedom, she gave her blue field
on which to rest the Red Cross of St. George, and when Ireland’s
banner was laid between—significant of lasting embrace —the union
was complete ; tria juncta in uno.
At an early period in English history the Red Cross of St. George
was emblazoned on the Royal Standard, side by side with the armorial
cognisance of the King. Gradually, as the national character de-
veloped, St. George’s Cross alone was displayed for England, with the
Royal Standard over the King when he appeared in the field.
In 1603, when James VI. of Scotland became King of England,
the banners of England and Scotland were united, the blue field *pid
White Cross of St. Andrew carrying the Red Cross and white field of
St, George over it. This was the Union Jack of the 17th and 18th
centuries.
In 1801, Ireland was taken into the Union, and the present
Union Jack was completed by St. Patrick’s Cross (red diagonal on
white field) being placed between the Crosses of St. George and
St. Andrew —“ All proper,” in the language of heraldry.
Ensigns carried by ships are white, or red, or blue, with the
Union Jack always in the upper corner next the mast, The white


ensign is for ships of war, the red for the mercantile marine, and
blue for the naval reserve and ships employed in the service of amy
Government department.
The Union Jack alone is displayed over fortresses and possessions
as the Queen’s own colour. Regiments carry the “ Queen’s Colours ’
and the “Regimental,” which is of the regimental colour, and is
usually emblazoned with the badge of the regiment and names of
battles in which it has been engaged :
“ The meteor flag of England
That guards our native seas;
The flag that braved a thousand years
The battle and the breeze.”
M.
THE MILKY SEA.
The phosphorescence described in the last number of the Shannon
Times and Maregraph is common to all seas, varying in brilliancy
according to the quantity and kind of animalculte and probably
the electric condition of the sea. There is, however, another pheno-
menon evidently akin to the phosphorescence of the sea, which
strikes with wonder the traveller when he firsts beholds it. It is
usually contemplated in silence, for words entirely fail when this
unexpected and unknown beauty bursts upon us. I will endeavour to
describe an occasion when I was on board a Royal Mail Packet, and
the Milky Sea appeared.
“ Oh ! where is the Captain ? ” cries one.
“ What can be the matter P ” says another.
“ Stand by the engine ! stop her! ” is the sharp order of the officer
on watch.
“ Hard-a-stai-board! ”
“ Hard over it is ! ” the old quarter-master steadily replies. W e
are running down upon a line of white water.
“ It looks like a coral reef,” is the report of the officer of the
watch. . n
When the course is quietly resumed the milky water is quickly all
around. No sparkle —no bright spot —belt all is uniformly bright
and glox-ious. We doubt almost if the ship can be supported on such
strange white stuff. It might be that we were stationary ice,
slightly snow-covered, but for the well-known heat of the engines,
which proves that the snow is yielding before us. The sky, usually
so bright with starlight, has become dark, and even black, by con-
trast with the white light sea. The stars twinkle out in the dark
vaults like diamonds in some cave. After sailing some hours it
may be, in the white sea, the ship passes out again into the open blue.
The uniform character of the light proves evidently its submarine
character. It is hard to look into the secrets of the vasty deep,
but observations, extending over twenty years, enable me to offer a
theory as to the cause of this phenomenon. So far as lam aware, it


is not seen out of the Arabian Sea. This is a sea of seasons, both in
weather and currents; the South-West monsoon, which brings rain
and life to the parched plains of India in the hot weather, begins in
May, and continues without interruption until September. The
current, beginning far South in the Mozambique Channel, runs
before the wind like a river, carrying with it, as a matter of course,
immense quantities of marine life, Medusas,. Ascadians, &c. On a rare
occasion, a monsoon suddenly dropping, the sea becomes calm and
smooth as glass, and far down in the depth we can see the treasures
of this ocean stream, strange coils of animal life, unknown I believe
as yet to the naturalist. Watching a river suddenly swollen by
rains, it is observed that every obstruction, each projecting
promontory has its eddy charged with debris, branches, twigs,
leaves, &c., &c. These remain massed together, interlaced until
the flood is over. The eddies in the currents caused by the Island
of Socotra and Cape Guardafui would necessarily collect immense
quantities of submarine matter, more or less in a state of decay, from
being carried so far and so violently. Imagine a closely-packed
submarine field which would, on the change of current, at the change
of season, be carried away from its moorings in the old eddy, and go
sailing away in the new stream far out to sea. If the foregoing can
be proved, of necessity we should have this soft evenly-diffused light
coming up from the semi-decayed mass below. No difference in the
animalculae of the water is noticeable during the prevalence of the
milky sea. The animalcules are there, but do not shine in the
presence of the greater brightness.
M.
MODERN AND ANCIENT SHIPPING.
The extraordinary development in the size of modern shipping,
and the speed and luxury of modern sea travelling, are amongst the
most striking wonders of the 19th century. Ancient mariners would
open their eyes in amazement could they see the P. & 0. S.S. Shannon,
or even sailing ships of the present day. Steamers of 6,000 tons are
afloat, in which you may travel round the world in luxurious ease.
It is curious to look back to the times of Magellan, whose ships first
navigated the globe. They were little caravels of 100 tons. That
was in 1520. The four vessels in which Vasco de Gama piloted
himself to the shores of India averaged only 120 tons, and those in
which Columbus discovered America were only 70 tons burden.
Figure to yourself the perils of the unknown deep in those days, and
compare with them the enjoyable ease and comfort of the modem
P. &O. ships. In those days, when the plucky mariner ventured
abroad, it was problematical if he would return. Few of us, I imagine,
can appreciate the difficulty attending the discovery of the Cape of
Good Hope and the subsequent voyage to India. At that time the
knowledge of this route was confined to the Moors and the Venetians,
who kept it to themselves. It is interesting to note that these little


ships, in which the old sailors went down to the great deep, were not
only perfectly seaworthy, but much preferred by the Portuguese and
Spaniards to the larger ships which they might have built or hired.
The art of shipbuilding was well known. The ships of the Genoese
averaged from 1,300 to 1,500 tons, but the principal discoveries of the
15th and 16th centuries were nearly all made in pigmy ships. St.
Paul must have been on board a ship of considerable size to have
carried 276 passengers and a cargo of wheat. The Alexandrian corn
ships are supposed to average 1,000 tons, so it was not because larger
ships were not obtainable that our ancient mariners did not set out
in them, upon, at any rate, some of their voyages of discovery. We,
from our advance in science—the mariners’ compass, the art of
navigation, steam, and the thousand resources of modern science—
are now quite at ease in circumstances which would have filled those
ancient heroes with dismay.
LIST OF PASSENGERS PER R. M. S.S. “SHANNON.”
From Sydney.
Mr. J. B. Deakin, Mr. Clarke, M.L.A., Mrs. Clarke and family, Mr. and Mrs. J.
Marks and family, Mr., Mrs., Miss and Master Munro, Mrs. Melville and family,
Mr. R. R. Amdell, Mr. and Mrs. L. A. Corbet and child, Mr. and Mrs. F. A.
Primrose and family, two Misses Clarke, Mr. and Mr. A. J. Sievers, Miss Sievers,
Mr. and Mrs. G. A. Blomfield, Mr. F. W. Hardy, Mr. James Holmes, Hon.
Charles Moore, M.L.C., Miss Moore, Mr. E. Alexander, Mr. S. R. Kennedy,
Mr. A. H. Waters, Mr. W. C. Chapman, Mr. F. H. Elderton, Mr. H. King,
Mr. E. H. Scott, Mr. S. H. Scott, Mr. G. B. Cove, Miss Colman, Master Tidman,
Mr. M. W. Smith, Mr. H. H. Greenaway, Mr. S. R. Groom, F.R.G.S.
From Melbourne.
Mr. A. W. Garrett, for Calcutta. Mr. G. Hampton, for Bombay.
Mr. G. F. Davis, Mr. F. J. Curtis, Mr. and Mrs. C. M. Longmuir, Mr. Edward
Elies, Mr. James Talent, Mr. J. R. Hyslop, Mr. Alex. Nielson, Mr. and Miss Abbott,
Dr. and Miss Cutts, Mr. J. S. Morlet, Mr. J. P. Goodbun, J.P., Mrs. Martin, Miss
Davis, Mr. A. J. W. Keenan, Mr. B. Moloney, Mr. and Mrs. W. Oliver and family,
Miss Affleck, Mr. E. Carlyon, Mr. R. D. Thomas, Mr. and Mrs. Cunningham and
family, Mr. and Mrs. J. Robertson and family, Miss M. Larrett, Mrs. Maitland
Ware.
Miss Gregorsen, from Glenelg. Miss Burt, from Albany.
ATHLETIC SPORTS.
Probably a more successful Athletic Meeting than that held on the Shannon,
On Saturday last, has never taken place on board ship. Favoured by magnificent
weather, a smooth sea, and an audience determined to be amused, the programme
was carried out without hitch or delay, and so great was the interest shown that
the Committee decided to have another Meeting at an early date. Capt. Murray
kindly acted as Judge, assisted by Mr. Clarke; Mr. Longmuir was Starter, and


Mr. Goodbun made a most efficient Clerk of the Course. Appended are the
results of the various competitions :
1. High Jump.
Bethom . . . 1. 4 feet 8 inches.
2. Three-Legged Race.
Bethom ) ,
Oliver )
3. Chalking the Line.
Oliver . . . 1. 7 feet 31 inches.
Bethom . . . 2. 7 „ 3i „
4. Potato Race.
Kennedy . . . 1.
Chapman ... 2.
5. Hurdle Race. (All fours).
Bethom . . . 1.
Chapman ... 2.
6. Standing long Jump.
Bethom . . . 1. 9 feet inches.
7. Cock-fighting.
Bethom . . . 1.
8. Ladies’ Egg Race.
Miss Davis . . . 1.
Miss Burt . . . 2.
9. Bucket Race.
Bethom . . . 1.
10. Children’s Race.
Seniors.
Marks .... 1.
Juniors.
Corbet .... 1.
NOTES OF THE VOYAGE.
As a retentive memory for dates and distances does not fall to the lot of us all,
the following notes of our present voyage may not prove unacceptable. They may
also serve to elucidate some knotty points which are frequently under discussion
in the Smoking Room.
SYDNEY.
Population, 220,427; distance from London, 12,136 miles; local time, 10h. sm.
before Greenwich; cost of telegram to Great Britain, 10s. lOd. per word ; leave
Sydney, April 18th, noon; Sydney to Melbourne 560 miles.
MELBOURNE.
Population, 282,981; distance from London by sea, 11,566 miles; local time,
9h. 40m. before Greenwich; cost of telegram to Great Britain, 10s. Bd. per word ;
arrive at Melbourne, Friday, April 20th; leave Melbourne, Tuesday, April 24th;
Melbourne to Glenelg, 485 miles.
ADELAIDE.
Population, 37,892; distance from London, 10,074 miles; local time, 9h. 14m.
before Greenwich ; cost of telegram to Great Britain, 10s. Bd. per word; arrive at
Glenelg, Thursday, April 26th; leave Glenelg, April 26th; Glenelg to King
George’s Sound, 1,007 miles.


ALBANY.
Population, 1,024; distance from London, 10,074 miles; local time, 7h. 52m.
before Greenwich ; cost of telegram to Great Britain, 10s. Bd. per word; arrive at
Albany, Monday, April 30th, 12 days oat; leave Albany, April 30th; Albany to
Colombo, 3,390 miles.
COLOMBO.
Population, 111,942; distance from London, 6,814 miles; local time, sh. 19m.
before Greenwich ; cost of telegram to Great Britain, 4s. lOd. per word; arrive at
Colombo, Friday, May 11th ; leave Colombo, Monday, May 14th. Colombo to Suez,
3,401 miles.
SUEZ.
Population, 13,625; distance from London, 3,302 miles; local time, 2h. 10m.
before Greenwich ; cost of telegram to Great Britain, Is. lOd. per word; arrive at
Suez, Tuesday, May 29th ; leave Suez, May 29th; Suez to Port Said, 87 miles.
PORT SAID.
Population, 10,000; distance from London, 3,210 miles; local time, 2h. 9m.
before Greenwich ; cost of telegram to Great Britain, Is. lOd. per word; arrive at
Port Said, Thursday, May 31st; leave Port Said, Thursday, May 31st; Port Said to
Malta, 935 miles.
MALTA.
Population—civilian, 154,392; military, 6,531. Distance from London, 2,280
miles. Local time, 58 minutes before Greenwich. Cost of telegram to Great
Britain, 6d. per word, with 2s. 6d. per message additional. Carriages should be
hired by the hour. Cost —2-horse carriage, 2s. 3d. per hour ; 1-horse do., Is. 6d.
per hour. Objects of interest; Opera House (season now over); Governor s Palace
—note the tapestries; also sec the Armoury, 203 feet long; Church of St. John,
magnificent building, dating from 1573 ; Garrison Library ; Public Library of the
Knights; numerous churches; bells always ringing. Citta Vecchia, /i miles
from Yaletta, is a pretty drive. See the market at Yaletta, also the view from
the Baretta. Arrive at Malta, Monday, June 4th; leave Malta, June 4th. Malta
to Gibraltar, 981 miles.
GIBRALTAR.
Population —civilian, 13,381; military, 5,610. Distance from London, 1,299
miles. Local time, 21 minutes after Greenwich. Cost of telegram to Great
Britain, 6£d. per word. Objects of interest: The Galleries; St. Michael s Cave;
shops, &c. The rock of Gibraltar is 1,400 feet high. Arrive at Gibraltar,
Friday, June Bth; leave Gibraltar, Friday, June Bth. Gibraltar to Plymouth, 1,054
miles. Arrive at Plymouth, Wednesday, June 13th. Plymouth to London, 295
miles. Arrive at London, Thursday, June 14th.
G. E. C.
Tlio aspersions contained in the following lines, which were found in our box
this week, are calculated to cause the captain to swear he has hitherto kept his
course, i.e., his temper, or, in other words, held his tongue. He hints, however,
darkly, that confusion will ultimately—say in four months or so—overtake the
Fenians.
To the Editor, Lat. 3° South.
“ There was an old tub, called the Shannon,
The shape of a rusty old cannon)
She pitched and she rolled like old Harry, I’m told 5
Oh! a dirty old hulk was the Shannon!”


THE TWO PETTICOATS.
O, the red, the flaunting Petticoat!
That courts the eye of day;
That loves to flare, and be admired,
And blinks from far away.
It may arrest the roving sight,
Or charm the fancy free,
But, if the wearer’s half as bold,
I’ll pass and let her be,
With her red, her flaunting Petticoat,
She’s not the girl for me!
But the white, the modest Petticoat!
As pure as drifted snow;
That shuns the gaze in crowded ways,
Where follies come and go,
It stirs the primrose in its path,
Or daisy on the lea,
And if the wearer’s like the garb,
How beautiful is she!
With her white, her modest Petticoat!
0, she’s the girl for me !
AMUSEMENTS.
On Friday evening the well-known farce of Box and Cox was performed on
deck. The characters were sustained by Messrs. Kennedy, Groom and Arndell,
of whom we cannot but speak favourably.
“Box” was represented by Mr. Kennedy, and his get-up was immense.
“ Cox,” as played by Mr. Groom, pleased everybody. Mr. Arndell’s “ Mrs.
Bouncer” caused considerable merriment, and his make-up was superb. The
introduction of a song sung by “ Mr. Box,” the accompaniment being played by
“ Mrs. Bouncer,” simply convulsed the audience.
We are glad to learn the second-class passengers were invited, and hope the
artists of the saloon will arrange to give us another performance of a similar
description shortly.
The afternoon of the 9th May, 1883, will long be remembered by many of the
passengers of the “ Shannon,” as on this day the old ceremonies formerly
universally observed on all vessels crossing the line were duly carried out. The
Captain and officers of the vessel kindly undertook the preparation of the necessary
dresses, &c., and on the night of the Bth, King Neptune duly hailed the vessel and
came on board. The morning of the 9th was occupied in the preparation, of the
bath, throne, &c., and at three p.m. punctually a procession, headed by a band,
appeared on the main deck. The king and his royal and especially charming
consort, were drawn by four quartermasters in triumph upon a gun carriage gaily
decorated for the occasion. The dresses of their majesties were much admired ;
the flowing locks and beard of the king, and his uncouth but majestic appearance,
contrasted well with the tasteful dress of her Majesty, who was represented by a
young lady passenger. The policemen were admirably dressed, and the stalwart
sergeant led his men to the arrest of various victims with great ardour; his
truncheon, a huge “carrot,” being always advanced threateningly. The Barber and
Doctor also were capitally dressed, and performed their duties faithfully. The fun
was commenced by the arrest of one of the saloon passengers, who cheerfully sub-
mitted to the ordeal, or he might, from his size and strength, have given that
officer of justice considerable trouble. He was duly shaved and ducked, being
thrown backwards into a large canvas bath on the signal being given. Other


passengers and some of the apprentices and stewards were treated in the same
way, amid the cheers and laughter of all the passengers, who were in a capital
position to see the sport. Of course no one was operated upon who made any
serious objection, and we may remark that the ceremonies, although duly carried
out, were so far removed from the extremely rough usage formerly practised, that
the objectors were few. When the ceremonies were over, the procession, headed
by violins and fife, was reformed and disappeared along the main deck. Then a
performance of dancing and singing by a number of Lascars (part of the ship’s
company) took place, and was very amusing. The face of the gigantic tomtom
player and his airs and graces will not be soon forgotten. Altogether a most
enjoyable and pleasant afternoon was spent.
ORIGINAL RIDDLES.
Why is the S.S. “ Shannon ” like Sydney Harbour ?
Why can one never starve on the “ after companion ” ?


The “Shannon” Times and Maregraph.
No. lII.] Saturday, May 19, 1883.
Ip the suggestion be favourably received, it is the intention of the
Editor, upon arrival in England, to print and publish the numbers
of “The ‘ Shannon ’ Times and Maregraph.” To this end, he trusts
passengers of the Shannon will favour him with contributions
upon subjects of interest in connection with the sea. There is a
“ Poet’s Corner” in our paper for any who desire to court the Muse;
verses, however, must be original. Our columns are open to every
one ; and all on board the S.S. Shannon are cordially invited to
favour us with their contributions.
THE AMUSEMENT COMMITTEE AND THE COSTUME
BALL.
To the Editor of the “ Maregraph.”
Sir—lt is currently reported that the Amusement Committee
have decided to exclude all passengers from the Fancy Ball of
Saturday next unless they appear in costume. This decision is, I
think, a mistake; although I have no doubt it "was not intended to
have any offensive meaning. It is always conducive to the enjoy-
ment of the participators in such festivities to have a body of spec-
tators ; and these last necessarily derive much innocent gratification
from the mere spectacle of pleasures in which they are unable
themselves to share. By excluding all passengers who do not
appear in costume, the Committee will certainly prevent the attend-
ance of some whom they w'ould like to see at the Ball; for the
chaperons and parents of the young ladies may not feel inclined to
allow their daughters to go without them, and may have no inclina-
tion to appear themselves in fancy costume. Surely the saloon
passengers on the Shannon are unlikely to criticise the dancers in
any unbecoming manner, and may safely be trusted to conduct
themselves with propriety; while it cannot be denied that it is not
consistent with fairness to exclude them from any portion of the
accommodation set apart for them by the Company.
I am, sir, yours, &c.,
Rdver.
QUERIES.
Why is it that no tea can be got by the bachelor, who does not
happen to belong to one of the 11 tea parties, who have tea of their
own P Is the ship’s tea so poor that the stewards are ashamed to
bring it, or have each of the 11 fair hostesses two stewards and
one-eleventh of a steward, so that not even one out of the 24 waiters
can wait upon a man ?


SHIP’S GOSSIP.
The normal condition of an Editor is to want news. There is no
Delphic Oracle to consult, and not a single spirit-rapper on hoard the
Shannon. There is nothing to be seen between Ceylon and the
famous old Rock, always on guard like a lion couchant , and which
Spain still speaks of in official documents, as “ temporarily in
possession of the English.” I mean, of course, Gibraltar, usually
called “ Gib.,” or the “ Rock.” Oh yes, there is that old crater, Aden,
in the Straits of Bal-el-Mandeb, with three trees guarded by a
couple of native policemen with red hair. In going up the Red Sea
you will have Mounts Horeb and Sinai on the right, and, if you look
sufficiently long into the water, you may see the ruts made by the
wheels of Pharoah’s chariot when pursuing the Israelites.
We are glad to learn there is to be another theatrical entertain-
ment shortly. This will be pleasant.
“ Plays are like mirrors, made for men to see
How bad they are, how good they ought to be.”
Many complaints and suggestions have reached us for this week’s
issue, but unless they take the form of a letter to the Editor it is
difficult to make them public. First comes a complaint that the
gentlemen are not sufficiently careful of their tobacco smoke upon
the hurricane deck. Another correspondent, presumably a lady,
says: —“ The gentlemen prefer those horrid pipes to chatting and
flirting in the way proper and natural to the Indian Ocean.” Com-
plaints are in the ascendant this week. “ There arc too many quiet
men on board,” says a fair one ; “they cannot even talk.” Really it
is too bad that the quiet man should be bullied into talking. It does
not follow they are fools by any means, if they do not join in your
conversations. You remember Corneille, Isocrates, Virgil, Descartes,
Addison and La Fontaine never talked in mixed assemblages, and
Butler and Dryden were both dull in conversation. I wonder if it
were their fault. The next complaint is the heat, and the difficulties
attendant upon getting your bath in the morning. Won’t someone
write some verses upon the luxuries of bathing P Most of the poets
have gone into ecstacies over “ Love’s Young Dream ” and the first
thrills of passion, and have—
“ Rhymed about what
In their private opinions, delicious or not,
But none, though they certainly havn’t abused it,
Have lauded the tub —let us hope that they used it.”
1 quite sympathise with those who complain of the heat. Even
writing on board ship is a species of mental gymnastics equal in
effect to waltzing round the inner chamber of a Turkish bath. I am
off for my afternoon tub.
“ There is nothing on board half so sweet as a plunge
In a jolly big bath, with a jolly big sponge.”
G,


STEAMSHIPS.
I suppose that 90 per cent, of the world believe that steam, as a
moving' power, is quite a modern invention. It is a popular belief
also that England and America were the first to adapt steam as a
moving power for ships, but Spain claims the honour. It is upon
record that Don Blasco de Garez, a Spanish naval captain, tried a
steam-engine on board a vessel of 200 tons in 1543. Charles Y. and
his whole Court were on board during the first trip, which was
successful. The invention was not encouraged, for want of money
and fear of accidents.
A patent was taken out in 1736, by Jonathan Hull, for carrying
ships on, at, or into any harbour, port, or river, against wind and tide,
or in a calm.
Fulton ran a steamer daily, in 1807, between New York and
Albany. All these were paddle steamers. But modern inventors
cannot claim that motion of ships by paddle-wheels originated with
them, for both Romans and Carthaginians used wheels, with which
they propelled their boats, either by hand or by animals. The
Chinese do this at the present day. Neither can Smith or Ericcson
be said to have introduced the Archimedean screw (1836). Captain
Delisle introduced it to the French Admiralty in 1823, and in 1832
Sauvage took out a patent, which is just the sanie as Smith’s screw.
Ericcson’s is the same as Delisle’s.
G.
THE BIGGEST TUG OF WAR ON RECORD.
When our gracious Sovereign was ordinarily mentioned as “ Our
youthful Monarch,” and gentlemen at public dinners drank with
uproarious cheers to “ Our young Queen and our old Constitution,”
when the electric telegraph was but a dream, when lucifer matches
and policemen were but novel inventions, when a bullet came out of a
gun at the same end at which it had gone into it, when Australia was
still known to the mass of English people as Botany Bay, and the
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company was but an
infant Corporation, a mighty contest arose between the advocates
of steamers with screw-propellers, and the lovers of the existing
paddle-wheel system.
In those days, as in these, a vast number of persons held Lord
Byron’s opinion that, “ Whatever is, is right,” and deduced from it
the conclusion that whatever was new must be wrong.- Every
fogeyish old gentleman would solemnly say, “ Wonderful thing,
steam, sir; still in its infancy !” and in the next breath protest against
any novel application of it, and assure you that “ These new fangled
ideas would be the ruin of the country, sir !”
Now, the English Admiralty is, as we all know, far too grand and
stately to bother itself about ideas and inventions and rubbish of that
kind. It went on building wooden war ships until after the success
of the Monitor and Merrimac had demonstrated that in future a
wooden frigate would be but a mere highway to Paradise, and it


insisted upon tlie British sailor being decorated with a pigtail, at
least two generations after every other man in Europe had left off
wearing any decoration of the sort, consequently there is nothing to
wonder at in the Admiralty’s refusal to have anything to do with the
screw-propeller, and insisting upon sticking to the wheel. But the
Lords of the Admiralty are not averse to experiments if they are
made upon a sufficiently grand scale to be consistent with official
dignity, so that it happened about 10 or 15 years after every one had
adopted the screw-propeller and paddle-wheel steamers of any large
size were growing comparatively scarce, the Admiralty decided to
prove to the world that the world was wrong.
The preparations were made upon a scale commensurate with the
dignity of this vast Empire, sir! Two sister ships, alike in every
respect, equal in power, size, and capacity to the smallest particular,
were chosen, and one of them fitted with paddle-wheels, and one
with the screw-propeller; the paddle-wheel steamer contained a large
and distinguished party, comprising the Lords of the Admiralty, the
officials of their department, and all the highly respectable people
who look upon the advent of a change as a freak of adventurers.
They made all proper provision for celebrating the victory of the
paddle-wheel over the screw, and a grand triumphal march was
specially composed in honour of the vindication of their Lordships’
judgment.
The vessels were placed stem to stem, and secured to each other
with powerful hawsers. At a given signal they were both to steam
ahead, and as they would necessarily do so in different directions,
the stronger would pull the weaker after it. Nothing could be fairer,
so their Lordships gave the word, and at the same instant the screw
began to turn and the paddle-wheels to revolve, and the pianist
struck up the grand triumphal march, and the gentlemen all sang a
chorus in praise of the Lords of the Admiralty, and joked each other
upon the woeful figure the screw-steamer would present when they
had towed it stem first from Sheerness to Blackwall.
But presently the First Lord of the Admiralty grew sea-sick, and
the pianist was obliged to leave off and call for a basin; and the
choristers grew tremulous, as if they were amateur baritones cultiva-
ting a vibrato, and somebody who had looked out of the window
exclaimed that the screw-steamer, which had been placed with its
head to the ocean, was towing them quickly out towards the North
Foreland. The First Lord of the Admiralty discharged the unlucky
officer who spoke upon the spot—but the statement was true not-
withstanding. Their Lordships, however, like true Englishmen,
would not own they were beaten, but when the screw-steamer had
towed the paddle-wheel vessel as far as Margate Jetty, they con-
sented to land as they had engagements for the evening.
They returned in a special train to London, in time for the
Meeting of Parliament that night, but nothing was said on the
subject until about three months afterwards, when, in answer to a
question of which notice had been given, the First Lord of the


Admiralty stated, “ That although the question of the Honourable
Member might be considered premature, and he might be open to the
charge of attempting to anticipate the Official Report, which would
be presented to Parliament, yet he would inform the Honourable
Member that their Lordships were entirely satisfied with the result
of the recent trial which had, in their opinion, triumphantly vindicated
their judgment, and fully established the superiority of the paddle-
wheel to the screw as a mode of propelling; at the same time, in
deference to sentiments expressed in that House, a number of screw-
steamers would be constructed in order that the public might judge
of their utility in active service. 5 ’ This is about as near as the
official mind can go to a confession of defeat: and this was the satis-
factory result of the biggest tug of war of which we have any
record. —Davy Jones.
VARIETIES FROM OUR OWN “ FLANEUR.”
It is not necessary for a ship’s carpenter to understand plane sailing.
The bight of a rope is dangerous.
The mariner’s compass has done some of the most important needlework in the
world.
When is a ship said to be ambitiously in love ?
When is she said to be judiciously in love ?
When is she said to be foolishly in love ?
What ship is that which has two mates and no captain ?
THE WHIST TOURNAMENT.
Mr. Greenway and Mr. Alexander ... ... 50, 50, 29, 40, 51 = 220
Corbet ~ Mrs. Corbet... ... ... 47,32,26,53
~ Groom ~ Mr. Clarke ... ... ... 50, 31, 51, 28, 50 = 210
„ Robertson „ „ Cunningham 50, 50, 32,41
„ Marks ~ Mrs. Ware ... ... ... 36, 50, 44, 33
Dr. Marsh ~ Mr. Primrose ... ... 38,50,50,53
THE OFFICERS AND CREW OP THE “SHANNON.”
Officers’ Department, 16; Engineers, 8; Pursers, 40 = 64. European Crew,
43; Firemen, 33; Coal Trimmers, 22 = 98. Pursers, 12; making in all 110
natives and 64 Europeans—a total of 174.
PASSENGERS.
In the Saloon we have 86 adult passengers and 24 children, with seven servants.
In the 2nd Class there are 34 adults and one child.
THE LASCARS.
The crew of aP. and O. ship numbers about 174. Of these 100 are Asiatics
and Africans, all being British subjects. The Lascar portion of the crew, or native
sailors, have an interesting history. The official word “ Lascar” means seafaring
man, and the best seamen naturally object to a vague term which would include
all sorts and conditions of longshore men, and much prefer the simple designation,
“ calassee ”or “ sailor.” The finest seamen come from Gogo, a town in the Gulf
of Cambay, about 300 miles north of Bombay. At the present time the whole


male population of this fairly large town goes to sea. Entering as a child of 10
or 12 to pull punkahs, the embryo sailor passes on in a P. and 0. ship, under the
wing of his father or uncle, to be a leading seaman of the highest scale of pay. It
is very interesting to see this town of Gogo, inhabited apparently by women and
children, and perhaps a few men on leave from their ships. Under the Moghul
Empire a fleet was maintained on the west coast of India, its chief port being
Surat. In 1600 the East India Company appeared in India, and established a
factory at Surat under treaty with Ichanger. The seamen of the Moghul fleet
were chiefly Arabs, with a few Abyssinians. Cut off from head-quarters, when
the empire begun to break up early in the eighteenth century, these men took to
piracy, and tormented the British who were struggling for their factories at
Surat. Being driven up into the Gulf of Cambay and Cutch, they formed small
colonies of sailors, and on the establishment of the Indian navy they readily took
service with the East India Company. Of good physique and brave, from their
Arab blood, with the sentiment of the sea strong in them, they were much valued
by the officers of the Indian navy. On the break up of the Indian Company, in
1858, the native crew's took service with the P. and 0. Company. For faithfulness,
courage, obedience and good seamanship, the true native of Gogo is scarcely
surpassed. Watching Lascars taking in half-frozen sails in the Chops of the
Channel, a British admiral was heard to say, “ No blue-jackets could have done it
better.” But the great increase of trade with India has created a great demand
for native seamen, which can scarcely be met, and it is difficult now to get a
whole crew of Gogo or Surat men. The P. and O. Company, however, have an
advantage over all others in obtaining good men, from the higher pay given, the
continuous service, and care which is taken of the men. The government is
parental and despotic—no grumbling or complaining is allowed, perfect and ready
obedience is required of them at all times—on the other part, the captain cares
for them as his children. When the crew have served about a year, they are all
sent home from the nearest point in India where the ship may happen to be.
The carrying of a native crew is not to save expense, but to gain efficiency; the
native being able to work in the sun, the white man is saved exposure which
would be disastrous. The same applies to the firemen. No Europeans could
endure the heat of the stoke-holes long in the tropics in ships running continuously,
as the mail packets do. The firemen and coal trimmers are natives of India
(chiefly from the interior), and men from the east coast of Africa. The latter are
generally freed slaves, and on Sunday when they are all mustered great variety of
face may bo seen. A fine specimen of a native seaman will be found in the
serang of the Shannon, Omar Hadji. —M.


The “ Shannon” Times and Maregraphy.
No. IV.] May 26, 1883.
An Editor is supposed to know everything, and to he thoroughly
saturated with news and information. But what is he to do without
a foreign correspondent, who can draw upon his imagination and
send startling items without fear of contradiction p Now that we are
in the romantic waters of the Red Sea, we shall have to call spirits
from the vasty deep. No doubt they will come. We are going,
therefore, to have recourse to the other world for information, and
there is, I may say, nothing at all startling or out of the way in this
proceeding. Editors, philosophers, and other folk, have frequently
imparted wisdom to the world through the instrumentality of the
Land of Shades. For instance, Mohammed had his dove, and Sertorius
his hind; Agrippa had a black dog, and Mr. Hepplewhite a black cat;
Numa had the nymph Egeria, and Minos, Legislator of the Cretans,
used to chat every nine years with Jupiter in a cave ; Faber and
Roger Bacon had their diabolical attendants—so has the Editor of
this paper. So beware! I said to him, as Abimelech said unto
Jedediah, “Go forth.” He went, and like the Sun Downer and the
Australian boomerang he came back again. Next week you shall
hear his revelations.
It is not surprising that ladies suffer from colds when they sit on
deck with “ clouds ” round their necks.
“ Some say the pleasure is as great
Of being cheated as to cheat.”
If this be true, some of our friends must have been thoroughly
enjoying themselves lately at Colombo and Aden.
Last night we came upon a gentleman of uncertain age, stretched
upon the deck and performing a grand nasal solo to an audience of
three cockroaches, which were rushing to and fro, apparently in a
state of great excitement, over the sleeper’s bald head. Who would
object to sleep on the Red Sea ! The only people I ever heard of who
hated and were ashamed of sleep, were the Troglodytes, and they
were a people who lived in caves, married their sisters, and slaughtered
their parents for amusement.
A STORY OF THE SEA.— Original.
I love the moonlight, particularly at the sea-side. Often when
people’s eyes are comfortably closed in slumber, I amuse myself
by gazing over the distant miles, and in imagination weave from
the ever-shifting waves, lighted by the partly clouded moon,
some lesson for human kind; but never until the day of which
I am about to speak did anything occur that 1 felt would be


worthy of taking note of, and of being handed over to the tender
mercies of Mr. Editor. It was mid Jnly, and I had been staying for
a few days at the favourite English seaside resort called Yarmouth.
Late one night I left my hotel to enjoy a pipe upon the sea shore,
and was pitching pebbles into the sea, when suddenly I heard the
rushing sound of footsteps passing at a rapid rate, and, the next
moment, saw the figure of a woman dash into the water. There was
splashing of phosphorescent spray, and then all was silent. I was
for the moment bewildered, although I took the situation in at
a glance. There was not a soul at hand, and I could swim but
little. Fortunately I remembered the water was not very deep at
that part, and as I saw a woman’s figure rise to the surface of the
sea, I dashed in, and was fortunate enough to grasp her by the leg,
and, in another minute, had her safely on dry land. She struggled
hard to get from me, crying out that she would die —“ Why do you
prevent me ? ” I told her she was a foolish woman, and held her fast.
Presently, under the bright moonlight, a train of men and women
came trailing along the sands, and I handed the would-be suicide
over to one who seemed to be her father. I moved aside, but not until
I had learned that she was the wife of a young fisherman who had
been sometime absent upon a fishing excursion, on the north coast of
Scotland. That night he had returned, and found her drinking with
some companions in a public-house. Frightened at the sudden appear-
ance of her husband, she temporarily lost her reason, and could
think of no other way of hiding her disgrace than by burying it in
the sea.
Many years passed before I revisited Yarmouth. One evening I
drove from thence to Lowestoft, some 20 miles, by the mail. The
driver, amongst other yarns, told me, much to my amusement, of the
adventure I have related, adding “ The strange part of it is, sir, that
we never could find out who that gemman was as pulled her out of
the water. She was that thankful, she wanted to thank him and tell
him how grateful she was he kept her from goin’ in again, but we
could not happen on him anyway. She has never forgot him, and
she is a ’appy woman now, with chubby young faces round her to
cheer and keep her company when her husband is away —and mind
you, sir, she teaches those youngsters to say a little prayer for the
gentleman who saved dear mother —and here we are, sir, at the
hotel, and I’ll just let you down here and say good night, for I must
deliver my mails, and I thank you, sir.” There w r as a clink of silver,
and we separated. g, H. L.
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED TO THE PURSER.
Bill of Fare,
Monday —Bombay Curry, Tuesday —Russian Curry. Wednesday
—Curri a la Thursday—Venetian Curry. Friday—
Ceylon Curry. Saturday—lndian Curry. Sunday — Recapitulation
Curry. Monday —Dc Novo Curry. Keep it up—Bluebottle,


THE AMUSEMENT COMMITTEE.
To the Editor of the “ Maregraph.”
Sir —Nearly five weeks of our voyage have gone by, and we have
had only one short concert and one little farce as the result of the
efforts of the Amusement Committee.
The concert and farce were both to a great extent dependent upon
the talents of two gentlemen, who certainly deserve the thanks of
the passengers for their unceasing exertions. It can hardly be that
these two gentlemen are the only passengers capable of aiding an
evening’s entertainment, and it is quite certain that, had the Amuse-
ment Committee, when first elected, adopted the usual course of asking
the passengers separately whether they would be willing to contribute
to the general enjoyment, they would have found themselves in a
position to give a series of attractive concerts at very short intervals,
probably twice-a-week.
I am, Sir, &c., &c.,
Disappointed.
S.S. Shannon , May 23rd, 1883.
A FRIENDLY HINT.
To the Editor of the “ Maeegraph.”
Sir—As we have passed through the worst of the hot weather,
and have still nearly three weeks to spend together, I would suggest
that the Amusement Committee bestir themselves to get a few
unpretending entertainments, consisting of vocal and instrumental
music, readings and recitations, which I am sure would be highly
appreciated.
I am, Sir, yours faithfully,
Dickory.
DIVING.
While lying at Aden some very clever diving was exhibited by
native boys, several of whom dived beneath the screw of the steamer.
Another jumped from a yard-arm fully fifty feet in height. These
boys never dive head foremost, they prefer jumping. Some amuse-
ment was created by a saloon passenger, Mr. Kennedy, being
challenged to take a header from the hurricane-deck in his clothes.
The feat w T as performed and the wager fairly won. It is needless to
say the gentleman got wet! As the salt water did not improve his
clothes, we hope the bet won is sufficient to give him fresh habi-
liments. On reappearing he was greeted with humorous jeers from
the passengers, such as “ Ho, ho! take a dive ! ” “ One shilling a
dive,” &c., &c. Mr. Kennedy was, however, satisfied to scramble
into a native boat, giving us a sickly smile.
X. Y. Z.


We have received several contributions in verse referring to the
decease of our late fellow-passenger, Mr. E. H. Scott. We thank
the contributors very much, but for obvious reasons it is undesirable
that they should find a place in the “ Maregraph.” The feelings of
surviving relations are rarely soothed by effusions of this kind,
however well-intentioned.
To the Editor of the Maregraph.
Sir —I venture to suggest that a very interesting part of our
history has been neglected in the “ Maregraph,” viz., “ The Log.”
Presumably it would have been written up by some one before the
end of the voyage, but as the Isthmus of Suez is a dividing line
between Continents, I foresee that after we have passed that sandy
ridge, the effort to tell the story of one’s life from day to day will be
so trying, that justice will not be done to it. Who, after the wonders
of that unique city, Yaletta, with its streets of stairs, palaces of knights,
and pickled monks, will care to look back across the great sea that
we have traversed. Yet, when the voyage is happily completed, it
may be that some of the possessors of the various numbers of the
“Maregraph” might feel a regret that in its paper no record of
places and things of interest through which we have passed should
have been made. Nor, I think, ought such a remarkable voyage as
we have made hitherto, as regards weather, to go unrecorded In
recognition of the services rendered by the weather we ought to
acknowledge the delightful absence of westerly gales off the coast of
Australia, and especially while rounding Cape Lewen, when it was
our bounden duty to expect, and to passively endure, some amount of
personal discomfort from those operations of nature that in two
senses result in, and are the result of, the rolling of the vessel. In
fact, we have been assailed by no bad weather since leaving Sydney,
and only heard of a gale while lying snug at the pier of Williamstown.
Those who remember those glorious days and nights when we flew
past the Australian shores, when we saw Wilson’s Promontory stark
and rugged in the moonlight, and Bald Head, the Eclipse Group and
Michaelmas Island, wave-worn and gray, standing forth as, through
the ages, in silent protest against the war of wind and water, will
readily forgive those one or two days when the Shannon rolled her
steel body about in an uncomfortable way. It is true that the
necessity of rolling does not satisfactorily appear to the unfortunate
passenger who has a thwartship berth, but one must remember that
to float on a liquid that moves in all kinds and sorts of unfortunate
ways simply means to move also, and it is quite a “ dry land ” notion
that it is the ship that does it. The blame should rather be attached
to the sea-girt position of our magnificent Australian Colonies.
Fortune thus smiling upon us, we sped away before favouring
breezes, light and pleasant, towards the Equator. Our course was
exactly N. 39 W., and from Lewen to Colombo we made an average
daily run of 295 miles. The Line was crossed on the morning


of the 10th May, and we dropped anchor in Colombo waters
at six a.m. on the 12th. With such precision and unerring accuracy
was the Shannon held on her course, that we came right up
to Galle lights as if we had sighted them from the Lewen itself.
By the thoughtful kindness that runs through and underlies
the administration of affairs on board our beautiful vessel, the run
from Galle lights to Colombo was so arranged as to bring us into
port in time for those who desired to catch the early train to Kandy,
the ancient capital, as everyone knows, of Ceylon. But, beguiled by
the prospect of a lengthened stay in Colombo, demoralised by the
indolence born of ship-board luxury and “ Dolce far niente,” wo
frustrated and brought to nought the nicely-balanced calculations of
our good commander. Only a few exhibited sufficient energy to avail
themselves of the advantages offered, and, as fate would have it,
even those energetic ones missed their reward, and frequently
returned with tales of flood-broken lines and weekly reckoning on
the morrow, which, so far as our own excursions to Kandy went,
never came ; they did not look as disappointed as they ought to have
done. And now, as the quarter-masters are bringing up benches and
making other bedtime preparations, I feel I must postpone further
recollections of Colombo till next week, when I trust you will spare
me again a quiet corner of the “ Maregraph.” — I am, Sir, &c., Delta.
NOTES ON THE RED SEA.
Some fifteen years ago the terrors of the Red Sea were great. It
can now be safely affirmed that science has done much to make the
passage through its dreaded waters a matter of ordinary travel.
Terrors are usually associated in our minds with dark things—here
they co-existed with bright skies and blue waters. The patience and
sufferings of the officers of the old Indian Navy, who so laboriously
surveyed these waters for the generations that were to come after,
often excited my intense interest and admiration; without the
stimulant of fame, in such vessels as we saw at Aden do duty as
light-ships, they toiled on, exploring interminable coral reefs, without
proper food, exposed to a pitiless sun. They, however, have the
honour of being the pioneers of the Overland Route. Do not we on
this day owe them something? We think of the long sea voyage
round the Cape with a shudder. But for some time after the F. O.
ships began running here, it appeared to be but a doubtful advantage
to exchange time and health for quick despatches sometimes to the
other world in a fit of apoplexy. Small, low in the water, with much
internal heat generated by a vast consumption of coal, one side
roasted in the morning the other in the afternoon, the ships were ill-
calculated to carry human beings through such a hot bath as the Red
Sea in July, August, and September.
The chief evil was our proximity to the water. The volumes of
vapour ascending from water of a temperature of over 90° were
breathed by the unfortunates on board, and all sorts of ills came


from, defective oxygenation of the blood. It is a fact that on more
than one occasion the ships were turned round hcad-to-wind, to get a
breath of fresh air for the passengers. How all is changed. In-
creased speed has shortened the passage. Elevated decks and im-
proved ventilation have, in the language of a recent traveller of
experience, turned “ the dreaded passage into a pleasant summer
trip.”
M.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“ Old Scratch.” —Yes, madam (we presume from the handwriting that the
communication is from a lady), we are quite of your opinion that it is not
“ gentlemanly or nice ” to sneeze loudly and continually, “ with a long drawn sigh
after each sneeze.” But we cannot help it. Perhaps the gentleman is in love. It
does make people sneeze sometimes. The Eabbins say that before the time of
Jacob men only sneezed once, then immediately died. A sneeze is usually fol-
lowed, in European or Asiatic countries, by a blessing from the bystanders. On
the occasions to which you refer, however, wc have no doubt the blessings were
forgotten. Depend upon it, the gentleman is in love.
“Sweet Seventeen.” —Yes, fair damsel, we heard of the “pairing,” but the
list was incomplete, so cannot be published. Was the editor offended ? Oh dear,
no ! In common gallantry he is-bound to believe, with every other gentleman in
the ship, that the lady assigned him is the most charming, graceful, and accomp-
lished of her sex on board the Shannon.
“ Beeswax.” —We cannot interfere with the black cat. We think that it is very
harmless, if not ornamental. To throw it overboard would be a cat-astrophe.
MARKET NEWS.
Sheeps’ eyes ... A good supply from the Australian Market.
Kids ... ... Market much overstocked.
Geese ... ... Supply unlimited.
Ducks ... ... Little ones.
Soap ... ... Plenty—soft.
Hops ... ... Small and few. Demand not great in the Eed Sea.
ABOUT THAT LIST OF PAIES !
It is said that a spy has been prying about
In the futile attempt to discover
The likings the ladies so rarely let out,
And the name of each favourite lover.
This sneak had decided to publish a list
Of the matches he oddly supposed to exist,
But the Editor said, “ If you do I’ll be —kissed ! ”
And threw the mean vagabond over.
The moral is short:
It is, “Never spoil sport,”
And, if you can’t find out a mate of your own,
Contrive to let other folks’ business alone.
Davy Jones.


DIALOGUES OF THE DAY.
I. —Heard in the Music Room: —
For two hours A. had been playing his best,
When B. called out, “ Pray, chummy, give us a rest,
For the people, I’m sure, if you left them a choice,
Would much rather hear my melodious voice.
For the songs that I sing
Are the sweetest,
Completes!,
And neatest
Of samples of that sort of thing.”
From the piano A. rose in a terrible rage,
And says he, “ Mr. 8., I’m game to engage
That, so long as I play, all the folks will attend,
While they don’t take much notice of you my young friend.
And all people agree
In admiring,
Requiring,
Desiring
Performances given by me.”
II. —Echoed from the Fo’castle: —
The lovely Miss B. and the brave Mr. A.
Sat up in the forecastle flirting one day;
And a handsomer couple you rarely will see
Than the brave Mr. A. and the lovely Miss B.
The lady said “ Darling! ” and he replied “ Dear! ”
And she asked “ Is there truth in the news that I hear,
That some scamp, prying into our little affairs,
Has coupled the names of the lovers in pairs ? ”
“No ! no! ” cried the lover, “ I’m happy to say
That the Editor stood in the vagabond’s way ;
May his name long be blessed who the lovers befriended,
And stopped the disclosures the tattler intended! ”
Says she, “ I agree; and, betwixt you and me,
I think I’ll go downstairs and kiss Mr. G.”
Again spoke the lover these words in her ear,
“ Kiss one who is very much nearer, my dear.”
But whether she did so or not I can’t say,
Since I thought it but kind to get out of the way.
Davy Jones.
Why arc the Stewards of the Shannon like race-horses ?
REJECTED COMMUNICATIONS.
Puss in the Corner. —Your letter is amusing, but would cause unnecessary
annoyance. Puss is too personal. Do not be offended, but try again.
A. B. C. —Too personal. Yes, I will return it you.


The "Shannon” polka
BY
E. RANDOLPH ARNDELL.






The “ Shannon ” Times and Maregraph.
No. V.]
THE COSTUME BALL.
The most important and interesting of the excellent series of enter-
tainments given during the voyage took place on Saturday last, when
the long-expected costume ball was held. The costumes had evidently
been planned with great taste and care, and executed for the most
part by the wearers themselves with extreme skill. The result was,
although they wei’e impromptu, and constructed from the materials
nearest at hand, they were far more interesting than is the case when
the whole matter is one of expenditure, and the details are left to
the professional costumier. The approaches to the ball-room were
attractively lighted by two files of Lascars holding lamps. These
attendants were drawn up on the staircase, their snowy robes, im-
passive faces and dark complexions contrasting impressively with the
gay habiliments of the guests. The ceremony of reception commenced
at a quarter to eight, when Captain Murray and a number of ladies,
who assisted as hostesses, took their station at the upper end of the
ball-room, which was gaily decorated with flags and well lighted.
The guests arrived with great punctuality, and as they entered they
were greeted with well-deserved applause. Forty-two original cha-
racters were assumed by 21 ladies and 21 gentlemen, and they were
all admirably made up; indeed, considering the difficulties attendant
upon the preparation, some of them were justly entitled to great
credit for the manner in which those obstacles had been overcome.
The ladies especially had rendered much valuable assistance, not only
by their just and accurate construction of their own costumes, but by
the aid they had given to the gentlemen, who, without their kindly
help, would have been at a great disadvantage.
The announcements were made by Mr. Powell, who introduced
in rapid succession the following ladies and gentlemen :
Spanish Lady Miss Davis.
Nun Miss Longmuir.
Queen of Gold Mines ... ... ... Mrs. Oliver.
Queen of Silver Mines ... ... ... Miss Affleck.
Old Woman who lived in a Shoe ... Miss Clarke. •
Fisher Woman ... ... ... ... Miss Atkins.
Flower Girl ... Miss Sievers.
Turkish Princess ... ... ... Mrs. John Egberts.
Huntress... ... ... ... ... Miss Burt.
Grace Darling Miss Moore.
Spanish Lady ... ... ... ... Mrs. Cunningham.
Bleached Indian Woman ... ... Miss Coleman.
Queen of Gipsies ... Miss Marks.
Flora Miss Ada Marks.
French Peasant Miss B. Marks.
Patience Miss A. Clarke.
Little Bo Peep ... ... ... ... Miss F. Clarke.
Eed Hiding Hood Miss Ida Munro.


Colleen Bawn ... ... ... ... Miss B. Gumming.
Mother Hubbard ... ... ... Mrs. Ware.
Robinson Crusoe Mr. J. S. Marlet.
Brigand ... Mr. Oliver.
Albanian Mr. King.
Neapolitan Fisherman ... ... ... Mr. Arndell.
Cingalese Chief Mr. F. Marks.
Australian Swagman ... ... ... Mr. Robertson.
Baby Mr. Goodbun.
Venetian Gondolier ... ... ... Mr. Carlyon.
Attache Mr. Longmuir.
The Duke of Pell Mell ... ... ... Mr. Corbet.
Quartermaster, R.N. ... ... ... Mr. Curtis.
Black Cook ... ... ... ... Mr. Elderton.
Captain Jinks ... ... ... ... Mr. Lindan.
Pack of Cards Mr. Chapman.
Officer of Shannon ... ... ... Mr. H. Marks.
Fisher Boy Mr. Campbell Munro.
Mild Hindoo ... ... ... ... Mr. Bethom.
Dick Turpin Master Cunningham.
Don Januario ... ... ... ... Mr. Levi.
Greek Nobleman ... ... ... Dr. Marsh.
The Great Unknown Mr. Septimus Marks.
Messrs. Cunningham, Monro, Thomas and Greenway attended in
Masonic uniform, the handsome insignia of the higher degrees of
the order worn by the two gentlemen standing first on the list being
specially interesting. Mr. S. R. Groom wore the wig and robes of a
barrister-at-law, and Mr. Maloney the cap and gown of an under-
graduate. In all the announcements numbered fifty, and a number
of ladies and gentlemen in evening dress attended as spectators, and
made a background for the dancers. An admirable selection of
dance music was given, with animation, by Mrs. Oliver, Miss Burt,
Miss Moore, Miss Marks, Miss Clarke, and Mr. Arndell, and the
dances were kept up merrily until the programme was exhausted.
Refreshments were served during the evening, and at 10 o’clock
supper was announced. The arrangements were all of the most
satisfactory description, and so much satisfaction was expressed at
the success of the entertainment, that a general desire for its repe-
tition has since been manifested. As this was deemed impracticable,
it has been decided to hold a full dress ball.
About 44 tons of coal is consumed daily on board of the Shannon.
The ship’s cargo consists of silk, wool, copper, tin, gold and
silver. Ivory was taken on board at Aden to the value of £27,000.
The popular barman of the Shannon says, that during the thirty
years’ experience in the Company’s service, he has never known so
much lemonade and stout drunk as during the present voyage.
On Wednesday we ran 232 miles.
On Thursday ~ 280 ~
On Friday ~ 270 „


ADVENTURE WITH LIONS.
In December, 1882, I was living at Msalala, on the banks of
Nyanza, just recovering from a distressing fever. Anxious to escape
from the natives and be alone, I determined to go butterfly hunt-
ing, taking as a matter of course my boy and gun. As was usual
I had not gone far before I sighted game, but was too weak from
recent illness to follow in pursuit. Whilst hunting in Mimopa
tangle for insects, I disturbed a strange looking animal, the size of a
goat, brownish colour, long tail, short legs, feline in aspect and move-
ment, but quite strange to me. I called for my gun, when my boy,
Backit, ci’ied out in terror, “No —flee! flee! —there are many of
them —run quickly !” “ Run ! why shall I run ? Give me the rifle —
what are they ?” I cried. “ Watoto ya Simba twana —the children of
lions, master Bga Mbio —do run away!” I snatched the gun from
him and shot “ a lion child.” I think I never saw such a picture of
terror as my boy now. Fear was written on every feature, while dank
beads of perspiration spread over his face, and away he bolted as if
he had been shot, leaving me to think over the mischief I had done.
The remaining cubs made off, and in another moment I heard a
loud roar and saw a tremendous lioness bounding towards me. I
gave myself up for lost. The terror of the boy had for the moment
unnerved me, and a lioness robbed of her whelp is not the most gentle
creature to deal with. I turned —I saw the lioness gained upon me —
her growls grew louder and fiercer. I thought she would pause at
the body of her cub, but she made straight at me. There was no
escape, and I am not accustomed to retreat; realising that I had done
wrong I halted, just as a parting yell came from my boy, and deter-
mined to face it out. My sudden halt caused the lioness to stop
instantly, and there she stood, lashing her tail, growling, roaring, and
displaying her wrath in the most unfeigned manner, not more than
twenty yards from me. Her consort, who had suddenly appeared
and joined in the pursuit, also came to a halt.
I now had time to inspect them, and saw that they were of the
pale, sandy-coloured variety, a sort which is noticed for its fierceness.
They were a right royal pair. There we stood, both parties feeling
there was no solution at present for the business in hand. What
was Ito do. It was a lovely shot, but there were two; kill cfne, the
other would take vengeance. Wound the lioness, what then ? At
last I began to retreat, facing my foes. When I had retired some 200
yards my foes returned to the dead body of the cub, whose skin I had
determined to possess. There they stood defiantly growling. I
resolved upon a ruse, so I suddenly set up a yell, waved my arms in
the air, and shouted like a madman, and in a moment both lion and
lioness bounded into the bush as if they had been shot. After waiting
some little time I obtained the body of the cub, which I shouldered
and returned triumphant to camp, very much to the astonishment of
Backit, who was organising a body of terrified natives to sally forth
and recover what remained of my dead body.


SLAVERY.
The following facts regarding slavery related by eye-witnesses
may be interesting. It is from the country west of the long C.
African lake called Tanganika that a large proportion of white and
black ivory finds its way to the coast. Arab traders not only
encourage and materially assist one tribe to attack and destroy the
villages of weaker neighbours, slaying those who resist and carrying
off the remainder as slaves, but they themselves send out bands of
men for a like purpose. Several hundred human beings having been
acquired by warfare or purchase (the cost of slaves in these parts
varying from a few yards of cloth to a few beads), they are con-
ducted, some in chains, some in yokes or forked logs of wood, which
are secured round their necks by an iron nail, to the shores of the
lake.
During this part of their journey many fall from exhaustion,
hunger and disease. When unable to proceed further, if not
despatched by a club or spear, the poor wretch is tied to a tree to
prevent his escape and ensure his becoming the prey of the hyena or
other wild animals, and thus instil terror into the hearts of their more
fortunate companions. On reaching the Lake fresh horrors await
them. Packed like joints of meat into boats, one upon another, till
these native craft would certainly sink if more were added, unable to
move in the least, they are ferried across the lake to Ujiji. In this
town many Arabs are said to keep slaves of a cannibal race for the
purpose of eating the bodies of those who have been killed for
disobedience, or for attempting to escape.
Before resorting to this extreme measure, it is usual to keep the
poor wretches heavily bound with chains in dark loathsome cellars,
so as to thoroughly crush out from the strong-minded the obstinacy
which the sense of being wronged and the love of freedom naturally
engenders. On the eastward journey, although they have carried
ivory for their master, when they get into camp, instead of resting,
they have to go out and look for food. Roots and leaves of trees, if
not poisonous, and locusts, are eagerly sought after. By cutting
firewood, and pounding or grinding corn for the natives of the place,
they may also earn a little bran, but the majority prefer to go into
the gardens to help themselves. This their masters encourage them
to do. I have known them, when in large numbers, defy the natives
belonging to the village, and like a swarm of locusts, clear their
gardens of everything that was edible. Whilst thus endeavouring to
save themselves from starvation, many of the poor wretches are
speared by the owners of the soil. Slave caravans from the interior
very often bring with them small-pox, which not only produces
frightful havoc in their ranks, but infests the towns and villages
through which they pass ; most of those who survive these trials, if
not transported elsewhere, are retained for caravan work, and but a
small percentage of those first captured ever attain the comparatively
happy position of household slaves,


COLDS.
There are few matters so important to a globe-trotter, and none,
I suppose, concerning which he takes so little heed, as precaution
against taking cold. Your friend would as readily recommend you
to take care of your soul as of your chest, your neck, or your feet.
Advice upon any of these matters from a sensible person is likely to
meet with a sneer of contempt, especially from young people who are
disgusted at any attempt to coddle them, and these remonstrances on
their part will last until they get that
“ Hell o’ a’ diseases,”
the toothache, supplemented, perhaps, with a little rheumatism. The
experience of medical men in all countries, supplemented by the
returns of mortality, prove that there are few dangers so serious as
“ only a cold.” Everyone, too, appears to have a latent knowledge
that colds are not safe companions, but it is only when high pressure
is put on, or when congestion of the lungs, cough with a blood
expectoration, lumbago and consumption heave in sight, that they
determine to listen. But then it is too late. Then arrives the day of
the “ I told you so ” people. Young persons especially are fond of
telling you that cold is healthy, “ that exposure hardens,” and
the like, but they decline to believe that w T hen it strengthens
it is strengthening only those who are naturally strong, killing off
all those of low vitality. I see people frequently in a steaming
perspiration rush to open windows for the breeze, or come suddenly
from a hot dining-room into the coolest part of the ship, opening
doors to sit in that “ delicious draught,” plunging when heated in
cold baths, wearing damp clothes and boots, utterly regardless of the
deadly chills creeping insidiously and surely into their loins and
limbs. You advise and warn, but “ Gallic will hear none of these
things.” He will not listen to the voice of the charmer, charm he
never so wisely. You may pipe to them, but they are like children in
the market-place. You may as well throw your pearls before swine
as advise, unless you do so professionally and receive a fee.
Instances were given in our last issue of the use of steam as a pro-
pelling power for ships, w r hich carried us back to the 16th century,
and we then pointed out the existing belief that steam ships are
of a recent date, very few knowing that they existed before
Fulton ran his steamer upon the Hudson in 1808. The same
erroneous impression, we believe, exists in regard to armour-plated
ships, the usually accepted belief being that they were not used prior
to the American Civil War, and that the French launched the first
ironclad, La Gloire, in 1860. Many instances, however, of armour-
clad ships can be given long prior to these dates. It will be sufficient
to mention the Santa Anna , which was built by the knights of St.
John of Jerusalem and plated with lead in 1530. The plates were
fixed on with bolts of brass. The Santa Anna was used in the
siege of Tunis. It is interesting to remember that the Romans and
others placed their shields over the sides of their triremes, thus
effectively converting them into armour-clad boats.


THE CONCERT.
On Thursday night a well-arranged concert was given in the
saloon of the Shannon. The performance was attended by all the
passengers, who passed a very enjoyable evening. It was evident,
from the enthusiastic applause with which each vocalist was received,
and the frequent encores which followed, that their efforts were
highly appreciated by the audience. The following was the pro-
gramme :
GRAND CONCERT.
S.S. Shannon. May 31st, 1883.
PROGRAMME.
Piano Solo ... ... “ Chanson a Poire ” ... Mr. Burnand.
( Miss B. Marks,
Trio ... ... ... “The Wreath” ... Mr. Arndell and
(, Mr. Longmuir.
Song ... ... ... “ The Vagabond ” ... Mr. Levi.
Song ... ... ... “ Let me dream again” ... Mrs. Atkins.
Piano Solo ... ... Impromptu—Schubert ... Miss Burt.
Song ... ... ... “Hearts of Oak” ... Mr. Ellis.
Duet ... ... ... “ Pulaski’s Banner ” f Mrs. Clarke and
( Miss Moore.
Chorus... ... ... “ Advance Australia ” ... Choir.
Song “ Oh, is there not one maiden true ?” Mr. Arndell.
Piano Solo ... ... Waltz—Faust ... Miss B. Marks.
Song “ Darby and Joan” ... Miss Moore.
Dialogue “ Julius Caesar ” f Messrs. Arndell
v I and Marks.
Piano Solo ... ... “Le poete mourant ” ... Miss Clarke.
Song ... ... ... “Life” ... Mr. Longmuir.
Finale “ God save the Queen.” ... Omnes.
THE SUEZ CANAL.
_ The Suez Canal has a history, intrinsic and adventitious, which is
quite without parallel. The conception of one mind, despised at its
birth, almost strangled in its infancy, it has become a subject of
European importance. At a State ball in Paris, M. de Lesseps was
presented by the Empress Eugenie to the Turkish Minister, with a
strong recommendation. The Porte, still grateful to France for her
share in the defence against Russia in ’54-’56, was nothing loth to
grant favour to a protege of the Empress of the French, and the
firman, a concession, was obtained.
Unnoticed probably at the time of its origin, a small beginning
was made at the Mediterranean end, and soon afterwards Lord
Palmerston stepped in to prevent forced labour, which was one of the
lesser details of the bargain, from being used in its construction—our
Government was firmly persuaded of the futility of the whole scheme,
but deemed it necessary to throw every obstacle in the way of it!
As the work, however, progressed, new thoughts arose, and the
prospect of its ultimate completion—another road to India and


Australia, entirely in the hands of the French —sent a shudder
through the British Constitution, and again Lord Palmerston
returned to the charge for the purpose of crushing the Suez Canal.
At a very low ebb from want of funds, even the French somewhat
weary of it, the time seemed ripe for a finishing blow.
By the original firman, five miles of land on each side became the
property of the Canal Company. By the exclusion of English
money, the Company was wholly French, and it required no great
effort to see how easily that ten mile strip could become the property
of the French nation, who then would hold the gate of the Bed Sea.
The objection to this was reasonable, and readily allowed by Turkey,
and the concession was withdrawn. It mattered not at all to the
almost used-up Canal Company whether they owned a mile or two of
desert more or less in the low state of their finances, but the whole
affair was hailed by their astute leader as the means of their
salvation from ruin. “ Compensation ” was now the cry. The
appeal was favoured by the Empress, and to make all smooth and
pleasant between England, France and Turkey, the Emperor was
made arbitrator. Presently an award of £4,000,000 replenished the
empty exchequer, and the Canal "was finished. Egypt was called on
to pay the money. Has she not ever been despoiled since the old
time ? She got a quantity of what were at the time considered
shares of doubtful value. These said shares were recently sold to
the British Government for £4,000,000. Was ever engineer so
“ Hoist with his own petard,” as was Lord Palmerston ?
(To he continued ).
OUR LOG.
Colombo was looking its best and brightest in the early morning
sunshine, that already promised a truly tropical day. The irregular
red roofs, ranged along the shore, stood out in vivid contrast with the
exquisitely fresh time of the umbrageous lettuce trees, themselves
relieved by the more sombre foliage of the cocoanut palms, acacias,
and many other European-looking trees, whose names we did, not
learn. On our right the waves were washing eagerly against, and
occasionally overleaping, the breakwater, beyond which rocked a very
fleet of native fishing boats, apparently in continuous danger of being
swamped. By 7 a.m. the ship was surrounded by Cingalese craft,
manned by graceful brown men arranged in scraps of gorgeous colour,
and the decks were swarming with merchants offering gems and
tortoiseshells, trifles and strings of beads, and such like small
varieties as delight the feminine (and sometimes the masculine)
mind. After the early breakfast there was a general exodus to
escape the discomfort of coaling, many of the passengers electing
to remain on shore till the hour of departure on the Monday.


Saturday and Sunday were passed in visiting various places of
interest. Among them were Mount Lavinia, the Cinnamon Gardens,
the Museum, Government Offices, English Cathedral, Queen’s House,
Hindoo Temple, &c., &c., due justice being also done to the long
line of bazaars, with their persistent and loquacious salesmen, to the
interesting native quarter, and to the Market place, with its piles of
mangoes, bananas, and the jack fruit that puts one in mind of a
green porcupine stripped of its quills. Most refreshing to the
voyager’s eye, too, was that long wide lawn of bright grass that
stretches away by the shore half-a-mile or more from the quaint
clock-tower lighthouse in the Fort, the Rotten Row of Colombo,
flanked on the further side by the handsome English barracks —the
largest in India.
The native inhabitants of Colombo comprise several varieties of
race —Cingalese proper, Tamils, Malays, Moormen, a sprinkling of
Indians, the largest proportion of all being Eurasians, each variety
wearing its own distinctive, oriental-looking, or less picturesque
dress. The Eurasians form a sort of upper stratum among the
tradespeople, and, in spite of natural disadvantage of colour, aspire
to public offices, clerkships, &c. They are known as “ burghers,” not
that they are entitled to any superior civil rights, but as indicating
their remote descent from the early Dutch and Portuguese settlers.
Spite of the high temperature and scorching sun, it was with
much regret that at noon, on the 14th May, we watched the beautiful
curved shores of Colombo receding in the distance, and turned our
faces towards Aden. Fortune still favoured our course. An allowance
of two days had been granted to the Shannon for the monsoon,
but it was not anticipated that we should meet with head winds and
bad weather. The only noticeable sign of change of season was the
westerly direction of the gentle winds, and, when approaching Cape
Guardafui, a damp freshness in the air, unlike anything we before
felt. Experienced ones said they could smell the monsoon, and
certainly there was a salt-sea flavour in the atmosphere. The passage
was smooth and delightful, with clear, soft moonlight nights, that
made sleeping on deck a very luxury.
For the information of those of our company who have not before
travelled by the Overland Route, it will be well to explain briefly
what this unknown and oft-times dreaded monsoon is. The word
simply means “ season,” and in the month of May the season changes,
the wind coming up from the south-west laden with rain clouds. In
other parts of the globe the equatorial region has its trade winds in
the oceans, which always flow from N.E. and S.E.; but the Arabian
Sea, Bay of Bengal, and China Sea have these monsoons, which change
periodically. This is brought about by the mass of land enclosing
those seas —the sun, of course, being the original cause, as it travels
north and south of the equator. The passage from Ceylon to Aden,
even in the monsoon, is not at all to be dreaded in a fine ship. The
delicious freshness of the air, which has come all the way from the
Cape of Good Hope to greet us, compensates for an occasional dip of


the bows, as the good ship thrusts the bright waves aside in her
onward course; and there are only two or three days of strong wind
on any passage.
, I* was very early on the morning of the 22nd of May—about
midnight, in fact —when the Shannon, after a 7 days’ and 12 hours’
passage, lay-to in view of the burnt-out volcano called Aden, that
stronghold by virtue of which England holds supremacy in the Red
Sea.
On Friday morning a Meeting Extraordinary was held in the
Smoking Room—Mr. Goodbun in the Chair. Proceedings strictlv
private.
THE WHIST TOURNAMENT.
The Whist Tournament resulted as follows :
1. Dr. Marsh and Mr. Primrose ... ... ... ... 241
2. Mr. Alexander and Mr. Greenway ... ... ... 220
3. Mr. Clerk and Mr. Groom ...” ... ... ... 210
Mr. Corbet and Mrs. Corbet 208
Mrs. Ware and Mrs. Marks ... ... ... ... 203
Mr. Chamberlain and Mr. Robertson 200
PUZZLES FOR THE FRENCH CLASS.
1. —G.
2. Mon premier est la premiere demon esp&ce.
Ma seconde n’a point d’egal.
Mon tout comme puis je vous le dire.
3. Je suis le capitaine de vingt cinq soldats, sans moi, Paris sera pris.
The above was written by the Empress Eugenie to Napoleon after her escape from Paris.




The “Shannon” Times and Maregraph.
No. Vl.] Saturday, June 9, 1883.
A LOYE SONG.
I wait for you, I watch the time
That wages well my fight;
You’ll love me yet, and I can wait
The dawning of the light.
I wait as waits the man who sows
Good seed in early spring,
And calmly sleeps the while it grows
To bud and blossoming.
And though the flowers may bloom too late
To comfort or to save,
I will not murmur at my fate,
They’ll flourish on a grave.
Davy Jones.
P. P. C.’s have been left at the office of this paper by “ Jumbo,” “ The Turtle
Doves,” “ Yeito,” “Naturally Dear Boy,” “ Soorley,” “Native Companion,”
“ Such a Headache,” “ Spoons,” “ The Shark,” “ The Sumber,” “ The Rabbit,”
“ Grinder,” “ The Chatoviahshah,” and “ The Growler.” To one and all adieu.
Jubeo te bene valere —vale !
HOME.
Ah ! home, sweet home! where’er we stray,
Thy influence still retain, when grey,
Then shall creature fancy steal
Back to the days of joyous youth,
The days of innocence and truth,
And joys that old age cannot feel.
In contemplation oft I see
My childhood sketched by memory;
Once more I’m trifling on the lawn,
Where waiting, I expectant stood,
Eeady to rush through field and wood,
Where all was home.
Then comes the fear —the heaving breast —
The quickened pulse—the sigh represt —
And more—much more, as o’er
The sea calm evening creeps,
And Nature murmurs as she weeps
“ His youth is o’er.”
Alas for those who have no home,
Who far in distant deserts roam,
Unpitied and alone !
What thoughts must dwell within his breast,
Who is alone his only guest,
And still lives lonely on.
Say, where is home ? Where’er are friends,
Where’er the sun of friendship lends
Its grateful light;
No matter wheresoe’er we rove,
If with us we have friends we love,
There is our home.
Vox,


TO THE COOK.
We may live without poetry, music and art;
We may live without conscience, and live without heart;
We may live without friends, we may live without books,
But civilised man cannot live without cooks.
(Bulwer Lytton. Editor’s Note.)
GIBRALTAR.
Gibraltar was known to the Phoenicians under the name of Calpe,
one of the pillars of Hercules, the other being Abyla, or as it is
now called, Apes Hill. The rock was first fortified, a.d. 711, by
Taric-ebn-Zeyad, a Moor. It was from this old warrior that the
rock takes its name —Tarics Hill or Gebal-al-Taric, now contracted
to Gibraltar. The old rock seems to have had a lively time of it,
and has passed successively through the hands of the Phoenician,
Carthaginian, Roman, Gothic, Saracen, and Spanish nations, until
at last she settled down, very properly and comfortably, into the
possession of the English, and we mean to keep her. There is very
little of the picturesque about Gibraltar, except a few Moors scattered
about the streets and markets. The only mercantile building is the
Exchange, and that is very modest in its pretensions. Leaving the
town with a guide you can reach the summit of the rock, from where
a magnificent view may be obtained of the Ronda Mountains and the
Sierra Nevada. The top of the rock is about three miles long, and
divided into three portions. The northern division is marked by
a hill called Wolf’s Crag, and the height of the rock at this point is
1,200 feet above the level of the sea. In the central position has
been built a signal house, where record is kept of the arrival and
departure of steamers from all parts of the world. Here you get an
extensive view of the coast of Spain, the Mediterranean Sea, the
Atlas Mountains in Africa, Ceuta, the convict station of the Spaniards,
and the coast of Barbary. Upon the third division, or southern
eminence, stands the remains of a tower, built by General O’Hara,
and called after his name. You should not quit the rock without
seeing the old Moorish Castle, Spanish Town, the new arena, and
the galleries which are cut through the solid rock, and are remarkable
for the vastness of their conception, and for the skill, energy and
industry expended upon their construction. There are plenty of
caves worth a visit, the principal are —St. Michael’s and Genista.
The climate is agreeable from November to May, but during the
remaining months the easthvind, or “ Levanter,” prevails. It is rather
preposterous that the King of Spain still includes Gibraltar in his
dominions, and in official documents mentions it as “ temporarily in
possession of the English.” It has been in our possession now about
170 years.
THE SUEZ CANAL {continued).
The whole Capital subscribed and acquired amounted to about
£17,000,000 in round numbers, The actual cost of the work was not


more than £11,000,000, the balance having been paid away in interest
on the original sum subscribed.
The Canal completed was by no means a commercial success. It
had been carefully kept out of sight that the Red Sea was not
navigable by sailing vessels, and how was a sufficient quantity of
steam-shipping to be found to make it pay ? Doubtless the Canal
would be used by steamships carrying vakiable cargoes, such as silk
or tea, which paid a large freight, but the cost of steam-navigation
precluded carrying the rough produce of the East, cotton, wool, rice,
hides, &c., except in sailing ships. It is not generally known that
about 1870 some British patriots were in treaty with the Suez Canal
Company for the purchase of their property. I believe that some
£4,000,000 were offered for it, but the Suez Canal Company held,
their hand, for reasons which soon became obvious. The whole of
the iron ship-building yards in the United Kingdom were hard at
work turning out steamships almost by the mile and by the acre.
They could only be intended for the Suez Canal. The cause of this
was that an invention which had long been in mens’ minds had
become perfected. The compound engine for steamships had reduced
the cost of working by at least one-half, and the steamer was now in
open competition with the sailing vessel.
The shortened route, via Suez, was ready, and by this co-incident
invention the canal became such a success as we have seen it to be in
the month of June, 1883. All our concern now is to find canal
enough.
THE AUSTRALIAN “ JONES ” ABROAD.
When Jones, of Australia, arrived at Plymouth by the P. and O.
S.S. Shannon, he was the proud possessor of a perfect museum of
curios, obtained by taking unfair advantage of certain simple-hearted
natives, not because he wanted the things, but because the other
passengers did the same. He found, to his surprise, that when ho
paid the duty upon his cigars (Malta and Gib.), they were not so
cheap after all, especially when he considered that they were not
really much to boast of when he bought them. At the station a
spotted stick (Colombo) fell from his roll of rugs, got between his
legs, snapped, and threw him flat upon his face. He did not knoAV
what to do with his spears (Albany) in the train. A gentleman sug-
gested taking them to the mokestalk as lightning conductors; but a
porter finally stowed them on the roof, after cutting his fingers with
the bits of bottle which have always been used for the blades of
genuine W. A. lances. Arrived at the township, where his people
lived, he found his parrot (Sydney) and puppy (Malta) both corpses,
the bird having eaten the dog’s head off, and choked itself with the
wool. Unpacking his box, he discovered some bananas (Colombo)
and oranges (Suez) that he had hidden from his cabin-mates, and
then forgotten; had gone bad, and ruined three fezzes (Port Said),


four ostrich plumes (Aden) and an embroidered hanging from Tunis
(Gib.). This was aggravating, but he found out afterwards he could,
if necessary, replace them in London for less money. The puzzle-
rings (Colombo), his friends thought, might be very nice if he could
remember how to put them together; so might the lizard dishes (Gib.),
but they came to grief by colliding with a lump of coal (Aden), which
would have been a nice present for the washerwoman if he had not
packed it next the bottle of kid-reviver and gum, both of which were
smashed. The brooches and earrings, &c. (Port Said), he divided
amongst half-a-dozen or so young ladies ; but he does not know what
they think of them—how should he ? The heavy rings (Colombo) he
wore on his own fingers until he learned better, and then he hid their
flashing gems in the obscurity of the pawn-shop. He doesn’t care for
his walking-stick— chibouk —(Port Said) now, he was explaining one
day, when a thriving family of cockroaches were suddenly drawn into
his mouth. He got on better with most of his other purchases, but
his grandmother put her eye out with the mast of his catamaran
(Colombo), and one of his nephews swallowed a slab of polished rock
(Gib.), thinking it to be a sweetmeat; and certainly it was unfortu-
nate that a centipede was in the lace (Malta), which bit his maiden
aunt in the neck. His deck-chair (Melbourne) came to grief on the
voyage, and his possum-rug (Adelaide) was so mildewed and moth-
eaten, that he has had a small muff made out of it, which looks very
well. He still has a bottle of Florida-water (Malta), and last, but
not least, the autograph of Arabi Pacha (Colombo), which he prizes
very much; but I know, through a friend who understands Arabic,
that it really means, “You I wish at perdition.” Trade is very brisk
still at ports of call of the P. and 0., and when Jones returns to
Australia he will deal on a larger scale than ever.
CONTRIBUTION FROM A MISSIONARY.
The question is often asked of what use are missions to the
heathen, involving the expenditure of large sums of money, to say
nothing of the loss of life amongst those engaged in the work.
Are not heathen much better off and happier in their uncivilised
condition than many who dwell in more favoured lands ? In the
first place, let us see what is really their condition without the Gospel.
To a traveller who merely passes through the country without making
himself thoroughly acquainted with their habits and customs, a
correct knowledge of which can only be acquired by long residence in
their midst, they would indeed appear to be much better off than
many who are surrounded by the blessings of civilization. May they
not often be seen in their villages singing and dancing as merrily as
possible from sunset till after daybreak ? Though the experience of
other travellers may be different, I consider the East Central Africans,
amongst whom I have laboured, as anything but a drunken race;


fond as they are of their native beer, they do not, as a rule, imbibe it
too freely. By working but a few hours a day during the greater
part of the year, they are enabled to comfortably provide themselves
with the necessaries of life. What more do they want ? But there
is another side to the picture. What is the meaning of these three
groups which I continually meet with in my itinerations ? What
are they so warmly discussing ? A person has died from old age,
disease or accident, as the case may be ; his friends, in seeking for
the cause of his death, attribute it to witchcraft. An individual (it
may be some near kinsman) who is thought to have borne him
ill will, or to have coveted his property, is accused of the crime;
they bring him to trial. His accusers state their grounds of
suspicion, and urge that he be subjected to the ordeal; his friends,
pi'otesting his innocence, demand his liberation, and sometimes accuse
the accuser as the guilty party. The third group, as outsiders, state
their view of the case, and the chief, as Judge, gives his decision. I
see a small band of young men marching along guarding an
unhappy wretch, and singing a song in which the words “ magambo ”
and “ moto”—“ trial ” and “ fire”—predominate. They are taking the
accused to undergo the test which will prove to the world his inno-
cence or guilt. There are two tests: one of which consists in
swallowing poison, and another which is conducted as follows : —lnto
a large earthen pot, full of boiling water, the medicine-man throws
a few twigs of some shrub, which impart to the water its peculiar
property. Whilst this is boiling and bubbling up, the accused, sur-
rounded by a large company, puts his forearm slowly into the water,
and then as slowly withdraws it. After a few hours have elapsed,
his hands are examined, especially between the fingers ; if they are
blistered he is guilty; but if they have taken no hurt he is innocent.
If the condemned be wealthy, he may escape death by paying a large
quantity of cattle to the accuser; but if he be poor, he will most
generally meet his death at the stake. Sometimes, however, he is
killed by a blow from a knotted stick.
Again, what means these cries of “ Oooheh ” from every part of
the village P Ah ! I see, an enemy is near. The men hasten home
from their gardens, and seizing their weapons run to the fray. As a
rule the enemy, too quick for them, have carried off their cattle into
the jungle, where, fearing the foe may be laying in ambush, they
dare not follow, but return home bewailing the loss of all their
wealth, often acquired by a long life of frugality and toil. In some
villages the people are kept in constant dread of raids being made
upon them by more powerful neighbours, who may carry them off to
be sold as slaves; and we frequently meet with large tracts of land,
bearing the marks of cultivation and happy homesteads, but now
covered by thick brushwood, the home of the antelope and wild boar.
In times of drought it is usual for one or more medicine men to be
accused of withholding the rain, for which they are punished with
death. The Makua, a tribe of hunters, if unsuccessful in the
chase, accuse their wives of being the cause, and burn them at the
stake.


In a few years we fear that rum, the direful curse of aboriginal
tribes, will find its way into the midst of our dark brothers in
Central Africa ; and then how much more pitiable will be their con-
dition, if left to grope on in darkness.
Essinga la Ngai.
TO THE COOKS.
That Heaven sends meats and the devil sends cooks,
Is a proverb vve read in a number of books.
I always believed, until now, it was true ;
But this trip on the Shannon has altered my view,
For not even Old Nick sends such bad cooks as you!
Davy Jones.
LINES FOR AN ALBUM.
Good wine and good women, good books and good friends
Are the dearest of blessings that Providence sends;
And Heaven has graciously ordered it so,
That we love them the better the older they grow.
It is only with age that good wine becomes dear,
And with age a good friend’s choicest virtues appear;
And all men in every time have contest
That the oldest of books is the wisest and best.
My Muse knows her duty, and is not so bold
As to hint that a lady can ever grow old;
She yows a good woman is like a fine day,
Which grows more fine as it passes away.
Davy Jones.
TO THE PIANO.
Tinkle, tinkle, all day long,
First a piece, and then a song,
Seldom anything that’s new,
Seldom time or touch are true.
Tinkle, tinkle, night and day,
How I wish some folks that play
Would try and learn the proper way,
Or silent let the piano stay.
Davy Jones.
OUR LOO ( continued).
Aden, bleak and desolate, utterly destitute of vegetation, the very
antithesis of fair Sirendib which had so lately gladdened our eyes,
its blackened rocks, bearing silent and unanswerable testimony to a
fiery birth, rose to our view out of a sea which looked in the bright
moonlight like a mass of silver. The oldest traveller confessed that
never before now moonlight danced upon the undulations of the
glassy sea with such magic effects. There are some things not
beautiful in themselves, which a fervid imagination can bring into
the region of ecstatic beauty, but here no such effort was needed —it


was lovely. An early train distracted the slumbers of the ladies on
deck. Abundance of time, abundance of opportunity and super-added
abundance of heat, were among the advantages of a day in Aden.
The Captain said, “You must see the tanks,” and, of course, we
obeyed orders (as we are accustomed to do!). Our minds being
fully prepared overnight (has any one a distinct remembrance of that
night ?) we were not surprised at being awakened early enough by
the screams of the baby ( Shannon ) mingled with the novel cries of,
“ Have a dive, have a dive,”
Aden has been aptly named the “ Gibraltar of the East.”
Occupied at first, in 1839, on account of its harbour and value as
a strategical position and fortress, it had apparently but little chance
of commercial prosperity, for the countries around were mostly
barren and sparsely populated. The security which accompanies the
“ Union Jack,” wherever it is hoisted, has worked quite a marvellous
change in Aden —it is now quite a busy pool. Ships call daily for
coal, water, and provisions, while thousands of tons of cargo, con-
sisting of ivory, coffee, gums, skins, &c., are collected at the depot
from the coasts of Arabia, Abyssinia, the opposite coast of Africa,
and from Zanzibar. The garrison of Aden is large, consisting of
native troops from Bombay, one English regiment, and a strong
force of artillery. The government has at last taken the forti-
fications in hand, the Suez Canal having doubled the value of the
little peninsula as a shelter and defence, while it has increased the
commercial prosperity. There is a striking resemblance to Gibraltar
in the place —occupied for the same reasons —a mere garrison for the
protection of Imperial rights and possessions.
The scarcest necessary of life in Aden is water. Mutton is
plentiful, the sheep coming from Berberah on the Somali coast.
Aden cows are almost as famous as those of Alderney, having the
advantage over them of not requiring lucerne. The glue which is
produced here is the best and cheapest on the earth —this clarified
butter is a necessity with all natives for cooking purposes. Fodder
and firewood, with some vegetables, come in daily from the country.
Although it rains but seldom in Aden itself, it is certain that the
high mountain ranges in the interior attract the rain clouds, and
that the plains in their proximity are abundantly watered; at times
the rivers, however, never reach the sea. ,
When it does rain at Aden it is a deluge. Such a rainfall had
occurred a few days before our arrival, and we saw one of the
immense tanks full! It has been comically asserted by the irreverent,
that the characteristic of the Aden tanks is, that they are always
dry and empty. The famous tanks, hewn at high altitude out of the
solid rock—a stupendous work, by some ascribed to Ptolemy, br-
others to Solomon, are too well-known to ne 1 description. They
have recently been restored at a cost of abo; £40,000, are capable
of holding 8,000,000 gallons, but have only been completely filled
three times within fourteen years ; for, seeing the precariousness
of allowing a population of 20,000 to rely upon this water supply,


the Indian Government in 1867 constructed an aqueduct of seven
miles in length to convey water from distant wells into the camp.
A proposition has further been made to bring fresh water to Aden
from the Misanna Spring, 40 miles distant, but the Bombay autho-
rities have not yet consented to incur so great extra expense.
The moon was rising whitely behind the jagged cindery ridges
of Aden when the Shannon again got under weigh and steered
for Perim, concerning which a popular error exists in the public
mind, it being generally believed that when the British, 20 years
ago, stole a march on France and planted our standard upon this
second Red Sea watchtown, that the island had never before been
accounted an English possession, whereas, in point of fact, it was
occupied by the East India Company in 1799.
On we went, through Bab-el-Mandeb, with such bright skies and
gentle winds, that the wrecks alone upon its rock-bound coasts
serve to remind us of the terrors that have won for it its pathetic
name —“The Gate of Tears.” We speedily overtook the Assam,
and proceeded in company through the Red Sea, the aim being
to get through the heat as speedily as possible. We were, how-
ever, but little troubled by it, as a fresh head-wind filled our
windsails, and brought us up strong and hearty to the head of
the Red Sea, and within range of Horeb, gray and cloud-capped,
four days after passing Perim. It had been the intention of the
Shannon to ask the Assam to dinner, but she evidently was
not inclined to condescend; she kept aloof and ahead, but she
crossed and recrossed our bows in such an exasperating manner,
that we at length decided to give her the coup de grace, and
spun past her with (figuratively speaking) flying colours, dropping
anchor in Suez Bay ready to give her an ironical cheer, as later she
swung past on her way to the P. &0. Dock. “ Why did you cheer us ? ”
asks an irate lady (“ Assamite ”). “How can I be responsible for
passengers whose motto is, ‘ Advance Australia ’? ” returns our
commander with a polite bow. Indeed, we would have sung the
refrain to them had it not been Sunday.
A trip to Cairo had been arranged for some portion of the
passengers, and a picnic to “ Moses’ wells ” promised to those who
could not make the railway journey; therefore it was with murmurs,
both loud and deep, that we found our stay at Suez limited to two
hours by that body of non-respecters of persons, the P. and O. Co.,
and indeed, before we could fairly look our disappointment in the
face, we were gently steaming into the mouth of the Canal. Our
passage through the Canal was pleasant in every respect, and wonder
of wonders the authorities were amiable and gave us every facility.
We observed, however, distinct evidence of French management in
tying up three ships where one would have sufficed.
There are some few persons who consider the Suez Canal
uninteresting, who see no beauty in its sandy plains ever changing
their hues as the sun rises or sinks over them in the lonesome
desert of El-Tih (or “ The Wandering ”), stretching far away east in


purple sunset shadows, in the blue waters of the “ lakes,’ with their
margins of pure gray white sand; the calm beauty of the middle
part between the Bitter Lakes, Ismaila —a sapphire ribbon set in
silver sand, with emerald tufts of rushes here and there.
The stillness of the desert, and the.purity of everything—only
sand and water —produce a feeling in the mind seldom experienced
elsewhere ; the gliding, silent motion of the ship adds another charm.
Of course a winter gale, or a hot driving sand storm, can change the
whole thing; but these are not the normal state of affairs.
Approaching the Mediterranean, and the fair scene changes to
stagnant pools. Nile mud appears, and we feel that the sooner out
the better for us physically and mentally. But we draw in deep
breaths of the fresh sea air coming to meet us, and are of good
cheer. We began our Canal voyage on Sunday evening, stopped
for the night on Monday at a station near Kantara, and passed out at
noon on Tuesday.
An hour or so sufficed to exhaust the interest of Port Said,
a nondescript place of no importance, save as a coaling depot, and as
being the head-quarters at this end of the Canal authorities. Between
the breakwater and the quay, the harbour was crowded with shipping
and boats, and presented a busy spectacle. The rough unmade
streets, lined with cafes and Arab bazaars, were thronged with
Levantines, and Arabs and Egyptians, and had narrowly escaped
quite recently being the scene of a massacre of the Christians, owing
to the blunders of the newly-appointed police.
The passage from Port Said to Malta was over a calm sea. We
mostly sat on deck and rested our bodies and minds, reflecting on the
strange panorama we had passed through, and making feeble plans
for an immense dose of exercise and “ new things ’ at Malta.
For Malta we would refer our readers generally to the “ Guide
Book ” and other authorities. It is too near home, so likely to be
visited by us again some day, so impossible to describe in this the
very last number of the “ Maregraph,” that we are fain to leave it
alone. We landed early —no fuss-like Aden, no baby Shannon to
run us on shore. The high gray walls of the fortifications seemed to
enclose us —ship and living beings—in a kind of lethargy at first,
satisfied only that we had arrived. But only for a moment. Again
the “ Shannonites ” awoke in their strength, and faithfully did their
duty that day. This will be sufficient, it is hoped, to recall to* our
friends and shipmates the events of the day at Malta, the sights, the
walks, the drives, the lace, the beggars, the red mullet, and- the
decreasing stores of Australian gold ! We met in the streets of
Valetta with smiles and salutes, as if we had not seen one another
since leaving Albany; we searched for one another, we gave each
other up; an occasional “ Coo-e-e !”in a low tone, crossed the street,
answered probably with the Aden watchword “ Have a dive.”
Passing along the shores of Malta, and looking into St. Paul’s
Bay, at 4 p.m. (June 2nd) the picturesque cliffs and rocky
hills of Gozo were left behind, and we sailed towards Cape Bon.


Pantellaria, the scene of Shakespeare’s “ Tempest,” was passed in
the night, and next day was spent on the Coast of Tunis. We saw a
few white villages, and the larger town of Benzerta. The Cain
Rocks were passed close, and then Solita. It is expected that the
French occupation of Tunis will lead to this coast being lighted. A
most dangerous reef lies far out here, on which H.M.S. Avenger was
lost, in 1841, and a light to cover it will be most welcome to mariners.
Our nautical authority ”on board says that it is not the fearfully
dangerous rocks, far out and uncertain in position, that wreck ships
most frequently—they are too much dreaded ; but it is the inoffensive-
looking low point of land with its green bushes perhaps, which brings
ships up. Thick haze hid the coast of Algeria, so we missed seeing
Algiers.
On the sth of June we had our breeze, the first and only fresh
gale we have had on the whole passage ; and even this was in perfect
accord with our voyage, fox’ bright and crisp were the white breaking
seas, with a glorious sky overhead.
A telegram had been sent by Captain Murray, at the request of
the Shannon's passengers, to the Peninsular and Oriental Company,
for permission to call at Gibraltar. Rot an earthly thing had we to
see there in the way of business or duty, as the Assam was the ship
to call in, but the Directors telegraphed to Malta their entire assent;
and now it only lay with ourselves to arrive at a nice time, arrange
for a fine day, stay a good while, and enjoy ourselves thoroughly.
The whole of the foregoing requirements were fully satisfied; and we
sailed “ homewards,” on the evening of the 6th of June, after a
delightful visit of nearly six hours at the old “ Rock.” It has been
the finishing touch to a very pleasant voyage, and we must all feel
how much has been added to our personal enjoyment by the courtesy
of the Directors of the Company. They are successfully endeavouring
to entwine “ Quis separable” with “Advance Australia.”
Delta.
SYDNEY TO MELBOUENE.
Latitude. Longitude. Runs,
April 19 38° 4" 148’52 300
MELBOUENE TO ADELAIDE.
April 24 38° 24" 57
» 25 37° 0" S 139T8E. 299
ADELAIDE TO KING GEOEGE’S SOUND.
» 27 35° 27" S 134T2 218
n 28 35° 20" 128T0 294
„ 29 35° 18" 12247 264
KING GEOEGE’S SOUND TO COLOMBO.
May 1 33° 56" S 114 26 220
i> 2 29° 51" 110 53 306
.. 3 26° 4" 107-22 294
4 22° 15" 104-00 295
» 5 18° 24" 100-40 298


KING GEORGE’S SOUND TO COLOMBO ( continued ).
Latitude. Longitude. Runs.
Mav 6 14° 30" 97'29 279
7 10° 31" 94-09 302
„ 8 6° 36" 90-53 310
„ 9 2° 59" 87-46 390
„ 10 0° 45" N 85-04 ...... 292
„ 11 4° 21" N 81-47 E 292
COLOMBO TO ADEN.
„ 15 7° 42" N 75-31 E 262
„ 16 8° 26" 70-43 289
„ 17 9° 11" 66-19 265
„ 18 10° 01" 61-45 275
~ 19 10° 59" 57-01 285
„ 20 11° 55" 52-02 295
„ 21 12° 31" 47-11 290
ADEN TO SUEZ.
„ 23 14° 6" 42-47* 193
„ 24 18° 3" 40T4 280
„ 25 21° 51" 37-54 263
„ 26 25° 39" 35-33 261
„ 27 29° 27" 32-35 297
PORT SAID TO MALTA.
„ 30 32° 46" N. 28-17 E 232
„ 31 34° 11" 22.56 280
June '1 35° 23" 17'42 270
MALTA TO GIBRALTAR.
„ 3 37° 23" 9-49 E 250
„ 4 37° 13" 4-09 270
„ 5 36° 53" 0-28 W 222
GIBRALTAR TO PLYMOUTH.
„ 7 37° 9" N 9-02 W 202
„ 8 40° 58" 9-31 241
AND LAST.
The arrival of the Shannon in English waters necessitates the
closing of the “ Mare graph,” whose readers will shortly be dispersed
over all parts of our old home, never probably to be entirely
reassembled, but all with a kindly recollection, we may trust, of a
most pleasant and prosperous voyage, which has been distinguished
by unusually mild and calm weather. The Editor desires to express
his thanks for the support and assistance the various writers in the
“ Maregraph ” have given to the journal, and particularly to
acknowledge the extreme kindness of Miss Colman and Miss Clarke,
who have voluntarily undergone the distasteful and monotonous
labour of copying the paper.


Good=bye
WORDS BY
EDWARD ELLIS
MCSIC BY
E. RANDOLPH AENDELL.








