

aei-iciouc, ,» A Ms
*V>x cj
THE PROBLEM OF EVIL
p J 3 E KJA O N
PREACHED IN THE UNITARIAN CHRISTIAN CHURCH,
pN jbUNDAY pVENING, jIIJNE 22, 1873,
MARTHA TURNER.
Melbourne:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST.
1873.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
The Committee of the Unitarian Christian Church have decided on
publishing the accompanying discourse, in consequence of the inaccurate report
of it by an ex-reverend writer in the Weekly Times of sth inst, under the
heading of ‘ ‘ The Critic in Church. ”
It is one of the Sermons delivered by Miss Turner in the ordinary course of
her duties, not intended for publication, and in no sense distinctively Unitarian.
The attendance on the night of its delivery was small, owing to the inclemency
of the weather, and it is now submitted to the wider sphere of public opinion
as the completest answer to the misrepresentations of “The Critic in Church.”
That the “ Critic ” should have prepared himself for his task by reading up
some of the hard things said of Unitarianism in bygone times is to be deplored,
that he should express disgust at the beautiful prayers used in the Unitarian
Liturgy is an indication of his inability to judge of literary composition,—that
he should fail to apprehend the simplest principles of Unitarian Christianity
may be due to his ignorance,—but, that he should unfaithfully report the sub-
stance of the sermon, and sneer at the lecturer for want of attractiveness, are
offences against literary honesty and good manners, from which his long con-
nection with the press and his social experience should have saved him, had not
his intolerance mastered his better judgment.
order of the Committee,
W. D. ALLMAN,
Hon. Secretary.
Melbourne, 7 lh July , 1873.


F 114^'
THE PROBLEM OF EVIL
% Jlnmon.
Shall we receive good at the hand of the Lord, and shall we not receive
evil?— Job ii. 10.
For it became Him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things,
in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation
perfect through suffering.— Hebrews ii. 10.
We have, in these two sentences, a suggestion of the different
theories regarding the existence and intention of evil and suffering
in the world, which obtained at different periods of the world’s
history. The one from the book of Job, probably the oldest of
our canonical books, exhibits God in the character of an arbitrary
dispenser of good and evil. For some reason the thinkers of
those simple times sought not to penetrate, the web of life was
parti-coloured, and in all justice they believed the distribution of
light and shade must be equally proportioned. Job had enjoyed
many years of uninterrupted prosperity, and it seemed a right and
just thing that it should be alternated by adversity. “ Shall a man
receive good and not evil at the hands of the Lord ?”
The question is asked in the abstract of all mankind, not with
reference to the character and claims of one special man. Ihe
distribution of good and evil was accepted as a fact, of God’s
dealings with His creatures, and it was asked, with some show of
reason, if a man could justly expect to receive always the one
without any admixture of the other.
The whole book of Job, is an attempt to solve the problem of
the existence of evil and suffering in the world. It is a valuable con-
tribution to the philosophy of a subject that includes all the dark
enigmas of life. The ground taken by Job’s friends is, that he,
while of apparently blameless life, must have cherished some secret
sin, which is now bringing down upon him the visitation of God’s
righteous indignation. Job, resting in the consciousness of his own
integrity, rebuts this charge, and argues against the theory, which


always connects the idea of retributive punishment with suffering.
The ground he takes, is the sovereign will of God, —His perfect
right to deal- with the creatures He has fashioned, as may seem
good in His sight. But this ground he presently finds untenable,
for the God whom Job worshipped was no capricious tyrant,
dealing His thunderbolt indiscriminately round the earth like
Jupiter, whose chief attribute and sole title to be worshipped was
his power. The God of Job, like the God of every true-hearted
man, must be just; His doings must be capable of explanation,
that will show him-to be not less just than powerful.
He concludes, as many another tried soul has done both before
his day and since, with a wild cry of remonstrance against the
fate that is bearing him down, and a passionate desire to know
why he is afflicted : “ Show me wherefore thou contendest with
me,” he pleads. The latter part of the book is taken up with a
reassertion and elaboration of the sovereign power of the will of
God, and the inscrutable character of His ways, owing to the
• incapacity of the finite mind to understand infinite purposes. Yet
this can never wholly satisfy the anguish-stricken heart, nor calm
the misgivings of the religious mind, lest God should prove to be
less just than man.
A God w r ho acts from the mere caprice or impulse of His own
will, can never satisfy the devout mind. It needs an object of
veneration, a being who desires the love and reverence of His
creatures, and who guides the world in a way that shall secure
that of his noblest and best children. We need a solution of
these matters that goes deeper than a mere question of will and
power, reducing his sentient creatures to mere machines, the
puppets of an arbitrary fate.
Ignorance, we are told, accounts for much of the sorrow and
suffering we see around us. God works by law, and when we
violate His laws we must expect to pay the penalty, even though
we act in ignorance. Nature’s teaching is rough; her punishment
is certain and equally severe upon those who err for want of
knowing better and those who wilfully disobey. Nature makes
no allowance for ignorance, tolerates no incapacity, condones no
error. All this is true, but it only removes the difficulty a step
farther. Why are we poor puny creatures placed in a world where
the conditions of life are so severe? left to grope our way
through the darkness; governed by inflexible laws, the slightest
infraction of which entails consequences so disastrous. Nor do
broken laws account for all the suffering in the world. Pain is an
inseparable condition from much that is highest in our physical
and mental organisation; yet we would never seek to purchase


freedom from this liability to suffering at the price of descending
in the scale of organisation, in order to acquire, if it were possible,
the bluntness which secures to lower organisms a certain immunity
from pain. Upon this point we are always certain no pressure of
anguish could wring from us a wish in that direction. We feel a
strong conviction that, in some way we cannot quite understand,
pain and suffering are conditions of progress, inseparably connected
with it. It is then we begin to see the meaning and the truth of
that other view of the philosophy of pain, which we have placed in
juxtaposition with Job’s, which dates from a nfUch more recent
period of the world’s history, after the flood of a new light had
touched the moral phenomena of the universe, or the relations of
man to God. “It pleased Him,” says the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, “ in bringing many sons to glory, to make the Captain
of their salvation perfect through suffering.”
Here we find the same principle —suffering inseparable from
progress, the highest moral perfection to be attained only through
suffering. Think for a moment of the enormous mass of suffering,
the fires of remorse, the floods of penitential sorrow that have been
employed for the purification of the conscience of humanity, to
soften and to cleanse it up to the point of tenderness, and truth, and
love, to which it has been educated at this period of the world’s
history—far as we feel it to be now from its utmost capability far
as it is from being what it ultimately must become, the ruling
power in the moral world. Think of the fiery trials of human
suffering and misery through which humanity has passed in order
to develop the sympathy of man with man —the bond of human
brotherhood —even so far as it is recognised now; far though
that is from the divine ideal of bearing each the other’s burden.
Think again of the long tyranny of injustice, cruelty, and oppres-
sion through which the sense of justice, as a protest for a higher
law, was brought to its prominence in the world’s esteem. Every
moral quality possessed by the race in the aggregate has been
made perfect through suffering, slowly and painfully evolved
through a thousand conflicting influences. Our most precious
possessions are the result of a struggle. Every attribute of man
that brings him nearer to God has been refined in the furnace of
affliction. This is as true of the race as it is of the individual.
The question still remains, Why should the best and highest be
susceptible of development only through suffering ? Why should
not our complex nature have been so constituted that the qualities,
which are the efflorescence of that nature, should develop har-
moniously, and by their native power and sweetness, as the unfold-
ing of the perfect flower ?


' These questions are permissible to reasoning beings. Too long
have the righteous feelings of the heart been repressed by the idea
that such questioning of the Divine purposes is wrong. Humanity
has a right to ask the meaning of all things that concern the laws
of its being and its development, so long as human beings believe
there is intelligent design in all that affects them, that they are not
the puppets of a mere blind chance, nor the slaves of a compelling
necessity, “ Show me wherefore thou contendest with me,” was
the utterance of a deeply religious, not a rebellious spirit.
We believe that God desires the love and veneration of his
creatures. This love can be shown only in preferring that which he
prefers. Such love, to be worth anything —to be a power in our
moral nature at all —must be spontaneous, must be free. It
is the element of freewill that induces the struggle, and consequent
pain. If our natures were so constituted we must invariably
follow the good, where would be the freedom that alone can
form character? Our moral education consists in this: There
is a constant choice offered to us. The evil and the good are ever
before us, alike possible to us. The preferential verdict in favour of
either must be given by our own conscience. Our God is a God
of progress. He has made progress the condition of life, and
stagnation the condition of death. The education of the discern-
ing faculty through this incessantly recurring choice, is the sole
means of progress. Thus are we being educated by and through
ourselves, in the wise order of Providence, into the perception ol
that which alone can make us wise, good, and happy —the know-
ledge and love of God.
The true instinct within us apprehends the fact that all the
tortures of remorse are preferable to the perfect ease and self-con-
tentment of one who is in bondage to sin, unvisited by any com-
punctions of conscience, suffering no visions of higher things to
trouble his composure. Instinctively we see that pain here marks the
higher moral state, and that some kinds of suffering are to be pre-
ferred to ease. Instinctively, too, we feel that happiness is not, cannot
be the highest aim and ultimate object of our existence. We feel
that human life must be regulated by a higher law than the possible
attainment of happiness in any shape. Whatever ultimate happi-
ness may result from the unflinching pursuit of the right, it will
not bring happiness in the process; that may be a reward, it can
never be an aim, for it would lead to positive stagnation. Evil
and suffering are the levers by which God moves the world.
The law of growth, says a recent writer, is this, “ That all pro-
gress is preceded by calamity, that all improvement is based upon


defeat.” This is the law in the material world. In the work of
subduing the earth, the human race has learned through its mis.
takes. The same law obtains in the moral world, “ Perfect through
suffering;” any higher stage only reached through infinite toil and
battle. The noblest and the holiest men this world has produced
have been moulded and purified in the furnace of affliction. We
have some of us known people of such rare and beautiful character,
with natures so perfectly attuned to all that was loveliest in human
experience, with hearts so large they seemed a refuge for all who
needed help and comfort, with sympathies so keen and so wide-
reaching they seemed to touch and brighten every phase of human
woe. We have felt sure that natures such as these have been
purified in the fire. It is there they have learned lessons, of ten-
derness for human weakness, and compassion for human sorrow,
which bring the soul so near to God, that in our best moods we
must confess it was well worth the discipline to have learned
them.
There are times when the bitterness of the heart’s suffering finds
expression in the rebellious spirit that prompted the Patriarch’s
wife to bid him “curse God and die.” The Christian ideal shows
us, that only in the forcing soil of pain and sorrow, meekly borne,
are the richest growths of character obtained. Christ, as the
representative Son of Man, is elevated, through a life of sorrow, to
heights of moral excellence, towering in lofty isolation above the
attainments of the race ; yet He but realised the possibility of
humanity. It is in bringing many sons unto glory that the Captain
of our Salvation is made perfect through suffering. He is the type
of all mankind —our Elder Brother —and has left us the precious
legacy of His example, whereby we learn that sorrow, nobly borne
for righteous ends, will help in the redemption of the world from
sin and error.
We are naturally apt to overlook the fact, that the human race
reached its present stage of development very-gradually. Many
things were once deemed evil, of which we now see the use and the
beauty; from which we may reasonably hope, that increased
knowledge and a larger experience may diminish very greatly the
positive evil in the world. Thus, in time, we may reach the
realisation ot the Christian hope, that all things work together for
good to them that love God; for the love of Him, as the love of
the highest, is that towards which He is educating us. Could we
eliminate from the world all that has been done for it by pain and
evil, the race would relapse, farther back than we can imagine, to
some rudimentary state of ignorance, weakness, and incapacity.
Still the question remains, as to why these ends could not be


achieved through other methods; why this necessity for evil and
suffering in a world created by infinite wisdom, governed by
infinite love, and upheld by infinite power? No answer has yet
been found to this question; the reasoning mind and the devout
heart are alike silent in presence of it. Patience, humility, and
silent hope, are better than philosophy here. Christian trust and
the Christian interpretation of life will help us to answer the
other and relative question —What good end does evil serve?
This at least we have learned. The question why the same end
could not have been served by less painful means, we must leave-
If some sad and suffering one should come and tell us of his
sorrows, and ask how they agree with the declaration “ God is
love,” we ask if discipline received in youth has caused the wise
parents who inflicted it to seem less loving in our eyes? In after
life we love them, not in spite of that discipline, but because of it,
and the loving wisdom that dictated it.
So, when some sad one, full of sorrow, asks, speaking of the last
bereavement, “ Could a God of love do that ?” we ask, in turn,
“ Can a God of love omit to do it ? Can he withhold any needful
discipline? Can-any human being who cares for another, when
that other lies in illness, refuse to give him the bitter draught ?”
That feeble, sentimental unwillingness to give itself pain that
sometimes goes by the name of love, is unworthy of it. The
mother who will not deny her child what it screams for is an un-
wise mother, and not a very loving one. There is no deep love
that cannot smite if need be. Have we not all some fragments of
wisdom in our store, that but for suffering we should never have
learned ? Or, should we have attained even to such poor growth in
goodness as we may have reached but for the bitterness of life s
discipline ?
In this way, our sufferings help in the redemption of humanity,
and we become akin to Him, who was emphatically the Man of
Sorrows, the Captain of our Salvation, perfect through suffering
the typical Saviour of mankind : for the world is not saved by the
sufferings of one man only, but by the sufferings of the race
collectively, raising all from lower to higher levels.
Fcrgusson and Moore, Printers, Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
