

THE HOUSE
OF
HOFFNUNG
1852-1952
IOO YEARS OF
WHOLESALE TRADING IN AUSTRALIA




THE HOUSE
OF
HOFFNUNG
1852-1952
100 YEARS OF
WHOLESALE TRADING IN AUSTRALIA




INTRODUCTION.
This is the informal story of a venture, started just 100 years ago, by a young
man whose faith in Australia has been vividly justified by the growth of the
business which he founded on a most modest scale till it is now one o f the
largest of Us hind in the Commonwealth.
From 1852 to 19 32 is a long period in this young country and during that
lime many trading establishments both Wholesale and Retail (whose names
were once household words) have perished by the wayside.
The f ull story of S. Hoffnung & Co. Limited, concerned with many events
and with the thousands of employees who have contributed to its success,
cannot be told in this one small volume; but it offers the management the
chance again to express the Company’s deep appreciation of the willing co-
operation and initiative shown by the Managers and Staff over the years.
It is our intention to touch only on some of the highlights and general
features of our development, which it is hoped will be of interest to the reader.
Merchandising on a grand scale must always be one of the most fascinating
occupations on earth, because, perhaps more than anything else, it touches all
human activities and must react sensitively over a period of a century to the
impact of hundreds of factors; must meet the circumstances brought about by
drought and war; must be alert for changing fashion and requirements. It
must weather financial storms and proceed with prudence and forethought
in times of adversity and ill-fortune.
When Sigmond Hoffnung commenced to distribute his merchandise 100
years ago, he unconsciously set himself out to become a part of the history
of the nation, and, in the endeavour to meet the ever shifting wants of the
people of Australia, he did not confine himself only to the material side, but
took an active interest in the civic and communal affairs of his new country
and in movements for the betterment of its inhabitants.
In setting down this story, the aim has been to avoid too much detail, but
at the same time to retain sufficient to interest all those associated with the
Company in its years of progress which, of course, includes those of its
members and the staff for whom this record has been prepared.
[?]
January 7th, 1952.


SIGMOND HOFFNUNG.
Founder of the Firm.


S. HOFFNUNG.
Though the exact date is not here recorded, Sigmond Hoffnung
was born in the year 1832. After an early education in Liverpool,
England, he obtained employment with a West of England
business and at a later stage travelled the Midlands on its behalf,
making many friends amongst the people upon whom he called,
thus gaining wide experience both in the art of selling and in
human nature.
This was a period of definitive change in Australia. The years
of the "hungry forties” were over. The fight for self-government
was going on under the guiding hand of William Charles Went-
worth. Gold had just been discovered on the Ophir and within a
few months had revolutionised both the present and the future
of Australia. While the pastoral industries languished for want
of the labour which had rushed pell-mell to the goldfields, the
country had become a workers’ and traders paradise. Everybody
seemed to have money, and that money naturally attracted adven-
turous English traders in profusion.
They came by almost every ship, bringing with them their
merchandise. Sigmond Hoffnung was one of them.
He himself had little or no capital, but his good friend Mr.
Henry Nathan, a wholesale merchant of Birmingham and customer
of the firm for which Sigmond Hoffnung worked, offered to lend
him £5OO to buy an assortment of goods to take to Australia.
Young Hoffnung had sufficient of his own funds to pay his
passage out—a journey of some four months. He was called on
to find about £2O for passage money and about a like sum (or a
complete personal outfit. He set sail for Australia with his moderate
stock, arriving in Sydney early in the year 1852.
He lost no time in opening business at No. 8 Wynyard Lane,
in those days a central situation for the trade. He operated
exclusively on a wholesale basis with only one employee—John
Watson by name—who spent his active working days in the
service of the firm for nearly 60 years.


THE FIRST WAREHOUSE.
No. 8 Wynyard Lane, Sydney.


At this period the population of New South Wales totalled 190,000
persons and the total annual revenue to the Government was under
£500,000. The “Sydney Morning Herald.” January 6th, 1852, re-
ported the arrival in London of the first Australian gold. Strange
to say, though gold was available in quantity at this period, the
“Sydney Morning Herald” of May sth, 1852, announces a shortage j
of coins, amongst them being coppers, and suggested the use of j
copper tokens or postage stamps as currency in place of them.
In view of the high cost of living in these modern times, it is
interesting to note prices of some foodstuffs, liquors and clothes
as advertised by sundry Sydney retail shops in the “Sydney
Morning Herald” just at about the period when Mr. S. Hoffnung
commenced trading in Australia.
Fowls 2/- each
Ducks 2/6 each
Eggs 1/3 per doz.
Cheese 6d. per lb.
Wholesale Price of Best Beef, Jd. per lb.
Wholesale Price of Others .... id. per lb.
Dried Apples 3id. per lb.
Potatoes £4/-/- per ton
Tea lOd. per lb.
Coffee Sd. per lb.
Vinegar 9sd. per qrt.
Olive Oil ! 7/- per gall.
Figs 4d. per lb.
Raisins 2Jd. per lb.
Keg Tobacco 1/6 per lb.
Manila Cigars _ £2/10/- per 1000
Dark Brandy, 5/9 per gall.
Rum 10% to 30% 0.P., 2/3 to 3/- gall.
Sandeman’s Port 4/6 per gall.
It was not long before Hoffnung’s first parcel of goods was sold,
the loan repaid to Henry Nathan.
A fresh lot of merchandise was ordered. Arrangements were made
with Henry Nathan to act as London buyer of Hoffnung’s require-
ments which, as the business continued to expand, made it
necessary to set up a buying organisation in London. This was
known as Henry Nathan & Co. It occupied a building at 15
Basinghall Street, E.C.2. Later these premises became too small
and a site was purchased at 102-104 Fore Street. E.C.2, upon
which the firm erected its own premises, which it occupied for
over 50 years until they were entirely destroyed with all contents
in the German Air Force Blitz on London on December 29th.
1940. The Company’s Head Office and buying organisation in
London is now situated at Imperial House, Dominion Street, E.C.2.
Sherry (Imported) 4/- per gall.
Bottled French Brandy 25/- per doz.
Bottled Gin 18/- per doz.
Champagne „ 35/- per doz.
Rich Glace Silk Frocks .... 32/6 each
Cashmere Frocks 10/6 each
Grey Calico l|d. per yard
White Calico 2d. per yard
Silk Neck Ties 4Ad. each
All Wool Flannel 6d. per yard
Coloured Prints 3Jd. per yard
Linen Towels 4|d. each
Delaine Dresses 4/- each
Cashmere Shawls 3/6 each
Men's Woollen Shirts 4/6 each
Men's Fancy Linen Shirts .... 1/6 each
Bullocks 31/* each. On the hoof.
Sheep 5/- each. On the hoof.
[?]
1852


THE SECOND WAREHOUSE.
The growth of the business also called for larger Sydney premises
and in 1833 Mr. Hoffnung moved to 339 George Street, one of two
small buildings situated between the Head Offices of the Com-
mercial Banking Co. of Sydney Limited and the Bank of New
South Wales. It is hardly necessary to mention that the buildings of
these Banks were not as close together as they are to-day and
each took the opportunity in due course to purchase the adjoining
building.
The business continued to grow with the influx of population
and the development of Australia, and once more the firm quickly
outgrew its premises.


THE THIRD WAREHOUSE.
In 1861 another move was made to No. 2 Wynyard Street, a
location which is now owned by the Bank of New South Wales.
After spending a busy five years in Australia and having
accumulated a useful store of knowledge of the • needs of the
early settlers and gold seekers. Mr. Sigmond Hoffnung decided
to visit England in 1837 to further replenish his stocks and meet
many of his manufacturer friends. Whilst in the Homeland, he
entered into a formal partnership with Mr. Henry Nathan, in order
to secure the additional funds needed to support the growth of
the Australian business.


PARTNERSHIP.
The capital of the partnership was £5,000. To-day over £1,200,000
Sterling—Capital & Reserves—are employed in the Company’s
business, which, with branches and subsidiaries, now has an annual
turnover exceeding £12,000.000.
When the partnership converted to a Public Company there
were several hundred Shareholders whose interests in the course
of time have been divided. To-daj* the Shareholders in our Com-
pany exceed 2,000 and reside in many parts of the world.
i The business continued to grow and now employed a small
staff with a few travellers visiting the city and country stores. It
maintained its principle of restricting trade to the Wholesale, and
is one of the few merchant houses at present in Australia, which
can say trading commenced, and has been confined to. Whole-
saling over the 100 years of its existence.
In 1870 the much enlarged business found itself housed at 117
Pitt Street in its own building, erected by the partners in what was
then the heart of the wholesale trading area. The building at
that time was regarded as the most up-to-date warehouse of its
kind in Australia. It was in time demolished and the site is now
occupied by the Head Office of the Mercantile Mutual Insurance
Co. Ltd.
No. 117 PITT STREET.


It is interesting to read some of the comments from a publication
of that period entitled, “A Glance at Australia in 1880.”
This extensive Warehouse designed by Mr. T. Rowe, Architect
(of historical note), has replaced some of the oldest houses in
Sydney. V/ilh a frontage to Pitt Street and terminating at the Tank
Stream, which in the time of Governor Phillip was a pleasant
rivulet, overshadowed by a wood, not more than 100 yards from
the then Government House, these handsome and extensive
premises are the largest of their kind in Sydney and are devoted
solely to the display of samples and open stock, the bulk goods
being kept in 9 (sic) other stores in the immediate neighbourhood.
In addition, S. Hoffnung & Co. have a large factory in the City
giving employment to over 60 hands in the making of Saddlery and
Harness.
Certainly times have changed in this modern era of motor and air
transport. It is safe to say no factory to-day exists in Australia
which could support as many as 60 hands producing only Saddlery
and similar goods.
The booh continues:—
At the time of writing, the Sydney Branch employed 99 hands
and 40 in Brisbane.
To-day employees in Sydney number just on 500 and the
Brisbane Warehouse employs 240. The total staff employed in
all the Company’s branches and subsidiaries now exceeds 1,250.
As the business continued to flourish, still more partners were
admitted and, in the year 1871, Messrs. D. Marks and S. Sinauer
joined the firm. The former took over the management of the
Sydney Warehouse, the latter confining himself to the London
Office and acting as Supervising Manager of continental buying,
which he conducted with more than usual talent.
In 1877, Mr. S. Hoffnung. returning to live permanently in
London, assumed general control of the London Office, thus to some
extent relieving his ageing partner, Mr. Henry Nathan.
His departure .from Australia, after a sojourn here extending
over a quarter of a century, was deeply regretted, not only by his
staff, but all those friends whom he had made in the course of his
career.
He had taken a real and active interest, apart from his business,
in promoting the welfare and expansion of his adopted country, and
was closely associated with many civic movements which have
helped to lay the foundations of one of the largest cities in the
British Commonwealth.


A BANQUET.
The menu for the public banquet tendered Mr. Hoffnung before
he sailed from Sydney, as a farewell tribute to his general popu-
larity, gives an idea of the gargantuan appetites of our Australian
forebears.
MENU.
SOUP
Mock Turtle a la Reine.
F!8H
Fillet of Whiting a la Provencale.
Fillet of Schnapper and
Anchovies.
ENTREES
Supreme of Chicken and Truffles.
Braised Veal a la Jardiniere.
Lamb Cutlets a la Toulouse-.
ROASTS
Haunch of Mutton and Red
Currant Jelly.
Fillet of Beef a la L'Espagnolc.
POULTRY
Turkey with Truffles and Olives.
Duck and Green Peas.
Ham Glazed in Champagne.
GAME
Guinea Fowl in Bordeaux Wine.
Wild Duck.
Pate dc Foie Gras in Aspic,
SWEETS
Empress Pudding.
Macedoine of Fruits.
Glace a la nesselrode.
CHEESE AND SALADS
FRUIT IN SEASON
WINES.
SHERRY
Amontillado.
CHABL1S
Leclaire.
8AUTERNE
Chateau Yquam.
Eschenauer Yquam,
HOCK
Marcobrunn 1862.
Rudsheimer.
CHAMPAGNE
Q6ld Top Meet.
Silver Top Moct,
Roederer.
Ayala.
CLARET
Chateau Margeaux.
PORT •
Fine Old Port.
LIQUEURS
In 1882 the foundation stone was laid of the well-known building
at 163/171 Pitt Street, adjoining the Sydney General Post Office,
Mr. T. Rowe again being the Architect. This building, which
was at first regarded by many as something of a white elephant,
was occupied in 1883 and became quite a landmark amongst the
commercial community of Sydney. Far from being beyond the
firm’s needs, however, it was found a few years later to be too small
for the requirements of the business. Thus it came about that a
large warehouse had to be built at 367/371 Kent Street to accom-
modate bulk stocks. These premises were entirely destroyed by
fire August 3th, 1938, and caused serious complications in the
plans which had been pre-arranged for the move to be made into
the new Clarence Street Warehouse, to which reference is made
later on.


163/171 PITT STREET.
The new warehouse, as with its predecessors, was the most
modern of its day. no expense being spared in design and fitments.
It was the first building of its kind in Sydney to instal Grinell
Automatic Sprinklers as a precaution against fire. Likewise it was
fitted with the first Hydraulic Passenger and Goods Lifts in the
country, the firm of Waygood sending out a special engineer from
England to supervise the installation—later changed to electric
power.
The Company used one of the first commercial typewriters to
come to this country—a weird and rather clumsy affair on 4 legs
with key levers operating from underneath the machine.
When telephone communication was introduced to Sydney on
a commercial scale the Company was among the first to use this
convenience, privately owning two lines to the General Post Office
Exchange for which it paid £2 Rental per annum and no extra
charge for calls!


RETIREMENT.
In 1886 Messrs. Abraham Hoffnung (brother of the founder),
Louis H. Nathan (son of the founder’s partner) and B. F. Marks
were admitted to partnership, the last retiring 10 years later.
In 1889 S. Hoffnung retired from the firm, giving up all business
activities., as also did his original partner, Henry Nathan—the man
who made it possible for his young friend in 1832 to lay the
foundation of the business as it is to-day.
As the century was nearing its close—actually December 28fh,
1899—the firm was incorporated as a private limited liability
company and adopted the title of S. Hoffnung & Co. Limited.
THE PUBLIC COMPANY.
A few years later, the private company on July 10th, 1902, sold
out to a public company named S. Hoffnung & Co. (1902) Limited.
On August 23th, 1904, the title was changed to S. Hoffnung &
Co. Limited.
The first Board of Directors consisted of:—
SIGMUND SINAUER, Chairman.
ABRAHAM HOFFNUNG. LOUIS H. NATHAN.
SIDNEY HOFFNUNG-GOLDSMID,
ALBERT H. NATHAN. GEORGE H. DAVIS.
Paid-up Capital of the company at that date was £550,000.
Mr. S. Hoffnung—the founder—passed away August 27th, 1904,
at the age of 72. A few years later his son, Sidney Hoffnung-
Goldsmid, resigned from the Board. Abraham Hoffnung died
April 3th, 1912, being the last of the name actively associated with
the management of the company.
AUSTRALIAN BOARD.
In 1912 an Australian Board of Directors was constituted, the
lirst Board being:
A. H. NATHAN. Chairman.
L. S. BARNETT. M. A. NATHAN.
Later in 1917:
LESLIE D. DAVIS and MARCUS WISE
were appointed to the Board, followed by W. J. Brien in 1929.


THE PRESENT MEMBERS OF THE AUSTRALIAN BOARD ARE:
LESLIE D. DAVIS.
Chairman.
PERCY C. OGILVIE.
MICHAEL P. WEBBER.
FRANK J. DAVIS.


153/159 CLARENCE STREET.
Present Sydney Warehouse.


ANOTHER MOVE.
The Company’s Sydney premises, 165/171 Pitt Street, were resumed
by the Commonwealth Government on April 50th, 1957, for
extensions to the New South Wales Postal Department, thus
causing the Company to again seek another site for its warehouse.
Fortunately this was possible at a near location, 135/159 Clarence
Street, in the centre of the wholesale trading district, a number of
buildings being purchased and demolished to make room for a
modern warehouse of 10 floors, providing nearly 150,000 square feet
for display and stock rooms.
The move from the old warehouse in Pitt Street to the new
building was an epic effort, commenced Christmas Eve, December
24th, 1958, and completed January Ist, 1959, no work being done
on Christmas Day. Thus in seven days the goods were removed
from their old fixtures into 50,000 cases and packages, which later
had their contents placed into fixtures in their new location. The
new warehouse was open for business on January 2nd, 1959.
Again full acknowledgment is due to the Company’s Staff for
its wonderful efforts and loyal assistance rendered in this stupen-
dous task.
GROUND FLOOR. CLARENCE STREET.


The following reprint from the “Sydney Morning Herald ’ of
December 27th, 1938, is of some interest.
BIG MOVE HAS BEGUN.
CITY WAREHOUSE TO NEW HOME.
STUPENDOUS TASK.
It is no small task moving the entire stock and fittings of a city
warehouse from old premises to new, as the management and
staff of S. Hoffnung & Co. Limited have discovered.
For 36 years Hoffnungs occupied their warehouse in Pitt Street,
next to the General Post Office. But the property was resumed so
that the Commonwealth Government could extend the Post Office,
and during the Christmas Holidays 300 men began the stupendous
task of moving £325.000 worth of stock and fittings from the Pitt
Street premises to new premises approaching completion at 153-159
Clarence Street.
Careful planning preceded the removal, which is being carried
out by the firm’s own staff. Plans were completed about six weeks
ago, when every one of the employees in the warehouse was given
detailed typewritten instructions regarding the part he or she was
to play.
At 3.30 p.m. on Friday a start was made, and from 7.30 a.m. till
10 p.m. on Saturday and again yesterday packing and removal
proceeded continuously, meals being supplied for the men engaged
in it by staffs of girls in the Pitt Street and Clarence Street premises.
The work will be continued every day this week, and it is hoped to
complete it on Monday and close the Pitt Street warehouse and
commence business in Clarence Street on Tuesday.
Up till last night 20,000 packages had been moved. Every
article of stock, from heavy hardware to the most fragile and
delicate of china, glass and crystal ware, has to be packed
separately, placed in separate boxes, each of which is marked with
its exact location in the new warehouse, and on its arrival there
immediately unpacked, so that the boxes can be returned to be
used again.
The Managing Director of Hoffnung & Co., Mr. Leslie Davis,
and his co-Directors, Messrs. W. J. Brien and P. C. Ogilvie, have
personally planned the move and are supervising operations.


BUSINESS BUILDERS.
It is worth placing on record some of the interesting personalities
who have spent so many years, in fact, most of their business
lives, in building up the Company to its present magnitude and
in promoting its welfare.
We have already mentioned the founder and his early associates,
but there are others such as Louis H. Nathan with his bright
personality and business ability, who was one time Chairman of the
Company; his brother, Albert H. Nathan, who devoted all his
business career to the Company in Australia.
ABRAHAM HOFFNUNG.


ABRAHAM HOFFNUNG.
Abraham Hoffnung, that colourful personality, younger brother of
the founder, joined the partnership in 1886 and, after the formation
of the Company, was Chairman for a number of years.
Abraham Hoffnung started his commercial career at the ripe
age of 12i with a large London retail establishment, which paid
him the princely wage of 1/- per week plus board and lodging.
In 1848 at the age of 14, in London, he was sworn in as a special
constable with other employees to protect his employers property
Irom Chartist rioters.
At the age of 19 he went to the United States and entered into
business on his own account, becoming quite success ful in a few
years. Later he established himself as a merchant in Montreal.
Canada, with continued success. After some years he transferred
his business to Liverpool. England, after which he became a
member o f the firm of S. Hoffnung & Co.
In the course of his career. Abraham Hoffnung rendered con-
siderable services to the Government of Hawaii, which was a
kingdom prior to the annexation by the U.S.A. In recognition of
these services, the King of Hawaii issued a commission appointing
Mr. Hoffnung his representative and Charge d’Affaires at the
Court of St. James, thus enabling him to penetrate the charmed
circle of the Corps Diplomatique at the Court of the Sovereign
of the British Empire.
Mr. Abraham Hoffnung also spent a number of years in Aus-
tralia, where he endeared himself to the staff and a wide circle
of friends.
He was an outstanding man of business and, during his career
with the Company, secured for it some of its most valuable overseas
agencies.
It would be impossible, within the narrow compass of this book,
to give an account in detail of all those who have done so much
to build up Hoffnungs as it is to-day. We must content ourselves,
therefore, by simply recording the names of the Company’s
Executive and Directors over the years up to the present.
These appear hereunder:—
S. Hoffnunc. A. H. Nathan Sir Rhys Rhys-Williams
H. Nathan L. S. Barnett S. H. Felton
D. Marks M. A. Nathan H. G. Davis
S. Sinauer M. Wise E. R. Isaacs
n' Tr°A l f NL:NG S. Meares H. C. Chapman
B. F. Marks w j. B r.en L. W. Rawson
LH.' Nathan £ C. O cILVIE H. Simmons
S. Hoffnung. Jnr. F. J- Davis A. E. Maugham
C. M. Duncan M. P. Webber S. E. Isaacs
M. Davis L. D. Davis E. K. Holmes


MR. G. H. DAVIS.
Mr. Davis joined the firm as a youth, starting his career with the
Brisbane Branch in 1874, a few years after its establishment. He
was amongst the earliest of the business pioneers who helped to
develop the trade and goodwill of our Northern Branch.
Mr. Davis, after spending some years 'on the roads represent-
ing his firm in the Northern parts of Queensland, was appointed,
in 1884, Warehouse Manager of Sydney. and, in 1896, on the
retirement of Mr. B. F. Marks, one of the junior partners, was
appointed General Manager for Australia.
When the firm decided to convert into a public company in
1902, Mr. Davis was appointed Managing Director and kept that
position until his death, August 23rd, 1911, in his 56th year.
Mr. Davis was noted for his business ability and was highly
respected in Australian commercial circles. The firm’s success in
weathering the financial crisis in the 90’s was attributable to his
able control and guidance through what proved a calamitous period
for many others, who were unable to withstand the critical times.


MR. MAURICE DAVIS.
Mr. Maurice Davis joined the lirm in 1887 as a young man and
spent practically all his commercial career with the Company,
rising from the lowest rung to become Managing Director in
London and Chairman of the Company, a position which he
retained for many years. He remained in harness and took a
keen interest in the Company’s affairs right up to the date of his
death, June 4th, 1943.
He had been trained in the Sydney warehouse and later acted
as a country representative in New South Wales for many years.
In due course he joined the London office as a buyer, having the
advantage of a full knowledge of Australian conditions and
requirements. He ultimately rose to managerial control of the
Company s English and Continental buying, his reputation being
that he was second to none in his ability to carry out these
functions. He was at all times highly respected for his ability
and commercial foresight.


TRADING DAYS.
In the early days of the Company s trading such modern con-
veniences as communication by cable and air mail were non-
existent and business with the Northern Hemisphere was slow
and long delayed. Merchandise and letters were carried to and
from Australia mainly by sailing vessel, taking up to three months
and more. Thus importers in the 30 s had little idea of the goods
which were arriving for them until they coidd peruse the ship's
manifest or the mail which the vessel itself was carrying for them.
News by messenger on horseback from the signal station at
South Head was not unusual, advising that a vessel had been
signalled, and the information conveyed to certain interested parties
in the City. After receiving notification in this way. some
merchants hired row-boats to meet the incoming vessel on its way
up Port Jackson to board it and scan the manifest to see what
luck they had in the shape of goods arriving.
It is a matter of history that retail buyers, upon hearing of the
arrival of new stocks, would queue up in our warehouse—even
on Sundays—to take their turn at selection, to fill their shelves, so
scarce were some general supplies. How times have changed!
Our importations in the early days were varied and oftlimes even
outside the scope of our very wide range of merchandise carried
nowadays.
Not always were the ventures of the firm successful, particularly
when there was a tendency to take a chance on a short market.
It is on record that onions imported from Spain sprouted on the
voyage, thus becoming useless: edible nuts from South America
arrived weevily; cargoes of sugar from Jamaica were damaged by
water or sweat—and so on, involving losses and disappointments
which sometimes must have proved a heavy financial burden on
the young partnership.
Over the years the firm has been interested in handling a wide
variety of goods, but, with the effluxion of time and the changing
method of trading, has found it necessary to disassociate itself
from a number of commodities.
For example, for many years a large business was done in tea
importing and distributing. A wholesale department in wines
and spirits (since closed) introduced to the Australian market
several well-known brands of liquors, which are still popular here.
Furniture of all types was largely imported from England before
manufacturing commenced in Australia and for which there was an
active demand in all States.


Carpets and floor coverings, band instruments, pianos, organs
and billiard tables were imported in considerable quantities, even
a few merry-go-rounds, horses and all.
We were amongst the earliest importers from tbe United States
of America for such merchandise as canned fruits, jams, barrels of
dried apple, tinned fish and other foods.
Mr. S. Hoffnung brought with him, in 1852, the first few cases
of Bryant & May matches to reach this country, resulting in the
agency and the sale in due course of many hundreds of thousands
of cases.
Sailing vessels were chartered by the firm in U.S.A. to carry
ship loads of kerosene, to Australia and at other limes were
chartered and had their holds filled with American woodenware
and furniture.
A considerable amount of export trade in British and Continental
goods was carried on in the early days between the London
Branch of the partnership and the United States of America but.
with the development of manufacturing in the U.S.A., this activity
gradually closed down.
As the years advanced and with the industrial progress of
Australia, so has the trade been diverted to other channels. In
the ’9o’s of the last century we had our own jam factory and we
also owned the Carrington Soap Works, both of which, in due
course, were disposed of to other interests.
About the same time we set up the first opal cutting business
in Australia, bringing out an expert cutter from Europe to supervise
the venture. We sent our buying representative regularly to
White Cliffs. Lightning Ridge and other fields to purchase opals
in the rough and exported abroad many thousands of pounds worth
of these popular Australian gems, cut and polished, ready for
mounting. We were also interested in the export of uncut
diamonds found in limited quantities in the northern districts of
New South Wales, likewise sapphires in the rough from Queens-
land, which were in strong demand abroad for industrial purposes.
We imported some of the earliest sheep shearing machinery,
being amongst the first to have such equipment available in Aus-
tralia. Unfortunately this venture was unsuccessful, as the
machinery then had not reached to-day’s state of perfection and
efficiency.
Thus, our trading over the years has been remarkably varied
and interesting and, as one activity disappeared, so another seemed
always ready to take its place.


In the early 1900' s we supervised the Australian factory for the
production of Eveready Dry Batteries, attending to the distribution
for many years all over Australia and New Zealand, the factory in
its first location being in a small room in a building on the site
now occupied by the Head Office of the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia.
We were the first commercial organisation to import and dis-
tribute the disc type record and talking machine, and were thus
associated with His Master’s Voice Gramophone Company for
many years. We also manufactured and assembled in Sydney
Gramophone cabinets under the well-known trademark of “His
Master s Voice and attended to the distribution of the Company’s
records throughout Australia and New Zealand.
And so the story goes on until to-day. Though perhaps many
of our early business connections may have changed, we still
take a very active interest in many other ventures which involve
widespread associations, not only in the Commonwealth but
Overseas.
It has often been said that one can procure anything at Hoff-
nungs, from the proverbial “needle to an anchor,” and maybe this
saying has a certain amount of truth in it, for actually we do
supply both needles and anchors.
Certainly our merchandise covers a very wide rqnge, which
we sectionalise in groups and departments under its respective
managers.
Here is a broad outline of what we handle:—
WATCHES. CLOCKS, JEWELLERY AND GEMS • BUILDERS'.
AGRICULTURAL & HOUSEHOLD HARDWARE • TRADESMENS
TOOLS-SADDLERY & GRINDERY • OILS & COLOURS. PAINTERS'
& HOUSEHOLD BRUSHWARE • CUTLERY & HAIRDRESSERS'
REQUISITES • TOBACCO, CIGARETTES & SMOKERS' REQUISITES
• FIREARMS. AMMUNITION. FISHING TACKLE. SPORTING GOODS.
TOYS & BASKETWARE • SILVERPLATED WARE & COSTUME
JEWELLERY • ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES & FITTINGS. RADIO SETS
• CROCKERY. CHINA, GLASSWARE & PLASTICS • PROPRIETARY -
MEDICINES. DRUGS & COSMETICS • FANCY GOODS. STATIONERY
& TRAVEL GOODS • CONFECTIONERY & GROCERY SPECIALTIES.


THE QUEENSLAND HOUSE.
When S. Hoffnung began to trade in Sydney, what is now the
state of Queensland was part of New South Wales and many of
his customers lived in the northern area.
From the very year of partition, 1859, Queensland, under its own
Government, made prodigious strides which have continued up to
the present day.
The business connection in the North was of sufficient import-
ance to induce Mr. Hoffnung to establish a branch in Brisbane in
1872, under tbe management of Mr. A. Marks.
Tbe early premises, known as Jewell s Buildings, were situated
in Market Street, Brisbane. Later tbe firm occupied premises in
Queen Street.
To meet expansion needs new premises were soon erected in
Charlotte Street and it is interesting to note the commentary from
the book “A Glance at Australia in 1880.”
The firm (S. Hoffnung & Co.) later erected new premises which
at the time had the distinction of being the first five-storied edifice
in the Colony. Since then the premises have been considerably
enlarged to cope with the trade the Company is doing in Queens-
land to-day.
Over the years we have had a number of Managers in our
Northern Branch whose names are still fresh in the memory of
their business associates and friends, amongst them being:
Percy Benjamin, M. A. Natban, E. R. Isaacs, H. V. Simmons.
At the time of writing the management of the Queensland
business is under tbe able control of Messrs. A. E. Maugham and
S. E. Isaacs.


QUEENSLAND TRADING IN THE OLD DAYS.
At the time of commencing trading in Queensland, in 1872, the
population of Brisbane totalled 15,829 and for the whole State
of Queensland, 128,507, which was widely spread over the terri-
tory. Transport was not easy and rather primitive in many ways.
The railways at the time covered less than a few hundred miles.
Vessels sailed up and down the Coast to the few ports then
existing, but, where transport was required for inland towns, the
bullock dray and waggon were mostly relied on and—in difficult
country—packhorses were in common use.
It was not unusual for inland traders, and those particularly in
the northern areas, to have to wait three or four months for
delivery from Brisbane of their goods.
No comfortable train or motor car transport was available to the
commercial travellers—either horseback, coach and team, private
waggon with driver and black boy to assist was not uncommon.
The latter type of transport was the general method adopted in those
days by Hoffnung’s travellers. There was a fair amount of rough
life. Towns being far apart, many were often forced to camp out
and sleep under the stars. Hotel accommodation was mainly rough
when obtainable. In .some districts the aboriginals were still in
their wild state and were known to attack. Many travellers were
armed with rifle or revolver, or both, for their protection.
BRISBANE WAREHOUSE.
Charlotte Street.


This letter, written to His brother by Mr. George H. Davis
(later Managing Director of the Company) when travelling for
the firm in Queensland, is interesting and gives some idea of the
difficulties and dangers facing the commercial traveller in 1877.
CHARTERS TOWERS.
June 9th, 1877.
My Dear Brother:
I have been away from Brisbane nozv about six weeks; during this time
I have not received any letters from Melbourne, possibly owing to the negli-
gence of some of the boys in the store who ought to have forwarded my
private letters with those sent by the firm, so I have nothing of note to
answer, therefore will try if I can to amuse you with the description of a
trip I have just returned from —the Hodgkinson Goldfields.
These arc situated about 80 miles inland from the port of Cairns, but
owing to 11 miles of road being so bad near this part, another town has been
formed at this distance upon the Barron River called Smithfield. It was
from this town I set out on my pioneering trip, being the first Commercial
Traveller that had visited these parts.
The field was discovered about seven months ago and has been in a
very flourishing condition since. It has one drawback which is the leant of
a road easy of access and short, the one at present in use being over an
immense range (more of which I will relate presently) and can only be
used by packhorscs, which causes carriage to be very high; 9d. per lb. is
charged for sundries and 6d. per lb. for Spirits and Provisions, with the
exception of Flour, which is carried for sd. The usual time taken by the
packers is 5 days to do this very short journey and when they arrive at their
destination there is no corn for the horses.
Well, to return to my original intention of relating my experiences of
this trip. I started from Smithfield on a Monday morning. You zvould
have laughed to have seen my equipment; slung to the side I had a Snider
Rifle, a saddlcpouch containing Rifle Ammunition and food for myself. On
my waistbclt I had a Sheath Knife, Watch Pouch and a Colt Army
Revolver with a large pouch for Ammunition and sundries. After once
getting into the saddle I felt as if I were a fixture.
I took my black boy zvith me to look after the horses and to lead one
that was packed with Blankets, Rations and other gear.
After about 2 miles on the road we entered a dense scrub which had
a light track cut through and zvide enough for one person alone to proceed.
We went in the follozving order—first your humble servant zvith his horse,
next the packhorse and in the rear the black boy armed zvith an old “Pepper-
box” (an old musket). This scrub is so thick that it is impossible to turn to
right or left; Lazvycr Vines and Supple-Jacks arc the order of the day.
The former arc a thin vine zvith thorns running both ways, so zvhotcvcr it
touches it lays hold of. The latter arc long pliable canes lying on the
ground and are very troublesome on account of the horses getting fast by
the legs, becoming entangled in them; one has then to dismount and cut
them free, zvhich is a troublesome and slow job ozving to the accoutrements
which haz’c to be carried. Every fezv minutes the Lazvyer Vines zvould lay
hold of me and tear zvould go the shirt or hat or flesh; one time one
fastened on to my hat, zvhich I laid hold of to prevent its coming off, and
the vine nearly pulled me out of the saddle. We had 17 miles of this work
to do and then came the range.


In knocking about the queer places in Queensland, I have seen difficult
parts and steep pinches in Ranges, but never anything to equal this—some-
thing like the side of a house only a little steeper—l could hardly zvajk up
it and then had to drag my saddle horse after me and go back again for
the packhorse.
I camped for the night when we had finished this job and, after getting
everything tidy, went over to a packers r’ camp not far from my own where
they told me they were unable to proceed owing to six of their horses having
been speared by the Blacks the night before, and advised me to make iny
black boy erect a fence similar to theirs and turn the horses into it. I did
so and also put my Snider and Revolver very near to hand when I went to
sleep. Nothing happened hozvever; we packed up in the morning and
proceeded on our journey until we came to the crossing place of the Barron
River, about 22 miles further up than Smithfield. Here I saiv several
parties of packers waiting to cross and could not understand why they
did not proceed, but on coming closer soon saw the reason, as there were,
about 15 Blacks on the other side armed with Spears and Nullah-Nullahs
and the waiting people (miners) were holding a debate as to whether they
should fire on the Blacks and wipe out a fezv or,wait until they went away
of their own accord, which might cause undue delay. At last one of the
party decided to settle the matter by firing a shot from his Rifle over
the heads of the Blacks, which so surprised them that they all took to their
heels and scampered azvay, never looking back. After this little upset I
thought it better to travel in company so did not leave until next morning,
when I got to the Walsh township, 15 miles from Thornborough, the chief
town on the Goldfield. I then rode in, turned out two of the horses, kept
my own and got down to business.
Corn was 35/- per bushel, so I fed my horses on bread at 1/- per loaf,
not much larger in she than an orange.
After visiting the small township and writing my orders I made a start
back and got dozen in a day and a half, a distance about 70 miles, which
was not bad travelling, taking into consideration the time it took on the
upward journey. Actually it is just as bad coming dOzmi the Range as
going up and it is zvith great difficulty that one can stop himself when one
is in full swing and sometimes the horses, which one has to drive in front,
make a dead stop and you are almost on top of them before you knozv where
you are.
As a finale my black boy took it into his head that he would walk when
at the bottom of the range, so I let him do this and saw nothing more of
him until the morning after I arrived in Smithfield.
I never want to go on that trip again until they find a new road. So
much for the Hodgkinson.
I cannot write as well as I could describe it to you by mouth, but hope
I have given you a little idea of some of the travelling in Queensland
these days. I have since been in Cooktozmv and Townsville and have been
here a week in this place, which is the richest Goldfield in Australia. If it
zvcrc in Victoria it would be noised all over the World, but the Queens-
landers have not the blowing powers and are satisfied to let the field be
worked on its own resources.
Your affectionate brother.
GEORGE DAVIS.


THE LONDON HOUSE.
This is the Head Office of the Company which, at its address.
Imperial House, Dominion Street, E.C.2, deals with numerous
Company matters in addition to its merchandising activities.
As a buying organisation it is perhaps amongst the best known
in the United Kingdom and Europe. Many important departments
are entirely devoted to purchasing merchandise and to attending
to the shipping of it to the Company’s various Australian Branches
and also to a considerable number of other importers in Australia,
New Zealand and other parts of the world.
The control is in the hands of Messrs. Stanley H. Felton
(Managing Director) and Harold G. Davis.
THE MELBOURNE HOUSE.
To expand its trade in jewellery, watches, silverware, cutlery' and
allied lines, the Company recently opened a branch in Melbourne,
at 250 Flinders Lane, and commenced business January 2nd. 1950.
Mr. Eric K. Holmes was appointed General Manager of the
branch. Results have more than justified the enterprise in catering
for the Victorian jewellery trade and a very bright future is ensured
in that State.
THE ADELAIDE HOUSE.
It was decided to open a branch in South Australia in 1911, the
purpose being to introduce the Company's special agencies to that
territory and build up closer contact with clientele, which, owing
to distance, had not been previously possible.
The branch has prospered, occupying different premises during
the course of years, and is now situated at Worando Building,
Grenfell Street.
THE AMERICAN OFFICE.
It was decided in 1891 to establish a buying office at 70 Broad
Street, New York. Business flourished and, before many years,
quite a large staff was employed, amongst it Mr. Marcus Wise,
who later became a Director on our Australian Board, and Mr.
Louis Sterling, who after some years settled in England and was
later knighted by His Majesty for his many charitable and
philanthropic acts.
Mr. A. Michelson, who joined the organisation in the early days,
became proprietor of the business jointly with Mr. M. D. Stern-
berg when the Company decided to discontinue operating in
America under its own name. Mr. Michelson controls the New
York business at the present time.


THE LONDON BOARD.
STANLEY H. FELTON,
Managing Director.
Sir RHYS RHYS-WILLIAMS,
Bt., D.S.O., K.C.,
Chairman.
LESLIE D. DAVIS.
Managing Director.
HAROLD G. DAVIS.


OUR CUSTOMERS-PAST & PRESENT.
We owe thanks and much of our success to the support we
have received from our friends in trade in all parts of Australia.
Without their generous aid we realise we could not have attained
our present standing in the commercial arena of this great country.
It is a pleasure to look back on the many opportunities we
have had to render financial aid to those who were about to set
themselves up in business, following upon which so many have
achieved success.
In times of stress—droughts and depression—we have carried
on, indirectly aiding the man on the land—the primary producer—
who so often bore tbe brunt of adversity. Through our help it
has been possible in periods of stress to let him have his require-
ments, for which settlement had to wait until more prosperous
days returned.
OUR MANUFACTURING FRIENDS.
To a Company such as ours, dependent on regular supplies of
merchandise, we pay tribute to those manufacturers, local and
abroad, in Great Britain, the United States and Europe, who
have assisted us over the years.
With many we have had very close association, from the early
days of our history up to the present time, and this affords us an
opportunity to thank them for their goodwill and co-operation.
THE FUTURE.
The Wheel of Time has turned steadily since S. Hoffnung, 100
years ago, commenced his small venture in Australia. During
that century the Company has passed through many vicissitudes,
local and world wide, succumbing to none, but steadily ploughing
its course and maintaining its precept. Faithful Service, Goodwill
to all.
Though it is not possible to give their names, we do not over-
look the loyal devotion and able efforts of our employees, both
in Australia and Overseas, whose assistance is so valued over
the past 100 years, and has meant so much to the Company’s
success.
The organisation of S. Hoffnung & Co. Limited has not ceased
to grow and we have many plans for advancement in the future.
We now may be considered old and well seasoned. And we
have grown, not because we have followed the lead of anyone
else, but have gone ahead on our own.
To those who will succeed us. this history, when read 100 years
hence, will record not only what has passed in our first century of
trading, but the fact that the Company at this time looks forward
with optimism to a bright future of development and expansion
both for our country and for our own enterprise.
THUS FROM THE PAST COMES A GUARANTEE OF THE FUTURE.


THE COUNTRY’S CALL.
This history of the Company would be incomplete without
grateful acknowledgment to those of its staff who volun-
tarily responded to their country’s call, some paying the
supreme sacrifice.
In World War I. 1914-1918, a total of 149 enlisted
from all branches. In World War 11, 1939-1943, a total of
294 enlisted from ajl branches.
Printed In Australia
by
John Sands Pty. Ltd.
