

e, Australian ‘Books
THE ART
& LIFE of
WALTER
WITHERS




The Life and Art of
Walter Withers


“the rising storm.”
[Walter Withers.


The Life and Art of
Walter Withers
MELBOURNE
ALEXANDER McGUBBIN
PUBLISHER
152 Elizabeth Street


Walter Withers
Harley Griffiths
Frederick McCubbin
(In the Press)
George W. Lambert
John Longstaff
(In the Press)
H. Fullwood
David Davies
(In the Press)
Septimus Power
Tom Roberts
John Mather
(In the Press)
Gambrae Stewart
J. Ford Paterson
A. E. Newbury
W. B. Mclnnes
(In the Press)
John Shirlow
LIST OF BOOKS IN PREPARATION
AUSTRALIAN ART BOOKS
The object of the series is to provide a little record of the work
of the leading Australian Artists.
Though each book is by no means exhaustive, it has been the
endeavour of the artists, the authors, and the publishers, to give
in each a typical record of each man’s best work.
The Publisher takes this opportunity of heartily thanking the
various ladies and gentlemen, and particularly the trustees of the
National Gallery, Melbourne, for their courtesy in allowing pictures
in their possession to be reproduced in these books.
ALEXANDER McCUBBIN, 152 Elizabeth St., Melb.


The Life and Art of
Walter Withers
WALTER WITHERS was born on 22nd
October, 1854, in the historical village
of Handsworth, on the borders of Staf-
fordshire and Warwickshire —within
a stone’s throw of the home of Watt, the
great engineer, and of that of Murdoch, the dis-
coverer of gas—the home of the landscape
painter, David Cox, at Harborne, being only
some three miles distant. The month of October
was a fateful month for him. He was married
on 11th October, 1887, and died on 13th October,
1914.
Nature was his great teacher. On her bosom
he learnt everything he cared to know; and she
revealed to him many of her great secrets, with-
holding many others, that he might strive to find
them out for himself, for Mother Nature, like
all wise mothers, does not make everything plain
and clear to her offspring, but bids them some-
times seek for themselves, that the finding may
give the greater knowledge and the richer joy.
No matter where he went, deep impressions
of Nature’s loveliness were being absorbed by
him, to be kindled later into new life, on canvas,
or in the more fascinating medium of water-
colour. Just as the living trees drink in the sun-


shine, and give it back to us in fire upon our
hearth, so does the true landscape painter con-
stantly drink in the beauties of Nature, giving
them back to us in some gem of thought, through
the medium of his brush. Hence it is absolutely
impossible for any man to represent Nature truly
unless he be constantly face to face with her.
Born with this great love for Nature, ever
ready to worship at her shrine, and with the
growing consciousness of a desire to express the
thoughts within him, he was one day suddenly
brought face to face with the knowledge that his
father would never consent to his becoming a
painter, nor would he be helped in such a mad
adventure. Like Barty Josselin, he had to learn
that “painting for hire” was not only unthink-
able, but that it was not respectable.
His father's decision caused some sad years of
drifting—years that were not really wasted, for
even the stern parental discipline could not pre-
vent the natural gift of observation from assert-
ing itself, and Withers used his power in that
direction to the full, employing water-colour as
a medium with which to express himself.
More than one person predicted the career of
the youth, in spite of his father’s resolve. But
these years of disappointment saddened him and
left their impress on the whole of his life. If
the sunshine of happiness does not enter into the
bones of the young, neither can it show itself in
later life. In spite of a strong sense of humour
and a great capacity for enjoyment, Withers was
of a lonely spirit and melancholic in his outlook
on life.
As so often happens in the lives of men who
achieve, an incident turned the whole course of
his life. Amateur theatricals in a private house,
8
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


V • ■ ■■ ' , v
’
I ' * p "
.
Wfj y - v. . .JL. -^-a.
k ■ » i > -i
' ; 2|> 1 *T -** ,®|V
f' r m «1-
JB
A '
r ... '%jt
S'-
f ff*" ’ / •■ .
.-’.. . ' . ■' "*.*
■ ;*■ : ' >•■**;.•'
„•*£ . .... ' -,. ,. < ... ,. .. :.. .... ...:;..... ..... ... , ’ :
,... ,? *iSPr * ■$
' t ,
-
i V i %
“THE VALLEY OF THE YARRA, NEAR
CHARTERISVILLE.”
[WaZ£er W^ers
In the possession of Dr. Henry O’Hara.


one Christmas Eve, gave him the first opportu-
nity to try his hand at painting in oils. A forest
scene was needed. Someone among the company
suggested Withers should paint it. All voices
were in echo, in spite of Withers’ protestations
that it was “impossible,” as he had never painted
in oils. He was overruled. The stage manager
said he would provide the canvas and colours,
and give Withers a room to himself. The writer
of the play promised to be in attendance to give
instructions. The “impossible” was done, and
the result a complete success. The future of
“Tranquil Winter” was promised in Scene 3,
“Portion of a Forest.”
This unexpected and unsought opportunity to
test his powers eventually led to his decision to
break away from the purposeless life he was
living. His father, still adamant with regard to
the career of a painter, offered him the choice
of America or Australia as a new country in
which to start on the land, promising him a sum
of money to take with him. Withers decided on
Australia. He left England in November, 1882.
On reaching Australia he disembarked at Mel-
bourne, and went on the land. In eighteen
months he had had his fill of farming, but the
uncongenial work had given him opportunities to
learn his Australia. His ever-observing eye had
noted her every mood—her softness, under the
veiling mists; her gradual hardness, as the hot
and fierce North wind obliterated the planes and,
with the strength of faith, moved mountains, far
distant, into the very centre of the landscape,
arousing the despair of the “new chum” painter,
who cried—“l cannot paint Australia; she has
no values!”
But Nature, like woman, must be wooed in her
10
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


moods, and Withers set himself to woo her. Long
days of farm labour found him a weary man at
night. There was little time for Art, and there
was very little work done in that direction at the
end of the eighteen months; but the eucalyptus had
got into his veins, and Australia claimed him.
During half his life Withers essayed to inter-
pret her, and Australians who love their beauti-
ful country (whose colours of blue and gold and
grey-green and crimson Withers has set upon
many a score of canvases, and whose “sunder-
ing seas” called him back from the homeland on
his one brief visit there, to paint their pearly
greys and deep Mediterranean blue, and foaming
sea-green and breakers washing the golden sands)
—these Australians account Withers one with
themselves in the love of this great isolated coun-
try, which is now emerging from the chaos of
war, a Nation newly born.
From the country Withers moved to Mel-
bourne, and secured a position as a draughtsman
in the firm of Wm. Inglis and Co., and later still
with Messrs. Fergusson and Mitchell, a Mel-
bourne firm of printers.
During the period of his black and white work,
Withers executed, in chalk, some fine portraits
for reproduction, that of the redoubtable Count
Von Bismarck being an especially fine specimen
of his work in this direction.
In his spare time Withers sought to cultivate
his Art, and eventually had work accepted for
exhibition in the Old Academy, Melbourne.
His eyes were now turning towards Paris, and
he used every endeavour to accumulate a suffi-
cient sum of money to achieve this end. He
arrived in England in June, 188 J, the Jubilee
year of Queen Victoria, and, as it has already
11
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


been said, he was married on the 11th October.
He and his wife settled in a small flat in the Rue
Tronchet, Paris.
The late Mr. E. P. Fox and the late Mr. Tudor
Tucker were then in Paris, and immediately-
called on Withers when they heard of his arrival,
carrying him off to the Academic Julien, where
they were both studying, with Bougereau and
Tony-Fleury as visiting professors. Withers
was soon in full swing of work.
Mr. and Mrs. John Longstaff, newly married
also, (Mr. Longstaff in the flush of his triumph
as first winner of the Victorian Travelling
Scholarship), arrived from Australia, and a little
colony of Australians settled down in I’Hotel
d’Univers, and there was a coming and going
between the two places of abode.
In June, 1888, Withers was back in Australia
with his wife, having been commissioned by Mr.
Willis Fergusson to return to Australia for two
years, in order to execute black and white work
for his firm.
“The Chronicles of Early Melbourne,” by the
late Mr. E. Finn, was illustrated by Withers,
this work awaiting him on his arrival in Aus-
tralia. It was published in book form, and is
freely illustrated with interesting pen-and-ink
drawings by Withers. One drawing of the first
Government House, and that of old Prince’s
Bridge (showing the swamp, which is now con-
verted into Alexandra Avenue,) are amongst the
most interesting in the book.
Withers elected to live in Kew, the nearness
of the River Yarra offering a painting ground
after his own heart.
One day, soon after Withers had settled in his
new home, a tall, loose-limbed, amber-eyed youth
12
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


li
1 ' I
1 Jg
1;
» k*
yip JHPl pFjj% . . ? '11|';fe»
Pife
•» jy
K b> V Wm'
; ii , - ,
1 .. *
1
B
& > *MaBte| w *
»T ! *;'.. fai| M s&mSm-
,'....*, 1:. ;s
:. ■■■ -,■ ;:■■ ? : ■ ■ ;
C£ r L^ m If; * ' JK f I f
'
■'■•■• ’ .. .
“TRANQUIL WINTER.”
[ Walter Withers.
By kind permission of
the Trustees of the Melbourne
National Gallery.


appeared on the scene, and stayed to lunch with
Withers.
He was shy, modest, eager to hear all about
Paris, and of the work of the Australians in the
different schools there. He listened with rapt
attention, saying little himself, but obviously
eager to know everything Withers could tell him.
He had that affectionate, appealing, almost depre-
cating glance, which earned for him the name of
“Smike” from Tom Roberts.
This visitor was Arthur Streeton, whose “Still
Glides the Stream and Will for Ever Glide,” his
first important work, had been acclaimed the
work of a genius—Streeton, whose name will
always live in the annals of Australian Art, in
spite of his self-imposed exile from his native
land.
Another visitor to the Kew studio, on occasions,
was Charles Conder, Streeton’s greatest admirer.
From their first meeting Charles Conder be-
lieved in Arthur Streeton and in his destiny;
and this belief made him follow Streeton, as one
follows the light that leads, for although in Art
Conder had something of his own, it was from
Arthur Streeton that he drew his source of
inspiration. Strangely enough, it has come to be
thought, by some critics, that Conder influenced
Streeton’s Art; it was quite the other way,
though, probably, Mr. Streeton never knew it.
Conder’s part was to set spur to his friend’s
genius and incite it to action —no mean part to
play. Conder himself, in the early days, gener-
ously acknowledged all that he owed to Streeton.
Conder and Streeton, together with Tom
Roberts, were the three painters who first settled
in the large deserted wooden house on the Eagle-
mont estate in Heidelberg. It was lent to them
14
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


by Mr. Charles Davies, brother-in-law of the
painted, David Davies.
Tom Roberts was the moving spirit of the
camp. He had great ability to organise and to
awaken to activity the younger men of his day.
He also had a genius for bestowing nick-names
on the members of the camp, which not only
exactly suited them, but by which they are still
known amongst the fraternity. Tom Roberts
was, indeed, the vital spark of the whole move-
ment. But for him, it is possible that no group
of painters would ever have come together.
Fred McCubbin became a frequent visitor to
the camp, beloved by everyone, and making his
inspiring influence felt everywhere.
In October of 1889 Withers’ wife went home,
and during her absence Withers spent much of
his time at Eaglemont. Tom Roberts dubbed
him “The Orderly Colonel,” in acknowledgment
of the system which Withers started to keep the
camp in order, putting men on fatigue duties,
and making a great point of hygiene.
In that summer (1889-90) Withers painted,
from the heights of Eaglemont, “The Valley of
the Yarray a large oil painting, now in the pos-
session of Dr. Henry O’Hara, by whose courtesy
it is reproduced in this little book. This Eagle-
mont period was one of great enjoyment to
Withers.
Amongst Withers’ collection of photographs is
one of the front of Eaglemont House, with
Whelan and himself standing on the path. The
word “counthry” and “do ye mind” are references
to Whelan’s manner of speaking.
In June, 1890, Withers’ wife returned to Aus-
tralia, and they lived for a short time in South
15
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


Yarra and then in Kew, but in September of that
year they moved into the Charterisville house,
Withers having found this romantic spot on one
of his rambles whilst at Eaglemont.
Mr. McArthur, the owner and creator of Char-
terisville and its wonderfully beautiful garden,
had died about a year before. Mrs. McArthur
had moved out of the place, with great regret;
it had been sold.
The collapse of the land boom had left its mark
on Charterisville, and the place was let to a dairy
farmer. This man, with his wife and children,
lived at the North end of the long grey stone
house, and Withers and his wife at the South
end. A kitchen went with each division of the
house, and an enclosed verandah, eighty-four feet
in length, ran on the Western side of the house.
A short passage cut in two the main portion of
the building, and led to the enclosed front veran-
dah with its long glazed doorways, revealing the
beautiful wistaria, hanging out its lavender blos-
soms, in the Spring.
The collapse of the land boom had also affected
Withers, so far as black and white work was
concerned, and he and his wife were undecided
as to their future.
Withers had scored some success with his
painting "The Valley of the ' Yarra,” and had,
moreover, begun to feel a grip on Australian
landscape. He was, therefore, somewhat drawn
towards Australia.
His wife, on the other hand, looked towards
England, with a woman’s natural desire to live
amongst her own people.
No definite decision had been reached when,
one Saturday morning, Mr. Fred McCubbin and
his wife made their appearance at Charteris-
16
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


i * J i ill'
.a.-^.^.. . TL mHKSmf i a f IdBlI # % H
mM|A||Cf llMiL & $ J> *WkiS >, 1 a , --■ H ;.f M&JjP
"I''' . i ,' v "~ **&*# v
'
“110° IN THE SHADE/’
[Walter Withers.
In the possession of Mr. Fredk. Challingsworth.


ville; he had come to offer Withers drawing and
painting classes in three schools.
Withers had no desire to take up the life of
a teacher, but the total failure of black and white
work made it expedient for him to weigh the
offer carefully. The fees connected with the
classes were sufficiently good to be well considered,
and Withers sought counsel with his wife. The
wife told her husband to decide for himself.
Withers decided to take the schools, and this deci-
sion resulted in a permanent home in Australia.
Withers now settled down to steady painting,
with the intention of opening a studio in Mel-
bourne in the coming Autumn of 1891.
On the rocks at the foot of the garden at Char-
terisville he painted a large oil, “After the Heat
of the Day” (now owned by Mr. Guyon Purchas),
and smaller works, “The Old Coach Road , Heidel-
herg” (now in the possession of Lady Irvine),
“An Australian Homestead” (afterwards taken
to England), and “The Trusting Place” besides
several other canvases of which there is no
record.
In April, 1891, Withers moved into a studio in
the A.M.P. Buildings, Collins Street, and held
there his first private exhibition, which was
visited by the late Janet Lady Clarke on the open-
ing day.
Besides attracting a large number of private
pupils to his new studio, he also held out-door
classes and gave special lessons, privately, to
visitors from the various Australian States, and
from Tasmania and New Zealand. Once a pupil
always a friend, seems to have been his experi-
ence.
Withers’ influence as a painter, upon the
younger Art students of his time, was marked.
18
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


In 1893 he spent several weeks in Creswick,
holding an out-of-door class during the month of
January. Creswick, with its Italian colouring of
blue and gold, made an ideal painting ground,
and the students were enthusiastic workers.
Amongst those who took advantage of this
opportunity were Percy Lindsay (then a promis-
ing young landscape painter), and, at the even-
ing drawing class held in the School of Mines,
his young brother, now the well-known Norman
Lindsay—a schoolboy then, whose remarkable
facility in drawing aroused Withers" wonder and
delight—a slight, rather delicate-looking boy,
with uncommon verve, and with an unconscious
certainty of purpose about him, “but modest
withal.”
Withers was himself painting at every possible
leisure moment while in Creswick, and executed
some fine work in connection with the seekers
of gold— “ Cradling,” now in the possession of
Mr. John May; “The Two Fossickers,” bought
by Mr. Theodore Fink; and “Finding Gold,” the
property of Mr. James Dyer, were the principal
works of this Summer.
Withers left Charterisville in the following
year, 1894, and took a cottage in Cape Street,
Heidelberg.
It was here that he painted some of his finest
work, of the fin-de-siecle period. One often
hears the remark, “That is the work of such
and such a man’s best period.” As a matter of
fact, in the career of a gifted man who is ever
striving upward, there is the best work of each
period, for a man is not always at the top of his
bent. In each period of his career there are times
when he hits the mark. Fortuitous circum-
stances combine to enable him to do so. These
19
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


are the moments of ecstacy which entice the doer
onward. By these inspired works the artist
attains immortality. They are the works which
will follow him.
“The Selector’s Home,” painted in 1895, was
an achievement that won the admiration of
Arthur Streeton and Fred McCubbin.
It displays the qualities of a keen observer of
Nature, which caused one critic to write of
Withers: “These paintings are the work of a
man who has studied Australian scenery with
no hasty methods, but with the slow and perse-
vering observation of one who notes a change
of effect in every day of the year.”
“The Selector’s Home” was painted during the
time Australia was suffering from a cycle of hot
and dry seasons—a time when one wakes in the
early morning, not to the songs of the birds, but
to the sound of the devastating meat-fly; a time
when the North wind scorches the paddocks, and
the thermometer rises higher and higher until,
of its own intensity, the change is wrought, and
there comes the welcome relief.
In “The Selector’s Home” there is no North
wind, but a steady glowing heat—a heat which
creates a pulsation of colour. In the bush on
such a day, one sees touches of pure blue in the
landscape, and in this picture it is the semblance
of vibration that is given. The soft green patch
of cultivation, in the centre of the picture, makes
a daring, but an artistically expressed contrast to
the burnt up grass and to the belt of green fruit
trees in the middle distance. The absence of
atmosphere in Nature has brought everything
forward, and the sense of far distance is lost.
A few months later “Tranquil Winter” came
from his brush.
20
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


.
’.V r; •
:?» | ;
. ■
mL.-:- .. •' .
\ "C ■ > , \
: ■ J&l'!
“SPRING ON THE
LOWER PLENTY, VICTORIA.”
[Walter Withers.


A greater contrast in subject, expression,
tone and in technique could scarcely be imagined
—the former vibrating with intensity, and this
latter work breathing an atmosphere of rest,
repose and tranquillity.
It is best described by the late gifted Art
critic of the Pall Mall Gazette, R. A. M. Steven-
son, who wrote the criticism on the work
exhibited in the Colonial Art Exhibition held in
London in 1898 (a venture made possible to the
Australian painters through the munificence of
Miss Eadith Walker, of Sydney) :
“This, ‘Tranquil Winter ’ is the most beau-
tiful canvas in the show. Rolling downs of
grey grass, chequered by shadows from
white-stemmed forest trees, the gently illu-
mined house and the delicate sky make a
delicious harmony of colour, as natural as
it is decoratively beautiful.”
Mr. R. A. M. Stevenson was the cousin of
whom Robert Louis Stevenson wrote: “Bob is
the best talker in the world.” He wrote the
standard work on Velasquez and was himself a
painter, being a member of the Barbizon School
at the time of Millet’s death.
The original sketch of this painting was pur-
chased by Lord Carmichael when he was Gover-
nor of Victoria, who wrote to the painter: “I
was very glad to be able to get the sketch of
4 Tranquil Winter because I have always admired
‘Tranquil Winter ’ so much.”
“The Rising Storm” was also produced about
this time—a dramatic painting, executed rapidly
during the short interval between the threaten-
ing, and the actual visitation of the tempest. It
is accounted one of the finest rapid pieces of
22
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


work which Walter Withers ever executed. It
has the boldness and vigour of a quickly executed
sketch with the masterly finish of an accom-
plished and inspired hand. It was bought whilst
still wet on the easel, and is now the property
of Mr. John Rippin, of Kooyong Road, Caulfield,
who has kindly allowed the painting to be repro-
duced in this book.
“Still Autumn” was next in succession, and
was exhibited in the Sydney Society of Artists’
Exhibition, together with “ Nearing the Town-
ship,” in 1901. It was awarded the Wynne Art
Prize, and afterwards was sent to the Bendigo
Jubilee Exhibition, where it was awarded a silver
medal for the best landscape exhibited there. It
was subsequently purchased by Mr. A. E. Lang-
ford, of Mentone, who also possesses the idealistic
“Evening in Heidelberg,” and the very realistic
smaller work, “The Mangel Patch,” a full-
coloured grey scheme, typical of the cultivation
patches lying on the river flats, near the Heidel-
berg bridge.
Want of space has prevented a reproduction
of “Still Autumn” appearing in this book.
“Spring,” recently seen in the Fine Art Gal-
lery, is anterior to “Tranquil Winter,” and should
have come into its place earlier in this record.
It was painted in the first Spring after Withers
left Charterisville for Heidelberg. It was ex-
hibited in Sydney in the following year. As a
work of Art it takes its place amongst the tender
and more English side of Withers’ earlier work.
It is a poetical rendering of a poetical subject.
Two cottages in evening light, a few fruit trees,
one decked with the lovely blossom of the peach,
and a cabbage patch, in which two women are
working. It was reproduced in an early number
23
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


of The Studio, and was purchased by Sir Bald-
win Spencer a few years ago.
“The Woodcarters” and “Early Morning,
Heidelberg,” followed in succession. Both were
bought by the Adelaide Art Gallery.
“Nearing the Township” came next in order.
This picture is a great favourite with the public,
and was purchased by the Sydney Gallery in
1901. The stretch of road leading to the town-
ship, the farm house and outbuildings lying to
the right of the road; the lonely, tired, footsore
swagsman wending his way, swag on back and
billy in hand, make an incident so well known
to Australian people that the painting made a
direct appeal, to which everyone seemed to
respond. The distant township lends an added
interest to the story, for it is there where the
hope of rest lies for the weary traveller.
It is impossible to trace one-fourth of the
smaller work which Withers executed in these
Heidelberg years. He was a most prolific
painter, and no record was kept of the where-
abouts of the numerous canvases, which were
painted and sold in quick succession, so soon as
Withers began to make himself felt.
The most complete collection of smaller work
is owned by Mr. John May, of Heidelberg. He
possesses upwards of thirty paintings, all of
first merit, showing Withers at his best.
Amongst the oils “Cradling,” “A Pastoral,”
“The Morning Ride” (reproduced in this book)
take pride of place, and amongst the water-
colours “The Red Rock,” “Point Henry Beach,”
“The Beach at Cowes,” and “The Road to El-
tham.” Two 7 x 9 in. oil panels and one 14 x 10 in.
are gems of the first water.
24
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


•/
i & S 1
•
* ;
■ ' mwm -
. . . .
,
“THE MORNING RIDE.”
[Walter Withers.
In the possession of Mr. John May.


“At Dawn ” was painted at this period, and
was purchased by Mr. Cuthbert Traill, after the
death of the painter—a beautiful rendering of
Walter Withers’ painting of cattle in scrub. Mr.
Traill also possesses a beautiful rendering of
“The Rising Moon at Heidelberg ,” by Withers.
But Heidelberg was fast developing, in the year
1902, into a suburb, and Withers had to go fur-
ther afield for his subjects. His health was
beginning to give him trouble; periodical attacks
of the heart had overtaken him. Life began to
be out of shape and to assume the form of ever-
increasing difficulties.
He had long been attracted to Eltham, but the
want of a train service had made it impossible
to go out in that direction hitherto. In the late
Summer of 1903 Withers heard of a small pro-
perty for sale there, and decided to buy it, as
the newly-constructed railway line to Eltham was
completed, and a regular, though very inadequate
train service was instituted. A large studio was
added to the cottage, and, the whole family took
up its abode there in June, 1903,
The first large canvas, which was painted in
the Eltham studio was the largest Withers ever
painted, and it was first exhibited at the Vic-
torian Artists’ Society’s Exhibition of 1905,
under the title of “The Return from the Har-
vest.” Later, the painting was greatly elaborated
—it became, in fact, a very much beloved child
of the artist’s brain—and time and again he
returned to it, with added thought and ampler
brush, with the result that it developed into the
most romantic work of the painter. It was ex-
hibited in its altered form in the upper Athenseum
Hall, Melbourne, in 1912, and after the painter’s
death it was shown, amongst other work of the
26
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


artist, in the Gordon College, Geelong. It was
purchased by the Traill family (former residents
of Geelong) and presented by them to the Gee-
long Art Gallery in May, 1917—a munificent gift,
the price of the painting being £BOO.
“Spring on the Lower Plenty" came after-
wards. The same subject as the former picture,
but painted in the lighter tone of Spring, as
opposed to the deeper and more sombre tone of
Autumn. A very excellent sketch had been exe-
cuted as the keynote for this larger work, and
was purchased by Mr. J. L. Wharton, Wellington
Parade, East Melbourne, who last year bought
also “The Waggoner's Return ," another of the
painter’s romantic pictures, painted at Heidel-
berg two Winters previous to his leaving there.
The next large canvas in order was “The Silent
Gums," bought by the Felton Bequest Trustees in
1907, and now hanging in the Melbourne National
Gallery—a painting which attracts much atten-
tion.
“The Drover" followed on—a realistic painting
purchased by the Bendigo Gallery.
“The Ragged Edge of the Bush," shown at the
same time as “The Silent Gums," and outrival-
ling the larger painting in the opinion of some
critics, is an idyllic rendering of a corner of the
bush to which sheep have strayed. It is a work
of great poetic beauty. “Sheep in the Forest,"
recently seen in the Decoration Gallery Exhibi-
tion, and which attracted much attention there,
is another beautiful corner of Orr Park, Eltham.
It was purchased by Mrs. T. G. Elder during the
currency of this exhibition.
Of water-colour drawings Withers left a phe-
nomenal number behind. As the end drew nearer
the faster he produced work, often bringing in,
27
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


from the open, two, and sometimes more, water-
colours in one day. He knew his time was short,
even as he painted. He always wanted to pass
out quickly; he dreaded a long illness and being
laid aside, unable to work. He was spared all
these things, and had his desire.
In these last days he seemed to set himself to
the tune of Barry Cornwall’s beautiful lines,
which had appealed to him so much in the full
flow of his manhood:—
“Art sick? Art sad? Art weary with the world?
Do all thy friends forsake thee?
Why, then give thyself
Unto the forests, and the ambrosial fields;
Commune with them, and with the electric sky.
Despair not, fellow! He who casts himself
On Nature's fair, full bosom, and draws food,
Drinks from a fountain that is never dry.
The Poet haunts there; youth, that ne'er grows
old,
Dwells with her, and her flowers; and Beauty
sleeps
In her most green recesses, to be found
By all who seek her truly."
He passed away on 13th October, 1914.
28
THE ART OF WALTER WITHERS.


i '*£ ■ • *
Jr.
"
“ ' ; v (
|||
:S§i.i : /
■..«■. " ' j
■pip 3
i-".' ■ :x T"
p * ? || W||. L,
- & m
.' • •::, - ;
S£ -. • "■ S ;^' S W
a
IN AUGUST.”
[ Walter Withers.
In the possession of Mr. Meynell Withers,


