

I
Jr
THE CLAIMS
OF THE
REV. W. B. CLARKE.
tvtOvfii'iOii. — Thucydides 11. CO.
SYDNEY
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET.
1860.
O yay yvovg, kai fir/ (Ta(j)wg SiSa^ag, ev ei nai fxt]
r *33*




THE CLAIMS OE THE REV. W. B. CLARKE.
The claims of the Reverend W. B. Clarke to the gratitude of this
community for valuable scientific services, long ago, and contin-
uously to this time, performed and never yet remunerated, 1 come
upon us at this time with irresistible force, for we find that
reverend gentleman at last borne down by the sufferings, con-
sequent on his fatigues, exertions, and privations, undergone in
the course of these services, so that it is not too much to say, that
his bodily strength has failed, and what has produced unbounded
good to the colony has been gained by the sacrifice of himself.
Mr. Clarke, whose tastes had early led him to the study of
natural philosophy, and particularly to the kindred sciences of
Geology and Mineralogy, but never to the neglect of his Sacred
calling,—arrived in this Colony in the year 1839, 2 with a mind
richly stored with all that could be acquired in the domains of
these sciences, by perusal of the best authors, by intimacy with
nearly all the great men of the age, and by personal explorations
over the whole of Europe, and thereby eminently fitted for the
laborious task he immediately entered upon. It may be said
exclusively so, for the Colony neither then, nor at any subsequent
period, could find another equally fitted for it.
Apart, however, from other scientific suggestions which have
emanated from him, and have been adopted with general ad-
vantage—as his Meteorological and Geographical notices —there
is one field of labour from which not only the Colony but the world
at large has reaped so vast a harvest, in which he led the way,
that upon this point alone, it will be enough to rest his claims —
the discovery and investigation of the mineral riches of the Colony,
especially in it’s Gold Fields.


In patient investigation, and deduction therefrom, at once
sound and brilliant, yet tempered with the modesty 1 that always
accompanies real merit, Mr. Clarke stands without a rival and
adopting as his maxim the celebrated Horatian line “ Nulhus
addictus jurare in verba magistri,” and with no preconceived
notions of his own, he steadily and systematically pursued his
course.
With regard to the first discovery of gold, although it is
true that Sir R. I. Murchison possessed great merit in predicting
the existence of gold in Australia from wholly independent
sources of information, 2 yet as great, if not greater, must be the
merit of Mr. Clarke, who, without external aid, proved the actual
fact 3 of the presence of gold at least five years before : and so
also, although Mr. Hargraves was appointed a Gold Commis-
sioner, after the discovery had been made, for the express pur-
pose of exploring for gold, 4 this gentleman was indebted for his
instructions, where to seek it, to the Rev. W. B. Clarke. 5
Mr. Clarke found gold so early as 1841 ; 6 reported it to
Sir George Gipps in 1843 : 7 and since 1850 has been continually
occupied by the gold question. 8 In 1851, at the age of 53, when
no layman could be found equal to the task, he undertook 9 those
long journeys which have made such frightful ravages upon his
health. In the course of his explorations he has traversed and
fully reported upon upwards of 100,000 square miles of country,
extending between lat. 30° and 37° S., and long. 147° and
154° E. 10
The extent and value of these labours can only be estimated,
by perusing his many able and interesting Reports, the greater
part of which have been published by the Government, and all
in the columns of the Sydney Morning Herald. In them, not to
mention his discovery of other metals, which he declares are
equal in extent with the Gold, 11 and whose localities he accurately
lays down, 12 he proclaimed the names of at least one hundred
places where Gold exists. 1 ”
The reports that appear in the Newspapers, almost daily, of
1 Appendix!. 2Appendix J.P. 3Appendix G.I.M.P. 4Appendix E.G.
5 Appendix C.G.K.L. 6 Appendix G.I.J.K.L.M. 7 Appendix M. (4.)
8 Appendix A.B. 9 Appendix A. 10 Appendix B.
11 Appendix G.M. (4.) 12 Appendix B.


fresh discoveries, 1 (as they are called) while they tend to raise our
admiration of the wonderful acumen of the man of science, cannot
fail in arousing our indignation that such is the only reward he
receives.
Wherever Mr. Clarke prospected, thither the diggers
flocked, 2 and, perhaps, his proudest triumph is contained in their
assertion “ that they never were deceived by him” 3 —and nume-
rous localities which he indicated were immediately worked, and
last to this day.
It was reserved for him and for him alone, to explore the
fastnesses of the Alpine Range, by ways known hitherto to one
or two stockmen only. It is frightful to contemplate the dangers
and difficulties that he encountered. Often baffled by blinding
snow, or the pouring rain, forced to swim rivers, deserted by his
servants, or, his waggon broken to pieces, laid on a bed of snow,
as he thought to die, afflicted with swamp fever, deprived of the
use of an eye, and frequently left senseless by falls from his horse,
he yet contrived to furnish one of his most finished Reports on
that District, and to announce the important fact that its Gold
extends over 16,000 square miles.
These journeys sowed the seed of the illness which he
narrowly and only partially recovered, and from which he is still
suffering in a neighbouring Colony, hoping to regain that health,
which, it is feared, he has lost for ever.
The Araluen Diggings which Mr. Clarke extensively
reported on in his Southern journey, and which Mr. Hargraves
asserted could not last for six weeks, 4 are still giving employment
to thousands, and the rapid growth of the Northern Diggings
fully justifies every assertion made by the Reverend Gentleman ;
while the recently opened Diggings in the Monaro Country is
the crowning triumph of his labours.
Such is a feeble outline of Mr. Clarke’s services and the
results to himself, and such are the chief grounds of his claims
upon New South Wales :—but not all, for, although of late years
he has not been called upon to undertake like dangerous journeys,
yet he has never been unemployed for the public good ; in every
new research he is still consulted, and still advises, gratuitously—in
1 Letter from Age, M. 7, 8, 9,10, N.O.P. 2 Extract from Age, Appendix I. M. (2) N.
3 Appendix H. 4 Appendix F.


every difficulty application is made to him, both by the government
of the day, and by private individuals; every new mineral is for-
warded to him for his opinion ; upon every novel question Reports
required from him, and in fact he may be fairly said to be the
unpaid Geologist and Mineralogist of New South Wales —as well
as universal Referee in all matters pertaining to the explorations
of Australasia.
It must be stated, however, that the neighbouring Colonies
of Australasia have been largely indebted to his researches;
and that they have been acknowledged by them: thus in
Victoria, he pointed out to Mr. Deas Thomson the Mount Alex-
ander Gold Field, and published in a Pamphlet, in 1851, the
exact locality he reported on the “ Mitta Mitta ” and “ Omeo ”
Gold Fields: 2 pointed out the promising productiveness of
Gipps’ Land, 3 now in course of realization ; he furnished in 1856
and 1859 six Reports on the TaSmanian Gold Fields, 4 having
previously explored the Island, while recruiting his shattered
health, thus mixing, as ever, the “ utile ” with the “ dulce.”
His services were acknowledged by the Victorian Govern-
ment, they voted him £lOOO, 3 but to this day about £470 is the
total amount paid.
He has published about thirty or forty different Reports on
the New South Wales Gold Fields, and has marked for publi-
cation about a thousand fossils. The interesting specimens, the
descriptions and notes on which, resembling the leaves of the
sybil! are contained in numerous memoranda, only capable of
arrangement by himself, must remain unknown to science and
the Colony, unless ease, time, and leisure, be afforded Mr. Clarke
to consolidate the useful information to be derived from them
into a form more applicable to public use: or till some future
Geologist shall regain the knowledge which will be lost, if Mr.
Clarke have not the power to complete this part of his labours.
But the important fact that Mr. Clarke deduced from his
researches into the nature of Gold, and which is likely to produce
the most lasting benefits to this community, is the discovery of
the matrix —while other eyes were endeavouring to detect the
visible Gold, the master mind of the finished geologist was tracing
1 Appendix H. J.L., see also I. 2 Appendix B. 3 Appendix 8.P., and Letter from Age.
4 Appendix I. 5 Appendix I.


out the origin of all gold, and at last was enabled to declare where
gold existed, though not visible to the naked eye. 1
A learned winter has well observed* “ In matters connected
“ with Political Economy, the experience of practical men ”
“is often appealed to in opposition of those who are called
“ theorists; even though the latter perhaps are deducing conclu-
sions from a wide induction of facts, while the experience of
“ the others will often be found only to amount to their having
“ been long conversant with the details of office, and having all
“ that time gone on in a certain beaten track, from which they
“ never tried, or witnessed, or even imagined a deviation.” “So
“ a i so the authority derived from experience of a practical Miner,
“ i.e. one who has wrought all his life in one mine—will sometimes
“ delude a speculator into a vain search for metal or coal, against
“ the opinion perhaps of Theorists , i.e, persons of extensive
“ Geological observation.” 2
“ It is to be observed also, that whatever credit is conveyed by
“ the word “ Discovery,” to him who is regarded as the author of
“ it, is well deserved by those who skilfully select and combine known
u truths ( especially such as have been long and generally known}
“so as to elicit important and hitherto unthought of conclusions. +
So in the present instance, gold was found apparently in
different rocks, but the “master mind” set to work, and by
generalising his facts became a theorist, but by turning his theory
to account and proving its truth in a variety of instances, he
became the true Practical Miner.
The Parliament of Hew South Wales, in 1853, voted Mr.
Clarke a sum of £lOOO, 3 which did not even pay his personal
expenses, and which Mr. Clarke would not have accepted as a
remuneration except under the pressure of pecuniaiy losses, so
that health and a third part of his life have been devoted to the
Colony, without any thing that can be termed compensation
from any quarter.
True it is that Mr. Clarke’s science , as well as actual services,
■although not requited here, have been everywhere in all Europe,
America, and Australasia, appreciated and acknowledged ; and
that the neighbouring Colonies have vied with each other in
1 Appendix (5) 1.J.0. 2Appendix D. (3) G.T.P.L. 3Note to Appendix A,
"Why. Rhet, 2, Chap, iii., §v. t Logic, iv. ii., § iv.


offers to induce him to transfer them to Tasmania or to Nelson,
but Mr. Clarke has steadily and unmoved by either, resisted their
invitations, and preserved his future usefulness for New South
Wales alone. One eloquent writer* in this Colony has recently
passed a most just judgment on these labours and claims, which
will remain a lasting monument of a genuine appreciation of
them, and a lasting reproach to the Government and people of
New South Wales, if the principles thus advanced be not
adopted and carried out.
The following is the paper alluded to :
THE CLAIMS OF THE REV. W. B. CLARKE.
From our report it will be seen that £3OOO are to be placed on the
Estimates as a fund from which to reward the discoverers of new gold fields—a
measure of doubtful policy. Similar proposals have been carried in other
Australian colonies, but we are not aware that the results have been very
satisfactory. Nevertheless, it is one of those questions upon which men may
easily come to a different conlusion. Though we could not conscientiously
support the motion, we should have had some difficulty in opposing it.
This vote, however, reminds us of an example of public ingratitude to
which we hope there are few parallels in this colony, or in any other part of the
world. It was the good fortune of this country when gold first attracted
attention, to possess a geologist of the highest scientific reputation—the Rev.
W. B. Clarke. This gentleman for thirty years, had devoted all his leisure
which he could spare from his sacred profession in the prosecution of this
branch of knowledge. There is no geological association in Europe or America
that is not familiar with his name. It occurs continually in the reports of their
transactions. His opinions are the subject of debate in their reunions. What
Person was among scholars ; what Hamilton was among metaphysicians ; what
Brunei was among engineers; what Cuvier was among naturalists; what
Faraday was among chemists, that Murchison and Clarke are among
geologists, the last perhaps less renowned only because he has been less favoured
by fortune.
When the discovery of gold was drawing off the population of this colony
and creating the deepest anxiety as to its future fate, the Government of this
country requested Mr. Clarke to undertake a geological expedition. This
involved, of course, some professional difficulties. But uniting the labours of
an unpaid missionary with the researches of a geologist, Mr. Clarke was
enabled to accept, without reproach, duties which no man in the country was
so well qualified as himself to perform.
A series of reports are contained in the Parliamentary Papers, published
in Great Britain, narrating the steps which he took, and giving an account of
* Sydney Morning Herald, 9th February, 1860.


the observations he made. Were these reports a detail of facts such as ordinarily
engage the attention of travellers, they would have been published in the colony
and read with avidity. Who but a scientific man can wade through a story of
palaeeozoic strata or porphyritic patches, or schistose beds, and all the other
tremendous terms which bristle throughout the report of these geological
surveys. We can, however, understand this, that Mr. Clarke traversed over a
large portion of the territory of this colony; that he was exposed to all the
fatigues and risks of exhausting journeys over burning plains and frozen
mountains, that he furnished to the Government a vast accumulation of facts
which could never have been collected, but by a scientific geologist. He was
not only able to correct some misconceptions with respect to the locality of gold,
which would have involved great waste of time and disappointment, but also
to point out with prophetic accuracy to what point of the compass the digger
might turn. Thus, from the time of the publication of these reports until now,
we have had almost weekly references in the journals to the correspondence
between the scientific geologist and the experience of the digger.
During the last few weeks the Snowy Mountains have attracted great
attention. Allowing for all the exaggeration which is so natural, there seems
to be little doubt that a great gold field is open there. Mr. Clarke pointed out that
16.000 square miles of gold digging territory lay in that direction. We have
understood that, in his opinion, the space over which the precious metal extends
is in reality four times that area. In every country newspaper near those
regions, we find allusions to the accuracy of Mr. Clarke’s geological observations?
and we feel confident in the future development, because it has been proclaimed
by a geologist who, though he has given innumerable opinions, has never been
found seriously at fault.
These valuable labours being completed, the Government of the day paid
Mr. Clarke a sum which barely compensated for his actual expenditure. He
had, indeed, the certainty that his labours will obtain for him a recognition of his
name by posterity. But of what avail is this ? By these fatiguing journeys
inroads were made upon his constitution. During the last few months, the effects
of long study and excessive physical toil have shown themselves in a form
awakening the most serious interest of his friends. He is now, we understand,
on a visit to one of the neighbouring colonies, in the hope of recruiting his health,
We put it to every reflecting man in this colony, and especially to every
member of the Assembly, whether we have dealt honourably and fairly with
Mr. Clarke ? Is it right that such a man, at sixty years of age, should have
no provision but that which arises from his profession, and which must, of
course, be terminated the moment his health breaks down. At present, we
believe, with a kind consideration which does them honour, his brethren of the
clergy are attending to his parish, but it is obvious that even his ministerial
function cannot be continued with advantage, unless he is enabled to recover
strength by a prolonged suspension from labour.
There is, however, a work which Mr. Clarke, of all men, is best qualified
to perform, and in which the colony is most deeply interested. W e understand
that, during his long residence, he has accumulated a large mass of papers
which require review and arrangement in order to publication. There must


be lodged in them information of high moment to the community; but, as a
book, how few geological works can hope for commercial success—an ephemeral
tale would have a thousand times better chance of pecuniary reward. Those
invaluable seeds of future prosperity which are lodged in the granite strata of
geological science can only be made available by some form of patronage
which no individual enthusiasm will supply.
Is there no gentleman in the Assembly who, cognisant of these facts, will
bring them before the representatives of the people? No man who has
received a pension for public service has had a stronger claim on the Legislature
than the Rev. W. B. Clarke.
And so in the neighbouring colony of Victoria, a writer in the Age thus
notices Mr. Clarke’s geological prognostications in 1851, respecting the
SNOWY RIVER AND EASTERN GIPPS LAND GOLD FIELDS.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE AGE.
Sir.— As your paper has always most high-mindedly been the eaidiest to
record any new discoveries of gold fields in New South Wales, I beg to hand
you the following rough statement of the auriferous prospects of the above
district, where at length the Rev. W. B. Clarke’s prognostications of its richness
have been fully proved. Ever since that learned gentleman’s visit of geological
inspection to the Snowy River and Twofold Bay country, many of its inhabit-
ants have systematically each year, while their crops were growing, or after
harvest or sheepshearing,l worked or prospected particular spots which were
more or less indicated by that gentleman as auriferous, and it has been well
known in Twofold Bay, Cooma, Bombala, and Pambula ever since 1851, that
some of the neighboring farmers and small stock owners depend somewhat on
their luck at these private diggings for a yearly augmentation to their means.
In addition to these local periodical workers, a few parties of regular diggers of
the more enterprising sort—those who prefer remote, quiet, and moderately
paying diggings—a large proportion of whom are Americans—have also
prospected and partly worked the southern part of Maneroo, where the many
heads of the Snowy river rise ; and I have known of a party who have worked
continuously for two years on the Delegete River country, on which its native
blacks say “ there is plenty of gold two days’ journey in the scrub from
Jackson’s station at Delegete Hilland I furthur know that in 1857 and 1858,
some squatters in the neighbourhood had fitted out two expeditions to penetrate to
this asserted El Dorado, but their drays could not get through, and some of the
since luckiest Adelong reefers formed a part of that spirited venture, which
failed because of the want of feed for the bullocks, the thickness of the scrub,
the limited resources of the promoters, and a most unfounded fear of the Ninety
mile beach blackfellows.
Coarse gold was found by some fencers in 1856-7, on the Bendock River on
Mr. Nicholson's station, while sinking post holes. In May last year, gold of a
shotty, coarse description was brought into Twofold Bay by a resident of that
place, who, it was currently stated, had found it in the Kiah River, near Mount
1 Appendix I.


Imlay, within twenty miles of Twofold Bay. The discoverer (R*b**ts) started
again immediately to attempt to reach the sources of the Delegete by following
up the Bemm River from Gann’s station, where also gold is said to have been
found. The sources of the Bemm and Delegete are divided by the same set of
ranges.
I have been informed that gold has been found up thq Genoa River, not far
from Capt. Stevenson’s station. The country between Twofold Bay and
Alexander’s station on the Genoa (forty miles S. W. of Twofold Bay) is mostly
a series of quartzose hills, covered with iron barb, and described by an experienced
digging friend of mine as closely resembling Tarrengower. This same digger
in 1857, en route to Adelong, from the Genoa River, tried the country nearly
up to the newly discovered Gibson’s Plains diggings, and he spoke most favorably
of the places which he had tried. Of Delegete and Bendock he said, “for
sluicing, and By large parties both these places will answer very well—the gold
is of a very good quality, and large.”
Now, as Gibson’s Plains cannot be worked for four or five of the winter
months, owing to the snow, diggers could not do better, if in parties, than to try
the tributaries of the Snowy River, down off the high ground, where snow is a
rarity, and where one of the finest winter climates is to be found. (The alpacas
are to be located in the same quarter, at Nimitybell, from the same cause of
good winter weather.) And if any of the diggers can do it, let them prospect
the main branches of the Snowy River itself, by boats, and thus avoid the
difficulties of the scrub, and of land carriage. Tea, sugar, and biscuits would
be provisions enough, for the main river abounds with fish and game.
I am convinced from information gathered at and near Twofold Bay during
the last seven years, that the higher, or Maneroo, as well as the lower waters, of
the Snowy River, will prove, on being properly tested, to contain as much gold
as any of the rich Victorian diggings, and especially in quartz, and thus afford
winter employment to those who, being prevented from working on the higher
grounds, will be allowed to register their claims there, and proceed to less incle-
ment situations. As to the route to Gibson’s Plains from Melbourne, Twofold
Bay is the only judicious plan,—well-marked roads and inns at convenient
distances have existed these twenty years there ; and the colliers bound from
Melbourne to Newcastle, going in ballast, would gladly take passengers and
horses, or bullocks, and drays and stores cheaply; or the Sydney steamers might
lower their charge to meet the present bad times. Two days by steamer, or
about double that time by a collier, would reach Twofold Bay ; and as that
place is not much more than half way between Melbourne and Sydney, the
Victorian merchant will be able to conpete on equal terms with the Sydney men
in supplying the new gold fields with every kind of merchandise.
In conclusion I assert that the eastern extremity of the Australian Alps,
out of which most of the Snowy River runs, will be one of the greatest gold
fields yet discovered.


APPENDIX.
Instructions to the Eev. W. B. Clarke
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
August Bth, 1851.
Reverend Sir
I do myself the honor, by the direction of the Governor-General,
to inform you that His Excellency has been pleased to accept your offer to
proceed to ascertain the probability of the existence of gold in various parts of
the Colony, not only in the alluvial deposits , hut also in the rock, both visibly
and invisibly; and to furnish a full report of the result to the Government.
2. Your attention is invited more particularly to the following places,
viz.:—
(1.) The heads of the Maclntyre Brook-.
(2.) The waters running into the Severn.
(3.) The Country at the head of the Apsley.
(4.) The Country below the Apsley falls.
(5.) The heads of rivers joining the Peel, near Tamworth,
(6.) The heads of the Talbrago and Coolaburagundi.
(7.) The whole of the creeks and rivers flowing to the Macquarie, as far
as Sappa Bulga.
(8,) The head of the Colo.
(9.) The heads of the Lachlan.
(10.) The rivers and creeks falling eastwardly and westwardly, between
the Crookwell and Cooma.
(11.) The heads of waters falling south-eastwardly from Cooma to
Cape Howe.
(12.) The Country between 35° and 37° south, and between 147° and
149° 30' east.
(13.) Such portions of New South Wales as lie S.W. from the Tumut.
(14.) The Meridian Ranges, between 146° and 149° east, and between
32° and 34° south,
(15.) The Country at the head of the Logan and Richmond.
3. You will therefore proceed, for the purpose of carrying out the object in
question, as soon as your arrangements will permit.


4. As a preliminary step, it appears, however, desirable, that the ranges
dividing the waters of the Hunter from those falling to the Coast,* between
the Hunter and Broken Bay, where metals are reported to exist, should be ex-
amined, and also the gullies about Murulla and JVingen.
5. It will be necessary that observations should be made on the geological
features of the Country, as well as experiments to ascertain, not only the wealth
and extent of auriferous alluvia, but the existence and amount of invisible gold
in the rocks; but it is not desired to confine you to any distinct system of
observation, as you will, no doubt, be better able to ascertain the speediest and
surest way of gaining the end required by following your own discoveries.
6. In making this survey, it is not intended to prevent you from examining
any portion of Country in which, from any well grounded information , you may
have reason to suppose that gold may be obtained.
7. You will have the goodness to make frequent reports to me in full
during your progress, for the information of the Government, entering into as
minute description of the Country, where gold may be found, as will render it
easy to mark its position on the maps of the Colony; and forward for the like
purpose, as opportunities may arise, specimens of any minerals, which in your
researches you may think of sufficient interest to transmit; describing with
precision the particular localities where they are found.
8. I am further to request that you will keep me informed of your address,
that I may be able to make any further communications to you that circum-
stances may render necessary.
9. In conclusion, I beg to add that your equipment and pecuniary allowance
will be in accordance with the terms suggested in your note of the 4th ultimo,
namely, to be supplied with all that may be necessary to carry on the survey at
the Public expense,J and allowed such compensation! as may be sufficient to
cover the loss of present income, and such further as the service
may appear to entitle you to; but lam distinctly to state that the Government
cannot accede to your stipulation or request, that when yonr final report has
been furnished, you should be allowed to be the bearer of it to England.
I have, &c..
(Signed,) E. DEAS THOMSON.
* Mr. Clarke had previously made an elaborate report on this District, at the request of
the Government, gratuitously, and which is believed to be mouldering away in the archives
at the Office of Lands.
J Cost of survey up to December, 1851, £270. t £3OO per annum. J £5OO ! !
was first voted, and when indignantly rejected, was increased to £lOOO, by the exertions of
Capt. P. P. King and Mr. 11. Nichols.—Some of Mr. Clarke’s reports are worth £5OO a
piece.


Statement of Discoveries, Bfc., officially reported on by Mr.
Clarke : — (principally with reference to his Southern Journey.)
LOCALITY.
REMARKS.
1851*
20 Sep.
Creeks and Ranges between Marulan, Jacqua 1 Limestone, Iron,
Creek and Shoalhaven River. > Statuary Marble,
J Slate, Gold.
Collins’ Flat, Shoalhaven River. v Limestone, Iron,
1 Copper to theWest-
j ward, and Gold in
J Shoalhaven Gullies
Along the Shoalhaven to Mount Elrington. I Iron, Limestone,
) Slates, Gold.
Boro Flat, Arnprior, Long Swamp, all creeks I „
from Narriga District. ( Gold.
10 Oct,
Durran Durra, —Runs on the back of the C. K
and S. Lands, Coghill’s property at Braid- | | Gold,
wood, Budawang Country, Mongarlow River; )-
Wombagugga, Tau-tu-lian Creeks, Jembai- | 1
cumbene Swamp, Lagoon Flat at BendouraJ^/
21 Oct
Deua River. • Slates.
Araluen—Major and Jillamatong Creeks, \
Jineroo Branch of Gourock Range. J '" r0 ' ( l, Lead,Copper
10 Nov
Bombay, Manar, Lake George, Gidleigb,
Queanbeyan, Micaligo, and the Berudba,
Bulonomang, Wari, Molonglo.
Tributary to Smith’s Creek, right Bank of
Murrumbidgee, below Micaligo, Yangielera,
and Covvara Creeks.
| Gold.
| Gold.
15 Nov
17 Nov-
Bircher’s Creek, Frog Hollow, Good-good A
River, and Alum Creeks. J
Cooma Creeks, Murrumbidgee River at
Mittagang, Rock Flat, Jillamatong Cks. J
Ural Creek (junction with Stony Creek), >
Moamba, Tongaro or Jacob’s, Moyengul,
and Berrima Rivers, Jugylmungee Creek,
joining Mitta Mitta Creek, rising in (
Currancoonungee Range, near Omeo; | I
Omeo Plain, Mitta Mitta River and Creeks j 1
on left Bank, Gibbo River (at the Mouth), ! |
Snowy River, above Jindebein. \J
Gold.
24 Dec
Slates, Limestones.
Gold. “ There are
various other loca-
1 lities, in this regi-
| on in which I anti-
cipate discovery
of Gold.”
8 3 Jan
Bobundara and Ironpot Creeks, or Kara,
Gungarlin, and Eucumbean Rivers. ) ' ao
McLoughlin River. Lead and Copper.
Kybean and Eumbaralla Rivers, Valley of A
the Brogo. ) Gold ’ .
Slaughter House Creek, near Junction with Gold, Iron, Lead,
Dclegete River. j Copper, Lime.
Maharatta Creek, Boroungoma on Bendoc
River, between Bondi and Nangutta (Genoa
River); Waterfall at Diliganea.
9 29 Jan.
10 6 Feb
1126 „
Clarke had
previously explored a great part of the
territory.
beginning from the
year 1839.


LOCALITY.
REMARKS.
12 6 Mar.
Delegete, Bendoc, and Deddic Rivers.
Gullengarrigal, at Featherstone’s, at Allen’s, A
at Bendoc, at Jandoon, Heyden’s Swamp, I |
Boroungoma, and between these Stations )■
and Merinoo.
Merinoo and Yambong. )
Dignams Creek, near Mount Dromedary;
Campbell’s River and Stony Creek, Dry
River, Greig’s Creek.
Nelbundera Ranges, Janmungee, Bar-
nangubbuc and Gungarlin Rivers, between
Big Bugong and Table Top Mountains ;
between Big Bugong and the Round y
Mountain to the E. of Dargal. Mouth of [
Eucumbean, Creek falling from Walland-
abee Ridge, between the Krak-en-bac and
Mowamba Rivers. Heads of Tumut. )
A *j x V J
15 3 M;
Gold.
NORTHERN JOURNEY.
6 Nov
15 „
Country between Marulan and the Peel River.
Hanging Rock Diggings, and the extension
of gold to the northward.
Contains views of the Dispersion of gold in
Australia.
On the occurrence of alluvial Lead Ore.
Hanging Rock anil Peel River Diggings.
Geological Structure, and auriferous con-
dition of the Upper Waters of the Namoi
and Apsley Rivers.
24 „
4
5
6
30 „
Lead. Gold.
7 Dec
28. „
Geological Structure and auriferous condition
of the country between the Heads of the
Apsley and Gwydir Rivers.
Geology of New England.
Liverpool Plains,
Tilbuster Creek, Gara Water, Saumarez.
Ningiai Creeks, Wollomumbi River.
Clarence District,
8 7 May
Gold and Iron.
10 14 Oct,
'I
j>Gold, &c.
10 14 Oct,
Condamine River.
Extract from letter from the Colonial Secretary to E. H,
Hargraves, Esqr., dated 10 th June, 1851 :
2nd Paragraph—
« It has been suggested to the Government, by a gentleman of great scientific
“ acquirements , that the 149th Meridian passes through a rich metalliferous
«region, and where schists, traversed by quartz rock, and which have been
“ transmuted by igneous rocks, occur, are localities in which creeks running
“ laterally into waters falling north should he examined. It is also stated, that


“ south of Bowning, the main creeks run south into the Murrumbidgee, and from
“ the lofty summits of the Alps creeks run north to the Murrumhidgee, which
deserve attention; and the heads of the Tumut and Cooradigbee, Tarcutta ,*
“ Yiven, &c., are mentioned as likely places to supply gold. The whole 149//*
“ Meridian, indeed, ought to he examined.”
Extracts, proving the fact that Gold was hnown to exist prior to
1851:
Extract from Sir C. A. Fitzeoy’s despatch to Earl Grey, dated
ls£ March, 1849. No. 40 ;
2. “ Researches have been made by a great many private individuals, and in
various parts of the Colony strong indications of the existence of metalliferous
ore have been discovered.
8. In some parts of the Colony, I am informed that auriferous ores have
been discovered. A specimen, weighing about 3 ozs. and a half, was lately
exhibited to me; I have not been able to learn the precise locality'where it
was found ; except that it is on the western side of the great dividing Range,
in the Sydney or Middle district.
9. An extensive Gold Field, is also said to have been recently discovered at
the Pyrennees, in the Port Phillip district,”
Extract from letter, No. 60, 118, dated 28 rd December, 1850 ,fnm
the Colonial Secretary to Geological Surveyor :
“ 2. The subject to the Mineralogy of the Colony, has very extensively,
‘ engaged the Public attention for some years past, .... and from
“ the discovery, in researches made by private individuals, of strong indications,
“ in various districts, of the existence of metalliferous ores.
“*• In some P arts °f the Colony, auriferous ores are stated to have been
“ discovered, and a specimen, weighing about 3 ozs. and a half, was exhibited to
“ the Governor, in 1849. The precise locality, where it was found, was not
ascertained, but it was understood to be on the western side of the great Divid-
“ ing Range,”
Extract from Sir C. A. Fitzroy’s despatch to Earl Grey, dated
June 11th, 1851. No. 101:
“ 2. Your Lordship is doubtless aware that men of science, both in Eng.
“land and in this Colony, long since predicted that certain tracts in the
Colony must, from their similarity of geological structure to other Countries,
* Appendix 31. (3.)


“ where gold had been discovered, be auriferous, and that gold has from time to
“ time, for some years past, been occasionally picked up in that part of the
“ Colony where it has now been found to exist in such abundance.”
Mr. Hargraves stated in his letter, dated 3 rd April, 1851, to the
Colonial Secretary : —•
“ My first discovery was made on the 12th February last.”
E. H. Hargraves to the Colonial Secretary, dated 2nd
December, 1851 :
“lam told, tbe Rev. Mr. Clarke speaks of the locality (“ Araluen”) in
the most glowing terms; nevertheless, I venture to assert it to he next to worth-
less, as a Gold Field.” (!)
Extracts from Introductory Chapter of u Plain Statements and
Practical Hints, respecting the Discovery and Worlcing of
Gold in Australiaby the Eev. W. B. Clarke, M A.
He, having stated in the “ Advertisement” that “ circumstances, which one
day will be better understood, have called for the introductory Chapter,” pro-
ceeds to say—
“ Years ago, Gold was found in small specimens, ‘by the earliest convicts ;
but the value of the indications was not then known, and the facts were
concealed. In 1841, the author of these remarks again brought Gold from the
very basin of the river now supplying it; this Gold was exhibited to members
of Government, and of the Legislature, in the Council Chamber itself, and to
numbers of persons in the community, who have testified to the fact; it was
spoken of openly ; it has been discussed in public Journals; it was made the
ground of enquiries into the probable extensive auriferous character of the
Colony; and from the result of those enquiries, conducted on scientific
principles, and backed by occasional additional proofs, it was openly declared,
that gold exists in “ considerable abundance ” in our “ schists and quartzites,”
and further, the very region was pointed out in which it would be found , . .
“ It is not necessary now to detail the careful processes by which the author
had convinced himself that Gold must exist in “ considerable abundance,” and
that it would be found along the 149th Meridian, to which he recommended, in
1850, the then expected Geologist to be sent; nor is it necessary, to the vindi-
* Sands and Kenny, 18th June, 1851.


cation of scientific claims, to draw any comparison between bis own convictions
and the experience of others. The fact which he would insist on is, that it was
left for one who makes no profession of geological science,* but who had been
in California, and by dint of observation, perseverance, and a series of fortunate
accidents, was enabled to arouse attention, to excite the public to explore the
very region, long known, and previously proclaimed, as abundant in gold.
“By whatever means gold has been developed in one region, it is clear
that it can only be predicated of another with any certainty or precision, upon
principles which depend not on chance, accident, or mere unscientific explo-
ration. It would be absolute presumption, daring the chances of disappointment,
for any one to pronounce, without grounds that will bear examination, that any
other locality is likely to produce Gold in “ considerable abundance ,” as well as
the Creeks and Ranges about Summer Hill.
The pick and the spade, and the “ prospecting pan,” may reveal, without
doubt, the existence of gold, but the wielder of these useful implements needs
other appliances to justify the expectation that they will not deceive, when
employed in any other locality.
“it wil l come to be acknowledged at last, that if this Colony and other
parts of the world are advancing in the acquisition of physical wealth, it must
be by the revealings of science that the progress of this advancement is to be
facilitated. Gold, from its value, simplicity, and almost immediate usefulness
may require, to bring it into circulation, less of skill than many other metals,
which are equally abundant in our Australian rocks; but, even as respects
gold itself, in future explorations, nothing but the deductions of science will
supply the faculty of vision with unerring certainty, and these deductions must
be to thousands worth more than the labours of a multitude of horsemen
galloping over hill and dale, in search of that to which one who understands
those deductions would be able to point without much risk of disappointment.
Extract from Mr. Clarke’s Report, No. 8, dated Banger's
Valley, 7th May, 1853 :
I can appeal, with satisfaction, to many persons in the Gold Fields, who have
expressed their confidence in these Reports, by stating that, after following
my tracks, they have found that I never “ deceived them.”
Extracts from Report, dated Gooma, 17 th November, 1851 :
“ No suspicion had existed of the auriferous nature of the alluvia before T
“ examined it.”
1 do not venture upon any opinion, as to the Commercial value of these
* It is very remarkable, that sixteen years previous to this, Mr. Hargraves actually
resided on the spot without dreaming of Gold.


localities, as respects gold, but it is very probable that when the shearing time
shall have passed, there will be numerous prospectors, now the existence of gold
is established, and the metal may be found in some abundance, as well as in
other neighbouring localities .”
From Report, No. 3, dated 2-Uh November, 1852, at Tam-
worth :
“ The more I see of the great backbone of this Continent, the more I am
impressed with the high probability of the extension of the gold fields, far
beyond the present limits of search.”
From Report, dated 2nd May, 1859, to T. D, Chapman, Esq. ;
“ The first notice I took of the region in question (Fingal), was in the
month of June, 1851, when I addressed a letter to his Excellency Sir W.
Denison, and about the same time made mention of it in a Pamphlet, published
in Sydney, on the “ Discovery and working of Gold in Australia.”
By reference to that pamphlet (pp 11-13), you will find, that I was
discussing, not the question of alluvial gold, but of gold bearing rocks. And
in relation to the manner in which such rocks are found in Australasia, I made
use of these expressions. “ Thus, then, in Australia, though the direction of
“ the predominant ridge is curvilinear, there may be a recurrence of certain
“ formations on different meridians parallel to each other; and thus, the very
“same rocks that are found fertile in metals along the 149th meridian, may
“ also be found fertile on the 152nd. And thus, also gold ought to be found, if at
“ all, in the province of Victoria, between 143° and 145° E., north and south of
.“37° S. lat. ; and in Tasmania, in 146° E. and 42° S.”
That I was not mistaken in one of these indications, has been since verified by
the discoveries of the gold bearing rocks of Mount Alexander and
Balaarat, of which the discoverer of the deposits in the latter district confessed
that he was induced to seek for them, in consequence of what I
HAD previously written on the subject. I quote from the report of
Gold Committee of the Legislative Council of Victoria, the following
passages:—
“ Mr . Thomas Hiscock, a resident at Buninyong, induced by the
“ writings of the Rev. W. B. Clarke, and by the discovery of Brentani's
“nugget in the Pyrennees district, five years before, had kept a constant look-
-out for gold in his neighbourhood. . . . It is obvious, that Mr. Hiscock’s *
“ discovery, at Buninyong, by attracting great numbers of diggers to the
“ neighbourhood was the cause of the discovery of Balaarat, is, in fact, upon the
“ same range, and at no great distance, about six or seven miles. ... In
“the language of a disinterested witness, Mr. Alfred Clarke, of Geelong, ‘the
“ discovery of Balaarat was but a natural consequence of the discovery of
“ Buninyong.’ . . . Your Committee recommend that the sum of jgIOOO
“ should be awarded to the Rev. W, B. Clarke, in appreciation of his researches
“ into the mineral wealth of the Country; .... to Mr. Hiscock, as the
“ substantial discoverer of the Balaarat deposits, a like sum of j£1000.”


Sir R. I. Murchison, in a letter to H. Merivale, Esq., dated
March 18 th, 1855 —in ivhich he disputes with Mr. Clarke the
priority of claim to the gold discoveries, admits :
“No one, either in the Colonies or at home, ever printed a line upon Aus-
tralian gold, until Mr. Clarice did so, at Sydney, in 1817.”
Letter from Mr. Clarke, to the “ Sydney Morning Herald ” :
SIR R. I. MURCHISON AND THE AUSTRALIAN GOLD FIELDS,
To the Editors of the Sydney Morning Herald,
Gentlemen. —Being a day or two ago at Bomhala, I was favoured by a sight
of your paper of the 3rd instant. I read therein an article, reprinted from the
English Examiner, in which the Editor of that journal endeavours to assign to
my distinguished friend, Sir Roderick Murchison, the whole merit of the
discovery of gold in Australia, in consequence of his statements in 1844 and
1846, respecting the parallels of the formation in this Country and in the Ural.
After repeating the predictions of the accomplished geologist, and exposing the
testimony which their fulfilment affords to the truthfulness of the science, he
goes on to say:—“ Claims of prophetic anticipations of Australian gold have
been set up, we observe, by some of the Sydney journals, and the local press
generally announces the real prophet to have been a certain Rev. W. B. Clarke,
but our geologist of the antipodes ought to have known that he had been anticipa-
ted some seven long years by a geologist on the opposite side oj the globe, who had
not like him the advantages of local inspection. Being on the spot, Mr . Clarice, if
he had any confidence in his own prophetic judgment, ought, like Mr. Hargraves,
who does not pretend to be a geologist, to have brought his notions to the test of
experiment."
I beg pennissson, through your columns, to say a word or two in reply to
this editorial dictum of the Examiner.
Of course, he has no knowledge of any thing connected with our gold fields,
beyond what transpired in May or June, 1851; and, therefore, “the geologist
of the antipodes ” may be in his eyes an impostor, who lays claim to other men’s
labours, making them his own. The expression “ ought to have known ” implies
as much; and another anonymous writer in the Maitland Mercury, insinuated as
•much last June. It may satisfy those friends who blamed me for not wasting
my time then in answering his scurrility, if I now gave the only reply, that
injustice deserves, a plain statement of facts. “The geologist of the antipodes,”
who did not suck his geology out of a gum leaf, nor take lessons in the science
from the aborigines, was not “ anticipated some seven long years” by what the
“ great geologist” said in London and in Cornwall in 1846 or in 1844. For to
say nothing of what preceded that date, in the columns of this very Herald, he
published a comparison between the geology of Russia and Australia so long as
the year 1847, i. e., in the same year, in which the Examiner says, Sir Roderick
addressed the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall! and there are numbers of


persons in the Colony, who can testify that so early as 1842, he declared his
knowledge of the auriferous character of this Colony, Nor has there been any
attempt to keep out of view what my illustrious friend has done respecting
Australia, for in the article in the Herald in 1847, the very statement of Sir
Roderick is appealed to as confirming the writer's views. Again, in the
pamphlet, “ Plain Statements and Practical Hints,” published by me in June,
1851, (p. 6,) will be found allusion to the “great geologist’s” opinions, as
quoted by the Examiner, and of his appeal to the English ministry in 1849. It
is clear, therefore, that “ the geologist of the antipodes not only ought to have
known,” but did know, and did all along do justice to the opinions of his illus-
trious friend, for whom personally, and for whose laborious and skilful devotion
to geology he has the very highest respect. I can hardly believe that there is
any man silly enough to fancy that a prediction by a geologist on the other side
of the globe could be claimed by a geologist at the antipodes (who, by the way,
is member of the same Society of geologists in England), and be made use of,
without detection, and consequent ridicule.
The facts are simply these : —I came to this Country in 1839, commissioned
to ascertain, for the satisfaction of some of my colleagues at home, the extent
and character of the carboniferous formation. At that time very little was
practically known of auriferous formations. My professional duties kept me,
of course, sufficiently confined to their own sphere of action; and the only
opportunity Ehad for some years of learning anything of the Colony, beyond
that sphere, was, when I took the place temporarily of a brother clergyman.
But I did make one week’s excursion in April, 1841, and then travelled west-
wardly to ascertain the limits in that direction of the Carboniferous rocks. I
reached that limit, and passed onwards to the Dividing Ranges, and in the
ravines, falling to the basin of the Macquarie, accidentally, as it were, came
upon quartziferous slates and granite, in each of which I detected gold. This it
was, which first invited my attention to the subject; and from that hour, I have
never ceased to profit by every information I could obtain, relative to the occur-
rence of gold in other Countries, and respecting the geology of this Country.
I think I might appeal, and not in vain, to one of the Judges of our Supreme
Court, to justify the statement that full nine years since, i.e., about two years
before Sir Roderick made the statement alluded to by the Examiner, I exhibited
the gold I had obtained, and spoke of the probable abundance of it, to the west-
ward of Sydney. Nay, I might appeal to an article in the Quarterly Review
(September, 1850), which is attributed to the pen of the “ great geologist ”
himself, and to the columns of the London Spectator, of 1850, in each of which a
positive prediction of my own respecting the return of the people from Cali-
fornia, coupled with the existence of gold in considerable abundance, is quoted
from a letter written by me, before Sir Roderick went to the English minister.
Although, therefore, I claim no privilege to be considered a prophet, this I do
claim, for the science I have cultivated, to have come to my conclusions upon
similar, if not better grounds, than the great geologist went upon, who sitting in
his study, as the Examiner says, 15,000 miles away, foretold what would happen
here.
Sir Roderick has been in the Ural, but he has his information from others


respecting Australia. I have been in Australia, and have had information from
others respecting the Ural. The cases are precisely parallel, and without arro-
gating anything to himself, “ a geologist of the Antipodes ” may assuredly, even
if the very humblest disciple of his great teacher, come to a parallel conclusion,
without the sarcastic reproof “ ought to have known.” Nay, having laid before
Sir Roderick himself every fact within my knowledge respecting our Gold
discoveries here, I have no fear that he will consider that I have attempted to
rob him of his laurels, because, for the sake of a common science, I have seen it
my duty to stand upon my own right. My simple object in asserting this right,
has been to advance the “ Antipodes ,” and to repay in such way as I can, the
attention and kindness I have always received from all members of this community.
Beyond this advancement of Australia, and the claims of my favourite study, I
have no interest whatever in this Gold discovery. I certainly do not think so
highly of it as to care for the honor of being a “ Prophet ” —and my only claim in
that respect has been, to use my own words, elsewhere, to be considered the first
person “in Australia ” to make known the auriferous character of her mountains •
Although even on such a question, an English Editor cannot resist a sneer at
Australia as being at the “ Antipodes.” lam willing to accept this designation,
and take it, albeit in a sense, perhaps, which was not intended, and I shall be
happy, if anything I have done, or may do, in advance of the “ Antipodes,’’
justify my being designated their “ Geologist.”
2. Ihe above remarks will, in some degree, furnish a reply to the
Examiner's taunt about “prophetic judgment” and putting “notions” to the
test of experiment.
Had the Examiner been aware when he was writing of the duties of the
clergy here, and all the restraints upon them, officially and otherwise, he would
have known that beyond what I have done, no clergyman could have done more,
under my then circumstances, I was no more on the spot,” and no more able
to ride up and down the Country as Mr. Hargraves did, for weeks and weeks,
even had I of consequences in a penal territory, . . .for
gold in abundance, than the Examiner himself, or Sir R. I. Murchison. My
notions” have, however, been “ testedthe Gold has been found, and in other
places and countries than were even contemplated by my illustrious friend. My
predictions, such as they were, have nearly all come true, and these have been
different from those to which the Examiner alludes. Nay, the latter was
backed by direct intelligence, and partly founded on that intelligence, that gold
occurred over some 200 square miles in South Australia, and from other state-
ments respecting gold actually found in New South Wales, in all these respects,
the gi eat geologist ” i?i England had as great an advantage as the geologist of
the Antipodes each reasoned from facts and comparative geology up to a
probability, that could not help being some day fulfilled.
Ihe words which 1 wrote in 1849, and which were published in London in
1800, before the disclosure of the Australian Ophir, have come true to the
letter. Copper, lead, and gold, are in considerable abundance in the schists
and quartzites of the Cordillera (Blue Mountains), &c. Fast numbers of the
population are going to California, but someday I think we shall have to recall
them. (Quarterly Review, No. 174, p. 430.) Your own shipping list shall be
my proof.


The statement that T made in June, 1851, (Plain Statements, p. 12) viz,,
“Gold ought to be found, if at all, in the province of Victoria, between 143°
and 145° E„, and north and south of 37° S, lat.” has also since been verified
to the letter, without any parallel prophecy of the sort in England, for this new
locality is not on the western slope of the Bathurst mountains.
And lastly, the statement in the same pamphlet (p. 10) respecting New
Zealand , has also been verified, as I learn from public report as well as from
private information.
If, then, my fellow-colonists, and the Sydney journalists especially, have done
me the honour to consider that I have had something to do with the discovery of
gold at the “ Antipodes .” I will bear ivith patience whatever attempts may be
made to merge my humble endeavours in the glory of nobler geologists than
myself; but I do not think I am to be blamed for endeavouring to justify this
partiality by disproving the inuendoes of such Examiners as those to whom this
long letter has alone reference. And if other predictions, over which I have the
same kind of claim as the cow as to the calf, respecting other localities distinctly
named, should prove equally well founded, I hope I may, though a “geologist
of the antipodes,” venture to say a good word in behalf of the principles which
hold here equally good as in Europe, and which prove, that when followed to
their legitimate consequences, they are equally as serviceable. The “notions”
I have held I have preferred to be tested by the “ experiments ” of others, my
own present researches have been purposely carried on in new ground, so that I
may enter into no other man’s labours. It is, at least certain, that few
geologists in Europe would have predicted what I have in some localities
ascertained.
“So much,” says the Examiner, “for the discovery.”
I remain, gentlemen, yours, &c.,
W. B. CLARKE.
Buckalong, February 18, 1852.
Extract from letter to “ Sydney Morning Tier aid, ” from Mr.
Clarke, dated 29 th May, 1851 ; —
“When in 1841, and subsequently from year to year, with increased con-
viction, as the results of my inquiries came before me, I announced that
Australia was an auriferous Country, and when in a letter
Nor do I shrink from further declaring what time will establish, that the present
gold field is but one of the numerous localities along the Cordillera, in which
gold and gold alluvia will be found by those who search for them.
The excitement created by the announcement that what during several years
I had declared, but which could not obtain credence, till it was made sensible by
verification of an individual who, I am informed, was guided to one of the
localities io which allusion has been made in my published statements, by
those statements themselves,”


Extract from Mr. Clarke’s letter, to “ Sydney Morning Herald ”
dated 29th October, 1858 :
“ I have full reliance on the indications that have led me now, without any
considerable error (from 42 to 24 S), through 18 degrees of latitude; and
enabled me, as I did, to point out in June, 1851, to the Hon. E. Deas Thomson,
the extension of the gold Country to Mount Alexander and Balaarat, and to give
the latitude and longitude of the fields now known as such, as may be found in my
pamphlet of that month ; which led to indications of gold in Tasmania and in
New Zealand, facts which are also on record, and which also led me to mention
the names of those creeks and rivers, running to the Murrumbidgee and Murray,
which were written down in the Colonial Secretary's Office, at his express desire,
and which afterwards were, in part, introduced in the instructions given to Mr.
Hargraves, who, had he acted on those statements, would have been the developer
or discoverer of those rich workings, which have since opened in that quarter.
“And the same indications, which induced me to point out that “some
gold” existed at the “back of Port Curtis,” also led me to indicate “ some
gold ” not far from the* Port de France, in New Caledonia.”
Appendix to Answers 12 and 13 f m the Evidence of the Rev.
W. B. Clarke, M.A., E.Gr.S., talcen before the Select Com-
mittee on the Management of the Gold Fields, on Friday,
24 th September, 1852.
From R. Therry, Esq., one of Her Majesty's Judges of the
Supreme Court.
My Dear Sir, Kera Yale, Wollongong, October 2, 1852,
I can have no hesitation in stating I quite well recollect the circumstance
of your communicating to me your discovery of gold. The conversation took
place on board the “ Parramatta” steamer some time in 1844, on my return to
Sydney, from a visit to a part of the country which I then represented in the
Legislative Council. On that occasion you showed a piece of quartz in which
* Wliat a contrast here between the unerring indications of science, which though
proved hy experience to he correct, are still sneered at by the misnamed '‘ practical man,”
(i.e. a man who knows nothing, immediately outside his own narrow view) and the happy
“hit of the said practical man, which is sure of being rewarded in the inverse ratio of his
skill.
f 12. Have you any objection to state to the Committee, when your attention was first
directed to the existence of gold in this country?—lt was in 1841, when I crossed the
Dividing Range to the Westward of Parramatta, in endeavouring to satisfy myself as to the
extent of the carboniferous formation in that direction, that I first became aware of the
existence of gold in Australia, by detecting it at the head of the Winburndale rivulet, and
in the granite westward of the vale of Clwydd.
13. (By Mr. Bolroyd.) Did you go further to the westward ?—No; I had satisfied
myself as to the object of my journey, and returned home. At that time I knew nothing of


two or three large specs of gold shone very distinctly and brilliantly ; and you
intimated that from that and other specimens you had seen, and from the
geological observations you had made, you were confident that gold would be
found in abundance in this colony. I mentioned the matter to many of my
friends at the time, and the recent extensive discoveries of gold brought very
vividly to my recollection your predictions which these discoveries have verified.
I, therefore, can have no objection to the mention of my name in the
manner in which you have introduced it in your evidence.
I have, &c.,
Rev. W. B. Clarke. (Signed R. THERRY.
From Mr. Charles Blakefield, a successful Gold Digger, written
voluntarily.
Sofala, Sept. 11, 1852.
Rev. Sir,
The long controversy in the public papers respecting the alleged original
discovery of gold in this country having now ceased, I beg to apologize for my
negligence in not having sooner added my evidence in proof of your attainments
as a geologist.
About nine years ago T gave you a piece of gold in quartz, found at Mitchell’s
Creek, and brought down by M* Gregor, the shepherd, when vou informed me
that nearly the whole of the rivers on this side of the dividing range were highly
auriferous. At the time I asked you why you did not make the fact known to
the public, when your reply was, that you were afraid that it would tend to the
utter disorganization of society, particularly as then constituted.
But had I known that the whole science of gold-washing lay in the shaking
of a tin dish, I am doubtful whether any such considerations of public policy
would have prevented me from essaying the facts at any time, particularly as a
friend of mine was also at the time extremely urgent upon me to join him in a
prospecting tour.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) CHARLES BLAKEFIELD.
Rev. W. B. Clarke,
the history of gold, but since then I have obtained every information I could upon the
subject. There are many persons living who know that I, very shortly afterwards began to
speak of the abundance of gold likely to be found in the Colony, and that as early as 1843,
I mentioned it generally. On the 9th April, 1844, I also spoke to the then Govenor, Sir
G. Gipps, and exhibited to him a sample, but without any result as to further enquiry.
The matter was regarded as one of curiosity only, and consideration of the penal condition
of the Colony kept the subject quiet as much as the general ignorance of the value of such
an indication. In that year I exhibited the gold, and spoke of its probable abundance to
some of the then Members of Council, and one of them, the late Mr. Robinson, replied to
me “you ought to have been a miner,” but took no further notice of it. The only person
who seemed to take much interest in the subject was his Honor Mr. Justice Therry. lam
able to fix the date of the time when I spoke to Sir G. Gipps, by the recollection that I spent
that day with him at Parramatta, and that it was the day on which a certain great meeting
of squatters was held in Sydney.


From F. E. Manning, Esq., (brother of the Solicitor-General of
New South Wales,) voluntarily 'written.
Carrabost, Tarcutta Creek, November 20, 1851
Rev. Sir,
Although some years have passed since we met at Appin, * J have,
during the last few months, often recalled to mind your saying that you knew
where to find gold on the Bathurst side, and finding that you proved a good
authority in that case, I was tempted to go prospecting here, as I hear you
stated that this was a likely locality to find gold. I think you will be glad to
hear that your prediction proves to be correct. This place is situated on the
right hand branch of the Tarcutta Creek coming up, and is about 45 miles
from its junction with the Murrumbidgee River.
A shepherd in the employment of Messrs. Walker and Co., at a place
called American Yards, eight miles lower down the creek, has also found gold
there, of the same description as it is here ; and he tells me that he has found
some on the hill side that looks “as if it had been melted;” but he will not
show me this.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) FRED. E. MANNING.
Rev. W. B. Clarke.
From James Mac Arthur, Esq, M.L.0., who was Chairman of the
Gold Committee, on 24 th September, 1852. This letter is,
therefore, confirmatory of my evidence.
Mi Dear Sir, Camden Park, Camden, July 29th, 1854
1 have deferred answering your note in order to refresh my memory by a
reference to memoranda connected with public transactions, which I know took
place at the period of our conversation, relative to your first discovery of Gold
in the Hartley District, and your conviction, from geological investigations,
that Australia would prove to be a great gold-producing country. I find, upon
reference to those memoranda, that your communications to me on the above
subjects must have been in 1843 and the early part in 1844. I well recollect
that you pointedly alluded to the grave objection to opening gold mines to the
cupidity of a population which at that time constituted the great majority of the
inhabitants of these colonies, and you mentioned the strong views entertained by
Sir George Gipps as to the ill consequences to be dreaded from a disclosure of
what you had ascertained.
On more than one occasion you expressed a hope that opportunities
* AS J h^ d forgotten the exact date of our meeting at Appin Parsonage, I applied to
. . : D - Bparlm S' the Incumbent of Appin and Bargo, and he informs me it was
m April, Jo4o, quoting a memorandum made at the time.—W. B. C.


would be afforded to you to pursue your geological researches, and you declared
your firm conviction that gold, with other valuable metals, would at no remote
period constitute a most important part of the resources of the colony.
You also mentioned that your own objects, apart from your public duties,
were confined exclusively to the extension of science.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) JAS. MACARTHUR.
Rev. W. B. Clarke.
Extract of a Letter from H. K. James, Esq., Secretary to the late
Bishop of Sydney.
I have no certain recollection when you first told me that you had found
gold in this country, but I thought, and still think, that you alluded to the fact
in one of your notes to me a very long time ago, which, if I could have found it,
would be of much value to you now.
“You have been, as long as we knew you, always speaking about ‘the
mineral resources of Australia’—‘that it was full of gold ’ —that we should ‘live
to see this one of the richest places on the globe,’ and so forth,* ‘ Clarke’s
prophecies’ upon these subjects were as ‘familiar as household words;’ they
seemed however, at the time, long before H. was ever heard of, to be idle tales,
and as you were very generally regarded as a scientific enthusiast, your observa-
tions and truthful predictions received very ordinary attention and entirely
failed to make the impression they were calculated to do. I have often thought,
if not said, ‘ if half of Mr. Clarke’s predictions of what this country is made of
proves true, it will be good to be here,’ and such I have no doubt was the
sentiment of many with whom you conversed about your golden dreams of
Australia. * • * * * * *
“ I have, &c.,
“ June 3rd, 1854. (Signed) “ H. K. JAMES.
“Rev. W. B. Clarke.’’
Letter from Captain Philip Parker King, R.K., M.L.C., &c.,
voluntarily written. (See “ Sydney Morning Herald,” 2nd
June, 1851 .)
My Dear Sir, Parramatta, May 30th, 1851.
Having noticed a remark of Mr. Hargraves upon your claiming to have
been the original discoverer of the gold field now being worked, and which
appears to me to attach doubt as to the correctness of your statement, I think it
right to remind you, that about two or three months ago you pointed out to me
on Dixon’s Map of New South Wales, a considerable extent of country in the
neighbourhood of the Canobolas, in which gold was known by you to exist in
large quantities.


If this communication can be of any service to you, you are at liberty to
make any use of it you please.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) PHILIP P. KING.
Rev. W. B. Clarke. Captain, R.N.
Extract from a Letter * published in the “ Maitland Mercm'y ”of
the 24>th January, 1852, on the Tamworth Gold Field.
“ Maitland, January 23rd, 1852.
“ I must here pay a tribute to the foresight and scientific investigation of
the Rev. Mr. Clarke, who unquestionably had ascertained the existence of an
extensive gold field in Australia long before any excitement had been caused by
the recent discoveries in California.
“ Mr. Clarke was investigating the geological structure of the country about
Murrurundi and the Page’s River, I think in the year 1845, and I recollect his
telling me that he had discovered gold in the Bathurst district in sufficient
quantities to pay a person for working it, or I think his words were, in quantities
sufficient to enable him to earn a subsistence, if necessity had driven him to
such a course; he also mentioned, at the same time, that most probably it
would be found along the western flanks of the Great Dividing Range, north of
Murrurundi, where it is now found extensively disseminated, thus proving bow
surely and accurately the predictions of science are to be realized.” * * *
Extract from the Leading Article of the “ Goulbv/m Heraldof the
20th May, 1851 , forwarded to me by the Rey. W. Soweeby,
Incumbent of Goulburn, who says, in his Letter enclosing it :—
“I am glad you are going to defend yourself. It is due to yourself and
your friends everywhere to meet your opponents clearly and fearlessly. I
intended to write to you to urge you to do it, but I thought surely *he does not
require any advice on a subject so important as the defence of his fair fame.’ ”
Extract from the “ Goulburn Herald,” of the 20th May, 1851.
Should there be any of our neighbours to whom the voice of warning is of
* I did not know of the existence of this publication till May, 1854, when I wrote for a
copy of it to the anther, John Gill, Esq., J.P., of Tamworth, a gentleman of the highest
respectability and acquirements. In reply he states that it was about the year 1844 (and
not 1845), and he is right, for I was on duty the first three months of that year at Muswell-
brook, in place of the Rev. W. Gore, and I then visited Brickham; I left Muswell-brook on
Ash-Wednesday, and after eight weeks duty, I met with a severe accident on my way to
Jerry’s Plains, which gives me the true date, 21st February. Mr. Gore to whom I applied to
fix the year, says in a letter dated 25th July, 1854, “ you were at Muswell-brook in 1844,
for the first time; I ought to know, for it was at that time I was married.”


no avail, we should say, * Bide awhile,’ —there will he no necessity for travelling
150 miles to gratify their inordinate love for adventure, in the hope of gaining
great riches by easy means. Bide awhile. We have in our own country a gold
mine as rich as that which is causing so much excitement in the public mind.
For the truth of this assertion we refer them to the first article headed “ Gold,”
in the second page of this number. It will be there seen that the Rev. W. B.
Clarke, whose labours in geological research in this colony have scarcely been
appreciated, stated between 1842 and 1847 that gold exists in the dividing range
(between Bathurst and Wellington), and also in the County of Argyle.f This
dividing range is the same line of hills which lies east of Richmond; and as the
recently proclaimed gold field has been discovered to extend indefinitely to the
northward, it is but fair to suppose that it does to the southward, and that the
whole scope of country is rich in gold.”
In the “ Maitland Mercury,” 6th October 1852, is an advertisement
signed “ Thomas Haydon,” offering 501. reward for the disco-
very of a paying and remunerative gold field, on the following
grounds : —
“ It having been pronounced some years ago by the Rev. W. B. Clarke
that gold existed in the tributaries of the Page, and it having been found in
small quantities in various localities in the neighbourhood,” &c.
Extract from the 11 Illustrated Australian Magazine,” October 1851,
published at Melbourne, Victoria, by Messrs. Ham, vn a statis-
tical article, signed Colchis, “ On the probable mfluence of the
recent Discoveries of Gold Mines, in various parts of the World,
on the relative value of Gold and Silver.”
“ Hence arises the curious question— ‘ How came the treasures of our adopt-
ed country to remain so long a sealed letter to those who daily traversed the
scene V The answer is plain and simple. We had no mineralogists or geologists
among us.”
To this the editor appends the following remarks in a foot-note :
“We cannot entirely agree with the writer; the Rev. W. B. Clarke is
acknowledged to be a thorough geologist, and years since he was aware of the
existence of gold in the very localities in which it has been recently found in
t The tract of country which I speak of as auriferous was the District as well as the
County, and in the latter I found gold in 1842. The whole eastern border of the county
along the Shoalhaven, I proved in 1851 to he auriferous; and the gold fields about Braid-
wood, Araluen. &c., are in the adjoining county.—W. B. C.


abundance. During a visit to this gentleman, a considerable time previous to
the discoveries made by Mr, Hargraves, we were shown a specimen of gold found
in the Bathurst Ranges; and we have seen letters, written by Mr. Clarke to his
friends in England, ten years ago, which proved he then knew the country to be
auriferous. The Rev. gentleman did not make public his knowledge of the ex-
istence of gold in Australia, simply because, considering that New South Wales
had only a short time ceased to be a penal settlement, and that the people were
not remarkable for their virtue, he feared it might become a curse rather than a
blessing.”—[Ed. I. A. M. Vol. 111., p. 211.]
Extract from “ Melbourne Argus,” November 15th, 1858 :
It was long since stated by the Rev. W. B. Clarice of New South Wales,
that in a geological point of view he considered the Lake Omeo district as the
great centre of all the Australian gold-fields , and that in or near to this richer
fields would yet he found than any then known. The rivers and creeks running
through the Ovens district to the Murray, all rise to the north-west of the
Snowy Mountains on that side of the lake, which is curiously situated in a great
basin with mountains all round it, and as no heavy gold or very rich spots were
found in that district, not even near the 'Mitta Mitta, which flows from the imme-
diate vicinity itself, Mr, Clarke’s prediction has been set down as untrue. The
discovery of the Indigo lead, so different in its character from any heretofore
known in the Ovens district, may yet lead to the discovery on that side of the
Alps of deep sinkings equal to those at Balaarat; and there is now good reason to
expect that during the present summer more than one rich field will be opened up,
near the streams that flow to the sea from the mountains to the south-eastward of
the lake. It has been known for some time past that small parties of men were
getting gold in different parts of Gipps Land, but where no one much cared to
inquire. That part of Victoria being quite cut off from direct communication
with any of the populous gold-fields, none of the rumours got abroad from which
rushes usually originate. Now, however, gold is regularly sent up from there
every week, and the number of men at work, at the places where they are
working, have been pretty well ascertained. There are. but a few parties
engaged in the search, and they are scattered over a great extent of Country,
finding gold near Prospect Creek, a tributary to the Mitchell, joining the latter
about ten miles from Lake King; on the Wentworth, another tributary of the
same river, and joining it about twenty miles higher up, and on the Zambo and
Snowy rivers. A sample of gold from the first named creek, sent to town the
week before last, consisted entirely of nuggets of very great fineness as to
quality, and some of them of a good size. Gold has also been found in several
places in Gipps Land, apart from the rivers named, and now that this gold is
constantly to be seen in the hands of the respectable buyers, who have nothing
to gain by misdirecting applicants for information, and it is pretty well known
to have been obtained in a short time by a small number of men, many of the
miners who have been unsettled by the rush to Port Curtis will doubtless find


their way to Gipps Land, and assist in opening up the rich fields, which, from
'present indications, we are justified in believing to exist on the south-eastern spurs
of the Snowy Mountains, Thus, in both directions from Lake Omeo, there is a
probability of much being done this summer to prove to a certain extent the truth of
Mr. Clarke's prediction.
Extract from Mr. Thomas Hale’s letter, in “ Sydney Morning
Herald 22 nd July, 1851 :
“ All recent experiments and discoveries confirm the assertion of the Rev.
W. B. Clarke in that Publication ” (the Quarterly Review, in 1849), “as to gold
existing in abundance in our Quartzites.”
Sydney Morning Herald.
GOLD.
Many months ago, we published various articles upon the subject of gold
mining and exploration, promising to return to it upon a future occasion. Such
an occasion seems pointed out by the present excitement respecting the existence
of gold, as alleged at a late meeting in Bathurst, of the particulars of which we
give an account in another part of the paper. As, however, from correspondence
a few days since, to which we have given place, a question has arisen as to the
claim of discovery, we think it may serve the ends of justice in a matter which
seems to have been taken up with some earnestness, to state here what are the
results of our enquiries upon that head. And as it may serve another purpose,
that of exhibiting the value of scientific investigations into the composition and
geological structure of this country, we the more readily enter upon it.
It seems then, from all accounts, that the following is a correct history of
the progress made from time to time in the investigation of the auriferous rocks
of the colony.
The first published statement we find in an enclosure of a dispatch of Sir
George Gipps to the Secretary of State, bearing date 28th September, 1840.
The enclosure alluded to is a Report by Count Strzelecki of his explorations of
New South Wales, and in that report we find mention, under the head of
“ Gold,” of “ an auriferous sulphuret of iron, partly decomposed, yielding a very
small quantity or proportion of gold, sufficient to attest its presence, insufficient
to repay its extraction,” and he quotes “the Yale of Clywdd” as the locality.
But this is not an ore of gold, but an ore of iron, and therefore it may be said
Strzelecki does not mention gold itself; for it is well known that “ auriferous
sulphuret of iron” is merely a variety of iron pyrites. In the beginning of the
year 1841, the first actual discovery of “ native gold," of which there are no
other ores, was made by a geologist now amongst us who has long been engaged,


without fee or reward, in the laborious work of elucidating the structure and
phenomena of Australia; we mean the Rev. W. 13. Clarke, who found the
metal in the Dividing Ranges separating the eastern and western waters of the
Macquarie. This fact, as well as the existence of particles of gold derived from
these ranges, in the alluvial bed of Winhurndale rivulet, was then announced by
him to many persons now in the colony, who can bear testimony to this
statement. As a matter of geological interest, the subject was, notwithstanding,
communicated to his scientific friends in England, and finding that it was
made known by them, he then published the fact, as well as his further discovery,
that the gold was in small quantities, in various portions of the schistose
formations, whose strike is parallel with the meridian, as well as in the
district of Argyle, where he also detected it. We find the fact announced by him
in communications to the Geological Society, and again in the Tasmanian Journal,
as well as in the pages of the Annals of Natural History, at various times from
1842 to 1847. During this period, Mr. Icely’s explorations led to the finding
of gold in the quartz rocks traversing the schistose formations of the Belubula
thus confirming Mr. Clarke’s allegation that gold is extensively developed.
A similar confirmation was made by the presence of gold in similar strata near
Gundagai. Classifying these facts, the geologist above mentioned, after careful
study of large collections of rocks from an enormous area in the Colony, announced
unhesitatingly to scientific persons in Europe and America, that the same
“constants” which mark the presence of gold in Russia and California, as
well as in Europe, are found in Australia; and that the localities where it may
be expected to occur are just those in which he had found it where meridian-
directed strata of schist highly inclined, and traversed by quartz dykes, or met
by diagonal intrusions of trap or porphyritic rocks, and that at such points only
the metal would be abundant. As evidence of this, we may here quote a
passage from the Quarterly Review, published in London in September, 1850.
“ The important point for Englishmen now to consider is, the extent to
which our own great Australian Colonies are likely to become gold-bearing
regions. The works of Count Strzelecki, and others, having made known the
facts that the chief or eastern ridge of that continent consists of palaeozoic rocks,
cut through by syenites, granites, and porphyries, and that quartzose rocks
occasionally prevail in this long meridian chain. Sir Roderick Murchison
announced first to the Geographical Society, and afterwards to the Geological
Society of Cornwall, his belief that wherever such constants occurred, gold
might be expected to be found. Colonel Helmersen suggested the same idea at
St. Petersburg. Very shortly afterwards, not only were several specimens of
gold in fragments of quartz veins found in the Blue Mountains north of Sydney,
but one of the British Chaplains, himself a good geologist, in writing home
recently, expresses himself: “ This Colony is becoming a mining Country, as well
as South Australia. Copper, lead, and gold are in considerable abundance in the
schists and quartzites of the Cordillera (Blue Mountains, fyc.) Vast numbers of
the population are going to California, but some day I think we shall have to recall
them.”
Nothing can be clearer than this testimony to the claim which the gentle-
man we have alluded to has a right to prefer to the discovery and announce-


ment of the existence of gold in this Colony, and in the basin of the Macquarie
River. And now we have announced to us the confirmation of this discovery
by Mr. Hargraves, who has found the predictions of geological inductions veri-
fied to the letter, he himself having taken a lesson in California, Whatever
value, then, may be attached to the abundance of gold alleged to exist in the
valleys of that river basin, of which we shall know more when the field has been
surveyed, and whatever praise may be awarded to Mr. Hargraves for his dili-
gence and perseverance and public spirit, we ought not to pass over the consider-
ation of the fact, that his announcement is only the confirmation of a discovery
made long before in another part of the same field by one who had no object
but the verification of scientific principles, the investigation of the structure
of the Colony for the benefit of others, and who, we have reason to believe,
is rejoiced upon those grounds only, that his predictions have been found
true.
We intend to return to the question of auriferous indications, and the com-
parison of this Country with other gold-bearing regions. But we deemed it
merely an act of justice to one, who is still engaged in maturing a geological
account of Australia, to state what we believe to be part of his share in the
development of its mineral wealth.
In conclusion, we remark that the gold-field announced in the Bathurst
paper, occurs in the vicinity of rocks indicated in the other portion of the
Macquarie basin, and it was to be expected, that in the valleys falling from the
dividing range between the southern heads of the Macquarie and the Belubula,
on which gold has been detected, that auriferous alluvia would abound. It is
really a very interesting testimony in favour of modern geology.
Reading and Wellbank, Printers, Bridge-street, Sydney.


