

THE
LAST OF THE TRIBE
A. POEM.
BY
WALTER SCOTT TARGETT,
MASSING RIVER.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED
AT THE
MASKING RIVER NEWS OFFICE,
Tinonee.
1870.


RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
HORACE DEAN, ESQ., M.L.A.,
MARK OF ESTEEM.


THE LAST OF THE TRIBE.
Beneath Australia’s burning sky,
"Where countless treasures scattered lie ;
Where forests of primeval age
The scorching heats of Heav’n assuage ;
Where leaps the timid kangaroo,
Or stalks the lone and proud emu,
And birds of ev’ry gorgeous hue,
Brighter than ever fancy drew,
Blit joyously from tree to tree,
Or sing aloud in harmony ;
With flow’rs so strange, so sweet, so bright,
As seldom gladden mortal sight,
A simple race once roamed these woods,
Hardened to all stern Nature’s moods—
On craggy height, in wooded glen
Their food they sought, nor sought in vain.
A wand Ting life they ever led—■
No glories o’er them e’er were shed —
No heroic deeds did they perform,
Of battle-shocks ne’er felt the storm;
The only joys their eyes might sec
Was but the weird corroboree,
When with deep and eldritch moan
They froze all nature into stone,
Or when with fierce and curdling yell
Their wild song on the night air fell,
Startling the lonely warrigal
irom his lair in the rushes talk


IN'o God they loved, the fiend they feared,
A phantom in their dreams appeared,
And deemed his power o’er them so great
That desp’rate was indeed their fate
Should they e’er trespass o’er the bound
That marked the sacred c«Z>m*-ground
Alone, without the bloody rite
That constitutes their god’s delight;
But when with hearts devoid of ruth
They led along some trembling youth
Unto that spot so drear and lorn
Whence first he dates his manhood born,
Ho prying eye of woman saw
The working of their secret law,
And that they might this law revere,
Death was the penalty severe,
Tor her who broke the dread decree
In wanton curiosity.
With gashes deep, with fiery shock
They sought his stubborn will to rock,
And as he bofe the fierce ordeal
Poretold his future woe or weal,
And when his sufferings dire were o’er
The tortured youth away they bore
Unto a lone, sequestered glen,
Where banished from his fellow-men,
Until his gaping wounds were healed,
Prom female face he lay concealed,
At length his exile lone was o’er
He sought his native tribe once more.
His safe return is hailed with glee—
Again the mad corroboree
O’er hill and dale echoing far
Proclaims a bloodless, mimic war.
♦ a solitary place, generally in the mountains, where the cabra
stones are found. These are quarU crystals, and each blach-
fellow carries one as a fetish,


The silver moon reluctant sees
Their fierce demoniac revelries,
And wraps her form in some dark cloud
Her beauty from their gaze to shroud.
Yet their wild notes they sweetly sing,
Erst soft and pure as .joy-bell’s ring,
Then thrilling loud they lift the strain,
As though convulsed with mortal pain,
Till the strained ear impatient grows
To hear the long.deferred close,
When swift as though the King of Death
Hadstricken all with icy breath
They stay the resonant refrain
And all is hushed and still again-
The burden of their midnight song
As through the stilly air it rung.
Was so unearthly in its tone,
That Eancy, superstitious grown,
Might deem it from some far-off sphere,
That ne’er before on mortal’s ear
Its music new and strange had thrown,
Erom immortal trumpets blown ;
Or from the fallen angel’s lyre
Arose those bursts of living fire,
The memory of their joys in Heaven,
Ere they for e’er away were driven.
Long, long they sing their eerie chant,
And worn with sore fatigue they pant,
Till morning’s dawn, cold, dim and grey,
Them from their orgies calls away.
Eor three successive nights the scene
Is acted o’er and o’er again,
When from the spot their way they wend.
By famine dire compelled to bend,
And seek elsewhere their sustenance,
Eorgotten when the demon-dance


Engrossed their cv'ry waking thought',
And o’er their minds oblivion brought,
ISow in soft dreaming indolence
Enwrapt in sleep is ev’ry sense,
As soon as hunger’s pangs are o’er—
They camp within some forest hoar,
And their existence melts away
Like mist upon a summer's day.
No legends gray, no battles won
Were handed down from sire to son ;
Unwelcomed born, uumourned when dead,
Such was the savage life they led
When first upon their jealous view
Burst the white-winued vision new
Of lordly vessel in full sail,
Careering- on before the gale,
And the white adventurer came
With thunder loud and lightning flame.
Their subtle instinct bade them know
He came an unrelenting foe,
And ’twixt wild rage and desperate fear
They met him with the quivering spear,
But at the first quick volley driven,
Their weapons from their grasp were riven,
And overcome with sudden dread
By lone and secret paths they fled.
They soon returned and curious peered—
Their walk betrayed how much they feared—
Till bolder still, more fearless grown,
Their weapons on the ground were thrown,
And branches green they next produce,
In every clime a flag of truce.
Before their dazzled sight displayed,
In negligent disorder laid,
A glittering heap of baubles shone
Brightly beneath the glowing sun.


And showered ’round with lavish hand
Presented to that savage band,
And as their confidence restored,
Thev broken peace no more deplored.
Alas ! that peace, the blacks might see,
Was worse than open enmity,
Per, like the deadly upas tree,
Which, ’neath’its tempting canopy,
Withers and blights each living thing—
And in its shade no plant can spring—
So does the white man’s shadow vast
The puny tribes before him blast.
Where are the hordes that wandered o’er
The pathless bush or sea-beach shore ?
They all are dead, or lingering on,
Like he who prompted first this song ■
Who palsied, .feeble, eld and grey,
Waited for death to.claim his prey,
Who standing by with mocking jibe.
Struck down the Last of all his Tribe.
But twelve short years have passed away,
’Twas on a beaming summer’s day,
On bursting from a tangled maze
A sable group fell on my gaze;
Two hundred souls there were or more,
Encamped upon the river’s shore ;
Their fierce array, their savage mood,
Alone in that vast solitude,
Might easily the stranger daunt
Who met them in their secret haunt,
But mindful of the white man’s skill,
His vengeance swift, his stubborn will,
They wished not to inflame his ire,
But from bis might sought to retire.
Not long his presence thus they shun,
•By demon drink they soon are won,


And fierce, bewildering delight
Glares in each eye with baleful light.
Gone is the savage dignity
That once they bore when they were free.
Now young and old to fell drink fly
And all who taste drink but to die ;
Resistless as the laws of Fate,
When once they sip they ne’er are sate.
Oh, Bacchus ! falsely called divine,
Who gather’st to thy reeking shrine
All that the earth calls good or great—
Who xnock’st the king in regal state.
Th’ mitred prelate calmly telleth,
As with pond’rous tone he dwelleth
Upon the words of stern rebuke
That emanate from God's own book.
He upwards points to Heaven’s gate,
And reads the words of awful weight,
Engraven on the portals clear—
wNo drunkard’s soul shall enter here.”
Tet in his private closet hidd’n,
He tastes the bowl by him torbidd’n,
And drinks to thee libations deep,
Whilst guardian angels round him weep.
O’er all the world, back through all time,
In every age and every Glim©;,
Millions have owned thy sov’reign sway,
And will until the last dread day.
Hast thou not reached satiety,
But fain must roam o’er isle and sea,
Relentless, to our far-off land,
And on the soil vindictive stand,
Scatt’ring around thy vine-wove wreath,
The drapery of the dart of death ?
It surely was a triumph poor,
To wanton o’er this race obscure,


That had not reason left to know
Whether thou cam’st as friend or foe,
But blasted by thy burning breath
Sank listless in the arms of Death.
Short time has passed since first began,
That endless lust that overran
The scattered tribes who greedy came
To taste the drunkard’s spirit-flame.
Now all are gone, or nearly all—
The shadow of death’s fun’real pall
Hangs brooding o’er the luckless few
Who yet this deadly course pursue.
Long years ago that lonely chief,
Who lived but by the chance relief
Aftbrded by the white man’s hand,
Who toils upon the teeming land
Once held by him, sans deed or fee.
When he but knew that he was free.
All desolate in a darksome wood
His lonely hut abandoned stood;
Colossal trees around him grew,
Unlocked their tops and cramped the view
Where hideous birds by night flew by,
Scaring him with their sudden cry;
When worn by superstition drear,
He feebly moaned and wept with fear.
By foul disease bow’d down and weak.
Unable sustenance to seek,
He hopeless lay in misery,
Until at length Death set him free, —
Once roamed a thoughtless merry boy,
Who scarce knew feeling but of joy;
For savage though his mother’s breast
Ho there in safety sure might rest;
The harsh-toned the stinging cord.
Is by the Coorie race abhorred.


While yet a youth, with careless glee.
He scaled steep rock or giant tree,
And from his leafy covert drew
The ’possum, struggling into view,
Or from some huge and hollow bole
Sweet piles of crystal honey stole.
A hundred feet twice told or more
Urora earth he opened out the store —
And as the custom with them yet,
One mounts the tree the prize to get,
And the fragrant nectar flings—
Unmindful of the vengeful stings
The irate insects deeply drive
Into the robber of their hive —
Uar down below, where watchful stands
A comrade with uplifted hands;
A sheet of bark he holds outspread—■
His vision keen directs o’erhead,
And catches thus the golden shower
They afterwards with greed devour.
Oft in the even’s gloaming light,
With breath subdued and eagle sight,
He crept the rustling bushes through,
To spear the wary kangaroo.
Swift flew the reed with whizzing note
And quivered in its slender throat;
Perth sprung the blood with sudden jet,
And with the sun its life bad set.
At length he saw approach the day
He to the mountains must away,
To undei’go the tortures great,
Consequent to his man’s estate.
The rites gone through, and safe returned,
His heritage not cheaply earned,
He sought amid an hostile tribe
A .sable beauty for his bride.


Xot liis the mild persuasion dear,
So melting to the female ear ;
Ho lover's tale of deep despair
If she refuse his lot to share—
The raptured words, the whispers low,
The trembling accents, as they flow
Soft from the lips, whilst hearts beat high,
And sigh begets responsive sigh.
Old Time flies by with rapid wing—
The fleeting hours new pleasures bring.
All innocent, they fearless say
That life is but a summer’s day,
And like the joyous birds in spring
"With gleesome hearts their love-songs sing,
Of genial temperament bereft,
This to his while congener’s left;
While to the savage beast allied,
.By force of arms he gained his bride,
Behold him on a midnight dark —
Well suited to his murderous work
Prowling around with silent care,
Watching intent the fitful glare
That sparkles from the bright watch-fires,.
Until at length it quite expires,
And all the weary dogs around
In careless sleep lie on the ground.
Secure at last from all surprise,
Into each tent he eager pries,
And finding soon her prostrate form,
Eeclining in soft slumber calm,
He nerves himself to bear the worst,,
And stakes all on one rapid burst.
Successful in th’ impetuous raid,
She quickly in his arms is laid,
And like a tiger with his prey,
Through the dense jungle flies away,.


Amid the sudden medley din.
Of yelling curs and startled men.
Pull soon her vacant couch they find.
Her impress soft still clear defined,
And having the abduction guessed,
Surlily sink again to rest,
Meantime the girl, unwilling won,
Cannot her destiny now shun ;
Her lover’s conduct rude she bears,
And then his soft caresses shares.
He next appeared as chief, or lord.
Or monarch of that savage horde —
His throne-room but the azure dome,
High lifted o’er his forest home—•
Without distinguishing array
That could his royalty betray,
Or mark him from the common herd
That to his dignity deferred,
Till on his breast in mockery placed,
A brassy plate with etchings traced.
With graphic detail overspread,
It told to those who curious read,
The name and rank the bearer bore,
And named the bounds he reigned o’er;
Title and deed mixed up in one,
Of land now by Onapunga* won.
Grown old at last he fearful saw
His subjects roam the wilds no more—
Wife, children die, till lonely left,
Of kingdom, comrades, all bereft,
Par from the fatal spot he fled,
Among his foes to hide his head,
►Seeking the shelter grudging shown,
♦ The white mu.


Tet caring nouglit so not alone,
But mingling with his fellow-man
He might his aching memories ban.
But weakening fast, at no great length
His weary limbs lose all their strength,
And, too feeble to wander more,
His pilgrimage on earth was o’er.
According to their barbarous plan
A hut was built for the old man,
And dragging there his prostrate form,
Left him exposed to sun and storm
To linger on, whilst famine drear
His body racked with pangs severe.
At intervals they brought scant food
To where his lonely mimi stood,
And saw him gaze with streaming eyes—•
His bosom palpitate with sighs,
To see once more his brethren dear,
Whilst they all-pitiless appear.
Soon are they gone, he shuddering saw
Them leave, and never viewed them more.
And when he heard no more their sound
His nerveless form sank to the ground,
And fell into a dreamy trance,
While Death stole on with sure advance,
Until in gorgeous beauty drest,
The sun sank in the golden west,
When with the shades of closing night
Began the ghastly awesome fight
With the grim King, until his dart
Hung quivering in the old chief’s heart.
His comrades came at morning’s light,
And viewed his body with affright.
They next a burial for him sought—
Unto a hole the corse was brought,
And placed within its narrow bound


A pile of sticks was heaped around.
Thus are they flung beneath the sod
When goes the soul to meet its God,
And when the ceremonial’s done
That lonely grave survivors shun ;
Thrusting from their frightened view
The visions that their minds pursue.
Thus perished he, no friendly aid
To his wild cot relenting strayed—
And whilst these lines his woes describe
Deep sleeps the Last of all the Tribe.
ilili
