

The
Proclivity of Civilised Woman
TO
Uterine Displacements:
The Antidote
M. U. O'SULLIVAN.








THE PROCLIVITY OF CIVILISED WOMAN
TO UTERINE DISPLACEMENTS:
THE ANTIDOTE
ALSO
OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS TO GYNAECOLOGICAL
SURGERY
BY
M. U. O’SULLIVAN
L. ET L.M.R.C.S. ET R.C.P. ED., L.M. DUBLIN
Fellow British Gynecological Society
Hon. Surgeon Women's Hospital, Melbourne
Hon. Gynecological Surgeon St; Vincent's Hospital,
Melbourne
Melbourne:
STI LLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, 195a COLLINS STREET
1894.




PREFACE.
In presenting my views on the subject of Uterine
Displacements, to the profession, I do so, chiefly with the
desire of influencing the general practitioner, who has not
been in a position to devote special attention to a class of
affections of everyday occurrence, and in the hope that I
may help to put a stop to their routine treatment by pessaries,
and such other measures, as have been heretofore used, to
the exclusion of all rational remedies.
1 have ventured to publish a number of illustrative
“abdominal” cases, taken promiscuously from practice,
because I believe that their publication—giving technique
of the various operations resorted to, their after-treatment,
&c.--must have an educational effect, which any general
treatment of the subjects dealt with, will fall far short of.
A few papers, read before the Medical Society are, as
indicated, reprinted from the Australian Medical Journal.




THE PROCLIVITY OF CIVILISED WOMAN
TO UTERINE DISPLACEMENTS.
THE ANTIDOTE.
The much hackneyed subject of uterine displacements
has constantly occupied the attention of the profession, and
passed through many phases, since the days when Hecamier
and Lisfrane first accorded them a place in the long list of
female ills. Previous to this, they were almost entirely
unknown; the only uterine lesion of which we have any
record being prolapse, which was, according to all early
research, accounted the bete noir of woman’s existence.
Yelpeau made displacements the chief morbid factor in
g}uißecology, and this teaching was accepted until Gosselin
championed metritis, as the only lesion worthy of serious
notice. Authors seem to have blindly gone from one
excess to another, until at length, in the light of more
recent research, the darkness is dispelled. The science
of gynaecology has now become more analytical; each
disease is consigned to its proper place. The term uterine
displacement, which in earlier times was so simple, and
referred only to one pathological point, now comprehends
complex elements, the consideration of which is of the first
importance, with a view to successful treatment. All the
nonsensical conflict of opinion that has marked the treatment
of this question, more particularly during the past half
century, is easily explained; if we consider the rigid and
inflexible dogmatism of most teachers in asserting their own
narrow views, and the many and varied factors from which
those pathological deviations may arise; if we remember,
with Mr. Halliday Croom, that there have been many authors
who regarded displacements as entirely mechanical, and
treated them accordingly; that others attributed them


solely to inflammatory action, and adapted their treatment
to the cause ; that there were still others who looked on
them as altogether due to general enfeeblement and loss of
tone; while there were many, perhaps very many, who
regarded displacements as the chief etiological factor in
chronic cases of disordered health in women, and treated
them vigorously with all sorts of mechanical appliances.
It is extremely gratifying that, thanks mainly to the bril-
liant labours of such authors as Mr. Halliday Groom, Lawson
Tait, Schultz, all the diversity of opinion, and thoughtless
empiricism of the past, are now heard of no more.
Simple displacements would appear, at first sight,
to be of comparatively little importance. Very many
healthy, fertile women suffer from them without any
subjective manifestations of their existence. All gynaecolo-
gists are familiar with the fact, that a woman may suffer
from even the most extreme disorders of place, and yet not
complain of the slightest inconvenience, and carry on her
ordinary duties without any very marked symptoms of her
abnormal condition.
I do not mean to convey, that those ordinary uncompli-
cated displacements are devoid of all pathological
import, because it cannot be denied that they create, for
the displaced organ, a strong tendency to morbidity,
and, as the primary factor in many disorders of its
function, nutrition and sensibility, they demand attention
and treatment; but I do maintain that most gynaecologists—
influenced perhaps by their own enthusiasm, and tempted
by the hysteria, or what I may be allowed to designate the
furor operations of their patients ; or in blind deference to
the teaching of obsolete authority—are liable to exaggerate
their seriousness, and make them the absolute cause, not only
of all passing and trifling indispositions, but of all chronic
invalidism in woman.


The effect of fifty years of this unworthy condition of
things is plainly evidenced by the alarm and apprehension
excited in the average female of to-day, by the commonplace
but solemn verdict, “ displacement of womb,” as well as by
the far-fetched and unwholesome methods of treatment
adopted in such conditions. For, is it not a notorious fact,
that the fashionable dislocation is, in all cases, treated by
th 6 reckless and indiscriminate use of pessaries, without any
regard to the cause? And if further evidence was required
in proof of my contention, it is to be found in the fact, well
known to every practitioner of experience, that a woman
will wear a pessary with satisfaction, and even pleasure to
herself, although it may give rise to fresh pains, and intensify
those already existing.
Before the student of gynecology can hope to treat
pathological deviations successfully, he must have—(l) a
precise knowledge of the mechanism by which the uterus is
retained in place; (2) a firm grasp of the general causation
of all abnormal positions; (3) lie must rid himself of all
narrow prejudices and preconceptions.
The uterus is, so to speak, suspended as a floating body
amongst the pelvic organs ; every breath, every movement,
every position of the individual, every degree of fulness of
the bladder and rectum influencing its position. Its most,
I may say its only, fixed point, is the attachment of the
utero-sacral ligaments, which arise from the isthmus, or
fundo-cervical junction, embrace the rectum in their division
posteriorly, and terminate in the sub peritoneal cellular
tissue, as high up as the second lumbar vertebra. The vesico-
uterine fold in front, and the broad and round ligaments at
the sides, support it in its normal median position of slight
anteflexion—the latter offering perhaps little, if any, resist-
ance to the descent of the organ, and serving only as guys
to steady it, and prevent deviation from its normal axis.


The supreme wisdom of this arrangement is self-evident,
when we come to consider the marked changes of position,
volume, and consistency, which the uterus undergoes in
pregnancy. Under normal conditions, the natural tonicity
of the pelvic floor and vagina is capable of preventing
prolapse of the abdominal contents. There can be no doubt
that much uterine support is afforded by the connective
areolar tissue, which unites this organ with the pelvic walls,
rectum, and bladder, as proved by the fact, that descent of
the uterus is almost always found to involve prolapse of
those viscera, and vice versa. There is still another force,
produced by negative pressure within the abdomen, called
the adspiratory, or retentive power, which is dependent for
its due exercise on the tonicity of the abdominal and
thoracic muscles, the efficiency of the respiratory act, and
the free and unhampered action of the diaphragm; and plays
no small part in preserving the harmonious disposition of
the pelvic and abdominal viscera.
Now, the uterus is not supported by one or two, but by
a combination of those several factors, each contributing in
some degree towards the retention of its normal physiologi-
cal position. It is quite clear then, that the first point to be
kept in view, if we would aim at successful treatment, is,
that this physiological position can become disarranged only
when any one or more of those supports is rendered weak
or inefficient; when the normal mobility of the uterus
becomes lessened or abolished, as the result of some previous
inflammatory or other pathological condition, affecting the
organ itself, or the surrounding tissues.
For all practical purposes, pathological deviations may
be best divided into—
(1) Those which occur in the vertical planes, with
deviation from the normal axis—flexions and versions.


(2) Those which follow horizontal planes prolapse,
elevation, inversion.
Besides these, there is another class of malpositions which
it would be absurd to consider under the same heading, viz.,
those changes in the position of the entire uterus, caused by
the pressure of tumours, any effusion into surrounding
tissues, and involving no alteration in the direction of the
uterine axis, or the relationship between the body and
cervix—antero, retro, and latero positions. It is evident
that the treatment of such malpositions is a matter of
secondary importance.
In connection with prolapse, it must not he lost sight
of, that as the uterus descends in the pelvis, the direction
of its axis must change, to suit itself to that of the
canal, through which it is passing, so that we will find
retroversion associated with descent. Retroflexion may
he also found complicating retroversion or prolapse.
I would here, too, direct attention to the fact, often over-
looked, that the axis of the uterus may he faultless in its
relation to surrounding structures, yet if the organ occupies
a lower plane in the pelvis than normal, constituting perhaps
a scarcely appreciable descent, the general disturbance may
be as marked as in the worst cases of flexion or version.
In this, as in all other pathological deviations, stretching of
the ligaments and tissues, compresses the veins, and leads to
chronic hypergemia, metritis, hyperplasia, &c., with the long
train of distressing symptoms pathognomonic of the “pelvic
woman.”
I have long adopted the following as the most practical
and systematic tabulation of the causes of uterine displace-
ments, given in their order of frequency :
(1) Displacements due to influences forcing the uterus
downwards.


(2) Displacements due to weakness or inefficiency of
uterine supports.
(3) Displacements due to forces dragging the uterus
out of position.
Speaking generally, it will be quite obvious that any of
the causes of displacement will act, with much greater
certainty of producing the pathological effect, if the uterine
weight is increased from any cause, and if the organ remains
in the relaxed and . subinvoluted condition sometimes
incidental to labour.
I will now deal shortly with the most prominent of those
causes which tend to the production of displacements in the
civilised woman.
Under Class 1 ; —displacements due to influences forcing
the uterus downwards; —may be included all conditions
creating any abnormal intra-abdominal pressure; tight
lacing and tight clothing suspended from the waist, ascites,
tumours, constipation, any excessive muscular exertion,
&c. Of these, I shall place in the fore-front the pernicious
habit of tight lacing. The evil effects of this cruel custom
on our womankind cannot be over estimated, or too strongly
insisted upon. This part of my subject will apply, with
special force, to the present generation of Australian women;
for no man, with a practical knowledge of the special
subject, can deny that uterine displacements, as well as all
other pelvic lesions, are much more common here than in
the older, less feverish, and less artificial countries of the
world. Here, the iron rule of fashion holds absolute sway
with the great bulk of our women, and dictates without
compromise the style and manner of dress. Here, we find
in full and unrestricted operation the many agencies which
are most potent in the production of that anatomical and
structural alteration of the womb, so notoriously prevalent
in this country. No one, who cares to enquire into the


subject, can help seeing the mischief women do themselves,
and the race generally, by constricting the lower half of the
chest, and most of the abdomen, in what that master mind,
Herbert Snow, so tersely describes as a “rigid circular
splint.”
The immediate and inevitable result may be epitomised
as anatomical displacements, followed by morbid
structural changes in important tissues and organs;
mechanical interference with function, with loss of muscular
power and nerve force. It is lamentable, that most of the
special ailments of adult civilised women should be thus
self-inflicted; but the horrors of the situation are infinitely
enhanced when we consider, that those vicious customs in
dress, are constantly being applied to female children of
tender years.
It may be, it no doubt is, a gratifying thing for a woman
—the faithful slave of fashion—to feel that she is able to
develop what she considers the beauties and fascinations of
her figure, while she conceals its would-be defects ; but the
wretched imposition is bought at too high a price. The
unhappy interference with the beauty and harmony of
Nature’s work only too often brings its own penalty. Her
functions will assuredly become imperfect, her viscera)
displaced, her abdominal and thoracic muscles wasted, and
her abdominal retentive power lost. She lays the ground-
work of chronic invalidism. She unfits herself for the
responsible obligations and congenial occupations of a wife.
She is denied the pleasures of a healthy maternit} 7 , and will,
in all probability, leave not a single heir to heart and home.
I am not going to enter upon an exhaustive enquiry into
the many evils of tight lacing, for, to do such a theme
adequate justice, one should travel through almost the whole
range of Medicine, as well as a large portion of the domain
of Surgery; but, in dealing with the many agencies that exert


their influence on the genesis of uterine displacements, one
cannot help giving it special prominence, and I feel constrained
to denounce, in the most unequivocal terms, a practice which
so conspicuously influences for evil, the health of the genera-
tive organs of the civilised woman, and at once places her
on a level with the Indian squaw who flattens her head, and
the Chinese woman who compresses her foot into an un-
symmetrical mass.
Under Class 2 ; —displacements due to weakness or ineffi-
ciency of uterine supports; —we generally find the cause
associated with increased weight of uterus, and resulting
from previous puerperal conditions.
Here, may be found not only the large subinvoluted uterus,
which I maintain should not, per se, involve any risk of dis-
placement, but also a yielding dilated condition of vagina and
perineum; uterine ligaments, which contain uterine tissue,
lax and weak; and in all probability a complete loss of ab-
dominal retentive power—the abdominal and thoracic muscles
being atrophied, and deprived of all tone and health by pre-
vious non-use, and the compression exercised by the “ circular
splint,” and tight clothing suspended from the waist.
That, increased weight of uterus, uncomplicated by the
conditions described, is unattended by increased risk of
displacement, is strongly evidenced in the natural healthy
woman, by her general freedom from any of the usual
abnormalities of position, during the early months of preg-
nancy, while yet an enlarging and heavy uterus occupies
the true pelvis, as well as by the almost complete absence of
malpositions amongst savage races.
During an extended trip through remote parts of Queens-
land and New South Wales, I enquired into this question
closely, and found a most striking immunity from displace-
ments of pelvic organs amongst the aborigines of those
colonies, notwithstanding the fact that they do not observe


tjie recumbent posture for any time after confinement.
Those women will continue their usual toil almost up to the
moment of delivery, and after a short interval of retirement
from the camp, will return with their much prized
“ picaninny,” only to resume their routine labours, and
perhaps trudge several miles to the nearest creek to
perform their post-partum ablutions, without suffering
ill consequences of any sort. This goes to prove, not
only that increased weight of uterus is not, per se, the
absolute cause of post-partum displacements, as it is popu-
larly credited to be, but also the more important truth, that
woman under natural primitive conditions of life, is gifted
with more marked recuperative power and vitality, as well
as a more stable condition of all her uterine supports, than
her sister in advanced society. lam convinced that all
the uterine deviations, resulting from previous puerperal
conditions, so common in civilised life, are directly traceable,
not to increased weight, as we have been taught to believe,
but rather to weakness and relaxation of uterine supports,
the penalty of antecedent pernicious customs, or the
accidents and injuries inseparable from tedious, inefficient
and assisted labours.
There is another custom, found only in civilised life,
which I cannot help thinking is responsible for many of
the displacements following parturition —I refer to the use
of the tight binder and pad. For several weeks the nurse —
under the pretext of preserving the figure, but in reality to
save her own reputation, which depends largely on the
thoroughness with which she develops this abominable
practice —keeps up forcible compression over the enlarged
uterus, while she rigidly insists on the level dorsal decubitus,
with the result, that she generally succeeds in forcing the
organ backwards into the hollow of the sacrum, when the
displacement becomes the inevitable cause, rather than what


it has heretofore been generally described as, the conse-
quence of subinvolution and chronic metritis. The obstetric
surgeon is in the habit of using it as a safeguard against
post-partum haemorrhage; but dependence on so incomplete a
remedy must have cost humanity many a valuable life, and
to aim at the treatment of so grave an emergency by such
trumpery means, should be unworthy of the age we live
in.
Before quitting this part of my subject, I would fain
emphasise my firm belief, that prolonged dorsal decubitus
is not, in the healthy female, absolutely essential to involu-
tion ; that its enforcement interferes with thorough uterine
drainage ; that the tight abdominal binder and pad are
unscientific and uncalled for; and that their indiscriminate
use is a most fruitful source of many pathological deviations,
and other conditions, heretofore attributed solely to increased
weight of uterus. Will any man dare for one moment to
assert that woman, the most perfect work of Creation, was
foredoomed to such helplessness and degeneracy as to be
hampered with the dire necessity for such artificial aids
to the normal discharge of a physiological process. Such
an assumption would be simply outrageous. Ido not mean
to preach the doctrine, that our puerperal woman will derive
no benefit from remaining in bed a reasonable time after her
delivery, or that a well-fitting bandage, applied for purposes
of bare support, and without exercising any undue compres-
sion, may not be a source of great comfort. I will admit, at
once, that those civilised women who remain in bed for a
few weeks, are in a better condition at the end of the puer-
perium than those who abandon it earlier. In those women,
whose forces are weak and inefficient, from such causes as I
have already enumerated, labour involves much consumption
of strength, and is followed by more or less exhaustion,
and desire for rest. The superstitious belief then, in the


lying-in custom, must be credited with undoubted advant-
ages in these days of feverish artificiality, when woman
would appear to have recklessly abandoned herself to all
sorts of denaturalising influences.
I have already said that any of the causes of displacement
will act, with greater certainty of producing a pathological
effect, if the uterine weight is increased; if the organ from
any cause remain in the relaxed subinvoluted condition some-
times incidental to labour. It is very evident then, that any
discussion of this much confused subject, must fall far short
of practical benefit to the student of gynaecology, which
does not deal with the various agencies that are found to
arrest, or delay, the natural retrograde metamorphosis of the
uterus after labour,, and give some sound idea of the exact
pathology of this condition. All the definitions of sub-
involution that appear in text-books I consider vague and
unsatisfactory. They furnish with no evidence of the exact
pathological condition of the uterus so affected.
From a strictly technical standpoint, I look upon sub-
involution, pure and uncomplicated, as a condition interven-
ing between the normal post-partum uterus, and chronic
metritis; and usually starting with traumatism or septic
absorption. Subinvolution and chronic metritis are really
but different degrees of hypersemic activity. One, so to
speak, merges into the other; yet they are pathologically
distinct. In subinvolution, we find no inflammatory
products, or new tissue formations, the tissues being the
same as in the normal uterus, but of course, more developed
from previous gestation, and usually showing, on microscopic
examination, some evidence of fatty degeneration.
It is now universally recognised, that the due fulfilment of
the function of lactation is essential to the complete involution
of the uterine tissues, during the normal puerperium. The
trophic sympathy between the breast and uterus, and
their marked subordination to nerve influence, natural or


abnormal, are to-day familiar to everybody. Here again,
I am reluctantly forced to reproach the fairer half of our
community, more particularly those in the higher walks of
life, with deliberately impeding their sexual organs in the
due discharge of their allotted functions. The suckling of
one’s offspring is the highest and most fundamental duty of
maternity, and the woman who, to enjoy the ephemeral
and unwholesome pleasures of society, refuses to discharge
this sacred function, is guilty of a gross violation of Nature’s
laws, wilfully frustrates the noble purposes of her being, is
unworthy the name of mother, and should have been
ruthlessly relegated to barren spinsterbood.
It is only those who are suffering from some physical
infirmity, or bodily affliction, which renders lactation
inadvisable, or may be injurious to the child, can be excused.
We are told that another very fruitful source of arrested
involution is to be found in leaving the recumbent position
and going about too soon after labour. But here, too, as I
have already indicated, the primary cause of the pathological
condition is some previous enfeeblement of, or injury to, the
uterine supports, with the usual general loss of tone and
reconstructive power. It is only where those latter conditions
exist, that increased weight of the organ leads, on the assump-
tion of the erect posture, to the unbroken chain of evils—
derangements of position, subinvolution, chronic metritis,
too frequent and profuse menstruation, leucorrhoea, backache,
general mental and bodily distress —which would seem to be
the heritage of the much enlightened woman of our time.
It is deplorable, but yet true, and it does not require much
research to show that woman, as we now find her, amid the
highly artificial surroundings of modern civilisation, has fallen
from her normal state. The evolution of her degeneracy
may be divided into three eras :
(1) The Savage. —Here women under primitive conditions
of life—Australian Aboriginal, Brazilian, Negro—surrounded


by an environment with which they are in perfect accord,
will, a few hours after delivery, resume their usual toil,
without ill effects of any sort.
(2) The Civilised. —l would have this era, or stage,
exemplified by the peasantry of older, less feverish, and
less artificial countries—England, Ireland, Scotland, &c.
Here women will rise after labour and attend to their
every-day duties on seventh to ninth day, often earlier,
and yet they enjoy a marked immunity from uterine
displacements, or other affections of special organs.
(3) The Denaturalised. — How different with the woman
who practises the customs, and conforms to the usages of
civilised society, as at present constituted, in large centres
of population, and in young communities like this, where
the external conditions of life, in respect of physical vitality,
are so demoralising. Here, the woman of fashion, comprising
all grades of society, from the lowliest denizen of the bush
to her who glories in fretted halls—for all are fashion mad—
shows the most marked tendency, not only to displacement,
of the uterus, but also to general morbidity of the generative
organs. Notwithstanding the many attentions that are
bestowed upon her, during a lengthened puerperium, by
that autocrat of the lying-in room, the monthly nurse,
she is still, on assuming her ordinary duties, the victim
of many aches and pains, and a frequent occupant of the
doctor’s chair. She is tenderly nursed and forcibly bound,
liberally drugged, copiously douched, and carefully dieted.
All possible sources of infection are carefully guarded
against. Eveiy detail that modern scientific thought can
suggest, with a view to promoting her convalescence, is
attended to. Still, during the whole period of active life,
her existence would seem to be one of constant suffering.
As to the production of special varieties of displacement,
circumstances, often more or less difficult to appreciate,
B


determine the direction of the malposition ; whether it be
ante or retroversion, or flexion, or prolapse. The same
causes which produce simple prolapse in one person, may
lead to retroversion with descent in another, in a third to
retroflexion; tire determination of individual cases being
entirely a question of mechanical forces, leading tc certain
results.
As I have already said, the normal position of the
uterus is one of slight ante-versio-flexio, and there are
authors of repute who maintain that those terms should be
expunged from our pathological nomenclature ; but so radical
a reform would hardly be in accordance with facts. For no
man, with a knowledge of the anatomy and mechanism of
the uterine supports, will deny the possibility of anterior
deviations becoming pathological, in cases where there has
been any antecedent subinvolution, or metritis, associated
with peri-metritis, or para-metritis involving the utero-sacral
ligaments, causing their contraction, and posterior fixation of
the isthmus. This latter condition would seem essential
to the production of anterior displacements. Otherwise,
retro-deviations will be the natural consequence of any
intensification of intra-abdominal pressure—puerperal or
virginal—more particularly if there be a relaxed subinvoluted
condition of uterine supports, with any increased weight of
uterus. Such is the sequence of events with the average
puerperal woman, who is subjected to the usual prolonged
post-partum dorsal decubitus, tight binding, &c., as well
as in those cases of prolonged and frequently recurring-
retention of urine, as demanded by the social customs of
to-day.
The most frequent combination in the production of
prolapse, is rupture of perineum or cervix uteri, or of both,
leading to subinvolution of vagina, uterus, and uterine
supports. Bearing on this question of individual displace


inents, there are a few important general facts which it may
be well to remember :
(1) Retro-deviations are quite common in unmarried and
nulliparous women, while prolapse is very rare.
(2) Both retro-deviations and prolapse are to be found
chiefly among parous, hardworking women.
(3) Prolapse is very common amongst old women, in all
conditions of life.
Having thus carefully enquired into the etiology of uterine
displacements generally, and their relationships to civilised
life, it should not be difficult to formulate a rational line of
treatment. Here perhaps, more than in any other depart-
ment of scientific surgery, the golden truism, that “ until the
cause is removed its effects must of necessity persist,” holds
good. We would be infinitely greater benefactors to
humanity, and more effectually promote the physical well-
being of our womankind, if instead of endeavouring to
overcome the effects of pressure in one direction, by counter-
pressure in another, of opposing force to force, as shown in
the general use of the abdominal belt and corset; if instead
of “impaling the unfortunate uterus on a stem,”or hoisting
it on davits—in the shape of one or other of those “contorted
pieces of wood, metal, or vulcanite,” called pessaries,
we tried to grasp the true principle for the relief of the
various displacements, by seeking the sources whence those
troubles spring, and by an honest unflinching advocacy of
Nature’s laws.
The treatment by pessaries, which has unfortunately
become so popular, can never be more than temporary and
palliative in its results. Mr. J. Halliday Croom leaves no
room for doubt on this point, when he tells us, in forcible
language, that “ vaginal pessaries are seldom if ever curative,
and that intra-uterine pessaries are surrounded with such
risks, in the direction of inflammation, hmmatocele, and
b 2


ovaritis, that he has discarded their use altogether.” With
his views lam in perfect accord. “ I hate pessaries,” says
Lawson Tait. “ I never use them if I can help it, and I have
many times wished they had never been invented.” With
so trenchant a condemnation, of what may be called the
mechanical method of treating displacements, coming from
the front ranks of the advanced school of to-day, we should
at least hold our hand, and weigh well the indications for,
and the dangers that may accrue from, the adoption of such
a line of treatment.
The various forms of vaginal pessary now in general use,
not only do no permanent good, but very frequently lead to
most annoying and serious consequences. Who amongst us
has not seen, over and over again, the inflammation, the
abrasion, the free vaginal discharge, that must follow from the
pressure of an ill-fitting pessary. We have all come across
instances of retro-deviation and prolapse;—resulting perhaps
from lacerated perineum and increased intra-abdominal
pressure; —that were treated, regardless of the cause, by the
everlasting pessary, but this time, large enough to force the
posterior vaginal wall up into the pelvis, far above its normal
level; and resulted in atrophy of the muscular tissue of the
vagina from over-distension, and inevitable recto-vaginocele
on its removal.
It is a matter of every day experience, to find all the
symptoms of retroflexion aggravated by the application of
a “Hodge;” the pessary fitting into the angle of flexion,
and not at all elevating the fundus. But worse than ail,
how often are we not confronted with cases where the very
existence of the patient is jeopardised by this obnoxious
system of treatment; where the presence of adhesions is an
absolute contra-indication to the use of all such mechanical
supports; and where the appendages are so much involved
as to render all such bungling attempts at cure positively


dangerous. Here, too, we should consider the dangers that
are inseparable from the free admission of a germ-laden
atmosphere, and the retention of pathological secretions
which must result, according to the shape and size of the
pessary used.
While thus condemning the indiscriminate use of pessaries
in the treatment of displacements, I wish it to be understood
that I do so, more with the desire of directing the attention
of the profession to the wholesale empiricism practised in
this branch of special ailments, and the opprobrium attach-
ing thereto, rather than of entirely discouraging appliances,
the intelligent use of which, as adjuncts to treatment, may
sometimes be attended' with considerable advantage.
Now, it may be taken for granted, that anything which
promotes the abdominal retentive power, will directly lead
to elevation of a dislocated uterus, and conduce to its
retention in a normal position. Therefore, I hold, it
becomes the duty of the surgeon to do everything in his
power, to render obsolete, for ever, those pernicious systems
of modern female dress, that are attended with so many, and
such serious consequences to the wearer. Here, we have a
field for health culture and reform, the successful champion
of which, would confer more untold benefits on humanity
than ever immortalised a Hunter or a Lister.
If there has been previous injury of the pelvic floor,
which was not dealt with by immediate operation, this
structure should be repaired as soon as its tissues have
sufficiently involuted to admit of surgical treatment. While
on this subject, I feel forced to characterise the conduct of
any man as grossly neglectful, and reprehensible, who, in
the face of the many evils that may follow laceration of
perineum, would disregard it, and defer its treatment.
I have already drawn attention to the self-evident fact,
that increased size and weight of uterus render it more
O


amenable to any exciting cause of, and therefore more liable
to, displacement, more particular!} 7 retro-displacement; and
I have also said that displacements of the organ lead to
disturbances of nutrition, congestive enlargement, and
chronic metritis—the increased weight in the one case
predisposing to, and in the other resulting from, displace-
ment.
Herein, lies the key to the treatment of such complicated
malpositions. It has been, for some time, a much disputed
question, whether the complicating increased weight and
metritis should be first treated, or the displacement reduced.
To those who are mindful of the wholesome proverb —
Sublatci cause tollitur efectus —the cure of such conditions
will involve no difficulties.
In the first class of case, we should direct our treat-
ment, ab initio , to stimulating the normal involution of
the uterus and its surrounding tissues, and overcoming
inflammation—by such measures as curetting, hot vaginal
douching, &c.; by the administration of chlorate or
bromide of potash and ergot; by trachelorrhaphy (Emmett);
by amputation of cervix (Simon Marckwald or Schroeder), if
marked hyperplasia, granular degeneration, &c., exist; by
insisting on the due fulfilment of the function of lactation.
I have always found, with almost unerring certainty, that
the discriminating application of those measures led to the
early reduction of such displacements, if the uterine supports
had not been previously injured, or rendered inefficient from
some cause.
In the other case, if it has not become fixed by peri-metritis
or peri-salpingitis, we should endeavour to replace the uterus,
and retain it in situ with a proper fitting pessary, and thereby
relieve not only the venous tension and nutritive changes,
so favourable to the development of inflammation, but also the
many distressing reflex disturbances, due to prolapse of the


adnexa, which is so generally associated with displace-
ments.
But we must not rest satisfied with the relief of existing
symptoms. Our treatment is still incomplete and unsatis-
factory, unless we have found the primary exciting cause,
the removal of which can be our only hope of establishing
a permanent result, or relieving our patient from the
annoyance of the ever-recurring dislocation.
We must not lose sight of the proverb that, “he who
cures a disease may be the skilfullest, but that he who
prevents it, is the safest physician.”
Woman should be made to recognise that, though
mistress of Creation, she is still subject to the kindly laws
of life ; that self-preservation should be with her, as it
is with every living thing, the guiding principle of existence,
and that without it, all her highest obligations to existing,
as well as to future, generations become impossible. The
necessity for proclaiming such golden truths, and insist-
ing, as far as possible, on their due observance, is
evident, if we honestly consider the physical degeneracy
of the fashionable female of the present day, and if we
acknowledge, as we must, the harmful influences that may
result to the child, through abnormal conditions of the
parents. No one will now deny, that the bodily deformities
which we designate fashion, and the utter disregard of all
physiological law, must involve disregard of offspring, and
lead, either directly or indirectly, to variations. There is no
more potent or incontrovertible truth in life, than that any
such persistent abuse of body or mind, as injures it, will
involve injury of descendants. Then, I say, it is the sacred
duty of every woman who hopes to become a mother, to so
live, as to preserve all her organs in their normal state.


ALEXANDER-ADAMS OPERATION MODIFIED, A
SERIES OF TWENTY-ONE CASES.
There are some chronic retro-deviations which will not respond
to either medicinal or prothetic measures, and would seem to defy
the law of removal of the cause, while others may be rectified,
only to recur immediately, on stoppage of the treatment and
removal of the support. Such are those chronic retroversions
and retrofiexions which are found associated with prolapse, and
more or less anterior or posterior colpocele, or with prolapse of
ovaries, rendering the use of pessaries impossible.
Tor the radical cure of those displacements, we must have
recourse to one or other of two procedures—operative shortening
of round ligaments, or abdominal hysteropexy. The former was
first suggested by Alquie, of Montpellier, for “prolapse.” Later
on, two English surgeons (Alexander of Liverpool, and Adams
of Glasgow) performed the operation about the same time, and
invested it with fresh interest. Within the last few years it has
been most happily modified, and brought within the range of
possible and palpable surgery by Dr. Geo. M. Edebohls. I have
now performed this modified operation (only dispensing with the
drainage of the inguinal canal) twenty-one times, with the most
satisfactoi-y results in every instance. I shall just give short
notes of my first case, which is fairly typical of the series :
Mrs. O’H., Parramatta, Sydney, aet. 32, married six years, no
children, came uiider my care on July 1, 1892. She complained
of severe bearing-down pains in the lower abdomen and back, weight
in rectum, with tenesmus, menorrhagia, frequency of micturition;
suffered from violent intermitting headache, and had aborted
twice. * There was no history of pelvic peritonitis.
On examination, I found the uterus enlarged and retroverted,
but freely movable. She had been under previous treatment, and
had worn pessaries of all designs, without any lasting benefit.
Preparatory to operation, which was at once determined on, I
reposed the uterus and had it retained in situ by a soft well-fitting
ring pessary. I advised rest in bed and total suspension of the
marital function, hot vaginal douching, and chlorate of potash and
ergot internally—a combination which 1 may, after much experi-
ence, be allowed to place first in the list of remedies for the


cure of subinvolution, and the chronic metritis that results
therefrom.
On July 28, I proceeded to operate. The following description
of the technique of the operation, with some modification from my
own experience, is based upon Edebohl’s papers, in the New York
Medical Journal, October 11, 1890. Having found the pubic
spine, a two and a half inch incision was made from above it, in
the direction of the inguinal canal, exposing the external ring. A
grooved director was now inserted into the external ring and pushed
along the inguinal canal, close to its anterior wall, as far as the
internal ring. The anterior wall was now divided in the direction
of the course of the aponeurotic fibres, along its whole length.
The internal ring was now felt, and the ligament was easily
found, as a well-marked, oval, strong band of fibres, with a
ligamentous sheen, emerging therefrom. It was brought out by
a blunt hook, and separated from its attachments.
Speaking, however, from later experience, it is not always
quite so easy to find the ligament. It may be looked for; with
most certainty of finding it; in the inferior and outer part of the
canal, nestling behind Poupart’s ligament.
The chief difficulty in performing the operation is the finding of
the ligament, more particularly if we look for it in the canal, at a
distance from the internal ring, owing to its separation into fibres
for insertion into the walls of the canal. With one hand pulling
on the round ligament, in a direction at right angles to the plane
of the aperture of the ring, the reflection of peritoneum from the
broad ligament, which was drawn out in the form of an inverted
funnel, was carefully peeled back off the ligament with the finger
tips, until three or four inches of it had been exposed. The wound
was now protected with wet perchloride gauze, and the operation
performed in the same manner on the opposite side. The drawn
out ligament, still attached to the pubis, was now taken charge
of by the assisting surgeon who, by means of a blunt hook, made
the necessary traction in the direction of the open canal. In this
situation it was secured by sutures of silkworm gut in the
following manner : —The first suture being introduced at the level
of the internal ring, it was passed through one lip of the wound—
embracing skin, fascia, and aponeurosis of external oblique into
the inguinal canal. Now the tightened ligament was pierced trans-


versely by the needle, which then traversed the other lip of the
wound, penetrating in succession the cut fascia of external oblique,
subcutaneous fat, and skin. Four sutures were passed in a similar
manner through all the tissues on either side of the wound,
piercing the round ligament in their course across the canal.
These sutures, when tied upon the skin, obliterated the canal, and
at the same time ensured the most thorough fixation of the
shortened ligaments within their own habitat. The excess of
ligament protruding from the lower angle of the wound, about
three inches, was now cut away. Edebohls drained the inguinal
canal by passing three or four strands of silkworm gut along the
bottom of the wound, emerging at either end. Ido not think the
latter procedure necessary, and have not resorted to it in any
single case. I have in every instance by careful coaptation of
surfaces, and thoi-ough asepsis, secured immediate union and
uninterrupted recovery.
During convalescence, I have in every case maintained the
uterus in position by a well-fitting Hodge pessary, introduced
before the operation. By this means, the ligaments were relieved
from the traction, which the uterus could not otherwise have
failed to exert upon them, through the tendency to recurrence
of the displacement. The pessary was left in situ for a month,
which the patient spent in the recumbent posture.
As a result of my experience of the Alexander-Adams opera-
tion, I am forced to declare, most unhesitatingly, in favour of the
modification of its technique, such as I have applied in this series
of cases. We have now for twelve years been led to believe, by
advocates of the original operation, that picking up and shortening
the round ligaments at the external ring was not only possible, but
easy of accomplishment, and invariably attended with the best
possible results. It is hard to rid the professional mind of pre-
judices in favour of any surgical procedure that it has become
accustomed to. Men are only too prone to take everything for
granted, and follow the beaten track.
While allowing the possibility of finding a few fibres or fasciculi
of the ligament at the external ring, and exercising sufficient
traction on them to influence a light, freely movable uterus, I
cannot —after frequent and careful endeavours to isolate it, prior
to laying open the canal by the modified method—admit that it


is either easy of accomplishment, to find it in anything like its full
strength, or that it is ever attended with the best possible results.
1 cannot help expressing my strong suspicion, that, in the hands
of the ordinary surgeon, a fasciculus of the internal oblique
muscle, or a band of connective tissue, with possibly a stray fibre
of the ligament, has been frequently sutured at the external ring,
while the self-satisfied operator congratulated himself on the
facility with which he “ picked up ” the ligament.
The drawbacks of the original operation are self-evident. It
is difficult to satisfactorily separate the subdivisional muscular
fibres that may be found at the external ring, more particularly
in nulliparous and unmarried females, whose ligaments (round)
have never become hypertrophied, in response to the stimulus of
pregnancy ; and if successful in doing so, we must miss the fibres
of insertion into the inguinal canal, and any traction that we may
be able to make on the ligament must draw out its peritoneal
covering (the canal of Nuck) in the form of an inverted funnel,
making a potential bowel or omental trap—a menace to the
patient’s health and life ever after. The presence of adhesions
is an absolute contra-indication to this operation, except where
they can be broken down by gentle manipulation.
THE VERÆ CAUSAE OF CANCER
[Read before the Medical Society of Victoria.]
In view of the greatly enhanced prevalence of malignant
diseases, and of the ever increasing number of victims those
loathsome and repulsive affections are claiming at our doors, no
man can deny their high claims on our attention, and it would
seem not unreasonable to hope that an intelligent discussion of
their etiology may be productive of much good. With this
object I will preface an account of a case of removal of the
uterus for malignant disease, by some remarks on what I have
termed the verce causae of cancer.


It seems to me a strange anomaly that we should devote so
much time and attention to maladies of phenomenal rarity, such
as leprosy; while we look on with perfect indifference at a class of
disease of every day occurrence, whose genesis is directly due to
an abrogation of Nature’s simplest laws, and is so amenable to
prophylaxis.
Nobody will question the greater liability of the female sex to
cancerous diseases. The statistics from the Registrar-General’s
fifty-second annual report show that of every twenty-one men,
and every eight women, who live to be thirty-five years of age,
one wilh respectively die of cancer.
In the great majority of instances, the female uterus and breast
are the parts attacked; while men are enormously more prone
than women to malignant affections of the tongue, buccal tract,
oesophagus, and stomach, and it is an interesting and significant
fact, that when we investigate parts not influenced by marked
differences of function, or the mode of life characterising the sexes—
what may be termed neutral ground, such as the internal viscera,
lower part of the intestinal tract and lymph glands—we find both
man and woman appear to suffer in equal proportion.
Time will not permit me to travel into the fields of exemption
in woman and proclivity in man. I will confine myself to that
province in which the peculiar liability of women to malignant
disease is displayed—the uterus and breast. Why are malignant
diseases of these organs so frequent?
As the cardinal feature in all cancer growth is an abnormal
cell proliferation, it is reasonable to assume that any organ
specially rich in cell elements would be much more liable to
malignant developments than one not so circumstanced; but
when we come to consider that the lymph glands and liver,
organs markedly parenchymatous, do not show any special
tendency of this kind, it is evident that we must look for some
additional causation factor.
Now, there are certain conditions found in the uterus, or at
least that portion of it whence malignant growths almost always
spring—its lining membrane—which at once suggest a special
liability to cancerous diseases. Here we find the cell elements
undergoing frequent modifications and changes in their growth
and arrangement, and here the nervous system exercises the most


absolute control over those histological variations (as demonstrated
in the menstrual process). As soon as the malignant process
is initiated, the normal healthy ratio of cell elements to well
formed tissue is lost; the little specks of protoplasm or cells
which form the bulk of every malignant tumour, appear to throw
off all allegiance to the central nervous authority, and seem no
longer subject to the laws which regulate the healthy organism •
they proliferate luxuriantly, are nourished, and grow—as all
parasites do—at the expense of the host which affords them
shelter.
In by far the majority of instances of malignant disease of the
uterus and breast, the variety is carcinoma, of which of course
the glandular lining is the parent tissue. What antecedent
history do we generally get? In a comparatively small number
of instances, we find cancerous formations initiated by direct
mechanical injury or irritation, the net result of which must be
brought about by lowering the vitality of the part, and destroying,
more or less, the physiological balance of its tissues. Cancerous
growths of the connective tissue variety (true sarcomata) appear
generally to follow some sudden rupture or other injury of
connective tissue elements, by a blow or strain. The injury is
often of a trivial and passing character, does not give rise to the
slightest suspicion of serious consequence, and is soon forgotten.
In squamous epithelioma of mucous surfaces there must, almost
of necessity, be a superficial lesion; a crack, cut, or abrasion as
a starting-point. Then, “ the door for the initiation of the
cancerous process is thrown widely open” (Snow), and continued
irritation of the adjoining tract does the rest. The mechanism of
production of a small percentage of breast carcinoma may be
explained in this way, and I have no doubt we may, without
fear, ascribe a few examples of the uterine disorder to a similar
agency.
Before quitting this, the most palpable factor in the etiology
of the cancer group, I would fain direct special attention to the
manner in which such specialised papillae of the skin as hair,
feathers, and teeth are developed. The researches of histologists
have established conclusively the truth of the contention, that
these structures, as well as glands of all kinds, are developed
essentially on the same plan as cancers—an epithelial down


growth into the subjacent tissues. It is undoubtedly an interest-
ing and suggestive fact, that abnormal irritation will frequently
produce hair in an unusual situation, and we are all conversant
with the elongation of cutaneous papillae into warts under similar
circumstances. In like manner, glands will l-espond to irritation
and grow, but the point which I would emphasise is, that a
continuance of those conditions will frequently lead to the
development of cancer.
Bland Sutton describes cancers as “ adherent glandular for-
mations that grow aimlessly, and have no function to keep them
in subjection.” This view gains weight from the fact that, in their
intimate structure, they resemble the glands in the immediate
neighbourhood of which they grow. Thus, cancer of the lip
resembles cutaneous glands; in the liver, it mimics the liver;
mammary cancer resembles imperfect mammary tissue, and so on.
In the large majority of those cases of cancer which are met
with in every-day practice, and furnish the bulk of mortality
statistics, no such mechanical exciting cause can be detected.
We must, therefore, look for some other explanation of the
malignant tendency and chronic invalidism, which would seem to
have become the heritage of the civilised woman. This we will
readily find in various depressing neurotic conditions. Herbert
Snow has laid it down as an axiom, that failing a mechanical
exciting cause, a neurotic is always to be found.
It must here strike us as noteworthy, that not only is it the
more neurotic and emotional se,x which principally suffer from
cancer, but also that the organs most prone to diseases of this
class are, in health, specially influenced by emotional conditions,
and by abnormal states of the central nervous system, as I have
already indicated. If we carefully investigate the personal history
of cancerous patients, we cannot avoid being struck by the large
number who tell us of some immediately antecedent trouble or
anxiety.
Most recent systematic writers agree, that mental distress ranks
as the first and most constant factor in the genesis of cancer ; but
the undoubted agency of several others, such as exhausting toil
and prolonged illness must hot be lost sight of, as they constitute
a weighty addition to the many other influences that promote
its development. Everybody must have seen cases which will


establish beyond doubt the reality of this connection. The
immediate sequence is a matter of daily familiarity. I myself
have met with many instances in which the cause and effect
seemed so obvious and decisive that, to question their close
relationship, would seem like struggling against the inevitable.
There are some other general factors bearing on this aspect of
woman’s health, and the rapidly increasing prevalence of cancer,
which, though apparently trivial at first sight, demonstrate very
forcibly the truth of the old proverb, that “great events from
little causes spring.” I will merely mention the most serious and
noticeable amongst them :—Constipation, tight lacing, excessive
use of neurotics—tea and coffee, “ cramming ” at school. The
modus operandi of such agencies has not been clearly explained ;
but there is little doubt, that they act by producing defective
innervation and depressed nutrition.
It is onl} r during the past few years that cancers have come to
possess any really scientific significance. In the light of recent
biological research, it does not appear improbable that they are,
like infective tumours (Paget’s “ Disease of Breast and Actino-
mycosis”), directly due to the growth of some specific micro-
organism, vegetable or animal. This would seem to be the most
rational hypothesis, and the only one that will satisfy all the
requirements of the case, and explain all its facts and phenomena.
Although no specific micro-organism has, up to the present, been
cultivated, there is little doubt that we are already on the
threshold of this great scientific achievement. The evidence of
most leading pathologists points to its early realisation. We find
Hanau of Zurich, Weber and Eiselberg, successfully transferring
or engrafting epithelioma, carcinoma, and fibro-sarcoma from one
animal to another. We find Professor Kubasoff, of Moscow,
after a long period of bacteriological research, arriving at the
conclusion, that cancerous growths are caused by a special patho-
genic rod-shaped microbe which, when inoculated under the skin
of animals, gives rise to cancerous degeneration, commencing in
the nearest lymphatic glands, and subsequently spreading to the
internal organs. We find that Albarran, Darier, Thoma and
Wickham have found an organism in cancer, which they describe
as belonging to the protozoa. We find Delepine, Duplay, and
Cazine demonstrating the presence of psorospermise and coccidise


in epithelial tumours and cancers. We find Sudakewitch, who
has obtained specially good results in his experimentations,
demonstrating most accurately certain micro-organisms, which
Metchnikoff asserts are nothing else than psorospermise and
coccidise. We find Dr. W. Russel describing, before the Patho-
logical Society of London, the existence of pi’otoplasmic bodies
which he terms the characteristic organisms of cancer, and which
are now known as “fuchsine” bodies. Woodhead, in his “Practical
Pathology,” lately published, says:—“ There can be no doubt
whatever, that the organisms to which Dr. Russel draws special
attention, are similar to those described by other observers as
psorosperms.” Whether these parasitic bodies originate the malig-
nant process, and are the cause of cancerous infection, or whether
they result therefrom, has not been finally decided ; but when
we consider that all recent biological research has proved their
occurrence in the epithelial cells, and that they undoubtedly give
rise to cell proliferation, as proved in the lower animals, we must,
at least, admit the strong probability of their causal agency in
the production of cancers.
I shall not dwell at any greater length on those many
general causes which help to produce so deplorable a condition of
things amongst our womankind, than to indicate :
(1) That whatever produces chronic ill-health depresses the
nervous system, and is clinically found to constitute an influence
strongly predisposing to cancerous developments generally.
(2) That local agencies exert only a minor influence in their
direct genesis.
(3) That while rapidly increasing in prevalence in civilised
nations, they are almost absent among the savage.
(4) That malignant disease is in very many instances primarily
local, and due to disordered functions, as proved by the fact
known to all surgeons, that the disease, when promptly removed,
may never recur.
(5) That benign ulcerations may become malignant, when it
may be assumed the phagocytic action of the leucocytes has
become subjugated by the micro-organism.
(6) That disease of any kind, whether malignant or inflamma-
tory, never occurs in an individual whose functions and nervous
system are in perfect health, and who has, as a consequence,


perfect local and general resistance to all pathogenic micro-organ-
isms—in whom phagocytosis is healthily and perfectly accomplished.
(And here I may be allowed to say, that Mr. Jonathan Hutchin-
son insisted that cancer is simply a modification of what occurred
in chronic inflammation).
(7) That when, from continued irritation, depressing influences,
or advancing age, the physiological character and vitality of the
animal cells become lowered, cancer finds all the conditions
necessary for its growth.
(8) That, in a word, cancerous disease is but one of the many
proofs of over-pressure on the nervous system, which the artificial
and vicious conditions of modern civilisation involve.
The case I bring before you is as follows :
A. S., set. 21, single, tailoress, was admitted into the Women’s
Hospital, on April 15, 1892. Patient was very pale and anaemic,
and was in a very low condition. She complained of great weak-
ness, pain in the lower part of the abdomen, and a very offensive
vaginal discharge. She was fairly well, up till eighteen months
previous to admission, when she was confined. Since her confine,
ment, she has gradually become very weak, and has never been
free from abdominal pain. Her parents are both alive, set. about
55 years. The mother is a very healthy woman ; but the father,
a powerful labouring man, has a tumour of the right side of the
neck, which appears to be malignant. The mother states that
her daughter fretted a great deal during the time she was preg-
nant, and has been very despondent ever since her confinement.
On examination, patient was found to be very thin; temperature
101°. The abdomen was sunken except in the midline just above
the pubes, where the uterus was very prominent. She was very
tender over the uterus, and in both ovarian regions. The vagina
was roomy, and almost full of a very offensive discharge ;
the discharge was seen to come from the uterus. The cervix was
very granular, and covered with small papillomatous growths.
The linger could with ease be passed into the uterus. The endo-
metrium, from the internal os almost to the fundus, was very
rough, and bled freely on examination. The sound passed nearly
six inches; the uterus was free and movable, and the broad
ligaments did not appear to be diseased; the right ovary was
enlarged and very tender.
c


Patient had been under treatment for a considerable time in
Albury, and the uterus had twice been curetted.
As there was little doubt that it was a case of malignant disease
of the uterus, and as no other structures were apparently involved,
it was decided to do hysterectomy. For ten days previous to the
operation, the uterus was irrigated twice daily with corrosive
sublimate solution 1 in 3000, and once daily two eight-grain
iodoform suppositories were passed well inside the internal os.
The fcetor was considerably reduced, but the temperature did not
decline, and three days before the operation it registered 104’4°.
Operation. —The uterus was much too large for removal by
vagina, so I determined on the operation of total extirpation by
the abdomino-vaginal method. Considering the mobility of the
uterus, and the non-involvement of the broad ligaments and
adjacent viscera and tissues, as far as could be verified by pelvic
examination, there was reason to hope that the gravity of the
operation would be justified by the great benefits which could be
expected only from this method. All the preliminary precautions
—thorough disinfection of the parts, &c.—having been attended
to, the patient was placed in the lithotomy position, and the lower
limbs separated by assistants. A Sims’ speculum was passed, the
cervix seized with a Yidsellum, and firmly packed with boracic
gauze. The mucous membrane was now divided along its anterior
and posterior reflections on to the cervix, by means of a scissors,
and pushed up to the extent of about one inch, taking care to keep
close to the cervical tissue, and clear of the ureters. The patient
was now returned to the supine position, and the abdomen
opened by a free incision extending from the umbilicus to within
a finger’s breadth of the pubis. The uterus was seized with a
strong Museux forceps, and drawn strongly out of the abdomen.
The broad ligaments were now severed between two sets of liga-
tures, in a line extending through the infundibulo-pelvic ligament,
with its ovarian vessels, and the round ligament towards the
cervix. An incision was now made across the anterior peritoneal
covering of the uterus, a short distance above the vesico-uterine
fold, and the peritoneum, which was still luckily free of the
disease, carefully detached and turned down. A posterior flap
was treated similarly. The uterine arteries were now easily
secured by picking them up on an aneurism needle, close to the


MALIGNANT UTERUS, WITH APPENDAGES.
LAID OPEN FROM FRONT.


cervix, and outside the reflected 'peritoneum. This latter procedure
I have now adopted in six consecutive hysterectomies, with the
utmost satisfaction to myself, there being no haemorrhage to dim
the field of operation, and no damage to, or inclusion of, the
ureters. The uterus and appendages were now removed, and the
flaps of peritoneum (already referred to) brought together with
fine interrupted silk sutui-es, so that the former site of the broad
ligaments and uterus was represented by a line of peritoneal
union extending across the pelvis, and marked by many sutures
and ligatures. The peritoneal cavity was now carefully washed
out, a glass drainage tube inserted, and the abdominal wound
closed with deep silver and superficial horsehair sutures.
I must here acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr. Martell, Senior
Resident Surgeon, for the notes of after treatment, and also for the
skill and attention with which he watched the progress of the case.
For a fortnight, the patient was treated in the special ward for
abdominal operation cases. At first she was fed by the rectum,
Brand’s essence, yolk of egg, &c., being administered, with
occasional doses of liq. quin. sed. Fluid was drawn from the
tube at frequent intervals ; the urine was drawn off by catheter.
There was very little of note, the temperature ranged up to 10R8°;
the pulse to 116. The discharge became a little offensive, and the
cavity was irrigated with boric acid lotion. On March 12th,
she was removed to the general ward.
From the 7th till 12th, the temperature was normal in the
mornings, and 99‘4° in the evenings.
After her removal to the general ward, the temperature again
began to rise, and on May 15th, it reached 105•2°. Vaginal
examination revealed the fact that the tissues about the orifice
of the urethra was the seat of a new malignant growth, which
was very exuberant, and secreting pus freely. An attempt was
made to remove this, but it proved only partially successful. The
temperature still remained high, and the patient began to get
weaker and present signs of general infection. Recovery was
impossible, and the patient was removed by her friends and taken
back to New South Wales on June 24th. Although the second
outbreak of the disease appeared to be very virulent, the cicatrix
in the roof of the vagina remained perfectly free up till the time
of her discharge —fifty-six days after the operation.
c 2


The practical conclusions to which I desire to invite attention
are—(l) The necessity for an early diagnosis, by the surgeon, of
all malignant developments ; for if such were more frequently
attained, and more promptly acted on, cancers would soon cease to
be what they have long been termed by systematic writers —the
opprobrium of surgery. (2) The benefits that would accrue to
humanity from a pronounced general advocacy of those simple
rules of life, that would prevent the denaturalisation of our women
and lead to prophylaxis. (3) The certainty of diminishing the
prevalence, not only of cancer, but of every other special female
complaint, by aiming at i-emoval of the causes which among us so
impede the sexual organs in the normal discharge of their allotted
functions.
Thus will we accomplish in this department of our profession
the ideal expressed in the proverb —Sublata causa tollitur effectus.
Thus may we hope to stem the advancing tide of invalidism
amongst the fairer half of our community, and show once more
“ how Divine a thing a woman may be made.” The uterus and
appendages were shown.
At the same meeting, Dr. O’Sullivan showed two specimens
of uterine fibro-myoma, successfully removed by hysterectomy ;
one represented the hard multi-nodular, the other the soft
oedematous variety. Concerning these exhibits, he made the
following remarks :
It gives me much pleasure to be able to place before you
two specimens which will exemplify, most clearly, the classi-
fication of “Fibroids,” so happily inaugurated by Lawson Tait
about eight years ago. I shall now shortly contrast the two
varieties.
Soft (Edematous.
1. Solitary. No subsidiary growths
ever appear, and may be easily
enucleated if seen early.
2 Very soft and uniform, often
resembling a pregnant uterus; yields
abundant serum on incision, and
does not bleed.
Hard Multinodular.
1. Multiple, and consists of masses
of all sizes, -which look as if they got
promiscuously entangled in the
uterine tissue. Their enucleation is
difficult and of no avail.
2. Very dense; yields no serum on
incision, but bleeds freely.


3. No respector of age, though
preferring the old. Grows exogenously ,
and is entirely independent of men-
struation.
4. The growth of the tumour is
not affected by the “ climacteric.”
5. Excision of appendages proves
utterly futile. This demonstrating
an exemption from the nerve control
which regulates the periodic uterine
losses.
6. Bai'ely attended with any undue
loss of blood per vaginam.
3. Essentially a disease of men-
struation, and is endogenous in its
growth.
4. It is arrested in growth, and
tends to diminish in bulk after the
menopause (which it may indefinitely
postpone).
5. Its growth, and any attendant
menorrhagia, or metrorrhagia, are
promptly terminated by removal of
appendages, and under the age of 40,
the tumour generally disappears
altogether.
6. Often involves exhausting
haemorrhages.
One of the most brilliant young gynaecologists of our time, Dr.
A. W. Johnstone, after a careful microscopic examination of a soft
oedematous myoma, came to the conclusion that it consisted of
lymphoid tissue, and was practically “ a homologous gi’owth of the
adenoid liningbut he is unsupported in this view.
Lawson Tait, to whose scientific penetration and practical
achievement we owe so much, refers the tumour to the non-
striated muscular fibre of the part, with its special fusiform cells
and rod-shaped nuclei.
It has a distinctive structural peculiarity ; its fibres being
widely separated in all directions, by cavities filled with serum, and
“ mush,” which is nothing more than broken down effete cells.
The multinodular tumour has its fibres closely packed, and is
not honeycombed in structure. These considerations, together
with the fact that the soft oedematous myoma is not amenable to
removal of appendages, nor under the control of the nerve centres,
which regulate the uterine functions, lead me to conclude, having
due regard to the evolution of such diseases, that, if we are not
here dealing with a truly malignant neoplasm, we are, at least, on
the borderland of malignancy. However, be this as it may, there
can be no question of the important and marked practical differ-
ences between this rather uncommon tumour, and the prevalent
simple nodular fibro-myoma of the uterus. It is to be hoped that
Mr. Tait, to whom is due the credit of having elucidated the
pathology of those neoplasms, and of having demonstrated their


many points of difference, will, at no distant date, complete his
achievement by endowing the fatal soft myoma with a distinctive
name—a name not shared by a class of tumour comparatively
harmless.
The operation which I performed in, both those cases, may be
shortly described as supra-vaginal amputation, after the manner of
Schrceder, with ligature of the uterine arteries, and intra-peritoneal
treatment of stump. Both patients are now, after an interval of
ten months, in perfect health.
Discussion.
Dr. Balls-Headley said they were much indebted to Dr.
O’Sullivan for his paper, and for showing the specimens. The
cases spoke for themselves they were excellent, and the
operations were exceedingly well done, and had been successful.
As to the causation of cancer, he did not agree with Dr.
O’Sullivan. He could not agree that it was a neurosis, that
nervous excitability was a cause. Also, if the state of the blood
had anything to do with the development of cancer, you would
expect frequently to meet with cancer in anaemic girls, but in
such cases it practically never occurred. He agreed that patients
found to be suffering from malignant disease had generally been
in bad health previously, but the cancer almost always, if not
always, developed in the site of a former irritation—an old placen-
tal attachment, or a granular os; but look at the crowds of such
cases in which there was no malignancy. He had never yet seen
a case of malignant disease of the cervix uteri where there had
not previously been a granular face, and generally a laceration
also. If due to the excitable condition of the parts, how was it
that malignant growths were not more common on the penis?
In men, cancer was commonly found in the lip and tongue, and
these men generally were smokers, and thus there was a source of
irritation. What the importance of heredity was, it was difficult
to say. He could not think that a depressed condition was of
much importance, but he thought there was a specific development
on an irritated surface. In regard to the infrequency of cancer
amongst savages, in them the raw irritated surface was almost
never seen. In such cases, great care should be taken to see that
the diagnosis was correct. In Hew York, he had seen a leading


European surgeon remove a uterus, which was subsequently
found to contain a small polypus dangling at the inner os. This
had been the cause of all the symptoms ; the patient died two days
afterwards. As regards the fibroids, he thought the symptoms
depended very much on the direction of growth; they also varied
much in size, according to their condition, and this could be
affected by treatment. In certain cases, great relief was obtained
by dilating the cervix and curetting, drainage being thus favoured.
In reference to the effect of removal of the ovaries in large cede-
matous growths, many years ago he operated on such a case, with
Dr. Rowan’s assistance. Now the tumour could scarcely be felt.
Drainage did a great deal for such tumours, and in their
treatment by electricity there was much passing of sounds,
and thus probably drainage was favoured, and so relief was
obtained.
Dr. Gardner asked how the diagnosis of sarcoma had been
arrived at, for he felt sure that he would have mistaken
the case for one of fibroid, with endometritis, owing to the
protruding nodule high up on the posterior wall, and he
concluded that a mistake could only be avoided in such a case
by curetting, and having the debris examined by a competent
pathologist. With regard to the method of operating, viz., the
abdomino-vaginal, he was entirely in accord with the reader of the
paper, for although he had seen a uterus three or four times that
size removed by Pean by the vaginal method, it was performed
for fibroid enlargement, and was done par morcellement, using
specially constructed knives, and cutting away the fibroid till the
uterus was reduced to a shell. The clinical distinction of Lawson
Tait between soft and hard fibroids was in the majority of
instances true. Removal of the ovaries and tubes in the case of
the hard fibroids would lead to an arrest of growth, and
sometimes to the almost complete disappearance of the growth.
Of this, he instanced a case in his own practice, in which no
tumour could be felt nine months after an operation for the
removal of the ovaries and tubes, although at the time of
operation the uterus reached the umbilicus. In regard to the
oedematous variety, removal of ovaides and tubes was of no avail,
as they continued to grow after the menopause, and the choice lay
between palliative treatment and hysterectomy.


Dr. Adam, while congratulating Dr. O’Sullivan on the results
of his cases, thought we were not yet in a position to discuss the
causation of cancer. In regard to the malignant case, the most
interesting point was the diagnosis. Dr. O’Sullivan said he
diagnosed the case from the clinical picture. He thought we
should not forget the value of curetting, followed by microscopic
examination of removed tissue in such cases. Twelve months ago,
he had seen a case that looked very like malignant disease. He
curetted, had the tissue examined; it was found not to be malignant,
and the patient was now perfectly well.
Dr. Rowan did not agree with the positive statement, made on
the authority of Lawson Tait, that removal of the uterine append-
ages was useless in soft cedematous myoma. He could show at
least a dozen such cases, in which removal of the tubes and ovaries
had been perfectly successful. He was doubtful whether removal
of the uterine appendages was of any use after the menopause, but
before the menopause, the operation benefited all cases, and cured
75 per cent.
Mr. G. A. Syme would like to mention one point in connection
with the technique of the operation. That day he had been
reading the account of a discussion on hysterectomy. Baer, an
American surgeon, recommended a free incision into the broad
ligaments, with ligature of the uterine arteries. Ho sutures were
used. He recorded ten cases, all successful.
The President (Professor Allen) said that he was not prepared
to admit any sharp distinction between the two classes of myomata
described by Lawson Tait. Myomata varied greatly in the amount
of fluid contained by them. Some were solid aud tough throughout,
others contained cyst-like spaces, which might be large or small,
numerous or isolated. A large solid tumour with a few such
spaces, even of great size, differed widely from a growth in
which the fasciculi of involuntary muscle were separated by
multitudinous small intervals. Some tumours contained islets
of spongy consistence. Others again were soft and succulent
throughout. But no definite division could be drawn between
the hard and the soft varieties, the dry and the oedematous.
Both the solitary and the multiple tumours might be hard or soft,
tougli or cystic. Comparatively tough myomata contained a large
quantity of fluid. If a tough cystic myoma is cut in half, and one


part kept in spirit, while the other is hung up in the air to dry,
the latter will shrink to a small fraction of its former size. The
two kinds of myoma, hard and soft, both display great variations
in the character of their encapsulation, being in some cases A r ery
sharply defined and easily shelled out, while in other cases they
are more intimately connected with the surrounding tissue. The
soft myoma, that continued to grow when the uterine appendages
were removed, was decidedly rare. Lawson Tait did not quote
many cases, and did not speak too clearly about them. In some
instances, however, the rate of growth and the clinical features
were suggestive of sarcoma, though the structure was purely
myomatous. In conclusion, he congratulated Dr. O’Sullivan on
the splendid surgical results of the cases submitted, and spoke in
high terms of the excellence of the specimens exhibited.
Dr. O’Sullivan, in reply, said he was much pleased that his
paper had given rise to so animated and interesting a discussion.
A practical expression of opinion from a body such as this must
always lead to good results, by directing an intelligent curiosity
to the of a class of diseases that are largely amenable to
prophylaxis. He was sorry that Dr. Balls-Headley had mis-
construed the gist of his remarks. Most leading systematic
writers, amongst whom may be mentioned Herbert Snow, Walshe,
Lobstein, and Sir James Paget, are agreed that depressing
neurotic conditions—-particularly mental distress—strongly pre-
dispose to cancer developments, and considering the directness of
the testimony on this point, it surprised him to find that anybody
should now question the soundness of the doctrine. The state of
the blood hkd not, per se, anything to do with the development of
malignancy. The anmmia referred to by Dr. Balls-Headley was
an inevitable consequence of the depressed nutrition and defective
innervation which naturally followed prolonged mental disquietude,
and the many other depressing neurotic conditions already
referred to as predisposing factors in the genesis of cancer. He
did not say that cancer was in any way directly due to the
excitability of a part, but rather that there was a special liability
to cancer where the cell elements were prone to frequent modi-
fications, and where these variations were under the direct and
intimate control of the nervous system, as in the uterus. Here,
constant irritation and devitalising influences of any sort will


work most evil. He quite agreed, that the greatest care
must he exercised in order to ensure a correct diagnosis.
He would admit the difficulty, in rare instances, of drawing
the line between malignancy and benignancy; but he asserted
that, in those exceptional cases of uterine cancer involving
doubt, it would be infinitely better that the surgeon should ;
having taken all the necessary precautions, and availed himself of
all the means at his disposal to arrive at an accurate decision :
err, by performing the major operation promptly, rather than that
a woman should, by indecision and bungling delay, be sacrificed
to the inevitable general infection of malignancy. Mistaking
malignant for non-malignant tumours is constantly occurring in
every department of surgery, and we cannot expect to be free
from it. He did not deal with the question of heredity of cancer,
as it could not possibly be looked on as a vera causa. It relates
entirely to the transmission, and has nothing to do with the first
appearance of the disease. With regard to treatment of “ fibroids ”
by dilating and curetting, he could not agree that any relief was
obtained therefrom. He contended that such measures aggravated
the evil by causing irritation, increased blood supply, and more
rapid growth. “Uterine tinkering” with astringents, electrical
currents, curretting, and such minor palliative measures, could
not be too strongly condemned. All these systems are annoying
and expensive to a patient, far more dangerous than a radical
operation, and never attended with permanent results. With
regard to the statement of Dr. Rowan, that he found removal of
appendages perfectly successful in soft cedematous myoma, such
was not the experience of the advanced school of gynaecologists of
the present day. He (Dr. O’Sullivan) could not help thinking
that Dr. Rowan mistook the hard nodular tumour, undergoing
some degenerative change, as it frequently does, for the soft
cedematous growth of pathology. (Edema is a frequent cause of
such softening in those tumours, and they are often the seat of
fatty, amyloid, myxomatous, cystic, and other degenerations; but
this condition of things must not be mistaken for the soft special
variety of tumour referred to, which is only amenable to
enucleation or hysterectomy. In reply to Dr. Adam, he would
say that his patient had already been curetted twice by a
leading surgeon in the country, her cervix was open, and the


endometrium easily accessible to examination. He would con-
clude by saying, in reply to Professor Allen, that not only were
the naked eye and microscopic appearances of the soft oedematous
and hard multinodular tumours different, but their pathological
and clinical characters were totally distinct.
CASES.
MULTIPLE FIBRO-MYOMA OF UTERUS-
HYSTERECTOMY—CURE.
[Read before the Victorian Branch of the British Medical Association.]
Before going into the details of this case, I will venture to
trespass a little on your patience, by touching, lightly, on the
scientific terms involved ; and I would fain invite your discussion
of a few interesting points, in the direction of etiology and pro-
phylaxis.
The pathological nomenclature, and classification, of non-
malignant tumours of the uterus are still, generally speaking, as
erroneous and confusing as they can be, notwithstanding the
efforts of recent histologists to expose past fallacies. The familiar
terms fibroma and myoma, as applied to uterine tumours, are
objectionable, because they do not convey to the mind an accurate
and comprehensive idea of the neoplastic growths to which they
are applied; because they do not indicate their common and
pathological significance. The term fibroid, or fibre-like, is only
applicable to a tumour composed entirely of fibrous tissue, and
always situated in connective tissue; but the so-called uterine
fibroid contains a variable quantity of muscular, as well as fibrous
tissue, both of which are derived from the parenchyma of the
uterine wall in which the tumour grows.


Virchow proposed that these tumours should be called myomata,
because of the presence of muscular tissue; but it is self-evident,
that this is as objectionable as the term fibroma. Both terms
should be discontinued, and I look on it as the duty of every member
of the profession to assist in blotting out such inaccuracies, and
thereby to promote a most desirable reform. While admitting the
difficulty of assigning to tumours their exact place in a purely
histological classification, and while recognising the great vardety
of cell elements, and the equally great variety in the distribution
and arrangements of those elements found in uterine tumours,
pathologists now agree that the term fibro-myoma, or myo-fibroma,
is the only one that fully designates those solid growths. The
same strictures will apply to the ordinary classification of such
growths. The terms sub-mucous, interstitial, and sub-peritoneal,
are, as a means of accurate differentiation, embarrassing and
worthless. We generally find that the multiple fibro-myoma—the
multinodular tumour of Lawson Tait—is all three, as in the
specimen which I have the pleasure of placing before you this
evening ; it is at once sub-mucous, interstitial, and sub-peritoneal,
it consists of dense nodular masses, almost cartilaginous, of
different sizes, which seem to be intimately entangled in the stroma
of the uterine tissue. This condition would appear to be a disease
of the “ fundus,” as there are few, if any, authenticated cases of
fibro-myoma affecting the cervix. Sections treated with dilute
acetic acid, and carefully stained with nitrate of silver, displayed
very clearly the characteristic rod-shaped nuclei.
May I briefly call your attention to some striking phenomena,
which I have often thought show a strong analogy to cancer
development, and would seem, like it, to be an heritage of civilised
life.
The uterus, like the breast, may be distinguished pathologically
from almost all other organs of the body by its remarkable
proneness to what may be called trophic tumour formations, or
disturbances of nutrition. The fibro-myoma of the middle-aged
woman, and the mammary fibroma of adolescence, consist histo-
logically of redundant normal tissue, and are more or less apt to
disappear spontaneously—a characteristic unknown in the case of
any other tumour.


Permanently benign, perhaps in most instances, each seems to
be but the product of overgrowth—a local perversion of natural
development. One of the greatest gynaecologists of our time has
quoted in the introduction to his work a pithy and expressive
French aphorism, “La femme est une malade .” Is this the natural
condition of our kind, and what are the reasons for this
melancholy assertion 1 ? Very little investigation is required to
show that this is not woman’s normal state, and that the phrase
can be applied to her only when she is placed amongst the
artificial and enervating surroundings of modern civilisation.
Amongst savage races, so far as we can ascertain, organic
disease was rare, the majority of their complaints ranking as
zymotic. Lawson Tait says, “ The proof that such diseases are
spreading is given by the fact that fibro-myoma, unknown among
the savage women of Africa, has become a very §courge among
their descendants of the Southern States, whose habits of living
have been somewhat assimilated to those of Europeans.”
Snow says:—“ There is reason to believe that uterine myoma
was extremely rare in the Middle Ages ; and of the existence of
mammary fibroma in the young savage woman, I have been
unable, after diligent search, to find any evidence at all. From
long continued observation, I feel amply warranted in assuming,
that uterine fibro-myoma and mammary fibroma of adolescence
are, like carcinoma, of which the female sexual organs form the
special realm, to all intents and purposes products of a civilised
state.”
History. —C. D., set. 37, native of Ireland, first came to
Australia fourteen years ago. The early history of menstruation
is uncertain, but up till the age of 28 years, when she married,
the patient enjoyed good health, and her menstruation was fairly
normal. For four years prior to marriage she had been
employed as a laundress, and had, necessarily, a good deal of
heavy work to do. Soon after marriage, nine years ago, she com-
plained of pain in the left side of lower abdomen. This pain
increased, and gradually extended into the right side. Abdominal
pain has been almost continuous during the past nine years, but
it has varied in character and intensity, being at first acute, and
latterly dull and aching. The patient has never been pregnant;
menstruation has been quite regular, at intervals of four weeks.


The flow has lasted from three to six days ; the quantity has been
rather profuse, and has always been attended with great pain.
Her family history is not particularly interesting. Both parents
lived to more than seventy years. One brother died of cancel'.
She has three married sisters, each of whom has had a family.
The patient herself had typhoid in the Melbourne Hospital two
and a half years ago, when, for the first time, an abdominal
tumour was discovered. At that time it was very small, and the
growth was for eighteen months after very slow. During the
past year, however, it has increased very rapidly. Together with
the increase in size, there has been much more pain, and micturi-
tion has frequently been painful and difficult. At first, the
tumour was apparently confined to the left side, the swelling on
the right side having attracted attention only five or six months
ago.
The patient was admitted to the Women’s Hospital on March
7, 1892. She was strong, and appeared to be in good health. On
examination, her chief organs —heart, lungs, kidneys, &c.—were
found to be normal. The abdomen was distended with a hard
solid tumour, which occupied its lower part, and was particularly
prominent in the left side. The tumour presented numerous hard
bosses, and was somewhat tender on manipulation. On vaginal
examination, almost the whole of the pelvis was occupied by the
hard mass, which was, without much difficulty, diagnosed as con-
sisting of multiple uterine fibro-myomata. The cavity of the
uterus measured about one and a half inches. After consultation
with the other members of the honorary staff, it was decided to
remove the tumour. The patient was kept in bed up to the time
of operation, on March 24th. She was kept on slop diet during
this time, and the functions of the bowels and kidneys were
carefully regulated.
The operation which I performed in this case may be shortly
summarised as supra-vaginal amputation, with ligature of uterine
arteries and intra-peritoneal treatment of the stump (Schroeder).
I opened the abdominal cavity by a free incision, extend-
ing from above the pubis to an inch and a half above the
umbilicus, excising the umbilical tissues. Having turned
out the tumour, I severed the appendages by doubly ligat-
ing the infundibulo-pelvic ligament with its ovarian vessels,


CORONAL SECTION OF TUMOUR AND UTERUS


and the round ligament in several pieces, and dividing them
between those two sets of ligatures ; so the uterus and tumour
were separated from their lateral connections without haemorrhage.
I now found it necessary to enucleate part of the tumour from the
cellular tissue, between the folds of the broad ligament on the left
side—a proceeding not unattended with difficulty—and afterwards
passed a temporary elastic ligature around its base. Then
an incision was made across the anterior peritoneal covering
of the uterus, a short distance above the vesico-uterine fold,
and a flap of peritoneum detached and turned down. A
posterior flap was treated similarly, and the. peritoneum covering
the cervix laterally was easily separated for about half an inch on
either side. I now secured the uterine arteries by picking them
up on an aneurism needle, passed close to the cervix and outside
the reflected 'peritoneum. In this manoeuvre, we have to deal with
the most important point in the performance of hysterectomy—
the avoidance of damage to, or inclusion of, the ureters. The
uterus and tumour were now cut away, about on a level with the
inner os, and the temporary elastic ligature removed. The stump
was dressed by removing a wedge-shaped fragment from upper
aspect of cervix. The cervical canal was disinfected with a
strong solution of carbolic acid, and the cut surfaces brought
together with a deep continuous catgut suture. The flaps of
peritoneum (already mentioned) were now brought together over
the stump with fine inteiTupted silk sutures. Breaches in the
peritoneum at either side were united, so that the former site of
the broad ligaments and uterus had a covering of peritoneum, and
was represented by a line of union passing across the pelvis, and
marked only by many sutures and ligatures. The pelvic cavity
was now carefully cleansed, a glass drainage tube inserted, and
the abdominal wound closed with deep silver and superficial horse-
hair sutures.
I must express my indebtedness to the Senior Resident
Surgeon, Dr. Martell, for the following notes of the after-treat-
ment,-as also for the attention and skill with which he watched
the case.
The points which I wish, more particularly, to emphasise are :
(1) The free abdominal incision, and excision of umbilical tissues.
There still seems a disposition to manipulate through a small


wound, thereby increasing, very materially, the risks of abdominal
surgery. When it is found necessary to extend the incision
through the umbilical tissues, their excision will give a much firmer
wound, and less liability to subsequent hernia. (2) Multiple
ligature of the broad ligaments, thereby preventing dragging on
the tissues, and the pain incidental thereto, tfcc. (3) Intra-
peritoneal treatment of the pedicle. This procedure may be now
said to have superseded the extra-peritoneal method altogether.
It is admittedly the more rational and scientific operation of the
two, the chief difficulty of its early history—haemorrhage—being
obviated, by securing the arteries and veins of the normal uterus.
(4) Ligature of the uterine and ovarian arteries. This is a point
of some importance in anaemic subjects, as patients suffering from
tumours generally are, and it absolutely removes all danger of our
quondam enemy—haemorrhage—either immediate or secondary.
In conclusion, I may be allowed to venture the opinion that,
in all cases where the tumour cannot be removed without the
uterus, the operation of the future will be extirpation of the
whole organ, thereby avoiding any tinkering with pedicle.
After-Treatment. —Patient was removed from the operating
room to the special ward at 5.40 p.m. At 7 p.m.—The tem-
peratui'e was 99-6°; pulse, 80 ; respirations, 25. She seemed to
be in a good deal of pain, and 2 oz. of bright red fluid were
drawn from the drainage tube, At 8 p.m.—One oz. of fluid was
drawn from the tube, and a zyminised meat suppository given.
At 9 p.m.—Two drs. of fluid were drawn from the tube. At
11 p.m.—Catheter was passed, and 5 oz. of urine drawn. At
12 p.m.—Was much troubled with hiccough, and a nutrient
enema of peptonised milk, with | oz. of brandy was administered ;
fluid drawn from tube, 1 dr., still bright red ; temperature, 100°;
pulse, 120 ; respirations, 37.
March 25 -—-At 6 a.m.—Has only dozed for a few minutes
during the night; had a good deal of pain, and is complaining
greatly of thirst. Was given warm water, 1 dr., with 10 drops
of brandy, every half hour. Catheter was passed, urine 8 oz. ;
fluid from tube, 1 dr., lighter in colour. Passed flatus through
rectal tube. Hiccough very troublesome. Temperature, 99‘2°;
pulse, 110; respirations, 34. At 12 noon. —Zyminised supposi-
tory given. Catheter passed, urine 10 oz. ; fluid drawn from tube


2 drs., clearer, with small clots. A little ice given to suck
occasionally. Mustard leaf applied to epigastrium. Hiccough
much better. Brand’s essence, 1 dr., with soda water and pep-
tonised milk, 1 oz., every two hours, was given by mouth.
Vomited twice during the morning. Temperature at noon, 99'6°;
pulse, 94; respirations, 30. At 6 p.m.—Temperature, 100'4°;
respirations, 35; pulse, 100. At 12 p.m.—Temperature, 98 , 6°;
respirations, 28; pulse, 90.
March 26.—Morning.—Temperature, 99.6°; respirations, 34;
pulse, 100. Evening.—Temperature, 101 *2°; respirations, 34;
pulse, 100. Was fed regularly by rectum, and occasionally by
the mouth. Bowels washed out twice. Remains of food very
offensive. Has suffered a good deal of pain, due to flatus; much
relieved on passage of rectal tube. Fluid drawn from the tube
three times during the day, rather more in quantity than
yesterday.
March 27. —At 6 a.m.—Temperature, 98*2°; pulse, 80. At
6 p.m.—Temperature, 98'6 0 ; pulse, 104. Castor oil given this
morning. Bowels not open at 4 p.m. Pil. col. et hyos. given.
March 28.—Morning.—Temperature, 99.° Evening.—Tem-
perature, 100‘4.° Bowels opened. Feels well. Is taking
nourishment freely.
March 29.—Morning.—Temperature, 99-4.° Evening.—Tem-
perature, 100 , 4.° Six wire and six horsehair sutures removed
to-day. Wound is looking well.
March 30.—Two more silver wire sutures removed. Cavity
washed out and wound dressed twice daily.
March 31.—Last six horsehair and four silver sutures removed.
Glass tube removed and india-rubber one substituted.
April I.—ls taking light solid food—tripe, bread and butter, &c.
April 2.—Passed a little pus in motion to-day. Ordered hot
vaginal douche twice daily.
April s.—Large rubber tube removed and small one inserted.
Aperture filling up rapidly.
Patient was removed to the general ward on April 7. From
March 29 till time of removal, the temperature varied between
normal and 101 ’B°. It reached its maximum on two occasions,
viz., the evenings of April 1 and 2, just before the pus was
D


detected in the stool. She got up on April 23, and was
discharged from the hospital on May 3. During the latter part
of her stay in the hospital, she was greatly troubled with
constipation, and it was necessary to administer an aperient
(cascara) almost daily. At the time of her discharge she was
quite well. Complained only of occasional slight pain.
Discussion.
Dr. Springthorpe said that there was no question as to the
exceedingly interesting nature of the case, because it repre-
sented a very successful operation. He regretted more gynae-
cologists were not present to discuss it.
Mr. Syme could not discuss the paper as a gynaecologist, but the
pathological questions raised were of interest. With reference to
the classification of uterine fibro-myomata into three forms, the
fact seemed to be that they were primarily interstitial, and then
grew to the mucous or peritoneal surfaces, or to both —it was an
arbitrary classification, but perhaps, not without use in regard to
treatment; sub-mucous and sub-peritoneal growths might often
be enucleated, but in interstitial growths, hysterectomy must
be performed. He thought, however, it must be very difficult
in diagnosis to exclude the existence of interstitial growths.
The operative procedures for such cases, and the opinions
regarding them, are numerous. Should the whole uterus be
removed, or should it be amputated above the cervix, as in
the present case ? Then, should the stump be treated by
the extra- or intra-peritoneal method 1 He congratulated Dr.
O’Sullivan heartily on his methods and results. Most scientific
surgeons hold that the intra-peritoneal treatment of the stump
is the ideal method, and Dr. O’Sullivan, in this case, added
another instance to show that it might be so treated without risk
and with advantage. The stripping of the peritoneum, so as to
ligature the uterine arteries extra-peritoneally, and avoid the
danger (which was very great) of including the ureters in the
ligature, was very commendable. This form of disease was
undoubtedly increasing, and it did appear to be an attribute of
advancing civilization. So also did carcinoma, but there could
hardly be much analogy between such different diseases. He con-
gratulated Dr. O’Sullivan on the manner in which he had brought


forward good matter for discussion, in amplification of the mere
record of cases.
Dr. McAdam thought Dr. O’Sullivan was to be congratulated
on a triumph in surgery. Dr. O’Sullivan struck the true note
when he said it was necessary to discuss the factors that cause
these diseases. He did not profess to know them, but would like
to hear Dr. O’Sullivan’s views, as prophylaxis was our ideal.
How did it happen in many cases of uterine fibro-myomata, that
the symptoms were latent, even though the growths were of large
size? In reading a paper by Sir James Simpson, he noted the
finding of a specimen 14 lbs. in weight, which was only discovered
post-mortem. Thei-e were no symptoms during life, save enlarge-
ment of the lower abdomen. Why was pain present in some of
these cases and not in others? There were other methods of
treatment sometimes used before resort was had to the drastic
method of operation. He might instance the hypodermic use of
ergotinin, and Apostoli’s treatment. What was Dr. O’Sullivan’s
opinion of these methods?
Dr. Nihill thanked Dr. O’Sullivan for his reports of this and
previous cases. The malignant one was singular, in that such a
condition should occur in so young a subject. He thought the
records of this case should be published far and wide, so as to
show the necessity for a thorough physical examination in the
initial stages of such affections, with a view to prompt and
effective treatment.
Dr. O’Sullivan, in replying, said that there was no department
of surgery in which there was a larger field for the exercise of a
sound judgment, than in female surgery. There was now no doubt
as to the superiority of the intra-peritoneal method of treating
the stump. The extra-peritoneal method was fast becoming
obsolete, all reliable statistics were against it, and it was irrational
in itself, because by its use there must be a drag on all the
tissues, a danger of secondary haemorrhage, a large sloughing
mass in the wound, an encroachment upon the capacity of the
bladder, a prolonged convalescence, and it created a potential
bowel trap, to menace the patient’s future health and existence.
In the intra-peritoneal method there was a simple line of perito
neal wound, and the abdominal wound could be completely closed.
It was always advisable to take the precaution of first tying the
d 2


uterine and ovarian arteries. The field of operation was not
then obscured by haemorrhage, and everything was easily seen.
The ureters were commonly about half an inch outside the cervix,
but in these cases the true anatomical relations were often much
disturbed, and there was great fear and danger of their inclusion
in the ligature, the case thereby being rendered hopeless. The
non-malignant forms were functional disturbances in the beginning,
and did not assume a pathological aspect until later on. Tait said
they commenced as vascular disturbances, and thence resulted
hypertrophies and developments. It would not be fair to ask him
to decide on the merits of Apostoli’s treatment, when such men
as Lawson Tait and Keith were at loggerheads over it. Tait had
gone so far as to say, that his consulting rooms were flooded by
the failures of Keith in using this method. He might summarise
the chief points in hysterectomy as follows : —(1) The propriety
of tying the uterine and ovarian arteries first, and the necessity
for avoiding the ureters. (2) A free abdominal incision—a small
wound was a fallacy. Treves said a free incision was better than a
small wound with contused edges. He excised the umbilical tissues.
He always had union by first intention within two or three days.
SOFT (EDEMATOUS MYOMA OF UTERUS-
HYSTERECTOMY.
M. McM., set. 47 years, servant, single, was admitted into the
Women’s Hospital. She was very thin and weak, and appeared
to be not altogether sane. No very reliable history could be
obtained from her previous to operation, but subsequently her
mental condition had so much improved, that she was able to give
a perfectly reliable account of herself. She was born in Ireland,
and first menstruated at sixteen years of age, soon after her
arrival in this colony. She has always been quite regular, at
intervals of three to four weeks, and until recently has had no
pain. The loss, which was at first scanty, had very much increased
during the past three years, and latterly was very great indeed,


the flow lasting usually for eight to ten days, and during the first
three days of each period always amounting to a 11 flooding.”
On admission, she complained of great weakness, and a sense
of great weight in the abdomen. She had noticed a gradually
increasing swelling of the abdomen during the past six years, but
this she attributed to “ wind.” Fifteen months ago, she was for
three weeks in the hospital, when her case was considered one
not suitable for operation. Three months ago, she was an
in-patient of the Melbourne Hospital, where she was treated for
“ swelling of the legs.”
On examination, the heart, lungs, and kidneys were found to
be fairly healthy; the abdomen was very greatly distended with
an apparently solid tumour, which was freely movable, and
extended from the pubes to about two inches below the ensiform
cartilage. On vaginal examination, the tumour was found to
occupy almost the whole of the pelvis, and was particularly
prominent in front. The cervix was dragged up under the pubic
arch ; the sound passed eight and a half inches directly back-
wards. It was decided to perform abdominal hysterectomy.
The operation performed here was exactly the same as the last.
The tumour, which weighed seventeen pounds, was removed (with
the uterus) by supra-vaginal amputation, and the stump treated
intra-peritoneally.
Patient removed to special ward 5.40 p.m. 6 p.m. —J x hot
water injected into rectum. 6.30 p.m.—Fluid drawn off from
tube 3 vi, dark red in colour. Temperature 99°, pulse 90, respira-
tions 28. 7.30 p.m.—Fluid from tube jj. 8 p.m.—Catheter
passed urine j iij. Zyminised suppository given. Fluid from
tube jss., bright red. 11 p.m.—Nutrient enema of peptonised
milk and brandy given. Fluid from tube less, and paler in color.
12 midnight. —Catheter passed urine J vij. Fluid from tube 3iij.
July 22.—3 a.m.—Zyminised suppository given. Patient is
very restless. 4 a.m. —Catheter passed urine | xij. Fluid from
tube 3 ij. Has been dozing frequently for a few minutes, at other
times has been very restless. 6 a.m. —Fluid from tube 3 ij.
Temperature 100‘6°, pulse 104, respirations 22. 7 a.m.—Rectal
tube passed, good deal of flatus ; injected two pints of warm
water into the bowel, which was in part retained. 8 a.m.—
Catheter passed urine Jv. Fluid has been drawn from tube


every two Lours, it is getting less each time, and is lighter in color.
Is being fed by rectum every three hours. 12 noon.—Urine Jv.
Temperature 99*8°, pulse 106. 6 p.m.—Fluid from tube much
less, urine j vi. Temperature 99 , 2°, pulse 108.
July 23. —6 a.m.—Slept between four and five hours. Has
had peptonised milk by the mouth (Jss.) every hour. Urine Jxv
during last twelve hours. 9.3o.—Passed urine and flatus natur-
ally, enemata discontinued. Taking milk and soup by mouth.
Temperature 100'2°, pulse 108. 6 p.m.—Temperature 100’8°,
pulse 102.
July 24. Temperature—morning 99‘6 0 , evening 100'2 o .
Patient was very restless and excitable during the night, and
refused to take any food. Was fed again by the bowel. A
sedative draught (chloral hydrat. gr. xx, potass, bromid. gr. xx)
given this morning. Patient was much quieter during the day.
Bromid. and chloral repeated in the evening.
July 25.—Slept about six hours, and has taken noui-ishment
again by the mouth. Temperature—morning 99°, evening 99'6°.
July 26.—Has been very restless and discontented all night.
Bowels moved after aperient. Wound dressed; two silver
sutures and nine horsehair sutures removed. Glass tube removed
and a rubber one inserted. One suture has broken, and has
disappeared into the abdominal wall. Temperature—morning
98-6°, evening 99 , 8°.
July 27. —Slept between five and six hours. Seems very strange
this morning. Has numerous delusions, and has attempted to
assault the nurse. Wound dressed. One suture removed; the
broken one is still missing. Temperature—morning 99°, evening
101 -6°. Bromide and chloral draught given at 11 a.m. and 7 p.m.
July 28.—Slept about seven hours. Still has delusions.
Bromide and chloral given by rectum, and pil hyoscine by mouth.
Four silver sutures removed. Temperature—morning 100’4°,
evening 100'6 o .
July 29.—Slept well, only waking occasionally for a drink.
Wound dressed; last four sutures removed. Is taking food well.
Temperature 100° and 100'4°.
July 31.—1 s much quieter, has no delusions, but is still a little
queer. Removed to general ward. Temperature—morning 99’2°,
evening 99'4°.


After removal to the general ward, patient did fairly well for
three days, when temperature rose to 102°. This was due to the
formation of an abscess just under the abdominal wall. Abscess
discharged freely on August 6, and temperature became normal.
The rubber tube was removed on August 14. Patient got up on
August 19, and was discharged from the hospital August 31. She
has very much improved, both mentally and bodily, and is quite
free from pain and discomfort.
PAPILLOMATOUS CYST OP EIGHT BROAD LIGA-
MENT, NECESSITATING HYSTERECTOMY.
M. E., aged 38 years, married, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Patient complained of a swelling of the abdomen,
which interfered very greatly with respiration and locomotion.
She stated that she was quite well up till eighteen months before
admission, when she first felt a dragging pain in the right side.
Nine months later, she noticed a swelling in the right side of the
lower abdomen ; this swelling increased in size very rapidly, and
caused great dyspnoea, and interference with ordinary household
duties. Patient was married twenty-one years ago, and has one
child 20 years of age. Her catamenia were regular every four
weeks, lasted seven days, and were extremely painful and profuse.
On examination, patient presented an unhealthy appearance ;
the abdomen was greatly distended, and occupied by a large
tumour. There was marked dulness in front, and resonance in
both flanks. The tumour was very tense and cystic in nature. On
vaginal examination, there was a distinct wave on double palpation,
the cervix uteri was drawn upwards behind the symphysis pubis,
and the fundus uteri was retroflexed.
After consultation with the other members of the staff, I
decided to attempt removal of the tumour by abdominal section.
The patient was prepared for operation in the usual manner, and


anaesthetised. I made the usual median incision about three
inches in length, and at once came down upon the tumour. It
proved to be a papillomatous cyst of the right broad ligament*
and had insinuated itself between the layers of that structure in
such a manner as to lift the whole of the peritoneum from the
posterior surface of the uterus. By aspiration, eleven pints of
fluid were drawn off". On account of the relation of the tumour
to the posterior surface of the uterus, it was quite impossible to
remove the sac alone, I determined therefore to perform hysterec-
tomy. After enlarging the abdominal incision, I ligatured the
sac about an inch and a half from the uterus, and to get as much
room as possible, removed the portion above the ligature. I then
ligatured in sections the broad ligament on both sides, being
careful to include in the last ligature of each side its corresponding
uterine artery. I then placed an elastic tourniquet around the
cervix, just below the level of the internal os. After stripping
down the peritoneum from the anterior aspect of the lower portion
of the fundus uteri, I removed the uterus at the level of the
internal os. A wedge-shaped piece of the cervix was then
removed, and the cervical canal rendered aseptic by means of
pure carbolic acid, applied on cotton wool on a Playfair’s probe.
The upper surfaces of the cervix were then brought together with
three rows of sutures. With the last row of which I was careful
to adapt the flap of peritoneum as accurately as possible over the
upper portion of what remained of the cervix. After removal
of the tourniquet, there was no haemorrhage. I inserted a glass
drainage tube, and closed the abdominal wound in the usual
manner.
After the operation, the patient appeared to be fairly well. At
the end of the first twelve hours, the temperature was 100‘8%
pulse 88, respirations 26. During the first fifteen days, the
temperature ranged between 100° and 102'8°. The sutures were
removed nine days after operation, the abdominal wound having
healed by first intention, except at the angle where the glass tube
was inserted. After the first two weeks, as the temperature did
not fall much below 100°, quinine in 5-grain doses every four
hours was given. Under this treatment the temperature fell to
99°, and continued at that for some days, when it became normal.
Patient, however, made little or no progress; her urine had all


along been of low specific gravity, and had contained traces of
albumen. U nfortunately, symptoms of uraemia gradually devel-
oped, and patient eventually succumbed to chronic Bright’s
disease exactly three months after operation. A post-mortem
examination by the honorary pathologist revealed two very atrophic
cirrhotic kidneys—one (the left) being only about the size of an
ordinary walnut.
HARD MULTI-NODULAR FIBRO-MYOMA OF
UTERUS—HYSTERECTOMY.
Mrs. H., set. 37, married, was admitted to St. Vincent’s
Hospital (private ward). She complained of severe abdominal
and lumbar pains, frequency of micturition, tenesmus, and marked
general debility. Menstruation was very profuse, lasting about
ten days, and all her symptoms became more prominent at this
time. On bimanual palpation, I found a large nodular uneven
tumour filling the pelvis, and extending upwards above the
umbilicus; a hard bos projecting downwards into Douglas’ space,
and displacing the uterus towards the pubis. The sound passed
six inches. There was no doubt as to diagnosis.
After due attention had been given to the patient’s general
condition, more particularly her bowel and kidney functions, I
performed supra-vaginal hysterectomy, according to Schroeder’s
method, with extirpation of the adnexa. I opened the abdomen
quickly through the linea alba, by a free incision extending from
above the umbilicus to within an inch of the pubis, paying no
attention to bleeding points. The tumour was now firmly grasped
with a large prehension forceps, and carefully drawn through the
abdominal wound. The broad ligaments were now divided
between two sets of ligatures, on a line extending through the
infundibulo-pelvic, and round ligaments, towards the internal os.
The uterus with adnexse and tumour being not quite free from
their surrounding attachments, and the connections of the bladder
with the tumour having been determined with a sound, I applied


the temporary elastic clamp. The remainder of the operation was
substantially the same as I have already described in previous
cases. A Keith’s drainage tube was inserted. The patient was
treated in the usual way. Nutrient enemata for two days at
intervals of five or six hours, allowing only small sips of toast-
water by mouth.
At end of second day, gave my usual alterative doses of calomel,
gr. j hourly, for six consecutive hours, followed by 3 j doses of mag.
sulph. every two hours, until bowels were freely evacuated. The
patient’s temperature never exceeded 100°.
The drainage tube was removed on the third, and the abdominal
sutures on the eighth day.
The patient left the hospital four weeks after the operation in
perfect health.
HYDATID OF LIVER—HEPATOTOMY.
K. D., aged 24 years, married, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Patient stated that she had enjoyed excellent health
up till eighteen months before admission, when she noticed a
swelling in the right side, just below the ribs.
On admission, she complained of pain and tenderness in the
right hepatic region. The pain was of a dragging and aching
character, and was worse when walking and during exercise.
On examination, the abdomen was normal in appearance, except
in the right hepatic region, where it was somewhat distended. On
deep palpation in this region, which was abnormally dull on
percussion, an indistinct sense of fluctuation could be felt. As
patient came from the northern part of Victoria, where domestic
animals frequently have access to the drinking water, the presence
of a hydatid cyst was suspected. An exploratory puncture with
a fine aspirating needle confirmed this opinion, and I decided to
treat the cyst by incision and drainage.
I made a free incision through the abdominal wall, over the
site of the tumour. The incision was about three and a half


inches in length, and extended obliquely downwards and outwards
along the margins of the eighth and ninth ribs on the right side.
The anterior portion of the cyst was situated deeply in the liver
tissue, and the posterior portion of the cyst, which bulged from
the under surface of the right lobe of the liver, was situated too
far back to allow of its being brought to the abdominal wound.
I therefore, after placing two large flat sponges under the abdomi-
nal wall, incised the liver, and came down on to the sac. There
was some free bleeding from the liver, but it was easily controlled
by hot sponges pressed into the wound. I then made a free
incision into the sac, and discharged its contents through the
abdominal wound. The edges of the sac were then drawn up
and sutured with catgut to the margins of the abdominal wound,
the flat sponges having been previously removed. A large
drainage tube was inserted, and the wound dressed with boric
acid. During the operation, nothing was allowed to escape into
the abdominal cavity.
For the next twenty-four hours, patient suffered a good deal of
pain, and her temperature rose to 101°. On the second day the
rash, so frequently seen after puncture of hydatid cysts, appeared
over almost the whole of the body. The temperature continued
high (about 101°) for a day or two, but there was no peritonitis,
except a little localised about the edges of the wound. On the
morning of the second day, the dressings were soaked with bile-
stained fluid, which was apparently due to the fact that, in
incising the liver substance, a good sized bile duct had been cut
through. This discharge of bile continued for about ten weeks,
and although very large quantities passed through the abdominal
wound daily, the stools were always natural in appearance, and
the patient’s general health was excellent. The sac cavity was
daily irrigated with weak solutions of tincture of iodine, and in
order to lessen the escape of bile, was continually plugged with
iodoform gauze. The cavity gradually granulated up, and the
discharge of bile only ceased on closure of the abdominal wound.
Patient was discharged from the hospital on July 16, and six
months after operation, was reported to be in excellent health.


HARD MULTINODULAR FIBRO-MYOMA OF UTERUS
—SALPINGO-OOPHORECTOMY.
K. 8., aged 32 years, married, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Patient stated that she was quite well up till four
years before admission, when she had a severe flooding. At each
menstrual period she has lost a very great deal, and has suffered
almost intolerable pain. About two years before admission, she
began to feel a nasty dragging pain in the lower part of the
abdomen, and this has continued up till the present.
On admission, she was very weak and anmmic. She complained
of great pain and tenderness in the left iliac region. On examina-
tion, the abdomen was fairly resonant in both flanks, but somewhat
duller than normal in the hypogastric region. On vaginal
examination, the uterus was felt to be distinctly enlarged,
especially towards the left side; it was also very tender. The
sound passed three and a half inches, and its passage caused some
little haemorrhage. The case was evidently one of uterine fibroid,
and I determined to remove the uterine appendages.
The operation was perfoi’ined on November 16. The patient
had a rapid convalescence, and left the hospital quite well on
December 28. With the exception of a little metrostaxis on the
third day after operation, there has been no loss of blood from the
uterus. The patient has reported herself twice since operation,
and with the exception of a few slight nervous symptoms, due to
her induced menopause, is enjoying excellent health. The tumour
was found, on her last visit, to have entirely disappeared.
PAR-OVARIAN CYST—ABDOMINAL SECTION.
Mrs. K., set. 36 years, was admitted to the private hospital on
January 9, 1893. She had been under treatment in the country
for a considerable time. On her first visit to my consulting room,
she complained of a dull aching pain, and a feeling of weight in
the lower part of the abdomen. This had been gradually getting
worse for some time, and was most severe after walking or other
exercise. Except for the pain and sense of weight in the abdomen,


she has been in fairly good health. She has had five children, the
last four years ago. Menstruation has been regular, but painful
and scanty.
On examination, a fluctuating tumour, fairly movable, could be
felt in the region of the right broad ligament. The uterus and
the left appendages were apparently healthy. The tumour was
evidently an ovarian of the right ovary, or a par-ovarian cyst of
the right broad ligament, and I decided on its early removal.
After her admission to the private hospital, she was kept in bed,
and the bowel and kidney functions regulated for a week.
On January 16, I performed abdominal section. On opening
the abdominal cavity, the tumour, which was about the size of an
emu’s egg, pi’oved to be a thin-walled par-ovarian cyst of the right
broad ligament. It was tapped with a small trocar, about a pint
of greenish fluid being obtained. After ligation of the pedicle
with the ordinary interlocking ligature, I removed the cyst. The
left appendages appeared to be quite healthy, and were not removed.
The abdominal wound was closed with silkworm-gut sutures, and
no drain tube was inserted. The sutures were removed twelve
days after operation, and patient, who made an uninterrupted
recovery, left the hospital on February 20, five weeks after
operation. She has since enjoyed excellent health.
MULTILOCULAR OVARIAN CYST—OVARIOTOMY.
Miss M., set. 18 years, first consulted me early in February.
She complained of great swelling of the abdomen, which had
lately been rapidly inci’easing, and causing her a good deal of pain
and discomfort.
On examination, the abdomen was found to be very consider-
ably distended ; it was dull on percussion in the mid-line, from
the pubes to the ensiform cartilage, and was distinctly resonant
in the flanks. An indistinct sense of fluctuation could be felt on
palpation. On vaginal examination, the whole of the pelvis was
found to be occupied with a tumour, and bi-manually, distinct
fluctuation could be made out. I decided that it was a case for


immediate removal of the tumour, and patient went into the
private hospital on February 10.
On opening the abdominal cavity, it was found to be occupied
with an immense multilocular ovarian cyst. The larger of the
cysts were evacuated in the usual way by aspiration, and none of
the contents were allowed to escape into the abdominal cavity.
It was necessary to enlarge the abdominal incision very consider-
ably to admit of the delivery of the tumour. After its delivery,
and before ligaturing the pedicle, the abdominal wound was closed
in its upper extent, to prevent the escape of the intestines. The
pedicle was very broad, and was ligatured in sections with the
usual interlocking ligatures. The ovary of the other side was
somewhat enlarged and cystic, and I decided to remove the appen-
dages of that side also. During the operation, no cyst contents
escaped into the abdominal cavity, so that both the peritoneal
toilet and the drain tube were considered unnecessary. The
abdominal wound was closed with alternate sutures of silver wire
and silkworm-gut. Patient made an excellent recovery, her tem-
perature never rising above a 100°. The sutures were removed
twelve days after operation, and she left the hospital on March 20,
less than six weeks after admission.
HARD MULTINODULAR FIBRO-MYOMA OF UTERUS
—HYSTERECTOMY.
A. T., aged 41 years, married, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Patient complained of a large swelling of the abdomen,
which caused her great pain and inconvenience. She stated that
she was quite well up till six months before admission, when she
began to suffer from severe and frequent floodings. Three months
•later, she noticed for the first time that her abdomen was enlarged.
This enlargement has been increasing very rapidly, and she, for
two months previous to admission, has been becoming greatly
emaciated. She has been married thirteen months, and has never
been pregnant. Menstruation has been very irregular and profuse,
and attended with great pain.


On examination, the abdomen is distended irregularly. By
palpation, a hard multinodular tumour can be felt occupying the
hypogastric and left iliac regions. On vaginal examination, the
cervix uteri is found to be drawn up and shortened ; the fundus,
which is greatly enlarged, occupies the whole of the pelvis. The
sound was passed four and a half inches.
After consultation with the other members of the Staff, I
decided to remove the uterine appendages if possible, and failing
this, to perform hysterectomy. The patient having been prepared
in the usual manner, and anaesthetised, I opened the abdominal
cavity with the usual incision. A large multinodular fibroid at
once presented itself, but the uterine appendages were so involved
and so adherent to the surrounding structures, that their removal
alone was out of the question. I then decided to perform hys-
terectomy. After considerably enlarging the abdominal incision,
I was enabled, with the aid of very strong Vulsellum forceps,
to deliver the tumour. I then proceeded to ligature the broad
ligaments in sections, bleeding on the uterine side of the ligatures
being controlled by means of long pressure forceps. A good deal
of difficulty was experienced in dealing with the left broad liga-
ment, on account of adhesions. After tying the uterine arteries,
I proceeded to deal with the uterus after the manner adopted by
Schrceder, and already described in the previous cases.
After operation, the temperature was 99°, pulse 80, and respi-
rations 22. Patient was fed with nutrient enemata, and the fluid
from the drainage tube evacuated every hour. The fluid obtained
was pale in colour, and only amounted to two drams at a time.
On the third day after operation, the temperature rose to 101°,
and the pulse to 108; peritonitis had set in; mag. sulph. was
administered in full doses, and the bowels copiously evacuated.
The temperature fell again on the fourth day, and patient appeared
somewhat better. It, however, soon rose again, and persisted at
from 102° to 103°, in spite of antipyretics. On the sixth day, the
patient showed signs of collapse, and died from peritonitis. The
discharge from the tube was never offensive, but on the fifth day it
had a slight mawkish odor, and the abdominal cavity was frequently
irrigated with a boric acid solution. This patient was in a very weak
condition on admission. Her frequent floodings had rendered her
so anaemic, that her case was never at any time a hopeful one.


FIBRO-MYOMA OF UTERUS, COMPLICATED WITH
PYO-SALPINX AND GENERAL PERITONITIS.
Mrs. H., set. 28 years. I was asked to see this lady in con-
sultation with Dr. F. She had been under his treatment only a
few days, but had had other advice on numerous occasions during
the past four years. Her history, as related to him, was that she
was quite well up till marriage four years ago. Shortly after
marriage, she contracted a venereal disease from her husband, and
has never been well since. Her menstruation has been regular,
but profuse and extremely painful. Between her menstrual
periods, she has suffered from an irritating leucorrhoea, and has
had an almost constant pain in the lower abdomen. The pain
has usually been of a dull aching and bearing-down character, but
she has also had numerous attacks of very acute pain. She
thought that some years ago she was rather “high-stomached,”
but she has for the last two years noticed that her abdomen was
gradually becoming more prominent.
On examination, it was seen that patient was very ill indeed ;
she was lying on her back, with the knees drawn up to the
abdomen ; the face looked pinched and anxious, the tongue was
dry, the temperature 100-B°, and the pulse 116. She complained
of feeling very ill, and of an intense pain in the lower part of
the abdomen. The abdomen was extremely tender and dull in
the mid-line for about eight inches above the pubes; above this,
and in either flank, it was fairly resonant. On vaginal examina-
tion, there was a nasty thin uterine discharge. The pelvis was
occupied by two distinct tumours—one, in the anterior part, was
extremely hard, and was evidently the uterus much enlarged; the
other, situated posteriorly, was semi-fluctuant, and extremely
tender. From the history of the patient, and her symptoms, I
decided that this latter was either a large pyo-salpynx, or an
encysted abscess in Douglas’s space. The uterine sound passed
six inches, and there was no doubt that the anterior tumour
was a fibro-myoma of the uterus. Both tumours were quite
immovable.
The patient was very ill, and had been gradually getting worse,
and I advised removal of the tumours by abdominal section.
She went into the private hospital on July 14th. During her


first two days’ residence, she became decidedly worse, and 1
operated on July 17th. Notwithstanding the fact that she had
been ill for such a length of time, the abdominal wglls were very
fat, and rendered the operation one of extreme difficulty.
On opening the abdominal cavity, the viscera seemed to be
bound together in one mass by very dense adhesions. The
omentum was everywhere adherent to the abdominal peritoneum,
and had to be cut through. Its veins were enormously enlarged,
and many of them had to be separately ligatured before division.
After a tedious separation of numerous adhesions, I came down
upon the posterior tumour. It was everywhere adherent to the
surrounding structures, and was with great difficulty removed.
It proved to be a large pyo-salpynx of the right side. There was
a considerable amount of haemorrhage, which was controlled by
pressure. I then proceeded to tie the vessels in the broad
ligaments, after which the uterus was removed, and the cervix
treated after the method of Schroeder. During this part of
the operation, there was little or no haemorrhage. After the
abdominal toilet, a drain tube was inserted, and the abdominal
wound closed with silver wire sutures. The operation occupied
nearly two hours, and at its termination, patient was very weak
and low. She was put to bed, and artificial warmth applied, and
stimulants administered. Although she became quite sensible
after the anaesthetic, she did not rally from the shock of the
operation, and died eight hours after its completion.
“INFANTILE UTERUS”—CYSTIC DISEASE OF RIGHT
OYARY-INTOLERABLE DYSMENORRHCEA-
SALPINGO-OOPHORECTOMY.
Mrs. 8., set. 35 years, was sent to me from the country. She
had been under treatment, with little or no benefit, for some years.
She was married at 25 years of age, and has never been pregnant.
She complained of an almost constant .abdominal pain, which wajs
greatly exaggerated at each menstrual period. Her suffering was
E


so great, that she found it necessary to remain in bed during the
whole of each menstruation.
On examination, the uterus was found to be infantile in char-
acter, and to be acutely antiflexed. The right ovary, which was
enlarged, could be easily felt prolapsed in Douglas’s space. There
was great tenderness in the left ovarian region, but the ovary
could not be felt. As the patient had been under treatment for
some years, with little or no benefit, and as the condition of her
uterus contra-indicated the possibility of a future pregnancy, I
decided to remove the uterine appendages. She was admitted to
the private hospital on July 19, and I performed abdominal section
three days later.
On opening the abdominal cavity, the right ovary was found to
be much enlarged, cystic, and prolapsed, while the left was
extremely atrophied, being only about half the size of an ordinary
ovary. The appendages of both sides were removed, and the
abdominal wound closed with silkworm-gut sutures. No drain
tube was inserted. The temperature never rose above 99°, and
patient, who made an excellent recovery, left the hospital on
August 11. Since the operation, she has been entirely free from
pain, but the artificial menopause has given rise to more than the
usual amount of unpleasant symptoms.
ECTOPIC PREGNANCY.
Mrs. L., set. 34 years, consulted me in May of last year. She
had had three children, the last six years ago. She did not have
a very good time at her last confinement, and was in bed for three
weeks. Since then she has never felt quite well, has suffered
from pain in the region of the uterus, and in both iliac fossae, and
has been troubled with leucorrhcea. Her menstruation has for
some years been quite regular, until about four months ago. It
then ceased for three months, and at the end of that time she was
suddenly seized with violent abdominal pain. This pain was


accompanied by a discharge of blood from the vagina, and she
believed that she was about to miscarry. She passed a few clots,
but did not observe anything resembling either foetus or decidua.
She has off and on for the past month had a sanguineous vaginal
discharge, and has suffered from an almost constant pain in the
lower abdomen.
On examination, there was great tenderness in both iliac fossae,
and on percussion in these regions, the note was much duller than
normal. There was a well marked areola around each nipple, and
the breasts contained fluid. On vaginal examination, the uterus
was found to be somewhat enlarged, and tobe pushed well up against
the pubes. The whole of the space of Douglas was occupied with
a Arm tumour, which was more prominent on the right side. On
bi-manual examination, there was a good deal of tenderness.
There was undoubtedly a pelvic tumour of recent formation,
and as the history of the case pointed directly to the presence of
an ectopic gestation, I decided to perform an exploratory abdomi-
nal section. The patient was admitted to the private hospital on
May 17, and as her case appeared to be ui’gent, I decided to
operate as soon as possible.
The operation was performed on May 19. On opening the
abdominal cavity, the whole of the pelvis on the right side was
found to be occupied by an ill-defined tumour. It proved to be
an ectopic gestation. The sac was bound down by extensive
adhesions, and some difficulty was experienced in removing it.
During its removal the sac ruptured, and the foetus escaped.
There was some free haemorrhage at the site of separation of the
adhesions, but this was easily controlled by pressure with hot
sponges. The peritoneal toilet was performed, plain hot water
(which had been previously boiled) alone being used. A drain
tube was inserted, and the wound closed with silkworm-gut
sutures. The tube was evacuated every two hours for the first
twenty-four hours, the quantity of discharge being profuse and
high coloured. On the second day, however, the quantity was
less, and the colour much less bright. The tube was removed on
the eighth day, when the discharge was sweet, scanty, and of a
light straw colour. The sutures were removed on the tenth day.
The temperature never rose above 100 ‘2, and patient, who made
an excellent recovery, left the hospital on June 28, 1893.
£ 2


DOUBLE PYO-SALPINX-SALPIXGO-
OOPHORECTOMY.
A. de L., aged 21 years, single, was admitted to the infirmary
department of the Women’s Hospital. Patient states that she
was fairly well up till three months before admission, when she
was confined in the midwifery department of the Hospital. She
had, soon after she became pregnant, noticed some sores on the
vulva, has suffered from constant vaginal discharge, sore throat
and mouth, and has lost a considerable quantity of hair. The
records of her accouchement show that the child was ill-developed,
and distinctly syphilitic. Her lying-in period was characterised
by an almost continuous high temperature, from the third till the
ninth day. On the fifth day, a good deal of thickening was
found around the uterus. This, under treatment, was consider-
ably reduced, but although the temperature was for some days
normal before she got up, this thickening never entirely dis-
appeared. She got up on the fourteenth, and was discharged on
the twentieth day.
On admission into the infirmary department, she presented a
very weak and unhealthy appearance, and complained of severe
and constant pain in the lower abdomen.
On examination, the abdomen was fairly normal in appearance,
extremely tender, and dull on percussion in both iliac fossae.
There was a nasty semi-purulent discharge from the vagina, the
cervix was lacerated, and the uterus retroflexed and tender.
There was great thickening all over the pelvic floor, and a sense
of deep fluctuation in the region of both Fallopian tubes. Her
temperature was 100° F. Patient remained in the Hospital three
weeks before operation, during which time she was placed on a
liberal diet, and had the vagina irrigated with hot water for
fifteen minutes thrice daily. During these three weeks she
improved very considerably, and at the time of the operation (on
June 4), her temperature had been for some days normal.
During the operation, there was a good deal of difficulty in
separating the uterine appendages from their adhesions. Both
tubes were very distended, and their separation was fortunately
effected without ruptui’e. A drainage tube was inserted. For
the first three days after operation, the temperature remained at


about 100-s°, the discharge from the tube was slightly foetid, and
the abdominal. wound looked angry and inflamed. Every pre-
caution had been taken during the operation to px-event any
escape of pus into the abdominal cavity, and the small portion of
the tube external to the ligature had been rendered as aseptic as
possible by the application of pure carbolic acid. As it seemed
probable that her unfavourable symptoms were aggravated by her
previous attack of syphilis, the oleate of mercury was ordered to
be rubbed into the axillse. After a few applications there was a
decided improvement, the abdominal wound assumed a more
healthy character, and the temperature became normal on the
sixth day. The discharge from the tube daily became less
offensive, and was free from odour on the eighth day, when the
tube was removed. From this time there was slow but gradual
improvement, and the patient was discharged to the Convalescent
Home on July 19.
HARD MULTINODULAR FIBRO-MYOMA OF UTERUS
—HYSTERECTOMY.
C. T., aged 47 years, single, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Patient stated that she was quite well up till eighteen
months before admission, when she first noticed a pain in the
small of the back and in the left side. This pain came on
gradually, and was most severe at her menstrual periods. The
catamenia have for some time been irregular and very profuse,
and have been attended with great pain.
On admission, patient complained of crampy pains in the lower
abdomen and left iliac fossa, also a large swelling which occupies
the greater part of the abdomen. Her general condition was
fairly healthy.
On examination, the hypogastric and left iliac regions were
found to be occupied by a dense tumour, which extended from the
pelvis to within two inches of the umbilicus. There was great
tenderness on palpation. On double palpation, a very tender tube


and ovary could be felt high up on the left side. The cervix was
drawn high up underneath the pubes, and Douglas’s pouch was
occupied by a dense and firm mass. The diagnosis was fibro-
myoma of the uterus, and I decided to perform abdominal
hysterectomy.
The operation was performed in a manner similar to that
adopted in the previous cases. There were no adhesions or other 1
complications, and during the performance of the operation, which
occupied only thirty-two minutes, the patient did not lose more
than an ounce of blood.
After the operation, she was fed by the rectum for the first
twenty-four hour's. At the end of that time, her temperature was
99'8°, pulse 72, and respirations 20. She slept well, and did not
suffer much pain. On the third day the bowels were moved by
calomel, and from that time on she made an uninterrupted
recovery. The abdominal wound healed by first intention, and
the sutures were removed on the ninth day. Patient left the
hospital feeling remarkably well on the thirty-fourth day after
operation. Two months subsequently she reported herself, and
stated that she had never felt better in her life.
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION THREE WEEKS AFTER
CONFINEMENT—ABDOMINAL SECTION.
This case I saw in consultation with Dr. Sutherland, of Ascot
Yale, to whom I am indebted for the notes of her history up till
the time of operation.
Mrs. 8., aged 32 years, was confined on the early morning of
April 24, 1893. Her labour pains had begun only six hours
before delivery, which was quite normal. The placenta and
membranes were expelled, and were apparently complete. The
perinaeum was not lacerated, but the vaginal tissues were a good
deal bruised. She apparently was doing well until the evening
of the third day, when her temperature rose to 100°, and her
pulse to 110. A dose of 01. ricini was given, and the bowels


freely evacuated. On the fourth day, the temperature rose to
101°, and the pulse to 112, and the abdomen was becoming some-
what tympanitic. On the eighth day, she had a smart attack of
diarrhoea, which was checked by mist, cretse c catechu. The
temperature and pulse still remained high—the former at about
101°, and the latter at 110 per minute. The bowels acted
regularly until the twenty-first day, when they ceased altogether,
and the nurse gave her a dose of oil. This did not act, and she
gave her a dose of pulv. rhei c soda. This also had no effect.
Two days before the bowels ceased to act, the temperature had
fallen to 98°, and the pulse remained at about 110. On the
twenty-third day, patient had a severe attack of vomiting, which,
according to the account given by the nurse, was dark, and had
a very offensive smell. She passed nothing through the bowel,
neither wind nor faeces, and the abdomen again became greatly
distended and tympanitic. Next day, she vomited about a quart
of faecal matter, of most offensive odour.
At this stage, I was asked to see the patient in consultation.
She had always been a very healthy woman, and had never been
laid up. She had, however, a history of having had, on one
occasion, a rather acute abdominal pain, which came on after a
sea bath. It had, however, rapidly disappeared, after the
applications of hot fomentations to the abdomen. From the
history of her lying-in period, and her present symptoms, I con-
cluded that the bowel had become involved in some inflammatory
adhesions, and advised an exploratory operation.
The patient having been anaesthetised, I made a free abdominal
incision. The small intestine was very distended, and in parts
deeply injected. After placing large flat sponges under each side
of the abdominal wall, to prevent, if possible, the escape of the
small intestine through the wound, I passed my hand into the
abdominal cavity. Deep down in the pelvis, on the right side,
I came upon a firm fibrous band, under which a coil of small
intestine had passed, and become strangulated. This band I
immediately divided between two ligatures, and freed the strangu-
lated intestine. During this part of the operation, a large coil
of small intestine escaped through the abdominal wound. It was
extremely distended, so much so that it could not be returned.
I therefore punctured it with a good sized trocar, and allowed a


large quantity of its contents, both gaseous and fluid, to escape.
After closing the intestinal wound with Lembert’s sutures, the
intestine was easily returned. The abdominal wound was closed
in the ordinary manner, and a drainage tube inserted.
After the operation, patient was very weak and low, but she
gradually improved. There was very little vomiting during the
first twenty-four hours, and the ejecta had lost their faecal character.
After an enema of turpentine and water, a large quantity of
flatus and shine faeces were passed. On the day after the opera-
tion, the bowels were moved naturally. The pulse rapidly began
to improve in character, and a few days after operation, both it
and the temperature became normal. From this time onward,
the patient made an uninterrupted recovery. She got up on the
twenty-fourth day after operation, and she is now strong and well.
DOUBLE PYO-SALPINX—ABDOMINAL SECTION.
F. J., aged 30 years, was admitted to the Women’s Hospital.
Patient stated that she was quite well up till six years before
admission, when she was confined of her first child. Her labour
was not difficult, but convalescence was slow, and immediately on
getting Up, she suffered from severe bearing-down pains in the
region of the uterus and in both iliac fossie. These pains have
been almost constant since, but were not quite so severe during
the time she was carrying her second child, which was born two
years ago. Since the birth of this child, however, the pain has
been more severe than ever, and she has been once or twice treated
for attacks of pelvic peritonitis.
On admission, patient complained of severe pain in both iliac
fossse, painful micturition and defmcation. She was very delicate,
and appeared to have undergone a great deal of suffering.
On examination, the abdomen was somewhat distended, and
extremely tender at each side of the uterus. On percussion, the
note was fairly resonant, except on the left side of the uterus,
where it was decidedly dull. The cervix uteri was badly lacerated ;
there was a nasty setni-purulent discharge from the cervix, and the


uterus was retroflexed, firmly fixed, and exquisitely tender. The
whole of the pelvic organs were firmly matted together, and in the
region of the left broad ligament, there was a distinct sense of
fluctuation.
The case was evidently one of old pyo-salpingitis, with con-
sequent pelvic peritonitis, and I decided to perform abdominal
section. On opening the abdominal cavity with the usual median
incision, the pelvic organs were found to be matted together by
extensive and very firm adhesions. The right appendages were
removed after a little trouble, but on the left side, everything was
so matted together that I found it necessary to enlarge the
abdominal incision sufficiently to allow the whole hand to be
inserted into the abdominal cavity. The left tube was very
distended and adherent, especially to the posterior surface of the
fundus uteri, and during its removal it burst, and discharged
some very unhealthy pus, which however was not allowed to come
in contact with the peritoneum. Subsequent to the removal of
the-left appendages, there was some very free bleeding from deep
down in Douglas’s space. On close examination, it was found to
proceed from the posterior surface of the uterus, and to be due to
the separation of the strong adhesions which bound the distended
tube to that organ. The bleeding was really severe, and as
ordinary measures failed to check it, I tied the uterine and ovarian
arteries of the left side. This was immediately effectual. The
abdominal cavity was thoroughly irrigated, a drainage tube in-
serted, and the wound closed in the usual manner.
Immediately after the operation patient was very weak and
exhausted, but she rallied, after stimulating enemata and the
application of a good supply of artificial heat. For the first
twenty-four hours she appeared to do fairly well, but on the
evening of the second day her temperature, rapidly rose, and she
was found to have developed some pneumonia at the bases of both
lungs. Fortunately, she was able to retain food and medicine
given by the mouth. The chest was well poulticed, and stimu-
lants, in addition to a mixture of quinine and ammon. carb.,
administered by the mouth. On the third day, the pneumonia
appeared to be running a typical course, and in addition, the
discharge from the tube became very offensive, and the abdomen
distended, tympanitic, and tender. No flatus was passing, and


the patient was evidently in a bad way. However, under treat-
ment and with good nursing there was, on the fifth day, a decided
change for the better. Stimulants had been freely administered,
the chest and abdomen continuously poulticed, the abdominal
cavity washed out regularly at intervals of two hours, and
enemata of turpentine had had a very beneficial effect in re-
ducing the tympanites. The temperature fell gradually to normal
on the seventh day, and with its decline, there was a marked
improvement in the general condition of the patient. The tube
was removed on the eighth day, and the patient transferred from
the special to the general ward. Shortly afterwards she was
discharged, and is now in perfect health.
LARGE SARCOMA OF RIGHT OVARY, COM-
PLICATED WITH ASCITES.
E. 8., single, aged 21 years, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Occupation, saleswoman; residence, Carlton ; born in
Victoria. First catamenial period at 13 years of age. Menstrua-
tion regular, but very painful and profuse. Was quite well up
to the beginning of last July, when she began to feel pain in the
right iliac fossa, and at the same time noticed some swelling in
this region, which has gone on increasing, until the whole
abdominal cavity is now very much distended. She has rapidly
lost flesh and strength, suffers from severe night-sweats, and has
much difficulty in micturition and defsecation. Latterly, she has
suffered much from dyspnoea, which is relieved by sitting up—a
posture which she now constantly maintains.
November I.—Abdomen uniformly distended to a marked
degree —shining, tense, tender to the touch, and more resistant
on the right side; resonant centrally, but dull everywhere else ;
marked fluid wave. Before the distension became so great, a
distinct tumour could be felt in the right iliac region, reaching a
little above the umbilicus. On vaginal examination, the uterus
was quite fixed, and Douglas’s pouch distended with fluid, all the


parts occupying a lower plane in the pelvis than normal. The
urine was loaded with urates, but no albumen.
Family History. —Father living, takes fits. Mother died from
bronchitis. Three brothers and sisters dead ; eldest from phthisis,
cause of others not known.
I performed abdominal section on the afternoon of November 5.
I found the abdomen filled with a brownish ascitic fluid, and the
pelvis and lower abdomen occupied by a soft friable tumour,
irregular in shape, and firmly adherent to all surrounding tissues
and organs. The tumour was, with great difficulty, separated
from surrounding structures, and its removal was followed by
profuse general oozing from the raw surface, all over the floor of
the pelvis, which I found impossible to check by ordinary
measures. I tried pressure with hot sponges; and the same
wrung out of a warm solution of iodine, without avail. I next
had recourse to haemostatic tamponade, with the best result. I
packed the true pelvis with a long strip of corrosive sublimate
gauze, bringing the free end through a large glass drainage tube.
After the administration of a warm beef tea and brandy enema,
the patient was now removed to the special ward. The usual
feeding by bowel was attended to, and sips of toast water only
given by mouth for two days. The patient progressed satis-
factorily. The tamponade was removed after thirty-six hours,
with comparative ease, and without removing tube. No fresh
haemorrhage. Shortly after the removal of the tampon, a free,
offensive, brownish discharge filled the tube. It was now found
necessary to wash out the cavity every hour, boric acid solution
being used, with the occasional substitution of weak iodine. The
temperature, which during first week varied between 101° and
102°, dropped to 99°, and the pulse, which was 140 after the
operation, gradually slowed down to 90 on the ninth day, when
she was removed from the special into the general ward. The
bowels were opened on the second day. Starting with a 1 gi\ dose
of calomel every hour, for six consecutive hours, followed by 3 j
doses of mag. sulph. every two hours. After the second day, she
was able to take sufficient nutriment by the mouth—chicken
broth, Brand’s essence, &c. There was no vomiting from the
first, and the abdomen remained quite flat and lax. The
sutures were all removed on the ninth day.


December 10.—The patient has been carefully attended in the
Hospital during the past two months. During this time the
drainage tube has constantly discharged a very offensive fluid,
necessitating the washing out of cavity every two hours, per-
chloride solution (1 in 200(3) being used, with an occasional
resort to weak iodine.
The tube was removed on January 11, and the discharge froln
the deep sinus still remaining, is still slightly offensive. The
temperature is now quite normal, and there is, so far, no sign of
recurrence, or secondary deposit in other organs. The patient
takes plenty of nourishment, and has increased in weight and
strength.
CYSTIC DEGENERATION OF BOTH OVARIES AND
FIBROID OF APPENDIX.
Miss O’K., set. 32, consulted me during January of this year.
She was then suffering from slight mental. trouble, and as a
consequence, there was some little difficulty in obtaining a
reliable account of her illness. She is a native of Victoria, and;
menstruation began during her fourteenth year. She had been
fairly regular up till six months before she consulted me; her
periods lasted usually from five to seven days, and there had been,
during the last four years, great dysmenorrhcea. During the
latter six months of last year, menstmation had been very,
irregular, and the quantity had varied considerably, while each
period had been marked by severe dysmenorrhcea. There was
nothing of interest in the family history.
Patient herself had. up till six months ago, been always fairly
healthy in body, although her mental condition had for some
time previous to this given her friends some anxiety. She has
always suffered, more or less, from constipation, but further than
this there was no history of intestinal trouble. On her first visit
to me she complained of severe, dull, aching pain in the lower.


part of the back and in the lower abdomen, frequent and painful
micturition, a bearing down pain in the region of the uterus,
painful menstruation, great nervousness, and an almost constant
frontal headache.
On examination, the abdomen was found to be slightly enlai-ged,
there was a good deal of tenderness in both iliac fossae, and in
these regions, but more particularly in the right, the percussion
note was decidedly dull. Per vaginam, the vagina presented the
normal condition of an unmarried woman ; the uterus was fairly
normal in position and size, but was very tender on bimanual
palpation. On each side of the uterus, and posteriorly, a tumour
could be felt, that on the left side being semi-fluctant, and larger
than that on the right. Both tumours were extremely tender,
and I recommended their removal by abdominal section.
Patient went into one of the private wards of St. Vincent’s
Hospital, and, after a few days’ preparation, I, with the assistance
of the other members of the staff, operated upon her.
The abdomen was opened with the usual median incision. The
tumours felt per vaginam proved to be enlarged ovaries, which
had undergone cystic degeneration. The left was somewhat the
larger, and contained one cyst about the size of a large orange.
This cyst was interesting, from the fact that it was filled with
very dark blood. During the removal of the right tumour, I felt
an abnormal swelling in the region of the caecum. It was very
hard, and on close examination, proved to be a tumour of the
appendix vermiformis. It was about the size of a bantam’s egg,
and adherent to both caecum and ileum, and I decided to remove
it. After separating the adhesions, I ligatured the tumour and
removed it; the free end of the appendix was treated by
inverting the peritoneal surfaces, and dosed the opening with
Lembert’s sutures. A drainage tube was inserted, and the
abdominal wound closed with silver wire sutures.
Patient made an uninterrupted recovery, and is now not only
quite well, but her mental condition has wonderfully improved.


A LARGE MULTILOCULAR, PAPILLOMATOUS
TUMOUR OF EACH OVARY.
Mrs. 8., set. 35, consulted me privately at the end of January
of this year. She complained of a great abdominal swelling,
which she said was increasing very rapidly; also of pain in the
small of the back and abdomen, frequent and painful micturition
and obstinate constipation. She also complained of dyspnoea on
exertion. She had been married twelve years and had three
children, the last four years ago. Her menstruation was regular
before marriage. Since the birth of her last child she had been very
irregular, and latterly the amount had been very scanty. She could
not say definitely when she first noticed the swelling of the abdomen,
but its increase during the last few months had been very great.
On examination, the abdomen was found to be greatly enlarged,
and to be almost completely occupied by some abnormal growth.
There was little or no tenderness on palpation. The percussion
note was particularly dull in both iliac fossse, the dulness extending
on both sides almost up to the lower ribs. The dulness was not
so well marked in the lumbar regions, nor in the mid-abdominal
line, where there was a well marked sulcus. On per vaginam
examination, the whole floor of the pelvis was found to be occupied
by a dense elastic tumour. The uterus was larger than normal,
and was pressed well forward above the pubes. I advised
abdominal section for the removal of the tumour, and patient
having decided to undergo the operation, went into a private ward
at St. Vincent’s Hospital early in February.
After a few days’ preliminary treatment, I proceeded to operate.
On opening the abdominal cavity with the usual median incision,
I came upon a large papillomatous tumour of each ovary. Each
tumour was so large that, to effect delivei'y, I found it necessary
to increase the abdominal incision well above the umbilicus. After
extraction of each tumour, the pedicle—which in each case was
extremely thick and fleshy, and formed by the hypertrophied and
expanded ala of the corresponding broad ligament—was secured
by the interlocking ligature, and the tumour removed. The
abdominal wound was closed as usual with silver wire sutures,
and patient made an excellent recovery, having left the hospital
on the fourteenth day.


[For the Notes of the following cases, I am indebted to Dr.
Pinniger, Senior Resident Surgeon, Women’s Hospital.]
PAR-OVARIAN CYST.
M. P., married, aged 31 years, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Occupation, household duties ; residence, Richmond ;
born in Victoria. First catamenia at 14|- years of age ; interval,
four weeks ; duration, four days; quantity, scanty. Dysmenorr-
hcea. At the present time, catamenia regular every four weeks ;
duration, four days; quantity, normal. Slight dysmenorrhoea.
Married seven years ago, when aged 24 years; two children; no
abortions. Had very easy confinements, last occurring four years
ago. Never had instruments or chloroform. Up on the tenth
day, and recoveries good. Was quite well up to the birth of the
first child (six years ago), when she noticed severe pains in the
head and lower abdomen, chiefly on the left side. These have
been steadily increasing. She has always been able to do her
work, but has a feeling of weariness after slight exertion. Now
complains of the above symptoms in an aggravated form, with
severe pain in the back, and says that she is unable to earn her
living in her present condition. She has no bladder or rectal
inconveniences. General condition weakly. Abdomen normal in
its appearance and consistence, but some slight tenderness in the
left iliac fossa, with a sense of resistance on deep palpation. On
examination, the vagina was found moist and roomy • os uteri
patulous; cicatricial band felt at left cervico-vaginal junction. A
fluctuating swelling felt posteriorly to the left of the fundus uteri,
but not tender to the touch.
Abdominal section was performed by Dr. O’Sullivan on August
10, 1893. The usual opening having been made, the left side of
the pelvis was found to be occupied by a par-ovarian cyst, about
the size of a goose’s egg. There were no adhesions, and no
distinct pedicle, the cyst was removed with its corresponding
tube and ovary ; the right ovary and tube being in an unhealthy
condition, were also removed. There was no oozing after; no
drainage tube was inserted. The wound was sutured and dressed
with boracic acid. The patient was fed for the first two days on
nutrient enemata, getting teaspoonfuls of hot water by the mouth.


Afterwards got chicken broth, Brand’s beef essence, and arrowroot
by the mouth. The patient recovered without any bad symptoms.
The temperature did not rise above 101° F., nor the pulse above
110. The sutures were i-emoved on the eighth day.
CHRONIC INFLAMMATION OF APPENDAGES, WITH
PARENCHYMATOUS CYSTS OF OVARIES.
B. 8., single, aged 31 years, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Residence, Hawthorn, Victoria ; born in Scotland, and
arrived in Victoria four years ago. Occupation, domestic servant.
First catamenia at 18 years of age; duration, six days; intervals
of four weeks. Very severe dysmenorrhoea, and very free
menorrhagia. At the present time, catamenia regular, at
intervals of four weeks; duration, six days, with very severe
dysmenorrhoea and menorrhagia. Has had two children; no
abortions. Had very fi’ee haemorrhage at her confinements,
and made slow recoveries. Did not have instruments or chloro-
form at confinements. Was quite well up to her first catamenia,
since then has always had dysmenorrhoea and menorrhagia, the
discharge coming away in clots ; very much worse during the
last eighteen months (since her last confinement). Has constant
burning pain in the lower abdomen, and bearing-down pains in
the vagina. Aching pains in the small of the back, severe head-
aches, and free and offensive leucorrhoea. Now complains of the
same symptoms, together with shiverings and great feeling of body
heat at poorly times. General health fair. Abdomen flat and
lax, some tenderness in the lower region, chiefly on the left side.
Vagina soft, moist, and roomy. A movable fluctuating tumour
felt in Douglas’s pouch. Fundus uteri movable, not enlarged, and
in the normal position.
Abdominal section was performed by Dr. O’Sullivan on
September 7, 1893. The usual incision having been made, both
ovaries were found to be very much enlarged, and firmly adherent
in Douglas’s pouch, the parenchyma of each having undergone


marked cystic degeneration. Double oophorectomy was done
without any difficulties. No drainage tube inserted. The patient
recovered without a single bad symptom. The temperature never
rose above 99-5° F., and the pulse never went above 91. The
sutures were all removed by the eighth day. Patient fed at first
by nutrient enemata. The bowels were opened on the second day.
The usual alterative doses of calomel followed by mag. sulph.
PYO-SALPINX.
M. K., married, set. 26 years, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Occupation, household duties; residence, Fitzroy;
born in Victoria. First catamenia at 14 years of age ; interval,
four weeks; duration, four days ; no pain, and normal quantity.
At the present time, catamenia irregular, at intervals of
three weeks ; duration, seven to ten days ; no pain; quantity
profuse, with clots. Married eight years ago, when aged 18 years.
One child seven years ago—easy labour and good recovery. Was
quite well up to twelve months after the child was born (6 years),
then noticed that she felt weak, and got very tired after slight
exertion ; but no pain, unless she exerted herself, when she got
bearing-down pains. About four years ago, noticed pain in the
left side of the lower abdomen, which has been more or less
constant ever since, and very much intensified on exertion.
During this time, she has had constant leucorrhcea. These
conditions are gradually getting worse, and she is now unable to
do her household duties. General condition healthy • abdomen
soft, uniform, not distended; no tenderness, except on deep
pressure in centre, just above the pubis and to the left. Vagina
moist and roomy. A soft fluctuating swelling felt to the left of
and behind the uterus. Os uteri gapes ; cervix elongated.
Abdominal section was performed by Dr. O’Sullivan on
November 2, 1893. The usual opening having been made, a large
distended tube the size of a turkey’s egg was found behind the
uterus, tilled with pus. Both ovaries were enlarged, and in a soft
F


degenerated condition. They were rather firmly adherent to the
adjacent parts, and were with much difficulty removed (with the
tubes) without rupture of the pus sac. General oozing was free,
but easily checked by hot sponging. A glass drain tube was
inserted, and the wound sutured and dressed with boracic acid.
After-Treatment. —The discharge through the drainage tube was
free at first, and the tube had to be exhausted every twenty
minutes. It soon diminished in amount, and became serous in
character. The tube was removed on the fifth day. Patient was
fed at first by nutrient enemata. The bowels were opened on the
second day, usual calomel and mag. sulph. Patient recovered
without a bad symptom. The temperature never went above
100° F., nor the pulse above 96. The sutures were removed on
the eighth day.
TUBO-OVARIAN ABSCESS.
R. K., married, aged 33 years, was admitted to the Women’s
Hospital. Occupation, household duties; residence, Fitzroy,
Victoria. First catamenia at 16 years of age; interval, four
weeks; duration, five to six days; no pain, and quantity rather
free. At the present time, catamenia irregular, at intervals of
one to three weeks; duration, six to eight days. Slight dys-
menorrhoea and profuse menorrhagia. Married twelve years
ago, when aged 21 years. Has had three confinements and one
mishap. Last confinement six years ago, and last mishap four-
teen months ago. Never had instruments or chloroform at
confinements, and up on the ninth day. Was quite well up to
the birth of the second child (nine years ago), when she noticed
that she had severe menorrhagia at each menstrual period. At
times, it would last two weeks; has always had very severe
catamenia since then. Also complains of severe pain in the
lower abdomen, chiefly in the left iliac fossa; weakness, head-
aches, faintings, severe pain in the back, and at times night-
sweats. Now complains of severe menorrhagia, and irregular
and frequent menses. Pain in the lower abdomen, chiefly in


the left side; headaches and general weakness. Leucorrhcea
daring the intervals, which is very profuse at times, and very
offensive. General condition weakly, and losing flesh rapidly.
Abdomen flat and firm. Tenderness on pressure all over the
lower abdomen, Tumour felt in the right iliac fossa. Vagina
roomy, moist, and menses now on ; cervix enlarged; external os
gaping. Tumour felt to right of uterus, and extending back,
fluctuating, and firmly connected with the uterus, which is fixed.
Abdominal section was performed by Dr. O’Sullivan, on
November 23, 1893. The usual opening having been made, the
tumour proved to be a tubo-ovarian abscess of the right side,
about the size of a turkey’s egg, intimately connected with
a small par-ovarian cyst, about the size of a hen’s egg. These
were firmly adherent to the uterus, small intestine, and other
adjacent parts, and on first introducing the hand, had very much
the feel of a uterine fibroid, from its hardness. The adhesions
were with great difficulty separated, and there was very free
oozing after, which was easily stopped by hot sponging. The
tube and ovary of the left side, being in a state of chronic inflam-
mation, were also removed. On opening the left tube, it was
found to contain pus. A glass drain tube was introduced, and
the wound dressed with boracic acid dressing.
After-Treatment. —Patient was fed for the first two days by
nutrient enemata, alternated with zyminised meat suppositories ;
getting a little hot water by mouth ; afterwards got chicken
broth, Brand’s essence, and a little arrowroot by the mouth.
The bowels were opened on the second day, starting with a
1-grain dose of calomel hourly for six hours, followed by 3j doses
■of mag. sulph. Patient got slight mercurialism, and the bowels
became very lax. On the third day, the dischai’ge from the
tube became very offensive, having a faecal odour. The cavity
was washed out hourly for four days with boracic acid solution,
and afterwards every two hours. The discharge gradually cleared
up, and lost its faecal odour. The temperature reached 103° F.
on two or three occasions, averaging 101’6°, but came down to
normal by the end of the third week. The pulse did not go
above 112. She left the Hospital at the end of the fourth week,
perfectly free from any symptoms, and presented herself a few
days ago in perfect health.
F 2


DOUBLE PYO-SALPINX.
Mrs. McC., native of Ireland, set. 33, married ten years, no
children, was admitted to St. Vincent’s Hospital on December 14.
She had never been well since her marriage. Shortly after
marriage she commenced to complain of severe pelvic pains, more
especially at her monthly periods, when she had to take to her
bed. She was seldom free from pain in the back, and for some
time she had been utterly unable to endure married life. On
bimanual palpation, I found the uterus pushed slightly towards
the front, and behind it, on each side, there was a distinct mass>
fixed, and very tender to touch. She had been under a great
variety of treatments, even the everlasting pessary was brought
into requisition, without, it need hardly be said, the slightest
benefit.
I made an exploratory incision, and found both tubes distended
with solidified matter-, and firmly adherent in Douglas’ space. The
contents of the tubes turned out, on careful examination, to be
inspissated pus. The operation for their complete removal was
extremely difficult.
She made an uninterrupted recovery from the operation, and
on January 10, I found the uterus quite free, and everything
quite normal.
She left the hospital on January 17 in perfect health
Stillwell and Co., Printers, 195a Collins Street, Melbourne.




