





1911.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
BUREAU OF CENSUS AND STATISTICS, MELBOURNE.
THE FIRST COMMONWEALTH CENSUS,
3RD APRIL, 1911.
NOTES
BY
G. H. KNIBBS, C.M.G., F.S.S., ETC.,
COMMONWEALTH STATISTICIAN.
By Authority:
J. KEMP, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
[C.S., No. 108]-C.15.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE HON. KING O’MALLEY, M.P.,
MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOME AFFAIRS.
(For Public Distribution.)




1911.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
BUREAU OF CENSUS AND STATISTICS, MELBOURNE.
THE FIRST COMMONWEALTH CENSUS,
3RD APRIL, 1911.
NOTES
BY
G. JL KNIBBS, C.M.GK, E.S.S., ETC.,
COMMONWEALTH STATISTICIAN.
§S gVutlumt,a:
J. KEMP, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
|C.S., 110. 108] C. 15.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OP THE HON. KING O'MALLEY. M.P.,
MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOME AFFAIRS.
' T<or Public Distribution.)


CONTENTS.
Chapter. Pafre-
I. Introductory ... ... ... ... ... ... 4
11. Historical .. ... ... ... ... ... 4
111. The Objects and Uses of the Census .. ... ... 6
IY. Preparing for the Census ... ... ... ... ... 8
Y. The Census Cards or Schedules ... .. ... ... 9
A. The Personal Card ... ... ... ... 10'
B. The Householder’s Card ... ~ ... .. 15
VI. Collection, Compilation, and the Census Report .. ... 18-


PREFACE.
It is hoped that the following notes will serve to bring before the
public the chief features of the purport and significance of the forth-
coming Census, which is to be taken as at midnight between the 2nd and
3rd April next. The operation of Census-taking can be perfected only
by obtaining intelligent and accurate answers to the inquiries instituted, and
the more nearly perfect it is the better equipped shall we be for acquiring
that knowledge of ourselves, which is essential to the advancement of our
infant nation and to the proper guidance of our national affairs. It is
confidently hoped, therefore, that in a national matter of this importance,
the people of the Commonwealth will be sufficiently imbued with public
spirit to render every reasonable assistance, and so to make this—the first
Commonwealth Census—a worthy achievement.
Copies of this pamphlet may be obtained gratis on application at this
Bureau, or at the offices of the State Supervisors of Census, at the ad-
dresses specified below.
G. H. KNIBBS,
Commonwealth Statistician.
Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics,
“ Rialto,”
Collins-street,
Melbourne.
The following persons have been appointed Commonwealth Officers for
the purpose of supervising the Census arrangements in the several
States:
State Supervisors of Census.
New South Wales —
J. B. Trivett, F.S.S., F.R.A.S.,
36 Young-street,
Sydney.
Victoria —
A. M. Laughton, F.1.A., F.F.A.,
Record Offices,
Queen-street,
Melbourne.
Queensland —
Thornhill VVeedon, F.S.S.,
Treasury Buildings,
Brisbane.
South Australia —
L. H. Sholl, 1.5.0., J.P.,
Flinders-street,
Adelaide.
Western Australia —
E. G. Stenberg, F.S.S.,
Perth.
T asmania —
R. M. Johnston, 1.5.0. j F.S.S.,
Davey-street,
Hobart.
a 2


I.—INTRODUCTORY.
So valuable are the results which will be derived by means of
the forthcomingt Census to be taken as at midnight between the 2nd
and the 3rd April next, so extensive have been the movements of popula-
tion in recent years, and so great the changes in industrial and social con-
ditions, that special interest may properly be felt in this—the first num-
bering of the people of the Commonwealth on a truly national basis. A
similar operation will, on or about the same date, engage the inhabitants
of all parts of the British Empire; it may justly be said, therefore, that
we are approaching a great Imperial stock-taking, not merely as to num-
bers and sexes of the persons living within the Empire, but also as to
many other matters of the highest social and economic importance. Were
the business of Census-taking limited to a mere counting of heads it would
be highly important, for though numbers are not everything, they form
a potent factor in the great political equations of the times. The Census
returns will, however, furnish much more than the mere data of numerical
strength; they will present a picture of national life and character. It is
true that the form in which this picture is drawn may, to some extent,
be repellant to the average man, who often fails to discern the inward
meaning of columns of figures and the significance of the lessons they
teach. In many cases there appears to be an instinctive aversion to what
may be styled arithmetical literature —probably a reminiscence of school-
day experiences.
In point of fact, however, it is not easy to over-estimate the import-
ance of this studied representation of our national life and social organism,
for that, briefly, is what a Census amounts to. The Census gives us not
only a vivid photograph of the present, but, with past Censuses, shows
also the direction in which we are travelling and the rate of progress we
are making, if any.
It is the object of these notes to bring before the public the purposes
yhich the Census is intended to serve, to explain briefly the nature and
importance of the information required, and to point out the necessity for
the answers being supplied as accurately as possible, as well as to touch
on such phases of the subject as appear likely to prove of general interest
and utility.
II.—HISTORICAL.
Though the practice of Census-taking, in some form or other, is
probably as old as any form of civilization, the institution now known as
the Census may be said, in so far as its scope and application are concerned,
to have been evolved only during the 19th century. We at least know
that in Babylonia statistical inquiries were carried out as far back as 3800
or perhaps even 4500 8.C., while in China enumerations of the people took
place certainly as early as about 3000 b.c., and in Egypt in about 2500
b.c. It is not without interest to note that the first Biblical account
of an enumeration of the people is that referred to in the Book
of Exodus (Exodus, xxx., 12), where it is stated that Moses was
directed to number the Children of Israel and to levy a poll tax,
the assigned date of this being 1491 b.c. There are several other
Biblical references to Censuses.* The most notable of all these is,
perhaps, that carried out in 1017 b.c. by the Hebrew King David. Strange
as it may appear to-day, there is good authority for believing that the
Biblical account of the Divine wrath, f resulting from the action of David
in carrying out this enumeration of the Israelites, gave rise to the idea that
the act of Census-taking was in all cases a religious offence, and consequently
* Numbers, i., 1-3, and 47-49. Numbers, iii., 14. etc., and iv., 34, eta 1. Chronicles, xxiii., 3, etc.
■2. Chronicles, ii., 17. 2. Samuel, xxiv., 1-9. 1. Ezra, ii., 1-61. Nehemiah, vii., 6-69.
tl. Chronicles, xxvii., 24. See also 1. Chronicles xxi., 1-6.


had the effect of delaying the adoption of the Census in England for
many years. A form of Census, taken every quinquennium for fiscal and
military purposes, was a regular Roman institution, and lasted from about
435 b.c. until the sacking of Rome (a.d. 410). After the latter date,
although various works of a statistical nature —notably the Breviary of
Charlemagne (a.d. 808) and the Domesday Book of William the Conqueror
(a.d. 1086) —were compiled in Europe during the Middle Ages, we have
no record of any further Census having been taken until the 17th century.
The credit for the revival of systematic enumeration belongs to the
Canadian province of Quebec, or La Nouvelle France, as it was then called.
There, a Census was taken in 1665, and at a somewhat later date Censuses
were also taken in Nova Scotia (then Acadia) and Newfoundland. In
Europe systematic records of population do not appear to have commenced
until the 18th century, during the first half of which enumerations were
carried out in several of the* German States. In the United States the
first Census was taken in 1790; in England and France in ißor jin
Norway in 1815 ; in New South Wales in 1828 ; and in Belgium in 1831;
while in later years during the 19th century Censuses were instituted in
nearly all the most important countries of the world. To-day every
civilized country recognises that a Census is indispensable.
In Australia the earliest enumerations were the annual musters under
the penal settlement regime; these musters were carried out regularly in
New South Wales, from the date of the first settlement in r7BB until 182-,,
and were extended during that period so as to comprise the districts ol
Van Diemens’ Land (Tasmania), and Moreton Bay (Queensland), as sooi
as settlements were founded in these territories*, both of which originally
formed part of New South Wales. The first regular Census in Australia
was that taken in New South Wales in 1828, followed by one in 1833,
and another in 1836. From this latter date the Census was taken every
five years until 1861, a decennial Census being substituted from then to the
present time.
In the other Australian States the intercensal period has varied from
three to eleven years. In Tasmania, Victoria, and Queensland, the early
Censuses were taken in conjunction with the Censuses of New South Wales
until these territories were constituted independent Colonies f ; their first
separate Censuses were taken in 1841, 1854, and 1861, respectively. In
South Australia the first Census was taken in 1844 and in Western Aus-
tralia in 1848. The first occasion on which the Censuses of the various
Colonies were taken on the same date was in 1881, when the date of
enumeration —the 3rd April—was the same as that adopted in Great
Britain. In 1891 and i9or a similar agreement was come to. The total
population of the Commonwealth, according to the State Censuses of 1901,
was 3,773,50 t, and according to present estimates the forthcoming Census
should show a population of about 4,500,000, exclusive of full-blooded
Aboriginals.
Hitherto, the Australian Censuses have been carried out by the indivi-
dual States, but the forthcoming Census of the 3rd April next will be a
Commonwealth function, and will be taken by the Commonwealth Statis-
tician, under the direction of the Hon. King O’Malley, Minister of State
for Home Affairs. The Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics
was created under the authority of the Census and Statistics Act 1905,
which provides for the collection of general statistics, and the taking of
the Census, and which sets forth the obligations of the public to comply
with these provisions. The advantages to be derived from making the task
of regularly enumerating the people a Federal one are obvious. Only by
* Tasmania was first settled in 1803, and Queensland in 1824.^
t Tasmania was created a separate colony in 1825; Victoria in 1851; and Queensland in 1859.


means of centralized control is it possible to secure all those conditions
which are essential to the presentation of thoroughly homogenous statis-
tics. Under Federal control it will be possible to obtain :
(a) substantial identity in the method of collection;
( b) more perfect identity of categories under which the returns are
to be tabulated j and
(c) uniformity in the interpretation of terms and in the scheme of
presenting the facts.
The Commonwealth Census of 1911, apart from being more reliable by
reason of its homogeneity, will be of greater utility, inasmuch as complete
totals will be given for the whole Commonwealth, and direct comparison
will be possible between the different States.
III.—THE OBJECTS AND USES OF THE CENSUS.
In the past the Census was undertaken primarily for military or fiscal
purposes and was too often used as an instrument by which monarchs mea-
sured the probabilities of success in their efforts towards the aggrandise-
ment of their kingdom. To-day these purposes, though existing to a greater
or less extent in connexion with the Censuses of some countries, occupy a
comparatively inferior position, and the modern Census is now used mainly
for sociological, economic and hygienic purposes. In order to recognise
the value of the modern Census it will be necessary for us to focus our
attention on some of the more important and direct results obtained through
its aid. These, however, are so wide that only a mere indication can here
be given.
(a) A National Stocktaking. —To the average citizen, the aspect of
Census-taking, which is of the greatest interest, is probably that under
which the periodical national count is viewed as a gigantic stock-taking.
It is the occasion on which the managers of the community in the persons
of the Government of the day take steps to ascertain the stock of human
life which the community represents, to classify that stock, according to
the categories of sex, age, birthplace, etc., and by comparing the totals in
the various classes with the corresponding totals for the previous Census,
to ascertain the gain or loss which has occurred during the intercensal
period. By such means the tendency of the community in the direction of
growth or decay can be readily determined, and its relative position amongst
the nations of the world can be measured. Without a Census everything
of this nature is based upon conjecture and estimates, often ill-founded.
In the landscape depicted by the Census results there are wide spaces
for which the figures supply the light and shade as vividly as the brush
of an artist. The classification of occupations, for example, represents the
scale of our industrial development. The variety of pursuits, the number
of persons engaging in each of them, and the relation of these pursuits to
each other all come into sight in this connexion. In the same way the
results of the inquiries as to education yield suggestions of the highest
value, for the condition of a people may be gauged by its intelligence or
by the prevalence of education. Ignorance often reinforces poverty, vice,
and crime, and though men are not made moral by instruction in “ the
three R’s,” yet an intelligent community lives on a more advanced plane
of moral life. Within the last decade the numerical strength of the British
Empire has undoubtedly increased, but the actual increase has yet to be
ascertained, and the result will be of no inconsiderable value. The fact
that the self-governing Dominions are now commencing to attain the status
of nation-hood is one of immense significance in connexion with the govern-
ance and destiny of our Empire. At the same time data will be made
available for dealing more effectively with what is commonly regarded as
6


the most urgent problem of the day. The declining birth-rate, the post-
ponement of marriage to a later period than formerly, the average number
of children per family, are among a number of matters concerning which
the Census returns will supply a trustworthy basis for argument and pos-
sibly for useful action.
\b) Statistical. —From a statistical point of view, the Census is prac-
tically indispensable. Not only does it furnish material concerning the
composition of the community of a nature absolutely unattainable at any
other time, and thus supply a rich field of investigation for the economist,
the sociologist, and the statesman, but it provides also a basis for the
standardization of all other statistics of the community. Statistics of pro-
duction, finance, transport, communication, trade, shipping, and vital statis-
tics, etc., however carefully compiled, lose much of their value unless it
be possible to co-ordinate them with the population from which they have
been derived. To know the value of production in different industries,
without knowing the number, sex, and age of those engaged in such indus-
tries, to know the extent of trade without knowing the number of people
responsible therefor, or to know the amount of public debt without knowing
the number of the population on whose behalf it has been raised, would
deprive our knowledge of the greater part of its value. For example, to
be told that the revenue derived from taxation in a particular country is
000,000, while that in another is only conveys in itself
no information whatever as to the relative incidence of these taxes upon
the individual inhabitants of the two countries, unless we also know the
population of each country. Even then we are hardly in a position to
judge unless we know what proportion belongs to the class of bread-
winners. To make the basis for our judgment still more complete, we
should have to consider the nature of the taxation, and then to possess fur-
ther information as to the economic and social condition of the people—
information, for example, such as the number of people earning different
incomes, and in the case of Customs or Excise duties, the consumption
by the different wage-classes of the various articles taxed. Although this
information is not being asked for at the Census, efforts are being made to
obtain it within the Commonwealth by other means. Again, we hear that
in the course of a year, there are 10,000 deaths in one place, 20,000 in
another. Unless we also know the population of each place, the propor-
tion of males and females, the number of persons in various age-classes,
and the nature of the occupations of the people, we cannot compare the
relative advantages of the two places with regard to health and hygiene.
All these and many similar important particulars are only obtained, and
can only be obtained, by means of the Census.
(c) Administrative.- —For administrative purposes, an accurate know-
ledge of the extent and distribution of the population is of the utmost value,
whether the matter in hand be that of providing facilities for transport and
communication, educational facilities, police, or other protection, or any
other of the many requirements of the community, the provision of which
devolves on the Government.
Another important object is that of obtaining information as to the dis-
tribution of population throughout the various parts of the country for the
purposes of division into electoral districts that will give equitable represen-
tation. The Commonwealth Constitution Act bases the representation of
the several States in the House of Representatives on their respective popu-
lations, thus making an accurate Census essential for the proper working
of the Constitution.
Whether a community is rapidly or slowly increasing, whether its mem-
bers are aggregating themselves in the towns or distributing themselves over
the country, whether existing or proposed expenditures of public or other
moneys—as, for example, on roads, railways, or schools —are justified by
•existing or anticipated local populations, whether the production of wealth
7


in any locality represents benefits to few or many; these are questions, the
answers to which are only possible through a good Census. Yet they are
indispensable to administration.
(d) Financial. —ln many ways a knowledge of its numbers is of ad-
vantage to a community from the stand-point of public finance. This is
especially the case in the Commonwealth, where the relative populations
of the several States have played such important parts in connexion with
the allocation to them of Commonwealth revenue and expenditure. Up to
the 30th June, 1910, all “ new ” expenditure of the Commonwealth was
debited to the States on a population basis, while under the scheme brought
into operation by the present Commonwealth Government, the populations
of the several States are made the bases of allocation of payments by the
Commonwealth to the States.
(e) Public Health. —Probably one of the most important objects of the
Census is that of enabling comparisons to be made between the death and
disease rates of various localities and in various trades. Reference has
already been made to the impossibility of instituting any such comparisons
without the knowledge obtained by means of the Census. With this
knowledge, in conjunction with statistics of deaths and diseases, investiga-
tions as to relative salubrity can be readily carried on, and by careful
analysis the cause of the excessive mortality or morbidity rates of any par-
ticular locality or trade may be ascertained and steps taken for the
amelioration of the conditions which have been instrumental in bringing
them about.
(/) General. —In addition to the more important objects and uses of
the Census which have been indicated in this chapter, there are many
others of minor importance. Enough has, however, been stated to show
that the modern Census is an institution of great value, and that the results
obtained by it are essential to the proper investigation of many economic
and sociological questions. It may be seen also that apart from its im-
mediate value the Census furnishes the basis upon which may be built that
derivative knowledge without which the legislation and administration of
a community would be carried on in the dark. It is this knowledge which
makes possible the review of the affairs of a nation, which enables some
estimate to be made of the success or failure of an administration, which
discloses whether those affairs indicate success or disaster. In short, with-
out statistics obtained by aid of the Census, any satisfactory review of, or
forecast in regard to, national affairs is an impossibility.
IV.—PREPARING FOR THE CENSUS.
Probably only those who have closely studied or have been engaged in
carrying out a Census realize the enormous amount of preparatory work
entailed, the extent of the field of inquiry, the amount of detail to be
covered, and the importance of getting accurate returns. In the first
place the nature and extent of the questions to be submitted have to be
carefully considered from various points of view, and possible objections
to certain queries or methods of presenting them have to be investigated
before even the Census form can be decided upon. Then the whole
country has to be divided up into Census districts and sub-districts, in the
most advantageous manner possible under the existing circumstances, care
being taken that the sub-districts are not too large, so that the collector
may be able to distribute and collect all the schedules within the allotted
time. This sub-division in the first place entails the preparation of maps
on a large scale covering the whole country, showing as clearly as pos-
sible the boundaries of the most important divisions, such as electoral and
municipal districts, with other boundaries such as city wards, suburbs,
etc., and then these maps have to be divided up into appropriate Census dis-
tricts. For each such district an officer—called an “ Enumerator ” must be
8


selected, possessing such qualifications as will warrant his appointment in
charge of the collection for that Census district. For the purposes of
organization at the forthcoming Census, the enumerators’ districts have been
grouped together for the several States of the Commonwealth, the Census
arrangements for each State being in charge of a supervisor, subject to the
general control of the Commonwealth Statistician. The total number of
enumerators to be employed at the forthcoming Commonwealth Census is
about 350. On each enumerator devolves the duty of cutting up his
Census district into suitable collectors’ districts, and of selecting for each
a person capable of carrying out the actual work of collection in that
collector’s district. Upwards of 6,000 collectors will be required for the
forthcoming Census. Those collecting in populous centres will carry out
their work on foot, while in the more remote districts bicycles, horses,
motors, vehicles, boats, and, possibly in some cases, camels will be
required.
On the present occasion the preparation of the maps and plans for all
the States except Tasmania, has been undertaken by the Commonwealth
Statistician. In the case of Tasmania arrangements were made with the
Surveyor-General of that State to have the requisite plans prepared in his
office. The divisions of each State under which it is desired to tabulate
the total population comprise Commonwealth Electoral Divisions, State
Electoral Provinces, State Electoral Districts, Counties, Parishes, and
Municipalities, and the boundaries of these various divisions require to be
accurately shown on the collectors’ maps in order that accuracy in the final
allocation of population may be secured. The matter is further compli-
cated owing to the various designations applied in the different States to
municipal areas and the local governing bodies controlling them. Thus, in
New South Wales, we have shires and municipalities; in Victoria, shires,
boroughs, towns, and cities ; in Queensland, shires, towns, and cities ; in
South Australia, corporations, district councils, towns, and cities; in
Western Australia, municipalities and road districts; and in Tasmania,
municipalities. Further, what is called a parish in New South Wales and
Victoria, is in South Australia termed a hundred, while both terms are
practically unknown in Western Australia.
While the preparation of the maps and the work of the enumerators is
going forward, consideration must be given to the subject of tabulation of
the returns when they reach the central bureau, so that as little delay as
possible may occur after the actual enumeration, and in this connexion the
methods of presenting facts at the previous Censuses of the Commonwealth
States and of other countries must be duly weighed. This will necessarily
involve the study of past Census Reports of various places as well as of
much current literature on the subject. Then having decided on the most
desirable method of presentation, the tabulation sheets must be prepared
and printed, and the necessary arrangements for the selection and accom-
modation of the Census staff must be made. It is computed that at the
forthcoming Census a staff of at least 150 clerks will be engaged for a
period of not less than two years. It is thus evident, from this brief de-
scription of the leading points connected with the preliminary work, that a
Census is by no means an undertaking to be entered upon without due con-
sideration of all its features.
V.—THE CENSUS CARDS OR SCHEDULES.
The scope of the Census in most countries is at present seriously
limited in various ways, among which the principal one is probably the
difficulty of obtaining intelligent and accurate answers to Census inquiries.
Such inquiries are advisedly worded so that they cannot well be misunder-
stood, and are in such a form that they will elicit the same sort of informa-
tion from all persons. Unfortunately it not infrequently occurs that no
9


proper attempt is made to comprehend the scope or object of the inquiries
instituted; the accompanying notes are not even read, while the whole
business is often regarded as an irksome imposition and a piece of in-
quisitorial official impertinence. The intelligence, co-operation, and good-
will of the people enumerated on the one hand, and of the actual collectors
of the returns on the other, are the links in the chain upon which the suc-
cess of Census largely depends.
In previous Australian Censuses, the information has been asked for
on a schedule in which the various queries appeared at the head of vertical
columns, the particulars concerning each person being written on a hori-
zontal line extending across the face of the schedule. Each schedule
usually made provision for twenty persons. At the forthcoming Census the
householder’s schedule will consist of an envelope, a householder’s card,
a personal card for each person in the household, and a set of instructions.
One householder’s card is to be provided for every dwelling or habitation
and is to be filled in by the head of the household, or the person in charge;
a. personal card is to be provided for each member of every household who
is present in the night from the 2nd to 3rd April next, and is to be filled
in either by the individual to whom the card refers or by the head of the
household.
Copies of these cards, filled in with supposititious examples, are given
on pages n and 16 of this pamphlet.
The use of a separate card for collecting the information from each
person has many advantages. When a schedule such as that used on
former occasions is filled in by persons unused to such work the liability
to error is considerable. With the personal card, on the other hand, each
reply has to be written in contiguity to the question, and the chance of
error is thus greatly reduced. The division of labour arising from the
■householder method of collection is by the provision of personal cards con-
siderably extended since each person in the household possessing the neces-
sary ability can now be entrusted with the filling in of his own personal
card. This will be a distinct advantage in the case of hotels, boarding-
houses, etc. A further advantage arising in such cases from the use of
personal cards, is that the only person in the hotel who need see the cards
is the proprietor or manager, who under the Act is responsible for the col-
lection in respect of the “ dwelling ”of which he is the “ occupier.” With
a large schedule or number of schedules the particulars furnished by those
entered early was often open for inspection by those entered later. This
was necessarily the case where each person was asked to fill up the line
relating to himself or herself. Another advantage of the use of personal
■cards for collection is that the information is at once available in a con-
venient form for any tabulation by hand sorting that it may be desired to
make. This system of collecting on personal cards has been adopted in
many European countries, and appears to have given every satisfaction. It
is proposed to deal briefly in the remaining parts of this chapter with the
leading features of the Census cards.
A. The Personal Card (see opposite page).
The personal card is the simplest that, under the circumstances, could
possibly be adopted, so far as the person who has to fill it in is concerned.
All it requires is, for each person present in the night from the 2nd to the
3rd April, or returning on the 3rd April (if not included elsewhere), a few
simple and readily ascertainable particulars. All matters relating to the
-classification, tabulation, and combination of these particulars when col-
lected are left to the Commonwealth Census Bureau. It should be borne
in mind that failure to answer any of the queries required (in either the
■householder’s or the personal card) is an offence punishable by a fine not
■exceeding £lO.
10


A
SPECIMEN OF A FILLED IN PERSONAL CARD.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
CENSUS, 3rd APRIL, 1911.
PERSONAL CARD
Tor Every Person present in the Night from 2nd to 3rd April, 1911,
or returning on 3rd April (if not included elsewhere).
Personal Card No. 3 ; of Householder’s Schedule No. 2.71
of Mesh No. 3 ; of Collector’s District of Census District No. 8,
State of— Yi'C/i-oA/VO/.
1. Name in full— .AA/iXCcA/, J^a/Kwe^.
(Underline Surname.)
_ ( Write M for Male) n
6X ( Write F for Female)
3. Date of Birth: —Day, 3; Month, ; Year, 18C|0.
(a) Where exact date of birth is unknown, age at last birthday... years.
(If married, write M.
If widowed, write W. m u
If divorced, write D. ll'-M/.
If never married, write N. M.
5. Date of existing Marriage ;—Year
6. Number of Children (living and dead) from existing Marriage.
(a) Number of Children (living and dead) from previous Marriage
7. Relation to Head of Household— <Sg-vu.
8. State if Blind or Deaf and Dumb
9. Country (or Australian State) where Born— iSe^iCa/nxL.
(If a British Subject by Parentage, write P. 1 c©
If a British Subject by Naturalization, write N. J J t
Race ;
11. If born outside Commonwealth, state length of residence therein—■
q years.
(a) Date of Arrival) . „ , , ~ , „
in Commonwealth) : ~ Da y> 13 ; Month > Year . IC i o2<
12. Religion— ©fv. ikiAKaCici-.
13. Education— H/.'UD'. <§&. Ai&tk-WAAA'ie- .
(a) At present receiving Education— ( ljt.
14. Profession or Occupation— ai- Tlrvi//.
(If engaged in more than one occupation, underline principal occupation.)
(a) State if Employer or Employee, &c
(See Instructions, page 4, line 14 (a) and (6)).
(b) If out of work, state period
(c) Occupation of Employer (if any).


The particulars specified above the heavy line on the card are to be
filled in by the collector. These particulars are provided for as a key to-
the place (i.e., the electoral division, district, or province, or municipal
district, etc.) to which each individual is to be allocated, and are neces-
sary so that the population of the various districts of the Commonwealth
may be accurately ascertained. Having located the district, the next thing
is to obtain a symbolical representation of the individual, and here it may
be well to draw attention to the fact that the information supplied is re-
garded as most strictly confidential, heavy penalties being provided for
anything in the nature of a breach of confidence on the part of any person
employed in the Census. Much of the objection which undoubtedly even
yet exists in some quarters, to replying to the questions asked in the
Census card or schedule appears to be due to a vague idea that in some
way or other the Census authorities are anxious either to publish to the
world or to ascertain for their own personal information the idiosyncrasies
of the individual members of the community. Nothing could be further
from the truth. Particulars relating to individuals are asked for only in
order that such individuals may be counted in the classes to which they
belong, and the information which it is desired to obtain is that relating,
to aggregates, and not individuals.
To proceed with the particulars asked for in the personal card —the
first query asks for the name of each person. So far as the tabulating,
and compiling work to be performed at the Census Bureau is concerned,
this query is of no value whatever, since, as has already been pointed out,
the Census results are absolutely impersonal and refer to aggregates only.
The objects of this query are, however, (a) to facilitate further inquiry by
the collector if it is found that any of the later queries have been erro-
neously or insufficiently answered, (b) to enable the number of each sex-
specified in the householder’s card to be verified, and ( c ), if necessary, to
provide a useful check on the accuracy of the information asked for in
the second query. This query relates to sex, and it has been found in
past Censuses that a male is occasionally, by inadvertence, entered as a
female, and vice versa ■ the insertion of the full Christian name will, in
the majority of cases, assist in the detection of such an error. The sex
should be indicated by inserting in answer to the second query the letter
“ M ” if a male, and “ F ” if a female.
In query 3 provision is made for ascertaining the age of the person
to whom the card refers. Many persons seem to think that it is a matter
of comparatively little importance what age they fill in on the Census
schedule, so long as it is somewhere near the mark. In past Censuses of
Australia, as well as of other countries, the returns in regard to age have
been grossly inaccurate, the numbers of persons concentrating at the ages
ending in o and 5, and the concentration being most marked at ages ending"
in o. This practice is much to be deplored, since many of the uses to
which the Census results are put require that the ages should be, as nearly
as possible, correct; hence inaccurate returns render the results much less
valuable than if the true ages were given. It is thought that most people,
when they wish to state their ages, refer back to the date of birth; it is
this date, therefore, that has been asked for in the first place, the computa-
tion of the ages being left to the Census staff. Where the exact date of
birth is unknown, the age at last birthday should be given. It may here
be mentioned that to knowingly make an untrue statement in the Census
schedule is an offence punishable by a fine not exceeding ,£SO.
Query 4 relates to the condition as to marriage, and need not be
answered in the case of children under \2 years of age. Provision is
made for denoting to which of the four divisions —married, widowed,
divorced, or never married—the individual belongs, the letters “ M>”
“ W,” “ D,” or “ N.M.” being used to indicate the respective conditions.
Many interesting and important questions, social and economic, depend for
12


rtheir elucidation upon the information furnished in reply to this query,
and it is, consequently, of importance that the particulars should be ac-
curately supplied.
Queries 5 and 6 (to be answered by married, widowed, or divorced
persons) refer respectively to year of existing marriage and to number of
children, living or dead, born to the existing or to any previous marriage
(or marriages).* The object of these inquiries is to throw some light
upon what are generally regarded as some of the most pressing problems
of the day, viz., the causes of the decline in the birth-rate, the postpone-
ment of marriage to a later age than formerly, the average number of
children per family, and the fecundity or reproductive powers of married
couples in relation to their ages at the time of marriage. Such problems
as these are of immense importance from the stand-point of our national
jdestiny. If a nation be content to drift along the path of least resistance,
it must necessarily suffer from a one-sided or defective development. It
will be evident, however, that in this country where we have the British
race transplanted and new influences at work, we shall do well to watch
with adequate attention the evolution of the people and to systematically
study the development of our race. Great schemes for the guidance of
,our national growth, and for the welfare of the constituent elements of
our infant nation, cannot hope to be uniformly successful unless directed
by an adequate study of the development of population in every material
relationship.
Query 7 provides for the statement of the relation which the particular
individual referred to bears to the head of the household—that is, whether
wife, son, daughter, or other relative, visitor, lodger, or servant, and in
■the case of public institutions whether officer, patient, nurse, prisoner, etc.
In query 8, provision is made for the statement of cases of
Blindness or deaf-mutism. Only persons totally unable to see should be
entered as blind, and as deaf and dumb only those who are dumb as well
as deaf. Care should be taken that no such cases go unrecorded, as the
possession of reliable information on these points is of no little value and
importance in the interests of the unfortunate persons who are so afflicted.
The information required in queries 9 and 10, relating, as it does,
•to country of birth and race, is also of great value. In this connexion,
there are really three distinct matters to be taken into account, viz., country
of birth, race, and nationality {i.e., political allegiance). No attempt
js made on the card to ascertain any particulars concerning nationality,
-except such as are required in order to enable a distinction to be made
between those persons who are British subjects and those who are subjects
of foreign powers. A person may be a British subject by reason, either
■of place of birth (which would be disclosed in query 9), by parentage, or
by naturalization (query to). Since a similar method is being generally pur-
sued throughout the British Empire, the result will be an enumeration of all
British subjects. In answer to query 9, the name of the country, colony,
or State of the Commonwealth, only should be specified, as excessive detail
is not required, and the entry of some insignificant village as “ country
where bom,” will often entail a considerable waste of time in inquiry and
investigation by the Census clerks. In query 10, in case where a person
is a British subject by parentage, the letter “ P ” should be inserted, and
where by naturalization, the letter “ N.” The inquiry as to race need
not be answered by persons of European racef; in all other
cases the proper information, such as Aboriginal, Chinese, Japanese,
Hindu, Javanese, Manilaman, Negro, Polynesian) or Aboriginal
half-caste, Chinese half-caste, etc., as the case may be, should be inserted.
As questions relating to the number of aliens, and especially of the Chinese
* In the supposititious example given on the card on page 11, since the reply to query 4 is “ N.M.”
■.■(never married), queries 5 and 6 are not answered.
t In the supposititious example given on the card on page 11, for instance, this line is left blank.


and Japanese populations in the Commonwealth, excite considerable interest,
it is of importance that none of this information should be omitted.
Query n provides for a statement of the number of years each indivi-
dual, not born in the Commonwealth, has resided therein. As an indication
of the permanence of settlement of the Commonwealth, this information is-
of considerable value. The length of residence is to be obtained in years,
and, as a check on the information thus furnished, a further inquiry is
made as to date of arrival in the Commonwealth. As showing the difficulty
which has been experienced in drafting unambiguous questions, so that they
cannot well be misunderstood, it may be mentioned that at the last Census-
of Western Australia, in one case the reply received to the query “ Length
of residence. If not born in Western Australia, state length of residence
therein*” was, “ 36-ft. half-block ” ; while in several cases the “ length of
residence ” was stated to be 6 x 8, evidently referring to a tent of those
dimensions.
Religious denomination is the subject of inquiry in query 12, and if
is desired that the denomination or sect to which each person belongs shall
be explicitly stated. Vague, indefinite terms, which might mean one of
several different religious bodies, are to be avoided. Thus “ Protestant ”
should not be used where “ Church of England ” is intended, or
“ Catholic ” where “ Roman Catholic ” is meant. If the person is a
free-thinker, or if no denomination or religion, the fact should be stated.
If any person, however, conscientiously object to state his religious
denomination, the word “object” may be inserted, this being,
the only query on the Census card to which the option of
refusing to furnish a reply is allowed. In every other case,
a refusal renders the person liable to a fine of Actual
experience in past Censuses has shown, however, that relatively few
people avail themselves of the right to object; and, in view of the fact that
the question is of such great and general interest, it is hoped that at the
forthcoming Census there will be such a desire on the part of the people
to make the Census as complete as possible, that the number of objectors
will be reduced to a minimum. In the case of children, however young,
the religion in which it is intended they shall be brought up, should be
inserted.
Query 13 provides for particulars relating to education. In the first
line, provision is made for the degree of education to be stated, the infor-
mation required being, however, of a very simply nature. If a person
cannot read, the letters “C.R.” are to be inserted in this line; if able-
to read only, the letter “ R.” is to be inserted; and if able to read and
write, the letters “ R.W.” If not able to read English, but able to-
read a foreign language, the letters “ R.F.” should be inserted; and if
not able to read and write English, but able to both read and write a
foreign language, the letters “ R.W.F.” are to be inserted. If the person-
to whom the card relates has obtained a University degree, the degree
should be stated, as well as the name of the University and the country
in which the degree was obtained. Query 13(a) refers only to persons
receiving instruction at the time of the Census. In this line, the kind of
school, etc., must be indicated. The “ U.” denotes a university, “ S.”
a State school, and “ P.” any other school; while “ H.” is to be inserted 5
if instruction is being received at home. The name of the school, etc.,
must be added; this information is required in order to allow of a complete-
classification according to class of school.
Query 14, the last on the personal card, relates to profession or occupa-
tion ; and, before filling in the answers to this query, it will be necessary
to read carefully the instructions relating thereto, copies of which are to
be distributed with the cards. It is of the greatest importance to ascertain
accurately the proportion of the population which obtains a living in each of
the many avenues of employment, and the instructions are intended to-
14


ensure that the occupations shall be stated with sufficient clearness to admit
of their being grouped under well-defined heads, and classified according,
to the nature of the object for which the work is performed. Thus, for
example, the term “ labourer ” is such a very broad one, and embraces-
so many and such varied occupations, differing essentially both in nature
and object, that it is absolutely necessary that some distinguishing words
or phrase should be used in order that the person enumerated may be
counted in that class to which he rightly belongs. Similar remarks apply
to such designations as clerk, carter, book-keeperi salesman, etc. These
should all, in the interests of the occupations concerned, be duly qualified,
as, for example, clerk to grocer, brewer’s carter, drapery salesman, etc.,,
in order that the employment provided by each class of occupation may
be accurately ascertained. In order to give still greater precision to the
nature of the occupation, a subsidiary query 14(c) is added, specifying
the occupation of the individual’s employer; this query is, of course, only
applicable to persons earning salary or wages, and is therefore not answered
in the supposititious example given in the form on page 11.
The system of classification which it has been decided to adopt in the
compilation of the forthcoming Census returns, provides for the division*
of occupations into eight main classes (i.) Professional, (ii.) Domestic,
(iii.) Commercial, (iv.) Transport and communication. (v.) Industrial,
(vi.) Agricultural, pastoral, mineral, and other primary producers,
(vii.) Indefinite, and (viii.) Dependents. At the Census of 1901, these
main eight classes were divided and sub-divided into over 650 orders,,
sub-orders, and groups. This number will probably be increased at
the forthcoming Census. It is evident, therefore, that failure on the part
of those responsible for filling in the schedules to define clearly the nature
and purpose of the occupations, will unduly increase the number shown*
under unsatisfactory “ indefinite” heads. The occupation to be specified,
is that which each person is following and deriving support from at the
date of the Census. If any person is unemployed at that date, the occupa-
tion usually followed should be inserted. If out of work for a period l
exceeding one week immediately prior to the date of the Census, the period
should be specified in reply to query 14 (b). The object of this query is
to afford some further indication as to the economic condition of different
industries, and the state of the labour market, employment, etc.
Query 14 (a) provides for a statement of the grade, etc., of the occupa-
tion, letters being used (see instructions) for the purpose of distinguishing..
Thus “ E.” inserted in this line, denotes an employer of labour other
than household servants; “O.” a person in business on his own account,
but not employing others; “A.” a person assisting the head of the house-
hold in his business, but not receiving salary or wages; “ W.” a person
receiving salary or wages; “ N.” a person who, at the date of the Census,
is out of work, and has been so for more than a week prior to that date.
The information furnished in this column will give an interesting indica-
tion of the magnitude of the various branches of industry in the com-
munity.
B. The Householder's Card (see next page).
There are four chief reasons for which it is necessary to provide house-
holders’ cards in addition to the personal cards for each member of the
household, viz;—
(a) To enable a preliminary count merely of the numbers of each sex
to be obtained as soon as possible after the date of the Census.
(l>) To act as a check on the number of personal cards in each house-
hold.
(c) To identify the personal cards of each household and to keep them
together. This is necessary for certain tabulating purposes, as, for examples
the tabulation of ages of husbands and wives.
(d) To obtain information as to habitations.
15


o
ooo-idjtniKio toi—
No. of
Persona]
Card.
£T c* c* c* c- c* c;
ro
C < Oa r^>
? e- e e > e
c 5=- 0 ato V> V?
r f % $ %- 1 T ?
Name.
- - -
p
- - - -
hi
£
No. of
CD00— TaiOl t4^COfcOI— *
Card.
H
1
O
B
t
03
K
Cn
H
09
1
B.
SPECIMEN OF A FILLED IN HOUSEHOLDER’S CARD.*
COMMONWEALTH OP AUSTRALIA.
CENSUS, SpdAPRIL, 1911.
HOUSEHOLDER’S CARD,
'Being a Summary of Members of the Household, or Family, Visitors, Lodgers, or
Servants, who slept or abode in this Dwelling in the Night from 2nd to
3rd April, 1911.
Householder’s Card No. 2.71
Of Mesh No. 3 ; of Collector’s District IS- 1 of Census District No. 8.
State of Vutits-Wo/.
County of t&ts-uA&e. Parish or Hundred of
Federal Electoral Division—
State Electoral Province —fboJeX
State Electoral District— fiW’ws^M'uba'ui,.
Municipality or Shire— JA/QXVeA/w; Ward or Riding—
(or other Local Government Area, viz.: — City, Town, Borough, Corporation, District
Council, Road District, de.)
Town, Village, or Locality — ftcx&K’ A\ -aX'V eA-rv.
Street, and Number or Name of Dwelling— 11}aVeA/Coty-V&cudL, 35.
1. Nature of Building— d'-W-uAC/.
2. Material of which outer Walls are built— tS-Wifky.
13. Number of Rooms— 7 ■
4. Owner, Tenant, or Rent Purchaser— (S'.
-5. Weekly Rent payable, or Rental Value per week—2s kfv.
To be filled in
by
Householder,
I hereby certify that the particulars on the 8 Personal Cards herewith
and on this Householder’s Card (forming together a Householder’s Schedule)
have been correctly and completely filled in to the best of my knowledge
.and belief.
Witness my hand— (Signed) fy<sh/n/ JAaMx,\/.
(Signature of Householder, or Person in Charge, or of a Collector.)
• There are slight variations of this form for the different States, inasmuch as the districts are
.differently named.


As in the personal card, so in the householder’s card, the first lines—
until we come to particulars of buildings—are to be filled in by the col-
lector, and are for the purpose of fixing the locality to which the persons
enumerated belong. Particulars as to locality are provided for here in
greater detail than in the personal cards, each of which can be identified
(as regards locality) by means of the corresponding householder’s card.
The five queries grouped together under brackets relate to dwellings, and
are to be filled in by the householder or person in charge. These particu-
lars are of great importance both from an economic, social, and hygienic
point of view, as throwing light on the subject of the housing of the
people.
Query i relates to nature of building, and particulars should be inserted
specifying whether the dwelling is a private house, a tenement in a private
house, an hotel, a boarding or lodging house, a religious or educational
institution, a military establishment, a charitable institution, or a penal
establishment.
In query 2 provision is made for inserting particulars as to the material
of which the outer walls of the dwelling are composed. It will be neces-
sary to state whether these consist of stone, brick, concrete, wood, iron,
canvas, or whatever material may have been used.
In reply to the third query the number of rooms must be stated. The
kitchen is to he included as one of the rooms, but such a room as a shop,
office, store, bathroom, pantry, or outhouse, is to be excluded, unless some
one sleeps therein. In case of a tenement the number of rooms in the tene-
ment only should be given.
Query 4 provides for a statement as to whether the householder is the
owner, tenant, or rent purchaser of the dwelling. The information should
be given by inserting the letter “ 0.” if an owner, “ T.” if a tenant, and
“ R.P. ” if a rent purchaser.
In reply to the fifth query particulars should be given as to the weekly
rent payable or rental value per week. Tenants should specify the actual
rent per week; owners, rent purchasers, and persons living free on premises
in lieu of rent should state the rental value per week.
In the tabular statement the name of each individual, for whom per-
sonal cards are filled in, should be specified. The name of the head of
the household should be inserted first, followed, when necessary, by those
of the wife, children, other relatives, visitors, lodgers, and servants in
their respective order. It is desirable that the full Christian name or
names should be given in all cases where space permits, as often providing
a useful check on the accuracy of the information supplied in the personal
cards, but where it is found impossible to insert full Christian names,
initials will be accepted.
The householder’s card, after being carefully filled in, must be signed
by the householder or person in charge of the dwelling to which it refers.
The instructions which will be left with the cards should be carefully read
before a start is made at filling in the face of the cards.
The great value of accurate information of the kind asked for in the
Census cards has so often been pointed out in the course of these notes,
that it is perhaps unnecessary to again refer to this phase of the question;
but for the information of those who may be so unresponsive to the call of
public duty as to require compulsion in a national matter of so great im-
portance as the Census, attention may again be drawn to the fact that, with
the single exception of the question relating to religion, a refusal to supply
any of the particulars required carries with it a liability to a penalty of
while a penalty of £5O attaches to the offence of knowingly making
any statement which is untrue in any material particular.
C.lo. »
17


VI.—COLLECTION, COMPILATION, AND THE CENSUS
REPORT.
Reference has already been made (see p. 8) to the division of the
whole Commonwealth into; (a) State supervisors’ districts (coincident with
(he States), (b) enumerators’ (Census) districts, and ( c) collectors’ sub-
districts. The State supervisor is immediately responsible to the Com-
monwealth Statistician, the enumerator to the supervisor, and the collector
to the enumerator, while the collector deals directly with the persons
required to furnish returns. The enumerators receive instructions to sub-
divide their districts in such a manner that each collector may be able
to carry out his work of distributing and collecting the schedules within
a prescribed time, varying in length according to the special circumstances
of each sub-district. In populous centres, the collectors will be required
to carry out the distribution of the schedules in their sub-districts during
the four days preceding Sunday, the 2nd April next. In all cases, the
distribution must be completed on or before Saturday, the xst April.
At each dwelling, the collector will ascertain the number of cards required,
and when distributing the schedules, will explain the nature and importance
of the returns, and the obligation imposed by law upon each occupier to
give a complete and accurate statement. Each personal card will be
accompanied by a set of instructions for filling in the particulars required.
On Monday, the 3rd April, next, the actual work of collection will be
commenced, and must be completed within the time allotted for each
particular sub-district. At each place visited> the cards previously left
will be asked for, and when received, the collector will ascertain if they
contain all the particulars required; if not, he will endeavour to obtain
such further information as is necessary. It will also be one of the duties
of the collectors to help those who, through being illiterate or from other
causes, are unable to personally fill in their cards.
When the work of collection is completed, the returns are to be handed
in by the collector to the enumerator, who, after having satisfied himself
that the population of the whole district under his charge has been satis-
factorily dealt with, will in due course forward them on to his State
supervisor; he, in turn, will send them on to the Commonwealth Statis-
tician. By this means, the raw material will be obtained from which the
Census Report, with its voluminous tables and appendices, is to be worked
up. This responsible and laborious task is carried out at the Central
Bureau. The compilers’ work consists in classifying, grouping, and sum-
marizing the mass of detail which has been gathered together, so as to
show in a convenient and condensed form the salient features of the
aggregate returns. Altogether, it is estimated that about 4,500,000 per-
sonal cards, and nearly 1,000,000 householders’ cards, will be analyzed.
It is upon the intelligence and industry of the Census clerk, combined with
the efficiency of the supervision which is exercised over him, that depends
the success of faithful!} representing the aggregates of the individual
returns.
An important part of the work, largely supplementary to that of com-
pilation and tabulation, is the preparation of the Census Report. The
ideal Report should contain, not only a statement in tabular form of
the results deduced, and a detailed account of the methods employed in
collection and tabulation, with comments on their merits and defects, but
should also provide an interesting sociological review of the community
enumerated, based on the tabular results obtained, as well as an indication
pf the many investigations to which the data may be applied, Another
18


branch of this work consists in the graphical representation of such of the
Census results as lend themselves to this method of display. Whereas
with figures alone comparisons are often tedious and appreciated with
difficulty, the graph or diagram is a direct picture in which the relative
magnitudes are preserved, and by means of which instantaneous com-
parisons of a large series of results are made possible. Then, again, there
are many penetrating and exhaustive mathematical analyses to be made,
and their results presented in a suitable form for the more scientific
reader. The crude results of the Census must be “ smoothed;” differential
relationships analyzed, and “life,” “natality,” and “marriage” tables
must be prepared for the use of the actuary and others. It will be
evident, therefore, that even after the raw Census material has been
reduced to tabular form by the Census clerks, the investigations to be
made, and the work to be carried out, are of an extensive and varied
character.
By Authority : J. Kemp, Government Printer, Melbourne,
19


SPECIMEN OF A FILLED IN PERSONAL CARD.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
CENSUS, 3rd APRIL, 1911.
PERSONAL CARD,
tar avery Person present in the Night from 2nd to 3rd April, 1911,
or returning on 3rd April (if not included elsewhere).
Personal Card No. 3 of Householder’s Schedule No. 27
No. 3 J of Collector’s District B; of Census District Nr, $
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Name in full— Miller, James.
(UndarUn. Sunuuno.)
_ (Write M for Male 1 ..
(Write P for Female|
Date of Birth Day, J; Month, Sept. J Year, 1890.
) Where exact date of birth is unknown, age at last birthday yean.
/If married, write M. )
Jlf widowed, write W. \ hi KA
j If divorced, write D. |
(if never married, write N. M. )
Date of existing Marriage:—Year
Number of Children (living and dead) from existing Marriage
) Number of Children (living and dead) from previous Marriage
Relation to Head of Household— Son.
State if Blind or Deaf and Dumb
Country (or Australian State) where Bom—■ Scotland.
/If a British Subject by Parentage, write P. \ p
J If a British Subject by Naturalization, write N. J
( Race:— ,
If bom outside Commonwealth, state length of residence therein—
-9 years.
131 Mo ” tb ’ Marchi 1902 -
Religion— Presbyterian Ch. of Australia.
Education— R.W. B.Sc. Sydney,
)At present receiving Education— (J,
Profession or Occupation— Student at University.
(If engaged in more than, one occupation, underline principal occupation.)
) State if Employer or Employee, &c -
(See Instructions, page 4, line 14 (a) and (6) ).
) If out of work, state period
) Occupation of Employer (if any) , -


Cwum Ttrm j CONFIDENTIAL.
Before Blllng la this Csrd pitas* stuty tbt Dlrtctlom cn ths ataompanylin
theet ui the Spthata Card on the Back hereof.
A. COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
CENSUS, 3rd APRIL, 1911.
PERSONAL CARD.
For tvtry Porton peasant in the Night from 2nd to 3rd April, 1811,
or returning on 3rd April (If not Included elsewhere). .
Personal Card No. of Householder’s Schedule qq
of Mesh Nof Collector's of Census District No.. ..^,O t
STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
left blud^
1. Name in fall
(Undorllao Saraamo.)
, _ (Write M fer lisle 1
1 ( Write F for Female J '
3. Date of Birth Daj ; Month ; Year J
(a) If exact date of birth is unknown, state age at last birthday years.
(If married, write M. 'J
A Jlf widowed, write W.
j If divorced, write D. J
V If nerer married, write N, M. J
6. Date of existing Marriage:—Year
6. Number of Children (living and dead) from existing Marriage
(a) Number of Children (living and dead) from previous Marriage
7. Relation to Head of Household
8. State if Blind or Deaf and Dumb
9.. Country or Australian State where Born
{lf a British Subject by Parentage, write P.
If a British Subject by Naturalisation, write N. J
Race •
11. If bon eutaid* Commonwealth, state length of residence therein—
_ years.
‘•tfSU^SS}
12, Religion
13. Education
(a) At present receiving Education
14. Profession or Occupation
(If eafft(«d la mora than one occupation, uderlise principal occupation.)
(a) State if Employer or Employee, Ac. ——
(S«o Instructions, ptf* i, Use U (a) an 4 (I) )•
(6) If out of work, state period .
(c) Occupation of Employer (if any)
UMS


*Censns Form 5.
C. INSTRUCTIONS
FOR
FILLING IN THE HOUSEHOLDERS’ SCHEDULES.
CONSISTING OF
THE PERSONAL CARDS “ A ” AND THE
HOUSEHOLDERS' CARDS “ B.”
Information given on a Census Card is strictly confidential,
and is used only for statistical purposes.
1.—GENERAL.
The householder or person in charge of the dwelling is required to fill in
the personal cards and the householder’s card (forming together a house-
holder’s schedule) contained in this envelope (or is to see that each perron
who abode in the dwelling on the night of Sunday, 2nd April, 1911, himoeif
or herself fills in one of the personal cards. The householder or person in
charge of the dwelling is further esquired to furnish on personal cards
particulars regarding those persons travelling or out at work during that
night (and not included elsewhere), and who returned to this house or dwell-
ing on Monday, 3rd April. If the house is occupied by different families-
on separate floors or in separate tenements, each such floor or tenement
must bo treated as a separate dwelling, and the occupier or person in charge
of each must make a return upon a separate householder’s card. In the oae*
of large pastoral and other similar establishments the proprietor or superin-
tendent may fill in the returns of his complete establishment, but a separate
householder’s card must in this case be used for each of the out-station
dwelling-houses or huts in which a distinct family or person resides, in
addition to that for the home station; and if any out-station is in a different
oolleotor’s district from that of the home station, the schedule (householder's
and personal cards) for it must be delivered to the collector of the distrust
is which such dwelling is situated.
Particular attention i« diawn to the fact that Section 26 of the Cenmu
and Statistics Act 1905 imposes a penalty of Fifty pounds on any person who.
in any form supplied under the Act, or in reply to any question asked him
under the authority of the Act, shall knowingly make any statement which
is untrue in any material particular.
2.— PERSONAL CARDS.
Un 2. — ’Write M for Males and F for Females. This is necessary, as the
names do not always form a sure indication of the sex.
Us* 3.—lt is important that this information be given with perfect
accuracy.
Unt 4a—Write M for married, W for Widower or Widow, D for Divorced,
and NM for Never Married, except in the case of children under 12 years of
Hm s.—Write here the year of existing marriage.
Um 6.—Write here the number of children bom to the existing marriage
whether now living or not; if none, write " Kona."
UM 6 (a). —Write here the number of children bom to any previous
marriage (or marriages) whether now living or not; if none, write ** None."
MM


Lins 7.—State whether head, wife, son, daughter, or other relative,
visitor, lodger, or servant; and, in the case of public institutions, whether
officer, inmate, prisoner, & o.
Line B.—lnformation is required only as to blindness and deaf-mutism.
Enter as blind only persons totally unable to see, and as deaf and dumb
only those w'ao are dumb as well as deaf.
Line 9.—lf bom in Commonwealth, enter the name of the State of birth;
if bom elsewhere, enter the name of the country of birth.
Lins 10.—If a British subject by parentage, whether born in the United
Kingdom, in a British possession, in a foreign country, or at sea, write P;
if a British subject by naturalization, write N. ■ If not of European reuse,
write Aboriginal, Chinese, Japanese, Hindu, Javanese, Manilaman, Negro,
Polynesian, or Aboriginal half-caste, Chinese half-caste, &c., &c., as the
case may be.
Line 11. —If not bom in Commonwealth, state length of residence therein
in years, and also state date of arrival in Commonwealth.
Line 12.—80 not use general terms that include more than one religions
denomination or sect.
In the case of children enter the name of the religion in which it is
intended they shall be brought up.
If you object to state to what religious denomination you belong writs
“ Object.”
Une 13.—Write CR for cannot read, B for read only, and EW for road
and write. If not able to read English, but able to read a foreign language,
write BE, and if not able to read and write English, but able to both read
and write a foreign language, write BWF.
If the person to whom the card relates has obtained a University degree,
state the degree, and give the name of the University and country in which
it was obtained.
Line 13 (a). —Write Uif at University; Sif at State School; Pif at any
other school; and Hif being educated at home. Give name of school.'
Line It.—
Army and Navy. —lf on actual service, state so. If retired, state
present occupation.
Persons in the service of the Federal, State, or Local Governments are
to state occupation, position, department, adding F if in Federal, S if in
State, and L if in Local Government service; and if engaged in any other
occupation, to specify its nature.
Justices of the Peace, Aldermen, Town Councillors, &c., and other
important public officers, are to state their ordinary profession or occupa-
tion.
Ministers of Religion are to state denomination. The indefinite term
“ Clerk ” must not be used. Local or occasional preachers are to return
their ordinary occupation.
Members of the Legal Profession are to state whether in actual practice;
if not practising, to state present occupation. Persons employed in
solicitors’ offices are to state whether they are articled or other clerks.
Members el the Medical Profession are to state whether they are physi-
cians, surgeons, or general practitioners, and to return themselves as prac-
tising or not practising; if not practising, to state present occupation.
mn


Teachers, Authors, Public Writers, and Artists ere to state the per-
tioular branch of science, literature, or art in which they are engaged.
Engineers are to state whether civil, mechanical, electrical.
marine, Ac.; also the nature of work on which engaged. '
Surveyors are to state whether land, mining, marine, Ao.
Englnedrlvers, Stokers, firemen, Ac., are to state the nature of the
business in connection with which they are occupied, thus;—“Engine,
driver at sawmiU,” “ Stoker at foundry,” “ Fireman on railway," Its.
Engine-drivers are not to be entered as engineers.
Miners are to specify the nature of the mineral on which they work,
and in respect of metallic ores, to state whether lode or alluvial. A miner
working for another is to return himself as “ miner "and not as “ labourer."
Artisans and Mechanics are to state the particular branch of their
trade, thus—“ Ship’s carpenter” “ House carpenter,” “ Coaohirnith,"
“ locksmith,” “Horseshoer,” Ac,
. Carters, Carriers, Labourers, Servants, Ac., are to be described fat
connection with their usual employment, thus—“ Carter to grocer," 11 Bui.
lock-driver on station,” “ Labourer making roads,” “ Omnibus-driver,"
“ Cabman,” “ Railway porter,” “ Telegraph messenger,” “ Homes tie ser-
vant.”
Persons engaged in Trade or Commerce, as Merchants, Manufacturers,
Storekeepers, Retailers, Brokers, Agents, Auctioneers, Ac., are to atate
the particular business in which they are engaged, or the principal com-
modity in which they deal, thus—“ Grain merchant,” “ Hat manufacturer."
Clerks, Bookkeepers, Salesmen, Saleswomen, Shopmen, Commercial
Travellers, &C., are to be described according to the business with which
they are connected, thus—“ Bank clerk,” “ Railway clerk,” “ Salesman in
soft-goods warehouse,” to grocer,” “ Commercial traveller to
wine merchant,” Ac.
Farmer or Market Gardener.—These terms are to be applied to all
persons actually in occupation of land and tilling, whether proprietors or
tenants; the term “ landowner ”is too vague. Market gardeners must not
omit the word “ Market.” The term “ Farmer ”is understood to mean
“ Agricultural farmer ” ; if “ Dairy” or “ Poultry farmer,” As., it
be so stated.
Persons not following any Profession, Trade, or Calling, and not holding
any public office, but possessed of independent means, are to designate
themselves as “ Proprietor of land,” “ Proprietor of houses,” “ Capitalist,"
“ Annuitant,” as the case may be. The term “ Householder ”is not to be
used in place of “ Proprietor of houses,” nor the words “ Gentleman"
or “ Lady ” in place of “ No occupation.”
Wives, Sons, Daughters, Brothers, and other Relatives habitually help,
mg on farms and stations, or engaged in hotels, shops, or other industrial
pursuits, are to be returned as “ Wife assisting,” “ Son assisting,” Ao., a*
the case may be.
Women.—The occupations of women who are engaged in any other
than domestic duties are to be distinctly recorded, but women an not to
be entered as engaged in the occupations of their husbands, fathers,
unless they habitually assist them. When only in the capacity of wife,
mother, daughter, sister, Ac., write, “ Domestic duties.”.


Children being educated are to.be designated “ Scholar," if not engaged
as well in any industrial pursuit; but if following any such pursuit during
portion of their time, as, for instance, delivering or selling newspapers,
mincing cows, Ac., before or after school hours, are to be set down as
following that pursuit, the entry on line 13 (a) sufficiently showing that
they are also receiving education.
Persons In Hospitals, Asylums, Gaols, to.—The position of officers in
the Institution, as “ Warder,” “Nurse,” Ac., is to be given, and in the
case of inmates,” Prisoner,” “ Patient,” Ac. { their calling (if any) before
they entered the institution is to be inserted on line 14.
N.B. —Great care is to be taken in writing the name of an occupation
which is common to many kinds or branches of business, to add the name
of the employer’s trade or business. The following occupations are of this
type, and require the additional information suggested within parentheses,
thus—Assistant (to draper). Accountant (to ironmonger). Apprentice (to
baker), Agent (for shipping company), Cashier (in bank), Clerk (to brewer).
Carter (to miller). Engine-driver (on railway), labourer (on wharf, on roads,
Ac.), Ac., Ac. Persons engaged in more than one occupation are requested
to state their several occupations, and to underline the principal one.
Line 14 (a) and (b). —Write E if an employer of labour other than house-
hold servants; 0 if in business on own account but not employing others
for salary or wages; Aif assisting head of household in his business but not
receiving salary or wages; W if earning salary or wages; and (except in
oases of leave of absence) add N if out of work for more than a week prior
to census, stating under (b) period during which out of work.
line 14 (c). —If earning salary or wages, state occupation of employer.
3.— USEHOLDERS’ CARDS.
BUILDINGS.—Line I.—State whether a private house; a tenement in
a private house; a hotel, boarding, or lodging house; a religious or educa-
tional institution; a'military establishment; a charitable institution! or
a penal establishment.
TJna 2.—State whether the outer walls are built of stone, brick, concrete,
wood, iron, canvas, or any other material.
♦
Line B.—State number of rooms, including kitchen, tut excluding shop,
office, store, bathroom, pantry, or outhouses, unless some one sleeps therein.
In the case of a tenement, give number of rooms in tenement only. In
case of a building the only resident whereof is a caretaker, give number of
rooms in caretaker’s quarters only.
Una 4. —Write 0 if owner; X if tenant; or BP if rent purchaser.
NOTE.—Every answer, except where abbreviations are suggested
in these directions, should be written IN FUEL.
fctesy: Wlffism ApplafaU OollWt. Qevwuunt Print**.—lMA
MM6
