

' i IB *
# -
i..
m THE MOST WONDERFUL)®
1 TREEJ1 THEWORm-| f/
no
O' pi
JfflhE PA-PAW^®
*jg J
j
z
THE MOST WONDERFUL
TREE IN THE WORLD-
THE PA-PAW


Jo the Medical profession. Scientists,
and Jftinfers :
THE HOST WONDERFUL TREE IN THE WORLD
THE PAPAW TREE
(Carica Papaia).
PRICE—ONE SHILLING.
The Carter-Watsoo Co., 65 Elizabeth Street.


XTbe papaw ißemefcies:
The Papaw Gargle
The Papaw Ointment
The Papaw Glyco-Phosphates
The Papaw Aperient Pills
The Papaw Tonic Mistoids
The Papaw Capsules
The Papaw Papayate
The Papaw Cooling Lotion


.PREFACE.
my father’s training and to my mother’s
Wf ollr influences I am responsible for my life
jll in career 3,8 tastes and struggles and
tilt JL %JJJ issues. When I was in my teens, dis-
\\%L, /) cussing with my father my future, he
said to me; “Because of small means,
I could not give you property to obtain
wealth; but I led you to study Nature and Christian
morals.” Through this training, from my boyhood my
greatest hobby has been the study of Nature’s sciences.
I made a collection of most of the British wild flowers;
I studied the birds, and was one of the first (if not the
first) to ensure an egg found in a wagtail’s nest as
laid by a cuckoo. The cuckoo, carrying an egg in her
bill, attracted the attention of the pair of wagtails,
which chased it away. The cuckoo cleverly ran back-
wards and forwards, to and from and over the nest,
until it got far enough ahead so as to pass into the
nest; and then, playing as before, flew off. I examined
the nest and found the one cuckoo egg had been
dropped in, and one wagtail’s egg taken out. To-day
I still have in my collection eggs collected while a
schoolboy. I collected shells, mosses, seaweeds, and
fossils from most of the English formations. Nature
was my hobby, and its Great Creator‘thus became
*my Teacher. True science lies in finding out His
ways and methods. In this spirit and search for
knowledge, I performed operations on, and experimented
with animals. Thus I determined the nerve activities
to be the cerebro-spinal, the stimulating life propel-
lers, the vaso dilators to the units; while the vaso


(motor, or then called sympathetic nerves, were the
inhibitory or vaso restrainer and depressors. Again,
the so-called sympathetic plexuses of ganglionic centres
exhibit branches of each kind, so intertwined that
the two restrain and hold each other (both systems)
in equilibrium. In this assurance I went to a meet-
ing of the Medical Society of London. A professor
was pleading the finding of the great ones of Europe,
that as alcohol was a narcotic, experts declared that
the right treatment of fevers and acute diseases was
to give a pint of spirits every day—of the then known
spirits, brandy, rum, gin, or whisky. As a young prac-
titioner, and in the confidence of research and a
belief that it was my duty to speak, I urged that
alcohol is a stimulant in all its doses, and never a
narcotic. I proved the narcosis found from alcohol
drinking to be the result of the Divine economy, which
to save the drinker and give another chance of reform,
splits in the digestion and blood circulation the alcohol
into carbonic acid (CO S ) and water. Thus I showed
that the carbonic acid, formed in the decomposition,
was allied to the choke-damp or after-damp which in
colliery explosions laid its victims in a comatose sleep
and death. I said: “Give a man a pint of spirits in
a draught: he takes it and falls down dead. Or give
the drunken man a further dosage of alcohol, and coma
of drunkenness is followed by the death coma.” lam
not fool enough to believe that this knowledge was my
own creation; but when I put it before the meeting,
the tide turned. I was immediately elected, on the
voices, a Fellow of the Society, and was appointed to
give the next monthly lecture. The medical men of
the day saw the light, and so the payments of hospitals
to-day for alcoholic drinks number fewer pence than
they formerly did pounds. And patients are not
assigned a pint of spirits a day.
In the so-called Bubonic Plague scare, flamed
up by a few baby-brain practitioners in Australia,
I, as a general practitioner, felt it to be my duty
to fight the scare. I even scandalised the authorities
by refusing to report cases. One day 1 got an official
letter stating that, by the authority of the Governor-


in-Council, I must report all cases, and that I was
liable to be lined not more than a hundred pounds
for each transgression. I answered by saying: “I have
somewhere about two hundred cases,” and bidding them
to fire away. I pictured myself famous in owing the
State two hundred times one hundred pounds for fines I
I have never yet received the summons; but State after
State dropped the fun or wickedness, until to-day if
a medico thinks he has got a plague case, he is simply
plagued about his business. But while hundreds were
falling in the rising scare, the fright collapsed,
and my patients recovered. One poor woman, who
in delirium was smothered by a drunken I (was
righteously obliged to report to the then Home Secre-
tary. He promised an inquest, and I was to give
Evidence. In the meantime (drop the curtain) who
was responsible? Three great guns reported the case
as the truest one of purpural bubonic plague. The
marks which they said were plague marks were the
facsimile of the ware mattress meshes against which
she was strangled!
The drink malarial colossus has died; the bubonic
plague scare has been strangled; the silly drowning
bacilli of fever cases by freezing patients in the iced
baths has been turned out at the back door; and now
I am hoping that the German kultur of the knife-
prods, and shadows of the Babylonian resumes of necro-
mancy, soothsayers, and all corruptions, will in the
new incarnations be suffocated before they destroy
hecatombs of sacrifices. The bacteria and bacilli and
all these hosts of reincarnation ghosts are the death
devourers. .Shall medical men lower our holy pro-
fession to deeds of villainy and shame? The Creator
of the world is the Righteous Ruler, and all liars
will be put down.




The Most Wonderful Tree
in the World.
The papaw tree (the Carica Papaia) is without
dotabt the most wonderful tree in the world. Its
properties, as agencies of life and death, are, I
believe, unparallelled. Yet, strange, to say, how little
for ages was known of its real virtues. Even its
discovered uses were misunderstood, and, vanishing
as miste, were soon forgotten. Those who thought
they knew its secrets, evidently did not correctly
understand. It was believed that the properties of
the tree acted as sexual stimulants; but such cre-
dence was on a par with the teaching that alcohol
is a life formative —both alike subservient to the illu-
sory services of dissipated prodigals.
In further knowledge of the plant, it was ascer-
tained that meat wrapped up in the leaves, in initia-
tive decay, became tender. How then could the papaw,
holding such a property, be a true stimulant? In
a sense the plant may be considered ,a tree of life;
but at the same time it evolves in certain stages
and relations as an administrant of death.
To-day we know the papaw as bearing the two
individual trees of different sexes. In the early stag©
no one seems to be able to foretell the sex of the
unit examined. Earely the tree accommodates itself
to share a portion for a group of male flowers, and
another on a lower part of the stalk, or on a branch,
reserved to female flowers. There are several varieties


in Queensland, the one called the Oowly holding
special favour.
Scientists make mistakes in exploratory work, and
how can all mistakes therein bo avoided! But it is
the duty of progressive students of Nature to cor-
rect mistakes, and to table new facts and further ob-
served phenomena. I must thus advise that the papaw
is an administrator of life; but must not forget that
it has occult marvellous properties, both in administra-
tion and combatancy of death powers. In a marvellous
way the papaw stimulates animal life energy and
vigour, by its own vivacity; but it kills disease by
its own deyan powers over antagonistic and death
bacilli. It exercises its destructive powers over the
lowest forms of animal life. In many cases I have
destroyed and vanished clusters of hydatids when the
most eminent surgeons have failed to cure by radical
and violent operations. Threadworms are easily ex-
pelled by its services. In one case a patient, a girl (of
eleven, who continually had epileptic fits, was cured
in the expulsion of a long round worm; while even
the tapeworm will not thrive, nor even remain in a
liberal papaw feeding. In Australia many birds are
fojund suffering from filaria worms in their blood.
The species do not appear to have been scientifically
and wisely classified. Too many medical men seem
to blame the mosquito for all such troubles. One
species, found in human victims, does not care to be
allied with mosquitoes. I have met with four cases
of this trouble, which cannot be mistaken owing to
the whiteness, like cream, of the water. The mother
worm is a hair-like unit, somewhere about an inch
in length. She lays tens of thousands, perhaps hun-
dreds of thousands, of ova or germs. These, like
the workers of a beehive, neither develop males nor
females, as the white units which exist in the water
continuously pass away with the voiding of the same.
Yet the mother worm keeps up the incoming armies,
to the progress of disease, or even death of the
victim.
My first case was a man of middle age. The
mother worm had apparently settled in the liver. I


applied papaw plasters, but failed to cure. la an
attack of dengue the patient sank. Yes, I had failed
to cure. The three cases I have seen since were ladies.
The mother worm had made her nidus in the substance
of the uterus. The result was congestion and thicken-
ing of the tissues, producing enlargement resembling
pregnancy, I used an aluminium injector tube. Two
or three times a week I injected into the interior of
the uterus a specially prepared papaw ointment. In
a few weeks the mother worm had been killed; the
white flow ceased, and the tumour disappeared. I
‘thus had the pleasure of knowing all the three cases
were cured.
In a case of hydatids in the South, the best sur-
geons had operated three times. In the skill and
pluck of the experts, three ribs had been excised. Yet
the creatures still increased in numbers and suction.
The family took counsel with the great surgeons. These
still claimed the confidence that another operation
would finish the trouble. But the family desired
•to see the hydatids passed out, and did not need any
more cutting or hacking. I was written to and told
of the case, and to save my medical brethren the
sorrow of one more slaughter, I sent the papaw treat-
ment, with special directions how to use it. In about
six weeks time I received a letter rejoicing that the
trouble had all come away, ..I wrote back and said I
feared the two sacs (lung and liver) might Still be
separate, and urging a further treatment. In another
few weeks I got a further letter, affirming that they
were sure both lots had come away, and that the lung
was cured, also the liver. A few days after receiving
this communication I was astonished by a surprise
visit. The patient, a small well-made man, and reduced
•to eight stone, introduced himself as the cured hydatid
case. He was accompanied by a big 'man, approach-
ing twenty stone weight. My patient then said that
he felt that the recovery was so miraculous, when
the best surgeons had failed, that he felt forced to
come the few hundred miles to thank me personally.
He added, “I want to tell you of a new
proving the efficacy of the papaw. My wife would


insist on herself doing the massaging necessary. As
she was pregnant, and had experienced such difficult
accouchmente in the past, we decided not to risk
trouble this time by the massaging. But she would
not be denied. When the time matured, the patient
lay down for a minute or two to rest, and the whole
was quickly over, the best time she had ever had and
the finest child.” I thanked him for his information,
but assured him tha)t I had quite a number of like
cases. I had had quite a sharp argument with Sir
Hugh Macßridges, who stuck me out that the papaw
ointment '"ould not be absorbed by the skin, that I
was a fool to suggest such a thing. Facts and fancies
differ. Truth is stranger than fiction.
Mrs. de Bruscher was condemned by the St. Louis
Hospital Staff as suffering so badly from internal
cancers as to be beyond the pale of assistance from
operative surgery. In a special consultation, the swells
of the profession agreed that the only chance was
to send her to a seaside sanitorium. There she could
be fed up, just as bullocks are fattened for staging.
As she was only five stone in weight, the first thing
was to secure nutrition. After a few days the matron
asked the house surgeon casually what diet to give
the patient. He answered: “D n it, give her any-
thing she likes; she will be dead in a fortnight.” The
poor patient, fearing a conspiracy, fled. To-day that
woman weighs some ten or eleven stone, and has some
as tine children as need be. Was such the result
of the fright or the papaw ?
Lady McDurer was an excursionist, exploring the
lands of the Southern Seas. She had to consult some
medical experts, who diagnosed a case of pregnancy,
inflated by a fetal tumour. Such trouble, she was
assured, only occurred in the world about once in a
century. As no case had ever been known to recover,
this would need a radical operation, if possible, to
save the mother. The lady wrote to me and asked
!me if I would undertake the case. This was to me-
a crisis. Could I trust the papaw as the lifeboat,
or would she follow the fashion of Queen Mary, the-
wife of Philip of Spain? I decided to try the power


of the papaw, and rejoiced when I learned how it
weathered the storms to a successful finish. Although
continuing my treatment, for certain considerations she
considered it wise to engage the services of an expert
local accoucheur. At first he demurred to take the
risk, unless she came into his home. She declined,
but agreed to take lodgings close by and to receive
the services of one of his certificated nurses. One
afternoon she complained to the nurse of feeling
tired. The nurse laid the blame on their rambles
in the city the day before, and advised her to lie
down. She did so: and while her previous troubles
had been prolonged and exhaustive, this was over in
a very few minutes. As everything was so natural
and healthy, the two decided not to send and trouble
the doctor. But next morning the baby took the
matter (in Nature's instinct) into his own hands,
and passed away the resolved tumour as an issue
of blood. A few weeks after I received the most
consoling fee I ever earned: “My dear Dr., I am the
happiest woman in the world.The doctors say such
a case was never before known to recover.. I am
splendid and the baby is a bonnie lad.” I afterwards
learned from strangers that not only was the little
chap a fine made child, but as he grew his in-
telligence was a surprise and a pleasure to all ac-
quaintances.
A Mrs, Queenie was for years unable to pass a
motion from the bowel, only by special mechanical
help. 'Dr. "Rise man. offered to open the bowel arti-
ficially, and so to cure the patient. She was wait-
ing for three hours while the patient ahead of her
was under chloroform. I have asked myself how much
evil is being done by keeping the nervous system so
many hours, as we learn happens to-day, under the
anaesthetic? Personally I protest against the same
as a danger zone. This lady swooned, and when she
was roused by the nurse, flatly refused to go into the
operating room. The incident finished up by the-
matron turning the patient out of the hospital, and
in such a way that other patients had to get her
clothes and dress her. ‘ She was brought to my hospital.


I failed to find any tumour or cancer of the bowel;
but there was a very large internal tumour which, by
its pressure, blocked the bowel passage. How the
experts had so misdiagnosed the case I cannot im-
agine. It took three or four months to dissolve the
tumour, and to-day that lady is one of the finest
women, and has no further trouble with' the bowels.
Since the papaw digests dead meat, I can under-
stand its combatative powers against blood poisons
and other disease bacilli; but I must think further
before I find out how its wonderful drawing powers
are marshalled. In a young lady whose leg was
severely burned in a night fire, the attendant medical
men had a difficulty in saving her life. When she
was able to go on crutches, one surgeon proposed,
under an anaesthetic, to cut out a piece of loose bone.
His patient nearly ibled to death. Naturally, in an
awful scared fury, he commanded her never to con-
sult any other doctor, as she was, he said, in the
last stage of consumption. She, hearing of a case
which had been pronounced by the 'Sydney experts
to be an incurable internal cancer, and which was
cured by the papaw, naturally wrote to this friend,
and on her advice came to Brisbane for treatment.
In spite of Sir Hugh Macßridge’s discovery that the
papaw ointment would not absorb through the skin, I
elected to test by experiment.
Laying long strips of clean old bed-linen, plas-
tered with the ointment, along the burned leg, and
changing them night and morning, I was soon cheered
by noticing puffed swellings in the line of the muscular
bundles. The upper port gradually became very red,
and at length opened out a wound, through which a
piece of bone some eight inches in length protruded
and forced its way out. It exuded with a slant from
the perpendicular, getting wider as the bone propelled
upward. I could not at all assist Nature, only by
keeping the limb at rest, and by keeping a soft pad
to prevent tilting the bone or overstraining the
wound. In a short time the piece of bone had
•dropped out, and in a further thrity-six hours the
wmund had healed.


I altogether succeeded in getting twelve or more
long pieces, evidently from the shaft; but later several
short pieces from the thigh. The surgeons in answer
to the hydatid cure suggested luck, or chancel Such
talk is beneath a true expert or scientist. But where
was the chance in this 'case? Again, has any other
tneans with which we are conversant ever supplied
such wonderful evidence of drawing powers?
Some practitioners say, “Yes, the papaw may be
a good ointment, but we have many other remedies
equal or superior.” I was not aware that the profession
had now been converted to believe the newspaper
quack advertisements, which are prognosed to cure
everything under the sun,, I heard a few days ago of p
practitioner thus caught in his own infantile paralysis
—he had been in the habit of prescribing a certain
item of which he knew nothing. When a chemist en-
lightened him, he simply trembled. As a medical man
I acknowledge that I am prejudiced against these-
quack remedies. By “quack” we understand a secret,
and often bogus phantom, which dare not reveal its
constitution and composition. Whep I gave my papaw
to the world, I did not specify something else as such
under that name: the ointment was a scientifically
prepared papaw ointment, as declared. As the world
goes, some quacks thought to take advantage of its
success, so they placed on the market a fake, adver-
tising the same as the papaw prescription. An analy-
sis by Government proved that the whole thing was a
hoax, and not papaw at all. Anything faked in a
secret coinage or under false' pretences, is undoubt-
edly a quack nostrum, and should be hounded off
from being a temptation to the public.
A few days ago a lady called on me suffering with
goitre. The essaying expert not only painted the same
with iodine, but made the lady drink the lotion. Any
thinker can imagine the condition resulting to the
tonsils and soft palate. On the lady’s, second visit
she expressed surprise to note how much the swelling
had gone down. In a joke I suggested that the
goitre, perhaps, was frightened of the iodine, and so
had run away. She then gave me a message specially


sent by her mother, to say that eighteen months pre-
viously, she had been scrubbing the floor, when a floor
tack was plunged into a finger-joint, and which re-
mained hidden, embedded in the joint. It suddenly
occurred to her to try the ointment obtained by her
daughter. She put a plaster of the same on the
finger. This in two days’ time had swelled up the
finger. She took off the plaster and pressed the swell-
ing, when the tack was freed and jerked out on to .the
floor.
A learned expert treated a child’s ear. Unfortu-
nately a broken piece or pieces of silver wire remained
in, and called for a serious operation 1 The friends
in wisdom opposed the same. The papaw ointment in
a few days’ occupation drew the broken pieces of wire
away. A lady got a sharp grass seed buried in the
nipple of her breast: the inflammation was very acute
and caused |a continuous bleeding, until the papaw
drew out the hair-like shaft and afterwards the broken
base.
A marksman, attending the rifle shooting, got a
bullet shot in his cheek. The surgeons failed to
extract it. After enduring the trouble for eight years,
the patient used the papaw ointment. In a few days
the coverings of the same came out holus bolus.
A little lad, playing in the bush, ran a thorn into
his eyeball. A wise attentive grandmother used the
finer Rose Otto Ointment. This not only drew out
the broken thorn, but to my amazement healed the eye.
Another boy was sent to wash out a pleasure boat
which was lying in the river against a drain exit
sluice. The daring youngster elected to take a plunge
in the dirty water. He got his eyes full of dirt and
rubbish. For two or three days the inflammation was
agonising and blinding. At length his friends thought
of the papaw ointment. In two or three days it brought
out in each eye a bolus of dirt, and before the
week end the eyes were well.
An elderly ladjy was angry because a fowl flew on
to a tree branch on the dividing fence, and so laid
her eggs in the neighbour’s yard. She stretched up
to hold of the branch, it broke off, and entered


the cheek immediately below the eye. She remem-
bered the papaw ointment, and in three days there
remained no signs of the wound.
A woman doctor operated on a patient’s bladder.
She apparently forgot to take out the wadding pad-
ding, which fell back and was caught in the bladder.
I was called to the case, but knew nothing of the
previous attendance. I believed at first that there
must be a stone in the bladder, but soon was con-
vinced that there was not. The spasmodic agony used
to come on suddenly. Lying on the back or the side
gave no relief; but the pain simply came on in agon-
ising intermissions. After a time I felt ashamed at
being, as I thought, defeated. In a desperation I
laid a thick plaster of the ointment over the abdomen
and to well cover the bladder. After a few days
the skin over the bladder abraded and the opening
enlarged, permitting the cotton wool to be expelled.
I had a similar case following a treatment in an
accouchment by the same woman. The wall of the
passage held an abscess, which continued off and on
for years to trouble the patient. The only remedy
that gave relief, by drawing out the cotton wool, was
the papaw. It not only cured the abcess, but gave
her another healthy baby.
A German girl trod on a hard-wood splinter and
embedded it into the sole of her foot. The foot
swelled and the agony was unbearable. A nurse placed
a thick plaster of the papaw ointment on the foot.
In the night the foot seemed to burst: she got up
and took the plaster off to examine—the splinter was
outside the foot.
I have had quite a number of cases in Queens-
land where the children, who so often go without
shoes and stockings, have run nails up into the foot.
The surgical treatment for such cases too often is
aborted by tetanus. The papaw cures the cases.
A young medico was absent from Australia. While
he was away I was called to attend his father. I
feared tetanus, as a fighting cock had severely torn
the web of his hand between the thumb and finger.
In a few days all inflammation and swelling disap-


peared: the case was cured. When the young man
returned he had a foot case, wounded with a nail, and
although the papers spoke of his skill and attention,
the boy patient died with tetanus. This had been
treated in the so-called orthodox care.
Oases might be multiplied. But I now come to-
consider a new power of the papaw. Undoubtedly the
papaw is the finest antiseptic as yet discovered. Its
powers of healing wounds is accelerated by its anti-
septic properties. A boy about nine or ten years
of age had evidently hurt his knee. In play or fall
or strain there was a subacute synovitis. His father
took him to a noted surgeon, who commanded to
paint with iodine. At first it seemed to promise
well; but as the skin dried, the joint swelled. In a
wisdom of wisdom the friends took the case into
their own care. They treated the knee and kept it
at rest in a thick plaster of the papaw ointment.
Next day a mucous moisture seemed to come away,
but on the third day an abscess burst. All infection
or blood poisoning was discharged, and in a short
time the lad could play about as well as ever. These
cases of synovitis are not at all uncommon, but the
treatment of papaw ointment, aided by a cooling
papaw lotion, acts as by magic.
The twofold function of drawing and disinfecting
make the papaw a great power in throat and allied
diseases. A few days ago a young came to
consult me. Her throat was white as snow. I found
out where her husband worked, and immediately
’phoned him to come straight away. I asked him,
as I could not take his wife into the hospital, in right-
eousness to the others, if he knew of an empty house.
He immediately fell in with my view, and told me
of one ten miles away by itself. He agreed to
take his wife to this lone house, and himself to stay
and give the treatment which I advised. In a week’s
time the patient came back cured. She then told
me that previously she had severe tonsilitis, for which
a doctor had freely lanced her throat. Of course, Ido
not say What disinfectant he used, but it left the
throat eo congested and relaxed as to proceed to


the condition in which I found her. A school in the
neighbourhood had been shut up and supposedly dis-
infected. —Silence bums.
A youth in Sydney and treated by the experts was
condemned to lifelong distress. The enlarged soft palate
was choking him. The experts counselled excision as
the only chance of saving his life. The military
doctors gave him a lifelong exemption as unfit for
all drills, etc., or future military service. He was
brought to Brisbane. His mother was a splendid nurse.
In her care and in the aid of the papaw treatment
(ointments and gargle) that youth became one of the
finest admitted recruits of New South Wales to the
army.
The power of the papaw over the delicate mucous
linings and sero-mucous covered membranes, verges
on the magical. I have had hundreds of throat
and nose cases, previously treated by other prac-
titioners, driven to consult me as to how to obtain
relief from their sufferings. I have therein noted
that the extreme treatments have only intensified
the trouble. Table salt, boracic, and alkaline salts
failed to produce good bacon, the parts being too
delicate and thinly bedded to properly house and
utilise the salt. On the other hand, the burning,
cutting, scraping, and tearing the throat and nos©
membranes is a steady source of income to the
fearless expert operator; but at the same time it is
a regular sluice-gate of delivery of the patient’s capital
outflow, both of life energy and coinage services. I
have been called to patients who have granted by
scores these murderous exploitations, for the good of
the expert’s pocket.
While writing these lines a new patient has
just been brought in. The little lad was in a certain
expert hospital for six weeks for diphtheria. For
definite reasons he was sent out as cured. Certainly
there was no white membrane left, but the tonsils
were enlarged and still in one mass of inflammation.
A sister of the hospital advised the mother to get
the throat seen to at once, as the tonsils be


operated on to thoroughly cure the boy. The mother
wisely answered that she knew what to do for her son.
What a revelation I A special hospital where
the most learned experts consult together to publicly
prove to the public their superhuman scientific butcher-
ing powers. Diphtheria said to be cured, but held
by the smart grip of the tonsils, to the further needs
of future cutting and hacking I Oh, ye godsl Twen-
tieth century imitations of ancient Chaldean astrology
and soothsaying.
A young lady, a Miss Yorkin, from the country
was sent to my hospital. She came in on a Tues-
day, almost suffocated and choking. She had. a violent
attack of quinsy, was unable to swallow, and had
difficulty of breathing. I used the Papaw Spray freely,
but at the same time applied a plaster of the Plapayat©
to the soft palate and tonsils. In a few hours the
swelling broke, and on the Sunday following she
returned to friends, cured. No operations were needed,
as the cure was perfect.
I passed by an infant slaughter-house: the cries of
the victims and of Rachel weeping for her children
recalled in memory Herod from the dead.
TESTIMONY TO PAPAW.
The following report on the use of Dr. Lucas’s
Papaw Ointment, as tested in Great Ormond Street
Hospital, in London, is published in the London “Medi-
cal Magazine for May, 1910. The report says:—
“These ferments, obtained from the papaw, are
made up in the form of' an ointment and gargle, and
are recommended as an application to enlarged and
swollen grandular tissues, the deposits of chronic in-
flammation, tumours and ulcerations. The propagation
seems to combine the most active ferments of the
plant in a successful manner. Its activity was demon-
strated by several cases of hypertrophy of the tur-
binal bodies, and in cases of enlarged tonsils. After
three or four weeks’ application there was very marked
improvement. There can be no doubt that the pre-
paration is unusually effective, and should prove very


serviceable, obviating the necessity for operative pro-
cedures in many cases. Such operative procedures are
often adopted much too hastilj r . The present ferments
are well deserving of a trial, and in many cases we
have no doubt the result will be satisfactory.”
A Mrs. Hardinge suffered in the drawing of a tooth
by her dentist. For some three or four years small
abscesses kept tunnelling the lower jaw. After a period
of acute suffering the dentist advised that a special
■expert from ‘Sydney was coming up to see him. and
they would together consult as to the best thing to
be done. This exported expert considered that a
portion of fang had been left in the socket. The in-
struments were ready to the wise man’s hand. He
used all the ennui of his diplomas to manipulate and
to extract the embedded fang. He pulled I and pulled 1!
Yet the fang only played more wildly on the hallu-
cinations of the operators. The poor patient feared
that her head would certainly be pulled off. At
length the learned professors gave up the attempt —
until the next time 1 The naughty patient had not the
savi to allow the pullers to again (having once failed)
do their level best to pull off her head. After a night’s
rest she called at my hospital and asked my advice.
I was too lazy or too knowing to use instruments
such as had failed; I therefore laid a plaster of
the Otto of Eose Papayate along the troubled and
painful lower jaw. After a few days the broken
splinter of the jawbone worked its way out through
the gum. The wound soon healed, and the trouble
having revealed itself and so responded, not as a
broken piece of fang, but as a discharged fracture
of the jawbone, quickly healed and has cansed no
further trouble.
A little lad, for something better to do, was playing
with an orange pip seed. He experimented to see
how far it could be pushed into his ear. Suddenly
the seed was lost and forgotten; but for some months,
on and off, pains, earache, and strange feeling sensa-
tions caused the little chap to shed many tears. Even
the gods of the heathen failed to reveal to the sorrow-


stricken parents the cause of the trouble or the
dream. The mother, hearing of the magic powers of
the papaw, brought the boy for me to examine. I was
not skilled enough to dare to stretch the delicate
canals or to explore among the membranes in an at-
tempt to burst the drum of the ear, so I consulted toy
Papayate Rose Ointment. Each night and morning
the ear was searched for the errant vermin by the
Papayate, as the ferret searches for the rat. Yes,
and it succeeded; for in a few days’ time the seed
was expelled from the ear. It had begun to vegetate,
but resigned itself honourably even in death to the
Papayate.
In the great collection assembled before the uni-
verse tribunal, called to ratify the destinies of the
human families of earth, the crowds are described
as “the small and great.” The apostle John, the
writer of the Book of the Revelation, speaking of his
wonderful vision, says: “I saw the dead, small and
great, stand before God.”
To-day all men know the proverb: “The young
may die; the old must die,” But how often is the
proverb diabolised by ignorance, alas, too frequently
by direct offence against Nature’s laws (launched by
surgeons and physicians). The nations of the earth
have not yet risen as nations, or even as sects, to
the absolute obedience and observance of the Divine
Moral Law. A satire says that doctors are licensed
to kill. The exact meaning of this squib is ironical.
It does not charge men with deliberately and openly
making murder a vaunted profession. They have not
yet attained the moral courage to publicly and sys-
tematically murder. But it is a notification to
the world that the medical profession is given too
free a license in so-called scientific methods to
assaultive disregard of the lives of their patients.
The manifestation of the moral character defines the
man or the woman. In the Divine law, no greater
responsibility can attach to any teacher or professor
than the conservation, education, and preservation
of the units of human life. While the Divine Man
commanded, for the benefit of humanity as a whole.


that all Christians should go and preach the gospel
of the spirit life to every creature, so in the same law
each individual is commanded to love the neighbours
as the self. In this general law the surgeon or
physician is responsible, as such, to the Great Phy-
sician for the physical life and health of his patients.
When an assassin cuts the throat of his victim, he is
guilty before the law of God and the law of man
for the murder. I cannot for a moment see any
difference between the coarse assassin brute and the
qualified educated man, whose treatment, sealed by
the valuation of fees paid, results under such Kultur
in the death of the sick one through carelessness, or
impudence, or ignorance.
I am aware that the fearful plague of Germanic
so-called Kultur is threatening to wreck the world
morally and physically. It is this wave of hellish
conspiracy which is responsible for thousands of deaths
before their tabernacle’s assigned time.
If, as a whole, the clergy and the vitalised Chris-
tians are responsible to God and to humanity for the
prevalence of moral diseases, or spiritual evils so
increasingly flooding society, equally so surgeons and
physicians, who are'nationally qualified and endorsed
as legally qualified surgeons or physicians, rue like-
wise responsible for the physical health of the public:
first as to the numbers of diseases unrestrained, and
secondly for the number of deaths which are raided
to die.
In the intricacies of the laws and fashions of
society, the subject is a most difficult one to unravel
as to where and on whom to lay the blame. A sur-
geon or physician devoid of moral purity, mental
training, and practical self-cultivated experience, is
like a three-ball trader, who ought to be defrocked and
placed as a scullion in the king’s kitchen. It is
often beyond the power of human criticism to decipher
why a person dies; but the All Wise One makes no
mistake, and holds every doctor, as well as every
clergyman, responsible, each to each, for the physical
as for the spiritual health of the people.


A young lady had reached her fourteenth year.
She was a finely framed girl. Her relations were
proud of her. gave a birthday party to her
honour. She got a cold through weather exposure.
In Society fashion, she was sent to the great expert,
so learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, for
the diseases of the young. Nasal and throat catarrh
has been specially seized upon to hold as serviceable
trenches of the German kultur. Tell it not in Gath,
repeat it not in Askelon, what is the treatment
evolved out of all the bacilli cultures. What was
the heart pressure? What were the secret expediences
of the pulled-up great General? Congestion followed
congestion. Can any one tabulate the burnings, scrap-
ings, and cuttings of the delicate mucous linings of
the throat, and nose, and ear passages? The mischief
spread, as Nature revolted, from the more superficial
to the deeper tissues. Did the operator understand
the delicate economy of the inner ear and all its
connections? Why, then, was the unconsciousness of
the innocent girl guerdoned to signal screams and
cries and moans. Oh, that her eyes had been a
flood of tears; but the tears could not flow. Burning
and scraping and cutting might, as the bayonet and
small arms, be sufficient to coerce the delicate mem-
branes, but the boney dugouts of the ear needed
artillery of mightier barrage—the hammer and the
fchisel had to do the work. The death was most
violent. Abscesses in the brain, in the ear. The
officials ordered the coffin lid to be screwed down,
lest the relatives should see. Call this the Divine
judgment of death! I protest. It is time such
kulture ceased.
One of my worst, or rather most obstinate, cases
of goitre was an ophthalmic case from Sydney. Leav-
ing her Queensland home, slie went to Sydney to be
under the care of a noted Italian doctor. He had
no nervous restraint to the restriction of operations,
which were permitted to his heart’s content. One
hears as a miracle wonder of the extraction of a bullet
from the heart; but the number of times that this
patient’s throat was cut, experimentally short of death.


was beyond belief. It took me just nineteen months
to cure. It was not, as in the general goitre cases,
a slower or more rapid shrinkage of the neck swelling;
on the contrary, the head was becoming literally a
swelled head. At length victory acclaimed the papaw
conqueror. It must have surely been a brain tumour
that burst. At the same time from both ears, from
each nostril, and from the throat itself, the blood and
matter simply poured. The patient was cured.
In the German kultur some of the experts are bud-
ding into little Kaisers. Sir Edgar Makinton excelled
in prudery and trickery. A little girl, a special favour-
ite of her proud mother, manifested signs of throat
weakness. The great doctor invited the happy mothou
to partake of his hospitality’, and to bring her daugh-
ter to his own private residence for special treatment.
This great man wn-s noted among his professional
brethren for advanced science, courtesy, and cunning
tactics and trickeries. When he got the patient in
the safe recesses against telltale whispers, he slipped
the kultur knife as nearly into or to the carotid artery
as possible, without killing. In a word, his cleverness
was only equalled by the expert who walked the
rope over the Niagara Falls. The volume of loose
tissues, inflated in the antiseptic kultur, was so voluble
and cleverly balanced that, when the child slept, the
opened throat was being filled to choking. The sad-
dened mother took the patient to another doctor. This
gentleman, in professional etiquette, made the mother
tie a pannican on to the girl’s back, and so, when the
choking started, the warning was given, and the
girl on being thus called to consciousness was made
to lie on her side. Splendid kultur and bumpture!
An elderly gentleman was sent to learn this expert’s
learned opinion of some disturbing abdominal paiiis.
The study of facial expressions, when exporting appen-
dicitis, holds many of the secrets of Kaiserine wisdom;
but this professor, seated on the Mulgarian throne of the
Central Powers, was one too many for the inquisitive
crowd. After holding his counsel and expressions, he
announced that to obtain his counsel the parties
must first pay his fee of two guineas. This paid, he


gave a letter advising admission for operation into
the Quingulcura Hospital! 11
To make an institution famous, give it a big name;
advertise its old-time deities, call it a sanatorium,
appoint vaunted professors, gown them with all the
drapery of university and college, and then illumine
the heavens with their sky-rockets and Roman candles.
Such a sanatorium must declare its unquestioned power
to cure all types and phases of tubrecular consump-
tion, by means and media of the remarkable Kock’s
cure.
Robert Tom Robert 'suffered from repeated and
neglected attacks of influenza, catarrh or catarrhal
cold, until his lungs became seriously diseased- They
were, so to speak, a special reserve for kultur sport.
The youth, just rising to manhood, was seized with a
vehement desire to live. Ordinary doctors with long
faces prophesied death unless the magician’s power of
Kock’s cure could be rendered. So he was sent to
Boolah-hoo Sanitorium. Treatment commenced, kul-
tured needles carried the enemy’s fighting boats into
Robert’s tent camp, according to the wisdom or caprice
of the attendant novice. He was ordered to sleep
out of doors, and to weather all weather as horses
and cows.
Exposed to severe westerly winds, attacks of in-
flammation exercised their preliminary trials prepara-
tory to the races. Hail and snow and rain showers
were tried to prove whether or no it would pay to train
him for the Derby. He was not allowed cover under
which to dress. He was not allowed to provide against
wet clothes. Such tests were necessary to raise the
energies of the life powers against all womanly do-
mestic and civilised comforts to cure the phthisis.
The more the teeth chattered the better. The more
rain and soakage of his clothes the better would the
grass beneath him grow. Repeated waves of maniacal
aggression caused the pulse to gallop. The rise of
temperature was splendid evidence of the kultur re-
action. While there was life there was hope. Yet,
in spite of the splendid work of the trial gallops, the
patient, was getting weaker.


At length the patience of his jailer was overreached.
Turning on the sufferer, he told him that he was rotten,
he could not be cured, and the sooner he cleared away
•the better. In a forlorn hope the broken-hearted
youth came under my care, a wonderful example of
•German kultur.
I can imagine a scene in the trenches—better im-
■agined than -described. The condition of the poor
fellow's lungs would have nonplussed any medical
student. But the vigour of youth and the determinate
-attempt to live, aided the papaw, and to-day the
patient promises to live a decent lifetime.
The impudence of the kultur is accountable for the
eight of accidents which never occur naturally. One
fine young fellow called upon me to show* a sight I had
never before witnessed. He had endured and per-
mitted the kultur injections and the knife to take
away a number of ribs on the one side. The fools
had cut away portions of the exposed lung. Then
they boasted that such a wonderful operation had
never been before successfully performed. In my ver-
dict the whole conspiracy* of these tyros should have
been tried for attempted manslaughter. The wilful
ignorance and boastful impudence were almost enough
to raise our fathers from the grave.
A good farmer was crossing a stream. He slipped
and fell. Here was a chance for aspiring courage to
earn the Victoria Cross. The spine was injured. What
was to be done? Make a new backbone, whispered
the kultur temptation. And so those unprincipled
butchers proceeded to cut away bits of the spinal
column. Such a thing was advertised as never having
been done before. Four series of cuttings and chop-
pings only added to the mischief. Malignant cancel'
followed the assaults on such a delicate part as the
spinal column. When I saw the patient the case was
incurable. But I had the pleasure of adding a lew
months to that assaulted man’s life, and to relieve to
a very large extent the pains and aches inflicted
through ignorant presumption.


CANCER OR MUMPS?
A lad was taken to Dr. W. Woolley for a swelling-
in the cheek. This Lodge adviser acknowledged that
he was not sufficiently educated to take .the risks of
cancer. He sent the boy on to Professor Gongi Gongi.
That learned expert saw the boy, freely used his kultur
needles, and gave the little fellow a sufficiency of in-
jections. He then declared the case to be malignant.
The cheek-bone portion of the jaw jnust be cut off.
So the poor mother was informed. She was the one
woman in a thousand, and answered her tormentor:
“The Almighty sent to me my boy skin whole, and it
is my duty to see that he go back, if he Is to go, skin
whole.” The expert professed to be immensely shocked.
Such effeminate women 1 Such foolish maternal senti-
ment! “Call herself a woman, a mother, and allow
her boy to die because of a trifling operation.” She
answered, “Guarantee to me, doctor, that the boy will
get well and be cured,” “I cannot do that, acknow-
ledged the great man. Then she said, “I will not be
an accessory to the murder, which I should be if, by
the operation, the boy die.”
The helpless woman actually had the courage to
decline to be a partner with the .most clever expert
in this marvellous exhibition of German kultur. She
took the boy away, nursed him herself, used the papaw
remedies, and to-day rejoices that an Unseen Power
kept her from kultur murder. The case was, after all,
only an aberrant example of mumps.
When I discovered the remarkable powers of the
papaw, as a member of the medical profession I right-
eously sent the remedy to the Cancer Research Enquiry
Commission, endowed in London with more than
£IOO,OOO. On my visit to London I called on the
secretary, and was informed that so many quack
remedies were sent that it did not pay the time neces-
sary to test the so-called cures. I naturally expressed
my surprise to learn that this youngster could speak
so of the medical units as quacks. My ointment had
not even been tested. But in a bold report the sentence
against all remedies was pronounced that the Commis-
sion had decreed that cancer was and ever will be in-


curable. Since that time I have read of a netting so
subtly made, and so splendidly set and arranged in
the recesses of the deep as to catch the crafty German
submarines. In a papaw laid trap netting Professor
Gongi Gongi kultur was caught as a submarine to
destruction. The great professor, with all his small
satellites, declared that the boy patient was suffering
from cancer of the cheek bone. This, in his wisdom
and learning and threats and favours, was to be cured
by the knife. The Cancer Commission says: Take down
this salvage, no cancer can be cured. And to-day the.
medical profession has dictated and rules the roost.
No medico is allowed to say that cancer can be cured.
Hence in Health Acts practitioners must be careful
never to assert that cancer can be or ever has been
cured. Exactly so; but if so, then there goes over
into the sea all the boasts of the knife kultur; or, bn
the other hand, where so-called cancer has been cured,
then the diagnosis must have been wrong. If so, the
disease cured could never have been cancer at all. Now
this boy patient of the learned professors and their
backers and abettors, when his mother had the wisdom
to flee the knife, was treated with the papaw, and to-
day no doctor in the world could diagnose cancer,
cured or uncured, in that boy’s cheek.
Further, allow that the Cancer Research declared
that cancer can never be cured: I positively affirm that
hundreds of cases of pronounced cancer, and pronounced
such by experts, have been caused, started, and ex-
ploited by the knife. Hundreds of cases have consulted
me. wherein surgeons have pronounced the troubles
to be malignant, which conditions have followed the
knife kultur. I challenge this assertion in the records
correctly and truthfully recorded and given to me-
from the examination of hundreds of patients kultured
by the knife, and pronounced to be cancer by exam-
ining surgeons. What is what? and who is who? Which
is right? The German Kaiserism and the expert Prus-
sian militarism, or the rational judgment of honest
healing redemption ? 'The whole question resolves to its
basement; What is cancer? When medical bodies and
experts disagree what is and what is not cancer, how


can one arrive at the definite truth? Examination of
•cases alone can give stable evidence. Appearances
can only be studied in a limited number of cases. It
may suit the evidence of some self-asserted experts
to stick the knife into the human body, to lay bare
the internal viscera; but such violence is against
Nature, and should be tried for criminal assault.
Further, the opening of the closed embodiments of the
body belongings, and letting in the external air inter-
feres with Nature’s economy, and is an assault on
the workings of the viscera so contained and thus
defended.
'ln a cp,se off a tumour of the liver, in which Nature
sought to rectify the trouble, she had skilfully mar-
shalled a fistula, or occult passage, and had arranged
the same to pass between tlio viscera from the source
of trouble to the surface of the exposed abdomen. This
fistula must have been three to four inches in length.
By coyly pressing the viscus, a discharge was passed
out. I tried to inject a remedial fluid, but failed. As
the discharge was being emitted, the fistula as quickly
closed up, so that not even air could be admitted.
Such an economy of fistulas passing from the internal
to the exposed external surface reveals the most cun-
ning wisdom, and the most consummate design and
care. From the nature of the discharges, and from
‘diagnosis of the size and hardness of the liver, the
judgment pointed to what we call a schirrhus liver.
For weeks I attended the patient, who persever-
ingly applied the papaw ointment over the higher ab-
domen. This evidently was slowly acting, as the
■discharge through the fistula daily proved. After a
few weeks’ treatment, suddenly feeling increased ab-
dominal pain, he sought to relieve the bowel. He
swooned, and when found by his friends had evacuated
over a bucketful of blood and corruption.
Slowly the case got well. What, then, is the in-
ference? The liver trouble had extended over several
years, and was undoubtedly a schirrhus tumour. Is
schirrhus cancer? If so, this case was cured; if cancer
cannot be cured, then schirrhus cannot be cancer.


I had another like case in Orange, in New South
Wales. The patient was carefully treated with the
papaw treatment. In about three months the liver
discharged its tumour, and the gentleman got well. At
the same time he had to take care, because of bis
age (72) and because of his long-standing sickness.
Feeling in good trim, he indulged sitting m his garden
on a cold morning to watch the sight of a good snow-
storm. He caught a severe cold, and before I could
send him relief, nature collapsed. He died from ca-
tarrhal dengue.
In several cases of gall stones I have had like
results. Surgeons reckon such cases lawful prey for
the knife. But: yes, but: the opening of the abdomen
is against Nature’s economy, and cannot be done With-
out leaving the scars, evidences of the assault. Again,
one hears of the great surgeon cutting out a large
number of gall stones at one sitting, big and little,
and then having to cut out another lot at a second,
or even a third sitting. Such sport is smarter and
surely more exciting than fox-hunting. Of course,
in true sport the hunter thinks of the fun and
excitement, but keeps his eye on the fox, to the
death. But the surgeon butcher takes no cognisance
of the shock or shocks inflicted on the suffering
human being; all he troubles about is the dash and
straight shots for the bull’s-eye, and—the Ifees.
I was called to a patient, a big man, who had b.
swelling in the abdomen. Some doctors pronounced
the trouble to be cancer. Some said schirrhus. Others
fixed their wise diagnosis as determining the case
dyseppsia, catarrh of the stomach, indigestion, and
what not. The man was a very big' man, and the
tumour was enormous. In my weakness I differed
from all the experts, and pronounced the tumour as
hydatids. In a careful papaw treatment a quantity
of offensive corruption was vomited, and also much
passed by the bowel.
Some of his female relatives called on me and
complained—not that I had wrongly diagnosed, but
that I had failed to cure him in a few days. Would
I have any objection to a consultation? And so it


was T arranged that Sir Peter Exploiter should see
him in consultation. He exploited as consultants know
how, and at last confirmed my diagnosis. What,
then, was to be done ? I stated my case and the
papaw treatment so far, and advised a. continuance
of the same; the consultant urged swift remedial
lest the patient choke. The sisters overruled and
declared that the great surgeon should operate. 1
disclaimed all responsibility, but agreed to be present
at the committal. I did not even give the chloroform.
The great surgeon was first treating a case, cut-
ting away a number of sub-cuticular tumours. The
patient was joking and drinking whisky. Each one
was cut out and the bleeding immediately stopped by
adrenalin. One noted prelate told me he was a
peace man, yet strange to say he had lost a any
pieces of his noble body in like operations.
And now my poor patient was brought in. I felt
extremely sorry, but was not allowed by the women
to be their brother’s keeper. It is unnecessary to
describe the operation. The knife made the first cut
and the nurses and attendants had to hold their
noses as the dead hydatids expanded their gases.
Even the great man got nervous with the sight. Tor
a time he was undecided what to do. Eventually he
scooped out spoonfuls of dead hydatids, and then he
put in a drainage tube. In three days the poor
patient slipped away from time and misery.
I have had many hydatid cases since, but never
trusted myself even to be present in the presence of
the knife. And all my cases have been cured by the
papaw.
And now I come to consider the pronounced can-
cers. As readers will have gathered, I have no pity or
sympathy with the so-called exploratory examinations.
The nature-closed bags or sacs of the body economies
are sacred to me; in fact, intrusion into the hidden
depths is criminal and adjudged the danger line of
adventure. I had a patient who in my diagnosis
had a tumour of the liver. Hearing of my successes
with the papaw, he placed himself under my care. He
consulted me some three times, and on each visit


■expressed, his delight at the progress made, stating
how all his friends noticed his improvement. A scul-
lion surgeon, touting for cases for the clique, flat-
tered the patient, belittled myself as a fool outside
the profession. He stated that I was only one against
the many. As the good man had plenty of money
he advised him to pay every doctor in town a fee,
and he would find that one and all condemned my
treatment. This harangue failing to catch the simple-
minded man, he suggested that they go together to
the Boomerang Hospital, where he could gratis obtain
the opinion of the staff of literati. But the patient
answered, “I have promised my wife never to submit
to an operation.” “Well,” said the tempter, “don’t;
I simply suggest that you have an exploratory opera-
tion, which will, without risk, reveal to yourself and
friends what is really the matter. Believing in this
■claptrap, the poor fellow took, as they told him. just
a whiff of anaesthetic; he immediately became uncon-
scious. The knife explored and the victim was quietly
buried. The exploratory operation was a Kaiserine
triumph.
A patient of mine, an Irish woman, who had mar-
ried a cruel German, had an uncanny life. She in-
variably asked my advice and help in sickness and
trbuble. I had to aid her for a boy with bad
asthma, but who was often wagging from school, and
often lay in gutters, exposed. I never had any trouble
with herself except ordinary dyspepsia at times, and
that rarely. A short time ago she was taken with
a spasmodic pain. When some interfering bouncer
saw her, such immediately ordered her to be taken
to a hospital. When she arrived, she protested
and said she preferred to go to her own doc-
tor’s hospital. This was refused: instanter the knife
was plunged in for exploration, and she was buried.
Did ever anybody hear of such a dead shot for dys-
pepsia? Of course it would be criminal, only the
choruses of medical sonatas must not betray an errant
note. Of course, it is easy in event of murder to
plead cancers, tumours, etc., etc. —only chance of giving
life. Such lies only aggravate the offence. Why is it


that the doctors have so much persuasive power? Do*
not ask me to investigate. It is not by scientific lore
that they succeed, but by Kaiserism. They terrorise
by portraying pictures of death, which they profess-
to be able to avert.
Miss Watkinsonia was an orphan, honorably seek-
ing to obtain her own living. The great throat expert
(?) treated her for nasal and throat catarrh. I will
not attempt to rehearse his Babylonian astrologies.
Suffice it to say that the throat put on a malignant
appearance. It was altered in colour and terribly
swollen. Then the lord of the profession said, im-
peratively, that she must have the tonsils excised —
that they were filled with adenoids. Oh, ye gods I
Had the learned practitioner transfused the nostrils''
bacilli into the throat? If so, it was a splendid method
of producing a veritable cancer. And to have them.-
excised II What would have been the fee 111 Fortu-
nately the girl escaped and tested the papaw treat-
ment, which never aids and abets the butcher. She
was cured.
This same medico, backed up as he said by the
greatest expert of Solomon land, got a Scotchwoman,
anid I presume must have treated her in a like manner,.
He pronounced the throat to be malignant, and his
able expert brother confirmed his diagnosis. I was
asked to see the case. Pardon me, gentle reader, I
called the experts liars. I said the papaw could cure
the case, and offered to do so. The poor woman be-
longed to a highly nervous family. Like a fool her
husband allowed her to go back and proclaim my
diagnosis. How many medicos, with no mind of their
own, and of little understanding and less of moral
courage, condemned my method, while they extolled
to the heavens the leaders of the profession, is not
my province to say. They got the poor creature in
terrors enchained, and in a comparatively short time
the undertaker was called in to finish the ceremony of
the splendid assured kultur. When I reproached her
husband for being such a fool, he just repeated the-
medical lore in his own brogue: “Her time was come,
she had to die of tuberculossis.”


It is simply astonishing what faith patients place
in the knife. It can only be explained, I think, by
the cowardly terrorism of misrepresentation of lies,
which are coming into fashion in the Kaisenne hetero-
doxy.
The history of Mrs. Macfadden corroborates me
in such opinion. She had some teeth drawn. Shortly
after she noticed a swelling in the jaw. She asked
the dentist if it was caused by the removal of the
teeth. He minified the trouble, but gave her a lotion,
which he said would soon put her right. He after-
wards acknowledged that the case was worse than
he thought, and advised her to see a doctor.
To get the best medical advice she went to Sydney.
She saw many physicians, but, like the woman in
the days of old, they only added fuel to the fire. At
last, in the weather-guage of the rising atmospheres,
she placed herself under the care of Lord Joneson.
The faces of expression, with the looks of sapient
thought, must have cost his highness a terrible loss
of mental energy. At length he pronounced the case
to be an incurable cancer. In sympathy for the good
lady and her affectionate husband, and a small purse,
he advised her to let all doctors go—to go home and
calmly and quietly to await the end.
On her return home, a neighbour and special
friend, who had learned the powers of the papaw,
urged them to try the papaw treatment. Her husband
replied, “She has had the .advice of the best special-
ists, of the greatest specialists in Australia, and I will
not have her worried any more.” This true friend then
privately sent me the • particulars of the case, and
asked me to send him a month’s treatment, for which
he paid. On receiving it he called at his friends’ house.
“Now,” he said, “I cannot bear to see your wife die
when I (know she can be cured; so I have paid for the
first month’s treatment. Will you oblige me by ac-
cepting it?” The husband and wife were both as-
tounded. This was true Christian love, and as such
it captured the pair. They no longer refused; they no
longer paraded the skill and repute of my lord kultur;
they agreed to faithfully give it a triaL Oh, the


power of spiritual perfect love I Before the month was
up the husband wrote to me and told me the result.
He said: “When I found what the treatment was doing,
I paid my friend for the lot that he bought from you
for my wife, and now I want you to send me another
month’s supply, for whioh I enclose the amount. Need-
less to say, the letters grew shorter and brighter, until
the last asked fojr a gentle tonic as the case was get-
ting on splendidly.
This is not the only case where my lord had given
up the case, in jhis judgment, as of incurable cancer.
A lady at Wentworth Falls had the professional dia-
tribes of my lord and the greatest marmarra experts
for an abdominal tumour (?) cancer. In the last
special consultation they declared that the patient
could not live another fortnight, consequently they
(having fees rolling in plenteously) would not operate
on this one at the point of death. The friends then
sent me word and described the troubled position of
affairs. I sent the treatment, and this is some years
ago; but the lady (72) has been twice to see me, that
we might rejoice together. The scene was most affect-
ing. She wept as she poured the praises of numbers
saved to my record in heaven. My lord reported this
case as an accident! Cancer cured by an accident 11
Hallelujah 111
In the hellish induction of the Kaiserism culture
the sophistry of intrigue has aimed to strike at the
women and children. Kill off the women and anni-
hilate the children, and the British and their Allies
tnust go under. And if even the successes be not
primary, still the damages will weaken and invalidate
the recuperative powers of Germany’s enemies. And
so by curetting the delicate mucous linings of the
female economy, and by scraping, cutting, and tearing
the throat membranes of the youngsters, they must
effectually lower the recuperative forces and vitality
of the race.
Curetting is responsible for a host of congestions
and congested growths, and these give the hue and
cry for operations, which operations, in conjunction
with the auxiliary antiseptics, imprison cancer. It is


highly criminal to assault this most delicate mucous
lining of womanhood. The skilled accoucheur of my
young days is disappearing before the more preten-
tious, dangerous, blundering midwife. He was wont
to exercise patience, and to administer nature-aiding
draughts. To-day chloroform is substituted, and in
many ways nature is forced and instruments are used,
because the attendant cannot spare the time. And
so accidents happen. Everything is made unnatural,
troubles follow, and the keen up-to-date surgeon ad-
vises curetting.
Mrs, Johns, in an untimely trouble, was brought on
a trolly 30 miles to be under the care of the country
town hospital surgeon. The patient was curetted.
Blood poisoning followed. Seven deep abscesses were
wasting away her life. A large internal tumour fol-
lowed. Her condition was most serious; but undoubt-
edly the papaw brought about the reaction which saved
her life.
In my judgment hundreds of internal troubles
follow the assaultive curetting. The curetting creates
the tumour. Every little pup of a doctor to-day begins
assaultive work by a try at curetting. Imagine the
folly that it would be to burn or skin off by acids the
lining membrane of the stomach. When cases of
swallowing burning acids do their work, how the
damaged stomach cries for vengeance: the agonies
are awful. In a word, can such a damaged stomach
-ever be properly cured? Even an ulcerated stomach
often baffles the physician. But when the ulcers are
congested and bleed, the case is very far gone. As
with the stomach, so it is with violent curetting. The
•tissues of the uterus wizen and contract. The organ
is twisted' in antiversion or in retroversion. As the
disease progresses, the sufferings become unbearable.
The tissues thicken and form into hardened patches.
These are pronounced to be becoming, or to have
already become, malignant. Different formed tumours
increase; agonies accumulate; the clever expert can
see nothing but cutting and slashing. The invariable
issue is prolonged suffering, increasing danger, and a
frightful drainage of life energies. The patient is


more or less unwomaned. Kultur is again and again
the brute force that holds the wife an invalid, and
the mother a martyr. The whole procedure is most
damnable, and is a disgrace to the medical profession.
If examinations can righteously be made without
exposing, it is lawful to seek to understand such so-
called cancer formations. By repeated surgical follies,
congestions aggravate into thickened patches of mem-
brane or tumours. Are they actually cancers? The
question here comes in; will the papaw treatment cur©
the congestions and reduce the tumours ? Have patients
given up thus been proved to get well? I could give
scores of cases, which happily prove that these far-
gone troubles are curable by the papaw.
Mrs. Gungasi, a middle-aged lady, had two sons.
What had caused the congestions and accumulations
of the tumour —foreign anathemas? It is not only the
uterus, but also the ovaries which become affected
by curetting operations, and at times by the accidents
of child-birth. The two learned operators during the
major operation for this critical tumour foolishly forgot
caution, and loquaciously squabbled. In the heat of
disagreement they forgot to keep the anaesthetic going.
The lady recovered consciousness and rose to find
herself, as she believed, bleeding to death. She abso-
lutely refused to receive any artificial soothing po-
tions and demanded her freedom.
Judicially condemned to death, she declined to
listen to the great surgeon’s arguments, and so was
allowed her ' freedom. Shortly after this outburst I
was interviewed and asked if I could cure cancer.
I found the one ovary driven from its place and
forming an enlarged tumour. But my faith in the
papaw was rising, so I undertook to do my'best. The
patient was a very intelligent woman, as her conduct
even in the agonies of death proved. This incident
occurred years ago, and that lady to-day has no symp-
toms of tumour, growth, or cancer.
Annie Ogidder was betrayed by her lover. In her
trouble and afraid of her family, she consulted a
chemist’s widow. This woman gave an extra strong
dose to bring on abortion. It killed the feeing but


failed to procure abortion. In the trouble the dead
tumour grew to the side of the uterus. I was called
by her father to see the case. It was one that needed
special caution. No curetting would be of any ser-
vice, and so I went on my own, and treated her
entirely with the papaw. In a few days the diseased
foreign body, or dead tumour, all came away, and
the recovery was complete.
Mrs, Jehu had an abdominal tumour of very large
size. Operations had only succeeded in producing com-
plications of the left ovary. In the care of the papaw
treatment, in four months the tumour had gone, and
the congestion of the ovaries gradually abated. After
a period of two years she again called upon me, and
bringing with her another patient. She told me that
her friends said she was looking years younger. She
asserted her perfect cure, not having had any recurrence
of the trouble.
A Mrs. Lewn, of Sydney, wrote to ask my aid and
advice. Her medical adviser diagnosed a tumour in
the right ovary, which he pronounced to be curable
only in the skill of a surgical operation. I sent treat-
ment, and in a short time received a request for a
further supply. Her testimony was that the ’first ten
days’ treatment had caused intense pain and discom-
fort, which ended in relief, resembling a miscarriage.
There were no further complications.
Mrs. Schroeder had five children. As her husband
was invalided she did a man’s work in the fields.
She carried sacks of corn on her back, and so strained
herself on the left side. Severe pains caused her to
consult Dr. Manificus. He diagnosed a large tumour
in the left ovary. After trying various remedies, the
doctor told her that her only chance was in an opera-
tion. She refused. The abdominal agonies at first
spread and increased, and in the use of the papaw
spasmodic twitches of pain set in. In prosecuion
of the treatment, what resembled a bladder tumour,
as large as a teacup, passed. It burst on falling to
the ground. Evidently a cystic tumour had passed
from the ovary, and so came away as a false concep-
tioned miscarriage.


A lady in New Zealand wrote to me that while
away from her home she was taken with sever© pains-
in her side. A medical man was called in, who pro-
nounced the presence of a cystic tumour of the
ovary. He gave her medicine, and said that in a
certain time he would bring another practitioner, and
they would operate. As it happened, the lady had
some of the papaw ointment with her. Unknown to
the doctor, she perseveringly poured his medicines
away, and instead applied the ointment plasters to
the painful part. After a time the two medicos met
for the consultation. They then interrogated the pa-
tient as to what she had been taking, for they said
the tumour was gone. In her joy the lady wrote
telling me of and thanking me for the success.
As it happened in the Brisbane case, a Mrs. Congo
and two aunts consulted a woman unmarried doctor
for certain symptoms. She advised for all the patients
the stitching of the uterus to the side. The two aunts
consented to be operated upon, and found the treat-
ment prevented more children. The niece, who elected
to try the papaw cure, after a time triumphed on behalf
of the papaw 'treatment by the rejoicing over a fine
son. Imagine the chagrin of the two aunts.
RETROVERSION OF UTERUS.
Mrs. J.P., aged 85, had been a great sufferer through
retroversion of the uterus. Two years before a woman
doctor had introduced a pessary. This had pushed
the uterus forward from the bowel, but had caused
bladder difficulties. I removed the pessary, and com*
menced the treatment with the papaw ointment on
sponges. At first the bladder troubles were persistent,,
but after a few weeks they gradually abated, until the
patient was able to do without pessary or sponge.
The use of pessaries only increases the difficulty
in further complications, and renders the case harder
to cure. I have attended numbers of cases of uterine
retroversion and other displacements, but have found
no difficulty with the papaw on the sponge in mechani-
cally righting the womb, and at the same time re-
laxing the ligaments to natural tension.


UTERINE TUMOUR.
Mrs. Wordsley, a married lady, consulted a medical
man, who pronounced her pregnant, and agreed to
attend her in her confinement. Two nurses also were
engaged. On a special Sunday morning, before day-
light, doctor and nurses were summoned. After a time,
I presume for policy, as the baby still lingered, a
second doctor was called in, and the case *was pro-
nounced a repetition of the Queen Mary incident.
The patient was advised to rest a few days in bed
to improve the general health, and then go into a
private hospital for operation.
I was consulted, and found a large uterine tumour,
and considerable congestion and soreness of the ovaries.
She intelligently commenced and carried out the papaw
treatment, and within two months the tumour had come
away. J
LARGE TUMOUR OE THE UTERUS.
A big German woman was brought from the country
by a friend whora( I had benefited. Seventeen years
before she was helping to plough, when the oxen rushed
right on to a stump, striking her abdomen. She was
pregnant. Troubles followed; the whole abdomen rose
in size as the uterus developed a big heavy tumour.
The pressure caused four (navel and inguinal bowel)
ruptures. As the growth proceeded it was a misery to
walk. Several surgeons had declined to operate, fear-
ing adhesions, complications, and the extent of the
tumour. I injected the papaw ointment, and gave
her a sufficiency for a month, as well as the general
treatment. Both bowel and bladder functions were
seriously affected. In a month’s time the woman came
alone. The tumour was no longer to be found, and
the uterine walls, still somewhat thickened, were
rapidly regaining shape and tonicity.
One lady in Sydney had the womb stitched to
the abdomen. The dear lady became pregnant. A
doctor attended, but the pains were of no avail.
Two other consultants were called. The womb was
splendidly united to the abdomen. Cesarian opera-
tion was performed, and mother and infant died.


OVARIAN TROUBLE.
Mrs. Jabin, Sydney. The lady was a widow, with-
out family. For years she had been troubled with
dysmennorhcea, accompanied with agonising pain. Her
medical adviser diagnosed a tumour in the right ovary,
which he pronounced curable only in the chances of
a surgical operation. The lady wrote and described the
case, and I sent her a supply of the papaw ointment
and accessory treatment. After some weeks 1 received
a request for a further supply, and stating that the
application of the ointment during the first ten days
had caused intense pain and discomfort. In further
correspondence she informed me that the tumour had
passed away.
I am a student of morals. To learn the morals
of a city is to be able to guage its peace and prosperity.
When the Divine Man healed ten lepers, only one re-
turned to say “Thank you.” ' I note that "the same
conduct holds to-day. Mrs. Widdens was the one out
of the ten. who for the papaw tendered a practical
truth-carrying “Thank you.” She had the misfortune
to run a thorn deeply under the nail of one of her
fingers. Oh I the agony, the pain from the inflamma-
tion of the quick. She had the papaw treatment,
which in a very short time drew the intruding thorn
out again and quickly relieved the trouble. In the
same street lived Mrs. Luten. She got an injury to her
thumb, and attended a public hospital for six weeks.
The young medicos had any amount of tries at probing
the thumb. How far did the elder ones set the exam-
ple. The practice was most up-to-date and successful
to bone destruction. When the good dame grieved or
worried, she was threatened that the top joint of the
thumb would otherwise have to be excised. For the
life of me I cannot imagine what was obtained in
these rifle shots: was the bull’s-eye in the middle line?
Mrs. Widdens likewise agreed with common sense, and
so she not only told Mrs. Luten of the success of the
papaw in her own case, but gave her a portion of the
ointment, I will let Mrs. Luten tell her own story.
She, on going to bed, put on a plaster of the iOir^ment,


and she says, “I got the first night’s rest for six
weeks.” She then persevered, and by the end of the
week a large piece of dead decayed bone, about three-
quarters of an inch square, came out. The hacking of
the flesh was worthy the skill of the public hospital
staff 1 But what an escape I With such a wounded
thumb, could It have been cut off without gangrene or
other bloodpoison issue? Tell it to the Germans.
Sir Joshua Williams was a professed moralist.
And so Mrs. Roacher, believing him to be a straight-
forward expert, allowed his highness to perform eleven
abdominal operations. What a marvellous power, but
how gained and gotten I Fancy, eleven attempts to
play the assault in the danger zone of human, life.
Yes, he told her that his perseverance had culminated
in a marvellous success. She was now cured, and
would never need to consult any doctor again. From
the kultur standpoint this was to be an unqualified
answer to the traducers of the Kaiserine tricks. Alas,
alas! Trouble again commenced. The hidden kultur
poison would not be enchained. Fains and backaches
multiplied. Such splendid skill thrown away! What
should the poor woman do? How could she again
brave months of torture ? She returned ‘to the medico,
her mind as a ship in a hurricane at sea.
Words were unnecessary: facts in manifestations
of angry swellings and ruptures revealed the unspoken
anguish. She asked his advice. What could be done?
She was a plucky woman—he was a pluckier general.
The only thing left was the twelfth operation! He
said he could not understand! Whatever had hap-
pened? Yes, another operation absolutely necessary I
“Never 1” said the wrathful dame. “Eleven times
you tried to kill me, and missed to succeed. You would
doubtless be successful this time. Never—no, never!”
The patient came straight to my surgery. I can
stand a good deal of the emotional, but I was never
so appalled. There were three abdominal ruptures,
where the stitches of the former sewings had broken
open. Along the right arm were four inflamed angry
swollen glands, which showed all the appearances of
true cancers. The throat revealed the battle to be


in. a malignant strife. I had to send for five yards
of calico to bind up the abdomen. She could not move
the arm because of the glandular swellings. Spite
of the shock, I recovered my equilibrium, and com-
menced to use the papaw treatment everywhere. The
case was, in the powers of the papaw, cured. To me
this is the most marvellous recovery I ever witnessed.
Let the curtain drop!
Mrs. Doldroms was troubled with a wart on the
finger. Strange to say she consulted the Astral pro-
fessor, the spirit-husband of Minerva. Of course, iodine
was too earthly, and the professor knew of no other
remedies to cure warts, only the astrals.
And so, welll the best thing to do was to offer
the finger as a sacrifice to the dstrals. And so the
poor obedient finger was, through no fault of its
own, cut off and laid on ye altar of ye gods. But the
darling professor either forgot to pray to the finger’s
astral sire, or perhaps his astral majesty was not
at home. And so the hand rebelled and joined in a
strike against the prophets of Baal.
Nevertheless, the professor got wild, and deter-
mined to try his hand in German kultur. His hand,
aided by the knife, punished the striker —hand cut off
the hand!
Who could guess when the German war broke out
how long it would last? And so with the professor’s
crusade. Things got worse and worse. The strikers
called out the armed limbs. But the professor had
not the pluck to put to rout the poor woman’s arm,
and so he bestowed his blessings and his prayers
on a young aspirant for a lieutenancy.
Alas, alas I the youngster was committed. How
splendidly he sawed off .that naughty arm. But it
takes more than a novice to beat back the Kaiser
kultur. Things went from bad to worse. The professor
gave up praying to the astrals. The other arm and
both legs joined the strike. And the professor left
the patient, having consigned her to be offered a dying
oblation for his own sins and his patient’s follies.
Meanwhile the patient awoke to her life responsi-
bilities. What were the magicians going to do? Most


assuredly, the only chance of life was to take ven-
geance on all the strikers. Cut off the remaining
arm and saw off the two legs. At all events it would
be a record for science kultur. But, strange to say,
the lady objected. She could reconcile herself to
carry about one arm only, but could not bear to
imagine herself armless and legless. So she left her
youthful chaperon’s care and bolted from the astrals.
That good lady has been my patient ever since. The
astral professor was an ardent student of occult science.
The bacilli and bacteria known and unknown to him
were magnus, major, maximus. His knowledge of anti-
septics was indescribable. The numbers of bacilli
embedded in that sad patient’s body was legion. Talk
of cancer! speak of malignant bloodpoisons! the arm
that remained hanging was covered with atomic mole-
cules. The legs were a composition of the Kaiserine
admixtures. These kept coming out in new crops; but
every fresh attack of the enemy was repulsed by the
British papaw.
After a few years’ absence from the care of her
beloved astral star, she one day forgot earthly man-
ners, and decided to descend from the skies and see
how her old friend fared. She called at his house.
Strange how he knew her, but having had so much
experience, he could not help knowing her spirit I To
describe his terror was beyond his visitor’s powers.
Did he swoon? Did he simply believe that at last
he was permitted to enter the dwellings of the gods.
“Oh,” he said, “you did scare me! How did you
come back again to life? I left you in the oare of the
carekeepers to die.” But she answered: “Yet I did
not die; I am your old patient.” And she proceeded'
to tell of the powers of the ‘papaw. It was a revela-
tion. He had to believe his sight. To-day that
patient shows very few scars of the terrible struggle.
She has two good fairly strong legs, and the one arm
has taken on itself the duties of the two. She makes
her husband’s shirts, and is herself a pattern of
domestic thrift and prowess to many of her sex. All
the cancer characters have . disappeared. The papaw
carnivora have swallowed all the astral bervivora.


PERIOSTITIS CASE—A CONTRAST STUDY.
Mrs. W. was a well-developed lady, about 45
years of age. One day she was passing some meat
through a sausage machine, when the latter sprung
and hit her a blow on the cheek bone. For a few
moments it paralysed her, but soon the pain became
almost unbearable. She got relief by hot fomenta-
tions and in a general hot and cold water treatment.
She believed herself cured.
After a few months the pain in the cheek-bone
returned, and she was alarmed to notice a swelling
or thickening of the bone. She had heard of the
efficacy of the papaw ointment, and elected to give it
a trial. Within an hour the application of the oint-
ment so relieved the pain as to encourage her to con-
tinue the treatment. Next day her husband noticed
a weeping all along the cheek-bone, so pronounced
as to lead him to ask why she had been crying. And
then the two noticed that the ointment had set up
this action of relief. For some days the weeping or
damping continued, during which all pain and sore-
ness, and all the swelling disappeared. The recovery
was perfect.
PHYMOSIS.
Mr. W. R., a youth of 20, suddenly discovered that
he was suffering from phymosis, in a very elongated
constricted prepuce from birth. He consulted me with
a view to circumcision. I advised him first to have his
throat and larynx, which threatened throat consump-
tion, treated with the papaw treatment.
He agreed to this, provided I promised to perform
the operation afterwards. In his zeal to get well he
used a quantity of the ointment around the Yjiroat,
and in the nares. Within a month these were so
much better that he requested the performance of the
promised opeartion.
Hirst I used a pair of narrow forceps and probed,
and to my surprise found all the foreskin adhesions
had disappeared. I then used gentle retraction, and
was astonished when the foreskin suddenly drew back
•over the glands. After that he simply applied the


ointment locally, and night and morning for a few
days drew back and returned the foreskin.
The case was cured. In the lad’s zeal in the
use of the ointment for the throat, it had been ab-
sorbed, and so the tissues in question were relaxed,
and the case was cured without circumcision.
In this providential happening, I learned the power
of the papaw over the sexual parts. The active prin-
ciple, absorbed from the throat, had entered the blood
circulation and acted physically in its own services and
powers. I was simply, as I have often been in the
successive discoveries of hidden papaw powers, amazed.
As I said to my patient: “There! I believe for the
first time in the world’s history circumcision is being
practically effected without the knife or sharp instru-
ment. At all events, in the Israelitish custom I never
heard of the same result, other than in the rabinical
surgery. Even Zipporah, the wife of Moses, had to use
a sharp stone. If she had only known of the papaw I”
I never now circumcise with the knife, but always
dilate with the papaw.
In a istudjy I have been able to carry the discovery
further. The mystical powers it has over the delicate
male tissues are only equalled by its powers over
the female economy. In its aid I reduce the thick-
enings of tissues caused by rude assault or violence
against delicate and highly ',' sensitive provisions. I
have cured tumours, many that have been pronounced
malignant by the experts of the Profession. I have
been able to relax the tissues, and to reduce inflamma-
tions and thickenings and hardenings, and to bring
back health and sexual vigour.
At the same time, in the uncanny sorrows brought
on the mothers by a careless accouchment practise
or midwifery, the papaw is a wonderful assistant
to the bringing back to a natural from the artificial
society unnatural labours one hears of to-day.
Mrs. Fortunate was a pirmipara, and over thirty
years of age. She was warned by medicos that she
must have two doctors, two nurses, and chloroform in
full doses, or she would fare badly. Hearing of mj
experience she wrote and asked *my opinion, and if


I would myself undertake the attendance. I agreed.
She came down from the country and entered a mater-
nity home where each patient could have her own
doctor in attendance. I gave the preparatory treat-
ment, and was, as I asked, phoned to on the first
signals. When I called* I found the patient very ner-
vous because of what the country advisers had told
her. I straightaway gave her a sleeping draught.
In about an hour’s time I called and found the
patient had just awakened; the true labour had com-
menced. The nurse was tired out, having been three
nights on railway journeys with patients. So I urged
her to rest in her own room and I would call her
when necessary. In the applied use of papaw oint-
ment the membranes rapidly relaxed, and the labour
was quickly over. The nurses called the baby the
“papaw 'infant,” and the mother confessed by ac-
knowledging her complete misapprehension of what
would have been, and what had been. She said: “I
thought the trouble to be a killing affair; but if this
be all, I would not mind the same every fortnight.
Mrs. Steel was the wife of a publican. She had
two boys under two years old. What happened? A
most clever wonderfully, paying kultur kept drawing
money from the husband’s resources. For twenty
years the tricks of the trade competed with the tricks
of THE TRADE. The kultur-cunning jugglery consisted
in performing operations with a swelling swagger,
and to doing the least possible harm—and least pos-
sible good. At all events the skill prevented the
brothers having a little brother for a pe?iod of twenty
years. At last, out of patience, she plucked up and
refused any more kultur. She asked my advice. For
several months she persevered with the papaw treat-
ment. At last in despair she said to me: “Doctor,
I fear the tumour is growing larger.” I quietly an-
swered: “Come and see me again in three weeks’ time,
and we will have a talk.”
She came, and placing a stethoscope. I asked the
nurse to listen. The amazed helpmeet listened and
burst forth exclaiming: “Why it is moving as if alive!”
“Yes,” I replied, “the baby will soon be here.” And


so, in the powers of the papaw, the errors of the past
were overcome, and the joys of the mother were caught
up in the triumph of the remedy,
I could give scores of instances where the papaw
has given health, happiness, and heirs and heiresses to
forlorn hope. When a lady has found out the so-
phistry, she allows Nature to be Nature still, and so
with a minimum of distress families are coming into
line with the happy days of the Hebrew women in
Egypt.
The coercing moral force that urges me to bring
the wonders of the papaw before the public is my
cognisance of the sufferings of humanity called by the
so-called war—l mean the demoniac strife of hell—to
the destruction by murder and pillage of the intelli-
gent and finest sections of the nations. Hundreds
of thousands of the bravest suffer and die in defending
the liberties and the homesteads of innocent men and
women. I suppose the abominations of vandalism,
and in feet the turn-out of all the vilenesses of hell,
was never so subtle and gruesome as to-day. When I
read of the hundreds dying from wounds and from
sicknesses in exposure, my blood boils. I know that
if the papaw remedies were in sufficient plenty in the
fighting lines, and with the Allies, and the down-
trodden enslaved assaulted peoples, that a very large
pereentage who now die would be saved. A Mr. Rowe
has written to me from Wanstead, England. He says:
■“Sir Robert Perks gave me some of the papaw oint-
ment. I sent some off to France, where I have some
sons in the army, and they tell me it is very effective.
They ask me to send more, as their friends and com-
rades want some also.”
A private, who was a most difficult patient of mine
when in Brisbane to set up, writes: “Mother, you ought
to take Sam to Dr. Lucas; you might take my allotment
—O. can fix it up. If you only knew what he has done
for me. It seems impossible ior you to think what I
can go through now. It knocks the bottom out of a
lot, but I am still going strong, thanks to Dr. Lucas.”
The mother is a widow who has seven sons, six of
whom are at the Front. It appears that I have &t-


tended them all, but the one who has written had a
hard time in rising to manhood. Heart weakness,
threatened phthisis, and abdominal and other troubles
tried my skill and patience, fearing he would never
compass the turn to health and manhood.
Thus his kind remembrances are the more valuable.
No one who knew him ever dreamed that he could
regain health, much more become one of Australia’s
finest soldiers.
Private Peters regularly writes from France to his
friends. He says so long as he has the papaw ointment
and the anti-fever lozenges he can stand the trenches,,
and keeps in good health.
In the Boer War Mr. Home, who had been cured of
the typhoid by the anti-fever lozenges, took a supply
of boxes with him. He not only kept himself right,
but helped all his friends who suffered from malaria
or typhoid. The cures at last won the attention of the
authorities, who were in form to order a consignment,
only the war finished.
As a specific to mitigate and remove the general
catarrh, I use the Tincture Gratiolae Co. in draught
or lozenge. This reduces the fever in a few hours.
FORMULA:
Rec Terebinth Oxid.,
Tr. Aconiti,
Liq. Strychnise,
Quniae Disulph,
Tr. Polygoni Hydropiper var. Australe,
Tr. Gratiolse Pedunculatae,
Sod. bicarb, powder and Papayate.
Dose: 5 to 20 Drops, or 1 or 2 Lozenges.
I obtained the idea of the small doses of the turpen-
tine from a retired Indian Army medical officer, but in
my first trials found his doses caused strangury in
children. That was remedied by weakening the dose.
Again, in visiting Gippsland, in Victoria, I learned of
the use of the Gratiola by the native aboriginals.
The success of the mixture has been amazing as a
fever reducer and a catarrh cuter.


A lay missionary went to New Guinea as carpenter
and builder. He took with him a supply of the anti-
fever lozenges. (I have also had the prescription
made into anti-fever mistoids.) This gentleman suf-
fered from a large number of attacks of malarial fever,
but always warded off the attack with the lozenges.
He was in the fever zone for two years, but by the
help of the lozenges during that time never lost a day’s
work.
The testimonies to the efficacy of this prescription
for dengue, typhoid, and all malarial fevers in tropical
countries, is the siimmum bonum, which in conjunction
with the papaw remedies reduces my death list to a
level far below the ordinary present-day kulturs.
Mr. Kidney was an observer of the supernatural in
the natural. In stepping too closely to the grave,
he got smothered with, but could not dissect, the
swarm of typhoid bacilli. And so he came into his
friend’s hospital to allow a friendly research into the
scientific treatment of these wonderful gentry. He
had a very weakening attack of typhoid fever. Strange
to say he recovered his equilibrium in less than the
week. All the bacilli fled. In the trust of the anti-
fever lozenges and the papaw adjuncts I never suc-
ceed in keeping these casefs for over a week or two
under treatment. When sent to the public hospitals
for eight or ten weeks’ rest and thankful endurance,
by coming into the papaw care the patients are really
released from gaol.
Many of the soldiers trusted in the munificence
of the old Ohaldaeens with the charge of immune
bacilli, when introduced by novices, got sick. In the
depths of burial these bacilli too often play truant.
Corporal' Jenkins was said to be tabooed by the
immune bacilli against- typhoid, by the reception into
his carcase of these strange bodies. His natural vigour
saved him from initiatory death. He was pronounced
immune, and so was sent to the Front. There he got
knocked about, and so again was sent home. After see-
ing his native land once more, he was said to be over-
taken by the bacilli, which had regained their freedom;
and so he, in mercy, was sent to the typhoid military


hospital for eight weeks’ rest. Is it any wonder, with
such brainy men at the lead, that the Germans go free ?
What right have the hospital authorities to play with
the lives of any recruits? Jenner found the small-
pox of humanity to be the same, or allied to, the cow-
pock found on the teats of milking cows, and so, by
taking the virus from the cow > or better through a
calf, and inoculating the infant or person of older
years, the pustules thus created were much milder
than the disease caught in promiscuous contagion.
And so the disease inoculated from the cow or calf
was not only marvellously milder, but also rendered
the patient immune from future Attacks. In the suc-
cesses at sight, two accidents were unforeseen. While
that of the disease thus imported from the cow is of a
milder form, there is the danger of the inclusion of
blood poisons when the vaccine is taken from the
human body. This, in the carelessness of medical
men, has done more to cause lack of confidence in
the teachings of the medical profession than all the
individual errors and mistakes.
I have had a number of patients inoculated with
the improvised typhoid killer, who were sick and ill
out of all reason from the services of the poison
distributors. By the help of the papaw remedies I
have been rejoiced to see all such cases cured. But
on the other hand, how many have died because the
authorities were too proud to try the ,papaw cure ?
Only a few such deaths have been acknowledged, but
those so acknowledged reflect a scandal and dis-
grace on the whole Profession. Why should a fine
healthy young man, who offers to fight for his coun-
try, be seized and secretly infected against his will?
lam disgusted with the mirage, and in jt ashamed
of the Medical Profession. The youth, in courage and
chivalry, gives himself to risk the burstings of shells
and ramblings of bullets; but to murder him in cold
blood and call it science is the worst form of German
kultur.
One patient thus suffering, and whom I was able
to rescue, had the tissues of the lower jaw after the
operation all pointing to malignant evils. I think


I never saw a jaw in a worse looking, more angry
■condition. I was proud to be the means of bring-
ing him back to health and strength; but I vehemently
protest.
The second great danger of or from inoculation
is the ignorance of the untrained. In England I was
•trained, where vaccination is compulsory. To-day, in
the Kaiserine kultur, all danger is caricatured and
thousands of casualties are tabooed from publication.
During a voyage from England to Melbourne I wit-
nessed the whole exposure. A lad came on board at
•Ceylon. His father had. died in Northern India from
a malarial outbreak. The boy was being sent to friends
in Australia. The day in Colombo was very close
and sultry. In a soft drink and feed corroboree, the
boy became bilious. When he came on board he was
sick and fevered. When the young ship’s surgeon saw
him, he treated him to cold ice-packs. He answered the
attention by coming out in a skin rash. This in time
became general, and a few of the papulae first showed
water, and a few pus later on. In a few hours the
eruption passed off, and the pustules scarcely left a
scar. The ship’s surgeon in the meantime had not
seen me, or I should have advised him against any
water-packs. When we got to Fremantle, all the
four medical men on board agreed that no symptoms
showed smallpox. The port doctor came to see the
ship and agreed. But later he got a friend (?) to see
the same. This man pronounced the case as small-
pox, and consequently the ship was quarantined.
In the confusion the passengers were ordered to
be vaccinated; but, alas, the assistants did not know
how to vaccinate. They plunged the lance deeply into
the deeper flesh. Of course, if they had had know-
ledge and experience, they should only have inserted
the vaccine into the cuticle. But in the deep cuttings
and proddings the lymphatics were angered, and nasty
wounds followed in many cases. Again, among so
many passengers, many were extremely nervous, and
a few died.
I am thankful that I was not responsible for the
mistake. But, after all, it was just a repetition of


the so-called Bubonic Plague scare. In both case®
several died. All these had been injected with the
kultur virus, and all had been terrified. Such in-
timidation is, I maintain, criminal. One young woman
saw what she thought to be the plague van; she was
placed in it against her will, and died before the
vehicle had travelled many yards.
A Minister of the Crown said to me: “Medical
reform must be a Profession reform; legislation outside
the 'Profession is impotent.” And after all, his words
were true. But whait a condemnation of the Profession f
The three corporations—medical, clerical, and legal
—hold the greatest commands over the people, and
so may become the greatest sinners in impudent self-
assertion. Yet, all these three classes are under the
Divine Government, and are responsible in the Divine
Moral Law for their every behaviour to all patients,,
clients and pastorates.
The great point to be remembered is that we are all-
responsible for every deed we do to mankind.
We shall all have to stand before .the great judg-
ment seat, when everyone will be judged. Then all’
wrongs will be avenged, and all righteous judgments
will be awarded. Every wrong wo de will be a rebound
on the wrongdoer. We may kill here, but be ourselves
killed or avenged hereafter!
RHEUMATIC ARTHRITIS AND ACUTE
PERIOSTITIS.
Mary Kirshaw, a child of 9, had suffered for some-
time with rheumatic arthritis. The knee was semi-
flexed, and the limb, which was swollen more than
halfway to the ankle, was rigid. The disease was here-
ditary in the family.
For a month the papaw ointment was applied to
the knee and leg. With a small trochar, some three
pints of semi-purulent matter and blood-stained serum
were drawn off from under the knee and from the side
of the leg.
As the leg reduced in size I attached an iron
weight to the ankle, and gradually extended the limb.
And after a month’s attendance I had the pleasure


of seeing the girl walk to meet me on my last visit, and
in another week she walked a mile up-hill to meet a
tram.
RHEUMATIC GOUT.
Mrs. Francis, a lady over 70 years of age, suffered
great pain and discomfort from rheumatic gout in
her hands. The joints of her fingers and knuckles
were more or less, contorted and distorted. Liniments
had falied to reduce the Swellings or to relieve the
pain.
A course of corrective treatment was used with the
papaw ointment. In two months’ time all signs of
the rheumatic gout had disappeared.
ACUTE RHEUMATISM—RHEUMATIC FEVER
Mr. -George Humstead was only 17 years of age.
Before I (knew him he had had a bad attack of rheu-
matic arthritis. Like many another in their teens,
he was not at all careful of his health. He would lay
out at night, or by the cool brook stream, irrespective
of mist or cold. The result was a very much increased
depressing attack of rheumatic fever. He came into
my hospital, and in a few days became an out-patient.
Alas, alas I we cannot put old heads on young shoul-
ders. In a few weeks he was back as an in-patient.
This time he was under more .rigid discipline, and
remained for a couple or so of weeks until he was
thoroughly cured. Three attacks of rheumatic fever,
and severe at that, yet with the papaw treatment he
was so far convalescent as to show no heart troubles,
and so was passed by the military examiners as fit
for the army. He enlisted, and in the change and
discipline served with distinction with the signalling
corps. After a time he was wounded, but not having
the papaw ointment had to suffer a bad time with
myelitis. After weeks he was able to return to the
Front.
Lady Mary Astreme, of London, was troubled with
severe pains in the thighs and hips. She belonged
of an aristocratic family, the male members many of
them holding commissions in the Army and Navy.
This lady was the Red Cross representative and nurs-


ing worker of the family. Skilled consultations of ex*
perts pronounced the trouble as a bad form of inflam-
mation of the sciatic nerve. She had bad sciatica.
The gentlemen consulted together, and no reasonable
expense would be spared to give the good lady relief.
When I was a student, any man proposing to-
operate on the sciatic bundle .of nerves would be con-
sidered a fool. But now, even in London, as in other
great centres, German kultur promises big fees and
vast honours and eclat. It is not for me to tabulate
the honour titles of the operator, I do not even know
the figure demanded for the performance of this latest
surgical slaughter. Of course, the great man was
to do the miraculous without endangering the danger
line. The operation was, as usual, reported most
brilliantly performed, only in time to save the lady’s
life.
But had the morphia and all the emollients and
soporifics lost their power? The agony preceding the
skilled touches was bad enough, but when the sciatic
nerve-strings were divided, the pain became madden-
ing. All the kultur of the experts was brought to
memory and service. Oh, the agony!
Nothing inside or outside the Babylonian records
could be found to give relief. After a time a friend
wrote to a retired Navy captain in Tasmania. That
gentleman knew that if anything could afford relief,
it was the papaw, and so he wrote directing me to
assist the great London surgeons. Thus I sent a supply
and directions how to use. After a few weeks I got
a letter of praise and thanks. She wrote it herself.
“Wonderful, wonderful, wonderful! Nothing we could
try or hear of eased the pain; but when I put on the
ointment and carried out the treatment, there was
no further pain.” The treatment cured all the great
man’s mistakes, and it completely cured the sciatica. .
A lady in Glasgow was under the care of the
experts of the Hospital and the University Boards for
a very obstinate attack of sub-acute rheumatism. No-
thing seemed to relieve, but only to aggravate. A
sister, living in South Australia, wrote and told me
of the case, and asked me to send the treatment. She


had three months’ treatment. Her last letter said: “I
have now no trouble, only that my boy is at the front.”
These cases both proved to the leaders of the
Profession the powers of the papaw. Cases might be
multiplied.
The mania to-day is the exploitation of appendi-
citis by the legion militant. While walking the ‘hos-
pitals I only saw one case officially so treated. The
patient was a middle-aged lady. For three weeks
she had a continual pain in the right side and below
the ribs. It was cared for in the physician’s ward.
It had evidently been caused through the lady swallow-
ing a lemon seed or pip. At that time the Germans
had not yet started their kultur militarism, and so
there was no suggestion of opening the bowel to see,
and to knife. The treatment consisted in abundance
of fluid drinks, olive oil, and soothing medicaments.
After a time the trouble disappeared as suddenly as
it came: the pip had slipped out from the appendix
and passed through the lower bowel.
The search trick for the intruder to-day pays so
well that every pup can try his hand, in the provisions
of the kultur laws. I say every pup: yes, in the confes-
sions of the faculty. Confession speaks of a case
where one gentleman took charge of a friend’s practice
while on holiday. A patient came, and the locum
tenems diagnosed the trouble to be appendicitis. ' So
he proceeded to operate. Splendid success! A pay-
ing game! In a little over a year after, the patient
came again with appendicitis. The family surgeon
being now at home, diagnosed the case appendicitis,
and proposed to cut off the appendix. The locum
tenems called. The surgeon told him of the trouble
and the proposed operation. The locum was to see
it performed. 'Then he said: “I don’t understand:
whatever was it that I cut off?” At all events the
public has to take the word of the operator. In my
experiencels I have had more white lies repeated to me
by patients, told them by surgeons, than an ordinary
man would possibly believe. Any one can prove this
statement. Take any difficult case to a dozen doctors.


and the number of diseases vouched therefrom will
astonish the natives.
A couple of brothers went for a holiday to a sea-
side resort. As father was not there to advise wisdom,
they both bathed, going into the water again and
again; then they lay on the sands in the sun to dry,
I would not recommend any reader such a pathway
to abdominal inflammation. Nineteen out of twenty
surgeons, if called in, would pronounce the trouble
appendicitis. Of these two brothers, the one having
confidence in my honesty and treatment came to me for
the same, and in a few days was cured. The other
brother in family reasons went to a young practi-
tioner, who of course pronounced it appendicitis. Not
knowing enough himself, he got another surgeon in
consultation, and the poor fellow was allowed to
undergo operation. Splendid success 1 Miraculous skill 1
Only "just saved by the skin of his teeth. But—oh,
those naughty “buts” —the after troubles were so bad.
.. . Ah, yes, the follies of the nurse 1 Oh, those
poor nurses! Surely a true kultur Kaiserism or Prus-
sian militarism. Some months after, the two brothers
went for medical examination, for the war. My
patient passed , first class; the poor fellow who had
been so marvellously played with was rejected. Oh,
ye gods!
Mr. Bulieu, living in a country town, was troubled
with a pain in the bowels. Good old Dr. Cockwarney
pronounced it to be a bad case of appendicitis, and
forthwith splendidly operated. Some time after the
patient came to my hospital. Yes, he had been oper-
ated on, and an ugly fistula was discharging, splen-
didly proving the success of the surgeon’s skill. He
elected to try the papaw treatment. In a few days
it cured all the profused local inflammation, and as
it cured the fistula there was no further need of
its help.
In the middle of the nineteenth century typhoid
fever was still common in England, and especially
among the poor. The chief trouble was assigned to
Peyer’s patches and other glands of the bowel. In
the wisdom of our fathers the abdomen, held sacred.


'was not opened, and so comparatively few died, but
hundreds lived on. When I was a student the hospital
-authorities were permitted to hold post mortem exam-
inations on non-paying patients who died. This revela-
tion was astounding, as it proved that numbers whose
;glandular troubles had come to death's door years
before, but had been saved for years, to die with other
troubles. If the abdomen had been cut, the patients
would either have died in the first bowel trouble, or
would have been suffering invalids for the remainder
-of life. All the bowel troubles are difficult and com-
plicated, but I have cured all my patients. Only it
needs care in diet and against exposure to prevent
recurrence. I never knew operations to thoroughly cure,
hut they have killed thousands. Dr. Kilkums gave his
patient up for operation next morning. Meanwhile
a nurse got half a dozen boxes of .the papaw ointment
and well massaged, assisted with warm poultices—
these were placed over the papaw plaster. An enema
was injected, and in the morning the patient was not
killed, but cured.
APPENDICITIS.
Mr. Nelder, a youth of 19, was suffering from
appendicitis. For nearly two days he had been obliged
to take pain-killer or opiates. But now the friends
became alarmed, as vomiting had set in. For some
days there had been no action of the bowel. He was
in a high state of fever and intermitting consciousness.
"The papaw plasters were kept hot by linseed meal
poultices all over the abdomen. The pain imme-
diately eased and gradually abated. Within 24 hours
the vomiting ceased. Injections of oil, soap, and emol-
lient enemas gradually relieved the lower bowel, while
doses of salad oil —the vomiting having stopped—
began to aid the peristaltic action of the bowel above
the obstruction. In five days the young man took
a journey ,of four miles. The cure was complete.
CANCER (?) OF THE STOMACH.
The Rev. Williams called on me in a forlorn hope.
He had all the most distressing symptoms of throat


and stomachic troubles. Vomiting, agonising pain,
corruptive ferment, which he described as unendurable,
and a general emaciation and weakness. As a last
resource he was ordered to take a voyage to England
and tour for twelve months. Previously to embarking
he called on me. I gave him the remedies sufficient
for Six months, which he promised faithfully to carry-
out. I do not think he would ever have reached
England without them.
INDOLENT ULCER OF THE LEG.
Mr. Daffy, a tall man, somewhat emaciated through
protracted suffering, was recommended to consult me
for a large indolent ichorous ulcer of the leg. Some
years ago he had received a heavy blow, which caused
an ulcer that for a long time baffled all attempts to
heal. After a time he again hurt the leg, with the
result that a worse ulceration followed. For a long
time he tried remedy after remedy, even resting in
a private hospital for some weeks. He had various
veins cut and tied, and minor operations.
When he consulted me the ulcer was some six
inches more or less in diameter. It was so painful he
could only limp with a stick, and his general health
was fast failing. The question was, was the bone im-
plicated ?
The patient thus described the effects of the 6int-
ment: “The wound lost its heat and pain, and became
covered with a film, under which a healthy flesh and
skin started to grow. In a month’s time the whole
was healed except three spots the size of peas.”
He had for some days stood and walked on the leg for
hours without inconvenience. The cure proceeded and
the general health returned.
SHALLOW CHRONIC ULCER.
Mr. Mackay. Some years ago this patient grazed
the right shin. The wound never properly healed, but
would become covered with a brown unnatural skin.
He again hurt it, and caused a shallow ulcer two
inches by one inch. He informed, me that the trouble
had bested many medical men. He commenced the


treatment. In five weeks the size of the wound had
reduced three-fourths, and the granulations were higher
than the surrounding skin, and rapidly forming a
new skin. The papaw appeared to dissolve the death
particles, and healthy healing action followed.
FISTULA.
Mr. W. Adds was troubled with a fistula. He
had failed to get relief in the ordinary remedies, and
wished to avoid an operation. In consultation I ad-
vised him to try the papaw ointment.
With the aid of linseed meal poultices, which re-
laxed the tissues and aided the absorption of the
papaw ferments, in a very few days the opening closed,
and there has been no further trouble.
FISTULA..
Mr. James, a solicitor, on the advice of the last
patient, consulted me for a fistula. The jpatient was;
terribly run down with hard work, and experienced a
high degree of fever in the local inflammation. In
the papaw remedies and general building-up treat-
ment, both constitutional and local troubles abated,,
and in a few days, as in the first, the fistula healed.
There has been no return of the trouble.
PERIOSTITIS AND VARICOSE VEINS.
Mrs. Johns, the wife of a public functionary, had
suffered largely from long standing. She was troubled
with varicose veins. On the one shin this condition
had led to an indolent ulcer and a large area of pain-
ful inflammation. I was consulted and advised the
papaw treatment.
The case was obstinate, as there was a degree of
acute periostitis, and at the same time the lady was
impatient to resume her duties, and would not give
herself proper rest. As she saw the improvement and
lost the she became more tractable, and within
six weeks all the periostitis, the varicose swelling,
and the diffused erythematous inflammation had dis-
appeared.


PERIOSTITIS.
Master Yeans, a boy of 10, grazed his shin in a
fall against a piece of wood. He was taken to the
■Golfers' Hospital. As far as I can learn the bone .was
scraped. In three months the boy left the hospital
worse than when admitted. When he came under my
care there were four wounds below the knee, which
were very angry looking and swollen. There was great
pain on pressure over the bone. The case was treated
with the papaw ointment. A number of thin films of
bone came away. The angry condition has left, and
there is no longer tenderness on pressure.
VARICOSE VEINS.
Miss Lovelace, a finely built, well-developed young
-woman, consulted Dr. Dukely for swelling ;md in-
flammation below the knees. He attributed the trouble
to varicose veins, and told her that the matter would
be serious unless she underwent an operation. As she
declined this he commenced a treatment, which was
followed by an open wound.
As the doctor still urged an operation, the lady
called to ask me.if the trouble could be got over with-
out the knife.
She commenced the papaw treatment. In a few
weeks the inflammation disappeared, the wound healed,
.and the patient recovered without the assistance of
the knife.
GALL STONES.
Mrs. Edge, an elderly lady, was admitted to the
Lewer Hospital for a swelling and induration of the
liver, which was believed to be an accumulation of
gall stones. Strong medicines were tried, but without
avail. They irritated and nauseated the patient. At
last her medical attendant advised that only an opera-
tion could give her a chance of life. She declined
and left the hospital. I was called in attendance.
In the space of some eight to ten weeks the liver
tumour burst and discharged its contents through the
bowels. She had no further liver trouble.
Mrs. Paterson, a well-built woman, about 50,
'had at various times passed gall stones. Before con-


suiting me, she had seen one or more doctors for a
swelling of the liver, which was diagnosed as caused
by the retention of gall stones. An operation was ad-
vised, which she declined.
She intelligently followed out the papaw treat-
ment, and after about a month the whole swelling
suddenly discharged the accumulated gall stones with
mucus, blood, and bile into the bowel. The bile duct
had evidently been relaxed and the stones 'vere soft-
ened by the papaw. She placed two specimens in an
envelope and put them into her purse for rafety.
The pressure of the purse had flattened each one as-
a pancake. In a microscopic examination the bile-
colouration was convincing.
CHRONIC BLEEDING PILES AND INCIPIENT
TUMOUR OF THE RECTUM.
Mrs. Wynn, aged 66, had for eighteen years suf-
fered from congestion of the lower bowel. She had
repeated attacks of bleeding piles, and was otherwise
constitutionally troubled. Her general health had given
way, and she was losing flesh and weight. On ex-
amination I found a chronic thickening of the rectum,,
with hardening of the tissues and great pain.
During the treatment with the papaw ointment,
she had a very severe attack of haemorrhage, but this
passed over and appeared as if a bowel tumour had
burst, discharging blood, pus, and mucus. After three
to four months treatment all the trouble Tiad disap-
peared, the bowels acted naturally, and the patient
recovered her general health and vigour.
ACUTE PILES AND CHRONIC THICKENING OF
RECTUM.
Mr. James, a schoolmaster in a country
applied to me by letter, and afterwards called at my
surgery. He was a martyr to bowel troubles, blind
and bleeding piles, and general dyspepsia. I found on
examination a highly congested condition of the
lower bowel, thickening, soreness to the touch, and
the troubles of past bleeding ulcers, etc. This, as the
last case, I believed to be an incipient thickening of


the reotum to the formation of a malignant tumour.
At first (the gentleman, being a bachelor and in lodg-
ings) the case was difficult. But in perseverance and
attention, all the troubles gave way to the papaw treat-
ment, and to-day, without the knife, or even tying of
the piles, the patient has made a good recovery.
PRONOUNCED CANCER OF BREASTS.
Mrs. J. This lady was about 38. She was slightly
built and somewhat emaciated. She had seen several
medical men, all of whom pronounced the breast
tumours malignant. They were flabby masses of small
knotted tumours. The glands in the axillae were sympa-
thetic. There was a continuous aching pain. The skin
was not broken, but the tumours had been getting
worse, affecting the general health. All her medical
advisers pronounced the trouble incurable, only in
the off-chance of an operation 1
This was the condition when the patient called to
consult me, in the hope that I might be able to do
something for her without the knife. Within three
months the health improved and the glands all resolved
to the natural condition. The breasts have hot troubled
her since.
CANCER OF THE BREASTS.
Mrs. Fairbairn, a lady 70 years of age, had been
troubled for many years with a tumour of the right
breast, which gradually became very malignant. Scirr-
hus folds, offensive in smell, on the least knock bled
freely. The nipple was buried within the surrounding
growth out of sight.
The papaw ointment gradually exerted a healthy
action, causing the lobules to soften and greatly re-
lieving the inflammation and pain, the whole breast
softening, only the nipple areole.
In this crisis the old lady was told that the X Kays
would be a certain cure. She had a course of this
treatment, with the result that the trouble developed
in a worse form than at first.
Some time after her husband called on me and
informed me that she had been persuaded to undergo


an operation, and, he added, she died the most awful
agonising death.
Mrs. Sorrows was troubled with a lump on the
breast. Dr, Poodles presumed to excise the breast.
As usual, splendid operation! But the youngster had
left too xxttle flesh basis, and so the skin adhered to
the ribs. Thus, every time the woman breathed, the
pain was awful, as it was tugging away at the sensitive
nervules. They say “once bitten, twice shy,” but
Mrs. Sorrows had further operations, which, indeed,
jumped her out of the frying-pan into the fire. The
cancers became more malignant. Her agonies could
not be eased by injections or by draughts. She got
worse and worse. Her swearing at the officials did not
mend the matter. At length she died. Her son called
at the hospital for the body. The matron was so
ashamed, she had to apologise, as she was obliged to
wrap it in a winding sheet, or it would fall to pieces.
Twentieth century advanced science! The same as
the old Chaldaean soothsaying, only more kultured.
Dear Mrs. Goodheart, beloved by all, was operated on
by the biggest felons in Australia. They sliced away
a part of both breasts, but they splendidly succeeded
in hardening the nerves from the arm in the adhering
axilla. Oh, the agony! She had a good daughter to
nurse her, but the bacilli had been sown, and the girl
was powerless. As I was on my way to London I
saw the lady, and I sent the papaw medicaments. She
lived some twelve months, and, thank God, in the papaw
aid and her daughter’s attention, comparatively free
from pain. She died blessing and thanking me.
BREAST TUMOUR.
Mrs. Ross. This lady weaned her infant at twelve
months old. The left breast was not properly dried
off, and a hard lump gradually appeared. This did
not gather, but formed a chronic tumour. The breast
enlarged, and became painful in the pendant position.
Medical gentlemen pronounced it a case which could
only be possibly cured by excision. The mischief
extended to the axilla. After two months' treatment
with the papaw ointment and general tonics, the case


was cured. No gathering followed, the whole of the-
hardened substance evidently becoming resolved.
BREAST TUMOURS.
Miss Alsopp. This was a young lady aged 20 years.
She was a stout, finely developed young woman. The
breasts were large and fleshy. She worked in a dress
factory, and to fashion her figure wore tight corsets.
The pressure caused a hardening, which developed into
well-defined tumours in both breasts. The glands
under both axillae were enlarged and hardened. As
the case was serious I persuaded the mother to take
her daughter from the factory, so as to give me the
fullest aid to prevent the tumours becoming malig-
nant. The treatment proceeded .for some ten or twelve-
weeks, and was gradually but progressively softening
the glands. At the end of that period the whole of
the glands resolved to their normal condition. The-
young lady afterwards got married and has had chil-
dren.
BREAST TUMOURS.
Mrs. Toolan attended the hospital for hard tumours
of both breasts extending to the axillae. She was in-
formed that they were probably malignant, and both
breasts must be cut off to save her life. In a three
months treatment with the papaw remedies all the
troubles disappeared, the glands resolved, the breasts-
became normal, and the trouble has in no measure re-
appeared.
BREAST TUMOURS.
Mrs. H. This lady was a widow, aged 43, with four-
children, the youngest 6 years. Sixteen years ago,
after her first confinement, the right breast became
very swollen and painful. At present both breasts
are hard and lumpy, as if from hardening tumours.
The burning pain has extended to the axillae. The
right its flmore painful than the left breast. This
patient is suffering from nasal and gastric catarrh.
In medical advice she is assured that nothing less
than an excision of both breasts can possibly cure.
She is worried and emaciated.


The general treatment for th© catarrh was carried
forward at the same time as the specific cancer
treatment. The lumps gradually became softer, all
pain disappeared, all trouble and swelling of the axillae
vanished, and in three months the case was cured.
One night, between 10 and 11 o’clock, I received
a telegram from a distant city: “Send at once a pound
of papaw ointment.” It was sent. In a few day's I got
a full account of the case. The lady had suffered the
excision of internal viscera—she was unsexed. As Dr.
(Expert and Dr. Support had left the case as dying, I
went on with the treatment. At last the patient so
far recovered that she compelled her husband to bring
her to Brisbane, to be under my personal care. The
papaw treatment cured her. One day the lady met Dr.
Expert and saluted him. He fled aghast. Next day
the doctor met the lady’s husband at the club. Swear-
ing most lustily, he apologised. “I was terribly scared;
I really did not know your wife. I believed her to be
dead. She could not live when we left her. What
cured her?” Some years after the husband met me in
Queen Street, and asked me to meet his wife. She
had come to the Exhibition. The lady was indeed
very much alive.
LIVER TUMOUR AND STOMACHIC PRESSURE.
Mr. Jones, a labourer in a pickle factory, had been
for some weeks under his lodge doctor for swollen
liver. He could keep nothing on the stomach
through the pressure on the pylorus. The pain,
continuous nausea and eructations of foul wind, were
most distressing. The liver was greatly enlarged,
especially on the right. All the general dyspeptic
symptoms were present. The nervous palpitation of th©
heart caused him great distress.
I commenced the treatment, giving very small doses
of morphia and veratrum viride to relieve the vomiting.
Plasters of the papaw ointment were laid over the
liver, stomach, and upper abdomen night and morning.
Cold lotions and hot linseed poultices were applied
alternately over the ointment plasters, or as judgment
directed. After four or five weeks’ perseverance his


wife called upon me to state that the tumour had
burst.
He had fainted, and the whole had discharged into
the alimentary canal as blood and matter, passing per
bowel and mouth. She stated that the odour was so
abominable, all the doors and windows of the house
had to be opened. The patient made a good recovery.
FIBROID TUMOUR OF RECTUM.
Mrs. "Vans, a lady over 60, and living in New
South Wales, was given up by her doctor as incurable.
For several months she had been bedridden. There
had been no proper relief of the bowels for five months.
There was a weeping, but the solids were vomited.
The bladder was so compressed it could not contain
water. The womb and attachments gave intense agony
through the pressure of the tumour, which forced
them out of position. This lady, who could only exist
through opiate palliatives, and in the great care and
love of her three daughters, urged her friends to write
and tell me of her trouble. I forthwith sent the papaw
ointment and other remedies, with needful instructions.
In the course of two months I received a letter from
one of the daughters, informing me that all the
tumour had disappeared; that the bowel, which nothing
before would move, was acting naturally; that the in-
jection of the ointment (by an instrument designed
for the purpose) caused no longer any discomfort;
that the discharges had ceased; that the pains had
mostly gone; that the general health, appetite and
strength were rapidly improving. A letter some weeks
after confirmed the former, and stated that the us© of
olive oil, which I had suggested, assisted the bowel
action.
I have never seen the above patient. The facts, as
given me by the father and daughter, simply tell
their own story.
SARCOMA.
Master Ilford, a boy 9 years of age, had a kind of
black wart on the nape of the neck, which in irritation
of the clothes and other disasters developed as a


gangrenous, black ulcerating tumour. This would partly
heal and break out again worse than before. I feared
a malignant development. But a continuous cleanli-
ness, application of the papaw ointment, and aid of
warm linseed poultices, the ,whole came bodily away.
The wound healed. There has been no recurrence.
But the patient became a noted Australian soldier.
LUPUS.
Mr. Luner applied to me suffering from a far
■developed lupus on the left nostril. It was pro-
nounced an incurable cancer, only to be alleviated by
surgical operations. He came to ask my help.
The case looked almost hopeless. The whole side
■of the nostril was implicated, and the trouble ex-
tended to the cheek. The man, who lived about 100
miles away, took with him a liberal supply of the
papaw ointment, and other accessory remedies. In
a few weeks he wrote his thanks, the tumour had
gone, the country people describing it as bringing
away with it all its roots.
ACUTE GASTRITIS.
Miss G., aged 22, of Toowong. A few days ago I
met this young lady, but failed to remember, as I
had not seen her for nearly two years. She then re-
minded me that she had been a patient suffering from
intense gastralgia and vomiting, but by attending to
diet in the treatment had been in good health ever
since. This was a case that was only saved from
advised operation in the kindness of someone who
urged her first to try the papaw treatment. In some
four months the case, which was more difficult through
the geneial weakness of the patient, gradually proved
the power of the papaw, and, as she said, she was
cured.
STOMACH LESION.
Professor Herbanim consulted me for a swelling
■which he could not understand.
The patient was a heavy fat man, and had been a
big eater. The trouble was a lesion of the stomach.


He suffered from enlargement, spasms of pain, and
vomiting. There was a distinct swelling of the stom-
ach, which could be defined by careful manipulation,,
giving the impression that the stomachic muscular
fibres had become relaxed and distended in a lunar-
shaped rupture. At times of great pain and distension
the patient only got relief by pressing back the swollen
curvature. The over-loaded stomach was able to throw
off the incubus of food by vomiting.
When) I was called to the patient, he was suffering:
form a severe attack of dengue, and naturally the
stomachic trouble was much aggravated. With the ex-
hibition of the Compound Tincture of Gratiola, the l
dengue was soon reduced, and the papaw plasters
aided the stomach. In a few weeks the stomach was
practically cured. I have given the case as being one
of somewhat rare occurrence.
Mr. John Joses was so interested in his friend’s
recovery from hydatids by the papaw that he accom-
panied him from New South Wales to thank me and
to consult for himself. He was a very big, heavy man,
but had for years suffered from a stomach trouble.
He stated that experts in England and Australia had
failed to diagnose or cure the trouble. Ho was charged
with cancer, scirrhus, hydatids, gall stones, and
every possibility by the different consulting surgeons.
I asked him how, then, could he expect me to diagnose
correctly and to cure him. He quietly answered: “I
have seen the cure of my friend, when the best sur-
geons had failed. I then set myself to thoroughly
examine him. After a time \ thought I felt a small
fluctuating fold contract and expand. I specially ques-
tioned him as to fighting, wrestling, or suffering from
any blows on the abdomen. He denied all such ex-
periences. At length, in further questioning, he sud-
denly drew up and said: “I do remember one slight
accident, but thought no more of it. I was larking
with the haymakers, and one of them touched the
stomach with a hayfork. But that was not sufficient to
hurt me like this.” “Well,” I said, “I can now under-
stand. The fork which, as you say, just touched the
skin, evidently slightly wounded the outer coat of


the stomach, and so the inner coat raptured sufficiently
to allow of your experiences." He answered: "I feel
you are right, but no other ever suggested such a
thing." I showed him how to use the papaw plasters,
and to bandage and hold in the part. Nearly a year
later his wife wrote and told me the stomach was
quite cured.
STOMACHIC LESION, SUPPOSED TO BE
SCIKRHUS.
Miss Ones, aged 20, was sent into the hospital
suffering from stomachic distress. For weeks she
had been unable to keep any food on the stomach. She
was rapidly wasting away. Under the hospital care
she got worse and whispers of operation were mooted.
At her own desire she was taken from the hospital,
and I was called upon to attend the case. In the papaw
and general treament the vomiting ceased, and I gradu-
ally relieved the extreme gastritis, and what appeared
to me to be incipient induration of the In
two months the patient was cured, and in three months
was able to take a situation. She has had no relapse.
N.EVUS.
Mrs. Wader’s little boy, aged 22 months, had a
nsevus covering the right cheek. Various remedies
had been used to no effect. The trouble extended
from the comer of the right eye, curved parallel with
nose, to near the upper lip, and covered almost the
whole cheek, being two inches broad.
The boy was a good-tempered, chubby child, but
was naturally fretted with the application of remedies.
This, was the first case of nsevus tested by this
treatment, and I had little expectation of curing it
by the same. But in deference to the mother’s wish
I assented to try. At first the papaw ointment
slowly contracted the outer area of the trouble, but I
felt that more was needed. I therefore added a few
grains of salycilic acid, with a decimal addition of
Oyllin to the papaw ointment.
On the next visit I was almost alarmed at my
•own daring. The nsevus was ulcerating all over its


surface, and so far that I feared the cheek would bo
eaten into. I then added a proportion of boracic
acid to heal. But this treatment delayed the progress,
and I had to go back to the salycilic axjid. The pro-
gress was marvellous, the naevus simply ulcerated away,
and a new skin rapidly covered the healing parts.
CYST OYER THE SPINE.
An engineer in Melbourne, who had a cyst tumour
about the size of a hen's egg over the dorsal spine, was
so incommoded by the pain, whenever he stooped, that
he had consulted not only surgeons in Australia, but
also of the hospital at Noumea. All agreed that the-
only cure was by the knife. A friend advised the
sufferer to come to Brisbane and see if I could do any-
thing for him without the knife. After a short time
with papaw treatment, a small black spot appeared,
the size of a needle point. In former experiences I
knew this sign, and so used gentle pressure to the
tumour. It unreeled out as a reel of cotton. The con-
tents were of a cheesy constituency. In five weeks
after my 'first seeing the case, the patient wrote to
me from Melbourne, stating that the location of the
tumour could not be discerned. It had been coming
for eighteen years.
CYSTIC TUMOUR. OF THE SCAUP.
Mrs. Howe had suffered with a tumour on the
scalp for 18 years. When it had become as large as
a hen's egg, her mother, a nurse in England to a cele-
brated surgeon, urged her, in his advice, to have it cut
out. We tried the papaw remedies. In two months'
time the contents had softened and come away as
cheesy matter. The thickened cyst wall gave more
trouble, but by injecting the ointment, and so arti-
ficially refilling the cyst, the walls melted away,
and the trouble disappeared.
CYSTIC TUMOUR OF NECK.
Mrs. Case had a tumour in the neck, behind and
below the left ramus of the lower jaw. It had been
growing for more than two years, and was now causing


her much pain and discomfort. She called and con-
sulted me for the same. In dread of an operation, the
lady intelligently and perseveringly used the papaw
ointment over the tumour. In a few days it began to
soften, and under six weeks all came away. The
contents were cheesy, and the smell was as of sour
or rancid milk.
OYSTIC TUMOUR.
Miss Una was a patient 22 years of age. For two
years she had noticed a small tumour in the neck
under the chin. As it was increasing in size, harden-
ing and causing much pain and inconvenience, she
was recommended to try the papaw treatment. The
tumour turned out to be an indurated cyst, but had
caused her most anxiety lest it should turn to cancer.
After a month's treatment the cyst became absorbed,
and in a few weeks had quite disappeared.
LOCOMOTOR ATAXY.
Master Ridge, aged 3 to 4. This little fellow
lay paralysed for eighteen months to two years. He
had to be wheeled in his carriage, and lifted in and
out of bed. As far as I could learn the paralysis
began to be noticed when he was fifteen months
old. The history is uncertain. I am unable to say
whether he had !had a blow or a fall, or from what
cause the trouble had set in. He had five older
brothers, all fairly strong and healthy.
The friends diligently applied the ointment along
the spinal column and to the stomach of the little
patient. After six months’ treatment the proud father
brought up his little boy, who ran about my consulting
and waiting rooms, as in child-like glee he was pleased
and attracted by the birds, butterflies, and other
natural history specimens. The recovery was remark-
able, and gives me a faith in this ointment sufficient
to preach salvation from many diseases to the world.
Miss A. C., a young lady, collapsed in a bicycle
fall. She suffered from spinal paralysis, and was
treated with a battery in a local hospital. Failing to
get relief, her father sent her by easy stages (four days’


journey) to my hospital. Two months' papaw treat-
ment and care restored the nerve-powers. Unhappily,
this patient was a victim drowned in the Clermont
flood.
TUMOUR OF THE LIP.
Mr. Walker, an oyster fisherman, was suffering
from an unhealthy ulcerating tumour of the lower lip.
It appears he had taken up and smoked another man's
pipe. At the same time 'he had been manipulating
with some chemical, and toujched or rubbed his lip. The
history thus was indefinite. The patient underwent
an operation. When called I inserted a piece of
cotton wool, covered with the papaw ointment, night
and morning. In less than a week the wound had
healed.
MALIGNANT FIBROID TUMOUR OF THE RECTUM.
Mr. W. James. This patient, a little over 30
years of age, suffered for nearly three years with a
bowel trouble, which gradually assumed a malignant
tendency.
The sufferer was treated by a lodge doctor, and I
believe by herbalists and others, who pronounced it
advanced cancer. As the family had heard of the
papaw treatment, I was sent for to ask if I advised
an operation, or if I could promise a cure. I cer-
tainly pronounced an operation to mean certain death.
At the same time the emaciation was no pronounced,
the constitutional weakness was so great, and the
vomiting so continuous, that I declined to promise
anything excepting to do my best. The kumour was so
hard and so largely developed that an examination was
extremely difficult. There had been no natural motion
for months. We commenced the treatment. The oint-
ment was gradually injected into the bowel, the in-
strument going in further, more easily, and without
pain as the improvement jiroceeded. Within two
months the patient could attend to himself, and one
day electrified his neighbours and friends by taking
a walk. He then went to his church and offered
public thanks for his recovery. His appetite returned,
the bowel service was restored, and he oould enjoy


-half a dozen slices of toast and butter to his tea.
One day, some six months hence, I was called, and
found him suffering from a most prostrating attack
of dengue. I was powerless; the long-overwrought
Isystem collapsed, and he passed peacefully away.
In the desire of his family and in the presence of his
friends I made a post-mortem examination, arid found
the bowel healthy throughout. I took portions of the
bowel and of the inguinal and other glands, and
-submitted them for examination to the Bacteriological
Institute. No trace of cancer could be found.
UTERINE TUMOUR.
Mrs. Lawson had been in the hospital and under
many of the local surgeons for many years for a large
■uterine tumour and troublesome complications of the
left ovary. She had been schooled that cancer could
not be cured, only in an operation.
The patient was a tall, stout woman, the mother
of four or five children. She suffered repeatedly from
nervous and melancholic dyspepsia, palpitation of the
heart, and windy spasms.
Within four months the tumour had gone, the
congestion of "the ovaries gradually abated, and she
got, as she said she felt, quite well.
After two years, as I write, she has come down
looking hale and well, to bring another patient. As
she said to those who met her, “My friends say I am
looking ten years younger. I was quite cured, and
have had no recurrence 6f trouble.”
UTERINE TROUBLE.
Mrs. Cross had suffered for some time with func-
tional disturbances. She was attended bj a medical
man who madly curetted. His bill was eight guineas.
But the trouble advanced.
A uterine trouble developed, the ovaries were both
■congested, and sore to abdominal pressure.
This case was treated directly ana with ointment
•over the abdomen. At first there was an extreme
tenderness, but this daily became less aoute, and the


uterus decreased in size. In a few weeks the trouble'
was cured.
UTERINE ENLARGEMENT: HARDENING OF
LYMPHATIC GLANDS.
Mrs. Sims was a reported case of Bubonic Plague.
She had been seized, sent to the Plague Hospital, and
had several bottles of the prophylactic serum injected.
Lancing the abscesses only made the troubles worse.
At last in desperation she was sent home, and a nurse
was commissioned to visit her twice a day. Eventually,
by poultices and home remedies, the wounds healed.
Some weeks after I was consulted . The lymphatics
round the femoral gland were enlarged and hardened.
Further abscesses threatened. This case was most
complicated. What with internal uterine trouble and
prophylactic plague injections, it was difficult to place
the symptoms to their causes. As in many other un-
certain cases, I at once started the papaw treatment.
In three months all the internal troubles had resolved,
the general health improved, and tire glandular swell-
ings were gone.
INTERNAL TROUBLES.
Miss B. was a delicate girl. The family was deli-
cate. She consulted me for functional troubles. She
was such an affirmed invalid that when, I first saw her
I strongly advised her against marriage. Finding
the marvellous properties of the papaw, I elected to
try a course of the treatment. In a comparatively
short time the health was restored, t(he womanhood was
strengthened, and the patient married. One more
family rescued by the papaw from knife destruction
and decay.
EXAMINATION OF SURGICAL TERRORS.
Lord Forkins had gained a great reputation. Pa-
tients travelled hundreds of miles and passed by
scores of general practitioners to visit and learn his
lordship's opinion. I never met his majesty personally,
but having had numbers of his cases, minus fees, and
exchanged for Further troubles, rolled over to myself.


his strategies are naturally to me a life study. Alee
Horner had placed his savings and his hopes in such
a great promised trust, to rescue him from the frailties
of an injured foot. Well feed for three operations on
the small bones of the foot, his highness was at last
placed on his metal. He declared, in his wisdom, that
the foot must be cut off bodily. It could never be !of
any use as a unit of service. Oh, the strength of the
life instincts in man! The patient left the celestial’s-
and was treated with the papaw units. The papaw
renovated and saved the foot.
A prayer hymn used to be sung:
Keep me little and unknown,
Loved and prized by God alone.
In studying the theology of the couplet one is aided
by one of the sacred writers. He speaks of many who,
in the bond of faith, proved true to the covenant of
righteousness with the Eternal, and thus he sums-
these up: “Of whom the world was not worthy.”
Our kultur’s morals strained to the opposite pole.
Puffed up and advertised by nurses and by touters,,
who were ever anxious to receive scraps from the rich
man’s table, he posed as a thorough strategist. He
excelled in daring assaults against the morals of sur-
gery. The nearer his attacks to stab the life danger
zone, the more magical rose his fame. If by accident
a strong nature got out alive—was ever surgeon so-
skilful? If, on the other hand, the patent dropped
down dead —nothing else could have saved, death was-
inevitable.
A short time ago Mr. Whelfs consulted a specialist.
“You must see Admiral Soons, he is the only man in.
Australia who can cut out your malignant throat,
and ” The two met and terrified the patient.
When I heard of the case I asked: “How would the
operator replace the cut-out larynx and pharynx? Would
it be by a sheep’s, a dog’is, or a pig’s throat?” Ah yes,
the operation would be terrible and disfigure; the
fee would be great; but it is your only chance. The
papaw answered: No savil


My whole soul rises against such demoniacal craft.
'The whole community ought to rise in its united man-
hood, and bring back the old British law, that any
•death after an operation within a year and a day
must be officially investigated.
Mr. Doldroms was an elderly patient. A severe
•catarrhal asthma was becoming chronic. There were
patches of rough breathing and attendant congestion.
His throat suffered severely. He gave up hope and
was losing strength. By the aid of the papaw reme-
dies, gargle and ointment, he gradually began to im-
prove. The asthma disappeared as he reg:lined health
and strength.
SEVERE LARYNGITIS.
Mrs. Wills, for severe throat distress, was under
the care of Dr. Shakes. She describes his treatment
.as one of acids. As she was gradually losing her voice
and suffered intense pain, and was becoming weaker,
her husband desired further advice. The catarrh was
most active, causing a continuous ichorous irritating
discharge of thin phlegm or mucus. The difficulty of
swallowing was great, and the difficulty of breathing
was aggravated by asthma. This patient had lost
heart, being so long ill, and complaining that she
suffered severe pain in using the prescribed remedies.
I immediately commenced the papaw gargle and
'Ointment treatment. Fearing consumption of the throat
malaise, I particularly emphasised the application of
the ointment over the larynx and trachea, with an
•occasional hot linseed poultice. The recovery began
in the first week, and before the end of six weeks the
nose and throat had recovered health and tone.
PNEUMONIC DENGUE AND ASTHMA DANAINE
PHTHISIS.
Miss White, aged 24, was given up by her medical
advisers as a hopeless case of confirmed consump-
tion. In their advice she broke off a marriage engage-
ment. As I had known the family in former years, the
lady came to town to tell me her category of sorrow.
J found the nasal and throat catarrh fair advanced.


And the trouble had spread to both lungs, causing OIL
the left a large area of congestion, and a gen©ral
catarrh of the lining of the bronchi. There was sibilus,.
splashing, night sweats, and other troubles. The papaw
cured the lung and throat troubles. The lady fully
recovered, and is to-day happily married.
DENAINE TYPHOID FEVER.
The longest case of attendance that I hare ex-
perienced with typhoid fever was a Mr. Hornby. It
began as a case of dengue, but in complications pro-
ceeded into the Danaine typhoid. I was not called in
to take charge of the case until the third week of the
attack. An amateur hydropath had been attending.
In the ’ pack or bandages round the head and neck,
the patient had taken repeated relapse colds, until
cerebral effusion caused meningitis.
The fever was soon reduced, but the subacute .ex-
hausting typhoidal condition was most tantalising. The-
stomach was irritable and would not retain food. The
bowel became very costive. Picking the bedclothes
and low delirium were intermittent. And the acute
neuralgia, in moments of consciousness, revealed the
condition.
I treated this patient perseveringly with the Anti-
fever medicine, with minute doses of morphia to re-
strain the delirium, but my anchor of hope was the
papaw ointment. And in this I was rewarded. He
had been a great smoker, and had suffered from ulcers
of the stomach; but a more splendid recovery I never
experienced. To-day the patient is a healthier man
than he has been for years. He has since assured
me that he has no recollection of the chief period of
his sickness. The unconscious condition was even
worse than I suspected.
DENGUE OR DANAINE MUMPS.
Miss Wilson, a girl about 12, was sister to one of
the boys who was injected with the plague prophylactic
and died. I was sent for to see her, and found the
glands of the neck swollen and painful, and the patient
unable to turn "her head, or to bear it to touch the


pillow. There was high fever and great terror of
plague. I guaranteed an immediate cure in the papaw
treatment, and in such confidence the young lady was
■convalescent on the third day. The glands did not
even suppurate.
TYPHOID AND PNEUMONIA.
Rev. Johns. This patient was a hard-working mis-
sioned He often practised more zeal than prudence.
In an excess of work and depressing visitation among
the sick poor and destitute, he was terribly run down.
In his weakness he caught a sever© cold.
I found the pneumonia in the second stage, every
sputum containing blood. The fever was high, and
continuous diarrhoea and sickness with delirium set in.
The patient was worn out through want of sleep. The
cough was most distressing. In ten days my attend-
ance was no longer needed.
MALIGNANT (?) TONSILS.
Miss Carne, a young lady of 17, had enlargement
of the tonsils. They filled the throat, allowing only
a narrow passage for the breath. The growths were
covered with large warty excrescences throughout,
giving a scirrhus or cancerous appearance. Within
two months, in the general treatment, and in the per-
severing use of the papaw gargle and papaw ointment,
both tonsils reduced three-fourth. All the warts have
disappeared.
QUINSY CAUSED BY HACKING AND CUTTING
TONSILS.
Miss Sid, a girl of 16, was brought to my surgery
by a nurse (for wise reasons in plain clothes). It was
with difficulty that she could breathe, and it was
impossible for her to open her mouth. It appears she
had been under a German, who had excised portions of
both tonsils. The latent inflammation had in an ag-
gravated catarrh brought on an acute attack of quinsy.
The breath was fetid with all the discomforts of a dis-
tressing quinsy.


I gave the gargle, to try if possible to mop the
throat with a brush, but I chiefly trusted to the ex-
ternal use of the papaw ointment. In four days, as
it were a miracle, both tonsils had resolved into natural
size and condition. There has been no relapse of the
trouble.
INCIPIENT MALIGNANT (?) LARYNGITIS.
Miss Size, 25, a lady teacher $n a public school, was
•obliged to petition for a long holiday in a thorough
constitutional breakdown and threatened throat cancer.
The cartilages of the laynx were ulcerated, and the
discharge created a most fetid ozena. The voice was
at times very weak, and always husky. The nares
were thickened with chronic catarrh. I felt from the
first that this case was critical. The eyes were weak-
ened, so that she had to wear glasses. There was at
the same time a considerable anaemia and impaired
digestion. After a few days the ulcers healed, the fetid
discharge ceased, the sore throat disappeared, and the
lungs and stomach recovered their tone. The lady put
on flesh, and has been able Tor some years, with short
spells, to "take the heavy duties of a conscientious
teacher.
GOITRE AND THROAT TROUBLE.
Mrs. LL> an elderly lady, had imade arrangements to
go into a private hospital, to undergo an operation for
goitre. She was to undergo the X Rays for 10 days,
and then have a portion of the gland excised. The
goitre had become very troublesome. There was a
swelling in the larynx, which caused her great pain
when swallowing. She was suffering from severe
chronic and subacute nasal and throat catlarrh. The
patient was very stout, and deaf in one ear. On learn-
ing that I was successful with many cases without
the knife, her husband cancelled the engagement with
the hospital surgeon, andi I commenced the treatment.
At the end of the first month the swelling had
decidedly lessened, and the lump was becoming softer.
At the end of three months the mischief was stayed.


and the goitre had to be searched for to be located. It.
was cured.
EXCISION OF THE TONSILS.
Mr. Warner, a young man, who suffered from nasaf
and throat catarrh, had his tonsils cleverly removed
by Dr. Shanks. I must say I have never known a
more clean shave. But it was another matter in future
years. The undefended throat offered no obstacle to
the passage of cold air in the larynx, and repeatedly
I have been called in to save the young man in pneu-
monic troubles, which followed dengue
epidemic or fresh cold. Comment is needless. He how
has the papaw ointment, and can thus provide against
the constitutional loss caused by the total expulsion,
of the tonsils.
CATARRH OF NOSE AND LARYNGEAL
INFLAMMATION.
Mr. Kales. This was an elderly man, who had
been living for some years at Port Douglas, in Northern
Queensland. The glands of the neck were enlarged.
The left side of the throat felt painful, or, as he de-
scribed it, a continuous ache. The larynx was con-
gested, presenting a dark, unhealthy appearance. The
trouble had been increasing for years. The parts were
thickened and the glands hardened and swollen, and
the chronic development of the nasal catarrh has run
along the, larynx and pharynx. Both nostrils were
largely occluded. After using the treatment for about
five weeks, he got much better, all the distressing
symptoms disappearing. In two months the case was
cured.
!Mr. X. This was a young man who was troubled
the general swelling of the lymphatics, consequent on
dengue. He had two operations performed, but the
trouble increased and the inflammation spread. The
frontal headache was so severe and chronic that he
could not properly attend to his clerical duties, and
life was a misery. At the same time the congestion
of the alimentary canal spread and brought about a


troublesome attack of piles. His friends and employers
looked upon him as a hopeless consumptive.
When I first saw this patient, his general health
was breaking down. He had neither energy nor spirit
for his daily work. He complained of a continuous
headache, which nearly drove him mad. The throat
was very angrily inflamed, and the gastric conditions
were dyspeptic. The use of the papaw ointment round
the throat and over the larynx in the daytime proved
most soothing. Application of the ointment to the
forehead and from ear to ear each night rapidly reduced
the congestions. After two months’ treatment the
patient recovered his spirits and vigour, and in such
degree that his fellow clerks specially noted the im-
provement, and many interrogated him upon the cause
of the change. '
CHRONIC LARYNGITIS OR CONSUMPTION OF
THE THROAT.
Mr. Hawkes, 19 years of age, consulted me for a
chronic ailment of the throat and larynx. His voice
was practically lost, and he could not articulate for
days together. The nares were stuffed up. The throat
was, to speak in common language, raw, ulcerated,
swollen, and inflamed. There was at times a thick
discharge of mucus, at other times there was a burn-
ing dryness and husky cough, and an amount of gastric
catarrh. In the papaw treatment the youth was quickly
oured.
Tor forty years I have been losing faith in the
German kultur enunciated foundations of medical pa-
thological science. I cannot agree to believe with Dr,
Astral either in spiritual or physical reincarnations.
Among the created organisms to which were given
life, whether animal or vegetable, there has never yet
been attested a proven account of any reincarnation.
Every species, from the first to the last, was endowed
to carry its own seed within itself. Thus in this en-
dowment the several units were fashioned to produce
new units of their own kind.
And this fashion was to continue to the end or
finish of each separate specific economy. But no unit*


having died, could possibly arise into a reincarnated
life.
Every creation of vegetable or animal organisation,
given by God, is specially endowed with that most
subtle force which we term physical life, and which
is beyond even the German kultur’s power of inspira-
tion, but which is given direct to each unit of every
species.
Our globe itself, as a planet of dust or death,
holds no such force as physical life, although endowed
as custodian with all the purely physical material
forces. The life divinely given to each organised
species, animal or vegetable, stamps each kind with its
own specific image. Thus I contend that life can
never exist excepting in its own unit creation and
preparation. And so no new reincarnation could arise
into being without the organism being simultaneously
prepared for its reception.
Let the kultur, if possible, create a mouse, a fly,
or a flower. We all know that success has never yet
lifted man to acquire competition with the powers of
Deity. And even supposing man did shape something
imitative of a vital organism, he certainly could never
vitalise its existence.
Each organic life is wisely perioded for a special
time and purpose. In a word, the life service is essen-
tial to the organic existence as such. When the life
ceases, it cannot be relit. If the life departs, the
organism collapses in death. All organisms have
to die.
Examine the mineral kingdom. It is a wonderment
of physical forces, and substances or force-holders, in a
regime of death. Apart from living creatures, there
is no physical life manifested in the world. All the
physical forces in a minimum play or service may be
utilised by the physical life. But when the physical
forces in power seize upon specific life they simply
destroy each unit.
Heat is essential to life, but bum the tissues and
you destroy the same. Electricity, magnetism, gal-
vanism, etc., may all contribute their quota to life,
but let these seize the life agencies in sufficient force


and life is destroyed. Thus we see that life must
have its organism prepared for its reception; and,
further, that such organism must be kept intact and
wisely supplied continuously with wavelets of life; or it
collapses in death. This shuts out all dhance of re-
incarnation.
Our Earth is surrounded by an Outside rock environ-
ment, believed to be ten or fifteen miles thick. It con-
tains rocks, which we use as building stones, as well
as clays, sands, etc., and quantities of gases, liquids
as water, etc. The bulk comprises minerals, so ar-
ranged as to be available for human service. The
study of these minerals necessitates a knowledge of
chemistry. The various physical changes effected be-
tween parcels of matter reveal the physical and chiefly
chemical forces assuring them. Copying then Earth’s
vaster cauldron laws and forces, the chemist in the
laboratory can manufacture chemical products. Yet
surely no chemist would be idiotic enough to pronounce
such productions reincarnations. Unfortunately such
lies have sometimes been faked.
IMix acids and alkalies in a volume of dead or
dying vegetable matter suspended in liquid, and the
chemical action creates fermentation and releases car-
bonic acid gas. Get a hogshead of beer which haa
been boiled, and so made both malt and hops immune
of vegetable life, and as it cools add yeast, and fermen-
tation is set up and carbonic acid bubbles are released.
To call this chemical product a yeast plant is a bur-
lesque on science and an insult to common sense. Allow
the fermentation to go further, and to turn sour: be-
cause of the production of vinegar to call this the
vinegar plant is surely a caricature. Of course both
can only be called plants on the hypothesis of a re-
incarnation of life. These fermentations are the results
of chemical action. How then can disorganised Organic
matter again receive life out of death, and be called
a life reincarnation ? That the agencies have been
caused by chemical action must be evident to the
smallest mind, for there is not a show of evidence of
biological reincarnations.


I get a dying papaw pabulum, and in a water solu-
tion add alkalies. The result is a chemical fermen-
tation, and carbonic acid bubbles expand in cellular
expansion. To call such a biological life birth, a yeast
plant reincarnation, is a lie. In this pabulum are the
dying decaying units of the papaw bacilli. I believe
they are allied in cellular construction and segregated
arrangement to every other plant bacillus. They copy
the characters of all. Is this why, as carnivora,
they destroy all the death thanatalia of disease? To
form a theory as to how the papaw cures more cases
than I ever knew any other drug or herb to do, I
can only, follow on these lines, and acknowledge that
the thanatalia flee before these fermented papaw units.
At all events, my fellows thrash all the other fellows.
All the jokes about breeding bacteria and bacilli
reveal the low status to which medicine to-day has
fallen.
In all kinds of death assaults, of or on the living
body, bacilli are recognised as the causes of disease.
Imagine calling these rotting, decaying units reincar-
nations, instead of exacerbus of death. Bloodpoison
bacilli bring about skin diseases, erysipelas, erythema.
Crushed or bruised tissues aggravate their bacilli to
chemically yield reinforcements, and aggravate death
forces to conquest. Internal visceral derangements, by
harbouring bacilli, breed disease. Interference with the
blood circulation causes fever, because of the imprisoned
thanatalia. Death is ever present in our dying bodies.
If the human economy were not governed by the re-
demptive, every sickness and ailment and accident
would cause death, I rejoice that I have learned the
powers of the papaw to be for relief against death’s
attacks. Thank God for this further hope. The oint-
ment invariably withdraws pain from burns and scalds,
and then proceeds to heal. It destroys erysipelas and
all skin diseases. It draws out foreign bodies, pieces
of decayed and broken bone, as well as pus from deep
abscesses, boils, etc., and the phlegm, ietc., from mucous
linings.
!My lecturer on surgery asked me on© morning at
lecture what I should do for a chronic carbuncle, I


shyly replied: “I should carefully puncture.” He com-
mented: “Sir, you know nothing about it. You must
make a deep cross cut to divide to the base all the
tissues.” Now I know better: I never cut at all, but
allow the papaw bacilli, as ferrets, to chase away
and destroy the ratters.
For all cases of hardened schirrhus the ointment
acts as French artillery. For. cancer which is pro-
nounced incurable, I just attack with my mighty guns,
and, provided the life-streams are not paralysed, the
patients forget in nine cases out of ten their pro-
nounced cancers and recover. In my experience the
papaw units cure or relieve all cases. Even leprosy,
on the testimony of a lady missioner, has been won-
drously helped by the healing of ulcer sores. Where
so-called cancers, after operations maul the nerve
tissues, even then life is prolonged and death becomes
a sleep. As a medical man I can challenge any treat-
ment to in any degree approach the power of the
papaw. When I learned of its powers what would
my position have been if ,1 had kept the discovery
a secret? I could not have held my head up as p
man. Nevertheless I have had a glorious preliminary
reward in the recovery of multitudes of patients, and
many when given up by others. Again I challenge any
one to malign the papaw as a marvellous remedy.
And now I have done my part. It is nearly
forty years ago since for pneumonia with consolidation
of one lung I was attended in London. Many physi-
icans did their best for me, as a medical man; but tone-
day my most regular attendant left me, saying, “Poor
fellow, he is gone.”
My saved life has been all the hardier for the
experience. I have worked all the harder for others.
As I said, I have had a great reward, and I feel
confident that the remedy will establish itself for
the blessing and salvation of thousands. I therefore
ask every person who wishes to live for God and
humanity, to make these facts known, 'by propagating
the good news to the people. Further, I assert
that it is the bounden duty of every Britisher
and every true man and woman of any nation, to


block and to put down the infernal use of the knife
to human butchery. Such practice is criminal. And
most of all I appeal to the Medical Profession, to turn
out from among us the Pharisees and Sadducees, yam-
ers and unbelievers, and to recreate a wise, judicious,
remedial salvation for the cure of diseases and the
relief of physical suffering and pain.
Pinall(y I plead with all medical men to disillusion
themselves from false science. I have faithfully told
the services of the papaw. Help me, then, to save
our brave soldiers from pain and suffering. Unless
death-struck, multitudes of the dying can be relieved
back to life. Daily our sick folk can, by the aid of
the papaw, be carried forward to their utmost confines
of life. Thousands who now die, in senseless fictions,
can, and ought to be saved. At all events, do not let
us soil our garments with blood to human death 1 And
on no consideration receive and bury in the living
bodies the so-called bacilli of demoniac lies.
THOMAS P. LUCAS.


e
,, FERMENTED* 'pI'PAYATE
Wholly set up r.nd printed in V:- - rai ,a by The Carter-Watson Co.,
Elizabeth Street, Brisbane, for Djr -Lucas, Vera Papaw
Hospital, New Farm, Brisbane.
