



by
of
f. S. Winter
NATIONAL LIBRARY
OF AUSTRALIA
CANBERRA
This Book
Was presented to
the Library
i(V. I- Srcviv.
... jo. vvoman s race
... A Siege Baby, &c.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY.


THE NEWEST NOVELS.
si>BioXwft.Xj A'csxx&.A.x.x.A.xsr bditioits.
Grown octavo, picture hoards.
Baring-Gould
99
99
Walter Besant
R. Buchanan
Wilkie Collins
B. L. Farjeon
99
Mrs. Hungereord
99
99
George Meredith
99
99
D. 0. Murray
James Payn
99
Hawley Smart
99
Miss Warden
99
J. S. Winter
... Richard Cable, the Lightship
Man
... Red Spider
... The Gaverocks
... Eve
... The World Went Very Well
Then
... Herr Paulus
... The Heir of Linne
... Little Novels
... The Sacred Nugget
... The Tragedy of Featherstone
... A Modern Circe
... Marvel
... The Hon. Mrs. Vereker
... Diana of the Crossways
... Harry Richmond
... The Ordeal of Richard Peverel
... Old Blazer’s Hero
... Glow-Worm Tales
... The Mystery of Mirbridge
... Saddle and Sabre
... A False Start
... Scheherazade
... A Woman’s Pace
... A Siege Baby, &c.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY.


WILLIAMS’S
AUSTRALIAN
YEAST POWDER
Will, of a certainty, make your
BREAD, TEA-CAKES, PASTRY, BISCUITS, dc.
LIGHT, WHOLESOME, and DIGESTIBLE.
Protected hy ROYAL LETTERS PATENT and
Guaranteed ABSOLUTELY PURE.
WILLIAMS’S AUSTRALIAN YEAST POWDER
is a household word throughout Australia. The first Yeast
Powder manufactured in the Colonies, its Purity, Excellence,
and Cheapness have kept it far ahead of its would-be com-
petitors, and to-day this article commands a larger sale than
that of all other Yeast Powders put together.
As may be expected, there are constantly cropping up
imitations of this valuable preparation, and it is necessary to
caution purchasers, when offered some worthless substitute
yielding the vendor more profit, to insist upon having
WILLIAMS’S.
For the TOWN, the BUSH, and the SEA.
Sold in Tins at 6d., by all Grocers and
Storekeepers.
BEWARE OP IMITATIONS I


<' THE &
METROPOLITAN GAS GO.
Begs to draw the attention of Consumers to the
ECONOMY, & CLEANLINESS/)
That is the result of using
GAS COOKING STOYES
SUPERIORITY of this means of COOKING
is daily proved by the demand and increase in
the number of Stoves supplied by the Company.
TERMS :
An AGREEMENT for RENTAL to be signed
for TWELVE MONTHS. A charge of 2/- per
month and upwards is made. If PURCHASED
PRIOR TO or at the EXPIRATION of twelve
months all RENT PAID is deducted from the
price of Stove.
For CASH a discount of TEN PER CENT, is
allowed.
NO CHARGE is made for FIXING, provided the
length of piping does not exceed 66 feet.


THE
KINGSWOOD
COOKERY BOOK
BY
H. F. WICKEN
Diplomee of the National Training School for Cookery
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY
1888


\Qtr^ : fT\ C3^tfyj u^''
° ‘ »v -
o I
I
o * . 1 I
-j
'gebicateb
BY PERMISSION
TO
LADY LOCH.


PREFACE.
In sending out an Australian edition of my Cookery
Book, I must express the surprise and pleasure it has
afforded me to find that the English edition has been
so much appreciated by those for whose benefit it was
written. It has had a far wider and larger circulation
than I ever anticipated for it. After living some time
in the colony I found that there were many recipes in
it which were quite useless in Australia. I, therefore,
determined to re-write the whole of it, and to make
such alterations and additions to it as I thought
necessary to make it—as I desire it to be—a really
practical guide to the Australian housekeeper. The
art of good cookery (if I may call it so) is so abso-
lutely necessary to the comfort and well-being of all
classes of the community that I think its value cannot
be over-estimated. A dinner well cooked promotes
digestion and conduces to contentment and happiness,
I hope the day is not far distant when cookery will
form an important item in the education of our girls.
The pleasure and gratification, to say nothing of the
utility, of being able to place on the table a dinner
prepared and, if necessary, cooked by her own hands
is so great that no Englishwoman can realize unless
she has experienced it, and having once felt it would,


I am sure, be willing to give up a small portion of her
time to acquire a knowledge so pleasant and profitable
to herself and her household. Cooking can be accom-
plished with so much ease and comfort when a few
simple rules are mastered and a method established.
I advise my younger students to read the recipe care-
fully first, then weigh and measure the ingredients
required. This may seem a little trouble at first, but
I maintain that if a thing is worth doing at all it is
worth doing well. I would also give them another
hint, and that is not to attempt too much at first.
Begin with a few simple dishes, and practise these
until perfect. The recipes given in this book are all
really practical, and have been worked out with most
satisfactory results, so that patience and perseverance
are all that is required. Gas-stoves are a great boon ;
by their aid a dinner can be cooked, even in hot
weather, with ease and comfort, but where these
cannot be obtained, the Ideal Stoves, imported by
Messrs. Long and Co., of Elizabeth-street, will be found
to answer admirably. I have had personal experience
of their utility, and can confidently recommend them.
This book is dedicated, by permission, to Lady Loch,
in remembrance of the kind support and encourage-
ment she gave me when I came as a stranger to this
Greater Britain. My task is done. I lay down my
pen with the sincere hope that what I have written
may prove useful to all cookery students.
Melbourne, September, 1888.


STENTS.
, I'AGE
Soups and Purees, Directions por 1
Fish ~ 3
Boiling and Stewing ~ - - -5
Braising ~ - - - 6
Boasting ~ - - 7
Cold Meat ~ - - - 8
Puddings ~ - - - 9
/
Omelettes and Soueeles ~ - - - 10
Pastry ~ - - - 12
Tea Cakes and Scones ~ - - - 13
Jellies and Creams ~ - - 13
Vegetables ~ - - - 15
Hints eor Kitchen - - - - 16
~ for Sick Nursing and Invalid Cookery - 19
~ eor Cookery Students - - - 25
Domestic Economy ----- 28
Menus ------- 31
Soups and Purees, Recipes eor - - - 40
Fish, Recipes for - - - - - 58
Meat and Poultry - - - - - 72
Pastry, Sweets, and Puddings - - - 124


Sauces ------- 177
Vegetables ------ 189
Omelettes, Salads, and Savouries - 201
Jams ------- 217
Drinks ------- 220
Eggs ------- 224
Bread and Cakes, Icing, &c. - - - 230
Sundries ______ 250
Index ------- 257


THE
KINGSWOOD COOKERY BOOK.
SOUPS AND PUREES.
The first subject upon which I wish to speak to the
student in cookery is soups and purees. I do not
think that in ordinary English and colonial house-
holds importance enough is attached to soup as a food.
During the cold weather a plateful of warm soup stimu-
lates the digestion, and is quite an appetizer for the
dinner; and in summer-time, even in very hot weather,
one would scarcely believe, until one had tried it, how
refreshing a plateful of soup, just warm, is when feel-
ing quite exhausted by the heat. Now, in an ordinary
way, expensive soups are not necessary, and when two
or three joints are cooked in the course of the week,
soup sufficient for three or four persons every day
may be easily made without buying soup meat.
Bones contain a large quantity of gelatine. Long
boiling only will extract this. A stock pot is absolutely
necessary. This should be placed on the stove every
morning (I need hardly say, perfectly clean). The
bones of joints, either of beef or mutton, or poultry,
broken up small and placed in with the trimmings,
2


gristle, &c. Cover these well with water, and when
it has boiled up remove the scum and put in some
peppercorns and an onion stuck with 6 cloves. Let
it boil steadily for 5 or 6 hours; then strain it,
and stand by for use the next day. Then, when
the fat has been well removed, you have the founda-
tion for almost any kind of soup. The bones and
head of a rabbit or chicken are a valuable addition
to the stock pot. The liquor in which a joint of meat
has been boiled makes excellent Scotch broth. Soups
should be just thick enough to coat the spoon. Do
not use much flour for thickening soups. Cornflour
makes a good foundation, but rice flour, crushed
tapioca, or semolina are much better and more
nutritious. Purges are much thicker than soups.
They must, of course, always be rubbed through a
hair sieve. They should never be allowed to boil
after they have been through the sieve. Both soups
and purees should be served very hot. Nothing is
more disagreeable than lukewarm soup, I think
because it is so often served nearly cold and greasy
is the reason why it is not so popular with us
as with our French neighbours. I feel that I
cannot conclude these few remarks better than by
quoting a sentence from a health lecture recently
delivered by C. R. Blackett, Esq. He says, speaking
upon this subject:—“How seldom do we find the
delicious soups and potages of the French upon an
English table, and yet really no dinner ought to be
considered complete without a soup. Any intelligent


housewife would soon discover endless ways of vary-
ing; them with different herbs and vegetables. Sauces
& O
spoil soup. Let them be avoided. A good soup or
potage at the beginning of a dinner is nature’s
teaching ; and, if generally adopted, would do more,
I believe, to check and prevent the craving for
stimulants than anything else. It is in itself a
powerful stimulant; it affords just that gentle excite-
ment to the stomach which prepares it for the more
solid food to follow.”
FISH.
For frying fish there is nothing to equal the French
method —that is, to have a deep kettle and plenty of
fat. If fish is properly fried like this, it is not at all
greasy, and is far nicer than if it is fried in the frying-
pan ; and there is another recommendation—it is so
much easier and more economical. There is a great
deal to learn about frying. The fish must be perfectly
dry ; to ensure this, wash and dry in a cloth for a few
minutes, then mix some flour, salt, and pepper on a
plate, and on another plate beat up an egg with oz.
dissolved butter, or spoonful of oil, and a little water,
and have plenty of bread crumbs on a paper ; put the
fish into the flour, and then at once into the egg;
' oo ?
brush it well over, and put it into the crumbs and
cover well; then shake off the loose crumbs, and it
is ready to fry, but it is better to let it stand in a


cool place for an hour before frying. Now we must
consider the frying-fat. Dripping, or a mixture,of lard
and dripping, is the best medium for frying. If a
French kettle is used, put 2 lbs. or 3 lbs. dripping,
according to the depth of kettle, and 1 lb. lard. Now,
this fat must not boil, but it must be a great deal hotter
than boiling water. Water boils at 212° of heat, fat
about 600°. The proper temperature for frying-fat is
385°. If you have no frynometer, you can test the fat
by dropping in a small piece of bread—if it browns
instantly the fat is ready. After a little experience,
it is an easy matter to tell just the right moment to
put the fish in, for upon that depends the success of
the fry; if the fish is put in too soon, it will eat
sodden and greasy, but if at the right moment it will
come out brown and crisp; the larger the quantity of
fat, the quicker the fish is cooked. In any case it is
always done when it is brown enough; and if the fat is
at the right heat that will be in 2or 3 minutes. No
turning is required, but if the fish rises above the fat,
keep it under with the slice. Drain for a few minutes
on kitchen paper before serving. After using the fat
a few times it must be strained through an old hair
sieve or muslin, the kettle well washed out and dried,
and the fat put back. The same fat can be used for
months if a little fresh dripping or lard is added from
time to time. When it looks very black, and bubbles
up like soap-suds, it has lost its virtue and must be
thrown away. The same fat can be used for fish
rissoles, &c.; in fact, for everything but fancy dishes


that must be fried in butter. If the fat is at the
right temperature when used, no one could tell what
it had been used for before, or in what medium the
dish was cooked.
BOILING AND STEWING.
Boiling and stewing are two different operations,
and I think there is not distinction enough made
between them. For boiling a very clean saucepan is
required, plenty of pure water, and a steady heat to
keep the water at the same temperature. To boil
meat perfectly it should be put into boiling water,
and allowed to come to the boil again as quickly as
possible; the pot should then be well skimmed, a
little salt added to throw up the scum, but not much,
as it hardens the fibres of the meat; it should be
drawn to the side of the fire, where it will keep
steadily simmering; quick boiling only hardens the
meat, and makes it tough and stringy. The rule,
20 minutes to the pound, is a good one, but very
much depends on the size and shape of the joint.
Experience alone will teach a cook just how long to
boil any particular joint. An important item is to
have the meat well covered with water. Stewing
cannot be conducted too slowly. Very little water
should be used, as the meat must cook in its own
juices. The meat should be put into hot water and
brought quickly to the boil, then drawn back imme


diately ; a few minutes’ fast boiling will quite spoil a
stew. When it has been brought to boiling point the
scum should be removed, vegetables and seasoning
added, and it should then be stood where it will
only just simmer. Allow it half as long again as
boiling time. If cooked in this way the meat will be
tender and the gravy delicious. I have often heard
people say, “ Curries are so quickly made; ” that is
quite a mistake. Curries should be allowed quite as
long as stews, if you would have them in perfection.
It is almost impossible to get a good Indian curry out
of India, because we have to depend upon a bottled
curry powder, whereas in India the condiments are
freshly gathered, pounded, and used at once. If
lemon juice is added just before the curry is served
it will make it taste fresh. The curry powder should
be fried with the vegetables. This hint was given
me by an Indian chef, and I have found it a great
improvement.
BRAISING,
Braising is really stewing in stock, but the heat
should come from above as well as below. If the
braising is to be done over a fire, choose a saucepan
with a closely-fitting lid, and place some hot embers
on the lid, and renew them from time to time. If a
gas stove is used, the saucepan can be placed in the
oven, which should be kept moderately hot all the time.


Care should be taken to have a nicely flavoured stock
and plenty of fresh vegetables, and allow the same
time as for stewing. Braised meat or poultry is a
very savoury dish, and it is an excellent way of cook-
ing old poultry. The recipes for braised veal are
especially good. All kinds of meat, poultry, and game
are good braised; fillets of veal and fillets of beef, larded
and dressed in this way, are a very favourite dish.
ROASTING.
To roast meat nicely in a gas or kitchener oven, make
the oven thoroughly hot, put in the joint, and allow
it to remain at the same temperature for 10 minutes,
then reduce the heat and cook slowly; in this way
the juices of the meat remain in the joint. Always
hang a joint in the oven, if possible ; it will be much
nicer than if cooked on the shelf. The oven door
should be opened from time to time to let out the
steam, and the joint should then be basted. The time
usually allowed is 15 minutes to every pound and
15 minutes over; but in gas ovens five pounds
will cook in. an hour. When the meat is ready to be
taken up, warm a little gravy from the stock pot and
pour round it. The gravy from the dripping pan pour
into a basin with the dripping. If served with the
meat, it is always greasy; but when the dripping is
cold remove it, and the gravy is then excellent for
mince or stew.


COLD MEAT.
The great cold-meat question is such an important
one to housekeepers that I feel sure a few hints on
this head will be acceptable. So many nice tasty
dishes may be made from the remains of a cold joint
if one knows just the right way to prepare them.
Many people say that meat recooked is always tough,
but it need not be if carefully dressed. Hash or
mince should never be allowed to boil. Never use
sauces of any kind in the preparation of gravies ; these
can always be added at table. Many people, to hide
bad cooking, put’in a large quantity of sauce; in fact,
you can taste nothing else. Gravies should be carefully
and nicely seasoned, but depend upon plenty of fresh
vegetables for flavouring. Fry them brown in a little
butter; if after that your gravy is not dark enough,
put in a small piece of a French pastile. These can
be bought in tins at a small cost, and are very useful;
thicken with cornflour or rice flour. If rissoles
or croquettes are required for breakfast, they can be
made the day before; egg and bread crumb thoroughly
and put in a cool place; theyfcan be fried in plenty of
hot fat in a few minutes in the morning. A raised
pie made of cold meat is an elegant way of using up
joints, and one that is always appreciated.


PUDDINGS.
There is such a variety of puddings, made in so
many different ways, that I can make but a few
general remarks upon them as a whole. For all sorts
of boiled puddings the mould must be quite full and
the water kept boiling all the time, or it will settle on
the top of the pudding and cause it to become sodden.
Should the pudding mixture not quite fill the mould,
place a few crusts of bread on the top; these will
absorb the water and prevent the pudding being
heavy ; they are easily removed when it is dished up.
Pudding cloths should be dipped in boiling water and
placed over the pudding quite wet; plunge the
pudding into plenty of boiling water. When it is
cooked enough take it out of the saucepan and take off
the cloth and let it stand for a minute or two; the
steam will draw the pudding from the sides of the
mould, and it will be much easier to turn out. Take
a hot dish, place it on the top of the mould, and turn
it over. If the mould has been well greased the
pudding will come out directly. Baked milk puddings
should not be placed in a very hot oven, as they
require to be cooked very slowly. Be careful to have
very fresh eggs and milk, for one musty egg will spoil
the dish; always strain the eggs after they are beaten;
if the whites are beaten to a stiff froth and added just
as the pudding is put into the oven, it will make it
much lighter. In mixing puddings of any kind mix
each ingredient as you add it; in this way you can


mix it more thoroughly than if it were all left to the
last. Puddings made with suet require long boiling.
Boiled puddings should be kept well covered with
water, and hot water poured in at the side of the
saucepan as it boils away. Steamed puddings should
be covered with a piece of well-greased kitchen paper;
the water should not reach more than half-way up the
mould, and should not be allowed to boil too fast.
For a winter pudding I would specially recommend
the Kingswood pudding; very few people would tell
it from a Christmas pudding, and if boiled and hung
up in a dry place it will keep good for weeks.
OMELETTES AND SOUFFLES.
The principle of making omelettes and souffles is
so easy and simple that it has always been a puzzle
to me that not one cook in fifty can send up either fit
to he eaten. The great point to he considered is
lightness; to ensure this the eggs must he fresh and
well beaten; the whites must be whipped to a very
stiff froth. Remember to have everything very
clean and cold. If only two whites are required,
take a large plate and a long thin knife, add a little
salt or sugar—this will make it easier to whip—and cut
the whites well with the knife. A special pan should
be kept for omelettes, and it should be used for
nothing else; but the oftener it is used for that
purpose the better it will be. An iron pan about 8 in.


across is a good size. Never begin to cook an omelette
until it is waited for; it should be served instantly it
is cooked, and very hot, if it is to be thoroughly
enjoyed. A most delicious dish may be made with
only eggs, butter, and sugar, which are nearly always
available. No pains should be spared in the prepara-
tion of this simple delicacy. The recipes I have
given are very simple, and will, I am sure, give
satisfaction if carried out faithfully. Souffles are
also a delicious dish, and easily prepared when the
principle is mastered. The foundation is always the
same, but variety may be obtained by using different
flavourings, such as apricot, vanilla, strawberry, &c.
Always put in one more white than yolk of egg. The
great points to be remembered are—to whip the whites
very stiff, to steam the souffle very steadily, and to
serve it instantly. If souffles are made for a dinner
party, it is always well to have something to fall
back upon, for if the dinner is delayed the souffles
will be spoilt; they must be timed for exactly the
hour at which they are to be served, and must on no
account be allowed to stand about; the lighter they
are the sooner they fall. They are an excellent dish
for an invalid, and will be fully appreciated if the
recipes given are carried out.


PASTRY.
In making pastry there are a few rules which must
always he observed. Always sift the flour into the
basin ; there are often small hard knots in the flour
which would not be nice in the pastry; and then if the
flour is sifted it makes it light, and the pastry will be
much nicer, Rub the butter or lard into the flour very
thoroughly, but lightly, with the fingers, not with the
palms of the hand, as they are always warmer, and the
pastry must be kept as cool as possible, and for that
reason never use a basin or plate that has just been
washed-up in warm water. About half a pint of water
will be required for every pound of flour in puff
pastry, but when part of the shortening is rubbed into
the flour very little water is required; a very good
rule is to have the paste and the butter about the same
consistency. Always keep the paste about the con-
sistency you want it to be when finished; roll it very
lightly, always one way, and only have enough flour
on the board to prevent it from sticking. A very hot
oven is required for puff pastry, or it will not rise,
however carefully it is prepared. Meat and other pies
will require a long time to cook; put them into the
hottest part of the oven at first, to make the crust
light, and then remove to a cooler part to cook the
meat; if the crust gets too brown, cover it with
buttered paper.


TEA CAKES AND SCONES.
I need only write a few words on this subject. I
have given a few well-tried and approved recipes. I
especially recommend the Yorkshire tea cakes and the
simple scones made with baking powder. They are
easily made, and I have never known them fail to
please. Always sift the flour, for two reasons—it
makes the cakes so ijauch lighter, and there is no fear
of finding those little hard knots in the cakes which
you so often see in flour. Be careful, too, that the
eggs are quite fresh; nothing is more unpleasant than
a stale or musty egg, and one such egg will spoil a
batch of cakes. Do not grease the tin for rich cakes,
and always leave them in the tin till they are cold.
When taken out of the oven they should be kept in a
warm place until cold ; if placed at once in the larder
they will be heavy.
JELLIES AND CREAMS.
Jellies and creams are considered by many cooks
very difficult dishes, but I think them very easy and
simple ; and if the following directions are faithfully
carried out I think my readers will be of the same
opinion. A special saucepan should be kept for
jellies, and it should be used for nothing else. For a
strainer take an ordinary kitchen teacloth. Jelly
bags are very troublesome things. They soon harden.


and are difficult to keep clean. On the other hand, a
teacloth is easily washed, and yet it makes a most
effectual strainer. If no jelly stand is at hand, turn
a chair upside down on the table, and tie a cloth
firmly over the legs with some string. When the
jelly is ready to strain, pour some boiling water
through the cloth, and have two basins ready that
will slip easily through the rails of the chair. When
the jelly is all in the cloth remove the first basin and
place the other one, and pour what ran through the
strainer back into the cloth, as that will not be quite
clear. It is only necessary to strain the jelly once ;
but do not hurry it let it drop through in its
own time. Have no flour about when preparing jelly.
The least bit of flour will effectually cloud it, and no
amount of straining will clear it; see, therefore, that
tables, hands, apron, &c., are all free from flour.
There is another very important thing to remember,
and that is, not to whisk it after it boils. It is much
better to leave off whisking too soon than to whisk
too long. Directly the jelly seems inclined to boil
take the whisk out and let it have a good boil up.
Then draw it away from the fire, but keep quite
hot for half an hour. Always use the best French
gelatine for both jellies and creams. When making
creams, remember to have everything very clean and
cold. Use thick, sound cream, and whisk it in one
direction until it becomes a stiff froth. A little
castor sugar will help it to rise. Mix the cream and
flavouring, or puree, thoroughly, or the cream will


look streaky. If these directions are carefully read
and attended to there will he no fear of failure.
VEGETABLES.
The general rule for cooking all green vegetables is
to plunge them into plenty of boiling water which has
been well salted; a little carbonate of soda is a great
improvement —it makes the greens a good colour, and
they are cooked in a much shorter time. After the
greens are put in, cover with the lid until they boil
up; then take it off, skim the pot, and let them boil
very quickly, uncovered, pressing them down into the
water from time to time. Spinach and peas are the
only vegetables that should be boiled in a small
quantity of water. Put peas on in cold water, with a
teaspoonful of sugar and salt. It is a difficult matter
to give any rule for boiling potatoes —there are so
many different varieties, and they must be boiled in
various ways. Old potatoes should be put into cold
water, new potatoes into boiling water ; some potatoes
will only bear boiling 10 minutes, and must then be
finished in the steam; but, as a rule, it is the best plan
to boil them slowly until a fork will go through easily,
then strain all the water away and toss over the fire
without the lid; that will dry them in a minute or
two. Some potatoes that will not boil well steam
beautifully, but allow them nearly an hour to cook.
If a pretty dish of potatoes is required, potato


croquettes might be made ; they never fail to give
satisfaction if nicely fried. If we consider what an
important dish potatoes are, I am sure that we shall
feel no pains ought to be spared in cooking them ;
and yet how few cooks will take the trouble to
send up well-boiled potatoes. To cook a potato and
boil an egg are supposed to be two of the simplest of
all cooking processes, and yet how few can achieve the
desired result. Vegetables, especially in the summer
time, should form a very important item in our diet;
they contain a great deal of potash, which is very
beneficial to the blood. Nature herself teaches us this
in the abundant supply which she gives us in hot
weather. Well-cooked vegetables and fruit should be
seen on our tables at every meal during the summer.
HINTS FOR THE KITCHEN.
All saucepans and cooking utensils should be kept
scrupulously clean; dirty saucepans not only spoil the
food, but are positively unwholesome, and are often
the cause of serious illness. If it is really impossible
to wash them up directly they have been used, stand
them full of cold water until such time as they can be
properly cleaned. They should be well washed in
soap and water and scrubbed inside with sand; the
outside should also be kept clean and bright. The
sanitary seamless steel saucepans are the best for
kitcheners and gas stoves. They will look almost


like silver if rubbed outside with Needhams polish.
Gas stoves should be washed in hot soda and water,
and rubbed over with a polishing brush; very little
black lead should be used, as it is a non-conductor of
heat.
Wooden spoons are much nicer than metal ones for
all cooking purposes, except for making curry, unless
one particular spoon is kept for that purpose, as the
curry penetrates the wood and makes it unfit for
other gravies and stews.
Never keep bottles of sauces in the kitchen cupboard.
With the exception of one or two special dishes, they
should never be used in the kitchen, but always added
at table. They are often put into soups and gravies,
to mask bad cooking.
Yegetable refuse of all kinds should be burnt up in
the kitchen. It will cause no smell, and, if put into
the stove when the cooking is finished, will keep the
fire alight for some time.
The ends of mutton chops and all pieces of suet
and fat may be cut up small, put into a saucepan of
water and boiled until all the water has boiled away
and the fat is extracted, then strained off*. When cold,
this is an excellent substitute for butter and lard for
pastry and cakes, and is capital frying fat.
In hot weather, if meat is washed over with sour
milk or buttermilk, and hung in a cool cellar, it will
keep good for a week or two. This coating must, of
course, be washed off before roasting.
3


THINGS WORTH REMEMBERING.
A pinch of carbonate of soda will keep milk or
cream sweet in hot weather.
In hot weather, when meat is likely to be tough, dip
it in vinegar before cooking. This will make it tender.
Potatoes (boiled) and celery, either raw or cooked,
are almost a specific in cases of gout and rheumatism.
Milk will remove ink stains from carpets, table-
cloths, &c., if applied directly.
Paraffine rubbed on gentlemen’s silk hats will make
them look like new.
Cold water is the best remedy for burns and scalds.
Keep them covered with a wet bandage and they will
not blister.
A small quantity of oatmeal porridge taken at bed-
time is the best of all remedies for sleeplessness.
A glass of hot water at night and cold water in the
morning will often cure biliousness.
Ammonia and water, or even cold water, will
relieve the pain caused by the bites of insects if the
parts affected are lightly bathed.
Three grains of alum will purify a gallon of water.
Let it stand for a time, and if no filter is to be had,
strain it through a piece of calico.
The smallest scraps of cold meat and fish can be
turned to good account by mixing them with salad
dressing and a fresh lettuce.
If a mustard plaster is mixed with white of egg,
instead of water, it will draw perfectly without
blistering the most delicate skin.


Bananas contain three times as much nourishment
as meat and potatoes, and as a food are superior to
bread. They are good either fried, roasted, or baked,
and make a delicious dessert if sliced and placed in a
dish alternately with slices of orange, well sprinkled
with sugar.
HINTS ON SICK NURSING AND
INVALID COOKERY.
It falls to the lot of most women, at one time or
another, to nurse and prepare food for the sick. There
are many admirable books written on this subject,
by those more qualified to speak on such matters than
I am, and I do not propose to supersede these in
any way, but merely to give a few general hints
which may prove useful in a sick-room. As this is a
cookery book, I will first speak of invalid cookery. All
food should be of a nutritious character, and made to
look as tempting as possible. Beef tea is generally the
first thing called for, and I shudder when I think of
the wretched stuff which has been brought to me and
called beef tea. The recipe in this book was given to
me by a physician, and I have found it answer
admirably. The beef, when strained away, is white
and hard, because all the nourishment has been ex-
tracted. It is always better to make it the day
before it is used, as the fat can be so easily removed
when it is cold, but never make more than one day’s


supply. In severe cases of fever raw beef tea is often
ordered. I have given a recipe for this. If the
patient is conscious, it is better to put it into a covered
cup, as it does not look nice. All milk puddings are
much lighter if the whites of the eggs are beaten
separately, and stirred in just before the pudding is
baked or boiled. There is not much nourishment in
arrowroot or cornflour puddings, both of which con-
tain so much starch. Semolina and tapioca are much
better; the others should only be given when a
change is desired. Baked milk is an excellent food
for an invalid, it contains so much nourishment, and
can often be taken when raw milk proves too heavy.
To prepare it, put some good sweet milk into a stone
jar; tie paper firmly over the top, and stand it in
a cool oven for five or six hours; it should then be of
the consistency of thick cream. I need hardly say
that as milk contains all the forty things necessary to
our system, it should be freely given to invalids. If
it cannot be digested in a raw state, then boil or
bake it, and it will be invaluable. Fish should also
form an important article of diet in the sick-room.
Whiting are the least oily and most digestible of all
fish, and, therefore, especially suited for an invalid.
The boudins of whiting will be found an excellent
invalid dish. Fish should always be filleted for the
sick-room. If the bones and trimmings are boiled in
water or milk, and this is used for making the
sauce, the whole nourishment of the fish is obtained.
Babbits and game, if not too high, form a pleasant


change in the hill of fare. If a chicken is to be
served, do not cook it all in the same way. Half
might be roasted and served with good gravy or beef
tea; the other half boiled, and served with white
sauce, made of the chicken liquor and milk. Put all
the bones and trimmings into the remainder of the
liquor, and let it boil for a long time, then strain it
off, remove the fat, sprinkle in a little sago or
crushed tapioca, and you have a highly nutritious and
appetizing supper dish. Remember to have every-
thing very hot and well served. Purees, being rubbed
through a sieve, are very easy of digestion. Vege-
tables, too, should be served in this way. If potatoes
are nicely boiled and dried, and rubbed lightly through
a sieve, they are much nicer for an invalid than if
served whole. Punctuality is a very important virtue
in a sick-room. Always have the meals ready exactly
at the time they are expected. Nothing is more
trying to an invalid than waiting, and the appetite
often vanishes before the food arrives. As a rule,
never ask a patient what he would like; so few can
bear this. Rather bring a tempting, tasty, little meal
as a surprise. It will often then be eaten and
enjoyed, when, if it was talked about beforehand, it
would be refused. Now, a few words about the
general care of the patient and the sick-room. A
nurse, however experienced, should always obey im-
plicitly the orders of the doctor, and carry out faith-
fully his instructions. Try no remedies that may be
suggested by anyone else. Be very particular in


giving the medicine regularly, but never wake
a patient for this, unless ordered to do so. Be
very careful to keep separate the bottles con-
taining medicines, and lotions, and liniments, as
a mistake might prove fatal. These should be
placed out of sight, if possible, and always out of
the patient’s reach. A delirious patient should never
be left alone for a single moment, and should be
humoured as much as possible. He can often be
coaxed when two men could not hold him if con-
tradicted. Enter into the whim of the moment and
agree and soothe rather than tell him he is mistaken.
Do not allow more than one or two visitors at a time.
These should not stay long and should maintain cheer-
ful conversation. Avoid all dismal tales ; and while
taking a kindly interest in the patient’s sufferings do
not dwell too much upon his symptoms, and ask
unnecessary questions. Avoid, too, all whispering in
a sick-room—this always worries a patient. Speak
so that he can hear distinctly all that is said,
and anything that you may not wish him to hear
should be told out of the room. If the patient is
restless, bathing the face and hands in tepid water
(into which put a few drops of eau de cologne) will
often soothe and induce sleep. An even temperature
should be kept in a sick-room ; and, while avoiding
draughts, plenty of fresh air should be admitted. Put
a few drops of carbolic acid in a cup of water, and
sprinkle the floor of the room with this several times
in the day; or a little sulphur may be burnt in a


shovel. These are very simple disinfectants. Unless
a patient is very weak always make the bed morning
and evening. If he cannot be removed to a chair or
sofa, make one side at a time. Change the bed linen
often. The under sheet can easily be removed without
disturbing the patient if it is folded very flat and
passed under him. The greatest care must be taken
in moving patients suffering with typhoid fever. Even
when they appear to be recovering, they should not
be allowed to sit upright, nor have even a mouthful
of solid food until the doctor gives permission. They
will often beg for it; and it seems hard to deny them,
but the nurse must be firm, as solid food taken too
soon is often followed by relapse and death. Milk,
and nothing but milk, is the food for a typhoid
patient. In giving iced milk do not keep a large
piece of ice in it, but wrap the ice in flannel, and
break off a small piece, and put into the quantity
of milk to be taken just before giving it to the patient.
The ice can be broken without any noise by a darning-
needle with a small piece of wood used as a hammer.
Do not keep any food in a sick-room, and what is left
after a meal should be at once removed. Glasses and
cups are cleaned in a minute if washed directly they
are used, and a small bowl and clean cloth just
outside the door are all that is required. In applying
hot fomentations be careful not to wet the bed clothes.
The best way to prepare them is to fold a towel across
a basin. Put in the middle a good sized piece of
flannel. Pour over this plenty of boiling water.


Then take the ends of the towel and wring- all the
water out of the flannel. Take it in the towel to the
bedside. You will then have it thoroughly hot,
yet nearly dry. If mustard plasters are mixed with
white of egg instead of water they will draw well,
and will not blister. Linseed poultices should be
made with crushed linseed. Rinse a basin out with
boiling water; then pour into the basin a pint or
more of boiling water, according to size of poultice
desired. Drop the linseed in a handful at a time
until it is just thick enough to spread. Have ready a
linen rag. Spread this, and apply quickly. Lay
over the poultice a piece of flannel to keep it warm,
and have ready a bandage to keep it in place. Bread
poultices should be made with stale bread and boiling
water. Heat the basin, put in some crumb of bread,
pour over boiling water, and cover down in a warm
place for a few minutes, then press all the water out,
and lay on a linen rag, and apply as hot as possible.
I will conclude with a hint for the nurse herself.
Wear a cotton dress, and soft shoes that will not
creak. Attend to your own health and diet. Take
plenty of nourishing food to get strength for your
work. If obliged to sit up at night, arrange for a
few hours’ rest during the day. It is a great mistake
to overtax your strength and nerves. This will only
make you irritable and unfit for your work. Main-
tain an even temperament and a cheerful countenance.
This will go far to reassure your patient and lighten
his hours of pain and weariness.


To relieve the sick and suffering is woman’s noblest
mission, and calls forth her best virtues. How well
has Sir Walter Scott said—
‘ ‘ Oh, woman, in our hours of ease,
Uncertain, coy, and hard to please,
* * *
When pain and anguish wring the brow
A ministering angel thou. ’ ’
USEFUL HINTS FOR COOKERY
STUDENTS.
It is better, as far as possible, to use the simplest
utensils, and not to have too many about, or one is apt
to get confused. A wire sieve is very useful, and not
very expensive; with care it will last for years.
Use it for making bread crumbs, for purees of
vegetables, and for everyday soups and gravies ; but
when very smooth sauces and soups are desired, a
hair sieve must be used. A frying basket is very
useful for frying parsley and small rissoles. It is
more convenient and economical to have a set of
French knives and a palette knife for whipping eggs,
clearing basins, &c., than to use old dinner knives. A
wire egg whisk will be found invaluable for whipping-
cream, Genoese pastry, &c. Never use a jelly-bag for
straining jelly and clear soup; have instead 1 yard of
canvas cloth or ordinary kitchen teacloth; this will
make an effective strainer, and be far less trouble than
a jelly-bag. Copper stewpans are a great deal of


trouble to keep clean, and are dangerous to use, unless
kept very bright. The seamless sanitary steel are
good, and not very expensive. These can be washed
in soap and water, and polished outside with Needham’s
polish. If iron stewpans are used, they should be
kept quite bright inside. This is easily done by
rubbing them with sand, taking care, of course, to
rinse them thoroughly afterwards, A pestle and
mortar will be found very useful; so many odds and
ends may be made into savoury meats if pounded well
and nicely seasoned. A set of weights and scales and
some tin measures are quite necessary—l pint, } pint,
and 1 gill are the most useful sizes for small house-
holds. The tin conical strainers are more convenient
than the ordinary round ones. A nice iron frying-
pan, about 8 in. across, should be kept expressly for
omelettes and pancakes, and used for nothing else ;
also, two l|-pint saucepans should be kept for making
white sauces. I need hardly say that strict cleanliness
must be observed in the kitchen. It is impossible to
cook a good dinner unless everything used is clean.
Saucepans, &c., should never be put away dirty.
Directly the cooking is finished fill them up with
water, and leave this in until they can be thoroughly
washed. Cold water soap is an excellent thing for
washing up saucepans, dishes, &c. They should after-
wards be well rinsed in cold water.
And now a few hints about cooking. The papers
round souffle moulds should be used double, and tied
on outside the mould. All puddings that are steamed


must have a piece of buttered paper covered over the
top to prevent the water from the lid running in-
Parsley cannot be chopped too finely. Parsley is
very freely used in the recipes given in this book, as
it is a great improvement to many savoury dishes,
but they will be quite spoiled unless the parsley is
fine and dry. Directions are given for the best
method of preparing this useful herb. Sweating-
vegetables is really putting them into a saucepan
with some butter and stirring them about until the
butter is absorbed. Never use pepper or sauces in
the preparation of soups and gravies—they are
generally a mask for bad cooking; fry the pepper-
corns, this will extract the flavour, and if pepper and
sauces are required, they can be added at table. A
bouquet garni is sometimes called a faggot of herbs—
it is a stalk of parsley and sprigs of sweet herbs tied
up with a bay leaf. Crushed tapioca and semolina are
much nicer for thickening soups and gravies than
flour ; a little cornflour should be stirred in while the
vegetables are frying, to give substance, and the
semolina or tapioca sprinkled in after the soup has
been through the sieve. Remember to serve every-
thing very hot; a good dinner is often spoilt by
being sent to table lukewarm. Be very particular in
dishing up, there is so much in the appearance of the
food; see that your dishes are neat and nicely
garnished. A little care and thought in these matters
will cause a simple dinner nicely cooked and well
served to be more appreciated than a costly banquet.


DOMESTIC ECONOMY.
There is much talk now-a-days of economy, retrench-
ment, &c., to reduce the cost of living; and yet to
live well at a comparatively small cost is a problem
sometimes hard to solve. It is the duty and
pleasure of every woman at the head of a house-
hold to consider how to get the greatest amount
of comfort for her family with an outlay proportionate
to her means. There is a great deal of difference
between economy and parsimony. By the latter
term I understand refusing to have those materials
which are really necessary in the preparation of
various dishes; and by economy, understanding the
quantity of the best material that is required.
Economy does not mean using cheap eggs and butter
—perhaps butterine—for cooking. Good eggs go
farther, and are cheaper in the end, than what are
termed cooking eggs. Rump steak, for instance, is
really cheaper than beef steak, because it goes much
farther; it is economy, too, to trim off the fat from
chops and cutlets before cooking. These look much
nicer on the table when so prepared, and the fat that
is cut off makes an excellent substitute for butter
and dripping in cakes and pastry. Put all the trim-
mings into a saucepan and pour in about a quart of
cold water; put this on the fire and let it boil until
the water has all boiled away ; then strain off into a
basin, and when cold it is ready for use. Fat can be
bought at the butcher’s for a trifle, and, rendered


down like this, will be much better and cheaper than
lard, and also more nutritious.
If very strict economy must be studied, all refuse
fat can be rendered down and exchanged at a soap-
maker s for soap. I know a lady who keeps her
house supplied jvith soap in this way. There are no
scraps of cold meat, fish, or vegetables but what may
be turned to account. Most delicious salads can be
made by covering tiny pieces of meat or fish with
salad dressing or mayonnaise, and serving with a
lettuce, or they can be made into fish or meat patties,
rissoles, or gratins. Cold vegetables, too, are delightful
in salads, or very good curried and served with rice.
Cold parsnips are excellent fried in a little butter; this is
a French method. A stock pot is invaluable and costs
nothing; the bones and trimmings of joints, bones of
fowls or turkeys, and rabbits, broken up and covered
with cold water, and boiled for 5 or 6 hours, make excel-
lent foundations for soups and gravies. This should
be made fresh every morning; then a day’s supply can
always be on hand. Always have everthing left
from dinner, however small the quantity, put into
clean plates, and the gravy or sauces into clean jars,
and placed in the larder ; so that in the morning you
can see at once what your resources are. Cold sauces
of any kind are nice stirred in with buttered eggs.
This is a very convenient breakfast dish when the
whites have been used for dinner dishes, as the yolks
only are required. A good deal of judgment is
required, in ordering a dinner, to give variety, and to


see that the remains of one day’s dinner are turned to
good account in a savoury made-dish for the next. A
good curry can he prepared from small pieces of meat
and inferior joints of poultry that have been served
the day before, or a chicken or fish cream can be
made from “ scraps.” A white soup, or purde, can be
made from the liquor in which poultry or meat has
been boiled ; mock turtle, from a calf’s head, and so on.
There is an endless variety in economy of this kind.
It is a study which becomes most interesting the
further it is pursued. There are so many possibilities
that cooking becomes a delightful surprise instead of
the drudgery it is often considered.
I cannot conclude without referring to that trouble
of housekeepers—scraps of bread. These accumulate
in a most extraordinary manner, I have given several
ways of using them up. The Bedford pudding, if
carefully made, will be found very good; also, the
savoury boiled pudding. They can be soaked in cold
water and baked in the oven and served with the cheese,
or dried slowly and pounded and used for gratins,
and for covering fish and cutlets. These details may
seem small and despicable upon first sight, but an
intelligent woman will reflect that upon these small
things rests, to a great extent, the happiness of her
home, and will be ready to say with George Herbert—
‘ ‘ Who sweeps a room, as for thy laws,
Makes that and th’ action fine.”


MENUS FOR TWELVE DINNERS.
Vegetables are not specified. Potatoes and two
plain vegetables in season should be served with the
roast. Dressed vegetables should be served as a
separate course occasionally,
Ist Dinner.
Clear Soup.
Fried Garfish and French Melted Butter.
Quarter of Lamb.
Boiled Chicken and Egg Sauce.
Lemon Jelly. Queen of Puddings.
Cheese Souffld
2nd Dinner.
White Soup.
Murray Cod and Oyster Sauce.
Sirloin of Beef,
Cutlets a la St, James.
Raspberry Cream. Apple Amber Pudding.
Chicken Salad.
3rd Dinner.
Puree a rAmericaine.
Fried Bream.
Haunch of Mutton and Red Currant Jelly.


Fricassee of Chicken.
Cold Marmalade Pudding. Yanilla Souffle',
Marrow Toast.
4th Dinner.
Oxtail Soup.
Oyster Souffle.
Fibs of Beef.
Celery au Parmesan. Stuffed Tomatoes.
Yeal and Ham Pie.
Lemon Sponge. Buff Pudding.
Anchovy Toast.
sth Dinner,
Soup a la Heine.
Mock Whitebait.
Fore-quarter of Lamb.
Fillets of Beef a la
Kingswood Pudding. Cream Cakes.
Cold Prawn Curry.
Oth Dinner.
Tapioca Cream.
Whiting a la Orly.
Braised Fillet of Beef.
Roast Chicken.
Lemon Cheesecakes. Charlotte Russe.
Lobster Salad.


7th Dinner.
Julienne Soup.
Fish Cream.
Sirloin of Beef.
Soubise Mutton Cutlets,
Rump-steak Pie.
Apple Jelly. Cocoanut Pudding.
Parmesan d’artois.
Bth Dinner.
Tomato Soup.
Oysters Surperbe.
Fillet of Yeal and Ham.
Braised Chicken.
Stewed Carrots. Potato Souffle.
Gateau of Apricots. Cabinet Pudding.
9tli Dinner.
Puree of Green Peas.
Boudins of Whiting.
Quarter of Lamb. Jugged Hare.
Diplomatic Pudding. Meringues.
Eggs in Aspic Jelly.
10th Dinner.
Mulligatawny Soup.
Murray Plaice and Shrimp Sauce.
Ribs of Beef.
4


Stewed Duck and Turnips,
Apple Fritters. Cassel Pudding,
Tomato Omelette.
lltli Dinner.
Oyster Soup.
Fillets of Fish and Maitre d’Hotel Sauce.
Braised Leg of Mutton.
Chicken Pie.
Potato Souffle.
Frangipane Tartlets. Rice Meringue.
Savoury Toast.
13th Dinner.
Bonne Femme Soup.
Fillets of Plaice and Parmesan Sauce.
Haunch of Mutton and Red Currant Jelly.
Curry.
Lobster Cutlets,
French Apple Turnovers. Yanilla Cream.
Mayonnaise of Chicken.
MENUS FOR TWELVE FAMILY DINNERS.
Ist Dinner.
Pot an Feu.
Meat from Pot an Feu and Tomato Sauce.
Apple Tart. Macaroni Cheese.


2nd Dinner.
Fried Bream and Melted Butter.
Roast Leg of Mutton.
Blanc Mange and Stewed Fruit.
3rd Dinner.
Gravy Soup.
Rump-steak Pudding.
Mince of Cold Mutton.
Jam Tart. Anchovy Toast.
4th Dinner.
Cod and Shrimp Sauce.
Roast Beef and Baked Potatoes.
Dowager Pudding. Cheese Fritters.
sth Dinner.
Fish Cream from Cold Cod.
Cold Beef and Salad.
Chicken Pie.
Apple Charlotte. Cheese Savoury.
6th Dinner.
Kingswood Soup.
Quarter of Lamb.
Manchester Pudding.
Cheese Sandwiches.


7th Dinner.
Tomato Soup.
Rump-steak Pie. Cold Lamb and Salad.
Fruit Tart and Custards.
Kidney Toast.
Btli Dinner.
Potato Soup.
Ribs of Beef.
Lamb Cutlets and French Beans.
Yennoise Pudding. Fruit Salad.
9th Dinner.
Fried Garfish and Melted Butter,
Curry. Rolled Mutton and Brown Sauce.
Apple Souffle. Jam Tart.
10th Dinner.
Macaroni Soup.
Calf’s Head and Bacon. Rump-steak Pie.
Apple Fritters. Cheese Souffle.
lltli Dinner.
Mock Turtle Soup (made from Calf’s Head Stock).
Braised Mutton.
Hashed Calf’s Head.
Alexandra Pudding. Savoury Rice.


12th Dinner.
Oyster Soup.
Fore-quarter of Lamb.
Pancakes. Rice Meringue.
Beetroot Fritters.
MENUS FOR SIX DINNERS OF SEVEN
COURSES.
Ist Dinner.
Prawn Savoury. Oysters.
Clear Soup. Tapioca Cream.
Fried Whiting. Boiled Cod and Bechamel Sauce.
Roast Turkey. Braised Fillet of Beef.
Cutlets ala St. James. Fish Cream.
Lemon Jelly. Boiled Cabinet Pudding.
Anchovy Toast. Parmesan d’artois.
Ices and Dessert.
2nd Dinner.
Oysters Surperbe. Curry of Prawns.
Bonne Femme Soup. Julienne Soup.
Fried Garfish. Fillets of Fish and Maitre d’Hotel Sauce.
Roast Ducks. Sirloin of Beef.
Lobster Cutlets. Soubise Mutton Cutlets.
Diplomatic Pudding. Pineapple Cream.
Mayonnaise of Chicken. Cheese Straws.
Ices and Dessert.


3rd Dinner.
Sardine Toast. Oysters.
Mock Turtle Soup. White Soup.
Fried Fillets of Fish. Boudins of Whiting.
Boiled Chicken and Egg Sauce. Haunch of Mutton.
Fillets of Beef ala Framjaise. Rissoles of Chicken.
Gateau of Apricots. Queen of Puddings,
Cold Prawn Curry. Golden Drops.
Ices and Dessert.
4th Dinner.
Stuffed Eggs. Curried Prawns.
Oyster Soup. Gravy Soup.
Jugged Hare. Sirloin of Beef.
Cauliflower au Gratin, Stuffed Tomatoes.
Curry. Quenelles of Yeal or Chicken.
Cold Cabinet Pudding. Strawberry Cream
Anchovy Toast. Cheese Sandwiches.
Ices and Dessert.
6th Dinner.
Tomato Omelette. Marrow Toast.
Oxtail Soup. Mulligatawny Soup.
Oyster Souffle.
Fried Fillets of Fish and Sharp Sauce.
Braised Leg of Mutton,
Roast Chicken and Brown Sauce.
Oyster Patties. Beef Olives.


Cocoamit Pudding. Coffee Creams.
Cheese Savoury. Venetian Rice.
Ices and Dessert.
6th Dinner.
Curried Vegetables, Tomato Savoury.
Puree of Rabbit or Hare. Soup ala Reine.
Fillets of Fish and Parmesan Sauce. Fish Cream.
Fricassee of Chicken. Quarter of Lamb.
Beetroot Fritters. Potato Souffle.
Salmon Cutlets. Fillets of Beef and Oysters.
Apple Amber Pudding. Pineapple Cream.
Lobster Salad. Cheese Fritters,
Ices and Dessert.
For dance suppers a variety of sandwiches should
be provided. They can be made of cold chicken and
ham, turkey and tongue, hard-boiled eggs and water-
cress, potted meats, &c. As a 'piece de resistance, a
galantine of beef or turkey, served with aspic jelly;
also, aspic jelly moulded with cold meats and salad.
Sweet jelly and creams, served in fairy moulds,
arranging the colours alternately, look pretty, and
are more convenient than large moulds.


SOUPS AND PUREES.
White Stock.
7 lbs. Knuckle Yeal.
8 pts. Water.
20 White Peppercorns.
1 Onion.
6 Cloves.
Salt.
Have the knuckle of veal sawn up, and cut the meat
into small pieces; take the marrow from the hones;
put into a large saucepan with the water, and when it
boils put in some salt, and skim thoroughly; add the
peppercorns and an onion stuck with 6 cloves, and
boil slowly for 5 or 6 hours, adding 1 pint more water
from time to time; strain through a hair sieve, and
stand by till next day; remove all fat, and it is ready
for use. This is the foundation of all white soups
and sauces.
Second Stock.
The bones and trimmings of meat, poultry, and
rabbits, or fresh bones from the butcher’s, broken up
small, will make nice second stock. If there is not
sufficient of these a few pounds of shin of beef or
knuckle of veal; cover well with water; put in
some peppercorns, and salt, and an onion, and boil for
several hours; strain through a hair sieve, and stand


by till next day; remove all the fat very carefully,
and this will be a good foundation for brown soups
and gravies,
Yery Good Stock.
7 lbs. Sbin Beef or 4 lbs.
Beef and 3 lbs. Veal.
8 pts. Water.
20 Peppercorns.
1 Onion.
6 Cloves.
1 Carrot.
Salt.
Cut the meat into small pieces, and take the
marrow from the bones; cut away all skin and
gristle—they will do for second stock ; put meat and
water into a very clean saucepan; let it come to the
boil; add a little salt, and skim thoroughly; put in
the peppercorns and vegetables, and if more scum
rises, take it carefully off; let it simmer for 5 hours,
adding 1 pint more water from time to time; strain
through a hair sieve, and let it stand till next day;
remove all fat, and it is ready for use. In very hot
weather all the vegetables may be omitted, and a
larger quantity used when making the soup.
Mutton Broth.
2 lbs. Scrag Mutton.
1 qt. Water.
1 oz. Eice.
Salt.
Thoroughly clean the mutton and cut it into small
pieces; put it into cold water and let it come gradually
to the boil; skim well; add a little salt, an onion,
the rice, and half pint water to allow for waste, and
boil very slowly for 3 hours. Strain off the broth


and let it stand till cold, when the fat can be easily
removed and the broth made hot as required.
Raw Beef Tea.
Salt.
lb. Steak.
pt. Water.
Take a piece of very lean steak and scrape it with
a sharp knife ; put it into cold water and let it stand
for 2 hours, then strain, and it is ready. This
should be made in small quantities, as it will soon turn
sour.
Beef Tea.
1 lb. Steak.
1 pt. Water.
Salt.
Take a piece of lean steak and scrape it the way
of the grain, or else put it twice through a sausage-
machine ; pour over 1 pint of cold water to every
pound of meat, and let it stand for 3 hours; then
place it in a cool oven, covered over, and cook very
slowly for 2 hours; strain it off; let it stand until cold ;
take off all fat, season with a little salt, and make
hot as required. Beef tea should never actually boil;
it is more nutritious and easier of digestion if kept
just below boiling point.
Rice Soup.
Take the water in which a chicken or veal has been
boiled, say 3 pints; wash some rice well in cold water.


and when the stock is boiling put in 3 ozs. rice and
1 doz. white peppercorns ; boil until the rice is quite
soft, then rub through a hair sieve, and if too thick
add a little milk or white stock ; make hot in a clean
saucepan, and if a richer soup is desired, stir in a gill
of cream. A teaspoonsful of chopped parsley may be
added.
Pot an feu.
5 or 6 lbs. Leg of Beef.
4 qts. Water.
2 Turnips.
3 Carrots.
1 head Celery.
2 or 3 Onions.
1 faggot of Herbs.
Salt and Pepper to taste.
Secure the beef in a nice shape with tape ; put it on
in a large saucepan with the cold water; when it boils*
skim very carefully, adding a little salt to make the
scum rise ; then slice in all the vegetables, and simmer
very gently for 5 hours; take out the beef, remove
the faggot of herbs, skim well, and serve the liquor
as a soup ; remove the tape from the meat, and serve
hot with a puree of vegetables or a sauce, or press it
until cold and serve with a salad.
French Soup.
Take some red carrots and an onion or leek; chop
them up, sprinkle them with sugar and salt, and toss
them in 2 ozs. of butter, but do not let them brown;
mix these with 3 pints or more of stock, 1 doz.
peppercorns, 2 stalks of celery, and one or two
potatoes ; boil all together for 3 hours ; then rub


through a hair sieve; if not thick enough sprinkle in
some crushed tapioca or sago ; if too thick, add more
stock; season and make hot; stir in 2 ozs. of butter
or a little cream, and serve very hot with fried
bread.
Tomato and Marrow Soup.
2 lbs. Tomatoes.
1 Marrow.
3 pts. Stock or Water.
2 Onions.
3 ozs. Butter.
2 doz. Peppercorns.
Slice up the vegetables and toss them in half the
butter, add the water or stock and the peppercorns,
and simmer for about 2 hours; rub through a hair
sieve ; put back into a clean saucepan, and when
quite hot stir in the rest of the butter cold, and, if
liked, a gill of cream. Serve with fried bread.
Vegetable Soup.
1 Cabbage.
1 pt. Green Peas.
2 Carrots.
•J- Turnip.
2 Onions.
1 Bouquet Garni.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
2 qts. Stock.
Celery and Salt.
Put the butter into a large saucepan, and when it
is dissolved put in the cabbage and sweat for 5
minutes; then put in all the other vegetables and the
stock; season with salt and boil gently for about an
hour, or until the vegetables are quite soft; remove
the saucepan from the fire, rub through a sieve, return
to a clean saucepan and let it get hot. Pour into a
warm tureen and serve with fried bread.


Gravy Soup.
£ Ih. Ham.
2 lbs. lean Beef.
2 lbs. Yeal.
2 lbs. Bones.
2 Onions.
2 Carrots.
1 head Celery.
\ Turnip.
2 doz. Peppercorns.
5 pts. Water.
Cut the ham in slices and lay at the bottom of a
stewpan with the beef and veal cut into pieces;
place on these the bones and vegetables; cover closely
and stand over a brisk fire. When the meat begins to
stick turn it, and as soon as there is a brown glaze at
the bottom of the saucepan, add three pints of hot
water; skim well. When it has boiled add one pint
of cold water; skim again and then put in another
pint; remove all the scum as it rises ; season with
salt, and simmer for four hours; strain through a very
fine sieve, remove all the fat, and serve very hot with
sippets of toast.
Mock Turtle Soup.
3 qts. Water.
Half Calf’s Head.
3 lbs. Knuckle of Yeal.
Basher of Ham.
2 ozs. Flour.
1 Carrot.
1 Bouquet Garni.
1 dessertspoonful Lemon Juice.
1 Leek or Onion.
3 Eschalots.
pt. Sherry.
Salt.
Bone and blanch the head for 10 minutes; butter a
stock pot; place in it the ham cut into pieces, the
head and bones, vegetables, seasoning, knuckle of
veal, and water, and let it boil for 3 hours; it
should be reduced then to 2 quarts; strain it off
and let it stand until cold, then remove carefully all


the fat; cut the head into small neat squares; put
1 oz. of butter and 2 ozs. of flour into a sauce-
pan, mix well, and cook it; pour on the hot soup ;
when it boils skim well; add the sherry, lemon juice,
and pieces of head. Put 1 doz. small forcemeat balls
into the tureen, pour on the hot soup, and serve.
Kings wood Soup.
3 pts. Stock.
4 Tomatoes
1 Carrot.
Curry Powder.
Salt. Bay Leaf.
2 small Onions.
2 Cloves.
12 Peppercorns.
2 sticks Celery.
1 oz. Butter.
1 oz. Cornflour.
1 oz. Crushed Tapioca.
Put the butter into a saucepan, and fry the onions
and peppercorns ; mix the cornflour with a little stock
and pour it over the onions ; add the tomatoes and
other vegetables and as much curry powder as will
lie on the point of a knife ; put in the hot stock and
stir until it boils ; then boil gently for 1 hour; rub
the contents of the saucepan through a hair sieve;
return to a clean saucepan ; sprinkle in the crushed
tapioca, and stir until it boils; when this is clear it
is ready for serving.
Semolina Soup.
2 pts. Stock.
pt. Milk.
2 ozs. Semolina.
Salt.
Put the stock into a saucepan, and when it boils
stir in the semolina ; boil for about 15 minutes ; then


add the milk and seasoning; let it boil up. Pour
into a warm tureen; serve with fried bread.
Macaroni Soup.
3 ozs. Macaroni.
3 pts. Stock.
2 Onions.
1 oz. Butter.
1 Carrot.
\ Turnip.
1 Bouquet Garni.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
1 oz. Cornflour.
Salt.
Cut up the onions, carrot, and turnip, and fry in
the butter with the peppercorns and bouquet garni;
mix the cornflour with a little cold water, and pour in
when the vegetables are brown ; put in the stock and
simmer for half an hour ; strain into a clean saucepan ;
boil the macaroni until tender in salt and water ; cut
it into pieces one inch long, put it into the soup, and
simmer for 5 minutes ; it is then ready for serving.
Ox Tail Soup.
2 Oxtails.
2 Carrots.
1 Onion.
2 qts. Stock.
1 Bouquet Garni
2 ozs. Butter.
1 oz. Flour.
Celery, 2 Cloves.
Cut up the tails and soak in cold water for 2
hours ; dry in a cloth ; put the butter into a stewpan ;
put in the pieces of tail and fry a good colour; then
fry the onion, add the flour, and cook that; then pour
in the hot stock and vegetables, and simmer very
gently for 3or 4 hours; skim very carefully; take
out the pieces of tail and put them into a tureen, and
strain the soup over them.


Pea Soup.
1 qt. Split Peas.
4 qts. Stock.
Celery and Salt.
2 Carrots.
30 Peppercorns.
2 ozs. Butter.
2 Onions.
Wash the peas thoroughly, and sweat them in the
butter for 5 minutes ; then pour in the stock ; slice
up the carrots, onions, and celery, and add these
with the peppercorns and some salt; stir until it
boils; let it simmer very gently for 3 hours ; rub
it through a wire sieve and return to the saucepan,
and make it quite hot; serve with dried mint
and fried bread. A good soup can be made by
using water and putting in 2 lbs, leg of beef cut into
small pieces. Serve these in the soup.
Cheap Soup for the Poor.
55 pts. Split Peas.
15 lbs. Carrots.
6 lbs. Turnips.
Celery, Salt, and Pepper.
6 lbs. Onions.
14 lbs. Leg of Beef.
24 lbs. Bones.
30 gals, of Water.
Chop the bones into small pieces and make a stock
of them the day before ; strain off and put in the peas,
vegetables, seasoning, &c., and simmer for 5 or 6
hours; when it has been cooking for 3 hours, cut the
meat into small pieces and put it in ; use a little dry
mint to flavour it. This is an excellent soup if care-
fully made, and can be sold to the poor, if desired,
for about Id. a quart.


Vegetable Puree.
3 Carrots.
1 Turnip.
1 head Celery.
2 Onions.
5 pts. of Water or Stock.
1 small Cabbage.
\ pt. Green Peas.
A few Spinach Leaves.
2 ozs. Butter.
20 Peppercorns.
Salt.
Cut all the vegetables into small pieces and sweat
them well in the butter ; add the water or stock, and
let all boil together for 1| hours ; then remove from
the fire and pass the vegetables through a fine wire
or hair sieve ; make hot in a clean saucepan; it is then
ready for serving. Send fried bread to table with
the puree.
Puree of Green Peas.
\ peck Peas
3 pts. White Stock.
10 Spinach Leaves.
10 Mint Leaves.
1 teaspoonful Sugar.
Salt and Pepper.
Shell the peas and boil them for 10 minutes in
water; strain off, and put into a saucepan, with the
stock, spinach, mint, sugar, and salt; boil all these
things together until the peas are very soft; then
remove the saucepan from the fire, and pass the
contents through a hair sieve ; return to a clean sauce-
pan and make hot. It is then ready for serving.
Mulligatawny Soup.
2 qts. Stock.
1 Eabbit or Wild Duck.
1 rasber of Bacon.
1 oz. Flour.
1 tablespoonful Mulliga-
tawny Paste.
1 Onion.
1 Apple.
1 Carrot.
20 Peppercorns.
1 oz. Butter.
oz. Curry Powder.
Salt.
Lemon Juice.
5


Put the butter into a saucepan; cut the bacon,
apple, and vegetables into small pieces, and when the
butter is melted put them into the saucepan, with the
peppercorns, and fry a pale brown ; then stir in the
curry powder, mulligatawny paste, and flour, and
cook for a few minutes ; pour in the hot stock ; cut
the rabbit or duck into joints, and add them to the
soup, and simmer very gently for 1 \ hours. Take
out the rabbit or duck, cut the meat from the bones
into neat pieces about half an inch square, and put
them into a warm tureen ; rub the soup through a hair
sieve; put in the salt and lemon juice ; return to a
clean saucepan, and make hot; pour it boiling on to
the meat in the tureen, and serve with a dish of well-
boiled rice. This soup can be made without the
mulligatawny paste.
Julienne Soup.
3 ozs. Carrots.
\ oz. Celery.
2 ozs. Turnips.
1 oz. Onion.
1 oz. Leek.
2 qts. Stock.
1 oz. Butter.
Shred the vegetables into small strips; put the
butter into a stewpan, and fry the vegetables a good
colour, sprinkling them with sugar and salt; add the
stock, and simmer very gently till quite tender.
Skim well, and serve with fried bread.
Consomme a la Royale.
2 qts. Best Stock.
1 lb. Lean Steak.
2 Carrots.
1 Bouquet Garni.
1 Onion.
6 Cloves.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
2 Eggs.
Salt.
Stalk of Celery.


Put the stock into a large saucepan; scrape the
steak, or put it twice through a sausage-machine,
and add that with the vegetables, an onion stuck with
cloves, the peppercorns, and the whites and shells of
two eggs; stand the saucepan over the fire and whisk
until it boils, but be sure not to whisk afterwards;
let it simmer gently for 5 minutes, then draw it
from the fire where it will keep quite hot, and let it
stand for half an hour ; place a kitchen cloth on the
jelly stand, or tie it over a chair turned upside down;
run some boiling water through the cloth ; then pour
into it the contents of the saucepan ; remove the first
basin when all is in the strainer, place another, and
pour the first straining into the cloth again. Be careful
not to disturb the meat at the bottom of the strainer, as
that will act as a filter and clear the soup. If properly
prepared it will only require to be strained once.
Return to a clean saucepan and make hot; have some
tarragon leaves or small forcemeat bails in the soup
tureen ; pour the hot soup over them, and serve.
Tomato Soup,
2 lb. tin Tomatoes.
1 rasher Bacon.
1 oz. Butter.
2 Carrots.
Salt
| Turnip.
1 Onion.
20 Peppercorns,
la oz. Flour.
3 pts. Stock.
Put the butter into a saucepan, and when it is dis-
solved put in the peppercorns, the vegetables cut into
small pieces, and the bacon cut into dice, and fry
them a light brown; then stir in the flour and


cook it for a few minutes; add the tomatoes, and
the hot stock ; stir until it boils up, then draw it
back where it will only just simmer, and let it
stand for 1 hour; rub through a hair sieve ; return
to a clean saucepan and make hot, and if not thick
enough, sprinkle in a dessertspoonful of semolina.
Pour into a hot tureen and serve.
Tapioca Cream.
1| pts. White Stock.
pt. Milk.
3 Eggs.
2 ozs. Crusted Tapioca.
Salt.
Put the stock into a saucepan, and when it is hot
sprinkle in some very finely crushed tapioca ; let it
boil, stirring all the time, until the tapioca is quite
clear; beat the yolks of the eggs in a basin, add the
milk, and strain this into the soup; stir until it comes
to boiling point, to cook the eggs, but do not let it boil;
when it thickens it is ready. This is served instead
of a soup.
Potato Soup.
2 lbs. Potatoes.
3 pts. Water.
1J ozs. Butter.
1 Onion.
i pt. Milk.
Salt and Pepper.
Peel, wash, and slice the potatoes and onion; put
them into a saucepan and sweat them in the butter
for 5 minutes, hut do not let them acquire any colour;
pour in the hot water and stir until it boils;
boil quickly until the potatoes are quite soft; then


rub them through a wire sieve ; season with salt
and pepper ; put into a clean saucepan, add the milk,
and stir until it boils. Turn into a warm tureen, and
serve with fried bread.
Onion Soup.
1 oz. Butter.
3 or 4 Onions.
1J ozs. Flour.
4 pts. Boiling Stock.
1 gill Milk.
Salt and Pepper.
Cut up the onions and fry in the butter ; stir in the
flour, then add the boiling stock, with some salt and
pepper ; skim well and boil until the onions are quite
cooked; remove all the fat, and add the milk. Have
ready some toast in the tureen; boil up the soup
and pour it over the toast.
Puree of Potatoes.
2 lbs. of Potatoes.
3 pts, white Stock.
2 ozs. Butter
20 white Peppercorns,
J pt. Milk.
1 Onion.
Peel and cut the potatoes into slices, wash and dry
them and put them into a large saucepan with the
butter and onion, and sweat them for 5 minutes, but
do not let them get brown; pour in the hot stock (all
but half a pint) and peppercorns, and boil quickly
until the potatoes are very soft; then take up and
rub through a hair sieve, adding from time to time
the half-pint of hot stock; return to a clean saucepan,
put in the milk, and when it boils it is ready to serve ;
a gill of cream stirred in makes a richer puree. Serve
with fried bread.


Purte of Babbit.
1 Babbit.
1 oz. Flour.
I gill Milk.
3 pts. Good Brown Sauce.
1 oz. Butter.
Cut the meat off the hack of the rabbit in two long'
fillets ; wrap the remainder in buttered paper and bake
for half an hour ; take it from the oven and cut all
the meat from the bones ; put the brown sauce into a
saucepan with the bones and pieces of rabbit, and boil
gently for 1A hours ; then take the saucepan from the
fire and rub the contents through a hair sieve; take
the fillets of rabbit and put them through a sausage-
machine, then pound them well in a mortar, and
rub them through a sieve ; put the butter into a
small saucepan ; when it is dissolved, stir in the flour,
add the milk, and stir quickly until it boils ; let it
boil for a few minutes; take the saucepan from the fire;
season the pounded rabbit, and mix it with this sauce ;
shape the mixture in teaspoons like quenelles ; butter
a saute or fryingpan, pour in some hot water and
poach the quenelles for 10 minutes ; then put them in
a hot tureen ; make the puree hot and pour it over
them ; it is then ready to serve.
Pumpkin Soup.
1 Pumpkin.
pt. Milk.
1 qt. Water or Stock.
2 ozs. Butter.
2 Onions.
1 Carrot.
1 Turnip.
Slice up the pumpkin. and onions, carrot and
turnips, and boil them in the water or stock until


soft; rub through a sieve, return to a clean saucepan,
add the milk and butter, and when quite hot serve
with toasted sippets of bread.
Artichoke Soup.
1 qt. White Stock.
1 pt. Milk.
2 lbs. Artichokes.
Fried Bread.
Lemon Juice.
Boil the artichokes in milk and water, and rub them
through a hair sieve ; mix the stock and milk, and
when quite hot stir in the puree of artichokes;
let it boil a few minutes ; if not thick enough,
sprinkle in a little crushed tapioca, or semolina ; take
it from the fire, flavour with salt and lemon juice,
and serve with fried bread.
Puree a L’Americaiiie.
2 lbs. Tomatoes.
2 rasters of Ham.
1 qt. Stock.
18 Peppercorns.
1 Carrot.
1 Onion.
1 oz. Cornflour.
1 oz. of Butter.
Salt, &c.
Cut the ham into small pieces ; chop the vegetables
and fry all with the peppercorns in the butter;
sprinkle with the cornflour and add gradually the
stock; simmer together until the vegetables are quite
tender; cut the tomatoes and put them in about
10 minutes before the vegetables are done; rub
through a hair sieve; make the puree hot, but do not
let it boil. Just before serving stir in 1 oz. of cold
butter; serve with fried bread.


Soup Haig re.
Take some carrots, turnips, leeks, or onions, celery,
and any vegetables that may be in season; peel and
slice them up; put lor 2 ozs. of butter, according to
quantity of vegetables, into a stewpan; put in the
vegetables and 20 peppercorns ; brown nicely in the
butter, sprinkling them with sugar ; then pour over
some hot water, and throw in a handful of haricot
beans; let all simmer together for 4 hours, rub
through a hair sieve, season to taste, and make hot in
a clean saucepan. A small piece of butter stirred in is
an improvement; send fried bread to table with it.
Puree of Haricots.
1 lb. Haricot Beans.
2 qts. White Stock.
£ pt. Milk.
1 doz. White Peppercorns.
2 Onions.
Pour some boiling water over the haricots, then
skin them like almonds; put them into the stock with
the onions, sliced up, and the peppercorns, and let them
boil for 1| hours, and then rub them through a sieve ;
put the puree into a saucepan with the milk, and stir
until it comes to boiling point; then pour into a
tureen, and serve with fried bread.
Oyster Soup.
3 pts. White Stock.
2 doz. Oysters.
1 tablespoonful Cornflour.
1 teaspoonful Lemon Ju ice.
J pt. Milk.
J pt. Oyster Liquor.
Put the stock and the oyster liquor on the fire ; mix
the cornflour and the milk into a smooth hatter, and
when the stock boils, pour this in and let it boil for a


few minutes, stirring all the time ; draw it back ; put
in the oysters, and leave it covered over, where it will
not boil, for 5 minutes; then strain in the lemon juice
and pour into a hot tureen.
Bonne Femme Soup.
1 Cucumber.
1 Onion.
3 pts. White Stock.
4 Yolks of Eggs.
2 Lettuces.
2 ozs. Butter.
J pt. Milk or Cream.
1 dessertspoonful Sugar.
Cut the vegetables into small pieces; put them into
a saucepan with the sugar and butter, and simmer for
10 minutes; mix the flour and stock together, and
pour on to the vegetables, and stir until the soup
boils; then draw it on one side and simmer until the
vegetables are soft; put the yolks of the eggs into a
basin; beat them for 2 or 3 minutes, adding by
degrees the milk or cream; strain this into the soup,
and stir until it thickens, but do not let it boil, or the
eggs will curdle; then pour into a tureen and serve
with fried bread.
Soup a la Reine.
1 Cooked Chicken.
1 qt. White Stock.
2 ozs. Boiled Eice.
pt. Milk or Cream.
Remove the skin from the chicken; cut up the
meat and pound it in a mortar, and rub it through a
sieve; put it into a saucepan with the stock and
simmer for half an hour; then add the cream or milk
and a seasoning of pepper and salt; let it boil up ;
then pour into a tureen, and serve with sippets of toast
or fried bread.


FISH AND SAVOURIES.
Prawn Savoury.
1 pt. Prawns.
1 teaspoonful Oil.
1 dessert-spoonful French
Mustard,
Pepper or Cayenne to taste.
Pick and chop the prawns finely; mix them well
with mustard, oil, and pepper, and serve in souffle
cases; garnish with parsley. This is a good and
simple savoury to serve before the soup.
Oyster Patties.
1 doz. Patty Cases.
2 doz. Oysters.
Lemon Juice.
pt. Milk.
2 ozs. Butter,
i oz. Flour.
Cayenne.
Strain the liquor from the oysters, and mix with the
milk ; put the butter into a saucepan, and when it is
melted stir in the flour, and cook well; pour in the
milk and stir until it boils; let it boil 2or 3 minutes.
Put the oysters into the sauce, cover down for 5
minutes ; season with cayenne and a little lemon juice.
Put 2 oysters into each case ; if the cases are cold,
stand them in the oven until hot through. A little
cream is an improvement to oyster patties.
Fillets of Fisli and White Sauce.
1 Plaice or Bream.
pt. Milk.
6 Peppercorns.
1J oz. Butter,
o oz. Flour.
Salt.


Fillet the fish and cut into long narrow strips, tie
them in a knot, and steam for 10 minutes or more,
according to size: take the head and bones, and boil
O 7 '
them in the milk, with the peppercorns, and if liked
a small onion stuck with 2 cloves, for 20 minutes ;
then strain the milk. Put the butter into a saucepan,
and when it is melted put in the flour and mix well
together ; pour in the milk and stir until it boils; let
it boil 2 or 3 minutes. Arrange the fish on a hot
dish and pour this sauce over.
Murray Plaice and Maitre d’Hotel Sauce.
1 Plaice.
.V Lemon.
1 oz. Butter.
h pt. Maitre d’Hotel Sauce.
Fillet the plaice ; cut each fillet into strips about
11 in. wide, and roll them up the side that has been
next the bone outside; butter a baking sheet; stand
the fillets on this close together; sprinkle them with
lemon juice and cover with a piece of buttered paper ;
stand in the oven and, cook for 10 minutes or more
according to size; then dish and pour over them
about half a pint good Maitre d’Hotel Sauce.
Mayonnaise of Lobster.
1 Lobster.
J pt. Mayonnaise Sauce.
1 Cucumber.
Nasturtium Flowers and
Leaves.
Pick out all the white meat from a lobster; wash
and pound the spawn and spread it over the pieces


of lobster and cut them about 1 in. square; pile these
on a dish; lay slices of cucumber all over, and pour
over the mayonnaise ; garnish with nasturtium flowers
or cucumber and chopped aspic jelly.
Oysters in Batter.
2 doz. Oysters.
Frying Batter.
Choose large, fine oysters, beard them, dip them in
frying batter, and fry until a good colour in very hot
fat; drain on paper for a minute ; pile high on a hot
dish and garnish with fried parsley and lemon slices.
Kromskies of Oysters.
1 doz. Oysters.
1 oz. Butter.
1 oz. Flour.
1 gill Oyster Liquor and
Stock.
1 Egg.
Pig’s Caul.
Pepper and Salt.
Prying Batter.
Beard and cut the oysters into small pieces; put
the butter in a small saucepan; when it is dissolved
put in the flour and cook ; then pour in the stock and
oyster liquor, and stir quickly; let it boil for 2or
3 minutes; stir in the oysters and season it; turn on
to a plate ; cover over with a buttered paper and let
it stand until cold; then shape into corks; roll them
in small pieces of caul, dip in frying batter, and fry
a nice colour; take them up; drain for a minute on
kitchen paper; pile high on dish; garnish with fried
parsley, and serve very hot.


Fish Patties.
1 lb. Cold Boiled Fish.
1 gill Cream,
f lb. Puff Paste.
Seasoning of Mace or
Nutmeg, Cayenne and
Salt.
Make a dozen cases of puff paste, pick the fish into
small pieces, and be sure that it is free from bone-
Mix in well the cream and seasoning; make this
thoroughly hot, either in a saucepan or the oven, fill
in the patty cases, and cover with a small round of
pastry, and serve hot.
Fried Bream.
3 Bream.
1 teaspoonful Oil.
1 teaspoonful Water.
Egg and Bread Crumbs.
Hot Fat.
Fillet the bream; mix some flour, pepper, and salt
on a plate, and dry the fish in this; beat' up an
egg, add the oil and water, and cover the fish well.
Take it out, put it into the bread crumbs; shake
off the loose crumbs, and lay by for an hour;
make the fat very hot, put the fish in, and fry a good
colour. Drain for a few minutes on kitchen paper,
and garnish with fried parsley.
Potted Bloaters.
6 Bloaters.
2 teaspoonfuls Anchovy
Sauce.
3 ozs. Butter
Cayenne or Pepper.
Cook six bloaters, or take six tinned bloaters; skin
and bone them; put them, with the seasoning and


butter, into a mortar and pound thoroughly; then
press into small pots and cover with dissolved butter.
This mixture will keep good for some time, and is a
delicious relish.
Fish Cakes.
J lb. Cold Boiled Fish.
Jib. Boiled Potatoes.
1 Egg.
1 oz. Butter.
Pepper and Salt.
Egg and Bread Crumbs.
Hot Fat.
Break the fish into pieces and remove the bones;
boil the potatoes, and rub them through a sieve ; put
the butter into a saucepan, and when it is dissolved
put in the fish, egg, and seasoning, and mix all
together ; turn it on to a plate, and when cold shape
it into flat cakes, about 2 in. across and 1 in. high ;
cover these with egg and bread crumb ; shape again
with a knife, and fry a golden brown in hot fat.
Drain on kitchen paper, and serve on a napkin gar-
nished with fried parsley.
Potted Fish.
1 lb. Cold Boiled Fish.
2 oz. Butter.
Cayenne.
1 dessertspoonful Anchovy
Sauce.
Pick the fish free from hone and skin; put it into
the mortar with the butter, cayenne, and anchovy;
pound it thoroughly ; put it into small pots, and run
some dissolved butter on the top.


Boudins of Whiting.
4 Whiting.
4 Eggs.
2 teaspoonfuls Parsley.
I pt. White Sauce.
1 gill Cream.
Lobster Coral.
Skin and fillet the whiting, and pound in a mortar,
and rub through a wire sieve ; put it back in the mortar
and pound again, adding the eggs, one at a time; then
mix in the cream and a seasoning of pepper and salt;
butter some small moulds ; sprinkle some with
parsley, very finely chopped, and some with coral;
fill with the mixture, and steam for 20 minutes,
or until firm ; take the white sauce, flavour it nicely;
mix some parsley and lobster coral with it ; turn the
boudins carefully out, and pour the sauce over.
Fisli in Batter.
1 gill Tepid Water *
Whites of 2 Eggs.
Hot Fat.
1 Bream.
lb. Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
Fillet the bream, and cut into nice shaped pieces
and dry in a little flour ; make a frying batter, as per
recipe; dip the fish in and well cover it, drop into
very hot fat, and fry a good colour; drain for a few
minutes on kitchen paper; pile on a hot dish, and
garnish with fried parsley.
Kedgeree.
1 lb. Cold Boiled Fish.
3 ozs. Rice.
2 Eggs.
2 ozs. Butter.
Salt and Pepper.


Cook the rice in nicely salted water, as by recipe
given. Flake the fish and remove all the bones;
have ready two eggs boiled hard, cut the whites into
small pieces and mix with the rice; put the butter
into a stewpan, and when it is dissolved put in the
rice, fish, pepper, and salt, and whites of the eggs,
and mix all well together ; then pile it high on a dish,
and rub the yolks of the eggs through a sieve so that
it falls over the fish. It is then ready to serve.
Cold Prawn Curry.
1 pt. Prawns.
2 Eschalots.
2 ozs. Butter,
J gill Cream.
1 tablespoonful Curry
Powder.
h pt. good White Stock.
1 Lemon.
1 oz. Flour.
Slice up the shalots and fry them in butter; fry the
curry powder and flour, then add the gravy and
simmer for 10 minutes; strain off. Pick the prawns
and pour this gravy over them, with the juice of a
lemon. Let it simmer very gently for half an hour;
stir in \ gill cream; heap on to a dish, and serve with
border of rice boiled in white stock; decorate with
prawns.
Lobster Cutlets.
1 Lobster.
1 oz. Flour.
1J ozs. Butter.
1 gill Milk.
1 dessertspoonful Anchovy
Sauce.
Cayenne or Pepper.
Take all the white meat from a lobster, and chop it
up. Put the shells in half a pint of milk and stand


by the fire for half an hour, then strain off; make
a thick sauce with the butter, flour, and 1 gill of
this liquor; add the sauce and seasoning ; put in the
lobster; mix well; turn on to a plate to cool; form
into cutlets; cover with egg and bread crumbs, and
fry in very hot fat; garnish with fried parsley and
the feelers of the lobster.
Oyster Souffle.
doz. Oysters.
1 Whiting.
\ gill Cream.
1 gill good White Sauce,
4 Eggs.
Cayenne, Nutmeg, and Salt.
Skin and fillet the whiting, and pound very
thoroughly in a mortar; add from time to time 1 doz.
oysters which have been bearded, the sauce and the
yolks of the eggs, cream, and seasoning. When well
pounded whip the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth ;
stir these lightly in; well butter a plain mould, and
tie round it a buttered paper several inches higher than
the tin; pour the mixture in, and steam steadily for
1 hour; turn out very carefully, and pour round it
a sauce made with half a gill of milk, half a gill
of oyster essence or liquor, 1 oz. flour, 1 oz. butter,
half a gill of cream, and 6 oysters, bearded, blanched,
and cut into pieces. Serve instantly.
Curry of Prawns and Tomatoes.
2 doz. Prawns.
1 bottle Tomato Conserve.
2 Onions.
1 oz. Butter.
£ oz. Curry Powder.
Eice.
£ gill Gravy.
6


Chop and fry the onions a good colour in the butter;
mix in the curry powder ; stir in the gravy ; pick the
prawns, and put them in, and turn in a bottle of con-
serve ; let all simmer very gently for 1 hour. Take
it up and arrange on a dish in a border of rice, and
garnish with a few fine prawns.
Mock Whitebait.
Cut some white fish of any kind into strips 1-J in.
long and in. broad; dry well in flour; put into
a frying basket; have ready some very hot fat,
plunge in the basket, and fry for 2 minutes; drain
for a minute on paper, pile high on a dish, and serve
very hot with a cut lemon, cayenne, and very thin
brown bread and butter.
Scalloped Lobster.
1 Lobster, or Tin of Lobster.
3 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
Pepper or Cayenne.
J pt. very thick White
Sauce.
1 tablespoonful Anchovy-
Sauce.
2 ozs. Butter.
Cut the lobster into neat pieces; stir the anchovy
and pepper into the white sauce, and dip each piece of
lobster into this; butter some scallop shells or a dish
on which it can be served, and sprinkle well with
bread crumbs; lay on this the lobster, cover with
crumbs, and put on the top a few small pieces of
butter. Bake in an oven, or in front of the fire, until a
good colour.


Lobster (Fried).
This is very good made with tinned lobster. Divide
into neat pieces and dip into French frying batter,
and fry in very hot fat; drain for a few minutes on
kitchen paper, pile high on a dish, and garnish with
fried parsley. The batter can be flavoured with a little
anchovy sauce.
Fish Cream.
1 lb. Cold Boiled Fisb.
3 Eggs.
1 oz. Butter.
1 gill Milk.
1 gill Cream.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
2 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
Cayenne or Pepper.
Scald the bread crumbs with the milk, chop up the
fish, and put through a mincing machine or pound in
a mortar; mix it with the bread crumbs and dissolved
butter; beat in the cream and eggs one at a time;
season nicely with parsley, pepper, and salt; press into
a buttered mould, and steam for half an hour. Serve
with bechamel sauce as an entree.
Tartlets of Dried Fish (Savoury).
i lb. Puff Pastry.
1 Dried Wbiting.
A gill Cream.
1 oz. Butter.
Cayenne or Pepper.
Line some patty pans with the pastry; boil the
whiting for a few minutes in milk, then shred up all
the meat; mix it with the cream and butter, dissolved.
The yoke of an egg may be used instead of the cream.
Season to taste. Put some of this mixture into the


patty pans, cover with a thin layer of paste, and bake
in a quick oven; brush the pastry with milk or raw
egg before baking. Serve as a savoury.
Oysters and Macaroni.
2 doz. Oysters.
J Lemon.
Pepper and Salt.
3 ozs. Macaroni.
2 ozs. Butter.
2 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
Boil the macaroni in salt and water, or weak stock,
until tender; drain all the water away; butter
a deep plate, in which it can be served, and put in
a layer of macaroni; over this the oysters; sprinkle
them well with lemon juice and a little of the oyster
liquor; then put a good layer of macaroni, seasoned
with a little pepper and salt; cover with a few
bread crumbs, and place the butter in small pieces
on the top; brown in a quick oven, and send to table
with a lemon and thin bread and butter.
Lobster in Aspic.
1 tin Lobster.
1 Cucumber.
1 qt. Aspic Jelly.
Rinse out a plain mould in cold water; pour in a
little melted aspic jelly; slice the cucumber without
removing the peel; decorate the bottom of the
mould with these; when it is set, open a tin of
lobster; pour away the liquor and cut the lobster
into small pieces; put in a layer of this, and then a
little more aspic; when this sets, another layer of
cucumber, and so on until the mould is full; put it


by for 2 or 3 hours, until quite firm; then turn
carefully out and garnish with slices of cucumber.
Salmon in Aspic Jelly.
1 tin Salmon.
1 qt. Aspic Jelly.
2 Eggs.
1 Lettuce or Small Salad.
Take a plain mould or cake tin, rinse it in cold
water; pour in a small quantity of melted aspic jelly,
and decorate with some hard-boiled egg’s, and with
DO ’
red radish and cucumber peeling, chopped very small;
when that is quite firm, rinse a smaller mould in cold
water and stand inside the other; fill up the sides
with the melted jelly, and let it stand until quite
firm; then take out the smaller mould. Open a tin
of salmon, strain away the liquor, chop slightly and
mix with about half a pint of aspic jelly (melted);
put this into the mould, and let it stand until quite
cold and firm, then turn out and garnish with hard-
boiled eggs and salad.
Salmon Cakes.
1 tin Salmon.
1 gill Water.
Cayenne or Pepper.
1 oz. Flour.
1 dessertspoonful Anchovy-
Sauce.
1 oz. Butter.
Put the butter into a saucepan, and when it is
dissolved put in the flour and cook well; pour in the
water and stir until it boils. Open the tin of salmon,
pour away the liquor, and chop the salmon slightly;
stir it into the sauce with the anchovy and pepper;


mix well, and put on a plate to cool. When cold,
make up into flat cakes about 1 in. high and 2 in.
broad; cover with egg and bread crumb, shape again,
and fry in plenty of hot fat; garnish with fried
parsley.
To Cook Dried Fish.
Put it into hot water, and boil 3 or 4 minutes,
according to thickness; take it out, rub it over with
some cold butter, and place in front of the fire, or
under the grill of a gas stove for 5 minutes. Just
before serving, break over it the yolk of a soft-boiled
egg, or send bacon rashers to table with it.
\
Whiting a la Orly.
Skin and bone the whiting, sprinkle the fillets with
lemon juice, salt, and pepper, and let them stand for
half an hour; flour them well, and fry in a little
butter. Take the bones and trimming, put them into
a saucepan with 1 gill sherry, a faggot of herbs, 1 doz.
peppercorns, and half a carrot; boil these together
for half an hour, then strain and thicken with corn-
flour. Serve this sauce in a tureen with the fish.
Fried Oysters.
1 doz. Oysters.
1 doz. Slices Bacon.
Toast.
2 ozs. Butter.
Roll each oyster up in a thin slice of bacon; put
the butter into a frying-pan; and, when it is quite


hot, put the oysters and bacon on small skewers, and
fry. Place on some hot buttered toast, and serve.
Lobster an Gratin.
1 Lobster.
1 gill Good Gravy.
Bread Crumbs.
Butter and Seasoning.
Carefully remove all the meat from the shell; clean
and trim the shell; mince the lobster, and put it
into a saucepan with the gravy and seasoning, and
make it quite hot; fill the shells with this; brush
over with clarified butter; cover well with bread
crumbs, and brown with a salamander or in front of
the fire. Serve very hot.
Potted Salmon.
1 tin Salmon,
3 teaspoonfuls Anchovy
Sauce.
3 ozs. Butter.
Pepper.
Open a tin of salmon; pour away the liquor, and
put the meat into a mortar; pound well, adding from
time to time the anchovy, butter, and seasoning. When
it is well mixed, see that it is sufficiently seasoned,
press into small pots, and cover with dissolved butter.


MEAT AND POULTRY.
Fillets of Beef Saute.
2 lbs. Fillet of Beef.
2 gill Sherry.
4 gill Ketchup.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 gill Gravy.
Lemon Juice.
Cut and trim the fillets into a nice shape; fry them
quickly in the butter, brown on both sides ; thicken the
gravy with a little cornflour, and add the sherry,
ketchup, and lemon juice ; put the fillets into this and
let them simmer very gently for 5 minutes; dish them;
boil up the gravy and pour over.
Moulded Meat.
2 lbs. Cold Boiled Meat.
3 ozs. Ham or Tongue,
Little Nutmeg.
1 gill Cream.
4 Eggs.
Salt and Pepper.
Mince the meat finely, and season nicely; stir in
2 eggs; add the cream, and make into a paste; boil
2 eggs for 15 minutes; remove the shells ; cut in slices
and arrange in a buttered mould; fill in the meat
mixture ; tie over with a cloth, and boil for 35 minutes.
Be sure that the mould is quite full, or the water will
get in and spoil the meat; turn on to a hot dish and
serve. This is a very nice entree.
Scotch Lollops.
1 lb. Lean Steak.
J Small Onion.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 gill Gravy.
Pepper and Salt.


Mince the meat and onion finely; put the butter
into a saucepan, and when dissolved turn in the meat
and onion and stir until rather brown ; pour over the
gravy; season and cover closely down ; let it simmer
slowly for 1| hours; pile high on a dish; pour the
gravy round, and garnish with sippets of toast.
Braised Fillet of Beef.
7 lbs Fillet of Beef.
2 pts. Stock,
i Turnip.
1 Bouquet Garni.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
1 Carrot.
1 Onion stuck witb 6 Cloves.
2 Tomatoes or Mushrooms.
1 rasher of Ham.
Trim the fillet and tie with tape into a good shape;
lay the ham on the bottom of the saucepan and put
the beef on it, arranging the vegetables, &c., round;
pour in the gravy; cover the saucepan closely and
stand it in the oven for 3 hours, basting from time to
time; take up the meat and put into the oven for half an
hour to brown slightly; skim and strain the gravy, and
reduce to 1 pint; dish the meat and pour this around.
Brazilian Stew,
3 lbs. Leg of Beef.
1 Carrot.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
?, gill Vinegar.
1 Onion,
Salt.
Cut the meat into small pieces, and dip each piece
into the vinegar, and lay in a buttered stewpan; slice
in the carrot and onion, and any other vegetable at
hand, and the peppercorns ; cover closely, and let it
simmer very gently; arrange in a dish, strain over the
gravy, and garnish with mashed potatoes.


\
Kidneys a la Brochette.
6 Kidneys.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
1 teaspoonful Lemon Juice.
3 ozs. Butter.
Pepper and Salt.
Put the kidneys into hot water for a few minutes;
then skin them and split open, without severing; dis-
solve 1 oz, butter, and season with pepper and salt;
dip the kidneys into this, and thread them on a fine
skewer; broil over a quick fire; mix together the
parsley (very finely chopped), the lemon juice, and
butter ; make into a roll, and divide into six pieces ;
when the kidneys are cooked put a piece of this
butter in the opening, and serve very hot. The
kidneys should be rather underdone.
/
Rechauffe of Mutton.
Slices of Cold Mutton.
I pt. Gravy.
1 Onion stuck with 6 Cloves.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
Lay the slices of meat in a baking dish, put in the
onion and peppercorns, and pour over the gravy; the
meat should be just covered with gravy; cover the
baking dish down, and stand in a cool oven for 2
hours or longer; arrange the meat on the dish, and
strain over the gravy. Serve with mashed potatoes.
This will be found most appetizing.
Sea Pie.
2 lbs. Steak.
1 lb. Flour.
Pepper and Salt.
2 pt. Gravy or Water.
2 lb. Suet.


Cut the steak into small pieces, season with pepper
and salt, arrange in a stewpan, and pour over the
gravy or water; chop the suet finely, stir into the
flour, and season with salt; mix into a dough with
about half a pint of water; roll out the crust exactly to
fit the stewpan ; cover the meat with this, put on the
lid, and when it has boiled up, stand it where it will
cook steadily for 2 hours ; take off the crust, put the
meat and gravy in a dish, and cover with the crust.
Stewed Rabbit.
1 Eabbit.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 Carrot.
A oz. Flour.
I pt. Gravy or Water.
1 Onion.
A doz. Peppercorns.
Put the butter into a stewpan ; cut up the rabbit,
and when the butter is hot put in the joints and fry
for a few minutes; take out of the fat and drain on
paper ; slice and fry the onion and peppercorns ; then
stir in the flour, and when brown add the gravy and
stir until it boils ; then put back the rabbit and stew
gently for 1 hour, or longer if the rabbit is old; pile the
joints on a dish; skim and boil up the gravy, and strain
over it; garnish with tomatoes or other vegetables.
✓
Fricassee of Fowl.
1 Fowl.
1 Onion.
1 pt. Stock.
1 oz. Flour.
1 doz. Mushrooms.
£ Lemon.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
Salt.


Cut the fowl into joints; put them into warm water
or stock, just enough to cover them; add an onion
stuck with two cloves and the peppercorns; simmer
for 10 minutes; take out the pieces of chicken and
prepare a sauce ; put the butter into a clean stewpan,
and when it is dissolved stir in the flour; when well
mixed add the liquor in which the fowl was cooked ;
stir until it boils; lay in the pieces fowl, and simmer
very gently for three-quarters of an hour ; blanch the
mushrooms for five minutes; put them into a saucepan
with the juice of half a lemon and a little butter ;
cook till soft; when the fowl is quite tender, dish it
and pour the sauce over; put the mushrooms in the
centre; garnish with fried bread or crayfish.
Liver Fricassee.
1 Calf’s Liver.
\ an Onion.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
.t pt. Gravy.
Yolks of 2 Eggs.
1 oz. Flour.
Lemon Juice.
Wash the liver and cut it into thin slices ; toss it in
the butter; take it out and drain on kitchen paper;
chop the onion and fry, with the peppercorns, a
pale brown; sprinkle over the flour; pour on the
gravy; put back the liver and simmer until tender;
pile high on a hot dish; strain the gravy into a clean
saucepan; put in the lemon juice; beat in the yolks of
the eggs, one at a time; stir over the fire until it
thickens, then pour over the liver.


Stewed Breast of Veal.
1 Breast of Yeal.
A lb. Savoury Forcemeat.
1 oz. Flour.
1 doz. Oysters.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
1 oz. Butter,
Bone the veal, and make a stock of the bones with
some vegetables ; stuff the veal with savoury force-
meat ; put it into a saucepan with the peppercorns,
cover with stock, and let it simmer very gently
for two hours. Put the butter into a small sauce-
pan, stir in the flour, and make a sauce with
some of the liquor that the veal was cooked in.
Blanch the oysters, cook them for a few minutes in
the sauce. Dish the veal and pour this sauce
over it. Garnish with slices of lemon and forcemeat
balls.
Stewed Steak.
lbs. Bump Steak.
1 Onion.
1 oz. Butter.
Salt.
f pt. Gravy or Water.
1 Carrot.
Flour.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
Trim the steak ; put the butter into a stewpan and
fry the steak a nice colour. When about half done,
put in the carrot, peppercorns, and onion; when these
are brown stir in the flour, then pour in the gravy or
water and stir until it boils, cover over and simmer
very gently for 2 hours; take up the steak, put it on
a hot dish, remove the fat from the gravy, and pour
it over. Garnish with carrots and turnips that have
been boiled separately.


Moulded Calf's Head.
J Calf’s Head.
J lb. Ham.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
3 Eggs.
J pt. Good Gravy.
Salt and Pepper.
Cut some slices from a cooked calf’s head and some
slices of ham ; season the meat with pepper, salt, and
finely chopped parsley. Well butter a mould and
line it with the eggs, which have been boiled hard
and cut in slices; fill the mould with calf’s head,
ham, and eggs in alternate layers ; pour in half a
pint of good gravy that will jelly when cold ; cover
the mould with a paste of flour and water, and bake
in a moderate oven for about 35 minutes ; remove the
paste, but leave the meat in the mould till it is cold
and firm, then turn out carefully and garnish with
salad.
Yeal ami Ham Pie (Very Good).
2 lbs. Veal.
Jib. Ham.
1 doz. Oysters.
Pepper and Salt.
2 Eggs.
2 Sweetbreads.
J pt. Good Gravy.
1 lb. Puff Pastry.
Blanch the sweetbreads and cut into thin slices.
Cut the veal into slices, dip each piece in the season-
ing and roll a piece of sweetbread and veal together;
pile high in the dish, with layers of ham, hard-
boiled eggs, and oysters; pour in a little gravy,
cover with a nice light pastry and bake for 1| to
2 hours. If the pie gets too brown, cover with a
buttered paper; remove the ornament from the top
and pour in some good gravy, and serve. If the pie is


to be eaten cold, dissolve a little gelatine in the gravy
so that it may be in a jelly when cold,
Boudiuetts of Cold Meat.
J lb. Cold Meat.
£ lb. Potatoes.
2 Mushrooms.
1 oz. Butter.
Salt and Pepper.
Egg and Bread Crumb.
Hot Fat.
Take some cold meat and mince it finely ; boil the
potatoes, dry them, and rub through a sieve; chop
the mushrooms, mix them with the meat and season-
ing ; put the butter into a stewpan, and when it is
dissolved put in the potatoes and meat and mix well;
turn on to a plate to cool; then make up into cork-
shaped pieces, egg and bread crumb, and fry in hot
fat; garnish with fried parsley. A little bacon or
ham may be used instead of the mushrooms.
Curried Fowl.
1 Fowl.
1 pt. Stock.
Salt.
2 Onions.
2 oz. Curry Powder.
1$ ozs. Butter.
Cut the fowl into joints; put the butter into the
saucepan, slice in the onions, and fry into pulp ;
lay in the joints of fowl, and fry a good colour; then
add the curry powder and flour, season with salt, and
add, by degrees, the stock ; simmer very gently for
an hour; take out the joints of fowl, shape nicely,
and arrange on a hot dish ; boil up the gravy, flavour
with lemon juice, pour over the fowl, and garnish
with boiled rice.


Pressed Chicken.
1 Chicken.
J lb. Ham.
1 Onion stuck with Cloves.
1 oz. Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
Salt and Pepper.
oz. Gelatine.
Cut up a chicken, and boil, until tender, in stock
or water, with an onion and 6 cloves; take out
the chicken, skin, and cut all the meat from the
bones; put the trimmings, &c., into the liquor in
which the chicken has been cooked, and let it boil
quickly, without the lid; chop up the chicken and
ham, and season nicely ; strain about 1 pint of liquor
into a clean saucepan; thicken with the butter and
flour, and dissolve a little gelatine in it, and mix in
the meat; rinse a mould in cold water, press in the
mixture, and let it stand until cold ; turn on to a dish
and garnish with small salad and beet-root.
Haricot Mutton.
3 lbs. Neck Mutton.
2 Onions.
1 Carrot.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
1 Turnip.
1 oz. Butter.
1 oz. Flour.
pts. Stock.
Salt.
Trim the fat from a neck of mutton, and cut into
neat chops ; put the butter into a saucepan ; when hot
lay in the chops, and fry quickly; they should be
brown, but not cooked much; take them out, drain
away some of the fat; put in the vegetables and
peppercorns ; when these are brown stir in the flour,
and then add the gravy ; stir it till it boils ; then put


back the chops, and let all simmer very slowly for
2 hours ; shake the saucepan occasionally ; pile the
chops on a hot dish, and remove all the fat from the
gravy with kitchen paper; pour the gravy round the
dish, and garnish with vegetables cut in strips and
boiled separately.
Minced Veal and Poached Eggs.
2 lbs. Cold Veal,
f pt. Stock.
Slice Toast.
3 Eggs.
1 oz. Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
Pepper and Salt.
Make a nice stock with the bones and trimmings of
the veal and some vegetables ; strain, and take off the
fat; put the butter into a stewpan; when it is dis-
solved, stir in the flour; cook for a few minutes; add
the stock, and stir until it boils; season nicely; mince
the veal finely, and when the gravy is cool put in the
meat, and simmer very gently for 15 minutes; some
cold forcemeat balls are nice warmed in the gravy;
have ready a slice of buttered toast; dish the veal
on this, lay on the top 3 poached eggs, and garnish
with forcemeat balls or lemon slices.
Fried Ox Foot,
1 Ox Foot.
Pepper and Salt.
Egg and Bread Crumb.
Hot Fat.
An ox foot, from which jelly has been made. Re-
move all the bones and press the meat into a pie dish,
seasoning it with pepper and salt; let it stand until
7
THE KINGS WOOD COOKERY BOOK.


quite cold and firm; cut it into slices and trim nicely ;
cover them well with egg and fine bread crumbs, and
fry in very hot fat; drain for a few minutes on
kitchen paper. Arrange on a hot dish, and garnish
with fried parsley.
Fillets of Beef and Bearnaise Sauce.
lbs. Fillet of Beef.
\ pt. Brown Sauce.
1 dessertspoonful Tarragon
Vinegar.
3 Eggs.
1 tablespoonful White Sauce.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
1 teaspoonful Shallot.
Salt and White Pepper.
Cut the fillet of beef into small cutlets, about the size
of a teacup, trim them nicely, and fry a pale brown in
hot butter; they should not be cooked too much ;
drain them for a few minutes on kitchen paper; dish
them on mashed potatoes, and pour round them a
good, thick brown sauce; put the shallot in a small
stewpan, with the vinegar, and let the vinegar boil
away; then put in the white sauce and the yolks of
the eggs, one at a time; cook the yolks thoroughly,
but do not let them boil; take the saucepan from the
fire, put the butter in, in small pieces, and, lastly, stir
in the parsley. Heap this sauce in the centre of the
fillets and serve.
American Hash.
1 lb. Cold Meat.
1 lb. Potatoes.
1 gill Gravy.
1 Onion.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 gill Milk.
Pepper and Salt.


Mash the potatoes, and mince the meat finely; chop
the onion; put the butter into a fryingpan, and when
it is hot put in the onion and fry a good colour;
add the meat and potatoes; stir them about in the
pan, pouring over, from time to time, the milk and
gravy; season with pepper and salt; when it is
thoroughly hot heap on to a dish, and put a small
piece of butter on the top. Serve very hot.
Savoury Hash.
Cut all the meat from the remains of a joint; put
the hones and trimmings into a saucepan, with an
onion, carrot, peppercorns, &c., and cover well with
cold water; boil for two hours, strain into a basin
and remove all the fat; fry an onion in 1 oz. of butter ;
slice in a carrot, tomato, or mushroom and piece
of turnip; stir in a large teaspoonful of cornflour; pour
in about 1 pint of stock made from the bones, and let
all boil for 10 minutes; cut the meat for the hash
into small pieces, put into a saucepan, strain on the
gravy, and let the meat simmer very gently for half
an hour ; arrange on a hot dish, and garnish with
carrots and turnips cut into fancy shapes and boiled
separately, or with mashed potatoes.
Shepherd’s Pie.
1 lb. Cold Meat.
1% lbs. Potatoes.
1 oz. Butter.
£ gill Milk.
1 gill Gravy.
Pepper and Salt.


Boil the potatoes and rub them through a sieve ;
put the butter, milk, and seasoning into a stewpan,
and when it is hot put in the potatoes, and mix well;
cut the meat into small pieces, and arrange in a pie
dish ; pour in the gravy; put the potatoes on the top,
to form a crust; smooth over with a knife; put the
pie in the oven and bake for three-quarters of an
hour.
Gateau of Cold Meat.
1 lb. Cold Meat.
1 Shallot.
1 oz. Butter.
1 tablespoonful Brown
Bread Crumbs.
1 gill Stock.
2 teaspoonfuls Parsley.
3 Eggs.
Pepper and Salt.
Well grease a plain tin and sprinkle with bread
crumbs; mince the meat finely, and put it into a
basin; chop the parsley and shallot, and mix with
the meat; season with pepper and salt ; beat the
yolks of 2 and 1 whole egg with the stock, and strain
it over the meat; mix well; put into the prepared
tin and bake for an hour; turn it carefully on to a
hot dish, and pour round some nice gravy.
Croquettes of Meat.
I lb. Short Crust.
\ lb. Cold Meat.
1 gill Stock,
oz. Flour.
J oz. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Parsley or two
Mushrooms.
Pepper and Salt.
Chop the meat finely ; mix it with the parsley or
mushrooms and seasoning; put the butter into a stew


pan, and when it is dissolved stir in the flour and
make into a smooth sauce; put in the meat, and mix
well; then turn on to a plate to cool; roll the pastry
out very thin, and cut into small rounds; put some
meat in the centre; wet the edge with water; fold
over and press together; dip into a well-beaten egg;
cover with fine crumbs, and fry in hot fat; dish on
a napkin, and garnish with fried parsley.
Rissoles.
y lb. Cold Meat.
1 small Onion.
w teaspoonful Parsley
\ oz. Butter.
oz. Flour.
1 gill Gravy.
Pepper and Salt.
Peel and chop the onion finely ; put the butter into
a small stewpan, and when it is hot put in the onion
and fry a light brown ; stir in the flour, and when it
is quite smooth pour in the gravy and stir until it
boils; chop the meat and parsley finely; put into
the saucepan with the seasoning, and mix well;
then turn on to a plate till cold; roll it into halls ;
egg and bread-crumb them; put into a frying basket,
and fry in hot fat; garnish with fried parsley.
Dry Curry.
Slices Cold Meat.
1 oz. Butter.
1 tablespoonful Curry
Powder.
Salt.
Cut some neat slices of cold meat; mix some curry
powder and salt together; dip the mutton in this ;


put the butter into a fryingpan; when it is hot put
in the mutton, and fry a nice brown; pile high on a
dish, and serve in a border of boiled rice.
Savoury Mutton.
1 lb. Cold Mutton.
3 Mushrooms or Tomatoes.
7-r pt. Gravy.
1 oz. Butter.
J oz. Flour.
Salt and Pepper.
Cut the meat into neat slices; cut up the mush-
rooms ; put the butter into a fryingpan, and fry the
meat and mushrooms for 2 or 3 minutes; add
the gravy and seasoning; mix the flour with a little
cold water or milk to a smooth paste ; stir this in, and
continue stirring until it boils; let it simmer very
gently for 10 minutes; place the meat on a hot dish ;
pour over the gravy and mushrooms. Serve in a
border of mashed potatoes.
Mince.
1 lb. Cold Meat.
J pt. Gravy.
1 teaspoonful Cornflour.
1 oz. Butter.
1 Onion.
1 Carrot.
Pepper and Salt.
Mince the meat finely ; put the butter into a stew-
pan, and when it is dissolved slice in the onion, and
fry a light brown; add the carrot and the cornflour ;
pour in the gravy, and stir until it boils; let it boil
for 15 minutes; then strain into a clean saucepan;
season the meat, and put it into the gravy; let it
simmer, but not boil, for 10 minutes. Put it on a hot
dish, and serve with sippets of toast.


Irish Stew and Oysters.
4 lbs. Neck of Mutton.
1 doz. Oysters.
2 Onions.
2 lbs. Potatoes.
1J pts. Stock.
Pepper and Salt.
Take 3 or 4 lbs. middle neck of mutton, and cut it
into chops ; slice the onions and potatoes ; put a layer
of potatoes at the bottom of the saucepan, then one of
meat, and some onion and seasoning ; continue in this
way, laying potatoes, meat, and onions alternately until
all are used ; then pour in the stock ; let it come to
the boil, and simmer very gently for 2 hours. Shake
it often while cooking. Just before-serving put in
a dozen oysters, and toss over the fire for a few
minutes. Pile on a dish, and serve very hot.
Yale Pie.
4 lbs. Steak.
2 Chickens.
Salt and Pepper.
U lbs. Pastry.
J pt. Meat Jelly.
1 doz. Oysters.
6 Eggs.
1 doz. Mushrooms.
J pt. Ale.
Cut the steak into pieces and lay it at the bottom
of a pie dish; cut up the chickens and place them on
the top ; put over them the oysters and mushrooms,
season well, and pour in the ale and gravy; cover with
paste, and bake for 2|- hours. This is a favourite
American dish.
Pork Cutlets.
Loin of Pork.
2 Onions.
| oz. Gelatine.
J pt. Thick Tomato Sauce.
Salt and Pepper.


Cut the meat from a loin of pork, divide into
cutlets, trim off the fat; put some butter into a frying-
pan, and fry the cutlets a good colour ; fry the onions,
put them on in a little water with the bones and
trimmings, and boil for 2 hours; make a strong
gravy, strain it, let it get cold, and remove all the fat;
put it on again, dissolve the gelatine in it, and
reduce to half glaze ; brush the cutlets over with
this when cooked. Arrange nicely on a dish, and
pour round them some tomato sauce.
Pork Collops.
1 lb. Cold Eoast Pork.
3 Apples.
2 Onions.
1 gill Sberry.
2 ozs. Sugar.
Cut some neat slices from a cold leg of pork, take
off the fat, and season with pepper and salt; broil over
a clear fire until brown, and serve with a sauce ; for
this mince the apples and onions, put them into a
saucepan with the sherry and sugar, and simmer very
gently for an hour, stirring frequently; place the
collops round the dish and pour the sauce round
them. Serve very hot.
Sheep’s Head Pie.
2 Heads.
1 dessertspoonful of Parsley.
1 lb. Pastry.
Pepper and Salt.
Clean two heads, cover with water, and boil until
quite tender; take them up and bone them ; boil the


liquor until it will jelly, and let all get cold; slice
the meat and tongues, place them in a pie-dish, and
sprinkle with parsley; when the dish is full put in
a little jelly, and cover with pastry, and bake for
hours; melt some jelly and pour in. Stand by
until cold. It is then ready to serve.
Pigeon Pie (Cold).
4 Pigeons.
1 lb. Sausage Meat.
J lb. Bacon.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
1 lb. good Pastry.
1 lb. Pump Steak.
1 pt. Gravy.
1 glass of Brandy (if liked).
Salt and Pepper.
Slice the bacon and steak into thin fillets, and lay
them at the bottom of the dish; sprinkle over some
chopped parsley and seasoning ; stuff the pigeons with
sausage-meat; lay them in and cover with steak ;
pour in a little gravy, and cover the dish with pastry;
bake in a moderate oven from 1| to 2 hours; make
the rest of the gravy hot, and if not in a jelly dissolve
in it half an ounce of gelatine ; add the brandy, and
pour into the pie. Stand by until cold.
Mutton Pie.
2 lbs. Cold Mutton.
1 lb. Potatoes.
1 lb. Short Pastry.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
Pepper and Salt.
1 pt. Gravy.
Cut the mutton and potatoes into slices; lay them
in a dish ; season each layer with parsley, pepper and
salt; when the dish is full pour in the gravy, and


cover with some short pastry; bake in a moderate
oven for 1 hour; brush the pie over with water or
egg before baking.
Friture de Yean.
1 lb. Yeal.
1 doz. Oysters.
Hot Lard.
Pepper and Salt.
Cut the veal into strips about 2 inches wide and
3 inches long, and fry in hot lard ; when nearly done
cut the oysters into small pieces and put them in, and
stir all together; season with pepper and salt and a
little lemon juice. Serve hot, with or without toast.
Stewed Kidneys and Macaroni.
6 Kidneys.
1 lb. Macaroni.
■| oz. Butter.
| oz. Flour.
1 dessertspoonful Parsley.
■| pt. Gravy,
Pepper and Salt.
Lemon Juice.
Skin the kidneys; cut them into slices; put the
butter into a fryingpan, and when it is hot put in the
kidneys and fry them for 2 or 3 minutes, sprinkling
over them the parsley ; mix in the flour ; pour in the
gravy, and when it boils draw it back where it will
simmer very gently; cover it with a lid or plate
for 10 minutes; boil the macaroni in salt and water
until tender ; arrange the kidneys in the centre of a
dish; put the lemon juice and seasoning into the
gravy ; boil up, and strain over the kidneys, putting
the macaroni round the dish as a garnish.


Epigrams.
1 lb. Cold Meat.
£ lb. Savoury Meat.
Frying Batter.
Cut some cold meat into neat slices, and spread
with any kind of sausage meat, or Strassburg tinned
meat will do; cover each piece with batter, and
fry a good colour in very hot fat; pile high on
a dish; garnish with fried parsley. This can be
served as an entree. A plainer, but very nice dish,
suitable for breakfast or luncheon, can be made by
omitting the savoury meat, and seasoning the slices
with pepper and salt and frying them in batter.
Sweetbreads Roasted.
2 Sweetbreads.
1 Egg.
Bread Crumbs.
1 oz. Butter.
1 dessertspoonful of Lemon
Juice.
Lemon Slices.
Trim off the sweetbreads and boil them gently in
water or stock for about 1 hour; when they are
cool, cover them well with egg and bread crumbs;
run skewers through them, so that they can be
easily turned, and cook until they are a nice
brown, either in the oven or in front of the fire ; place
them on a hot dish; draw out the skewers ; melt
the butter in a saucepan ; add the lemon juice ; mix
and pour this over the sweetbreads. Garnish with
slices of lemon.


Chaud Froid of Chicken.
1 Chicken.
J pt. White Sauce.
h pt. Aspic Jelly.
1 gill Mayonnaise Sauce.
Salad.
Make half a pint of good thick white sauce, and
stir into it half a gill of melted aspic jelly; cut a cold
roast or boiled chicken into neat joints; remove the
skin, and dip each piece into the sauce and well cover
it; put them in a cold place until firm; decorate them
with pieces of cucumber and radish peel; chop a little
aspic and arrange it on a dish ; place on this the pieces
of chicken; prepare some salad and mix with it about
1 gill Mayonnaise sauce ; put it in the centre, and
finish off with little more aspic.
Ox Foot Stew.
1 Ox Foot.
J pt. Brown Sauce.
2 Carrots.
1 Turnip.
Salt and Pepper.
An ox foot, from which jelly has been made, will do
nicely for this dish ; remove all the bones and cut the
meat into neat pieces; place it in a saucepan, and
pour over about half a pint of brown sauce; let it
get quite hot; cut up some turnips and carrots into
small pieces, and boil them separately in salt and
water; dish the foot, pour over the sauce, and garnish
with the vegetables.
Savoury Stew.
1 lb. Ox Kidney.
1 lb. Tomatoes.
Pepper and Salt.
1 lb. Potatoes.
2 Onions.
1 oz. Butter.


Dissolve the butter in a saucepan ; cut the kidney,
potatoes, onions, and tomatoes into thin slices, and put
them into a saucepan in alternate layers until all are
used ; season nicely with pepper and salt; simmer very
gently for 1 hour; arrange on a hot dish ; boil up the
gravy, pour round, and serve.
Liver and Bacon.
1 lb. Liver.
J lb. Bacon.
J oz. Flour.
oz. Butter.
pt. Gravy.
Lemon Juice and Parsley.
Wash the liver well, and cut into neat, small
slices; mix some flour, pepper, and salt on a plate,
and dip each piece into it; fry the bacon first,
and keep it hot; put the liver into the fat and
fry a good colour; arrange nicely on a hot dish
alternately with the bacon; drain away the fat from
the pan; put in the butter and flour, and stir about
until brown; season nicely; put in the lemon juice
and parsley, and strain over the liver and bacon.
Beaf Steak and Kidney Pudding.
£ lb. Suet.
Salt and Pepper.
1 gill of Water.
1J lbs. Steak.
2 Kidneys.
Very small piece of Onion.
1 lb. Flour.
Chop the suet finely; mix it with the flour; add a
pinch of salt, and with the water make into a stiff
paste; butter a basin; roll out the crust and line it;
cut the meat and kidneys into small pieces, and fill the


basin; put in a very small piece of onion; season
nicely; pour in half a gill of water; cover over ; dip
a cloth in boiling water; tie down the pudding; put
into boiling water and boil 3 hours. Turn carefully
out of the basin and serve.
Steak and Kidney Pie.
2 lbs. Lean Steak.
2 Kidneys.
1 lb. Pastry.
Pepper and Salt.
Cut the steak into thin slices; mix some flour,
pepper, and salt on a plate, and dip each piece of
steak into this; cut a small piece of kidney, and, if
liked, fat too, and roll up in the steak; pile high in a
dish; pour round half a gill of water or gravy; cover
with crust; ornament the top ; brush over with egg or
water, and bake in a good oven for 2 hours ; remove
the centre ornament, and pour in half pint of gravy
before serving.
Galantine of Turkey.
1 Turkey.
1 Tongue.
1 qt. Aspic Jelly.
2 lbs. Sausage Meat.
1 lb. Bacon.
Glaze.
Bone the turkey ; boil the tongue, skin it, and cut
away the roots. Put these trimmings through a sausage
machine, and then mix in with the sausage meat; lay
the turkey open, and put on a layer of sausage meat
and some bacon cut in strips; then put in the tongue
and pack all round with sausage meat and bacon;


roll up the turkey, tie in a cloth, and boil slowly for
2\ to 3 hours, according to size; take up and press
under weights until the next day ; remove the cloth,
glaze well, and garnish with chopped aspic jelly.
Russian Tartlets.
7 Dinner Rolls,
pt. Aspic Jelly.
Slices of Cold Chicken.
Celery.
The dinner rolls should be very small, not more than
half the size of ordinary dinner rolls ; scoop out all
the centre; take the skin off the chicken, and cut it
into small dice; cut the jelly into pieces about the
same size; split up the white part of the celery and
cut small; mix these together, sprinkle with cayenne,
and fill the rolls. Arrange on a napkin and serve.
Cassolettes of Chicken.
J lb. Macaroni.
\ Chicken.
pt. Thick White Sauce.
Slices of Ham or Tongue.
pt. nicely flavoured White
Sauce.
Boil the macaroni until tender; cut into pieces
about |-inch broad; butter some cassolette moulds; cut
a small piece of ham or tongue about the size of
sixpence, and place it at the bottom; then fill the
mould all round with macaroni, taking each piece
up on a larding needle and fitting it in; mince the
chicken and ham or tongue finely; season, and mix
with some thick white sauce ; fill the moulds with this


mixture, stand in a saucepan of boiling water and
steam for half an hour; turn carefully on to an entree
dish, and pour round them some nicely flavoured
white sauce. Cassolettes may be made with veal.
Either the chicken or veal should be previously cooked.
Mutton Cutlets a la Reforme.
7 Cutlets.
2 ozs. Butter.
J lb. Ham.
3 Eggs.
A pt. Good Brown Sauce.
Trim away all the fat from the cutlets, and scrape
the hone clean, about 1 inch from the end; chop a
little ham very fine, and mix it with the bread crumbs ;
beat up the yolk of an egg with half an ounce of dis-
solved butter and a teaspoonful of water; dip the cut-
lets in this, and cover with the ham and bread crumbs ;
then fry a good colour in hot butter ; take the whites
of three eggs, squeeze them through a cloth into a
buttered jar, stand it in boiling water, and steam until
firm; turn on to a board and cut into strips about 1
inch long and one-eighth of an inch broad; take the
lean part of the ham and cut into pieces the same
size; put these into some good brown sauce, and make
hot. Pour this over the cutlets, which should be dished
in a circle. They are then ready for serving.
Fillets of Veal Braised.
7 or 9 Fillets of Yeal.
1 pt. Stock.
J pt. Brown Sauce.
Onions, Carrots, Celery,
and Peppercorns.
£ pt. Peas.


Place the fillets in a saucepan; put in plenty of
vegetables, and a little stock ; simmer very gently for
1 hour; take up and place them on a baking sheet
to brown in the oven ; glaze them; dish on mashed
potatoes, and pour round the brown sauce ; heap the
peas, which have been nicely boiled and should be
of a good colour, in the centre.
Rolled Mutton.
4 or 5 lbs. Neck of Mutton.
Jr lb. Yeal Seasoning.
1 pt. Brown Sauce.
Julienne Yegetables.
Trim off the fat from the meat, and bone it; lay on
the seasoning, and roll up; sew up securely; put it
into a cloth and place it in 2 quarts stock, with some
vegetables, and stew gently for 2| to 3 hours take it
up, draw out the cotton it was sewn with ; put it on
a hot dish, glaze the top, and pour round some
good brown sauce; it may be garnished with Julienne
vegetables.
Braised Veal.
Breast of Yeal.
1 lb. Fat Bacon
lb. Yeal Seasoning.
£ pt. Brown Sauce.
Onions, Carrots, Turnip,
Celery, Peppercorns.
Bone the veal; lay on the seasoning; roll up, and
sew in the stuffing, lard with fat bacon, and place in
a stewpan ; if you have no stock, pack the saucepan
with the hones and trimmings of veal, and plenty of
vegetables, and pour on 3 pints of hot water; season
with salt and peppercorns; cover over; place some hot
8


ashes on the saucepan lid, and let it simmer very
gently for 2J to 3 hours; take up, and brown in
the oven, or with a salamander; pour round the
sauce, and garnish with peas or Julienne vegetables.
Soubise Mutton Cutlets,
7 or 9 Cutlets.
1 qt. Stock.
£ gill Cream or Milk,
3 Onions.
l|-ozs. Butter.
1 oz. Flour.
Trim the cutlets and lard them; arrange in a sauce-
pan with the stock and plenty of vegetables, and
stew very gently for 1 hour. Take them up, glaze
them, and arrange on a dish; thicken the liquor
in which they were boiled with a teaspoonful of corn-
flour and reduce till quite thick ; pour this round the
cutlets. Boil the onions till tender and rub them
through a hair sieve. Put the butter into a saucepan,
and when it is dissolved stir in the flour and add the
cream or milk; put in the onion puree, season with
salt and white pepper, and when thick put this in
the centre of the cutlets.
Mutton Cutlets a la St. James.
7 or 9 Cutlets.
ozs. Butter,
1 oz. Flour.
1 gill Milk.
1 Egg.
Slices of Chicken or Yeal
and Ham.
i pt. Sauce.
Julienne Vegetables.
Braise 4 lbs. or 5 lbs. neck of mutton; when cold cut
7or 9 cutlets from it, and trim them nicely; make ‘ a
panada of the flour, milk, and butter; mince the


chicken and ham, and mix it together; put the
panada into a mortar with this and the yolk of an
egg, and pound well. Spread this mixture evenly over
the cutlets, brush over with dissolved butter, and
bake them for about 10 minutes. Arrange on a dish,
pour round them a nice sauce, and fill in the centre
with Julienne vegetables warmed in a little melted
aspic jelly.
Fillets of Beef a la Francaise.
7 Fillets of Beef.
1 oz. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
Potato Chips.
Glaze.
Lemon Juice.
1 gill Strong Gravy.
Trim the fillets nicely and fry in hot butter •
cut seven small pieces fat, and either fry or
cook them in the oven. When the fillets are done,
take them up and keep hot. Pour some strong gravy
into the pan and boil for a few minutes. Season the
fillets with pepper and salt, glaze them, arrange on a
dish, and put on each fillet a piece of fat and a small
piece of Maitre d’Hotel butter, made with the parsley,
butter, and lemon juice; pour round the gravy,
and fill in the centre with potato chips.
Devilled Meat.
Some thin slices of Cold
Meat, Fowl, or Kidney.
1 teaspoonful Mustard.
2 teaspoonfuls Worcester
Sauce.
2 teaspoonfuls Ketchup.
1 teaspoonful Vinegar.
1 teaspoonful Salad Oil or
Butter.
1 teaspoonful Lemon Juice
J gill Claret or Burgundy.


Put the meat on a dish, mix all the ingredients
well together, and pour over it. Set the dish in the
oven for 15 minutes, and baste the meat well with the
sauce. Serve very hot.
Pressed Beef.
8 lbs. Brisket of Beef.
Vegetables.
Aspic Jelly.
Glaze.
Have a nice square joint of corned beef ; take out the
bones and tie up securely; put it on in cold water, with
the bones, carrots, onions, and peppercorns; when it
boils up skim well, and simmer very slowly for 3
hours; take it up, and press under heavy weights
until the next day; then trim away the ragged
parts, glaze nicely, and decorate with aspic jelly.
Curry of Cold Meat.
1 lb. Cold Meat,
i pt. Gravy.
1 Apple.
1 Onion.
Little Mulligatawny Paste.
1 dessertspoonful Curry-
Powder.
1 teaspoonful Cornflour.
1 oz. Butter.
Salt.
Peel the apple and onion ; slice them up and fry a
good colour in the butter; then stir in the curry
powder, paste, and flour ; add the gravy, and stir until
it boils; let it boil slowly for 10 minutes; cut the
meat into small pieces, let there be some fat with it;
lay it in a clean saucepan, and strain the gravy over
it; simmer very gently for 1 hour or longer; arrange
the meat on a dish, pour over the gravy, and serve in
a border of rice.


Boiled Mutton.
6or 7 lbs. Middle Neck of I 2 Onions.
Mutton. I pt. Parsley Sauce.
Remove the pith from the bones, and see that the
meat is well jointed ; put it into boiling water, throw
in some salt, and skim well; draw it from the fire,
and simmer very gently for quite 1| hours; then
take it up and pour over the parsley sauce. If turnips
are served with the meat, they can be boiled in the
same saucepan. A little rice or tapioca is nice to
thicken the broth. If it is to be served as soup,
remove the fat and sprinkle in some parsley.
Stewed Chops. —No. 1.
3 or 4 Chump Chops.
1 oz. Bread Crumbs.
Pepper and Salt.
\ pt. Gravy.
I- Carrot.
1 small Onion.
Trim all the fat from the chops; butter a saucepan,
and lay them in ; mince the onion, and cut the carrot
into slices; put these on the chops, and pour over the
gravy. When it has boiled up draw on one side and
simmer very gently for 2 hours. About half an hour
before serving remove the fat and put in the bread
crumbs; pile the chops on a very hot dish, put the
vegetables round, and pour over the gravy.
Stewed Chops.—No. 2.
6 Chops.
2 Onions.
11- pts. Water.
1 Carrot.
1 Turnip.
Parsley.
1 oz. Tapioca.


The chops should be cut from the leg; trim away
the skin, and make them a nice shape ; put them into
hot water, and when they boil throw in some salt and
skim well; then put in the vegetables, which have
been cut up very small; simmer very gently for 1|
hours ; about a quarter of an hour before serving put
in the tapioca; take up the chops and put them on
a hot dish ; boil up the liquor, and if not good
enough, reduce by boiling fast without the lid; pour
this, with the vegetables, over the meat, and garnish
with some very finely chopped parsley.
Brawn.
1 Pig’s Head.
2 lbs. Gravy Beef.
3 qts. Water.
2 Onions.
1 Bouquet Garni.
2 Carrots.
40 Peppercorns.
Wash the pig’s head thoroughly, and put it on in
cold water; when it boils skim well, and boil gently
for 3 hours, or until the meat will drop from the
bones; take it up, cut the meat olf, and put the bones
into the saucepan again; season the liquor nicely, and
let it boil fast until it will jelly; skin the tongue;
cut this, the head, and beef into pieces, and arrange in a
brawn tin or pie-dish; strain the liquor over it, and
stand until the next day. Turn out carefully and
garnish with salad.
Galantine of Chicken.
1 Chicken.
1J lbs. Sausage Meat.
2 rashers Bacon.
1 pt. Aspic Jelly-
Glaze.


Bone the chicken and lay it open; cut the bacon
into long strips and lay it on, then the sausage meat,
then some more bacon; roll it up; tie in a cloth and
put into a large saucepan with the chicken bones,
trimmings of meat or poultry, and some vegetables;
boil slowly 2 hours ; take it up, but do not take it out
of the cloth, and press under weights till the next
day; then remove the cloth, glaze nicely, and garnish
it with chopped aspic jelly.
Creme a la Volaille.
1 Chicken.
J pt. White Sauce.
1 gill Aspic Jelly.
1 gill Cream.
3 ozs. Ham.
Pepper and Salt.
Pound the white meat of a chicken, and rub it
through a sieve; mix with it some very nicely-
flavoured white sauce and melted aspic jelly and
cream; season with pepper and salt; rinse some
small moulds with melted aspic jelly ; half fill with
this mixture, and stand in ice until firm; mince
some ham or tongue very finely; sprinkle this into
the half-filled moulds, and fill up with the cream ;
stand again in ice until set; then turn on to an
entree dish and garnish with truffles, trefoil, and
aspic jelly.
medallions a la St. James.
Yeal or Chicken.
J pt. thick White Sauce.
Tongue or Ham.
Salad.
Aspic Jelly.


Cut into oval shapes some cold dressed veal or
chicken, melt some aspic, dip each piece into it, and
cover with a round of ham or tongue ; when this is
firm dip into very thick white sauce, and cover well;
when cold set the medallions in aspic, and decorate
with cucumber and radish peeling cut into stars;
let it stand until quite set; then cut into medal-
lions, and dish in salad and chopped aspic jelly.
Cutlets a la Pompadour.
7 or 9 Cutlets.
1 gill Green Pea Sauce.
1 gill Brown Sauce.
1 gill Tomato Sauce.
pt. Green Peas.
\ pt. Aspic.
Braise a neck of mutton, and when cold cut into
cutlets and shape nicely; have the three different
coloured sauces ; they should he very thick, and have
some melted aspic mixed with them; spread each
cutlet with sauce of one colour or the other; stand by
until firm; then brush over with melted aspic, and
arrange the colours alternately; have ready some
nicely boiled peas; jwhen these are cold, mix with
them some melted aspic, and stand by until cold
again ; heap these in the centre of the cutlets.
Cold Galantine of Beef.
Take about 10 lbs. thick flank or silverside of
beef, and a calf’s foot, plenty of vegetables, a bay
leaf and some sweet herbs, some peppercorns, and 2 or
3 cloves ; put the beef and foot into a saucepan, with


about 2 quarts of stock or broth ; bring it up to the
boil, and skim well; then put in the vegetables and
spices; draw on one side, and simmer very gently
for 5 hours; take up the beef, and put into a deep
dish; strain off the gravy, and if there is too much,
reduce it by boiling quickly without the lid; season
with salt and pepper if required; pour round the
beef and let it stand until cold; then turn out and
serve with a salad; remove the bones from the foot,
and serve according to recipes given.
Beef and Vegetable Stew.
Take 2 lbs. or 3 lbs. of leg of beef, and plenty of
carrots, onions, celery, and turnip ; cut all up into
small pieces; dip the meat into vinegar, put it into
a brown baking jar, with the vegetables; tie it
down and let it cook slowly in the oven for 5 or
6 hours. About an hour before serving, open the jar
and put in a seasoning of pepper and salt, and return
to the oven ; put a border of mashed potatoes round
the dish, and the stew in the centre. This will be
found an exceedingly nice dish, and very nutritious.
Pigeons and Prawns; or, “Ragout de Crevettes.”
4 Pigeons.
4 pt. Gravy.
4 pt. Prawns.
1 oz. Butter.
4 oz. Flour.
1 Onion stuck with 6
Cloves.
1 gill White Wine.
1 doz. Small Mushrooms.
2 Yolks Eggs.


Prepare the pigeons for roasting; cut them in half
and put into a stewpan, with the onion, stock,
and wine; simmer till tender; take them up and
keep hot; strain the gravy; put the butter into a
small stewpan, and when it is dissolved stir in \ oz.
flour; mix well and pour in the gravy in which the
pigeons have been cooked; when it boils put in the
prawns, skinned, and the mushrooms, and simmer
until tender; drop in the yolks of the eggs and stir
until the sauce is quite thick; sprinkle in a little
very finely-chopped parsley, and see that it is nicely
flavoured; dish the pigeons in a circle, and put the
mushrooms and prawns in the centre.
Imitation Sweetbreads.
Soak some brains in warm water until quite clean ;
skin them and let them lie in salt and water for an
hour; then boil them in stock or milk flavoured with
vegetables for about three-quarters of an hour; let
them get cold ; cut in slices, dip in egg and bread
crumbs, and fry in a little butter; place them on a
hot dish ; melt in a saucepan 1 oz. of butter, stir in
a little chopped parsley and the juice of half a lemon;
pour this over the brains just before serving. This
is a very nice breakfast dish, and can be quickly
prepared if the brains are boiled the day before.
Chicken and Tomato Stew,
Take a cold boiled or roast chicken; take off the
skin; slice up some tomatoes and one or two onions


or a leek ; butter a saucepan ; lay these ingredients in
alternate layers; add 1 gill good gravy; simmer very
gently till tender; take out the pieces of chicken and
pile high on a dish; boil up the sauce ; stir in 1
oz. cold butter; season nicely, and pour over the
chicken. Serve very hot. Send mashed potatoes to
table with this.
Cornish Pasties.
1 lb. Pastry.
\ lb. Lean Steak.
J lb. Potatoes.
Salt and Pepper.
Cut the steak into small dice ; parboil the potatoes,
and cut them into pieces about the same size; mix
together, season nicely, and sprinkle with little water
or gravy ; roll out the pastry; cut out with a round
cutter about 6 in. across; place the meat and potato
in the centre; wet the edges well, and join together
at the top ; pinch into a frill, brush over with water
or egg, and bake for half an hour. These are good
either hot or cold.
Mock Venison.
1 \ lbs. Cold Mutton.
tt pt. Good Gravy.
1 gill Port or Claret.
Salt and Pepper,
i oz. Plour.
1 oz. Butter.
1 tablespoonful Eed Cur-
rant Jelly.
Sippets of Toast.
Trim and cut the meat into small pieces; put the
butter into a stewpan, and when it is dissolved put in
the flour; cook it and add the gravy; when this has


boiled up put in the jelly, wine, and seasoning ; lay in
the meat, and simmer gently for half an hour; heap
the meat in the centre of a dish; boil up the gravy,
and if not thick enough reduce by boiling quickly
without the lid ; pour this round the meat, and stand
the toast round. If this dish is carefully prepared it
is an exceedingly nice entree.
Turkey and Oysters.
1 Turkey.
2 doz. Oysters.
1 Egg-
o ozs. Bread Crumbs.
1 oz. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
I Lemon.
Pepper and Salt.
Prepare the turkey for roasting; take the heart
wash, and boil it for 15 minutes; take it up and chop it
very finely or pound it in a mortar; chop the oysters,
and mix these with the bread crumbs, chopped pars-
ley, lemon rind, and seasoning; beat up the egg, add
the lemon juice and dissolved butter, and mix the dry
ingredients into a paste; add a little oyster liquor if
too stiff; stuff the turkey, sew up tightly, and roast
from 2to 3 hours, according to size. Serve with good
brown gravy.
Fillet of Beef Larded.
6 lbs. Fillet of Beef,
i lb. Bacon.
6 Young Carrots,
2 Onions.
2 qts. Stock.
Salt and Pepper.
Lard the beef and put it into a braising pan ; cut
the vegetables into small pieces, and place them round


it; pour in the stock and simmer very gently for 21-
hours ; take out the beef and place it in a deep dish ;
arrange the vegetables; boil the stock quickly, and
dissolve in it a sheet or two of gelatine, strain care-
fully over the meat, and stand by till cold; glaze the
top of the beef, and serve with the jelly round it.
Stewed Tripe.
lbs. Tripe.
1 Onion.
J tin Tomatoes.
1 pt. Gravy.
Pepper and Salt.
Cut some tripe into small, neat pieces; put it into a
saucepan with enough gravy to cover it; strew over
an onion chopped, pepper and salt, and half a tin of
tomatoes; stew very gently for 3 hours ; dish the tripe,
boil up the gravy and pour over it; if the sauce is not
thick enough, thicken with a teaspoonful of cornflour.
This, if carefully prepared, is considered by epicures a
very fine dish.
French Pie.
2 lbs. Yeal.
3 Eggs.
lb. Haxn.
\ lb. Cooked Sausage.
Boil a knuckle or breast of veal in as little water as
possible; when cold, cut into squares and season highly
with pepper, salt, and lemon; boil the eggs hard, and
cut up the ham and sausage ; place part of the eggs,
ham, and sausage in a plain mould or pie-dish ; put in
a layer of veal, then more ham and sausage, and so on


until all the material is used; be sure that the gravy
will jelly; pour this over, and stand by until set, then
turn out. This is a nice breakfast or supper dish.
Fillets of Beef and Olives.
2 lbs. Fillet Steak. I
2 ozs. Butter. |
Jpt. Brown Sauce.
1 doz. Olives.
Cut the steak into small thin slices about as
large as the top of a teacup ; put the butter into a
fryingpan, and when it is hot, put in the fillets and
fry them a good colour. Dish on a circle of mashed
potatoes; peel some olives, cutting them round and
round in one piece until you come to the stone, place
these in the centre and pour round a good brown
sauce.
Beef Olives.
IJlbs. Pump Steak. I
2 ozs. Beef Suet.
3 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
1 Egg.
1 teaspoonful Parsley,
Sweet Herbs, and
Lemon Peel.
1 pt. Brown Sauce.
Cut the beef into thin slices and trim them off;
take the trimmings, suet, crumbs, parsley, and a
seasoning of lemon peel, herbs, &c., and chop finely
and bind into a paste with an egg. Take a small
piece of this forcemeat and roll it up in a slice of the
steak ; do this until you have used up all the material;
either thread them on small skewers or tie up with
string and place in a saucepan. Pour round them
about a pint of brown sauce, and stew very gently


for 1 hour. Take them up, slip off the skewer,
arrange on a hot dish, and fill in the centre with
dressed vegetables and pour round the sauce.
Kidney and Tomato Stew.
3 or 4 Kidneys. j
3 or 4 Tomatoes. |
1 oz. Butter.
Pepper and Salt.
Skin the kidneys and cut them in slices, and slice
the tomatoes. Rub the butter well over a small stew-
pan, put in a layer of tomatoes, and then one of
kidney, and so on, until all are used ; let it simmer
very slowly for half an hour; season then with
pepper and salt, and if liked, a little cold butter.
Serve very hot.
Colonial Goose.
Take a shoulder or leg of mutton and bone it. Boil
some onions until soft; chop them up, and mix them
with some bread crumbs and sage ; season nicely with
pepper and salt. Put this into the place from which
the bone was removed, and sew it up. Place a
rasher of bacon or ham in the bottom of a sauce-
pan, lay in the mutton, and pack round it the bones
and trimmings, with an onion and vegetables, and
1 quart water. Boil it gently for 1 hour; then take
it up and put it into the oven for 1 hour or more,
according to size; reduce the gravy, strain it, and
pour round before serving.


Wild Duck Roasted.
Wild duck should not be dressed too soon after
being killed, and should not be cooked too much ; roast
it in front of a very quick, hot fire, and when it has
been down 5 minutes baste well with butter; do
this constantly for 25 minutes; then take it up and
serve in a very hot, dry dish, and send a cut lemon to
table with it, and the wild duck sauce, as given in
another recipe.
Savoury Sausages.
1 lb. Sausages.
h lb. Flour.
1 pt. Milk.
2 Eggs.
Salt.
Put the eggs into a basin and beat in by degrees
the flour and milk; season with salt, and pour into
a buttered tin; skin the sausages, cut into pieces, and
put them into the batter; bake in a moderate oven for
about three-quarters of an hour.
Cornish Pie.
l|dbs. Pump Steak.
1 lb. Potatoes.
1 gill Gravy.
1 lb. Short Pastry.
Pepper and Salt.
Cut the steak into small pieces and slice the
potatoes; butter a pie-dish, and put in a layer of
potatoes, then one of steak and some seasoning;
place in alternate layers until the dish is full; pour
in a little water; cover with some short pastry; make


a hole in the centre, and place round some pastry
leaves; bake in a moderately hot oven for 1| to 2
hours. Just before serving, pour in about a gill of
gravy.
Grilled Kidneys and Bacon.
Take six or eight kidneys and as many rashers of
bacon; skin the kidneys and split them open; dip them
in dissolved butter; roll up a rasher of bacon, which
should be very thin, and thread alternately on a
skewer ; put them on the grill of a gas stove or over
a clear fire for 5 minutes ; place on a hot dish, draw
out the skewer, and serve them with the gravy that
runs from them.
Quenelles.
1 lb. Veal Cutlets.
2 Eggs.
4 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
pt. Bechamel Sauce.
Pepper and Salt.
Put the veal twice through a mincing machine, and
then pound in a mortar; moisten the crumbs with a
little milk or cream, and add these and the yolks of
the eggs while pounding the meat, sprinkling in from
time to time some pepper and salt; if the paste is too
stiff, add another egg ; when well pounded shape in a
dessertspoon, and put into a buttered fryingpan ; pour
in some boiling water, cover with buttered paper,
and simmer for 20 minutes; take them up carefully,
arrange on a dish, and pour over some good bechamel
sauce. Fill in the centre with green peas.
9


Sour Boast.
5 lbs. Fillet of Beef.
3 Onions.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 doz. Cloves and Spices.
3 ozs. Stoned Eaisius.
1 pt. Water.
4 gill Yinegar.
1 oz. Sugar.
24 Peppercorns.
Tie up the fillet and brown it in the butter; take it
out, and brown the onions; put it back with the spices,
vinegar, &c., and stew very gently for 5 or 6 hours.
One hour before serving add the raisins (stoned) ; take
up the meat, untie it, and place on a hot dish; boil up the
gravy, take out the peppercorns and spices, and pour
round the meat. Serve with hot water dumplings.
Collared Ox Cheek.
Take an ox cheek and foot; thoroughly cleanse both,
blanch, and put on in a large saucepan, well covered
with water; when it boils up, put in some salt and
skim well; boil for 3 or 4 hours; take up the meat,
take out all the bones, and chop it up; season with
salt and pepper, and spice if liked, and press into a dish;
put some weights on top, and let it stand until cold ;
serve with salad or sliced beetroot. The liquor in which
it was boiled will make good soup.
Poor Man’s Goose.
Take a sheep’s heart and liver, wash well, and slice
them up ; slice up also 1 lb. raw potatoes and one or
two onions; butter a pie-dish, put in a layer of potatoes.


then one of liver and some onion, then some more
potatoes, and so on until the dish is full, seasoning
each layer with some pepper and salt; pour in half-a-
pintof water or gravy; put a piece of buttered paper on
the top, and bake in a moderate oven for about 2 hours.
Chicken and Tartare Sauce.
J Cold Chicken. | Frying Batter.
Cut the chicken into small joints, remove the skin,
dip in frying batter, and fry in hot fat until a good
colour; drain for a minute on paper, pile high on a
dish, garnish with fried parsley, and serve Tartare
sauce in a sauceboat.
Stuffed Mutton.
1 leg Mutton.
2 qts. Stock.
1 lb. Forcemeat.
1 Onion and Carrot.
Bone a leg of mutton, and salt it for 3 days; stuff
it with any kind of forcemeat, half roast it, and
put it into a nice gravy, with an onion and carrot,
and stew very gently for 2 hours; reduce the gravy
to half glaze, dish the meat, and pour this round; serve
with vegetables. This will be found a delicious dish
if carefully prepared. Allow plenty of time for
stewing.
Tripe en Pate'.
Stew some tripe in milk, with one or two onions,
until very tender; cut it into pieces about 2 inches


square; dip it in a frying batter, and fry a good colour;
drain for a few minutes on kitchen paper; pile high on
a dish, and garnish with parsley.
Yorkshire Brawn.
1 Pig’s Head and Feet. [ Pepper and Sage.
Thoroughly wash and cleanse a salted pig’s head;
put it into a saucepan with the feet, and cover with
water; when it boils skim well, and boil until the meat
is all off the bones; then take it up ; remove all the
bones ; chop the meat on a hot dish and season with
pepper and sage; boil up the liquor, and strain it over;
press into a brawn tin, and let it get cold. Turn out
and garnish with salad.
Calf’s Liver a la Parisienne.
1 Liver.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
1 oz. Butter.
3 ozs. Bacon.
1 Shallot.
Pepper and Salt.
Wash the liver and cut it into thin slices ; dissolve
the butter in a stewpan and lay in the liver; chop the
bacon, shallot, and parsley very small, sprinkle them
over the liver, cover closely, and stand on the hot stove
for 1| hours; it should not even simmer; dish the
liver, boil up the liquor, and pour it over. Serve
very hot.
Pig’s Trotters.
Boil them very slowly for 6 hours in stock or water,
with an onion stuck with cloves and a few pepper


corns. Let them get cold; divide down the middle,
dip in dissolved butter, and then in bread crumbs.
Grill, or cook them in the oven until thoroughly hot
through and nicely browned.
Calf’s Liver a la Brochette.
1 Liver. I
3 or 4 Easbers Bacon. J
2 ozs. Butter.
Pepper and Salt.
Wash the liver, cut into thin slices, and again into
pieces about 2 inches square. Cut some fat bacon into
pieces the same size, and thread them on a skewer
alternately ; dip each skewer into dissolved butter
seasoned with pepper and salt. Cook before the fire
or in an oven until brown; draw out the skewer,
leaving the liver and bacon on a hot dish. Pour
o
round the gravy which has run from it.
Spiced Beef.
For 10 lbs. of meat make the following pickle :
1 lb. Salt.
1 oz. Cloves.
Brown Sugar.
2 ozs. Saltpetre,
oz. Allspice.
Take a piece of brisket of beef, and rub it every
day with this pickle for 7 or 8 days. When it is to
be cooked, take out the bones, roll it up and tie it
tightly; place in a deep pan with a little stock or
water. Cover the top with a paste of flour and
water, and bake gently for 4 hours. Leave it until
cold, then take off the string and glaze it.


Vol au Yent.
Make a good rissole mixture with chicken and ham
or veal and ham; stir in a little cream; flavour and
season nicely. Take some best puff* pastry; roll out
about 1 inch thick; cut out a large round, the same
as for patty cases, and bake in a very quick oven.
Take out all the inside, fill in with the mixture, and
serve quite hot.
Pork Sausages.
To each pound of fat pork, perfectly free from
skin and gristle, put 1 oz. bread crumbs, 1 teaspoon-
ful each of salt, pepper, and powdered sage ; pour
over the meat, after it has been all well mixed, a tea-
cupful of water or gravy, made with the trimmings of
the meat; put the meat through the machine into
the skins, which have been inflated and well washed ;
divide into convenient lengths, and hang up for a few
hours before using.
Beef Sausages.
The coarser parts of beef answer very well for
sausages, but if required good, use buttock steak. To
every pound of lean steak add lb. suet and 2 ozs.
bread crumbs ; season well with pepper and salt and
sweet herbs; proceed then the same as for pork
sausages.
Veal and Ham Sausages.
To every pound of veal allow 6 ozs. ham, about
equal quantities of fat and lean; season well with


pepper, salt and sweet herbs, and sprinkle with gravy;
proceed then as for pork sausages. These are very
good made with cold veal and ham.
Fondu.
Soak a large slice of bread in a gill of boiling milk,
beat it up, and when quite smooth add a slice of cold
meat, minced very fine, a small piece of onion which
has been boiled to a pulp, and a little bacon or ham ;
season with pepper and salt; add 2 well-beaten eggs ;
put it into a well-buttered mould, and bake for about
20 minutes; turn it out, pour round some gravy.
Fresh meat of any kind can be used for a fondu, but
it should be put through a mincing machine, and
baked then for a longer time.
Mock Brawn.
1 Sheep’s Head. | 1 lb. Pickled Pork.
Thoroughly clean a sheep’s head; boil it in salt and
water for about 5 minutes, then take it out and put
it into the saucepan with the pork and 2 doz. pepper-
corns ; just cover with water, and boil 3 hours; take
out the head, remove the bones, and put them back in
the saucepan; skin the tongue, and chop all up with
the pork ; press into a brawn tin ; let the liquor boil
very fast, without the lid, until reduced to half a pint;
strain this on to the brawn, and let it stand until cold;
turn out and garnish with small salad.


Calfs Head and Maitre d’Hotel Sauce.
Take a calf’s head; thoroughly clean it; blanch it
in boiling water, and wipe well with a clean hot cloth ;
take out the brains, and put them in warm water;
put the head in plenty of cold water, and when it
boils skim well; put in some salt and vegetables, and
boil very gently for 3 hours, putting in the brains
about 10 minutes before it is finished; take up the
head and put it on a hot dish ; cut the tongue in
half; skin it, and place it in another dish with the
brains round it, and pour over a little sauce; cover
the head with Maitre d’Hotel sauce, and garnish with
vegetables. The liquor in which the head was boiled
makes excellent mock turtle soup.
Rolled Calf’s Head.
Bone a calf’s head ; scald the tongue and skin it;
place this in the head with a layer of forcemeat well
seasoned ; roll it up, and tie securely with tape; put
it into a cloth and boil for 3 hours in weak stock with
some vegetables ; remove the cloth, and pour over it a
good brown or Italian sauce. This dish is very good
cold; if to be served cold, press under weights while
in the cloth until the next day, then remove the cloth
and glaze it, and serve in a border of aspic jelly, or
with a salad.
Galantine.
Cut the rind from a large loin of pork, with about
half-an-inch of fat, and salt it for two days ; then soak


it in cold water, to soften it; lay it out flat, and put
on a layer of sausage meat, then one of veal seasoning,
then some cold chicken or rabbit chopped up, or some
hard-boiled eggs, or some sheep’s tongues boiled,
skinned, and cut into slices; then another layer of
sausage meat; let all these be nicely seasoned; roll it up
and tie up securely with tapes ; put it into a cloth
and boil it in a stock pot for three - or four hours,
according to thickness; then, without removing the
cloth, press it under weights until the next day; take
off the cloth, glaze it, and serve with a border of aspic
jelly or a salad.
Cold Mutton Potted.
Cut up some cold lean mutton and put it twice
through a sausage machine, or pound well in a mortar ;
allow 3 ozs. butter to every pound of meat, half tea-
spoonful mixed spice, some pepper and salt; mix all
well together, and press into small pots; cover with
dissolved butter; a few spoonfuls of good gravy
might be added, but it would not keep long then.
Sheep’s Head.
2 Heads.
3 Carrots.
1 Onion.
1 pt. Maitre d’Hotel
Sauce.
Soak the heads in cold water; scrape and clean
them thoroughly; remove the brains and put them to
soak in warm water, and wash the heads again; put
them on in plenty of cold water, and when they boil up
put in some salt and skim well; put in the vegetables;


simmer them very gently for quite 2 hours; tie the
brains in a piece of muslin, and put them in about 10
minutes before the heads are taken up ; put the heads
on a dish; take out the tongues and skin them, and
lay them round the dish with the carrots ; pour over
the sauce ; the brains can be stirred into a little parsley
and butter sauce, or placed round the dish with the
tongues.
Roast Chicken (American).
Soak some crumbs of bread in cold milk; mix with
it a little sweet herbs and some pepper and salt; fill
the body of the chicken with this mixture; truss for
roasting, and while it is cooking baste it with the
gravy that runs from it; flour it well about 10
minutes before serving and baste constantly ; this will
brown it nicely; serve with good brown gravy in a
tureen. Roast from 1 hour to hours, according to
size.
Jugged Hare.
1 Hare.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 lb. Lean Steak.
1 pt. Water or Gravy.
lb. Veal Forcemeat.
1 Onion.
6 Cloves.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
Cut the hare into neat joints, wash it well, and dry
in a cloth ; dip in flour and fry in the butter; put it
into a brown baking jar with the steak cut into
small pieces, an onion stuck with 6 cloves, and the
peppercorns and gravy; cover over and stand it in
the oven for 3 hours; make the forcemeat into balls.


and bake until a pale brown; pile the hare on a
dish; strain the gravy into a saucepan and boil up;
pour it over the hare, garnish with the forcemeat
balls, and send red currant jelly to table with it.
Broiled Chicken.
The legs and back of a roast or boiled chicken do
nicely for this dish. Work into a paste a little
butter, flour, anchovy, pepper, and, if liked, a little
curry powder; cut some of the meat from the legs
into neat slices; cover the meat and bones with this
mixture; dip into dissolved butter, and broil over a
clear fire, or cook in front of the fire, or on the grill
of a gas stove ; pile on a hot dish ; serve dry, or with
a little good gravy poured round.
Stewed Duck and Turnips.
A cold duck does nicely for this dish ; if you have not
one, roast one until about three-parts done, then cut
it up into neat joints and put it into a saucepan with
some gravy, a glass of sherry, a faggot of herbs, an
onion stuck with cloves, and some peppercorns; let
it simmer for half an hour, then strain away about
1 gill of gravy into another saucepan; cut the turnips
into balls; toss them in some butter, put them into
this gravy and stew until tender ; take up the pieces
of duck and dish them in a circle ; take out the
turnips, and put them in the centre; strain all the
gravy into one saucepan, thicken with a little butter
and flour, season nicely, and pour round.


PASTRY AND SWEETS.
Petit Choux Tartlets.
5 ozs. Flour.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 oz. Castor Sugar.
Cherries and Cocoanut.
pt. Water.
3 Eggs.
Jam and Cream.
Put the butter and water into a saucepan, and when
it boils stir in the flour and sugar, and cook them well;
remove the saucepan from the fire, and beat in the
eggs, one at a time; the more it is beaten the better it
is; let it cool; take some of the mixture up in a
dessert spoon which has been dipped in hot water;
shape it with a knife, and drop it carefully on to a
greased tin ; put them into a slow oven, and bake for
about 1 hour; when finished they should be a pale
brown; while still hot open one end and take out the
inside, fill in with jam and whipped cream; brush
over with white of egg and sugar, and decorate with
dried cherries and desiccated cocoanut.
Italian Fritters.
6 slices Bread.
2 pt. Lemon Syrup.
2 ozs. Butter.
Shape the slices of bread nicely, and fry in hot
butter; pile high on a dish, and pour over either some
lemon syrup or any kind of preserve made hot.


Potato Cheesecakes.
1 lb. Potatoes.
1 Lemon.
2 ozs. Sugar.
2 Eggs.
2 ozs. Sultanas,
fj- lb. Pastry.
Boil the potatoes and rub them through a sieve;
beat in the yolks of two eggs, the rind and juice of a
lemon, the sultanas, and sugar ; line a dish or some
patty pans with light pastry, nearly fill them with the
mixture, stand on a baking sheet, and bake in a quick
oven for about 20 to 25 minutes. Sprinkle over some
castor sugar, and serve either hot or cold.
Jam Sandwiches in Pastry.
1 lb. Pastry.
3 ozs. Castor Sugar,
\ lb. Jam.
1 Lemon.
2 Eggs.
Roll out two pieces of light pastry into thin strips
about 8 inches broad; spread one piece with jam
and place the other strip over it; press the edges well
together, mark with a knife the width you wish to have
them, and trim the edges neatly; put into a quick oven,
and bake a pale brown; put the sugar, whites of the
eggs, and lemon juice into a basin and whisk them until
the icing is smooth and firm ; colour half with a few
drops of cochineal; while the pastry is hot cover half
with the pink and half with the white icing; stand it
in the oven with the door open until firm, then cut it
into fingers where marked, and pile on a dish.


Raspberry Sandwiches.
1 lb. Ground Almonds
lb. Castor Sugar.
2 stale Sponge Cakes.
Icing.
lb. Flour.
2 Eggs.
3 ozs. Raspberry Jam.
Mix the almonds, sugar, and flour together and mix
into a firm paste with the eggs; roll into a thin sheet,
pound up the sponge cakes, and make them into a
paste with the jam; spread this over the almond paste,
and put another layer of almond paste on the top;
cut into shapes, and bake very carefully in a moderate
oven. Ice them with pink and white icing.
Suet Pudding (plain).
1 lb. Flour.
5 ozs. Suet.
•J- pt. Water.
Salt.
Sift the flour into a basin, chop the suet very finely,
and mix well together ; add a little salt, and with the
water make it into a dough ; dip a cloth in boiling
water, tie the pudding up tightly, put into boiling
water and boil for 2 hours. Take out of the cloth,
place on a hot dish, and serve. If this pudding is
mixed with an egg and a little milk, instead of water,
it will be a great improvement.
Suet Pudding (very good).
1 lb. Flour.
10 ozs. Suet.
2 Potatoes.
1 Egg-
Pinch of Salt.
Chop the suet finely, and mix it with the flour ;
sprinkle over the salt; mash the potatoes very


smoothly, and stir them into the flour and suet; beat
up the egg ; add about gills water and make into
a smooth, light paste; dip a pudding-cloth in boiling
water ; tie up the pudding, plunge into boiling water,
and keep it boiling constantly for 2| hours. Take off
the cloth carefully, and serve very hot.
Lemon Pudding (plain).
1 lb. Flour.
6 ozs. Suet.
2 Lemons,
2 ozs. Sugar.
Chop the suet finely; mix with the flour ; grate
over it the rind of one lemon, and make into a paste
with some cold water; roll out in a long thin strip;
mix the juice of the lemons and sugar together, and
spread over the crust; roll it up and tie securely in a
cloth ; put into boiling water, and boil for 2 hours.
Dripping Pastry.
A very nice pastry can be made with dripping
for everyday pies and tarts. Allow from 6to 8 ozs.
dripping to every pound of flour, and a pinch of salt;
rub the dripping carefully in until it is as fine as dust;
then make into rather a stiff paste with about 1| gills
cold water ; mix it well and roll out once ; it is then
ready to use.
Hot Water Dumplings.
11b. Flour.
J teaspoonful Baking
Powder.
2 ozs. Lard.
jy gill Boiling Water.
Salt.


Put the flour into a hot basin and sprinkle with
salt and baking powder; melt the lard in boiling
water and mix the flour, &c., into a light paste with
the hot lard and water; take up pieces in a hot spoon
and drop into boiling water; cover the saucepan and
boil 10 minutes. Serve very hot with sour roast.
Boiled Custard.
1 pt. Milk.
4 Eggs.
2 ozs. Sugar.
teaspoonful Vanilla.
Put the milk and sugar into a saucepan ; put the
yolks of 3 and 1 whole egg into a basin and beat
them; when the milk boils, pour it on to the eggs,
stirring all the time ; strain it back into the saucepan,
stand over the fire, and whisk well until the eggs
thicken, but do not let it boil; pour it back into a
basin, add the flavouring, and whisk until nearly cold.
Put it into custard cups, and grate some nutmeg on
top.
Savoury Custard.
1 Egg.
1 gill Beef Tea.
oz. Butter.
Salt.
Beat up a fresh egg to a strong froth ; pour in the
beef tea and seasoning ; butter a gallipot; strain in the
custard ; stand in a saucepan of boiling water ; cover
with a piece of paper and steam for 20 minutes ; turn
carefully on to a hot dish.


Dowager Pudding.
3 ozs. Eaisins.
f lb. Cracknel Biscuits.
1 Lemon.
4 Eggs.
1 pt. Milk.
2 ozs. Sugar.
Stone the raisins and arrange them in a buttered
mould; break up the biscuits into small pieces and
mix with the grated lemon peel; put them into the
mould; make a custard with the yolks of the eggs
and the milk, and pour over the biscuits; let it stand
for an hour ; tie down and boil for 1 hour; it can be
served with sifted sugar or raspberry jam.
Bedford Pudding.
2 ozs. Sugar.
J lb. Jam.
Bread,
2 Eggs.
1 gill Milk.
Soak some crusts of bread in cold water till quite soft,
then squeeze them very dry; put into a basin and
beat in the sugar, yolks of the eggs, and milk ; butter
a pie-dish and half fill with the mixture ; then spread
over it half the jam ; fill the dish with the rest of the
bread, and put it into the oven and bake until firm ;
spread the rest of the jam on the top; beat the
whites of the eggs to a very stiff froth with a little
sugar; pile these on the top of the pudding; smooth
over with a knife, and put back in the oven until
brown. Serve either hot or cold.
Baked Cabinet Pudding.
3 Penny Sponge Cakes.
1 pt. Milk.
1 oz. Sugar.
3 Eggs.
1 gill Sherry.
10


Break the cakes into pieces and soak them in the
sherry ; beat 2 yolks and 1 whole egg in a basin;
pour on the boiling milk and sugar ; arrange the cakes
in a buttered pie-dish ; pour over the custard and bake
in a cool oven. This is a very nice cold pudding.
Melbourne Pudding.
5 lb. Suet.
4 tablespoonfuls Raspberry
Jam.
1 teaspoonful Baking Pow-
der.
% lb. Flour.
1 gill Milk.
1 teaspoonful Carbonate of
Soda.
Chop the suet finely, and mix it with the flour and
baking powder ; stir in the jam ; dissolve the soda in
the milk, and mix the pudding up quickly ; press it
into a well-greased basin, and boil 4 hours ; turn out,
and pour round a wine sauce.
Yorkshire Pudding.
1 pt. Milk.
6 ozs. Flour.
2 Eggs.
Salt.
Put the eggs into a basin with some salt, and beat
in the flour with a fork; add a little milk from time
to time; before it gets at all thin beat well; then add
the rest of the milk and let it stand for an hour ; well
butter a tin, pour in the mixture, and bake for 1 hour
in a moderate oven. Just before serving put it under
the meat for a few minutes.
Bridal Pudding.
•5 Oranges,
i pt. Milk.
1 teacupful of Sugar.
4 Eggs.
1 dessertspoonful Arrowroot.


Peel, quarter, and remove the pips from the oranges ;
lay in a glass dish and sprinkle with sugar; make a
custard with the yolks of the eggs, milk, and arrow-
root, and pour over the oranges; whip the whites to a
stiff froth, and pile roughly on top. These should be
added just before the pudding is served.
German Pudding.
4 lb. Bread Crumbs.
3 ozs. Butter.
3 ozs. Sugar.
Apricot Jam.
i pt. Milk.
1 Lemon.
3 Eggs.
Put the rind of the lemon into the milk, and let it
stand for half-an-hour; pour it boiling over the
crumbs ; when cool work in the butter and sugar;
beat the eggs well and stir them in; butter a plain
mould ; put in a layer of the mixture, then one of
jam, then another of the mixture, and so on, until the
mould is full, putting crumbs at the top ; steam for
hours, and serve with apricot jam sauce.
Victoria Pudding.
1 pt. Milk.
2 tablespoonfuls Apricot
Jam.
4 or 5 Eggs.
2 ozs. Sweet Biscuit.
i pt. Jelly.
1 oz. Sugar,
o oz. Gelatine.
Decorate a mould with a little red jelly and
candied fruits, and let it stand until set; make a
boiled custard with the yolks of the eggs and milk;
cut the biscuits into small pieces and stir them in
with the jam ; when the custard is cool dissolve the


gelatine in half a gill of water, and strain in; when
nearly cold pour into the decorated mould, and stand
by until quite firm. Turn out carefully, and garnish
with red'jelly.
Orange Flower Pudding.
1 qt. Milk.
3 Oranges.
3 ozs. Sugar.
i lb. Flour.
3 Eggs.
1 gill Sherry.
Make a smooth batter of the flour and milk, and
stir over the fire until it boils ; let it boil a few
minutes, sweeten with the sugar, and when nearly
cold beat in the eggs, the grated rind and juice of the
oranges, and the sherry; pour into a buttered mould,
and steam three-quarters of an hour; turn out and
serve with a sauce of orange juice, sherry, and sugar.
Buff Pudding.
1 pt. Milk.
3 Eggs.
1 Lemon.
3 ozs. Butter.
2 ozs. Sugar.
2 ozs. Flour.
1 tablespoonful Marmalade.
Make a batter of the flour and milk, put it into a
saucepan, and stir until it boils ; let it boil 2 or 3
minutes; stir in the butter, sugar, and lemon peel,
and let it stand till nearly cold; beat in the eggs;
line a dish with light pastry, pour in the mixture,
and bake for half-an-hour, or until firm and of a
pale brown colour; put the marmalade on the top, in
small pieces, and sprinkle with sugar. Serve cold.


Sultana Pudding.
1 lb. Flour.
t lb. Sultanas.
2 ozs. Candied Peel.
\ lb. Suet.
2 ozs. Sugar.
£ pt. Water.
Chop the suet very finely and mix it with the flour ;
clean the sultanas and cut the peel into small thin
pieces; stir these in with the sugar; make into dough
with the water; dip a pudding cloth into boiling
water, put in the pudding, tie it up, and plunge into
boiling water; keep it boiling steadily for at least
2 hours; remove the cloth, and serve with butter and
sugar.
Sausage Meat Pudding.
1 lb. Flour.
\ lb. Suet.
1 lb. Sausage Meat.
Chop the suet finely and mix with the flour ; make
into a paste with some cold water; roll into a long
thin strip, spread the sausage meat evenly all over;
roll it up, tie securely in a cloth, and boil for 3 hours.
Frangipane Tartlets.
pt. Milk.
2 Eggs.
ozs. Sugar.
Essence of Vanilla.
1 \ ozs. Butter.
1-J ozs. Flour.
\ lb. Pastry,
Make a smooth batter of the flour and milk, boil
until thick; take it off the fire, stir in the butter,
sugar, and vanilla, then beat in the eggs ; let it stand
until cold. Line some patty pans with light pastry,
half fill with the mixture, and bake in a quick oven.


Raised Pie Crust.
1 lb. Flour.
1 gill Boiling Water.
I lb. Lard.
Sift the flour into a basin ; put the lard and water
into a saucepan, and when it boils pour over the flour,
and mix quickly into a paste; cut off’ one-third for the
cover, roll out the rest into a strip ; cut off* a small
piece for leaves, wet the edges, and join together; turn
it up and shape into a case, fill with meat, and cover
over; make a hole in the top and ornament with
leaves; place in a quick oven, reducing the heat after-
wards till the meat is cooked.
Cold Cabinet Pudding.
1 pt. Jelly.
6 Finger Biscuits.
1 pt. Milk.
1 oz. Castor Sugar.
7 sheets Gelatine.
4 Eggs.
2 ozs. Glace Cherries.
2 ozs. Eatafias.
1 teaspoonful Yanilla.
Make a boiled custard with the milk and the yolks of
the eggs only ; a little cream is a great improvement;
when nearly cold put in the finger biscuits cut into
small pieces, the ratafias and cherries, cut in half,
sugar and vanilla; dissolve the gelatine in a very small
quantity of water, and strain in; decorate a mould
with red and white jelly, and a few cherries or other
dried fruits—apricots are nice; turn the pudding
carefully in, and stand by until quite firm; turn out
when required, and garnish with chopped jelly.


Cold Marmalade Pudding’.
1J pts. Milk.
1 Lemon.
2 ozs. Sugar.
5 Eggs.
b lb. Marmalade.
5 Sponge Cakes.
Beat the eggs in a basin, and pour the boiling milk
on them; sweeten to taste; cut the sponge cakes
in half, and spread them thickly with the marmalade •
well butter a mould, arrange the cakes in it, and pour
over them the hot custard; tie over carefully, and
boil for an hour; let it stand until it is quite cold, and
then turn carefully on to a dish; a little red jelly
chopped finely is a pretty garnish for this pudding.
German Apple Tart,
f lb. Pastry.
6 large Apples.
1 Egg.
1 oz. Cornflour.
3 ozs. Sugar.
i pt. Milk.
Line a flat dish with some nice light pastry,
and turn the edge over in a roll; bake in a hot
oven; stew some apples, sweeten and flavour with
lemon; when cool place them in the pastry; put
the milk in a small saucepan; mix the cornflour
smoothly with a little cold milk; when the milk in
the saucepan is nearly boiling, stir this in and let it
boil for a few minutes, stirring all the while ; remove
the saucepan from the fire and stir in the egg well
beaten ; pour this mixture over the apples and brown
lightly in the oven or in front of the fire. This is a
particularly nice dish, either hot or cold.


College Pudding.—No. I.
2 lbs. Stale Bread
Crumbs.
J lb. Suet.
1 qt. Milk and Water.
1 Lemon.
£ lb. Currants.
\ lb. Peel,
f lb. Sultanas.
lb. Sugar.
4 Eggs.
Chop the suet very finely ; clean the fruit ; cut the
peel into, very small pieces; pour the milk over the
bread crumbs, and when these are well soaked, put in
all the dry ingredients; grate over the lemon, and
beat in the eggs; well butter some small moulds,
three-parts fill them with this mixture and steam,
for 1 hour. They must be covered with paper.
Turn out and serve quite hot.
College Pudding.—No. 3.
pt. Milk
1 oz. Butter.
J lb. Bread Crumbs.
1 oz. Sugar.
1 oz. Candied Peel.
2 Eggs.
Put a piece of lemon peel in the milk, and when it
hoils take out the peel and pour over the bread
crumbs; beat in the butter and sugar, and let it stand
for an hour; cut the candied peel into very small
pieces and add it; beat the eggs well, and stir them
in just before baking ; well butter some small moulds
or cups ; about three-parts fill them with this mixture,
stand on a baking sheet, and bake in a moderate
oven for half-an-hour ; turn out and serve with sherry
and sugar.


Apple Charlotte.
Slices Bread and Butter.
J pt. Milk.
6 Apples.
Sugar.
Lemon.
Butter a pie-dish, dip a slice of bread and butter into
milk and lay it at the bottom; slice in some apples,
then sprinkle in some sugar and a little lemon juice,
then another slice of bread dipped in milk and some
more apples; continue until the dish is full; cover
with the apple peelings and bake in a moderate oven;
take off the peeling when baked; slip it out of the
dish and strew over castor sugar.
Kings wood Cakes.
6 Sponge Cakes.
J pt. Custard.
Jam.
Glace Cherries.
Cut 6 penny sponge cakes in half; spread them
with jam and close them together ; arrange in a glass
dish, and pour over them some nicely flavoured boiled
custard; decorate with glace cherries.
Bread and Butter Pudding.
Slices of Very Thin Bread
and Butter.
1 pt. Milk.
1 oz. Candied Peel.
2 or 3 Eggs.
Cut some very thin slices of bread and butter into
dice and place at the bottom of a well-buttered pie-
dish, and strew over the candied peel, cut very small;
put the milk and sugar in a saucepan ; when it is


boiling pour it over the eggs, which have been beaten
in a basin; use only one white of egg; whisk and
strain over the bread and butter; let it stand for an
hour, then bake in a cool oven.
Vennoise Pudding.
0 ozs. Crumb Bread.
2 ozs. Candied Peel.
1 oz. Loaf Sugar.
3 ozs. Castor Sugar.
1 Lemon.
4 Eggs,
f pt. Milk.
3 ozs. Sultanas.
1 gill Sherry.
Cut the bread into dice; put it into a basin,
with the sugar, candied peel cut small, grated rind
of a lemon and sultanas; pour over all the sherry;
put the loaf sugar dry into an old saucepan and
burn it well; then pour in the milk and stir until
it boils; put the yolks of 3 and 1 whole egg into a
basin and pour over them the boiling milk; whisk
well and strain over the dry ingredients in the basin ;
mix carefully and turn into a well-buttered mould;
cover over with paper and steam for 3 hours; turn
carefully on to a dish, and serve with German wine
sauce.
Brown Bread Pudding.
1 Stale Loaf.
1 Lemon.
3 ozs. Castor Sugar.
1 gill Cream.
£ pt. Milk.
4 Eggs.
Essence Yanilla.
Make about | lb. fine bread crumbs ; put them into a
basin with the sugar ; grate over the rind of a lemon ;


put the milk into a saucepan ; if no cream is used, put
1 gill more milk ; when it boils, pour over the
crumbs; if cream is used, whip it well and stir in
with the yolks of the eggs, one at a time; whip the
whites of the eggs to a very stiff froth and stir
lightly in; add essence, pour into a well-buttered
mould, and steam for hours; turn out carefully and
serve with German wine sauce. Cherries are very
nice put into the pudding instead of vanilla; they
should be dropped in whole ; boil some, with some
sugar, and serve round the pudding instead of the
German sauce.
Ringswood Pudding’.
\ lb. Bread Crumbs.
4 ozs. Flour.
lb. Brown Sugar.
3 Large Apples.
4 ozs. Raisins.
2 ozs. Sultanas.
2 ozs. Currants.
2 ozs. Candied Peel.
6 ozs. Suet.
Put the bread crumbs, flour, and sugar into a basin ;
chop the suet and apples finely, and add them with
the currants and sultanas, well cleaned, and the raisins
stoned and cut in half, the candied peel cut into
small pieces; mix all this well together until it
becomes like paste ; no egg or moisture is required;
press very firmly into a well-buttered basin or mould ;
tie over a cloth dipped in boiling water and boil for
7 hours ; hang in a dry place, and boil again for 3 or
4 hours the day it is required. This is an excellent
pudding.


Pancakes.
1 pt. Milk.
6 ozs. Flour.
3 or 4 Eggs.
2 ozs. Dripping or Lard.
teaspoonful Baking
Powder.
Lemon and Sugar.
Put the eggs into a basin, and beat in the flour,
adding the milk gradually; let it stand, if possible,
for an hour; then stir in the baking powder ; put
the dripping or lard into a small saucepan, and when
it is dissolved rinse out the fryingpan with it; the
pan should be about 6or 7 inches across; let the pan
get quite hot, and then pour in sufficient batter to
cover the bottom; when this is set and nicely browned
on the under side, toss over and cook for a minute
or two; then sprinkle with lemon juice and sugar
roll up, and put on to a hot dish. Keep hot while
others are frying.
Boiled Cabinet Pudding.
1 pt. Custard,
b lb. Finger Biscuits.
1 doz. Glace Cherries.
Vanilla.
Make a pint of custard with 1 pint milk and the
yolks of 3 or 4 eggs; well butter a plain mould;
decorate the bottom with the cherries and line up the
sides with the finger biscuits; break up the rest of
the biscuits and nearly fill the mould; any sweet
cake crumbs will do; sweeten and flavour the custard
with vanilla; pour this into the mould; put over a
piece of buttered paper and steam for hours; turn
carefully out and serve with jam sauce.


Manchester Pudding.
1 pt. Milk.
11b. Castor Sugar.
I lb. Bread Crumbs.
1 oz. Peel.
3 Eggs.
5 ozs. Sultanas.
2 ozs. Butter.
Few drops Essence of
Yanilla.
Put the bread crumbs into a basin, and pour on
them the boiling milk; beat in the eggs; clean the
sultanas; cut the peel into small pieces, and add
these; melt the butter in a saucepan, and stir into the
crumbs; flavour with a little essence of vanilla or
lemon; well butter a pie-dish or mould; pour in the
pudding, and bake in a moderate oven until firm;
when cold turn it out of the dish, and serve with
either castor sugar or a little sauce made of sugar
lemon juice, and water boiled to a syrup.
Nestor Pudding.
lib. Beef Suet,
lib. Flour.
1 gill Cream.
11b. Eaisins.
1 lb. Bread Crumbs.
2 ozs. Castor Sugar.
3 Eggs.
Sauce.
2 Eggs. 1J ozs. Sugar. 1 gill Sherry.
Line a mould with stoned raisins; chop and roll
the suet very finely, mix it with the bread crumbs,
flour, and sugar; heat the eggs and strain them in;
add the cream, with a flavouring of vanilla or lemon;
beat all together for 10 minutes; pour into the mould,
tie down with a cloth and boil for 2 hours; turn on
to a hot dish.


Put the yolks of the eggs into a small saucepan,
add the sugar and sherry, and whisk well; directly
they thicken, take the saucepan from the fire and
pour the sauce round the pudding.
Rice Meringue.
1 teacupful Ground Pice.
1J pts. Milk.
3 Eggs.
2 ozs. Sugar.
Jib. Jam.
Put the rice and milk into a saucepan and simmer
for 7 or 8 minutes; add the yolks of the eggs well
beaten, and the sugar; pile high in the centre of a
dish and well cover with jam; whisk the whites of
the eggs to a stiff froth with a little castor sugar,
and flavour with some essence of vanilla or lemon;
spread these over the jam, and stand the dish in the
oven until the icing is firm. Leave the door open,
as it must not acquire any colour.
German Savoury Dumplings.
1 lb. Flour.
1 teaspoonful Chopped
Onion.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
1 teaspoonful Baking
Powder.
1 tablespoonful Meat,
Kidney, or Bacon.
1 Egg.
1 gill Water.
Salt and Pepper.
Sift the flour and baking powder into a basin; chop
the ingredients finely, and mix with the flour; season
with salt and pepper, and make into a stiff paste
with the egg and water; make into the size of an
egg, and boil for three-quarters of an hour.


These dumplings are very nice with stews, broth,
or soup.
Iced Fruit Pudding,
J pt. Custard,
\ pt. Cream.
\ pt. Fruit Puree.
Sugar to taste.
Make a good custard, and whisk until cold; whip
the cream and add that; stir in gradually the fruit
puree; sweeten to taste, and freeze. Apricot puree
is very nice for this pudding.
French Pastry.
1 lb. Puflf Pastry,
Jam.
Marmalade.
Desiccated Cocoanut.
Pistachio Kernels.
Roll out the pastry about a quarter of an inch
thick; dip a knife in hot water, and cut into strips
10 inches long and 1 inch wide; lay these strips on
edge ; wet the side with either water or lemon juice
and join together; leave plenty of room for them to
spread; place on a baking sheet and hake in a quick
oven until pale brown; spread some with jam and
some with marmalade; sprinkle the jam with desic-
cated cocoanut, and the marmalade with chopped
pistachio kernels or citron peel ; arrange alternately
on a dish.
Rough Puflf Pastry.
1 lb. Flour. I
10 ozs. Butter. j
1 Lemon.
1 gill Water.


Sift the flour on to a board, and cut the butter into
it; mix the lemon juice and water together, and wet
up into a stiff paste; turn on to a floured board and
roll into a long thin strip, fold over into three, turn
the open ends, top and bottom, and roll again; fold
into three and roll; this should be done five times.
It is then ready for use, or may be laid in a cool
place for an hour.
Bread and Fruit Pudding.
Slices of Bread.
1 bottle Fruit.
3 ozs. Sugar.
-J oz. Gelatine.
1 Lemon.
Rinse a plain mould in cold water; place at the
bottom a round of bread, and put some fingers of
bread all round the tin; put the fruit into a sauce-
pan and boil for a few minutes with sugar; take it
out and place in the mould; add the gelatine and
lemon juice to the fruit syrup, and more sugar, if
required ; boil up, and pour carefully into the mould;
stand by until cold and set; then turn carefully out,
and serve with sifted sugar.
Cassel Pudding.
I lb. Sugar. I
£ lb. Flour. I
£ lb. Butter.
2 Eggs.
Beat the butter to a cream; sift in the sugar and
beat well, then the yolks of the eggs, and then dredge
the flour slowly in; beat the whites of the eggs to a
stiff froth, and stir these lightly in ; butter some small


moulds or cups, half fill with this mixture, stand on a
baking sheet, and bake in a moderate oven for 20
minutes; turn carefully out, and serve with sifted
sugar and sherry.
Genoese Pastry.
8 ozs. Sugar.
7 Eggs.
Jam.
6 ozs. Flour.
5 ozs. Butter.
Vanilla Essence.
Put the sugar and eggs into a basin ; stand over a
saucepan of hot water and whisk for 20 minutes ;
dissolve the butter in a small saucepan; remove the
basin from the fire, pour in the butter and stir in the
the sifted flour ; have ready 2 tins lined with well-
buttered paper; pour in the mixture, and bake in a
quick oven for about 10 minutes; warm the jam in a
saucepan, spread a piece of paper on the table and sift
with sugar; turn the pastry on to this, spread
quickly with jam, and roll up; place on a sieve till
cold.
Iced Pudding*.
\ pt. Custard.
pt. Cream.
Eatafias and Macaroni.
Wine or Liqueur.
Dried Cherries and Citron
Peel.
Make a rich boiled custard ; whisk until cold ; whip
the cream and mix cream and custard together; put
in some sweet biscuits, cherries and citron peel shred
finely, with wine or liquer to taste ; wet a mould, put
in the pudding and freeze, keeping it packed in ice
until the moment of serving.
ll


Apple Fritters.
Apples.
Frying Batter.
2 ozs. Castor Sugar.
Hot Fat.
Peel the apples and take out the core without
quartering them; cut them into slices and dip them
in frying batter; plunge into hot fat ; pile high on a
dish, and sprinkle with castor sugar
Roly Poly Jam Pudding.
d lb. Suet. 1
8 ozs. Flour. |
d lb. Jam.
Water.
Chop the suet very finely and mix with the flour ;
mix into a very dry paste with a little cold water, and
roll into a strip ; spread over the jam and roll over
and over ; put it into a pudding cloth which has been
dipped in boiling water ; tie up the ends and boil for 2
hours ; turn carefully on to a hot dish.
Baked Plum Pudding.
d lb. Suet,
f lb. Flour,
d lb. Sultanas.
2 ozs. Candied Peel.
2 ozs. Sugar.
1 teaspoonful Baking
Powder
1 Egg
d pt. Milk.
Sift the flour into a basin ; chop the suet finely, and
stir in with the sugar, baking powder, and peel, cut
into small pieces, and sultanas, cleaned; mix all
together; beat up the egg, add the milk, and strain
into the pudding; mix well, and turn into a well-
buttered Yorkshire pudding tin ; bake in a moderate


oven for about three-quarters of an hour, or until firm
and a good colour ; cut into small squares, pile on a
dish, and serve with sprinkled sugar.
Apple Tart.
1 lb. Short Pastry.
8 or 9 Apples.
J gill Sherry.
2 ozs. Sugar.
1 Lemon.
Peel the apples and pile them in a dish; well wet
the edge and cover with nice pastry; take the apple
parings, pips, sugar, lemon, and sherry, with 1 gill
water, and make into a syrup; strain half this into
the pie-dish before covering with the crust; stand
the tart on a baking sheet, and bake in a moderate
oven; brush it over, before putting in, with cold
water, and sprinkle with sugar; when the pie is
baked, pour in the rest of the syrup ; send boiled
custard or cream to table with it.
Mushroom Pie.
1 doz. Large Mushrooms.
6 Potatoes.
2 ozs. Butter.
h lb. Pastry.
Salt and Pepper.
Peel and cut into small pieces the mushrooms ; peel
and slice the potatoes ; butter a pie-dish, and lay these
in alternate layers, adding a little water and season-
ing ; when the dish is full, cover with pastry, and
hake in a moderate oven; make a gravy of the
parings and stalks of the mushrooms, and when the
pie is baked pour this in.


Lemon Cheesecakes.
1 lb. Loaf Sugar. I
J lb. Butter. j
6 Eggs.
3 Lemons.
Grate the rind of the lemons and squeeze the juice
from them, and strain into a saucepan; beat the eggs
and put all the ingredients in together; stir over a
slow fire until it is about the consistency of cream ;
pour into jars, and, when cold, tie down like jam.
This is an excellent mixture, if carefully made, and
will keep good some time. When using, grate in a
macaroon, or 1 or 2 sweet biscuits. Cheesecakes
should always be served cold.
Strawberry Ice Pudding.
2 pts. Strawberries.
lb. Loaf Sugar.
1 Lemon.
1 oz. Isinglass.
1 doz. Almonds.
Ice.
Pick the fruit; sift over it some castor sugar ; put
it on to a hair sieve and let it stand for half-an-hour,
and then rub it through with a wooden spoon; put
the sugar and isinglass into a very clean saucepan
with half a pint of water, and let it boil for about 10
minutes; when cold, mix it with the strawberry
puree and strain in the juice of a lemon ; dip a mould
in cold water ; pour in the pudding ; cover the mould
over and pack it in ice for some hours; do not turn
out until required for table. The mould may be
decorated with a few blanched almonds before the
pudding is put in, or it may be garnished with some
large, fine, ripe strawberries when it is turned out.


Chantilly Tartlets.
1 lb. Short Pastry.
J lb. Apricot Jam.
1 pt. Milk.
2 ozs. Flour.
1 lb. Castor Sugar.
6 Eggs.
2 ozs. Butter.
2 ozs. Ratafia Crumbs.
Line some patty pans with short crust; when baked,
half All with apricot jam ; put the sugar and flour
into a saucepan ; add the milk gradually and make
into a batter ; beat the eggs and pour them into the
milk, &c., and cook them, stirring all the time, until
the mixture thickens like custard ; put the butter
into a stewpan and stir in the ratafia crumbs ; when
the custard is cold fill in the tartlets and put on the top
a layer of crumbs ; sift some sugar over and brown
for a few minutes in a hot oven, or use a salamander.
Semolina Put Wing.
2 ozs. Semolina.
1 pt. Milk.
2 ozs. Sugar.
3 Eggs.
Put the semolina into a-sauccpan with half a pint
of milk and the sugar, and boil for 10 minutes ; make
a custard of two yolks and 1 whole egg and the rest
of the milk ; mix it with the semolina ; turn into a
buttered pie-dish and bake until set in a cool oven.
Puff Pastry.
1 lb. Flour. I
1 lb. Butter. )
1 Lemon.
1 gill Water.
Sift the flour on to a board, make a well in the
centre, squeeze in the lemon juice, and with the water


make into a paste ; a little more water may be
required, according to the flour, but the paste should
be of the same consistency as the butter; work the
paste about until it is quite smooth and soft; squeeze
the butter very dry in a cloth, and roll out the paste
just large enough to wrap it in; wrap it up and let it
stand on ice, if possible, for 15 minutes, then very
carefully roll into a long thin strip ; great care must
be used to prevent the butter coming through the
crust; fold it into three, turn the open ends top and
bottom, close these with the rolling pin, and roll out
again; this should be done seven times, putting it by
between each roll for 15 minutes; if for patty cases
roll out a quarter of an inch thick, cut with round
pastry cutter, which should be dipped in hot water,
and then cut through half-way again with smaller
cutter; place on a baking sheet, and bake in a very
quick oven.
Vanilla Souffle.
4 Eggs.
ozs. Butter.
1 oz. Flour.
oz. Sugar.
1 gill Milk.
Essence of Vanilla.
Put the butter into a saucepan, and when it is dis-
solved put in the flour and cook well without brown-
ing ; then add the milk and stir quickly ; let it boil
for a minute or two ; then take the saucepan from the
fire and beat in the yolks of three eggs, one at a
time ; add the sugar and vanilla; whisk the whites
of 4 eggs in a basin to a very stiff froth ; stir these


into the other ingredients; butter thoroughly a plain
high mould, line round with paper 3 or 4 inches
above the tin (this must be well buttered too);
pour in the souffle ; cover with a buttered paper;
stand it in a saucepan of boiling water, which should
come half-way up the tin ; steam it for three-quarters
of an hour; turn it carefully on to a hot dish, and
serve instantly with wine sauce.
Rice Souffle.
1 pt. Milk.
2 ozs. Rice.
3 Eggs.
1 Lemon.
ozs. Sugar.
Put the milk into a clean saucepan, and when it
boils shake in the rice, which has been well washed ;
stir until the rice is soft; then turn into a basin, add
the sugar, grated rind of a lemon, and the yolks of 2
eggs; beat the whites of 3 eggs to a stiff froth, and
stir them lighly into the other ingredients; pour the
mixture into a well-buttered pie-dish ; place in a
moderate oven and bake for 40 minutes, or until firm.
Serve immediately with wine sauce.
Apricot Souffle.
d pt. Apricot Puree.
4 Eggs.
1 oz. Flour.
1 gill Milk.
ozs. Butter.
1 oz. Sugar.
Put the butter into a saucepan, and when it is dis-
solved put in the flour, and cook well without brown-
ing ; then add the milk; stir quickly, and let it boil


for 2 or 3 minutes; remove the saucepan from the
fire, and beat in, one at a time, the yolks of the
eggs; put the apricots through a hair sieve; take 1
gill of the puree and mix it with the souffld; sweeten
it; whisk the whites of 4 eggs to a stiff froth, and stir
these into the other ingredients; well butter a plain
mould; line it up with paper 2 or 3 inches higher
than the tin ; pour in the souffle ; cover with buttered
paper, and steam for three-quarters of an hour; turn
carefully on to a hot dish and serve instantly with
apricot sauce poured round.
Royal Mince Pies.
lb. Mincemeat.
1 lb. Good Pastry.
3 Eggs.
2 ozs. Castor Sugar.
1 oz. Clarified Butter.
1 Lemon.
Line some patty pans with good puff paste ; put the
mincemeat into a basin; mix with it the yolks of the
eggs, butter, sugar, and the juice and grated rind of
the lemon; put some of this mixture into the lined
pans, and bake until the crust is a good colour; beat
the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, with a little
sugar, and flavour with lemon juice ; when the pies
are baked heap this mixture on top, and put back
into the oven until a very pale brown.
Douglas Pudding.
3 Eggs.
5 Apples.
3 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
3 ozs. Currants.
3 ozs. Sugar.
£ teaspoonful Lemon Peel.


Chop the apples and put them into a basin; mix in
the bread crumbs, currants, sugar, and eggs, well
beaten; beat well; pour into a buttered basin and
boil for 2 hours; turn it carefully on to a hot dish,
and serve with sifted sugar and sherry.
Queen of Puddings.
1 pt. Bread Crumbs.
1 qt. Milk,
2 Lemons.
3 ozs. Castor Sugar.
J lb. Strawberry Jam.
4 Eggs.
lb. Icing Sugar.
Put the milk into a saucepan, and when it boils
pour it on to the bread crumbs; add the sugar, the
grated rind of two lemons, and the yolks of the eggs;
put this mixture into a buttered dish and bake until
set; put the icing sugar into a basin with the whites
of the eggs and the juice of the lemons, and beat to a
stiff froth ; put a layer of strawberry jam on the top
of the baked mixture, and then a thick layer of
icing; replace in a very cool oven until the icing is
firm ; half the icing may be coloured with cochineal
and laid on first, and covered afterwards with white.
Savoury Pudding.
3 Onions.
4 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
2 ozs. Flour.
1 Egg.
2 ozs. Oatmeal.
2 ozs. Suet.
1 teaspoonful Sage.
pt. Milk.
Pepper and Salt.
Boil the onions for 20 minutes and chop them
finely ; powder the sage, and mix all the dry ingre


dients well together ; make into a paste with the egg
and milk; put it into a buttered pie-dish and bake
three-quarters of an hour. This is good with roast
pork.
Cape Pudding.
lb. Bread Crumbs.
pt. Milk.
2 Eggs.
2 ozs. Butter.
2 ozs. Sugar.
lb. Jam.
Put the bread crumbs and sugar into a basin ; put
the butter and milk into a saucepan, and when they
boil pour on to the crumbs and sugar; put in the
yolks of the eggs, beat well, and pour into a buttered
pie-dish ; bake until set; when it is cool, spread over
a layer of jam ; whip the whites of the eggs to a stiff
froth, with a little sugar, and pile them on the top;
stand in a hot oven to set, but not brown ; when cold
it is ready to serve.
Christmas Pudding.—No. 1.
2 lbs. Eaisins.
1 lb. Currants.
1 lb. Sultanas.
lb Candied Peel.
1 lb. Bread Crumbs.
2 lbs. Flour.
2 lbs. Suet.
1 oz. Spice.
12 Eggs.
1 gill Brandy.
Stone and chop the raisins ; clean the other fruit;
cut the peel into small pieces; chop the suet finely,
and mix all the dry ingredients well together; beat
the eggs in a basin, mix with the brandy, and pour
over the pudding; stir well, and when thoroughly
mixed, press into a mould; tie down tightly with a


pudding cloth and boil for 8 hours; take up and hang-
in a dry place and boil again 2 hours the day it is
required.
Christmas Pudding.—No. 2,
2 lbs. Eaisins.
2 lbs. Sultanas.
J lb. Candied Peel,
Suet.
Jpt. Ale.
1 lb. Sugar.
2 lbs. Bread Crumbs.
1 oz. Sweet Almonds.
2 Lemons.
4 Eggs.
Stone and chop the raisins; clean the sultanas;
chop the suet finely; cut the peel into small pieces;
chop the almonds, and mix all the dry ingredients
well together; add the grated rind and juice of 2
lemons; beat the eggs, mix with the ale, and strain
this over the pudding; stir well and let it stand for
an hour; then press into well-buttered moulds, tie
down tightly, and boil for 6 hours; hang in a dry,
cool place, and boil again for 3 hours the day it is
required.
Amber Padding.
5 Eggs.
t| lb. Castor Sugar.
6 ozs. Butter.
2 ozs. Candied Peel,
Essence of Almonds or
Yanilla
f lb. Good Pastry.
Pat 3 yolks and 2 whole eggs into a basin, and
beat well ; add the butter, dissolved ; beat in the
sugar, peel, and flavouring ; line a dish with paste;
pour in the mixture, cover with paste, and bake
in a moderate oven; slip out on to a glass dish
and strew with sugar. Serve cold.


Finchley Pudding.
1 pt. Milk.
i lb. Flour,
lb. Eaisins.
2 Eggs.
6 ozs. Suet.
Boil the milk; when cold stir into it the flour and
finely-chopped suet; add 2 eggs, well beaten, and the
raisins, stoned and cut in half; turn into a buttered
dish and bake for 1 hour.
Mincemeat.
1 lb. Eaisins.
1 lb. Currants.
1 lb. Castor Sugar.
1 lb. Candied Peel.
1 oz. Cinnamon and Cloves.
1 gill Port.
1 lb. Suet,
Apples.
1 oz. Ground Almonds.
3 Oranges.
3 Lemons.
1 gill Brandy.
Stone and cut the raisins across several times ; these
should be weighed after stoning; cut the peel into
small pieces ; chop the apples and suet; the cinnamon,
cloves, and almonds should be ground and sprinkled
over the dry ingredients ; add the grated rind and
juice of the oranges and lemons, and pour over all the
brandy and wine ; mix well and press into jars; cover
with a paper dipped in brandy ; tie down closely and
stand in a cool, dry place for 2 weeks; it is then
ready for use.
Apple Meringue.
12 Apples.
A lb. Stoned Eaisins.
o ozs. Sugar.
2 ozs. Candied Peel.
4 Eggs.
2 Lemons.


Stew the apples and rub them through a hair sieve;
put in the raisins, peel, and sugar to taste ; turn into
a buttered pie-dish and bake in a slow oven for half
an hour, keeping it covered up ; beat the whites of the
eggs to a very stiff froth, with some sugar and lemon
juice; lay this on the top in heaps ; put back in the
oven till set and a pale brown; serve cold with cream
or custard.
Pastry Custards.
1 pt. Milk.
1 oz. Cornflour.
4 Eggs.
1 Lemon.
£ lb. Sugar.
Essence of Lemon.
1 lb. Pastry.
Line some patty pans with pastry; put the milk
into a saucepan with the lemon rind and sugar; mix
the cornflour smoothly with a little cold milk; and
when the milk in the saucepan is boiling, pour this in
and let it boil 2or 3 minutes; take out the lemon
peel, beat the yolks of the eggs and stir these in and
flavour with a few drops of essence ; when cold, half
fill the patty pans with this mixture ; bake in a
moderate oven until firm.
French Apple Turnovers.
1 \ lbs. Apples.
J lb. Sugar.
oz. Butter.
1 Lemon.
lb. Apricot Jam.
1 lb. Pastry.
Peel the apples, cut into quarters, and stew with
the sugar, butter, grated rind and juice o£ a lemon
until tender; when cool line some patty pans with


pastry; put in some apple and a teaspoonful apricot
jam; cover over with pastry; brush over with white
of egg and water; place in a brisk oven, and bake
until a good colour.
Savoury Bread Pudding.
J lb. Bread.
1 qt. Stock,
1 oz. Bacon.
J lb. Cold Fish.
A Sardine or Anchovy.
1 Egg.
Pepper and Salt.
Boil the bread in stock until quite soft, and squeeze
it fairly dry; chop up the bacon and sardine and flake
the fish; mix all these things together, season, and
mix with an egg into a paste; put into a buttered
pie-dish, and bake for half an hour.
Alexandria Pudding.
4 ozs. Suet.
4 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
3 Eggs.
2 ozs. Flour.
2 ozs. Sugar.
3 ozs. Marmalade.
1 gill Wine.
Shred and chop the suet very finely, and mix with
the bread crumbs, flour, and sugar in a basin; stir in
the marmalade; beat the eggs in a basin; add the
wine, and strain into the dry ingredients; mix
thoroughly; pour into a well-buttered mould, and
steam for 3 hours; turn carefully on to a dish, and
pour round wine sauce.
Cheesecakes.
1 pt. Milk.
8 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
2 ozs. Candied Peel.
2 gill Brandy or Sberry.
3 ozs. Butter.
3 ozs. Sugar,
4 Eggs.
1 lb. Pastry.


Put the milk and butter into a saucepan, and when
it boils pour over the bread crumbs; when cold beat
in 3 yolks and 1 whole egg, the sugar, candied
peel cut into very small pieces, and the brandy or
sherry; if this is objected to, essence of almonds or
lemon may be used; line some patty pans with nice
pastry, nearly fill with cheesecake mixture, and bake
in a moderate oven.
Short Pastry (very good).—No. 1.
1 lb. Flour.
12 ozs. Butter.
1 Lemon,
gill water.
Sift the flour on to a board and rub in the butter
until the flour is like dust; squeeze the juice of the
lemon into the water, and with this make a very dry
paste; work about with the hand until thoroughly
mixed and smooth; roll out once and it is ready for
use.
Short Pastry,—No, 3.
1 lb. Flour.
J lb. Lard-
1 gill Water.
Sift the flour into a basin; put in a pinch of salt;
rub in the lard lightly, and mix into a stiff paste with
the water; work about until smooth, and roll out
once; it is then ready for use. If this crust is mixed
up very dry, it is a very useful one to make in hot
weather for everyday pies; if used for fruit pies, a
teaspoonful of sugar may be added to the flour.


Diplomatic Pudding.
5 Eggs.
pt. Milk.
3 ozs. Sweet Biscuits.
2 ozs. Sugar.
1 gill Sherry.
1 gill Cream.
1 doz. Dried Cherries.
£ oz. Gelatine.
pt. Lemon Jelly.
Make a custard with 4 yolks of eggs and 1 whole
one ; pour into a basin, and whisk till nearly cold; if
cream is not used add a little more milk; cut the
biscuits into small pieces; a few ratafias are nice;
put them into the custard; cut the cherries in half
and put them in, and a little very finely-shred citron
peel; stir in very carefully the sherry ; dissolve the
gelatine in half a gill of water ; if the weather is hot,
use an extra sheet or two of gelatine; stir this in,
and when the pudding is nearly cold pour into a
decorated mould; this should be decorated with
some lemon jelly, red and white, sprinkled with
cocoanut and pistachio kernels; stand for several
hours in a very cool place; it may be served on a
bed of chopped jelly.
General Crust.
1 lb. Flour.
3 ozs. Lard.
8 ozs. Butter.
J Lemon.
1J gills Water.
Sift the flour into a basin, rub in the lard, and make
into a stiff paste with the water and lemon juice; cut the
butter into slices and roll out very thin in some flour;
roll out the paste and cover with the butter ; sprinkle
with lemon juice and fold up ; roll out again, and it


is ready for use. This is a delicious crust, but can
only be made in cold weather, when the butter can be
rolled.
Lemon Water Ice.
4 Lemons.
2-}j gills Water.
6 ozs. Sugar.
Put the rind and juice of the lemons, the sugar, and
water into a saucepan, and boil until it is a syrup ;
strain into a basin and freeze.
Fruit Puree.
Pick the fruit and put it into a saucepan with the
juice of a lemon and some sugar, and a gill of water
to every pound of fruit; boil until soft; rub through
a hair sieve with a wooden spoon.
Croute d’Ananas.
1 Pineapple.
3 ozs. Sugar.
1 Lemon.
1 Sponge Cake.
Candied Fruits.
1 gill Sherry.
Peel and cut the pineapple into slices; slice the
cake and lay alternately in a dish with the pineapple ;
put the sugar, juice of a lemon, sherry, and 1 gill of
water into a saucepan; boil until it becomes a syrup ;
pour this over the pineapple, decorate with candied
fruits, and it is ready to serve.
12


Rhubarb Mould.
1 bundle Rhubarb.
J lb. Sugar.
1 oz. Gelatine.
1 Lemon.
A pt. Water.
Wipe and cut the rhubarb into small pieces ; put it
into a saucepan with the sugar, lemon juice, and about
half a pint of water; stew very gently until soft;
rinse a mould in cold water; lay in the rhubarb ;
dissolve the gelatine in the juice (there should be
enough to fill a quart mould) ; if not sweet enough, add
more sugar; boil up and pour o ver the rhubarb ;
stand in a cool place till firm; dip the mould in warm
water and turn carefully out; serve with custard or
cream.
Meringues.
1 lb. Sugar. | 12 Whites of Egg.
The whites of egg must be very fresh ; put them
into a basin with some sugar, and whisk, adding the
sugar from time to time until they are a hard, solid
mass; oil some paper and fasten it on to boards ;
take the mixture up in dessert spoons, shape like an
egg, and drop on to the oiled paper; sift plenty of
sugar over them; stand in nearly a cold oven until
firm; very carefully scoop out the inside and fill in
with whipped cream, jam, &c.
Whisky Apples.
To every pound of apples add three-quarters of a
pound of sugar, the rind and juice of 1 lemon,


a little cinnamon, bruised ginger, vanilla, and half-gill
whisky. Peel the apples and scoop out the core ; put
them into a large clean stewpan with the whisky,
spices, &c., and simmer very slowly for an hour;
turn the apples and skim frequently; do not let them
break; they will become quite transparent; place
them in glazed jars; boil the syrup for 5 minutes
and pour over them when cold; tie down. These
will keep good for a long time, and are delicious;
served as dessert.
Orange Jelly.
6 Oranges.
2 Lemons.
1 lb. Loaf Sugar.
3 Eggs.
3 pts. Water.
J pt. Wine.
J pt. Lemon and Orange
J nice.
2 ozs. Gelatine.
Peel the oranges and lemons very thinly; strain
half-pint juice, put it into a large clean saucepan
with the other ingredients, and whites and shells of
the eggs, and whisk until it comes to boiling point.
Let it boil up and stand by the fire for half an hour;
run some water through the straining cloth; pour
the contents of the saucepan carefully through;
remove the basin and place another, and pour very
gently the jelly through again; rinse the moulds
in cold water, fill, and stand by until quite firm;
dip the moulds in warm water and turn carefully on
to a glass dish.


Lemon Jelly.
2 qts. Water.
3 ozs. Gelatine.
1 pt. Wine.
8 Lemons.
1 lb. Loaf Sugar.
4 Eggs.
4 Cloves.
Put the water, gelatine, and wine into a very clean,
large saucepan; peel four of the lemons very thinly
and put into the water, and strain in half a pint of
lemon juice; add the sugar and cloves; heat the
whites of the eggs for a minute or two, and put these
in, with the egg shells, broken up; whisk well over
the fire until it nearly boils; take out the whisk,
and let it boil for 2 or 3 minutes ; draw it back,
and let it stand where it will not boil for half an
hour; run some hot water through the straining cloth,
then pour through the contents of the saucepan,
remove the basin, and return gently to the cloth ;
it will drop through then clear and brilliant; rinse
a mould in cold water; fill with jelly, and stand by
till required.
Aspic Jelly.
2 qts. Water.
4 ozs. Gelatine.
1J gills Sherry.
2 Eggs.
£ gill French Yinegar.
1 Carrot.
1 Onion, stuck with 4 Cloves.
40 Peppercorns.
Celery or Celery Seed.
Bouquet Garni.
Salt.
Put all the ingredients into a large, clean saucepan,
with the whites and shells of 2 eggs ; if a sharp jelly
is desired, increase the quantity of vinegar; a table-
spoonful of tarragon vinegar is a great improvement;


whisk until it nearly boils; take out the whisk and
let it boil up; boil for 2 or 3 minutes ; then draw
back, where it will keep hot, for half an hour; run
some water through the straining cloth ; pour through
the contents of the saucepan; remove basin, and pour
very gently through again; let it stand until cold.
Aspic Meat Jelly. —No. 2,
4 lbs. Knuckle of Veal.
2 lbs. Gravy Beef.
7 pts. Water.
1 Onion stuck with Cloves.
2 Eggs.
Salt.
2 Carrots,
y Turnip.
1 Bouquet Garni.
1 gill Vinegar.
1 gill Sherry.
40 Peppercorns.
Chop the knuckle of veal well; cut the beef into
small pieces; add the water, and when it has boiled
up put in a little salt and skim very thoroughly; let
it boil slowly for 5 hours, then strain through a hair
sieve and let it stand until the next day; take off the
fat with a spoon and wash the top well with a cloth
dipped in hot water; then put it into a large, clean
saucepan with an onion stuck with 4 cloves, 2 carrots,
and half a turnip sliced up, a bouquet garni, vinegar,
sherry, peppercorns, salt, and the whites and shells of
2 eggs; whisk it well until it nearly boils, then take
out the whisk and let it boil for 2 or 3 minutes ; draw
it on one side and let it stand for half an hour; put a
clean tea-cloth over the jelly-stand ; pour some boiling
water through it, then pour the contents of the
saucepan slowly through; remove the basin, place
another one under the cloth, and carefully pour the


jelly through again ; it is then ready for use ; it may
be moulded with small pieces of lettuce, watercress,
and hard-boiled eggs ; when it is cold, if it is cut into
blocks or chopped, it forms a pretty garnish for dishes
of cold meat and poultry.
Trifle.
1 Sponge Cake.
6 Macaroons.
2 doz. Ratafias.
2 ozs. Sugar.
tj pt. Sherry.
J gill Brandy.
pt. Cream.
lb. Apricot or Rasp-
berry Jam.
Break the sponge cakes into pieces and lay in a
glass dish, and cover with macaroons and ratafias;
soak well with sherry or brandy; spread over a good
layer of jam; put a little sugar, a few drops of lemon
juice, and brandy, with the cream, and whisk it in a
basin ; stand a hair sieve over another basin, and as
the froth rises, take it up in a spoon and put it on the
sieve ; the firm part remains ; what drops through is
whipped again and again, till no more froth can be
made; heap this on the top of the jam, and it is
ready ; it may be decorated with candied fruits.
Blanc Mange.—No. 1.
1 qt. New Milk.
1 oz. Isinglass.
2 ozs. Sugar.
Flavouring.
Put the milk and sugar into a saucepan with the
gelatine and stir until it boils; add the flavouring;


pour into a jug and stir until nearly cold; rinse a
mould in cold water; pour in the blanc mange and
let it stand in a cool place until firm ; turn carefully
on to a dish and serve with stewed fruit or jam. One
gill of cream stirred into this is a great improvement.
Blane Mange.—J\o. 2.
1 qt. Milk.
3 ozs. Cornflour.
Flavouring.
1J ozs. Sugar.
Put the milk into the saucepan with the sugar ; mix
the cornflour in a small basin, with a little cold milk,
to a smooth paste, and when the milk is nearly boiling,
pour this in and stir well; let it boil for 2 or 3
minutes ; rinse a mould in cold water and pour in;
let it stand until cold.
Pineapple Fritters.
1 Pineapple.
6 ozs. Sugar.
Frying Batter.
Peel and slice the pineapple ; cut into small pieces
and stew with the sugar in a little water until tender;
when cool, dip them in frying hatter, which may he
made with the water in which the pineapple was
hoiled; fry in hot fat and serve with sugar.
Jaumange.
Make the same as blanc mange, and heat in the
yolks of 2or 3 eggs; flavour with brandy.


Apple Souffle.
8 Apples.
J pt. Custard.
2 ozs. Sugar.
1 Lemon.
1 oz. Butter.
Peel some apples and stew them with the lemon
peel and juice, butter, and sugar, until soft, then rub
them through a sieve; make a boiled custard with
half a pint of milk and yolks of 3 eggs; when cold,
mix with the apples and put into a glass dish; beat
the whites of the eggs to a strong froth with some
sugar, and flavour with essence of lemon or almonds;
heap these on the top of the apples and custard just
before serving.
Charlotte Russe.
1 pt. Cream.
1 doz. Glace Cherries.
1 gill Bed J elly.
1 oz. Castor Sugar.
oz. Gelatine.
Vanilla.
1 doz. Finger Biscuits.
Take a plain round mould and rinse it in cold
water; place the cherries in a pattern at the bottom,
and pour in gently the warm jelly; set it by until the
jelly is firm; then line the mould all round with
finger biscuits cut in half; put the cream into a basin,
add the sugar, and whip until it is quite stiff; then
flavour with vanilla; dissolve the gelatine in half a
gill of water, and stir it into the cream; place it care-
fully in the centre of the mould, and stand it in a
cool place till firm; dip the mould into warm water,
and turn the russe on to a dish.


Pineapple Cream,
1 Pineapple or tin of Pine-
apple.
1 oz. Gelatine.
\ gill Water.
1 pt. Cream.
2 ozs. Sugar.
1 teaspoonful Lemon Juice.
1 gill Jelly.
Cut the pineapple into small pieces; put half into a
saucepan, with the juice (if a tinned pineapple is
used) or water, lemon juice and sugar, and boil to a
syrup ; whip the cream until it is quite stiff; dissolve
the gelatine, and mix this with the cream, pineapple,
and syrup ; decorate a mould with a little jelly
(Princess jelly is the prettiest for this cream); turn
in the cream, and stand by until firm ; put the mould
into warm water for a minute, and then turn care-
fully on to a dish.
Apple Jelly.
2 lbs. Apples.
1 Lemon.
1 lb. Loaf Sugar.
1 oz. Gelatine.
Cocliineal,
Peel and core the apples and put them into a sauce-
pan, with the sugar, rind and juice of a lemon, the
pips of the apples, and about half a gill of water, and
cook until they are quite soft; then take them up
and rub through a hair sieve ; dissolve the gelatine
in a gill of water, stir this into the apples; colour
half of it pink with a few drops of cochineal; rinse
some small moulds in cold water and fill with the
jelly; let them stand until firm; dip the moulds in
warm water, shake gently, and turn on to a dish.


Calves’ Foot Jelly.
/ trj-
-3
3
2 Calves’ Feet.
2 Lemons.
2 Eggs.
jfa £ lb. Loaf Sugar,
i pt. Sberry.
Cinnamon or Cloves.
Put the feet on in cold water; bring them to the
boil; skim well; take up, and put into cold water;
wash and scrape them well; put them again into
a saucepan, with about 6 pints of water; when
it boils skim well, and boil very gently for 5 hours ;
strain through a hair sieve into a basin, and stand
by till the next day; take off the fat with a spoon,
and then wash the top of the jelly well in hot
water; put into a large, very clean saucepan; add
the sugar, rind, and juice of the lemons, the whites
and shells of 2 eggs, 4 cloves or little cinnamon, and
the sugar and wine ; whisk well over the fire, but
take out the whisk before it boils or it will not clear;
let it boil up, then stand on one side for half an hour;
take a clean tea-cloth, put it over the jelly stand,
and pour some boiling water through it; pour all the
contents of the saucepan through the cloth; remove
the basin, and place another one underneath, and pour
the jelly again through the cloth. If carefully pre-
pared it will not require any more straining; dip a
mould into cold water, pour the jelly gently in, and
stand in a cool place till firm; dip the mould in
warm water ; shake gently, and turn carefully on to
a dish.


Gateau of Apricots.
1 tin Apricots.
3 ozs. Sugar.
1 Lemon.
1 oz. Gelatine.
1 gill Cream.
Rub the apricots through a sieve; add the juice of
a lemon; dissolve the gelatine in the juice from the
apricots; stir this into the purde with the sugar;
pour into an open mould which has been rinsed in
cold water ; let it stand for some hours; turn carefully
on to a dish ; whip the cream until it is quite stiff;
sweeten this with sugar and heap in the centre.
Strawberry Cream.
1 pt. Strawberries.
3 ozs. Castor Sugar.
1 oz. Gelatine.
1 Lemon.
£ pt. Cream.
Pick the strawberries; sprinkle well with sugar,
and let them stand for half an hour; then rub
through a hair sieve; dissolve the gelatine in half a
gill water ; whip the cream until it is quite stiff; put
the lemon juice and sugar with the strawberry
puree; mix with the cream, and if not a good colour
put in a few drops of cochineal ; stir in the gelatine ;
rinse a mould in cold water; pour in the cream and
stand in a cold place until firm; dip the mould in
warm water, and turn the cream carefully on to a
dish.
Raspberry Cream.
1 pt. Raspberries,
pt. Cream.
2 ozs. Sugar.
1 oz. Gelatine.
1 Lemon.


Pick the raspberries and strew well with sugar,
let them stand for half an hour, then rub through
a hair sieve with a wooden spoon; add the lemon
juice and sugar to the puree; whip the cream until
it is very stiff, and then mix well with the pur^e;
dissolve the gelatine in half a gill of water, add this
to the cream and mix thoroughly; rinse a mould in
cold water and pour in the cream; let it stand in a cool
place until firm, then dip the mould in hot water and
turn carefully on to a dish.
Velvet Cream.
1 pt. Cream.
1 oz. Gelatine.
1 gill Sherry.
1 Lemon.
1 gill Honey.
1 oz. Sugar.
Whip the cream until quite stiff; mix the honey,
lemon juice, sugar, and sherry together, and stir it in;
dissolve the gelatine and mix it thoroughly with the
cream; pour into a wet mould and stand by for a
few hours; dip the mould in warm water and turn
carefully on to a dish.
Vanilla Cream.
3 Eggs,
i pt. Milk.
1 pt. Cream.
1 oz. Gelatine.
1 oz. Castor Sugar.
J teaspoonful Essence
Yanilla.
Put the yolks of* 3 eggs and 1 white into a basin,
and beat well; pour on to them the boiling milk ;
strain back into the saucepan and cook until the eggs
thicken; pour back into a basin and whisk for 5


minutes; then stand by until the custard is cold;
whip the cream until it is quite stiff; sweeten and
flavour with the vanilla; dissolve the gelatine in half
a gill of water, mix the cream and custard together
thoroughly, and then stir in the gelatine; decorate a
mould with some red jelly, pour in the cream, and
stand in a cool place until set; then dip the mould in
hot water and turn carefully on to dish.
Port Wine Jelly.
1 pt. Port.
1 Lemon.
i oz. Gelatine.
1J ozs. Sugar.
Put the wine into a saucepan with the rind and
juice of a lemon, sugar, and gelatine; let it get hot,
and stir until the gelatine is dissolved; strain through
a hair sieve; add a few drops of cochineal; pour into
a mould which has been dipped in cold water, and
stand by in a cool place until firm ; dip the mould
into warm water, and turn carefully on to a dish.
Ox Foot Jelly.
1 Ox Foot.
A lb. Loaf Sugar.
2 Eggs.
2 Lemons.
Flavouring, or £ pt. Wine.
Wash the foot; put it on in cold water; when it
boils up put in a little salt and skim thoroughly; take
it out of the water; wash well in cold water; put
it back in the saucepan and cover with cold water—
about 2 quarts; boil for 5 or 6 hours; strain it
through a hair sieve and let it stand till the next day,


then remove all the fat and wash the top well with a
cloth dipped in hot water; put the jelly into a large,
clean saucepan, with the sugar, rind, and juice of the
lemons and the whites and shells of 2 eggs; whisk
until it nearly boils ; take out the whisk; let it boil
up ; draw it away from the fire to stand for half an
hour; place a tea-cloth over the jelly-stand; pour
some hot water through it, and then pour in while wet
the contents of the saucepan; remove the basin and
place another one, and pour the jelly back again; dip
a mould in cold water ; colour half the jelly red with
a few drops of cochineal ; pour this into the mould,
and when it is firm fill it up with the white jelly ; let
it stand for some hours, then dip the mould in warm
water, shake gently, and turn carefully on to a dish.
Lemon Sponge.
2 Lemons.
2 Eggs,
f pt. Water.
J oz. Gelatine.
4 ozs. Castor Sugar.
A few drops Cochineal.
Put the rind and juice of the lemons, the sugar, gela-
tine, and water, into a saucepan, and pour over them
the water; stand over the fire, and stir until it boils;
boil for 5 minutes; then strain into a basin, and let it
stand until nearly cold; put the whites of the eggs
into a basin, and pour in by degrees the lemon juice,
gelatine, &c., and whisk well until of the consistency
of sponge; divide into 2 parts ; colour half with a
few drops of cochineal; take up alternately, a table-
spoonful at a time, and pile high on a glass dish.


Orange Snow.
J oz. Gelatine.
4 pt. Water.
3 ozs. Sugar.
6 Oranges.
1 Lemon.
Whites 2 Eggs.
Make same as lemon sponge, and when it has the
consistency of sponge turn into a mould which has
been rinsed in cold water, and stand by in a cool
place until firm; dip the mould for a minute into
warm water, and turn the snow carefully on to a
dish.
Orange Salad.
1 doz. Oranges.
4 ozs. Sugar.
1 gill Brandy.
Cut up a dozen oranges; put them into a salad
bowl; sprinkle well with sugar, and pour over the
brandy; let it stand covered over for half an hour.
Devonshire Junket.
1 qt. Milk,
pt. Whipped Cream.
1 dessertspoonful of Eennet.
Warm the milk to blood heat; stir in the rennet;
put into the dish in which it is to be served, and let
it stand in a warm place for 1 hour; it should then
be quite firm ; whip the cream very stiff and sweeten,
and place over the junket in small pieces.
To Candy Lemon Peel.
The rind of the lemons can be used for this after
the juice has been used for other purposes; remove
all the pith, and soak the lemons in strong salt and


water for 48 hours, and drain them quite dry ; make
a strong syrup—about 1 lb. sugar to every quart of
water —and when it is boiling put in the lemons and
stew them gently until quite soft; take them out, and
as they cool sprinkle well with sugar; when quite
cold and firm put them into a close tin for use.
Tomato as a Sweet.
Skin and slice some tomatoes; sift over them some
sugar, and serve with cream. They are delicious in
this way.
Apple Snow.
2 lbs. Apples.
4 Eggs.
3 ozs. Sugar.
1 Lemon.
Peel and core the apples, and stew them until soft;
rub them through a hair seive; add the lemon juice;
whip the whites of the eggs to a very stiff froth with
some sugar; mix this with the apples; heap on a
glass dish, or serve in small glasses with custard or
cream.
Apples, Stewed, —No. 1.
2 lbs. Apples.
\ lb. Sugar.
1 oz. Butter.
1 Lemon.
1 teaspoonful Essence of
Almonds.
Peel the apples and put them, with the butter, sugar,
rind and juice of a lemon, into a saucepan, and stew
until tender; then rub through a hair sieve ; flavour
with essence of almonds; pile on a glass dish, and
serve with custard or cream.


Apples, Stewed. —No. 3.
Apples nicely stewed with varied flavourings at
different times are always acceptable. Cloves, lemon,
ginger, sultana raisins are all good with apples. Send
plain pastry, baked in squares, or short cakes, to
table with them.
SAUCES.
Oyster Sauce.
1 doz. Oysters.
£ pt. Milk.
1 gill Oyster Liquor.
1 teaspoonful Lemon Juice.
2 ozs. Butter.
J oz. Flour.
Put half the butter into a small saucepan, and
when it is dissolved stir in the flour ; pour in the
milk and oyster liquor, and stir until it boils; boil 2
or 3 minutes; blanch the oysters, and stir them into
the hot sauce, and then stand covered over for 5
minutes; take the saucepan from the fire ; put in the
lemon juice, and last of all the cold butter in small
pieces.
Italian Sauce.
3 ozs. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
1 oz. Cornflour.
2 Shallots.
\ pt. White Wine.
pt. good Stock.
Simmer the shallots in the stock for a quarter of an
hour with 1 dozen peppercorns, 3 cloves, and 1 or 2
allspice ; strain the gravy, and make a smooth sauce
13


with the butter, flour, and gravy, the same as in
recipe for white sauce ; then add gradually the wine ;
pour it into a jar, and make it hot in a saucepan of
boiling water.
Shrimp Sauce.
J pt. Melted Butter.
pt. Shrimps.
1 oz. Butter.
1 dessertspoonful Anchovy
Sauce.
Make the melted butter by recipe already given j
skin the shrimps, and stir them in ; cover down in the
hot sauce for 10 minutes; just before serving stir in
1 oz. cold butter and the anchovy sauce.
Yellow Sauce.
\ pt. Milk.
•5 oz. Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
Yolks of 2 Eggs.
Put the butter into a small saucepan, and when it is
dissolved stir in the flour and mix well; pour on the
milk, and stir until it boils; draw back from the fire,
and beat in the yolks of two eggs; cook for a few
minutes, but do not allow the sauce to boil after the
eggs are in. This is a good sauce for fricassee.
Sharp Maitre d’Hotel Sauce.
2 ozs. Butter.
\ oz. Flour.
Salt and Cayenne.
\ pt. good Gravy.
1 tablespoonful Chili Vine-
gar.
1 tablespoonful plain Vine-
gar.
Put the butter into a stewpan, and when it is dis-
solved stir in the flour ; mix well; pour in the gravy,
and stir until it boils; then put in the vinegar and


seasoning. This sauce is often served with calf’s head,
or slices of cold meat may be warmed in it.
Sauce for Roast Pork.
1 Onion.
1 Apple.
I; pt. Stock.
.V oz. Flour.
1 teaspoonful Mustard,
i teaspoonful Curry Powder.
1 oz. Butter.
Salt.
Fry the onion and apple in the butter; when soft
and brown strain off the fat, and stir in the flour and
curry powder, then the mustard, dry; mix well
together, and pour in the stock ; let it boil for about 5
minutes; then strain into a sauce-boat, and flavour
with a few drops of vinegar or lemon juice. This is
a very nice sauce for roast pork.
Melted Butter.
2 or 3 ozs. Butter.
Salt to taste.
1 pt. Water.
1 oz. Flour.
Put half the butter into a small saucepan, and when
it is dissolved stir in the flour, and mix it until quite
free from lumps; cook it for a minute, then add all
at once the cold water, stir until it boils, and let it
boil 2 or 3 minutes ; take the saucepan from the fire,
season with salt, and stir in, in small pieces, the rest
of the butter. As soon as this has melted it is ready
to serve.
Mayonnaise Sauce-
3 Eggs.
I gill Yinegar.
gills Oil.
Pepper and Salt.
Put the yolks of the eggs and the salt into a basin,
and work them well with a wooden spoon, adding,


drop by drop, the oil; when well mixed add the
vinegar very slowly, half of which should be tarra-
gon, and season to taste with white pepper. This
sauce cannot be made too slowly. It should be of
the consistency of cream when finished.
Tartare Sauce.
J pt. Mayonnaise Sauce.
1 oz. Gherkins or Eschalots.
1 dessertspoonful Mustard.
1 tablespoonful Tarragon or
Chili Vinegar.
Mince finely the gherkins and eschalots ; stir in the
mayonnaise, adding the vinegar and cayenne. It is
then ready to serve.
Maitre d’Hotel Sauce.
1 pt. Milk.
1 oz. Flour.
Salt.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 tablespoonful Lemon
Juice.
1 teaspoonful Chopped
Parsley.
Put the butter into the saucepan, and when it is
dissolved stir in the flour and cook without browning
it; pour on the milk, and stir until it boils; boil
for a few minutes; remove the saucepan from the
fire; put in the lemon juice and seasoning of salt;
have ready a teaspoonful of finely chopped parsley r
and stir this in last of all. If a richer sauce is
desired, add a tablespoonful of cream.
Piquant Sauce.
1 pt. Stock.
* 1 oz. Butter.
1 oz. Flour.
2 doz. Peppercorns.
1 Onion.
1 Carrot.
Turnip.
1 tablespoonful Vinegar.


Put the vinegar and butter into a saucepan, and
when they are quite hot put in the vegetables and
peppercorns, and fry them until all the vinegar is
absorbed; stir in the flour, and when brown add the
stock, and let it boil very gently for half an hour;
then rub it through a sieve and return to a clean
saucepan; if not sharp enough, add a little lemon
juice. '
Mint Sauce.
J pt. Vinegar.
3 ozs. Sugar.
3 ozs. Mint.
Wash the mint, pick off the leaves, and chop very
finely; put it into a sauce-boat, and mix in the sugar;
stir in the vinegar, and mix well; let it stand for an
hour before serving.
Horseradish Sauce,
1 stick Horseradish.
1 gill Cream.
1 teaspoonful Flour.
2 tablespoonfuls Vinegar
or Lemon Juice.
Salt and Cayenne.
Scrape the horseradish very fine; mix it in a basin
with the flour, salt, and cayenne; stir in the cream,
and very slowly add the vinegar ; it is then ready.
This is a very nice sauce for cold roast beef.
BroAvn Sauce.
1 pt. Gravy or Water.
1 oz. Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
1 rasher Bacon.
1 Carrot.
■J Turnip.
1 Onion.
2 doz. Peppercorns.


Peel and cut up the vegetables into small pieces;
put the butter into a saucepan, and when it is hot
put in the vegetables and bacon, and fry a good
colour; stir in the flour, and when it is brown add
the stock, and stir until it boils; simmer gently for
about an hour; trimmings of poultry, mushrooms, a
tomato, or celery may be added or used from time
to time to vary the flavour of the sauce; rub it
through a hair sieve ; then make it hot in a clean
saucepan, and it is ready to serve.
White Sauce.
1 pt. Milk.
1 oz. Flour.
2 ozs. Butter.
Salt.
Put the butter into a saucepan and let it dissolve,
but not acquire any colour, or it will spoil the sauce ;
stir in the flour and cook it for a minute, then pour
in all at once the cold milk; stir until it boils, let it
boil 2 or 3 minutes ; season nicely with salt, and it is
ready. Omitting the salt and substituting sugar, this
recipe will do for plain sweet sauce.
Egg Sauce.
1 pt. White Sauce. 1 2 Eggs.
Boil the eggs for 15 minutes, remove the shells,
cut the whites into small pieces, and stir into the
sauce; pour this over the dish of meat or fish; put
the yolks on to a sieve and press them through


with a wooden spoon so that they fall in golden
rain on the dish.
Dutch Sauce.
2 Eggs.
2 tablespoonfuls Vinegar.
4 ozs. Fresh Butter.
Salt and Pepper.
Put the vinegar into a saucepan with some white
pepper and salt, and reduce it to half the quantity;
remove the saucepan from the fire; add 2 table-
spoonfuls of cold water and the yolks of 2 eggs ; put
the stewpan on the fire and cook the eggs, stirring all
the time, but do not let them boil; divide the butter
into 3 or 4 pieces; take the stewpan from the fire,
put in one part of the butter; stand it again on the
fire, constantly stirring; take it off again, and put in
another part of the butter; do this until all the
butter is used up; if the sauce thickens, add a little
cold water. This is considered one of the first and
best of white sauces; it requires to be made very
carefully. It is a good sauce to serve with fish.
Tomato Sauce.
6 Tomatoes.
3 Shallots, or 1 Onion.
1 oz. Butter.
1 gill Stock.
2 ozs. Ham or Bacon.
1 Bouquet Garni.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
Salt,
oz. Flour.
Wipe the tomatoes and cut them into pieces; put
the butter, and bacon cut into dice, into a small stew-
pan ; when hot, stir in the flour, tomatoes, and


peppercorns; add a gill of stock and the bouquet
garni; let all boil for about 20 minutes, stirring
constantly; then put it through a hair sieve, season
with salt, return to a clean saucepan and make hot;
if too thick, add a little gravy.
Wine Sauce.
1 oz. Sugar.
1 tahlespoonful Raspberry
Jam.
1 gill Sherry.
A Lemon.
gill Water.
Put the sugar, lemon juice, jam, and half a gill of
water into a small saucepan, and let it boil for 5 or 6
minutes; add the sherry, and when it is hot strain
through a hair sieve; it is then ready.
Custard Sauce.
lEgg.
ts oz. Sugar.
1 gill Milk.
Essence Vanilla.
Put the milk and sugar into a small stewpan; beat
the egg well, and when the milk boils pour it on the
egg and whisk well; flavour with vanilla; strain into
a stewpan and cook until it thickens, but don’t let it
boil, or the egg will curdle ; it is then ready.
Parsley Sauce.
pt. Milk or White Stock.
1 oz. Butter,
ij oz. Flour.
1 teaspoonful Chopped Pars-
ley.
The liquor in which the meat has been boiled is
nice for this sauce. Put the butter into a small


saucepan, and when it is dissolved put in the flour and
cook without browning; pour in the milk or stock
and stir until it boils ; let it boil for 2 or 3 minutes ;
take the saucepan from the fire, season with salt, and
stir in the parsley, which has been very finely
chopped.
Onion Sauce.
Pepper and Salt.
4 Onions,
pt. White Sauce.
Peel the onions; put them on in cold water ; when
they have boiled 2 or 3 minutes throw the water
away; cover again with cold water and boil until
soft; take them up, chop and season, and stir into half
a pint of white sauce.
Jam Sauce.
2 ozs. Jam.
1 Lemon.
1 oz. Sugar.
1 gill Water.
Put the jam, lemon juice, water, and sugar into a
small saucepan ; stir until it boils; then simmer for 10
minutes; thicken it with half a teaspoonful of corn-
flour ; let it boil up; then strain round the pudding.
This is a nice sauce for cabinet pudding, souffles, &c.
German Wine Sauce.
2 Eggs.
1 gill Sherry.
1 oz, Castor Sugar.
Put the yolks of the eggs into a small saucepan;
add the sherry and sugar; stand over a slow fire, and


mix well with the whisk until the eggs thicken. It
is then ready to serve.
Brandy Sauce.
3 Eggs. I
1 gill Milk or Cream. |
1 gill Brandy.
2 ozs. Sugar.
Put the yolks of the eggs into a basin; beat well;
add the sugar, milk or cream, and brandy ; pour into
a jug, and stand in a saucepan of boiling water for 10
minutes, or until it thickens, stirring well all the
time. Then it is ready.
Bechamel Sauce.
1J pts. Milk.
1 pt. Good White Stock.
2 Onions.
2 ozs. Flour.
1 Carrot.
Celery.
1 Eschalot.
4 ozs. Butter.
Salt.
Put the milk into a saucepan with the onions stuck
with 4 cloves, the carrot, celery, bouquet garni, and
white peppercorns; simmer very gently for about 10
minutes; then strain it off and mix with the white
stock ; put the butter into a very clean saucepan, and
when dissolved stir in the flour and mix well; then pour
in the stock, and stir until it boils; let it boil gently
for 5 minutes, stirring all the time; strain through a
hair sieve, and stir until cold. This may be warmed
up as required. A gill of cream added after the sauce
is made is a great improvement.


Bread Sauce.
1 8011.
\ pt. Milk.
6 Peppercorns.
1 Onion.
Salt.
Butter or Cream.
Put the crumb of the roll into a clean saucepan,
and the onion, stuck with 2 cloves ; pour over the
milk; stand by the fire for a quarter of an hour;
then put it over the fire and let it boil; take out the
onion, stir in 1 oz. of butter, and rub through a sieve ;
a little cream added then is nice. Make it hot and it
is ready.
Apple Sauce.
1 oz. Butter.
1J ozs. Sugar.
6 Apples.
1 Lemon.
Peel and core the apples, but do not cut them; put
them with the pips into water and boil until soft;
take them up and rub through a hair sieve with a
wooden spoon; stir in the butter, lemon juice, and
sugar ; make hot, and it is ready.
Sydney Relish.
1 lb. Mushrooms.
6 Shallots.
3 ozs. Mixed Spice.
1 qt. Brown Vinegar.
2 lbs. Tomatoes.
3 ozs. Sugar.
1 oz. Salt.
2 or 3 Capsicums.
Peel the tomatoes, mushrooms, and shallots ; cut up
all the ingredients into small pieces and mix well with
the salt, sugar, and spices ; place them in a basin ; boil
the vinegar and pour it over; cover closely down


until cold, then bottle it. It will keep good some time,
and is a nice relish with cold meat.
Sauce Poivrade.
1 Onion.
3 Shallots.
1 oz. Butter.
1 Bouquet Garni,
vr gill Vinegar.
1 pt. Stock.
| oz. Flour.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
Pepper and Salt.
Mince the onion and shallots and fry them with the
peppercorns in the butter until a good colour; pour
in the vinegar and reduce about one-fourth; add the
stock and bouquet garni; thicken with a little flour;
draw the saucepan on one side and simmer for 20
minutes; skim off the fat and put through a hair
sieve; reduce to proper consistency; season with
pepper and salt. This is a good sauce for game and
dishes of dressed mutton.
Sauce for Wild Duck.
1 tablespoonful Harvey’s
Sauce.
1 tablespoonful Worcester
Sauce.
1 glass of Port.
The Juice of a Lemon.
1 teaspoonful Made Mustard
Cayenne.
Put all these things hut the mustard into a small
saucepan and stir until quite hot, then mix in the
the mustard and pour into a warm sauce tureen.


VEGETABLES.
Curried Potatoes.
1 lb. Potatoes.
1 Onion.
Lemon Juice.
1 gill Stock,
d lb. Butter.
Curry Powder.
Slice the onion and fry in the butter; slice in the
cold boiled potatoes ; dredge with curry powder and
salt to taste ; pour in the stock and a little lemon
juice, and shake over the fire for 10 minutes.
French Beans Saute.
Slice the beans into thin strips, and put into boiling
water, with half a teaspoonful carbonate of soda and
salt; boil very quickly without the lid till soft, strain
off the water; put 2 ozs. butter into a saucepan, toss
the beans in this, and serve very hot.
Beetroot in Bechamel Sauce.
2 Beetroots. j 1 pt. Bechamel Sauce.
Wash the beetroot and boil till nearly cooked;
take up, skin, and cut into rather thin, neat slices.
finish cooking them in bechamel sauce; when quite
tender, dish the beets and pour the sauce over.


Haricot Beans (Boiled).
Take large haricot beans and cover with boiling-
water ; let them stand 10 minutes; the skins will then
peel off easily; put into boiling water, salted, with an
onion, and boil until quite soft; strain off the water,
and mash with 1 oz. butter and pepper and salt. Pile
high on a warm vegetable dish.
Puree of Mushrooms.
Chop some fresh mushrooms and simmer in broth
until quite soft; add 2 ozs. fine bread crumbs
and cook until the moisture is absorbed; rub through
a sieve, put back into a saucepan, and add butter,
pepper, and salt, and a little cream if a rich purde is
desired; make it quite hot, and it is ready. This
puree is very good served with fried chicken.
Potatoes a la Duehesse.
1 lb. Potatoes. I
1 E gg- 1
1J ozs. Flour.
Pepper and Salt.
Boil and mash the potatoes smoothly; mix in the
egg, seasoning, and flour; have ready some hot fat;
take up a spoonful of the mixture in a rough shape
and drop it in ; fry a pale brown; take out and drain
on some kitchen paper; pile high on a dish, and
garnish with fried parsley.
Celery au Parmesan.
1 head Celery.
J gill Stock.
1 oz. Butter.
2 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
4ozs. Cheese.
Salt and Pepper.


Wash and trim the celery and boil in salted water
for 20 minutes ; strain off the water and place on the
dish in which it is to be served; sprinkle with grated
cheese, then bread crumbs seasoned with pepper and
salt, then more cheese, and moisten with a little stock ;
cover with crumbs, and place the butter in small
pieces all over; brown in the oven or in front of the
fire for about 15 minutes.
Potatoes with Milk.
2 Eggs.
3 ozs. Butter.
Salt and Pepper.
2 ozs. Flour.
J pt. Milk.
2 lbs. Potatoes.
Slice some boiled potatoes; melt the butter in a
stewpan and stir in the flour; add gradually a gill
of warm milk, pepper, salt, and little nutmeg; when
the sauce has boiled put in the potatoes; simmer
gently for 10 minutes, then draw the stewpan away
from the fire; mix the yolks of the eggs with a gill
of milk; pour into the stewpan and stir until it
thickens ; turn on to a hot dish and serve.
Turnips in Stock.
6 Turnips.
2 ozs. Butter.
J pt. Stock.
1 oz. Flour.
1 teaspoonful Sugar.
Salt.
Wash, peel, and cut each turnip into 4 or 6 pieces;
put them into boiling salt and water, and boil for
7or 8 minutes; strain off the water; put in the
butter, and shake the turnips in it until they are a
light brown ; now put in the flour, sugar, and salt;


add the stock, and simmer gently until the turnips
are quite soft; dish them and pour over the sauce.
Boiled Cauliflower.
1 Cauliflower. | 1 teaspoonful Sugar and Salt.
Remove the outside stalks of the cauliflower, wash
well, and let it remain in cold water for an hour,
in which put a tablespoonful of vinegar; this will
kill the insects; have ready a large saucepan of
boiling water; season with salt and sugar ; plunge
the cauliflower in, with the flower downwards ; let it
boil quickly, without the lid, for about 20 minutes;
take it up carefully, drain on a sieve for a few
minutes, then dish and serve.
Carrots with Ham.
6 Carrots.
lb. Ham.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 oz. Flour.
1 gill Stock.
1 Onion.
Salt and Sugar.
Melt the butter in a stewpan and stir in the flour ;
add the stock, and let it boil.; cut the ham into small
pieces and put it into the sauce; slice the carrots, and
boil them for 5 minutes in water seasoned with salt
and sugar; strain the water off, and put them into the
sauce with an onion, and simmer gently until the
carrots are tender; dish up, take out the onion, and
pour the sauce over them.


Potato Chips.
1 lb. Potatoes. j Hot Fat.
Peel and wash the potatoes, and dry well in a
cloth; cut them into small pieces and shape into
quarters; sprinkle with salt; put them into a frying
basket, and fry in very hot fat; drain for a few
minutes on kitchen paper; pile on a dish, and serve
with fried parsley.
Stewed Carrots.
6 Young Carrots.
1J ozs. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
Scrape and cut the carrots into fancy shapes, and
boil in water seasoned with salt and sugar; strain
off the water; put 1| ozs. butter into a stewpan ;
put in the carrots, and sprinkle over the parsley,
and cook very slowly till quite tender ; keep them
covered closely, and shake frequently to prevent
them from burning; pile on a dish, and pour the
sauce over.
Potato Souffle.
4 Potatoes.
oz. Butter.
1 gill Milk.
4 Eggs.
Pepper and Salt.
Well scrub 4 large potatoes, and bake them until
quite soft, but don’t burn the skins; cut them care-
fully in halves, so that they will stand nicely; rub
the potato through a sieve; put the butter into a
14


stewpan, and when it is dissolved put in 3 ozs.
of potato; season well; remove the saucepan from
the fire and heat in the yolks of 3 eggs; whisk the
whites to a very stiff froth and stir them into the
other ingredients; stand the 8 half-skins on a baking
sheet; half fill them with this mixture; put into
a moderate oven and bake for about 10 minutes, or
until they have risen well and are of a pale brown ;
arrange them on a napkin and serve.
Vegetable Marrow.
1 Marrow. ] \ pt. White Sauce.
Peel the marrow; cut it into quarters and remove
the seeds; wash well in cold water; have ready
some boiling water nicely salted; put in the marrow
and boil for about 10 minutes ; drain off the water ;
put the marrow into a vegetable dish and pour the
sauce over, or it may he served plainly with a little
cold butter.
French Beans.
2 lbs. French Beans. | J pt. White Sauce.
Slice the beans; wash well in cold water; have
ready a large saucepan of boiling water well salted ;
put in the beans and boil quickly without the lid for
20 minutes ; when soft strain off the water and shake
well in a colander; put into a vegetable dish and pour
over them the white sauce; if the beans are at all
old, add half a teaspoonful of carbonate of soda.


Cabbage, Boiled.
1 Cabbage. I 1 tablespoonful Vinegar.
Salt. |
Cut off the outside leaves and hard stalk of the
cabbage and put it into cold water, with a teaspoonful
of vinegar; wash it well; have ready a large sauce-
pan of boiling water, well salted ; put in the cabbage
and cover over ; when it has boiled up remove the lid
and let it boil very fast, pressing it into the water from
time to time; boil for about 20 minutes; when it is
soft take it up, drain the water off, and press it well
with a vegetable presser; turn it into a dish and cut
into five or six pieces.
Green Peas, to Boil.
£ peck of Peas.
Mint.
1 teaspoonful Sugar.
1 teaspoonful Salt,
li ozs. Butter.
Shell the peas and put them on in cold water with
some sprigs o£ mint, the salt, and sugar; bring them
to the boil, and boil without the lid from 15 to
20 minutes; take up a few in a spoon and press
them ; if soft, they are done ; strain off all the water ;
take out the mint; put in the butter, and when it is
dissolved, turn the peas into a hot dish and serve.
Croquettes of Potatoes,
2 lbs. Potatoes.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 Egg.
Salt and Pepper.


Boil the potatoes until soft and rub them through
a sieve ; put the butter and seasoning into a saucepan,
and when it is hot turn in the potatoes, drop in the
egg, and mash them smoothly; spread on a plate till
cold, then make up into balls and croquettes, cover
with egg and bread crumbs, and fry in hot fat; dish
on a paper or napkin, and garnish with fried parsley.
To Boil New Potatoes.
Potatoes.
1 sprig Mint.
oz. Butter.
Salt.
Scrape and wash the potatoes, put them into
boiling water with a sprig of mint and some salt;
boil fast for about 20 minutes, or until rather soft;
strain the water away, take out the mint, put in the
butter, and toss over the fire until the butter is dis-
solved. Turn into a hot dish and serve.
Cauliflower au Gratin,
1 Cauliflower.
2 ozs. Parmesan Cheese.
pt. White Sauce.
Boil the cauliflower, until tender, in salt and water;
cut away the green leaves and press all the water out
with a cloth; place on the dish in which it is to be
served. Make a pint of white sauce and put into it
half the cheese ; pour this over the cauliflower and
sprinkle the dry cheese on the top ; place it in front
of the fire, or in the oven, for a few minutes to
brown; it is then ready to serve.


Stuffed Tomatoes.
7 Tomatoes.
1 dessertspoonful Parsley.
1J ozs. Butter.
2 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
2 ozs. Ham.
Sbred of Onion.
Pepper and Salt.
7 Pried Sippets Bread.
Choose 7 tomatoes of good shape and size; cut off
the top and scoop out part of the inside; mix the
parsley, very finely chopped, the bread crumbs, ham,
and onion in a basin; season with pepper and salt,
and bind together with the butter; fill the tomatoes
with this mixture; stand on a buttered tin, and bake
for about 10 minutes; have ready seven rounds of
fried bread; stand the tomatoes on this and serve.
Potato Snow.
2 lbs. Potatoes. j Salt.
Boil the potatoes carefully in nicely-salted water,
and dry them well; stand a wire sieve over the
vegetable dish, and press the potatoes through with a
wooden spoon; they will fall like a heap of snow;
serve at once uncovered.
Boiled Potatoes.
2 lbs. Potatoes. 1 Salt.
Wash and peel the potatoes very thinly; wash
again in clean water ; put into a saucepan; cover with
cold water nicely salted, and boil for about 20 minutes;
then strain the water off, and let them finish in the


steam for about 10 minutes; then remove the lid of
the saucepan, and toss them over the fire for a few
minutes until thoroughly dry.
Savoury Cabbage.
1 Cabbage.
3 ozs. Cheese.
1 oz. Butter.
2 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
Pepper and Salt.
Boil a cabbage until soft; drain and squeeze very
dry; put half of it in a hot dish, and sprinkle over
half the grated cheese; season with pepper and sal
and a few small pieces of butter; then put in the rest
of the cabbage ; strew on the remaining cheese and
butter in small pieces, and cover the top well with
bread crumbs; bake in an oven 20 minutes. This is
a delicious dish, and a nice change from plain cabbage.
Cassolettes of Potatoes.
2 lbs. Potatoes.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 Egg.
Pepper and Salt.
}j pt. Thick White Sauce.
Tomatoes, Carrots, Green
Peas, &c.
Egg and Bread Crumbs.
Boil the potatoes until soft, then rub them through
a sieve; put the butter into a saucepan, and when
it is hot put in the potatoes; drop in the egg and
seasoning; mix well, and put on a plate to cool;
when cold, make into flat cakes about 2 inches across
and 1 inch high ; mark with small cutter or ring in the
centre; well cover with egg and bread crumbs, and
fry in hot fat; then take out the centre; fill in
alternately with tomatoes, carrots, peas, &c., cut into


small pieces, and mixed with a little thick, white
sauce.
Potato Cakes.
1 lb. Potatoes.
1 oz. Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
1 Egg.
Salt.
Boil and mash the potatoes; put the butter into a
saucepan, and when it is dissolved put in the potatoes,
Hour, egg, and a seasoning of salt; mix well, and turn
on to a houred board; shape into small, hat cakes;
put on to a buttered tin; brush over with egg or
water, and bake in a brisk oven until pale brown ;
cut open, butter, and serve hot.
Potato Beignets.
1J lbs. Potatoes.
2 ozs. Butter.
2 Eggs.
2 ozs. Grated Cheese.
Egg and Bread Crumbs.
Hot Fat.
Rub the potatoes through a sieve and mix them
into a paste with the butter and egg; roll and cut
into fancy shapes; grate some cheese over them;
cover with egg and bread crumbs and fry a pale
golden colour; or they can be baked in the oven.
Serve these as a separate course, or they can be used
as a garnish for many dishes.
Masked Potatoes.
2 lbs. Potatoes.
1 dessertspoonful Milk.
2 ozs. Butter.
Salt and Pepper.


Boil or steam the potatoes and put them through a
wire sieve; put the butter, salt, and milk or cream
into a saucepan; when it is quite hot put in the
potatoes and stir well about; pile on a hot dish, and
make them look rough and rocky with a fork.
Turnips in White Sauce.
6 Turnips. | \ pt. White Sauce.
Peel the turnips and cut them into dice ; put them
into boiling water, nicely salted, and cook them until
quite soft, hut do not let them break; take up and
strain the water off; have ready the white sauce,
nicely seasoned; stir the turnips into this ; border
a dish with carrots, cut into fancy shapes; put the
turnips in the centre, and it is ready for serving.
These are very nice with rump steak.


OMELETTES, SALADS, AND
SAVOURIES.
Poet’s Salad.
2 Boiled Potatoes.
1 teaspoonful Mustard.
1 teaspoonful Anchovy.
2 teaspoonfuls Salt.
3 tablespoonfuls Oil.
1 tablespoonful Vinegar.
Yolks of 2 Eggs.
J teaspoonful Onion.
Press the potatoes and yolks of eggs, boiled hard,
through a sieve; mince and bruise the onion well;
add very gradually the oil, salt, anchovy, and mus-
tard ; last of all, the vinegar ; make this very slowly,
in a cool place, and let it stand for an hour.
French Beans and Tomato Salad.
Take some cold cooked French beans, pile them on a
dish, and sprinkle with vinegar or lemon juice; slice
the tomatoes, raw; mix together some salt, pepper,
oil, and vinegar; dip the slices of tomato in this, and
arrange them on top of the beans.
Fruit Salads.
Fruit salads can be made with any kind of fruit ;
pick it carefully, and, if peaches or apricots, remove
the skin and stones arrange in a glass dish, and sprinkle


well with white sugar; pour over a glass of white
wine or brandy; cover over and let it stand for an
hour or two; sprinkle well with sugar just before
serving. These can be made without wine if desired.
Beetroot and Macaroni Salad.
Take equal quantities of cooked beetroot and
well-boiled macaroni ; slice the beetroot and cut the
macaroni into 1-inch pieces, and mix them together ;
make a simple salad dressing with a little salt,
pepper, mustard, oil or cream, and tarragon vinegar;
pour this over, and let it stand for an hour before
serving. It should then be a good colour.
Salad Dressing.
2 Eggs.
1 teaspoonful Brown Sugar.
1 teaspoonful Harvey’s
Sauce.
2 tahlespoonfuls Salad Oil.
2 tahlespoonfuls Vinegar.
1 gill Cream.
Salt, Pepper, and Mustard
to taste.
Boil the eggs hard; put the yolks into a mortar
and pound them well, then put them into a basin with
the mustard, pepper, and salt, and mix well, adding
gradually the oil, then the sauce and vinegar; when
all are thoroughly mixed, put in the cream. This
dressing should be carefully and slowly made, and
poured over the salad just before serving.
Chicken Salad.
tj Chicken.
1 gill Thick White Sauce.
Salad Dressing.
1 Lettuce.
6 Eadishes.
Small Salad.


Cut up a cold chicken into small pieces and remove
the skin; dip it into some thick white sauce; arrange
some salad on a dish; put over it a little dressing,
and then some pieces of chicken, then more lettuce,
radishes, &c.; continue this in layers until all the
materials are used up, leaving plenty of salad for the
top; garnish with beetroot and hard-boiled eggs.
Potato Salad.
1 lb. Cold Potatoes.
1 Lettuce.
1 gill Salad Dressing.
1 Ancbovy.
Cut the potatoes into small pieces and pour over
them a nice salad dressing in which an anchovy has
been minced; heap on the top a lettuce broken into
small pieces.
Celery Salad.
1 bead Celery,
1 gill Oil.
2 Eggs.
1 teaspoonful Vinegar.
Salt.
Wash the celery and cut it into pieces 2 inches long ;
put the eggs in a basin (yolks only), and add very
slowly the oil; when it is well worked up, gradually
pour in the vinegar and season it with salt; put in
the celery, and cover well with the sauce ; pile high on
a dish and garnish with beetroot cut into fancy shapes.
Fish Salad. Moulded.
1 lb. Cold Fish.
1 pt. Aspic Jelly.
Lettuce and Small Salad.
Beetroot.
2 Eggs.
Vinegar and Salt.


Flake some cold boiled fish and lay it in vinegar
or lemon juice; sprinkle with salt and leave for an
hour; melt the jelly; rinse a mould in cold water,
pour in a little of the jelly, then put in a layer of
fish ; when that is firm, put in a little more jelly and
some salad; wait again until that is set, then put in
more jelly and some hard-boiled eggs; continue in
this way until the mould is full; stand by for an
hour or two. Dip the mould in warm water, shake
gently, and turn carefully on to a dish.
Cotillion Sandwiches.
These are very nice for a supper dish. Mince up
some cold roast turkey; cut some nice bread and
butter, cover with turkey, and season with French
mustard; put another slice of bread and butter on
top, press together, and cut into shape.
Anchovy Savoury.
6 Anchovies.
3 Eggs.
Pepper.
3 or 4 slices of Toast.
1 oz. Butter.
Skin and clean some anchovies; boil the eggs hard,
take out the yolks—the whites are not required for
this dish; put the anchovies, yolks of eggs, butter,
and pepper into a mortar and pound together well.
Spread this mixture on buttered toast and serve cold.
Cheese Straws.
2 ozs. Butter.
2 ozs. Flour,
ozs. Parmesan.
1 Egg.
Salt and Cayenne.


Rub the butter and flour together, and then mix in
the grated cheese and seasoning and bind into a paste
wdth an egg; lightly flour the board and roll the
paste into a strip one-eighth of an inch in thickness,
and rather more than 5 inches wide; take a sharp
knife, trim off the edge and cut the paste into strips
about one-eighth of an inch wide ; then take two round
cutters, dip them in flour, and cut little rings of
paste; grease a baking sheet, place on it the straws
and rings, and bake a very pale brown ; then take
the straws and thread them through the rings.
Savoury Marrow Toast.
I- pt. Peas.
3 slices Toast.
Cayenne.
2 ozs. Grated Cheese.
1 dessertspoonful Anchovy
Sauce.
Have some slices of toast cut into good shapes;
spread these with marrow; lay on some well-boiled
peas, and mix some cheese and anchovy sauce together,
and put on the top ; stand in a quick oven, or in front
of the fire, for a few minutes, and serve very hot;
spinach may be used instead of the peas, and butter
for the toast instead of marrow.
Savoury Toast Piquant.
1 dessertspoonful Anchovy
Sauce.
1 dessertspoonful Worces-
ter Sauce.
1 dessertspoonful Cream.
1 teaspoonful Yinegar.
1 yolk Egg.
Some Cold Boiled French
Beans.
Slices of Toast.


Put the sauces and cream in a small saucepan; stir
in the egg, and make all quite hot; then put in some
cold boiled French beans ; have ready some nice slices
buttered toast; cover them with this mixture, and
serve very hot.
Sardine Toast.
Slices of Toast.
Sardines.
Anchovy Paste.
Very finely chopped Parsley.
Make some nice slices buttered toast; spread over
little anchovy sauce ; lay half a sardine on each piece;
garnish with parsley.
Anchovy Toast.
1 oz. Butter.
2 Eggs.
1 dessertspoonful Anchovy
Sauce.
1 teaspoonful Worcester
Sauce.
Cayenne or Pepper.
Slices of Toast.
Make some hot buttered toast; cut it into shapes,
and arrange on a dish ; melt the butter on a very hot
plate ; stir in the yolks of the eggs and mix well;
add the anchovy and Worcester sauces; when quite
hot pour over the toast, and serve immediately.
A simple anchovy toast can be made with slices of
buttered toast spread with anchovy sauce.
Curried Rice.
1 teacupful Bice.
1 dessertspoonful Curry
Powder.
1 gill Gravy.
1 oz. Butter.


Boil the rice by recipe already given; mix the
butter and curry powder together; pour in gradually
the gravy, stirring all the time; put it into a saucepan
and boil for 5 minutes; then put in the rice and
shake well together; cover it over, and let it stand
by the side of the fire until the gravy is absorbed; it
is then ready to serve.
Cheese Fritters.
1 pt. Water.
1J ozs. Butter.
3 ozs. Flour,
b lb. Cheese.
3 Eggs.
Salt and Pepper.
Hot Fat.
Put the water and butter into a saucepan, and
when it boils work in enough flour to form a thick
paste ; take off the Are ; season well, and work in the
grated cheese, the yolks of 3 eggs and the whites of
2, beaten to a stiff froth; let it stand for 2 hours;
have plenty of hot fat, and drop into it pieces of paste
about the size of a walnut; pile on a dish; sprinkle
with salt, and serve very hot.
Tomato Savoury,
1 Tomato.
1 gfll Milk.
2 Eggs.
Salt.
Skin and boil a tomato, and season with salt; take
up, and drain off the water; put the milk into a
saucepan, and when it boils stir in quickly the eggs,
which have been well beaten; when this thickens
put in the tomato and juice; stir for a minute, and
serve very hot on toast.


Anchovy Savoury.
6 Anchovies.
3 Eggs.
Toast.
Pepper.
Clean, skin, and scald the anchovies; put them
into the mortar with the yolks of the hard-boiled
eggs, and pound well together; spread on buttered
toast, or make into sandwiches with bread and
butter.
D’Artois Parmesan,
lb. Puff Pastry.
3 ozs. Parmesan.
2 Eggs.
1 oz. Butter.
Cayenne.
Divide the pastry into two parts, and roll out very
thin into two equal sizes; mix the grated cheese
with the butter, dissolved, and the yolks of 2 eggs ;
season with cayenne, and salt if required ; spread this
mixture over one piece of pastry; cover over with
the other, press the edges together, and cut into
rounds with a pastry cutter ; brush over with an egg
beaten up, or water, and bake in a brisk oven for 10
minutes.
Cream Toast.
J pt. White Sauce. | 5 slices Buttered Toast.
Make half a pint of nice white sauce; have ready
some slices of buttered toast; when the sauce boils,
put in the toast and simmer for a few minutes ; take
out the toast, arrange on a hot dish, and pour the


sauce over; half a gill of cream is a great improve-
ment to this dish.
Savoury Rice.
£ lb. Eice. | 1 qt. Stock.
Wash the rice well and boil in stock until tender;
strain off. This is very nice served with meat.
Macaroni Cheese.
3 ozs. Macaroni,
f lb. Cheese.
1 oz. Flour.
1J ozs. Butter,
f pt. Milk.
Salt and Pepper.
Put the macaroni into nicely salted boiling water,
and boil for about 20 minutes, or until tender; take
it up and put it into cold water; put the butter into a
stewpan, and when it is dissolved put in the flour, and
cook; then add the milk and stir until it boils; put
in half the grated cheese and season nicely; cut the
macaroni into pieces about 2 inches long; put a layer
on a plate, then some sauce and some dry cheese;
continue doing this until all the materials are used up,
leaving plenty of cheese to cover the top ; stand it in
front of the fire, or put it into the oven to brown for a
few minutes ; garnish with sippets of fried bread.
Macaroni Stewed in Stock.
3 ozs. Macaroni.
Salt and Pepper.
1 pt. Stock.
£ oz. Flour.
15


Put the macaroni into salt and water and boil fast
for 5 minutes ; take it up and strain all the water from
it; thicken some stock or gravy with a little flour;
put in the macaroni and stew very gently for half an
hour; arrange on a hot dish, and strain the gravy over
it. This is very nice served with roast mutton.
Cheese Savoury.
7 croutons Bread.
7 thin slices Cheese.
Mustard.
Cut some slices of bread out with a pastry cutter;
fry in hot fat; cut some slices of cheese a little
smaller than the bread ; put a little mustard on one
side, and lay the cheese on the fried bread, and warm
it through in front of the fire. Serve very hot.
Venetian Rice.
p lb. Eice.
pt. Gravy.
1 oz. Butter.
1 Onion.
2 ozs. Cheese.
Pepper and Salt.
Wash the rice well in cold water, and leave in clean
water for an hour ; put the gravy in a saucepan, and
when it boils throw in the rice, and boil quickly for 5
minutes ; cover over and stand by the fire until all the
gravy is absorbed; then stir in the butter, cheese, and
seasoning; cover down and stand by the fire for 10
minutes; pile on a hot dish and serve.
Golden Drops.
1 oz. Butter.
3 ozs. Cheese.
Cayenne or Pepper.
2 ozs. Flour.
1 gill Water.


Make a thick sauce of the butter, flour, and water;
beat the eggs in one at a time, and then the cheese
and seasoning; beat all well together ; then put it
into a colander, hold it over a pan of very hot fat, and
rub the mixture through ; it will fall in small drops ;
fry 2 minutes, until a light brown; drain on some
kitchen paper, sprinkled with salt, and pile high on a
dish.
Kidney Toast.
2 Kidneys.
1J ozs. Butter.
Toast.
teaspoonful Parsley.
1 tablespoonful Gravy.
Pepper and Salt.
Cook the kidneys in 1 oz. butter, and chop them up
very finely; put them into a saucepan with the other
ingredients and about half an ounce of butter; mix
all well together; have ready some hot buttered toast;
spread with this mixture and serve.
Marrow Toast.
A Marrow Bone.
1 oz. Butter.
Cayenne or Pepper.
1 teaspoonful Anchovy
Sauce.
% teaspoonful Parsley.
Break the marrow bone, and take out all the mar-
row ; put it into boiling salt and water for a minute;
drain all the water away, and put in the anchovy,
parsley, and pepper; stir all together until quite hot ;
have ready some buttered toast; spread with this
mixturej and serve very hot.


Beetroot Fritters.
1 Beetroot.
Vinegar, Pepper, and Salt.
1 Onion.
Frying Batter.
Hot Fat.
Boil a beetroot and an onion, and when cold remove
the skin and cut into very thin rounds; place on a
dish; season with pepper and salt and a little vinegar;
let them remain for an hour; make a sandwich of 2
slices of beet and 1 of onion; drain on a sieve; dip
into frying batter, and fry quickly; garnish with
fried parsley.
Macaroni and Tomatoes.
f lb. Macaroni.
Seasoning of Pepper and
Salt.
6 Tomatoes.
1 oz. Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
Cut the tomatoes into pieces, and boil for a few
minutes ; then press them through a hair sieve ; take
half a pint of the puree; put the butter into a stew-
pan ; when it is dissolved put in the flour, and cook ;
then pour in the puree, and stir until it boils ; season
nicely with pepper and salt; boil the macaroni in
salt and water until tender ; strain off the water, and
cut it into pieces about 2 inches long; mix the
macaroni and tomatoes well together; arrange on a
dish ; garnish with fried bread.
Cheese Sandwiches.
d lb. Cheese.
i lb. Ham.
1 oz. Butter.
1 oz. Mustard,


Pound the ham in a mortar; add the mustard and
butter, and mix well; spread thin slices of bread and
butter with this mixture; press well together, and
cut into triangles.
Breakfast Relish.
i lb. Cold Beef.
J lb. Cooked Ham.
£ teaspoonful Lemon
Peel.
2 ozs. Bread Crumbs.
1 Egg-.
Seasoning of Nutmeg.
Pepper and Salt.
Mince the ham and beef very finely; grate the
lemon peel, and mix with the meat, adding the bread
crumbs and seasoning; bind into a paste with the
egg and shape the mixture into croquettes ; dip these
into egg, cover well with bread crumbs, and fry in
hot fat; garnish with parsley and lemon slices.
Cheese Souffle.
1 oz. Butter.
oz. Flour.
1 doz. Peppercorns.
1 gill Milk.
3 Eggs.
3 ozs. Parmesan Cheese.
Cayenne and Salt.
Put the butter into a stewpan, and when it is
dissolved put in the peppercorns and fry them for a
few minutes ; strain the butter into a clean stewpan,
put in the flour; mix smoothly; add the milk and
stir until it boils; remove the saucepan from the
fire; beat in the yolks of the eggs, one at a time;
then add the cheese and seasoning ; whisk the whites
of the eggs to a stiff froth, and stir them lightly in ;
well butter a plain mould; pour in the mixture and


bake in a moderate oven for half an hour; fold a
napkin round the tin and serve instantly in the tin in
which it was baked.
Ham Omelette.
3 Eggs.
1 oz. Butter.
2 czs. Cooked Ham.
1 teaspoonful Gravy or
Milk.
Little Pepper and Salt.
Beat the eggs in a small basin, season them, and
add the gravy or milk; chop the ham very finely;
put the butter into an omelette pan, and when it is
dissolved, pour in the eggs, &c., and turn them about
with a fork; when they begin to set, divide the
omelette into two parts, spread the ham on one half
and fold the other over ; brown the top for a minute
or two in front of the fire and slip on to a hot plate ;
serve instantly.
Savoury Omelette.
3 Eggs.
I teaspoonful Parsley.
Pepper and Salt.
1 oz. Butter.
1 dessertspoonful Gravy.
Put the butter into the fryingpan, and let it get
quite hot; beat the eggs for 2 or 3 minutes, and
season with pepper and salt ; put the parsley into the
hot butter, and warm it; then turn in the eggs, and
stir them about; when they are set, hold the pan
for a minute in front of the fire; then fold the
omelette over into an oval shape, slip onto a hot plate,
and serve directly.


Kidney Omelette.
2 Kidneys.
3 Eggs.
Pepper and Salt.
ozs. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Parsley.
\ gill Gravy.
Skin the kidneys and cut them into small pieces;
put half the butter into the fryingpan; put in the
kidneys, and cook for a few minutes, and sprinkle
with the parsley; beat the eggs thoroughly for a few
minutes, and add the gravy and seasoning; put the
rest of the butter into another fryingpan, and when
it is quite hot put in the eggs, and turn them about
until they begin to get firm ; divide into two pieces ;
spread the kidney over one piece, fold the other half
over, shape and slip on to a hot plate, and serve
immediately.
Sweet Omelette.
2 Eggs.
1 oz. Butter.
1 oz. Sugar.
Jam.
Put the yolks of the eggs into a basin with some
sugar and mix them; put the whites on to a plate,
and whip them with a long, thin knife into a stiff froth ;
then mix together; put the jam on to a plate to warm ;
put the butter into a fryingpan, and when it is quite
hot pour in the omelette mixture; let it stand over
the fire for 2 or 3 minutes; then put the pan into
the oven for 3or 4 minutes; slip the omelette on to a
very hot plate, spread the jam over half of it, and
fold over ; serve instantly.


Cold Meat Omelette.
gill Gravy or Milk.
Pepper and Salt.
3 Eggs.
1 oz. Butter.
2 ozs. Cold Meat.
Mince the meat finely, and season it nicely with
pepper and salt; beat the eggs in a basin and add the
milk or gravy; put the butter into a fryingpan, and
when it is quite hot turn in the meat and eggs; stir
them about with a fork, and when they begin to set
hold the pan in front of the fire for a minute; fold
over into an oval shape, slip on to a hot plate and
serve immediately.
Omelette Souffle.
o Eggs.
2 ozs. Castor Sugar.
4 oz. Butter.
Essence of Yanilla.
Put the yolks of 4 eggs into a basin with the sugar;
work them up with a wooden spoon and flavour
with vanilla; put the whites of 5 eggs into a basin
and whisk to a strong froth, with a little sugar ;
mix them with the yolks; well butter a pie-dish or
souffle tin ; pour in the mixture and bake for about 10
minutes until the souffle is of a pale brown colour;
slip out of the tin into a hot dish, sprinkle with castor
sugar, and serve instantly.
Tomato Omelette.
4 Eggs.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 gill Thick Tomato Sauce.


Beat the eggs in a small basin for 2 or 3 minutes ;
put the butter into an omelette pan; when it is quite
hot turn in the eggs and stir them about; as they
become firm divide into two parts ; spread some thick
hot tomato sauce on one half; double the other piece
over and hold the pan in front of the fire for a minute
or two, slip on to a hot plate, and serve instantly.
JAMS.
Pineapple Jam.
Peel and slice the pineapples, and cut them into
small squares; cover with sugar, and leave for 24
hours; then put into a stewpan with the juice of 2
lemons, and boil till tender; put into jam pots, and
when quite cold and firm tie carefully down, and store
in a dry place.
Strawberry Jam.
To every pound of picked fruit add three-quarters
of a pound loaf sugar and a teaspoonful of lemon juice;
put into a large preserving pan; let it come gradually
to the boil; stir frequently, and when it boils stand
where it will simmer well all over for 1 hour; then


put into pots; when quite cold and firm cover with
paper dipped in brandy ; tie securely down, and store
in a cool, dry place.
Apple Jam.
To every pound of apples add the grated rind and
juice of one small lemon and three-quarters of a pound
of loaf sugar; put all into a preserving pan, and let it
boil for an hour after it has simmered well all over ;
then take it up, pour into pots, and let it stand until
quite cold ; it is then ready to tie down.
Rhubarb and Orange Jam.
To every pound of rhubarb allow 2 oranges and
three-quarters of a pound loaf sugar ; wipe the rhu-
barb and cut into small pieces about half an inch long;
slice and cut up the oranges without peeling them, but
remove the pips; put it on with the sugar, and when
it comes to the boil let it simmer well for quite an
hour; take it up and put it into pots, and cover down
when cold.
Green Gooseberry Jam.
To every pound of picked fruit add three-quarters
of a pound sugar and 1 lb. over to every 7 or 8 lbs.;
put into the preserving pan, and when it has well
boiled up boil steadily for 1 hour. It is then ready to
take up.


Blackberry and Apple Jam.
Put three-quarters of a pound blackberries and a
quarter of a pound apples, and to every pound fruit
three-quarters of a pound sugar ; put into a preserving
pan, and boil for 1 hour after it has well boiled up.
It is then ready for potting.
Quince Jelly.
Slice the quinces, unpeeled, and put them with the
pips into a large stewpan ; cover with water, and, stew
very slowly for some hours; strain without squeezing
the pulp; add 1 lb. sugar to every quart of juice ; let
it boil until it will jelly, taking the scum off as it
rises ; pour into jars, and leave uncovered until cold.
Stewed Quinces.
Peel and core the quinces, and put them into an
enamelled stewpan; tie the pips up in muslin, and
put them in with sugar, a little water, and some sago
or tapioca; stew very slowly until they turn a bright
red and are soft; arrange in a glass dish; let the
syrup boil for 2 or 3 minutes, and then strain it over
them.
Orange Marmalade.
Slice the oranges without peeling them, only taking
out the pips; to each pound of sliced oranges add 3
pints of cold water ; let this stand 24 hours; then boil


it till the chips are clear and tender, which will he in
about If hours; let it stand until the next day ; then
weigh it, and to every pound allow If lbs. of loaf
sugar; boil until the syrup jellies and the fruit looks
bright and clear; this will take nearly 1 hour. The
flavour of this marmalade is improved by putting 1
lemon to every 6 oranges.
DRINKS.
Porter Cup.
1 bottle Porter.
1 bottle Ale (mild).
J Nutmeg.
3 or 4 lumps of Sugar.
1 glass Brandy.
1 dessertspoonful of Syrup
Ginger.
1 teaspoonful of Carbonate
of Soda.
Mix these ingredients, except the soda, well together,
and let them stand for an hour, covered over, in a
cool place; just before serving stir in a spoonful of
carbonate of soda.
Tea.
The old plan of allowing 1 teaspoonful of tea for
every person and one for the pot is a very good
allowance ; pour some boiling water into the teapot
and make it thoroughly hot; pour this away and put


in the tea; cover it down in the warm pot for a minute
or two; directly the water boils pour it over the tea,
filling the pot right up ; cover with a cosey, and let it
stand 5 minutes.
Cocoa.
Take a very clean saucepan and put into it half a
pint of milk, or milk and water; mix 2 small tea-
spoonfuls of cocoa with a little cold milk, until it is
quite smooth ; pour over this the boiling milk, stirring
all the time ; put it back in the saucepan, and let it
boil up ; it is then ready to serve.
Coffee—French.
One dessertspoonful freshly-ground coffee to every
breakfastcupful required; put the coffee into a jug,
with a small pinch of salt; pour over it boiling water ;
stir well, and cover closely by the side of the fire for
5 minutes; then strain into a hot coffee-pot.
Coffee —English,
Allow 1J ozs. coffee to every pint of water; put
the coffee in a pot; pour over the boiling water ; put
the pot over the fire, and let it boil up once or twice;
stand for 5 minutes, and it is ready to serve.
Mulled Claret.
1 pt. Water.
2 Lemons.
£ lb. Sugar.
2 bottles Claret.
1 glass Brandy.
Small Nutmeg.


Boil in water for 20 minutes 6 cloves, the rind of
2 lemons, sugar, and cinnamon; add 2 bottles claret,
and a glass of brandy ; while warm, strain into glasses,
and grate in little nutmeg.
Apple Water.
6 Apples.
1 qt. Water.
2 ozs. Sugar.
1 Lemon.
Peel and core the apples ; put them into a jug with
the pips, rind, and juice of a lemon, and sugar; pour
over them the boiling water, cover down until cold ;
then strain off, and it is ready.
Refreshing Drink.
3 ozs. Eice.
1 qt. Water.
1 oz. Sugar.
1 tablespoonful Rasp-
berry Flavouring.
Wash the rice thoroughly and boil it in 3 pints of
water until it is reduced to a quart; strain off, sweeten,
and flavour with fruit essence.
Australian Drink.
1 bottle Gingerbeer. ] 1 glass Port Wine.
Mix together, and drink while effervescing.
Claret Cup.
1 bottle Claret.
2 glasses Sherry or
Madeira.
1 glass Liqueur.
1 Lemon.
2 ozs. Sugar.
Ice.
1 bottle Sodawater.


Pour the claret into a basin with the sherry, grated
rind and juice of a lemon, a little liqueur, and the
sugar; let it stand half an hour; then add a bottle of
sodawater and some ice, and it is ready to serve.
Toast ami Water.
1 slice Toast. | 1 qt. Water.
Toast a piece of bread very brown; put it into a
jug of cold water; cover over and let it stand for 1
hour; strain off, and it is ready to serve.
Lemon Syrup,
1 oz. Citric Acid.
2 teaspoonfuls Essence
of Lemon.
2 lbs. Sugar.
1 qt. Water.
Boil the water and sugar together until it becomes
a syrup ; take it off the fire, and when it is cool stir
in the essence of lemon and the citric acid; bottle
when quite cold. A tablespoonful of this syrup in a
glass of water makes a pleasant drink.


EGGS.
Egg Sandwiches.
Cut some thin slices of bread and butter; have
ready some hard-boiled eggs and watercress; cut the
eggs in slices, spread over the bread and butter; put
in some watercress leaves; season with salt; press
another piece of bread and butter over it; cut into
shape and serve.
Eggs and Tomato Sauce.
4 or 5 Hard-boiled Eggs.
£ pt. Tomato Sauce.
Croutons of Bread,
Peel the eggs, and when the tomato sauce is quite
hot put them in, and let them simmer until quite hot;
then take them out and cut them in half, and stand
each half on a crouton of bread ; boil up the sauce, and
pour it over them.
Stuffed Eggs.
6 Eggs.
Watercress.
2 ozs. Butter.
12 Croutons of Bread.
Anchovy.
Boil the eggs hard ; peel and cut them in half ; take
out the yolks; wash the whites in cold water, and


stand them on the croutons; pound the yolks in a
mortar, some with watercress, some with butter, some
with anchovy sauce; fill the whites with these mix-
tures, arranging the colours alternately; garnish with
beetroot and watercress, or serve in a salad.
Italian Eggs.
3 Eggs.
1 dessertspoonful Bread
Crumbs.
1 dessertspoonful Milk.
6 Croutons.
2 ozs. Butter.
\ teaspoonful Parsley.
Ancbovy to taste,
pt. Yellow Sauce.
Boil the eggs hard; peel and cut them in half;
remove the yolks; wash the whites in cold water,
and stand them on croutons ; pound the yolks up and
put them into a saucepan with the other ingredients,
and stir until about the consistency of thick cream;
fill the whites with this mixture, and pour round some
yellow sauce.
Eggs a Maitre d’Hotel.
2 lbs. Potatoes.
3 Eggs.
A pt. Milk.
Salt.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 dessertspoonful Parsley.
1 dessertspoonful Lemon
Juice,
f oz. Flour.
Boil and mash the potatoes nicely and pile them
high on a dish ; boil the eggs for 15 minutes; remove
the shells; cut them in slices and arrange them on the
potatoes ; put the butter into a stewpan, and when it
is dissolved put in the flour; mix smoothly, and cook
16


for a few minutes; then add the cold milk all at
once, and stir until it boils; boil for a few minutes ;
remove the saucepan from the fire ; put in the lemon
juice, salt, and parsley very finely chopped; pour
this sauce over the potatoes and eggs, and serve very
hot.
Scotch Woodcock.
2 Eggs.
1 gill Milk.
1 dessertspoonful Anchovy.
1 oz. Butter.
\ oz. Best Flour.
3 slices Buttered Toast.
Wliite Pepper.
Put the butter into a small saucepan, and when it is
dissolved stir in the flour; cook this for a few minutes,
then add the milk and stir until it boils ; let it boil 2
or 3 minutes, remove the saucepan from the fire and
put in the pepper and anchovy ; boil the eggs for 15
minutes; remove the shells; cut them in half; chop
the whites finely, and put the yolks through a sieve;
lay one piece of toast in a dish ; cover with the sauce
and a little of the egg; then put on another slice of
toast and cover again; leave plenty of sauce and egg
for the top ; when all the toast is used up cover well
with sauce, and arrange the egg in strips of white and
yellow; serve hot.
Eggs a L’Aurore.
4 Eggs.
1 pt. Good White Sauce.
2 ozs. Parmesan Cheese.
1 gill Tomato Sauce, or 1
dessertspoonful Anchovy.
12 croutons Bread.


Boil the eggs hard ; cut the whites into dice and
rub the yolks through a sieve; border a dish with
some of the croutons of bread; have ready the
sauce, nicely flavoured with tomato or anchovy ; put
first a layer of white of egg, then one of sauce, then
one of the yolk of egg and cheese ; continue until all
the material is used, leaving plenty of yolk of egg
for the top; divide into quarters with croutons of
bread, and it is ready to serve.
Breaded Eggs.
6 Eggs.
3 ozs. Butter.
Egg and Bread Crumbs.
Pepper and Salt.
Boil the eggs hard; when cold, slice them ; beat up
a raw egg ; season the bread crumbs with pepper and
a little chopped parsley ; dip the egg slices in the raw
egg, and then into the crumbs; put the butter into a
fryingpan, and when it is quite hot put in the eggs
and fry for a few minutes; serve very hot.
To Boil Eggs Hard.
Put the eggs into boiling water, and boil steadily
for 15 minutes; be sure that the eggs are well
covered, and that they do not stop boiling; take
them up and put them into a basin of cold water
until cold.
To Boil Eggs.
Put the eggs into boiling water; be sure that they
are well covered, and boil them for 3or 4 minutes; if


eggs are very freshly laid, they will require longer
boiling.
Potted Eggs.
6 Eggs.
1 tablespoonful Anchovy
Sauce.
2 ozs. Butter.
Cayenne or Pepper.
Boil the eggs for 15 minutes; remove the shells,
take the yolks and put them into a mortar with the
anchovy, butter, and seasoning, and pound well;
press into small pots; cover with dissolved butter.
Eggs and Bacon.
Cut the bacon in thin rashers; cut off the rind and
trim away the rusty parts; put it into a cold pan
and fry very carefully ; drain for a few minutes on
paper and arrange on a hot dish; have ready some
boiling salt and water in a good-sized saucepan;
break the eggs into a cup and leave the yolk quite
whole; drop carefully into the saucepan; allow one
for each rasher; let them simmer very gently until
the white looks firm, that will be in about 3 minutes ;
take up with a fish slice, trim off the ragged edge,
and lay carefully on the bacon.
Tomatoes and Eggs.
6 Eggs. I
2 Tomatoes. 1
2 ozs. Butter.
J gill Yinegar.
Fry some eggs carefully in butter; take them out
and dish them ; put into the butter in which they


have been fried salt, pepper, vinegar, and the juice of
2 tomatoes; let it boil for a minute or two, and pour
over the ego-s.
Oo
Scalloped Eggs.
2 or 3 Hard-boiled Eggs.
1 cupful Bread Crumbs.
1 gill thick White Sauce.
1 oz. Butter.
Pepper and Salt.
Cut the eggs in slices and dip them into the sauce ;
put a layer of bread crumbs on to a buttered dish,
moisten them with milk, and season with pepper and
salt ; put on the slices of egg and cover them with
crumbs ; put the butter in small pieces on top, and
brown in front of the fire or in the oven.
Savoury Dish of Eggs and Bacon.
Toast some bread and cut it into squares; break
on to it as many eggs as may be required ; stand the
dish in front of the fire or on the grill of a gas stove,
and toast over it some rashers of bacon; by the time
the bacon is cooked the eggs will be set; if there is
too much fat pour some away, and serve very hot on
the dish it has been cooked in.


BREAD AND CAKES, ICING, &c.
Sponge Cake.
8 ozs. Castor Sugar.
7 Eggs.
6 ozs. Flour.
Essence of Lemon or
Almonds.
Break the eggs into a good-sized basin and put in
the sugar; stand over a saucepan of warm water, and
whisk about 20 minutes, or until it has risen well and
looks white; then put the basin on the table, and mix
in the sifted flour ; butter a cake mould and sprinkle
it well with sugar and flour, and tie round a buttered
paper ; pour in the sponge, and bake in a very steady
oven for about 1 hour. Do not open the oven door
for half an hour after the cake is in.
Muffins.
2 qts. Water.
1 lb. Potatoes.
2 ozs. Salt.
4 oz. Sal Prunelle.
2 tablespoonfuls Yeast.
4 lbs. Flour.
Peel, boil, and mash the potatoes; dissolve the
yeast and prunelle in tepid water; mix flour and
potatoes together, and with the yeast make into a
sponge ; let it stand 3 or 4 hours ; then powder over
it the salt, and add enough flour to make a very soft


dough ; let this stand in a warm place for half an
hour; break off pieces about 2 ozs. each, roll them
round, and stand on a floured tin to rise for 20
minutes; bake them on a muffin or hot plate well
dusted with flour; when one side is brown turn over,
and cook on the other.
Parliaments.
1 lb. Flour.
3 ozs. Butter.
1 oz. Sugar.
gills Milk.
|db. Currants.
1 oz. Mixed Peel.
Put the flour into a basin; make the milk and
butter quite hot; pour it over and work quickly into
a paste; divide into 2 pieces; roll out one piece
very thin; sprinkle it with the currants and finely-
chopped peel and sugar; cover with the rest of the
paste ; put on to a floured baking sheet, mark with a
knife, and bake in a rather slow oven until crisp.
Crumpets.
2 qts, Water.
2 ozs. Salt.
)r oz. Sal Prunelle.
3 tablespoonfuls Yeast.
1J lbs. Flour.
Mix the yeast in some tepid water and stir in the
sal prunelle; sprinkle the salt over the flour and
make it into a thick batter ; stir well and let it stand
for 3or 4 hours; have ready some crumpet hoops;
put in a good tablespoonful of the mixture, and bake
until firm.


Rice Cake.
5 lb. Ground Eice.
\ lb. Sugar.
5 lb. Butter.
3 Eggs.
1 gill Milk.
| lb. Flour.
2 teaspoonfuls Baking Pow-
der.
Beat the butter and sugar to a cream ; then drop
the eggs in one at a time and beat well; mix the rice,
flour, and baking powder together and beat them in
gradually; turn into a buttered tin and bake 1| hours
in a slow oven; a little candied peel is an improvement
to this cake.
Christinas Cake.
1J lbs. Flour.
1 lb. Brown Sugar.
3 lbs. Currants.
1 gill Brandy.
1 lb. Butter.
10 Eggs.
% lb. Mixed Peel.
Sift the flour, clean the currants, and mix together;
heat the butter and sugar together to a cream; add
the eggs, two at a time, not previously beaten, then
the brandy slowly; add the currants and flour, and
last of all the peel; line a cake-tin with paper, but do
not grease it; pour in the mixture, and bake 3or 4
hours.
Jelly Cake.
1 scant Breakfastcupful of
Sugar.
1 Breakfastcupful of Flour.
3 Eggs.
| teaspoonful Carbonate of
Soda.
1 heaped teaspoonful Cream
of Tartar.
Beat the eggs and sugar together for 10 minutes;
mix the cream of tartar and flour together, and sift


into the eggs, stirring just enough to mix well;
dissolve the carbonate of soda in 1 tablespoonful of
boiling water ; add quickly to the rest, and spread the
mixture on well-buttered tins thin and evenly; put
into a hot oven for 5 minutes; as soon as they are
taken from the oven spread with raspberry jam; pile
one on top of the other and sprinkle with sugar.
Plain Tea Cake.
lb. Flour.
2 ozs. Sugar.
4 ozs. Currants.
4 ozs. Butter.
2 Eggs.
1 gill Warm Milk.
teaspoonful Carbonate of
Soda.
Hub the butter and flour together ; stir in the sugar
and currants; beat the eggs in a small basin ; dissolve
the soda in the warm milk; pour over the eggs;
strain on to the dry ingredients; mix quickly; pour
into a buttered tin, and bake in a moderate oven for
1 hour.
Sydney Buns,
1 lb. Cornflour.
h lb. Sugar.
J, lb. Butter.
3 Eggs.
1 teaspoonful Baking Pow-
der.
Beat the butter and sugar to a cream; add the eggs,
one at a time, well beaten; mix the baking powder
and cornflour together and beat in; continue beating
for 10 minutes; drop pieces of the mixture on to a
buttered baking sheet; put into a hot oven and bake
for about 10 minutes, or until a pale brown and firm.


Cream Cakes.
pt. Water.
4 Eggs.
\ pt. Cream.
J lb. Butter.
1 lb. Flour.
2 ozs. Jam.
Put the butter and water into a saucepan, and when
it boils stir in the flour and cook for a few minutes ;
take from the fire, and beat in the eggs one at a time;
then beat well for 5 minutes, lightly butter some
baking sheets and drop on to them pieces of the
mixture ; bake in a steady oven for half an hour ; open
and fill in with whipped cream and jam.
German Cake.
3 teacups of Flour.
2 teacups of Sugar.
1 teacup of Milk.
Jr lb Butter.
5 Eggs.
2 teaspoonfuls Cream of
Tartar.
1 teaspoonful Carbonate of
Soda.
Melt the butter and stir in the eggs, previously well
beaten; mix the flour and cream of tartar together,
and stir into the eggs and butter; dissolve the soda
in milk and pour in ; beat all together a quarter of an
hour; turn into a well-buttered tin, and bake in a
slow oven for an hour. This cake is good iced, or
served with sifted sugar.
Scotch Cake.
| lb. Flour.
t]- lb. Sugar.
Essence of Lemon.
1 lb. Sultanas.
6 Eggs.
J lb. Butter.
Beat the butter and sugar to a cream, then beat in
the yolks of the eggs, which have been previously


beaten; beat these all well together ; whip the whites
of the eggs to a stiff froth and stir them in with
essence of lemon to taste; add the flour very
gradually, and then the sultanas, which should be
quite dry and clean; line a cake tin with paper, pour
in the mixture, and bake in a moderate oven for H
hours; let it stand in the tin until nearly cold. This
cake will keep good for some time, and should not be
cut for at least a week after it is made.
Sultana Cake.
1 lb. Flour.
J lb. Butter.
lb. Sugar,
i lb. Sultanas.
3 ozs. Candied Peel.
2 teaspoonfuls Baking
Powder.
3 Eggs.
1 gill Milk.
Sift the flour into a basin; rub the butter lightly in,
then stir in the sugar, sultanas, and peel, cut into
small pieces ; add the baking powder; beat the eggs
and milk in a small basin, strain into the dry
ingredients, and mix thoroughly; turn into a well-
buttered tin; stand this on a baking sheet; put into a
moderate oven and bake for 1| hours ; turn carefully
on to a sieve till cold.
Soda Cake (Very Good).
3 cups Flour.
1 cup Sugar.
1 cup Currants.
1 cup Sultanas.
3 Eggs.
1 cup Candied Peel.
1 cup Butter.
1 ciip Milk.
2 teaspoonfuls Cream of
Tartar.
1 teaspconful Soda.


Cream the butter and sugar together; add the eggs,
well beaten; put the cream of tartar into the milk ;
stir in the soda until it froths over; mix this with the
butter, &c., in the basin; stir in the flour gradually,
then the fruit, and mix thoroughly ; turn into a well-
buttered tin, and bake in a moderate oven for 1| hours.
Gingerbread.
2 lbs. Flour,
d lb. Butter,
f lb. Sugar.
1 teaspoonful Ground
Ginger.
1 lb. Treacle.
1 Egg,
£ pt. Milk.
1 teaspoonful Soda.
Sift the flour into a basin, and rub in the butter ;
add the ginger, treacle, and sugar, and mix well; put
the carbonate of soda into the milk ; mix smoothly,
and add the egg, well beaten; work the dry ingredients
into a stiff* paste with this; pour into a buttered tin
and bake for an hour.
French Icing.
2 lbs. Loaf Sugar.
1 pt. Cold Water.
J teaspoonful Essence of
Lemon or Almonds.
Put the sugar and water into a saucepan and boil
for 20 minutes; pour it into a basin; add the flavour-
ing, and stir until it looks cloudy ; then pour it over
the cake.
Hard Icing.
J lb. Icing Sugar. I
1 Lemon.
2 Eggs.


Put the sugar, lemon juice, and the whites of 2 eggs
into a basin; stir with a wooden spoon or whisk for
about half an hour, or until it is very smooth and
quite thick; when the cake is iced it should stand in
the oven with the door open, or on the stove, till set
and firm.
Bath Buns.
lbs. Flour.
1 tablespoonful Yeast,
1J gills Water.
1 gill Milk.
6 ozs. Sugar.
2 ozs. Peel.
4 ozs. Sultanas.
3 ozs. Butter.
2 Eggs.
2 ozs. Eougbly-pounded
Sugar.
Sift the flour into a basin ; cream the yeast with a
teaspoonful sugar; pour on to it the tepid water, and
strain into the flour; stand in a warm place for an
hour; then drop in the eggs, sultanas, peel, fine sugar,
gill warm milk, and the butter, dissolved; beat this
all well together, and then leave it in a warm
place until it has risen to double the quantity; then
take up a tablespoonful at a time and drop on to a
greased tin, sprinkle with the rough sugar, and bake
in a moderate oven until brown.
Scotch Shortbread.
2 lbs. Flour.
1 lb. Butter.
1 oz. Sweet Almonds.
oz. Caraway Seeds.
J lb. Loaf Sugar.
Beat the butter to a cream; dredge in gradually
the flour and sugar; add the caraways and the


almonds, blanched and chopped; work about until the
paste is quite smooth ; divide into 6 pieces ; put each
cake on to a separate paper ; roll out square and pinch
up the edge ; put into a good oven and bake for half
an hour.
Shortbread.
1 lb. Flour.
\ lb. Butter.
1 oz. Castor Sugar.
Sift the flour and sugar into a basin; melt the
butter in a stewpan, and when it is dissolved pour it
on to the flour and make it quickly into a paste;
lightly flour the board and roll out; cut it into
squares and pinch up the edges; place a piece of
candied peel in the centre ; put it on to a baking sheet
and bake in a moderate oven until a pale brown.
Galette.
1 lb. Short Paste.
1 Egg.
lb. Fresh Butter.
Make a nice light paste with 8 ozs. flour and 3 ozs.
butter ; roll it out very thin, and spread on to it the
fresh butter ; wrap the butter up in the crust and roll
out 5 times; roll it out about half an inch in thick-
ness and cut out with a cutter; brush over with egg
and shake over some icing sugar, and bake until a
good colour.
Scones.
1 lb. Flour. I
1- pt. Sour Milk. |
1 large dessertspoonful
Baking Powder.


Mix the flour and baking powder together and
sprinkle over a little salt; mix up quickly with the
sour milk and knead a few minutes until quite
smooth; roll out about 1 inch thick; cut into rounds,
and bake in a hot oven for 10 minutes ; cut open and
butter, and serve at once; if no sour milk is at hand
stir a little baking powder into some milk—that will
turn it.
Victoria Sandwiches.
2 scant cups of Flour.
1 scant cup of Sugar.
4 ozs. Dissolved Butter.
Essence of Lemon.
3 Eggs.
2 teaspoonfuls Baking Pow-
der.
1 small cup Water.
Warm the butter and beat in the sugar; drop in the
eggs, one at a time; then the flour must be lightly
beaten in; add flavouring to taste, and the water
gradually ; last of all, the baking powder; butter some
flat tins or plates ; pour in the mixture and bake in a
quick oven for 15 minutes ; spread half with jam, and
lay another piece on top; sprinkle with sugar.
Almond Rock Cakes.
1J lbs. Flour.
J lb. Cornflour.
4 ozs. Ground Almonds.
6 ozs. Butter.
J lb. Sugar.
2 Eggs.
5 pt. Milk.
J teaspoonful Baking Pow-
der.
Sift the flour into a basin and rub in the butter ;
mix in the sugar, almonds, and baking powder; beat
the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth ; stir in the milk.


and with this mix the dry ingredients into a stifl*
paste ; drop in rough pieces on to a greased tin ; brush
over with white of egg, and sift over some sugar;
bake in a brisk oven.
Sponge Ginger Loaf.
J lb. Treacle.
1 teaspoonful Ginger.
1 oz. Butter,
2 ozs. Brown Sugar.
1 gill Sour Milk.
1 lb. Flour.
1 teaspoonful Soda.
Warm the treacle, butter, and milk ; beat in the
ginger, soda, and flour; beat for 2 or 3 minutes;
butter a shallow tin, pour in the mixture, and bake
in a moderate oven for half an hour.
Grantham Gingerbread.
1 lb. Flour.
1 lb. Castor Sugar.
2 Eggs.
5 ozs. Butter.
1 oz. Ground Ginger.
£ oz. Volatile Salts.
12 drops Essence Lemon,
Mix the sugar and flour well together; rub in the
butter; put in the ginger; beat up the eggs; mix
with them the essence of lemon and salts; beat all
well together; form into rough lumps, put on a
buttered tin, and bake in a moderate oven for half an
hour.
Short Cookies.
lb. Lard.
1 lb. Rice Flour.
1 teaspoonful Carbonate
Soda.
6 ozs. Sugar.
1 Egg.
1 tablespoonful Lemon
J nice.
1 cup Warm Milk.


Sift the flour into a basin; mix in the sugar, and
rub in the lard; warm the milk in a saucepan, and
stir in the soda ; with this make the dry ingredients
into a stiff paste; sprinkle in the lemon juice, and
when well mixed half fill some buttered patty pans,
and bake in a moderate oven for about 25 minutes.
Sandwich Cake.
3 Eggs.
2 ozs. Butter.
2 ozs. Castor Sugar.
i lb. Flour.
1 gill Milk.
Raspberry Jam
Work the butter to a cream, adding gradually the
sugar, eggs, and milk; beat in the flour, and whisk
well; butter four pudding plates, and pour this
mixture in, dividing it equally; bake for about 25
minutes in a moderate oven, or until of a pale brown
colour and firm ; take the cakes carefully out, spread
three of them with jam, and place the other on the
top, over which sift some castor sugar; divide into
pieces; pile on a dish, and serve when cold.
Queen Cakes.
1 lb. Flour.
1 lb. Butter.
1 lb. Castor Sugar.
£ lb. Currants.
\ lb. Candied Peel.
8 Eggs.
Put the butter into a large basin, and beat it to a
cream; add by degrees the sugar; when well beaten
whisk the eggs in, one at a time; add the currants and
peel; stir in the sifted flour; well grease some small
17


moulds or tins; half fill with the mixture ; stand on
a baking sheet, and bake for about 25 minutes in a
moderate oven; turn out carefully, and stand on a
sieve till cold,
Ginger Cake,
1 lb. Flour.
J lb. Butter.
lb. Candied Peel.
3 Eggs.
1 tablespoonful Ginger.
2 tablespoonfuls Baking
Powder.
J lb. Sugar.
1 gill Milk.
Sift the flour into a basin and rub the butter lightly
in; stir in the sugar, ginger, and candied peel, cut
into small pieces, and, lastly, the baking powder ;
beat the eggs in a small basin; add the milk, and
strain into the dry ingredients ; mix thoroughly, and
turn into a well-greased tin; place on a baking sheet,
and bake in a moderate oven for 1| hours; turn it
carefully out of the tin, and place on a sieve till cold.
Shrewsbury Cakes.
J lb. Butter.
6 ozs. Flour.
1 Egg.
J lb. Castor Sugar.
1 teaspoonful Lemon Peel.
Put the butter and sugar into a basin, and beat
them to a cream ; then add the egg and lemon peel;
stir in by degrees the flour; when a smooth paste,
turn on to a floured board, roll out as thin as possible,
and cut into small round cakes ; place on a buttered
tin, and bake in a moderate oven for about 20 minutes;
turn carefully on a sieve to cool.


Seed Cake.
1 lb. Flour.
lb. Sugar.
2 teaspoonfuls Baking
Powder.
§ lb. Butter.
3 ozs. Candied Peel.
1 oz. Caraway Seeds.
3 Eggs.
1 gill Milk.
Sift the flour into a basin and rub the butter lightly
in; add the sugar, caraway seeds, and candied peel,
cut into small pieces, and, last of all, the baking
powder; beat the eggs in a small basin ; add the milk,
and strain into the dry ingredients; mix thoroughly,
and turn into a well-greased cake tin ; bake in a very
moderate oven from to 1| hours; turn carefully
out of the tin, and stand on a sieve until cold..
Vienna Bread.
2 lbs. Vienna or Best Flour.
2 ozs. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Sugar.
1 tablespoonful Yeast.
1 pt. Milk.
1 Egg.
1 small teaspoonful Salt.
Put the butter and milk in a saucepan, and let the
butter dissolve and the milk become tepid ; sift the
flour and salt into a basin, and make a well in the
centre, into which drop the egg, unbeaten; cream the
yeast and sugar; pour on to it the butter and milk,
and strain into the flour ; make quickly into a dough ;
cover with a cloth, and stand in a warm place for 11-
hours ; then turn it on to a floured board and knead
for about 15 minutes, or until smooth and soft; divide
it into 2 parts; shape into loaves, and put it into
floured tins; stand it in a warm place for half an


hour; then put it into a slow oven, and bake from
to 1| hours; place on a sieve till cold.
Cornflour Cake.
J lb. Cornflour.
£ lb. Flour.
6 ozs. Sugar.
4 ozs. Butter.
3 Eggs.
1 teaspoonful Baking Pow-
der.
Cream the butter and sugar well together, then add
the eggs; mix the cornflour and baking powder on
a plate; stir these in by degrees and beat well ;
line a cake-tin with well-greased paper; pour in the
mixture ; stand the tin on a baking sheet; put into a
moderate oven and bake for about an hour; turn very
carefully out, and stand on a sieve till cold.
Gingerbread Cake.
2 lbs. Flour.
lbs. Butter,
f lb. Castor Sugar,
f lb. Treacle.
2 ozs. Ginger.
7 Eggs.
2 teaspooonfuls Baking Pow-
der.
Beat the butter to a cream ; shake the sugar in by
degrees, and add the eggs one at a time ; when this is
well mixed add the treacle, ginger, and baking
powder; stir lightly in the sifted flour; pour into a
well-buttered tin lined with paper, stand on a baking
sheet, and place at once in a moderate oven ; bake for 2
hours; turn carefully out of the tin and place on a
sieve till cold.


Soda Scones.
1 lb. Flour.
i pt. Milk.
3 ozs. Butter.
1- oz. Cream of Tartar.
1 oz. Carbonate Soda.
1 oz. Sugar.
Sift the flour, sugar, cream of tartar, and soda into
a basin, and rub in lightly the butter ; put the milk
into a saucepan and make it tepid; pour on to the
dry ingredients and make quickly into a paste; turn
out on to a floured board; shape into 2 flat cakes,
and these again into 4 pieces; place on a floured
baking sheet and put into a hot oven and bake for 15
or 20 minutes ; brush over with cold milk just before
they are done, and serve either hot or cold.
Milk Rolls.
2 ozs. Butter.
J pt. Milk,
1 lb. Self-raising Flour.
Sift the flour into a basin and rub into it the butter;
make into a smooth dough with the milk; flour a board,
and turn it out; divide into small pieces, and make it
either into fancy shapes or plain rolls; place these
on to a floured tin; brush over with milk ; put into
rather a quick oven and bake for about 15 minutes;
brush again with milk just before taking them from
the oven.
Rock Cakes.
J lb. Flour.
£ lb. Currants.
4 lb. Sugar.
1 tablespoonful Milk.
1 oz. Candied Peel.
1 teaspoonful Baking Pow -
der.
3 ozs. Butter.
1 Egg.


Sift the flour into a basin, and rub in the butter
lightly; clean the currants; cut the peel into very
small pieces, and add these, with the sugar and baking
powder, to the other ingredients ; beat up the egg and
milk, and with this make them into a very stiff paste ;
take up small portions, and shape them into rocky
pieces ; place on a buttered tin, and bake for about 15
minutes in a quick oven; then place on a sieve till
cool.
Rice Buns.
I lb. Ground Eice.
lb. Sugar.
3 Eggs.
} 2 lb. Flour.
5 ozs. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Baking Pow-
der.
Put the butter into a basin and beat it to a cream ;
add by degrees the sugar; mix the flour, rice, and
baking powder on a plate ; put one egg to the butter
and sugar, and then about a third o£ the flour and rice,
and continue until all the ingredients are used up;
butter some small bun tins, half-fill them with the
mixture, put them into rather a quick oven, and bake
for about 12 or 15 minutes; turn carefully out until
cold.
Yorkshire Tea Cakes.
f lb. Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
1 teaspoonful Sugar.
gills Milk.
1 Egg.
1 tablespoonful Yeast.
Put the butter into a saucepan, and when it has
dissolved put in the milk and make it tepid ; cream


the yeast and sugar in a basin, and pour on to it the
milk; sift the flour into a basin; drop the egg into the
middle; strain on to it the yeast and milk, and make
into a dough; turn on to a floured board, shape into
two flat cakes, and put into two small floured cake
tins (they should be rather high ones) ; cover with
a piece of paper, and stand in a warm place for
an hour; then put into the oven, and bake for 15
minutes; brush over with milk, and stand on a sieve
till cool.
Milk Biscuits.
1 gill Milk.
1 oz. Butter.
t] lb. Flour.
tI teaspoonful Baking Pow-
der.
Put the butter into a saucepan, and when it is dis-
solved put in the milk and make it hot; have the
flour and baking powder in a basin, and pour the hot
milk on to them and make into a smooth paste ; flour
the board, turn the paste on to it, and roll out very
thin; cut out with a paste cutter into small rounds ;
prick with a fork ; place on a buttered tin, and put
into a moderate oven for 15 or 20 minutes; then turn
on to a sieve to cool.
Oatmeal Biscuits.
5 ozs. Oatmeal.
3 ozs. Flour.
1 oz. Castor Sugar.
2 ozs. Lard or Butter.
£ teaspoonful Soda.
1 Egg.
1 gill Water.


Put the lard or butter into a saucepan to melt; put
the flour, sugar, soda, and oatmeal into a basin ; put
1 gill water into the saucepan with the lard, and when
quite hot pour on to the dry ingredients ; add the egg
and make into a smooth paste ; turn on to a floured
board, roll out the paste as thin as possible, and cut
into biscuits; well grease a baking sheet, place the
biscuits on it, and bake in a cool oven for 20 or 25
minutes, and then put them on to a sieve to cool.
Gingerbread Nuts.
1 lb. Flour,
b lb. Treacle.
4 ozs. Butter,
b oz. Ginger.
1 teaspoonful Soda.
3 ozs. Sugar,
b- gill Milk.
Put the flour, ginger, and sugar into a basin with a
pinch of salt; put the treacle and butter into a
saucepan to melt; when it is quite warm add the
milk; pour this upon the dry ingredients and make
into a firm paste; lightly flour the board, and turn it
out; knead for a few minutes; then take small
pieces and roll them into balls about the size of a
walnut; put them on to a buttered tin and bake in a
quick oven for 15 minutes.
Saucer Cakes.
d lb. Flour,
b lb. Castor Sugar,
b lb. Ground Eice.
2 ozs. Candied Peel.
2 Eggs.
Beat the butter to a cream; stir in all the other
ingredients; beat up very lightly 2 eggs ; mix these


in and beat the mixture well; butter some saucers,
half-fill with the mixture, and bake in a moderate
oven for about half an hour.
Coffee Cakes.
8 ozs. Castor Sugar.
7 Eggs.
6 ozs. Flour.
1 gill Coffee Essence.
Put the sugar and eggs into a basin; stand over a
saucepan of hot water and whisk for about 20
minutes, or until it has risen well; remove from the
fire; stir in the coffee essence and the flour; well
butter some small tins, pour in the mixture, and bake
a pale colour in a moderate oven.
Raspberry Buns.
lbs. Flour.
J lb. Butter.
6 ozs. Sugar.
Raspberry Jam.
3 Eggs.
1J gills Milk.
J oz. Carbonate of Soda.
1 oz. Cream of Tartar.
Powder the carbonate and cream of tartar, and
mix with the flour; rub in the butter; mix the sugar,
eggs, and milk together, and make into a smooth
paste; break off pieces about 2 ozs., roll them out
into round or oval shapes; put in a teaspoonful of jam,
pinch the edges well together, and place them with
the closing side downwards on a baking sheet, and
bake until brown; they may then be iced and stood
in a cool oven until firm.


Dessert Cakes.
J lb. Sugar.
4 Eggs.
1 gill Sherry.
\ lb. Butter.
10 ozs. Flour.
lb. Candied Peel.
Beat the eggs and sugar together for 5 minutes ;
melt the butter, but do not let it get hot; stir this in,
and then beat in the sifted flour, wine, and candied
peel; butter some small moulds and fill them two-
thirds full; bake in a cool oven a very pale colour.
SUNDRIES.
Gruel.
A pt. Milk.
pt. Water.
2J ozs. Oatmeal.
Sugar to taste.
Put the milk and water into a clean stewpan ; mix
the oatmeal with a little cold water to a smooth paste;
when the milk and water nearly boils, pour this in
and continue stirring. Gruel should boil for at least
15 minutes, as oatmeal is indigestible and unwhole-
some unless well cooked.
Maitre d’Hutel Butter,
2 ozs. Butter.
1 dessertspoonful Parsley.
1 dessertspoonful Lemon
Juice.


Put the butter on to a plate and work in thoroughly
the parsley and lemon juice; make it up into tiny
pats. This is very nice for chops and steaks. Have
very finely-chopped and dry parsley for it.
Palladia Jellies.
This may be made with the remains of jellies and
creams of different colours ; rinse a mould in cold
water; carefully melt the jelly and pour in a layer
at a time ; wait until firm, and then continue in a
different colour until the mould is full.
Veal Seasoning.
d lb. Bread Crumbs.
1 tablespoonful Parsley.
1 teaspoonful Sweet Herbs.
3 ozs. Suet.
2 ozs. Bacon or Ham.
1 Egg.
Little Lemon Peel.
Pepper and Salt.
Chop the suet and parsley very finely, mix with
the seasoning and finely minced ham, and bind all
together with egg.
German Paste.
7 ozs. Flour.
4 ozs. Butter.
4 ozs. Castor Sugar.
1 Egg.
Lemon Peel, or flavouring
Rub the butter into the flour; add the sugar and
lemon peel; beat up an egg, and make into a stiff
paste ; roll out and cut into biscuits, and bake in a
moderate oven.


Frying Batter.
f lb. Flour.
1 gill Water.
2 Eggs.
1 tablespoonful Oil.
Put the flour into a basin and pour in the oil; make
the water tepid ; mix gradually with the flour into a
smooth batter; let it stand for an hour, if possible;
put the whites of the two eggs on to a plate; sprinkle
with salt, and whip to a stiff froth ; stir these into the
batter just before it is used.
Panada.
1 oz. Best Flour.
1 oz. Butter.
1 gill Milk or Water.
Put the butter into a small saucepan; when it is
dissolved put in the flour, and cook well, without
browning; stir in the milk, and beat well; when it
leaves the bottom of the saucepan clean, it is done.
Julienne Vegetables.
Cut the red part of the carrot and slices of turnip
into long thin strips, and cut these again into pieces
about 1 inch long; put some water into a saucepan ;
put into it a teaspoonful of salt and the same of sugar ;
boil the vegetables without the lid until quite soft;
then strain off, and they are ready.
To Boil Bice.
J lb Eice. I Salt.
3 qts. Water. |


Wash the rice well; have ready a large saucepan of
boiling water, nicely salted; put in the rice, and let it
boil very quickly without the lid for about 10
minutes, or until it feels soft; strain it off on to a
hair sieve, and let clean hot or cold water run on it
2or 3 minutes ; stand it on the stove, covered over, to
dry for about 20 minutes. It is then ready.
To Chop Parsley.
Pick the stalks from the parsley, as these will not
chop ; wash the leaves very thoroughly, put on to a
board and chop for a few minutes; then put the
parsley in the corner of a clean cloth and wash well
in cold water, squeezing very dry; return to the
board, and with a sharp knife chop very finely.
Fried Parsley.
Parsley. | Hot Fat.
Take the leaves of the parsley only; wash well and
dry in a cloth; put into a frying basket, and when
the fat is very hot plunge in; let it remain for 1
minute, then take it out, shake it well, and dry for a
few minutes on paper.
Fried Bread.
Stale Bread. | 2 ozs. Lard.
Cut 2 or 3 slices of stale bread into small dice ;
make some lard very hot in a small saucepan ; put in


the bread and fry golden brown ; pour off the fat and
drain for a few minutes on kitchen paper; serve on a
folded napkin or dish paper.
To Clarify Butter.
Put some butter into a clean saucepan, and dissolve
it; as the scum rises take it off; when quite clear
pour into pots for use. Be sure that the butter does
not burn or brown.
To Boil Ham or Bacon,
Soak it in cold water for an hour or two; then
scrape it well, and put it on in a large saucepan of cold
water, and bring it to the boil very slowly; when it
boils draw it from the fire, and let it cook very slowly
indeed for 2 or 3 hours, according to thickness ; when
the fork will penetrate easily stand it on one side, and
let it remain in the water until it is cold ; then take
it out, remove the rind, and sprinkle with fine brown
bread crumbs, or glaze it.
Cornflour.
1 oz. Cornflour. I Sugar,
f pt. Milk. I
Put the milk into a clean saucepan ; mix the corn-
flour with a little cold milk into a smooth paste;
when the milk is nearly boiling pour this into it, and
continue stirring; let it boil for 2or 3 minutes ; turn
it out into a clean basin, and it is ready.


Pickle for Meat or Tongues.
4 lbs. Coarse Salt.
1 lb. Treacle.
2 ozs. Saltpetre.
\ lb. Whole Pepper.
4 qts. Water.
Put all these things into a large saucepan and hr ing
to the boil, stirring often ; let it boil 10 minutes, and
7 O ' '
pour into a pickling tub; when cold, it is ready for
use.
To Clarify Dripping.
Cut the dripping from the basin, and take off the
sediment from the bottom; put into a large basin,
with a little salt; pour over plenty of boiling water,
and stir it until it is all dissolved ; let it stand until
quite cold and firm ; then cut it off the water, and it
is ready for use.
Porridge.
Take a very clean saucepan, about half-full of
water; when it boils, sprinkle in some coarse oatmeal,
stirring all the time, until it is about the consistency
of cream; then let it boil gently for half or three-
quarters of an hour. A very nice porridge can be
made by using half oatmeal and half yellow meal. It
should always be well boiled, and served with cold
milk and sugar.




INDEX.
A PAGE
Alexandria Pudding - - 158
Almond Rock Cakes - - 239
Amber Pudding - - 155
American Hash - - 82
Anchovy Toast - - 206
~ Savoury - - 204
Apple Sauce - - - 187
~ Water - - - 222
~ Fritters - - - 146
~ Tart - - - 146
~ Charlotte - - 137
~ Meringue - - 156
~ Jam - - - 218
~ Stewed - - - 176
~ Snow- - - - 176
~ Jelly - - - 168
~ Souffle - - - 168
Apricot Souffle - - 151
~ Gateau - - 171
Aspic Jelly - - 165
Artichoke Soup . - 55
Australian Drink - - 222
B
Baked Plum Pudding - 146
~ Cabinet ~ - 129
Bath Buns - - - 237
Beans Saut6 - - - 189
~ in Sauce - - 194
~ Haricot - - 190
Beetroot in Sauce - - 189
~ Salad - - - 202
~ Fritters - - 212
Bechamel Sauce - - 186
Beef Olives * - 110
~ Sausages - - - 118
~ Vegetable Stew - 105
~ Tea - 42
PAGE
Beef Steak and Kidney
Pudding - 93
Bedford Pudding - - 129
Boiled Custard - - 128
~ Mutton - - 101
Boiling and Stewing - - 5
Boudins of Whiting - - 63
Boudinettes of Meat - 79
Bonne Femme Soup - - 57
Brazilian Stew - - 73
Braising 6
Braised Fillet of Beef - 73
~ Veal - - -77-97
Bread Pudding - - 187
~ and Fruit Pudding 144
~ and Butter ~ 137
~ To Fry - - 253
~ Sauce - 187
Brown Bread Pudding - 138
~ Sauce - - - 181
Brandy Sauce - - - 186
Bridal Pudding - - 130
Breaded Eggs - - - 227
Breakfast Relish - - 213
Brawn - 102
Broiled Chicken - - 123
Broth, Mutton 41
Blackberry Jam - - 218
Blanc Mange - - - 167
Buff Pudding - - - 132
Butter, To Clarify - - 254
C
Cabinet Pudding, Boiled - 140
Carrots and Ham - - 192
~ Stewed - - - 193
Cabbage, To Boil - - 195
~ Savoury - - 198
18


PAGE
Calves’Liver Brochette - 117
~ Parisienne - 116
Calves’ Head, Rolled - 120
~ a Maitre d’Hotel 120
Calves’ Foot Jelly - - 170
Cassolettes of Chicken - 95
~ of Potatoes - 198
Candied Peel, To Make - 175
Cassel Pudding - - - 144
Cauliflower, To Boil - - 192
~ au Gratin - 196
Cape Pudding - - - 154
Celery au Parmesan - - 190
~ Salad - - - 203
Claret Cup - - - 223
Chantilly Tartlets - - 149
Cheesecakes - - - 158
Cheese Straws - - - 204
~ Fritters - - - 207
~ Sandwiches - - 212
~ Savoury - - - 210
~ Souffle - - - 213
Chicken and Tomato Stew 106
~ and Tartare Sauce 115
~ Salad - - - 202
~ American - - 122
~ Pressed - - 80
~ Chaud Froid of - 92
Charlotte Russe - - 168
~ Apple - - 137
Chops, Stewed - - - 101
Cheap Soup 48
Cold Meat 8
~ Omelette - - 216
Cocoa, To Make - - 221
Coffee ~ 221
~ Cakes - - - 249
College Puddings - - 136
Cold Cabinet Pudding - 134
~ Marmalade Pudding 134
Cornflour Cakes - - 244
~ To Make - - 254
Cold Prawn Curry - - 64
Consomme ala Royale - 50
Cotillion Sandwiches - 204
Cornish Pasties - - 107
„ Pie 112
Colonial Goose - - - 111
Cold Mutton, To Pot - 121
Collared Ox Cheek - - 114
PAGK
Crumpets - - - - 231
Cream Cakes - - - 234
~ Toast - - - 208
Croute d’Ananas - - 161
Croquettes of Potatoes - 195
~ of Cold Meat - 84
Crgme ala Yolaile - - 103
Curried Potatoes - .189
~ Rice - - - 207
Curry of Prawns and
Tomatoes - - 65
~ of Fowl - - 79
~ of Cold Meat - 100
Custard Sauce - - 184
Cutlets a la Pompadour - 104
~ ala Soubise- - 98
~ ala St. James - 98
D
D’Artois Parmesan - - 208
Dessert Cakes - - - 250
Devilled Meat 99
Domestic Economy - - 28
Dowager Pudding - - 129
Douglas ~ - - 152
Dripping Pastry - - 127
~ To Clarify - 255
Dumplings, Hot Water - 127
Dutch Sauce - - - 183
Dry Curry 85
Devonshire Junket - - 175
Diplomatic Pudding - - 160
E
Egg Sauce - - - 182
Eggs and Bacon - - 228
~ Scalloped - - - 229
~ Savoury and Bacon - 229
~ and Tomato Sauce - 228
~ Stuffed - - - 224
~ Italian - - - 225
~ a Maitre d’H6tel - 225
~ L’Aurore - - - 226
~ Breaded - - - 227
„ To Boil - - 227
~ Potted - - - 228
~ and Tomatoes - - 224
~ Sandwiches - - 224
Epigrams - - - 91


F PAGE
French Soup 43
„ Pie 109
~ Apple Turnovers - 157
~ Pastry - - - 143
~ Icing - - - 236
~ Beans - - - 189
~ ~ and Tomatoes 201
Frying Batter - - - 252
Fried Ox Foot - - - 81
~ Parsley - - - 252
~ Lobster 67
~ Bream 61
Fruit Salad - - - 201
~ - - - 161
Fricassee - - - - 75
Friture de Veau - - 90
Frangipane Tartlets - - 133
Fish Salad - - - 203
~ Patties 61
~ Cakes - - - 62
~ in Batter 63
~ Cream 67
~ Potted 62
~ Dried, To Cook - 70
Fish ----- 3
Fondu - - - - 119
Fillets of Beef Saute - 72
~ alaßearuaise 82
~ ala Francaise 99
~ Larded - 108
~ au Olives - 110
~ Braised - 73
Fillet of Veal - - - 96
~ of Fish 58
Finchley Pudding - - 156
G
Gateau of Cold Meat - 84
~ Apricots - - 171
Galantine, Savoury - - 120
~ of Turkey - - 94
~ of Fowl - - 102
Galettes - 238
German Wine Sauce - - 185
~ Cake - - - 234
„ Pudding - - 131
~ Apple Tart - - 135
~ Dumplings - - 142
~ Paste - - - 251
PAGE
Genoese Pastry - - - 145
General Crust - - - 160
Green Peas, To Boil - - 195
Gingerbread - - 236-240
~ Cakes - - 244
~ Nuts - - 248
Ginger Cake - - - 242
Golden Drops - - - 210
Grilled Kidneys - - 113
Gravy Soup 45
Gruel .... 250
Gooseberry Jam - - 218
H
Haricot Mutton - - 80
~ Beans, To Boil - 190
Hare, Jugged - - - 122
Ham Omelette - - - 213
~ To Boil - - - 254
Hot Water Dumplings - 127
Horseradish Sauce - - 181
Hints for Kitchen - - 16
~ Sick Nursing and
Invalid Cookery 19
I
Iced Pudding - - - 145
~ Fruit Pudding - - 143
Icing - - - 236
Imitation Sweetbreads - 106
Italian Fritters - - - 124
~ Sauce - - - 177
„ Eggs - - - 225
Irish Stew 87
J
Jam Sauce - - - 185
~ Apple - - - 218
~ Strawberry - - 217
~ Rhubarb - - - 218
~ Gooseberry - , 218
~ Blackberry - - 219
~ Pineapple - - - 217
Jelly, Apple - - - 169
~ Orange - - - 163
~ Quince - - - 219
~ Lemon - - - 164
~ Ox Foot - - - 173
~ Calves’ Foot - - 170
~ Aspic - - - 164


PAGE
Jelly, Port Wine - - 173
„ Cake - 232
Jam Sandwiches - 125
Jugged Hare - - - 122
Julienne Soup 50
~ Vegetables - - 252
Jellies and Creams - - 13
Jaumange - - - - 167
K
Kedgeree 63
Kidney Omelette - - 215
~ Toast - - - 211
~ ala Brochette - 74
~ and Macaroni - 90
~ and Tomato Stew 111
Kingswood Soup - 46
~ Cakes - - 137
~ Pudding - - 139
Kromskies of Oysters - 60
L
Lemon Syrup - - - 223
~ Jelly - - - 164
~ Sponge - - - 174
~, Water Ice - - 161
~ Pudding - - 127
~ Cheesecakes - - 148
Liver Fricassee - - - 76
~ and Bacon - - 93
~ ala Parisienne - 117
~ Brochette - - 117
Lobster in Aspic - - 68
„ au Gratin - - 71
~ Cutlets - - 64
~ Scalloped - - 66
~ Fried 67
M
Macaroni Soup - - 47
~ Cheese - - 209
~ in Stock - - 209
~ and Tomatoes - 212
Mayonnaise Sauce - - 179
~ of Lobster - 59
Maitre d’Hotel Sauce - 180
~ Butter - 250
Manchester Pudding - 141
Marmalade ~ - 219
PAGE
Marrow Toast - - - 211
Medallions ala St. James 103
Meringues - - - 162
Melted Butter Sauce - - 179
Melbourne Pudding - 130
Menus - 31
Mince - 89
~ and Poached Eggs 86
Mincemeat - - - 156
Mint Sauce - - - 181
Milk Rolls - - - 245
~ Biscuits - - - 247
Mock Turtle Soup - - 45
~ Whitebait - - 66
~ Venison - - - 107
~ Brawn - - - 119
Mutton Rechauffe - - 74
~ Cutlets i la Re-
forme - - 96
~ Broth - - 41
~ Pie - - - 89
~ Soubise - - 98
~ ala St. James - 98
„ To Boil - 101
~ Stewed - - 101
Moulded Meat - - 72
~ Calves’ Head - 78
Mushroom Pie - - - 147
Mulled Claret - - - 221
Mulligatawny Soup - - 49
Murray Plaice - - 59
Muffins - - - - 230
N
Nestor Pudding - - 141
O
Omelette Souffffi - - 216
Oatmeal Biscuits - - 247
Omelettes and Souffles - 10
Onion Soup 53
„ Sauce - - - 185
Oyster Sauce - - - 177
„ Patties 58
~ in Butter - - 60
~ Souffl6 - - 65
~ and Macaroni - 68
~ Fried 70
„ Soup 56


PAGE
Oysters, Kromskies of - 60
Orange Jelly - - - 163
~ Snow - - - 175
„ Salad - - - 175
~ Flower Pudding - 132
~ Marmalade - - 219
Ox Tail Soup 47
Ox Foot, Stewed - - 92
„ Jelly - - - 173
~ Fried 81
P
Parliaments - - - 231
Panacha Jellies - - 251
Panada - - - - 252
Pancakes - - - - 140
Parsley Sauce - - - 184
„ To Chop - - 253
Pastry 12
„ Puff - - - 149
~ Short - - - 159
~ French - - - 143
~ Custards - 157
Petit Choux Tartlets - 124
Pea Soup 48
Pineapple Cream - - 169
~ Jam - - 217
Pigeon Pie 89
~ and Prawns - - 105
Pig’s Trotters - - - 116
Piquante Sauce - - 180
Poivrade ~ - - 188
Porter Cup - - - 220
Pot au Feu 43
Porridge - - - 255
Port Wine Jelly - - 173
Pickle, To Make - - 255
Potted Bloaters - - 61
~ Salmon - 71
Poor Man’s Goose - - 114
Pork Cutlets 87
~ Collops 88
~ Sausages - - - 118
Potted Fish 62
~ Meat ... 121
„ Eggs - - - 228
Poet’s Salad - - - 201
Potatoes, To Boil - - 196-7
~ Cheesecakes - 125
~ Croquettes - - 195
PAGE
Potatoes ala Duchesse - 190
„ Cakes - - 199
~ Curried - - 189
~ Mashed - - 199
~ Beignets - - 199
~ Cassolettes - - 198
~ in Milk - - 191
~ Soup 52
~ Salad - - - 203
~ Puree 53
„ Souffle - - 193
~ Chips - - - 193
~ Snow - - - 197
Prawn Savoury 58
Pressed Beef - - - 106
~ Chicken - - 80
Puff Pastry - - - 149
Puree of Babbit - - 54
~ Green Peas - - 47
~ Mushrooms - - 190
~ a I’Americaine - 55
~ Haricots 56
Pumpkin Soup - - 54
Pudding, Christmas - - 154
~ Suet - - - 126
~ Amber - - 155
~ Lemon - - 127
~ Finchley - - 156
„ Hot Water - 127
~ Dowager - - 129
~ Bedford - - 129
~ Baked Cabinet - 129
~ Alexandria - 158
~ Boiled Cabinet - 140
~ Cold ~ - 134
~ Melbourne- - 130
~ Yorkshire - - 130
~ Bridal - - 130
~ German - - 131
~ Victoria - - 131
~ Orange Flower - 132
„ Buff - - - 132
~ Sultana - 133
~ Sausage Meat - 133
~ Cold Marmalade 135
~ College - - 136
~ Bread and Butter 137
~ ~ Savoury - 158
~ ~ Brown - 138
~ ~ and Fruit 144


PAGE
Pudding, Vennoise - - 138
~ Kingswood - 139
~ Manchester - 141
~ Nestor - - 141
~ German Savoury 142
~ Iced and Fruit - 143
~ Iced - - - 145
~ ~ Strawberry 148
~ Cassel - - 144
~ Roly Poly - - 146
~ Baked Plum - 146
~ Semolina - - 149
~ Douglas - - 152
~ Queen of - - 153
~ Savoury - 153
~ Cape - - - 154
Q
Queen Cakes - - - 241
~ of Puddings - - 153
Quince Jelly - - - 219
Quinces, To Stew - - 219
Quenelles - - - - 113
R
Raised Pie Crust - - 134
Raspberry Sandwiches - 126
„ Buns - - 249
~ Cream - - 171
Raw Beef Tea 42
Rechauffb of Mutton - - 74
Rice Cake - - - 232
~ To Boil - - - 252
~ Buns - - - 246
~ Meringue- - - 142
~ Souffle - . - - 151
~ Soup - - - 42
Rissoles 85
Rock Cakes - - - 245
Roast Fowl (American) - 122
Roasting 7
Rolled Mutton - - 97
Rolled Calf’s Head - - 120
Rough Puff Pastry - - 143
Rhubarb Jam - - - 218
~ Mould - - 162
Rump Steak Pie - - 94
Refreshing Drink - - 222
Roly Poly Jam Pudding - 146
PAGE
Royal Mince Pies - - 152
Russian Tartlets - - 95
S
Sardine Toast - - - 206
Salad Dressing - - - 212
Sauce Poivrade - - - 188
~ for Wild Duck - 188
~ for Roast Pork - 179
Sandwich Cakes - - 241
Salmon „ - - 69
~ in Aspic - - 69
Saucer Cakes - - - 248
Sausage Meat Pudding - 133
~ Pork - - - 118
„ Beef - - - 118
~ Veal and Ham - 118
Savoury Toast - - - 205
~ Marrow - - 205
~ Custard - - 128
~ Eggs and Bacon - 229
~ Bread Pudding - 158
~ Rice - - - 209
~ Cabbage - - 198
~ Omelette - - 214
~ Hash 83
~ Mutton - 86
~ Pudding - - 153
~ Stew 92
~ Sausages - - 112
Scotch Collops 72
„ Cake - - - 234
~ Woodcock - - 226
Scones .... 238
Semolina Pudding - - 149
~ Soup 46
Sea Pie 74
Seed Cake - - - 242
Second Stock 41
Shortbread - 237-238
Short Pastry - - - 159
~ Cookies - - - 240
Shrewsbury Cakes - - 242
Shrimp Sauce - - - 178
Sharp Maitre d’Hotel Sauce 178
Shepherd’s Pie - . 83
Sheep’s Head Pie - - 80
„ To Cook - 121
Soda Cakes - - 235
~ Scones - - - 245


PAGE
Soubise Cutlets - - 98
Sour Roast - - - 114
Soups and Purees - - 1
Soup Maigre 56
~ ala Reine - - 57
~ Semolina - - 46
~ for Poor - - 48
~ Rice 42
~ French - - 43
~ Pot au Feu - - 43
~ Tomato and Marrow 44
~ Vegetable - - 44
~ Gravy - 45
~ Mock Turtle - - 45
~ Kingswood - - 46
~ Macaroni - - 47
~ Ox Tail - - 47
~ Pea - - - 48
~ Mulligatawny - 49
~ Julienne - - 50
~ Clear 50
~ Tomato 51
~ Potato 52
~ Onion 53
~ Pumpkin - - 54
~ Artichoke - - 55
~ Oyster 56
~ Bonne Femme - 57
~ Tapioca Cream - 52
Stock, Good - - 41
Steak and Kidney Pie - 94
Stewed Rabbit 75
~ Chops - - - 101
~ Kidneys - - 90
~ Tripe - - - 109
~ Carrots - - 193
~ Duck and Turnips 123
Stuffed Mutton - - 115
~ Tomatoes - - 197
~ Eggs - - ■ 224
Strawberry Jam - - 217
~ Cream - - 171
~ Ice Pudding - 148
Sponge, Ginger Loaf - 240
~ Cake - - - 230
Spiced Beef - - - 117
Suet Pudding - - - 126
Sultana Cake - - - 235
~ Pudding - - 133
Sydney Relish - - - 187
PAGE
Sydney Buns - - - 233
Sweet Omelette - - 215
Sauce, Oyster - - - 177
~ Italian - - - 177
~ Shrimp - - - 178
~ Yellow - - - 178
~ Sharp Maitre d’Hotel 178
~ for Roast Pork - 179
~ Melted Butter - 179
~ Mayonnaise - - 179
~ Tar tare - - 180
~ Maitre d’Hotel - 180
~ Piquant - - 180
„ Mint - - - 181
~ Horseradish - - 181
~ Brown - - - 181
~ White - - . 182 1
» Egg - - - 182
~ Dutch - - - 183
~ Tomato - - - 188
~ Wine - - - 184
~ Custard- - - 184
~ Parsley - - - 184
~ Onion - - - 185
~ Jam - - - 185
~ German Wine - 185
~ Brandy - - - 185
~ Bechamel - - 186
~ Bread - - - 187
~ Apple - - - 187
~ Sydney - - - 187
~ Poivrade - - 188
~ Wild Duck - - 188
T
Tartlets of Fried Fish - 67
Tartare Sauce - - - 180
Tapioca Cream - - - 52
Tomato, Sweet - - - 176
~ Soup 51
~ Stuffed - - 197
~ and Marrow Soup 44
~ Savoury - - 207
~ Sauce - - - 183
~ Omelette - - 216
Toast and Water - - 223
Tea, To Make - - - 220
Tea Cakes and Scones - 13
„ Plain - - 233


PAGE
Turnips in Stock - - 191
~ in White Sauce - 200
Tripe en Pate - - - 115
„ Stewed - - - 109
Turkey and Oysters - - 108
~ Galantine - - 94
Trifle - - - - 166
U
Useful Hints 25
V
Vanilla Cream - - - 172
~ Souffle - - - 150
Vegetable Marrow, To Boil 194
Vennoise Pudding - - 138
Vegetables - - - 15
Veal and Ham Pie - - 78
~ Braised - 77-97
~ and Ham Sausages - 118
~ Seasoning - - 251
Vegetable Soup - - 44
~ Piir6e - - 49
Vol au Vent - - 118
PAGE
Vienna Bread - - 243
Victoria Sandwiches - 239
~ Pudding - - 131
Velvet Cream - - 172
Venetian Rice - - 210
W
Wild Duck, To Roast - 112
~ Sauce - - 118
Wine Sauce - - - 184
White Sauce - - - 182
~ Stock 40
Whiting ala Orly - - 70
Whisky Apples - - 162
X
Xmas Pudding - - 152
~ Cake - - - 232
Y
Yellow Sauce - - 178
Yorkshire Tea Cakes - 246
„ Pudding - - 130
Yale Pie 87
George Robertson and Co., Printers, Melbourne and Sydney.


THE &
'DTOAL STORE iIMITED,
FLINDERS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
XIJ HE MUTUAL STORE was established in November, 1872, with a
Capital of £5,000, in order to supply its members with their house-
hold requirements. Its growth from that time to the present has
been one continued success. It has now a Paid-up Capital of £50,000,
with a Reserve Fund of £114,000 ; has returned to its members as
Dividend on their Share Capital and Bonus on their purchases the sum
of £58,700, and its sales for the last twelve months amounted to £175,000.
The advantages of The Mutual Store are now offered to the general
public.
The following are the Departments of the Store: —
Grocery and Provision
Poultry and Game
Grain and Fuel
Wine, Beer, and Spirits
General Furnishing Ironmongery
and Electroplate
Stationery and Fancy Goods
Boot and Shoe
Woollen and Tailoring
Gentlemen’s Mercery
Furniture and Carpet
General Drapery
Millinery and Dressmaking and
Mantle
Underclothing
Silks and Dresses
Manchester
Hosiery and Glove
China and Glass.
Yisitors to or residents in Melbourne and suburbs or the country
districts will appreciate the advantages of finding all their requirements
supplied under one roof.
SPECIAL ATTENTION IS PAID TO STATION AND COUNTRY ORDERS.
A SPECIALITY is made of the following articles, recommended by
Mrs. Wicken in her Cookery lessons :
French Gelatine
Fish Fryers
Parsley Fryers
Vegetable Boilers
Cooks’ Brass Wire Sieves
Conical Gravy Strainers
Seamless Tinned Steel Sauce-
pans and Stewpans
French Cooks’ Knives
Palette Knives
French Cooks’ Forks
19


ECONOMY! COMFORT! CLEANLINESS I
IDEAL
IDEAL
IDEAL
IDEAL
IDEAL
IDEAL
IDEAL
IDEAL
IDEAL
STOVES
STOVES
STOVES
STOVES
STOVES
STOVES
STOVES
STOVES
STOVES
If you desire
PERFECT COOKING
At the least possible expense and
trouble, you will
Send for a Circular,
Or INSPECT those really perfect
COOKING STOVES.
Send for Testimonials, See.
* the ideal acorn *
Takes two-foot Wood, burns Coal and Coke, and
is adapted for both
Town and Country Use.
C3se>
LONG & COMPANY
SOLE j^GKEIsTTS,
101 ELIZABETH STREET.


JOHN DANKS &. SON
42 (only) BOURKE STREET WEST.
THE BEST HOUSE IN TOWN.
GAS
BRACKETS
AND
GLOBES,
A
Splendid
Assortment.
USE BANKS' ECONOMISER GAS BURNER.
It will Lessen your Gas Bills and Give a Better Light.
CHANDELIERS,
The New Colonial
E]S6IJ2E,
With Enlarged Fire Box,
toiler, and Cylinders,
Safety Lock-up Fire Box
(tad Ash Pan, is positively
Ihe Best in the Market.
A Large Stock on hand
of Engine and Thrashing
Machine Wearing Parts.
SOLE AGENTS
prices.
GAS STOVES, all makes, in stock,
For Cooking and all other purposes.
Inspect Show Rooms.
RANSOMES’
NEW AUSTRALASIAN
THRASHER,
Pitted with Rotary Shakers,
Third Blast under Caving
Riddle. It assures Perfect
Shaking, Perfect Separation
from Cavings, Perfect Dress-
ing. It is Perfection.
BUY NO OTHER.
Portable Engines, Semi-
Fixed Engines, Fixed En-
gines—a Large Stock always
on hand.
FOR
RANSOMES,
S MS
JEFFRIES LIMITED.
DANKS & SON’S PUMPS and IRRIGATION PLANT Guaranteed thoroughly effective.
Cast and Wrought Iron Pipes for Irrigation always in stock.
Don’t throw away your Old Spoons, Porks, Cruets, Epergnes, Salvers, Tea and Coffee
Services, &c. —send them to
JOHN DANKS & SON, 42 (only) Bourke Street West,
To be RE-PLATED EQUAL TO NEW.
