

THE MENACE
OF PROTESTANT
LETHARGY.
Roman Catholics
and the State.
Price 3d.
WRITTEN AND PUBLISHED BY
THE LOYALIST LEAGUE OF VICTORIA,
Universal Chambers, 325 Collins Street,
MELBOURNE.
1920.




PREFACE.
In all countries the loyalty of the Roman Catholic
citizen is necessarily a doubtful quantity, for their
first allegiance is to a Power which has always
claimed authority temporal, as well as spiritual, and
which demands unquestioning obedience of its sub-
jects, That the Popes claim the right to de-
pose Kings, to release subjects from their allegiance,
and to nominate successors to the forfeited thrones,
everybody knows. But many people fancy, not only
that the modern world would laugh such a pretension
to scorn, which is true; but that the conflict between
the Vatican and those States which refuse abject sub-
mission to it has come to an end, which is false. A
mere glance at twentieth century happenings in Roman
Catholic countries suffices to establish the point. To
fight against an enemy in war is not loyalty, it is
a Small part of loyalty-and is a public duty.
In France, Gambetta exclaimed, in 1877, ‘‘Le
clericalisme voila rennemi" (Priest-craft is our
enemy"), and from that day till the coming
of the Huns made the French a united people,
with but a single object—there was unceasing strife
between clericalism and all that made for freedom.
As a result of the venomous fury With which the
clerical papers flung themselves into the attack on
Dreyfus. Ferry passed a Bill, in 1901, which dealt
drastically with the religious Orders, providing,
amongst other things, ‘‘that no member of an un-
authorised Order should teach in any school." In
1904 a law' was passed forbidding members of any
Order to teach, and a year later the Separation Law


set forth that the French Republic neither supported
nor recognised any religious organisation, and that the
revenue of such bodies must be transferred to Associa-
tions of Public Worship. Italy expropriated the mon-
asteries in 1870, and its drastic anti-clerical legislation
is in force to-day. If it is objected that in Italy such
legislation was due to the Pope’s claim to govern
that part of the country which once formed the Papal
States, the fact must be admitted, but it merely
stresses the ' point that Rome still cherishes
temporal ambitions. And the student may note that
even countries wholly Romanist, as Austria and Spain,
have been forced to action more or less closely re-
sembling that taken in France and Italy. In Austria-
Hungary the fiercest battle . was over the marriage
question. The law of the land said the children of
mixed marriages were to be brought up in the Church
of the parent whose sex they inherited. Rome said
that boys and girls alike must be baptised by its
priests, and entered in the parish registers as Roman
Catholics. In Spain there was trouble when Ferrer,
the founder of a number of undenominational schools,
was shot by clerical fanatics, and there was legislation,
in 1910, to restrain the religious Orders, which, swol-
len by monks and nuns banished from France and the
Philippines, were a menace to the State, as their mem-
bers, though exempt from all taxation, did not hesi-
tate to sap the loyalty of its subjects.
These facts have been briefly touched on, lest any,
who have had little leisure to bestow on study of the
issues involved, lend their ears to the absurd, but oft-
repeated assertion, that the loyalty of whole-hearted
Romanists is questioned only by a handful of fanatical
Protestants. All the world over, in Protestant lands
and in Roman Catholic countries alike, statesmen and
people have resented the claim of Rome—
(1) To teach children* that their first duty is to
obey the Priest, and that Protestant Go-
vernments are un-Christian.


(2) To declare illegitimate the children of marri-
ages conducted in accordance with the laws of
the State.
(3) To give its sanction t© disloyalty, by allowing
prelates and priests who have been guilty of
treasonable and seditious utterances to retain
their place in the Church.
We propose to show very briefly on what Rome
bases its extraordinary claims, what those claims are,
and how they may best be opposed.




The Menace of Protestant
Lethargy.
The Church and the State.
An Evil Organisation.
Australians generally are anxious that there should
be a clear-cut line between Church and State. The
State, they hold, has no concern with a man’s theo-
logical opinions or his ecclesiastical preferences. The
words, “Render therefore unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar’s, and unto God the things which
are God’s,” appeal to them even more strongly than
to their kinsmen of the Old World. The principle laid
down is admirable, and seems simple, but in practice
there are difficulties. In New Zealand and in other
countries a number of “conscientious objectors” were
imprisoned in the war-time; those of them who were
“conscientious” honestly believed that Caesar was de-
manding that which was God’s. That most of these
objectors were mere shirkers does not affect our present
point, which is, that in actual life there are occasions
on which men and women, honestly anxious to do right,
take quite different views of their duty to God on the
one hand, to the State on the other. When such oc-
casions arise, and little groups of men and women
cry, “We ought to obey God rather than men,” the
statesman who thinks them sincere ignores their de-
fiance of the law just as long and as completely as his


duty to tk® country allows. But when, instead of
"God’' we write “Church”; when the Church happens
to be one boasting its whole-hearted allegiance to an
Italian Pontiff, surrounded by advisers, the vast
majority of whom are also Italians; when, in-
stead of little groups of obscure enthusi-
asts, we have to reckon wffh Roman
Catholics, who form a fifth of the population—all
the factors of the statesman’s problems are changed.
If men’s theological beliefs and ecclesiastical prefer-
ences separate them from their countrymen, lead them
to shun national schools and to build denominational
ones induce them to contend that when mixed mar-
riages take place all the children born of them must
be educated as Roman Catholics, even the most
tolerant of Australians has to admit that a man’s
religion may affect his citizenship in very momen-
tous matters. He does not want to decry any
man’s creed, but facts oblige him to confess that if
we would understand the attitude of the Roman-Irish
here in Australia (as all the world over), to Eng-
land, we cannot ignore what they are taught
as religion. So far as possible we refrain
from belittling certain articles of the Roman
Catholic faith, but that we may comprehend
the attitude of the Roman Irish to Sinn
Fein and the “Republic,” we must state those
articles, and must show how completely they place
the great body of devout Roman-Irish at the mercy
of priests. And we must point out; too, that the al-
legiance of the priest is always to Rome, that his tradi-
tional feeling towards England is one of hatred be-
cause she does not submit to priestly rule. The
fact that a Church with its head-quarters in Italy
demands implicit obedience -from its adherents in
all that relates “to faith and morals,” and that Aus-
tralians in hundreds of thousands admit the de-
mand, is one which no sane politician can ignore.
That Rome does make the claim wc shall
establish by two quotations from her decrees, quota-


tions the formal language of which may weary the
reader, but which establish our point beyond all ques-
tion.
Rome's Comer in Truth.
Orthodox Protestantism takes its stand on the open
Bible, bids the layman study it and base his conduct
on its teaching. Rome bases a special claim on the fact
that the Canon of the Bible was determined by a
Council of the Church. It asserts that it, and it
alone, has power to say which of many Christian
writings should be recognised as Scripture, and that
it alone has wisdom to interpret those writings. In
a formal decree the cononical books from Genesis
to the Apocalypse of John the Apostle (including
the Apocrypha) are enumerated; and the following
anathema is proclaimed:—
“If any one receive not as sacred and canonical
the said books entire with all their parts, as
they have been used to be read in the Catholic
Church, and as they are contained in the
Latin Vulgate edition, and knowingly and de-
liberately condemn the traditions aforesaid;
let him be anathema.”
Furthermore, in order to retain petulant spirits, it
decrees that
“No one, relying on his own skill, shall—in matters
of faith, and of morals pertaining to the build-
ing up of Christian doctrine—by wresting the
sacred Scriptures to his own meanings, pre-
sume to interpret the said sacred Scripture
contrary to the sense which Holy Mother
Church, whose office it is to judge of the true
sense and interpretation of the Holy Scrip-
tures, hath held and doth hold, or contrary
to the unanimous consent of the Fathers, even
though such interpretations were never at any
time published.”


This extract is from a little volume entitled, “Roman
Catholicism: An Explanation of Catholic Belief Taken
from Official Sources.” It has a preface by Mon-
signor R. Hugh Benson, and has the “Nihil Obstat”
of the Censor deputatus, and the “Imprimatur” of the
Vicar-General dated 12th December, 1911. The pass-
age is quoted here because it gives, not in our words,
but in words officially approved by Rome, one of the
dogmas on which the authority of the Church of Rome
and the power of its priests are based. Our concern
is not with the value of the statement from the theo-
logical standpoint, nor are we at all concerned with in-
terpretations clever controversialists may put on it.
We simply ask the reader to note the impression the
words make on his own mind, the impression they must
make on the mind of plain men not given to proving
that black occasionally means white, and very often
means grey. The plain man would unhesitatingly de-
cide that the Roman Catholic child or man must ac-
cept the Bible as his priest gives it to him, includ-
ing the Apocrypha, which Protestants ignore, and
that, further, he must accept them in the sense
in which that Church interprets them. For the ordin-
ary Roman Catholic, who is not a scholar with abund-
ant leisure and a well-appointed library, the inter-
pretation of his Church is just what the priest or priests
with whom he comes in contact choose to tell him.
The Pope’s Supremacy.
We propose to quote only one other passage at length.
It is from the section of the little book cited above,
which treats of “The Pope, St. Peter’s Successor.” It
is as follows: —
“We teach, therefore, and declare that by the
Lord’s ordinance the Roman Church has
sovereignty of ordinary power over all other
Churches, and that this jurisdiction of the
Roman Pontiff, which is truly that of a bis-
hop, is immediate; and that to him all, both


pastors and faithful of every rite and dignity,
both as individuals and collectively, by their
obligation of hierarchical subordination and
true obedience, are subject, not only in what-
soever concerns faith and morals, but also in
whatsoever belongs to the discipline and go-
vernance of the Church throughout the world;
so that by holding fast with the Roman Pon-
tiff, unity, both of communion and of profes-
sion of the same faith, the Church of Christ
may be one flock under one supreme shepherd.
This is the teaching of Catholic truth, from
which no one can deviate without loss of faith
and of salvation.”
Here, again, our concern is not with the grounds on
which the claim of supremacy is based, or with any
subtle explaining away of what is set down by the
Roman Church, but simply with the effect the words
have on the mind of the plain man, and with the use
which priests can make, and do make, of them. If the
reader meditated joining the Roman Church, and read
the passage quoted, he would conclude that in all mat-
ters which concern “faith and morals,” he must un-
hesitatingly accept the teaching of the Church, under
penalty of loss “of faith and of salvation.” And if
you take from human life all that concerns faith and
morals, what is left? To the really religious man,
mixed marriages, the lawfulness of divorce under any
given conditions, the impressing of certain beliefs on
the child’s mind, the payment of just wages, the licen-
sing or prohibition of the liquor traffic, the rights of
property, whether owned by saints, publicans or aliens,
the waging of war and the making of peace, are all
questions of faith and morals. In other words, they
are matters in the discussion of which appeal is made
to our sense of right and wrong; and, more than that,
they are but a few of countless matters on which the
Roman Church has spoken from time to time, and on
which many Roman Catholics still look to it for guid-
ance. At the present moment, for example, the papers


are telling us in one issue that the Pope condemns
the treasonable utterances of Dr. Mannix, and that he
is opposed to Sinn Fein outrages; in the next, that “the
Vatican is strictly neutral.” And by both Loyalists
and Sinn Feiners, as by politicians and newspapers of
all parties, it is assumed that a direct utterance from
Rome would determine the attitude of thousands of
Roman Catholics in Great Britain, the Overseas Do-
minions, and the United States, just as pastorals deal-
ing with Socialism and various Labour problems have
affected their attitude in regard to those matters.
The Growth of Priestcraft.
To many men and women who are very familiar
with the New Testament the evolution of priestcraft,
the assertion of a claim to infallibility and the rest,
are a standing cause of perplexity. To them the Gos-
pels stress the direct relationship which should
exist between the individual and his God, and the
Epistles tell of little Churches the heads of which
made no arrogant claim to superiority over other
Christian teachers. They know, however, that after
the conversion of Constantine, and with the growth of
the power of the Roman See, there came a change as
complete as any in Old World fables concerning the
conversion of man or woman into bird or beast. The
crimes of some Popes who claimed to be successors
of the Galilean fisherman fill not a few pages of the
history of the Papacy even as written by Roman
Catholics, and the arrogant claims of other Popes fill
an incomparably greater number of such pages. Popes
placed the kingdoms ruled by kings who offended them
under a ban, terrorising superstitious people by with-
holding the sacraments and the right to Christian
burial; they took the crown from this man and gave it
to that one; a monarch would allow the servants of
Rome to beat him in a public place, as he did penance
for real or imaginary sins. One Pope handed Ireland to
an English king; another would have handed England


to Spain, The simple explanation of the happenings
is that, always and everywhere, from the first syllable
of recorded time down to the present, men possessed
of far-reaching powers have abused them. The priests
of the old Pagan faith had devices of their own for in-
creasing their authority, and as they increased it
the majority of them abused it. The tendency is not
peculiar to the clergy, for it is constantly displayed by
all manner of men, from the kings of finance, who
play with millions, to Labour leaders who hanker
for another £4OO a year. None the less, superstition,
cosmopolitanism, and celibacy do make the priest’s
craving for power, and his exercise of power, speci-
ally dangerous. Clearly, if a simple-minded Irish pea-
sant. or the simple-minded wife of a Roman Catholic
labourer out here in Australia, really believes that by
withholding the sacraments the priest can condemn her
child or herself to an undying hell, there is no point at
which he or she can refuse abject submission. And as
a citizen of the world the priest can laugh at extradi-
tion; if the State banishes him, he knows that, land
where he will, the faithful will accept him as a hero
with a saintly halo about his head. Finally, his celibacy
enables him to concentrate on any cherished purpose,
and to dare all in pursuing it. He has given no host-
ages to fortune, no loss he sustains, no abuse to which
he may be exposed touches wife or child. Perhaps it
was the knowledge of all this which stayed the hands
of the Australian Government when Dr. Mannix
flaunted the Sinn Fein flag. Weakly they said, what
end was to be served by deporting one whose Church
could give him a platform in any enemy or neutral
country, and whose utterances would receive world-
wide publicity? To most minds, however, the expul-
sion from Australia would have been a punishment
severe enough and well deserved.
The Political Priest as Parasite.
There were centuries throughout which the political
priest ruled with a high hand. There were then, as
there are now, many other priests of quite different


type. Had there not been holy men, such as Chaucer
pictured in his prologue to the “Canterbury Tales/’ the
prelate bent on temporal sway would have had scant
chance to gratify his ambition. The simple, saintly vill-
age priest won from the people that confidence and that
affection for the Church, which the wily Italian priest
so sadly abused. When despotic churchmen and abso-
lute monarchs made common cause, the dungeon, the
rack, and the stake, silenced or made an end of those
who challenged the claims of Rome. But in these later
days, when absolute kings have played fast and loose
with the Church, have trembled for their own safety,
and have seen the spirit of Protestantism creeping on
resistlessly as the ocean tide, the political priest has
generally adopted the methods of the parasite. He
has posed as a good, or at least as an unoffending
citizen; he has fed on the bounties of the State, has
flourished under its protection, whilst insidiously de-
stroying the loyalty of its people. How he has done
his secret work we shall show; but here it may be
pointed out that Dr. Mannix, reverting to the more
open methods of earlier days, was the victim
of a not unnatural mistake. At times during
the war the plight of England seemed well
nigh desperate. There were uneasy misgivings
in the minds of many loyalists, men some of
whom confess that when things were darkest their
cheerful talk was sadly like the whistling of the
frightened lad, only to keep his courage up. Who
can wonder that at such times priest and rebel, eager
to see the downfall of England, fancied that it had
come? Even yet these men have not abandoned the
hope that the Roman-Irish vote in many lands may
oblige the British Government to tolerate a Republic,
the establishment of which would involve the ultimate
destruction of the Empire. Had the Hun won no vic-
tories, had his crushing defeat come early instead of
late, Dr. Mannix would have adhered to the ways of
the parasite, growing at the expense of the body it
has made its home.


The Spread of Knowledge.
And now for a brief study of the stealthy
work which, had the war resulted in the
triumph of the Hun, or even in a stalemate, would
have made the vapouring of Mannix and the posturing
of De Valera forerunners of the fall of all that is best
in our civilisation.
The last hundred years have seen a wondrous spread
of that sort of knowledge which the political priest
most dreads. Through the ever-increasing facilities
for easy and inexpensive travel, through the multiplica-
tion of cheap books and periodicals, through the shorter
hours of labour, the great mass of the people are edu-
cated to-day as only the very few were educated a
hundred years ago. As a result, the clergy of all de-
nominations have lost something of their prestige.
When the parson in a Protestant village, the priest in
a Roman Catholic village, was the one educated resi-
dent, when books Were .are, and the ability to read
them with perfect' ease wa; rarer, the part of a clerical
Sir Oracle was easily played. It was the easier be-
cause the untaught villagers seldom wandered further
than their market’ town, and seldom met anyone whose
mind had been expanded by intercourse with men
living in other lands and professing other creeds. It
is really to the broadening of the mental outlook, to
the development of the enquiring spirit, that the priestly
Sir Oracle objects. He smiles benignly whilst the
Christian Brother tells boys that Mont Blanc is 15,782
feet high, that the three angles of any triangle are to-
gether equal to two right angles; he remains unruffled
whilst the nun explains the diatonic scale or mentions
that Sebastian Bach was born in 1685. Such know-
ledge leaves the children as unthinking, as superstiti-
ous, as docile as it found them. But our political
priest scowls when a teacher pictures the state of the
English monasteries in the early years of Henry VIII.,
or tells how hopelessly Roman Catholic Spain has
fallen behind, how its mental activity is almost confined


to the coastal cities, of which Rome is losing its grip-..
These are matters mention of which is apt to convert
bright boys and girls into troublesome little marks of
interrogation. Every despot, be he prince or priest,,
knows that the “Why?’’ habit is one that grows, and:
that those who acquire it are likely to question the:
divine right of any prince who acts like- a knave,
the divine inspiration of any priest unless it
can be shown to be 'true. He who would fain
say, “ I am Sir Oracle, and, when I ope my
lips, let no dog bark,” detests the scientific
spirit. Till what the historian would call the
other day, prince and priest of the despotic sort had
to combat that spirit only in the very few. And, so
long as the monasteries and convents were a nation’s
schools and colleges, it was easy to busy most of the
intellectual few in the beautification of missals or in
the writing of commentaries on poets whose works
did not threaten crown or mitre. But as the civilisa-
tion advanced, the politician saw, with Robert
Lowe, that “We must educate our masters”; and the
political priest saw that the Roman Catholic Church
must educate its children, or let their parents send
them to the schools which were opening on every
hand.
Control of Education.
When the schoolmaster passed from the big city to
the small town, from the town to the village, and from
the village to the remotest hamlet, the hand of the
political priest was forced. And he saw that education
was by no means a bad thing, if only he could control
it. Even education in the strict sense —the drawing out
of the child’s powers—may serve the despot’s end, if
only he can draw out and develop those qualities he
selects, leaving undeveloped those which would under-
mine his sway. Education by intelligent laymen in-
spires loyalty to the State, for it shows how civilisation
is impossible without the State. It encourages enquiry


and freedom of thought. But these are fatal to the
pretensions of a Church which definitely forbids “all
faithful Christians to defend as legitimate conclusions
of science such teachings as are known to be contrary
to the teaching of the priesthood.” And the Church
makes the veriest laughing-stock of the ignorant priests
who talk largely concerning the literature and science
of which Cardinal Newman complained sadly so many
of the Irish clergy were hopelessly ignorant. That
the Roman Catholic clergy of Ireland were deplorably
ignorant was their misfortune rather than their fault.
They had been trained, not in great national universi-
ties, where the sons of devout churchmen and earnest
sceptics, of Liberals and Conservatives, of aristocrats
and of plutocrats, met and discussed every problem of
the day with all the ardour of youth, but in semin-
aries presided over by priests, attended only by the
children of the “faithful,” in which any questioning
of the Church’s teaching was regarded as a prompting
of the Evil One. The clerical professor who dwarfed
the mind of his pupil did as he had been done by. In
the seminary there is no freedom of thought, no critic-
ism of anything the Church has said; the text books
are censored. How far this is carried is shown by
the amazing demand of the Irish Roman Catholic
bishops, that, if their people were to send their sons
to the Queen’s Colleges there must be separate chairs
even in such subjects as geology and anatomy. And
these priests, who had themselves been robbed of nearly
all that makes secondary or advanced education valu-
able, gained control of the schools in which luckless
Irish children in tens of thousands were to be taught.
They control also 267 Victorian schools in which, last
year (1919), no fewer than 38,364 children were en-
rolled. To maintain their separate schools in Victoria,
the Roman Catholics of the State pay in sub-
scriptions and fees for an education distinctly
inferior in important respects to that imparted in the
State Schools. The reader who has not studied the
question naturally asks, “Why?”


Destructive Teaching of Roman Schools.
The first point to note is that the teacher in a Roman
school is a puppet in the hands of the priest. If a lay-
man, he is free to the extent that if he finds the bond-
age intolerable, he can go. If he is a member of a re-
ligious Order he has not even .that measure of free-
dom, unless he happens to possess moral courage in
an extraordinary degree. In either case, whilst he re-
mains in the school, the priest is ever at his elbow.
He must train the children in priest-worship and in
rebel-worship, for these are inculcated in the text books
compiled by the Christian Brothers. He must
teach that the priest’s utterance on any matter
of faith or morals —that is, on everything that really
matters —is final. Of course, in the decree from which
we quoted mention is not made of the priest, but of the
Church. As regards, say, 99 out of 100 educated in a
Roman Catholic primary school, which word you use
matters nothing. It matters nothing, because prob-
ably not one in a hundred as he grows up studies the
Fathers, the findings of the different Church Councils,
etc., with a view of deciding for himself whether his
particular priest is accurately stating the doctrines of
Rome. As to the rest, on nearing manhood they ac-
cept the local priest as the mouthpiece of the Church,
after the fashion of the Irish peasant; or else regard
religion as a superstition to be adroitly exploited for
social, political, and business ends, after the fashion of
the up-to-date French citizen. Here, in Australia, we
have both types. In our schools the teacher has to
inspire suspicion of all Protestants, with a very special
mistrust of and disloyalty to all Protestant Govern-
ments. If a number of Roman Catholics are loyal, as
they undoubtedly are, it is in spite of the history taught
in Roman schools, a history which consists to an
extent most Australians find it hard to realise, in les-
sons glorifying the Irish rebels and defaming all who
opposed them, and inspiring a rancorous hatred of
England.


German and Roman Catholic Methods.
.The priests sow discord and disunion in every State,
and their methods in Protestant countries very closely
resemble those which Germany pursued in times of
peace. Unceasing preparation is made for war. Ger-
may set herself to fashion a whole nation so that it
would desire a world war, and would fling itself into
it heart and soul, bearing the sacrifices involved with-
out a murmur. To that end school and university,
platform and pulpit, newspaper and library, were
pressed into the service. Rome does the same. It
isolates its children in denominational schools, edu-
cates its priests in seminaries, has its sectarian papers,
with a little religious instruction and a monstrous
amount of disloyal talk, has its Sinn Fein speakers in
its guilds, and its anti-English orators in the pulpit.
When the Hun was accused of making ready for war,
he posed as an injured innocent, asserting that such
groundless charges were calculated to create enmity
and to provoke hostilities. So Rome, when the in-
sidious work done in her schools, seminaries and
guilds is criticised, raises the cry of “Sectarianism.”
They say, “We must do justice to our fellow citizens,”
that “there must be the fullest religious liberty.” These
are mere platitudes. Everything hinges on the defini-
tion of “justice” and of “liberty,” Australia wants
loyal citizens, must have them or perish. Therefore,
to let any body of men, acting under the cloak of
religion, inspire hatred of Protestant rule in general,
and of English rule in particular, is to grant them,
not liberty, but a dangerous licence. The Germans
sought to make the State supreme with a view to world-
dominion; the priests strive to. make Rome supreme
with a view to world-dominion. The German Junkers
stressed the divine right of the Kaiser; the Roman ex-
tremists proclaim the infallibility of the Pope. Those
whose aim it is to secure world-wide sway for any
organisation, be it Church or State, cannot tolerate
freedom of thought. The reason is on the surface.


The aim is iniquitous and absurd, the arguments urged
in support of it are hopelessly bad; therefore the
many who are to assist the interested few in pursuing
it must not learn to think.
Shriking the Issue.
Australians generally are anxious to shirk the issue.
Their mood in regard to Roman aggression is much
what the mood of most Englishmen was in regard to
German war preparations up to the middle of 1914-
As far back as their memories would carry them,
Britishers remembered talk of the dread world-war
into which Great Britain would be swept. There had
been no such struggle from Waterloo, in 1815; every
few years there were ominous rumblings, every few
years the papers said the eruption was coming, yet
for about a century Great Britain knew nothing of any
life and death struggle, and most people put down talk
of the war, with talk of the big gooseberry and the
latest folly of the girl of the period, as a standing
subject for “the silly season.” Mr. Asquith and the
Liberal Party forswore the old adage, “If you would
have peace, prepare for war.” To talk of lasting
peace and the millennium, to belittle Germany’s fever-
ish war preparations, saved money and trouble. The
result was disastrous. In like Avay ; most Australians
are intent on remaining “blissfully ignorant” of what
happens in Roman schools, seminaries, guilds. They
do not want to take a stand which may involve the
loss of pleasant acquaintances, clients, customers, poli-
tical supporters. So they cheerfully accept the assur-
ance that the Roman Catholic is as good and as loyal
an Australian as any Protestant can be.
The Ne Temere Decree.
Nothing can show more conclusively than does
the meek acceptance by the Government of the
Ne Temere Decree, how far weak complaisance
of Protestants allows Rome to go. According


to that decree, marriage of a Protestant
and a Roman Catholic, marriage celebrated by a
Protestant clergyman, in a Protestant country in full
compliance with the law of the land, is invalid. The
woman concerned is unmarried, the offspring of the
union are illegitimate. The Kaiser put down his foot,
and made an end of the decree as regards Germany.
Roman Catholic France laughed this impudent preten-
sion of the priests to scorn. The Australian politician
meekly accepted the gross insult to the religion he pro-
fesses on census day. The cynic may say the poli-
tician does not count, for his meanness when in quest
of votes verges on the infinite. But the politician can-
not for any length of time tolerate an insult to the
majority of the Australian people, if the majority them-
selves resent it. The ordinary Protestant is tolerant.
But in this matter there is absolutely no excuse for the
Protestant who allows women of his own creed to be
insulted because they insist on the right to. be married
in their own Church, and who is silent when.arrogant
priests brand children, legitimate according to the
teaching of his Church and the law of his State, as
bastards. He knows that the thing happens, and that
when he pretends that his inaction is due to a fine
tolerance, he is merely cloaking indolence, cowardice,
a weak love of quiet where there is no true peace,
or a mean desire for gain even at the cost of honour.
To allow a priest to say he recognises a State mar-
riage, but to say also that his Church has a right to
say it is not a proper marriage, is for the Government
to connive at an internal authority repudiating State
authority.
The False Position.
The anxiety of the priest to isolate the Roman
Catholic child, to steep him through and through with
sectarian and racial prejudices before he mixes with
men in the professional or business world, is the in


evitable outcome of the false position so clearly set
forth in the extracts which we quoted above. The
Bishop of Rome asserts that, as successor of St. Peter,
he is head of the Christian Church, not only in Rome
or in Italy as a whole, but throughout the whole world.
And, be it noted, he aspires not to a nominal headship,
to that purely formal precedence which in many posi-
tions really able men are often willing to concede
with a contemptuous smile. The Pope claims, and so
far as the Roman Catholics in them are concerned,
exercises a real authority in all countries. He asserts,
moreover, that he is infallible, that he and his Councils
are the divinely-appointed exponents of truth; and he
means not merely that he is' inspired as anyone who
utters noble truth is, but that, in all appertaining to
faith and morals, he is, when speaking ex cathedra,
always and necessarily right, while those who hold any
different opinion on such matters are always and neces-
sarily wrong. If claims so transparently false are to
be maintained in an age like this, millions of minds
must be as mercilessly cramped as are the feet of
Chinese women; the cramping must be begun in in-
fancy, and the-exercise of independent thought in
youth and manhood must be checked at any cost. So
the priest aims at making the Roman Catholic people
members of a secret society in the State, but not of
it; accepting every advantage it can be induced to offer,
and displaying only such surface loyalty as makes them
useful servants of the Church,
Roman Catholics in Parliament
When, at the Federal Elections of 1919, it was
bluntly asserted that the loyalty of candidates con-
nected with the Church of which De Valera’s friend,
Dr. Mannix, was Victoria’s head, must be suspect,
there was a bitter outcry against “Sectarianism.” Those
aggrieved pointed to the undoubted loyalty of a few
prominent Roman Catholics, and asserted that, behind


these few who boldly challenged the treasonable ut-
terances of the Archbishop, there were many compara-
tively obscure Papists as true to the Empire as they.
That is gladly admitted. In a certain sense the Angli-
can, Presbyterian and Roman Churches here may be
spoken of as English, Scotch and Irish respectively.
That is to say, when the census is taken on April 4,
1921, the ordinary Irishman, who does not come from
Ulster, will set himself down as a Roman Catholic,
though he never darkens a Church door. And a still
larger •number of men whose outlook has broadened,
who have ceased to accept, such dogmas as the infalli-
bility of the Pope at all, or who accept it in
some sense which makes it harmless, will write
themselves down Roman Catholics, because they
hold that some sort of religion is of vital
importance, and are not disposed to leave the
Church of their fathers. But all that said, the Protest-
ant who denies that the great body of Roman-Irish
are disloyal proclaims either his ignorance or his in-
sincerity, When they opposed conscription and ac-
claimed Dr. Mannix, they asserted the fact for them-
selves; eVery issue of their Victorian paper, “The Ad-
vocate/’ proclaims it for them. And it is in regard to
the election of members of Parliament that the Hun-
like methods of Rome to which We referred just now
have been most conspicuous. The volumes of “Han-
sard” are rich in pages devoted to debates which deal
with efforts of the Church of Rome to secure control
of the schools, to win a separate grant, and with the
efforts of its instruments, the Roman-Irish members,
to use the Civil Service in favour of their co-religion-
ists here, and the vote of the House in favour of their
co-religionists in Ireland.
The Hypocritical Cry of “ Let us Banish
Sectarianism.”
Everybody who cares to know is aware that at elec-
tion after election, the Roman Press and a whole army
of priests insisted that no devout Roman Catholic


could support a candidate who was not prepared to
vote for the separate grant for Roman schools, and to
insist that England must grant the “just” claims of Ire-
land. In the committee-room no organiser, paid or
amateur, ever pretends to doubt that the big Roman-
Irish vote goes so solidly for the candidate supported
by the priests, that the exceptional voters who assert
their independence may be ignored in any rough cal-
culation of the probable result of the poll. Yet, in
face of all this, no sooner do those who object to sep-
arate schools as a menace to national unity, organise,
than the cry of “Sectarianism” is raised. How bitterly
the Roman-Irish hate England few of us realised till
Dr. Mannix proclaimed his own feeling from the house-
top, and the great body of his Irish co-religionists
cheered him to the echo. Any man of ordinary intellig-
ence who devotes a few minutes to a P. & O. map of
trade routes, must see that the proclamation and estab-
lishment of an Irish Republic makes the early dis-
memberment of the whole Empire not only possible,
but probable. Yet loyal citizens are asked to banish
“Sectarianism,” and t© return to Parliament Ronlan-
Irish Members, who will use their position to embarrass
and to humiliate England in every conceivable way,
till she lets Rome take over the government of Ire-
land.
The Civil Service.
The M.P., or better still, the Minister of the Crown,
who can secure billets either permanent or temporary
for Roman-Irishmen eager to enter the Civil Service,
is invaluable to the political priest. No Church, not
even one which controls the schools, finds it easy to
retain a grip of its adherents when they pass from the
school world into the larger one beyond its walls. Quite
apart from scepticism and any conscious change of be-
lief, now, as of old. “the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the lust of other things


entering in,” destroy much of the seed which
parents and teachers sow in the child’s mind.
The way in which France, Italy, and even
Austria-Hungary have resented the high-handed pro-
ceedings of the Roman Church shows that in most
countries the Roman Church fares no better than
others in this respect. So the political priest does
what in him lies to make the Church a secret society,
which can promote the interests of the servile, and
stay the advancement of the independent. The Roman-
Irish are notoriously fond of positions in the public
service. Of course, there are in the service some
men of outstanding ability, who do splendid work.
But the rank and file occupy an almost unique position;
no initiative is demanded of them, they escape a host
of anxieties which beset those who establish businesses
of their own, and those who enter the service of pro-
gressive firms disposed to drive the drones from the
hive. So long as a civil servant is punctual and sober
in business hours he can reckon on the slow but steady
promotion which comes by seniority. If he has ambi-
tion, a friendly priest, possessing the ear of a Minister,
may gain for him one of those prizes in the service,
of which there are so many in these days of ever
multiplying departments. The priest is quite sure of
the Roman Catholic Minister of the Crown; by skil-
fully playing on the Party system, he may easily tempt
the Protestant Minister. If such a Minister is afraid
he may lose his seat and with it his portfolio, the pro-
mise of the Roman-Irish vote, about a fifth of the
whole, is a big bribe; if he is sure of his own return,
the promise of certain Roman votes on a division likely
to destroy the Government of which he is a member is
a bribe almost as great. Everybody knows all this who
has seen anything of political life from the inside. For
the priest to promote the interests of members of his
flock by bringing pressure to bear on politicians is to
display a fatherly interest in his flock. For Protest-
ants to object, is denounced by the priest as a pitiful
spirit of narrow sectarianism.


The Business World.
What has been said applies to both the Federal and to
the State Houses, and to all branches of the public ser-
vice. There are in every department opportunities for
the exercise of patronage by the Minister, and so for
pressure by the priest, who has a solid vote to offer.
Possibly it can be exercised most freely in the making
of temporary appointments, and in the selection of
men to do work on railway lines, irrigation schemes,
and the like. In good times, we frankly admit, the
man who is prepared to do hard manual work requires
no patron; but in times of collapse in any particular
industry a friend at headquarters, a friend who can
tell a Roman Catholic foreman or ganger to give Pat
or Mike first call, is a friend indeed. And for the ease-
loving ex-pupil of a Roman school, the boy robbed of
independence, taught that unquestioning, unreasoning
obedience is the first essential to salvation, there are
many snug billets in municipal councils, in the offices
of public boards, and still more in the offices of great
companies. To the aspiring city councillor, to the keen
managing director, the priest can make overtures with
every chance of success; to the former he can offer a
solid vote, to the latter the custom of the “faithful.”
And, unless they have pondered the subject deeply and
have a very strong sense of duty, those approached
easily satisfy conscience. “If I appoint Pat and Mike
they will do the routine work as well as Sandy and
John. And Father O’Reilly will get me the R.C. vote,”
or “and Father O’Reilly will get my company the lives
of any Irish people in his parish who want to insure,”
and so on.
The Coral Reef.
In any single instance the sort of patronage under
discussion appears well nigh harmless. Anyone of us
interested in a lad or in a man with whom the world


has gone badly, may meet one in authority, and say,
“If you have an opening, I’d be glad if you would give
Smith a show, etc.” The action results from a wholly
natural and kindly impulse, and probably there is not
an adult reader of these lines who has not done some-
thing of the sort. Such influence exercised spontane-
ously by men of all creeds and of all parties is harm-
less ; but when a religion is organised by priests
so that they, consciously or unconsciously,
form a secret society, exercising unceasing pressure
through the priests, the doings of individuals, insig-
nificant in themselves, are collectively as formidable
as the coral reefs built by myriads of insects. The
word “unconsciously” was used of set purpose. The
priest may or may not be a good judge of character;
but necessarily he knows a great deal about the char-
acter, the habits, the circumstances of the Roman
Catholics whom he uses for the Church. Apart from
a few perverts numerically unimportant, the people of
his flock have been trained in Roman schools, and the
teacher’s knowledge of them is at the service of the
priest. But incomparably more important than that,
the mother, the sister, the wife or fiancee, the devout
employer and the devout fellow employee or fellow
sportsman of the Roman, Catholic Church, eagerly
tell in the confessional all that the priest wishes to know.
So the priest knows without an effort many things
concerning even the lax and sceptical of his flock,
which a Protestant could not learn about a Protestant,
even if he were eager enough, mean enough, and rich
enough to employ a small corps of private detectives.
For that matter the detective can learn nothing worth
knowing about a decent, law-abiding citizen ; whilst
mother, sister, fiancee, and friend know every strong
and every weak point in his character. The clergy and
the members of the different religious Orders form the
inner circle of the most powerful secret society the
world has known; the power of that society is based
on the confessional.


Church and Select Society.
The Minister of the Crown, the private employer,
the elector who puts his trust in Roman Catholics,
should bear in mind that the Church is not only a
despotic Church, demanding unquestioning obedience,
but is also a secret society, which can serve those who
yield it and can break those who refuse it. This ex-
plains much which is otherwise unintelligible. Every
thoughtful man or woman whom the mixed marriage
of an intimate friend or of a relative, the chances of
business, or other happening, has brought in close
contact with Roman Catholics, has wondered when
men, apparently utterly devoid of religious feeling,
have yielded abject submission to the priest. The
writer has known men who seldom entered a church,
whose morals were lax, whose whole interest was in
making money with the least possible effort and in
spending it on the meaner sort of pleasures, insist, with
a grim determination worthy of whole-hearted fanatics,
that their children must be educated in the Roman
Catholic Church. Probably there will not be a single
reader of these lines who has any varied experiences of
life, who cannot recount cases in which the veriest pro-
fligates have fought for the Church, as though it were
dear to them as life itself. The explanation is simple.
The cupboard of the worst sort of man about town is
full of skeletons, and the confessional places the key
to the cupboard in the hands of the priest. So the
mere fact that the Roman Catholic in the department,
the business house, or the Parliament means well, goes
for very, very little. If he has at any time made a seri-
ous false step, he is obviously at the priest’s mercy.
But passing that, if he confides in mother, wife, fiancee
or friend of his own denomination, if he takes letters
and papers home, and trusts to the members of his
household, as most of us do, the facts gleaned in chat
by the home fireside or from the papers left in the
desk, will be retailed to the priest in the confessional.


Domestic Confidence.
But if the Protestant should be very chary of trust-
ing the Roman Catholic in politics or business, how
much more chary should the Protestant be of marry-
ing a Roman Catholic. We have made passing refer-
ence to the Ne Temere Decree, and it is referred to
again because it is necessary to point out how all but
impossible it is that a Protestant should be happy as
the husband or wife of a member of the Church which
promulgated such a decree as the Ne Temere, unless
he or she is willing to yield absolutely all the priest
demands. The decree is based on the assumption that
a priest can convince a man or woman that the Protes-
tant child of a mixed marriage will be lost. Now, no
parent, especially a mother, who really believes in
hell can enjoy peace of mind whilst convinced
that a loved child is doomed to it. And -the mental
unrest must be intensified unspeakably, when it is per-
petually urged that the child’s everlasting suffering will
result from the gratification of the parent’s earthly
fancy for a heretic. And in the confessional that idea
will be remorselessly driven home; it will’be stressed
not only when the offender is well and happy, but
when, in moments of sickness and depression, death
seems very near. And in the stressing much will be
made of the point that the love of the heretic husband
or wife must have grown very cold, if it will not con-
cede a point so vital to a child of the Church of Rome,
so trivial to a member of a Church which admits that
Roman Catholics may be saved.
Pricst-madc Disloyalty.
The enormous power of the Roman Church as a
secret society with political activities was notably dis-
played at the time of the conscription referendum. In
the early years of the war the Labour Party was out-
standingly loyal. Nothing could have been more satis-
factory than the Fisher-Hughes manifesto, the promise


of the last man and the last shilling. As the war pro-
gressed, as the horrors of the trenches were revealed,
the courage of the timid in all parties grew fainter
and fainter. But there was never a moment when the
natural shrinking of men constitutionally timid,' or
of mothers, sisters, or affianced, endangered the
loyalty of the Liberal Party. On the other
hand, the loudly-boasted loyalty of the Labour
Party fell from it, as though it had been
a cloak thrown on merely to deceive electors true
to the Empire. The great body of the Labour
Party, swayed by Dr. Mannix and his creatures who
had made their way into Unions, into Labour Leagues
and Labour Executives, fought against conscription,
applauded when the war for the world’s liberties was
denounced as a sordid trade struggle, and was for peace
with dishonour. Why? Simply because Dr. Mannix
controlled a great secret society. His word was obeyed
not only by the Roman-Irish in the Labour Party, but,,
to their shame be it said, by Protestant members of Par-
liament, who cravenly feared that, without the Roman-
Irish vote and influence, they would lose their seats.
There are a few constituencies in which Labour is so
strong that it could return its candidate though a fifth of
its supporters stood aloof. But in such constituencies the
M.P. has to secure pre-election, and is likely enough
to fail utterly if the R.C. element in the Leagues, act-
ing under the secret leadership of the priest, first does
all it can to undermine his reputation and to make
that of his opponent, then votes solidly against him.
Hatred of English Freedom and Education.
Till the other day, there were many who asked,
“What has the Church of Rome to do with Federal
politics?” Its interest in Victorian State politics was
easily explained. The' ,State Parliament controlled
education, Rome wanted a separate grant. But the
Commonwealth has no concern with the schools. It
was clear that Rome was not wedded to either of the


fiscal theories, or to any particular form ol taxation:
up to 1915 it had struck very few that Rome had any
special interest in defence. In other words, till Dr
Mannix spoke, few Protestants had the faintest concep-
tion of the Ultramontane hatred of England. For
the ignorance there was some excuse. From 1815 to
1915 there was never a moment when the Empire
seemed in serious danger. Only a few old men had
any clear recollection of the Crimea, and though the
Crimea involved some loss of men, money and prestige,
it was never a fierce fight for the very life of the
Empire. “Britannia rules the waves, Britons never
could be slaves.” More than that, the Pope proclaimed
himself a prisoner in the Vatican, and in truth had
lost his temporal power. France, once superstitious,
had grown materialistic, and was banishing presumptu-
ous members of religious Orders; Italy was sceptical.
Rome seemed suffering from senile decay, and was
thought so harmless that it pleased “broad-minded”
Protestants to dwell on its past glories, and on the
aesthetic side of its ritual. But the momentary
triumph of Dr. Mannix made an end of numberless
fond illusions. And let us not shirk the disagreeable
fact that Dr. Mannix did score a success. He, backed
by the Church and the secret society for which he
spoke, did prevent Australia from carrying into* full
effect the policy for which all loyal Protestants stood.
Without him and his, the shirkers, their too tender
womenfolk, in some cases their selfish women-folk,
would have been as specially timorous sheep without
a shepherd, Rome supplied the shepherd, for Eng-
land stands for that freedom which is fatal to Rome’s
dream of a world tyranny, and to Rome, in its fierce
hatred of England, Ireland is an invaluable asset.
Dr. Mannix still talks treason, and the Vatican
declares itself neutral. The Ultramontanes, or
extremists, take it that they must score,
that England must lose either way. Their
reasoning is simple. If the latest demands of Sinn


Fein are granted and an Irish Republic is tolerated,
the Empire will almost certainly fall with the coming
of the next great war. If those claims are refused,
the power of the political priest as head of a vast secret
society bids fair to grow greater and greater, wherever
the English language is spoken and the Irish are allowed
to enter. The religion and the politics of the Roman-
Irish are combined in proportions it is impossible to
define, because they vary enormously in individuals.
At the one extreme is the simple-minded soul who
sighs for the religious life, dreams of the convent as
the ante-room to Paradise; at the other is the noisy
barracker at an Irish Race Convention, who longs for
luxury without work, and who finds the bar-room his
earthly paradise. But Rome’s policy of separateness
places both these and even the more moderate of those
between the two extremes at the service of the Church.
The political priest can use the would-be nun, for she
accepts his voice as the voice of God; he can use the
creature of Tammany, for he can make and can break
Tammany’s leaders. And, be it remembered, though
the name is American, Tammany is wherever corrupt
men endeavour to run the State. And the priest can
use the moderates because the confessional places their
home life at his mercy, his command of the "faithful”
everywhere enables him to injure them in their daily
life, be they civil servants, employers or employed, and,
finally, because they are the sometime pupils of separ-
ate schools, he can strike them through their friends.
Priests Good and Bad.
We have somewhat reluctantly analysed the claims
and the methods of the Church of Rome, and have done
so simply and solely because those claims and those
methods are being so abused by politicians masquerad-
ing in the clerical garb, that if Protestants remain
silent the Empire must perish. The outstanding fea-
tures of the position may be briefly summarised. In
the apostolic days there were a number of Churches


scattered here and there to which epistles were ad-
dressed, and in which the Gospel story was studied. No
one of those Churches claimed sovereignty over the
others, either temporal or spiritual. To-day, though
it is an absolute falsehood, Rome asserts that
to it of divine right belongs world-wide supremacy.
It teaches that it alone can say what gospel,
what epistle is inspired, can declare the true meaning
of either, losing which meaning seekers after truth
merely wrest them to their own destruction. It claims
to hold the keys, asserts roundly that ouside its pale
there is no salvation except for the victims of “invin-
cible ignorance.” As a necessary sequence, it demands
absolute obedience, does its utmost to keep its children
separate, and uses the confessional to detect everything,
from the first whispering of doubt or desire in the
child’s mind, to the last foul longing or actual crime
of the grandfather. That is a judicial and colourless
statement of facts. Two points stand out. One is
that no other Church puts forward such claims
in any part of the English-speaking world.
The other, that where the claims are conceded such
power is put into the hands of mere mortals, that,
possessed of it, a modern St. John might well sink on
his knees and pray to be preserved from temptation to
abuse it. We are not at all concerned to deny that
there are priests who do so pray, who do, as humbly
and as faithfully as they can, use their authority in
what they deem the highest interest of the members
of their flock. If there were no such men in Roman
Orders, if all were arrogant prelates and ambitious
priests seeking temporal power, the Church would col-
lapse like a house of cards. But, bluntly, no man of
the world pretends to think that the average Roman
priest is a saint. Passing all stories of priestly
wrongdoings from the days of Chaucer and Lydgate
down, we know that the faces of very few of the priests
we meet in busy streets, in concert halls, or on tram or
train, are sicklied o’er by excessive thought on matters


either secular or divine. The bearing of the majority
proclaims them very ordinary Irishmen, and their con-
versation shows us that in the seminary they did not
acquire that “much learning” associated with madness.
This is not urged as a reproach. No one
pretends that the ordinary Protestant clergyman
is a profound philosopher. But then, no one
hints that the Protestant clergy should exer-
cise anything like the sway to which the Roman
priests aspire. For, be it noted, the most extreme of
Anglican sacerdotalists never asserted that he
and his fellow Anglicans were the sole exponents of
truth, that there was no salvation in the Roman or in
any other Church outside their own. And, possibly,
even more important, no Anglican insists that the
Church of England should be the established Church
of France, of Italy, of the United States, that the
Archbishop of Canterbury should dictate to all Christ-
endom in everything relating to faith and morals. It
is the putting of tremendous powers, and of a craving
for powers yet more tremendous and world-wide in
their scope, into the hands of men most of them palp-
ably commonplace, some of them childishly vain, which
is deadly dangerous.
The State’s Duty.
The need to-day is to awaken the State to
action. The lack of religious instruction in
our State School buildings is deplorable. Here
in Australia the Church of Rome is masquerad-
ing as the champion of the worker. And here that
Church, which has lost its old-time grip in France,
Italy, and, so far as the cities are concerned, even in
Austria-Hungary and Spain, is palpably gaining
ground. The other day the writer heard a rather
languid clergyman sigh sadly to a lady of his congre-
gation, “Rome has captured the Labour Party,” to
which the unexpected reply was, “Where were you
sleeping when that happened ?” The Protestant


Churches must make it much clearer than they have
done, not that they are for giving alms to
the destitute, but that they are for doing justice to
the ordinary wage-earner. Further, Protestants
must devote much more energy to teaching chil-
dren their duty to their God and to their Empire.
As to the first of these matters, flying visits of over-
worked clergymen to State Schools on week days and
amateur teaching in the Sunday Schools are quite
insufficient. To the second we shall return a moment
or two later.
About Impossible Remedies.
Some people whose motives are beyond question,
hearing Dr. Mannix and legions of obscurer Roman-
Irish spouting treason, noting that in the Roman
schools disloyalty is more or. less openly instilled into
the child’s mind, realising that the political priest as
head of a secret society is a menace to the Empire, are
for clearly impossible remedies. Our forefathers de-
prived Roman Catholics of political privileges because
of their mischievous behaviour. Then they decided
to re-admit them to political rights, and made them
eligible for offices, thinking even Romanists would
respond to generous treatment. In this they
were mistaken. The Romanist has again be-
trayed his trust, and the punishment should fol-
low. Again, our forefathers decided that any
Church might establish denominational schools for
primary instruction. There they made a mistake in-
evitable at the time, but none the less far-reaching in
its consequence. Separate elementary schools mean
separate communities in the one nation. However,
there the schools are, and those who have fought for
more than a generation to get the Bible into State
Schools, know as well as do the Roman Catholics, who
have fought as hard for a separate grant, how difficult
it is to secure any change in the laws relating to prim-
ary education; but it must be done.


Protestants and Roman Schools.
A number of Protestants send their chil-
dren to convent schools, because such establish-
ments are cheaper than ordinary boarding schools,
and are “genteeler” than the State Schools. A larger
number of Protestants let their girls learn music at
the convents, excusing themselves on the ground that
no denominational colour can be given to a piano lesson
or even to explanation of theory. To which there are
two obvious objections: that any teacher, be
it of music, art, or science, who has a
strong personality, influences the pupil, and the fees
for whatever subject paid, and successes in whatever
department won, add to the revenue and the status
of schools. The main point to be stressed, however,
is that here the matter is wholly in the hands of Pro-
testants; in the first instance of the offending parents,
in the second, of the great body of Protestants who
can easily create a public opinion fatal to this sort of
“breadth,” So, too, of the fashion in which a large
number of business and professional people—possibly
a majority of them—allow themselves to be black-
mailed for Roman schools. An hour or two before
the writer sat down to pen, these lines, the proprietress
of tearooms in a busy suburb remarked to him : “I
have to buy tickets for all the Roman Catholic con-
certs, and to give something to all their bazaars. If I
said ‘No’ I should ruin my business.” In this con-
nection “ruining the business” meant losing a few
bigoted customers, but, incidentally, it may be men-
tioned that the lady is a member of the Protestant
Federation, and that she is not by any means as ex-
ceptional as she should be. An amazing feature of all
this is that the Protestant who allows himself or her-
self to be blackmailed by the priest or his agents, will
pluck a Protestant friend by the sleeve and exclaim,
“You must not ask Mrs. Reilly to buy a ticket for our
Protestant school concert; she is a Roman Catholic
and would be hurt.”


** Newspapers. 11
Readers who have reached middle age may remem-
ber that when the clever French humorist, Max O’Rell,
who had spent much of his life in England, visited
Australia, he toured with a lecture, the title of which
was “John Bull and Sandy, to say Nothing of Pat.”
After a caustic criticism of the English and of the
Scotch, Max O’Rell surprised his audience by explain-
ing that he was literally going to say nothing of Pat,
because Pat was too thin-skinned and too undeveloped
to tolerate plain speaking. The Roman-Irish use this
hyper-sensitiveness to such purpose that we allow them
to inform us that we shall be lost, that our Govern-
ments are un-Christian, that our schools are godless,
and make no reply. Of the “Bulletin” of to-day, the
writer sees little, but for years, whilst thousands of
Australians considered it the one paper racy of the
soil, issue after issue contained hideous caricatures
of Protestant “parsons” and of Protestant laymen of
the type dubbed “wowser,” whilst caricatures of Roman
Catholic priests, monks and nuns were so few that—
if any appeared—it is impossible to recall them. If
the “Bulletin” stood alone, in other words, if it were a
matter of the sympathies and the antipathies of a
particular proprietor or a particular editor, the matter
would not be worth mentioning. But till Dr. Mannix
forced the hands of many editors, the recognised policy
of the ordinary paper—political, society, or humorous
—was to say nothing of the Roman-Irish. Let us
hope that the Mannix outbursts have made an end of
all this, and that in future the priest, notably the poli-
tical priest, will be criticised just as frankly and as
fully as is the Protestant clergyman ; that the failings
of the Roman-Irish will be discussed just as freely and
fairly as those of Anglican, Presbyterian or Methodist.
Hypocrisy ought to be exposed; but let us remember
that Moliere painted Tartuffe, the arch-hypocrite of
the world’s literature, in a France which was wholly
Roman Catholic. Protestants should not object to the


exposure of humbugs, whatever thdr creed; bat they
should make it clear that they will not play-the game of
Rome, by supporting nominally unsectarian papers
which lash offending members of all Churches except
the Roman. The day they make their feeling clear
there will be a conplete change of tactics, for, in the
overwhelming majority of cases, the pro-Rome policy
is merely one enforced on the literary staff by the
counting-house, in obedience to the mandate of the
great Roman-Irish secret society. In other words, it
is very seldom a matter of principle or of prejudice
cherished by the editor, and is nearly always a matter
of increasing or of maintaining sales in order to secure
advertisements.
Religion of Candidates.
Week by week, the profound disloyalty, the bitter
anti-English feeling of Dr. Mannix and the Roman-
Irish, become more apparent. These final paragraphs
are penned on Saturday, August 14, 1920, and the even-
ing “Herald” of to-day contains an extraordinary
manifesto signed by three Roman Catholic Archbishops
and six Bishops who left Australia to pay a visit to
Rome. In the manifesto these prelates not only ex-
press sympathy with their “distinguished and beloved
colleague, Dr. Mannix,” as regards his technical arrest,
but they add;—
“One of the offences attributed ff> him consists of
the fearless championship of the principle
underlying a just and permanent Irish settle-
ment, and the Irish right to select their own
form of Government.
“Dr. Mannix’s advocacy of this principle carries
the support of the whole Episcopate, and also
that of the Irish people of Australia and New
Zealand, as was demonstrated at the Irish
Race Convention, recently held in Mel-
bourne.”
In face of this amazing document, is it too much to
demand that candidates, when filling in their nomina-


lion papers, shall state their religion? In a Federal
constituency voters number tens of thousands, only a
quite insignificant minority of whom have any intimate
acquaintance with a candidate, and of those few the
majority are naturally of his own Church. There are
certain material facts likely to influence a member’s
attitude in the House (no matter what his Party),
which the elector ought to know. One of these is his
nationality, but as to that certain conditions are de-
finitely laid down, and only British-born or fully
naturalised subjects are eligible for election. Another
is his occupation, which is, in the majority of instances,
enough to indicate his personal feeling where capital
and labour, the interests of a protected profession or
of a trades union are involved; that the candidate has
to state. In face of a declaration by the Roman
Hierarchy that it and the Irish people of Australia
favour the Mannix stand in relation to the Irish Re-
public, which means the ultimate dismemberment of
the Empire, a constituency ought to know whether any
df the candidates who seek the seat are (Roman
Catholics. If a constituency chooses to elect a sup-
porter of the Irish Republic knowing where he stands
in relation to the Empire, that is the political crime
of the electors. But that voters should know that a
candidate is an adherent of a Church which, according
to its Bishops, is disloyal, is a matter which concerns
the Commonwealth. Of course, what we ask is not*
that the R.C. candidate must make a statement from
which other candidates are exempt, but that every can-
didate must state his religion, just as he must state his
occupation. If he is ashamed of his faith, he is a
man with whose services the country can very well
dispense.
Lessons in Patriotism.
In view of the episcopal utterances from which
we have quoted, it is clear that lessons, the
accurate history of, and on, our duty to


our country should be compulsory, and should:
be given to children by approved teachers in all schools,,.
State, denominational or proprietary. If any school
objects to this, let it be closed, whether it be Anglican,.
German Lutheran, Presbyterian, or Roman Catholic.
Certain schools are imparting instruction which tends
to sap the loyalty of the children, and to inspire them
with contempt for and hatred of England. There is,
to some extent, as a result of this, a great deal of sham
cosmopolitanism. The Roman-Irish have used unions,
leagues, organisations of all sorts for the diffusion of
the sentiments they imbibed in the Church schools. At
the outset they pose as ardent Australians, but as soon
as they dare they throw off the mask, and do all that
in them lies to force on the Commonwealth a policy
which means its destruction whenever Great Britain
is hard hit. The so-called play by Father Kennedy,,
called “Advance, Australia,” as a sham patriotic name
is a case in point. Bishop Dwyer was good enough to
open our eyes when he declared that our Australian
Governments are godless, and that our Australian rulers
do not care a pin whether the people go to heaven or
to hell. Vapid talk about the workers of the world
settling all differences in wordy battle, should be coun-
teracted by hard facts as to the ignorance of the demo-
cracy in some States, the tyranny exercised by the
rulers in others. We shall all hail the day when the
workers of the world, be they workers with pick or
with pen, unite to make an end of war. But in the
meantime we cannot afford to risk the loss of free-
dom by pretending to think that such union is in sight..
Convents, Workshops, Prisons.
The case of Sister Liguori (Miss Bridget Partridge),,,
who bravely made her escape from the convent in
which she was imprisoned, stresses the importance of
bringing convents, R.C. homes, reformatories, and the
like under the control of an effective and resolute
police. The facts in the Sister Liguori case are so


fresh in the memory of the public, that the merest
reference to them will suffice. She escaped from her
cell, and, in spite of the sworn information of Doctor
Dwyer, R.C. Bishop of Wagga, that she was insane,
was liberated on'the order of Dr. Ross, the Govern-
ment medical officer of the N.S.W. Government, and
that after her detention at Darlinghurst for the most
careful examination. If young people, who in some
cases are little more than lads and lasses, choose to
devote themselves to the service of the Church, and
to enter a home, that concerns them and their parents
rather than the public. But it should be impossible to
make either convent or monastery a prison, from which
one who has been disillusioned cannot go at will; to
explain that a nun can herself get out in three months
is a mockery, such cruel pressure is brought in in those
months that the girl would prefer death. Then,
again, as regards homes and reformatories, it has been
bluntly asserted that the management of some of these
places has made charity a cloak for merciless sweating.
Damaging statements have been made as to the expen-
diture of moneys subscribed for definite purposes. It
is not pretended for a moment that R.C. charities are
the only ones which have been criticised, but it is main-
tained that all institutions should be constantly open to
inspection, and that every organisation which collects
money for the sick, the old, the unfortunate, should be
called on to account for every penny. Such a provi-
sion would be gall and wormwood to prelates of the
Cardinal Cullen type, but the law must not accept the
alleged sanctity of any man or of any body of men,
Protestant or Roman Catholic, in lieu of a duly audited
balance sheet.
Educate! Educate! Educate!
In a Democracy very much is possible to a thor-
oughly united and active minority. Fortunately for
the world, the millions who in different countries set


themselves down Roman Catholics* are not united.
Right through France and Italy the many are opposed:
to absurd claims made by the priest. Even in Austria-
Hungary and Spain, the Roman Church has lost its
command of the cities. But the Roman-Irish are
united, their religion and their politics being so inter-
woven that it is impossible to say just what results
from superstition, just what from national sentiment.
The lethargy of most Protestants makes the Roman-
Irish vote and influence a serious menace to the Em-
pire. And the lethargy is largely due to ignorance.
Australia needs a daily paper which will put the facts
fully and fearlessly, a paper which does not desire the
Roman-Irish vote for its Party, or Roman-Irish pat-
ronage for its advertisement columns. Given such a
paper the Protestant majority would elect politicians
ready to deal out equal justice in spite of the priest
and his “votes for sale.” With such a paper the power
of the Roman Church in Australia as a secret society
would be broken, if it was not destroyed. In the
meantime everyone whose eyes are opened to the great
danger can do something to educate those about him.
The constant iteration of hard facts must tell.
We in Australia have a noble heritage. Again
and again we assert that we are building a
great nation destined to play a glorious part. But
all the hopes which inspired the pioneers, all the hopes
we cherish will be dashed to the ground, if we allow
arrogant and disloyal priests to poison the minds of our
children and citizens, and to do so whilst posing as the
champions of Democracy. Rome is necessarily the un-
dying foe of Democracy, of liberty, fraternity and
equality, for it insists on the infallibility of the Pope,,
the authority of the priest, and the unquestioning
obedience of the layman.
Direct action by Protestants is undesirable unless
the Government neglects its duty and allows the State-
to be more endangered.


The State must, tor the protection of all, do what
other States have done —
(1) Inspect or, if found necessary, suppress nun-
neries and monasteries.
(2) License priests.
(3) Close denominational junior schools.
(4) Punish disloyalty sharply.
(5) Re-enact the ‘‘Roman Catholic Disabilities
Act.”
(6) Punish anyone questioning the sufficiency, for
all purposes, of a marriage under State
law.


THE FOLLOWING PUBLICATIONS
are obtainable at the office of The
Loyalist League of Victoria
325 Collins St., Melbourne.
“FLOUTING AUSTRALIAN MARRIAGE LAWS.”
Price, 3d.; by Post, 4d.
“THE TRUE STORY OF SINN FEIN."
by Hr, Alex. Leeper,
(New and Revised Edition)).
Price, 3d.; by Post, 4d.
“SLANDERS ON GREAT BRITAIN REFUTED.”
Free,
“REVOLUTION OR EVOLUTION?”
Price, Id.; by Post, 2d.
“INDUSTRIAL SECTARIANISM VERSUS
INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY.”
Price Id.; by Post, 2d.
.“THREE ENEMIES OF DEMOCRACY—THE DRIEST,
THE PROFITEER, THE AGITATOR.”
Price, Id.; by Post, 2d.
“ROMANISM AND MILITARISM.”
Price, id.; by Post, 2d.
“THE MENACE OF MANNIX AND CO.”
Price, 2/-; by Post, 2/2.
“THE MENACE OF AN IRISH REPUBLIC.”
Price, id.; by Post, 2d.
“THE MENACE OF PROTESTANT LETHARGY,”
Price, 3d.; by Post, 4d.
“THE MENACE OF ROMAN CATHOLIC SCHOOLS."
Price, 3d.; by Post, 4d.
“WAKE UP AUSTRALIA,"
(Rev. T. E. Ruth).
Price, 2/6; by Post. 2/8.
“ROMANISM: A MENACE TO THE NATION”
(Father J. J. Crowley, ex-Priest).
Price, 5/-; by Post, 5/3.
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH IN ITALY.”
(Rev, Alex. Robertson, D.D.).
Price, 3/6; by Post. 3/8.
"THE PAPAL CONQUEST.”
(Rev. Alex. Robertson, D.D.).
Price, 3/6; by Post. 3/8.
“WAR THINGS THAT MATTER.”
(Benj. Hoare).
’ Price, 5/-; by Post, 5/3.
"THE ROMAN MISCHIEF MAKER.”
(Hugh E, M. Sluttield).
Price, 7/6; by Post, 7/9.
Varleys Pty. Ltd., Printers, Melbourne.
