

The Christ of the Flesh
AND
The Christ of the Spirit.
A SERMON
BY
REV. CHARLES STRONG
Minister of the Australian Church.
AUGUST 1886
Melbourne:
DUNN & WILKINSON, PRINTERS, QUEEN ST. SOUTH.




- “As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.
Paul , Epistle to the Romans.
«• Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God.”—
ist EpistU of John.
“The gospel owes its power to its fundamental principle of the potential
kinship between man and the celestial Father.”— Riville, History of Religions.
“O Beauty, old yet ever new !
Eternal Voice and Inward Word,
The Logos of the Greek and Jew, . .....
The old-sphere music which the Samian heard ! —Whittier.
“Ring out the darkness of the land,
Ring in the Christ that is to b e.”-In Memonam.
r “ What a task it was to recognise humility and poverty, mockery and despising,
disgrace and wretchedness and suffering-to recognise these things as divine!
& Goethe.
“Es ist die Zeit gekommen, dass er weder mehr der Christus der Kirche, noch
des einzelnen frommen Gemuthesbleibe, sordern beide Forderungen versohnend,
in Warheit der Christus der Gemeinde, der Menscheit, der allgemeinen opfer-
freudigen That werde, sich wieder-piegelnd, Warheit und Leten gewmnend in
jedem Eizelnen, der von seinem Geiste erfiillt, sich gleich wie er als Sohn und
Tochter Gottes weiss.” — Langkaus, Das Christenthum.
“The victory over di-integrating egoism and the deadly chilliness of the
heart will only be won by a great Ideal, which appears amidst the wondering
peoples as a “ stranger from an ther world,” and by demanding the impossible
unhinges the reality.”— Lange, History of Materialism.


THE CHRIST OF THE FLESH AND
THE CHRIST OF THE SPIRIT.
MATTHEW XXII., 41 —46. MARK XII., 35 —37.
"What think ye of the Christ? Whose Son is He?"
Our English translators have rendered good ser-
vice by the insertion in the revised version of the
definite article “ the ” before the word Christ. This
may seem a very trifling alteration, but it is not so
in reality. Christ has become in popular usage a
mere surname, the significance of which has been
lost. All surnames had originally a meaning, but
we have lost these meanings, and never think of
what a man’s surname originally signified. And
so the original meaning of Christ is lost. It is to
us only the surname of Jesus. The insertion of the
article “ the ” helps to restore the original signifi-
cance of the name. “ The Christ ” suggests more
than simply “ Christ.” The full force of the title,
however, is only realised when we remember that
Christ is simply the Greek translation of the
Hebrew Maschiach, or Aramaic Messias—in our


translation rendered Messiah denoting the
Anointed, the King, Jahveh’s Anointed conse-
crated with holy oil, who was to ascend the throne
of Israel in the latter days, and in whose reign of
peace and righteousness the mountain of Jahveh’s
house would be exalted on the top of the moun-
tains, all nations flowing up to it to worship the
God of Jacob. In the latter days of Judaism there
came to be a widespread expectation of such a
king, who it was believed must spring from the
family of David according to the words of an
ancient prophet who had sung of the coming glory
of David’s house, when, from the decayed tree of
Jesse there would come forth a green branch, one
who should be Immanuel, that is, “ God is with us.”*
In him, would they then be able to sing as
of old, “ Jahveh of hosts is with us ; the God of facob
is our refuge .”*f* When the fortunes of the nation
were fallen low, it was natural that this star of hope
should burn more brightly. Jahveh could not have
left his chosen people to perish. Surely the day of
Jahveh, spoken of by the prophets in the dark
times of old, would come, and Israel freed from
the heathen oppression of Roman legions would
yet be seen to be the chosen people, and Jerusalem
to be the place where men ought to worship.
The language of those ancient prophetic poets was
taken as common prose, and the Scriptures were
searched diligently by the scribes to see when and
how this King should come. “Ye search the
Scriptures,” we read, “ for in them ye think ye have
* Isaiah ii, t Ps. xlvi«, 7


eternal life.” “ Search, and see,” said the contemp-
tuous clergy of the day, “ that out of Galilee ariseth
no prophet.” “ Can any good thing come out of
Galilee?” “Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the
Jews,” was written in derision over the cross, we are
told. No King, according to the Scriptures, could
come from Nazareth. When we bear all this in
mind, the little word “ the ” becomes a most im-
portant one. Jesus —the Christ, the Messiah, the
anointed King, to whom the words ol the Hebrew
poet’s coronation ode were applied : — “ I have set
my King upon my holy hill. Jahveh said unto me,
Thou art my son ; this day have I begotten thee. I
will give thee the nations for thine inheritance. And
the uttermost part of the earth for thy possession .”*
The Apostle Paul omits the article. He speaks of
Jesus Christ. But then Paul had got beyond the
mere historical standpoint. Christ to him had in a
great measure become the Ideal Man, the second
Adam, the Lord the Spirit whom he knew no more
after the flesh as the Hebrew Messiah. And we
ought to follow Paul, no doubt, in this. Christ
should be to us “the Lord the Spirit.” Nevertheless,
it is well for us to apprehend the historical signifi-
cance of the word, and to see how the Hebrew
name becomes invested at length with an universal
significance. The Gospels, dealing not so much
with the ideal as with the historical, speak not
always but frequently of the Christ, the Messiah.
“ Thou are the Christ. One is your Master, even
the Christ. We have found the Messiah (which is
*Pis, ii.


being interpreted anointed). Behoved it not the
Christ to suffer these things ? Let him save him-
self if this is the Christ of God. Art not thou the
Christ ? save thyself and us.” What the disciples
of Jesus at first thought was that Jesus was he who
would redeem Israel, the King who would restore
the Kingdom, and have a throne with seats on the
right hand and on the left. The first Apostles
laboured to show that Jesus was the Christ or the
Messiah in whom the nation’s hopes were yet to be
fulfilled, notwithstanding Jesus had been crucified.
The cross was the stumbling block. How could he
be Messiah and yet have been crucified ?
When, then, Jesus asks the Rabbis what they
think of the Christ, whose son he is, we are
reminded in the first place of the Hebrew Messianic
expectation, which in later Judaism became so
prominent, and on which turned the destiny of the
nation. Judaism in its later development centres
in the Christ, the Messiah. Its faith and hope are
bound up in him, as the Son oi God and the King
of Israel. “ I adjure thee,” cries Caiaphas, “by the
living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God.” Jesus’s question, there-
fore, is a most crucial one. It is equivalent to,
What think ye of the true king of Israel, the true
Son of God, the truly Anointed of God? What
makes him such? Is it his descent from a par-
ticular family ? Is it on this that the future of the
nation depends ? Is God’s Son, as you call him, in
whom all your nation’s hopes centre, God’s Son,.
God’s Anointed, Israel’s King, the Messiah, by


virtue of his descent from the ancient house of
David ? “ How does David call him Lord ?”
That was a crucial question we say, like that
other Avhich Jesus on another occasion asked, “ The
baptism of John was it from heaven or of men?”*
It was a question which, like that other also, Jesus
apparently left unanswered, but which suggested
its own answer, and of which doubtless the teachers
of the day saw with alarm the drift. Why should
he have asked that question, we can imagine them
saying, and why should he have quoted that i ioth
psalm if he didn’t mean to throw doubt on our
belief in the Christ, the Messiah, the Son of God ?
Jesus, we fear, is undermining the faith. Whose
son is he ? How is he David’s son ? These were
suspicious questions. It is plain that Jesus does
not think of the Christ as we do. It is plain that
Jesus attaches no importance to the Davidic
descent of the Messiah, and so it is plain also that
Jesus has dangerous ideas about the future of the
nation and of our religion. Here we can picture
Scribes and Rabbis shaking their heads and saying,
The son of Joseph has gone far wrong on the
fundamentals, on the vital point in the faith, the
one point on which error is fatal—the doctrine of
the Messiah.
From the orthodox point of view, Jesus was
wrong, for by God’s Anointed, God’s Son, the
Rabbis meant something different from what Jesus
meant. By the Messiah, the Christ, the King, they
meant an earthly prince, attested by signs and
•Luke xx., 4.


wonders as God’s messenger or God’s Son in the
sense of the second Psalm, where Jahveh says,
“ Thou art my Son ” —the restorer of the kingdom of
Israel, who would dash his enemies in pieces like a
potter’s vessel, and rule them with a rod of iron, and
to whose enemies the advice is given, “ Kiss the Son
lest he may be angry and ye perish by the way ; for
his wrath will soon be kindled. Blessed are all they
that put their trust in him.” Jesus, on the other
hand, meant by the Christ one who was anointed,
not with sacred oil, but with the Spirit, on whom
the Spirit descended like a dove—to use the
metaphor of a later age—anointed to proclaim
deliverance to the captives, and the opening of the
eyes to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised, to bring good tidings to the poor, and to
preach the acceptable year of the Lord.* Jesus
meant by “ King ” what the author of the fourth
gospel, catching His spirit if not exactly His words,
represents Him as saying—“ To this end was I born,
and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness of the Truth ; everyone that is
of the Truth heareth my voice.f ” Jesus’s idea of the
Messiah was that of one who needed not signs and
wonders to proclaim his advent. “ Neither shall
they say 10, here !or there! Lo ! the Kingdom of
God is among you (or within you). An evil and
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign.” To
Him the symbol of the Christ was a little child :
“ Whosoever shall humble himself as this little child
the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of God.”
*Luke iv., 18, 19.
tJohn xviii,, 37.


To Him the Messiah was not discoverable by ancient
records and old genealogical trees. His right to
be King was established by the Kingly Spirit, by
his power to bind the hosts of evil and set the
captives free. And when Jesus spoke of Gods
Son it was very evident that he meant not God’s
Son in the old Hebrew sense of the psalm already
quoted, in which the King of Israel is spoken of as
God’s Son, or of that passage in 11. Samuel, where
Nathan the prophet, speaking in the name of
Jahveh to David, says of Solomon, “ I will be his
father and he shall be my Son.” To the Hebrew
there was a gulf between God and man. Hebrew
religion is strict monotheism, and God s Son seems
to be but a term of special favour, as when it is
written, “ Out of Egypt have I called My Son,” Israel
being thus spoken of as Jahveh’s Son. But Jesus
seemed to mean something else than this. The
Greeks also spoke of the sons of God. Their
heroes and great men were said to be the children
of the gods and goddesses who sometimes visited
the earth. The Greek gods were really human
beings, or at least, unlike the God of Israel, they
were not separated by a clear line of demarcation
from men. Jesus, however, if he does not use the
phrase, Son of God, in the old Hebrew sense,
certainly does not use it in the Greek sense. Son
of God seems with Him to denote the relation of
the child-Spirit to the parent-Spirit. It is an
earthly relationship spiritualised. The Son of
Man, a phrase borrowed from the Old Testament
-also, but with a fuller meaning on His lips than on


the lips of Ezekiel or Daniel, is Son of God in*
virtue of a common Spirit. They know each other
as father knows child, as the child’s heart knows
its father. “No man knoweth the Father but the
Son, and no one knoweth the Son but the Father.”
Thus Jesus thought of the Christ as the Son of
Man in whom dwelt the Father, and who dwelt in
the Father. As a modern German writer has
expressed it: —“ The expression is simple, but the
thing signified is new. Jesus first knows himself,
not in emotion, but in sober quietness, to be God’s
child ; before Him no one ever felt Himself to be
so, or called himself so. He is the first-born of the
Father, yet, according to His own view, the first-born
among many brethren.”* Jesus feels himself one with
God,but it is a oneness in which He calls His brethren
to share that they may be one with Him in God.
“To as many as received Him to them gave He
power to become sons of God ” —“ born of God.”
“ Behold,” writes one who saw into the meaning of
Jesus’s life, “what manner of love the Father has
bestowed upon us that we should be called children
of God.”*f* The Messiah of Jesus is a spiritual being,
living and moving and having his life in the Father
of Spirits. To Him the old phrase, common to Jew
and Gentile, “ Son of God,” and the old phrase of the
Hebrew prophets, “ Son of Man,” become, as we read
in John’s gospel, words of Spirit and Life, the Hebrew
or Gentile “ flesh ” profiting nothing.
What think ye of the Christ, the Messiah?
Whose Son is He? There lay in a nutshell the
*Wellhausen, Religion of Israel.
+l. John, iii., 1,


question of the difference between Jesus and the
religious world of His day. It was evident that
they and he thought of the Christ in very different
ways, and so of necessity in very different ways
also of the calling of Israel and the future develop-
ment of Israel’s kingdom and religion. Yes, that
was the all important question of the day—What
think ye of the Christ ? Whose Son is He ? Was
he to be the traditional Christ —the Christ of the
letter and the law —the little narrow Christ of the
nation—the descendant of the warrior-king? Or
was he to be the fulfiller of noble hopes and
spiritual ideals, and universal thoughts embedded
in the nation’s history, in songs of poets and
prophets, and the aspirations of spiritual souls ?
Was he to be Son of David and King of Israel, or
Son of the Father and King of Truth ?
So much for the original significance of our text.
But its significance is not exhausted by reference
to the time of Jesus. When Jesus had departed, this
question still marked the dividing line between
Christian and non-Christian in theology. The old
Hebrew notion of the Christ passed into the
Christian Church. Many of the first disciples
believed in Jesus as the Christ, the Messiah (hence
the name Christian, or people who believe that
Jesus is Messiah or Christ), but their Christ was
still what Paul calls a “Christ after the flesh.” They
believed that Jesus was the Son of God in the old
Hebrew sense, not in the sense in which Jesus used
the words. He was to them a great earthly prince,
who had indeed been crucified, but who would yet


assume the kingly role and prove himself the Christ
or Messiah of Israel, after the orthodox fashion,
when He would take unto Him His great power
and reign, in the manner spoken of in the
Apocalypse.* Side by side with this Christianity
flowed another and more spiritual, according to
which Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God, but
not in the old sense, or not altogether in the old
sense, a Christianity represented in the most
spiritual portion of the epistles and in such
chapters as the 14th, the 15 th, or the 16th of
John. Jesus is thus the Christ in the spiritual and
most profound sense. Ihe older orthodox view
falls into the back ground, even when it does not
altogether disappear. He is the Way to the
Father. He is the Truth and the Life. He is the
Light of the world. He is the Reconciler of Jew
and Gentile in one Body to the Father. He that
abides in Him abides in God. He comes again, not
in flaming clouds, but in the Spirit of Truth and
Peace, the abiding Comforter. To be in Him is to
be a new creature, and to cry “ Abba, Father.” To
have faith in Him is not simply to believe that He
is the anointed King of Israel, but, yielding to
Him as spirit to Spirit, to be sons and daughters of
God in Him, free from the old law, walking in
liberty and love, fellow citizens and of the house-
hold of God, that God who is Spirit, Light, Love,
who is God alike of Jew and Gentile, and the
fulfilling of whose law is charity. And still further,
The most perfect production of the Jewish-Christian
Apocalyptic School.” —See Short Protestant Commentary.


we may say, as we follow the history of Christianity,
there is yet a third view of the Christ, which we
may call the Greek view, conceiving of the Son of
God after the Greek fashion, not as a deep spiritual
being, whose life is in God, and in whom God
abides, but as one whose deepest relation to the
Father is expressed in the metaphysical distinctions
and abstractions of the later creeds. To be a
Christian in this sense is to believe that Jesus was
the Christ, and that the Christ was the Son of God
in the way in which Greek mythology or Greek
philosophy might conceive of God’s Son. These
three views of the Christ, so different, flow together
not only through the first ages and the middle ages
of the religion known as Christianity, but even in
the Christianity of to-day, and still the question
which determines the nature and value of men’s
religion is : —“ What think ye of the Christ ? Whose
Son is He?” We have the orthodox Hebraistic
view of Christianity, differing not in its methods,
but only in its conclusions from ancient Judaism,
searching the Scriptures, the letter of the Scrip-
tures, for proofs, and basing the evidence of
Christianity and of the divinity of Jesus on signs
and wonders. Its Christ is the Hebrew Messiah in
a slightly altered form. He is God’s anointed
King in the sense of the second Psalm rather than
the King of Truth and Love spoken of in John’s
Gospel. We have the Greek view of Christianity,
which says, I believe that Jesus is th® Christ, the Son
of God, in a mythological sense, or in a cold meta-
physical and abstract sense, and which makes


logical dogmatism as to the hypostasis, the sub-
stance, the distinctions of the Godhead and the
procession of the Holy Ghost, the essence
of a “ faith ” without which men shall, as
the Athanasian creed affirms, without doubt
perish everlastingly. These two views the
Hebraistic and the Greek —are often blended,
running into and out of each other, and forming a
strange intricate web, in whose mazes we seem to
lose sight alike of Jesus and the Father. But,
besides these views, there is what we venture to
call the distinctively Christian view, that which is
most in accord with our conception of Jesus and His
teaching, and which to the question, What think ye
of the Christ; whose Son is He? answers:—The
Christ, the Anointed of God, the true King of Israel,
the Redeemer of the Kingdom, is the King of
Truth, the Lord of Love, the best and fullest Man-
hood, the Son of Man, the child of the Spirit who
consciously lives in God and knows himself as
spirit one with that God who is Spirit, Light and
Love, born of God, the Son of God. Jesus is the
Christ, from this point of view, as He is Son of
Man and Son of God, and those who have His
Spirit are “ the Christ ” too, for they are, in the lan-
guage of Paul, His Body, His Flesh, and His Blood.*
What think ye of the Christ ? Whose Son is He ?
becomes then no mere question in theology,
answered differently by different sects and schools,
but the crucial question by the answer to which is
■determined the spiritual or non-spiritual mind
*See I. Cor. x., 12.


whether of churches or of individuals. By the
answer to it is determined a man’s whole view of
Christian religion, the Church and the destiny of
the human race. For therein lies his conception of
the kingly, the divine, the human, the redemption of
man, the establishment of the kingdom of God. What
think ye of the Christ that was, of the Christ that is to
be, ye churches, ye nations, ye men and women ?
Such seems to be the question. Was He, is He to
be a king after the fashion of the kings of the
world, a Hebrew King, a Roman Emperor, a Leader
of modern Fashion or a Plutocrat ? Was He, is He
to be Son of God in the sense in which Pharaoh
King of Egypt and the Emperor of China are “ the
sons of God ?” Was He, is He to be a mytho-
logical being or a metaphysical abstraction to be
argued about, defined, and imprisoned in your
creeds ? Was He and is He to be of this sect, or
of that, of this church or of that, of this century or
of that? Was He whom you regard as the
Revelation, the Messenger, the Son of God, the
Central Point of the world’s history, and is He to
be the incarnation of brute force, a mere wonder
and sign worker, an unnatural prodigy, a per-
petuator of division between Jew and Gentile,
Christian and Christian, the symbol of Jewish
nationalism or British nationalism or Christian
formalism and churchism? Or was He and is He
to be the incarnation of Spirit, Light, Liberty, and
Love, the highest, truest Manhood any age can
conceive, the Redeemer of man from self and the
animal, the Prophet of humanity, healer of division,


saviour of sinners, friend of the children, inspirer of
hope and faith and love, revelation of God as
Father and of Man as Son, Son of God, Son of
Man, Word of God uttered out of the depths of
human nature and out of the heart of the universe ?
Who is the Christ to us, brethren, and whose
Son is He ? On the answer to the question hung
Israel’s future. On the answer to it hangs ours as
nation and as church. We too have our Messiahs.
Shall we choose the Christ of tradition, narrow,
vengeful, unloveable, or the dry abstraction of the
schools, or the creation of Christian mythology, or
the respectable Christ of Society, or the Christ of a
materialistic age, son of blind force and the brute ?
Or shall we choose as our guiding Star, our Hope,
our Redeemer, our King, Jesus with his profound
sense of union with God, sonship and brotherhood
—Jesus, meek and lowly in heart, Son of Man, Son
of God, quickening Spirit of liberty, truth and love ?
Shall the Christ be to us the phantastic Christ of
mediaevalism, the creation of fear, or the invention
of the priest—the dead Christ of a past age ? Or
shall He be the Spirit of a New Man, living faith, ,
in whose humanity and divinity can alone redeem
and elevate us, and be the foundation of church,
nation, and civilisation, against which the gates of
Hades shall not prevail ? What think ye of the
Christ? Whose Son is He? That is no question
of the schools, no riddle of an abstract theology,
but the most practical of modern questions, the
answer to which is given, not with the head only,
but with the heart—the answer to which we are


each giving in our lives as sons of the light or sons
of the darkness —sons of the Spirit, or sons of the
animal— children of the bondwoman, or children
of the free—children of the Father, or children of
the devil. The Christ that was, the Christ that is
to be—whose Son is He? The Messiah of the
Church and of the Race—who, and what is He ?
“That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.” Be it yours
to choose and follow the Messiah “ after the Spirit ”
of Sonship, Brotherhood and Light, Son of the
ideal Truth and Beauty, Lord of Life and Love.
Dunn and Wilkinson, Printers, Queen-street, Melbourne.


