

A
Concise History
AUSTRALIAN SETTLEMENT
AND PROGRESS,
TOGETHER WITH
FULL REPORTS
OF THE
CENTENNIAL CELEBRATIONS
IN 1888.
PRICE -
Reprinted from The Sydney Morning Herald.
[ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.]




THE
CENTENNIAL SUPPLEMENT
TO
The Sydney Morning Herald,
TOGETHER WITH
REPORTS
OP THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS IN CONNECTION WITH
THE CELEBRATION OF THE CENTENARY OF
AUSTRALIAN SETTLEMLNT.
PRINTED FOR JOHN FAIRFAX AND SONS,
SYDNEY, 26th JANUARY,
1888.
GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO., PRINTERS. SYDNEY.




THE CENTENNIAL SUPPLEMENT
TO
The Sydney Morning Herald.
THE ORIGIN AND PROGRESS
OF
AUSTRALIAN SETTLEMENT.
SCOPE OF THE CENTENNIAL SUPPLEMENT.
(,Sydney Morning Herald Leader , January 24, 1888.)
We publish to-day, in our Centennial supplement a re-
view of the origin and progress of Australian settlement,
of the growth of Australian interests, and the development
of Australian resources. Indulgence in periodical retro-
spect is a habit of civilised human nature. It is followed
by individuals, by societies, by nations. We have wit-
nessed the celebration of the Centenary of the United States,
the rejoicings at the jubilee of her Majesty’s reign, and
now, at the close of our own first centennium, we are
compelled, by the very force of instinct, to look back upon
the past, to compare its small beginnings with the facts
around us, and to look forward with somewhat of wistful-
ness but more of hope to what the future shall bring forth.
The intention of the Supplement is to help our readers both
here and elsewhere to make this survey and comparison, by
defining our present position and tracing the steps which
have led up to it.
The history of Australian progress is a narrative of per-
severing industry and almost incessant struggle. In glanc-
ing over the pages of our supplement illustrations of
this will be found under almost every head. 1 he early
years had difficulties of their own, absorbing all the
energies of the first settlers, whilst the rate of progress
was slow indeed. But from the time when the way into
the interior was first opened, and men began to perceive
the capabilities of the land, there has, notwithstanding
temporary fluctuations of fortune, and checks administered
by adverse seasons, been an almost uninterrupted process
of exploration and discovery and reclamation of the
immense territory for the use of man. Certainly the
pioneers of Australian settlement have encountered less
danger from a hostile native population than the early
settlers in North America or Southern Africa did; but
many of them, nevertheless, were always conscious that
they carried their lives in their hands, and if personal
records of/-the early times were published, they would
contain many thrilling narratives of adventure and conflict.
The remarkable freedom of the Australian plains and
forests from beasts of prey formidable to man has un-
doubtedlv favoured the occupation of the country; but on
the other hand the dryness of the climate and the scarcity
of water-courses have been sources of peril. But we have
had a hardy race of explorers, whom neither danger could
daunt nor hardship baffle, and the explorers have been well
followed up by men of practical enterprise.
In like manner we may point to Australian political his-
tory. It is difficult for us now to form a vivid conception
of the state of things that prevailed in the days of abso-
lute Crown Government. The publication of some docu-
ments lately has recalled attention to the dispute between
Governor Bligh and the military party. It is hard in these
days to form a clear notion of the conditions in which such
revolutionary proceedings were possible. But we can
trace the growing influence of a love of liberty and a desire
for free government in the persistent struggles which pre-
ceded each successive step in the course of reform. The
men who bore the pressure in those times
were characterised by an elasticity of spirit which
could not be suppressed. Had the colony been
founded by men of a feebler race there would neither have
been the reclamation of the territory nor the gradual pro-
gress upwards from the personal rule of a Crown colony to
the establishment of the free institutions under which we-
now live. It was well for the struggling settlement, and
well for the interests of the Empire, that the Imperial
authorities, taught by the sharp lessons of the American
conflict, adopted a policy of concession. Had another
policy prevailed, we may take it for granted that
the first centennium of the colony’s foundation would
have closed amidst circumstances widely different from
those we see around us now.
In the development of our material interests generally
we have had to fight against difficulties particularly our
own. There is little doubt that the choice of Australia by
the Imperial authorities for the original purposes of the
first settlement was partly determined by the length of the
voyage. We can well imagine that this was considered a


recommendation of the site. But from the time when the
settlement began to change its character its distance from the
great centres of population and markets of commerce in the
old world was a grievous disadvantage. Australia in its
progress has had to contend against a scarcity of labour, a
deficiency of skill in directing it, long delays in communica-
tion, and heavy freights. We may well congratulate our-
selves upon the influence of the gold discovery in mitigat-
ing or neutralising some of these adverse conditions. The
aun sacra fames sent out a population which Australia would
probably never have attracted across the ocean by means
of any less powerful spell. It would be a mistake to
suppose that the value of the gold discovery has been repre-
sented by the weight of gold produced, or its purchasing
power. We must never forget either its direct or its in-
direct influence in the matter of immigration. It drew to
the colony “all sorts and conditions of men,” and if we
could have spared some of them, many others have done
good service in promoting general progress. There is much
interest in tracing the steady increase of the Australian
population, and in observing how the parent colonv
parting from time to time with large sections of its
territory, and large bodies of its people, has thriven under
the process, and rapidly recovered lost ground. Whether
in the future anything will happen to cause a strong cur-
rent of immigration to set towards these shores is a ques-
tion which the future will answer, but, looking forward
we must not ignore the effects that may be produced by
the steadily increasing proportion of the native bom.
Some of the conditions that checked our progress during
the first half of the century, and indeed until a later date,
have changed their character or lost their force. The
review of the wonderful development of the means of com-
munication between Australia and the rest of the world not
only offers a partial explanation of the accelerated commer-
cial advance of the last 20 years; it causes some degree of
wonder at the speed attained before. When our trade was
carried by sailing-vessels ; when there was a tardv course
of post; when telegraph cables had not been laid,
the conditions of commerce were different in-
deed Some may regret the “good old times;”
but the beneficial influence of the change has made itself
felt truly, whether we consider the improvement of our
outward communications or the construction of railways
within our own territory. The new conditions open out
new possibilities to an extent not yet to be defined.
Our supplement covers a wide ground. It may be well
that we should be reminded that material progress is
not the only test of national prosperity or wel-
fare. And Australia has a fair record of achieve-
ments in religious activity and philanthropy, in the
cause of education, in the province of literature and art.
We do not say that in these things we have cause for
exultation or pride. The work of the first century is done
Sometimes it has been facilitated bv surrounding circum-
fa^ eB i.i norefreqUentl> ’ P erha P s - jt been hampered
by the difficulties of the situation; but, such as it is, it is
done, and our wisdom will lie in using the vantage ground
on which we are now placed to such good effect that we may
avoid the errors of the past, and enter upon the work of the
newceutury with the determination to secure results worthy
of the improved conditions which now prevail.
INTRODUCTION.
A RETROSPECT.
Australia, nationally speaking, will be a
?oo n c dred ,£f ars old on the 26th of January,
1888. This, therefore, is our Centen-
nial year, and in the midst of our cele-
bration and holiday-making the more serious
and retrospective aspects of our political
and social conditions are apt to be over-
looked ; but it is our intention, in as
short a space as possible, to bring before our
country and the rest of the world the
salient points in our history and progress,
and to sketch the configurations of our
political and continental structure. One hun-
dred years is not much so far as chronology is
concerned, but itmay affect very largely the history
of the world, The last hundred years have cer-
tainly been very important in the progress of
mankind. It is only, arithmetically speaking, the
nineteenth part of the Christian era ; but in its
ettects it represents far more. In every country
of the earth since 1788 vast strides have been
made in science and the arts, and from the
Jtnglish-speaking race has gone out a great scientific
and commercial influence which is felt wherever
mankind is. It was through English scientific
research that Captain Cook first came to the
couthern Seas. English invention and investi-
gation have always gone hand in hand with com-
merce, and thus they did in the case of Aus-
t[alia< , « was a fortunate thing for England that
she had America and Australia for her surplus
people, otherwise the social problem of over-
population would have assumed terrible propor-
tions. It is likely that the world has now been
discovered completely so far as habitable land
is concerned, but there are explorations yet to be
begun in the far south. The South Pole will be
easier to explore, it is thought, than the North
Pole, and whatever value the discoveries may
be commercially, they will add to the
geographical knowledge of the world, for
which such men as Sir John Franklin died.
Uur history has been a marvellous if a compara-
tively uneventful one. We have had no national
conflict and no internal strife. Our progress has
been accomplished without bloodshed, and if we
cannot point to much that makes a distinctive
national character, we have a good deal to show
for our citizenship and prosperity. Australia was
tlie last of the continents to be discovered and
the last to be colonised. It was over a century
after America had been found by the ambassadors


of civilisation that De Quiros and Torres skirted
the New Hebrides, and Dutch navigators set
foot on Australian soil. But it was only
one hundred years ago that this great island,,
which Torres called “ Terra Australis,
and which Flinders afterwards shortened
to “ Australia,” was taken possession of by Captain
Cook for the British Crown. He first cast anchor
in Botany Bay, a few miles to the southward of
Sydney Harbour, a name destined to become a
noted one in Australian associations. Previously to
this Dampier, Tasman, Pelsart, Carpenter, and
others examined the coasts. The real history
of the colony begins with the landing of
the first shipload of convicts at Botany
Bay under the command of Captain Phillip.
Just at this time also La Perouse, a
French navigator, reached Botany Bay, only to
find the British flag hoisted, and so he passed on
to make other explorations in the Pacific, and was
never heard of again. Had La Perouse arrived
first, Australia would, no doubt, have been a
French colony. Norfolk Island became a branch
convict settlement under Lieutenant King. ~ In
1795 Governor Hunter formed settlements on the
Hawkesburv. During Governor King’s term of
office, about 1803, an officer named Macarthur
started wool-growing at Camden, with a couple
of Spanish merino sheep, given him by George 111.
In 1803 a settlement was formed in Tasmania by
Judge-Advocate Collins. Hobart Town was
founded, and in 1829 separation from New South
Wales occurred. In 1815 Governor Macquarie
built a road across the Blue Mountains, and thus
opened up a highway for the squatters. In 1829,
the Legislative Council, consisting of fifteen mem-
bers, was established to make laws for the colony.
The first quarter of a century was noted for the
explorations of such men as Oxley, Cunningham,
Hume, Hovell, Sturt, Macleay, and Mitchell.
In 1802 Port Phillip was discovered by Lieu-
tenant Murray, and in 1835 Fawkner founded
the City of Melbourne. In 1851 Victoria became
a colony with a Government of its own. Mr.
Latrobe was its first Governor. This year was
also remarkable for the discovery of gold at Bal-
larat. In 1802 Flinders touched the coast of what
is now South Australia, and in 1835 the colony
was founded, with Captain Hindmarsh as Gover-
nor. About 1825 the colony of Western Aus-
tralia was founded, and it, like New
South Wales and Tasmania, became a con-
vict settlement. In 1770 Captain Cook sailed
into Moreton Bay, but it was not till 1823 that
any settlement was formed there. At that time
it became a convict station. In 1841 the trans-
portation of convicts ceased, and in 1859 More-
ton Bay became Queensland, and separation
occurred, Sir George Bowen being the first
Governor. Western Australia was discovered, it
is supposed, in the sixteenth century, but there is
no record further back than 1616, when Hartog
explored the South-Western district. In 18j *
the colony was founded, with Captain Stirling
as the first Governor. Western Australia was the
one colony that desired convict labour, and the re-
sults have been what might have been expected.
The colony has never made progress. Convict
settlement was scarcely an auspicious beginning
for a country, but the danger to the national
existence which was likely to spring from it was
soon entirely overborne by the great tide of legiti-
mate immigration and settlement. There were
same dark hours before the dawn, but the vast
growth of a free population dispelled the un-
happy gloom of an ill origin. The battle of
anti-transportation was fought strenuously side
by side with the conflict for elective government.
Between the years 1846 and 1850 more than
25,000 convicts had been brought into Tasmania.
After repeated representations to the Home
Government, it was finally decided to scatter the
convicts over several of the colonies, and not con-
fine them to Tasmania. However, when this was
attempted, and a vessel —the Randolph—appeared
at Port Phillip Heads with convicts on board, the
captain was forbidden t,o enter. In Sydney, wheie
the vessel sailed next, the same opposition was
offered, and so Western Australia had to take
them in. The Anti-Transportation League was
formed in 1851, and the colonists set themselves
to work to force the English Government to stop
the transportation of convicts to Tasmania. When
in 1850 Tasmania got her own Legislative
Council, the people pushed their cause so faith-
fully that in 1853 the Secretary of State, the
Duke of Newcastle, decided that no more convicts
should be sent to Tasmania.
AUSTRALIA.
GEOGRAPHICAL.
Australia, including Tasmania, lies between 10 and
-45 degrees of latitude and 110 and 153 degrees E.
longitude. The continent extends 2400 miles east and
west, and 1971 miles north and south. Its area is about
3,000,000 square miles. It is, in fact, the largest island
in the world. New South Wales, the oldest of the Aus-
tralian colonies, has an area of 323,437 square miles.
The extreme length is 850 miles. Once the colony
comprised the whole eastern half of the continent.
It lies between 28T0 and 37*28 latitude and
157*37 and 141* E. longitude. It is bounded by the
Pacific Ocean, Queensland, South Australia, and Vic-
toria. The great dividing range of mountains inter-
sects the colony from north to south. Inland
there are 40 or 50 miles of fine table lands, and
beyond them great interior plains. The table lands


are about 2500 feet and the plains are from 400 to 800
feet above the level of the sea. The coast line trends
north-east boldly for 800 miles. At the extreme south
of the colony Twofold Bay forms a commo-
dious shipping harbour, and Port Jackson is ac-
knowledged to be one of the finest if not
the finest harbour in the world. Newcastle is the
second port of the colony in importance. Along the coast
line are several lakes, Illawarra and Macquarie being
the most noted. The mountain ranges are the Coast
Range, the Dividing Range, and the Interior Ranges.
The highest mountain in the Dividing Range is Mount
Kosciusko, which rises to a height of 7308 ft. The
loftiest peak in the coast range is 3712 ft. In the in-
terior range the peaks do not rise higher than 2000 ft
The rivers hare their sources in the main range of
mountains. Those flowing eastward empty into the
Pacific Ocean, and those flowing west discharge their
waters into the river Darling. The Darling joins the
Murray not very far from the point at which the three
colonies of New South Wales, South Australia, and
\ ictoria meet. The principal coast rivers are the
Hawkesburv, 330 miles ; the Hunter, 300 miles ; the
Shoalhaven, 260 miles; and the Clarence, 240 miles.
The Darling is 1160 miles long. It drains about
200,000 square miles of country. It is navi-
gable for 600 miles. The Murrumbidgee runs through
1350 miles of country, and the Lachlan, which
falls into it, is <OO miles long. The Murray, which
divides New South Wales from Victoria, is 1120 miles
long, and is navigable in rainy seasons for several
hundred miles. The rivers of Australia are very shal-
low, and when a great rainfall comes the country
is often submerged for miles round. There
are. only a few small lakes in the interior. Vic-
toria lies between the river Murray and the sea,
with New South Wales to north and east and South
Australia to the west. The area is 86,850 square
miles, or about one-thirtieth of the whole continent.
Its extreme length is 420 miles and its breadth 260
miles. The Australian Alps form the mountain range
that extends south-westerly from eastern New South
V ales and is met bv the Dividing Range, which
extends along the centre of the colony. There
ate several high peaks in the main Alps
®\er 5000 feet high. A great many volcanic
cones and craters are found in the Dividing Range. The
Murray is the only large stream. It rises in the Alps,
and has a course of about 1400 miles in the colony.
There are a number of salt lakes in the colony. The
Gipps Land Lakes, which have a connection with the
sea, are five in number, one of them being 90 miles long.
South Australia covers an area of 915,000 square
miles. The original area was 300,000 square miles,
but in 1861 the great northern strip called “No Man’s
’ waB a dded. Its settlement occurred before that
of Victoria. Of its vast territory, much is of little
value ; but the great scrub land in the far interior,
which was considered for so long as useless and unin-
habitable, has been found to be rich in minerals,
and will eventually be a source of great
wealth. South Australians the least mountainous
of any of the colonies.. The highest peak is only
3000 ft. The Murray is the only river of any note or
size, there are some large lakes in the interior,
both Eyre and Gardiner being over 150 miles long.
Ihe area of the colony is about 679,000
square miles, and it has a seaboard of 2250
miles. The Pacific Ocean, Torres Straits, South
Australia, and New South Wales bound it. Its western-
boundary is long. 138- E. from lat. 9* to 29-. The
Darling River takes its rise in Queensland, and
makes a highway through New South Wales, Vic-
toria, and South Australia to Adelaide. Two ranges
of hills, running transversely, and the river Darling,
divide the colony into four districts. The mountains
are not high, the greatest elevation being only 5400 ft.
There are few important rivers beside the Darling.
Queensland is very rich in minerals, and within the
last 10 years the mining interests have been largely
developed. Its progress since 1859 has been a successful
one with the exception of a short interval, when over-
speculation produced serious commercial depression.
Tasmania has an area of 24,600 square miles. It is
between 40 and 45 degrees of latitude, and is removed
from \ictoria by about 24 hours of steam travel.
It is a country of hills, and its climate
is very equable and pleasant. It has a
large number of rivers and several small lakes.
Western Australia includes about one-third of the
continent, or 978,300 square miles. Its length is
about 1500 miles. It is bounded on the east by the
meridian of 129 E. Only about one-twentieth
of its area has been explored. For very
long it \va.s believed that the greater portion of the
interior of the colony was a desert, but that idea has
now exploded. However, there are large portions of
V estern Australia which have never been explored.
Attempts though are being made now bv the
geographical societies to extend the explorations.
I here are few mountains, and the rivers are not many.
The largest of the rivers is not more than 250 or 300
miles in length.
CLIMATE.
No climate is so much misunderstood as that of
Australia. Because it is in the Southern Hemisphere
people are apt to make the mistake of supposing that our
climate is litter for Hottentots than for Europeans. In,
the colony of New South Wales alone may be had nearly
all climates. In the mountain district of Kiandra snow-
falls in the winter time, and the thermometer some-
times drops to eight degrees below zero. There the winter
is much the same as in some of the western European
countries. In the inland plains, however, the heat is
very intense in the summer. The thermometer along
the river Darling reads from 100- to 120- in
the shade, and the average rainfall is only 12
to 13 inches per annum. The climate of Svdney
is trying in the summer, but the winter weather
is delightful. Ihe mean heat of the metropo-
lis is about 63*, or about that of Lisbon.
The enervating effects of the Sydney climate
are not felt in the interior, though the heat is
much greater. The summer, however, is quite endur-
able, and there are many resorts which afford coolness
and recreation. The very hot weather does not last
more than about two months. v The climate
of Queensland is a very hot one. but even there, be-
cause of the dryness of the heat, it is not felt so much
as might bo imagined. The mean temperature of Bris-
bane i 3 69', and the variations in the thermometer are
not so great as in the other capitals. The Victorian
climate does not differ much from that of New


South Wales, but the climate of the capital is more
variable than that of Sydney, while being less ener-
vating. Its mean temperature is 58*. South Australia
is hotter than either New South Wales or Victoria. The
mean temperature is about 65’. There is a mountain
climate within three hours’ ride of Sydney which is brac-
ing and healthy, and a great many businesspeople leave
the city at the end of the week to spend their Sundays
in the uplands. That the climate of Australia is a
healthy one there is no possible doubt. People who
have been troubled with lung disease live here
when they can live nowhere else. The instances are
many’ in which people have come to Australia for a
short lease of life, and have got a very long one. The
mean maximum temperature of Sydney is 80’ in the
shade, and the mean minimum temperature 45’
in the shade. “ Southerly bursters ” and thunderstorms
are of frequent occurrence in the summer, and are not
unwelcome as they help to clear the atmosphere- The
summer season of New South Wales may be said to
resemble very closely that part of Western Europe
which lies between latitudes 41 - -53’ —55 - -5 1 •; and the
winter season is much the same as that of Southern
France, Italy, Spain, and Algeria. All the plants and
flowers of the world will flourish outdoors in some part
of New South Wales. The prevailing winds are cool,
coming from the west and south in winter and from
the north-east and west in summer. Altogether the
climate of the colonies may be considered in most
respects preferable to that of any other country in the
world. Its drawbacks are far less than its advantages,
and it certainly is a climate which favours the poor and
the feeble. •
EXPLORATIONS. *
After the visits of the early navigators the first real
attempts at exploration and discovery were made by
Bass and Flinders, Flinders made a chart of his dis-
coveries, and wrote an account of his voyages. In
1817 Oxley, the Survevor-General of the colony at the
time, was sent to explore the country in the direction
of the Lachlan River. His opinion was that the
country of the Lachlan was “for ever uninhabitable,”
and he held the same idea of the Macquarie River
district. He also discovered and sailed up the
Brisbane River for 50 miles. Allan Cunningham, an
enthusiastic botanist, succeeded in opening up a country
hitherto unknown. He discovered the fine pastoral
lands of the Liverpool Plains and the Darling Downs.
Then came Hume and Hovell, who set out to bring a
party of convicts from Sydney to the Southern coasts
overland, it being understood that if the journev cvere
made successfully the convicts would be pardoned.
The expedition, however, proved a failure. Captain Sturt,
the most noted, perhaps, of the explorers, organised an
expedition in 1828 to the Macquarie, but got little
further than did Oxley. In 1829 he again started in
company with a naturalist named Macleay for the
Muirumbidgee and the Lachlan, and reached the
Murray. Hume and Hovell had crossed the same
stream years before. The next traveller was Major
Mitchell. His attention was directed to the north-
west aud the Upper Darling, which river he reached in
1831. lie made another expedition in 1835, and again
in 1836 he started for the south, and explored the
Mun ay, and named what is now known as Victoria
“ Australia Felix.” In 1840 Count Strzelecki explored
the region of Mount Kosciusko, and was the first to
climb the mountain. He declared that gold existed in
the ranges. The settlements at Adelaide and Mel-
bourne grew very fast, and little by little knowledge
of the country was extended. One of the most
noted of the discoverers of the last fifty
years was Eyre, who struck into the interior
and got as far as Mount Hopeless. Here he
changed his course, and made for Western Australia.
It was a terrible undertaking, and he and his party
endured fearful hardship. However, he reached King
George’s Sound at length. In 1844 Sturt made
another expedition into the heart of Australia. He
crossed the Grey Range and the Stanley Range, and
came to the great sand plains. There he, with his
party, had to remain the summer with the heat
130’ in the shade. Poole, who was the surveyor of
the party, died. Sturt got within 150 miles of the
Tropic of Capricorn, and was then obliged to turn back.
On his way he discovered Cooper’s Creek. In 1844
Leichhardt explored the northern part of New South
Wales and the southern district of Queensland. He
travelled from Sydney to the Gulf'of Carpentaria, and
explored on his way the rivers Fitzroy, Dawson, Isaacs,
Mackenzie, Burdekin, Mitchell, and the Gilbert. In
1847 he made another attempt at exploration, which
was not so successful, and in 1848 he organised a
third one, and his last, for he and his party
were never heard of again. In 1848 Mitchell
explored portions of Queensland, and discovered thu
Culgoa and the Warrego rivers. The same year Kennedy
wa« sent to explore Cape York Peninsula. He landed
at Rockingham Bay, and travelled toward Cape York;
but, when only a few miles from his destination, h»
was killed by the natives. Of the 13 who went with the
expedition only three survived. In 1856 Gregory went
in search of Leichhardt. He did not find him, but he ex-
plored the courses of two rivers, the Victoria andthe Roper.
In 1860 Burke and Wills started on their expedition
to the interior. This was the largest and most com-
plete expedition that had started for the North. It
was arranged by the Royal Society. Burke was leader,
and afterward Wills, an astronomer, became second iu
command. At Burke and Wills left half
the expedition behind, and pushed on. At Cooper's
Creek they waited for Wright, but he did not come,
and so Burke pushed on towards the Gulf of
Carpentaria. He left four men and some camels
and horses to wait his return. They reached
the Gulf and started back, only to find on arriving at
the depot that the party left in charge had started but
a few hours before. They started for Mount Hope-
less, but did not reach it, and they returned to Cooper’s
Creek. There, after great hardship, both Burke and
Wills died, and King, their companion, who survived,
found refuge with the blacks. Search parties
were sent out, and at last King was found. In 1862
Stuart made the journey across the continent. In
1873 Warburton crossed the continent from east
to west. In 1874 Forrest, a Government surveyor,
crossed from Western Australia to the telegraph line,
and in 1876 Giles did the same. ''There still remains
about a million square miles of land in the West to be
explored. The same indomitable courage which moved
those whose travels we have here recorded will no
doubt fill others, and we may expect in the next 10
years to have no blank spaces on our map.


TIIE ABORIGINES.
ORIGIN OF THE RACE.
The Australian race, which is rapidly disappearing
with the progress of European settlement, is probably
of great antiquity. Its origin is a question which is
keenly debated amongst ethnologists. In certain re-
spects the Australian aborigines resemble the Papuans,
and a Papuan origin is attributed to them by some
writers, who rely upon the fact that many customs and
superstitions are the same in both races. But there are
great differences as well as resemblances, while
there is little if any similarity in the languages.
The Australian natives are nomadic. They
have no fixed habitations, but roam about
from place to place, living upon animals, fish, and
roots, only restricted in tlieir wanderings by tribal
boundaries. They never by any chance cultivate the
soil, and their only shelter consists of a fevr sheets of
- bark made into temporary huts, which are erected one
week and abandoned the next. The natives of the
Pacific inlands, on the other hand, cultivate the soil,
build houses, live in settled villages, have a regular
currency, and, generally speaking, approach much
nearer to a state of civilisation than the Australian
aboriginals. W allace holds the latter to be distinct
from the Papuans, and says that they are the
survivors of an ancient and peculiar race,
while Mr. A. W. Howitt suggests that the
Australian race is formed by the admixture of
some successful invaders, say from amongst the hill
tribes of Deccan, with the original inhabitants.
Recently, Mr. E. M. Curr, chief inspector of stock in
ictoria, who has had large opportunities of observa-
tion, has published a boon, in which he advances the
theory that the Australian native is by descent a negro,
crossed by some other race. He admits that his phy-
sical characteristics differ from those of the negro in
some important particulars, but he shows that the
customs, language, and in some cases the superstitions,
of aboriginal Australia agree in a marked manner with
those of negro Africa. The most striking point of re-
semblance is the language. With regard to
customs and superstitions, it is found that
some of them are common to the negro, the Papuan, and
the Australian; but Mr. Curr points to the remarkable
fact that, whereas the Papuan and the Australian lan-
guages differ from each other almost in toto, many of
the words used by the Australian blacks are almost
identical with those employed by the negroes. The
theory of the African origin of our aborigines may be
said to depend chiefly upon affinities of language.* In
some important respects the habits of the two races
show differences as great as, if not greater than, is the
case with the Australians and the Papuans. For in-
stance, as the author of the theory points out, the
African race has for a very long period led the settled
life of the agriculturist, and has been used to
rude forms of government, whilst the Australians
have been wandering hunters, without government.
Mr, Curr suggests, -however, that the Australian
aboriginal may have had his origin in some negro
type before the negro race made its appearance°in
Africa, and the fact that the words and the customs
found in the two continents at the present time are in
fvery case more generally prevalent in Australia than
in Africa has led him to the inference that the customs
and languages of Australia lesemble more those which
used to prevail in Africa in past ages than those now
existing in the latter continent.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS.
"Whatever may be the origin of the Australian race,
the tribes throughout the continent are so much alike
in physical characteristics, customs, arms, and language
that all the writers agree in making them out to be of
one common stock. On this point there seems to bo
no reasonable doubt. In colour, physique, and general
mode of life there is little difference between the
aboriginal of the tropics and the aboriginal of the
temperate regions of Australia. The tropical savage is
less clothed, fiercer, and more addicted to cannibalism
than the southern tribes, but the race is essentially the
same all over the continent. The Australian native,
though called a black, is not sooty, but rather of a dark
copper colour. His average height is less than that
of the Englishman, but greater than that of the
Frenchman; occasionally he attains magnificent pro-
portions. As a rule, he is more lightly built and less
muscular than the Englishman; he is more active, and
his sight is keener, than that of Europeans. The nose
is usually short, and depressed in the centre, though
sometimes it is aquiline ; the mouth is wide, and the
lips are thicker than those of Europeans, but less thick
than those of Africans ; the teeth are large, white, and
strong ; the hair is abundant, long, and generally wavy,
though occasionally quite straight; sometimes tinged
with auburn, which is particularly noticeable about the
moustache, beard, and whiskers, which are generally
luxuriant. The Australian native has an erect
and graceful carriage, and his movements
are light and easy. In his savage state he
shows great endurance, and recovers quickly
from injuries which would prcve fatal to most Euro-
peans ; but when he takes to the ways of civilisation
he loses his hardiness, and is susceptible to complaints
from which in the wild state he is free, particularly
lung disease, which proves very deadly.
LAWS AN» CUSTOMS.
There is no well-defined form of government amongst
the aborigines. The head of the family rules as an
autocrat. He may ill-treat or kill his wife without
being called to account, he disposes of his daughters in
marriage without any regard to their own wishes, and
he decides whether the new-born baby shall be
reared or destroyed. Infanticide is very com-
mon amongst the blacks—either from difficulty
in obtaining food for the family, or from the
trouble that would be experienced in moving a number
of children about from place to place. If room can be
found for the new arrival he is spared ; if not he is
strangled immediately. In all tribes there are some
men who take the lead, but there seems to be no ac-
knowledged chieftainship. When important matters
affecting the general welfare have to be dealt with
they are settled by a meeting of the tribe. The tribes
keep within their own rudely defined territorial limits,
but they associate to a limited extent with
each other. Those who are not associated
together, or have net established some
sort of understanding, regard each other as enemies.
Polygamy is common amongst the aborigines, and there
is no limit to the number of wives; but ordinarily an
Australian black does not possess more than two or
three. In most cases marriage is wholly exogamous,
that is to say marriages are only made outside the tribe ;


in some instances marriages are made within as well
as without the tribe. The blacks have a great horror of
marriage between blood relations, and the union of
cousins, and even second cousins, is forbidden.
Marriage is not held to create relationship; the woman
is always said to be of the tribe and class in which she was
bom; but the children belong to the tribe of the father.
Some of the blacks are cannibals. Those in the
tropics are confirmed man-eaters, but as a rule the
tribes in the temperate regions only carry the practice
so far as to eat small portions of the fat of a slaugh-
tered foe as an act of revenge. In country settled by the
whites the practice is given up at once.
WEAPONS.
The chief weapon used by the blacks is the spear,
which is mad® of many sorts and patterns. For fight-
ing purposes a heavy barbed spear is used, which is
/.thrown by the hand ; the lighter spears employed in
hunting (and in fighting also in some cases) are
propelled by the wommera, or throwing-stick.
The heavy spear can be thrown with effect 70ft.,
and the light spear over 100 ft The boomerang, a
wooden weapon in shape like a scimitar, without handle
or point, is peculiar to the Australian natives. There
are two kinds. One, which is used chiefly as a toy, can
be thrown 100 yards or more and made to return to the
thrower; the other, which is larger, heavier, and
straighter, does not return to the thrower. It is used
in war and for hunting purposes, and inflicts very
severe wounds. Clubs and shields are used in great
variety, and the blacks also make slone tomahawks,
chisels, and knives, which are employed for cutting and
trimming spears, clubs, and shields, and for stripping
bark from the trees with which to make huts
and canoes, nets, bags, baskets, and calabashes. Awls and
needles, made from bones, and rugs of opossum and
kangaroo skins are amongst the useful articles manu-
factured by the aborigines.
RELIGION AND CIVILISATION.
The Australian tribes have no religion and no
god. They are intensely superstitious, and believe
firmly in sorcery, to which they attribute
every evil that happens to them. If a man
dies from sickness, or falls from a tree and is
killed, it is at once concluded that he has
been bewitched by an enemy, and the massacre of
an unoffending tribe is frequently the sequel.
Although the Australian natives as a race are
ignorant and degraded, they possess considerable intel-
ligence. In all the colonies aboriginal stations have
been established by the Government, or by missiouary
effort, and each station has its school. It is found that
the black boy or girl masters reading, writing, and
arithmetic more rapidly than the child of English
p irents; but being quick to forget, eventually the
restraints of civilisation become irksome.
STATISTICS.
What the native population numbered when Australia
was first occupied by the whites can only be guessed,
but it must have been considerable. It is estimated
that there are even now 20,000 aborigines in North
Queensland, and as many more in the northern territory
of South Australia, but we have no trustworthy data
to go upon. According to the report of the Aborigines
Protection Board of New South Wales, there were liv-
ing in New South Wales, in October, 1886, 4893 full-
blood blacks and 2741 balf-castes, making in ail 7634.
The full-bloods had decreased by 469 during the year,
while the half-castes had increased by 119. The
aboriginal population of Victoria is under 1000. The
number in Western Australia is uncertain, as a large
portion of the immense territory of that colony is un-
explored. But although the native may hold his own
in the unexplored regions for a time his fate is sealed.
As settlement spreads the black will give place to the
white man. The experience of the past shows that the
two races cannot exist together. The occupation of the
land by the European settler deprives the aboriginal of
his means of subsistence, and whether he fights or
accepts the situation the result is the same. If
he attacks the whites or preys upen their
flocks and herds, he is shot down, and if he makes
friends with the new-comer, his destruction is not less
certain. The Australian natives, while made to profit
by civilisaiion, are only too ready to copy the
vices of the European, while the alteration in their
mode of life makes them susceptible to diseases from
which in their wild state they were entirely free. As
settlement spreads, the aboriginals will give place to the
white man, and their complete disappearance from the
continent is only a question of time.
THE FAUNA AND FLORA OF AUSTRALIA.
FAUNA.
The animals which constitute the fauna of
Australia comprise species which are amongst the oldest
mammals known, and which cannot be met with in
other portions of the world. Including carnivorous,
herbivorous, and mixed feeders, they vary in weight
from a few ounces to over a hundredweight. With the
exception of the rodents, the seals of the coast, the
native dog, and the bats, they are all marsupials, and
are usually nocturnal in their habits, and for this
reason nearly all #ur birds of prey are nocturnal also.
The most representative is the kangaroo class. These
animals, by means of long hind legs and a strong tail,
move in bounds or long jumps, and with some of them
a well-mounted horseman cannot keep pace. Amongst
the smaller kinds are the wallaby, the pademelon, and
the bandicoot. The platypus, or water-mole, is remark-
able in that, whilst it is a warm-blooded animal and lays
eggs, it also afterwards suckles its young. The dingo,
or native dog, is killed by the settlers because
of the destruction it creates amongst the sheep.
In appearance it is something like a fox.
It does not bark, but makes a dismal whine. It is
generally of a yellowish colour, and will interbreed
freely with the domestic dog. There is also a native
cat Wombats, the flesh of which is reputed to be
palatable, burrow in the ground. The flying foxes are
disliked on account of the mischief they play in fruit
gardens. They are really large bats of a reddish colour.
The smaller species, however, discard fruit, and are
insectivorous. The opossum (phalanger) is plenti-
ful; and there is likewise a flying kind, which
is very similar to the squirrel. The native bear
is a small stupid animal, easily caught in the daytime,
when it is generally asleep and refuses to awake, and
it is easily tamed. The echidna, or Australian
hedgehog, is often met with, and small animals, such as
water and bush rats and mice, abound in thousands.
The bird tribes are very largely represented, there being


over 750 species; but usually, whilst they boast of
magnificent plumage, good songsters are somewhat
rare. The cockatoos, magpies, and butcher-birds can
easily he taught to talk, and there are birds that
are perfect ventriloquists, such as the atrichia, of which
there are two species, the native skylarks, and the bell-
bird, or mocker. Whilst one of these birds is
whistling at your feet, you would fancy that it was
several hundred yards away. The parrots are most
numerous, including, large and small, some 60 kinds,
and many are most handsomely feathered. The owls
feed on small bush mice, and only make their
appearance at night. The emu, which is
very much like an ostrich, must be regarded as the
representative bird of Australia. Its eggs are prized
by visitors because of the readiness with which they
can be embellished and worked up into ornaments, but
since the blacks have retreated inland they have become
so plentiful that the squatters destroy them by
hundreds, the birds being disliked on account of the
large quantity of grass which they eat and the injury
which is thus done to sheep-farming. The Australian
cassowary is found in the scrub of Queensland, and is
one of the largest species of the genus known. It is
heavier than an emu and has thick short legs ; its
wattles are green, blue, and black, which give it a hand-
some appearance. The bower birds are so called because
of their building propensities. Gathering together
sticks or bush, they push them into the ground, and
thus make a bower or “playhouse” for themselves.
With them are included the satin birds and the rent
birds. Iliere are three species ©f mould-raising birds
which put together heaps of leaves, small sticks, debris,
and sand. In the middle they lay their eggs; the heat
caused by the fermentation hatches them, and the
young are born with their wings so far developed that
they can fly within 24 hours afterwards. The species
include the megapode, the leysoa, and the talegalla or
brush turkey. On the coast there are many kinds
of seabirds, whilst inland game of various descriptions
is met with, plover and quail, and ducks, geese, swans,
and pigeons being plentiful. Iteptiles are found on all
sides, and scarcely need recapitulation. Many are
repulsive in appearance, and apparently answer but
little good purpose; but an exception must be made
in the case of the tortoise, of which there are three or
tour varieties, and it is also worthy of mention that
very large turtles are occasionally captured. There are
snakes, both innocent and venomous. Amongst the
largest is the carpet snake, which often measures between
14ft. and 15ft. It is prettily marked, and lives on
birds and small animals, but its bite is not poisonous.
In Queensland there are pythons which measure 2011.
The black and brown snakes’—of which there are
several species—and the death-adder’s bite is most
deadly, lhese chiefly infest the warm parts of the
country, hut considering the population deaths from
snakebite are rare.' With regard to fish the
coast of New South Wales is highly favoured, and
they ar e not only present in abundance, but some of them
are of excellent quality. The fish most appreciated
are the schnapper, whiting, so’e, flounder, and garfish.
The schnapper is very fine eating, and specimens are
often caught weighing up to 201 b. From the rivers
we get the perch and several kinds of Murray cod,
which are highly- piized. It cannot, however, be said
that me has been made of fish as a food to any-
thing like the extent which might have been expected.
Periodically much has been said and written on
the subject; but the only thing which can be reported
of the fishing industry is that, as yet, it is in its
infancy.
FLORA.
Where cities, towns, and villages now stand, or
where well-fenced sheep-runs exist, there was 100 years
ago little else than bush. Tall and stately trees, small
scrub, or dense undergrowth, existed as the character of
the country varied. As with the fauna, so with the
flora—botanists found specimens which were either
entirely new to them, or which possessed characteristics
ditlering from the species already known. Botany
Bay was so named because of the wealth of the
new specimens found there. The different parts
of the coast, the mountain ranges, and the interior
have plants confined to themselves. The coast is
noticeable for the density of the vegetation generally
and for bright dark-green foliage: whilst in the in-
terior the forests are more open and are composed
chiefly of eucalypts. What in the neighbourhood of
the coast is called “ bush ” would in India be known
as jungle. As a rule, Australian plants are not re-
markable for tkeir odour; but some of them
have a most delicious scent. Our native plants
are seldom or never used to beautify our gardens,
yet, in Europe, they form some of the most charming
exhibits in the flower shows, and are grown to such
size and perfection that Australians can scarcely recog-
nise them. This is more particularly the case with
the epacrids, rutaceous and leguminous plants.
Amongst the most noticeable vegetation of the colony
are the palms, many of which, in the Illawarra dis-
trict, attain a height of 130 feet or over.
The best-known fpecies, which the settlers termed “ the
cabbage-tree palms,” are the Livistona australis and
the Seaforthia elegans. There are not any palms
beyond the mountain ranges, but magnificent tree-ferns
are there found; and, whilst they are numerous all
along the coast, it is in the district of the Blue Moun-
tains that they reach perfection. Here the Alsophila
australis and the Hixonia antarctia often reach 50ft
high. A peculiar feature of the tallest peaks of these
mountains is that the trap forces its way through the
rocks and forms a rich bed of soil at the top, wherein
these ferns thrive luxuriantly. The stag’s horn ferns
(platycerium), which are remarkable as being true epi-
phytes, attaching themselves to trees or rocks, also
grow to an extraordinary size, and specimens have
frequently been found of over a ton in weight. The
bird’s-nest ferns (Neottopteris nidus), which are like-
wise very large, often form a feature in the landscape.
Whilst many of our ferns are of great beauty, perhaps
the most noticeable are the arborescent kinds, of which
the principal is the alsophia. The whole of the family
is very numerously represented, including some 200
species, and from tremendous trees they descend down
to almost microscopical objects—such, for instance, as
the xymenophyllum and the trichomenes. Unquestion-
ably the great timber of the colony is found in the
larger eucalypts and in the broad-leaved iigtree.
Some of the latter grow to enormous proportions.
The prevailing types of the genus eucalyptus are the
E. amyzdalina, usually called the messmate, the E.
pilularis, black butt, and the E. resinifera, or red
mahogany. Immediately allied is the red gum, or


■“apple tree.” The finest trees in the Northern dis-
tricts are the Flindersia, commonly called the ash, and
the Costanospermum, or bean tree. Growing generally
within the coast is the far-famed red cedar, now, unfor-
tunately, getting very scarce. It is one of the
most durable and ornamental timbers known.
Next to the cedar, for usefulness, are the
various kinds of hardwood, being mostly eucalypts
and mvrtaceous trees. The Banksias vary in
height from trees of good proportion to dwarf shrubs.
They have a greenish-brown fiower, and their leaves
are peculiarly rigid. There are several species in the
colony, the most noticeable being B. serrata, B. lati-
folia, and B. integrifolia. The turpentine tree
(Syncarpia laurifolia) is one of the finest on the coast
ranges, but is small about Sydney ; and oue
peculiarity of its timber is that it is almost impassible
to burn it. In the swamps can be found the mela-
leuca, a kind of tea-tree, and another most useful plant
is the Similax glycyphylla, or native sarsaDanlla.
The undergrowth of the coast district is of a varied
character, and no particular order of plants prevail. In
the western country (interior) the mallee scrub or
stunted eucalypt abounds. The bark of the acacia is
used by tanners. The native olive (Eloecarpus cyaneus)
has beautiful white flowers, whilst a common shrub
is the “ mock orange,” which has flowers which are
remarkable because of their strong, sweet smell. The
Ceratopetalum gummiferum, which is locally known as
the Christmas bush, grows wild, and can be found in
abundance. The lillypilly and several of the Eugenia
are located here, as also is the Xylomelum pyri-
forme, or “ native pear.” The “ native rose ”
(Boronia serrulata) and similar varieties are
amongst the attractive plants of the smaller
flowering species. The most noticeable are the Crowea
saligna, Correa speciosa, and Philotheca australis.
Among the many interesting and beautiful specimens
of the dwarf vegetation are the Epacideae rustocea and
smaller varieties of the leguminous plants, which
include the Gompholobrium grandiflorum, Pullenaea
flexilis, P. daphnoides, Dillwynia ericifolia, D. llori.
bunda, and the Platylobium formosum. The Bauera
rubioides, a small plant which bears a pink and white
flower, is generally found growing near rocky places or
close to water; and the “flannel flower” (Actimotus
lielianthi) or “ Australian Edelweiss,” which is
found in sandy places, is of the parsley tribe.
There are no true heaths in Australia, the Epacridacene
take their place, and usually they contain an abun-
dance of pretty flowers. Most common are the F. longi-
flora, E. pulchella, E. microphylla, E. paludosa, Lysi-
ncma pungens, and others. There are several classes
of the Grevillea to be found, and in some instances
they are cultivated. The “ honeyflower ” (Lambertia
formosa) is so called because it bears a red flower full
of honey. We have also a native currant (Leptomeria
acida) and a native cherry (Exocarpus cupressiformis),
There are two classes of orchids, the terrestrial and the
ephytal, and to the latter belongs the well known rock
lily (Dendrobium speciosium), so abundant on the
xocks and'" trees about Sydney and along the coast.
Most frequently to bp found of the terrestrial variety are
the species of Thelymitra, Caladenia, and Diuris glo-
sodia; but the most attractive flower of this kind is, per-
haps, the well-known rock lily, Dendrobium speciosum.
Of wild flowers, there are many varied and beautiful
kinds; but owing to the gradual destruction of our
forests and the ravages of holiday-seekers, some of the
rarest are fast disappearing- In the interior there are
native grasses and herbs suitable for pasturage, but a
large number comprise plants of the saltbush kind.
THE AUSTRALASIAN CAPITALS.
SIDNEY.
Sydney, the capital of the parent colony, New South
Wales, was so named in honour of Viscount Sydnev,
who was, at the time of christening, in the Government
of the younger Pitt. It is charmingly situated on the
southern shore of Port Jackson, and was the
scene, on the ever-memorab'e 26th of January,
1788, of the proclamation of British supremacy
over Australia. It was here that Captain
Arthur Phillip, R.N., who was sent out by the Im-
perial authorities to form a penal settlement, landed
with his motley throng, which consisted of about 600
male and nearly 200 female prisoners. The first
encampment was formed at the head of Sydney Cove,
the choice of site having been determined by the
existence of a stream of fresh water running through
the locality into the harbour. For nearly half-a-century
all the commercial business of Australia was transacted
in cr through Sydney, but the total amount in those
davs for the whole of the continent was scarcely a
tithe of what is now done for New South Wales alone.
Those responsible for the laying out of the city had no
conception of what its future greatness would be,
and as a consequence no adequate provision was
made for its natural growth. Sydney occupies
a peninsula, which, on its eastern boundary, from
the south head of Port Jackson to the north head of
Botany Bay is about 13 miles long. The city itself,
which was incorporated in 1842, covers an area of 2bTU
acres. Its greatest length from north to south is 3 3-8
miles, and its greatest breadth from east to west 2 <-8
miles. The total length of streets is about 100 miles;
they are generally narrow and irregular and have a
somewhat old-fashioned appearance. Ihe principal
business thoroughfares, George-street and Pitt-street,
however, contain buildings which for massiveness
and beauty of architecture can scarcely be
excelled. The new Post Office, for instance,
is a splendid structure of the Venetian and Florentine
order, colonnaded on two sides, and, with the exception
of the granite columns, built entirely of Pyrmont
stone. The Town Hall is another magnificent building,
and, when completed, will, in point of public accommoda-
tion, be unsurpassed. Other buildings worthy of mention
are the Colonial Secretary’s Office, the Lands Office, the
Public Works Office, the Museum, the Anglican and
Roman Catholic cathedrals, the Jewish Synagogue,
and the University; the various banks and public
offices are generally built in a most palatial style. The
Parliament Houses and the Mint, in . Macquarie-street,
are relics of a bygone age, and will eventually
give place to buildings more worthy of the importance
of the colony. The new hospital in course of erection
will also be a great addition to the architectural beauty
of Sydney, and it is hoped that new law courts will
shortly replace the present unsightly structure. Govern-
ment House, which is more picturesque than com-
modious, occupies a delightful position between Cir-
cular Quay and Farm Cove. The Botanic Gardens and
the Inner Domain, adjoining, are beautifully laid


out; the reserves m the city occupy altogether about
«00 acres. The water supply is obtained from the
Nepean River. Nearly the whole of the metropolitan
area is reticulated with water-mains. At present all
the sewerage and drainage of the city are emptied into
the harbour, but in the course of a few months the new
liondi sewerage system will be available, and then the
contents will be emptied into the ocean, at a spot between
the harbour and Botany Bay. The wharfage accom-
modation is extensive. It comprises a portion of
" oolloomooloo Bay, the whole of Circular Quay,
the greater portion of Darling Harbour, and
thence, with a few breaks, around various inlets to
Jlorts Dock, the depth of water available
being sufficient almost everywhere for vessels
®t the greatest draught. Sydney forms the
head-quarters of the naval squadron stationed
m Australian waters. Nearly all the outlying suburbs
are reached by means of steam tramways, and those on
the northern shore of the harbour are amply provided
with ferry services. The climate of Sydney is ex-
tiemely mild, the mean annual temperature being
62’6deg. Ihe total population of city and suburbs
according to the last official records, is 346,758.
MELBOUnXE.
Melbourne, the capital of Victoria, is situated on the
northern bank of the Tarra River, between six and
seven miles from its fall into Hobson’s Bar. The city
indeed, extends to the south side of the river: but
the land is flat and suampy, and, as a business
centre, has little in common with the city
proper. Meffiourne, which was discovered about
r ° f the year 1802 - was “amed after
Lord Melbourne; and Port Phillip, a portion of which
is called Hobson s Bay, received its name from the
first Governor of New South Wales. In 1803 Captain
Collins arrived in port with a batch of convicts, intend-
ing to establish a penal settlement on the banks of the
bay; but he formed such an unfavourable opinion of
the locality that he abandoned the idea. In the same
year Mr. Grimes, Surveyor-General of New South
Waxes, sailed up the river Yarra-the rirst trip, pro-
bably made by a white man, and it appears, from the
records available, that 32 years elapsed before the
second white man went on a similar trip. The initial
attempt at settlement was made by the Hentvs of
Launceston, who in 1834 established a whaling station
at Portland Bay; but in the year following John Bat-
man formed a settlement on the western shore of Port
i huiip, and Melbourne practically commenced its
existence from that date. Melbourne begins at the
heaa of Port Phillip, but the city boundaries, which en-
close seven square miles of land, are some distance inland
Ihe streets, which aggregate 100 miles in length are
straight, and run at right angles through the entire
length and breadth of the town; the main thorough-
fares are one chain and a-half wide, but narrow lanes
alternate with them. The chief streets are Collins-
street Bourke-street, Flinders-street, Swanston-street,
and Llizabeth-street, and all are accommodated with
cable tramways. The most noteworthy public build-
ings are the Parliament Houses, the Treasury, the Law
Courts, the University, the Public Library, the National
Museum, the Town Hall, the Mint, and the two Cathe-
drals, the latter not being completed. Some of the
banks, insurance companies, and woolbrokers occupy
magnificent buildings, bluestone and freestone being
the material mostly used. The Governor’s residence
on the south side of the Yana, is a large building
occupying one of the most elevated sites in the
metropolis. Ihe Botanic Gardens, which possess an
area of 109 acres, are most tastefully laid out. The
water supply is obtained from the Yan Yean reservoir,
in a valley among the Plenty Ranges, a distance of 18
“ile® from the c ‘ty. No system of sewerage exists in
any part of the metropolis. The city of Melbourne
which was incorporated in 1842, is encircled by
populous suburbs—some of them, indeed, are termed
cities the number of inhabitants ranging from 5000
to 20,000. Wharfage accommodation for vessels ®f
heavy draught is provided at Williamstown and Sand-
ridge, but vessels of lighter draught proceed up the
larraasfaras the Falls Bridge, and thus land their
cargoes in the heart of the city. The climate of Mel-
bourne is somewhat bracing, the mean annual tempera-
ture being 57'. The total population of Melbourne and
the suburbs is estimated at 371,630.
ADELAIDE.
Adelaide, the capital of South Australia, is situated
on the river Torrens, six miles from the Gulf of St.
\ incent, with which it is connected by railway The
site was selected in 1836 by Colonel William Light
Surveyor-General and Commander of the Rapid, who
named the city after Adelaide, Queen of William IV.
In December of the same year Captain John Hind-
marsh, R.IS., arrived with immigrants, and
entered into formal possession as first Governor.
Ihe city is built nearly in the form of a square, and
occupies a delightful position on a large plain, hemmed
m on the east by the Mount Lofty range of mountains,
which are about five miles distant. The city of Ade-
laide was incorporated in the year 1842, its total area
exclusive of reserves, being 1042 acres. The city is
divided by the Torrens River into two parts, the North
and the South. The former is the residential portion
and the latter the chief commercial centre. The means
of communication between the two divisions are ample,
the river being spanned by four iron bridges. The
streets, the total length of which is 80 miles, run at
right angles. The handsomest thoroughfare is Kino-
u llliam-street, which is two chains wide. Rundle and
ILndley streets are the principal business thorou°-h-
-fares, each being a mile long and a chain
wide. Many of the public and private offices and
but dings are of great architectural beauty, the Town
Hall, the Post and Telegraph offices, the” Government
offices, Parliament Houses, &c„ being especially notice-
able. The Governor’s marine residence is delightfully
situated at Glenelg, and his country villa on the
ilount Lofty Range is termed the Government farm.
Ihe public reserves are very extensive, the grounds
known as “ Park Lands,” surrounding the Botanic
Gardens, alone covering over 1900 acres; the total area
of reserves, &c., amounts to about 2610 acres. ' The
gardens are exquisitely arranged and kept in a beauti-
ful condition. The water supply is obtained from two
large reservoirs a few miles distant from the eastern
portion of the city, every dwelling being connected
with the mains. . The horse tramways render the
means of communication betwten the city and suburbs
ea-\ and pleasant. Port Adelaide occupies a low
marshy position, and a bar at its entrance prevents
large vessels entering from the Gulf of St. Vincent.


The annual mean temperature is 61*5 deg. The
total estimated population of Adelaide and the suburbs
is 127,000.
BRISBANE.
Brisbane, the capital of Queensland, is situated on
the banks of the river Brisbane, which surrounds it
on two sides. It was founded as a penal settlement in
1825, and named in honour of Sir Thomas M.
Brisbane, the then Governor of Australia. In
1842 the establishment was abolished, and
the country thrown open to free settlers.
In the same year a steamer, belonging
to the A. S. N. Company, visited Brisbane for the first
time. The city of Brisbane, which is about 25 miles
distant from the entrance to Moreton Bay, was incor-
porated in the year 1859. Its area is about 2000 acres,
and the total length of streets is about 70 miles. The
six principal streets are Ann-street, Adelaide-street,
Queen-street, Elizabeth-street, Charlotte-street, and
Mary-street, all running in a north-easterly direction.
The thoroughfares are generally of good width, and the
roads well made. The northern and southern
portions of the city are connected by the Vic-
toria Bridge, a magnificent iron structure,
with swing openings for the passage of
ships. Some parts of the city are 100 feet
above mean sea level. Brisbane possesses many
handsome and commodious buildings, chief among
which may be mentioned the Parliament Houses, the
Post-office, the Vice-regal lodge, the Museum, the Law
courts, and the Town Hall. The more wealthy
corporations and public companies, as well as
private merchants, also occupy spacious and ele-
gant offices. The wharfage accommodation is extensive,
and ample for the requirements of the port In the
Botanic Gardens, which are tastefully laid out and well
kept, tropical and semi-tropical trees grow luxuri-
antly. The water supply for the city is obtained from
a large artificial lake in the ranges near the head of
Enoggera Creek, about seven miles from the city, the
area of the watershed being 7000 acres. A thorough
system of drainage exists all over the city. The annual
mean shade temperature of Brisbane is about 70 deg.
The total population of the metropolis is estimated at
51,683.
PERTH.
Perth, the capital of Western Australia, is pictu-
resquely situated on tbe Swan River, 12 miles above
Fremantle. This portion of the colony was first taken
pos-ession of by Major Lockyer and a detachment of
the 39th Regiment, in the year 1826, but no settlement
worthy of the name took plaee until three years
afterwards. In 1829 Captain Fremantle hoisted the
British flag near the mouth of the Swan
River, at a spot where Fremantle now stands.
On the 12th of August, in the same year, a
party of colonists from England, attracted by the offer
of extensive grants of land, practically founded the
present capital and commenced the work of colonisa-
tion. The first assignment of land in Perth was made
on the 27th of September, 1829. In 1850 the colo-
nists forwarded a petition to the Home Government to
make Swan River a convict settlement. The authori-
ties readily acceded to the request, and during the suc-
ceeding 18 years sent out no less than 10,000 convicts.
In 1868, however, in deference to the unanimous wish
of the whole of Australia, transportation from Eng-
land was stopped. Perth, was constituted a muni-
cipality in 1856, and created a city in 1880.
The city is fairly laid out, and the streets are wide
and regularly formed, the main street running east and
west, being planted with trees for a distance of two
miles. There are some imposing buildings in the
city, the chief being the two Cathedrals, the Town
Hall (built entirely by convict labour), Government
House, and the Legislative Council Chamber. The
mean annual temperature of Perth is 64 deg.
The total estimated population, according to the latest
official returns, is 5822.
HOBART.
Hobart, the capital of Tasmania, is situated on the
west bank of the river l7 miles from
the ocean, at the southern end of the island. It was
founded by Colonel Collins, on the 19th of February,
1804, and, in honour of Lord Hobart, the then Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies, was named Hobart
Town. The second word was, however, for a long time
considered superfluous, and a few years ago an Act of
Parliament was passed to abolish it. Hobart, which is
built on a succession of hills, occupies a sheltered
po-ition at the foot of Mount Wellington. The city,
which was incorporated in the year 1857, contains an
area of 1270 acres and possesses 36 miles of
streets. Tbe latter are wide and intersect each other
at right angles. The chief thoroughfares are Elizabeth-
str.et, Collins-street, Macquarie-street, Liverpool-streat,
and Murray-street; all the roads are excellently made,
convict labour having been utilised to the utmost ex-
tent in the early days of settlement. There is a
number of fine public buildings in the city, especially
Parliament Houses and the Town Hall. Government
House occupies a delightful position on the banks of
the Derwent, and the .Botanic Gardens, adjoining, are
in the summer time a marvel of beauty. The chief
reserres are the Domain, of 1000 acres, and the Royal
Society’s Gardens, of 25 acres. Water is obtained
from springs on Mount Wellington, where it is stored
in a large reservoir, and thence conveyed to the city
and suburbs. The wharf and dock accommodation are
ample, and probably in excess of requirements. Hobart
is a favourite resort of Australian tourists, the mean
annual temperature being only 55'41deg. The total
estimated population of Hobart and the suburbs is
29,400.
WELLINGTON.
Wellington, the capital of New Zealand, is situated
on the shores of Port Nicholson, an inlet of Cook’s
Strait, at the southern portion of the North Island. Up
to 1865 Auckland held the premier position of capital
city, but in that year the seat of govern-
ment was transferred to Wellington on ac-
count of its central position. Wellington was
founded by the New Zealand Company in 1840.
The city has an area of 1100 acres and contains 37
miles of streets. The majority of the chief public
buildings of the colony ars located here, the most
remarkable being the Government offices, . which
comprise probably the largest wooden structure in the
world. Few of the public buildings or offices have
any pretensions to architectural beauty, the liability of
the island to earthquakes rendering it advisable to use
as much wood as possible in preference to stone or
bricks. The harbour is about six miles square, and
the wharfage accommodation is very extensive. Horse


tramways are in use in the city. The mean annual
temperature of the North Island is 58*3 deg. The
total estimated population of Wellington, according to
the latest available returns, is 25,945.
NOMENCLATURE.
THE MOTHER COLONY.
For one hundred years this colony contentedly
carried the cumbrous name given to it at its birth to
civilisation by Captain Cook, who saw, or fancied he
saw, on the coastline, some resemblance to the south of
Wales. The colonists were too intent at first at
making a living, and afterwards on achieving
wealth, to think of the more ambitious object of
making a nation. So it did not matter much to them
by what name they were called. But the approach of
the Centenary begot many new aspirations, and fore-
most amongst them—at least in many minds—was
the desire for a name of pleasanter sound and that
. would lend itself to the terminology of national life.
Ihe inventive genius #f the colony exhausted itself
over the selection, and Sir Henrv Parkes stepped in
with the barren result that is n6w known far and
wide.
THE YOUNGER COLONIES.
As for the younger colonies, three of them
rejorne in names that are at once euphonious and
easily handled. Victoria honours the Sovereign
within whose reign she has sprung front °a
wilderness into a vigorous and wealthy State. Queens-
land is equally loyal, though perhaps not quite so easiiy
turned round the tongue. Tasmania runs so smoothly
in all its forms that, if the people owning it have little
interest in the discoverer from whom they received the
name, they ought at least to be grateful for their escape
from being Dutched “Van Diemenslanders.” New
Zealand, named by the same discoverer, sounds pleasantly
enough, though it is utterly devo.d of significance
to those most interested. The awkwardness of South
Australia and Western Australia is at least redeemed by
geographical fitness. J
DISTINGUISHED ENGLISHMEN.
Earl Sydney, Lord Melbourne, Governor Brisbane
Dowager Queen Adelaide, Lord Hobart (Secretary
of State ior the Colonies at the time), and the
Iron Duke were laid under contribution for the
very fitting names of the chief cities. Nor is there
much room for rechristening any of our principal ports.
Earl Moreton, president of the Roval Society had
claims of strong friendship towards the discoverer for
the honour of giving name to Queensland’s great Gate-
way, and Governor Phillip had an immeasurably stronger
right in connection with the port of Melbourne.
Ine Derwent is not unworthy of its Cumber-
land namesake, whilst Port Adelaide took natur-
ally the name of the city it served. In connection with
Port Jackson there is a striking example of the early
creeping in of errors as to derivation. Until recently
the honour of giving name to one of the finest
harbours in the world was credited to an
ordinary seaman named Jackson, who was sup-
posed. to have seen it from the foretopmast of
Laptam Cook s ship as it sailed by. It is pretty
certain that somebody must have seen it under some
euch circumstances, for it is marked on Cook’s chart
But it has since been discovered from the Admiralty
records that nobody of the name was on Cap-
tain Cook’s ship at the time, and that in itself
seems fatal to . the old derivation. Besides, it is
known that Sir George Jackson, Secretary to
the Admiralty, had greatly befriended Cook, and
the natural and now accepted conclusion is that
the name was given in his honour. Limits of space
will only allow the barest mention of the West Austra-
hnn port named after Captain Fremantle; Carpentaria,
after Captain Pieter Carpenter, a commander in the
service of the Dutch East India Companv ; the Bar of
Auckland, after Lord Auckland; Bass "Straits, after
the surgeon of that name, who first sighted the pas-
sage ; and Torres Straits, after the lieutenant of that
name serving under the Spanish de Quiros. The
neighbourhood of Captain Cook’s landing has tena-
ciously held to names of his bestowing—Suther and
i oint, after one of his seamen, who was buried there
Scarborough, Sandringham, and Botany Bar.*
But the last mentioned is an instance of
the overwhelming power of association. The name
had scarcely travelled over England till it became
divested of all its floral beauty, and degraded to
the lowest of all uses as a bogey with which
to frighten refractory children. The names of dis-
tinguished Englishmen, and of many a well-known
British landmark, have been reproduced on our older
counties and towns and on our rivers and plains.
Lord Ilawkesbury was honoured at the discovery of the
hrst river, though three separate discoveries of higher
Pf.™ * he Bame stre am later on led to the names
U ollondilly and Warragamba (from the natives), and
Nepean, after Sir E. Nepean, of the Admiralty, getting
a share of the honour. Sir Robert Peel had also
a river allotted to him, and the principal town
on its banks, Tamworth, was called after
his electorate. . Earl Bathurst had his name
borrowed for a river, a lake, a metropolitan street, and
one of our principal inland towns; whilst Captain
Cook, who opened the door to the whole territory, has
had a port, a ward ef the city, a whole county/and a
river which is only distinguished by his discoverv of
xt, called after him.
THE early GOVERNORS.
The early Governors came in for the lion’s share
ot the honours of nomenclature. Governor Phillip’s
memory rests not only on the great port already
referred to, but on a street, a ward, and a county.
Captain Hunter owns a county, a river (whose
former name of “Coal Itiver ’’ gave place out of pure
regard to his claims), a street in Sydney, and the prin-
cipal thoroughfare of Newcastle. Governor King has not
only furnished the name of a county, but of our principal
cross street, and doubtless many a hard-pressed debtor
has blessed him for a King-street to “go up.” Cap-
tain Bligh is remembered at least by the street and
county bearing his name; and as for Governor Mac-
quarie, the difficulty is to turn the eye in any direction
without seeing traces of the peculiar architecture of his
time, to say nothing of the aristocratic street, the city
ward, the county, the river, and the very beautiful
lake, all doing devotion to his name. >Sir Thomas M.
Brisbane has the. usual honours of street, ward, and
county, and has this added above all that his name is
on the capital of Queensland. Sir Charles Darling-
goes on for ever, though a little sluggishly at mid-
summer, in the magnificent river in the west of the


colony; tc is thought of again into -J* £1
magnificent ar mr asSoo ; a ted with somo
TL richest pastes o£ Queensland. Gouetuot
Bourke has a street, a ward, a county, a town, an
Bourse George Gipps has a street and a ward
monument. cLdnev but his governorship is
places namS had to be found from one or other of
fi? sources —importation, native nomenc ature or-
“S ZIL of all—the inventive genius of the
settlers. Amongst the imported names not yet men-
tioned, there were good and bad dl ° 3 ™- c f
the best are—Newcastle, for our principal coal district,
Maitiand Grafton, Clarence, Hastings, Inverell,
Liverpool, Goulburn, Albury, Milton, Camden, Pa
dington, Waverley.
native names.
Our attitude to native names has been some-
thin- like our treatment of the natives themselves
We °have been too intent on the wor o
settlement to spare eitner appreciation or humane
feeling for the poor aborigines. Yet many of their dames
are beautiful and appropriate. It would ■
nossible to improve upon such names as Illawarra,
Kiama Arrawatta, Killara. Fortunately we can point
to “Manly” as an instance of our recognition of good
Qualities in the original owners of the soil, though
even this has been threatened with disuse in favour of
the borrowed name New Brighton. Our contemptuous
treatment of native names might find some show of
excuse if we substituted better ones. But what can be
said for such attrocities as Trunkey Creek, suggested
hy aesthetic association with an abnormally-nosed
shepherd ; Tom Ugly’s Point (corrupted from the
native “ Wo-erly ”); our Devil’s Pinches, and Pinch-
guts Dirty Butter Tracks, and Dough-boy Hollows;
Hr Cow, Cockatoo, Larry’s, and Bluegum Flats; our
Ve-etable, Felled Timber, and Saucy Creeks; our Go-cups,
Snaphooks, Keepits, and Puddledocks; and, worst ot
all our Vincent’s Holes and Hell Holes. As a point
£’our favour, it must be noted that we have not gone
far amiss in calling places after our own name*
Beyond a Wentworth, Lawson, Blax and, Hay, Robert
son! and Parkes, there has been little development in
this direction, always excepting the wide range of
toadyism to be suspected in the naming of the very
Stive little village of Smithfield. Credit may also
be taken for such names as Rosehill, gracefully surren-
dered for the native name Parramatta; G.eenhills,
which had to give place, through building transformer
tions, to Windsor; Moss Vale, Waratah, Erma, and
Emu.
THE PRESS.
EARLY VENTURES.
The growth of Australia has been almost syn-
chronous with the growth of the Press. For many years
—almost a century, indeed—before the settlement
upon the shores of Port Jackson, the newspaper was
known in England through various periodical
productions. The Morning Chronicle was published in
1769, the Morning Post in 1781. It was not till 1/
however, that a newspaper which stood on fi™grou
sprang into existence. In that year the Lon-
don Time, was first published, although it
i j • i._ j three years before under the
title oTthe Daily Universal Register ; so that the colony
of New South Wales and the most important news-
paper in Great Britain are of precisely the same age.
The Times very speedily demonstrated the
of power which lay in the Press even m that early
dawn of its existence, though few indeed of the state
r\s fViaf timp could have dreamt of the
men or pressmen of that tune couiu nav
mighty proportions to which the power of the Press
was to grow in these latter days of its _ pros-
npritv Itwas not long before the rulers of the infant
colonv of New South Wales perceived tho im P
t h e p ress as a factor at any rate m tne
diffusion of information, if not in the formation
and Lection of opinion. Fifteen years after
the foundation of the colony the Sydney
Gazette and New South Wales 4di;erftser appMTCd.
so that in celebrating the Centenary of New South
Wale, we are only 15 years short of h« “ntoary of
the establishment of the Press m Syiney. Jhis h»t
print was, a, might be ejected, a very faint fo»
shadowing of the greatness of its mcceesom. It »
nrinted bv George Howe, a Creole, to whom the
Government paid £6O a year for the work and was^ t e
official oro-an of the Government. It lasted 4) ye. ,
not without its own small ambitions, one of which was
to appear as a daily. A copy of it at the present day is
rare enough to be regarded as a literary curiosity.
The Government Gazette, issued in 183-, took its
place as the Government organ, a position it
has ever since occupied. Tasmania followed
the example of New South Wales in when tho
Derwent Star first made its appearance on the literary
horizon. This interesting little pioneer paper was
printed by one George Clark, who on account apparently
of differences among the proprietary, three years( after;
wards in 1813, founded an opposition paper called the
Van Land Gazette, which three years
afterwards again was followed by the Hobart
Town Gazette, produced by Mr. Andrew Bent
it lasted nine years and then suddenly
collapsed. The next colonial paper appeared on
Se 14th October, 1824, with the auspicious title
‘f the Australian, and ante the dmtmgmAed
management of William Charles Wentworth afte-
hand of an assassin. In the same year Sir Thomas
Brisbane had granted liberty of the Press to New
South Wales and the opportunities for vigorous and
tadepenlent utterance afforded by thi. too. were
u«ed by the young and able conductors of the
new paper. The Australian was followed by the
MonitJr m 1826, conducted by Edward Smith Ha
In 1827, the free speaking of the new papers prov g
distasteful to the ruling powers, Gcneral Darlmg a d
the Council passed “An Act for preventing tne
mischief arising from printing and publishing
newspapers 0 of a like nature by .persons
not known, and for regulating the prmtingandpub-
lication of such papers in other respects, and also for
restraining the publishers from the publication _of
WasphemLaud seditious articles.” Aiter eustammg


With the Government for a short
tune the Australian and the Monitor finally succumbed
In 182 P 9'two" ° f G ° Vemment and im&TSS
In 1829 two new papers were started in Tasmania the
Launceston Advertiser and the Cornxvall Press
flrcT 1831 ' T April 18th ’ the Sydney Morning Herald
?, l. ppe K,' d -“? d ! r ““ ofthi SydJ?£Zu-
£<rrsr d b? Mesi ”- w ’ rf r„Zi
ESSLJXSJ the ?
Lan f founded and Edited'the CeloS'S^arW
of J > t7 ’ several . hmes for himself the distinction
of condemnatmn for libel. The Atlas followed in
844, and numbered among its staff of contributors
S d 'S i“-
uu“ r £ ®r 1,1 “» d “ ad « ™“eedlgW3T qS*.'
-he Shipping Gazette, 1843-60- l/iv. rZ '
Sydney, established in 1845 ’ J? f *
the MaiZ in 1872 in ° orporate d
he People, 1847-9- and 1L p ! , . ? ds o/
n 1848 TJiq q j ’ , r , 7 Peoples Advocate,
t «.« T ?- Sy< l nei/ Matl was established in 1860
t the suggestion of the late Mr. Charles T '
equalled only by the * e °° ravers ™rk
no-land Th/d ' * b#3t „ lllustra ted journals in
V a - Th ® departments of the Mail embrace a
•mestic circle find a
“oS toSS'LEf p ¥X d iE
h.d by th. proprietors of the S TZfalToi
;ablishment of the Mr.ii . atct ’ on rne
at journal The MnlirewetaZlsZT’™*' 1 ™
aducted till « f -i *** losw, and was
t .S"a7 ‘nmi’eirirw^'T-7 , u hipl ° t,1 '“™'
T whS “a” 7 i isoontiaue^ u i twi°S;
t Bennett b?
rVo swr »
;--.in*
“ d th.'zni“ .sr s ] r
active bv.beineTOnS with 1 " m “ Me mad «
other mlSr 7.ZdL " L"*"' °“ g !” aI attic!e *-
ESSgSS
% an evening i?T . °
eetionist party in Now Smith wJu,. ° £ th ®
THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD
he Sydney Morning Herald is the oldest daily news _
r m Australia, and the journal Jh/T 7
most identical with that of New SoutfTw
kftsksrSs
* p p n iecid xt was issued as a bi-weekly
published on Mondays and Thursdays- in Ifiqr if
advanced to the Dositinn o<- • ~ in wa s
kL\ F £ia “£Lft Z 1 *“ “oi
zhx “i- ™ pu S2ZX ft uT
late Mr.^OhMl^JolTn^rf.j 18 ;*^ 6 * 1 ll,e
t \Z Isl - -
bjfttanftZtaft oft bee ” publi ’ h « d
f ,h. A
E ; ?rSSsS
columns. Th o ft?,,!;. SP “ iol " tic,es for its
s?
i£?F£^==S
have also represented th« Sp
occasions nnri P d the paper on important
present at Tlo reFeSeD f tat 4 Ve3 ° f tha Herald were
and at lITTo If ? Ulgaria ’ in the Soudan,
the nLreT of ? ff ° rd Special descriptions of
the Eusso-Turkish V War was* Mn'TSahl '“Sf
wTept pace^with* Mornin9 He ™ ld
2dL?& r rsMLi&
machia. made ftftftftft/
th.««,hnte , Naplet a,d the one-cvlinder Brown’
SS Lat” T ft' d “‘? ia »‘l>er part, of 7ft
Eng,and, ordorft two dUl!“f“dX
■ton. eng.no,. Thus came th, tat prlntta?ftftZ
portation
machines, which were superseded SI X, °* vlinder
ance, „„ w a, wo,hi.
the
nemid, the Sydney Mail, and the Echo. The motivl
gin^fthekt 8 / 3 °tf - f ° Ur Steam 6ngines and four ga B en-
fn ®\ t e lat . ter bein g m ost in use, the former behU held
n readiness in case of emergency. Jour Hoe and Po’s
web-printing and folding Sachin,,, one V°cftwl
printing and folders, with special machines amf . r
•nc, for the production of P illu s tr«ed pa L r s ft
for P ’mo"ldi'„T! d n d from f ‘ ler “? P “ plat,s ' tha »PPamas
n.od.r„ OUI i d n “ S „,“ d “SS.-'SJ*"*' «>» ™t
take credit for keepin* in .J & fairl^
aceordlD g to the pressure upon its columns
OTUR NEW SOUTH WALES JOURNALS.
- SUT3HT.« SZ


trated. The Bulletin is an illustrated weekly
paper combining political and society news. Sun-
day newspapers, though common enough in other
countries, were unknown to Australia until very re-
cently, when two Sunday journals appeared almost
simultaneously, and are now published in Sydney
every Sunday morning. Religious papers have
long been published in Sydney. For many years
the Australian Churchman was an exponent of
the views of the Anglican Church in Sydney,
but has latterly ceased publication. The Freeman’s
Journalis a long-established representative of the Roman
Catholics. Another organ of similar views is the Nation.
The Presbyterian is an advocate of the Presbyterians,
and evangelical (undenominational) religion has an
organ of its own in the Christian World. The
Record is published in the interests of the Church
of England. The New South Wales Independent
is the organ of Congregationalism; and the
Baptist represents the Baptist denomination. The
Weekly Advocate is the recognised exponent of the
Wesleyan Church. The Protestant Standard is a
vigorous free-lance journal, unconnected officially with
any Church. has an organ in the Free-
masons’ Journal. The remainder of the metropolitan
publications are devoted to trades and professions;
agricultural, medical, shipping, commercial, mer-
cantile, licensed victualling, and theatrical interests.
Country journalism is remarkably active in New South
Wales; there is not a town of importance through-
out the colony which does not possess at least one
paper, and the number sometimes ranges from one to
five and six. Among provincial papers of import-
ance are the Maitland Mercury, the Goulburn Herald,
the Bathurst Free Press and the Times, the Newcastle
Chronicle and Herald, the Dubbo Dispatch, the
Wagga Wagga Advertiser, and the Albury Banner.
Certainly ,if a profusion of journals and
general journalistic activity are any reliable index
of popular intellectual briskness and literary appetite,
there are few countries in the world which approach
Australia in this respect. As a rule, the country
papers reach a creditable standard of merit in tone and
ability; some of them bear favourable comparison
in these respects with the metropolitan papers. Many
of the suburban papers circulate largely in the city as
well as in the district in which they are printed. The
total number of country and suburban papers in New
South Wales is 150, a number which is constantly in-
creasing. « If a new gold or silver mine is discovered, the
enterprising printer, who sometimes adds in his own
person the position of editor, turns up with his plant
almost as soon as the miner has his battery erected,
and the fortunes of the paper fluctuate with those of
the field. If that is permanent, the paper is bound to
be so; if the field is easily worked out, the paper
shares its fate and perishes for lack of clients. The
agricultural and pastoral districts, however, afford
permanent support to the papers published within
them, some of which are of large size and in the pos-
session of considerable resources. Other papers pass an
existence which is a perpetual struggle against ex-
tinction ; but in the end perseverance and the increase
of population enable them to triumph.
JOURNALS OF THE OTHER COLONIES.
The neighbouring colony of Victoria is also
remarkable for the number and character of its
journals, metropolitan and provincial. In 1838
Mr. John Pascoe Fawkner made the first attempt at
newspaper publication in Melbourne. The Melbourne
Advertiser was the name of this novel effort, which
consisted of a sheet of foolscap in manuscript, 32 copies
of which were circulated. This crude effort was con-
tinued for two months, when the arrival of some news-
paper requisites enabled Mr. Fawkner to bring his
paper out in type. It is rather painful to learn that on
account of neglecting to comply with the existing
press laws this auroral publication was suppressed,
and before it could be again published the field was
“jumped ” by a rival paper, the Port Phillip Gazette.
The pioneer editor, however, entered the field, and a fierce
competition ensued between the two papers. Interest-
ing as these records are of early colonial journalism,
they can only be glanced at. Both these papers, to-
gether with the Daily News, went as tributary streams
to swell the power of the Melbourne Aigus. This, the
most important paper in the southern capital, was first
published in 1846. After a somewhat languishing
existence for a few years, the gold discoveries in Vic-
toria, which gave such an impetus to the progress of
that colony, performed a like service for the Argus.
The Age was first published in the middle of
the golden days of mining in Victoria, in 1854.
The Melbourne Daily Telegraph has been published
since 1869. The Melbourne Herald was started
as a morning paper, but was afterwards trans-
formed into an evening publication. The Australasian,
a weekly, is issued from the Argus office, which
also publishes the Sketcher, an illustrated monthly
paper. The Leader, also a weekly paper, and the
Illustrated Australian News, an illustrated monthly, are
issued by the Age proprietary. A considerable number
of religious and miscellaneous journals is published iu
Melbourne. The total number of suburban and pro-
vincial papers published in Victoria is 160.
The Moreton Bay Courier was the first paper pub-
lished in Queensland, issuing as a four-page weekly.
It is now the Brisbane Courier, a leading daily paper.
The Daily Observer, an evening paper, is published in
Brisbane by the same proprietary. The Brisbane
Telegraph, another evening daily, founded in 1872, is
one of the most widely circulated of Queensland
papers. The Queenslander, a well-known weekly
journal, issues from the office of the Brisbane Courier.
The Week, a somewhat similar journal, is published by
the company which owns the Brisbane Telegraph.
The Queensland Figaro, a satirical illustrated
weekly, and the Queensland Leader, an illustrated
paper, are also among the weekly journals
published in Queensland. The Queensland provincial
journals are numerous and- important, numbering
almost 60 journals scattered over the wide extent of
the colony.
The South Australian Register occupies the curious
distinction of having been in existence before the
colony from which it takes its name, the first number
having been printed in London under a different
title in 1836, just previous to the departure for the
colony of its first Governor and instalment of colonists.
It is now known as one ®f the foremost colonial daily
papers. The South A ustralian Advertiser, a morning
daily, has been published in Adelaide since 1858. The
Express and the Evening Journal, two daily evening
papers, also appear in Adelaide. The Observer and


the Chronicle are two weekly papers issued re-
spectively from, the offices of the Register and
the Advertiser. The usual number of religious
and miscellaneous weekly and monthly prints is pub-
lished in Adelaide, and scattered through the colony
are something over 20 provincial papers.
In Tasmania the Launceston Examiner is the oldest
paper, and, after the Sydney Morning Herald, perhaps
the longest established in Australia, having first ap-
peared early in 1842 as a weekly. Since 1877 the
Hobart Town Mercury, established in 1855, has been a
leading Tasmanian daily, having absorbed no less than
five separate publications in its upward course. A
third daily paper, the Telegraph, is published at Laun-
ceston every evening; and the Tasmanian News,
another evening paper, at Hobart. The total number
of papers published in the island colony is 12.
Three daily papers are published in Perth, the West
Australian, the Morning Herald, and the Daily News.
The remaining papers published in Western Australia
are weeklies, and altogether 12 papers are published in
that colony.
In New Zealand, since the Bay of Islands Advocate
appeared in 1840, the progress of journalism has been
almost phenomenal. It has proceeded by leaps and
bounds. Altogether 132 papers are published in New
Zealand, no less than 43 of which are dailies.
THE GOOD OLD TIMES.
The above is a rapid review of the progress of
the Australian Press within the century. As we
have said, there is not a town of importance
throughout the whole of Australasia which does not
possess a newspaper of its own, and the colonial
settlement in which a paper, however bumble and
unpretentious, is not published must be small and
insignificant. In our large cities journals are brought
out whose mechanical resources and staff of writers
entitle them to rank side by side with the greatest
London papers, many of which they equal, if not
surpass, in circulation. Looking at the complex and
perfect machinery which is called into requisition to
Dring out our great newspapers at the present moment,
one looks back with something like a smile to the
time when the Daily Gazette and New South
Wales Advertiser —a copy of which unambitious
sheet may be seen by the curious any day
at the Museum in College-street—was the sole
precursor of the powerful Australian Press of to-
day. It is with something akin to incredulity, too,
that one hears, in these days of the übiquitous rail-
road and the world-traversing cable, of the struggles
between the newspapers, not much more than 30 years
ago, to obtain the first news from the long-expected
vessels from home. The necessities of those times
required the maintenance of a whaleboat, with a crew
of sturdy sailors, in which the representatives of
this journal went for miles outside the Heads to
achieve the coveted feat of climbing up the
side of the incoming vessel and obtaining the
home news first. This struggle was con-
tinued at the other end of the continent when the
telegraph first connected Sydney and Glenelg. In
the same way, in the gold era of Victoria, the Mel-
bourne Argus maintained a atoreship in the Bay, on
which a reporter lived, with a cook, a steward, and a
crew of 14 men, for the express purpose of being
rowed out to the home vessels, and obtaining
his budget of news. The reporter is not called
on to undergo such thrilling experiences to-day. They
belong to a past —a return to whose crudities the
advancement of science, here as elsewhere over the
world, has rendered impossible. The path of the press
in theie lands must be still onward and upward. We
may fairly say that the Australian people may be
congratulated that in but few instances has the press
of these colonies been marked by impurity "of
tone or by baseness of motive. As we indi-
cated at the outset of this review, the Centenary of
Australia marks also the centenary of the establish-
ment of the London Times, with which the Press as an
institution of the civilised world began.
THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE PRESS.
Looking back over the past century, what a * notable
careerof triumph the Press has achieved. It has brought
the light to millions of homes throughout the world, and
has destroyed the shackles in every community in
which it has been allowed to raise its potent voice
without restriction. Entirely a growth of modern
civilisation, without it that civilisation would have
been shorn of half its triumphs. With few exceptions,
and those exceptions in certain directions only, the
voice »f the Press has always been raised on behalf of
the liberty and the amelioration of suffering humanity,
and in fearless defiance of tyranny and injustice. The
best way to conceive of the power and ability
of the Press is to imagine, if that is possible,
what the world would be without it It is
not too bold an assertion to make, that kings may
fall, dynasties change, and Parliaments perish, but the
Press stands on firm and solid ground, and can only
perish with the civilisation which called it into
being, and which it has done so much to increase
and perfect. One of the greatest masters of the
English tongue Newman has expressed his
astonishment at the literary excellence and great
ability of the contributions to the newspaper
press. This is not so remarkable, however,
when it comes to be remembered that the
contributions to every great journal are the
product of the carefully sifted talent of the communi-
ties in which they exist. In respect to the literary
character of the Australian Press, it is not overbold to
say that it falls nowhere short of that of other countries.
The future of the Press in these lands must be one of
advancement. Still will it attract to its ranks
thoughtful and cultured men; its blows will ring
out on the armour of injustice, corruption, and igno-
rance ; and its endeavour will be for nobler manners,
purer laws, till in the beneficent consummation of
things is brought about that “ Parliament of man and
federation of the world ” which at present is only the
far-off vision of the poet
POPULATION.
When Captain Arthur Phillip, on January 26, 1788,
landed on the shores of Sydney Cove, and formally
laid the foundation of the future Australian Empire,
the total number of colonists is said to have been
1030 ; nearly 700 were convicts, the rest being officers,
marines, women, and children. After the lapse of 100
years, the population of the Australian colonies is ap-
proaching 4,000,000 souls. It will be interesting to
notice briefly the steps by which this marvellous progress
has been attained. In its inception the colony of New


r e,em ;r
the convicts t . , too anxious
f a pri :° n ’ ButVo wLom of the authorities in
was directed towards counteracting this
feelin- ' and'endeavours were made to induce genu
ieenn 0 . Encouragement was given to
SS4 and gran W llnd w J mad. to industrious
couples, hut, nevertheless, for many years the natural
increase of the population was of
crease in numbers was due chiefly to the arrival oi
fresh convict ships. The records of those early days were
imperfectly kept, but it is computed that eD
Phillip returned to England in Decembe , ,
population of the colony, including Norfolk Island
which was then a dependency did not exceed 3500
souls. In January, 1793, the first batch of tree
settlers, mostly farming men, arrived m the BeUona.
They settled first at Liberty Plains, but afterward
migrated to the Hawkesbury. Henceforward the
stream of free immigration continued to fl ow,
at first very slowly and in an intermittent manner.
When Governor Hunter left the colony in September,
1800, the population numbered 5547 persons, n
including 961 in Norfolk Island. Governor King
ruled the colony next, and at the expiration o
his term, in 1806, the population was at
about 9000, of whom 7200 were in New South Wales
Governor Bligh remained in office only about three
years, and during his rule the colony continued to ad-
vance in population; but the number of persons in the
colony at the conclusion of his Governorship has not
been left on record.
In the meantime .ettlemeet had been going on m
Tasmania. The first party oE settlers landed mrihat
island in 1803. It consisted of -1 P erß “ 8 ’
of whom 10 men and six women were con-
victs. In the following year another party amvcd,
consisting of 13 officers, 44 marines, and 367 convicts.
In 1805 the settlers at Norfolk Island abandoned that
place, and settled in Tasmania. It was not until the
year 1821 that the first free immigrants arrived at
Hobart Town. Tasmania, or Van Diemen a Land, as it
was then called, was considered as part of the col °J\ y
of New South Wales, being governed by a Lieutenant-
Governor, subordinate to Governor Macquarie. lhis
viceroy several times caused “musters” of the popula-
tion Jbe made, or in other words took a rough census.
In March, 1810, the total population, including las-
mania, consisted of 11,590 persons. In October, 18-1,
Se number had increased to 38,778. During the
Governorship of Sir Thomas Brisbane, Tasmania became
a separate colony, the number of convicts m the island
then being nearly 6000. When Governor Brisbane
left the colony at the end of 1825, the population of
New South Wales alone was estimated at 33,67 o per
sons. During the next six years, while Governor
Darling ruled, the colony continued to increase steadily
in population' The first regular census was taken
by order of this Governor, in 1828, and the number of
colonists was found to be 36,598. In 183 , w en
Governor Darling returned to England, it had mounte
up t« 51,155. During the rule of Governor Bourkethe
census was taken twice—in 1833, when the population
numbered 60,794; and in 1836, when the number had
increased to 77,096. No less than 1621 immigrants
arrived in New South Wales during 1836 of whom 808
were assisted by the State. Sir Richard Bourke left for
England in 1837, and in the end of that year the
population was estimated at 85,267 souls. .
Transportation to New South Wales came to an end in
1839, during the rule of Governor Gipps, who succeeded
Sir Richard Bourke, in 1838. The tatal number of
convicts sent to this colony from its foundation to the
arrival of the last convict ship, the Eden, in November
1839, was 59,788; 51,082 were males and 870 b
females. Transportation to Van Diemen b Land
was continued until 1853, up to which period 67,655
convicts had been sent to that island ; 50,042
were males and 11,613 females. From that period to
1868 convicts were sent to Western Australia
alone, that colony having received 9718, all males.
Western Australia, it may be mentioned, was the third
colony of the Australian group in point of formation.
The first settlement on the westward coast was made
in 1825, but it was not until 1829 that the» colony
of Western Australia was proclaimed. In 183 U tne
colonv possessed 850 inhabitants, and the number
had doubled in 1834. The colony of South Australia
was not founded until 1836. The first settlers arrived
there in July of that year, and the colony was pro-
claimed in December. At this time settlement had
already commenced in the Port Phillip district, an
in November, 1836, the population consisted of 18b
males and 38 females.
increase of immigration.
The rule of Sir George Gipps, which lasted from
1838 to 1846, was marked by a great increase or im-
migration to the colony. In the year 1841 no less
than 23,200 immigrants arrived, the largest number m
one year during the whole of the colony s history
Of this number 8548 went to Port Phillip, which was
still a portion of New South Wales. The population
of the colony at the end of 1841 amounted to 149 669
persons. At the end of 1846 it had increased to
196 704, and the same rate of progress continued
duri'nsr the term of office of Sir Charles h itzroy, until
the year 1851, when the memorable discovery of gold
precipitated Australia into a nation. The separation of
the Port Phillip district and its erection into the colony
of Victoria took place the same year; nevertheless at its
close the population of New South Wales atone num-
bered 197,068, and at the end of 1854, when Sir
Charles Fitzroy retired, the number had mounted up
to 251 315 It is computed that nearly 60,000 immi-
grants’arrived in the colony during this Governor s
term of office. During the rule of his suc-
cessor Sir William Denison, the northern part
of New South Wales was formed into a
separate colony under the name of Queensland
occurred in the year 1859. At
population of the colony numbered 342,062 at the
end of 1859 the population of New South Wales alone,
after the severance of Queensland amounted to
336,572 persons. At the end of 1860,just before Sir
William Denison’s departure, the number had reachea
348,546. Sir John Young became Governor of
New South Wales in 1861, and at the end
of that year there were 357,978 inhabitants
of the colony, of whom 201,574 were males
and 156.404 females. When Sir John retired, at the


i??-,’o n th 9 population had increased to
444,( 09, *.43,131 of whom were males, and 201,578
females. Lord Belmore, who succeeded to the
Governorship, remained in office until early in 1872.
At the end of the previous year there were 282,846
“ a . e . 3 . o and 234,912 females in the colony, or a total of
517,758. A census of all the Australasian colonies
had, however, been taken in February of the same
year, and this gives us an opportunity of comparing
the population of the whole of these colonies, and of
ascertaimng the grand total. Victoria headed the list
with 731,528 souls, 401,050 being males and 330,478
females. New South Wales came next, with 503,981,
J 70,051 of whom were males and 228,430 females.
Ihe next in order was New Zealand, the European
population of which numbered 256,393, of whom
there were 150,336 males, and 106,037 females. It is
computed that there were at the same time 37,502
Maons m New Zealand. South Australia stood fourth
° n ’ QA o!’o W 1 i h 1 ? 5,626 P ersons » 95,408 being males
and 90,218 females. Queensland came next, with
andT ° f i l2 °’ lo i/ consisting of 71,767 males
hiJ ale9 ’ , The CO W of Tasmania num-
ered 101, 785 people, of whom there were 53,911
males and 47,874 females. Last of all came Western
Australia, the population of which was only 25,353
being 15,565 males and 9788 females. The grand
total of white population in the whole of Australasia
1063*008 0 ’ ? Wh ° m the males numbered
1,063,608 and the females 861,162.
Sir Hercules Robinson eommenced his rule as
Governor of New South Wales in June, 1872. At the
T 0 d r ® f Q tha J ear tne estimated population stood at
243 204* 7 there were 292,015 males and
At the conclusion of his term of
close 1879, the estimated population at the
T°t the previ ° us J ear at 671,888, of whom
365,625 males and 306,263 females. At the end
1879, a few months after the arrival of Lord
Augustus Loftus, the figures had increased to 386,926
males and 322,533 females, or 709,459 in all. The
l «« S i US °u’? 1 thS c l olonies was a * ai n taken in February,
still stnnS 6 • re !u tS shoWed tkat whil ® the colonies
still stood in the same order as in 1871 with
regard to population, the rate of increase had been so
Jreat in New South Wales that it was easy to foresee
toria Sh Th° U d f be ?° re l0 ? g outBtri P her neighbour Vic-
toria. Ihe actual results were as follow Victoria
Jr d > o«o tal P°P ulation of 862,346, of whom there were
45*.,083 males and 410,263 females; New South Wales
So nf / 51 ’, 468 PerS ° nB ’ 411 - 149 being males and
41,319 females; New Zealand had 489,933 inha-
bitants, exclusive of 44,097 Maoris, and of the Euro-
pean population there were 269,605 males and 220,328
females. South Australia had a population of 279 865
of which number there were 149,530 males and 130,335
i? ? 1 Ueon 1 sl o and the population numbered
altogether, 125,325 being males and 88,200
The P°P“ latioa of . Tasmania amounted to
,705 persons, 61,162 being males and 54,543
females. In Western Australia the number had
jjsyjLi! 2^ 7oB ’ i f ciudin& i7 -° 62 mai-
-12,646 females. The grand total for the whole of Auetral-
l 3 2sfiTm ’ 7 f 2 ’ s i° Per T*’ I’4B 1 ’ 485 ’ 916 be “g m *les and
1,256,634 females. Lord Augustus Loftus left
the colony near the end of 1885. At the close of that
?97%00 eBtl , mated Population of New South Wales was ■
fn 7 ’n tT aQd 43 °’ 381 females ’ or 957 > 91d Persons
m all. No census has been taken since 1881, but the
returns f or 1886 have been carefully estimated by Mr.
Coghlan, the Government Statistician, and by making
due allowance for unrecorded departures and other
t e r e “ tS ° f dl »turbance he gives the estimated popula-
tion of the Australasian colonies at the close of that
year as 3,426,562 persons, 1,860,812 beino-
male, ud 1,565,750 females. Victoria stil!
; bl,t ' in 1881 she
• i Qoof 8 “habitants more than New South Wales
in 1886 her majority had fallen to 1077. The relative
positions of South Australia and Queensland had
jfW 1 Jhe last-mentioned colony stood fourth on
the l.st, while South Australia had fallen back to the
J o th p i a ° e ‘ The actual figures for the several colonies
are as follow Victoria. 1,003,043, of whom 531 452
were males and 471,591 females; New South
Zd ksoST ? f 551,343 WGre malea
and 450,623 females ; New Zealand, 589,386
of whom 317,646 were males and 271,740 females •
Queensland 342,614, of whom 201,024 were males
and 141,590 females ; South Australia, 312 758 of
whom 162,980 were males and 149,778 females •
asmama,l37,2ll, or 73,323 males and 63,888
females ; Western Australia, 39,584, of whom 23,044
were males and 16,540 females.
Mr. Coghlan estimates the papulation of the Austral-
asian colonies on the 31st December, 1887, to have
been as follows : —New South Wales, 1,044 000 (an
j Victoria, 1,035,943 . C'ZliS
S' .(fr? 41,828 Maoriea) ; Queensland
140 7??’ Australia, 315,000; Tasmania,
1 Western Australia, 44,532, making a
grand total of 3,543,032 souls. °
The density of the population of Australia, compared
with its area, is computed at 1 person to every square
mile. America has 6 persons to the square mUe
Africa has 17 ; Asia has 46 ; and Europe 87. It has
been computed by Mr. Hayter that the a?ea .f increase
of the population of Australia is 42 per cent, in every
678 nocf the P °P ulatioH in 1001 should
? 27 a 5 9 8 ’° 29 , ; - 59 - vears afterwards it should be
SSw" Jear 2001 “ “ hould bo no leM


NEW SOUTH WALES.
HISTORIC VIEW.
Captain Arthur Phillip (1788-92), first Governor of
New South Wales, was a man of decision of character
tempered with humanity. The fleet, consisting of
11.M.5. Sirius and Supply, six transports having on
board 600 male and 200 female prisoners, and three
store ships, arrived in Botany Bay on 18th and 20th
January, 1788. A regular form of government was at
once established, and Lieutenant Philip Gidley King
and a small party were despatched to colonise Norfolk
Island. In 1791 the second fleet arrived, bringing out
the New South Wales Corps, raised in England for
service in the colony. At the end of 1792 Captain
Phillip resigned, owing to ill-health. He received a
pension of £5OO a year, and died in 1814.
Captain John Hunter, R.N. (1795-1800), com-
menced the practice of allotting convicts as servants to
the settlers. The first school building and the first
place of public worship were erected. Coal was found
at Newcastle and Bulli; and many important dis-
coveries along the coast and around Tasmania were
made. Captain Hunter embarked for England in Sep-
tember, 1800; he was afterwards promoted to the
rank of Rear-Admiral, and died at an old age at
Leith, Scotland.
Captain Philip Gidley King, R.N. (1800-6), who
bad served under Captain Phillip, had evidently but a
low idea of the capabilities of the colony, and left
things to take their natural course. Bushrangers com-
mitted fearful atrocities. A grant of 5000 acres of
land was made to Mr. John Macarthur to facilitate
sheep-breeding, and settlements were formed at New-
castle, Hobart Town, and Port Dalrymple. In 1803
The Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser
was established, and in 1806 there was a calamitous flood
in the Hawkesbury River. Captain King’s administra-
tion was, on the whole, unfortunate for the colony;
but the difficulties of his situation were great. He
died on 3rd September, 1808, at Lower Tooting,
Surrey,
Captain William Bligh, R.N. (1806-8), was a man
of very contradictory character, and raised feelings of
opposition which ended in revolution, the military class
suddenly making him a prisoner. Major Johnston
assumed command as Lieutenant-Governor of the
colony. Captain Bligh was given command of H.M.S.
Porpoise, and sailed for Tasmania. Upon the arrival
of Lieutenant-Colonel Macquarie he returned to Sydney
and was received with honours. In 1811 Major John-
ston was tried by court-martial and was cashiered, and
Captain Bligh was promoted to the rank of Rear-
Admiral.
Lieutenant-Colonel Lachlan Macquarie (1810-21)
brought from England instructions to remove from
power those who had usurped the Government. His
era was the commencement of prosperity. He con-
structed 276 miles of roads, including one across the
Blue Mountains, and erected a large number of public
buildings. He established townships at Windsor, Wil-
berforce, Castlereagh, and Liverpool, and settled many
families of emancipated convicts on small farms. He
favoured land and marine discovery, and tracts of land
in the interior, now rich agricultural and pastoral dis-
tricts, were opened up. He died in England, much
regretted, in 1824.
Major-General Sir Thomas Brisbane, K.C.B.
(1821-25), brought with him a high reputation as a
soldier and a man of science ; but he entrusted the
details of government largely to inferiors. This was
the era of free immigration, and grants of land were
made to immigrants in proportion to the capital they
brought. Convict labour was assigned to them, and
the penal settlements were gradually broken up.
The Monaro Plains were found, and the journey of
Hovell and Hume from Lake George to Bass Straits
was made. Allan Cunningham, the explorer, found a
passage from the upper part of the Hunter district to
the Liverpool Plains ; and the Brisbane Biver—on the
banks of which the capital now stands—was traced to
its source. Trial by jury in civil cases and the
freedom of the Press were established; and Van
Diemen’s Land, or Tasmania, was formed into a separate
colony.
Lieutenant-General Sir Ralph Darling (1825-31)
instituted a Land Board to regulate the granting of
land, and caused the construction of a large number
of roads. A sheep and cattle mania, during which
large stocks were purchased, was followed by a three-
years’ drought, during which time many people were
ruined. A system of water supply was carried into
effect, and a general post office was established. The
Sydney College and the Australian College were
founded. The first steamer was built in the colony ;
and the shipment of horses to India was commenced.
Major-General Sir Richard Bourke (1831-7) was a
man of superior intellectual attainments. He intro-
duced the system of selling Crown lands by public
auction, passed liberal measures for the promotion of
general and religious education, and improved the
constitution of the Courts of Justice. The colony of
Victoria was discovered, and in 1836 a regular Govern-
ment was established. A British Resident was also
appointed to New Zealand. General regret was ex-
pressed at his departure, and a bronze statue was
erected to his memory near the Domain.
Sir George Gipps (1838-46) was a Peninsular
veteran, and was distinguished for great oratorical
powers. The establishment of large banks, and loan
and trust companies brought about a great monetary
•crisis, ending in almost universal failure. The practice
of boiling down the carcases of sheep for tallow
was commenced. In 1842 a Constitution Act for the
better government of New South Wales was passed,
and a Legislature of one House and 36 members was
established. New Zealand ceased to be a dependency
of New South Wales ; and the Sovereign sanctioned a
petition for making Port Phillip a distinct and separate
colony. Leichhardt entered on his explorations and
lost his life. The Clarence River was met with ; Gipps


Land was discovered, and an extensive knowledge of
the country about the Gulf of Carpentaria was ob-
tained. Sir George Gipps died a few months after his
return home in 1847.
Sir Charles Augustus Fitzroy, K.C.H. (1846-55),
held office during a time that was remarkable chiefly
for a vigorous anti-transportation agitation and for
the discovery of gold. The four colonies of New
South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, and South Australia
formed a league to secure the discontinuance of trans-
portation, and were successful. In 1851 Victoria was
formally separated from New South Wales, and in 1853
a bill was passed establishing two deliberative Chambers
—a Legislative Council and a Legislative Assembly.
The first sod of the first Australian railway was turned
by the Governor’s daughter, a steam-postal service was
established, and the inauguration of the Sydney
University took place.
Sir William Thomas Denison, K.C.B. (1855-61), had
been previously Governor of Tasmania, In 1855 the con-
firmation of the New Constitution was announced, and
he was reappointed as Governor-in-Chief, his position
being changed from that of a servant of the Adminis-
tration in England to that of the representative
of her Majesty. A Parliament under the system
of responsible government was formed under Mr.
(afterwards Sir) Stuart A. Donaldson. In 1858 a new
Electoral Act was passed, creating vote by ballot and
instituting manhood suffrage. Telegraphic communi-
cation between Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide was
established, and in 1859 Moreton Bay was formed into
a separate colony under the name of Queensland,
Sir John Young, Bart. (1861-67), had been formerly
Secretary for Ireland. The Felons’ Apprehension Bill
being passed, bushrangers, who were causing much
trouble, were executed or sentenced to imprisonment.
Sir John Robertson’s Land Bill was agreed to, and Mr.
(now Sir Henry) Parkes and Mr. Dailey were appointed
as lecturers to Great Britain with the view of pro-
moting immigration. Ecclesiastical affairs generally
assumed a more settled form, and the Public Schools
Act became law. His Excellency left behind him
lasting expressions of friendship and goodwill.
The Right Honorable Edward Richard, Earl of
Belmore (1868-72), was a member of her Majesty’s
Privy Council. .During the first year of his Govern-
ment H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, who was on a
visit to the colony, narrowly escaped assassination at
the hands of O’Farrell, the Fenian. His Excellency
made tours of the South-western, the Western, and
Northern districts, and in 1871 opened the first Inter-
colonial Exhibition in Prince Alfred Park. At the
close of 1872, in consequence of the failing hea’th of
Lady Belmore, he resigned and returned to England.
Sir Hercules George Robert Robinson, Knt.,
G.C.M.G. (1872-1879), was a man of great ability, and
no Governor ever enjoyed more popularity. He com-
pleted the annexation of the Fiji Islands to Great
Britain upon satisfactory terms to England, and also to
Thakombau, the reputed king. As the result of an
intercolonial conference, the ocean mail service was
reorganised. In 1876 New South Wales was repre-
sented at the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition, and
the victory of Edward Trickett on the Thames secured
for this colony the rowing championship of the world.
His Excellency left Sydney in March, 1879, to assume
the Governorship of New Zealand.
The Eight Hon. Lord Augustus Loftus, C.B.
(1879-1885), resigned the post of Ambassador at St,
Petersburg in order to accept the Governorship of this
colony. He had had upwards of 42 years’ work in the
diplomatic service in various countries of the European
continent. He was received here with marked cordiality
from all classes of society. One of his first public acts
was to open the Sydney International Exhibition of
1879, and in April, 1880, he formally declared it
closed.
The Eight Hon. Lord Carrington, G.C.M.G., our
present Governor, assumed office on the 11th December,
1885, and is one of the most highly-esteemed and
popular men who have yet represented the Sovereign
in New South Wales.
PARLIAMENTARY GOVERNMENT.
THE EARLY YEARS.
The colony of New South Wales, now a self-
governing community in the fullest sense of the term
(compatible with the recognition of Imperial supremacy
in matters touching Imperial interests), began its his-
tory as “ a Crown colony of the severest type.” Be-
tween the foundation of settlement here and the
passing of the Imperial Statute that gave our Consti-
tution the force of law there was an interval of 67
years, which may be divided into three periods. Dur-
ing the first, lasting from 1788 to 1824, almost
absolute powers of government (subject to the con-
trol of the Home authorities) were vested in the
Governor -of the day. During the second, which ex-
tended from 1824 to 1843, the Governor acted with
the advice of a nominated Legislative Council, at first con-
sisting of seven members, and afterwards of 15. During
the third period, from 1843 to the close of 1855, the
affairs of the colony were in the hands of a mixed
Legislative Council. This at first consisted of 36
members, viz., 12 nominated by the Crown, and 24
elected by £2OO freeholders or occupiers of dwelling-
houses of £2O annual value. The elected members
were required to hold as a qualification a freehold of
the clear value of £2OOO, or the yearly value of £IOO.
In 1850 an Imperial statute was passed providing for
the separation of the district of Port Phillip and its
erection into the colony of Victoria. The qualification
for electors in New South Wales was then reduced to
a £IOO freehold, or a £lO household or leasehold, or
the holding of a pastoral license, 'By the same
statute provision was made for constituting Legis-
lative Councils on a similar basis in the colonies
of Victoria, Van Diemen’s Land, South Australia, and
(subject to the condition that a two-thirds majority of
the householders should petition for it) in Western Aus-
tralia also. In later years, bicameral legislatures, with
responsible government, were set up in all these colonies
(except Western Australia) and in the new colony of
Queensland. But no two of the constitutions that
regulate the new order of things agree at all points.
Reverting to New South Wales, and to the three
periods referred to, it was of the first that Wentworth
expressed his belief that this colony was the only
province of the Empire, exclusively inhabited by
Englishmen, “in which there was not at least the
shadow of a free government, as it possessed neither a
Council, a House of Assembly, nor even the privilege
of trial by jury.” In the second period there was.


perhaps, the shadow, but there was nothing more.
In the third there was enough of the substance _ to
whet the appetite of the colonists. It is not surprising
that for years preceding the attainment of free govern-
ment under the new Constitution the cause of popular
liberty was fought for with persistence, and that
elements of bitterness were infused into the struggle.
the preparation of the constitution
The mixed Council did good work in its day. It
contained men of standing and of capacity. Party
feeling was not absent The very constitution
prevented that. But there prevailed a sense of dignity,
an elevation of tone, and a recognition of reponsioility
that at present, under a system to which the
title of “ responsible government ” is technically
applied, are not always conspicuous. It was in the
mixed Council that the draft of our present
constitution was prepared. A committee was appointed,
and the work was done con amove. In the course ot
the proceedings some obnoxious provisions were pro-
posed. The Legislature was to consist ot two
Chambers, and the idea was to create an hereditary
titled aristocracy to supply members for the Upper
House. But an influential agitation directed princi-
pally against these provisions arose out of doors. Pubhc
opinion even then made itself felt. When the bill as
drafted by the committee came before the Council in com-
mittee for consideration, the aristocracy provision was
struck out. It was also agreed that the first members
should be appointed for five years, after which lile
appointments were to be made, unless the law were
altered in the meantime. The bill was read the third
time in December, 1853, and being reserved by the
Governor was sent home under the charge of Mr.
Wentworth, who had taken a foremost part in the
movement, and Mr. E. Deas-Thomson, the Colonial
Secretary.
THE CONSTITUTION BILL IN ENGLAND.
The bill underwent some slight alteration in England,
for in certain respects it trenched upon the province of
Imperial authority, and might have led to difficulties
with other colonies. In the main, however, it was left
unchanged. One of its defects was cured by a special
provision of the Imperial Act which was required to
enable the Queen to assent to the measure. But for
that provision, the colonial Parliament would
have had no power to amend the. Constitution,
except in one or two specified particulars. The
Imperial Act, with the Constitution appended
as a schedule, reached the colony in October, 1855, and
on the 24th November the new order of things was
formally inaugurated by Governor Sir W. T. Denison,
the old Council having been dissolved in the mean-
time.
FEDERATION.
The committee by whom the original draft of the
Constitution was prepared expressed in its report a
strong opinion in favour of the creation of a federal
assembly for the colonies. This idea was not embodied
in the bill. The attention of the Imperial authorities
was, however, given to it, and the Secretary for the
Colonies, in his despatch accompanying the Constitu-
tion, notified their judgment that the time was un-
suitable for carrying it into effect.
THE NEW REGIME.
The proclamation of the new Constitution of the
colony was soon followed by the measures necessary for
the nomination of a Legislative Council and the
election of a Legislative Assembly under it ;
and the first Parliament under responsible
government met on the 22nd May, 1856. The
Parliament created by the new Constitution con-
sisted of two Houses, the Legislative Council and the #
Legislative Assembly; the former nominated by the
Crown, with a Crown-appointed President ; the latter
elective, with a Speaker elected by its members from
amongst themselves. The Council was composed of
not less than 21 members, of whom not more than
one-fifth might be persons holding office of profit
under the Crown. No pioperty qualification was
named. The Assembly consisted of 54 members,
none of whom, except the then recognised members of
the Ministry, or other Ministers, not being more than
five, who might be specified by proclamation in the
Gazette, could hold office of profit under the
Crown. The members of the Government at
the time were the Colonial Secretary, the Colonial
Treasurer, the Auditor-General, the Attorney-General,
and the Solicitor-General. The electors were required
to be either owners of'a freehold of £IOO, £lO house-
holders, occupiers, or leaseholders, persons paying £4O
a year for board and lodging, lodgers paying £lO per
annum, persons in receipt of a salary of £IOO per
annum, and holders of a pastoral license. Persons
qualified to be electors were qualified. to be members,
with the exception of ministers of religion, who were
declared ineligible.
THE CONSTITUTION AMENDED.
By a special provision in the Act no bill altering the
number or apportionment of members of the Assembly
or the constitution of the Legislative Council could
become law unless it were carried by majorities of two-
thirds of the full number of members in each House.
During the first general election .a strong feeling dis-
closed itself in favour of the substitution of an elective
Upper House for the nominated one, and a stronger
feelin (T for the repeal of the “ two-thirds clauses
which°stood in the way of the change. The latter took
effect before three years had passed; but, althougn the
way was thus cleared, and several attempts have been
made by the introduction of bills to alter the constitu-
tion of the Legislative Council, it still remains as at
first. A change under the Constitution has, however,
taken place. The first members were nominated for
five years. In the absence of an amending Act, they
have since the five years been appointed for life.
In the case of the Legislative Assembly, some im-
portant changes have been made. Electoral Acts were
passed in 1858 and 1880, reducing the franchise and
increasing the number of members. Six months
residence in an electorate prior to the collection of the
electoral roll now entitles an adult to have his
name upon it The non-resident, freehold or leasehold,
qualifications are retained, and provide multiple votes
according to the number of electorates wherein they are
held The number of members, which had previously
been increased, was, by the Act of 1880, raised at once
to 108. But provision was also made to give an addi-
tional member to any electorate when its electoral roll
presented a certain increase in the number of names.
Thus, where one member had been returned, two were
to be returned after the electors numbered 3000,
where two had been returned there were
to be three after the number reached 5000.


and for three there were to be four when the
ZltTth Va f 800 °; ’ ThiS SySt6m was intend ed to
ob\ iate the frequent cnanges in the distribution of the
representation whreh the movements of population
might otherwise seem to call for. But in practice it
“ “ convenientl y rapid increase in the
umber of members. There are already 124; and a
much larger increase would overtax the resources
of the country an d make the Assembly unmnnage-
Tb? r A ° b ? n Z e thls matt er is foreshadowed.
Ihe Constitution has also been amended at some
otter points. By an Act of our own Parliament in
Assemhi e v n r b r ° f office - holders " b ° may sit in the
Assembly has been increased so as to provide for en-
largements of the Cabinet. By an Act of the
Imperial Parliament, in 1873, the colonies were
permitted to make differential tariff agreements
between themselves - a proceeding which was
express y prohibited bv the original Constitu-
7he provision disqualifying ministers of
religion for election to the Legislative Assembly was
repeated in 1858. The duration of the Legislative
im w-tv m r 7 -i mi p ted t 0 W was reduced
in 1874 within a limit of three.
NOMINATED AND ELECTED COUNCILB.
We have already remarked that no two of the con-
£Sb°w? £ the , C(domes are agreement. In New
South Wales and Queensland the Upper Houses are
1“ f Vict ° ria a » d
are elected, but under different conditions. The
nval principles have thus been tested side by side. It
wouid be difficuit to offer any positive opinion as to
which has worked out the better results, because in each
and X£ eCU l lar duences have been brought into play
and different conditions have prevailed. In Victoria
where originally the elective Upper House rested upon
a narrow class basis, disputes with the Assembly were
fnt o eroi d ? d S< 7f * s f iousl y prejudicial to thepublic
d +• &nC ! th ? Constltutlon was amended and the
foundations of the Council were broadened, the
two Houses have worked well together. Here al-
favo U u S r of Gr \ haS * CUrrent of °P ini ° n
favour of making the Council elective, the earlier ex-
TWp OO h ° r i ctor i a ba,s had a restraining effect.
Those who recognise the desirability of strengthening
the Council by giving it elective responsibility and popu-
lar support perceive also that the benefit mSt
be purchased at the price of liability to deadlocks. The
Urg6d , in d6fenCe ° f nominati ° a has been
Uie elasWity it provides. The value of that principle
was tested here in one way some 27 years ago, when
the Governor of the day—Sir John Young—was per-
suaded to appoint a large number of members at once
PiiXrVffl opposition to a
particular bill Through the peculiar circum-
stances of the time, the movement undS-
went defeat. The Governor, however, was cen-
sured for his action by the Imperial authorities, and it
may be doubted whether any ordinarily discreet repre-
sentative of the Crown would now give his assistance
to . similar at.empt. Tho dasticitj o( the nZ£S
ouncil has since then generally been shown by its
eadiuess to yield to pressure and to discontinue its
resistance to any measure approved by the Assemblv
Tv the t IS T denCe that * is approved
by the country also. There is reason how-
ever, to fear that the Council has a tendency
I to compound for a too great readiness to yield where
questions of gravity are at stake, by showing a deter-
mined front on points of minor importance.
the council and the assembly.
The Constitution of Victoria expressly provides that
SI tv “ a - y u jeCt m ° ney bi,ls ’ but ma J not amend
constitutions of New South Wales and
Queenslana simply provide that money bills shall
r? ff mthe 9 A r Isthis a distinction with-
foritilf it, 61106 ? i ller6 the Assem bly has always claimed
“ h 6 ex ° l “ 81ve ri S hts as to money bills exercised
by the House of Commons. The Council has uni-
formly contended that, under the Constitution, it has
I' 011 ’ a ht amend; and it has
T f t > hat ri ght more than once. No very serious
difficulty has yet arisen out of this difference of view.
Amended bills have been laid aside by the Assembly,
and others meeting the Council’s suggestions
have been introduced in their place.
land a dispute upon this point was referred by
consent to the Privy Council, and the award
was favourable to the Assembly’s claims. The know-
edge of that fact will probably prevent any similar
reference being made from this colony ; but the news
as received _ here at a time when a corresponding dis-
°"\. and the manner of its reception
the expectation that our Legislative Council
lefir-e 110 * be -? eterred . this opinion from acting as
letore upon its own views of right.
personal responsibility of the governor.
We have referred to the censure upon Sir John
toung for lending the authority of the Crown for the
upport of a party to the destruction of the reasonable
of the Upper House. In Victoria, during
conflict between the two Chambers, the Governor!
, Charles Ealing, displayed a spirit of partizanship,
nd was recalled. These cases illustrate a principle in
ie Government of these colonies which has not at all
mes been clearly recognised. The Governor, as the
spresentative of the Crown, exercise; cer!
tin powers and discharges certain functions,
! th o aP r m t 0 tbe Crown in En
ut the Governor is also a servant of the Crown
7 " issio ": and acting under instructions.’
is position, therefore, differs from that held by the
'own m England. Whilst “ the Crown can do no
‘ on {?’ , lGs rc P rc sen(ative can do wrong, and may
called to account for it by the Crown-or, in fact, by
8 . SeCret . ar T i of State for the Colonies. The
visers or the Crown in the colony are re-
r b ! 6 f to f , . Parl mmcnt for the advice they
e, but this does not relieve the Governor of
i responsibility to the Imperial authorities. In
ne cases—as in deciding for or against the execution
a capital sentence—he is expressly required to act
ording to his own deliberate judgment, even if it be
traryto the advice of his Ministers. The same
iciple regulates his action when a dissolution is
ed for, and in some other critical emergencies.
the working of the constitution.
• i S -^ em of government brought into opera-
'la BoG 18 <j with few modifications in addition to
!e indicated above) still in force. During the 32 vears
legislative Assemblies have been elected. The average
of the twelve Parliaments preceding the one now
sxistence has been 2 years 4 months and 18 days,
shortest was the second, which lasted for 1 year


and 19 days. The longest was the fifth, which lasted
4 years 9 months and 22 days. No Parliament has
been allowed to expire by effluxion of time. Of the 62
gentlemen who sat in the first Assembly, either as
original members or in seats that had been vacated
before its close, only 20 (so far as our present in-
formation goes) are still alive. Within the same period
23 Ministries have been formed and have passed away.
The 24th is now in office. The average life of a Minis-
try has been less than a year and a-half. The Ministry
with the shortest life was that formed by Sir John
Robertson in 1885, which lasted from December 22 af
that year to February 25 of the following year. The
longest was that of Sir Henry Parkes, which lasted
from December 21, 1878, to January 4, 1883, four
years and fifteen dajs. The introduction of the new
order of things involved the formation of a new
Ministry. The officers of the Government under the
old regime held their places under a tenure incompa-
tible with the new principle of responsibility to
Parliament. Mr. Stuart Alexander Donaldson was
charged with the duty of forming the first responsible
Ministry. Its composition was as follows:—Mr. S.
A. Donaldson, Colonial Secretary; Mr. T. Holt, Colonial
Treasurer; Mr. (now Sir) W. M. Manning, Attorney-
General ; Mr. John Bayley Darvall, Solicitor-General;
Mr. George Robert Nichols, Auditor-General and
Secretary for Lands and Works; and Mr. W. C.
Mayne, representative of the Government in the
Legislative Council. The present Ministry consists
of Sir Henry Parkes, Colonial Secretary; Mr. J. F.
Burns, Colonial Treasurer ; Mr. Thomas Garrett, Secre-
tary for Lands; Mr. John Sutherland, Secretary for
Public Works; Mr. B. R. Wise, Attorney-General;
Mr. James Inglis, Minister for Public Instruction;
Mr. W. Clarke, Minister for Justice ; Mr. C. J. Roberts,
Postmaster-General; Mr. Abigail, Minister for Mines;
and Mr. Julian Salomons, Q.C., Vice-president of the
Legislative Council and representative of the Govern-
ment in the Upper House.
Many laws have been passed, and many of them
have after a few years been repealed or amended. We
have become familiar with the ebbings and flowings of
the tide in legislation. In 1861 Parliament passed an
Act to limit Chinese immigration; in 1867 it was re-
pealed. Since then the policy of restriction has been
reverted to. A Civil Service Superannuation Act was
passed in 1864; in 1873 it was repealed. In 1884 a
new system of superannuation, combined with classi-
fication and graduated increases of salaries, was
established. Two years afterwards the latter
part of the arrangement was brought to an
end, and now the superannuation is threatened. For a
course of years the tariff was light and simple. In
1865, under the pressure of a deficit, ad valorem duties
were introduced. In 1873 they were abolished. In
1886 they were revived in conjunction with a number
of specific duties, so large that hardly anything could
enter the port untaxed. Last year the ad valorem duties
were repealed, and the tariff was otherwise sim-
plified and lightened. The land law has undergone con-
siderable changes, and may still be regarded as in a state
of unsettlement; but this subject is treated at length
elsewhere. In other matters the course of legislation
has not shown so much fluctuation. In connection with
electoral and Parliamentary questions, the steps taken
have been in the one direction. The same may be said
of the relations between State and Church. First,
grants for public worship were prohibited; next, the
aid given to Denominational schools was limited, and
afterwards withdrawn ; and last, the funds derived from
the clergy and school estates were appropriated to pur-
poses of education. But amidst the mass of general
legislation it is not difficult to discern the intermittent
tracks of the reformer in Acts passed in the interests of
deserted wives and children; to reclaim and provide for
destitute children; to protect the property of married
women; to establish juvenile reformatories; to provide
for and regulate divorce, giving equal rights to the
wife and the husband ; to place real property in a
position corresponding with that of personal property
in cases of intestacy; to facilitate the administration
of justice by means of District Courts; to place the
law of bankruptcy om a sound foundation for the pro-
tection of creditors and honest debtors and the ex-
posure and punishment of fraud; to introduce Torrens’
system of land transfer; to establish Post-office Savings
Banks; to encourage life insurance; to make em-
ployers liable for accidents to workmen in their employ ;
to legalise trades-unions; to consolidate the criminal
law. Better things might probably have been done ;
but in view of what has been done, our wisdom lies in
striving for better things in the future.
THE CIVIL SERVICE.
ORIGINAL SYSTEM OF PATRONAGE.
Before the Constitution Act came into force the
Secretary of State had practically absolute patronage of
the principal appointments in the Civil Service of this
colony, and by a schedule to 13 and 14 Vic., c. 59, the
Civil list was fixed at £45,000, with £2500 for
pensions. But by the Constitution Act, which came
into force on the 24th November, 1855, patron-
age was taken away from the home official,
and it was enacted that the appointment
to all public offices under Government which
should thereafter become vacant or be created should
be vested in the Governor, with the advice of the Exe-
cutive Council, except in the case of those officers who
on political grounds were liable to retire and certain minor
appointments. A sum of £3500 annually was appro-
priated permanently for pensions to superannuated
officers, but this sum was not applicable to pensions for
officers appointed since 1855.
A STTPJCRANNUATION ACT.
In 1864 an extravagant and ill-considered Superan-
nuation Act was passed ; it established a superannua-
tion fund by an annual deduction of 4 per cent,
from all salaries, and an annual grant of £lO,OOO
from the Treasury Fund, which was invested to meet
claims. The Act provided for pensions to officers super-
annuated or retiring under certain circumstances, and
for gratuities in cases of premature incapacity or death.
The Act was a lamentable failure, and was repealed in
1873. There were many charges which had to
be respected by the repealing Act. A number of arrears
were charged on the Consolidated Revenue at reduced
rates ; but officers who were forced to retire,- by the
Government were left their full pensions and the
gratuities were paid in full. The deductions of 4 per
cent, were refunded to all officers then in the service on
application, and a loan for liquidating the sums was
authorised. The claims of officers under the Constitu-


tion Act were preserved under certain conditions.
From 1873 to 1884 the public service was entirely
without statutory regulation, and, except so far as the
annual grant for pensions of £3500 fixed by the Con-
stitution Act provided a superannuation fund for a few
officers, was without any system of voluntary or com-
pulsory retirement. In 1884 the late Sir Alexander
Stuart, after an abortive attempt some years before,
passed an Act regulating the whole service.
THE act op 1884.
The Civil Service Act of 1884 provides for the classifi-
cation of all officers in the public service, except public
teachers and officers in the Department of Public
Instruction, employees in the railway or any other de-
partment engaged under special regulations, messengers,
housekeepers, letter-carriers, stampersand sorters,bailiffs,
warders, nurses, boatmen, and persons in printing and
telegraph offices, dredge and marine services, and others
in similar positions. The officers were grouped in three
divisions, as follow: —General division, divided into
six classes, and a probationary class, arranged according
to the Appropriation Act of 1884; professional divi-
sion, including engineers, surveyors, barristers, soli-
citors, medical officers, and other persons classified as
professional by the board, subject to the Governor’s
approval, divided into four classes, and a cadet or
junior class ; educational division, including all
persons in the Department of Public Instruction,
but the Act provides for no classification of this
division. Excluding officers with salaries of £IOOO
in the general division, and £I2OO or over in the pro-
fessional division, classified officers were to receive
annual increases as follow:—First-class, £3O; second-
class and third-class, £25; other classes, £2O. Of the
employees not classified, those under section seven of
the Act were to receive such increases as the regulations
provided; and those under section eight were limited
to an increase of £lO per annum. An officer who had
received the maximum classification salary for four
years might, by order of the Government, be promoted
to the next class above him, and receive the
minimum rate for that class; but no officer
could enter the first class in that way. No
Parliamentary increase to or reduction of salary was to
alter an officer’s classification, and neither reduction of
salary nor abolition of office might give a claim for
compensation. These regulations as to classification
and increments on salaries were, as will be seen, subse-
quently abolished. The Estimates for each year are
required to be prepared so as ta show under the head
of each department the number to be employed in each
class and the aggregate of salaries. The same infor-
mation for the year before must be shown in a parallel
column.
A UNIFORM SYSTEM.
The Act of 1884 introduced a uniform system »f
appointment and promotion in the Civil Service. Before
the Act, patronage was in the hands of Ministers
and members of Parliament; but Stuart’s Act es-
tablished the principle of regulating influence by Act
of Parliament. As to admission, except for a few
special offices, applicants for appointment to the proba-
tionary class, through which all must pass,
had to show certificated acquirements, the stan-
dard being the University Civil Service or some
equivalent examination. Persons thus certificated
are placed on a register, from which probationers
are recruited. When the nature of the office requires
it, the Civil Service Board may fix any other
standard of efficiency or require a special examination.
Probationers must be 17 years of age and under
25; they must give satisfactory credentials as to cha-
racter, and serve for at least 12 months ; during
the first six months they are entitled to £SO per
annum. On the recommendation of the board, the pro-
bationer, if he has passed the University junior exam-
ination or given proof of equivalent attainments, will
be entitled to £75 per annum. Promotion
from the probatienary class to the sixth class is
conditional on passing an examination, or on proof
of similar attainments, and the candidate who receives
the highest number of marks is appointed to any
vacancy that may occur. A candidate for the cadet
class in the professional division must have passed the
junior examination or its equivalent. If he is ad-
mitted he remains for the period, and at the salary
prescribed, and can only be promoted to the fourth class
after an examination.
VACANCIES.
In case of a vacancy in any office, the board considers
whether the vacant office is to be continued in the class
fixed by the salary of the late occupant. If the Minister
recommends any alteration the Governor giveseffectto it.
The superior officer of the department in which the
vacancy is transmits through the head of the depart-
ment a report, and recommends some officer of the
department to the vacancy. The head of the depart-
ment may transmit a similar report and recommenda-
tion. The board reports to the Minister in charge of
the department the name of the officer or officers so
recommended, and of any other in the same or another
department, whether in the same class or the one im-
mediately below it, considered by the board qualified
to fill the vacancy, specifying the length of ser-
vice, competency, and attainments of the officers
recommended. The Minister recommends and the
Governor appoints the officer reported by the board to
be best qualified, preference being given to an officer of
the same department if equally fit. If the officer
appointed enters a higher class he takes the minimum,
salary. If he remain in the same class his salary is
not increased. In special cases the Minister may go
outside the service to secure special qualifications, and
in such cases examination or probation may be dis-
pensed with. But all such appointments, with the
reasons for them, must be reported to Parliament by the
board in the annual report. The Minister may make
temporary appointments, but the persons so appointed
are not competent for admission to the service till they
have passed the prescribed examinations, and their
temporary employment is limited to two years.
DISCIPLINE.
As regards discipline and punishment, the Act pro-
vides that, if an officer is considered guilty of any
misconduct or malpractices in his accounts, the
Minister, or any officer authorised by him, may imme-
diately suspend the defaulting officer. Ihe case is
then referred to the Governor, who requires the
officer suspended to show cause why he should not
be dismissed. The officer may then be dealt
with by removal, suspension, reduction to a lower
class, or salary, fine, or dismissal, according to the
nature of his offence. For a grave offence punishable
by criminal law he is subject to summary dismissal.


For insolvency he is subject to forfeiture of his office,
unless he cantoow that it was not “
or extravagant or dishonourable conduct Tor dis
honourable conduct or intemperance, fine, suspensron
or dismissal, is the penalty. Suspension if followed
hv dismissal ©Derates as a forfeiture of salary during
the Sof suspension. All fines are stopped from
salaries and carried to the credit of the Superannuation
■^ holidays.
Each officer is entitled to a holiday of three weeks
ner annum; hut this may be allowed to accumulate
till it reaches a maximum of two months. Sic
leave on full or reduced salary may be given for three
months! and renewed for a like period ; but a month s
absence on sick leave is a forfeiture of the annual leave.
Every application for sick leave must be accompanied
by a medical certificate. After 20 years service an
•fficer is entitled to a year’s leave on half pay, or six
months leave on full pay; and after 10 years’ service
to six months’ leave on half pay, or three months on
full pay. Leave may be granted in case of pressing
necessity but such leave may be deducted from the
anmial leave. Subject to the Minister’s direction,
bankholidays and all proclaimed holidays are service
holidays.
SCHOOL TEACHERS AND OFFICERS.
officers and teachers in the Department of Public In-
struction who are not subject to the regulative and
disciplinary provisions of the Act are su jec
to the provisions for superannuation and kindred
purposes. According to these, officers of years
Le P and upwards, of right, and under that age on proof
of mental* or bodily infirmity, can claim a retiring
allowance • but, where they retire on account of infirmity,
if restored’to health they may be called upon to resume
heS duties. The scale begins at 15 years’ service,
when one quarter of the annual salary is allowed
and one-sixtieth of the annual salary for every
additional year of service. The allowance must
no! however, exceed two-thirds of the annual
salary. The salary is computed on the average
of the payment for the three years preceding retire-
ment exclusive of forage and travelling allowances.
In case of compulsory retirement, where a» officer is
not entitled to a superannuation allowance, a gratuity
of onf month’. p, 7 for each year of »t,.oe may ba
granted. Where an officer is incapacitated by bodily
Story, suffered in the discharge of his duty, a gratuity
ofTwo months’ pay for each year of service maybe
granted, and in case of death, under the B»me circum-
stances a grant of a like sum may be made to
children, or mother of the deemed.
If an officer die leaving a widow or children
under the age of 16 in necessitous circum-
stances ' a gratuity not exceeding six months
pay may be granted. The maximum salaries on which
aUowaSes of gratuities are given are £I2OO per annum
to the professional, and £IOOO in the general division
The allowances and gratuities are provided from a fund
composed as follows:—Deductions of 4 per cent, from
all salaries; a public grant of £20,000 per annu
be continued for five years from the passing of the
Act, the unexpended balance of the £3500 appropriated
under the Constitution Act, and fines. This fund
bears interest at 4 per cent., payable by the Consoli-
dated Kevenue Fund half-yearly. At the end of
every three years the account is subjected to
actuarial investigation, aud according to the result of
such investigation the Government may reduce the
rate of the deductions from salaries and make a pro
rata reduction in the superannuation allowances and
gratuities. Officers who were in the service at the
rassin°- of the Act aro required, on superannuation, to
pay as back deductions the equivalent to 4 per cent on
the aggregate payments received as salary, such deduc-
tions being taken off their pensions.
the board.
The Act is administered ministerially by the Coloma
Secretary, but its provisions are carried out by the
Civil Service Board. The members of this board are
appointed by the Governor and are paffi by fe .
The board is composed of the Hon. Geoffiey
Ea-ar, Messrs. John Williams, A. C. * raser ’
C.°A. Goodchap, and T. Littlejohn. The first
renort of the board was presented in 188 b. it
■was seen that, taking what would appear to be the
natural interpretation of the Act the annual increments
to salaries would soon drain the Treasury, but the
board agreed that clause 7 authorised the withdrawal
from the operation of the Act except parts V. and
VI of other classes of the public service beside those
already excluded, who may oe placed under
similar rules and regulations to those made bf
the Commissioner for Railways. They forthwith
moved the Government to make such rules
lations for the Government Printing Office, the Post
and Telegraph Department, the Mines Department, the
Dredge senice, and the Marine Board. Jhe classifica-
tion made by the board caused much dissatisfaction,
tion mane uy n npa's from its decision,
and there were a number of appea s rrom ’
nmvards of 1000 of which were disallowed. The rep t
of the board demonstrated that the Act was in a large
measure unworkable, and that material amendments
were necessary. T hb act oe 1-887. , _ .
In the same year an Act to take effect from the Ist
nf Tmuarv 1887, was passed, entitled the Civil Ser-
:L J lTZ—t Ac?,
the suggestions of the board, provides that so muc
of the Civil Service Act, 1884, as prescribes a classifi-
cation of all officers within divisions, and so much of
£ saM Act as entitles such f < pne-
„„ such classification, ate hereby repealed So atp»
sent the Civil Service ,s regulated l,y Stuart s Act ot
1884 as modified by the Act of 188 b.
the strength of the service.
The reportofthe Civil Service Bo.rdf or 1886, presented
nn thp 18th of May, 1887, showed that 12,2x3 persons
on the 18tn o . y, c„ rv i ce . The Superannua-
were employed in the Civil sallg J tory con .
dUiou^Th^Mcei^Twere —the annual grant, £20.000,
Ser the
cent, tom salaries, £63 642 Is., Daian £63
S'6d 5 °ma^ g m a S SmW <«■ .
totl eupenditui was £11,160 16s. 114, leaving »
balance to the credit of 1 though
17« 10d on 31st December, 188 b/ Altnougn
financially the Superannuation Fund is us a satis-
l 1 , held 3 during


the past year, and resolutions were passed proposing
amendments to the Act ; but as yet no practical results
nave followed.
THE NEW COMMISSION.
Great consternation was experienced amongst the
officers of the Civil Service when it was made known
that it had been decided that the state of affairs before
the new Civil Service Act came into operation was to be
reverted to; that is to say, the increments under that
Act were to be removed, and the salaries were to
s.and the same as before the Act came into force. The
financial Statement made on the Ist December last
showed that this was the case. In consequence of the
opposition this sweeping measure met with throuo-h-
-out the country a royal commission was appointed°by
the Executive Council to inquire into and examine
existing arrangements for carrying on the public service.
The inquiry is to be held with the object more espe-
-cia.lyof bringing under strict scrutiny and examina-
tion the organisation and the conduct of business in
each separate branch of the service under
the respective Ministerial heads. The commission
will also investigate the extent of the duties in each
case, the necessary clerical strength for the satisfactory
performance of the work, and report as to competency,
the number and the disposition of the employees, with
a view to the amalgamation or abolition of offices and
the general improvement of the service. The com-
mission consists of the Hon. James Watson, president;
if u A VT 1 S S ’ mana ff er of the Commercial Bank;
p -L>- Fitzgerald, formerly Deputy Surveyor-
General, but who is now retired from the
> r - Jacob Garrard, M.L.A. ; Mr. W
I‘Millan, M.L.A.; Mr. Christopher Bolleston, formerly
Auditor-General, now retired from the service; and Mr.
°in ee, M.L.A. Thus at the beginning of our
•“° n , d Ti c ® n . t “ r J a careful investigation is to" be made
into the Civil Service, which, it is generally admitted,
H m “ ee l o£ reform - Bu * such reform is to come, as it
% 0U ’ a . £er ] _ n q uir J, and not by a sweeping reduction
_o£ salaries without any consideration of the deserts of
, A , few da y s ago a Cabinet minute was issued
inch stated that, in carrying out such reforms as appear
expedient and necessary, it has been determined to
request officers over 60 years of age to retire in all
instances where the Minister deems it to be of advan-
3, J he . l? üblic - At the age of 60 officers are
entitled of right to a retiring allowance, and, though
lere are exceptions, it is considered as a rule that the
publm service would be strengthened by the retirement
of officers oyer 60 years of age.
the land question.
rp, ~ , IN THE EARLY DAV*.
ment in h a!°7 °v administrati °a and land settie-
fV? A . whenever it may bo written, will be
the history of a series of experiments. Some of them
the livhS Sted by th ? ry ; others were instituted in
Sets in «n mOreOrltB \ imperfeot Btud - v of actual
tacts in some cases the forces of nature, and
to e h r e r 8 °i f human Dature - were allowed
was made to * 7in ° therS tbe “deavour
was made to coerce, or restrain, or direct their
operation by artificial means, and unexpected
P 1 r ° dUOed - ? ut whether with or without
the direct sanction or guidance of the ruling powers,
and whether in furtherance of their plans, or in opposi-
tion to them, the pioneers of settlement traversed the
continent from south to north and from east to west,
and pastoral enterprise of some sort has extended (it
may be roughly said) over the greater part of
the available field. There are some districts little
hnown. . The immense territory of Western
Australia, the only Crown colony of the group
contains tracts of country not yet fully explored
-Hut the belief in the existence of a great central desert
has been dispelled; the place where Burke and Wills, the
explorers, perished from exhaustion is now part of a
run; cattle or sheep have been placed on the furthest
wilds; agriculture has taken root and flourished ; and
the products of Australian pastures and arable land
orchards, vineyards, and dairy farms, are sold in the
markets of the old world.
Although all this has been brought about within a
hundred years, not nearly the whole of that time has
been occupied in the process. The ideas of the first
settlers were limited. Planted on the edge of the great
continent that now supplies cheap animal food to
Europe, the settlement was not free from risk of star-
vation. One of the first steps in pastoral enterprise was
that taken by the few head of cattle which broke away
from their quarters near the site of our University
and found “ fresh fields and pastures new” on the banks
of the Nepean. The wool-growing industry was started
under Captain Macarthur in a more systematic, not to
say scientific, way. Settlement gradually extended in the
coast district, up the river valleys, and across the
mountains after the discovery of Bathurst Plains ; but
the process was a slow one for years. Advancing
afterwards at an accelerated rate, it led to the forma-
tion of separate colonies, and radiated more rapidly
from the new centres of energy. And thus it has come
{ 7°o t ™n at ’ wiulst there is now a population estimated
at 2, b 9 9,96 5 scattered over the surface of the con-
tinent, raising flocks and herds, cultivating the soil
operating upon its stores of mineral wealth,
and employed in the development of at-
tendant industries and trade, various systems
of land law and settlement prevail. But each colony
has been influenced in some degree by the action of its
neighbours, ideas adopted in one have been introduced
with more or less of modification elsewhere, and in
some sense there has been a competition for the favour
of settlers and occupiers in the offer of attractive
terms.
In New South Wales settlement was in the earlier days
confined within the limits of 19 counties. It was
carried on prosperously under a system of freehold grants,
issued on nominal terms. The grants were surveyed,
and grazing privileges were allowed outside. This’
system, was superseded, and one of sale by auction was
set up in its place. The growth of population, the in-
crease of stock, and the desire for land on freer condi-
tions soon led to the transgression of the official boun-
daries of settlement and the unauthorised occupation of
the territory beyond. The movement was so extensive
that the authorities had to recognise it, and permission
to occupy was given under a license, on pavment
of an annual fee of £lO. After this system
had been tried and had developed unsatisfactory
results, the issue of leases under tender was introduced,
and, under different forms of lease, the greater portion
of the Crown lands in occupation is held at this day.


THE acts of 1861.
When responsible government fwas introduced, in
1856, there was much dissatisfaction with the then
existing land regulations and their operation. If
pastoral occupation on the large scale was provided for,
men in search of smaller areas, for agri-
culture or for cultivation and grazing combined,
were subjected to many delays and much difficulty and
disappointment. The blame was thrown upon the
auction system, under which sales took place; but the
causes of mischief lay chiefly in the manner in which
it was worked. Instead of keeping the survey of
lands suitable for smaller settlement well in advance
of the requirements of the times, the surveys lagged
behind. Applications for land to be offered at auction
were subject to long delays; and the limitation of
the quantities offered exposed men of small means to
disadvantage through the competition of capitalists and
speculators. Demands were made for a radical change
of system, and bill after bill was framed with a view
to a liberal settlement of the law. All these attempts
were unsuccessful until, in 1861, Mr. Robertson (now
Sir John), supported by a high tide of popular
enthusiasm, carried two bills, the one to regulate'
the alienation, the other the occupation, of
Crown lands. The cry was then for “ free selection
before survey,” the distinctive principle of the bill.
The popular belief was that through the operation of
that principle any poor man could place his family and
household goods in a waggon, travel up the country
until he found a place to suit his choice, pay his de-
posit, sit down, and be settled for life. At that time
men’s minds were in some degree misled by thoughts
about the homestead system in America, the difference
between the circumstances of the two countries being
insufficiently considered.
One main feature of the Occupation Act was the
establishment of a system of pastoral leases, with a
term of five years, the rent determined by appraise-
ment, by two appraisers appointed respectively by
the Crown and the lessee, with an umpire appointed
by themselves. The distinctive characteristic of the
Alienation Act was the system of conditional purchase,
or free selection before survey, which was superadded
to that of sale by auction, for the special purpose of en-
couraging settlement by persons of small means. When
that system was in full operation the whole country
was thrown open to it, with the exception of lands
bearing improvements of a prescribed value, lands
within a certain distance of town boundaries, and areas
temporarily or permanently reserved from sale by the
Government. Thus the lands held under pastoral
lease were, unless improved or reserved, brought under its
action. The conditional purchaser, having selected (at
his own risk) a piece of land (not less than 40
acres nor more than 320), made application for it at
the local land office, tendered a deposit of ss. per acre (the
price being £1), and, on getting a receipt for it,
obtained with the receipt a Parliamentary title to the
land, if it was open to selection a»d the description
of it in the application could be identified. After
that, he had to reside upon the land for a fixed time, to
place improvements of a prescribed relative value upon
it, and to pay either the balance of the purchase-
money** or interest upon it at the rate of 5 per cent,
per annum as long as the balance remained unpaid. The
conditional sale of any land within a pastoral lease
cancelled so much, of the lease as related to
the land sold and three times its area of landadjoining,
and the purchaser was allowed to hold the latter under
a form of lease, the object being to provide him with
grazing privileges.
THE WORKING OF THE LAW.
It may here be remarked that although, when the
land applied for was open to conditional purchase, when
the description was sufficient and correct, and the de-
posit had been paid and acknowledged, the transaction
was complete, sa far as withdrawing the land from the
leasehold and giving the selector proprietory rights
over it were concerned, the whole proceeding was
liable to be vitiated by the subsequent discovery that
the land had not been open to selection, or by defective-
ness in the description, besides which a valid purchase
was liable to forfeiture for non-fulfilment of conditions.
The system contained, therefore, within itself, elements
of disappointment to the conditional purchaser. But
it also contained elements of offence to the pastoral
lessee. It exposed him to the liability of being in-
truded upon by strangers, who seized choice
portions of his leased land, and made him
aware of their presence by impounding his cattle
when they visited their accustomed haunts. As a
matter of fact, conditional purchase, introduced for the
purpose of promoting bona fide settlement, was preg-
nant with uncertainty and risk to the genuine settler,
and provided dishonest men with opportunities for
levying blackmail upon the pastoral lessees by sitting
down upon their runs, with a view to being bought
out
But the lessee was not left helpless. There were
provisions in the law which he could use as weapons
both of offence and defence. He could protect his
land by erecting improvements upon it He could pur-
chase land upon which improvements had been made,
He could use such influence as he had to procure the
notification of temporary reserves. He could employ
people whom he could trust to take up conditional pur-
chases in his «wn interest. He could hem the actual
selector in, or block the intending selector out. He
could test the validity of the selector’s title in the
courts. And he could bring all the powers which
the law placed in his hands to bear against the selector
acting honestly and without intention to offend, as
well as against unscrupulous men by whom con-
ditional purchase was abused. The law was perverted
on both sides; and the development of bitter class
antipathies and class conflicts, together with frequent
disappointment to well-meaning men, were amongst the
natural results. In some districts to which the system
of conditional purchase was better adapted, a large
amount of genuine and beneficial settlement took
place; but in the pastoral country, fraud, and oppres-
sion, and demoralisation were prominent amongst its
fruits. Under its influence men were encouraged to
seek a livelihood by traffic in land rather than by steady
labour in its cultivation, and even men who began as
genuine settlers often quitted their holdings to pursue
the more attractive speculation of land-jobbing.
AMENDING THE LAW.
For 14 years the law of 1861 remained unaltered ; but
it had not been long in operation before the light
thrown upon its provisions by the class conflict before
mentioned, and by litigation arising out of it, showed
the need for fresh legislation. In 1875 an Act


was passed for the purpose of making good defects,
correcting ambiguities, checking abuses, and providing
more effectually for the enforcement of the conditions
of conditional purchase, which had been flagrantly
disregarded. But the measure was soon found
to be inadequate, and in 1880 it was followed
by another, extending some provisions of the law,
amending others, and aiming generally at the improve-
ment of the system rather than at any radical change.
An important alteration, however, was made in the
method of fixing the pastoral rents. Under the pre-
vious arrangement, which left the matter in the hands of
appraisers, and gave the lessee an equal voice with the
Crown in their appointment, it was found that the in-
terests of the Crown received less than a full measure
of consideration. The Act of 1880 left the rents to
be appraised by officers appointed only by the Crown,
- and reserved for the Minister a right to veto or alter
their decisions.
But the Act of 1880 proved to be unequal to the
requirements of the situation. The conflict between
pastoral lessees and conditional purchasers continued.
One of its results was the rapid alienation of Crown
lands to the lessees, by auction sales, improvement pur-
chases, and other methods, not for purposes of settle-
ment, but with the view of “ securing ” their leaseholds
against invasion. In 1877, the proceeds of land sales
exceeded £2,900,000; in 1881 they approached
£2,500,000. The influx of easily acquired money into
the Treasury stimulated extravagant expenditure. The
alienation of so many millions of acres of land to
pastoral lessees threatened injury to the public interest.
The extensive borrowing of money by the lessees for
this purpose loaded them with a burden of debt, and
absorbed capital that might have been better spent in
improving their holdings. The mind of the country
became convinced that what was required was a radical
change in the law, and not a mere patching-up of its
deficiencies. A bill introduced for the latter purpose
was rejected by the Legislative Assembly. A dissolu-
tion and a change of Ministry followed, and in 1884
the Land Acts of 1861 and the Amending Acts of 1875
and 1880 were repealed, and replaced by a measure
framed on widely different lines.
THE NEW SYSTEM OF 1884.
The old system had been in operation so long, and had
produced such extensive effects, that the new one had to
be adapted to actual conditions, and the change was
not so thorough as it might otherwise have been. Free
selection was neither abolished nor confined within are»3
specially chosen by the Government, but to prevent the
conflict of interests between pastoral lessees and condi-
tional purchasers, which arose from the indiscriminate
application of the old system throughout the colony,
an expedient which had first been introduced in Queens-
land was adopted. This was the division of each pas-
toral holding into two as nearly as possible equal parts,
one of which, termed the “leasehold area,” was with-
drawn from conditional purchase, while the other,
called the “resumed area,” was thrown open to it.
The pastoral lessee, whilst retaining only half his hold-
ing, was relieved from liability to disturbance
by conditional purchase. On the other hand
the mode and conditions of conditional purchase were
altered with a view to the diminution of causes of dis-
appointment and dispute, and the infusion of a larger
measure of certainty into the business. The condi-
tional purchaser, on paying his deposit and getting his
receipt, was an applicant to purchase, and not, as under
the Act of 1861, a purchaser; his application had to be
examined to ascertain whether the land was open to
selection; and when the land was open, and had been
surveyed, the application was confirmed. The maxi-
mum area was enlarged to 2560 acres. The im-
provement condition under the old law was abandoned ;
hut the conditional purchaser was required to fence his
boundaries within two years after the confirmation of
his application, and he was not allowed to bring any
action for trespass (other than a wilful trespass) on the
land until it had been fenced.
One important feature of the Act of 1884 was the
division of the colony into three parts —the Eastern,
the Central, and the Western; and by varying the
provisions of the law, an endeavour was made to adapt
it to varying local conditions. Thus, conditional pur-
chase, originally designed for the promotion of agri-
cultural settlement, was disallowed in the Western
division, with its poor soil and scanty rainfall, and a
system of “ homestead ” selection for pastoral purposes
on a small scale was set up in its place. Another
innovation was local administration by means of local
boards, nominatedby the Government and entrusted with
power to deal with applications, conduct inquiries, hear
complaints, and give decisions upon various matters,
subject to a right of appeal to the Minister. To these
boards the appraisement of the pastoral holdings was
also committed; but the determination of the rents
was reserved for the Minister himself.
Pastoral lessees were granted not only an undisturbed
tenure of their leaseholds, but the length of the term
was extended to ten years in the Central division and
fifteen in the Western, with a contingent right to an
extension for five years more when the leases expired.
The appraisement was regulated by a minimum rent, and
a fixed rate of increase was prescribed at the end of each
quinquennial period. The lessees were allowed to occupy
the resumed areas under a yearly license, subject to
conditional purchase. The old provision that enabled
them to purchase at a fixed price land on which they
had placed improvements was repealed, and it was ex-
pressly provided that, at the expiration, forfeiture, or
surrender of a lease, the improvements upon the land
should become the property of the Crown.
DELAY, DISAPPOINTMENT, AND PARTIAL FAILURE.
The new Act came into force on the Ist January,
1885 ; but in the nature of the case months had to
pass before it could be brought fully into operation.
The heavy work of dividing the runs in a fairly
equitable manner was not completed before the middle
of the year. In the meantime, to prevent inextricable
confusion, conditional purchase had to be suspended.
Until the runs had been divided the work of appraise-
ment could not begin. When it had begun, it was
found to be a protracted undertaking, and the actual
determination of all the rents was not concluded
before the end of last year. By that time a large
amount of dissatisfaction with the law and its ad-
ministration had been produced, and fresh legislation
was again admitted to be necessary.
A number of influences combined to bring about
these results. The long delays and the un-
certainty were necessarily prejudicial to dealings
with the land. The new law limited the sale of land


by auction to 200,000 acres within any year; but the
altered conditions lessened the demand for land on the
part of the pastoral lessees, already staggering under
the burden of losses caused by a prolonged drought and
low prices. Before the rents were fixed they had to be
collected at the old rates, which were in many cases
altogether inadequate. The suspension of condi-
tional purchase for six months, and the fact that
where it had been resumed the reduced de-
posit of 2s. an acre hardly covered the
cost of survey, materially diminished the income from
that source. " As a revenue measure the Act had failed.
Conditional purchasers complained of delay in the con-
firmation of their applications and of the expense of
fulfilling the fencing condition. Pastoral lessees,
unable under the new law to purchase laud in virtue of
improvements, and to borrow money for improvements
which would pass into the hands of the Govern-
ment on the expiry or surrender of their leases,
discontinued expenditure upon improvements and
thus threw a number of bush labourers
out of employment. Another grievance arose out of
the action of the Minister for Lands, who, in the eier-
cise of his right to determine the rents, set aside the
appraisements by the local boards in many cases, and
named higher rates in accordance with his own ideas.
But in the Western division, over and above all other
causes of dissatisfaction, there was the rabbit plague to
contend with.
THE BABBIT PLAGUE.
The rabbit plague, though treated with comparative
indifference at its first appearance, has become threaten-
ing to the prosperity of the colony. Our neighbours
to the south and west had an earlier experience of its
severity; but the invasion of our territory has been con-
tinuous for years past, and the rabbits have been
steadily spreading in a north-easterly direction until
Queensland is endangered. A resolute attempt was
made in 1883 to cope with the evil by special legislation
for the destruction of the animals. The lessees were
compelled by law to take action, but the Government
undertook to pay part of the cost, the payment being
dependent on the production of scalps or skins. At
that time one-fifth of the colony was in-
fested. But so ineffectual were these measures
that in the earlier half of 1887, although
the Government alone had expended some
£360,000, the area infested was about two-fifths
of the colony. It is now recognised that the hope of
safety lies in the erection of main lines of wire-netting
fence, to stop fresh supplies from without, and
separate the infested from the non-infested districts
within our own colony ; and also in the compulsory
enclosure of each run, so that the army of invasion may
be dealt with in detail. The Government has in some
parts of the infested country been paying more in rabbit
subsidy than it received in rent. The subsidy system
will therefore be discontinued, and the Government,
while erecting the great dividing fences at the public
cost, will probably advance money to the lessees for the
enclosure of their holdings.
A NEW BILL.
The need for new land legislation was not only
admitted before the close of last year, but a Land Bill
was placed before Parliament. As its fate is a thing
of the future, it is enough in this retrospect to glanoe
at some of the points at which it proposes to alter the
present law. It creates a Central Land Court to hear
appeals from the land boards, though it leaves the
power of fixing rents with the Minister. It abolishes
the fencing condition, and does something to facilitate
the placing of the selector upon the land. It requires
payment of a survey fee with the deposit upon a con-
ditional purchase application. It gives outgoing lessees
a claim to compensation for improvements from in-
coming tenants, and extends the terms of leases except
in the Eastern division, where no provision is made fon
a renewal when the five years’ pastoral leases run out.
It deals with the rabbit question on the lines indicated
above; and it makes fuller provision for the eradica-
tion of scrub, the rapid spread of which threatens to
render large tracts of country unfit for occupa-
tion.
SOME STATISTICS.
In conclusion, a few figures from official sources.
The area of the colony is estimated at 310,700 square
miles, or 198,848,000 acres. Of this 42,528,062 acres
had been alienated up to the close of 1886, leaving
156,319,938 acres unalienated. Of the unalienated
land 142,927,493 acres were held in 1886 _ under
one form or another of lease (exclusive of
mining leases). Of the alienated land, an area of
25,543,709 acres had been conditionally purchased
under 202,971 selections up to the close of 1886; but
deeds had been issued for only 1,304,066 acres of these
conditional purchases, and an area of 16,164,190 acres
was in process of alienation. This gives for condi-
tional purchase a total of 17,468,256 acres, the remain-
ing area of 8,075,453 having either lapsed, or been
voided or forfeited. The area under crop,
1886-7 (sown grasses excluded), was 977,664
acres —an increase of 458,656 upon the
area in 1876. The live stock at the close of
last March numbered 39,169,000 sheep, out of a total
of 86,352,000 in the seven colonies of Australasia ;
1,367,000 cattle, out of 8,264,000 ; 361,000 horses, out
of 1,372,000; 209,000 pigs, out of 1,143,000; and a
total of 41,108,000 head, out of a total of 97,133,000.
PASTORAL AND AGRICULTURAL.
PASTORAL.
New South Wales has been known for many years
as “ the great pastoral colony.” The complete magni-
tude of her resources was not, however, properly
recognised by the outer world until the extension of
railways overcame the main watercourses as a means
of carriage, and brought the largest portion of her wool
to the port of Sydney. Prior to this change, nearly
one-half of this colony’s principal product figured in
the London market as Victorian wool, and as produc-
tion and trade are the tests of a country’s merit, New
South Wales, although possessed of nearly as many
sheep as all her neighbours, suffered in the com-
mercial comparison. It was not until the railways were
extended to Bourke, Hay, Jerilderie, and Albury that
European manufacturers of woollens recognised the fact
that ltiverina wools, so long the reigning favourites,
were grown in the mother colony of Australasia.
Such figures as appear in the following table were to a
great extent disregarded. 1


Colony.
Area in Acres.
No. of Sheep
in 1878.
No. of Sheep
in 1887.
New South Wales...
Victoria
vlueens and
South Australia ...
Western Australia...
Tasmania
New Zealand
198,848,000
56,245,700
578,361,600
678,400,000
427,838,080
16,777,600
66,817,920
25,479,484
9,379,276
5,631,634
6,377,812
868,325
1,838,831
13,069,338
39,169,304
10, , 70,403
9,690,445
6,696,406
1,809,071
1,603,946
16,677.445
Number of sheep compared with the respective areas of the
Australasian colonies in 1878 and 1887:
The returns from which our figures are taken were
collected in January of last year. The seasons since
then have been remarkably good, and the lambing is one
of the best known. Never was grass more plentiful, so
it is probable that the present stock of sheep in
the colony is fully 45,000,000. More than nine-
tenths of this number are of the merino breed.
The wool clip varies in quantity, scarcity of rich
food having at times its natural effect, but s~lb. of
greasy wool per sheep is very close to the average ob-
tained from year to year. Shepherding is a custom of
the pa. 4; nearly all the sheep of the colony are now
“ paddocked,” that is are kept in enclosures varying in
size from one mile to many miles square. Washing
sheep prior to shearing them is but rarely practised,
but when it is practised the average of wool obtained
is about 31b. 3oz. per sheep. The exports of wool from
this colony, the result of the 1887 clip, should be equal
to 204,000,0001 b. of greasy wool. It is probable that
over 30 per cent, of it was sent from Melbourne and
Adelaide, which under ordinary circumstances will
always have a portion of the trade.
QUALITY OP STOCK.
The quality of the sheep as yielders of
fleece has been much improved during the last
10 years. Tasmania, favoured by soil and climate as
a country for improving all breeds of sheep, has done
great service to Australia by sending regularly each
year large drafts of purebred sheep from her best
flocks. During the last five years no fewer than 10,000
Tasmanian sheep have been distributed amongst
the flocks of this colony. It has taken about
60 years to bring the flocks of Austral-
asia to their present state. The best flocks
of Spain, Germany, and France judiciously
blended, aided by a favourable climate, have produced
wool the absence of which would be a severe blow to
manufacturers of clothing material. Even
America, despite of all her struggles to
use nought but home products, has to im-
port large quantities of Australian merino wools.
Eew South Wales is undoubtedly a favourable home
for the merino sheep, and in no other country is sheep-
breeding more successfully or more carefully conducted.
If seasons are ordinarily favourable, the merino sheep
thrive. Iheir ailments are few and are easily overcome.
They need no shelter sheds, and as a rule their first ex-
perience of housing is when first brought at shearing
time to yield" their fleece. Even in the recent
depressed times, when all products suffered extra-
ordinary falls in price, merino sheep-breeding was
remunerative, and yielded larger profits than the keep-
ing of other kinds of stock. Hence it is that New
South Wales, with 45,000,000 sheep, has not more than
about 1,400,000 cattle, 350,000 horses, and 210,000
pigs. Queensland has over 4,000,000 head of cattle,
and supplies large stores of beef to her sister
colonies. Some years ago the mother colony
had thrice the present stock of cattle, but
the larger stock were gradually displaced by the-
bearers of wool She has still, however, some of the
best cattle in the world. Her Herefords and Devons
are the best in Australia, and her Durhams of very-
good quality. There are many stud herds wherefrom
to pick drafts of young stock. America occasionally
makes selections from the best herds of New South
Wales. There are also herds of Ayrshires, Alderneys,
and Angus polled cattle, and last, but not least, on the
South Coast, the great dairy district of Australia, there
are pastured an excellent strain of milking cattle. All
the breeds mentioned are the progeny of some of the
best herds of Britain, from which supplies have been
regularly drawn. Breeders have not been
niggardly in making their purchases—£looo
for an English bull or £5OO for an imported
sheep is not regarded as an exceedingly high
price. A similar remark may be applied to horse
stock. Britain’s best studs have been drawn upon for
blood, coaching, and heavy draught stock. The New
South Wales horse, commonly called a “ Waler,” is
well known in India, and has been seen ere now on
English racecourses. Columns could be filled with
authentic detals of the hardiness and wonderful per-
formances of Australian hackneys, for equines thrive
quite as well as bovine and ovine stock on Australian
pastures.
SMALLNESS OP THE BEGINNINGS.
Something needs be said about the past, so that the
smallness of the beginnings from which the pastoral
property of Australasia increased—land improvements,
plant, and stock, which is now valued at £300,000,000,
of which per cent, belongs to New South Wales—
may be realised. There is so much haziDese
about the records of early settlement on the soil that
the study of histoiical statistics is rather puzzling.
One writer will give the origin to the one bull, four
cows, one calf, one stallion, three mares, three colts, and
some sheep, goats, and pigs, landed from England
exactly 100 years ago. Another describes the
famine experienced during the first few months of
settlement, aDd says, “Even the sheep and cattle,
which were reserved for breeding purposes, were killed.”
It is definitely known, however, that Cape and Bengal
sheep formed the first flocks of this colony. Atkinson,
in his work on “Grazing in New South Wales,”
published 60 years ago, describes the sheep
as a very unsightly and diminutive race, covered with
long, coarse hair, and more resembling the goat than the
sheep. He traced the cattle which he saw to the Indian
buffalo, “ remarkable for large haunches and shining
hair.” Wentworth, who over 70 years ago wrote
of pastoral settlement in New South Whies, accurately
foretells the future of the colony in the following words :
“ No country in the world, perhaps, is so well adapted
to the growth of fine wool as the colony of New South
Wales. There i 3 in its climate alone a peculiar con-
geniality for the amelioration of wool, which has been
found in itself to occasion in a few years a very per-
ceptible improvement in the coarsest breeds of sheep.
Even the East India sheep (of the colony), which in ita
natural state is entirely covered with hair, produces,
without any cross with a finer race, a progeny the-
superiority of whose fleece over that of the parent
stock is visible in every remoter generation,’


In 1792 there were in Australia —1 horse, 1 mare,
2 colts, 16 cows, 2 calves, 1 ram, 50 ewes, 6 lambs, 1
boar, 15 sows, and 22 pigs. During the first dozen
years there arrived in the colony 304 sheep, the greater
part from Calcutta, the remainder from the Cape
Colony. In 1794 there were 526 sheep, and this
number increased until we find that in the year 1803
there were 10,157 sheep. In 1804 an official
despatch describes seven-eighths of the sheep
a 3 worthless, having but little or no wool.
The remaining one-eighth yielded 31b. of wool
each. The despatch says, “ But as the fleeces are con-
stantly improving by the distribution of rams from
the Spanish, South Down, Teeswater, and Irish rams
to flocks of the heavy Bengal breed, it may be inferred
that wool will soon increase.” The prediction was
verified in 1820, when 58 bales of wool fom
Sydney sold in London at an average of 3s.
7d. per lb., the best bringing ss. England’s im-
port of wool from Australia in 1820 was 99,4161 b,
These were the small beginnings which, aided by the
enterprise of the Macarthurs, Coxs, Lawsons, and
dozens of other pioneer pastoralists, brought the
stock of Australasia to its present condition.
At the separation of Victoria the stock of this
colony numbered 13,059,324 sheep, 1, <38,965 cattle,
and 132,000 horses. Victoria took from that
number 6,589,000 sheep, 390,923 cattle, and 20,086
horses. Queensland’s formation also lessened the
stock rather materially, but the mother colony quickly
restored the balance and has sufficient power now to
form many pastoral settlements.
PAST AND PRESENT.
But the pastoral settlement of the present is widely
different from what it was 50 years back. Instead of
the rough slab hut with its rustic furniture, a
log for a seat, a sheepskin for a bed, a tin
cup, and a slush lamp, there are luxuriously
furnished houses, aye, even hundreds of miles west of
the Darling River. The old shepherd, with his dog
and scrip, has been displaced by the mounted boundary
rider. A trip to Bourke, formerly, in the matter of
time, as long as four voyages to England now require,
is a uleasant journey by railway of about 24 hours.
Much has been done in the way of advancing
settlement, but little has been attempted in
utilising the soil power so as to lessen the
disastrous effect of dry years. During the last
20 years good examples have been set in the
way of irrigation. The silage system has been adopted
and many large stations have powerful irrigating
plants, but much remains to be done ere Australia is
rendered even reasonably drought-proof. As it is. at
present, a couple of dry seasons cause semi-starvation
of flocks and herds ; a continuance of the dry weather
brings about immense losses by deaths. The soil is
sufficiently fertile to yield food for more than double
the number of stock kept, but the pastoralist uses the
plough but slightly and rarely conserves surplus grasses.
The occupation of pastoral country has other draw-
backs. There are many pests to contend with. In
the first half of the century there were the wild dogs or
dingoes. These are now so scarce that a reward of 30s.
per scalp does not prove profitable to the hunters.
Later the marsupials and wild horses increased to such
an extent as to cause much trouble and expense. A
good kangaroo skin is now worth 55., one of extra
good quality 103., and wild horses are very scarce-
The present bane is the wild rabbit, who now com-
mands about one-half of the colony. His advent and
success are due to gross carelessness on the
part of the legislators of the colony. A long
while prior to 1880, when the wild rabbits
first came across from Victoria, it was . known
that they had proved a plague in Tasmania, New
Zealand, Victoria, and South Australia. Yet, in 1882,
one-sixth of this colony was similarly affected. Even
then proper action was not taken. The rabbits were
allowed to spread over the western country and
across the borders of Queensland. Last year the
rabbit plague cost the State about £IOOO per day
under what was known as the bonus system, which
employed armies of trappers. Rabbit-proof fencing
is now displacing the bonus system, and as the
fences have proved economical and useful in Victoria,
it is likely they will be equally successful in this
colony.
AGRICULTURE.
Although the mother colony is in her. hundredth
year, agriculture within her limits is in its in-
fancy. It is related that when the first settlers landed
in Port Jackson an effort was made to grow wheat and
other cereals, which were planted with a hope of
raising large crops. A more unlikely spot could
not have been selected on any part of the conti-
nent. The soil which had produced the lovely natural
flowers so much admired by early voyagers was, in
reality, but a raw sand, which, lacking the application
of proper manures, was almost useless for the purposes
of the agriculturist It is, therefore, not a matter for
surprise that the people of the first fleet were almost
starved before the second fleet arrived with supplies.
Such a famine has never since been known in the land.
Possibly tue early impressions regarding the necessity
of depending upon outside sources for agricultural pro-
duce has had some effect upon settlement ever since.
Until recently the mother colony has been dependent
on other parts of Australasia for a large proportion of
her breadstuffs, horse fodder, and the like. From
the first days of settlement the early colonists, bold,
brave, and venturesome as they were, having the choice
of wide tracts of country, found it much more profit-
able to pasture cattle, sheep, and horses than to use
the plough or wield the scythe or the reaping hook. As
the country was explored immense areas of good agri-
cultural land were discovered. The garden soils of the
county of Cumberland were soon to some extent utilised.
The rich alluvial flats of the Hawkesburv were soon
caused to vield enormous crops of grain. Further in-
land, when the Blue Mountains were crossed, the rich
plains of Bathurst yielded hay and wheat of superior
quality. What might be called the testing of the
soil was conducted as pastoral settlements advanced.
On the coast, too, agriculture was spreading. The
pioneer timber cutters, in pursuing their hazardous
avocation, gradually cleared the scrub lands,
at the back of which were _ rich cedar
forests, and exposed soil the richness ot which soon
tempted its occupation by farmers. The well-known
dairy districts of the Southern Coast, Wollongong,
Kiama, Shoalhaven, Ulladulla, and Moruya and the
rich maize lands of the north, the Manning, Hastings
Macleay, Clarence, Richmond, and Tweed, owe the
settlement to the necessity which arose for goo


timber. The plough followed the axe. Nearly all
the districts mentioned were at first sown with
wheat, of which quantities quite sufficient for the
then requirements of the colony were produced. But
about 30 years ago wheat-growing received a severe
check by the appearance of the disease known as red
rust Wheat-production on the coast was abandoned,
and agriculture received a blow the effects of which are
still felt. The Southern Coast lands were then devoted
to dairy farms, and in the north lucerne, maize, and
sugar took the place formerly occupied by wheat
AGRICULTURAL SETTLEMENT.
Recent calculations show that settlement on pastoral
blocks of country has materially increased, whilst
agricultural settlement has been almost standing still.
In 1878 there were 4676 occupiers of holdings of less
than 15 acres each. There are at present not many
more than 6600 such occupiers. These figures show
that orchards and gardens have not increased to any
great extent. In the case of holdings of from 15 to
400 acres, such areas as would be used
for farms, there were in 1878 26,200
occupiers. The present number is not more than
28,000. On the other hand, the larger holdings have in-
creased to a remarkable degree. At the close of 1886 there
were 16,750 holdings of more than 400 acres in extent
compared with 6938 in 1878, an increase of 59 per
cent. In the year 1876 there were cultivated over
450,000 acres, which was less than three-quarters of
an acre per head of population. It is satisfactory t#
know that some advance in agriculture has been made
since then. At present, the population being over a
million, there is fully one acre per head. This is
progress of a slow kind, but those best acquainted with
the colony know that one or two of its districts, if
properly tilled, could supply nearly all home require-
ments. The western slopes, from the Blue Mountains
inland, have immense tracts of farming land. On the
western rivers—the Darling, the Namoi, the Murrum-
bidgee—large crops are obtained, and agriculture might
steadily be pursued if the immense stores of water
which these rivers contain were properly utilised.
WHEAT PRODUCTION.
The average production of wheat for 26 years has
been 13-23 bushels per acre. The highest during the
period was 17-37 and the lowest 6-75 bushels per acre
respectively. The mean average of wheat production
in this colony from 1873 to 1887 was 14-81. Vic-
toria’s average was 12-02, South Australia 8-16,
Queensland 10-37, West Australia 11-54, Tasmania
18-19, New Zealand 26-09. It will be observed that
New South Wales stands third in order of all the Aus-
tralasian colonies and first of all the Australian colonies.
But if the land of the mother colony were properly
treated the average yields would be much higher.
The virgin lands of the South and West frequently
yield over 30 bushels per acre. No system of rotation
of crops is followed, nor is there in the majority of
places the slightest rest given to the soil, which is called
upon, year after year, to produce wheat. As a result
the averages of the older farming districts are rather
low, and, of course, they affect the average of the gross
yield. At present there are under wheat about 350,000
acres, the produce of which is likely to be close upon
5,250,000 bushels. P
MAIZE-GROWING.
Maize-growing forms a staple industry on the banks
of the coastal rivers, especially those of the north,
where an average of 35 bushels per acre is obtained.
On the South Coast the yield is almost as satisfactory,
but inland it is much less in quantity. In the
year 1865 there were more, than 100,000
acres under maize. At present the area is
about 150,000 acres, and the total yield about
4,000,000 bushels per annum. In some parts on
virgin soils immense crops of maize have been raised,
over 100 bushels per acre being not an uncommon
yield. Much more would be done in the way of culti-
vation of this cereal if the demand tor it increased.
"Victoria was at one time a large customer to the maize-
grower, but her protective policy has materially
affected this colony’s exportation. Oats, barley, and
rye can be grown in fair quantities, but importa-
tions from New Zealand lessen the encourage-
ment to producers. Large quantities of malting barley
could be produced ; but very little in that way is done.
The total consumption of grain of all hinds in New
South Wales amounts to 10£ oushels per head of
population; whilst the produce of the colony is not
eight bushels, or 75 per cent of the total consumption.
Doubtless, as population increases, many of the large
tracts of farming country which are now under sheep
will be used as small farms. If wool producing were
not so profitable, the mother colony would be exporting
large quantities of cereals.
DAIRY PARMING.
No branch of the agricultural industry occupies a
position more satisfactory than that of dairy farming,
in which during the last five years many important
changes have occurred. The South Coast country is
beautifully diversified by networks of dairy farms.
Higher on the tablelands, close to the main southern
railway line, between Campbelltown and Goulburn,
dairying has made great progress. Far away
in the North, near the Queensland boundary,
on the Richmond and Tweed rivers there are large
dairy herds. The usefulness of cream-separating
machines was recognised about six years ago, and since
then dozens of milk factories have been established.
Co-operation in the matter of making butter, selling-
produce, and buying supplies is now the rule. Home
requirements have been fully met, and lately large
quantities of butter exported. Near the southern
boundary, on the coast, there are several large cheese
factories, and butter-canning on the Danish principle is
regularly carried out. The business of butter exporta-
tion to England will bear expansion, and as New South
Wales butter has already established a good name in
the London market, the prospects of dairy farmers
are cheering. Sown grasses as food for cattle appear
in fair proportion to other crops. There are now about
170,000 acres under artificial grasses, an increase
of 100,000 acres over the area so cultivated
in the year 1877. Very little is done with
root crops. There are only about 18,000 acres
under potatoes, which yield about 46,000 tons, much
less than is needed for home use. The soil and the
climate are well adapted to the growth of the tobacco
plant, and since 1862, when 224 acres were planted,
tobacco-growing has become an industry. At present
there are about 13,000 acres under the crop. The
yield is about 12cwt. per acre.


the sugar-cane.
About a quarter of a century ago it was discovered
that sugar-cane would thrive in the Northern rivers,
and there was a great rush of speculators to
select or purchase sugar lands. Many companies were
formed, large areas planted, and expensive machinery
erected. The results unfortunately did not equal
anticipations. It was found that in parts south of
the Clarence frosts damaged the cane, but north-
ward of that district the industry became firmly
established, and it rapidly spread to Queensland.
There are at present in this colony about 16,000
acres under sugar-cane, which yield about 168,000
tons of cane each year. On the Clarence, Richmond,
and Tweed rivers there are several large mills. Those
belonging to the Colonial Sugar-erfining Company
rank among the best sugar plants in the world. Tho
industry is remunerative and firmly established.
WINE-GROWING.
If a more than ordinarily remarkable instance of the
slow progress made in agriculture during the last cenjtury
were required, wine-growing might be cited. No part
of the world is better favoured by soil and climate
as a vinevard country than New South Wales ; but
although' the vine-growing and wine-making wore
firmly established as far back as the year 1828, the
area under grape vines at present is only 5840 acres.
Of this about 3200 acres are used for wine-making,
the remainder for the production of saleable freight.
The wines produced are acknowledged to be of
excellent quality. Large orders for them have
been received from France, but still the mother
colony’s vineyard interest does not extend to any
appreciable extent. In 1878 there were 4184 acres
under vines. The average yield per acre is about 200
gallons of wine. In every part of the colony, except the
semi-tropical portions, which are but few, and on the
highest mountain ranges, the grape vine thrives and
bears large crops. It may be said that there
are millions of acres suitable for wine-growing,
and as population increases the industry is
certain to expand. It is a matter for surprise that
many of the European vignerons, whose vineyards are
completely ruined by phylloxera, do not settle upon some
of the vast tracts of New South Wales which are now
available. Australian wines are at all times welcome in
Europe, but the worth of Australian lands is over-
looked. Greater progress has been made in Victoria
in wine-production, but in South Australia the progress
of the industry has been quite as slow as it has been hero.
FRUIT.
Fruitgrowing is another branch of the agricultural
interest which has not received the attention which it
deserved. As in the case of vines, there are millions of
acres suitable for orchards, but still fruit comes from
outside sources. Each year Tasmania sends green fruit
value at about £140,000 ; other countries send dried
fruit value at £lOO,OOO. But the step from importa-
tion to exportation is in reality short. During
last year several capitalists recognised the anomalous
state of affairs. Companies were formed, and doubt-
less the export trade which has to some extent com-
menced will be materially enlarged. Nearly all kinds
of fruit can be grown successfully within the colony’s
limits. English fruits thrive on the tablelands, whilst
on the coast the banana and the orange flourish.
It is with the latter that most success has
been achieved. There are at present under
orangeries about 8000 acres, the average produc-
tion from which is about 1000 dozens per acre.
Tew of the fruits peculiar to a warm and sunny climate
thrive better in the colony than the members of the
citron family, especially in the coast districts, and in
those regions where there is not too much frost. They
grow luxuriantly in the open air in and around the
neighbourhood of Sydney, and along the banks of the
coastal rivers. The orange was introduced into Sydney
from Brazil by the first fleet which conveyed settlers to
these shores. Captain King, who was afterwards the
second Governor of the infant colony, informs us in the
history he has given of the formation and pro-
gress of the colony, that in 1790 the orange
and lemon trees were in a thriving state. The first
large orangeries planted were in and near the town
of Parramatta, and in the sheltered nooks and valleys
along the Parramatta River, The cultivation of the
orange was gradually extended to the Hunter and other
rivers of the North. Altogether there are some 30
different kinds of oranges and lemons grown in our
orchards, including the St Michael’s, the Navel, the
Sangareen, the Seville, and the Mandarin orange ; the
Lisbon lemon, the rough lemon, the lime, the sweet
lemon, tho citron, and the shaddock. The culture of
the orange family has generally been a remunerative
one here, and as this fruit does not grow well in Vic-
toria, Tasmania, or New Zealand, there has long been
a considerable trade done in exporting it to those
colonies.
GAKDENS.
But, looking at horticulture in this colony, apart
from commercial principles, there are very few faults
observable. Sydney is surrounded by beautiful gardens.
Even the cottage homes of the humblest labourers are
decked with nature’s choicest gifts in the shape of
beautiful flowers. There are scores of plant nurseries,
and the business of propagating plants and selling seeds
is profitable. Nor is this love for flowers confined to tho
coast. In the inland districts every squattage has its
garden usually well kept and carefully tended. Nearly
all localities of any importance have their horticultural
societies and their annual flower shows. In the fal
West, where the rainfall is remarkably light, irrigation
is practised, and the patient Chinese raise large crops
of vegetables and fruits.
MINING.
FIRST SIGNS OF MINERALS.
The first signs of the vast areas of valuable minerals
the colony possesses were observed about 90 years ago,
when large seams of coal were found at the entrance to
the river Hunter. Gold was seen in the year
1823, but was not sought for as a matter of
occupation until the year 1851. From this
point the gradual development of our mineral re-
sources commenced. Iron, shale, tin, copper, silver, lead,
antimony, bismuth, manganese, cobalt, and precious
stones were unearthed. The total value of the various
products due to miners’ enterprise since the foundation
of the colony is about £73,000,000. More than half of
this sum is made up by gold, of which 10,000,0000 z.
have been raised, and about one-fourth is to the credit


of coal, of which over 40,000,000 tons have been
brought to the surface. Tin, copper, and silver stand
next in order of meiit, and, with other minerals, make
up the total of a century’s development.
COAL.
Notwiihstanding the magnitude of these totals, how-
ever, geologists and mining experts of good reputation
aver that mining in New South Wales is merely in its
infancy. In the case of coal such opinions are
based . upon data which are so plain as to be
undeniable; but the future of other mineral
resources is dependent upon the material aid which
labour and science will afford. That there are
immense beds of coal, which for the greater part
is of excellent quality, is fully proved. The
carboniferous formations extend for hundreds of
miles along the eastern slope close to the coast, from
the Hunter .River in the North to Bateman’s Bay in the
South ; while in the West they are found in the
upper valley of the Castlereagh at Marulan, Berrima,
and in.the Lithgow Valley. There are now about 70
coal mints registered and under official inspection. Of
these, 45 are in the Hunter River district. The South
Coast, has about 12 mines, and the Western district the
remainder. The entire number employ about 8000
persons, or more than one-third of the total
number engaged in mining throughout the colony.
Prior to 1829, the total output of coal did
not amount to more than 50,000 tons, but from
that year the demand for home consumption and
exportation gradually increased until the present time,
when the annual delivery from the mines is about
3,000,000 tons, of which quantity about 60 per cent,
is exported, the principal customers being Victoria,
South Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, America,
China, and Java. In the important matter of quality
there is. practically little difference between the best
Australian and the best British coals. The average
price obtained for New South Wales coal, at the pit's
mouth, is about 10s. per ton. The Hunter River col-
lieries are the largest and most important, and have
more than two-thirds of the present trade. Newcastle,
the port «f the Hunter district, is a safe haven for even
the largest ships. It has great natural advantages,
and is well furnished with wharfs, cranes,
and shoots. The Southern coast districts, from which
coal is shipped, are not so well favoured by
nature, and have to depend upon small harbours and
jetties, both of which are unsafe when gales sweep
along the coast, but if the demand for coal increased
even ten times the present output, New South Wales
could satisfactorily meet the requirements. There are
immense areas of valuable coal land unworked ready
for the miner's pick.
GOLD.
Gold-mining has successfully withstood the test of
36 years, and still employs about 7000 persons. No
metal is more attractive to the adventurous Briton than
gold, and hencs the fact that its discovery in largo
quantities in the dis'.ricts of Bathurst and Wellington
of this colony was a very important factor in
the settlement of Australia as a whole.
It was gold which brought the name “ Australia”
prominently before the world. In July, 1851, a lump
of gold, which weighed 12720 z., was found on the
luron. Other rich deposits were soon discovered. The
news spread quickly, as did the tidings that other parts
of Australia were mines of gold. The rush to the new
world commenced. Clipper ships were laid od.
Commerce received a fresh impetus. Sydney became a
great city.
The results of nearly two score years of toil in gold-
seeking are much greater than is embraced by the bare
statement that so many ounces were won. Gold
helped to settle a hardy, brave, industrious population
on the soil. The pioneer pastoralist was ably seconded
by the venturesome miner. Thus nearly every district
of this vast country has been tried by the gold-seeker.
From the coast to the localities 600 miles inland there
are scattered alluvial and reef workings. The Govern-
ment Geologist estimates that the extent of country
covered by certain formations in connection with
which gold is always found is over 70,000 square
miles, and there are formations too which, although in
a geological sense not likely to contain the much-
sought-for metal, have ere now completely upset the
calculations of experts by yielding large stores
of mineral wealth. Much prospecting has been done, but
there are yet immense tracts to be tried. Each year
brings fresh proofs that there are yet new goldfields to
conquer. The latest is the finding of a rich gold reef
at Cobar, an inland district which formerly was thought
only capable of yielding copper. It should, however,°be
clearly understood that in New South Wales, as
in other parts of Auslralasia, gold-mining is not
what it was 20 years back. There are now in this
colony about 7000 persons engaged in gold workings,
using machinery which requires steam to the extent of
1200 horse-power. In 1862 there were obtained
619,9090 z. of gold; last year the total quantitv found
was 91,8500 z. The figures tell their own tale.
The production since 1872 has fallen away most
remarkably. The decline mentioned has recently
prompted legislators to pass measures by which
sums are offered by the State to encourage
and assist prospectors. This has been the custom in
other colonies for years. Many prospecting par-
ties are setting about their work cheerfully. The
gravest trouble hitherto has been that the reefs wire
not payable to any great depths. Some districts,
although possessed of rich gold veins, have proved want-
ing when the miners sank 200 ft. Gold has been
found at a depth of over 1000 ft., but this was an
exception. That i 3 the bitter experience of nearly 30
years of trials, but in some cases it is overlooked by
investors, who too often are led into paying absurdly
high prices for mining properties mainly on the
strength, of representations concerning yields from
quartz obtained close to the surface, It would
have been much better for the colony as a whole if
mining, especially quartz-mining, had been conducted
on sound business principles instead of wild fancies
and gambling theories. The periodical outbreaks of the
gold fever enrich the few and impoverish the many,
while the reaction is too frequently injurious to the
industry. Such a blow was struck between the years
1871 and 1875, when it was imagined that
hundreds of reefs possessed stores of gold which were
almost inexhaustible. Immense sums were lavished on
the possession of machinery to work untried reefs. The
records of gold obtained plainly describe the effect of
the wasteful expenditure. The figures are—lB7o,
240,0000 z. ; 1871, yield 321,0000 z. ; 1872, yield
434,0000 z. ; 1873, yield 360,000 oz.; 1874, yield


-270 OOOoz. From the year last mentioned there was a
gradual decline until the total for last year, which was
about 100,OOOoz. The totals are approximate ; but
they serve to support the view that investors have
need to be cautious and to look back before
venturing on speculations in gold-mining properties.
There is a promising field in this colony for invest-
ments of capital to develop likely places, but satisfac-
tory results are not likely to accrue if at the start the
greater part of the capital is required to purchase the
land, as has hitherto been the practice. Land-jobbing
and share-trafficking do not constitute mining, and
it may be mentioned that these remarks are
equally applicable to other metals as well as gold. It
is now well known that the valuations of mining pro-
perties on this side of the world too often lean to the
sanguine side. The reefing districts are littered over
with, machinery which is rusting in idleness, simply
because the force of the axiom “ First try your mine and
then buy your machinery” was overlooked. Another
glaring mistake is that of feeling confident that
because block No. 1 is rich in ores, block, say, No.
10, half a mile off, must be nearly, if not quite as
vood. These are dark shades, which are necessarily
prominent when sketching the mineral wealth of the
colony.
SILVER.
Silver-mining is indeed very young, not yet having
reached its teens. So far as its steps have progressed, it
is full of promise; possibly the anticipations concerning
its future are much too sanguine. Fifteen years ago
small quantities of silver were taken with gold from
mines at Boorook, in the New England ®r northern
table land country, and some large sums were invested
in machinery, but without leading to the expansion of
the industry to any considerable extent. Better far
was the experience at Mitchell, a short distance
west of the Blue Mountain Range, where not
long since over 500 men were profitably employed.
The most important of the argentiferous discoveries,
however, date back only about three years, and are
located in the Western division of the colony, near the
border of South Australia. In this part of the colony,
long considered a mere arid waste, there are. now
settled, with everv sign of permanence, a population of
about 6000 miners and others, who are well supported
bv the industries consequent on the unearthing of
.mmense stores of rich silver ore and prospecting. One
mine, known as the Broken Hill Proprietary, employs
€BO hands, and has a complete smelting plant During
1886 this company raised and treated 14,750 tons of
ore, from which tons of silver, valued at
£228,519, were obtained. From August, 1886, to
August, 1887, this wonderfully rich mine paid
no less than £160,000 in dividends. . There
are other first-class pay r able mines on the Barrier fields
which, if properly worked and not over-weighted by
sums in the shape of capital, are likely to prove
profitable to investors. Silver-mining, so far as it has
progressed, has left a good record. In 1876 the value
of silver and silver and lead ore exported was
£16,848 ; in 1886 the export was valued at £492,029,
the total export for 10 years being £1,141,929.
At the outset of this new branch of mining many
mistakes were made in treating the ores, several of
which required more than ordinary knowledge.
During the last two years, however, the services
of skilful metallurgist; from Europe and America
have been secured, with results which, in the majority
of instances proved, hav' been satisfactory. A railway
from South Australia is extended to the Barrier mines,
which are now attracting British capitalists, who are
investing largely in the new fields.
TIN*.
Tin-mining, which did not commence until the year
1872, has been satisfactory from the first to the present
time. The production of 16 years is valued at about
£8,000,000. How so much wealth could have been
allowed to remain for so many years dormant in regions
which were regularlv traversed by miners is a sub-
iect for surprise, and* the fact may reasonably be cited
as supporting the view that there are yet many other
minerals only awaiting discovery to add materially to
the colony’s exports. It was not until the year 187
that the curiosity of a shepherd regarding the worth ot
some dark-looking substance, excavated from a saw-pit
in New England, led to the discovery that nearly all
the watercourses of that quarter of the colony were
heavily charged with stream tin. There was a great
rush of gold-miners and other persons to the new fields,
which soon afforded evidence of their worth. Inis
was in a part of the country which, for nearly 50
vears, had been a grazing ground for cattle and
'sheep. Some of the deposits of stream tin were
very valuable, and profitably employed large parties
of men for many years. Then lodes were
discovered, and with deep leads were Y°, T -, e 1
For many years it was thought that the tm fields ot
the colony did not extend outside the northern table
land, but lately payable tin was found close to the
Barrier Ranges, in the West, at a place known as Booia-
macca. The largest yield of tin from the whole colony
was in the year 1882, when the value was £B3d,4bi,
but the output of recent years is satisfactory, being
of the value of not less than £450,000 per annum.
copper. . .
Less satisfactory, but yet a good branch of the mining
enterprise, is copper, which in the course of 30 years has
left records the total of which is about £5,000,000.
The central portion of the colony has yielded,
and yet contains, immense stores of this metal.
Prior to the year 1884 copper-mining was very profit-
able, although the principal mines were hundreds ot
miles from the coast; but the extraordinary decline in
the prices obtained for the metal during recent years
materially checked, and at one time nearly overcame,
the industry. In 1872, copper sold at £lOB per ton ,
in 1884, about one-half that price was realised ; and m
1886 the best Chili bars sold at £3B 7s. 6d. per ton. Ihe
depression in the market, although it checked further
development of copper-mining in this colony, did not
have the effect of closing the principal mines. In 188 b,
two of the copper properties in the West employe
more than 800 persons. The ores of the West are
remarkablv rich and the lodes large. The Nymagee
mine yields from 14,782 tons of ore as much as
1478 tons of copper. Such properties only need a fair
market to render them very valuable. A return to the
price of 1884 would bring about the development ot
several new mines.
iron. . ,
There are immense quantities of iron ore _
broadcast over the mountainous country within 1 K
miles of the metropolis. Magnetite and brown hema-


-
Imports.
Exports.
Total
trade.
1 Home
produce.
Re-ex-
ports.
I Total
exports.
Jf. S. Wales...
Victoria
Queensland..
S. Australia..
W. Australia
Tasmania ...
N. Zealand ...
£
20,973,548
18,530,575
6,103,227
4,852,750
758,013
1,756,567
6,759,013
£
12,884,200
9,054,687
4,813,092
2,822,138
626,524
1,312,416
6,386,682
£
2,672,013
2,740,634
120,878
1,666,870
3,869i
19,124
286,109
£
15,565,213
11,795,321
4,933,970
4,489,0081
620,693)
1,331,540
6,672,79li
£
36,529,761
30,325,896
11,037,-197
9,341,756
1,388,406
3,088,107
13,431,804
59,733,693
37,899,739
7,509,497145,409,236'
105,142,929
tite, the richest of ores, containing on an average about
oO per cent, of iron, rest by the side of good coal. The
richness of the ore has been its greatest drawback, and
, caused many failures in its treatment The only
works of note which are turning this portion of the
I moral wealth to a profitable account are at Eskbank
near Lithgow. In 1885 bars, rails, and castings of iron to
the value of about £26,000 were made, but the industry
is in a languish, ng condition. Recent developments of
science have rendered the treatment of rich ores such
as Aew South It ales possesses possible. The difficul-
aes experienced here in smelting have been completely
overcome, and experts confidently predict a great future
for the Australian iron industry.
OTHER MINERALS.
Cinnabar, cobalt, mercury, bismuth, calamine
St!? 6 ’ manj ° ther minera,s - although
p entiful, are, like iron, merely waiting the in-
crease of population ere entering the ranks of remunera-
tive mining products. Kerosene shale, of which, dur-
ng 2° years, about 460.000 tons have been raised
. ploys a great number of miners, and is plentiful
.nough to warrant a large expansion of the industry,
diamonds and gem stones have attracted sufficient
Mention to prove that they are deposited profusely in
any parts of the colony. During the year 1885 the
l U S ra r an ])l f mond Company’s mine at Bingera yielded
i 34 diamonds, which weighed 209 carats; the Crown
ewel Mme gave 285, which weighed 105 carats. The
irgest diamond found in the colony weighed 5 5 carat.
Garble, valuable building stones, slafes an d fire-
ajs abound, a fact which is amply proved bv
e , many handsome buildings which now adorn the
etropolis of New South Wales. Few countries if
la l e . more . reliable sources from which to draw
)ies of mineral wealth.
COMMERCE.
EARLY DRAWBACKS.
The growth of the commerce of Australasia ha
n remarkable. At the outset the settlement in
t Jackson was largely dependent on the English
rket for its supplies of goods that were not
luced in the colony. From the earliest records
learn that within the first dozen years the internal
e was under the control ef a monopoly of the
ers of the New South Wales Corps. Obtaining
mand of tne imported goods, and notably of
’ hej r SO don terms that often ruined the
ers. Governor King, by granting licenses
the convicts to sell rum, broke up the
opolv; but this introduced a state of
was even more unsatisfactory. R um became
nd ot currency. The results of the system
carter, however, were so prejudicial the
ests of settlers, owing to the enormous percentage of
.s the dealers made, that Governor Bligh placed
!e Kings stores a supply of articles of house-
-2T n ’ as wel! f of beef> pGrk ’ wheat >
ia,ze. He gave an order to the settlers on
commissariat for the articles they required and
t'the e h n 7 0 Paj ‘ n Pr ° duCe at a Certain flxed
t the ensuing harvest. In this way the colony
id a very objectionable system of trading. Amongst
i other disadvantages was the want of money as a ci>
J ing , me(l >um. Foreign dollars and tokens were in-
t oduced and circulated as a convenience, until the in-
crease of population and the more rapid spread of com-
munication led to the establishment of banks.
expanding trade.
Amongst the earliest shipments from Australia was a
STofVon,' Tr' hlCh Tf f nt from Newcastle to the
° f T^ ood llo f e “ [ he first year of the present cen-
tury. The records of the early trade are of a fragment-
ary character. In 1822, 34 years after the
ormed, the total smpment of wool was 172,8801 b" and
leyona a few cargoes o£ coal, this formed the princS
article, the product of the colony, wK
™ "I’"! 6 ' 1 ' The whale oil trade, however
very extensively in these early days. In the
S “ the colony Jthe v,L
)t BDO. This business grew rapidly, and in 1840
t reached a total value of £'224,144. It then, however
egan to decline, but the export of wool steadily in-
reased. In 1830 the quantity exported was 899 7501 b •
a 1840, 8,610,7751 b. ; in 1850, 32,361,8291 b The
hipments of tallow were inconsiderable until after
\ the total value of the exports in that
ear navmg reached only £968. But in the next
ecade there was a vast expansion, the total value iu
300 being £300,721. In the latter years of the same
de the export of coal, which previously had been of
considerable dimensions, began rapidly to expand
e quantity in 1850 being 31,608 tons. Vhe
tal value 0 f the imports into the colony
that year was £2,978,338, and of the ex-
rts £2,399,580 From about this period
te the discovery of gold and the separation of Vic-
ia \ colon y in 1850 contained 265,000 inha-
a“ts:, The P ro » ress thenceforward, under the stimu-
of the immense immigration which set in, became
No . twithstandin g the separation of
the ex ports increased in value from £2,399 580
1850 t° £4,186,277 in 1858; and though then
rn of Queensland, the trade of New South Wales
tinued to increase, the exports in 1860 beimr valued
esolo 0 ! 0 ’ iY,f° ,?
,68.,,80... And the other colonies have progressed
degree not less marked, as will be seen from the
>wing table, which we copy from a work just
the a —
Sde S b i e 4 h r S 7? at total
trade of £37 ss. 7d. per head of population ; Western
Australia, £37 2s. 9d. ; Queensland, £32 19s. 4d. •
Victoria, £3O 14s sd. ; South Australia, £29 16s. 9d. ;
ew Zealand, £23 Is. 4d. ; and Tasmania; -£22 16s.
9d. Isew South Wales had considerably the largest
trade, as well as the largest per head of population.


IMPORTS INTO NEW SOUTH WALES.
Year.
From
Great
Britain.
From
British
Colonies.
From
S’th Sea
Islands.
From
Fish-
eries.
From
U. S. of
America.
From
Foreign
States.
Totals.
1837..
1847..
1857..
1867..
1876..
1886..
£
807,264
1,028,817
3,864,901
2,203,462
5,763,533
10,445,980
£
185.044
286,649
1,646,106
3,525,986
6,957,463
5,718,356
£
1,764
6,919
41,804
8,768
32,808
36,491
£
80,441
41,557
31,434
4,790
4,400
£
9,777
1,550
274,645
127,939
277,540
1,018.773
£
97,932
178,835
870,518
728,859
637,032
1,104,792
£
1,182,222
1,544,327
6,729,408
6,599,804
12,000,882
19,293,959
Additional 1876—Overland ... Total value, £1,671,894
„ 1886— „ ... Total value, £1,679,589.
EXPORTS FROM NEW SOUTH WALES
Year.
To
Great
Britain.
To
British
Colonies.
To
S’th Sea
Islands.
To
Fish-
eries.
To
U. S. of
America.
To
Foreign
States.
Total.
1837..
1847..
1857..
1867..
1876..
1886..
£
518,581
936,674
1,987,703
3.111,108
5,918,187
6 026,954
£
145,797
233,643
2,088,7 0
3,593,038
2,679,038
3,971,818
£
485
14,231
42,436
61,029
45,145
50,261
£
54,434
15
£
10,617
'7,204
17,270
148,116
521,216
£
17,592
16,987
285,884
98,270
255,475
895,890
£
747,876
1,201,535
4,011,952
6,880,715
9,045,961
11,466,139
Additional 1876—Overland ... Total value, £3,957,980
>» 1886 „ „ £4,090,074
SHIPPING OUTWARD.
Year.
To
Great
Britain.
To
British
Colonies.
To
South
Sea
Islands.
To
Fish-
eries.
To
United
States
of
America.
To
Foreign
Ports.
Total.
1837..
1847..
1857..
1867..
1876..
1886..
Tons.
13,398
21,267
33,060
41,295
54,389
224,750
Tons.
27,592
57.071
231,069
536,691
787,984
1,391,236
Tons.
3,383
5,394
8,832
33,288
13,183
Tons.
10,344
23,645
7,459
'"286
Tons.
"5,178
20,441
115,485
265,970
Tons.
13,262
14,664
94,987
119,462
61,868
248,847
Tons.
64,596
120,030
377,147
726,721
1.053,300
2,143,986
SHIPPING INWARD.
Year.
From
Great
Britain.
From
British
Colonies.
From
South
Sea
Islands.
From
Fish-
eries.
From
United
States
of
America.
From
Foreign
States.
Total.
1837..
1847..
1857..
1867..
1876..
1886..
Tons.
21,867
25,349
113,436
57,143
128,523
395,063
Tons.
26,477
47,598
184,530
547,542
855,532
1,458,123
Tons.
581
2,443
3,437
5,111
9,760
10,248
Tons.
13,004
22,501
7,608
919
411
Tons.
1,220
160
14,212
8,538
41,781
98,278
Tons.
4,226
8,968
28,190
27,717
38,397
152,906
Tons.
67,369
107,019
351,413
646,970
1,074,425
2,114,618
The trade of the colonies, having a population of barely
three and a half million, thus exceeded £100,000,000
sterling—an amount larger than the total value of the
trade of Great Britain when the Queen ascended the throne.
CHIEF TRADING CENTRES.
About 90 per cent, of the trade of New South Wales
is with Great Britain and the colonies, and the other
colonies have probably a like proportion. The chief
exports of the colony consist of wool and other pro-
ducts of pastoral industry, which find a market almost
wholly in the mother country, although of late years
an increasing quantity has been sent direct to the Con-
tinental market, and some to America, and lately a
trial shipment of 600 bale* has gone to China. The
surplus cereals of Australia also find a market in
England, except a small proportion which is taken for
Africa. Our gold, silver, tin, and copper products are
almostentirelyexportedto the mother country. California
and the East take the bulk of our surplus production of
coal. As to the £60,000,000 of imports, they are
mainly obtained from Great Britain. Tea and other
Eastern produce we procure direct from the pro-
ducing countries. Germany and Belgium have been
pushing their manufactures in our markets, but
they form only a small part of our total
imports—about 2§- per cent in 1886. And
as commerce has grown to such dimensions, it
would, perhaps, be strange if it were not conducted
with increasing regard to economy and facility. The
total tonnage of the vessels entered and cleared in 1886
was £12,853,786 —an increase of very nearly 100 per
cent, in the decade. And a very prominent feature has
been the substitution of steam vessels for sailing ships
in the coasting and intercolonial, as well as in the
foreign, trade.
The following tables, which have been supplied to
us from official sources, show the griwth and direction
of the foreign commerce and shipping business of New
South Wales during the past five decades: —■
TARIFFS.
In fiscal matters, the colonies of Australasia have-
shown a marked independence of each other.
Though at different times the theory of intercolonial
free trade has been discussed, so far each colony holds
by its own tariff in disregard of the interests of every
other. Each practically treats its neighbour as a foreign
State. Customs duties are levied upon the goods of
every colony alike. There has been talk of differential
duties as between two or three of the colonies. Vic-
toria has asked Tasmania to interchange. Victoria and
Queensland have also been parleying with the
same object; but so far nothing has been
done. Customs officers in the various seaports
and on the border stations collect duties for the
respective colonies. The inconvenience of this
on the border stations of New South Wales and
South Australia resulted in the adoption by the
Governments of the two colonies of a convention, by
which, in consideration of the payment of a fixed
sum by the Government of South Australia to the
Government of New South Wales, goods were allowed
to cross our borders for use in this colony free from
duty. But this arrangement was not found to
work satisfactorily and was abandoned. The colonies,
therefore, now levy duties all round on the basis of
their own tariffs. An examination of the Customs
lists shows that, except New South Wales, every
colony has a protective tariff. The tendency
of legislation in all these colonies has set steadily
towards the imposition of Customs duties, with the
view of encouraging the growth of native industries.
Generally they have been imposed at a time of depres-
sion, when the revenues were inadquate. The taxation
pill has been made palatable by duties which are
supposed to create work and remove depression.
Almost every article imported has been subjected to
duties, generally ad valorem, though in some instances
according to weight or measurement. Queensland ha^


Taxation.
Customs.
Other taxes.
Total.
New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania
New Zealand
£2.068,571
2,004,460
965,754
436,114
164.048
276,265
1,315,801
£543,264
630,100
230,897
149,009
20,951
95,279
646,361
£2,611,835
2,634,560
1,196,651
585,123
184,999
371,544
1,962,162
£7,231,013
£2,315,861
£9,546,874
—
Reve
Total.
nue.
FromC’stms
Expendi-
ture.
New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania
New Zealand
£7,594,301
6,481,021
2,810,147
1,975,269
388,564
568,924
3,688,016
£2.068,571
2,004,460
965,754
436,114
164,048
*276,265
1,315,801
£9,078,869
6,153,540
3,202,030
2,383,290
394,675
584,756
4,310,875
£23,506,242
£7,231,013
£26,468,035
duties on the basis of 7£ per cent, ad valorem ; Tas-
mania, 10 per cent. ; Western Australia, 12i percent.;
South Australia, 10 per cent, and 15 per cent.; New
Zealand, 15 per cent.; and Victoria, 20 to 25 per cent In
the case of Victoria and New Zealand the duties
originally imposed were smaller, but the inevitable
tendency of protection has been manifest in the
raising of the duties when it has been found
that they were inadequate to keep out the
imported article. Twice in New South Wales ad
valorem duties were imposed, but this year the colony
has again reverted to a simple tariff, comprising about
73 articles, of which a few have a protective incidence,
the Government of the day not deeming it prudent to
face the opposition which would have been encountered
had they attempted to remove them, or place countervail-
ing excise duties on the locally produced articles. The
revenues from taxation in the various colonies in 1886
are shown in the following figures, compiled from statis-
tics recently published byour Government statistician:—
FINANCE.
The public revenue and expenditure of the various
colonies run into large amounts. The following table,
compiled from the handbook of Mr. T. A. Coghlan, our
Government statist, shows the leading figures for the
year 1886:
It will be seen that New South Wales occupies the
leading position, though per head of population
Queensland has rather the largest revenue.
BANKS OF ISSUE.
The banks play a more than ordinarily important part
in providing funds for the requirements of enterprise.
In all there are 26 banks of issue. We gather from
the Australasian Insurance and Banking Record that
last year their paid-up capital amounted to £15,658,682,
and reserved funds £7,781,178. In addition, these
banks borrowed £105,082,000 from the general public,
including £11,747,000 outside the colonies. They
traded, further, with £5,015,000 of notes. Of the
total amount of their assets, they lent on bills,
mortgages, and otherwise £109,497,000; they held
in coin and bullion, £18,011,000, and possessed landed
property amounting to £4,159,118.
OTHER MONETARY INSTITUTIONS.
Besides the banks of issue the colonists largely use the
savings banks for the investment of capital, and Mr.
Coghlan, our statist, gives the total deposits in the
Government and Post Office Savings Banks of Aus-
tralasia in 1886 as £11,540,005, being an average of
£24 Os. 3d. per head for each of the 480,573 depositors,
or an average of £3 Bs. 6d. per head of the
mean population. These figures indicate that the
people of the colonies are thrifty, and that
their industry yields an ample reward. The
building societies also employ a large amount, of
capital in their business. An idea of the
magnitude of the transactions of these institu-
tions may be gathered from the figures in the two
principal colonies. From the “Year Book of
Australia ” we learn that in round figures the
societies in New South Wales have capital and
revenue funds amounting to about £1,750,000, and
deposits from the public amounting to about
£3,000,000. In Victoria the funds of members are in
excess of £3,000,000, and the societies have over
£4,000,000 of borrowed capital, Less than two-thirds
of the population of Australasia have thus about
£12,000,000 capital. In round figures the
capital forming the basis of the business of the building
societies of the colonies represents fully £15,000,000.
Another form of investment of capital is in the life
insurance institutions. Exclusive of three Ameri-
can societies, there are about 13 Australasian
societies, whose invested funds may be reckoned
at about £11,000,000. Savings banks, building socie-
ties, and life insurance associations of Australasia
have, in round figures, liabilities representing about
£37,000,000. A small part of this is invested with the
banks of issue, and therefore to add the total to the
banking capital would be partially to duplicate the
wealth of the colonies so far as represented in
these institutions ; but the figures as a whole imply that
these four classes of institutions have and hold pro-
perty representing about £140,000,000, and this, it i 3
believed, is about £20,000,000 in excess of their private
indebtedness. And, in addition to this, the Anglo-
Colonial and Colonial Investment Loan Agency and
Land Companies of Australasia have about £10,000,000
of paid-up capital, £2,000,000 of reserve funds, and de-
benture stock to a very considerable amount, certainly
in excess of £20,000,000.
MARKET RATES.
Though it is shown that there is so large an amount
of capital in the banks and other institutions of the
colonies, the market rates are much higher here than in
other parts of the world. Investors ordinarily obtain
from 4 per cent, to 5 per cent, for money lodged with
the banks, and 1 per cent, to 2 per cent, more from the
building societies. Of course, as investors expect high
interest, borrowers have to pay a high rate. The
present discount terms are 5J to 7 per cent.—about
twice as much as the English quotations, and higher
than the American. The natural effect of the high
rates is, of course, to direct English capital to the
colonies; and insurance companies and other institu-
tions, as well as private individuals, have for two or
three years past been sending money here for invest-
ment in mortgages on station and otner property.
MANUFACTURES.
The position of New South Wales in manufacturing
industry is very satisfactory. There has been a steady


and continuous growth, and what is noteworthy is the
fact that during the periods when the population
increased with great rapidity the number of hands
employed in the manufactories and works of the colony
increased at a still more rapid rate. This is very clearly
seen by reference to the Census Report of 1881. Com-
paring the numbers in 1871 and 1881, the report
states:—“ The total increase of skilled workers of all
classes was, during the decade, 18,939 persons, or
78-88 per cent of their number, being nearly 30 per
cent, greater than the rate of increase of the total
population.” The Registrar-General observed that
“this fact is a striking proof of the
progress of manufacture under the free-trade policy of
the colony.” Since the census year this movement has
continued. Between the close of 1881 and 1886 the
increase of the population was about 28 per cent.,
whilst the increase in the number of hands returned as
employed in the manufactories and works of the colony
was about 46 per cent. The actual increase was some-
thing less than this, as, in the last return, a number of
industries were included which previously were excluded.
However, after making allowance for this difference,
there is a very marked excess in the manufacturing
figures.
When we come to closely examine the records of
early years, and even of comparatively recent ones, we
find extreme difficulty in obtaining trustworthy data
respecting separate industries. There are two reasons
for this. The first is the meagre attention that was
given to statistical matters in bygone years, in conse-
quence of the slight interest manifested by the public.
The second reason is found in the difficulty that always
exists in a new country of defining and classifying
industries. It is hard to say which of these reasons is
the more important, but the second one has been
found a serious impediment in census years in
preparing reports of the occupation of the
people. To quote a paragraph in the Census
Report of 1871, “The same person may be member of
Parliament, a merchant, a land proprietor, and a
grazier; another, an innkeeper and a farmer. Many of
the gold-miners are also proprietors or occupiers of
land.” Mention is also made of men who united the
occupations of fishermen, mechanics, and wharf
labourers. It is evident that in a new district there
cannot be that division of labour which is so necessary
and so profitable in a large population, and where, under
one roof, one man carries on several industries it is no
easy task to decide on the heading under which his
establishment ought to be placed. When also indiffer-
ence exists as to the necessity for even approximate accu-
racy we may be sure the tables prepared require to be
used with much judgment. Up to as recent a date as 1876
the Statistical Registers of New South Wales did not
give the number of hands employed in separate indus-
tries, the number of establishments alone being given.
The latter information taken by itself is always apt to
be misleading, as an “ establishment ” may employ
10 men or 1000.
According to the census of 1811 there were 10,715
“ mechanics and artificers” in the colony, and in 1846
there were 10,769. The census of 1861, under the
heading of “ skilled workmen and artificers,” gave the
number employed as 18,454. It may be worth while to
give the separate figures for 1861. In the superior arts,
1129 ; in the metals, 3097 ; in wood, 5550 ; in stone,
and earth, 2871; in leather and skins, 3502; in other
materials, 2305. The classifications here used have not
been adhered to; indeed, the changes of classification
that have taken place add greatly to the difficulty in
following the growth of our industries. The census of
1871 showed a growth during the decade in skilled
workmen of 5557, bringing up the total number to
24,011. Ten years later the number had increased to
42,’950. But in the meantime the Statistical Register
had begun to record the number of hands employed in
our manufactories and works, and the total so recorded
in the last census year was 31,311, or only about 75 per
cent, of the number of so-called “skilled workmen
and artificers.” The increase of steam power is, of
course, an excellent test of the growth of manufactur-
ing industry, but the statistics on this point were never
properly obtained until the year 1885. We find,
however, the following in the Statistical Register for
1862: —“In 1853 there were 141 manufactories or
works conducted by machinery; in the 10 years ending
with 1862 they had increased to 859.” This shows a
considerable growth; but it is necessary to say that the
return included steam vessels and engines, instead of
being limited to manufacturing establishments.
Although the number of establishments without the
record of ° the hands employed is not trustworthy evi-
dence of the growth of any industry, it is still a
matter of interest, especially as we learn something of
the order in which our industries were opened up. Of
course there is a natural order of development. A
handful of people cannot land upon the shore of a new
and distant country and settle down to the manufacture
of fancy goeds. They must supply their wants in the
order of their urgency; hence the first industries we
should look to see established are those connected with
the erection of buildings and the production of articles
of food and drink. The records of the colony bear out
this expectation. It must also be remembered that the
great distance that lies between Europe and these
colonies has been very favourable to the early estab-
lishment and rapid growth of purely manufacturing
enterprises. The inducement to local manufacture i 3
increased just in proportion to the distance from out-
side sources of supply and to the cost of transit from
those markets. But for these circumstances it could
have scarcely been expected that in so short a time
there should have been the marked and important
development that has actually taken place. _ The
earliest record we have in the Statistical Register of
the manufactories of the colony is for the year 1841.
The total number for that year stands at only 61 ; in
1845 the number stood at 101, and in 1850 it had
grown to 206. Flour-mills were not included. Con-
siderably over one-third of the total in 1850 consisted
of “ tanneries,” Ac. The following are the principal
industries and number of establishments which find
record in the Statistical Register for the year 1841:
Distilleries, 2; breweries, 13; sugar refinery, 1; soap
and candle works, 6; tobacco and snuff manufactories,
3; woollen mills, 4 ; hat manufactory, 1; ropeworks,
3; tanneries, Ac., 11.
LABOUR.
OCCUPATIONS OF THE PEOPLE.
It is no easy task in a comparatively young country
to obtain figures giving with accuracy the different


occupations of the people. The following estimate,
however, may be taken as approximately correct:—
In the pastoral and agricultural industries, 35 per
cent. ; engaged in mercantile pursuits, wholesale and
retail, and in shipping, 19 per cent; employed in the
various manufactories and works, 15 per cent; em-
ployed in the railways and public offices of the colony
(public instruction excepted), 8 per cent; in mining,
7 per cent; in the professions (public school teachers
included), 5 per cent.; in sundry occupations, 13 per
cent. This may be accepted as a fair statement of the
relative importance of the various occupations of the
people of this colony. In Victoria the occupations are
much the same, but in the younger colonies there are
more or less differences, thus in Queensland there is a
larger percentage of the population supported by the
agricultural and pastoral industries, and a smaller
percentage supported by the manufacturing industry.
WAGES.
In this subject the question of wages must, of course,
occupy a prominent place. The most disturbing element
in the rates of wages during the century has certainly
been the gold discoveries. For the year 1850, that is
just before these discoveries, the Statistical Register
gives the following as current wages:—Carpenters,
smiths, wheelwrights, bricklayers, and masons,
all 4s. 6d. per day; farm labourers and shepherds,
£l6 to £l9 per year, with board and lodgings,
In 1851 these wages rose about one-half; in 1852 they
were just double the rates of 1850. In 1853 the rise
still continued, carpenters and smiths receiving about
12s. 6d. per day, and wheelwrights, bricklayers, and
masons 15s. to 16s. per day. In 1854 the advance
continued, and apparently in many industries reached
its highest limits, carpenters being paid 155., smiths
145., wheelwrights 155., bricklayers 18s., and masons
21s. per day*. During the following four y r ears these
wages gradually receded, and in 1858 the average wage
paid to these five classes of labour was 10s. to 10s. 6d.
Ihe wages of farm labourers and shepherds did not
advance as rapidly, nor to the extent shown in the
foregoing figures, but the advance obtained was held.
The wages, with board and lodgings, rose to £lB to
£23 in 1851, to £25 to £3O in 1852, to
£25 to £4O in 1854; and they stood at £3O to £4O in
1858, in which year, as we have seen, the ordinary day
wages had considerably declined. Wages apparently
remained unaltered till the years 1863 and 1864, when
they fell from Is. to 2s. per day, remaining steady at
the decline for about 10 y’ears. About 1874 an "im-
provement set in, which steadily increased, and which
has not yet been lost. The following are the nominal
rales of wages paid in 1886, as recorded by the Govern-
ment Statistician : —Stonemasons, bricklayers, and
plasterers, 11s. per day; quarrymen, 7a. to 10s. ; car-
penters, joiners, and painters, 95.; labourers, Bs. ;
plumbers, gasfitters, &c., 10s. to 11s. ; slaters, 10s.
to 125.; iron-moulders, Bs. to 9s. 4d. ; boiler-
makers and iron shipbuilders. 10s. ; engineers, 9s. to
12s. ; engineers’ labourers, ss. to 75.; shipwrights, 11s.
to 12s.- Under the head of weekly wages we have
wheelwrights and blacksmiths, 355. to 605.; farriers,
355. to 555.; saddle, collar, and harness makers, 30s to
50s ; tailors and pressers, 50s. to 60s. ; coopers, 40s. to
50s. ; brickmakers, 255. to 555. ; cooks, 30s. to 60s. ;
drapers, 30s. to 70s. Wharf labourers are paid Is.
per hour, and coal lumpers Is. 3d. It is difficult to
speak positively about the relative rates of wages in
all the foregoing branches of industry in the other
colonies. There seems, however, to be no doubt that,
as regards the average rate paid, this colony
halds the premier position. It scarcely needs pointing
out that wages in these colonies must tend to
uniformity, for labour will naturally seek the
most profitable channels. As an example of the diffi-
culty of comparing wages in the colonies we may refer
tothefact that the New Zealand Statistical Register gives
separate rates for nine districts, into which that colony
is divided, and, according to the table provided, the
wages of shepherds, with board, vary -from £35
to £5O in one district up to £6O to £BO in another, and
the day wages paid to masons vary from 9s. to 10s. in
one district, to 16s. in another. It is needless to say
that such a table is thoroughly misleading.
HOURS OF LABOUR.
Equally or almost equally as important as the rates
of wages is the number of hours of labour. For
many years eight hours has been recognised in
many industries as the limit of a day’s
labour, and the eight-hour system has become
more and more generally accepted until it may be said
to be the rule. The system even governs work on
board our steamers, and sailors, firemen, &c., now re-
ceive extra pay for working beyond these hours. So
much is the system engrafted on the industry of the
colony that an Eight-hour Demonstration is now a
yearly event, and a public holiday is set apart in this
and other colonies for its celebration. It is to be re-
gretted, however, that long hours of labour still prevail
in most of our retail shops and in other employ-
ments. We have also the anomaly that those who
work short hours on the first five days of the week
enjoy a holiday on Saturday afternoon, whilst many
of those who work long hours on the first five davs
work up to midnight, or nearly midnight, on the
Saturday.
TRADES-UNIONS.
Labour in this and the other colonies is largely con-
trolled by trade-unions. This is especially true of
the two colonies of New South Wales and Victoria. In
the other colonies the populations have not yet grown
large enough for the unions to become so readily and
effectively established. In New South Wales the
number of trade-unions is probably not far short of 50. A
considerable number are affiliated together as a Trades
and Labour Council. The various bodies representing the
building trades have also a council. The seamen have
a very strong union, and with some other bodies
form a Maritime Council. There is no doubt that the
unions have exerted a powerful influence in the labour
market
CONDITION OF THE WORKING CLASSES.
The condition of the working classes in these colonies
will not suffer by comparison with that of their fellows
in any other part of the world. House-rent is the chief
itent which can be called excessive. Probably the
Australian workman, on the average, pays three times
the weekly rent that is paid by the English workman.
On the other hand, meat is much cheaper
than in England, and there is but little
difference in the price of bread. Clothing, boots
and shoes, furniture, and manufactured articles of
all kinds, as well as articles of food like poultry, bacon,
jams, dried fruits, Ac., are all rather dear. But most of


these articles can be bought cheaper in New South Wales
than in anv other of these colonies, because of the greater
freedom from Customs duties. The large number of
building societies and the heavy deposits in the
various savings banks all bear evidence of the sub-
stantial well-being of our working men. The savings
banks deposits on the Ist January, 1886, were
£3,484,461 in New South Wales, and £3,409,266 in
Victoria; and the total in the whole of the Austral-
asian colonies was £12,876,427. Although the
amount deposited in New South Wales is larger than
in Victoria, the number of depositors is much less. It
is impossible to ascertain the savings invested in build-
ing societies and in direct purchases of land by the
working classes, but it is certain that the total amounts
to quite a large sum. Another evidence of prosperity
is to be found in the records of the life insurance
offices in the colonies. It was estimated in 1884 that
there were then 150,000 policies in force in Australian
offices, assuring in all no less than 42 millions sterling.
It is clear that a large number of these policies are
held by the working classes. The condition of the
people in these colonies has been almost continuously
changing for the better during the last 30 yeais. The
work of colonisation is one that calls for many fine
qualities, and we may rest assured that the work of
winning these great colonies for mankind has not been
accomplished to the extent it already has been without
a record of labour, of endurance, of privation, and of
skill, of which we may be proud. Thousands have
contributed by their hard and lonely lives in remote
districts to the easier life that to day all the population
may enjoy more or less thoroughly.
THE DOMESTIC SERVANT.
The welfare of no class is more marked
than that of the domestic servant. The Statistical
Register says that in 1850 the wages of the general
house-servant were £l2 to £l5 a year. The gold dis-
coveries, which caused a drain of male labour, of course
made female labour more valuable, and in the course of
four or five vears servants’ wages advanced 50 to 100
per cent. This gain was partly lost after the gold fever
subsided, but the rapidly growing prosperity of the
colony and the comparative scarcity of female labour
caused a substantial increase to take place during recent
years. The present wages of female general ser-
vants in this colony may be reckoned at from
£3O to £45 per annum, that of laundresses
a few pounds higher, and that of female cooks at from
£4O to £7O. It is probable that the wages paid for
female labour are higher in New South Wales than in
Victoria, because there are about seven more females
to a hundred males in the latter colony than in the
former. Hence we find in Victoria about 4000 more
females employed in factories than in New South
Wales. The “ servant-girl ” question is one of un-
ceasing interest to mistresses in this colony, and there
is no present prospect of the number of servants in-
creasing so as to fully meet the wants of New South
Wales.
GOVERNESSES.
There is a fair demand for governesses partly by
families situated on stations up the country, who find
it difficult to otherwise obtain tuition for their children.
Salaries of from £lOO to £l5O are occasionally paid;
but it is probable that the majority of governesses do
not receive more than is paid to first-class general
servants. What is known as “ light, genteel employ-
ment ” is naturally scarce in these colonies at present.
It represents a stage of development that we have
scarcely reached.
LEGISLATION.
Legislation of a more or less stringent character has
been passed in some of the colonies for the regulation
of factories, especially with a view to the protection of
children. In Victoria power is given to municipalities
to compel the early closing of all ordinary shops.
The accommodation generally provided for workmen
in the manufactories and works of the colonies
is fairly good and is improving every year. The
number of large, well-ventilated buildings is continually
increasing, and the requirements of sanitary scienee
receive growing attention. It is much to be regretted
that the overcrowding which is so conspicuous a feature
of the old cities of Europe should be permitted in
Australia. Probabiy the least satisfactory feature in
the condition of our working classes is their house
accommodation; in the cities especially it is too often
both bad and dear. In concluding this brief notice of
the position of labour, a word may be given to the fre-
quent cases that come under public notice of men who
immigrate to these colonies, and who, finding nothing
to their tastes, and lacking ability to turn to anything
new, return to England. Such men too frequently
explain their own failure or excuse their own unsuit-
ability by misrepresentation of the position and resources
of these colonies. In the past harm has been done by
these men, but the fuller knowledge of Australia now
being gained in Europe will probably prevent such
misrepresentation in the future.
COMMUNICATION.
TRAVELLING IN OLD TIMES.
In nothing has this colony made greater progress
than in the matter of communication. Lines of
powerful, well-appointed steamships now run with
such regularity, swiftness, and safety, between
Sydney and the principal ports of England, the Euro-
pean continent, and America, that a visit to any of
these places is regarded as a pleasure trip. Nothing
is wanting in the way of comfort on the steamers,
and so rapid are the passages that the voyager may make
a tour of Europe and America and be back in Sydney
again almost without being missed. Not very long
a°-o it was considered satisfactory to reach England in
from 100 to 130 days; now the passage may be done
in 30 days. The first trading or merchant vessel that
visited Sydney, apart from those which formed a por-
tion of the convict fleets, entered the port on the Ist
November, 1792. It was a small brigantine called the
Philadelphia, which had brought a cargo of provi-
sions to the country on speculation.. Nearly seven years
afterwards —in the evening of the 29th June, 1799 —
the ship Albion arrived from England, and was at once
famous for having made the fastest passage known
since the foundation of the colony—a ] assage of 3
months and 15 days. At this time, early as it was,
there was communication between the colony and
America. It was in connection with what was known
as the oil and skin trade, but it formed the means of
bringing the two countries together. 1 1822 is the


earliest yew for which official statistics are in
existence in this colony, and in that year there were 48
arrivals of vessels representing 17,142 tons from Great
Britain, and 45 departures of 16,730 tons for that
country. In 1886, the last year for which statistics
have been published, the arrivals and departures from
and to the old country were respectively 238 of
395,036 tons, and 112 of 224,750 tons. In addition
to the extensive and regular communication which
exists with Great Britain, numbers of steamers and
sailing ships trade more or less constantly between Syd-
ney or Is ewcastle and most of the principal ports of the
world. Communication may, in fact, be had easily and
cheaply with any place to which either the visitor to
or the resident in the colony may desire to go. The
elfects of the remarkable progress which has taken
place during recent years in the construction of fast-
going steamers have been experienced here equally with
other countries possessing important seaports and a
large and growing trade.
OUR MODERN STEAMSHIPS.
No steamships in the world surpass some of those
which run constantly, carrying large numbers of passen-
gers, between Sydney and London. The disappearance of
the small sailing vessels of the early days, to give place to
the smart ocean-going clippers of 1000 tonsT with their
comfortable passenger accommodation, took place in con-
nection with Australian trade at the same time as
means of communication by ocean travelling improved
in a similar manner elsewhere. These, again, as steam
became a much more important factor than formerly,
gave way to the magnificent fleets of steamships
■which now come here. Steam communication with
England existed as far back as between 1850 and
1860. The P. and O. Company’s steamships
were coming here at about the latter date, but the
day had not then arrived for steam communication to
be so rapid and so frequent as to induce all or most of
the travellers between England and the colony to pre-
fer steamers to sailing vessels, and most London
traders at that date provided special accommodation for
passengers, and depended to a very considerable extent
lupon the passenger trade for the profits of their
voyages. But the difference between the facilities
for ocean travelling in the old days and those available
now, is seen in the fact that 20 or 30 years ago the
larger sailing vessels which visited Sydney made° little
more than one voyage in each year, while at present
the powerful steamer* coming to the port make three
trips during the year.
Ihe necessity for securing adequate provision for the
transit of mails had much to do in bringing to Sydney
such fine vessels as those of the P. and 0. Co. and the
Orient Oo.; and the same thing was the eause of
rapid and regular communication with America. The
Pacific Ocean was first “bridged” by the boats of
the company which carried the mails for England via
Panama, and later on by the steamers of other large
American companies, including those of the Pacific
Mail Steamship Co., which now run between Sydney
and San Francisco.
LOCAL COMMUNICATION.
Intercolonial communication by sea has been
similarly progressive. The small sailing vessels which
originally carried on the passenger trade have long
since given place to capacious steamers, and the comDe-
tition between the different steamship companies makes
travelling between Sydney and the various Austral-
asian colonies cheap and pleasant. The progress of
internal communication has been equal to that of
external communication. Railways and well-con-
structed roads make travelling "to almost any
point in Australia safe and expeditious. Postal
and telegraphic facilities also exist in everv
direction. Within the last few years the advan-
tages of the telephone have been added to those of ‘the
telegraph, and though telephonic communication
doe 3. not at present extend beyond meeting the
requirements of business houses connected with
telephonic centres in towns, experiments have shown
the feasibleness of running the telephone wires from
town to town, and before very long telephonic com-
munication throughout the colony will probably become
a permanent institution. Railways traverse the colony
in all directions, and so connect with the systems of
other colonies that people may travel by rail from Sydney
to Melbourne and Adelaide, and from Sydney to Brisbane.
The journey to the Victorian capital is done in 17 hours,
to that of South Australia and to the capital of Queens-
land in 37 hours. Prom each of these metropolitan
cities the railway systems of the three colonies respec-
tively radiate, so that in reality the railway traveller
starting from Sydney may journey in well-appointed
and efficiently-managed railway trains over three parts
of the continent of Australia. The construction of
the New South Wales railways has of late years pro-
ceeded very rapidly. At first there were great difficul-
ties to overcome, and progress was slow. The line of
mountains known as the Great Dividing Range,
which runs north and south from one end of New
South Wales to the other, had to be crossed, and
the work of carrying the railways over this formidable
barrier to the fertile plains beyond was protracted and
expensive. But once over the mountains the labour of
railway extension was easy, and now lines traverse the
length of the colony from north to south, extend almost
to the boundary of the colony in the west, go very far
into the north-west and south-west, and branch off from
the great trunk rail\|hys in various other directions to
meet the requirements of the population in important
towns and districts remote from Sydney. The
first sod of the first railway was turned on 3rd July,
1850, only 38 years ago, and there are at the present
date in daily operation railways to the extent of 2054
miles.
Other lines will also be constructed. There are still
some towns and districts in the far interior which need
this means of communication, and to these railways
must sooner or later be made. Some must be made
without delay. The northern coast towns, and one or
two in the south, east of the Dividing Range, are not
yet connected by railway with the ports which form
their natural outlets on the seaboard. Localities in
the interior rich in agriculture or pastoral pursuits
have yet to be joined to the trunk lines. The North-
Western railway must be pushed further towards the
south-western boundary of Queensland ; and the
Western railway system will in due time be further
extended to offer all reasonable facilities to the residents
on the Western rivers. On the railways at present
open for daily traffic there travelled last year about
16,000,000 passengers, at an average rate of 2d. per
mile for first-class accommodation, and l£d. for second-
class.


Steam tramways were introduced into Sydney. in
1879. They connect the city with the suburbs im-
mediately adjoining it. At the time of their being
first brought into use an idea was entertained that
they might be profitably laid down in the country to
act as feeders to the railways, but an experimental line
of this kind has not realised expectations. A line has
since been laid down at Newcastle for purposes similar
to tkose for which the trams are run in Sydney, and it
may be that other towns will eventually be provided
with this means of local communication.
Road-construction, of course, preceded the laying
down of railwaye, and roads exist in every part of the
colony. Adopting the plan afterwards followed in
railway construction, three main trunk roads were
carried’ north, south, and west, and from these branch
roads were made to every point. Votes of money,
annually passed by Parliament, serve to keep the roads
in repair, and as both the work of construction and
maintenance is in the hands of a Government
department, under the direction of a thoroughly
competent engineer, the road system of the
colony is efficiently carried out. Where rivers or other
watercourses have to be crossed, and are not fordable,
bridges are constructed, or punt accommodation is pro-
vided, and nothing within reason is wanting in the
efforts to afford facilities for safe and quick transit by
road in those parts of the colony which the railways
have not yet reached. Where the railway train does
not go the well-constructed road forms the track for a
line of regularly running mail coaches under contract
to the Government, and with these punctuality and
as much comfort as coach travelling affords anywhere
can be found.
EDUCATION.
SMALL BEGINNINGS.
The necessity for schools was impressed upon those
interested in the welfare of the colony at a very early
period of its history. In 1792 the first chaplain, the
Rev. Mr. Johnson, wrote to the Society for the Promo-
tion of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, lamenting the
neglected condition of the children, and suggesting that
educated convicts might be employed as teachers at a
small salary. In a despatch, dated August, 1796,
Governor Phillip stated that a Public school for the care
and education of the children was much wanted to save
them from certain ruin. The first building used as a
schooihouse was raised for a church, and was
afterwards wilfully burnt down. Governor Phillip
speaks of the building as “ used on the
week days as a schooihouse, in which from 150 to 200
children are educated under the immediate supervision
of the clergyman.” Notwithstanding the concern for
the children thus manifested by the first Governor, no
properly organised system of State education existed
until 1848, in which year Lord Stanley’s National
System of Education was introduced. Prior to that
date the schools were started by the clergy, or were
private The buildings used were, as a rule,
unsuitable; no attention was paid to lighting and
ventilation, the appliances were meagre and of the
roughest kind, and too often little or no inquiry was
made as to the character and qualifications of the teacher.
Even in 1854, when considerable improve-
ment had been effected, the Commission ap-
pointed to inquire into the state of educa-
tion throughout the colony reported:—The schools
are badly situated and ill-adapted for the purpose, in
bad repair, and insufficiently supplied with the means
of carrying on the instruction of the pupils. The
number of children attending school is small; their
attainments in every branch of knowledge, and especi-
ally in religious subjects, are very small. The con-
dition of the schools as regards instruction is deplorable
in the extreme; few schools are worthy of the name.”
THE ORIGIN OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
From 1820 to 1847 assistance was granted to the
primary schools established by the various Churches, but
no supervision was exercised over such schools by the
State. With the incorporation of the Board of National
Education and the appointment of the Denominational
Board in 1848 the history of public instruction in New
South Wales may be regarded as commencing. The
Denominational Board had little more to do than to
distribute the funds voted by the Legislature, the
management of the schools being left in the hands of
the four State-aided Churches. The National Board,
on the other hand, had to introduce and build up an
entirely new system, and to provide both schools and
teachers. The members were, however, enthusiastic
and determined ; in spite of very great difficulties,
they worked steadily and vigorously, and
achieved marked success. Under this board, suitable
school buildings were erected, proper furniture and
apparatus were supplied, trained teachers were imported,
the pupil teacher system was introduced, arrangements
for the training, examination, and classification of
teachers were made, and the systematic inspection of
schools was commenced. The instruction in the
National schools was strictly non-sectarian, but
provision was made for general religious teach-
ing, and for special lessons by clergymen to the
children of their respective Churches. The com-
petition of the two systems, National and
Denominational, did some good, but in many places it led
to a needless multiplication of schools. Small towns
frequently had several schools where one would have
sufficed, and the country districts were left without the
means of education. This state of things caused a
general desire for a change, which was eventually
brought about by the Public Schools Act of 1866. In
1848 the colony was credited with 462 schools, attended
by 23,574 pupils, but very little reliance can
be placed on the school statistics of that
time, as there was then no uniformity in the mode of
recording, and no check upon the returns of attendance.
In December, 1866, when the two boards were abolished,
there were 259 National schools with 19,641 pupils,
317 Denominational schools with 27,986 pupils, and
604 private schools with 15,556 pupils, a total of 1180
schools and 63,183 pupils. The population of the
colony, 220,474 in 1848, had now reached 447,620,
more than doubling in the interval, but schools and
scholars had increased even more rapidly.
THE ACT OF 1867.
The Public Schools Act, which came into operation
in January, 1867, provided for the continuance of
Denominational schools under certain restrictions, but
practically prevented any addition to their number.
Tne National schools were henceforth termed Public
schools, and to meet the wants of thinlv-peopied


May,
1880.
1 December, 1887.
Schools.
Scholars.
Schools.
Scholars.
Public Schools
Provisional ditoo ...
Halt-time ditto
House to House ditto
Evening Public ditto
Denominational ditto
705
313
97
None in
None in
150
68,823
8,312
1,683
operation
operation
22,716
1782
344
182
66
16
Noneun’er
147,499
6,183
2,421
1,416
365
depart’ent
Totals 1
1265 I
101,534
2390
157,884
—
1883.
1887.
—
Schools
Scholars, mean quarterly
enrolment
School fees received
Gross expenditure
Net expenditure
Cost for each pupil of
mean quarterly enrol-
ment
1,706
130,175
£51.427
£821,852
£770.425
£5 18 4
2,390
156,636
£63,895
£624,700
£560,805
£3 11 9
Increase, 684
Increase, 26,461
Increase, £12,468
Decrease, £197,152
Decrease, £209,620
Decrease. £2 6s 7d
■districts. provisional and half-time schools were brought
into existence. The supervision of all State-aided
schools was now entrusted to a Council of Education,
consisting of five members, appointed by the Govern-
ment. The council extended the work begun by the
National Board, but was for several years ham-
pered, as that board had been, by a regulation
\\ liich compelled the residents of a locality to subscribe
one-third of the cost before they could bo granted a
school. The cancellation of this regulation in 1875, in
obedience to a resolution of the Legislative Assembly
on the motion of Sir Henry Parkes, though it
necessitated an increased vote, was a boon to the
country districts, and gave a great impetus to the estab-
lishment of schools. The Council of Education had
charge of primary education from January, 1867, to
the 30th April, 1880, when its functions
were, under the terms of the Public Instruction Act,
transferred to a responsible Minister. The Council
passed over ,to the Minister 705 Public schools, with
68,823 pupils; 313 Provisional schools, with 8312
pupils; 97 Half-time, with 1683 pupils; and 150
Denominational schools, with 22,716 pupils: a total of
1265 schools and 101,534 pupils. The private schools
were then given as 554 schools, with 53,756 pupils,
so that when the Public Instruction Act was intro-
duced the colony had 1819 schools and 155,290 pupils.
From 1866 to the beginning of 1880, the population
had advanced to 734,282, but the pupils at school had
increased twice as fast.
THE ACT OF 1880.
Ihe chief provisions of the Public Instruction Act,
the one now in force, are:—
1. The supervision of primary education is placed in the
hands of a responsible Minister.
2. In all schools the teaching must be strictly non-
sectarian ; but the words “secular instruction” are
neid to include general religious teaching. At least
lour hours of each school day must be devoted to
secular instruction exclusively, and a portion of each
day, not more than one hour, must be set apart for
the special religious instruction of the children of
any persuasion by the clergyman or other religious
teacher of such persuasion. Children not receiving
lesson re^lous instruction proceed with the ordinary
a' "a ii te ? cllers an( ! officers are Civil servants.
4. All school fees, except those paid in evening schools,
are the property of the State, and must be paid into
the consolidated revenue. The rate of fee is fixed at
threepence per week for each child, the maximum
charge for a family being one shilling. Free eduea-
ttuu is granted in cases of poverty.
o. 1 üblic schools may be established wherever an aver-
age attendance of 20 pupils can be secured.
b. 4 rovisional, half-time, and house-to-house schools
may, according to circumstances, be established in
sparsely-peopled districts.
7. Secondary instruction is provided for by means of
o tu 8 ’ 11 , ools and Superior Public schools.
. Ihe teaching of English and Australian history is
insisted upon.
9. Attendance at school is obligatory upon all children
between the ages of 6 and 14, residing within two
miles of a school, unless they are being educated in
some other way, or have passed the standard for
exemption.
10. Aid to Denominational schools was withdrawn at the
end of 1882.
Regulations for carrying out the provisions of the
Act have been issued by the Governor, with the ad-
vice of the Executive Council, and have the force of
law. . The most important of these relate to the
training, examination, classification, and payment
of teachers, and to the instruction of the pupils/ The
Public schools are arranged in nine classes, according
to the number of pupils in attendance. A school of the
first class has an average of not less than 600 pupils ;
a school of the tenth class has 18. The head master of
a school of the first class receives a salary of £4OO per
annum, and, if married, is provided with a residence,
vested or rented; the teacher of a tenth class school is
paid £lOB. The salaries of provisional school teachers
range from £9O to £6O per annum; and house-to-
house teachers are paid £5 per annum for each pupil in
attendance, up to a maximum of £lOO. In regu-
lating the course, of secular instruction, care is taken
that reading, writing, and arithmetic receive the great-
est attention.
THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
_ Department of Public Instruction, organised bv
Sir John Robertson, has carried on its work with much
vigour, and has spread schools all over the colony, even
to the remote settlements of Barringun, Milparinka,
and Silverton. It would be difficult, it not impossible,
to find a place in the colony in which a dozen children
of school age could be collected unprovided with a
school. Notwithstanding the loss of the 150 Denomi-
national schools, with 22,000 pupils, in December,
188*,, the department can now show a large increase in
both schools and scholars during the time it has been
at work. This will be clear from the following
table:— °
The great demand for new schools and new build-
ings, and some extravagance in the way of ornamenta-
tion, made the public instruction very costly during
the first years of its existence, but under economic
management the expenditure shows a steadv decrease
since 1883. A glance at the following table will
make this clear:—
It is to be regretted that there is no Act in force in this
colony similar to that in Victoria, which requires all
private schools to beep proper records of their pupils’
attendance, and to furnish accurate returns to the De-
partment of Public Instruction/*,The statistics relating
to the private schools of New South Wales are not
very reliable. So far as can be ascertained, they num-
ber 650, and are attended by about 40,000 pupils. The
Denominational schools, about 300, with 25,000 pupils,
are included in this return. Talcing the pub-
lic and private schools together, we have about


•200,000 children, or about 19 per cent, of
the gross population of the colony, in actual
attendance at primary schools. This must be regarded
as satisfactory, but it is clear that there still is ample
scope for the vigorous carrying out of the principle of
compulsory attendance.
SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION. —MIDDLE CLASS
SCHOOLS.
For many years the secondary schools of the colony
have been to' a large extent supplied by private or
denominational enterprise, and many of such schools
have a deservedly high reputation. The State has,
however, done something to fill up the gap between
the primary school and the University by establishing
Superior Public Schools, Public High Schools, and the
Sydney Grammar School.
* Superior Public schools must have not fewer than
20 pupils educated up to the standard for the fifth
class. The course of instruction for that class in-
cludes the English, mathematics, history, geography,
.and science, prescribed for the University examina-
tions. There are now 38 of these schools, with 1725
pupils in fifth classes. No charge is made for instruc-
tion in the advanced subjects, but teachers and pupils
are assisted by grants of the special text-books re-
quired.
High schools were established in 1883 with the
view of connecting the primary schools with the Uni-
versity. Schools for boys and girls were started at
Bathurst, Goulburn, Maitland, and Sydney. The school
for boys at Bathurst, and the two at Goulburn, have
been closed, as they failed to attract pupils. The
remaining five have.been successful, particularly those
in Sydney. During 1887 the high schools were at-
tended by 708 pupils ; of these 580 belonged to the
Sydney schools. Admission to the High schools can
be obtained by examination only. At the examinations
held in January and July scholarships are awarded to
the most deserving applicants. The school fee is £2
2s. per quarter, but if parents are unable to pay the
fee is remitted. The sum of £3912 was paid in fees
lust year. The High schools have taken a good position
at the University’, and have already furnished students
to that institution.
The Sydney Grammar School was opened in 1857,
and has been a great success. It is managed by
trustees, and is supported partly by the fees of pupils,
and partly by Government aid. The annual endow-
ment is £ISOO, but this has been supplemented by
special grants, amounting last year to £BSO. During
1886, information far 1887 not being obtainable, this
school had an enrolment of 513 pupils, and an average
attendance of 405 ; the school fees paid amounted to
£6028. The Sydney Grammar school has always done
well at the senior and junior examinations, and has
given to the University a large proportion of its dis-
tinguished students.
THE UNIVERSITY.
The University of Sydney was incorporated in 1851,
with power to confer degrees in arts, law, and medicine,
and to supply a liberal education to “ all orders and
denominations without any T distinction whatever.” By
the University Extension Act of 1884, the Senate is
empowered to give instruction and to grant such degrees
and certificates as it shall think fit, in all branches of
knowledge except theology or divinity. The same Act
admits women to all university privileges equally with
men. By a Royal Charter, issued 7th February, 1858,
the same, rank, style, and precedence were granted to
graduates of this University as are enjoyed by graduates
of universities within the United Kingdom. The
government is vested in a senate, consisting of 16
elective fellows, and not more than six “ex-officio ”
members, being professors of the University. This
University is a teaching as well as an examining in-
stitution. Professors have been appointed for classics,
mathematics and natural philosophy, chemistry and
mineralogy, physics, natural history, anatomy and physio-
logy, engineering, and modern literature. A full staff of
lecturers is also engaged. The lectures are open to
persons not members of the University upon payment
of a moderate fee for each course. Lectures in con-
nection with the University extension scheme are
delivered in some central place in the city. Each
course consists of 10 lectures, and concludes with an
examination. The subjects taken up have been,
English literature, ancient history, modern history, and
political economy. Arrangements are being made
for giving similar lectures in the larger country
towns. Since its establishment this Univer-
sity has granted over 400 degrees ; seven
of these have been conferred upon ladies. There are now
142 undergraduates on the books, and of these 20 are
ladies. The State endowment is £12,000 per annum,
but this sum is frequently supplemented by votes for
special purposes. Although the University is strictly
unsectarian, due regard has been paid to sectarian
interests by the establishment of denominational col-
leges affiliated to it. Three of these have been erected—
St Paul’s, for the Church of England; St John’s,
for the Roman Catholics ; and St Andrew’s,
for the Presbyterians. Last year these col-
leges had 46 students. By means of the Civil
Service and the Junior and Senior public
examinations the University is exercising a beneficial
influence upon the teaching of many of the schools,
and by its evening lectures it is coming into close
contact with the people generally, no longer conferring
its advantages upon a select few.
To sum up educational matters, it may be said that
New South Wales has a system of public primary in-
struction so well distributed that, except in very isolated
districts, every child of school age is within reach of
some school. In its High schools and Grammar
School it has excellent secondary education, while the
higher education is afforded by a University which is
steadily striving to make its influence felt through all
classes of the community.
TECHNICAL EDUCATION.
The board appointed in 1883 for the promotion of
technical education has established numerous classes
in Sydney and the principal country towns fer instruc-
tion in the arts and sciences, and their application to
trades and manufactures, and has erected in Sydney
workshops for practical training in handicrafts. The
subjects taken up by this board are so numerous and
so varied that detailed information would take up too
much of our space. The classes are well attended ; in
Sydney alone upwards of 2000 students are enrolled;
in the suburban and country districts over 500. lhe
popular science lectures given under the direction of
the board are much appreciated, and are attended by
over 200 persons on an average. The annual vote for
technical education is £17,000.


| 1863.
1886.
Clerg.
Church of England
£17,967
£5,791
33
Roman Catholic
8,748
3,000
17
Presbyterian
2,873
902
6
Wesleyan
2,784
1,050
T
£32,372
£10,743
BCHOOLS OF ARTS.
These are assisted by the Government to the extent
of £1 for every £2 subscribed locally. As 162 towns
receive! a grant in 1887, it is evident that these institu-
tions are well distributed. The total grants amounted
to £12,000. Though most of the Schoels of Arts do
little education beyond supplying a reading-room and a
circulating library, they encourage a taste for literature,
and place the newspapers, magazines, and standard
works of the day within reach of the masses.
ECCLESIASTICAL.
FREE CHURCHES IN FREE STATES.
The Australian colonies have effectually solved the
problem of free Churches in free States. In some re-
spects the senior colony has suffered disadvantages
through having to deal with vested interests which
grew up in the earliest years of colonisation ; but any
evils arising therefrom may now be considered things
of the past, for here, as in the neighbouring colonies,
the various denominations have learned to live and work
side by side, with equal privileges and a fair share of
mutual respect and good-will.
THE FIRST CHAPLAIN.
The Rev. H. Johnson, who accompanied the first
fleet as a chaplain representing the State Church of the
motherland, had the honour «f laying the ecclesiastical
foundations. His first church, constructed of wattle and
daub, “at the back of the huts on the east side of the
Cove,” was opened August 25, 1793, and burnt
down October Ist, 1799. The first brick church—old
St. Philip’s—was consecrated on Christmas Day, 1810.
In 1826 King George IV. set apart one-seventh of the
whole territory for the State Church endowment; and
in 1836 the Bishopric of Australia was established
under Rev. William Grant Broughton, who had for-
merly administered the ecclesiastical affairs as Arch-
deacon under the Diocesan of Calcutta. In process of
time separate Sees were provided in the neighbouring
colonies —New Zealand, in 1841 ; Tasmania, 1842;
Adelaide and Melbourne, in 1847 (at which time the
designation of Bishop Broughton was altered to that of
Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan of Australia and
Tasmania). The See of Perth was constituted in 1857,
and that of Brisbane in 1859. The expansion of
population in this colony necessitated still further
subdivision of ecclesiastical oversight, and ac-
cordingly five new dioceses were created in
the following order:—Newcastle, 1847, under the
Rev. William Tyrrell (afterwards succeeded by Rev.
J. B. Pearson, D.D., LL.D.) ; Goulburn, 1853, Rev.
Mesac Thomas, D.D. ; Grafton and Armidale, 1866,
Rev. W. C. Sawyer (succeeded three years later by
Rev. J. E. Turner, M.A., D.D.) ; Bathurst, 1869, Rev.
Samuel Marsden (succeeded October, 18, 1887, by Rev.
C. E. Camidge, D.D.); and Riverina, 1884, under
Rev. Sydney Linton, I).D.
OTHER DENOMINATIONS.
Meanwhile representatives of the other leading
denominations of the motherland followed the stream
of emigration, and in due course took their share in
the work of supplying the population with religious
ordinances. Roman Catholic services were commenced
as early as May 15, 1803. Rev. Mr. Cover conducted
services in connection with the Independents in 1798 y
though the first Independent Church (with Rev. Mr.
Jarrett as pastor) only dates from 1833. The first
Wesleyan minister, Rev. Samuel Leigh, arrived August
15,1815; whilst Presbyterianism was pioneered by
Dr. Lang.
CONCURRENT ENDOAVMENT.
The fact that these bodies had largely shared in the-
religious work of the new territory necessitated* a re-
adjustment of the endowment question, and in 1833,
during the administration of Sir Richard Bourke, ai
scheme of concurrent endowment, to be shared pro rata-
by tbe Anglican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, and
Wesleyan bodies, was substituted for the previous ex-
periment of establishing a State Church. This
arrangement was carried out till 1862, when con-
tinued agitation resulted in the passing of an
Act for the abolition of State-aid to religion
and the transfer of all endowments to educational
purposes, the grants then payable to be secured
to the clergy in receipt of them till their death or re-
tirement. The actual amounts paid by the State to
the various religious bodies in 1863 and 1886 were as
follow :
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
The consequent change iu the .status and pecuniar y-
advantages of the Church of England was at first
somewhat bitterly lamented; but voluntax-yism proved
equal to the occasion. So thoroughly have both clergy
and laity thrown themselves into the responsibilities-
of self-government and the sacrifices necessary to self-
support, that selid and rapid progress has been made-
throughout the eolony, and many of the ecclesiastical
leaders have admitted that the evils so greatly feared from
the alleged “ spoliation ” of 1833 and 1862 have not
followed, and that instead of them the Church has
gained immensely through freedom from the tamper-
ings of State control. The first step towards falling in
with the changed order was taken in 1866, when an
Act of Parliament was obtained “ to enable the mem-
bers of the United Church of England and Ireland in
New South Wales to manage the property of the said.
Church.” The Diocesan Synod, under this Act, consists-
of the licensed clergy, and lay representatives elected by*
the church members of the various parishes, and meets
once a year. When not in session the synod is repre-
sented by a standing committee consisting of the-
Bishop, seven clerical, and 12 lay members. Similar
synods have since been established in the other dioceses-
of the colony. Under the “ constitutions” provided by
the abovenamed Act, a provincial synod, to meet,
triennially, was called into existence in 1869, com-
posed of the Bishops of New South Wales and clerical
and lay representatives of the various dioceses, with-
power to deal with appeals and references from diocesan
synods. This machinery of government is further-
strengthened by a General Synod,, representing the
whole of the dioceses in Australia and Tasmania (as-
agreed upon at a conference of Bishops and representa-
tives, held in Sydney in 1872) ; but the determinations-


Denomination.
1861.
1871.
Increase
1881.
Increase
Population of Colony
350,860
503,981
153,121
751,468
247,487
Church of England...
159,958
229,243
69,285
342,359
113,116
Roman Catholic
99,193
145,132
46,739
207,020
61,088
Presbyterians
34,692
49,122
14,430
72,545
23,423
Methodists
23,682
39,566
15,884
57,049
24,786
Independents
5,411
9,253
3,842
14,328
5,075
Baptists
4,151
7,307
3,156
Unitarians
849
828
Hebrews
1,759
2,395
636
3.266
871
Pagans
12,909
7,455
9,345
1,890
of the General Synod are not binding in any diocese
until accepted by the Diocesan Synod. Bishop Broug i-
ton was succeeded by the late Bishop Barker, and in
1884 Rev. Alfred Barry, D.D., D.C.L., Canon of West-
minster, became Bishop of Sydney, Metropolitan of
New South Wales, and Primate of Australia and Tas-
mania.
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH.
The Roman Catholic Church of Australia and Tas-
mania was administered under the jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Mauritius till 1834, when Sydney wa3 con-
stituted a see, with the late Dr. Folding as first
Bishop. Eight years afterwards the status of Dr.
Folding was raised to that of Archbishop of Sydney
and Vicar-Apostolic of New Holland; but this was
narrowed again by the creation of an Archiepiscopal see
at Melbourne in 1876. Meanwhile the following dioceses
had been founded :—Hobart in 1842, Adelaide in 1844,
Perth in 1845, Brisbane and Fort Victoria, 1859;
Ballarat and Sandhurst in 1874; whilst, within the
colony of New South Wales, Maitland and Bathurst
dioceses had been created in 1865, and placed in charge
of Rev. James Murray, D.D., and Rev. J. F. Byrne,
D.D. ; Goulburn in 1866, under Rev. William Lanigan,
and Armidale in 1873, now under Rev. Elzear Tor-
reggiani, O.S.F.C. Dr. Polding was succeeded by
Archbishop Vaughan, after whose death Patrick Francis
Moran, D.D., was consecrated to the archiepiscopal see,
March 21, 1884. On July 27, 1885, Dr. Moran was
created Cardinal; and, at a plenary council of all the
Bishops of Australia and Tasmania held the same year,
the following developments were determined upon, and
carried into effect two years later: —Adelaide, Brisbane,
and New Zealand were raised to the dignity of arch-
dioceses ; and Grafton and Wilcannia (under Rev. Dr.
Doyle and Rev. Dr. Dunne), Sale, in Victoria, Port
Augusta, in South Australia, and Christchurch, in New
Zealand, were created new dioceses.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCHES.
Presbyterianism in Australia owes much to the zeal
and energy of its most distinguished pioneer, the late
Dr. John Dunmore Lang, who airived in Sydney in
1823, and opened his ministry in the courthouse.
Amongst the important events marking its history, first
place may be given to the union effected in 1865
between the representatives of the various divi-
sions of the Church of Scotland, with the exception of
a few congregations which still hold aloof under the
designation of the Synod of Eastern Australia. Next
in impoitance was the drawing together of the Presby-
terian churches of all the Australasian colonies in a
federated union in 1886. The church of each colony
retains its autonomy as regards funds and property, nor
are the necessary prerogatives and powers of the
general assemblies infringed upon. The present
moderator of the Presbyterian Church of this colony is
Rev. W. Bain, of Newcastle, whilst Rev. S. P. Stewart
is moderator of the Church of Eastern Australia, above
mentioned.
METHODISM.
Methodism, by virtue of its system of lay agencv, lias
become very widely disseminated throughout the whole
of the Australian colonies. For purposes of connexional
administration, this colony and Queensland are still
combined in one conference. The President for
1888 is Rev. G. Lane, of Sydney. The other
branches of the Methodist family are not so strong
here as in some of the other colonies; still the Primi-
tive Methodist returns for this colony for 1886
included 23 ministers, and church property valued at
£50,000, providing accommodation for nearly 10,000
persons.
independents.
The. Independents, or Congregationalists, date the
beginning of organised work in these colonies from 1833,
when churches were founded almost simultaneously in
Sydney, Hobart, and Launceston. As the name implies,
each church has full control of its internal affairs; but
the churches of each colony combine in a Union, composed
of the pastors and other church representatives, for con-
ference and joint action on all common questions. The
chairman of the Congregational Union of New South
Wales for 1887-8 is Rev. J. Jefferis, LL.D.
BAPTISTS.
The Baptist body, which differs from the Indepen-
dents solely on the question of baptism, is much
stronger in Victoria than in this colony. The chairman
of the Baptist Union for 1887-8 here is the Rev. Charles
Bright, of Bathurst-street Church.
SMALLER SECTS.
Sects of smaller dimensions are numerous enough in
these colonies, as a glance at the Registrar-General’s
returns will show. But the absolute freedom of re-
ligious profession has had its natural effect in prevent-
ing rancour or strife. License has been restrained by
the sense of liberty; and, on the whole, the various
bodies, diverse as they believe themselves to be, have
dwelt together in peace and a fair measure of unity.
ECCLESIASTICAL STATISTICS.
The following table will show the relative positions
of the principal denominations at the taking of the
census for the last three decennial periods:—
The detailed information of the next table depends
on less reliable data. In the intervals between the
census years the Registrar-General has to rely upon re-
turns furnished, as a matter of courtesy, by the clergy
of the various denominations ; and not only do incon-
venient delays occur, which have in some instances to be
covered by approximate estimates, but even where the
returns are promptly and carefully made it is impos-
sible in the absence of a regular census to ensure
accuracy. The returns are made up to December 31,
188 b, when the population of the colony numbered
1,001,906 ; and they lepresent a list of no fewer than
24 sects and designations.


Total
Church ofEngland
Roman Catholic
Presbyterian
Wesleyan and other Methodists
Independents
Baptists
Other Protestants
Unitarians
Hebrews
Others
Denominations.
”©
©
*©
©
©
455,898
276,843
96,790
85,968
19,138
9,819
19,839
1,202
4,409
32,060
Adherents
©
©
©
323
255
136
169
58
23
30
1
4
Clergy.
Churches . 4 5
& Chap’s ) o g
©
: 4k. to CO Ox
tO 03 Ox CO Os © 03
COM©CO©to©©Ox
tv
685
636
513
360
42
55
135
Other l S'®
buildings ' •S' c
©
to
106,935
88,906
45,523
81,459
16,385
8,426
32,728*
500
900
Sittings.
©
©
60,796
72,505
19,970
44,873
8,865
4,095
30,465*
Average atten-
dance at prin-
cipal service.
o»
©
©
: : : co to co a-
. 1 . CO CO Ox © *— 1 ©
— © © 4* © to ►—
SundaySchools-
©
©
3,451
1,443
1,416
3,836
706
251
156
Teachers.
©
*©
©
33,313
23,151
10,937
26,939
6,111
1,986
1,224
Average atten-
dance of
scholars.
* Including Salvation Army returns.
The above figures do not, however, by any means re-
present the whole of the activities of the religious
bodies. Large contributions are made by most of them
to missionary enterprise. The three first mentioned
have colleges affiliated to the University and numerous
high-class schools, whilst the Wesleyans have a pros-
perous college for boys at Stanmore, and a ladies’
college at Burwood. All denominations contribute to
the support of philanthropic and charitable institutions,
and exert in numerous ways a healthful influence on
the life of the community.
CHARITIES.
Life has always been comparatively easy in New
South Wales, and the wage-getting class has
found no difficulty in securing employment. But
a long experience has now shown us that no
amount of general prosperity keeps poverty at bay.
The very facility with which money can be earned
tends to make men reckless, to have confidence
in their luck, to believe that to-morrow shall be as
to-day, and even more abundant. Want has always
been the great teacher of thrift, and when that teacher
does not enforce his lessons the scholars are apt to be
thoughtless and forgetful. Government men, too,
formed for a long time the greater portion of the
working class; and as they always considered them-
selves entitled to fall back upon the Govern-
ment, they gave a tone to the customary
morality of that class. It was no uncommon
thing to hear such men say that as they brought
nothing into the world so they would take nothing out,
and that they did not mean to die with an unspent
shilling in their pockets. Thriftless philosophy of this
kind must of necessity land men sometimes in
penury. Of later years as the community has
become more settled, misfortune has added
its contingent to the charity-seeking class.
Long-continued sickness, accident, and the sudden
death of the bread-winners of the family have given
rise to many cases of want. It is to the credit of the
people of New South Wales that they have never
hardened their hearts against cases of distress. If
they have erred at all it is rather on the side of too
much charity than too little. They are open to the
charge of having to some extent encouraged mendi-
cancy and of giving help to undeserving people.
They are now getting a little more strict in endeavour-
ing slowly to base their charities on more scientific
principles, and conduct them under more rigorous in-
spection.
THE ABSENCE OF A POOR LAW.
No regular poor law has as yet ever been adopted.
From very early days the custom grew up of starting
private charities, and then of asking Government
assistance proportionate to some extent to the amount
of voluntary subscriptions. To such charities the
Government gave land, and also donations of money in
aid of any building fund. This was the case with the
Benevolent Society, and also with the first Infirmary.
In this way the Government eased itself of the trouble
of any poor law department, and by giving money and
asking no questions left it to private committees to be
its almoner. The plan was convenient to the
authorities, but it was found to have its
disadvantages, because there was no official
interference with the distribution of charity and no
supervision, while Government property was handed
over to private trusts without formal reservation of the
national interest therein. The consequence is that
many valuable landed properties are now held by
charitable trusts, the Government interest in which is at
present undefined, and the legal and political question
thus raised has not at present received its solution. At
a later period of the colony’s history, as claims on the
Government began to multiply, the principle was intro-
duced of giving to charities an equal sum to that
raised by private contributions, but this principle
has not been and could not be applied to
some of the principal charities, because extreme
poverty had to be dealt with at any special
crisis, and if private charity was not equal
to the demand, Government had to step in and make
good the deficiency. This has been notably the case
with the Benevolent Asylum, with the Infirmary—
now reorganised as the Sydney Hospital—and
the Prince Alfred Hospital, and with the Asylum
for Destitute Children. In these institutions
the Government has paid for all the cases it sent, and
the price paid has been such as to leave a fair margin
of profit to the management The Asylum for Desti-
tute Children has within the last two years ceased to
be a recipient of the Government bounty, and is living
on its endowments, its subscriptions, and its receipts
from parents. The reason for this has been that the
Government, having adopted the boarding-out system,
no longer needed to make use of the asylum. It sent no
more children there, and gave no more endowment, and


the managers have continued the institution in a
modified form. All the children that have been cast
UDon the care of the State are now boarded-out
under the supervision of the State Children s Relief
Board—a board of ladies and gentlemen all nomi-
nated by the Government, and sufficiently supplied
from the Government funds. This charity is a purely
national one, without any intermixture of private
contributions. The completeness with which the board
has done its work has not only caused all the Govern-
ment children to be taken from the asylums,
but also from the two Denominational orphan
schools, which from very early times have been
maintained at Parramatta, and in this way
three charities have been merged into one.
All the country hospitals, as well as the two city hos-
pitals, are ®n the mixed footing, but there is also in
Sydney a Denominational hospital conducted exclusively
under Roman Catholic auspices, but open to the recep-
tion of patients of all Churches. It is supported-by
private contributions, and gets no Government grant.
For the adult poor the Government maintains two
asvlums at Parramatta, and another at, Liverpool, as
well as a special asylum for women at Newington.
There is one hospital, and only one, which is a purely
public institution, and that is an iron structure, at
Little Bay, on the coast, 10 miles to the south of
Sydney. It was originally constructed as a smallpox
hospital during one of the smallpox scares, but it was
found afterwards more convenient to deal with that
disease in a floating hospital attached to the quarantine
station; and since then the Little Bay Hospital has
been largely devoted to typhoid cases or convalescent
cases from the other hospitals. Practically, therefore,
the Government has only five charities exclusively
under its own management. Everywhere else it
operates with or through private trusts, which it sub-
sidises. This, however, is exclusive of the lunatic
asylums, which are on a large scale, and which are
wholly Government institutions. Patients whose
friends can afford to pay are expected to do so.
THE PREVENTION OF ABUSES.
Of late years it has been felt necessary to do some-
thing to introduce order and method into the various
public charities, and as far as possible to prevent abuses.
Two things especially were needed : first, to put some
growing check on the tendency of persons to throw
themselves and their needy relatives on the State ; and,
secondly, to exercise some control over the management
and expenditure of the various charitable committees
which were largely spending the public money.
An officer was appointed as Inspector of
Public Charities, and he now makes an annual
report to the Colonial Secretary. In this way. the
charitable business is carried on with more publicity,
and defects of management are becoming gradually
removed. It is felt, however, still that the charitable
expenditure of the colony is large compared to its
population, and the system still needs improvement.
His report for the year 1887 shows that the cost of
public charities to the Government that year was
£137,584, but part of this money was spent in build-
ings, part spent as subsidy on the basis of £1 grant
for £1 subscription, and part spent in maintenance.
As the subsidy was about £40,000, it follows
that an equal amount was raised by private contribu-
tions in aid of these institutions. Apart from the
regular hospitals in the city, there is a hospital for
sick children, an institution for the deaf, dumb, and
blind, a separate institution for the industrial blind,
and an infants’ home, which is a modification of a
foundling hospital. Nearly every country town has its
hospital, and towards these there was subscribed in the
gross in the year about £26,000; but the contribu-
tions of patients did not much exceed £3OO,
from which it will be seen that the class
of persons who seek the advantage of these
institutions come to them really or professedly
without the means to pay for their treatment. There
is a very general feeling among those who are
acquainted with the working class that they both could
and should contribute in some shape or other more than
they do at present towards hospital management, either
by donations through the trades-unions, or by payment
for individual cases. But at present everybody in need
is cared for, and a further economy or a more equitable
method of distributing the burden of expenditure is a
reform for the future.
UNAIDED INSTITUTIONS.
In addition to the public and mixed charities to
which we have already alluded, there are many that
get no public grants at all. There is a Charity Organi-
sation Society which endeavours to investigate every
case prior to relief; tnere are a Soup Kitchen and two
Night Refuges, two Female Refuges, homes established
by°the Salvation and Blue Ribbon Armies, while
every separate ecclesiastical organisation has its fund
for the poor, and in most cases these funds are not
disbursed with any strict sectarian regard.
TIIE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE.
EARLY PROCEDURE.
In 1788, when the“ First Fleet” arrived and landed
their consignment of compulsory immigrants, the laws of
England, statutory or otherwise, were, of course, brought
into force for the regulation of the little colony, and
the military officers whose duty it was to control the
somewhat turbulent spirits of those days became the
sole administrators of the enactments which were
considered applicable to the newly-established off-
shoot of the British Empire. Justice, owing to the
nature of the surrounding circumstances, had to
be “ short, sharp, and decisive,” and the scales were
frequently not altogether evenly balanced ; but when the
population of the colony was swelled by the arrival of
free settlers, a new state of things arose and courts
were established to meet the necessities of the new era.
The progress of law reform in the early days was, how-
ever, slow, and in many cases unsatisfactory. It was not
until the advent of responsible government and
Parliamentary representation that the work of
framing laws less tentative and more suitable to
the requirements of the increasing community was
accelerated and extended. Of late years the civil busi-
ness of the Supreme Court has become out of all
proportion to the power of the Bench to deal with it,
and recently the number of Judges has been increased,
though this improvement was not carried out by the
Legislature without persistent application and advocacy
on ° the part of those who were earnestly bent upon
expediting the proceedings of the superior court, and


thus relieving the unfortunate suitors whose cases
seemed to be for ever pending.
JUDGES PAST AND PIIESENT.
A little over 12 months ago the Bench suffered a
severe loss in the death of the then Chief Justice (Sir
James Martin), who succeeded Sir Alfred Stephen upon
t tat gentleman s retirement. During the many years that
Sir James Martin presided over the business of the
Supreme Court, his sound legal knowledge and learning
proved to be of great assistance to his brother Judges'*
and his keen intellect enabled him to grasp °the
points of the most knotty cases, and place them
concisely and clearly before a jury. IJ e was
followed by Stop. M. Darley, who'now holds The
position and whose elevation to the high position of
Chief Justice has received the hearty approval of
the entire legal profession. Sir William Manning
who, upon the death of Mr. Justice Hargrave some
years ago took charge of the Equity branch of the
Supreme Court, retired towards the close of last year
owing to failing health, after having rendered valuable
services to the colony, not only in the administra-
tion of its laws, but also in connection with the
higher education of its youth. The vacancy caused by
his retirement was tilled by Mr. W. Owen, the acknow-
i edged leader of the Eqmty bar, whose appointment,
like that of the Chief Justice, was received with
unqualified pleasure by the Bar. The Judges now upon
Die bench consist of Sir F. M. Darley, C.J., Mr. Justice
Eaucett, Mr. Justice Windeyer, Mr. Justice Innes, and
Mr. Justice Stephen, Puisne Judges, and Mr. Justice
Owen, Chief Judge in Equity. At the end of last year
too, additional strength was given to the Supreme
b &, . th ° appointment of Mr. George Hibbert
Deflell, Chief Commissioner in Insolvency, as
" Banll ™ptcy under the new Act, which position con-
fers upon him the powers of a Supreme Court
for certain purposes. The Supreme Court sits for
e ' gbt “° ntbs ln the y ear > commencing in
lebruary, for the hearing of appeals and the trial of
civil causes and in the case of the latter the hearing is
generally before juries of four, though the parties may,
f they elect to do so, submit the matter in dispute to
the decision of a jury of 12. The Equity business has
now become a very important branch of the Supreme
Court jurisdiction, and the Judge sits for the greater
part of the year The Chief Justice deals with Ad-
miralty, and regular sittings are held for the hearing of
Divorce cases. It is unnecessary to refer to the numerous
ZTJT W + ! du T g a seriea of Jeers have been
passed for the amendment and improvement of the law
m minor matters, but one or two reforms of a more
noteworthy character may be mentioned in illustration
of the earnestness with which Parliament during the
ast decade has taken in hand the task of simplifying
costly V an<l rendering ifc more effec tive, speedy, and less
AMENDMENTS IN THE LAW,
In 1880 “ A Bill to amend the law respecting the
procedure and practice of the Supreme Court in its
Equitable jurisdiction, and to facilitate statements
erisi ’ m aS passed ‘ Before this Act came into
existence, evidence was, as a rule, given before the
Maste'm Equity, and i„ this way i e n heavy eute
were unduly prolonged. At present the evidence in
contested cases is taken by oral examination of witnesses
before the Chief Judge in Equity himself, who
lias an opportunity, not only of weighing the vaiue
the testimony submitted, but of seeing the dcmeano
ot those who go into the witness-box. The JuiUe h
also the power, if the parties so desire it, to summ
a l ur 7 ear a suit, and the taking of evidence m
be expedited by the employment of shorthand write
Other salutary amendments have been brou*
into force in connection with this jurisdiction, ar
suits m Equity are now disposed of in a muc
shorter time than was possible under the old lav
An Act to consolidate and amend in certain
specta the criminal law was passed by the Legislatu
Aifi J ears a o°* I 1 > s a measure upon which S
Alfred Stephen bestowed an immense amount of tim
and labour, and although he received the able assistant
ot other eminent members of the legal profession, h
is entitled to the principal credit for the car
Which he _ bestowed upon it, and the successfu
manner in which he carried it throug
-Parliament. As a consolidation and codification o
various laws for the repression and punishment o
crime it is acknowledged to be a great advance upon
the previous modes of procedure in criminal matters
the Divorce Act has now been in force fo
a considerable number of years after having been
rejected session after session by the Legislative
Council; and at the end of last year
bill to amend that Act, by giving to
the woman the same facility for divorce as the
man, and also to authorise the granting of divorce on
certain grounds not included in the original Act, was
adopted by both Houses. Curiously enough, it
originated in the Upper House, but was not accepted
by . that branch of the Legislature without strong op-
position. This Act has, however, been reserved for her
Majesty’s assent. The amendment of the Insolvency
laws, the unsatisfactory nature of which has
been abundantly apparent for many years,
also formed one of the prominent features
ot last year’s legislation, and a Bankruptcy Act
I has been passed which, while it will give insolvent
debtors every protection and relief to which they may
be entitled by reason of misfortune, contains ample
provision also for conserving the interests of creditors
and exposing and punishing fraudulent bankrupts,
the new Act was passed so recently that no further
reference need be made to it except to say that it
effects an important and a desirable change in
one branch of the law, and that the date of its
coming into operation will be a prominent mark in the
law calendar for the centennial year.
. t THE minor courts.
Civil actions which are too trivial to justify the expense
of an appeal to the Supreme Court are dealt with in the
District Courts, and country causes are taken by the
District Court Judges from time to time when "they
visit the provinces to preside at the sittings of Quarter
Sessions. Petty debts maybe recovered in a summary way
at the police courts, and this provision has proved most
beneficial. The administration of the law in its Criminal
jurisdiction is mainly attended to bv the Supreme
Court Bench, who not only preside at the gaol delivery
at Darlmghurst, but go on Circuit three or four times
a year, when they also adjudicate upon all civil matters
involving large issues which may be brought before
t ©m. Ample provision is also made in the metropolis
and the various towns throughout the colony for the


punishmentof petty offenders and the preliminary investi-
gation of breaches of the law of a more serious character.
Within the last five years stipendiary magistrates have
been appointed in all large centres of population ,
and as the gentlemen selected to fill the positions are
fully conversant with the common law matters coming
under their jurisdiction, the cases are disposed of in a
much more regular and satisfactory manner than they
were before stipendiary magistrates were appointed.
Further important changes are promised during the
present session of Parliament in the higher branches of
the law by abolishing or modifying some of the forms
which still unnecessarily hamper suitors and increase
the expense of Supreme Court proceedings. It may
fairly be anticipated that one striking feature of the
hundredth anniversary of the colony will be the
advance made in the administration of justice.
NAVAL AND MILITARY.
OUR THREE LINES OF DEFENCE.
Much has been done in recent years towards per-
fecting the military defences which have been estab-
lished 0 for the protection ef the colony, but a report
which was recently submitted to the Government by
Major-General Schaw, an Imperial officer of experience
and distinction, who lately visited New South Wales,
shows that a good deal has yet to be accomplished before
we can deem ourselves secure from the attack of a
hostile invading force. To meet contingencies which
may some day arise, there have been . estab-
lished three lines of defence. The first consists of
men-of-war vessels, or armed cruisers, to guard our seas
and intercept the approach of an enemy; the second
includes coast batteries and torpedo defences for tne
protection of points on which a descent might be made
in the event of vessels of war escaping the cruisers;
and the third embraces a field force of all arms, intended
to do battle with the enemy should troops be landed.
Sydney being the headquarters of the _ Imperial
squadron in these waters, it has not been incumbent
upon the Government to give so much attention to
naval defence as Victorian Ministries have been com-
pelled to do.
the new south wales fleet.
The New South Wales fleet, if it can be so
called, consists of the Wolverene, a wooden
■steam corvette, 2540 tons, 400 horse-power; a
•steam hopper barge, and two torpedo boats.
The Wolverene, with stores and armament com-
plete, was handed ever as a present to the colony
by the Imperial authorities in 1882. She was intended
for the use of the Naval Brigade, but for some reason
or other she has not been fully utilised. The ship was
laid up in ordinary by the last Government,
and her guns have been taken out of her
and placed in Forts Denison and Macquarie.
The Neptune, a steam hopper barge belonging to the
Harbours and Rivers Department, is manned by the
Naval Artillery. She is a vessel of 300 tons and 250
horse-power, and has one 64-pounder M.L. converted
Tifle gun. The Acheron and Avernus, twin torpedo-
with improved Whitehead torpedoes, make
up the fleet. These boats, which are of steel, attain a
speed of 15 knots, and carry a crew when in action of
nine men. They are under the command of the colonel
commanding the torpedo and signalling corps. Both
boats were made in the colony. They are 80ft. long, with
10 feet beam, and have on indicated horse-power of
3UO. They are in good order and condition.
THE NAVAL BRIGADE.
The Naval Brigade—a partially paid force—was
fo.med in 1863 to man H.M.S. Brunswick,
a ship offered to the New South Wales
Government bv the Admiralty, on condition
that she should be sheathed with iron at a
cost of £60,000. The undertaking was considered too
expensive, so the offer was refused, and the Naval
Brigade undertook the duties of seamen when
landed from a ship and the manning of forts
and batteries. The brigade, on its first public appear-
ance, mustered 20 officers and men, but it rapidly
increased in numbers until, in 1885, it had a strength
of 640 of all ranks. In January last the Government,
with the object of lessening the naval and military
expenses, reduced the strength of the forces, and the
brigade now numbers only 328 officers and men. ihe
principal officers are Captain Commanding Francis
Hixson, 8.N.; Commanders G. S. Lindeman, K,.JN.;
H. Cross, and A. S. Lewington. The naval artillery
volunteer force was enrolled in November, 1882. ihe
corps was formed to work the guns on any man-o-war
or gunboat that might belong to the colony. The men are
thoroughlv efficient —probably the best trained of any
branch of the service. They have been drilled regu-
lar! v on board the Wolverene, and the exigencies of the
services have compelled them to undertake the duties
appertaining to A.B.’s of the navy. They also act as
landing parties, and carry out boat practice and
manning and arming boats. For that purpose
they possess one launch mounting 9-pounder boat-
gun, one cutter mounting 7-pounder boat-gun,
one cutter mounting Hale’s war rocket tubes,
two whalers, and one galley. The force, which
is under the control of Commander Lee, is about 200
strong. The officers and men provide their own
uniforms, the Government allowing arms and an annual
grant for providing instruction and incidental expenses
incurred in working the corps. The important department
of repairs and outfit has not been neglected.
THE IMPERIAL SQUADRON.
Some time ago the Government handed over to the
Imperial authorities Garden Island—one of the largest
islands in Port Jackson—for the construction of a
naval depot, and everything has been done that
has been declared necessary by the Imperial represen-
tatives to make the depot complete. It will
render the Imperial vessels independent of outside
assistance, and will complete the unity of the general
scheme of Australian naval defence. Ihe largest
vessels in the British Navy will be able to moor along-
side the wharf, and the buildings will be replete with
appliances for all kinds of repairs. A new graving
dock, said to be one of the largest in the world is
being built at Cockatoo Island, and when finished it
will afford facilities for docking the largest
ships of war that are likely to visit
these waters. The Imperial squadron on the Australian
station, which, as already indicated, hns its hcad-
ouarters in Sydney, is under the command of Lear-
Admiral Henry Fairfax, C.B. It consists of he
Nelson, flagship, a double-screw iron armour-plated
ship, carrying four 18-ton guns, eight 12-ton guns, and


six 20-pr. B.L. guns, provided with a ram, 7630 tons,
6640 h.p. : Captain, Tynte F. Hammill; Diamond, 12
guns, screw corvette, 1970 tons, 2140 h.p. : Captain,
F. S. Clayton; Opal, 12guns, composite screw corvette,
2120 tons, 2190 h.p, : Captain, Day H. Bosanquet;
Calliope, 16 guns, screw corvette, steel and iron cased
with wood, 2770 tons, 4020 h.p. ; Captain, Henrv C.
Kane; Egeria, 4 guns, composite screw sloop, 940 tons,
1010 h.p.: Captain, Pelham Aldrich; Rapid, 12 guns,
screw composite corvette, 1420 tons, 1400 h.p. : Cap-
tain, Archer J. W. Musgrave; Swinger, 4 guns, screw
composite gunboat, 430 tons, 520 h.p.: Lieutenant and
Commander, J. L. Marx ; Myrmidon, screw surveying
vessel, 877 tons, 720 h.p. : Commander, Richard F.
Koskyn; Dart, screw composite yacht, 470 tons, 200
d*q., employed on surveying duties : Lieutenant and
Commander, A. M. Field; Raven, steam composite
gunboat, 465 tons, 380 h.p. : Lieutenant
and Commander, Frank W. Wyley; Undine,
Harrier, and Lark, schooners employed on surveying
services. An agreement has been entered into between
the Imperial Government and the Governments of the
principal colonies for the maintenance in the Australian
seas of a largely augmented fleet—sufficiently strong
in numbers and weight of metal to efficientlv guard our
waterways under all circumstances.
THE SECOND LINE OF DEFENCE.
With regard to the second line of defence, good solid
progress has been made in the construction and arming
of the coast batteries. These batteries have
beeu built at various places along the coast,
which would, if unprotected, give an invading
force a favourable opportunity for landing. At those
most distant from head-quarters an artillery garrison of
sufficient strength is constantly maintained. Large
batteries, mounting heavy pieces of ordnance, are con-
structed on the heights commanding the entrance to
Sydney harbour, and opposite the entrance itself is a
casement of great strength. The works, which are
considered good examples of engineering, were
designed by the late Major-General Sir Peter
Scratchley. . There are, in addition to the artillery
defences, mines of torpedoes laid out at such places as
are likely to be threatened by the ships of an enemy.
There is a partially-paid corps of torpedo and signal
operators, about 230 strong, who attend to that branch
of the defences. A permanent force of artillery, about
500. strong, are trained for field and garrison gun
service.
THE THIRD LINE OF DEFENCE.
The field force, which forms the third line of defence,
consists of cavalry, field artillery, engineers, and
infantry. The Imperial troops were with-
drawn from New South Wales in 1870. The
first volunteeer force was enrolled in Sydney
in 1854. It was established under an Act
of Council, 18th Viet., No. 8, and consisted of
one battery of artillery, one troop of cavalry, six com-
panies of infantry numbering between 300 and 400
men. It practically ceased to exist in 1856, but in
1800 a second force was enrolled under the same Act
It comprised two batteries of artillery in Sydney, one
battery in Newcastle, one troop of mounted rifles,
companies of rifles in Sydney and suburbs,
and six companies of rifles in the country districts.
On the Ist of January, 1861, the establishment con-
sisted of 1696 of all ranks, but its strength and com-
position varied to the end of 1867, when four-
additional batteries of artillery were raised in Sydney,
and the companies of rifles at head-quarters were orga-
nised as two regiments. At the close of the year 1867
the Volunteer Regulation Act was passed, authorising
the issue of grants of land as a reward for
the services of such volunteers as might servo
continuously and efficiently for a period of
five years. The issue of land orders was, however,,
stopped in 1874. During the years the system was in
operation the force averaged annually 2884 of all
ranks. A reorganisation of the volunteers became
necessary, and was carried out in 1878, on the lines
recommended by Sir William Jervois. In 1871, the
year following the withdrawal of the Imperial
trrops, one battery of permanent artillery and two
companies of infantry were raised; but the latter
were disbanded in 1872. The artillery was increased
in 1876 by a second, and in 1877 by a third battery..
The torpedo corps was organised in 1887. The fol-
lowing may be taken as the present strength of the
military forces: —Regular artillery, 376 men; Volun-
teers partially paid or militia —artillery, 614;
engineers, 100; torpedo, 160; infantry, 2056. Re-
serves—cavalry, 542; artillery, 180; infantry, 2357.
The reserve force is purely a volunteer service, with a
capitation grant and issue of arms. It represents the
principle of a citizen soldiery, lightly, cheaply,
but efficiently equipped; and the movement has
led to the creation of a corps of mounted
infantry, for which the circumstances of the colony am
peculiarly favourable. The field forces are provided
chiefly with the Martini-Henry arms. The annual
match meeting of the New South Wales Rifle Associa-
tion gives a stimulus to rifle shooting, but the grant
from the State in aid of its funds is small. It is
believed that to meet an attempted invasion the colony
could call out a force very little short of 10,000 men
for service on land and water; and new corps are
periodically springing into existence. No pains have been
spared to place the forces upon an efficient footing
as regards organisation, discipline, and equipment. The
regimental officers are, as a rule, well acquainted with
their duties, and command the respect and obedience of
their men. The rank and file execute their duties with
the object of making themselves a highly trained and
efficient force. The Commander-in-Chief of the forces
is his Excellency Lord Carrington, G.C.8., ILC.M.G.,
who is Honorary Colonel of the Sydney Lancers, and
the General commanding the forces is Major-General
J. S. Richardson, C.B.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
The mode of conducting the business of municipal
government in New South Wales does not materially
differ from the way in which it is transacted in Eng-
land. To a great extent our local government laws
follow English precedents, and there is a tendency
here to imitate some peculiarities of corporate life in
the mother country which would be more
honoured in the breach than in the ob-
servance. On the other hand the powers
exercised by our municipal bodies are not so extensive
as those conferred upon English town councils, either in
regard to quasi judicial matters or to the guardianship


and relief of the poor. We have no ancient franchises.
Everything connected with our municipal government
is comparatively new. During the reign of William the
Fourth Acts were passed to regulate market dues, to
make a tunnel to supply the town of Sydney with
water, and to regulate the alignment of
its streets, but it was not until the
third year of her Majesty’s reign that an Act was
passed to declare the town of Sydney to be a city, and
to incorporate the inhabitants thereof. Since that time
some 30 separate Acts of Parliament affect-
ing the City Council and suburban and
country municipalities have been passed.
For many years the general municipal spirit
was checked by a paternal Government whose
action was rather municipal than political. There
was, in fact, little left for the people to do ; roads
and bridges were constructed and maintained by public
officers, and paid for out of the Colonial Treasury, and
town streets were little better than parish roads. When,
in 1856, New South Wales first experienced the free-
dom of constitutional government, the municipal idea
began to take hold of the people. In 1858 a General
Municipalities Act was passed. After being in opera-
tion about nine years, it was superseded in 1867 by the
existing statute,. under which *at present about 120
municipal corporations and districts are constituted, and
perform useful work.
It will be observed that there are two separate sets
of municipal laws —one for the city of Sydney and one
for the rest of the colony. The City Council
has been required to perform duties in relation to
water supply and sewerage beyond its corporate limits.
A quarter of a century ago Sydney was a city without
suburbs. In 1853 Acts were passed giving to it
special powers in relation to sewerage and water supply,
and these powers it still retains, But the condition of
things is now so entirely changed as to make it neces-
sary that works of a metropolitan nature in relation to
the supply of water, the construction of sewers,
and sanitation generally, should be taken out of
its hands and placed under the control of a body repre-
senting the whole metropolitan area. Arrangements for
this purpose are in progress.
The growth of the suburbs has been marvellously
rapid. Their population is now about 150 per cent
greater than that of the city itself, the total inhabitants
of the metropolis being about a quarter of a million.
THE CITY.
The city of Sydney is divided into eight wards, and,
with the exception of one which bears the name of the
great circumnavigator, Cook, they are called after
Governors of this colony—viz., Phillip, Gipps, Bourke,
Brisbane, Macquarie, Fitzroy, and Denison. Three
aldermen are elected for each ward, and every year
one for each ward retires. On the Ist December
annually the city is called upon to elect eight aider-
men, the retiring city fathers being eligible for re-
election. Any citizen qualified to vote for an
alderman, and not specially disqualified, is
eligible for the aldermanic office. The voting is
cumulative from one vote upon rates of an annual value
of £25 to four votes upon property assessed at more than
£l5O, and the voting is by ballot The sections of the
Act which relate to bribery are strict and comprehensive.
In regard to building lines and buildings, and the paving
of footpaths by owners, the council has special powers.
The assessment on which the rate is based is made
on a fair annual value, with a deduction not exceeding
10 per cent, for outgoings. In the case of unoccupied
land the assessment is 6 per cent, on the capital value.
The limit of the rate is 2s. in the £, but at present
Is. 6d. in the £ only is levied. The exemptions from
rates are—Land vested in trustees for the purpose of
public recreation, health, and enjoyment, hospitals,
benevolent asylums, and buildings solely for
public worship and public schools. The council
may levy special rates up to 6d. in the £
for special purposes in any particular locality. It has
powers which it has exercised in regard to markets,
parks, and cattle saleyards. It levies rates for water
and for watering streets, and has special authority in
regard to sanitation within the city limits. It is
authorised to make sewers and drains and to levy a
sewerage rate. It receives a temporary endowment of
£25,000 per annum from the Government The
Mayor is elected annually by the aldermen. Upon the
whole the City Council has performed its functions
with activity and intelligence, and it has generally had
among its members a fair proportion of men of first-
class ability. The city is well kept and cleansed. It
has over a hundred miles of streets, some of them
paved with hardwood blocks. Its sewerage is more
than 60 miles in length. There are about 8000
electors on the roll.
SUBURBAN AND COUNTRY MUNICIPALITIES.
Under the Act of 1858, 35 municipalities
were legally constituted and incorporated. By the Act
of 1867 these were designated boroughs, notwithstand-
ing that some of them under the previous statutes were
only classed as municipal districts. Municipalities under
the Act of 1867 are divided into two classes —“boroughs”
and “ municipal districts,” according to area
and population. Boroughs and municipal
districts may be incorporated on petition
of persons liable to pay rates in the event
of incorporation. Municipalities may be divided into
wards according to population. The votes are cumula-
tive up to four, and the voting is by ballot. Large
powers are given to incorporated bodies under this Act
in respect to the abatement of nuisances, the making of
drains, the establishment of free libraries and free in-
fant schools, and the making of bylaws relating to
health and the restraining of noxious and offensive
trades. The Act sets forth that “ all lands, houses,
warehouses, counting-houses, shops, and other buildings,
tenements or hereditaments within any municipality
shall be ratable property within the meaning and for
all the purposes of this Act save as is next hereinafter
excepted ; that is to say, land, the property of her
Majesty, and unoccupied, or used, or reserved, or vested
in trustees for public purposes ; land and buildings in
the occupation of the Imperial Government, or the
Government of New South Wales, or of the council of
the municipality; hospitals, benevolent institutions,
and buildings used exclusively for public charitable
purposes; churches, chapels, and other buildings used
exclusively for public worship; all schools subject to
the provisions of the Public Schools Act of 1866,
colleges, and universities.” Every year the councils
make an estimate of their requirements, and “ raise the
amount so estimated by an assessment and rate upon all
ratable property within such municipality, assessing
the same at nine-tenths of the fair average annual lenta 1


of all buildings and cultivated lands, or lands which are
or have been let for pastoral, mining, or other purposes,
whether such buildings or lands shall be then occupied
or not, and at the rate of £5 per centum upon the
capital value of the fee simple of all unimproved lands,
such average rental and capital value of all such rat-
able property to be estimated by valuers.” Special rates
may be levied for sewerage, water supply, and gas.
The municipalities incorporated under the Act of 1867
receive endowment from the Government as follows:
“ in each of the first five years after the incorporation of
such municipality, a sum equal to, but not exceeding,
the whole amount actually raised by rates or assess-
ments and subscriptions paid up for general purposes
m the year last past. In each of the next succeeding
five years, a sum equal to, but not exceeding, one moiety
of the amouni so paid up in the year last past; and in
each of the next succeeding five years, a sum equal to,
but not exceeding, one-fourth part of the amount so paid
up in the year last past, and thenceforth all contribution
from public funds by way of endowment shall abso-
lutely cease.”
there are 120 boroughs and municipal districts
in the colony exclusive of the City Council.
They contain about 90,000 dwellings. The esti-
mated capital value of their ratable property is
£55,000,000. The annual value upon which rates are
struck is upwards of £4,120,000. The length of roads
in boroughs and municipal districts, exclusive of the
city, is about 4250 miles, of which about half are
made ; and the estimated value of these roads and
streets is £l,soo,ooo—that is, about £5OO per mile for
2000 miles of made roads and streets, and about £220
per mile for the others.
The boroughs have spent about £150,000 in the
erection of town halls or other municipal buildings ;
and some of the council-chambers are large and hand-
some, their cost varying from £5OO to £25,000. The
municipal districts have spent £30,000 for similar
purposes. Some of the borough councils meet
in rented premises, and as yet numerous
municipal district councils do likewise. In
the boroughs and municipal districts there
are 88,500 electors on the rolls. Of these
46,666 are entitled to one vote, 28,388 to two votes,
8462 to three votes, and 4954 to four votes. There
are upwards of 1000 aldermen; 573 represent boroughs,
and 510 represent municipal districts. Owing to the
lapse of time the larger endowments have ceased, but
the various municipalities generally receive upwards
of £lOO,OOO from the Gavernment and £20,000 or
£30,000 from ratepayers as “subscriptions” towards
special works. The municipal figures of New South
Wales may be thus briefly summarised, in round
numbers: Capital value of property in the city of
Sydney, £42,000,000 ; capital value of Sydney suburban
property £32,500,000; capital value of property within
the limits of other municipalities, £22,ooo,ooo—mak-
ing a total of nearly one hundred million sterling.
AREAS.
The incorporated areas differ greatly from each other in
their dimensions. Sydney embraces about four square
miles. The suburban borough of Darlington is only
one-twelfth of a square mile in extent. The Glebe
occupies three-quarters of a square mile, and several
others are fractions only of a section. Parramatta and
Marrickville each cover about 2£ square miles. The
borough of the city of Bathurst is about 4-J
square miles; that of Newcastle, 1§; that
of Grafton, nearly 5; that of Armidale, 39£ ; that of
Goulburn, nearly 13. Central Illawarra covers 119
square miles, and Kiama, 120. The incorporated'por-
tions contain the bulk of the population of the colony.
About one-third—3oo,ooo persons—live within a radius
of 20 miles from the General Post Office in
Sydney. But the municipalities embrace only a
mall portion of the territory of New South
Wales, which contains upwards of 200,000,000
acres, or, in round numbers, about 325,000 square miles.
This colony, therefore, is about as large as Great
Britain and Ireland and France combined. We have
upwards of 300,000 square miles yet open to settle-
ment and municipal energy. The work in the various
incorporated areas has for the most part been well
done, and it has added greatly to the comfort
of the ratepayers. A large proportion of the buildings,
public and private, are substantial and well constructed
and give evidence of architectural taste. Many of
them would do credit to any European city. The next
step will be to bring into the system of local govern-
ment the outlying population, and to this end a Local
Government Bill has been among the legislative
measures promised by several successive Ministries.
The economic necessity for legislation in this direction
is evidenced by the fact that during the last 10 years
the Government has spent on roads and bridges about
£6,000,000 ("six million pounds sterling), which sum
has been paid out of the public Treasury.
Most of the other colonies have followed our example
in regard to municipal legislation and municipal work,
although some of them have adopted the district board
system. But throughout Australia the spirit of local
government is demonstrated in a practical manner and
with gratifying results.
WATER SUPPLY.
THE TANK STREAM.
Governor Phillip gave the preference to Sydney Cove
as the site for Australian settlement because it had the
finest spring of water, and round that spring—the
“ Tank stream ” —were grouped the primitive huts and
tents. The drought of the following year led the
people to draw upon neighbouring streams, and
especially on those running into Blackwattle Swamp.
In 1802 three reservoirs or tanks were excavated for
water storage near the site of the Herald Office, and this
early water supply was fenced round to the “considerable
improvement of the appearance of the town.’’- Eight
years later pollution from the surrounding dwellings
had become serious enough to call for the most
drastic orders in Council, even to the pulling down
of the houses of offenders. In the Gazette of March
18, 1824, appeared a grateful acknowledgment of the
“providential supply in Blackwattle Swamp,” and an
expression of devout hope that the Government would
“ ever secure the spot from the clutches of private
individuals.” At the Quarter Sessions in November,
1825, the Grand Jurors made a “ presentment ” about
the danger of trusting to the Tank stream- for the
double duty of water supply and natural sewerage ;
and after the following year, when the popula-
tion had reached the promising dimensions of 10,000,


no more mention was made of it as a source of water
supply. About this time Mr. John Busby, who had
arrived in 1824 as mineral surveyor to the Govern-
ment, reported in favour of drawing a water supply from
the Upper Lachlan Swamp, between Paddington and
Randwick. The work of driving the tunnel, since known
as “ Busby’s bore,” wa3 commenced with prison labour
in September, 1827, and completed in June, 1837, when
the population had increased to 40,000; but parts of
the tunnel had become serviceable as early as 1830,
because of its drainage from the rocks already pierced.
The total length was 12,000 ft., average width 4ft., and
height sft.; 28 vertical shafts, from 20ft. to 80ft. in
depth, had to be sunk; and the total excavations
amounted to 255,930 cubic yards. The cost was
£24,000, and the daily supply afforded was between
300,000 and 400,000 gallons. The original scheme
included a reservoir at the outlet in Hyde Park,-to
hold 15,000,000 gallons, but this was never attempted.
A severe drought in 1838 caused the authorities to
search for further supply, and the dam at Cook’s River
was constructed ; but it was found unequal to the ex-
clusion of salt water, and, nine wet years suc-
ceeding, nothing more was done till the drought of
1849 forced the question once more to the front.
Meanwhile the City Corporation, which came into
existence in 1842, had carried out certain minor im-
provements. Previously the citizens had to send to
Hyde Park for their water, and pay for it at a shilling
per cask. The corporation erected stand-pipes at various
street corners, and reduced the price to sixpenoe per
cask. Later still reticulation was commenced to the
lower parts of the city, £1 being charged for connect-
ing each house, and 10s. as the annual rate per room.
In 1849 the city surveyor, Mr. F. Clarke, under in-
structions, brought up a recommendation for a dam
across the lower part of the Lachlan Swamp, from
which the water could be pumped into Busby’s bore.
Shortly afterwards the corporation was abolished, and
their duties relegated to a commission. On October 31,
1853, a bill was assented to giving the commissioners
full powers to resume all necessary watercourses
and alienated land between Botany Bay and Sydney.
The further developments of the Lachlan Swamp
scheme consisted in the interception of the outflow at
Botany, and pumping, by means of three 100 horse-
power engines, two of which were always at work,
one and a-half million gallons daily into a reservoir at
Paddington, 214 feet above the sea. and three and
a-half million gallons daily into a reservoir at Crown-
street, at a height of 139 feet. The outlay has been
about £150,000.
A ROYAL COMMISSION.
On September 20, 1867, under the administration of
Sir Heury Parkes, a Royal Commission of six mem-
bers, with Professor Smith as chairman, was appointed
to “ consider the present water supply, and, if deemed
inadequate, to ascertain the best measures for securing
a plentiful supply.” Although only appointed for
three months, the commissioners obtained extension of
time, and presented their final report on May 23,
1869. At the appointment of the commission
the population of the city and suburbs numbered
120,000, and the commissioners arrived at the very
modest conclusion that provision for a quarter of a
million would cover the most liberal stretch of faith
about the future. But they made the fair allowance
of 48 gallons per day per head, thus fixing 12,000,000
gallons per day as the supply to be aimed at. They
found that the sources then relied upon could not be
brought up to such requirements ; but, inasmuch as the
water was of excellent quality, and might be required
for emergencies, they recommended that the old system
should still be retained and kept in working order.
Turning their attention to new sources of supply,
no fewer than nine separate schemes were surveyed,
and carefully considered. (Three others suggested later
were examined before the report was finally adopted.)
THE NEPEAN SCHEME.
The unanimous decision of the commissioners (with
only dissent as to certain details by a single member)
fell upon what is described as the “ Upper Nepean
Gravitation Scheme.” This scheme was afterwards
fully approved by Mr. William Clark, member of the
Institute of Civil Engineers, who came from England
for the special purpose of advising the Government, in
an elaborate report submitted on May 15, 1877. The
drainage area includes the watershed of the Upper
Nepean River, and of its two tributaries, the Cordeaux
and Cataract, in all about 354 square miles of sand-
stone country, mostly sterile and uninhabited. At
Pheasant’s Nest, a gorge in the Nepean below its
junction with the Cordeaux, and 430 ft. above sea level, a
dam 10ft, high deflects the water through a tunnel
in the sandstone rock, a distance of 4A- miles, when it
' strikes the Cataract River at a place called Broughton’s
Pass, whore a 10ft. dam keeps the water at a height
of 421 ft. above the sea, and diverts the combined
streams into a second tunnel, lj mile in length, from
which the water emerges on the western slope of the
main dividing range separating the watershed of the
Nepean from that of George’s River. Thence the
water is carried in an open conduit in the sandstone
to a point near Mount Sugarloaf, where the sand-
stone gives place to Wianamatta shale ; but the conduit
is continued, with occasional short tunnels, to a
point 34J miles from the starting place. Here
the water is carried through the dividing range
before mentioned by a tunnel 3300 yards in
length, and at the 41st mile is delivered into
the Prospect Reservoir. This reservoir has been formed
by a dam 108 chains in length, and 80ft. at its highest
part. It covers 1291 acres, and holds 10,635 millions
of gallons, of which 7110 million gallons, the contents
of the uppermost 25ft., would be available for distri-
bution in Sydney. The level of the top of the water
is 195 ft. above the sea.
From this storage reservoir the water is carried by an
open conduit 4 miles 58 chains, and by an iron aqueduct
7986 ft. to a small reservoir of 400,000, at a distance
of 14 miles from Sydney. Thence it is carried by a
48-inch syphon 4628 yards in length across Duck Creek
valley (a depression of 100 ft). Leaving the syphon
the water is again conveyed by open conduit 1 mile 37
chains to a small storage reservoir, enclosed by an
earthern embankment, at an elevation of 164 ft. over
sea level. From this point the water is conveyed 10
miles to Crown-street reservoir by 42in. pipes, cap-
able of delivering 12 million gallons daily. The
construction of an 800,000-gallon reservoir at
Petersham is also included in the scheme.
Bv these arrangements, instead of continuous piping,
84 million gallons daily can be brought to within 20f
miles of Sydney, and 29 million gallons daily to


within 14 miles. The various channels include:—
Tunnels, lOf miles ; open conduits, 34J ; aqueduct, 3
miles; pipes, 13J ; and reservoirs, If ; making a total
of 63 miles. The estimate of cost was £1,170,768.
The work has been carried out under various con-
tractors, and the total expenditure to June 30,
1887, was £1,982,278. The water came into use
November 5, 1887. During the execution of the
work a series of droughts so reduced the supply from
Botany that the Government decided to tap the
Nepean supply at Prospect by a temporary piping.
This work was carried out by Messrs. Hudson Brothers,
' at a cost of £67,084, and the water was thus made
available on January 30, 1886, or 21 months eariier
than by the permanent works. The works thus
described will compare favourably with the water
supply systems of other countries. The Yan Yean
reservoir storing the Melbourne water supply is
about the same distance from the city as the Prospect
reservoir is from Sydney, and, like it, has been con-
structed where no natural watercourse can endanger its
safety or purity. Yan Yean covers 12 acres more
ground than the Prospect reservoir, but has a less
capacity by 700 million gallons. The New York
Croton aqueduct is 40 miles long; Glasgow (Loch
Katrine), 26; Aberdeen, 20 ; Vienna, 57 ; Paris, 104 ;
and London (New Diver), 39 miles, though only
representing half that distance in a direct line.
Since 1857 the Sydney water supply has been con-
trolled by the City Council ; the water rates have been
struck annually, the present charges being 3s. 6d. per
room, or 6d. per 250 gallons per meter. The water
fund showed a small credit balance at the end of last
year. A bill to give effect to the Metropolitan Water
and Sewerage Act of 1880, by constituting a board of
seven members to exercise all necessary trusts and
powers over water supply and sanitation in the county
of Cumberland, has been passed by the Legislative
Assembly, and partlv dealt with by the Legislative
Council.
■WATER CONSERVATION.
The general subject of water conservation was
referred to a Royal Commission on May 10, 1884, con-
sisting of Messrs. W. J. Lyne, Russell Barton, J. B.
Donkin, F. A. Franklin, H. Gilliat, John Kidd, D.
M'Mordie, C.E., W. S. Targett, G. W. Townsend, and
F. B. Gipps. The final report was presented on May
9, 1887, Mr. Gipps dissenting, and included the follow-
ing recommendations: —That river gauge records
should be kept continuously and systematically,
especially in connection with the Murrumbidgee,
Darling, and Murray. That surveys should hp made
forthwith for the construction of irrigation ofli»ls on
the Murray and Murrumbidgee. That funds should
be voted for a more complete examination of the
Lachlan, Macquarie, and Darling Rivers, and of Lake
George, Lake Bathurst, and Lake Cudgellico; and that
surveys should be undertaken to ascertain whether it
would be possible to.conserve and divert the water now
running to waste down the Paroo, Bulloo, and Warrego.
In emphasising their recommendations, the ComnTis-
sioners urged that on water-conservation mainly depend
the prosperity and the development of the whole of the
Central and Western divisions of the colony, whilst
the Eastern division might by the same means be
made vastly more productive.
SANITATION.
Previous to the year 1854 the drainage of Sydney
was confined to a few square stone conduits, constructed
by prison labour. Within the next two vears, the
principal streets—Pitt, Castlereagh, Elizabeth, Phillip,
and Macquarie—had oviform sewers constructed in
them, under direction of the Commissioners who had
replaced the municipal council, Pitt-street sewer being
4ft. 6in., and the others 3ft. 6in. in depth. A main
sewer was also constructed, 6ft. in depth, from Mac-
quarie-place to Fort Macquarie, where recently a
further extension with outlet valves so as to dis-
charge 12ft. below water has been added. Essex-street
sewer, discharging near the outlet of the Tank stream,
was also constructed at this time. The City Council,
after its restoration in 1857, followed up the work,
with the Hay-street, Blackwattle Swamp, Woolloomoo-
loe, and other smaller sewers ; but the southern
slopes were left with only the open sewer of Shea’s
Creek.
On April 12,1875, a board, consisting of 15 gentle-
men,. with Professor Pell as chairman, was appointed to
inquire into the whole matter of sewage and health. As
the result of full inquiry and mature consideration, this
board came to the following conclusions:—That all con-
servancy systems of sewerage may be abandoned, as
not effecting the objects intended, however efficiently
carried out. That the “ dry earth ” system
is efficient only . in the case of private
dwellings and public institutions where regular and
careful management can be enforced, and is quite
inapplicable to large towns; and that the authorities in
Europe and India unanimously suported that opinion.
That the “Liernur” system must also be rejected, on
the testimony of the London committee of 1876, that
“ they did not know one English town in which the
apparatus, if adopted, would be other than a
costly toy.” That “ filtration ” processes may be
well adapted to large establishments, whether private or
public, but are obviously inapplicable to a populous city.
That “precipitation” processes had never yet shown
paying results, or anything like effective deodorisation.
Furthermore, the board found that, notwithstanding
all the practical light thrown upon the question, the
system of discharging into the sea was increasingly
resorted to by the coastal towns in the United King-
dom, the sewerage of London itself being still carried
into the Thames at Barking and Crossness. When
the board proceeded to apply the results of their in-
quiries to the sewerage of Sydney, they found the area
divided into a northern and southern system by a ridge,
200 ft high, at Ben Buckler Point, north of Bondi, and
declining to half that height at Newtown. The
northern and immensely more important system had
the following outlets: —Blackwattle Bay' receiving
the drainage of about 696 acres; Darling
646 acres; Sydney Cove, 267 acres; Woolloomooloo
Bay, 350 acres; and Rushcutter Bay, 743 acres. On
the southern side, the water reserve drained
about seven square miles; whilst Shea’s Creek
could be utilised for Redfern, Waterloo, Macdonald-
town, and parts of Newtown. The board recommended
that for the northern system a sewer should be con-
structed from the junction of Newtown and Parramatta
roads, which, following the last-mentioned, should in-
tercept the Abercrombie-street sewer, cross Belmore


Population
Mean death
Colony.
1886, per
rate per
Dec. 31,
1886. '
1000 mean
1000,1876
1886.
population.
to 1886.
New South Wales
1,001,966
14,587
14-89
15-55
Victoria ..
1,003,043
14,952
15-15
14-94
Queensland
342,614
5,575
1665
17-83
S. Australia
312,758
4,234
13-52
14-60
W. Australia
39,584
806
21-56
16-23
Tasmania
137,211
1,976
14-58
15-98
New Zealand ...
589,386*
6,135
10-53
11-33
Park, and receive Hay-street sewer at Elizabeth-street,
thence along Forbes and Wemyss streets to junction of
Liverpool and Oxford streets, where it would meet a
branch intercepting sewer from Kent-street and Darling
Harbour, and another main sewer from the system
draining into Sydney Cove ; thence along Liverpool-
street, taking in drainage of Woolloomooloo, across
Rushcutter and Double Bay valleys, and discharging
into the sea slightly above high-water mark, at 40
chains to north of Ben Buckler Point, under a precipi-
tous cliff, into deep water, where the ebb tide sets well
off the coast. The gradients of the main sewer to be
2ft. 6in. per mile, the form circular, and the diameter
ranging from sft. 9in. to 7ft. 6in. The branch sewers to
be oviform, ranging from 4ft. 6in. x 3ft. to sft. 6in. x
3ft. Bin., and the gradients lin 700. The very lowest
parts of the northern system would still drain into the
harbour, and their deposits be dealt with by dredging.
As to the southern system the board recommended
that the sewage should be concentrated on Shea s
Creek, and utilised on a farm at Webb s grant.
The board’s recommendations for the northern system
were adopted with only slight variations, and the
works were commenced shortly afterwards. Except
about 1100 yards of sandy soil, the main sewer lies
through sandstone, requiring little brickwork. lhe
board’s estimate of cost was £256,000, and the actual
expenditure under contract to June 30, 1887, was
£336,941 10s. 3d.
PUBLIC HEALTH.
DEATH RATE.
At the close of 1886 New South Wales had a popu-
lation of 1,001,966. The mean death rate for the
year was 14-88 per 1000 of mean population,
and the average rate for the 11 years, 1876 to 1886,
was 15*15 per 1000. The following table will show,
for comparison, the
Mean Death Rate op the Australasian Colonies.
It will be seen from the above table that Queensland
mortality greatly exceeds, whilst New Zealand mor-
tality falls as far below, the averages for the other
colonies, But no European country, whose figures are
available, comes even so low as Queensland, except
Norway and Sweden, whose average is about 17 per
1000; whilst the death rate in Hungary is 36 per
1000. The average in the United Kingdom is about
19, the rates for England and Scotland being higher
than that for Ireland.
DISEASE PREVENTION.
With regard to provisions for disease prevention, the
health authorities of most of the colonies are hampered
by inadequate legislation; and the lack of federal
-quarantine increases the difficulty. The Health Act of
Victoria is the most perfect. It was parsed as recently
as 1883, and is administered by a board of nine
members, with Mr. Akehurst, P.M., as president, and
Dr. Shields as Government Medical Officer. This colony
has long been promised an amended Health Act;
meanwhile the best is made of present powers
by a board consisting of Dr. Mackellar as president
and Government Health Officer, the Under-Secretary for
Finance and Trade, the Inspector-General of Police,
the Mayor of Sydney, Mr. Thomas Playfair, Dr.
MacLaurin, and Sir Alfred Roberts, with Mr. Edmund
Sager as secretary. Dr. Mackellar is also Port Health
Officer, with Dr. J. C. Sibley as assistant. The quaran-
tine station at North Head is under the superintend-
ence of Mr. J. F. Vincent, and there is a hospital for
dangerous contagious diseases at Little Bay.
GENERAL HOSPITALS.
The general hospitals of the colony number 58, of
which the Sydney Hospital, Prince Alfred Hospital,
and Little Bay are the most important. The number
of patients at the close of 1886 was 1003; the
admissions for the year numbered 12,122; and the
aggregate number of bod 3, 1620. The income for the
year included £56,427 Government votes, £51,913
from private subscriptions, and £18,240 from other
sources, making a total of £126,580. The actual ex-
penditure was about £114,000. The general hospitals
of Victoria provide 2247 beds, and have a daily
average of about 1700 inmates. These figures
do not include the private hospitals of either
colony, of which St. Vincent’s is the most
conspicuous example. This colony has also four
hospitals for the insane—at Gladesville, Parramatta,
Callan Park, and Newcastle. The number of patients
under care during the year was 3151, with a daily
average of 2553; and the cost, including expenses of
Darlinghurst Receiving-house, amounted to £85,521125.
Bd., or £31155. 4d. per annum for each adult inmate, of
which £9691 7s. sd. was collected from estates or
friends of patients. Victoria has five hospitals for the
insane, with 3139 beds, and a daily average of 3227
inmates. Expenditure, about £3O 18s. per annum for
each inmate.
MORTALITY IN TOWN AND COUNTRY.
During the 16 years (1870 to 1886) the mean death
rate per 1000 inhabitants of this colony was 23-37 in
the city, 18-00 in the suburbs, and 13-39 in the country.
But for several years past the rate has been abnormally
high in the suburbs, and in 1886 was 21-04, as
against only 17-06 in the city, and 12-64 in the country.
These figures indicate grave dangers through the absence
of anything like a regular system of suburban sanita-
tion. The disparity between city and country mortality
is, of course, most marked amongst children. The
mean annual death rate amongst persons over five years
of age during the last 16 years was 15-81 in the city,
9-38 in the suburbs, and 9-87 in the country per 1000
of population. But in the case of children under five
years of age the rates were 74-40 in the city, 68-90 in
suburbs, and only 34-22 in the country. The most
fatal year of the 16, as far as the children were con-
cerned, was 1875, when the death rate rose to 105-64 in
the city, 80-35 in the suburbs, and 40-37 in the country
per 1000 of population under five years of age. The
average rate of mortality for the 16 years amongst
infants under one year of age was 179-5 per 1000 in the
city, 154-8 in the suburbs, and 91*7 in the country. The
* Exclusive of Maoris.


most fatal diseases to persons under five years of age
were diarrhoea, convulsions, and atrophy and debility.
Amongst persons over five years, phthysis has been the
greatest enemy. From this disease alone 1023 persons
died in 1885. Pneumonia comes next, then typhoid
and bronchitis. Probably the high rate of mortalitv
from chest complaints is largely to be accounted for by
moribund patients coming here from other countries
under mistaken “ medical advice.”
ART.
DIFFICULTIES IN NEW COUNTRIES.
A few sentences extracted from the address delivered
by Sir Alfred Stephen, G.C.M.G., C. 8., President of
the New South Wales Academy of Art, on the
occasion of the annual meeting of that society some
years ago, point out so clearly the difficulties against
which the artistic faculty must contend in new coun-
tries that we make no excuse for transcribing them :
“ In a young community, wh ere the majority have for
so many years sought—often struggled—for main-
tenance alone, the claims of art, and all that tends to
create and foster it, are unheeded. It does not spring
up in a day. Its study—the practice of it in the
examples of painting and sculpture at least—requires
mere than even a generation for full development. A true
taste for it, among more than the gifted few, must be
excited.” The facts so clearly put bv the president
should always be borne in mind when an effort is made
to estimate the position attained by art in a land which
was unknown until long after the race for colonial
supremacy between the great rivals, England and
France, was finally decided on American plateaus and
Indian plains. It is unnecessary to dwell upon the
uncongenial surroundings in which art of any kind must
necessariiy find itself in a country where nature has
first to be subdued. It would be as idle to look for
high appreciation of the ideal in such a country as to
expect the workman to busy himself with the orna-
mentation of the building before the foundations were
securely laid. Persons, therefore, who blame the
colonies for backwardness in things which lend
grace to life place themselves in the unenviable posi-
tion of railing at the inevitable.
PROGRESS OF ART IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Having said so much in explanation of the obvious
fact that in Australia the cultivation of the useful has
left the worship of the beautiful some way behind, we
turn to the more pleasing task of endeavouring to
ascertain the progress and present position of art in
New South Wales on this the colony’s hundredth birth-
day. It is only within the last 18 years that societies
for the promotion of objects exclusively artistic have
obtained a firm footing in the parent colony. We use
the word “artistic” in relation to representation alone.
It is well known that literary and musical societies
date from a period much less recent in New South
Wales annals, some of the latter unions being almost
as old as the century. ' Further, omitting poetry,
concerning which there may be some dispute,
there is no doubt that at least one musical work
of a high class—Wallace’s “Maritana”—was com-
posed in Australia. In prose literature, too, more than
one work has secured well-earned popularity far beyond
colonial confines. Why Painting should have lagged
behind while her sisters were pressing so boldly to the
front is a question much more easily asked than satis-
factorily answered. Certain it is that not before 1871
did an institution having the advancement of art as its
object arise in New South Wales. It was in the year
mentioned that, largely owing to the efforts of the late
Mr. Mort, the New South Wales Academy of Art
was founded. The inaugural address was delivered
by the late Dr. Badliam, whose acquaintance
with the literatures of the countries where art
was cradled, and where it reached an unequalled de-
velopment, was second to none on the illustrious roll of
European scholars. One means adopted by tho infant
society for the furtherance of its objects was to hold an
annual exhibition of colonial works. These exhibitions
were open to contributors from the sister colonies as
well as to those of New South Wales. In 1873 two
prizes of £25 each were offered by the Honorable John
Campbell, and awarded by a competent committee.
They were for the best pictuies, in oil and in water-
colour respectively, executed by colonial artists.
Another method adopted for promoting the society’s
objects was to establish a school of design. For this
purpose models were obtained from South Kensington,
London, but the sequel was for a time a little depress-
ing, for, according to the presidential address already
referred to: —“ Being unable to obtain the necessary
accommodation for opening classes, the council was
compelled to stow the models away in a warehouse,
and thus for some years the school project remained in
abeyance.” From the same source we learn that
“ Our annual exhibitions of colonial work of art, as you
are aware, have been continued, but they have not met
with the success—nor (to say the truth) with that
assistance from the public—which the projectors had
hoped for and expected.”
THE ART GALLERY.
The foregoing excerpta throw much light on
the difficulties against which the artistic faculty has
to contend in a new country whose people are mainly
occupied in founding homes for themselves and
their children, Such difficulties, as was previously ob-
served, are in the nature of things and inevitable. Art
unions were established in connection with the
Sydney Academy. It would be too soon to offer a final
opinion regarding the ultimate result of this method,
but, so far, its success in Sydney has not been unquali-
fied. There is one direction, however, in which the
efforts of the New South Wales Academy of Art have
terminated worthily. It was through these efforts that
the Art Gallery was founded. When it is stated that
the present value of the collection to be found in the
latter institution is no less than £50,000, it will be
readily conceded that if the academy’s exertions have
not been quite successful in some .departments thev
have been gratifyingly so in others. It was not till
1880 that New South Wales may be said to have
possessed an Art Gallery at all. It was in the Sep-
tember of that year that the nucleus of the present
collection was afforded a temporary shelter in an unsuit-
able building in the Inner Domain. In December, 1885,
the whole of the works were removed to the present
partially-completed structure in the Outer -Domain.
The completion of the latter building will remove from
the colony the reproach of having provided no adequate
place for the protection and display of the collection,


whose value is increasing yearly. The history, then, of
the New South Wales Academy of Art is briefly this :
The institution was founded in 1871, mainly through
the exertions of the late Mr. T. S. Mort. For three years
it struggled on without Government aid. It -was then
that the sum of £5OO was placed on the Estimates and
devoted to the purchase of works with a view to the
ultimate establishment of a gallery. In 1876 trustees
selected from the council of the academy were appointed
“ for administering the votes of Parliament towards the
formation of the Gallery of Art, and in aid of the New
South Wales Academy of Art.” Then followed
periodical grants of money, with the result that to-day
we see the colony in possession of a collection of which
it has no need to be ashamed. Among the works which
attract most attention, professional as well as popular,
may be mentioned De Neuville’s “ Defence of liorke s
Drift,” Luke Filde’s “ The Widower,” and Sir Frederick
Leighton’s “Wedded.” Indeed, from the names of the
artists, the character of many of the recent purchases,
and the prices paid, it is clear that the present trustees
of the National Art Gallery of New South Wales aim
high, and are determined to reach their standard.
THE ART SOCIETY.
1880 saw the inauguration in Sydney of the Art
Society of New South Wales. This society’s pro-
gramme, judging by the “ memorandum of associa-
tion” for 1887, appears to be more ambitious and com-
prehensive than that of its predecessor the Academy.
Among other objects we find —“To provide means for
the study by the members of the fine arts in all parts
of the world. ... To form and maintain classes
for the benefit and instruction of the members of the
society. ... To acquire and form an art library
and reading room.” The holding of periodical exhi-
bitions appears to be a prominent feature also in the
foregoing programme. Considerable success has so far
attended the annual exhibitions referred to. Year by
yftar there has been a marked advance in the
value of the work done until, at the display
recently held, this improvement was so obvious
that a large number of the works sent for
public examination found purchasers at fair figures.
Thus, while the “ New South Wales Academy of Art”
concerned itself chiefly with obtaining works from the
various European schools, its younger sister the “ Art
Society” devoted its attention solely to the duty of en-
couraging local talent. Buie No. 8, in the “ regula-
tions for exhibitions,” says :—“ No work will be re-
ceived unless it be the bona-fide production of the
member exhibiting it” Bearing this in mind—re-
membering that all the pictures shown at the late ex-
hibition were by persons either born in the colonies or
who have made Australia their home —the number and
quality of the works are matters for congratulation.
Considering the objects of this society, and the good
work it has accomplished in the face of more than
ordinary disadvantages, the opinion is gaining ground that
the aid so far extended to it by the Government has not
been marked by undue profuseness. No one will chal-
lenge the necessity for providing paintings of a high
class from European schools. If a taste is to be culti-
vated at all, it must be cultivated by worthy models.
There are many war's, however, in which a helping
hand might be extended to colonial artists. In art, as
in other matters, although it is not meet that charity
should end at home, it is frequently prudent for it to
begin there.
AUSTRALIAN ACADEMY OF ARTS.
The last increase in the artistic institutions of New-
South Wales occurred four years ago, and consisted of
twins—“ The Australian Academy of Arts ” and the
“Sketching Institute of New South Wales.” The
former is limited to 20 members, each of whom must be a
professional “artist, architect,or sculptor.” This is just
half the number assigned to the Acaddmie Francaise-, but
whether the Australians will reach in our day the
« immortality ” so long the heritage of the Academie’s
members, is a question on which it would be idle to
offer an opinion. At all events, if only from the
limited numbers, it will not require so much glory to
go round. The “ Sketching Institute” has for its raison
d’dtre the popularising of “outdoor sketching from
nature.” It is under high patronage, and its energetic
director spares no pains to ensure its success.
A BRIGHTER FUTURE.
From what has been said, it is clear that steady pro-
gress has attended the cultivation of art in New
South Wales, especially during the last few years.
For artists, too, there is a brighter future opening.
The prospect of such a future has been sufficient to
attract some men of talent from old-world schools, and
there can be no doubt, as years go by, that immigration
of this desirable kind will increase. In a word, New
South Wales has had to face the same obstacles that all
young communities have had to face when, material
wants being satisfied, men naturally yearn for that
higher life which mere worldly good fortune can never
supply. She has approached those difficulties, over-
come most of them, and now finds that, a determined
effort having been made, obstructions once thought
insuperable either contract or disappear when a real
endeavour is made to surmount them.
HEALTH AND PLEASURE RESORTS.
The health resorts of New South Wales are many.
This is owing to the geographical peculiarities of the
surface and the consequent diversity of climate. That
diversity of climate is due, not so much to the
eight degrees of latitude through which the colony
stretches, as to the great table land which runs from
north to south, separating the warm, humid coast
districts from the warm, dry plains of the . West.
Thus, without leaving the colony, the invalid
in search of health can be transported in a
few hours from the climate of Egypt to that of
England. As few of the mountains, however, either
in New South Wales or in Australia, reach the snow
line, there is an absence of the majestic Alpine scenery
which lends to the neighbouring islands. of New
Zealand their most attractive characteristics. The
rivers whose sources are in the western slope of the
tableland flow for the most part through level
country, and so have little to recommend them from a
scenic point of view. Not so the eastern flowing rivers.
Owing to the comparative shortness and abruptness of
their courses, as well as to the diversified character of the
country through which they pass, scenes of surpassing
loveliness are to be found on many. This is especially
the case with the Hawkesbury, which falls into the sea
at Broken Bay, about 15 miles to the north of Sydney.
Of some of the lower reaches of this fine stream the
late Anthony Trollope writes There is a river, or


rather portion of a river, known to very few tourists,
which 1 think beats the Rhine. This is the Upper
Mississippi, for about 150 miles below St. Paul’s. It
is not my business here to describe the Mississippi, but
I mention it with the object of saying that in my
opinion the Hawkesbury beats the Mississippi.”
CAVES.
The Jenolan, formerly called the Fish River
Caves, about 35 miles from Mount Victoria, are
among the foremost natural curiosities, not of
New South Wales alone, but of Australasia.
They are of limestone formation, and for num-
ber, beauty, and magnitude are unequalled. At least
one of them is estimated to be 500 ft. high. In
many, the forms assumed by the numerous
stalactites and stalagmites are fairly bewildering. In
traversing these gigantic corridors and chambers,
each possessing peculiar beauties of its own, the feel-
ing of wonder at the sombre labyrinth and fan-
tastic shapes is frequently followed by one
closely akin to apprehension. The eye tires, not of
monotony, but of endless variety. If some of the
great halls to which the guide introduces you are re-
markable for the beauty of the designs wrought by the
slow dripping of lime-saturated water through ages,
others are no less remarkable for the grotesque shapes
produced by similar percolations. At the entrance to
one chamber, for instance, when the magnesium wire
sends light into the farthest comers,it requires no powers
of fancy to imagine yourself on the threshold of a vast
menagerie, so whimsically alike do the inanimate forms
appear to those of wild animals. In another cave the
dark rocks at the back and overhead have a strange
resemblance to a lowering sky, while the delicate
white tracery in the foreground strikingly resembles a
heavy, snowfall. These caves, together with the
land in the vicinity, have been proclaimed a public
reserve. They attract tourists from all parts of Aus-
tralasia, the Government providing accommodation and
guides at reasonable rates.
PARKS, GARDENS, BEACHES, AND RESERVES.
_ Great care has been exercised by the Executive in pro-
viding reserves for public use and recreation in all centres
of population throughout the colony. In Sydney alone
th e pleasure resorts are so numerous that on popular
holidays the task of choosing a spot for a day’s outing
is by no means an easy one. So advantageously is the
capital of. the colony situated with its noble harbour,
numerous inlets, tempting beaches, and wooded heights,
that the whole environment might be considered one
great pleasure ground. Of Port Jackson itself and its
proverbial beauty, it is superfluous to speak. Re-
ferring to this fine sheet of water and its numerous
armlets, Mr. Trollope observes :—“ I despair of
being able to convey to any reader my own
idea of the beauty of Sydney harbour. I have seen
nothing equal to it in the way of land-locked scenery—
nothing second to it. Dublin Ray, the Bay of
Spezia, New York, and the Cove of Cork are all
picturesquely fine ; but they are not equal to Sydney
either in shape, in colour, or in varietv.” From
various high points in the vicinity views can be ob-
tained which bewilder by their varietv and charm. It
would be impossible within our limits to enumerate
more than. , a few of the pleasant places to be
found in the neighbourhood. Middle Harbour,
one of the principal arms of Port Jackson,
ie serpentine, bold, and romantic. Manly ha*
a fine ocean beach, a sort of marine parade, on
which the breakers of its restless neighbour the South
Pacific chase each other in play or in anger. Manly
itself is a noted holiday resort, to which fresh attrac-
tions are being added daily. One of the latest of these is
an aquarium, where fishes of divers kinds disport them-
selves with an abandon suggestive of pleasure af being
freed from the constant danger of hook, net, or rapacious
neighbour. Bondi, a short distance south of the harbour,
possesses an ocean beach also, and a lately erected aqua-
rium. The latter is beautifully situated in a romantic
glen which looks seawards. The recent addition to its
attractions has already enhanced the popularity of
Bondi in a marked degree. This will not appear sur-
prising to those who visit the new institution and ob-
serve its bonny surroundings. Watson’s Bay, Botany,
Mossman’s Bay, Coogee (which also has its aquarium),
and a score of others have each and all their attrac-
tions.
HYDE PARK AND THE DOMAINS.
Hyde Park is a quadrangular block of nearly 50
acres, conveniently situated between the city and the
populous suburb of Woolloomooloo. It is open day
and night, and is perhaps the most frequented of
Sydney’s public places. A fine avenue of trees runs
through the centre from north to south. At the
northern entrance stands a statue of the late Prince
Consort, while in the south-eastern portion of the park
a colossal statue of Captain Cook shows that the people
of New South Wales were not unmindful of the great
man whose discoveries conferred a continent in perpetuity
on the British race. North-east of Hyde Park are the
Inner Domain, the Outer Domain, and the Botanic Gar-
dens. The former is a space of 56 acres surrounding Govern-
ment House, and reserved for the Viceroy and his
household. The Outer Domain is much larger, having
an area of 82 acres, and, like Hyde Park, is open at all
hours. Unlike the latter, however, the Outer Domain
is not devoted to pedestrians alone, but contains some
pleasant carriage drives, in which those fortunate enough
to possess this means of locomotion are sometimes to be
seen. As many of the finest Sydney views, embracing
the harbour, the North Shore, Woolloomooloo Bay, and
Farm Cove, with the war ships riding at anchor, can be
obtained from various points on the principal drive, a
stranger would naturally expect that on fine' afternoons
a procession of showy vehicles and gay riders would be
abroad. So far, however, is this from being the case,
that a walk might be taken through the Domain when
the calm air is heavy with incense from the Bot.mic
Gardens, without meeting a vehicle beyond an unosten-
tatious-looking hansom cab, with a prosaic driver
behind and an attenuated horse in front. It is a
remarkable circumstance in connection with
Australian city life that the agreeable
custom so universal north of the Equator of
driving, riding, or lounging in a certain place, at a
certain hour, is quite unknown in this southern land.
This is why, of all the sights of London to a native-
born Australian, that of Itotten-row in the season is
the strangest. But, if fashion does not rendezvous in
the Outer Domain, the same cannot be said regarding
those who cannot fairly claim a place in the beau
monde, who make no scruple about sitting at dinner in
morning dress; sometimes, indeed, without the
formality of a coat These blithe, light-hearted people


assemble here in thousands, particularly on bunday
evenings, and while away the time abus-
ing licensed victuallers or unravelling intricate
theological knots. In a word, the bydney Outer
Domain is occupied on Sunday afternoons by a dozen
assemblies of the most diverse schools of religious
thought, from the narrowest Calvinism to the most
comprehensive latitudinarianism. They preach and
argue and wrangle, a little noisily, perhaps, but with
the greatest good-humour, until tea-time, and then go
decorously home, satisfied with having begun the week
well. All visitors to Sydney should spend a Sunday
afternoon in the Outer Domain if they would witness
the fierce blaze of light a person can throw upon a
subject of which he may know little.
THE ROTANIC GARDENS.
Between the Outer Domain and the sea lie the
Botanic Gardens. Their situation may fitly be called
superb. They contain about 40 acres, surrounded by
the Domain on all but the northern side, which is
crescent-shaped and bounded by the waters of Farm
Cove. For some distance south from the semi-circular
sea-wall forming the northern limit the' ground is
level, and is laid out in lawns and many-shaped flower
beds. Thence to the southern boundary there is a
gradual rise, which adds diversity to the scenery, while
affording protection from the rough southerly wind
common throughout the year. It is not the sightseer
alone, but the botanist, who will be repaid by a visit,
for in addition to a large collection of indigenous
trees and plants there will be found various exotics in-
troduced from the most distant lands. Side by side
with hardy, deciduous European trees, the tropical and
sub-tropical palms and bananas are to be seen growing
luxuriantly. In the orchid-house and the hothouses near
the main entrance are many plants of great beauty and
rarity. On a fine day, with a clear sky overhead, a
yielding lawn underfoot, the songs of birds and
aroma of flowers in the air, and superb views on all
sides, the Sydney Botanic Gardens would be found
hard to match.
OTHER RESORTS.
Besides the reserves already enumerated, there are
many others, such as Moore Park, Cook Park, Phillip
Park, Belmore Gardens, Prince Alfred Park, Victoria
Park, the National and Centennial Parks, to be found
in the city or suburbs, or in the country just beyond.
The Randwick Racecourse contains over 200 acres of
level ground in the vicinity of the suburb from which
it derives its name. The Zoological Gardens at
Moore Park, on the Randwick-road, are rapidly
and deservedly growing in popularity. Although
the space is rather circumscribed, a defect
which will probably soon be remedied, a
good deal has been done to make this institution
attractive. Some fine specimens, particularly of the
larger carnivora, have been secured, and already some
of the cubs bred in the Gardens are well on their way
to maturity. At Parramatta the house at one time
used as a country residence by the Governors has a large
area of ground attached, which has become a public
reserve. Lady Robinson’s Beach is a reserve near the
western extremity of Botany Bay. There is a move-
ment on foot among the residents of the neighbour-
hood to build a sea-wall round it, after the manner,
probably, of that surrounding Farm Cove, the northern
boundary of the Botanic Gardens. When it is remem-
bered bow tbe colony of New South W ales, owing to
the physical peculiarities of its surface, particularly
with regard to elevation above the sea level,
possesses 0 climates of varying degrees of temperature
and humidity, its claim as a health resort will be readily
conceded. A few —and a few only—of the more im-
portant public reserves and recreation grounds have
been mentioned ; but when it is borne in mind that the
passing of the Lands for Public Property Acquisition
Bill not only made provision for securing fresh reserves
in the public interest as occasion arose, but placed some
hundreds of thousands of pounds at the disposal of the
Executive for the intended purpose, the care taken by
the colonists of the past and of the present that the
colonists of the future should have no cause to com-
plain of the lack of pleasure resorts reflects credit on
the people and their leaders.
YACHTING AND SAILING.
From the very foundation of the colony sailing as
an amusement has held a prominent position amongst
our sports. The Anniversary Regatta is an older
institution than the Constitution. Few great cities
are blessed with such opportunities for aquatic
sports as Sydney. Port Jackson presents a large
expanse of water, sheltered from the sea, with an
infinite variety of bays and reaches. Within easy
distance the Pacific Ocean offers its attraction to more
adventurous mariners, while along the coast are many
ports, offering every inducement to cruising in the way
of scenerv, fishing, and bathing —Botany, Port Hack-
insr, Jervis and Twofold bays to the south, Port Mac-
quarie, Port Stephens, and that paradise of yachtsmen,
Broken Bay, to the north. It is impossible to trace in
detail the development of the various sailing-boats which
are now seen in the harbour. The yachts have followed
more or less the traditions of the mother country. Fol-
lowing on the Madge Wildfire, more than 30 years ago,
Mr. It. Harnett built the Australian. This is a
notable vessel, for she was constructed on lines
altogether different from the then accepted form. In-
stead of the cod bow and mackerel tail, she was built
on the principle of segments of a circle, and it is a re-
markable fact that both in Great Britain and here the
present accepted model approaches very closely to that
curious machine which was 30 years ahead of the
times. The Xarifa on somewhat similar lines followed,
and proved as great a success. But it is only by de-
grees, and from lessons taken from imported models,
that we have come to the yacht of to-dav. Still the
local builders and designers have done good work, and
both as regards speed and good workmanship in many,
as boats built and designed in Sydney have
held their own with imported boats. It must be
admitted, however, that at present British designs are
to the front, the reason being that until quite recently
our local builders have gone by rule of thumb,
while naval architecture has brought designing
on the other side of the world to a
science. The latest addition to our fleet, the
Era, 40 tons, though the designer is an Englishman,
shows that we have recognised the importance of
science as applied to yacht-building. Amongst the
smaller craft an almost greater change has taken place.
From the deep open boats of our fathers we passed


through the shallow fixed-fin boats to the racing
centreboard skiffs and dingies, and finally to the open
boats and half-deckers of to-day, with their light
draught, enormous beam, and huge centreboards. Open-
boat sailing has long been a feature of the harbour,
and much wonder has been expressed by visitors
at the craft with enormous sails and no other
ballast than the line of men hanging out
on the weather gunwale. Lively indeed is the
scene which may be witnessed on any Saturday after-
noon or holiday. The harbour from one end to the
other dotted with white sails, the yachts with their tall
masses of canvas, and the smaller boats with their huge
sails and a row of men in bright guernseys hanging
out to windward; boats from 40 tons down to
little Bft. canvas dingies, as carefully built and no
less skilfully handled than their larger sisters. Of the
clubs at present in existence the Royal Sydney Yacht
Squadron is the oldest. But even before this time the
regattas were sights worth seeing. Excursions by rail
and other attractions were less numerous than
now, and on Anniversary Day the regatta was the out-
ing. Crowds covered the ground about Fort Macquarie
and other points of vantage, while the harbour was
alive with craft of every description. The first Anni-
versary Regatta took place on January 8, 1834, and
from that time to the present the regatta has been
looked upon as the aquatic carnival of the year.
In July, 1862, a number of yacht-owners met and
determined to form a yacht club to be called
the Australian Yacht Squadron. Next year the
club received the patronage of H.R.H. the
Prince of Wales, under the title of the Royal
Sydney Yacht Squadron. The club has continued
to flourish, and at present possesses a fleet of 34
yachts, and has about 138 members on the roll. In
1867, after the visit of the Duke of Edinburgh, the
Prince Alfred Yacht Club was founded under his
patronage. The older club allows no yachts under five
tons, but the P. A. Y. C. admits smaller boats ; many of
the yachts and members, however, belong to both clubs.
The Prince Alfred Club has 24 boats and 70 members.
The fleet of the Sydney Amateur Sailing Club consists
of open and half-decked boats of all sizes. The club
was founded in 1872 for the purpose of encouraging
sailing and organising races, and it now has
80 boats and 130 members. Under its auspices most of
our most noticeable amateur helmsmen and sailors have
grown up. Later still, Balmain, which has always
been a great sailing centre, formed the Balmain Sailing
Club. Most of the boats in this club also belong to the
S. A. S. C., and between them the two clubs keep the
racing half-deckers and open-boats busy in the season.
The Balmain club has between 60 and 70 boats and
120 members. About nine years ago the first race for
canvas dingies took place. At that time these boats
were roughly-built craft, but the encourage-
ment given to them and their juvenile crews
has improved the build to such an extent
that the canvas dingies of to-day are as carefully
modelled and built as the larger and more pretentious
vessels. In 1883 a club was founded in their interest,
and now numbers 26 boats and 140 members, who are
famous for the skilful and daring manner in which
they sail their small craft.
But sailing is not confined to Sydney. All along
the coast the fishing-boats are known for their sea-
worthy qualities, and at every important centre an
annual regatta is held. Botany now has its sailing
club, and the Macleay is well known for the keen
interest taken in open-boat sailing. Our open boats are
a type peculiar to ourselves, but our yachts Jiail from
all parts. From England come such yachts as the
Mistral and the lolanthe. The Waitangi, winner of the
Intercolonial Cup last year, comes from New Zealand,
but it is to alterations made here that she owes her
present fame. Last year a great impetus was
given to yachting. On the suggestion of Sir William
Clarke, owner of the Janet, the Royal Sydney Yacht
Squadron and the Victorian Yacht Club inaugurated
the Intercolonial Cup. The first series of races took
place in this port, and the cup was won
by Mr. A. Milson’s yacht Waitangi. This
year no yacht from other ports will visit
us. This is unfortunate, as Mr. Milson’s
new yacht the Era, 40 tons, built according to the
latest designs, will not have an opportunity of testing
her qualities with any boats from foreign ports. The
present season has seen an important change in the
rules of the yacht clubs. Formerly the R. S. Y. C.
would not admit centreboard boats to its
races, and the P. A. Y. C. only allowed centreboards if
fixed. But the success of American centreboard boats
has caused a relaxation of the rules, and the elder club
now admits them under certain restrictions as to the
proportion of depth to length, while the younger club
makes no restrictions. The Miranda, a 40-ton centre-
board boat built by Mr. J. Want, is the first boat
to enter the clubs under the new rules. In addition to
this, the clubs have adopted the new Yacht Racing
Association rules of measurement.
It is impossible to go into the details of the perform-
ances of boats dear to the memory of boating men
Chance, Era, Xarifa, Mistral, Magic, Nereid, Carlotta,
Lottie, and a host more; suffice it to say that
at present the enthusiasm in the sport is as" keen
as ever it was, and that from cruising and racing many
valuable lessons of pluck, judgment, and endurance
have been learnt. Amongst some to whom a tribute is
due for practical encouragement to yachting
and sailing in past years we may "mention
the Hon. George Thornton, M.L.C., Messrs.
James Milson, Alfred Fairfax, Richard Harnett, the
Hon. Henry Dangar and Mr. W. 0. Gilchrist, who,
though still amongst us, have retired from active yacht-
ing. In honour of the centennial of the colony, the Go-
vernment have presented a Cup of the value of £5OO
to be raced for by the yachts, and this race, together
with the other features of the regatta which is to take
place on the 27th, should prove a fitting beginning to
our second century of aquatics.
THE TURF.
A NATION OF HORSEMEN.
Although we have attained pre-eminence in aquatics,
and have fairly well held our own in the cricket field]
there cannot be a doubt that horseracing is the
national sport of Australia. Almost every second
man you meet is a horseman in more or less
degree, and out on the back blocks men are to
be found by the score that no horse could
unseat. There is an inborn love of the horse in


every Australian breast, and it is not to be wondered
at that we have become a nation of horse-
men, and that horse-racing is our principal pas-
time. Thoroughbreds were first imported to this
colony by the late Sir William Macarthur and Messrs.
Lawson and Rouse; and, others following their ex-
ample, the colony gradually became possessed of
some of the best strains of blood in the world.
Several enterprising gentlemen formed studs, and
in a comparatively few years they have succeeded in
producing animals able to compete with anything bred
on the Continent of Europe or in America.
PROMINENT BREEDERS.
Prominent amongst the breeders of thorough-
bred stock were and are: The Hon. E. K.
Cox, the Hon. James White, the Hon. John
Eales, the Hon. W. A. Long, and Messrs. Lee,
Reynolds, Town, Loder, Dangar, Baldwin, Rossi,
Busby, Bowman, Lloyd, De Mestre, Wyndham, Mit-
chell, Bowler, Ronal, Lawson, Barnes, Smith, Rut-
ledge, Tindal, Hassall, Roberts, Badgery, Suttor,
&c. Sales of yearlings are held annually,
and on occasions the prices realised for a
particularly well-bred colt or filly have reached as
high as 2000 odd guineas. Prominent amongst the
sires that have been imported to our shores are Kelpie,
Sir Hercules, Whisker, Kingston, Lord of the Hills,
The Drummer, Splendour, Livingstone, Magus, Mail
Train, The Marquis, Boiardo, Bay Camerton, Emi-
grant (Rous’), Emigrant (Lawson’s), Cap-a-Pie, Capti-
vator, Marvellous, Chandos, Duke of Athol, Millionaire,
Moorethorpe, Flying Pieman, Grand Master, Glorious,
New Warrior, Obscurity, Epigram, Free Trotter, John
Bull, Hawthornden, St. John, Odd Trick, Pitsford,
Renguy, Theorem, Somnus, The Premier, Snowdon,
Gemma di Vergy, Wilberforce, Yelverton, Vespasian,
and others of lesser note; and their produce having been
mated with the descendants of equine celebrities in the
other colonies, such as Fisherman, Robinson Crusoe,
Panic, Peter Finn, Traducer, Tim Whiffler, St. Albans,
Musket, The Hermit, Gang Forward, &c., the most
satisfactory results have been attained in the production
of some really great racehorses. The deeds accom-
plished by The Barb, Tim Whiffler, Tarragon, Chester,
Veno, Yattendon, Fireworks, Goldsbrough, Grand
Flaneur, and other heroes of the past, can never be
forgotten, and many of our records will bear favour-
able comparison with anything accomplished in England
or elsewhere. So far Maribyrnong, Yattendon, and
Goldsbrough can claim to have been the most successful
of the New South Wales-bred sires.
BEST RECORDS.
Our best records in all the colonies are as follows: —
Three furlongs by Innuendo, in Victoria, half-a-
mile by Bis Bis, at Adelaide, in 0.48: five furlongs by
Acme, at Hawkesbury, in 1.1|; three-quarters of a
mile by Volcano, at Kandwick, in 1.14, and by New-
stead, at Flemington, in 1.14; seven furlongs by Phan-
tom, at Flemington, in one mile by Crossfire, at
Kandwick, in 1.41; a mile and a furlong by Cerise and
Blue, at Flemington, in 1.55 J; a mile and a-quarter by
St. John, at Flemington, in I.Bf ; a mile and a-half
by Prince Imperial, at Hawkesbury, in 2.35 J; a mile
and three-quarters by Woodlands, at Flemington, in
3,4 i ; two miles by Dunlop, at Flemington, in
two miles and a quarter by Nelson, at Auckland (N.Z.),
in 4.0 ; and three miles by Trident, at Flemington,
in 5.25 f, and at the same place by First King and
Commotion in 5.26. The fastest Derbys were won by
Martini-Henry and Trident in 2.39, thus beating the
English records for that classic race. Such brilliant
records must read like a fairy tale to those who
remember that the first race, little better than a hack
race, took place at Parramatta on April 30, 1810, and
that the first sod was turned on Kandwick in 1859.
THE AUSTRALIAN JOCKEY CLUB.
The Australian Jockey Club was established in 1828,
and when it became possessed of the Kandwick Race-
course (thanks to the efforts of the late Mr. W.
M'Quade and others) it soon converted it from a bed of
sand into a really good course. Mr. T. S. Clibborn,
the present secretary, was appointed in 1873, and
during his long reign of office has made it one of the
best of racecourses, though it must be admittted that
it is still greatly inferior to Flemington, which is
beyond question the best-appointed racecourse in the
world. The Kandwick course is prettily situated be-
tween hills, about two and a-half miles from the heart
of the city. It is oval in shape, right-handed (which
is a mistake), and a mile and a-quarter round.
Several important improvements are now being
effected which will give a straight run of
nearly half a mile. There are three handsome and
substantial stands, and every convenience is provided
for visitors. The Kandwick course can be reached
by road or rail, and the largest attendance that
has yet assembled there on a single day may
be set down at about 22,000. Following the
success achieved by the Australian Jockey Club,
similar institutions have been formed at Hawkes-
bury, Rosehill, Canterbury Park, Wagga Wagga,
and in fact nearly all the leading provincial townships.
During the early days, and until a few years back,
when he retired with an untarnished name, Mr. John
Tait, who has been aptly named the 11 Father of the
New South Wales Turf,” invariably secured the lion’s
share of the races. Then Sir Hercules Robinson’s
presence amongst us gave the turf a great impetus, and
at about the same time the Hon. James White began
to fostor racing, and so remarkable has been his
success that his name has become a “ household word.”
Each season it is evident that racing is rapidly ad-
vancing, for scarcely a week is allowed to pass without
a race gathering of more or less importance.
ATHLETICS AND FIELD SPORTS.
CRICKET.
As a national pastime cricket has always found
great favour in this colony, and the patronage at first-
class matches still remains so good that the takings on the
Association Ground are looked to by visiting English
teams to cover the bulk of the necessary expenses, and
leave a profit to the promoters. The earliest cricket played
in Sydney was on the north-west portion of Hyde Park,
at that time known as the racecourse, and the first
match of which there is any record took place there in
1826. The early intercolonial matches were also
played in that locality from the year 1857, but in 1869,
the Albert Ground, Kedfern, having been opened, four
matches were played on that green. In February, 18i 6,
the last match was played on the Albert Ground, which
was subsequently cut up and sold. In February, 18< 8,


the first intercolonial match was played on the Associa-
tion Cricket Ground, the present scene of all first-class
cricket in the colony, It came into existence in 1851,
on an application from Colonel Bloomfield to the Go-
vernment for a grant for a military garden and cricket
ground for the use of the Imperial troops. In 1870,
the ground not being further required for that purpose,
those troops having been withdrawn, was reserved “ for
the use of such troops as may be raised for the defence
of the colony,” and it was then known as the Military
and Civil Ground. From 1872 to 1874 the ground was
handed over to the East Sydney Club, and then to the
Civil Service Club. The latter ceased to exist in 1875,
and in 1877 the ground, as it now stands, was dedi-
cated as a cricket ground, under the management of the
New South Wales Cricket Association, the present trus-
tees being—Messrs. P. Sheridan (managing trustee),
C. Oliver, and W. W. Stephen. The ground, which is
about 12 acres in extent, has been greatly
improved and beautified. Two spacious stands,
one for members and the other for the use of the public,
have been erected, and there is now no finer or more
perfectly-appointed cricket ground in existence. The
outlay upon it amounts to about £lB,OOO. The inter-
change of visits on the part of representative teams is
becoming more frequent as the facilities for speedy
travelling are multiplied. The various meetings which
have taken place have undoubtedly improved play to a
wonderful extent, so that cricket now is as much a
scientific pursuit as an outdoor sport. The first Eng-
lish team, captained by H. H. Stephenson, visited us in
the season of 1861-2. They played 12 matches, all
against odds, winning six, drawing four, and losing two.
In 1863 George Parr’s team came here, and out of the
16 matches played, all against odds, 10
were won and six drawn. Ten years later saw
the advent of W. G. Grace’s team, and then the im-
provement in colonial play was manifest, as in 16
matches the Englishmen were thrice beaten, once by an
18 of New South Wales. In the 1876-7 season, James
Lillywhite brought out a team of professionals, and for
the first time the Australians and Englishmen
met on equal terms. An eleven of New South Wales
played a drawn game with the visitors, while a com-
bined eleven of New South Wales and Victoria de-
feated the Englishmen by 45 runs. Each colonial team,
by itself, numbering 15, also inflicted defeat on the
Englishmen, New South Wales winning by 2 wickets
in one match, and by 13 wickets in another. Lord
Harris had command of the fifth team, which came here
in the 1878-9 season. They played 13 matches, winning
five, losing three, and drawing five. Of the total, five
matches were 11 a side, and the Australians won three
of these, New South Wales scoring a win by 5
wickets. In 1881 Shaw, Shrewsbury, and Lilly-
white brought out a professional team, which played
25 matches. Seven of these were 11 a side, the
Australians winning two. The seventh team came here
in the season of 1882-3, and all the important matches
were 11 a side, New South Wales winning a signal
victory by an innings and 144 runs, The eighth Eng-
lish team, in 1884-5, was once more under the manage*
ment of Shaw, Shrewsbury, and Lillywhite. Eight
matches (out of a total of 33) were played 11a side,
and All Australia won the only two in which the Eng-
lishmen suffered defeat, the first by six runs, and the
second by eight wickets. In the 1886-7 season, Shaw,
Shrewsbury, and Lillywhite brought out the ninth
English team, which played 10 matches 11 a side
out of a total of 29. In the 11 a side
matches New South Wales won the onlv
two in which the Englishmen suffered
defeat, the first by six wickets and the second by 122
runs. The 10th and 11th English teams are now
with us, one, which is captained by Mr. A. C. Smith,
being a venture by Shaw, Lillywhite, and Shrewsbury
(having come out at the invitation of the trustees of
the Association Cricket Ground), while the other is in
the colonies under arrangement with the Melbourne
Cricket Club. Playing with Shaw’s team, New
South Wales has won the first and third matches
and lost the second, while against the M. C. C. team
New South Wales won by nine wickets and
two runs. From 1878 to 1886 five Australian
teams visited England. They played altogether
about 190 matches, of which 139 were 11
a side. Of these 64 were won, 27 lost, and 48
drawn. A sixth Australian team will leave for
England in March. In 1868 the proposal to send home
a team of aboriginal cricketers was arranged. They were
got together in the Lake Wallace district, and coached
by T. Wills and C. Lawrence, and left for England
in February of that year. They played 47 matches,
of which 14 were won, 14 lost, and 19 drawn. Their
most signal win was against the Farbrother team,
which they defeated by an innings and 284 runs.
At East Hampshire one of the aboriginal
bowlers named Twopenny obtained the fol-
lowing average:—10 overs, 7 maidens, 9 runs, 9
wickets, while the remaining batsman was caught bv
him off Mullagh’s bowling, Of late years, however,
aboriginal cricketers have disappeared from sight, and
almost from memory. New South Wales has the credit
of having witnessed the largest score ever made in one
innings, viz., 1238, made many years ago at Pyrmont,
in a match between the Ulster and Macquarie clubs.
The record is viewed with suspicion in another
colony, but the individual scores are still extant, and
one of the players at least yet lives in Sydney. At a
recent conference of intercolonial delegates in Mel-
bourne, the recommendation of the Victorian Associa-
tion that the patronage of associations should not be
granted to any English eleven visiting the colonies for
three years after the present season, or to any Austra-
lian team irrespective of the one now in course of
organisation, visiting England for two years, was agreed
to, although the New South Wales delegates voted
against it The number of balls to the over was
also discussed, and it was resolved that in future
there be six in place of four. The great improvement
which of late years has taken place in break bowling
has created much difficulty with regard to the law of
leg-before-wicket, and an appeal is to be made to the
Marylebone Club for the purpose of bringing about
some alteration in the present hard and fast law which
practically says that a batsman cannot be given out leg-
before-wicket, no matter whether he stands in front of
the wicket or not. In future the Victorian, New South
Wales, and South Australian elevens will each play a
match with the others every season in such a way that
each team shall have one home and one absent match.
ROWING.
As the greater portion of Sydney and its suburbs
are almost completely surrounded with expanses of


water, it is not to be wondered at that the dwellers in
this “ city bv the sea ” are fond of aquatic pursuits, oi
that rowing is one of the most popular of their many
pastimes. New South Wales holds the pride of place
in this particular sport. Judged from a rowing stand-
point, she may be said to have occupied the foremost
position among the nations of the world, as one of
her scullers held the championship of the world
against all comers for more than three years,
and has quite recently retired upon his well-won
laurels. The prowess of her rowing men has
given a world-wide celebrity to New South Wales,
and it is not going too fir to assert that the
world has never seen a mightier oarsman than William
Beach, the Illawarra sculler, whose physique
and courage enabled him to meet and defeat
all the representative rowing men of the. day.
Although rowing is by no means neglected in the
other colonies, none of the group can produce
such an array of really good scullers as we can.
New South Wales can boast of the deeds of Brennan
(the first champion of Australia), Mulhall, R.
Green, Punch, 11. Green, M'Grath, Donnelly,
Hickey, Laycock, Rush, E. Trickett, Messenger,
Neil Matterson, Peter Kemp, Tom Clifford, Neilson,
and William Beach, the retired champion of
the world. A New South Wales oarsman, Richard
Green, the then Champion of Australia, went to
England as early as the year 1863. He rowed Robert
Chambers on the Thames for the Championship of the
World and £2OO a side. Green pulled a great race for
a mile, but he was eventually beaten by the Englishman,
who was a little too good for him. Edward Trickett
was the first Australian whowonthe Championship of the
World. He defeated Joseph Sadler —England’s cham-
pion of the oar—on June 27th, 1876. On Trickett’s
returning to Australia, Michael Rush challenged him
for the coveted honour. This was in June, 1877. The
race took place on the Parramatta, and was witnessed by
more than 50,000 persons. Rush was defeated.
Soon after this the wonderful performances of Edward
Hanlan, the Canadian oarsman, challenged the atten-
tion and the admiration of the world. One after another
he me, and conquered, and the Australians
were desirous that Trickett should measure blades
with the Toronto man. A match was arranged to
take place on the Thames on the 15th November,
1880. The interest taken in the event was
very great, the friends of each man being
confident of success. The result of the race came as a
surprise to the people of these colonies. Trickett was
defeated by the Canadian. It is estimated that
£IOO,OOO changed hands over this race. Elias
Laycock then went to the front and had a
splendid career for a short time, but in the end he too
went down before the all-conquering oarsman. With
later events in the rowing world everyone is more or less
familiar. The circumstances of llanlan’3 visit to the
colony and the story of his defeat by Beach on August
16, 1884, and again in the year 1885, are fresh in the
memory of our readers. Hanlan, who was never quite
satisfied that Beach had beaten him on his merits, re-
turned to New South Wales last year, and on the 26tli
of November he met his old opponent on the Nepean in a
match for the Championship of the World and £IOOO.
The course was three miles and a-quarter. A good race
was rowed throughout, but Beach won by
two lengths in 19 minutes 55 seconds. Ihe lllawarra
man retired after winning this race, and handed the
championship to Kemp, a brilliant sculler, of much
promise, who had challenged him to row for the posses-
sion of the title. Kemp has been challenged by Clif-
ford, and the pair meet on the Parramatta on the 11th
February, to decide who is to hold the championship.
It is Hanlan’s intention to row the winner for the
much-coveted honour and £2OO a side, and ere
the Canadian leaves Australia he will row Edward
Trickett on the Fitzroy at Rockhampton. The present
year promises to be a very lively one in the rowing
world, as several American oarsmen are expected
here. Amateur rowing has made favourable progress
during the last few years, and the intercolonial eight-
oar races attract much attention. There are 11 good
rowing clubs in and around Sydney.
FOOTBALL.
Three different games of football are played in the
colony—Rugby, Australian or Victorian, and British
Association. Rugby is the standard game, although
the colonial pastime, which is called indifferently the
Australian or Victorian game, has lately grown con-
siderably in public favour. The Rugby Union was
started in Sydney in 1874 with five clubs. In 1881
the number had increased to 35 clubs, and now it com-
prises about 90 clubs, having some 3500 members.
Intercolonial matches are occasionally played with
Queensland and New Zealand. In 1882 the first two
intercolonial matches were played here against the
Queensland representatives, who were beaten
both times. In 1883, in Queensland, New-
South Wales won both matches. In 1884 the
Queensland players came here, and were beaten in both
matches. In 1885 New South Wales won and lost a
match in Queensland. In 1886 Queensland won and
lost a match here. In 1887 New South Wales
won and lost a match in Queensland. In 1882
the New South Wales players visited New Zealand,
where they played seven matches, winning four. In
1884 New’ Zealand played three intercolonial matches
here and won them all. In 1886 the New South
Wales team visited New Zealand again, and played 12
matches, scoring only two wins. A team of English
footballers will visit the colonies during the winter
months.
PEDESTRIAN ISM.
The last few years have seen a wonderful advance in
pedestrianism, and so large have the prizes become that
well-known runners come here from England and
America to take part in the handicaps. Championship
foot races appear to have died out, and they have of
late years been replaced by Sheffield handicaps, for
which the acceptances, to say nothing of the entries,
are generally quite as numerous as will
permit of an event being disposed of in
four days. The favourite distance is nominally
150 yards, but the scratch man generally runs about
135 or 140 yards, while those on the limit have per-
haps 15 yards’ start of him. The hurdle race, is
also a popular institution, the distance being
somewhat shorter. There are usually eight
hurdles, 3ft. high. The quarter-mile distance
also makes a very attractive race. The prin-
cipal running grounds are the Sir Joseph Banks, at
Botanv, and the Carrington Grounds, Surry Hills.
The first Sir Joseph Banks Handicap was run at


Botany, in Maj’, 1884, and was won bv D. Blyth, off
the 20-yards mark, in 14 1-1 Oth seconds. This may
be called the inauguration of foot-racing there,
although several minor handicaps had been run pre-
viously. The largest prize ever given at Botanv was
£oos 10s. for the third Sir Joseph Banks Handicap, run
in March, 1885. It was won by Jas. W. Byrnes, off the
15-yards mark, in 13f seconds. The largest nomina-
tion and acceptance ever received for any of the Sir
Joseph Banks handicaps was for the 13th, the nomina-
tions numbering 403, and the acceptances 254. These
handicaps are always 150 yards, and whatever
starts are given are computed from that dis-
tance. The exact distance run depends on
the handicaps that are declared. Attached to
these grounds is a quarter-mile circular track. The
Carrington Grounds, with the grand stand and other
buildings thereon, cost £7OOO, having been finished at
the end of 1886. The first Carrington Handicap was
run during Christmas week in that year, and £525
was divided in prize money on that race. The length
or the straight track is 175, and of the outside oval track
ooJ yards. The largest acceptance for anv race on this
ground numbered 256.
LAWN TENNIS.
Although lawn tennis is a popular and fashionable
sport throughout the colony, its patrons have not yet
come together into an association. The Sydney Lawn
tennis Club, which is the leading organisation, has
been in existence since 1880, although it has not pos-
sessed its present title for that length of time. The
membership roll shows a list of 70 playing members,
intercolonial matches were started with Victoria some
our years ago, and up to the present each colony has
won three. In Victoria they are played on
asphalt, and here on grass ; but the recent
completion of the asphalt courts at the Association
Cricket Ground will no doubt enable our players
to meet the Victorians in their own courts on terms of
equality. The present champion of the colony is Mr.
C. W. Cropper, who has held the position for two years.
Ihe lady champion is Miss Mayne, of Victoria. The
doub e championship for gentlemen is held by Messrs.
Riddle and Webb, of Victoria, and for ladies by the
Misses Scott, of New South Wales.
BOWLING.
Bowling is a sport which has always been endowed
with much vitality in the colony, due no doubt in a
great measure to the intercolonial and interclub
contests. The New South Wales Bowling Associa-
tion came into existence in 1880, and it comprises
fpf C , u , havin ff a membership roll of about 450.
ihe following are the names of the associated
clubs and the number of rinks they can
play: City, 8 ; Balmain, 8 ; Glebe, 6 ; Bosehill, 8 •
JJnioa Eecreation (Strathfield) 10, Newtown 4. The
City is the leading club, and its green in Cook Park
entailed an outlay of £3OOO. It holds the- president’s
trophy, having won it four times, and another win will
make it the club’s exclusive property. Intercolonial
matches are played annually with Victoria,
the following being the resultslBBo, first match
played in Sydney, Victoria won by 23 points;
second match (same yean, played at Melbourne, Vic-
toria won by 54 points ; 1881, third match, played at
Sydney, New South Wales won by 10 points ; fourth
match (same year), Victoria won ; 1882, fifth match,
played at Sydney, Victoria won ; 1883, sixth match
Victoria won ; 1884, seventh match, played at Sydney'
New South Wales won by 19 points ; 1885, eight
match, played at Melbourne, Victoria won by 55
pomts ; 1886, ninth match, played at Svdney, New
South Wales won by 39 points ; 1887, tenth match,
played at Melbourne, Victoria won by 27 and 13
points. In the last year the championship was altered
from one game to the best two out of three, and the
change is regarded with great satisfaction.
CYCLING.
Since the initiation of the Cyclists’ Union in 1883
cycling has been pushing ahead with great vigour, and
to-day it is established on a very sound basis. There
21 „ clubs in tbe union > with a member-
ship roll of about 500. Last year seven new
clubs were formed, and about 200 new members
thus came into the ranks of the union. C. R. Wood is
the amateur champion of the colony. The record for
the best mile on grass is held by F. H. Shackleford, of
I Melbourne, who covered the distance in 2 minutes
o 3 3-5 seconds, on the Association Cricket
Ground in 1885. All the important racing in
the colony is done on grass tracks, but the
cyclists with other sporting bodies are agitating for
anotner ground close to the Association Cricket Ground,
so that they may lay down an asphalt track, and oive'
athletic sports generally more extended scope.
COURSING.
Coursing is not in a very vigorous condition in the
colony at present, although most of the large centres of
population to the South and West have their coursing
clubs. The sport was first instituted on a public basis
at Bathurst in 1876, but it died out there again in
18b_. In 1879 . the New South Wales Club
Derby was organised, and was run regularlv
until 1886, in which year the venue was
moved from Rooty Hill to the Rosehill race-
course, and the principal stake was called the Rosehill
Cup.
THE OTHER COLONIES.
VICTORIA.
EARLY SETTLEMENT.
Victoria was discovered, practically, bv Lieutenant
John Murray, commander of the Lady' Nelson, iu
January, i and before the end of the same vear,
Mr. Charles Grimes, Surveyor-General of New South
Wales, entered Port Phillip on a surveying expedition
aDd penetrated some distance into the fresh waters of
the 1 arra. In October of the following year Captain
Collins brought out a company of convicts in the
Calcutta and Ocean, and attempted to form a settle-
ment at Sorrento; but after a few months’ trial he
hastily packed up and moved the whole camp to Tas-


mania, explaining to Lord Hobart Secretary of State
for the Colonies—“ When all the disadvantages attend-
ing this bav are publicly known, it cannot be supposed
that commercial people will be very desirous of
visiting Port Phillip.” For the. next 20 years
the aborigines were left in undisturbed possession,
except that William Buckley, an escapee from Captain
Collins’ stockade, remained amongst them. ihe next
visitors were Messrs. Hovell and Hume who made
their way across country from Sydney m 1824 lwo
vears later Hovell accompanied a Government party
to form a settlement at Western Port Bay; but after
onlv one year’s experiment this also was abandoned,
and the honour of the actual opening of settlement in
the Port Phillip district fell to Messrs. Henty,
who came over to Portland from Tasmania m 1834.
Other pastoralists speedily followed; and Bateman, a
native of Parramatta, and John Pascoe Fawkner be-
came the pioneers of trade between the new district
and Sydnev. Captain Lonsdale was appointed first
resident magistrate in 1836; and in the following
vear the first 100 half-acre Melbourne lots were sold
at an average price of £35 each, Mr. Robert Hoddle,
who had planned the city site under direc-
tion of Mr. Surveyor-General Mitchell, act-
ing as auctioneer. Mr. Charles Joseph Latrobe
succeeded Captain Lonsdale on September 30, 1839
and had the honour of conducting the afiairs ot
the new settlement during the interesting stages o
rapid growth which led to its independence in 1851,
when his office of Superintendent was enlarged to the
higher rank of Lieutenant-Governor, to correspond with
the expansion of Port Phillip district into the colony
of Victoria. The transition period was marked by two
memorable events—the unprecedented devastation of
Black Thursday, February 6, 1851, when, during a hot
wind and a temperature of 119* in the shade, a terrible
fire swept over the greater part of the new settlements ;
and the discovery of gold, with its consequent rush o
population from the neighbouring colonies and from
the most distant parts of the world. It may be truly
said that the impetus of that rush has been ever since
maintained, and that Victoria has been “ uplifted, as
it were, in a night, from an unconsidered nook in
an out-of-the-way wilderness, to the position of. a
nation, and a power in the world.” The population
at the appointment of the first resident magistrate in
1836 numbered 14; at the time of the gold discovery,
it had increased to 76,162 ; at the close of 1886, it was
1,003,043. Following are the names and terms of
office ' of the Governors who succeeded Mr. Latrobe :■ —
Sir Charles Hotham (June. 1854, to the granting of
responsible government in December, 1855); Sir Henry
Barkly (1856 to September, 1863); Sir Charles
Darling (September, 1863, to May, 1866); Sir J.
Manners Sutton, afterwards Viscount Canterbury
(1866 to 1873) ; Sir George Bowen (1873 to 1879) ;
Marquis of Normanby (1880 to 1884); and the
present Governor, Sir Henry Brougham Loch. During
temporary vacancies of the vice-regal office, the follow-
ino* colonial officials held the position of Acting-
Governor: —Mr. J. V. F. Foster, Major-General
Edward Macarthur, Brigadier-General J. J. Carey,
C. 8., Sir W. F. Stawell (on three occasions), and Sir
Redmond Barry.
AREA, DIVISIONS, AND CLIMATE.
The territory extends from 34* to 39* S. lat., and
from 141* to 150- E. long. It is separated from New
South Wales by the river Murray, and a line from The
Springs on Forest Hill to Cape Howe, whilst the 141st
meridian of E. loner, separates it from South Australia
on the south-west. Its extreme length is 480
miles, its breadth 240, and its area 87,884
square miles, or 56,245,760 acres. The terri-
torial divisions consist of four districts and
37 counties. Gipps Land district is characterised by
“colossal mountains, magnificent streams, and fertile
plains,” and is chiefly of volcanic formation. Murray
district is also mountainous, and well watered. It in-
cludes the most varied resources ; some parts are
noted for auriferous wealth, others are adapted to
agriculture, whilst in the north-east are extensive
pastoral plains. Wimmera district, covering about
25 000 square miles of the north-west of the colony,
and Loddon district occupying the north central
portions, are chiefly adapted to pastoral pursuits.
The climate of Victoria is generally regarded as both
healthy and pleasant, the chief drawbacks being the
hot winds of the summer months and the liability to
droughts. The average yearly rainfall is about -b
inches, and the mean temperature for the last -. years
has been slightly under 58-, the maximum in the shade
being 111*2 and the minimum 27*.
POPULATION AND VITAL STATISTICS.
Victoria commenced its career as a colony with a
nnrmlation of 76,162; the number had grown to
731,528 (males 401,050, females 330 >^ 7 o in . 18^’ 8 t 1 °
862,346 (males 452,083, females 410.263) in 1881
and to 1,008,043 (males 531,452, females 4< 1,591; at
the close of 1886. During the last 10 years the birth
and death rates to the mean population have been
subject to only the slightest fluctuation, except in
the year 1876, when they were both abnomMly
high. The births were 32T7 per 1000 in 187 C
and 31*23 in 1886; whilst the deaths were lo*Bo per
1000 in 1877, and 15*15 in 1886. The mamagc rate has
risen during the same period from b *3l to 7g 4 pe
1000. The figures for 1886 were—Births, -»
marriages, 7737; and deaths, 14,952. The defiled
figures°exhibit many striking features, two ° f ic
touching the distribution and conjugal condition of the
population, are anything but , satisfactoryj Of the tot
population of the colony at the end ot 1886, no tower
than 371,630 persons, or 37*05 per cent, were concen-
trated in Melbourne and its suburbs; and
of 1881 it was shown that there were 97,296 un-
married men over 20 years of age, exclusive of 12,749
widowers, and 47,806 unmarried women over the same
a<re, exclusive of 21,634 widows, Following is a list
of the most prevalent diseases, and the number of
deaths resulting from them in 1886 Phthysis, 1375
deaths; diarrhoea, 906; pneumonia, 903; bronchitis,
688 ; typhoid, 522; cancer, 496; and apoplexy, 367.
In 1876 an epidemic of scarlet fever caused the death
of 2240 persons, or about one-sixth of . the total mor-
tality of the year. Estimated population, December
31, 1887—1,035,943.
Concerning the thrift of the people, °J e^ n .
savings banks returns for 1886 show the following
figures -.—Number of depositors, 194,631; amount o
deposits, £3,431,014; amount per depositor, £l7 1-b.
7d.; amount per head of population, £3 9s. >ci.


GOVERNMENTAL, PARLIAMENTARY, AND MUNICIPAL.
The Constitution of Victoria, passed by the Legisla-
tive Council in March, 1854, ratified by an Act of the
Imperial Parliament in the following year, proclaimed
November 23, 1855, and subsequently amended,
contains the following provisions: The Gover-
nor is appointed by the Crown, with
power to represent the Sovereign, except in
matters involving Imperial interest. The Executive
Council consists of the Governor and the responsible
Ministers for the time being. Powers of legislation
are vested in two Elective Chambers. The Legislative
Council consists of 42 members, elected by ballot for
six years, by 14 provincial districts, one-third of the
numbor retiring biennially, so that each district elects a
representative every two years. The franchise requires
a freehold rated at £lO, or leasehold at £25 ; and the
number of voters is 121,370, Candidates must possess
freehold of the annual value of £lOO, or capital value
of £lOOO. The Legislative Assembly consists of 86
members, chosen by ballot trienniallv, by 55 electoral
districts (including by latest returns 224,378 voters).
The franchise is virtually manhood suffrage, but can-
didates for election must be two years resident in the
colony. Since 1870, members have voted themselves
£3OO per annum for “ reimbursing their expenses.’’
The present Parliament is the thirteenth since the
institution of responsible government, and was opened
March 16, 1886, the average duration of the previous
12 having been two years and three months. The last
Parliamentary session, which commenced June 7,1887,
was the thirty-seventh, previous sessions having lasted
on an average months. The present Government is
the 23rd, previous Administrations having had an
average tenure of office of 502 days. Following is the
present distribution of portfolios:—
Premier, Treasurer, and Minister of Railways and Mines —
Hon. D. Gillies
Chief Secretary and Commissioner of Water Supply—
Hon. A. Deakin
Commissioner of Trade and Customs—Hon. W. F.
Walker
Attorney-General—Hon. H J. Wrixon
Minister of Justice—Hon. H. Cuthbert
Commissioner of Crown Lands and Minister of Agriculture
—Hon. J. C. Dow
Commissioner of Public Works—Hon. J. Nimmo
Minister of Defence—Hon. J. Lorimer, M.L.C.
Postmaster-General—Hon. F. T, Derham
Minister of Public Instruction—Hon. C. H. Pearson
Portfolio without office —Hon. D. M. Davies
Portfolio without office—Hon. J. Bell, M.L.C.
The public revenue for the year ending June 30,
1886, was £6,481,021, or £6 11s. 3d. per head of popu-
lation; expenditure (exclusive of loans), £6,513,540,
or £6 12s. per head; public debt, £30,114,203. The
revenue for 1887 was £7,054,434, an increase of
£393,868 on the returns for 1886. The approximate
value of imports for 1887 (including gold and specie,
£683,898) was £18,996,965; and exports (including
gold and specie, £1,256,091), £11,373,663.
For purposes of self-government, the colony is
divided into 59 cities, towns, and boroughs, and
125 shires. Under the Local Government Act of
1874, any district containing rateable property to the
value of £lO,OOO is constituted a shire, an aggregation
of 300 houses is constituted a borough, and a borough
on attaining to a revenue of over £lO,OOO becomes a
town. The constitution and powers of the local coun-
cils arc nearly identical, and the rating limits are fixed
at a minimum of 6d. and maximum of 2s. 6d. in the
pound. For the year 1886 the capital value of rateable
property in the cities, towns, and boroughs was esti-
mated at £53,905,592, the annual value at £4,824,911;
the revenue was £615,612, and the expenditure
£665,842. The area was 220,876 acres, the population
51 i ,102, dwellings 113,014, and the ratepayers
128,741. Corresponding figures for the shires
were : —Capital value, £71,973,156; annual value,
£4,796,224 ; revenue, £615,125 ; expenditure,
£603,112; population, 471,530; dwellings, 101,730 ;
ratepayers, 122,316. Melbourne was incorporated in
1842, with an area of 5020 acres. Population within
municipal limits, 72,786; streets, 100 miles; tene-
ments, 14,831; ratepayers, 14,564; assessed annual
value, £1,331,560; revenue year ending August,
1887, £178,406.
Water-conservation has received special attention in
Victoria. The Van Yean scheme of water supply for
Melbourne was carried out more than a third of a
century ago, at a cost of nearly two millions. The
principal reservoir is about 22 miles from the city, and
about 595 ft. above its level. It covers an area of 1360
acres, or 12 acres more ground than the reservoir at
Prospect, and has a capacity of 6400 million gallons,
or 700 million gallons less than Prospect. The cost of
management and maintenance to the end of 1885 was
£290,568, making a total cost of £2,224,287. The
gross revenue since the opening of the works in 1854
has been £2,096,290. Subsidiary reservoirs have
since been constructed at Jack’s Creek, Morang, Preston,
Essendon, and Caulfield, whilst 90 other schemes of
water-supply for provincial towns or districts have
been constructed, wholly or in part, bringing up the
total storage to 13,400 million gallons, and the aggre-
gate cost to over f our millions sterling.
land: pastoral, agricultural, mineral.
Victorian lands previous to 1884 were administered
under an Act which came into force February 1, 1870,
and was amended nine years later, and under the Malice
Pastoral Leases Act of 1873, which still remains in
force. The Land Act of 1884 divides the unalienated
lands of the colony (except the Mallee country) into
the following six classes :—(1) Pastoral lands, which
may be leased in areas of 5000 to 40,000 acres, for anv
term not extending beyond 1898, at an annual rental
based on grazing capacity, at rate of Is. for each sheep
and ss. for each head of cattle; lessee to clear off all
vermin within three years, and to be compensated by
next tenant for substantial improvements up to 2s. 6d.
per acre. (2) Agricultural lands, which may be
taken up for similar periods in areas not exceeding
1000 acres, at a rental of from 2d. to 4d. per acre, with
stringent conditions for extermination of vermin, and
with a maximum claim for improvements from next
tenant of 10s. per acre. (3) Auriferous lands, which
are subjected to liberal conditions for the encouragement
of all legitimate mining interests; whilst large votes have
been made for years past to stimulate prospecting. (4)
Lands open to auction sale, of which only 100,000
acres may be disposed of in any one year, and the
proceeds must be paid into the Railway Construction
Account (5) Swamp lands, which are first drained
and then leased by auction for 21 years, in areas not
exceeding 160 acres. (6) Reserves for water supply
or State forests. The land alienated during the last


fourteen years has realised slightly under £1 ss. per
acre; the total proceeds of land sales to December
31, 1884, were £21,930,461, or £1 11s. 4d. per acre;
and the total area alienated to end of 1886 has been
22,489,383 acres.
The following are the principal agricultural figures
for the year ending A' arch, 1887 : —Wheat,
1,052,665 acres, yielding 12,100,036 bushels; maize,
4901 acres, 231,447 bushels; oats, 185,765 acres,
4,256,079 bushels; barley, 37,031 acres, 827,852
bushels; hay, 445,150 acres, 483,049 tons;
potatoes 49,974 acres, 170,661 tons; grape
vines, 10,310 acres. Total area under crop (grass land
not included), 2,141,291 acres. Agricultural imple-
ments and machinery were valued at £2.674,613 ; and
the improvements at £16,017,098.
Pastoral returns for the previous year show: —Runs
422, embracing 8,081,648 acres; average size, 19,150
acres; yearly rental, £30,682; average rental, -914 d.
per acre. Stock (year ending March 31, 1887) :
Sheep, 10,700,403 ; cattle, 1,303,265; horses, 308,553 ;
pigs, 240,957 : total, 12,553,178.
Victoria has a world-wide fame a 3 a gold-bearing
country. Other precious metals, including silver,
tin, copper, iron, &c., exist, and have been more
or less developed; but since nearly two-thirds of the
area of the colony are believed to be auriferous, and
numerous paying fields have been open ever since the
first discoveries in 1851, gold has naturally absorbed
nearly all the mining capital. The number of quartz
reefs found to be auriferous were returned at 3799 in
1883. The total quantity of metal raised from 1851 to
December, 1886, was 54,393,1820 z., valued at
£217,572,728. The number of miners is estimated at
about 28,000.
INTEHCOMMUNICATION.
All the Victorian railways belong to the State,
and are classed under the Northern, North-eastern,
Western, and Suburban systems. The latest official
returns, December, 1886, show that at that date 1753
miles were open for traffic, and 316 miles under con-
struction. The gauge throughout is sft. 3in.; and
the cost for construction of lines completed to end of
1884 averaged £13,757 per mile.
The tramways of Melbourne belong to a trust, and
the following figures with regard to them were officially
supplied to the Select Committee on the Tramways
Trust Amendment and Extension Bill, November
1887: —Lines, 10 (with various branches) ; mileage
for cable trams, 32|, at a cost of £1,122,250; horse
tramways, 15f miles, costing £100,000; cost of con-
verting 8|- miles horse tramway into cable system,
£276,375; total length contemplated, 57| miles;
total cost, £1,498,625. The tramways already in
operation seem to give very general satisfaction.
The Postal and Telegraph systems are very complete.
Following are the principal figures for 1886 :—Post
Offices, 1429; letters received and despatched,
32,500,000; newspapers and packets, 18,250,000;
telegraph stations, 420; miles of line constructed,
4094; miles of wire in operation, 10,111 ; telegrams
received and despatched, 1,938,049.
RELIGION, EDUCATION, JUSTICE, CHAKITY.
Religion.— The Constitution Act provided for State-
aid to religion to the extent of £50,000 per annum, to
be paid pro rata to such of the leading denominations
as might accept it ; but this was abolished in 1875.
At the close of 1885 there were 2150 churches and
chapels, 538 school-houses, and 1330 other public or
private buildings used as places of worship, making a
total of 4018 ; the approximate number of services
conducted during the year was 310,816 ; there was
accommodation for 510,000 worshippers, and an
average attendance per Sunday of 320,000. The
number of clergy registered for the solemnisation of
marriages was 923. Following are the figures re-
turned by the principal denominations : —Church of
England, 839 places of worship, 96,626 sittings,
average attendance 58,004, clergy 193. Presbyterians:
Places of worship, 872 ; sittings, 87,000 ; average at-
tendance, 73,000 ; clergy, 186. Wesleyan Methodist :
Places of worship, 914 ; sittings, 113,822 ; average
attendance, 51,500 ; clergy, 141. Primitive Metho-
dists : Places of worship, 148; sittings, 16,000 ;
average attendance, 10,000 ; clergy, 34. Con-
gregational sts : Places of worship, 76 ; sittings,
18,000; average attendance, 10,000; clergy,
54. Baptists: Places of worship, 116; sittings,
15,975; average attendance, 9335; clergy, 43.
Roman Catholic: Places of worship, 620; sittings,
110,000 ; average attendance, 81,500 ; clergy, 121.
The Sunday schools of Victoria on January 1, 1886,
numbered 2163, with 16,908 teachers, and an average
attendance of 146,863 scholars. The principal figures
are: —Church of England: Schools, 430; teachers,
3472; scholars, 27,838. Presbyterian: Schools, 391;
teachers, 2680 ; scholars, 29,600. Wesleyan: Schools,
545; teachers, 5219 ; scholars, 30,264. Independents:
Schools, 82; teachers, 770; scholars, 7400. Baptists:
Schools, 69 ; teachers, 663; scholars, 4981.
Education. —The Victorian system of primary edu-
cation is undenominational, compulsory, and free, and
is administered —under a comprehensive Act, which
came into force January 1, 1873 —by a responsible
Minister and efficient staff of inspectors, and local
boards of advice. Following are the official figures
for 1886 : Number of State schools, 1870 ; teachers,
male 1712, female 2466, total 4178 (including 1076
pupil teachers and 321 work mistresses) ; gross en-
rolment of scholars, males 119,133, females 111,443,
total 230,576; net enrolment, 190,223; average
attendance, 123,550. The cost to the State, exclusive
of expenditure on buildings, &c., was £538,035, or
£4 7s. Bd. for each child in averrage attendance.
Melbourne University was incorporated by Act of
Parliament in 1853, the buildings were commenced
July 3, 1854, and opened October 3, 1855. The
Senate, ’ consisting of all persons who have been ad-
mitted to a degree of M.A. or Doctor, elects one of its
own members annually as Warden, and 20 of its
members, of whom not more than three may be
members of the teaching staff, to form the University
Council. The Councillors hold office for five years,
and elect out of their own number a Chancellor and
Vice-Chancellor.
The private schools of the colony in 1885 numl ered
655, with 1634 teachers and 35,115 scholars. These
figures include six Denominational Grammar Schools,
with 53 masters and over 900 students.
Justice is admistered in Victoria by a Supreme Court,
presided over by a Chief Justice and four I uisne
Judges, with jurisdiction in divorce, matrimonial, and
ecclesiastical cases; Courts of General and Petty Ses-
sions: County Courts; Courts of Insolvency and


Mines; and Licensing Courts. In several of the
Courts business has been remarkably light for years
past
Charitable institutions are numerous and varied,
including upwards of 73 institutions of all kinds, with
1383 wards, providing 9007 beds.
COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURES.
Victoria adopted a protectionist policy a quarter of a
century ago, after a prolonged contest between the two
Chambers of Legislature. Duties ranging from 7£ to
25 per cent, ad valorem, and from moderate taxes up
to almost prohibitive charges on specific articles, are
now imposed on everything that can be locally pro-
duced ; and as the colony’s resources are most varied, it
follows that the free list is exceedingly limited. The
imports for 1886 were valued at £18,530,575, or £lB
15s. sd. per fiead of the population; exports,
£11,795,321, or £ll 19s. per head; and the revenue
from Customs at £2,004,460. The shipping returns
for the same year were :—Vessels inward, 2307, with
tonnage 1,848,058; vessels outward, 2324, with ton-
nage 1,881,329; total, 4631 vessels of 3,735,387
tonnage. The manufactories and works of Victoria,
1886-7, numbered 2770, and the hands employed
45,773. Value of machinery used, £4,786,857, and
value of land and buildings, £6,541,301.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
South Australia, as originally constituted in 1834,
comprised about 300,000 square miles. A “no man’s
land ” of 80,000 square miles, lying between it and
Western Australia, was next added ; and in July, 1863,
a slice off New South Wales, in area about 335,116,800
acres, known as the Northern Territory, was also
thrown in, making a total area of 903,690 square
miles, or 15 times the area of England and Wales.
Its territories extend through the middle of the conti-
nent, from ocean to ocean, a length of 1850 miles, the
greatest breadth being 650 miles. It was first colonised
by emigrants from Great Britain, under the auspices of
the South Australian Colonisation Association, which
had obtained a grant of land from the Imperial
Government with the following conditions :—The land
to be sold at the rate of 12s. per acre (afterwards
raised to 205.), and the proceeds devoted to bringing
out poor emigrants; the affairs of the company to be
controlled by commissioners appointed by the Secretary
of State for the Colonies, and the Governor to be nomi-
nated by the Crown. Port Adelaide was selected, and
named after the Queen of William IV., and the site of
the future city was chosen on rising land seven miles
off, on the Torrens River. Captain Hindmarsh, the
first Governor, took possession, and issued his procla-
mation under a gum-tree at Glenelg, on December 28,
1836, and in March of the following year the first sale
of Adelaide lots realised five and six guineas each.
The first newspaper, the South Australian Register,
was commenced on June 3, 1837 ; and the South Aus-
tralian hank transacted business in a tent till buildings
were erected, March, 1837. During the first three
years of the colony’s history 250,320 acres of land
were sold, realising £229,736, and corresponding pro-
gress followed in nearly all the factors of settlement;
but the gold fever spreading from Victoria in 1851
carried over some 15,000 men, and seriously paralysed
for a time all the industries of South Australia.
Responsible government was secured in October, 1856,
since which time the colony has made steady progress.
The climate has been compared to that of Sicily and
Naples; the mean winter temperature is Sl'*: and the
yearly rainfall averages 21-091 inches.
THE LAND ! AGRICULTURAL, PASTORAL, MINERAL.
The Crown land laws of South Australia, numbering
no fewer than 34, were consolidated in one Act near the
end of 1886. Under this, and two short amending Acts,
assented to December 9, 1887, the land may be dealt
with—(l) By sale under selectors’ agreements; (2) by
private contract, or auction, for cash ; (3) by leases,
with right of purchase, of scrub lands ; (4) by leases
of grazing and cultivation lands. Under the first
category agricultural lands may be secured at £1 per
acre, by deferred payments, with stringent conditions as
to residence and improvements pending completion of
purchase money. Under the second country land that
has been passed at deferred payment auction, and town
and suburban lands, may he sold for cash at an upset
price, to be fixed by the Comissioner for Lands. The
third category covers the scrub lands of the colony,
which may be obtained on lease for 21 years, in areas
not exceeding 3200 acres. All money paid as rent is
credited towards purchase, and on £1 per acre
being completed, the fee simple is granted.
The fourth category includes grazing and cul-
tivation leases of blocks ordinarily limited to 20,000
acres each, for periods not exceeding 21 years.
The minimum rental is a halfpenny per acre, in addition
to 5 per cent, on the value of all improvements on the
land at the date of lease. Amongst the special provi-
sions of the Act, one of the most important is a clause
reserving to the Crown all gold in lands hereafter to he
alienated, and making it lawful for the Commissioner
and all persons authorised by him to enter on any such
lands and search and mine for gold, the owner being
entitled only to compensation for any damage done to
the land. A board of five members assists the Com-
missioner in administration.
The land administration in the Northern Territory
still remains under the provisions of the Act of 1882,
which are fairly liberal, admitting of blocks not exceed-
ing 1280 acres being selected at 12s. 6d. per acre, on
deferred payments.
The total area alienated, or in process of alienation,
at the end of 1886 was 11,278,944 acres, comprising
7,297,638 acres alienated in fee simple; 370,000 acres
granted without purchase, and 3,611,306 acres in pro-
cess of alienation, under deferred payments. The average
price obtained for town lands has been £l6 6s. per acre,
and for suburban, £2 3s.
Agriculture. —The varieties of soil and climate in
South Australia afford suitable places for the most
diverse products, but hitherto wheat-growing has pre-
dominated over all other farming industries. Following
are the agricultural returns for the year ending March
31, 1885 (the latest available): —Wheat, 1,942,453
acres, yielding 14,621,755 bushels; oats, 7,264 acres,
88,639 bushels; barley, 15,697 acres, 211,207 bushels;
hay, 308,429 acres, 285,839 tons; potatoes, 5665
acres, 23,192 tons; grape vines, 4590 acres, 473,535
gallons wine. Total area under crop (grass lands not
included), 2,762,273 acres.


Pastoral.— The stock returns for March 31, 1885,
give the following figures : —Sheep, 6,096,406; cattle,
389,726 ; pigs, 163,807 ; total, 7,418,359.
Mineral. —As compared with Victoria, bouth Aus-
tralia must be considered poor in metals, at least as tar
as its resources have yet been explored. It possesses,
however, abundance of copper and iron, and some silver
and lead mines, which are not to be despised. Ihe
principal copper mines are the Kapunda, 50 miles from
Adelaide, discovered as early as 1842 ; the Montacute
mine, discovered a year later, in the Mount Lofty
Ranges, only 12 miles from Adelaide ; and richest of
all the Burra mine, 100 miles to the north of Adelaide,
discovered in 1845. During 1860-2 the Wallaroo and
Moonta mines were discovered and opened, and though
thev have been worked a quarter of a century neither
shows signs of exhaustion. The gold raised in the
colonv to end of 1886 amounted to 199,2760 z., vahied
at £786,949.
population and vital statistics.
The population, which had grown to 63,900 in 1850,
received a serious check from the migration to the
Victorian goldfields in the following year, from which
it did not very speedily recover. The census of 1871
included 95,408 males, and 90,218 females—total,
185 626. In 1881 the numbers were, —Males, 149,030 ;
females, 130,335; total, 279,865. The estimated
population at the close of 1886 was 312,758 males,
162,980; females, 149,778. The births during 1886
numbered 11,177, or 35-67 per 1000 of population;
marriages, 1976, or 6-31 per 1000 ; deaths, 4234, or
13-52 per 1000. The mean death-rate for the 11 years,
1876 to 1886, was 14-60 per 1000 of population. The
latest figures for the Northern Territory gave a popula-
tion of 603 Europeans, and nearly 4000 Chinese and
Malays. Estimated population, December 81, 1887 —
3 i 5,000. . ■
The thrift of the population, as indicated by the
Government Savings Bank returns, shows the following
figures for 1886: —Depositors, 56,685; amount of
deposits, £1,581,100; amount per depositor, £27 17s.
10d.: amount per head of population, £5 os. lid.
The last item is considerably above the corresponding
figures for any of the other colonies.
GOVERNMENT : PARLIAMENTARY, MUNICIPAL.
Constitutional government in South Australia dates
from October 24, 1856. The Governor, appointed by
the Crown, the responsible Ministers for the time
being, and certain other specially-appointed members
constitute the Executive Council ; and the legislative
powers are vested in two elective Chambers. Ihe
Legislative Council consists of 24 members—six for
each of four districts—elected by the province as a
whole. Candidates must be British subjects, 30 years
of age, and three years resident; voters must be 21
years of age, six months on the roll, and must possess a
freehold of £5O value, or a leasehold or household
of the annual value of £25. One-third of
the members retire every three years. The roll for
1885 included 30,622 voters. The Legislative As-
sembly consists of 52 members, elected by ballot for
three years, by 26 electoral districts. The franchise is
virtually manhood suffrage; and the voters on the roll
for 1885 numbered 58,561.
Following is tbe list of Governors, with their terms
ot office :—Captain Hindmarsh, December, 1836, to
the middle of 1838 ; Captain Gawler, 1838 to the end
of 1840 ; Captain (afterwards Sir George) Grey, 1840
to 1845 ; Colonel Robe, 1845 to 1848 ; Sir Henry
Youn°-, 1848 to 1854 ; Sir Richard Macdonell, 1850
to 1862; Sir Dominic Daly, 1862 till his death at
Government House in February, 1868 ; Sir James Fer-
gusson, 1868 to 1873 ; Sir Anthony Musgrave, 1873
to 1877 : Sir William Jervois, 1877 to 1883 ; and Sir
William’Cleaver Robinson, the present Governor.^
The 12th Parliament was opened June 2, 1887, and
the present Ministry came into power a week later. 1 ol-
lowing is the distribution of portfolios:
Premier and Treasurer, Hon. T. Plavford.
Chief Secretary, Hon. J. L. Ramsay.
Attorney-General, Hon. C. J. Kingston. _ .
Commissioner for Lands and Immigration, lion. J. Coles.
Commissioner for Public Works, Hon. A. Catt.
Minister of Education, Hon. J. C. F. Johnson.
The Agent-General in London is Sir Arthur Blyth,
K.C.M.G. ; Hon. Sir Henry Ayers, KC.M.G., is Presi-
dent of the Legislative Council. The office of Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly has recently become
vacant by the decease of the Hon. Sir It. D. Ross.
The public revenue for 1886 was £1,975,269, or £b
6s. per' head of poDulation ; expenditure (exclusive of
loan fund), £2,234,*395, or £7 2s. 9d. per head. The
public debt at the end of the year amounted to
£18,340,200, or £5B 12s. lOd. per head of population,
and equal to 9-28 times the revenue. The revenue for
1887 was £2,013,777.
Municipal. —Local self-government is carried out
under 30 municipalities and 121 district councils, with
power to levy rates, grant licenses, andapply the proceeds,
with Government subsidy thereon, to local improvements.
The rateable value of property in the municipalities in
1885 was £1,016,700, and the assessment £62,090; in
the districts the rateable value was £1,080,817, and
the assessment £46,172. The prevailing rate is Is. m
the pound. Adelaide was incorporated m 1849, with
an area of 3362 acres, including 1751 acres of park
lands and 52 acres of other reserves. The population
at the end of 1886 was estimated at 45,000; length of
streets, 86 miles; rated tenements, 8849; ratepayers on
the roll 10,625; assessed annual value of city pro-
perty, £351,507 ; Capital value, £12,000,000. The
revenue for 1888, including city and sewerage funds,
amounted to £74,526. The water supply is from the
River Torrens; length of mains, 500 miles; storing
reservoirs, Hope Valley (807,000,000 gallons) ana
Thornden Park (138,000 gallons); total cost,
£B9O 881; revenue, 1886, £60,145. Water conserva-
tion throughout the country districts, has also received
considerable attention. The expenditure for tins pur-
pose in 1885 amounted to £67,916 ; and boring opera-
tions in the Northern Territory have been attended, by
marked success, abundant supplies of water having
been found at several places at depths ranging from
339 to 1350 feet.
INTERCOMMUNICATION.
Railways. —Private railways have been in use
between Adelaide and Glenelg, and Adelaide and Hold-
fast Bay since May, 24, 1840. All the other railways
are in the hands of the Government, The first length, of
about seven miles —Adelaide to the Port —was opened
April 21, 1856; and, since then, there has been a steady
development of railway enterprise. The gauges used
are sft 3in. and 3ft 6in., and the average cost of con-
struction per mile for all lines completed to the end ot
1886 was £6042; total, £8,348,800. At the date


mentioned there were 1382 miles of line open for
traffic, and 417 under construction. The receipts for
the year were £555,589; working expenses, £359,840 •
net receipts, £195,749, or 2*50 per cent, on the capital
expended. r
The Tramway Company’s report for half-year ending
June 30, 1885, gave the following figures:—Five lines
with a length of 35 miles; stabling for 423 horses;
i ra “ cars; P asse ngers carried, 2,458,688; receipts
£27,853 ; expenses, £19,387.
Roads.— The Central and other Road Boards have
over 4000 miles of roads under their care, of which
about half are formed and metalled. The total expen-
diture on these roads since 1852 amounts to nearly
■“a millions. Coaches connect with the principal ter-
minal stations of the railways throughout the country,
whilst omnibuses and cabs in abundance complete the
vehicle traffic of the city.
Postal and Telegraphic.—Postal rates differ from
those of IS ew South \\ ales only in that newspapers are
charged gd. within the colony. Following are the
principal figures for 1886: Number of post-offices,
568; letters received and despatched, 13 129 9°l •
newspapers and packets, 6,672,013. In telegraphic
enterprise South Australia has had the honour of carry-
ing out at immense cost a trans-continental line from
Adelaide to Port Darwin in the extreme north, a length
of 1973 miles, thus connecting the colonies with the
telegraphic system of the world. This great work
was commenced in August, 1870, with an estimate
of £120,000 for expenditure, and completed in the
face of the most baffling difficulties just two years
later at an actual cost of £370,000. The first mes-
sage from London delivered by this wire reached
Adelaide June 20, 1872, and the usual time of
transit is about six hours. At the end of 1886 South
Australia had 200 telegraphic stations, 5459 miles of
lines, with 10,310 miles of wire. No return of the
messages received and despatched is available for
1886, but the figures for 1884 were 731,128. A tele-
phone exchange has also been established in Adelaide,
with 1539 miles of wire.
RELIGION, EDUCATION, JUSTICE, CHARITY.
Religion. Ihe pioneers of colonisation in South
Australia set their faces from the first against all ideas
of a State Church; and, despite a determined attempt
of Colonel Robe, the fourth Governor, to reproduce the
Imperial system, the religious bodies have always
enjoyed perfect equality. Following are the latest
available figures as to their progress. From the census
of 1881 and the Denominational returns at the end of
1883:—Church of England, 75,812 adherents, and
church accommodation for 35,200; Roman Catholics,
42,628, church sittings; Presbyterians,
17,917, with 7186 sittings; Wesleyans and Primitive
Methodists, 52,788, with 61,435 sittings; Independents,
<9OB, with 10,341 sittings; Baptists, 13,979, with
13,012 sittings; other Protestants, 45,222.
1 limary education is undenominational, compulsorv
up to a minimum standard, and free to all children
whose parents are unable to pay. The usual fees range
from 4d. to 6d. per week for each scholar; and the
teachers incomes are subsidised by the State, partly in
the way of fixed salaries and partly in the form of
payment by results. The Educational Department is
administered, under direction of a responsible Minister,
by an Inspector-General, a Superintendent, and five
inspectors. Following are the principal figures for
1886 .-—Schools, 504; teachers—male 415, female
666, total 1081; gross enrolment of scholars, 49,922 ;
net enrolment, 44,405 ; average attendance, 28.000, or
per-centage of 6305; expenditure, exclusive *of new
buildings, by the State, £90,768, by fees £23,736, total
£114,504 ; cost for each child in average attendance,
£116764' T ° tal Government ex P en diture for the year’
Adelaide University was founded in 1875, chiefly
through the munificence of two of the leading colo-
nists, Sir W. W. Hughes and Sir Thomas Elder, each
of whom gave £20,000 to the foundation fund. It
includes chairs for classics, English (with mental and
moral philosophy), mathematics, natural science, and
lectureships in law, music, and other subjects; and its
degrees rank with those of British universities.
Amongst the High schools of the colony, St. Peter’s
College (Church of England) and Prince Alfred
College (Wesleyan) take first rank. The other Protes-
tant denominations have combined to support a Union
College.
The judicial system includes a Supreme Court, pre-
sided over by Chief Justice S. J. Way and two Puisne
Judges—his Honor J. P. Boucaut and his Honor W.
H. Bundey; a Vice-Admiralty Court, a Court of Insol-
vency, and 68 local Courts of civil jurisdiction, of
which two are in the Northern Territory. The police
force was organised in 1839, and is now controlled
under a Consolidating Act passed in 1870. The
mounted forces number about 225, and the foot police
abont 250.
The charitable institutions include eight general
hospitals, two casualty hospitals, two lunatic a&vlums,
institutions for the destitute, orphanages, and reforma-
tories. The annual amount expended on the State-
aided charities is about £85,000.
COMMERCE AND MANUFACTORIES.
Ihe fiscal policy of the present Government is
strongly protectionist. Ad valorem duties are charged
on many articles, including drapery, furniture, vehicles,
drugs, earthenware, jewellery, leather, and stationery;
whilst specific duties are levied on a somewhat ex-
tended list of imports. The revenue from Customs in
1886 was £436,114 (or 22-08 per cent, of the total
revenue), as against only £149.009 from all other
taxes.
The imports for 1886 were valued at £4,852,750,
or £l5 10s. per head of the population; exports,
£4,489,008, or £l4 6s. 9d. per head: total trade,
£9,341,758, or £29 16s. 9d. per head. The shipping
comprised 859 vessels with 770,922 tonnage inwards,
and 8(8 vessels with 787,554 tonnage outwards:
total, 1737 vessels, with 1,558,476 tonnage. •
Ihe^ manufactories of South Australia for the vear
1886-7 included 731 works, employing 9946 hands.
QUEENSLAND.
_ Queensland’s first name of Moreton Bay District,
given in honour of Earl Moreton, is the principal con-
necting link between it and Captain Cook, the first
Englishman who sighted its coast Nor did Lieutenant
Flinders, who was sent by Governor Phillip to search
for an inlet from Moreton Bay to the interior, in 1789,
leave any permanent trace of his visit. To Lieutenant


Oxley, Surveyor-General of New South Wales, belongs
the honour of discovering Brisbane River, in 1823, and
making known the promising nature of the country
through which it flowed. Then followed the branch
penal settlement from New South Wales in 1824, and
the dark chapter of tyranny towards the convicts and
inhumanity towards the aborigines. But Allen Cun-
ningham’s explorations and the gradual opening up of
pastoral settlement on the Darling Downs having
nrepared the way for better things, the new
territory was thrown open to colonisation in
May, 1842. Land sales on easy terms attracted
large numbers of free immigrants, and in 1859
Moreton Bay district became the promising colony of
Queensland, with Mr. (now Sir) Robert G. W.
Herbert, one of the permanent under-secretaries of the
Colonial Office, as its first Colonial Secretary. The
succession of Commandants, —Captains Miller, Bishop,
Logan, Clurrie, Evans, Major Colton, Lieutenant
Gravatt, Lieutenant Gorman—had given place in 1842
to a Police Magistracy. The administration of Captain
J. C. Wickham, R.N., first as Magistrate, November 14,
1842, to 1853, and afterwards as Government Resident,
did much towards preparing the way for the more
perfect form of government. But to Dr. Lang was
chiefly due the success of the separation movement,
and he afterwards received well-merited thanks from
the Parliament he had done so much to call into exist-
ence. The proclamation of the colony arrived on June
3, 1859, and Sir George Bowen, the first Governor,
entered upon his office on the 10th of December
following. The first Parliament assembled on
May 27, 1860, in tbe old Convict Bar-
racks in Queen-street Mr. Elliott w r as chosen
Speaker, the late Mr. A. Macalister, C.M.G.,
Chairman of Committees, and the late Mr. Justice
Bring was the first Attorney-General. No fewer than
17 Acts relating to the land and agriculture were passed
by the first Parliament. But it was not long till a very
serious difficulty had to be grappled with, in the matter
of coolie labour. The cotton and sugar planters came
very early to the conclusion that the nature of the
climate and of their pursuits demanded labour that
would bo cheaper and more inured to excessive heat
than any obtainable in the European market; hence
there sprang up a large traffic in the importation
of Indian coolies, Chinese, and South Sea Islanders.
Parliament at first imposed stringent regulations, but
these failing to prevent abuses, entire prohibition was
at length enacted. After Sir George Bowen’s removal
to New Zealand in 1868, Colonel Blackall filled
the vice-regal office till his death in 1871.
The colony made steady progress during the adminis-
tration of the next three Governors—Marquis of Nor-
manby (1871 to 1874), Sir William Cairns (1874 to
1877), and Sir Arthur Kennedy (1877 to 1883) ; and
the spirit of enterprise has been still more marked since
the advent of the present Governor, Sir Anthony Mus-
grave.
Queensland has an area of 670,000 square miles, and
a coastline of 2500 miles, made picturesque by numer-
ous islands and reefs, and distinguished by the Great
Barrier Reef, which stretches a great part of the total
length, at a distance of 10 to 100 miles. Its mountain
system includes three principal ranges and a number
of detached hills. The Coast Range extends along the
eastern seaboard at a distance of about 50 miles, and
culminates in Mount Dalrymple, at a height of 4250 ft.,
and Bellenden Kerr Hills, 5000 ft. The Main Range runs
inland of the coast range, and is known under various
names. The Dividing Range forms part of the boun-
dary between the colony and New South Wales.
The surface of the colony comprises three divi-
sions :—l. The coast district, formed by the narrow
strip between the coast range and the sea. 2. The
highland district, extending from York Peninsula to
near Brisbane. 3. The comparatively level plains
between the mountain regions and the western boun-
dary of the colony. The river system has three distinct
slopes —(1) a northward slope, including the Mitchel,
Staaten, Gilbert, Norman, Minders, Leichhardt, Albert,
Gregory, and Nicholson rivers, which flow into the
Gulf of Carpentaria; (2) a south-westerly slope, in-
cluding the Herbert, Diamantina, Barcoo, Condamine,
Paroo, Warrego, and numerous small streams flowing
toward the basin of Lake Eyre, ou the Murray; and (3)
a coast region, including the Brisbane, and other rivers
flowing to the Pacific. The coast is strongly marked by
capes, headlands, and bays; and excellent harbours exist
at Moreton Bay, Hervey Bay, Keppel Bay, Port Curtis,
Port Bowen, Rockingham Bay, and Investigator Roads
in the Gulf of Carpentaria. The climate has been
compared to that of Madeira; the mean shade tempera-
ture is 69 - 9.
LAND : AGRICULTURAL, TASTORAL, MINERAL.
Previous to 1885 the land laws of Queensland gave
to pastoral tenants large areas at nominal rents, whilst
selectors could take up maximum areas of 5000 acres,
and obtain a freehold after three years’ fulfilment of
certain conditions. The Land Act of 1884, which
came into force March 1, 1885, with amending Acts
subsequently passed, provides for six different classes of
land tenure:—l. The previously existing pastoral
lessee has been secured a new lease of not less than half
his run for 10 or 15 years, with compensation in case of
earlier resumption. 2. Occupation licensees, with
annual licenses renewable till the land is required for
settlement. 3. Grazing selectors, who may lease up to
20,000 acres at a minimum rental of fd. per acre per
annum for 30 years. 4. Agricultural selectors, with a
maximum of 1280 acres for 50 years, at a minimum
annual rental of 3d. per acre, and option of purchase at
the end of the term at 20s. per acre. 5. Homestead
selectors, who may acquire the fee simple of 160 acres
for the sum of 2s. 6d. per acre, in addition to 10s. worth
of improvements. (6.) Purchasers of town lands, at a
minimum of £8 per acre, or of suburban lands at £2 per
acre. The Act is administered by a Board consisting
of two members, who are paid £lOOO a-year each, and
are debarred from sitting in Parliament, acquiring any
interest in a holding under the Act, or engaging in any
business but that pertaining to their office. An appeal
lies to the Supreme Court against their decisions; and
in each land district there is a land agent and a land
commissioner.
The total area alienated or in process of alienation at
the end of 1886 was 10,995,374 acres ; and 316,000,000
acres were under pastoral leases.
Agricultural returns for the year ending March 31,
1887, show the following figures:—Wheat, 6787 acres,
yielding 21,221 bushels; maize, 75,566 acres, 1,709,673
bushels; barley, 768 acres, 18,483 bushels; hay,
39,280 acres, 75,371 tons; potatoes, 7202 acres, 26,967
tons; grapevines, 1517 acres, 147,410 gallons wine,


653 tons of grapes ; sugar cane, 54,010 acres, 58,545
tons of manufactured sugar. Total area under crop
(grass land not included), 221,843 acres.
Pastoral returns for year ending March 31, 1887,
give the following figures:—Sheep, 9,690,445 ; cattle,
4,071,533; horses, 278,694; pigs, 61,861; total,
14,102,563. The average rental for the runs in un-
settled districts is about a farthing per acre, and in the
settled districts about £2 per square mile.
Minerals.— Queensland is justly famed for its
mineral wealth. Gold has been discovered in nearly
every part of the colony, from Warwick in the south to
the Palmer in the north, Gympie, with its auriferous
area of 90 square miles, and population of 10,000,
taking first place amongst the older fields, whilst the
newer discoveries at Mount Morgan have attracted the
notice of speculators and investors in all parts of the
world. Until recently outside capital had done little
for Queensland mining; but now the tide has turned
with such force as to suggest the risk of reckless
speculation with its inevitable reaction, to the colony’s
injury. The total quantity of gold raised, to the end
of 1886, was 5,226,6450 z., valued at £18,293,257.
But these figures do not include the large quantities
carried out of the colony by the Chinese. The
northern portions of the colony abound in copper ores,
and the Peak Downs Mine alone sent down £1,000,000
worth, and paid £215,000 in dividends in the space of
five years. Stream tin has been found in great quanti-
ties in the granite country round Stanthorpe on the
southern border, and at Herberton and the North
Palmer. Coal, silver, cobalt, bismuth, zinc, antimony,
manganese, precious stones, and excellent building
stone have also been found, and only await labour
and capital for their development.
POPULATION AND VITAL STATISTICS.
The population of Queensland has grown very
rapidly during the last 16 years, and especially during
the last six years. The census of 1871 included
120,104 persons; by 1881 the number had increased to
213,525, and at 31st December, 1887, it was estimated
at 359,059. The births during 1886 numbered
12,582, or 37‘58 per 1000 of mean population; mar-
riages, 2785, or 8’32 per 1000; deaths, 5575, or 16’65
per 1000. The mean death rate for the 11 years,
1876 to 1886, was 17’83 per 1000. The aborigines
of Queensland are variously estimated at from 25,000
to as many as 70,000; but the lower estimate is pro-
bably nearer the mark. The history of their contact
with civilisation reflects little credit on the superior
race. The Chinese element in the population has occa-
sioned much perplexity. Stringent regulations have
been in force for years past to limit the influx, but the
tendency now is towards the nearest possible approach
to prohibition. On the other hand, the colonists have
liberally encouraged European immigrants to come and
share in the development of the country’s resources,
over £3,000,000 of public money having been devoted
to that purpose. As an item in the thrift of the
people, the Government savings banks returns for
1886 show:—Depositors, 37,599; amount of deposits,
£1,337,965 ; amount for each depositor, £35 12s. sd. ;
amount per head of population, £3 19s. lid.
government: parliamentary, municipal.
The Constitution granted in 1859, and slightly
amended 10 years later, provides for a Governor
appointed by lie Crown, an Executive Council consist-
ing of the Governor and responsible Ministers, and two
Houses of Legislature. The Legislative Council con-
sists of 36 members appointed for life by the Crown.
The Legislative Assembly is composed of 58 piembe
elected for five years by 44 electorates. The franchi
requires a freehold worth £lOO, a Crown rental or
£lOO, or a household rental or lodging of not less tha
£lO per annum. Each member draws two guineas p
day whilst the Assembly is in session for expenses (bur
the total sum must not exceed £200). The President o::
the Legislative Council is the Hon. Sir Arthur Hunt
Palmer, K.C.M.G., and the Hon. D. E. Roberts is Chair-
man of Committees. The present Parliament is th
ninth since the commencement of responsible govern
ment. It was opened November 8, 1883, and its fifti
and last session closed on December 10, 1887. Follow
ing is the distribution of portfolios in the presen
Administration :—Premier, Vice-President of Executiv
Council, Chief Secretary, and Colonial Treasurer, Hon
Sir S. W. Griffith, Q.C. ; Attorney-General, Hon
A. Rutledge; Colonial Secretary and Secretar
for Public Instruction, Hon. B. B. Moreton
Postmaster-General, Hon. W. H. Wilson; Secretar
for Public Works and Mines, Hon. W. O. Hodgkinson
Secretary for Public Lands, Hon. Henry Jordan
Secretary for Railways, Hon. C. B. Dutton ; Agent
General and member of the Cabinet, Hon. J. F. Gar
rick, C.M.G. The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
is Hon. W. H. Groom; and Mr. Simon Fraser i
Chairman of Committees.
The public revenue for 1886 was £2,810,147, o
£8 7s. lOd. per head of the population; expenditure
(exclusive of loans), £3,202,030, or £9 11s. 3d. per
head. The public debt at December 31, 1886, was
£20,820,850, or £6O 15s. 3d. per head of population
and equal to 7'41 times the revenue. The revenue for
1887 was £3,032,462.
Municipal. —Brisbane was incorporated September
7, 1859, with an area of 2183 acres; length of streets,
65 miles; rated tenements, 6500; ratepayers, 6194 ;
assessed annual value of city property, £571,031;
capital value, £7,558,278 ; value of real estate of cor-
poration, £229,345. The city is divided into six wards
with two aldermen to each, elected for two years, one
retiring annually. Revenue for 1887 : Rates, £57,000;
all other sources, £70,000: total, £127,000. Expen-
diture, £300,000. In response to a petition from the
ratepayers, South Brisbane has recently been gazetted a
separate municipality. Under the Divisional Boards
Act there are 93 boards, controlling an aggregate area
of 667, square miles; number of dwellings,
39,282; ratopaveis, 54,234; assessed capital value of
rateable propertv, £33,219,552 ; revenue, 1886,
£252,335.
INTERCOMMUNICATION.
Railways. —The Queensland railway system includes
a Southern line, from Brisbane to Wallangarra, and
connecting with the Northern line of N. S. W. at Tenter-
field ; a Western line, from Brisbane to Charleville;
a Central line, from Rockhampton to Barcaldine
Downs; a Northern line, from Townsville westward
through Charters Towers and Hughenden; and several
short lines, from Maryborough to Gympie. Bundaberg
to Mount Perry, &c. All the lines belong to the State,
and the gauge throughout is 3ft. 6in. At the close of
1886 there were 1555 miles of lines open to traffic, and
637 miles in course of construction or authorised. The


capital cost was £10,716,352, or an average of £6892
per mile; receipts for the year, £640,845; working
expenses, £476,966 ; net receipts, £163,879 ; percentage
on total cost, including the unproductive expenditure on
lines not opened, 1-62.
The postal returns for 1886 were: K umber of post
offices, 662; letters and post cards received and des-
patched, 10,503,345, or 31-59 per head of population ;
newspapers, 9,391,614, or 28-24 per head; revenue,
£102,273; expenditure, £208,410.
Telegraph stations numbered 282 ; miles of line-in
operation,"B22s, and in course of construction, 779,
making a total of 9004 ; miles of wire, 14,443 ; tele-
grams received and despatched (of which 249,0*2 were
official and free), 1,450,567 ; amount received, £82,958.
Horse tramways, with some 64 miles of lines, are in
ODeration in Brisbane, Rockhampton, and 1 ownsville.
RELIGION, EDUCATION, JUSTICE, CHARITY.
All denominations have been dependent on the
voluntary support of their own adherents from the
commencement of the colony. Following are the
principal returns for 1886: —Church of England,
112,972; Roman Catholic, 77,077 ; Presbyterian,
35,669 ; Methodist, 24,613 ; Independent, 7052 ; Bap-
tist, 8537.
Education. — The Queensland Education Act of lb* 6
established a very effective system of primary instruc-
tion, under direct control of a responsible Minister.
The State schools are wholly supported at the public
expense, but a small number of provisional schools,
which are intended to prepare the way for State schools,
are supported jointly by private contributions and
Government aid. Religious instruction finds no place
in the programme of lessons, but under certain condi-
tions it may be given out of school hours. 1 or the
encouragement of higher education the State offers
£2OOO for the erection of grammar schools,, and £5OO
a year towards masters’ salaries, on condition that non
less than half those amounts are raised locally; on
those conditions prosperous grammar schools are now
in operation at Brisbane, Ipswich, Toowoomba, Mary-
borough, and Rockhampton, and many of their pupils
have given a good account of themselves at the Sydney
Universitv public examinations. Scholarships covering
three years’ grammar school instruction are open to
pupils under 14 in the primary schools; and exhibi-
tions of the annual value of £lOO, and tenable for
three years, are open to grammar school students under
19 years of age, to cover a University course.
Justice is administered by means of a Supreme Court,
presided over by Chief Justice Sir Charles Lilley and
three Puisne Judges; Circuit Courts, presided over by a
Supreme Court Judge; District Courts, under three
District Court Judges ; Magistrates’ Courts,. adjudicated
in by Police Magistrates, assisted by. Justices of the
Peace. The police force, under Commissioner Seymour,
includes over 600 men, exclusive of a special contingent
of native troopers and trackers.
The Charitable Institutions, administered under an
Act passed in 1885 include 37 public hospitals, a hos-
pital for sick children, two benevolent asylums, and six
orphan asylums, with an aggregate of 205 wards, 1338
beds, and nearly 10,000 patients under treatment,
during the year. There are also a lying-in hospital at
Brisbane and a similar institution at Maryborough;
three Lock hospitals, four lunatic reception houses, with
nine wards and 52 beds; and two lunatic asylums,
with about 700 patients, maintained for the whole or
part of the year, at a cost of about £21,000. The pro-
portion of the insane to the total population is about 1
in 372, or 2.68 per 1000.
COMMEKCE AND MANUFACTURES.
Under the fiscal policy of Queensland customs duties
are levied for revenue purposes. The specific duty list is
not large, but a 5 per cent, ad valorem duty is imposed
on all the articles not included in a somewhat limited
free list The revenue raised through the Customs in
1886 was £965,754, or 34-37 per cent of total revenue.
The export trade of Queensland consists largely of raw
products, the principal being wool, cattle, gold, copper,
hides, tallow and timber, whilst sugar is the only
manufactured article of any consequence. The returns
for 1886 show —Imports, £6,103,227, or 4GB 4s. * d.
per head of population; exports, £4,933,970, or £l4
14s. 9d. per head; total trade, £11,037,197, or £32
19s. 4d. per head. Shipping—lnwards, 918 vessels,
with 557,026 tonnage; outwards, 977 vessels, with
563,544 tonnage ; total, 1895 vessels, with 1,120,479
tonnage. The manufactories of Queensland included
1125 different works in 1886, but the number of hands
employed has not been returned.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia is territorially the largest of the
Australian colonies. It takes in the whole of the con-
tinent westward of 129- east long., and extends from
13-30 to 35-8 south lat.—a breadth of 850 miles by a
length of 1490, comprising, with its adjacent islands,
an area of 1,057,250 square miles, or eight times that
of the United Kingdom. Early in 1829 Cap-
tain Fremantle, arriving in H.M.S. Challenger,
hoisted the British flag at the place which
has since borne his name; and on June Ist of the same
year Captain (afterwards Sir) James Stirling arrived as
the first Governor of the new colony. His party con-
sisted of a staff of eight persons, 10 artisans and
mechanics, with their wives, families, and servants;
and the stock brought out at the same time comprised
51 head of cattle, 200 sheep, 33 horses, besides pigs
and poultry. Between this time and the close of 1800
no fewer than 39 immigrant ships arrived, bringing
1125 passengers, and cargo to the value of £144,277.
The first assignment of Perth lots took place on Sep-
tember 27, 1829 ; and the first printing press was landed
December, 1832, but it was not till 1840 that
the Perth Inquirer, the first newspaper, was published.
Captain Stirling was succeeded by Mr. John Hutt
in 1839, and he by Colonel Clark in 1846. Lieutenant-
Colonel Irvin followed (February, 1847, to July,
1848), and at the close of his tenure of office a census
was taken with the following results :—Population,
4622 ; land under cultivation, 7047 acres; cattle,
10,919 ; sheep, 141,123 ; horses, 2095 ; and pigs,
2287 ; the imports were estimated at £45,411, and ex-
ports at £29,508. Shortly afterwards the colonists, as
a desperate remedy for their painfully slow growth,
asked the Imperial Government to use the place as a
convict depot; and, during the nine years, 1850 to
1859, under the administration of Captain Fitzgerald
and the late Sir Arthur Kennedy, 5169 convicts and
6364 other persons, most of whom belonged to the
prisoners’ families, arrived in the colony. But the


other colonies taking alarm made a joint protest ; and
in 1868, after some 10,000 exiles had been absorbed
by the West Australian population, transportation
ceased. The next two Governors were Mr. J. S.
Hampton (February, 1862, to November, 1868) and
Mr. (now Sir) F. A. Weld (September, 1869, to
December, 1874). During Mr. Weld’s adminis-
tration the colony made good progress. Tele-
graphic communication was established between the
principal towns, and afterwards extended to South Aus-
tralia ; and, in 1870, the colony was divided into elec-
toral districts, and the first election of members to the
Legislative Council was held. Sir W. C. F. Robinson
succeeded Mr. Weld (November, 1874, to September,
1877), and was followed by Sir Harry St. George Ord
(1877-1880), in whose time the Northern Railway from
Gerald town to Northampton was opened. Sir W. C.
F. Robinson returned for a second term of office in
April, 1880 ; and on his transfer to South Australia
m 1882 Mr. F. Napier Broome was sworn in as
Governor (June 5, 1883), and received the honour of
knighthood a year later. His tenure of office has been
disturbed by several conflicts with the Crown law officers,
but it has been marked by fair progress throughout the
colony,, and especially by a strong agitation for
responsible government The climate of Perth, with a
mean temperature of 64‘, is exceedingly salubrious. The
temperature of the southern parts of the colony is little
higher than that of England, whilst in the northern
districts the climate is almost too hot for European
labour.
™ LAND : AGRICULTURAL, pastoral, mineral.
, Ihe land laws of Western Australia are fairly
liberal, and the real property system of title having
been introduced before much land had been alienated,
land, transactions are simple and comparatively inex-
pensive. I own and suburban lots are sold by auction
at. moderate upset prices. Crown lands in rural dis-
tricts may be bought in blocks of not less than 10
acres at 10s, per acre, or may be obtained under occu-
pation licenses in areas of not less than 100 acres by
payment of Is. per annum for 10 years. Pastoral lands
in the central district can be leased for 14 years at £1 for
every 1000 acres; in the Kimberley district the minimum
price is 10s. per 1000 acres, and in all other districts
os. per 1000 for the first seven years and 10s. for the
remainder of the term. Further improvements in the
land regulations have recently been agreed to in the
Legislative Council with a view to encouraging
settlement. 6
Agricultural.— The principal products are wheat,
barley, hay, potatoes, and vines; but the country affords
such varieties of soils and of temperature that the pro-
ducts of all parts of the world might be successfully
cultivated. Following are the returns for the year
enffiog March, 1887:-Wheat, 288,516 bushels; oats,
-8,512 bushels; barley, 82,816 bushels; maize, 3933
bushels; other cereals, about 8792 bushels; potatoes,
10,1 tons; hay, 25,718 tons; wine, 98,350 gallons,
total area under crops, 84,403.
1 , returns for the same year comprise
1,809.0,1 sheep; 88,254 cattle; 25,655 horses: and
24,605 pigs.
Mixerai —The Government Geologist has reported
lavourably on the auriferous nature of the country
traversed by the Margaret, Mary, Elvira, Panton, and
id rivers; and in 1886 a rush of diggers from the
neighbouring colonies took place to the region of Mou
Barret, but with disappointing results. Copper ant
lead mines have already been fairly developed; anc
iron and tin ores are known to exist in abundance.
POPULATION AND VITAL STATISTICS.
The population has slowly grown from 4622 in 18‘
to 25,353 in 1871, to 29,708 in 1881, and 39,58
(males 23,044, females 16,540) at the end of 188
The births during 1886 numbered 1466, or 39-31 p
1000 of population ; the marriages 297, or 7.94 p
1000; and the deaths 806, or 21-56 per 1000. Th
mean death rate for the 11 years 1876 to 1886 w
16-23 per 1000. Estimated population, December 3'
1887—44,532.
The depositors in Government savings banks, 188
numbered 2176 ; amount of deposits, £29,124,
£l3 7s. Bd. per depositor, and 15s. 7d. per head o
population.
government : parliamentary, municipal.
Western Australia is still a Crown colony, and th
Administration is vested in a Governor, appointed b
the Crown ; an Executive Council (consisting of th
Governor, Colonial Secretary, Surveyor-Genera
Attorney-General, Colonial Treasurer, and Director o:
Public Works) ; and a Legislative Council. Eigh
members of the Legislative Council, including th
officers above mentioned (except the Director of Publi
Works), are appointed by the Crown, and 16 others are
chosen by eight electoral districts. The qualification
for an elector is a householding of £lO in annua
value, and for a member, landed property to the value
of £lOOO, or an income of £250 a year. 'The principal
officers of the Administration are :
Governor, Sir Frederick Napier Broome, K.C.M.G.
Colonial Secretary, Hon. Malcolm Fraser, K.C.M.G.
Attorney-General, Hon. C. N. Warton, M.L.C.
Surveyor-General and Commissioner of Crown Lands Hon
John Forrest, C.M.G.
Treasurer and Collector of Revenue, Hon. A. O’G. Lefrov
I C.M.G.
Director of Works and Commissioner of Railwavs, Hon
J. A. Wright, M.L.C.
Commissioner of Lands Titles, Hon. J. C. H. James, B.A
Postmaster-General, Mr. A. Helmich.
Auditor-General, Mr. E. L. Courthope.
Collector of Customs, Mr. L. W. Clifton.
Chief Justice, Hon. Alexander Campbell Onslow.
Puisne Judge, Hon. E. A. Stone.
Speaker, Hon. J. G. Lee Steere.
The public revenue for 1886 amounted to £388,564,
or £lO 7s. lid. per head of population. The expendi-
Itur e, exclusive of loan funds, amounted to £394,675,
or <£lo 11s. per head. The public debt on December
31 1886, was £1,286,000.
Municipal —Perth and Fremantle have each a
Mayor and corporation, and there are 10 other muni-
cipal councils, with power to levy rates up to 7|- per
cent on the annual value of all properties, within*"their
boundaries, for local improvements, and to control
licenses, markets, and other affairs falling under local
government. The main roads of the colony (in length
about 1400 miles) are maintained by 36 district boards
at an annual cost of about £17,000. Perth was incor-
porated in 1871, and has now 1100 tenements, 1200
ratepayers, and an assessed annual value of £670,000.
INTERCOMMUNICATION.
Railways. —The first railway in Western Australia
was opened in 1878 with a length of 34J miles, con-
necting Northampton and Geraldtown. The gauge on


nil lines is 3ft 6in. The total length of Government
lines opened at the end of 1866 was. 154 miles, and
the length under construction (exclusive of land grant
contracts—Beverley to Albany and Geraldtown to
Guildford) 46 miles; cost per mile, £4ob9; receipts
for 1886, £35,896; working expenses, £4l,d»».
About 100 miles of tramways have been constructed
by timber companies. ,
The postal returns for 1886 include 80 offices,
1,847,694 letters and post cards, or 49*69 per head ot
population; 1,153,892 newspapers, or 31*03 per head ;
revenue, £13,305; expenditure, on Postal and ieie-
graphic Departments combined, £31,112.
Telegraphic returns show 2385 mile 3 of line
operation, and 500 miles under construction; 105,613
messages received and dispatched (of which 48,745
were official and free) ; revenue, £7,428.
RELIGION, EDUCATION, JUSTICE, CHARITY.
Religion.— Rev. J. B. Willenoom arrived in the
colony on July 18, 1829, as the first chaplain repre-
senting the Church of England, and in 1856 Dr. M.
B. Hale (late Bishop of Brisbane) was appointed the
first Bishop. Representatives of other denominations
followed in due course, and the following figures from
the census of 1881 show the general progress made to
that date: —Church of England, 62 places of wor-
ship, 20 Sunday school buildings, and 12,263
adherents, or 54*74 per cent, of the popu-
lation; Roman Catholics, a cathedral in Perth and
17 other chapels, with 8413 adherents, or 28.32 per
cent of the population; Wesleyans, 11 places of wor-
ship and 2084 adherents; Presbyterian, two places of wor-
ship (a large church has since been opened in Perth) and
1004 adherents; Independents, three places of worship
and 1262 adherents; other bodies, 329; and unspeci-
fied, 209. The four denominations first mentioned receive
a moderate amount of State aid in the form of con-
current endowment
Education. —Th.e Education. Act now in force was
passed a year after the educational reform of 1870 in
England, and as nearly as possible on the same lines.
Schools are divided into elementary (corresponding to
the Public schools of the other colonies) and private, or
denominational. The elementary schools are liberally
subsidised by the State, and controlled bv a central board
of five laymen, belonging to as many different
denominations, and by local boards, chosen triennially
by the electoral voters of each district. Four hours a
day are devoted to secular instruction, and half-an-hour
(guarded by a conscience clause) to reading the Bible
(without note or comment) or other religious book
approved by the board. Private schools may secure a
capitation grant by submitting to a conscience clause,
and to government inspection for secular results.
School fees range from 2d. to Is. per week. Returns
for 1886 included 89 elementary schools, with 49
male and 101 female teachers ; an enrolment of 4508
pupils—229s males and 2213 females; and 16 private
schools with an enrolment of 1221 pupils. The average
attendance of pupils at the State schools was 3344, or
74*17 per cent, of the enrolment. The cost for
instruction included £8920 from the State, and £1424
in fees from parents, or £3 Is. for each pupil in
average attendance. The subsidy to the private or
denominational schools amounted to £1 Bs. BfcL for
-each pupil.
Higher education is provided for by several private
schools, and the Government Grammar School at Fre-
mantle and High School at Perth, with two scholarships
of £5O each, and an exhibition of £lOO a year, tenable
three years at a colonial university.
Justice is administered by a Supreme Court, presided
over by a Chief Justice and a Puisne Judge ; Quarter
Sessions ; Petty Sessions, with 12 police magistrates ;
and a Court of Appeal.
The Charitable Institutions include 10 general hos-
pitals, a Protestant and a Roman Catholic Orphanage,
two poorhouses, a native institution, and a Lunatic
Asylum. The average number of paupers is about
300.
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES.
Customs duties were only levied for revenue pur-
poses until January 4, 1887, when a protectionist
tariff bill was passed. The Customs receipts
for 1886 were £164,048, or 42*22 per cent, of
the year’s income. ■ The imports for the year
were valued at £758,613, or £2O ss. 7d. per head of
the population ; exports £630,393, or £l6 17s. 2d.
per head. The year’s shipments comprised 287 vessels
inwards, with 260,286 tonnage ; and 255 vessels out-
wards, with 260,286 tonnage. The manufactories and
mills of the colony number 169, flour mills and saw-
mills being the most important. An industry differen-
tiating this colony from the rest of the group is the
pearlshell fishery, which now engages from 30 to 40
vessels, and a great number of aboriginal divers, the
yearly export ranging in value from £25,000 to
£96,000.
TASMANIA.
When Abel Jans Tasman, in his search after the
« Great South Land,” came upon Tasmania, November
24, 1642, he loyally named it Van Diemen’s Land,
after his superior officer, the Governor-General of the
Dutch East Indies. But his own name was preferred
by the colonisers of the territory, and formally substi-
tuted, in response to an address from the Legislative
Council, January 1,1856. Captain Cook landed at
Adventure Bay on January 26, 1777, on his third
voyage, and held friendly intercourse with the natives.
In 1798 Dr. Bass, surgeon of the Reliance, made fuller
exploration of the western coast, and established the
fact of its insularity ; and the straits separating
it from Australia were named after him by
Governor Hunter. Tasmania was formally taken
possession of by a small company from Sydney, under
Lieutenant John Bowen, as Commandant and Superin-
tendent, in August 1803, and Risdon on the Derwent
(named after the Derwent in Cumberland) was chosen
as the site for a branch penal settlement Colonel David
Collins, who succeeded Lieutenant Bowen in 1804,
took over with him the company of convicts originally
intended for Port Phillip, and removed the settlement
to the present site of Hobart, and called the place
Hobart Town, in honour of Lord Hobart, who was
Secretary of State for the Colonies at the time. (On
January 1, 1881, “Town” was dropped, and the name
of the Tasmanian capital became Hobart) Port Dal-
rymple was settled from Sydney by a company in
charge of Colonel Paterson, in October, 1804, the site at
first chosen being named York Town. Two years later
a more suitable site was found and named Launceston,


as a mark of respect to Governor King, whose birth-
place was Launceston in Cornwall. Under Colonel
Davey’s administration (1813 to 1817) the colony made
substantial progress. Colonel William Sorrell’s term
of office (1817 to 1824) was marked by some notable
events. In the very first year an outbreak of bush-
ranging had to be dealt with, and this piece of business
Colonel Sorrell accomplished with a firm hand. During
his second year a census was taken, and the population
shown to number 3240 ; and in the year following the
first criminal sittings were held, Judge Wylde,
from Sydney, presiding. Merino lambs from
Mr. Macarthur’s Camden flocks wore in-
troduced in 1820, and a census taken in
1821 gave the following figures :—Population, 7400 ;
sheep, 182,468; cattle, 34,790; horses, 550; land
under cultivation, 14,940 acres. Commerce followed
industrial progress, and during the census year 26
vessels arrived and sailed, one of them carrying to
England the first direct shipment of wool, including 12
bales! Colonel George Arthur succeeded to the ad-
ministration May 14, 1824, and on the 24th of the
same month a Supreme Court for the territory was
opened, with Mr. John Lewes Pedder as Chief Justice
and Mr. J. T. Gellibrand as Attorney-General. From
this time the public affairs were administered with
strict system, and the records reliably kept. In response
to a petition for separation from New South Wales
\ an Diemen’s Land was made an independent colony
in 1825. Two years later the Van Diemen’s
Land Company commenced operations, hav-
ing received a grant of 350,000 acres. The
colony made rapid progress under the administration
of Sir John Franklin (1837 to 1843) ; but Sir Eardley
Wilmot’s three years (August, 1843, to October, 1846)
proved unsatisfactory to all concerned. During the
government of Sir William Denison (1847 to 1854)
the gold discoveries in Victoria led to a great exodus
from Tasmania; and two years later, owiDg to per-
sistent and earnest protestations from the colonists,
transportation ceased. Under Sir Henry Young, the
first Governor-in-Chief (1855 to 1861) the colony made
several important advances, including the introduction
of telegraphs and the laying of a cable connecting the
colony with Victoria, the division of the colony into
municipalities, the lighting of Hobart with gas, and
the commencement of railway construction. The suc-
ceeding administrators were Colonel Gore Brown
(1862 to 1868) ; Mr. (now Sir) Charles Du Cane
(1869 to 1874) ; Mr. (now Sir) F. A. Weld (1875 to
1880) ; Sir J. H. Lefroy (1880-1) ; and Sir George
C. Strahan (1882 to 1886). The present Governor
(Sir Robert C. Hamilton) received his appointment
December, 1886.
Tasmania lies south of the Australian mainland,
from which it is separated by Bass Straits, 150 miles
in width. It is 210 miles in extreme length, from
Cape Green to South Cape, and 200 miles at its greatest
breadth. Its area is about 24,330 square miles
(15,571,500 acres), or about one-sixth less than
Ireland. Including lakes and islands the area is
16, 1 88,000 acres. Its climate is mild and salubrious ;
the mean temperature at Hobart is 54-5.
THE LAND : AGRICULTURAL, PASTORAL, MINERAL.
The Crown lands of Tasmania are administered
under the Waste Lands Act of 1870, and several
short amending Acts subsequently passed. They are
classed under the following divisions :—(1) Town
lands, comprising the suburban areas of Hobart and
Launceston, and all towns and villages; (2) Agri-
cultural lands, comprising all lands deemed suitable for
agricultural purposes, and proclaimed as such; (3)
Pastoral lands, including all areas not comprised in
class lor 2. Any person not under 18 years of age
may secure up to 320 acres of agricultural land bv
paying the cost of survey and £1 6s. Bd., per acre in
principal and interest, extending over 14 years, with
option of earlier completion; but either he or a tenant
or servant must reside on the land till the full amount
is paid. The Minister for Lands may sell by auction
agricultural lands at an upset price of £1 per acre, and
pastoral lands at ss. per acre, either for cash or deposit,
and 13 annual payments, with one-third added to the
price to cover interest. Pastoral licenses for areas of a
maximum carrying power for 4000 sheep or 1000 head
of cattle may be obtained at auction for 14 years, new
areas being. obtainable by private contract at the
Minister’s discretion. But pastoral lessees must not
cultivate the land for sale or barter. The
adjacent islands may be leased for terms not ex-
ceeding 14 years by tender or at auction. All lands
alienated are open to resumption by the Government
for mining purposes at any time within five years, com-
pensation being made for all improvements"; and all
pastoral licenses are terminable on six months’ notice-
that they are required for sale or public purposes, with
compensation for permanent improvements. By the
Immigration Act of 1867, immigrants paying their
own way to the colony are entitled to land orders to the-
value of £lB for each person over 15 years of age, and
half that amount for each person under 15 ; but grants
are only issued after five years’ residence. The total
area of land alienated, or in process of alienation at the
end of 1886, was 4,513,454 acres.
Agricultural returns for the year ending March,
1887, afford the following figures:—Wheat, 35,322
acres, yielding 632,573 bushels; oats, 21,607 acres,
560,622 bushels; other cereals, 9385 acres; potatoes,
16,084 acres, 75,773 tons; hay, 47,269 acres, 50,158
tons ; green fodder, 5351 acres ; other tillage, 115,040
acres ; total area under crops (exclusive of grass land),
250,058 acres.
Pastoral returns for the same year, covering licenses
with an aggregate area of about two millions of acres,
furnish the following figures:—Sheep, 1,608,946 ;
cattle, 148,665 ; horses, 29,684 ; pigs, 73,118 ; total,
1,860,413.
Minerals. —For convenience of administration in the
Department of Mines, the colony is divided into six
mining districts; and the regulations which have been
framed for encouraging the discovery and development
of the great mineral resources which undoubtedly exist
are exceedingly liberal. The total produce of gold to
end of 1886 was 450,6700 z., valued at £1,926,179.
POPULATION AND VITAL STATISTICS.
The following figures show the stages of growth in
population : 1500 in 1811; 7400 in 1821 ; 101,785 in
1871 ; 115,705 in 1881 ; 137,211 (males 73,323,
females 63,888) in 1886, and 140,711 at end of 1887 ;
and 140,711 at end of 1887. The births in 1886
numbered 4627, or 34-14 per 1000 of the mean
population; the deaths 1976, or 14-58 per 1000;
marriages 985, or 7-27 per 1000. The mean death
rate for the last 11 years was 15-98 per 1000.


GOVERNMENT * PARLIAMENTARY, MUNICIPAL,
The Tasmanian Administration rests with a Governor
appointed by the Crown ; an Executive Council, con-
sisting of the Governor and Cabinet Ministers; a
Legislative Council of 18 members, elected for a term
of six years by 15 electorates; a House of Assembly of
36 members, chosen for a term of five years by 36 elec-
torates. Members of the Council must be British sub-
jects, of not less than 30 years of age; and voters must
be 21 years of age, and possess freehold of the annual
value of £2O, leasehold of the annual value of £BO,
or belong to a professional class. Members of the
House of Assembly are chosen on a franchise which is
virtually manhood suffrage. The present Parliament
is the ninth, and was opened August 24, 1886.
The present Ministry came into office March 29,
1887, and following is the distribution of portfolios :
Premier, Chief Secretary, and Registrar of Records, Hon.
P. O. Fish.
Minister for Lands and Works, Hon. E. N. C. Braddon.
Attorney-General, Hon. A. J. Clark.
Colonial Treasurer, Hon. B. S. Bird.
Hon. W. A. B. Gellibrand is President of Legisla-
tive Council and the Hon. W. Doddery is Chairman of
Committees. The Speaker of the House of Assembly
is Hon. T. Reiby, and the Chairman of Committees,
Mr. H. E. Lette.
The public revenue of the colony for 1886 was
£568,924, or £4 4s. per head of the population; ex-
penditure, £584,756, or £4 6s. 4d. per head. The pub-
lic debt at the end of the year stood at £4,026,720 —
equal to £29 6s. lid. per head of the population, and
7*oB times the revenue.
Municipal. —Hobart municipality has an area of
1270 acres; population (January 1, 1887), 25,043;
number of houses rated, 5157 ; ratepayers, 5157;
assessed value of property, 1887, £162,859; extent of
roads and streets, 37 miles; total revenue, £63,592.
The water supply is drawn from Mount Wellington;
length of mains, 13 miles 20 chains; storage,
40,000,000 gallons; cost, £90,000. Launceston.—
Area, 3340 acres; population, 15,000; buildings
rated, 3453; annual value of property, £111,747;
total revenue, £50,084. Its water supply is drawn
from St. Patrick’s River and Distillery Creek; length
of mains, 49,| miles; storage capacity, 1,050,000
gallons ; cost, £65,000.
For purposes of local self-government the colony is
divided into 19 rural municipalities (exclusive of
Hobart and Launceston), each with its warden and
police. The area of the 21 municipalities is
6,102,455 acres. The rates (exclusive of water
rates) range from 7d. to Is. in the £ in the country,
to 2s. in Hobart and 2s. 2d. in Launceston.
INTERCOMMUNICATION.
The railway system of Tasmania includes the main
line from Hobart to Launceston (133 miles), and its
branches; the Launceston and Western Railway from
Launceston to Formby, on the Mersey River, a distance
of 82J miles, and a number of short lines. The total
length of lines open for traffic at the end of 1886 was
303 miles, and under construction 138 miles. The
gauge is 3ft. 6in., and the average cost per mile for
construction £BOBl.
The postal and telegraphic arrangements include 251
post-offices and 144 telegraph stations; and during
1886 the number of letters received and despatched
was 4., 109,230; newspapers and packets, 3,806,738;
telegrams, 214,738. The rates are the same as in
most of the other colonies.
The roads give a mileage of 4576, of which 416 i
miles are controlled by 86 road trusts, at an annual
cost of about £31,000. The main rords (about 400
miles) cost about £lB,OOO. Several lines of stage
coaches connect Hobart with important country town-
ships, and omnibuses and cabs complete the provisions
for traffic.
RELIGION, EDUCATION, JUSTICE, CHARITY.
Religious. —Rev. R. Knopwood arrived in Tasmania
as chaplain, with Colonel Collins, in 1804, and on
August 27, 1842, Dr. R. F. Nixon was appointed first
bishop. Rev. B. Carvosso conducted the first Methodist
services in the colony when passing as a visitor in
1819, and regular services followed in 1820. Presby-
terian services were commenced by Rev. A. M'Arthur
in 1823, and Congregational services were established
at Hobart by Rev. F. Miller in 1830, and by Rev. C.
Price at Launceston, 1832. No account of the re-
ligious denominations was taken in the last census;
but the approximate figures for 1886 are : Church of
England, 72,284; Roman Catholic, 30,516; Presby-
terians, 12,513 ; Methodists, 9920 ; Congregationalists,
4998; Baptists, 1290; all persuasions, 126,220.
Educational.— Up to the end of 1884 primary educa-
tion was under the management of a special council. But
from that date it has been directly under the control of
the Government in the Chief Secretary’s Department;
and a local board of nine persons is elected yearly to
exercise supervision in each district. The returns for
1886 give the following figures Schools, 209;
teachers, 157 male, 233 female—total, 390: gross en-
rolment,.B742 males, 7272 females—total, 16,014; aver-
age attendance, 7866, or 49T2 per cent* of enrolment:
average number of pupils per school, 51; cost to the
State, £27,306 ; children’s fees, £8458 ; cost (for in-
struction only) per head of average attendance, £4 10s,
lid. From these schools there are 12 exhibitions,
tenable for four years, and ranging upwards from £l6
13s. 4d. per year, to carry pupils to one of the four
High schools. The High schools are still under a
council, which has power to conduct local examinations
similar to the Oxford and Cambridge annual ex-
aminations, to confer the degree of Associate of Arts,
and to award two scholarships of £2OO per annum
each, tenable four years, at a British university,
and two minor scholarships of £4O per annum,
tenable two years, within the colony. In 1882
a bill was introduced to the Legislature for the estab-
lishment of a university, but it was rejected by a large
majority. Local examinations are, however, held for
matriculation at the Universities of Sydney and Mel-
bourne, and for matriculation and degrees at London
University.
Charitable institutions are still on a small scale,
though fairly adequate to the healthful condition of the
people. Five general hospitals treat annually about
5000 patients, of whom about one-tenth are in-patients.
There are also two pauper institutions, and a home for
the friendless ; and two hospitals for the insane pro-
vide 142 wards, with 400 beds, or slightly more than
the colony’s present requirements.
COMMERCE AND MANUFACTORIES.
Customs duties are imposed solely for revenue pur-
poses. Ad valorem charges were abolished in 1883


and the specific list was slightly reduced at the same
time, though it is still somewhat extensive. The
revenue from this source in 1886 amounted to
£276,265, or 48*56 per cent, of total revenue for the
year.
The imports were valued at £1,756,567, or £l2 19s.
3d. per head of population; exports, £1,331,540, or £9
16s. 6d. per head. Total trade, £3,088,107. The
year’s shipping included 690 vessels inwards, with
343,656 tonnage; and 715 vessels outwards, with
348,773 tonnage. Total shipping, 1405 vessels, of
692,429 tonnage.
The manufactories of the colony number about
3500—jam factories, breweries, and tanneries being
the principal. Tasmania grows splendid hops, and, in
addition to beer for home consumption, makes a fair
export from its breweries to Sydney and Melbourne.
The annual export of jam had risen to more than
4,000,0001 b. in 1883.
NEW ZEALAND.
New Zealand, comprising North, South, and
Stewart s islands, with the numerous islets adjacent,
was discovered and occupied by the Maoris, an intelli-
gent race supposed to be of Malay origin, at an unknown
date. Tasman, the Dutch navigator, discovered the
territory in 1642, and named it after one of the divi-
sions of his native land. In 1767 Captain Cook landed
on the east coast of the North Island, and named the
place Poverty Bay. Later on he landed at various
places and took possession of the territory for King
George 11. As early as 1809 the Church Society estab-
lished its agents amongst the Maoris ; representatives
of the Wesleyan Missionary Society followed in 1822,
and Roman Catholic missionaries in 1838. To the
New Zealand Land Company, formed in 1837, with
Lord Durham as president, belongs a large share of the
honour of practically opening up the country to
successful colonisation. The first fleet of five
vessels arrived at Port Nicholson with immigrants
from the mother country on January 22, 1840;
and thus was founded Wellington, the present seat of
government. About the same time Captain Hobson
arrived at Auckland, as Lieutenant-Governor, and pro-
claimed the British sovereignty, there on January 29 ;
and on the 6th of the following month the treaty of
Waitangi, ceding the sovereignty was formally ratified
by the native representatives. Auckland continued to
be the capital till, by Act of the Legislature in
1865, it was decided to remove the machinery of
government to Wellington, the more central city. It
is estimated that of the surface soil of the colony
twelve million acres are suited to agriculture, and fifty
million acres to pastoral purposes. The climate is
admitted to be equal to the most healthful in the
world. The death-rate is considerably below that of
any of the neighbouring colonies.
f THE LAND : AGRICULTURAL, PASTORAL, MINERAL.
During the time of Provincial Government, each
province had its own land regulations, and these have
been continued, with only slight modifications, by the
Land Act of 1877, and subsequent amending Acts,
and consolidated by the Act of 1885. All Crown
lands are divided into three classes:—l. Town
and village lands, which are obtainable at auction
(usually in quarter-acre blocks) at an upset price of
£7 10s. 2. Suburban lands, which are also obtainable
at auction, in sections of from two to 20 acres, at
an upset price of £3 per acre ; the terms in "both cases
being 25 per cent cash, and the balance within a month.
Village selections, under an acre, at a minimum price
of £5, or small farm allotments up to 50 acres, at a
minimum price of £1 per acre, may also be obtained ;
but each villager can only hold one “ selection ” or
allotment. 3. Rural lands, whether agricultural or
forest, which vary in price in different provinces, from
the mere cost of survey up to £2 per acre.
Pastoral runs with a maximum carrying capacity for
20,000 sheep or 5000 cattle are leased by auction, the
lease being terminable at any time, without compen-
sation, by 12 months’ notice from the Crown that the
land is required for public purposes. One of the most
important features of the Act of 1885 is a perpetual
lease system for pastoral areas up to 5000 acres and
agricultural areas up to 640 acres, at rentals of 2-£ and
5 per cent, on the values, to be assessed every 21 years,
with provision for compensation from incoming to
outgoing tenants for substantial improvements.
The total land and territorial receipts for the year end-
ing March 31, 1885, amounted to £324,022. The total
area alienated to the same date was 18,264,285 acres,
for which the money realised was £12,718,169. The
area alienated or in process of alienation at the close of
1886 is returned at 19,130,885 acres.
Agricultural.— The variety of soils and climate and
the infrequency of drought enable the New Zealand
agriculturists to produce nearly all kinds of cereals to the
greatest perfection. Following are the returns for the
year ending March 31, 1887 :—Agricultural holdings,
,31,763; area under wheat, 253,025 acres, yielding
6,297,638 bushels ; maize, 4720 acres ; oats, 387,228
acres, 11,973,295 bushels; barley, 21,535 acres,
558,606 bushels ; hay, 57,938 acres, 79,013 tons ;
potatoes, 27,683 acres, 134,965 tons; total area under
crop (land under grass not included), 1,372,219 acres.
Pastoral holdings in 1885 numbered 1246, com-
prising an area of 11,092,714, at an aggregate rental of
£166,218. The stock returns for the year ending
March, 1886 were: —Sheep, 16,677,445 ; cattle,
895,461 ; horses, 187,382; pigs, 369,992. Total,
18,130,280. These figures include 112,850 sheep!
42,103 head of cattle, and 92,091 pigs belonging to the
Maoris. The pastoral and agricultural societies num-
ber 31.
Mineral.— New Zealand is remarkably rich in
minerals. Gold was first discovered by Mr. Gabriel
Reid in 1861, at Tuapeka, in the province of Otago ;
and in 1865 rich deposits were found at Hokitika.
Since then rich fields have been opened up in many
other places throughout five of the provincial districts.
Copper, silver, coal, petroleum, and some of the finest
kinds of building stone have been proved to exist in
great quantities. The gold yield for 1885 amounted
to nearly a million sterling ; the number of miners was
12,034, including 8591 Europeans and 3443 Chinese;
and the value of plant, water-races, &c., was estimated
at £767,148. The total exports of gold from
New Zealand to December 31, 1885, amounted to
10,552,2770 z., valued at £41,379,292.
POPULATION AND VITAL STATISTICS.
The census of 1871 showed that the population had
grown rapidly during t e first 30 years of colonisation.


The figures were —males, 150,356 ; females, 106,037;
total, 256,393. By 1881 the numbers had increased to
489,933—ma1e5, 269,605; females, 220,328. The
estimated population on December 31, 1886, was
589,386—ma1e5, 317,646; females, 271,740. (The
Maoris are not included in any of the above figures.
At the latest date their numbers were estimated
22,868 males, and 18,960 females; total, 41,828.)
The various nationalities were thus represented in the
census returns for 1881; —New Zealand, 223,404;
other Australian colonies, 17,277 ; England, 119,224;
Wales, 1963; Scotland, 52,753; Ireland, 49,363;
other British possessions, 4014; Chinese, 5033 ; other
countries, 16,902. Estimated population December 31,
1887—603,787.
The vital statistics of New Zealand are strikingly
favourable. The births in 1886 numbered 19,299, or
33-14 per 1000 of the population; marriages, 3508, or
6-02 per 1000; and the deaths 6153, or only 10-53
per 1000. The mean death rate for the last 11 years
was only 11-33 per 1000 of population, as against
15*98 in Tasmania, and 17"83 in Queensland.
The thrift of the people, as indicated by Government
Savings Bank returns, gives the following items for
1886:—Depositors, 74,871; amount of deposits,
£1,615,979; amount per depositor, £2l lls. Bd.;
amount per head of mean population, £2 15s. 6d.
GOVERNMENT : PARLIAMENTARY AND MUNICIPAL.
The Constitution, granted May, 1856, provides
for a Governor, appointed by the Crown; an
Executive Council, consisting of the Governor and
the responsible Ministers for the time being; and
two Legislative Chambers. The members of the
Legislative Council (of whom two are Maoris)
are appointed for life by the Crown. The number is
not fixed, but it is usually between 40 and 50. The
House of Representatives consists of 95 members,
elected for three years on a franchise which is virtually
manhood suffrage.
Following are the names and terms of office of the
Governors since the institution of responsible govern-
ment: —Colonel Gore Brown, September 6, 1855, to
October 2, 1861 (a period marked by a fresh outbreak
of the Maori war, which seriously checked the progress
of the Northern Island); Sir George Grey, as Adminis-
trator, October 3 to December 4, 1861, and as Governor
from the later date to February 5, 1868 (a desultory
war continuing through the first four years); Sir
George Bowen, February 5, 1868, to March 19, 1873;
Sir James Fergusson, June 14, 1873, to December 3,
1874; Marquis of Normanby, December 3, 1874, to
February, 1879 ; Sir Hercules Robinson, March 27,
1879, to September 8, 1880; Sir Arthur Gordon,
November 29, 1880, to June 24, 1882 ; Sir W. D.
Jervois, G.C.M.G., January 20, 1883, to the present
time.
The first Parliament was opened May 27th, 1854;
the present and tenth Parliament was opened on
October 6th, 1887, when Sir M. O’Rorke was chosen
Speaker for the fifth time. The present Administra-
tion is the twenty-third, and the following is the distri-
bution of portfolios :
Premier, Treasurer, and Commissioner of Post and Customs
Major Atkinson
Minister for Works and for Native Affairs—Mr. Mitchel-
son
Colonial Secretary—Mr. Hislop
Minister for Justice and Defence—Mr. Fergus
Minister for Education —Mr. P’isher
Minister for Lands, Immigration, and Mines—Mr,
Richardson
Attorney-General—Sir F. Whittaker
Without portfolio—Mr. Stevens.
The present Speaker of the Legislative Council is
Sir W. Fitzherbert, K.C.M.G.; Hon. W. D. H. Baillie
is Chairman of Committees ; and Sir Francis Dillon
Bell is Agent-General in London.
The public revenue for 1886 amounted to £3,688,016,
or £6 6s. 6d. per head of population; expenditure (ex-
clusive of loan funds), £4,310,875, or £7 Bs. per head.
The public debt(including deficits of Provincial Govern-
ments) stands at £37,587,776. An accrued sinking
fund, amounting to £3,469,264 at the close ot 1886, re-
duces the debt to £34,118,512. But this amount
means £57 17s. 9d. per head of population, or more
than nine times the total revenue. The number of
persons who paid income tax for the year 1884-5 was
25,460 ; and* the amount actually realised (including
certain arrears) was £269,000. The value of real
property was returned at £101,000,000; and of personal
property at £64.000,000. The taxpayers were thus
classed —2045 persons paid on sums under £lOO, 2674
on sums of £lOO and under £2OO ; 2189 on £2OO and
under £300; 112 on £50,000 and under £lOO,OOO ;
44 on £lOO,OOO and under £200,000 ; and 33 on
sums over £200,000. The dwellings in 1881 num-
bered 92,833 in occupation, 6737 unoccupied, and 848
in course of erection.
Municipal. —Since 1875 the powers of local govern-
ment formerly exercised by Provincial Councils
have been vested in County Councils, who,
amongst other duties, keep up the main roads of the
colony ; whilst provision is made by means of 70 muni-
cipal boroughs and 318 road districts, with local boards,
for the maintenance of byroads and other local works.
Following were the property assessments in 1882:
Boroughs, capital value £27,016,503, annual value
£1,970,147 ; road districts, capital value £75,166,079,
annual value £3,523,955. Total assessments: Capital
value, £102,182,572 ; annual value, £5,494,102.
New Zealand has also two important institutions,
covering works that have as yet been scarcely
touched in New South Wales—River protective
boards of which there are 20 ; and harbour boards,
to the number of 19. The excellent work done
by the harbour boards is amply witnessed by the fact
that most of it pays handsome returns. The Auckland
board has an income of £35,000, whilst the Otago
and Wellington boards realise £42,000 each per
year.
INTERCOMMUNICATION.
Railways. —New Zealand holds a good place amongst
the colonies in the important matter of railway enter-
prise, as the following returns, for 1886, will show:—
Government lines open, 1729 miles ; private, 88 miles :
total, 1809 miles. Lines in course of construction, 171
miles. Capital cost, £13,017,567, or an average of
£7564 per mile: gross receipts, £998,768; working
expenses, £699,072; net receipts, £299,696; percen-
tage of net receipts to capital cost, 2*36. The gauge
throughout is 3ft. 6in.
The postal arrangements are very similar to those of
New South Wales, except that a half-penny tax
is imposed on newspapers carried within the colony,,


and a penny for intercolonial delivery. Following
are the returns for 1886: —Number of post-offices,
1089 ; letters and post-cards received and despatched,
39,518,479, or 67*89 per head of the population;
newspapers, 14,324,047, er 24*61 per head; revenue,
£206,029 ; expenditure, £168,069. The figures for the
Electric Telegraph department for the same year were
as follows Stations, 330; lines in operation (includ-
ing 359 miles of cable), 4546 miles; lines in course of
construction, 79 miles; length of wires, 11,178 miles ;
telegrams received and despatched, 1,836,266 (of which
252,549 were official and free) ; amount of receipts,
£106,638. These two departments were united on
January Ist. 1881.
RELIGION, EDUCATION, JUSTICE, CHARITY.
The only official connection between Church and
State in New Zealand is under the marriage law, which
requires each minister who desires to celebrate mar-
riages to be registered by the Government. The re.
turns furnished by the ministers of the various reli-
gious bodies for the year 1884 include the following
figures:—Church of England, 235 ministers and
200,816 adherents ; Eoman Catholic Church,
86 ministers and 68,349 adherents; Presbyterians, 138
ministers and 113,038 adherents; Wesleyan Metho-
dists, 95 ministers and 39,544 adherents; other
Methodists, 28 ministers and 6652 adherents; Inde-
pendents, 19 ministers and 6699 adherents; Baptists,
16 ministers and 11,476 adherents; Sunday-school
children of all denominations, 78,891.
Education.— Primary education is now conducted by
a Government Department, under the Education Act of
1877, which came into force on January Ist, 1878 ;
and the Native Schools, Industrial and Reformatory
Schools, and the Institution at Sumner for the Deaf and
Dumb have been brought under the same control. The
colony is divided into 12 districts, which are further
subdivided into small school districts, each under a
local education board. The regular instruction is
secular, compulsory, and free ; but religious instruction
may be given after school hours, under certain condi-
tions. The system is maintained by a State
vote of £3 15s. per annum for each child
in average attendance, a supplementary sum of
ss. per child for certain purposes, and a further sum
of Is. 6d. per child for scholarships. Following are
the returns for 1886 : —State schools, 1054 ; teachers,
1206 males and 1515 females : total, 2721. Gross
enrolment of scholars: Males, 75,825 ; females,
68,730 : total, 144,555. Average attendance, 80,737,
or 55*85 per cent of the enrolment; estimated number
of district children on the rolls, 105,300 ; cost of in-
struction—State, £316,408 (including £29,605 from
educational reserves) ; fees for extra subjects, £333 :
total, £346,741 ; or £4 ss. lid. for each child in
average attendance. Expenditure on buildings, &c.,
brings up the total cost to the State for the year to
£419,641, or £5 2s. 4|d. for each child in average at-
tendance. Higher education is also liberally provided for
by some 24 High schools and by a University with four
affiliated colleges. The University is only an examin-
ing body, so that terms are usually kept by the students
at one or other of the colleges, which maintain lecture-
ships and professorships for the purpose. The Senate
is composed of 24 members, and the present chancellor
is James Hector, M.D., F.R.S., C.M.G.
The administration of justice is provided for in the
Supreme Court, presided over by Chief Justice J.
Prendergast, and four Puisne Judges; District Court,
with four Judges; and Magisterial Court, adjudicated
in by a large staff of stipendiary magistrates. An
Appeal Court, at which all the Supreme Court Judges
sit, is held annually at Wellington. The police force
included, in 1885, a field force of 387 armed constables,
474 policemen of various grades, 10 district constables,
and 24 native constables.
The charitable institutions are now administered
under the Hospital and Charitable Institutions Act of
1885-6. Following are the latest available returns:
Public hospitals, 37, with 180 wards, and 1237 beds, —
patients admitted during the year, 5625 ; benevolent
asylums, 7, with 142 wards and 337 beds; orphan
asylums, 7, with 27 wards, 311 beds, and 234 inmates;
lunatic asylums, 8, with 407 wards, 1515 beds, and 1215
patients; industrial schools, 7, with 675 resident chil-
dren ; institute for the deaf and dumb, with 32
inmates; and a large number of societies of a benevo-
lent character.
COMMERCE AND MANUFACTORIES.
New Zealand collected 36.68 per cent, of its revenue
for 1886 through the Customs. Ad valorem duties of
15 and 25 per cent, are charged on a large number of
articles, and there is also an extended list of specific
duties. The total imports for 1886 were valued at
£6,769,013, or £ll 12s. sd. per head of mean popula-
tion ; exports, £6.672,791, or £ll 9s. 3d. per head;
total trade, £13,431,804, or £23 Is. 6d. per head. The
shipping comprised 725 vessels inward, with 502,572
tonnage; and 707 vessels outward, with 488,331 ton-
nage; total, 1432 vessels, with 990,903 tonnage. The
colony’s manufactories of various kinds number 2268,
and give employment to 25,665 hands.


Colony.
Area
Square
Miles.
Estimated
Popula-
tion
December
31, ’86.
Pastoral and Agricultural.
Sheep. |
Cattle.
Horses.
Pigs.
Acres
under
Crop
(grass ex-
cluded).
New South Wales ...
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia
Western Australia...
Tasmania
New Zealand
Totals
310,700
87,884
668,224
903,425
975,920
26,375
104,235
1,001,966
1,003,043
342,614
312,758
39,584
137,211
589,386*
39,169,304
10,700,403
9,690,445
6,696,406
1,809,071
1,608,946
16,677,445
1,367,844
1,303,265
4,071,563
389,726
88,254
148,665
895,461
361,663
308,553
278,694
168,420
38,360
29,684
187,382
209,576
240,957
61,861
163,807
24,655
73,118
369,992
977,664
2,141,291
221,843
2,762,273
84,403
152,388
1,372,219
3,076,763
3,426,562
86,352,020
8,264,778
1,372,756
1,143,966
7,712,081
Colony.
Trade and Commerce.
Einancial.
Deposits in
Govern-
ment Sav-
ings
Banks.
Imports.
Exports.
Total
Trade
per head
of
Popul’tn.
Shipping.
Revenue.
Expendi-
ture
(exclusive
of loans).
Public
Debt.
New South Wales ..
Victoria
Queensland ..
South Australia
Western Australia..
Tasmania
New Zealand
Totals ..
£
20,973,548
18,530,575
6,103,227
4,852,750
758,013
1,756,567
6,759,013
£
15,556,213
11,795,321
4,933,970
4,489,008
630,393
1,331,540
6,672.791
£ s. d.
37 5 7
30 14 5
32 19 4
29 16 9
37 2 9
22 16 9
23 1 4
Tons.
4,258,604
3,735,387
1,120,479
1,558,476
497,508
692,429
990,903
£
7,594,301
6,481,021
2,810,147
1,975,269
388,564
568,924
3,688,016
£
9,078,869
6,513,540+
2,202,030
2,383,290
394,675
584,756
4,310,875
£
41,034,249
30,114,203
20,820,85C
18,340,20(
1,286,00(
4,026,72<
37,587,77(
£
3,504,804
3,431,014
1,337,965
1,581,100
29,124
40,019
1,615,97
59,733,693
45,409,236
31 3 11
12,853,786
23,506,242
26,468,035
153.209,99
11,540.005
Colony.
Postal and Telegraphic.
Railways.
Manufactories.
Area of
Land
Alienated,
Dec. 31, ’86.
Estimated
Population
Dec. 31,’87.
Letters re-
ceived and
despatch’d.
News-
papers and
packets re-
ceived and
despatch’d.
Telegrams
received
and
despatch’d.
Opened.
Under
Con-
strue tn.
Works.
Hands
em-
ployed.
New South Wales ..
Victoria
Queensland ..
South Australia
Western Australia ..
Tasmania
New Zealand
Totals
42,849,900
32,500,000
10,503,345
13,129,921
1,847,694
4,109,230
39,518,479
34,381,200
18,250,000
9,391,614
6,672,013
1,300,708
3,806,738
17,791,706
2,661,126
1,938,049
1,201,495
713,379$
315,197
214,738
1,836,266
Miles.
1,935
1,753
1,555
1,382
154
303
1,809
Miles.
267
316
637
417
46
138
171
3,694
2,770
1,125
731
169
2,268
45,783
45,773
9,946
25,655
Acres.
41,285,464
22,489,383
8,455,033
9,527,761
1,851,742
4,513,454
19,130,885
1,044,000
1,035,943
359,059
315,000
44,532
140,711
603,787
144,458,569
91,593,979
8,880,250
8,891
1,992
...
107,253,722
| 3,543,032
THE LATEST OFFICIAL AUSTRALASIAN STATISTICS.
* Exclusive of 41,828,Maoris.
+ Year ending June 30, 1886.
t For 1885.


THE
AUSTRALIAN CENTENNIAL CELEBRATIONS.
Reports from The Sydney Morning Herald
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 25.
UNVEILING OF THE QUEEN’S STATUE.
Chancery-square, as the open space at the top of King-
street has now been denominated, yesterday presented a
scene the like of which has been rarely witnessed in the
Australian colonies. It was there that the first of the.
ceremonies in connection with the celebration of the
Centenary of Australia took place, and the demonstration
which was witnessed by fully 50,000 persons, was in every
way worthy of the occasion. There was nothing about it
suggestive of the lingering remnants of old world
pageants, but it illustrated the fact that at the close of
the first hundred years of Australian settlement there can be
produced a spectacle as striking to the eye and suggestive
to the mind, as any of the old time “ shows ” which are
clothed with the dignity of ancient custom and the tra-
ditions of centuries. It was fitting that Australians should
at such a period of their history begin their rejoicings with
the unveiling of the statue of the Queen, upon the pedestal
which has waited for it something like seven years.
The city itself was dressed in festive attire, it was not
a general holiday, it is true, but that gave effectiveness to
the pageant rather than militated against its success.
Closed shops and deserted thoroughfares have a dismal and
depressing influence, but open doors and well-stocked
windows look cheerful, and inviting. Flags of almost
every pattern, and ensigns of every hue, decorated
the principal streets. The city, in fact, was gay with
colour. The parks and pleasure grounds were in their
glory, and their wealth of fresh foliage and flowers was a
lovely sight. The streets from an early hour in the morn-
ing were crowded. Visitors from the country came, throng
upon throng, in trim holiday garb—the healthiest, happiest,
heartiest looking folk that the eye could wish to rest upon.
Hundreds had arrived by the early trains, and hundreds
had been in the city for days, as the crowded hotels and
cafes can testify. The cheap excursion trains provided by
the Ilailway Department have been well patronised,
and the carrying capacity of the intercolonial
steamers has been strained to its utmost limits.
The representative men of the sister colonies had
not all arrived in time to take part in the ceremonies of the
day, but sufficient were here to do honour to the occasion—
glad to assist in forging another link in the chain which
binds together England and Australia.
A mandate had been issued prohibiting all vehicular
traffic in the streets adjacent to the statue from an early
hour in the morning, and the people could therefore
assemble without danger to life or limb By 10 o’clock,
two full hours before the ceremony commenced, the people-
began to congregate at various parts of the square. Barriers
were erected to prevent their encroachment upon forbidden
ground, and the police adopted effectual measures to guard
against tresspassers. The windows of the buildings in the
vicinity of the square and, in some instances,
tiie very housetops were crowded with spec-
tators thus early in the day, who amused
themselves watching the arrival of the school children and
the military. The children, tastefully attired, flowed in a
steady stream for more than an hour towards the stand re-
served for their accommodation. A thousand of their
number had been selected for the pleasing duty of singing
the National Anthem, a popular part of the programme.
These were allotted a special place in front, carefully re-
served, near the base of the statue. About 11 o’clock the
Permanent Artillery, the men of the First and Second
Regiments, the Sydney Scottish Rifles and Engineers took
up their place in rank in frontof the statue—the red uniforms
on the one side and the dark on the other. The crowd had
now swelled to many thousands, and in serried masses
the people thronged each thoroughfare converging on the
square. The grand stand was filling up rapidly, ladies and
gentlemen filing into their places with uninterupted
regularity. The police had up to this point succeeded in
preserving a large clear space in front of the dais, while
all around was a surging mass. Suddenly the
line in front broke by the force of pressure from
the rear, and with a rush the crowd closed
in. The police endeavoured to stem the approaching tide
of human forms, but their efforts were unavailing. There
was no confusion. A line was formed immediately in
front of the dais, and harmony was restored. The multi-
tude was still augmenting and waiting with the utmost
patience and good humour the arrival of the vice-regal
party. A somewhat ludicrous incident about this time
served to divert the attention of the spectators. Near the
Mint there stands a tree whose massive trunk and spreading
branches were a desirable coign of vantage from whence to
witness the cremony, so apparently thought a venturesome
Hibernian, who straightway secured a position upon one of
its limbs. He was quickly espied by a constable, but he
was impervious alike to threats and entreaty. The police-
man’s reasoning might be sound, but it evoked no response
from the nimble-footed one high in air. The emissary of
the law was reinforced by three of his brethren, and amid
jeers and hooting each began to ascend the tree. At length
the Irishman was dislodged, and after an unsuccessful
attempt to escape was secured, and probably marched off to
durance vile. Another of the crowd endeavoured to sec&re
a place upon the tree, and he too was taken in charge by the-
police.


A few minutes before 12 o’clock Lady Carrington arrived
to perform the ceremony of unveiling. The party from
Government House, who were loudly cheered as they took
their seats on the dais, included his Excellency the Governor,
the Earl and Countess of Carnarvon, the Duke of Man-
chester, Sir Henry Loch. Governor of Victoria; Sir William
Robinson, Governor of South Australia : Sir Anthony
Musgrave, Governor of Queensland; Sir Frederick Broome,
Governor of Western Australia ; Sir R. G. Hamilton,
Governor of Tasmania ; and Sir Charles Mitchell, late
Governor of Fiji. It was expected that Sir William
Jervois, Governor of New Zealand, would have been here
in time to witness the ceremony, but H.M.S. Nelson
had not reached Port Jackson, and thus neither he nor
Admiral Fairfax was present. The fact was much to be
regretted for another reason. Had the officers and men of
the squadron been here they would doubtless have taken
part in the demonstration. The Premier and members of the
Ministry, the members of the Centennial Celebration Com-
mission, his Honor the Chief Justice, Sir John Robertson,
Sir Patrick Jennings, and many distinguished colonists
and visitors from Victoria, South Australia, and Queens-
land were on the dais.
The scene was now striking and picturesque to a degree.
The sky was overcast and threatening, but all around was
brilliant and animated. The spongy clouds, however, were
no unpleasant exchange for the sunny cataracts which
would have dazzled the eye, had the weather been of the
type to which we are accustomed in January. On
the grand stand everything was bright and beauti-
ful. One arm of ’ the structure ran parallel
with the eastern end of St. James’s Church, and the
other with the northern boundary of Hyde Park,
leaving space for another stand being built for the
accommodation of the school children who sang the
National Anthem. Tier upon tier rose the seats to a
height of something like five and twenty feet; its arms
extending to a width of 50ft., and its length being about
300 ft. With a semi-circular curve the structure
encompassed the dais. It was filled, but not to
overcrowding. The light colours and soft textures of
its fair occupants contrasted agreeably with the
dark lines of the surging mass who crowded and
surrounded the square. • From its uprights at
the rear floated the flags of every" nationality
and dependency under the British Empire—conspi-
cuous amongst them being the flag of Australia. A vast
wreath of evergreens surmounted the stand, and the
motto in large blue characters “ God Save the Queen.” On
every hand bunting and evergreens were in profusion.
The dais, which measured about 40ft. by 20ft., was richly
draped and carpeted. The flights of steps were covered
with cabinet cloth. The platform was overlaid with
Brussels carpet. The approach to the dais was through
an archway and covered passage, magnificently adorned
with flags and banners. On the front of the dais was an
emblem of historic interest—a beautiful carving in wood of
the badge of the colony, it had first been used on the
occasion of the unveiling of the statue of Captain Cook in
Hyde Park. The central portion was a silver shield on
which there was the St. George’s cross in red, bearing a lion
passant and four eight-pointed stars in gold. The shield
and its heraldic ornaments were encircled by a
wreath of waratah foliage and flowers, tied with
a light blue ribbon. The ceremony of unveiling was
performed on an elevated dais, from which rose the bronze
figure of her Majesty, a fine work of art, repre-
senting the Queen as she has appeared in later years.
The crowd, numbering, as already stated, upwards of
50,000 persons—a vast sea of faces—filling the squares,
covering housetops, extending to Hyde Park on one side,
and far down Macquarie and King streets on the other,
was as orderly and well-behaved as ever assembled to
take part in any demonstration. Its constituent elements
it would be a hopeless task to attempt to define. It repre-
sented every section, every class in the community, and
reflected credit upon ail.
The appearance of the vice-regal party on the dais was
the signal for prolonged and hearty cheers. Lady Carring-
ton ascended the elevated dais on the arm of the Hon. John
Lackey, chairman of the Centennial Celebration Commission,,
and the Countess of Carnarvon, who accompanied her, wa»
escorted by Sir John Hay. There a pleasing little ceremony
took place—a happy prelude to the great event of the-
day—in which the principal actors were four little ladies
Miss Cecilia and Miss Eleanor, daughters of Mr. Cecil B.
Stephen, and Miss Ituby and Miss Gwladys Griffiths, who
presented Lady Carrington and Lady Carnarvon with
charming floral bouquets. Then came the speeches of his
Excellency the Governor and Sir Henry Parkes, the formal
unveiling, the firing of a salute of 21 guns, the singing of
the National Anthem, and then enthusiastic cheering for
the Queen, the Governor, Lady Carrington, and “Our
Guests.” Just as the ceremony closed a few drops of rain
fell, but the weather was delightfully cool, and nothing
occurred to disturb the harmony of the proceedings which,
under the direction of Mr. R. Burdett Smith, M.L.A., Mr.
J. H. Want, M.L.A., and Mr. Slattery, M.L.A., passed
off most successfully.
THE SI’ATUE AND PEDESTAL.
The statue, unveiled by Lady Carrington yesterday,
is a splendid specimen of the sculptor’s art, and
fittingly replaces the one which was destroyed by the
disastrous Garden Palace fire on the 22nd September, 1882.
All those whose residence in the colony extends back to the
time when the Garden Palace was in existence, will recollect
that one of the most prominent decorations of that magnifi-
cent structure was Mr. Marshall Wood’s im-
posing bronze statue of her Majesty, which
stood directly under the dome of the building. Ihe
statue was justly regarded at the time as one of the best
specimens of artistic work which had then reached the
colony ; but its position in the Garden Palace, owing to the
bad light, and for other reasons, was not looked upon as
satisfactory. It was therefore decided to remove the statue
to a more appropriate site, and the space between fet.
James’ Church and the Hyde Park Barracks, the
scene of yesterday’s ceremony, was naturally se-
lected as being’ most suitable, more especially
as the statue of the late Prince Consort occu-
pied a position closely adjoining. Advantage was
taken of the presence in the colony of their Royal High-
nesses Princes Edward and George of Wales to lay the
foundation-stone of the pedestal, the ceremony taking
place on the 2nd August, 1881. Judging from accounts
published at the time, the event was then regarded
as a most important one, and the ceremony was
of the most imposing character. 'lhe organisation
of all the arrangements was entrusted _to Messrs.
R. Burdett Smith, M.L.A., and John Davies, C.M.G.,
M.L.A., and these gentlemen seem to have carried out their
most onerous task with srreat success. Sir John Robert-
son, who was then Minister for Education, granted a holi-
day to all the Public school children within 20 miles of
Sydney, and the result was one of the most remarkable
demonstrations ever witnessed in New South Wales, lhe-
whole city put on a holiday appearance, flags and bunting
being profusely shown, and at 1 p.m., time when the
ceremony took place, it was estimated that fully 80,000
persons were congregated about St. James’ Church and
Hyde Park. A dais was erected in the enclosure surround-
ing the pedestal, for the accommodation of the Governor s
party, which was occupied by Prince Edward and 1 rince
George of Wales, his Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus
and Lady Loftus, the members of the Ministry, and a
number of members of Parliament and other promi-
nent individuals. Round the enclosure the iNaval
Brigade men, and sailors and marines from the
squadron then in port, formed a hollow. square,
which kept back the immense crowd of sightseers.
The proceedings commenced with a grand procession, which
included a number of sailors and marines, fire brigades,
and temperance and friendly societies. Some 15,000 oi
20,000 children were present, who were entertained after-
wards with cakes, oranges, &c. The ceremony of laying
the stone was performed in the usual manner by Prince
Edward of Wales, copies of the local papers and other
articles being placed under it.


The uncertainty of human affairs was, however, never
more clearly demonstrated than on this occasion, for the
pedestal, the foundation-stone of which was laid with so
much eclat on that memorable day, was never destined to
receive the statue for which it was prepared, and it re-
mained standing unoccupied until quite recently, when the
present statue was placed in situ. All the arrangements
lor the removal of the statue from the Garden Palace to the
pedestal were upset by the great fire, which, destroying the
Garden Palace, destroyed also the statue of her Maiesty,
and left the pedestal to stand for years without its destined
occupant. When the excitement caused by the fire
had subsided, the Government of the dav began
to consider the propriety of replacing the lost
statue, with the result that a vote of £3OOO was placed on
vT j v tlmates * or 1883 for this purpose. After the vote
had been passed, the Government made an attempt to obtain
designs for the new statue from colonial artists, but the
result being by no means satisfactory, recourse was had to
-London. Sir Saul Samuel, the Agent-General, was in-
structed to arrange for the production of the
statue, and a committee was appointed to select
a sculptor. It consisted of the following gentle-
men:—Lord Rosebery, Lord Sherbrooke, Sir Frederick
Leighton, Sir Saul Samuel, and Sir Chas. Nicholson. The
choice of the committee fell on the well-known sculptor,
Mr. Joseph Edgar Boehm, who was forthwith
commissioned to execute the statue, an agree-
ment being entered into with him on the 22nd
October, 1885, by which it was arranged that he
was to complete the statue, and deliver it on board ship,
for the sum of £3OOO. It will thus be seen that between the
signing of the agreement and the completion of the statue
a period of about two years elapsed, which seems
unaccountably long, even for the construction of an
elaborate work of art of this kind. Whilst the negotiations
lor the production of the statue were going on, her Maiesty
was graciously pleased to signify to Mr. Boehm
her willingness to give him every assistance which
cou d aid him in producing a good likoness of herself.
A clause m the agreement provided that the designs for
the statue were to be considered the property of the Agent-
General for the New South Wales Government, and that
lr. Boehm was not to be at liberty to make copies or
replicas of the said statue. This is somewhat curious
reading in the light of a cablegram received in Svdney a
short time ago, which announced that on October's, 1887
a replica of this statue of the Queen had been unveiled bv
the Prince of Wales at Balmoral. y
The pedestal on which the statue stands has so long been
familiar to the public gaze, and has foimed the centre of so
many public gatherings, that it is hardly necessary to enter
into any detailed description of it here. It consists of a
block of polished Moruya granite, 12ft. high, and circular
in shape. Ihe only inscription on it is the word
Victoria cut into the granite on the front of the pedestal
and the monogram “ V. I. It.” at the rear, the letters being
gilded. Around the base of the statue a neat enclosure is
formed by ornamental iron pillars and chains, and the spot
is well lit with several powerful lamps.
The statue is placed on the pedestal so as to face due
east, thus .coking towards the old immigration barracks,
and haying the statue of the Prince Consort on the right
side. It is constructed entirely of bronze, which is cast
hollow, and in order to give the figure the necessary weight
and stability the interior is filled with concrete. The
statue is firmly fixed to the pedestal bv means of granite
plinths passing from the pedestal to the interior of the
statue. Regarded as a work of an, the statue is looked
upon as a great improvement upon that which was de-
stroyed in the Garden Palace. In that work the
Queen was represented as she appeared at the com-
mencement of her reign, whereas the present figure is
a most accurate and life-like presentment of her appearance
1 v - e ? rs ‘ T* l6 tofa l height of (he figure from the
plinth to the crown is lift. 4in., and the height from the
pound to the crown about 23ft. its weight exceeds two
tons. ihe likeness of the Queen is considered by
competent judges to be a most faithful one, and
when the statue was exhibited in London before ship-
ment to a number of distinguished colonists the
greatest satisfaction was expressed with Mr. Boehm’s
work. The Queen is represented as wearing the
Royal robes, which are gracefully draped around her figure,
the long train of the dress being embroidered with the rose,
shamrock, and thistle, emblems of the three portions of the
Lnited Kingdom. On her breast are placed the ribbon
and star of the Garter, and in the right hand she holds the
monarch’s sceptre, which is pointing downwards. The left
hand is occupied with an orb, and an Imperial crown is
placed on the head. The general appearance of the statue,
notwithstanding its great size, is very natural, the
attitude in which the Queen is represented being a graceful
and easy one. In the expression of the face Mr. Boehm
has been particularly happy, having succeeded, with the
inspiration of a true artist, in stamping upon her Majesty’s
countenance a, benign and pleasing look, combining at once
the dignity of a great monarch and the kindliness of a good
woman.
THE MILITARY FORCES.
The arrangements of the military department included
the provision of a guard of honour, a saluting battery of
field artillery, a cavalry escort for the Governor and Com-
mander-in-chief, and a ceremonial parade of all arms, in
which every section of the force was represented. It was
expected that the naval forces of England would be repre-
sented by companies from the men-of-war belonging to the
station, but as the ships had not returned from their cruise
the scene at the statue lacked the interesting feature which
would have been created by the welcome appearance of the
blue-jackets. The guard of honour was furnished by the
Permanent Artillery, and consisted of 100 rank and file and
o sergeants, under Captain Baynes, with Lieutenant
Bridges and Lieutenant Kyngdon; Captain Savage
tne adjutant, being also present. The band was also in
attendance, and played the guard to the ground during the
march from the Barracks. The Permanent Artillery had
already provided two guards of 50 men each under Major
Airey and Captain Baynes respectively to receive the Go-
vernor of Tasmania and the Governor of South Australia on
their arrival early in the morning. These guards were
accompanied by the Hobart Garrison Band and the South
Australian Militia Band. A saluting battery, and four
field guns horsed, were detailed for duty under
Colonel Spalding, C.M.G., with Lieutenant-Colonel Airey,
Major Airey, and Lieutenant Le Mesurier. These
guns were stationed in the Outer Domain, while the guard
of honour took up its position on the north of the ground in
fiont of the statue. The Sydney Lancers furnished the
Governor’s escort, and paraded 30 men under the command
of Major Macdonald, with Captain Dodds, Captain Knox
Lieutenant Vernon, and Captain Milward, R. A., who is acting
as adjutant to the cavalry. The troops forming what may be
termed the representative branch of the parade were
assembled in the Outer Domain, and formed up in column
facing south, at the southern end. These troops were so
selected that branches of the force were represented at the
unveiling of the statue; and to maintain the representative
character c>f the parade, and at the same time avoid inter-
ference with the public view, the detachments were ordered
to parade in small details of a definite proportion to the
enrolled strength of their regiments. 'Thus the parade was
limited to 300 rank and file, with the usual proportion of
officers, exclusive of the guard of honour and saluting
battery. The detachments formed up in the Domain
m the order of the following list, which gives
their proportionate strength of rank and file:
Volunteer Artillery (partially paid), 48; Volunteer Artil-
lery (reserves), 22; Torpedo Corps, 30; Infantry (reserves
of suburban districts), 50; Infantry (Sydney Scottish
Rifles), 20; Engineer Corps, 20 ; 2nd Regiment
Infantry (partially paid), 55; Ist Regiment In-
fantry (partially paid), 55. The bands of the
Ist and 2nd Regiments were also present. The actual
strength on parade was somewhat short of the figure put in
orders, as some of the detachments did not bring out the
specified numbers. The officers on this parade were the


following:—Volunteer Artillery, Captain Chapman (in
command), Lieutenant Lester, Lieutenant Orr ; Reserve
Volunteer Artillery, Captain Phillips (in command), Lieu-
tenant Dunne; Torpedo Corps, Major Walker (in com-
mand), Captain Wilson, Lieutenant Broughton, Lieutenant
Logan; Reserve Infantry (suburban), Captain Mullarky
(in command), and Lieutenant Butler (Ashfield), and Lieu-
tenant Wiseman (Marrickville), Lieutenant Watson (Hun-
ter’s Hill); Scottish Rifles, Captain Campbell (in
command). Lieutenant Pearce; adjutants of reserves,
Captain Bouverie and Captain Baylv; Engineer Corps,
Lieutenant Cansdell ; 2nd Regiment Infantry, Major
Norris, adjutant (in command), Lieutenant Stack, Lieu-
tenant Gilchrist, Lieutenant Mason, Lieutenant Shipway;
Ist Regiment Infantry, Lieutenant-Colonel Farrell (in
command), Captain Morris, Lieutenant Anderson, Lieutenant
Burton. The whole parade was under the command of the
commandant, Major-General Richardson, C.B. The
general was accompanied by Colonel Roberts, C.M.G.,
commander of the Artillery Forces, who, by the
way, commanded the troops at the unveiling of
the statue of Prince Albert, and by Major Mac-
kenzie, the assistant adjutant-general. The other head
quarters’ staff officers present were Lieutenant-Colonel
Baynes, chief paymaster, and Sergeant-Major Williams,
principal medical officer. The formation of the column
was timed for 11 o’clock, and when ready the troops
marched out of the Domain by the southern gate, headed
by the bands, and proceeded to the enclosure, where they
were formed up on the north and south sides of the
in front of the platform. The Volunteer Artillery, Torpedo
Corps, and Suburban Infantry Reserves were placed with
the Permanent Artillery guard of honour on the north,
across Macquarie-street, thus completing the group of
dark uniforms, and in front of the guard of honour General
Richardson, Colonel Roberts, Major Mackenzie, and Cap-
tain Jomerie took up their positions. The bands were
drawn up on the right front of the guard of honour, close
to the platform. The Infantry and Engineers were
formed up on the south near the Hyde Park
entrance, and included all the red cloth of the
parade. All branches turned out in capital style,
with clothing, arms, and accoutrements, in good order ; and
the details of the parade, though small in their extent,
were carried out with rapidity and precision. The troops
were in their places by the appointed time of half-past 11,
and stood at ease until called upon to perform their part of
the ceremony.
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.
It was anticipated that a number of Friendly Societies
would have taken part in the demonstration, but to the sur-
prise of many only one, the Protestant Alliance, made its
appearance on the ground. There are between 7000 and
8000 members in this society, but of these not more than
300 met at the Protestant Hall yesterday morning. It
was explained that if the day had been pro-
claimed a public holiday, there would have been a
much larger attendance; but a number of the members who
perhaps could not afford to lose two days’ pay, preferred
being present at the trade societies’ demonstration on
Thursday, rather than at yesterday’s celebration The
gathering, headed by the Young Workmen’s fife and drum
band playing lively airs, and the banner of the society,
marched down Castlereagh-street into Park-street, and then
into the southern half of Hyde Park, where they remained
in waiting for nearly half an hour, and as none of the other
societies had arrived at the end of that time, they proceeded
through the main avenue to the statue, where they took
position on the left of the dais. The banner-bearers held
aloft the old banner of the society, which has a
ground of blue and a border of yellow silk. On
one side is a representation of the Queen pointing
with her left hand to an open Bible showing the words
“ Righteousness exalteth a nation,” with Windsor Castle
as a background to the picture, while on the top are the
words, “ Long Live Our Noble Queen,” and at the bottom,
41 Long May She Reign.” On the other are portraits of
the founders of the society, with its title, “ Protestant
Alliance Friendly Society of Australia,” overhead, a crown
in the centre, ancl the date of its establishment underneath.
The society has just had a magnificent new banner manu-
factured at a cost of £lOO, which it was intended to display
yesterday, but owing to the route fixed on by the centennial
committee, viz., through the park, it was deemed unsafe to
risk its being injured by the trees or ropes. The officers of
the society present were : —John Wheeler, D.G.M.; George
T. Smith, D.G.M.; G. D. Iredale, G.S.; J. G. Morris,
G.T.; J. H. Read, D.D.M.; G H. Johnston, P.M.; and
Samuel Giles, W.M., marshal.
THE SCHOOL CHILDREN.
Bv no means the least pleasing and effective portion of
the ceremony was the vast assemblage of school children,
whom the efforts of the committee had brought together to
witness an event which, with its impressive surroundings,
will leave an indelible impression on their youthful minds,
to be strengthened as they reach a maturer age into a
feeling of loyalty and devotion to that august Sovereign
whose long reign has don ■ so much for the peace and
prosperity of the British Empire. Ihe original arrange-
ment was that the children should assemble in Hyde Park
North, but this rendezvous was subsequently altered, a
change which at first was productive of considerable con-
fusion. At 10 o’clock Hyde Park presented a most
animated spectacle, detached groups of joyous chil-
dren, all clad in their best attire, occupying the
greater portion of the sward at the northern end of the park.
Gradually and by slow degrees these independent segrega-
tions of children were gathered together and classified into
schools by their respective teachers, who for a little while
had quite a busy time of it, and were marched off to the
Public school in Castlereagh-street. Here the schools were
properly separated and formed into marching order,
all of which was not accomplished without the
expenditure of some little time and patience
on the part of the teachers, but at last con-
fusion and chaos were turned into order and discipline,
and everything was ready for a start. In the meantime the
children belonging to the Catholic denominational schools
had formed up at St. Mary’s, and both detachments of
children marched through the park to the stand provided
for their use, close to the statue. It was a happy idea of
the organisers of this great ceremony to include the children
in it, for nothing could have been more beautiful than the
appearance which the happy children presented as they
marched through the park on their way to take part in
the great ceremony. No greater evidence of the general
prosperity of all classes in Australia could be produced than
the universally well-to-do aspect of the children, for all
were dressed with extreme care, and some with a refine-
ment of taste which denoted the careful attention of loving
hands at home. The girls —of all ages, from the three-vear-
old tot to the full-grown miss—naturally carried off the
palm in this respect, and with but few exceptions
they were all attired in white frocks and blue sashes,
a costume appropriate to innocence and youth. There was
no attempt made at any uniform attire in the dresses of
the boys, whose rougher nature and greater exuberance of
animal spirits do not lend themselves so readily to any
artistic treatment of this kind. It is difficult for those of
mature years to readily enter into the feelings of children on
such an occasion as this, but their keen enjoyment of the
whole affair, as depicted on their happy and smiling faces,
was sufficiently manifest, even to the most casual observer.
There were probably at least 1200 children present, the
Public schools sending some 900 children, and the Denomi-
national schools about 300. The following schools were
represented, each one sending from 50 to 60 scholars:
Public schools: Camperdown, Pyrmont, Paddington,
Glebe, Castlereagh-street, Waverley, George-street, Red-
fern, Fort-street, Balmain, Leichhardt, Cleveland-
street, William-street, and Bourke-street. Catholic
Denominational schools: St. James’s, St. Mary’s,
St. Patrick’s, Christ Church, St. Francis’, and
the Sisters of the Good Samaritan. The stand
provided for the children occupied an excellent posi-
tion, just to the right of the statue, and was raised some


°, ff the so that all the youngsters were
enabled to obtain an excellent view. A small numbeTof
s ta“d "and fndled th fonn8 ’ but the & reat majority had to
Wo d k d - dee< ?:, the number was so great that it would
ave been impossible to place the children within the allotted
space in any other way. Each school was in charge of its
the P ebiid° heild a S d j T°I teachers > and the arrangement of
the children on the stand was controlled by Herr Hugo
“J? lead f in the musical portion of the
programme. At the close of the proceedings the
children were afforded an excellent opportunity of
ooTnT of vV y ,r Veoed figure fr °m a nearer
the rlaL ’ r B . , hey Were admitted to walk round
nnmeihately at the base of the statue.
a memenS l^ 8 ’ WhlC - h are t 0 be £ iven to each scholar as
in otZr tn a f 0t ? lmon > "' ere not distributed yesterday,
is “'■» - *—■
THE VICE-REGAL PROCESSION.
th™? 6 - eaSt f inte^ stin g Mature of the proceedings was
fr ?' n Government House to the statue. The
Hunter piSf Vlce - re gal carriages was via Macquarie,
Street tn ?w Ihl f lp st f ee , ts > and thence by way of King-
/ ortl °? ° f , the roadway situate between the
rhureh l A tand and lb ? easte, n portion of St. James’
Church A procession which should include the Governors
rtnu Jpl co ] on, ®f’ as well as some other persons of distinc-
amm.nt nt at y a 1 , for ward to with a considerable
.“7i! interest. People who were fortunate enough to
SrS having balconies on the line of route, as well as
tVip Lr?;t d ’ ,° 0k u ? P° sltl °ns at various heights to watch
not dT \l\ h r Othor P e °P lc . whose houses are
7 n e lth balconies, were to be seen with their
friends in full force at the numerous windows. The pave-
«l n l 8 t7 er . e i° CC T ed by some thousands of citizens, all
atCh , a glln P se °t the pageant, that was anticipated.
-icga procession was composed of three carriages,
2n l?;t' chweres bod - v of the Sydney Lancers
“ d . a , tr °°P of the mounted police force. The staffs of the
Governors d ?d not take part in the procession, but
tbo louH dvance ? f 11 ln eairiages to the statue. Amongst
atl ® ll, ® n f w] m proceeded in that way to the statue
rt la rt L p d t Ler x?’ £ aptain K eith Falconer, Captain Prit-
°hard > ? r a P tain Mecharn, Mr. Robinson, and Maior Philli-
£ k t l?h mageS . 0f h * s Excellency Lord Carrington and
fntow a t 6 es P Ol ts > P as sed out of the Government House
gateway at a quarter to 12 o’clock. The place of honour
fbere u’ aS t o?, CUpied by the Sydney Lancers, of whom
there were about 30, under the command of Captain Dodds,
was Lieutenant Vernon. The troop was formed
p n half-sections, with lances at the trail. First came
the two leaders, then the connecting file, then the firs
division of 10 or 12 nien, who immediately preceded the
cair age (a barouche) of his Excellency Lord Cairington,
r.v., Ij.um.g. i n i t were seated the Governor
(who wore a rosette of pale blue, the Centen-
mal colour). Lady Carrington, Sir Henry Loch,
Aeh ’ k.C.M.G., Governor of Victoria, and Sir
Mrtir D Mrt) USR m'; e 1: Governor of Queensland.
Major M Donald (the officer commanding the cavalry, and
ramn'iro th< -Lancers) rode on one side of Lord Carrington’s
carnage, and Captain Knox on the other. Following the
Came the second division of the Lancers
ble ' and then the roar half,
section, followed by two orderlies from Government House,
ine escort of police troopers numbered 24, and was
under the command of Sub-inspector Thompson.
8 o uard was formed up in half-sections, as
was the case in regard to the Lancers. Half the
troopers composed the rear-guard to the second
carriage, while the remainder occupied a similar position
snnf t 0 th ° I hlrd carria S e - In the second carriage (a
sociable) were the Countess of Carnarvon, Sir William
Robmson, G.C.M.G. (Governor of South Australia), Sir
Robert Hamilton, K.C.B. (Governor of Tasmania), and
Sir I'rederick N. Broome, K.C.M.G. (Governor of Western
Australia); and in the third carriage (a landau) were Sir
Charles Mitchell, K.C.M.G. (ex-Govemor of Fiji), the
JDuke of Manchester, K.G., the Karl of Carnarvon, and
M^°A.^ asCo *^ ne ’ P roceBB i° n proceeded at the trot,
and the occupants of the carriages were cheered as they
passed through the streets. On arrival opposite the statue
.Lord and Lady Carrington were received with much enthu-
siasm. Ibe party were welcomed by the Premier (Sir
Henry Parkes, G.C.M.G), and the members of the Centen-
mal Celebration Commission. Lady Carrington was es-
corted to the vice-regal dais by the president of the com-
mission (the Hon. John Lackey, M.L.C.) and Lady
Carnarvon by the President of the Legislative Council (Sir
John Hay, K.C.M.G.). The members of the commission
who, in addition to Mr. Lackev and Sir John Hay, were
present were-the Hon. J. F. Burns (Colonial Trea-
surer), the Hon. C. J. Roberts, C.M.G. (Postmaster--
General), the Hon. J. H. Young (Speaker of the Legis-
lative Assembly), Messrs. R. Burdett Smith, T. M. Slattery,
D. O Connor, S. Burdekin, A. J. Riley, J. H. Want,
Ms.L.A., James R. Fairfax, E. Fosbery (Inspector-
General of Police), and James Barnet (Colonial Architect).
Amongst other gentlemen who were present were the At-
torney-General (Hon.B. R. Wise), and Minister for Works
(Hon. John Sutherland), the M inister for Mines (Hon. F,
Abigail), the Minister for Justice (Hon. William Clarke),
the Minister for Public Instruction (Hon. James Inglis),
the Most Rev. the Primate (Dr. Barry), the Right Rev.
Dr. Murray (Bishop of Maitland), the Right Rev. Dr.
Doyle (Bishop of Grafton), and the Right Rev. Dr..
Corbett (Bishop of Sale), all three of whom attended as a
deputation to represent the Roman Catholic Church ; the
Chief Justice (Sir Frederick Darley), Hon. S. A. Joseph,
Hon. P. G. King, Hon. W. J. Trickett, Hon. G. Thorn-
ton, Sir John Robertson, Sir Patrick Jennings, Mr.
Justice Faucett, Captain Hixson, Dr. Marano (Consul for
Italy), Dr. Milford, Mr. C. B. Stephen, Mr. Spencer,
Mr. J. C. Iseild, M.L.A., Mr. C. li. Burnside (secre-
tary to the Centennial Celebrabration Commission), Mr.
H. Hudson, and Mr. Spencer. The following
visitors also occupied seats on the Governors’ dais:
I lol ' l Victoria : Sir James Macßain (President of
the Legislative Council), Hon. M. H. Davies (Speaker of
tj lo Legislative Assembly), Dr. Brownless (Chancellor of
the Melbourne Mr. F. T. Derbam (Postmaster-
General), Alderman B. Benjamin (Mayor of Melbourne),
Alderman the Hon. C. J. Ham, M.L.C., Councillors G.
Godfrey’, ferry, Bowen, Anderson, Buxton, Peirce, M.L.A.,
and Geddes, E. G. Fitzgibbons (town clerk). From
Queensland: Hon. W. Forrest, M.L.C., Hon. W. H.
M ilson. M.L.C. (Postmaster-General). f rom South
Australia: Hon. J. C. F. Johnson (Minister of Educa-
turn), Hon. R. A. larlton, M.L.C. From Tasmania:
Hon. B. Stafford Bird (Colonial Treasurer), Mr. A. Crisp
(Mayor of Hobart), Hon. VV. Moore, M.L.C., Messrs.
E. H. Sutton, M.H.A., H. Conway, M.H.A., A. C.
Douglas (Secretary Post Office), F. J. Pritchard, Major-
General Sussex C. Milford, Le Chevalier Y. Marano, M.D.
(Italian Consul).
THE CEREMONY.
Ihe ceremony of unveiling was but momentary, though
full of meaning and interest. It was performed with
electric quickness in the presence of thousands, through
whose minds must have passed with equal rapidity the
thought that they were not only honouring the Queen whom
that statue represents when they cheered so joyously,
but the constitutional system of government which
they enjoy under her reign. The first intima-
tion that the patient spectators received that
the ceremony was at hand was the appearance
of four pretty little girls on the dais. They were all dressed
in white, with sashes of pale blue. Two of (hem, Cecilia
and Eleanor, were the daughters of Mr. Cecil Stephen, and
the others were Ruby and Gwladys Griffiths. They bore
huge bouquets of beautiful flowers. Whilst admiring these
little ones the crowd suddenly became apprised of the


presence of Lord and Lady Carrington, and started cheer-
ing. Lady Carrington, leaning on the arm of the Hon. John
Lackey, the Countess of Carnarvon conducted by Sir John
Hay,and Lord Carrington appeared in front ofthedais. There
was renewed cheering, and the bands played the National
Anthem. The Vice-regal party then ascended the dais,
an 1 one of the little girls stepping forward handed the
most beautiful bouquet to Lady Carrington. It was com-
posed of tuberoses, souvenir roses, white bouvardia, white
boxes, large adianthum, maidenhair ferns, and ealadium
leaves. On the surface the crown and the letters “ V.R.1.”
were worked in red ardisia berries. Another beautiful
bouquet was handed to the Countess of Carnarvon. It was
made of similar flowers, but contained the Australian
coat-of-arms, worked in yellow berries. Their ladyships
were somewhat surprised at receiving such handsome
bouquets. Speeches were then delivered by his Excellency
Lord Carrington and Sir Henry Parkes.
Lord Carrington said : Your Excellencies, My Lords,
Ladies and Gentlemen,—ln assisting at this ceremony of
unveiling the Queen’s statue, we are not only paying our
tribute of personal respect to the Sovereign of the greatest
confederation which the world has ever seen, but as loyal
citizens and as honest men we are asserting a great prin-
ciple. (Cheers.) We are showing our veneration for order,
and we recognise that under a constitutional sovereignty we
have been able to obtain tbe greatest amount of freedom
which a country has ever enjoyed, with the certainty that the
weakest of us will be protected, and that justice
will be meted out to all alike, and that the laws made by
the people themselves will be administered without- fear,
partiality, favour, or affection. (Cheers.) Under the
Queen’s rule every person in New South Wales knows that
The powers of the Executive are held in trust for the
people, and that Ministers are ultimately responsible to the
people themselves for the exercise of those powers.
(Cheers.) Freedom such as under other circumstances
would be a danger to the State we enjoy under our well-
balanced constitution. May we ever cherish it, and be
worthy of it. In the hour of trial and of danger may we
never falter, but preserve our independence and our civil
and religious liberty all over the world, rallying round our
old flag, and trusting in our old watchword of " God save
the Queen.” (Loud cheers.)
Sir Henry Parkes, whose appearance was greeted
with much cheering, said: Your Excellency, my lords,
ladies, and gentlemen, it is desired that I should say a few
words on this memorable occasion. We are about to unveil
the statue of our Queen, that Queen who has reigned over
the best part of our existence; the 50 years which have
marked her reign are the 50 years of which we are most
proud. (Hear, hear.) During that half century we
have done all the work of building up a great free
nation, where all the men are equal in the southern hemi-
sphere. (Cheers.) Will you allow me to refer to an
incident in my own life in the words I have to say to you ?
Fifty years ago I, then a friendless lad, wrote a few words
on the Queen’s accession to the throne, and, if you will
permit me, I will read those words now rather than make a
speech. (Cheers.) Remember, it was 50 years ago, and,
■probably, there are very few men living who gave expres-
sion to their opinion upon this glorious reign so long back
as that. Well, my words are these:
High-destined daughter of our country, thou
Who sitt’st on England’s throne in beauty’s morning!
God pour His richest blessings round thee now;
And may the eyes that watch thy glory’s dawning,
With hearts right glad and loyal, proudly scorning
All that dare hostile to Victoria be,
Daily behold new light thy name adorning;
So'mav’st thou trust thy people’s love for thee,
Queen" of this mighty land—Protectress of the Free !
(Cheers.)
I venture to think that these words, written when I was a
boy, a friendless lad, have been fulfilled by her great reign
as if they had been a prophecy. (Hear, hear.) The
Queen of this great empire, by her graciousness as a
Sovereign, by her brilliant qualities as a woman in all the
relations of life, by her high sense of constitutional duty,
has performed the kingly office with a higher degree of
success than any living Sovereign ; and if we look back on
the history of our country we see no name, not excepting the
great Elizabeth herself, which is more entitled to reverence
and to the deep love of her subjects as a constitutional
Sovereign than Queen Victoria. (Cheers.) The statue
we unveil is a fit emblem of this auspicious
time. She has presided over the destinies of
our Empire throughout our creation as a nation, she gave us
our great free institutions, and she has infused into the
progress of the world a spirit of liberality and high thought
which no Sovereign has ever intused before. I shall say no
more, but I join with every loyal man here in the prayer
that God may bless the Queen of the British Empire.
(Great cheering.)
Then without further delay Lady Carrington per-
formed the auspicious ceremony, and the Royal
Standard, in which the statue was draped, dropped
off, ran up a line, and waved in the breeze.
The statue was unveiled, and the ceremony was
over. As soon as the multitude beheld her Majesty’s form
loyal cheers resounded in the place, and there was great
enthusiasm. A salute of 21 guns was fired by the Permanent
Artillery from the Domain. A thousand or more school
children sang "God save the Queen” under the baton of
Herr Hugo Alpen, and Lord Carrington called for twice
three cheers for her Majesty, and met with a hearty
response. Mr. Lackey called for three cheers for Lord
Carrington and one for Lady Carrington, and it is
almost needless to say that these were most cordially
given. The Governor and his party then moved off
slowly, while the bands played the National Anthem.
DISPERSION OF THE CROWD.
Scarcely had the ceremony been completed and the last
notes of the National Anthem died way when a slight
shower of rain began to fall, as if to add an unrehearsed
effect to the programme by christening her Majesty’s
statue. A few umbrellas were put up; but, otherwise, the
vast crowd scarcely seemed to notice the shower, and it
was only by slow and imperceptible degrees that they
melted away in the most orderly manner into the surrounding
thoroughfares of College-street, King-street, Macquarie-
street, and Hyde Park.
THE POLICE AND THE TRAFFIC.
In anticipation ot the great crush, the heads of the Police
Department took time by the forelock, and perfected their
arrangements admirably. During the past few days
members of the detective forces of the sister colonies had
arrived in the metropolis, with a view to watching a number
of criminals from their particular districts who are known
to have temporarily taken up quarters in Sydney, and these
officers, with the local staff ot plain-clothes men, kept a
keen lookout for offenders. Inspector-General Fosbery,
with the majority of his principal officers and very large
relays of constables, was upon the ground, and orders had
been so arranged, -and the men were so placed, that the
utmost order prevailed.
RAILWAY AND TRAM ARRANGEMENTS.
The number of persons who availed themselves ot the
tram service as a means of transit yesterday was very
large, although not the largest that has been registered. In
the forenoon the traffic inwards to the city was very great,
necessitating the employment of several additional trams,
which were run on the principal lines to meet the require-
ments of the public. During the afternoon the strain
wore off somewhat, but towards evening it again revived,
although not to the same extent as during the morning.
The number of passengers who arrived by train at Redfern
Station was unusually large. All the various suburban
trains conveyed large crowds of people from the different
stations along the lines, and the trains from the country
were packed with visitors to participate in or witness the
Centennial celebrations and festivities.


THE STREETS.
'Visitors to Sydney—and, judging from appearances,
there are an extraordinarily large number—must
have been considerably surprised at the manner
in which the character of the principal streets
was altered in a few hours yesterday. Early
in the morning preparations on an extensive scale were
commenced in George-street, and the result was that in a
short time it presented quite a gala appearance. Bunting
was flying in all directions from verandahs to many feet
above the loftiest buildings. The most attractive feature
in the transformation was the lines of gay banners and
bannerets. These were extended on bright-coloured poles
at a uniform height along the verandahs, and
extended on both sides of the street from Park-street
almost to the foot of the northern end of the street. Each
pole is surmounted by a banneret, and below that there
is a shield bearing a coat of arms either colonial or Impe-
rial, from which extend three flags representing either the
colonies, Britain, France, Germany, or other Powers with
which Australia has been brought into commercial rela-
tions. The private display of flags from the principal
buildings from the Havmarket round to Miller’s Point pre-
sented a bright and attractive appearance. The most
effective display of bunting was to be ssen on
landing at Circular Quay. The various ship-
ping . offices, consular offices, Exchange, Government
buildings, and warehouses along Pitt-street, &c.,
had their distinctive bunting, which all became
as if the display was an individual one. The
pedestrian and vehicular traffic was very heavy during the
earlier part of the day, and in some parts of George and
Pitt streets the foot passengers, omnibuses, and cabs all
appeared to be so mixed up that the wonder was that there
were not many accidents to record. With the excep-
tion of the vehicles which had fixed routes, the
traffic all seemed bound for one point—the Queen’s
statue. There was no abatement in the crush between
King and Hunter streets till near noon, when there was a
slight lull. After the ceremony of unveiling the statue,
although there was a great crush into the heart of the
city by way of King and Hunter streets, it did not last
long, as the majority of the spectators completed the day’s
outing by visits to the Gardens and parks, and by harbour
excursions. Matters in the principal thoroughfares were
fairly quiet till towards evening, and then a
steady stream poured into George and Pitt streets from
all directions. Residents of Paddington and the more
eastern suburbs had an extra attraction on their way to
the city in the elaborate preparations which are being
made in Oxford-street. The frameworks of three arches
have been completed, and two of these are almost complete
as far as covering with greenery and affixing mottoes suit-
able to the occasion. As all the shops were open, and the
wares set off to the best advantage with the aid of gas jets, the
street presented a more than usually lively appearance.
The footways, and also the road in some places, were
crowded with pedestrians up to a late hour. Going through
Hyde Park, the extensive preparations which were being
made for a brilliant display to-night were subject of com-
ment and pleasant anticipation. George-street, however,
was the great centre of attraction, and to that important
thoroughfare the people flocked in thousands. The
street was brilliantly lighted by a combination of
street lamps, illuminations, and the gas jets used
to set off the wares in the various shops. Starting from
Devonshire-street and working northward, the street on
both sides and on the roadway was fully occupied by a
crowd which was of the most orderly character. This
street seemed to be the principal resort of the visitors, and
seldom has such a series of attractions been presented to the
stranger. The illuminations were few, but the display in
the shop windows proved sufficient to take a rapid
survey of on one night.
THE HARBOUR.
In all matters affecting the city of Sydney, t whether of
usiness or pleasure, the harbour plays* are an important
part , and it was only to be expected that on the opening- of
the Centennial celebrations yesterday Port Jackson would
assume that attractive appearance for which it is noted
The vessels in port displayed the usual bunting, com-
posed of ensigns and house flags, and from the
different points and prominent houses along theshores or the
harbour the colonial ensign and national flags of Old Eng-
land were flying. From an early hour in the mornin-
it was apparent that events of more than usual importance
were to take place ashore, judging from the number of
passengers conveyed to Sydney by the ferry steamers and
the various harbour steamers. The stream of passengers
kept up till about 11 o’clock, and then there was a lull"till
after the luncheon hour when the favourite seaside resorts
were patronised. The North Shore, Neutral Bay, Balmain
and other ferry steamers were busily occupied* during the
evening and night in conveying excursionists homewards
and taking intending sightseers to the city. Although
kind 5 WaS a VGry arge traffic there wa s no accident of any
LADY CARRINGTON’S RECEPTION.
Lady Carrington held a reception at Government-house
yesterday afternoon. The weather was cool and pleasant
and though it was one of those grey days which we have
not infrequently m Sydney, the Gardens looked bright and
beautiful, apparently suffering little, through the sun’s
rays being modified and softened, so as not to be felt. At 4
o clock carriages and cabs in long and continuous lines
could be coming from all directions, and passing alon-
Macquane-street to the Domain. A t the gates of Govern?
raent-house there was already at this hour a crowd of
spectators. Inside the vehicles were so numerous fhat
their occupants alighted from them long before they reached
Government-house, and made their way thither* on foot
The arrangements made for the vehicular traffic were good
1 he road next to Macquane-street was set apart for carriages
entering, and the road on the other, or Farm Cove side was
for those going outwards. The traffic was so great, however
and came with such a rush, that there was a stand-
s ill for a long time. Hence, though it was not
altogether necessary to alight from their car-
riages before reaching Government-house, many did
so, simply to avoid having to wait. hall
at Government-house was densely crowded by ladies and
gentlemen, who made but slow one step
forward every minute. Always advancing a little they
passed on to the narrow passage leading to the drawing*
room, got through in closely-packed lines of five orllx
deep, and finally succeeded in arriving at the door leading
on to the colonnade, where they were announced by the
private secretary (Captain Wellington), and courteously re!
ceived by Lady Carrington and Lord Carrington. This
stream of visitors continued for 1 hour and 20 minutes
incessantly, during which time, of course, Lady Carrinrton
remained on her feet without any rest whatever. It may
easih be understood that we are not exaggerating when we
say there must have been nearly 3000 Ladies and
gentJemen present. What a formidable task to
shake hands with each and every one of these'
Before rescuing the colonnade sfrains of music were heard
and all seemed merry. This was trying to the patience of
the Jadies, who were compelled to move slowly on through
the hall. Most of them passed the time away chatting
about the unveiling of the statue and admiring the pictures
in the hall—notably, one of Lady Carrington. The scene
from the verandah was very fine. A sparkling fountain
first caught the eye, and away out through the vista of f!
fo iage was Bradley’s Head boldlv projectingTtSlf and
intermediate the waters of the harbour, with a bright sheen
on their surface, buoying up the French warship Duchaf-
fant and many smaller craft. This was a view that mado
many of the intercolonial visitors strike a posture of adiS
ration, and they got nearer and nearer to the environs of
the Gardens, until they beheld the steamer Lucinda oth!r
boats, and much of the harbour not before visible ’ The
Gardens, which are nicely laid out and descend


in a series of terraces, looked well indeed. The lawns were
green, the shrubs were green, and the flowers blooming and
healthy. Chairs were placed in convenient spots in and
around the fountain, and in fact on all the lawns in the
vicinity. On the lowermost lawn a marquee was erected
for the service of light refreshment. The band of the
South Australian Militia and the band of the local per-
manent forces played popular selections of music through-
out the afternoon, and made the promenade still more
enjoyable. The atmosphere of the place was full of merry
sounds that were only rivalled by the merry faces. The
ladies, who were’ in the majority, showed no
extravagance in their dress. Plain white costumes
were rather numerous, and though there were
also many shades of the Centennial blue,
there was such a diversity of colour generally that it would
be difficult to name the predominating one. The study of
the vast assemblage was quite interesting. Never before
was there such a gathering at Government-house. It
represented various ranks of society, almost all nations, and
all creeds. Both princes of the Church and of the State were
present —the Primate of Australia and some of the Anglican
Bishops, the Cardinal and many of his bishops, the Grand
Duke Alexis of Russia and suite, and the Earl of Carnar-
von, and most of the intercolonial Governors were there
amongst other distinguished persons. The reception
assumed the character of a garden party, and great
sociality prevailed. All seemed to have enjoyed
themselves well, and the greater part remained
till nearly 6 o’clock. Many of the ladies expressed
sympathy with Lady Carrington, whom they said must have
been quite exhausted had the weather been hot. As in a
great many instances no cards were presented, we are unable
to give more than a small proportion of the names of those
present, and these only the more prominent visitors.
There were present: ’ The Earl and Countess of
Carnarvon; Sir H. B. Loch, Governor of Victoria;
Sir Wm. Fitzherbert, representative of New Zea-
land; Sir A. Musgrove, Governor of Queensland ;
Sir W. Robinson, Governor of South Australia; Sir R.
Hamilton, Governor of Tasmania; Sir Frederick N.
Broome, Governor of Western Australia; Sir Charles
Mitchell, ex-Governor of Fiji; the Duke of Manchester;
the Grand Duke Alexis of Russia and suite; the captain
of the Russian ship Rynda ; Sir Henry Parkes; Sir J ohn
Robertson; the Hons. Jameslnglis, Minister of Education;
W. Clarke, Minister of Justice; B. R. Wise, Attorney-
General; J. F. Burns, Colonial Treasurer, New South
Wales; Sir Samuel Griffith, Premier of Queensland; the
Hons. T. Playford, Premier; J. G. Ramsay. Chief Secre-
tary ; C. C. Kingston, Attorney-General; J. C. F. John-
son, Minister of Education, South Australia; Sir James
Macbain, President of the Legislative Council;
the Hons. M. H. Davies, _ Speaker of the Legis-
lative Assembly; Colonel F. T. Sargood, M.L.C.;
James Balfour, M.L.C.; F. T. Derham, Postmaster-
General, Victoria; Dr. Brownless, Chancellor
Melbourne University; the Chief Justices of New South
Wales and South Australia; the Mayors of Melbourne,
Adelaide, and Hobart; the Primate and the Bishop of
Riverina; the Cardinal, the Archbishop of Melbourne, and
the Bishops of Adelaide, Sale, and Brisbane; the Mode-
rator of the Presbyterian Assembly, Victoria; Colonel C.
F. Roberts, Captain Bouverie, Colonel Wells, Major
Haiming Lee, Colonel French, of Queensland, and other
military officers ; Mons. E. M. Paul, Consul for Russia ;
Captain A. Gray, acting Consul-General for the Nether-
lands; Mr. W. H. Eldred, Consul-General of Chile;
Major-General Sussex C. Milford, and Le Chevalier V.
Marano, Italian Consul. In most cases the gentlemen
named were accompanied by their ladies.
PUBLIC MEETING AT ST. MARY’S
CATHEDRAL.
A meeting of the Roman Catholics of the arch-diocese of
Sydney was held in St. Mary’s Cathedral yesterday even-
ing, in connection with the Centennial celebrations,
for the purpose of inaugurating a movement for the
completion of this sacred edifice. The vast building was
filled in every part with a large and fashionable audience,
and the sanctuary, which was temporarily used as.
a platform, was' occupied by a number of the
leading Catholic clergy, several distinguished visitors
to the colonv, and many leading citizens. Amongst
those on the platform were—His Excellency Lord
Carrington, Sir Henry Loch, Governor of Victoria; Sir
W. C. Robinson, Governor of South Australia; Sir
Anthony Musgrave, Governor of Queensland; Sir F. N.
Broome, Governor of Western Australia ; Sir Charles Mit-
chell, ex-Govemor of Fiji; Sir Robert Hamilton, Governor
of Tasmania; Monsigneur Rigny, Arch-priest Sheehy;
Dr. Carroll, Vicar-general; Archbishop Reynolds, Arch-
bishop Dunne, Bishop Murray, Bishop Byrne, Bishop
Lanigan, Bishop Teoreggiani, Bishop Doyle, and Bishop
Corbett; Dr. O’Haran; the Hon. M. H. Davies,
Speaker of the Victorian Assembly; Hon. J. G.
Duffy, M.L.C., Victoria; Mr. Highett, M.L.A., Victoria;.
Sir Ed. Strickland, K.C.8., Right Hon. W. B. Dailey,
P.C., Sir Patrick Jennings, Hon. N. Fitzgerald, M.L.C.
Viet., his Honor Mr. Justice Faucett, Judge Casey, Vic-
toria, Messrs. Slattery, M.L.A., Dalton, M.L.A., O’Con-
nor, M.L.A., O’Mara, M.L.A., and Critchett Walker.
Alderman Crisp, M.L.A., Mayor and Alderman Dillon, of
Hobart. His Excellency the Governor presided, and Car-
dinal Moran occupied the seat on his right hand, the
Governors of the various colonies being placed on either
side. Their Excellencies, on arrival at the Cathedral,
were received with immense applause, the organ, playing
a grand march as they walked up the aisle. Their Excel-
lencies were accompanied by the following staff: Lord
Bertie, Major Gascoigne, Major Phillimore, Captain
Pritchard, and Captain Keith-Falconer.
Cardinal Moran, in opening the proceedings, said
that before their regular meeting commenced this evening
he would ask a few moments to thank his Excel-
lency the Governor and the Governors of the other colonies
for the great honour they had conferred on the whole
Catholic bodv bv their presence amongst them on that most
auspicious occasion. (Applause.) lhe special purpose for
which they had met was'to start an organisation for the
completion of some portion at least of that stately cathe-
dral. (Applause.) The whole Catholic bodv took the
deepest interest in everything connected with St. Mary’s,
and the reason was that St. Mary’s was the mother church,
not of Sydney, not of New South Wales alone, but of all
the Australia's. (Applause.) Its beginnings were made in
sad and dismal times. In those days it seemed to this fair
colony of Australia that it was spellbound in a dreary
winter of bondage and of bigotry, and the foundations of
the rising structure were watered with the tears
of the sorrowing exiles of those times; and even
when the structure began to arise in stately proportions,
even then it had its difficulties to contend against. (Ap-
plause.) The foundation-stone was laid by one of his
Excellency’s predecessors, as Governor of this colony, at
the close of October in the year 1821. Some 20 years later
a visitor to the church, in recording his impressions of the
building, said that the pillars which supported the roof
were giant cedars hewn in the forests of Illawarra; that
they stood there in all their solidity of construction, but at
the same time in all their crudeness and roughness. But
perhaps the solidity of these cedars was a fitting
symbol that the Catholic Church in those days was
solid in its strength, though still in its outward
aspect so rude and so uncomely. A few years
later, the structure, when almost completed, .was in a few
hours nearlv reduced to ashes by the devouring element of
fire, and some years afterwards the same fate befel the
second structure. It seemed indeed then as if all hopes
were blighted; but the contrary resulted. One of the most
noteworthy results of that sad catastrophe was the sym-
pathy, the’wonderful sympathy which |that disaster evoked
from' every class and from every denomination in the com-
munitv. (Cheers.) Perhaps there had been no single event
from the foundation of the colony to that day which so united
and blended together every class, and every condition, and
every denomination of people throughout these colonies—
(Applause) —as did that sad catastrophe which betel St.


Marv’s. (Hear, hear.) The result of that sympathy
was that the new foundations were laid more solidly and
the building rose in larger and more stately proportions on
the site of the former edifice—(applause)—and now thev
had assembled to complete some portion at the least of
this stately cathedral as a fitting memorial of these
Centennial celebrations. His Eminence then called upon
the Hon. W. B. Dailey to welcome the Governors of the
different colonies. (Applause.)
Mr. Dalley, who was received with applause, then de-
livered an address of welcome to their Excellencies. He said
Your Excellencies, my Lord Cardinal, ladies, and gentle-
men, —I have been requested by his Eminence the Cardi-
nal-Archbishop to say a few words of grateful welcome to
Lord Carrington for his attendance at this meeting, and for
the thoughtful courtesy which suggested his bringing here
the distinguished company by which he is surrounded.
(Applause.) Nothing could have manifested a deeper and
’truer sympathy with the great Catholic body of colonists,
not only here but throughout the whole of the
Australian colonies, than this compliment to them,
and this homage to liberality of opinion which
he has paid by this action. (Applause.)
xor this is no ordinary occasion, and this is no ordinary
place. Here, on this spot, was laid the foundation-stone
of the first ecclesiastical structure for the public worship
-of the Catholic Church in this country. It is a place con-
secrated by memories and sufferings, and is in the eyes and
hearts of all Catholics a holy and historical site. The
builder of the edifice which was then commenced reared
upon that foundation an imposing and beautiful building,
which remained up to a comparatively recent time a striking
example of his devoted services to his flock,
•and of the generosity and liberality of the
Australian people. On the performance of that
function nearly 70 years ago, one who then occupied the
high and responsible office which your Excellency now fills
and adorns laid himself with his own hands the foundation-
stone of that building, declaring that he felt himself very
much honoured in having been selected as the represen-
tative of his King in laying the first stone of the first
Homan Catholic Church attempted to be erected in Aus-
tralia. . (Applause.) He followed up this gracious act by
’addressing, on the eve of his departure from the cabin of
the very ship which was carrying him back to England, a
letter to the then spiritual representative of the Catholic
-Church in this country, promising that he would not
fail, on his arrival in England, to move the Imperial
Secretary of State to extend assistance towards the com-
Eletion of the sacred building. Nor was he forgetful of
is promise. A letter addressed by the Colonial Secretary,
early after the assumption of the Government by his
successor, intimates to the Catholics that the Government
is prepared to contribute to the building of the edifice a sum
equal to the sum total of all additional donations which
might be bestowed by private liberality. (Applause.) Under
existing circumstances your Excellency cannot bestow upon
>us such splendid and substantial assistance. But you bestow
upon us the great and prized gift of your sympathy and
liberality. (Applause.) At a later period another pre-
decessor of your Excellency assisted at the laying of the
foundation-stone of the Catholic affiliated college of the
University of Sydney; and still more recently, when the
building which formerly occupied this site was, to the inex-
pressible grief of the Catholic body, swept away by fire,
another of your predecessors—one *of the ablest, gentlest,
■ and best loved of them—publicly associated himself with
our expressions of grief, and eloquently stimulated the
generosity of the public in the erection of this noble edifice.
(Applause.) We have thus, at the hands of the representa-
tive of our Sovereign, an inheritance of liberality and
sympathy which, while it has more immediately
blessed us, cannot have been without the most beneficial
influence upon the community. In the spirit in which
these services were rendered by the great and good men
who once bore the weight of responsibility which you sus-
tain to-day, you visit us to-night, with the distinguished
■ company which you have brought with you, to render to us a
■great service, but a still greater one to the community,
which will see in your action a high example of love of
justice, sympathy, and religious freedom. Permit me to
otfer to you the expression of the welcome and thankful-
ness of the Catholics of Australia. (Long and continued
applause.)
Mr. Justice Faucett, in proposing the first resolution,
said that at this particular period, when we were cele-
brating the centenary of the colony, our attention had been
called necessarily and unavoidably to the history of the
colony, which, notwithstanding the fact that it had at
different times had large portions divided off from it was still
able to hold itself forth as the leading and most powerful
colony in Australasia. (Applause.) This was, however
an occasion on which, they were called upon go express
more particularly their feelings for the sympathy which
they had received from those who ruled this colony at
different times. Most of them would remember with feel-
ings of gratitude the sympathy with which one great
Governor assisted them in laying the foundation stone of
that great educational esablishment, the College of St.
John’s, within the University of Sydney. They remem-
bered again the large sympathy extended to them when
that terrible calamity occurred in the time of Sir John
Young, and how readily that Governor came forward and
took a leading part in expressing the sympathy of those
who differed in faith from them. They remem-
bered all these things, and he felt bound to
confess, that now he was called upon to propose
this resolution, he felt almost ashamed to do so, because he
felt that one portion of it was really attempting to antici-
pate a thing which already existed, and to call upon them
for the assistance and sympathy which ho knew they
would give. (Applause.) He considered that it was a
good idea for his Eminence to have called this meeting
together at this particular time. The building was still
incomplete, and many who would otherwise consider it to
be their duty to come here wore thus prevented from
enjoying the benefits they would receive if the buildin°-
were what it might be. (Applause.) The present was the
time to enlarge the building and to carry it out to its fair
proportions, by means of which they might be enabled
by-and-bye, to some extent, at all events, to
see the grandeur and magnificent proportions of this
extensive building. (Applause.) He had much pleasure
m moving the following resolution,—“ That the Catholic
body, in public meeting assembled, pledge themsolvesj to
carry on to completion the present portion of the cathedral
as a memorial of the centenary of the colony, and that in
order to raise the necessary funds, they appeal to their
fellow colonists of all denominations throughout Australia
for practical sympathy and support, and that a subscription
list be now opened, r
The Hon. N. Fitzgerald, M.L.A., of Victoria, said he
had very much pleasure in seconding the resolution, which
had been so ably proposed by his friend, Mr. Justice
Faucett. He felt also that a very high honour had been
conferred on him by his having been invited to take part
in those interesting- proceedings. He was not vain enough
to think that he owed that distinction to any merit that he
could lay claim to. He believed that the honour had been
conferred on him as a compliment to the colony in which
he resided—(applause)-and perhaps as an acknowledg-
ment of the generous manner in which an appeal of the
same nature as that initiated that night had been re-
sponded to there. He wes delighted, as every visitor to
this great city was delighted, to take part in the memor-
able, in the historical festivities which were now in pro-
gress, but he would say, as fitting the occasion which had
called them together, that not the least striking illustration
of the progress of this colony was the presence of Cardinal
Moran there that night. (Applause.) The Catholic re-
ligion was the same now as it ever had been—knew no dis-
tinction of race, knew no geographical boundaries—(cheers)
—and the Supreme Pontiff truly appreciated the future of
these colonies, recognised their progress, when he conferred
that high distinction upon his Eminence—an honour to
him, an honour to his diocese, and an honour to all
Australia. (Applause.) And honoured as they were
that night by the presence of o many dis-


tinguished men, representatives of her Majesty
in these colonies—(applause)—their gratitude for
which was so eloquently expressed by his right honourable
friend, Mr. Dailey, that their presence there that night was
an acknowledgment of their respect to the epis-
copal character of the Cardinal, and to his
exalted station —he would fain believe that it
was an indication by their Excellencies now that they
regard the Catholic religion here, as it is regarded every-
where throughout the world, as the greatest upholder of, and
as exercising the most powerful beneficent influence of the
social order. (Applause.) But while they celebrated the
completion of the first century of Australia’s existence,
while they dilated upon the progress of these colonies, he
spoke as a Catholic when lie said that their retrospect
afforded them no cause for being ashamed. (Applause.)
They had not lived in the vanity of past
ages. If they had pointed to the memorials
of former times, if they had pointed to the evidence of
greater things done by better Christians than themselves,
it was only for the purpose, not to boast, but of stimulating
their people to further efforts in the cause of religion, of
charity, and of humanity. (.Applause.) The Catholic
Church was known through all ages, not alone for the
•deeds that it had done, but for the men that it had sent
forth to preach the gospel of peace, the gospel of faith.
(Applause.) They, Catholics of New South Wales, had
been singularly favoured in the men who had been sent to
them. Mr. Fitzgerald made a brief but stirring reference
to the labours of the former servants of the church in this
colony, and during the remainder of a most eloquent speech
urged the claims of the completion of the Cathedral upon
the Catholics of the colony and of Australia.
Dr. Carr, Archbishop of Melbourne, also addressed the
meeting. He said that in Melbourne they had engaged in
a similar great work to the one which they were at present
called on to further, and he derived a kind of encourage-
ment from that fact, because what had already taken place
in another colony might also occur here. The people of
Melbourne had already expended £150,000 on their Cathe-
dral, which was not one penny in debt. (Applause.)
Again, he felt a kind of encouragement and sympathy in
addressing those who were his own countrymen,
either by birth or by descent, for he need not remind
them that the Irish people had always been great
builders. The permanence of the Irish structures had been
accounted for by the assertion that the Irish used a pecu-
liar cement, and no doubt they had done so, but to his mind
the cement thus used was not a material one, but a moral
and religious cement, which gave the binding force to the
completed work. He also referred to what had been done at
New York, where the great cathedral was once in a similar
state to St. Mary’s, and where the £20,000 required
to roof it had been subscribed at one meeting by a hundred
gentlemen of the diocese. What had occurred at New York
might occur here; and, although he did not say that a
hundred gentlemen would subscribe £20,000, still a sufficient
number of persons would subscribe large sums, so as to
enable his Eminence to complete the good work within a
reasonably short time. (Applause.)
Archbishop Reynolds, of Adelaide, then addressed a
few words of encouragement and sympathy to the meeting,
expressing the opinion that, after all that had been said, the
best thing which the Cardinal could do would be to call on
the collectors. (Laughter and applause.)
Lord Carrington, amidst great applause, then put the
resolution, which was carried unanimously.
A collection was then taken up, and subsequently the
Hallelujah Chorus was sung by the united choirs of the
city and suburban churches.
Sir Patrick Jennings proposed a vote of thanks to his
Excellency the Governor in highly eulogistic terms, and
the resolution was put and carried unanimously, and with
long-continued applause.
Lord Carrington, on rising to respond, was received
with enthusiasm, the cheering lasting some time. He said:
My first duty is to announce the sum of money which has
been collected in the Cathedral this evening. The total
amount collected amounts to £2231 2s. (Applause.) Now,
my Lord Cardinal, before I say one single word of grati-
tude or of thanks for the great compliment that has been
paid me this evening as the representative of her Majesty
the Queen, I beg leave to express the great and sincere
pleasure that I feel on welcoming once more amongst us
my right honourable friend, Mr. Dailey. (Loud applause.)
I congratulate you, my Lord Cardinal, I congratulate my-
self, I congratulate the great Catholic community, and I
congratulate the colony itself, that God Almighty
has been pleased to make an amelioration in his
condition, and I hope that before long we may
see him entirely restored to his original health.
Now your Excellency, my Lord Cardinal, ladies and
gentlemen,—l beg leave to return with great respect, and
with all kindness, my sincere and grateful thanks for the
real compliment that'you have been pleased to pay me this
evening. Some 70 years ago, as you have been told to-
night, one of the last acts of Governor Macquarie was to
lay the foundation-stone of this Cathedral. On that occa-
sion the Venerable Father Therry made use of the
following words:—“The Governor has laid the firm
foundation of a moral edifice of unanimity,
mutual confidence, and fraternal love, and has
strongly cemented the respect and affections of all per-
suasions and of all parties, to our Sovereign and to each
other.” Governor Young, on another occasion, took the
chair at a meeting in aid of the cathedral, and it is in the
hope that I may by my presence here assist in the good work
in some manner, that 1 have availed myself of the
courteous invitation of his Eminence and. that I am
here to-night. While, of course, 1 hold per-
sonally to the doctrine and system of that
branch of the Christian Church to which l myself belong,
I conceive that in these great colonies it is the duty of the
Queen’s representative, when acting in his public capacity,
to know no distinctions of creed or religious denomination—
(loud applause) —and I am very glad to be able to
show my sympathy with any work which is intended to
serve our common Christianity, and which commands the
religious adhesion of so large a section of Her Majesty’s
subjects in this colony. (Loud applause.) Religious
belief, in my opinion, is the foundation on which all good
citizenship should rest; and, as Lord Macaulay has so well
expressed it: —“ The real security of our common
Christianity is to be found in its benevolent morality, in its
exquisite adaptation to the human heart, in the consolation
which it brings to the house of mourning, and in the light
with which it brightens the great mystery of the grave.”
(Loud cheers.)
Cheers were given for Lord Carrington, for the Governors
of the other colonies, and for Lady Carrington, and the
proceedings then terminated.


AUSTRALIA 100 YEARS AGO.
THURSDAY, JANUARY 26.
The following leader appeared in the Sydney Morn-
ing Herald on January 26 :
Australia wakes up this morning to find itself one
hundred years old. Strictly speaking it is only Sydney
that has attained that age, for on the 26th of January,
1 1 88, Australia—using the name not in its geographi-
cal sense, but as expressive of an area of colonisation—
did not extend more than a musket-shot from the
mouth of the Tank Stream. The guests at Govern-
ment House, looking from the entrance gates down
Bridge-street may see pretty nearly the spot
where the first germ was planted that has grown
to what we see to-day. The actors on that occasion
were too incurious of the future, and were too little
aware of what they were doing, to preserve with any re-
verence the spot where the first rude flagstaff wa3 erected,
but, judging from the accounts in the books, it must
have been close to where Macquarie-place now stands.
In later years a small obelisk was put up in the
locality as a surveyor’s mark, from which all
roads were measured as from their starting-point.
Erected for. one purpose, it may well serve for
anolher, and it might fitly bear the historic inscription
“ Here began Australiafor that was the site of the
Government camp on the morrow of the debarkation,
and all that has since been done in the way of dis-
covery, occupation, and improvement, has radiated from
that centre.
Novelists, in satirising human nature, often make
their characters who have risen to success in life exhibit
great anxiety to conceal the obscurity of their origin,
and make them persecute the Heralds’ College° to
trace some imaginary descent from a noble familv,
and give the right to old armorial bearings. Com-
munities, too, are not free from the same vanity, and
many an aneient tradition runs history up into fable,
and traces nations to heroes, and heroes to demigods,
10-ciay we patronise no such myths, and indulge in no
vain imaginations. We do not pretend to falsify his-
tory, or conceal the key of the closet that contains the
skeleton. We own up to the truth that Australia
began as a convenience to Great Britain, as a distant
prison. It was no band of adventurous colonisers,
no fugitives from tyranny, no persecuted
saints, that sought to plant the flag of
commerce and of liberty upon these shores.
A hundred years ago, the Union Jack, when unfurled for
the first time on the Australian shore waved over onlv an
unwalled gaol. What we pride ourselves on is the
fact that the settlement outgrew its origin, and com-
pletely effaced the traces of it. Thanks to the physical
resources of the country itself, and the enterprise of
the population that was drawn hither, a penal settle-
ment, after a few early struggles, passed into a free and
prosperous, community. Just as the acorn when
planted dies as such and gives birth to an oak
which has gathered all its sustenance from
a fertile soil and free air, so the seed that
was planted by the margin of Sydney Cove has lost
its form, and even its substance, and has grown by
what it has fed on into a group of as orderly and pros-
perous communities as the sun shines upon. Indeed,
the social development of Australia is quite as remarkable
as its material progress. In no part of the world i 3
money, more freely voted for educational purposes.
I here is an ambition to establish on broad foundations
all tlw tivLosing agencies of modem times, and reli-
gioas agencies are liberally sustained. But for the records
which remain, the character of Australia’s origin would
not be guessed at, for there is nothing to disclose it
Early Australia did not last more than thirty years.
There was very little indeed done during the first
twenty. After that Macarthur’s wool discovery began
to tell, and the spread of the people and the founding
of other settlements gave to the term Australia a
wider meaning. It meant by 1840 the Britk k flag in
Van Diemen’s Land, in Polynesia, at Swan itiver, in
St Vincent’s Gulf, in Port Phillip, and in Brisbane.
Considering the small number of persons engaged
in the task, that degree of expansion, though each
nucleus was a small one, was something to
boast of. But when the gold discovery came, then
indeed Australia was “precipitated into a nation.”
That was the beginning of the great future. N lt
brought free labour in abundance, and speculative ad-
venturers by the shipload. From that time till now—
that is during half-a-century—the enormous progress
has been made which to-day we survey with so much
justifiable pride. All this spread of settlement, all
these great cities, all these railways, all this vast pas-
toral and agricultural operation, has been practically
the work of fifty years—for the first half-century
consisted of tentative beginnings. To be strictly
accurate, we call it the work of a century ; but in esti-
mating the probabilities of the future, it would be a
safer datum to treat Australia as only 50 years old.
As we have said, the Australia over the extent of
which we exult to-day is the composite result of two
forces—the intrinsic capabilities of the country, and
the energy of the men who have occupied it. Matter
and men have each furnished their contribution.
Nobody knew what the country was when the experi-
ment was first made, and had it been the barren
sandy waste that some of the early Dutch discoverers
thought it, the soil would have yielded to the
world no great nation. Government money might
have been poured out like water upon the thirsty soil,
but the planted germ would only have shown its tender
leaves to be scorched like Jonah’s gourd. Happily,
the country possessed the capacity for supporting a
larger number of people, and that capacity gradually
disclosed itself. It is not fully known even yet; but
from time to time, as larger resources were needed,
they have been unfolded. There has never been a day
when it could be truthfully said, “ The country is
overstrained, and can support no more.” Nor will our
children, nor our children’s children, live to see that day.
And even if the country, good as it is, had fallen
into unenterprising hands, it might have been a settle-
ment, but it would not be the Australia of to-day. We
have a right to be proud of the colonising capacity of
our countrymen. To the achievement of what” we
count up to-day there has gone an immense amount of
energy, endurance, and daring; and in the midst
of our congratulations and enjoyments we call t®
mind with pleasure and with pride the gallant work
done by the pioneers of our civilisation, and the moral
quality, as well as the mental labour and the muscle,
that have been wrought into the fibre of Australian
life. Our position to-day is not an unlaboured growth,
it is the product of immense toil; and we recognise,
in the fullest spirit of gratitude those labours of a
generation parsed away which it is ours to continue
and complete.


THE CENTENNIAL INTERCOLONIAL AGRICULTURAL EXHIBITION.
The Exhibition of the Agricultural Society of New
South Wales, which was promoted as one of the most
fitting and appropriate method* of commemorating the
Centenary of the colony, commenced on Tuesday, the 24th
of January. The Society, having been liberally subsidised
by the Government, endeavoured to make the exhibition
worthy of the occasion, and although in some instances the
general arrangements suffered from a want of organisa-
tion, due in a great measure to the limited space of time
into which an unusual amount of work had to be
compressed, the society are to be congratulated
upon the fact that they organised one of the most
complete exhibitions of the kind that has ever been
attempted here, and one which was prolific in all
the material signs of progress, and bore abundant testi-
mony to the extent of our resources. With a large special
Government endowment at their disposal, the society
were in a position to offer attractive inducements to
exhibitors, and the result was most satisfactory,
as the entries numbered upwards of 4000, and
comprised almost everything connected with our
pastoral and agricultural industries, manufactures, and
mineral wealth. At the present time the enclosure at
Moore Park is very different in appearance from what it
was a few months ago, and the handsome permanent
structures will long remain as a memorial of the important
event which brought them into existence. In the first
place the . original grand stand, which has done
duty for some seasons, and which is erected
just where it ought not to be, has dwindled
into insignificance when contrasted with the
commodious structure which now occupies a portion of
the northern side of the ground. Another special
improvement was made in connection with the pavilion
on the eastern hill, by the erection of two large
annexes ; and the working dairy building is a valuable and
novel addition to the property of the society, as is the
large structure which contains 40 loose boxes for stallions.
The machinery section was very creditable, and in addition
to leading Sydney firms agricultural machinery and imple-
ments were sent from Victoria, South Australia, and New
Zealand. A great many novelties were shown, notably
machinery for harvesting purposes. The cattle section
was much larger than it has been since 1879.
A noteworthy feature in this section was the steady
advance, evidenced by the number of Ayrshires and
Aldemeys on the ground, of dairy farming stock in contra-
distinction to beef breeds. In horses, the thoroughbreds
were not numerous compared with previous shows, but what
there were may fairly be described as high class, the
celebrated *' Monmouth and Segenhoe being most
honoured. - The trotters were a remarkably fine lot, and it is
evident that this particular class of horse is becoming very
popular in the colony. Childe Harold stock stood out in
relief as prize winners. The draught stock was quite up to
the average, and the pony class was also well-filled. In
the horse section generally, Andrew Town is a leading
prize- taker. The dogs and poultry formed two large and in-
teresting sections. There were about 400 exhibits of dogs,
and, as usual, the fox-terrier class was largely filled,
and the first prize takers were exceptionally good.
The Italian greyhounds formed an attractive class, and
though the St. Bernards exhibited were few in number, the
breeding was undeniable. Bulldogs were also satisfactorily
represented, and the same remark will apply to collies and
greyhounds. As to the poultry, pigeons, and canaries, the
season was a bad one for such exhibits, but notwithstanding
all drawbacks they formed uninteresting collection. In pigs,
the Berkshires and white Yorkshires took a prominent
position, lhe Berkshires did not consist of a very large
class, but there was a close competition between them,
and some of the animals required careful judging. In the
main pavilion and its annexes were well stocked with choice
colonial products. In front of the main entrance there
were some trophies of sugarcane, a remarkably
beautiful collection of ferns of all kinds, fern trees’,
cabbage palms, &c., which were artistically arranged.
The collection of flowers was also a satisfactory one.
The evidence of the mineral resources of the colony
displayed excited more than mere passing interest. Running
almost the entire length of the pavilion were a series of glass
cases containing numerous exhibits of mineral ores from
the Department of Mines, and these were flanked by
pyramidal trophies of block tin, and ingots of copper, and
also antimony ore and star antimony. The gold ore sent in
by the same department was also highly interesting, and it
contained specimen quartz from the Mother Shipton mine ;
samples of alluvial and reef gold from all parts of the
colony, and a quantity of gem stones. A block of
Waratah coal was exhibited, and the Mining Department was
a further exhibitor of an excellent collection of indigenous
timbers and mining and geological maps. The work of
arranging the exhibits was ably carried out by Mr. J. E.
Carne, curator of the Mining Museum. The Technological
Museum sent in a large quantity of polished colonial
timbers, some of the pieces being sft. long by 2ft. lOin.
wide. The same department, too, exhibited a large number
of illustrations of New South Wales flora, and some
samples of wool grown at Parramatta in 1804, together
with a piece of very old hardwood—in an excellent
state of preservation which was recently taken from
a well in George-street, near Bridge-street. The
Wheal Victoria and Wheal Australia tin-mining com-
panies, Inverell, displayed very neatly arranged pyramid
as an indication of what the mines named can
produce in the way of lode and stream tin, of which a
collection weighing some four tons was exhibited.
Adjacent to the main entrance there was a
very valuable exhibit by the Karapoi (New Zealand)
Woollen Manufacturing Company, who furnished a very
strong proof of what energy and enterprise are capable of
achieving without any special assistance in the way
of protection. On the eastern wall, Mr. Maiden,
curator of the Technological Museum, had ar-
ranged 506 different species of pressed Australian
herbs and flowers, which took an immense amount
of time to collect and prepare, and some of the lead-
ing photographers exhibited excellent work from their
several studios. The fruit and vegetables in the annexes
were remarkably good—the former especially—and the maize
and sugar growing industries of the Clarence were well re-
presented, while the dairy produce was well to the fore.
Although the Opening (Second) Day, January 25, was
not proclaimed a general holiday the public attended
the ground in large numbers, and during the afternoon
there must have been close upon ten thousand
people present. At a quarter-past 1 o’clock his
Excellency the Governor, accompanied by the Governors
of the other colonies, also Lord Bertie and Major
Gascoigne, A.D.C., and escorted by a number of
mounted police under Sub-inspector Thompson, arrived
within the enclosure. His Excellency was re-
ceived by Sir John Robertson (president of the society)
Sir Henry Parkes, and the Hon. John Lackey, M.L.C.,
(vice-presidents), Mr. W. W. Richardson (chairman), and
several members of committee, and conducted to that por-
tion of the new grandstand which had been specially set
apart and prepared for his use, and that of other distin-
tinguished visitors. Among these we noticed Sir Henry
Loch (Governor of Victoria), Sir William Robinson
(Governor of South Australia), Sir Anthony Mus-
grave (Governor of Queensland), Sir William Jer-
vois (Governor of New Zealand), Sir Robert
Hamilton (Governor of Tasmania), Sir Frederick
Broome (Governor of Western Anstralia;, Sir
Charles Mitchell (late Governor of Fiji), the Duke of
Manchester, Sir Edward Strickland, Sir William Manmng,


Sir Patrick Jennings, Mr. Justice Faucett, Mr. Justice
Windeyer, Mr. Justice Owen, the Hon. J. F. Burns
(Treasurer), Hon. John Sutherland (Minister for Works),
Hon. B. R, Wise (Attorney-General), Hon. J. Inglis
(Minister of Education), Hon. W. Clarke (Minister for
Justice), Hon. F. Abigail (Minister for Mines), Major-
General Richardson, Colonel Roberts, Bishop Barry, the
Hon. J. F. M‘Bain (President of the Legislative Council
of Victoria), Hon. M. H. Davies (Speaker of the Legisla-
tive Assembly of Victoria), Hon. J. H. Young (Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales), Aider-
man Benjamin (Mayor of Melbourne), Prince Poutiatine
and Count Apraxine (of the Russian corvette Ryndal, and
E. M. Paul (Russian Consul) were also present at the
ceremony. The Grand Duke Alexander, who is a lieutenant
on board the same vessel, was unable to visit the show-
ground, owing to the pressure of his duties on board. As
soon as Lord Carrington had reached the grand stand Mr.
Richardson read the following address: —
‘‘ Agricultural Society of New South Wales, Sydney.
‘To his Excellency the Governor, the Right Hon. Baron
Carrington, G.C.M.G.
“ May it please your Excellency,—
“ For the third time your Excellency does us the honour
to open an exhibition of our society, and it is with more
than ordinary gratification that we receive the honour from
your hands on this the occasion of the opening of the Exhi-
bition, which will assist in emphasising the completion of
the Centenary of Australasia.
“ Whilst fully realising the exalted position your Ex-
cellency occupies in our midst, we record with pride your
Excellency’s personal efforts in association with this society
to give an impetus to the industries it represents.
“ The undertaking which your Excellency will pre-
sently declare an accomplished fact has been attended by
more than usual anxiety—the work of months having
been necessarily crowded into weeks; but the compensa-
tion is a splendid one in the 4000 entries recorded in the
catalogue which is now in your Excellency’s hands. .
“ Throughout Australasia fine seasons have lately pre-
vailed, and brightened prospects are opening for the great
producing interests. Although we cannot claim to show
your Excellency evidences of the progress this country has
made since the great historical event in Captain Cook’s
career, yet we have satisfaction in pointing to the material
wealth _ represented in the live stock, agricultural, and
industrial sections brought together in so short a time, and
at a period of the year least suitable.
“ Thanking your Excellency for doing us the honour to
preside on this occasion, we now ask that you will be
pleased to declare the Great Centennial Intercolonial Ex-
hibition open.
“ W. W. Richardson,
“ Chairman of Council.
“ Moore Park, Sydney, January 20, 1888.”
His Excellency replied : Mr. Piesident and members
of the Agricultural Society of New South Wales, Mr,
Richardson, and Gentlemen, —It is with feelings of the
utmost satisfaction that I receive this address at your
hands on such an all-important occasion as the opening of
vour Exhibition in connection with the Centennial celebra-
tions of this colony. While deeply realising the difficulties
with which you have had to contend, I cannot but congra-
tulate you upon the successful result of your labours, and I
venture to hope that there may be a succession of good
seasons during the second century of the colony (Applause.)
I now declare the exhibition open. (Cheers.)
At the invitation of Mr. Richardson three hearty cheers
were then given for the Queen, the Governor, and Lady
Carrington, and this brought the formal ceremony to a
close.
THE BANQUET.
Shortly after the exhibition had been declared open
an adjournment was made to the spacious luncheon room
under the new grand stand, where the commemorative
banquet took place. Mr. W. W. Richardson occupied
the chair, having on his right his Excellency Lord
Carrington, and on his left his Excellency Sir Henry Loch,
Governor of Victoria. The vice-regal representatives of
the other colonies were also seated at the same table
together with Sir Henry Parkes and other members of the
Ministry. The guests numbered between 300 and 400, and
in addition to the names already given in connection with
the opening: ceremony, the following gentlemen may be
mentioned as among those present at the banquet:—
Hon. Francis Ormond, M.L.C. (Victoria), Colonel
Sargood (Victoria), Hon. H. W. Nein, Lieutenant-
Commander F. Raymond Pelly, R.N. (H.M.S.
Undine), Hon. C. J. Ham, M.L.C. (Victoria),
Hon. J. C. Bray (South Australia), Herr K Krauel
(Consul-General for Germany), C. L. Hill, M.L.A.
(Queensland), Rabbi Davies, Colonel Roberts. Major
Mackenzie, Mr. Justice Cooper (Queensland), Hon. W.
Forrest (Queensland), Hon. James Balfour (Victoria),
Major Pritchard, A.D.C. (Queensland), Inspector-General
Fosbery, the Hons. Andrew Garran, LL.D., J. B. Rundle,
R. H. Roberts, G. H. Cox, H. Mort, E. YVebb, E.
Vickery, S. A. Joseph, YV. Halliday, P. L. Shepherd, J.
Lucas, W. H. Suttor, F. T. Humphrey, J. Davies, George
Lee, G. Campbell, R. H. D. ‘ White, R. Hill,
and S. Charles, Ms.L.C. ; Messrs. G. R. Dibbs,
W. J. Lyne, H. Copeland, A. Wilson, J.
Hurley, J. M'Farlane, W. C. Wilkinson, H. Clarke,
J. E. Tonkin, R. B. Wilkinson, S. Burdekin,
G. Withers, W. L. Davis, H. H. Brown, J. Haves,
J. S. Hawthorne, W. J. Trickett, J. See, T. Colls, YV.
Stephen, D. A. Ferguson, A. Bowman, T. H. Hassall, J.
Gordon, Ms,L.A.; Messrs. D. L. Dymock (president of the
Kiama Agricultural Association), Walter Lamb, A. A.
Dangar, T. A. Dibbs, G. N. Griffiths, P. R. Gordon,
Charles B. Fairfax, Samuel Cook, and Ernest Favenc.
An excellent repast, well laid and served, was provided by
F. VV. Forster, of Forster’s Hotel, Castlereagh-street, and
this having been duly attended to, several toasts were pro-
posed and responded to.
Mr. Richardson proposed “The Queen,” which was
received with enthusiasm.
Sir John Robertson proposed “His Excellency the
Governor.” He said he had been in the colony since re-
sponsible Government was inaugurated, and he thought
they had never had a better Governor than Lord Carring-
ton. (Applause.)
The toast was drunk with all the honours.
Lord Carrington, in responding, said: Your chairman
has told us that there is a rule, and I venture to think that
it is a very wise and good rule, that no person should be
toasted at the meetings of this society excepting the
Sovereign. On this occasion, however, my health has been
proposed, and I feel it all the more, as an exceptional
honour, and I return my most respectful and grateful
thanks for the toast and the hearty reception accorded to it.
I gladly take this opportunity—this being the first time i"
have had the privilege of meeting the Prime Minister in
public since the event—to congratulate Sir Henry Parkes
on the high distinction her Majesty the Queen has
conferred upon him—(Applause.)—and I go so far
as to say, and I believe this gathering will go
with me, that we look upon this high and well-
merited distinction not only as a compliment to the
great statesman, but to the colony. (Applause.) I also
take the opportunity of congratulating a gentleman who
bears the same patronymic as myself—Mr. Edwin Smith,
Mayor of Adelaide—upon having received a high and well-
merited distinction. I also congratulate him upon the
triumphant success which has attended the Adelaide Exhi-
bition. (Applause.) I hope that a similar result will
attend the Melbourne Exhibition, at which we all hope to
assist, and that it; will experience the triumphant success
which it deserves. (Applause.) On my arrival in this
colony two years ago the colony was suffering from
the effects of such bad seasons as might have shaken the
foundation of the most solid prosperity, but, thank God, the
drought has now broken up, and the courage and energy of
the people of New South Wales has brought back to us all
that we thought we had lost. (Applause.)
Sir Henry Parkes (who was received with cordiality)
said : It devolves upon me to submit to you a toast
which I am quite sure you will all drink in


bumpers. For the first time we see assembled
in this city Her Majesty the Queen’s representa-
tives from every Australian colony—(applause) - and
I am sure that it must be gratifying to all to find that his
Excellency the Governor of New Zealand, though so far
removed from us, has at great inconvenience come here to
assist us in celebrating this eventful day. (Cheers.) , We
have also the Governor of that glorious little island Tas-
mania—(Hear, hear)—that little island which has gone
through such eventful changes since the British
flag was hoisted in this part of the world;
and then we have the Governors of all the
sister colonies of the continent, and I am sure that
we should not feel at all content if we separated without
drinking the health of these distinguished servants of the
Crown. (Cheers.) Without exception, they are distin-
guished men, because, apart from the accidental position
they occupy as servants of her Majesty, some of them have
rendered brilliant services in other parts of the world before
they came amongst us. It would be, of course, invidious
to point to any of these distinctions; but it is a source of great
satisfaction to every Australian colonist to feel that the
greatest care and clearest discernment are always exercised
in appointing to these high offices English gentlemen.
(Applause.) We have never had a man since the advent of
responsible Government who was not, above all
things, a high-minded gentleman. (Hear, hear.)
We have had in many cases men of marked
personal distinction and of great personal abilities.
The gentlemen assembled at this board now in no way
impair that high enconium upon a high and important body
of gentlemen, and I think that the Centennial Governors
have worthily represented their august Queen, and faith-
fully performed their duties here within the limits and
obligations of our constitution. (Applause.) Without
saying more, I ask you to drink with the utmost en-
thusiasm the healths of their Excellencies the Governors
of the Australian colonies. (Loud and continued cheer-
ing.)
Sir Henry Loch (who was received with enthusiasm)
said that he had been suddenly called upon to discharge
the very important and responsible duty of responding for
seven Governors, himself included. (Cheers and laughter.)
It was only when he entered this room that he was aware
that this responsibility would be placed upon him. He
believed that this was the first occasion, as stated by Sir
Henry Parkes, upon which the Governors of all the Aus-
tralasian colonies had ever met together to celebrate any
public event - (applause)—and he trusted that their
coming together on that occasion might be accepted as a de-
sire on their part to do honour to the great occasion which
had called them together, namely, to celebrate the centen-
nial of Australia. (Applause.) It seemed that they had
arrived at that period in the life and history of Australia
w hen there was a general understanding that they should
take stock as regarded the progress of the past, and also
look forward and take a new departure for the
future. (Cheers.) And looking back, he thought
that amorgst the industries of the country there
was no industry which had shown more progressive results
than that of agricultural products. (Applause.) Although
there was a special impetus given to the Australian colonies
by the discovery of gold, the soundest foundation upon
which the prosperity and greatness of a country could be
based was that derived from the products of the soil. (Hear,
hear.) These products, whether in grain or the growth of
cattle or sheep, were essential to the well being of the
country—(hear, hear) —and they also led to the development
of a healthy, vigorous population, which was the back-
bone of the country. (Hear, hear.) It always afforded
him the greatest pleasure to visit agricultural shows. This
was the first in this colony at which he had the pleasure to
be present, and he looked forward with much gratification
to going round the yards after the banquet, though
he had heard enough to enable him honestly to say
that he could "well congratulate New South Wales
upon the success of the exhibition. (Hear, hear.) He
only wished that the great shows which were now being
held in all the colonies could take some intercolonial form —
(hear, hear) —as it would bring together the producers of
the colonies. (Hear, hear.) He was well aware that dis-
tance and other reasons rendered such a result at present
impossible; but all the colonies were being brought rapidly
into communication with each other by railroad, and he
trusted that this year might be made the occasion of the
colonies drawing closer and closer together—(cheers)—
with an earnest desire that where difficulties existed
those differences should either be removed or ameliorated ;
and bearing in mind that the permanent prosperity of one
colony must mainly depend upon the continued prosperity
of all the colonies. (Loud and continued applause.) He
had now the pleasure of proposing “ Success to the Agri-
cultural Society, coupled with the name of the chairman,
Mr. Richardson.” (Cheers.)
Mr. .Richardson responded as follows Your Excel-
lencies, my Lords, and Gentlemen, —I can hardly
express the pride and pleasure I feel in
having the honour to occupy the chair on this
most singular occasion, for it is the first time in the historv
of the colony that so many of her Majesty’s
representatives have sat at the same board. On behalf
of the Council, and for myself, I thank you
most heartily for the kind way in which you have honoured
the toast. We have done our best to make the show a
success, and have been ably assisted by some of the repre-
sentatives of country societies and the press. In
reviewing the material progress of the country during
the past century in as short a manner as possible, it is re-
corded that in 1788 the Governor was greatly grieved
at hearing that five ewes and one lamb had been killed
at a farm not far from the site of the present
railway station, and it is now a little more than 50 years
since her Majesty first ascended the throne and although
only a youngster at the time I can recollect it fairly well,
as we had no bread to eat, and flour at that time was £lOO
a ton. Now, your Excellencies and gentlemen, we have in
this colony alone upwards of 42,000,000 of sheep, with an
estimated output of 223,000,0001 b. of wool, and we
have in all the Australasian colonies a pro-
duction of over 40,000,000 bushels of wheat;
and we possess over 90,000,000 sheep, 9,000,000 cattle,
nearly 1,500,000 horses, over 1,000,000 pigs—to say nothing
of hares and rabbits. (Cheers and laughter.) As the day
is drawing on, and many of those here present may not have
another opportunity of visiting the show after to-dav, I
will now ask you to go round the grounds, hoping that
what you see may leave a pleasurable impression on your
minds, not only of the show, but of the centennial time at
Sydney.
On the 26th the attendance at the Exhibition was
enormous, and was about three times as large as on the
preceding day. The judging was further proceeded with,
among the awards made being that for the Tribune
Hunters’ Plate, and those in connection with the wool
classes. The Naval Artillery Band, under the direction of
Mr. J. Craig, played a number of selections within the en-
closure of the grand stand. At about 2.30 p.m. consider-
able excitement was caused at the entrance gates
by some one alighting from a landau and urging
the crowd to force their way into the enclosure
without paying, and tendering at the same
time the information that the ground was public property,
and consequently open to all. As a result of this demon-
stration there was a general rush to the main gates, which
under the great pressure put forward soon gave way, the
woodwork surrounding the fastenings being broken. Im-
mediately this happened numbers of persons passed in, and
fully 1500 entered before the police could prevent any
further influx in this manner, and before order could be
restored. t
The counter attractions of the Anniversary Regatta and the
Intercolonial Cricket Match had an appreciable effect upon
the attendance at the Agricultural Exhibition on the
27th, but notwithstanding this fact the society are to be
congratulated upon the share of public patronage accorded
to them. During the afternoon the number of visitors on
the ground probably numbered about 8000, and both grand-
stands had a considerable number of occupants. 4he
principal attraction was the jumping and trotting competi-


tion, and the parades of stock also appeared to be very
popular. Within the area set apart for machinery, and
close to the running track, Wolseley’s Steam Sheep
Shearer was m full operation, aud the Australian Sheep
Shearer, driven by compressed air, was also worked, as
they were located close together the crowds wlio inspected
them had an excellent opportunity of estimating their value.
There was a great falling off in the attendance at the
Centennial Show Ground on the 28th, and the total
number of persons who went out could not have exceeded
3000. This may probably be accounted for by the fact
that a day’s racing took place at Randwick, and attracted a
very large number of people. During the forenoon some
unpleasantness occurred at the main gate, owing
to certain persons insisting upon the right of
free entrance, and two men did actually force
their way in. As, however, they subsequently
assaulted two of the officials, one of whom was the Hon. G.
H. Cox, M.L.C., they were promptly arrested by the
police and locked up. Owing to this unpleasantness the
gate was kept partially closed during the afternoon, but
this precaution was unnecessary as there was no further
disturbance of a serious character. As usual the jumping
contests were watched during the afternoon with cl.se
interest, and the fact that the day’s competition
was to be the final for the Licensed Victuallers’
1 late seemed to render the jumping specially
attractive. The conditions of the event were as
follows “ For horses that have not been first, second, or
third in a steeplechase since January 1, 1887 ; to carry 11
stone, and, in the opinion of the judges, to he up to that
weight with hounds. Amateur riders, to be approved of by
the council, and to ride in steeplechase or hunting costume.
Open to horses and riders from any of the Australian
colonies or New Zealand. The horses to be judged for
general hunting qualifications, and to be tried twice round
the jumping track on the show ground, on each of two
afternoons, over such fences as the council may decide •
three jumps in each round.” The winner turned up in
Henry Vollmer’s brown mare Lady Bird, 8 years 4 months
old, and bred by C. Vollmer, of Woodville. Trevarthen’s
Hart (Goulbum) took second honours, A. K. Lee’s (West
Maitland) Rocket was third, and G. L. Lee’s (West Mait-
land) Lblis fourth. The working dairy was again freely
patronised, and the operations of butter-making, cream-
separating, &c., were carried on in the presence of Quite
a crowd of spectators.
Notwithstanding the fact that to some extent the show
had lost its attractiveness to many persons owing to the
departure of a number of the stock, the attendance of
visitors on the 30th was satisfactory, about 5000 bein°-
present during the afternoon. As far as the general public
w ere concerned, a considerable amount of interest was mani-
fested m the sale of stock, but in regard to buyers it could not
be said that they exhibited much desire to speculate. The
purchases made were few. Great interest was taken
m the final contest for the Distance Handicap Trot, and
the race, althoue-h not an exciting one. was watched
by a good many people. Town’s Viking won rather
easily from Garryowen, and the latter lost all chance
by the frequency with which he broke during the
race. Bromley was third, and might have carried off
second honours were it not that he also broke just on the
jo Full descriptions of the sections and the awards are sub-
HORSES.
Judges: Blood- Messrs. A. Loder, G. Dougharty, E. O.
F a’ V,- L ° We ’ L ' H - Hasßal1 ’ ALL.A., W. Kellett,
A- Badgery; trotters Messrs. Thos. Love J
Shepherd, J. Rutherford, H. Mackenzie; heavy draught
and active farm-Messrs. S. Clift, J. T. Junor, J. Evans
J. Graham, H. G. Morton, J. Readford; coaching, road-
sters, miscellaneous, and teams—Messrs. G. Loder F W
J - Si “ Pher<i ' F ' U,dser *
occupied by 1 « c m’S tap”
easily established. Chester’s brother, Monmouth, havin'*
prizes on two previous occasions, was not
eligible to compete again, but he was awarded the Cen-
tennial Prize, while the first award fell to his
companion, Segenhoe. Both have grown into really grand
horses, and are likely to be a deal more successful at shows
and the stud than they were on the turf. Segenhoe, who
is a full brother to Richmond, Bos worth, &c., won the
Maribyrnong Plate in 1881, and Monmouth put a race or
two to his credit; but it is their blood rather than their
performances in public that entitles them to their proud
positions. They are the property of Mr. ‘Andrew
i own, of Richmond, and it is worthy of remark that
the squire of Robartville carried off most of
the prizes for which the stock reared by him competed.
Ihe second prize was secured by Forest King, by Mari-
bvnong from Zarifa, a neat but rather small-looking* brown
the property of Sullivan Brothers, of Rock Forest, near
Bathurst. _ Glorious (imp.) looked the picture of health
and condition. He has a beautiful rich colour, which is
set off by a handsome blaze, and has the appear-
ance of being a thorough gentleman. He is the sire
of such well-known performers as Boolka and Santa Claus
and it may fairly be said that Mr. Mitchell’s pride of
1 able Top never produced a bad one. Siaonara was there,
looking as gay as a two-year-old ; but there is scarcely
enough of the son of Maribyrnong and Sappho to enable
him to compete with the most prominent stallions, though
his blood is equal to anything in the world. Othello, by
Ihe Barb from 1 airy Queen, was commended.* He was a
very fast horse in his time, and once carried some-
thing like 12st. ilb. to the front for a welter race
at Randwick. Bower, by Daldi from Poetess, was not
much to look at; but Emperor had a nice looking, even if
unsociable, representative in Poor Paddy. Here acquaint-
ance was renewed with County Boy who, some seasons ago,
was regarded as being one of the fastest horses in the
country ; and with the Hawkesburv Handicap winner,
Hastings, who has filled out and furnished into a very
fine animal. A prize was not given in Class 2, for stallions
3-vears-old ; but Mr. C. Allen’s Comedia, by Dante from
Guizette, by Tim Whiffler, come in for commendation.
Classes 3 and 4 got mixed in the catalogue, and when the
tangle up was mastered, the first prize for stallion, 2 years,
t° Mr* W. Kelso’s colt by Goldsbrough from Stella,
while the prize for yearlings was appropriated by Mr. A.
I own s chestnut, by Gloucester from Agitation, and the
second by Mr. R. Waddy’s Derelict, by Robinson Crusoe
from Beatrice. In the class for mares 4 years and over,
Mr. A. Town was again successful, as he obtained the
first and second awards with Sapphire and Queensdale, two
as highly-bred mares as there are in the colonies. Mr.
John MT.aughlin, of Waverely, was awarded the first prize
for filly 2 years old, through Rosabella, by Maribyrnong
from imported Rosedale j and the first prize for yearling
filly went to Mr. A. Town’s Egalite filly Fergus the Ist;
and the second to Mr. G. Clift’s bay, by Navigator from
Walruk, and one of the first of the Navigators. In ad-
dition to obtaining the first prize in her class. Sapphire
came in for the Centennial prize for the best blood mare or
filly, colonial bred.
'I he coaching horses were a very fine lot, and it is clear
that this particular breed is receiving the attention from
stock owners that its importance requires. Beacon, a tall
grand-looking bay, by Yorkshireman from Bonny, the
property of Hindmarsh Bros., of Kiania, got the first
prize for the best imported coach stallion. The
second went to Mr. G. S. Yeo, of Mulgrave, through
1 erfection, a fine strapping fellow by Coker’s Perfection,
from a mare by Old Phenomenon ; while His Royal High-
ness, by Lord Clifden from May Queen, was highly com-
mended. The colonial bred coach horses were superior to
those shown at any previous exhibition. A well-conditioned
and strapping stallion called Lord Ashton, by Lord John
(imp.) from Darkie, by Duke of Cleveland (imp.),
the property. of Mr. C. Keininger, secured first
prize for stallions 4 years and over; and the second
to Mr. W. Fisher’s Brown Shales, by
Shales. Mr. M‘Mahon’s candidate, Lord Beacon, by
Beacon (imp.) from a Duke of Cleveland mare, was
successful in the class for stallions three years and over,


wherein Young Perfection, by Perfection rimp.) from
lthica, bv Clansman, the property of Mr. John Algie. was
next In Class 13, for stallions over two years and under
three years, Lord Cyrus, by Lord John (imp.) from Jessy
(imp.), the property of Rindmarsh Brothers, or Kiama,
not onlv obtained the first prize, but aiso appro-
priated the Centennial prize; while the Centeimial prize
for the best mare three years and over went to
Mr. A. Nelson’s Kate, by Duke of Cleveland (imp ) from
Kate. An imported dark brown, by Tally-ho from Kath-
leen, the property of Mr. W. J. Clark, of Victoria, was
■judged to be the best stallion amongst the roadsters. Mr.
C. Allen secured the second award with Cock Robin while
The Swell, the propertv of Mr. J. G. Lackey, was mghly
commended. The trotting stock showed to great advan-
tage, and the exhibits were, without doubt, the best
that have ever been paraded before the public of
New South Wales. Amongst the youngsters Bur-
lington and Vikingshowed prominently. Doncaster (imp.),
a beautiful chestnut bv Elmo from Lady Emily, the
property of Dr. Slade, though a grand horse, got the
second pr ze for stallions 3 years and over; but went down
before Mr. G. Allen’s Tommy, bred by Mr. Town, by
Childe Harold from a Shakespeare mare. Childe Harold
was very successful with his progeny, and when the
Centennial Drive is completed trotting stock will go up m
value to an extent that will be sure to make the industry a
paying speculation. The Centennial Champion Prizes tor
the best trotting stallion (colonial bred), and for the best
trotting mare or fillv (colonial bred), went respectively to
Mr. A. G. Faithful’s Burlington and Mr. A. I owns
Violetta. The heavy draught were not so numerous as on
previous occasions, but the lack of number was made up m
excellence, and Messrs. J. E. Onus, G. S. Yeo, A. Town,
and John Trestrail secured the majority of the awards with
their representatives. In the active farm division Mr. A.
Graham’s Pride of Picton stood out superior to
his fellows, and the exhibits of Messrs. Town and Onus
came in for a great share of attention. Mr. A. A. Dangar s
special prize for the best cart stallion went to Mr. J. E.
Onus, of Richmond, through Clan Campbell. Ihe Cen-
tennial Champion prizes, for the best heavy draught
stallion and the best heavy draught mare, were secured by
Mr. A. Town, with a brown by Gallant Scotchman from
Countess and Duchess, by Prince of Wales from Countess.
Amongst the ponies were some of the most beautiful
animals that have ever been exhibited, and those shown
by Messrs. G. S. Yeo, John Bennett, John M‘Laughhn,
H. M'Quade, H. Clinch, J. Trestrail, W. Morgan,
and A. Town were amongst the most successful.
The Centennial champion prize for the best pony stallion
under 13 hands went to Mr. G. S. Yeo.’s Uncle lom> and
that for the best mare to Mr. Benson’s bay, bred by Mr. A.
Town. In the miscellaneous division Mr. T. M. Alcock s
special prize for the best buggy, horse, and turnout was
awarded to Mr. C. H. Durham’s Honesty, the donor having
withdrawn his horse Midnight from competition, ihe
hackneys were about up to the average, and the nomi-
nations of Messrs. E. H. Weston, G. T. Riley, and J- G.
Brown received the most attention from the judges. Ihe
general arrangements were very far from being faultless,
and some of the exhibits were mixed in their stall accommo-
dation a little too freely. ,
Messrs. Barker and Ebsworth, of Double Bay, secured
the first honours for the best pair of carriage horses
in harness, with a handsome and useful pair ot
hays possessing plenty of quality and style, but
these exhibitors were unfortunate in the class tor
single harness owing to their exhibit having arrived too
’ate for competition. Only two teams competed for the
prize offered for the best four-in-band turnout, m harness,
and the blue ribbon was awarded to Mr. Walter Doug as,
the well-known studmaster, of Inveralochy, nearGoulburn,
for a well-matched bay quartette, hv Lord Clnden, w l e
Messrs. Barker and Ebsworth had to be contented with
second honours for a mixed team of strong and stylist
roadsters. Mr. Douglas also secured, without competition,
the trophy presented by himself for best four-in- a J I
bred and owned bv exhibitor. For the best pair ot buggy
horses in harness,'Dr. G. M. Slate, Macquane-street, was
successful in getting the coveted decoration for the well-
performed pair, Hattie (imp.), by General Benton, and
Huon (imp.), by Almont, jun.; and second honours de-
servedly went to Dr. It. B. Warren, who exhibited a hand-
some pair ot bays by Yabba, bred by Mr. E. Henot in the
A 1 bury district. Mr. H. M'Quade’s bay mare Rosemary a
daughter of the defunct Vermont, jun., annexed the blue rib-
bon in the classfor singleharness horses; and Orlando, a well
shaped dapple brown, the property of Dr. A. Shewen,came
off victorious in the section for horses suitable to drive in a
dogcart or ladv’s phaeton. A very stylish turnout was
shown by Mr. Y. Alexander, owner of cab N0..3, who was
awarded the special prize, presented bv Mr. VV. W. Richard
son for best hansom cab turnout. The horse Lecturer is a
good upstanding brown, and the vehicle, which was turned
out bv ‘Messrs. Vial and Son, Castlereagh-street, is a most
creditable sample of the coachmakers’ art. A useful lot ot
horses competed in the class for Cavalry charge™, in which
the principal decoration was appropriated by Prince, an
upstanding animal, owned by Mr. J. Hardie, R,v ® rs^°“ '
Steelboy, the property of Mr. A. J. Dodds, securing second
honours. Queen's Messenger (imp.) by Messenger, bred in
Scotland, and introduced to this colony last year, had
nothing to touch him in the section for cobs
over 14 and under 15 hands; and the red ribbon
was awarded to Mr. M’Elhone’s Tinker. °ut of
the 14 entrances for the lrxbune Hunters Plate,
10 went through their first performance over fences
about 4 p.m., and the exhibition attracted large numbers of
spectators, who took a lively interest m the proceedings.
The gelding Myall was the first to face the timber, but he
discounted his chances by rapping several times, besides
striking one fence pretty hard. Lone Hand, a Manning
River bred horse, was more successful, and he was followed
by Rocket, who slightly rapped his hrst and third fence, but
cleared the others in good style. A Bega bred horse
bv Maribymong, touched the top rail m his round,
and the big chestnut Baldwin, by Duke of Cleveland,
struck his second fence with some emphasis. The best
performance was by the Lithgow representative, Victor
bv Trump Card, owned by Mr. W. F. Hayley. Re .T*?
ably piloted bv Mr. George Savage, and the style in which
he cleared his fences evoked well-deserved recognition
from the spectators. Giraffe, a northern district horse
baulked at his first fence; but the rMer could
hardlv be held blameless in the matter. Eventually,
however, he negotiated all his fen “ B / lth ™
a mistake. The Riverina-bred horse Gratis waa
inclined to be fractious at the commencement,
but he shaped well over the timber, and Walleroo did like-
wise. Waverley, a powerful brown horse, also showed a
decided liking for his work.
The following were the awards
Blood Horses (imported or colonial).—Stallion, 4 years an
over- A. Benson’s Segenhoe, by Manbyrnong Ihe bairn, 1,
Sullivan ‘ Brothers’ Forest King, by Manbyrnong—Zanfa 2;
Mr. James Mitchell’s Glonous (imp.), highly commended.
Stallion 6 vears and under 4 years: C. Allens Lomeaia, oy
Dante—Grizette, commended. Stallion, 2 years and under A
years: VV. Kelso’s Kedfem, by Goldsbrough—Stella, 1.
Stallion, 1 year and under 2 years: A. lowns , c ’
bv Gloucester—Agitation, 1; K. Waddy’s ch c Derelict, by
P-' u Crusoe—Beatrice, 2: John Tates ch c, by
. ~enuoi. (imp.)—Evangeline, highly oemmended. Mare, 4
vears ana A. Town’s b m Sapphire, by The Drummer
Amethvst, i: A. Town’s b m Queensdale, by Manbyrnong—
Kosedale. 2; J. L. Brown’s br m Glencora, by Yattendon-Foam,
highly commended. Filly, 2 years and under 3 yeaia. J.
M'Laughlin’s h f Rosabella, by Maribymong—Kosedale (imp-),
1- VV. H. Phillips’s br f Roma, by Testator— Beauty, 2. Filly,
1 year and under 2 years: A. Town’s b f, by Fergus 1.
Egalite, 1; Geo. Clift’s b f, by Navigator—Walrun, 2.
Centennial Champion Prizeforbest blood stallion, any age, c 1 -
nial bred : A. Town’s b h Monmoiuh, by Yattendon—Lady
Chester. Centennial Champion Prize, for best blood marc or
filly, any age, colonial bred: A. Town’s b m Sapphire, by ihe
Dmmmer —Amethyst.
Coach HoRSES.-Imported.-Stallion, 4 years and over : Hind-
marsh Brothers’ b h Beacon, by Yorkshireman-Bonny, yl, «•
r Yeo’s hr h Perfection, by Perfection, aam b Old
Phenomenon, 2. George Hindmarsh’s Ha K °>* l ”£d.
ness, by L«rd Clifden-May Queen, highly eommendea.
Coach Horses (colonial bred).-Stallion. 4 years and uver • •
Heininger’s Lord Ashton, hy Lord John (imp.)—Dai me, ,


William Fisher’s Brown Shales, by Shales, 2. Stallions, 3 years
old and over : F. M’Mahon’s, sen., Lord Bacon, by Bacon (imp.),
1; John Algie’s Young Perfection, by Perfection—lthica, 2.
stallions, over 2 years and under 3 years: Hindmarsh
Brothers Lord Cyrus, by Lord John (imp.), 1. Stal-
lions, 1 year and under 2. years : C. M’Cabe’s be 1.
Mare, 3 years o!d and over: E. C. Brav’s Lady Cleveland, by
Duke of Cleveland, 1 ; A. Town’s bm, 2 ; C. M'Cabe and II nl-
- Bros., highly commended. Filly, 2 years ola and unuer
J years: J. E. Onus’s bf, by Perfection, 1; A. Nelson’s Kate, by
Duke of Cleveland, 2. Centennial Champion Prize, for best
coaching stallion, any age, colonial bred: Hindmarsh Bros’.
Lord Cyrus, by Lord John (imp.)—Jessy (imp.). Centennial
Champion, for best coaching mare or filly, any age, colonial
bred : A. Nelson’s Kate, by Duke of Cleveland (imp.)-Kate.
Koadsters-Roadster stallion: W. J. Clarke’s br h (imp.), bj
lally-ho—Kathleen, 1. ‘ J
Trotting Horses, imported or colonial-bred.-Stallion, 3 years
old and over, toged useful trotting horses: Geo. Allen’s ch h
Tomim, by Childe Harold, 1 ; Dr. G. 11. Slate’s ch h Doncaster
(imp.), by Elmo—Lady Emily, 2. Mare, 3 years old and over ;
VinWM lo "' ns b m Violetta, jun., by Childe Harold -
Violetta, 1; A. town’s b ra Sylph (imp.), 2;
tr ~U w d eru, s . , ilmo s Vermontena, by Veimont, Jun.—
Hattie tVeir, highly commended. Trotting colt, 3 years old to
vLVi« d ha ™ e r ss : „ A - Town’s blk c Viking, by Childe Harold-
vioietta, 1, F. J. Meston’s b c George Augustus, by Childe
’ 2 ‘ T . Fllly ’ 3 - vears old > t 0 be tried in harness :S.
Moidem s Blmos \ ermontena, bv Vermont, Jun.—Hattie Weir,
L; J. Aheame’s b f, by Childe Haro.d-a Yorkshire
Hero mare, 2. Colt, 2 years old, to be tried in harness—
A. JL, Faithfull’s Burlington, by Bob Mason-Gracie, 1 ;
A. Gibson s Harold, by Childe Harold—Miss Patchen, 2: A.
Benson schc by Childe Harold—a Shakespeare mare,
n Colt, one year and under two years : A? Z
Faithtulls Brazil, by Childe Harold—Vina, 1. Filly
two years old, to be tried in harness: A. L. Faithfull’s’
r,, by Uob Mason—Josephine, 1; A. Town’s
? d ,, 1 p b - v h Chllde Harold—Ella Chieftain, 2; J. De V. Lamb’s
TOlv’ivl, J ° se P h mare, highly commended.
Filly, l jcar aiui under 2 years : A. Town’s b f bv Childe Harold
fw ft.ll? tch ® n ’, L . Centennial Champion Prize, for the best trot-
ting stallion (colonial bred) : A. L. Faithfull’s Burlington, by Bob
Mason Giacie. Centennial Champion Prize, for the best trotting
Harold*—V mlett i° nliil : A ' Town s Violetta, Jun., by Child?
Heavy Draught Horses.—Stallion (imp.), Clydesdale or
reputed Clydesdale, 4 years old and over : J. E. Onus’Cbm
Alta (In i‘ P ' ’ b T» P arale 7’ 1 : W. J. Clarke's Prince of
Albyn (imp.), by Prince ot Wales—Jewel, 2. Stallion (imp)
shire or reputed shire, 4 years old and over : Geo. S. Yeo’s
Wapping Butcher (imp.), 1; Geo. S. Yeo’s Everton
Tom (imp.', by Ihumper, 2. Stallion, colonial-bred, 4 vears
nd over : A. Town’s br h, by Gallant Scotchman—Countess,
o’. *• T-yndeUnll sbr h Topsman, by Young Topsman (imp.),
and’ W F \ t !l ' Ck ( lat ® T !7 bbo ''ne), by Peter the Great,
Stallion \ ~l ops by Youn S Topsman, commended,
shot hv il ; d und ® r * years : John Trestrail’s brcGun-
-s“?*’ by B * G , u , n (imp-)—Jeanme, 1; A. Town’s br c, by Gallant
•now? i ma ? Cuchess, 2. Mare, 4 years old and over, w.tli or
Kentvre slm-' t V " Bur " side Mary (imp.), by King of
Sf vJf.L.tik 1 ’ r» A * low ? s Buchess (with foal at foot by
bt. latuck), by Prince of Wales—Countess, 2 ; Alexander
o 1 P, nces f’ by i° lll1 £ Banker, highly commended. Filly,
J jtais old and under 4 years : A. Town’s brf, bv Gallant Scotch-
Z’ Town’s bf, by Gallant Scotchman—Victorian
menHnH’ 2; wii E ' O ° nUS 8 by Shieldbearer—Helton Kate, com-
p ff' ™*y- 2 y ea i; s <dd and under 3 years ;A. Town’s bf, by
Gallant Scotchman—\°ung Countess, 1 ; A. Town’s bf, by Gal-
lant Scotchman- Australian Maggie, 2.
f ’ AR ? Norsks (including Suifolks).-Stallion, 3 years old
p ada P. ted I( > r producing active farm horses :A.
Graham sPride of licton.by Carlton Tom (imp.), 1 ; J. E. Onus’s
RovafprWe n h e m Uunlo P (imp.), 2; A. Amos’s Prince Roval, by
A Tnww p a h *k y «°™ lllended - Mares, 3 years old and' over :
ru ?$ e ’ by Gallant Schotchman —Bonny, 1; J. E. Onus’s
Bally, by Gladstone (imp.), 2. Best four fillies, heavy draught
Z a r C T * a s m ’ f c p lonlal - brcd > br “ d by exhibitor: A. Town’s br f,
by Gallant Scotchman—Strathalan May; brf, by Gallant Scotch-
n Mag:gie; bf, by Gallant Scotchman—Australian
Maggie, and b f, by Gallant Scotchman—Young Countess.
Special prize, presented by Mr. A. A T )iny‘Lr
’ “ da t ptcd to P roduc e active farin' horses,
suitable to the country requirements of the colonv
open to all draught stallions in the show: J. E. Onus’s
Clan Campbell (imp.), by Darnley— Campbelltown Ldv
Centennial champion prize, for best stallion, heavy draught or
active farm colonial bred: A. Town’s br h, by GaUan? Scotch-
yCais 3 molltbs - Centennial champion prize,
for best female, heavy draught or active farm, colouial bred • V
Town s br m Duchess, by Prince of Wales—Countess, aged.
Teams. Best pair of carriage horses, in harness—Barker and
Ebsworth, pair bays, 1; R. H. E. Upton, bays, 2. Best four-in-
hand turnout, in harness-Walter Douglas’(Dandy, Kingston,
Garfield, and Brighton), all by Lord Clifden, 1; Barker and Eb=-
wortli, mixed team, 2. Special prize presented by Mr. Walter
Douglas tor best four-in-hand team, bred and owned by exhibitor—
M SliteV°hfvf*w^ 8t r air horses, in harness-Dr. G.
Gmn \k ’ F a T ttle '' lmp ') b 3 r General Benton, and Huon
tel by Almont Junr.—Polly, 1; Dr. K. B. Warren, bays, by
\abba, 2. Best pair ponies, m harness, not exceeding 14 hands’-
Daiie 2 US K^r S n an and - Ui £ k ’ 1; J ’ TrertraiPe Donald and
H h P po . nles > »n harness, not exceeding 13 hands :
H - M Grade s Harlequin and Columbine, 1; A. B. Fyke's Mick
Best pan- ponies, in harness, not exceeding 12 hands :
11. Clinch s Tom and lod, 1; T. H. Fleury’s Jerry and Diddler,
Miscellaneous.—Horse, other than stud horses, for single
harness—H. M Quade’s b m Rosemary, by Vermont Junrf—
Premier mare, 1; L. Aaron’s eh g Trump, by Trump Card-Sir
Charles mare, 2. Horses—(Other than stud horses) in dogcart or
lady’s pheaton-Dr. A. She wen’s br h Orlando, by Valentia,
can 2 r foreman’s b h Otho, by Hunter-Mad-
cap, 2, 1. La wry s Don, highly commended. Suecial
by Mr. W. JRichaidson, for best
horse ’ and tur n-out—Frederick Alexan-
der s cab No. 3, br h Lecturer, 1. Horse for springcart, to be
tried m harness—H. Paterson’s ch g Charlie, 1; P. H. Throsbv’s
Pi ince, by Sultan—Darkie, 2. Cavalry charger, to be ridden in
uniform—J. Hardie’s, jun. b h Prince, 1;A. J. Dodds’s g h SteeU
boy, by Confidence, 2; J. H. Clark’s b h, highly commended.
Cobs over 14 and not exceedimr 15 hands—W, Young's Queen s
Messenger (imported), bv Messenger. 1; A. M’Elhone’s b h
iinkei, 2. Best pony in harness over 13 and not exceeding -14
hands-J De V. Lamb’s Harry, by Tim Whittier, 1 ; 11. Wooife’s
Master John, by Little John, 2 ; E. B. Bundle's Lady, highly
commended. (other than stud horses) for single
harness : I. M. Alcock’s Midnight, by Elmo—Maggie. Spec al
tuinout reS (: nt H b n M £’ T '- M - Alcock > for boat buggy horse and
turnout . C. 11. Durham s Honesty, by Confidence—Browney.
Hackney up to list. : E. H. V, eston’s Warrior, bv Conqueror, 1 •
L. Geoghans Glenmaire, by Lottery. 2: A.' A Dann-ar’i
Traveller, highly commended. Hackney up to 14st° G
1. Rileys Foxhunter, by Foxlow - Rouse Mare." i•'
°"v, k t, r S k S f“|’ by Kingston, 2« Barker and Ebs-
woith s b h, bred by R. and D. Rous, highly commended.
Speciai prize presented by Mr. A. A. Dangar for best walking
maie c geldmg in saddle : J. L. Brown’s Oliver, by Sir Richard.
rrr7 S .^ h ack , ney ’ tO , be ridden b Y «■ la dy on the ground :J. B.
Uift s The Arrow, by West Australian—Lady Hunter, 1 ; E. 11.
Weston s Victor, by Conqueror, 2. Pony stallion over 13 and
not exceeding 14 hands : John Trestrail’s Caractacus, bv
lam o Shanter—Yaffle, 1 ; Ross and M‘Gregor’s Moses
Carmurathen, by Ling Cropper—Molly Darling, 2. Pony geldim-
or mare, over 13 and not exceeding 14 hands : W. 11. Morgan’s
I ’s’ h Jones : s ,. M yMle, 2; W. Carling’s Beppo, highly
commended. Pony gelding or mare, to be ridden, over 12 and
not exceeding 13 hands : A. Town’s Tom Sayers, 1 ; J. Abia-
hams Sydney, 2. Pony stallion, over 12 and not
exceeding 13 hands : P. H. Throsby’s Tam o’ Shanter,
by sir lhomas (imp.)—Garters, 1 ; D. Chappellow’s Tonnnv, by
Silverlocks, 2; J. Richardson’s Cupid, by Willie—Cream v,
highly commended. Best pony in harness, not exceedin"- l'»
hands : W. Hynard’s Beach, bred bv Mr. John Bennett, l” a"
Towns s Sailor, bred by exhibitor. 2 ; G. Brock’s Prince Charlie'
by Bonnie Charlie, highly commended. Pony stallion, not excoed-
IP?*, 2 ba . n< 3 /- : Ge .°\ s - T Ye o’ s Uncle Tom, by Sir Thomas (imp.)—
Pretty Star (imp.), 1; John Bennett’s Bonnie Charlie, by Ponil:
Match, 2 ; Mrs. G. C. Woodhouse’s blk pony (imp.), highly
commended. Pony gelding or mare, not exceeding 12 hands'■
Benson s bay, bred by A. Town, 1; J. Bennett’s Effic, bv Bonnie
Charlie, 2; S. Campbell’s Bantam, highly commended. Cen-
tennial Champion Prize for best pony stallion under 13 hands
Geo. S. Yea s Uncle Tom. Centennial prize for best pony mare
under 13 hands : A. Benson’s bay, bred by Mr. A. Town.
Jumping.
Stewards: Messrs. H. Lamb and L. J. Harnett. Judges:
Messrs, ii. Rouse, jun., Charles Durham, and V. J. Dow-
ling.
The Tribune Hunters’ Plate, value 25 sovs., presented by the
proprietors of the Tribune, with 7s sovs. added, divided into three
prizes of 55 sovs., with the Plate for the first horse, 15 sovs. for
the second, and 10 sovs. lor the third.—Mr. W. F. Havlev’s
Victor, 1; Mr. D. Ferguson’s Walleroo, 2; Mr. E. J. Wangcn-
heirns Giraffe, 3; Mr. VV, Cope’s Waverley, commended. The
clever S hor n e UnCe<i tbat tbey considered tbe winner a particularly
Trotting Races.
Distance Handicap —2 miles.—First division: Garry*
owen, 1; time, 6 minutes 14 seconds. Second division :
Brumby, 1 ; time, 5 minutes 20 seconds. Third division :
Burlington, 1; time, 5 minutes 25 seconds.
Malden Trot— l| mile. — Viking, 1; Duke, 2; Bur-
wood, <3; time, 4 minutes 22 seconds.
Centennial Champion Trot— 2 miles.—Little Dick.
1; Cyclone, 2; Huon, 3 ; time, 5 minutes 35 seconds.


Final for the Handicap Trot.
Mr. R. Town’s bl c Viking, 3 years. 373 yards 1
Mr. \V. Knight’s b g Garryowen, aged, 300 yards 2
Mr. J. Gardiner (ns) Bromley, aged, 430 yards 3
CATTLE.
Judges.—Durhams: E. B. Woodhouse, W. Macgregor
(Victoria), J. A. Badgeiy, James Monaghan, John Butler.
Herefords: A. Badgery, J. H. M'Connell (Queensland).
Devons: P. R. Gordon (Queensland), A. Broad, Hon. It.
H. Roberts. Ayrshires and Alderneys: T. Brown, W.
Kennedy, E. Evans. Stewards: G. N. Griffiths, A. H.
Cox, Hon. G. H. Cox, A. Bruce.
It seemed almost like the old times when one visited the
rifle range corner of the show-ground. There were actually
over 300 head of cattle in the stalls. This was a great im-
provement upon recent events. In 1874 there were more
than 400 head of bovines on Alfred Park, but with 1879
came grief and low prices. Stud cattle became almost un-
saleable. Prior to that the public taste gave Shorthorns
the premier position. They have it still, but lately Ayr-
shires have run them so closely that it is quite possible
1889 may find the dairy breed on the level with the aristo-
cratic Durham. If the late exhibition is a true guide
the Ayrshire has even now the first position. Dufhams
numbered in the catalogue from 523 to 567, Ayrshires from
604 to 695, Alderneys ranged from 696 to 770. Thus it will
be seen that the dairy breeds are the favourites with ex-
hibitors, and, as a matter of fact, what the exhibitors do
show is a fair indication of the public taste.
Herefords and Devons were very small in quantity,
but good in quality. Indeed, the good prizes offered
this year should have drawn stronger competition in the
beef breeds.
The arrangements for the cattle was not all which they
should have been, possibly the same remark may be applied
to the exhibition as a whole; but, strange to think,
the judging of the first day went along more
smoothly and much more quickly than the
judging of former years. To have all the cattle prizes save
those for fat stock complete in one act is a strange experi-
ence, and speaks volumes in favour of the stewards and
judges. The judging did not commence until 11 a.m. on
the 24th of J anuary, and as there were no regular rings to
parade in, the stock were scattered to some extent. One
section was out wide in the cricket field inside of the
trotting track, another cooped up in a comer close to the
fence of the rifle range. Despite of these drawbacks, the
judging of the chief classes was over before lunch time.
Then came a dreary drag until at last at 6 p.m. the black
polled were worked through. Amongst the last lots, too, was
a Holstein bull, which stood alone in the section for “other
kinds of stock.” Through some mistake the fat stock were
not ready. •
The best of the Durhams were of Victorian breeding. In
the class for bulls over 3 years there were S. Gardiner’s
Court Duke and Christian’s 48th Duke of Derrimut in the
front rank. Past this there were Gardiner’s bulls with the
blue ribbon in two-year-old yearlings. In the bull calf
that careful energetic breeder, A. A. Dangar, was to the fore
with Buckhurst, a son of Hillhurst’s 6th Duke, which also
has the special prize for the best shorthorn bull calf
in the show. It cannot be said that the quality
of the Durhams as a whole was an improvement
on former years. Food fights half the battle, and the pre-
sent exhibition suffered through hasty preparation. The
greater part of the stock shown in the pens were not put
in the stalls until near the close of the year. Thus it
happened that the great moving masses of fat which used to
parade on Alfred Park were missed at the late meeting.
But why was the representation of the shorthorns left to so
few breeders. Dangar, Christian, Gardiner, Tindale,
MTntyre, and Booth were left to keep up the reputa-
tion of a breed, of which there were sufficient on
the ground to. prove that it only needs a rise in the
market to bring such strength as was experienced
14 years ago to bear. The cow class in Durham.s
was unusually good. The champion cow is one of
Robertson’s breeding, being by Wetherby—Winsome 11..
The second placed, Dangar’s Beauchamp’s Duchess, is a
first-class animal, as are M‘lntyre’s Geneva’s Matilda sth
and 55th Duchess of Derrimut. G. T. Chapman’s Jewel,
by 29th Duke of Brunswick, also shows to advantage in
this class.
In the Herefords, G. Loder, F. S. Reynolds, G. H.
Cox, and John Nowlan were the principal exhibitors.
Here again the paddock feeding was evident, as
against the old plan of keeping stock for months
in the stalls. It does not pay now to treat a
favourite bull calf as a baby for six months or so before
show time. The old Hereford blood, so well known, was
present at the exhibition in the form of the champions,
George Loder’s The Earl, a son of Normanby; and
Reynolds’s Last Day 12th.
The hardy red breed known as Devons were upheld by
Messrs. Yeo, Reynolds, Amos, and others, but there was a
lack of good sound competition in several of the classes.
Yeo’s pen of six heifers, grass-fed, were remarkably good.
Reynolds’s Coquette 13th, the champion cow, and Yeo’s
Temptress, were excellent specimens of the breed.
In the Ayrshires, there was a start made with 16 bulls in
one class. In this H. H. Brown’s Young Baron, a New
Zealander, was to the front, and has the championship. A. L.
Park was next in the class, and there were three commenda-
tions. T. L. Peate came out in great force in the female
Classes. It was no slight honour to have the championship in
cows with such competition, but such was the position of
Mr. Peate. John Lyndsay, John Thompson, H. H.
Harris, Badgery Brothers, and H. H. Brown penned cows of
first-class quality. J. E. Pemell deservedly has the yearling
heifer ribbon, but was run very closely by Peate’s exhibit in
a very strong class.
In Channel Island cattle there was the strongest form yet
displayed in this part of Australia. M‘Langhlin, Tooth,
Brown, Hyam, Holmes, Inglis, and Peppin are the
names which have the principal parts of the
prize list for males. In females there were
Inglis, Wisdom, and others, all of whom had very
good stock. Staughton Brothers, of Victoria, stood alone
in the Polled Angus section with first-class specimens ot
the breeds. One of the females was one of the best cows on
the show ground.
The cattle section of the exhibition, like other sections
of live stock, closed for all, except sale purposes, on
the 28th. As before remarked, the dairy classes were well
filled, but the beef breeds were not as strongly represented
as they should have been. Take the Durhams for example,
their reputation would have suffered had it not been for the
able support rendered by their enthusiastic liberal admirers
Walter Douglas, A. A. Dangar, Robert MHntyre, and S.
Gardiner. Mr. Douglas, of Inveralochy, excelled all his
former efforts by the grand display w’hich he made
in the new classes for grass-fed stock. The com-
plaint hitherto has been that the shew-ground
Durham was as a rule a pampered specimen of the
bovine stock. Mr. Douglas did much to remove this
impression by showing some of the purest Bates’ strains
fresh from ordinary paddocks. In the special breeders’
prize for six yearling bulls he penned an admirable lot,
each one of wnich would be suitable for a crack stud. In
the class for six heifers with calves at foot he was equally
successful. Indeed two such yards of stock are but rarely
seen. In the Centennial class for six grass-fed heifers,
bred and owned by exhibitor, he scored a win with half-a-
dozen pretty daughters of Lord Hillhurst.
The following were the awards:
Durhams.—Bull 3 years and over : S. Gardiner’s Coax Duke,
1; J. B. Christian’s 48th Duke of Derrimut, 2; A. A. Dangar’s
Buckingham, commended. Bull, 2 years : 8. Gardiner’s Heir of
Roan Duchess, 1, and MTntyre’s special; S. Gardiner’s Tregun-
ter’s 18th Duke, 2. Yearling bull: S. Gardiner’s Alvie’s Gwynne
2nd. 1, and A. A. Dangar’s special. Bull calf: A. A. Dangar, 1,
and special. Cow: J. B. Christian’s 40th Duchess of Derri-
mut, 1, and champion ; A. A. Dangar’s Beauchamp’s
Duchess, 2 ; R. M‘lntvre’s Geneva’s Matilda sth aud 55th
Duchess of Derrimut, hitrhlv commended. Heifer, 2 years : J.
B. Christian, 1: R. M’lntyre’s Oxford Matilda, 2. Yearling
heifer: A. A. Dangar’s Carrie Knightley, 1 and special; R.
MTntyre, 2. Heifer calf : A. A. Dangar, 1 : R. M'lntyre, 2.
Hkrkfords. —Bull, 3 years and over : G. Loder’s The Earl, 1 ;
and Champion, G. H. Cox, 2. Yearling bull: F. S. Reynolds’s


Dignity and Glendower, 1 and 2. Bull calf: G. H. Cox.
Cow :G. H. Cox’s Princess 13th, 1; John Nowlan, 2. Heifer,
2 years : F. S. Reynolds’s Last Day 12th, 1; and Champion,
G. Loder’s St. Clair Lass. 2 ; G. H. Cox’s Comely 10th, highly
commended. Yearling heiter: Reynolds’s Chloe 10th. Heifer
calf. G. H. Cox’s Comely 12th.
Devons.—Bull, 3 years and over: J. Boardman’s Skylark, 1.
Bull, 2 years: A. Amos’s Grand Prince, 1; J. M. Ferguson, com-
mended. Yearling hull: F. S. Reynolds. Bull calf: J. Board-
man. Cow: F. S. Reynolds’s Coquette 13th, 1, and champion;
G. S. Yeo’s Temptress, 2; and Duchess of Dennington. 3; A.
Amos, commended. Heifer, 2 years and yearling: Reynolds.
Special centennial prize, six grass-fed heifers : G. S. Yeo, 1; A.
Amos, commended.
Ayrshires.— Bull, 3 years and over: H. H. Brown’s Young
Baron, 1, and champion; A. L. Park, 2; W. D. Warden, highly
commended; J. Lyndgay, commended; J. E. Pemell, com-
mended. Bull, 2 years : J. E. Pemell’s Duke of Barbiston 19th,
1; A. L. 'Park. 2; T. L. Peat’s Dornech, highly commended.
Yearling bull: John Lyndsay’s Young Teviot, l; John Thomp-
son’s Nero, 2. Bull calf : j. E. Pemell’s Randwick Duke, 1;
T. L. Peate’s Border Chief, 2; K. B. Ferguson,
commended Cow :T. L. Peate’s Lovely Jane, 1. and champion;
T. L. Peate’s Edith, 2 ; Badgery Brothers’ Nellie, highly com-
mended; W. H. Harris, H. H. Brown, commended. Heifer, 2
years: John Lyndsav, Illawarra, 1; T. L. Peate, 2; H. H.
Brown and J. E. Pemell, highly commended; J. E. Pemell, com-
mended. Yearling heifer: J. E. Pemell, 1; T. L. Peate, 2.
Heifer calf : T. L. Peate, 1 and 2. Four grass-fed heifers: K. B.
Ferguson, 1; J. Monaghan, 2.
Alderneys and Jerseys.—Bull, 3 years and over: J. M'Laugh-
lin. 1; R. L. Tooth’s Khedive, 2 ; H. H. Brown and H. H.
Osborne, highly commended. Bull, 2 jears: S. H. Hyam’s
Westfield, 1; R. L. Tooth’s Sultan, 2;"G. H. Holmes, com-
mended. Yearling hull: S. H. Hyam’s Endge Park, 1; H.
H. Brown’s Jersey Lad, 2: Tooth, highly commended. Bull calf:
Hyam’s Roy, 1; W. P. Faithfull, 2. Cow: S. H. Hyam, with
May Blossom, 1 and 2; Jersey Lily, John Thompson, Melody 2nd,
H. C. F. Peppin, W. Inglis, and Tooth, highly commended.
Heifer, 2 years: W. Inglis’s Silver Grey,’ 1; R. L.
Tooth, 2; R. Wisdom and W. R. Dickenson, highly commended.
Yearling heifer : R. L. Tooth’s Empress, 1; W. Inglis. 2 and h.c.
Heifer calf : M. Nancarrow, 1 ; S. H. Hyam, 2. Centennial
prize—4 heifers, grass fed: H. H. Brown, 1; W. H. Harris, h.c.
Champion hull: S. H. Hyam’s Eridge Park. Champion cow:
Hyam’s May Blossom.
Polled Cattle. —Staughton Brothers, three firsts and one
second.
Special Breeders’ Prizes. —Best six bulls. 1 year old, any breed,
grass fed, and owned by exhibitor; special prize, £lO 10s : Walter
Douglas, Invcralochy, 1. Best six heifers, with calves at foot,
say 3 and 4 years oldj first calf; any breed, grass fed, and owned
by exhibitor; special prize, £lO 10s: Walter Douglas, 1.
Centennial Prize for Durhams.—Six grass-fed heifers, bred and
owned byexhibitor, from 1£ to 2J years old: Walter Douglas, 1.
Fat Cattle.—Ox, any breed: Walhallow and Piallaway
Estates, 1; J. Nowlan, highly commended. Fat cow. any breed:
J. C. Manchee, Fatty, 1; J. Nowlan, highly commended. Cen-
tennial special prizes.—Fat bullocks—Durham : Walhallow and
Piallaway Estates. Fat bullock—Hereford: J. Nowlan. Fat
cow—Hereford: W. Pearse. Fat bullock—Devon: J. C.
Manchee.
FAT SHEEP.
Stewards: W. T. Wright and G. N. Griffiths. Judges:
James Monaghan, William Buttel, and D. M’Gregor.
The display of sheep was a failure. The entries were few,
and the animals, with one or two exceptions, were not
meritorious. Fore the best pen of five merinos there were
five competitors ; but none were judged worthy of a prize,
although a lot sent by Mr. H. M’Namara, Darling Harbour,
were highly commended. For a pen of five of any other
breed, a first prize only was given for those owned by
Messrs. Badgery Brothers, of Sutton Forest. They were
wethers, four and five years old. Four or five other pens
were on view. A sheep entered by Mr. Sullivan, but not
for competition, was so much fancied by the judges that
they recommended it for a special prize.
PIGS.
Judges : T. L. Peate, H. Hicks, jun., and W. K.
Gibbons. The show of pigs was on a much larger scale than
is usual at Sydney. There appeared also to be great
improvement in the breeds. The white pigs and the Berk-
shire boars were of an exceptionally good character. One of
the most successful exhibitors was Mr. James Rowe, of
Christchurch, New Zealand. He brought over a large
number of animals, and carries away some of the best
prizes. His favourite are the white breeds, but he also
shows a few blacks. In whites, including Yorkshire, there
was good competition in both large, medium, and small
varieties. Of animals that were “ all fat and blubber” there
were practically none to be seen. This isa very good feature,
as it is a guarantee that the pigs shown are useful and
commercial animals. A great feature of the Yorkshire pig
is that it comes early to maturity, is easily kept, and is a
good breeder. “Jumbo 2nd,” which carried away the
champion prize for the best boar af any age, is a splendid
animal, although only 7 months old. He has already taken
two prizes at other shows. “Countess 2nd,” which has
received the champion prize in sows, is in her fifth year.
She was the largest of her breed on the ground,
and fanciers who could recognise her various beauties
spoke loudly in her praise. The “Princess Louise”
and “Maud,” were in competition against her. but
although promising porkers they had no chance,
being as yet only 14 weeks old. Mr. Rowe also takes
first prizes in mediums for boar and sow, in small
whites for boar and sow, and several other prizes. The
black breeds were a poor lot, and seemed of a mixed variety.
Some of the awards were withheld. Amongst the Poland
China, however, there were several good specimens. The
championship prizes both for boar and sow are secured by
Mr. W. H. M'Keown, of Roseville, with very
likely animals about a year old. The Berk-
shires were a splendid class, and there was large
competition in all sections. They were now being largely
fancied, being found to be a veiy useful kind, and
one that will thrive if called on to “rough it.”
Amongst the boars there were some very faithfuliy-bred
animals. The first prize was carried off by Mr. Edwin Wil-
son, of North Willoughby, with the “ Duke of Bethunga,”
who is 18 months old. There were 15 exhibitors in this class.
Including sows with litters, there were about two dozen on
view. Very many appeared of equal merit, and the judging
must have been difficult work. Mr. B. Rush, of Cook’s
River, and Mr. M. Porter, of Gordon, were first prize takers.
Several pens having “ three porkers ” in each were an
attraction, and there were some very good animals in the
extra class forwarded by Messrs. W. C. Payne, J. Rowe,
and E. Wilson. The awards were as follows:
Large white —Boar: J. Rowe, 1; E. M. Betts, 2. Sow: J.
Rowe, 1 and 2. Champion prizes, hoar and sow: J. Rowe.
Medium white—Boar: J. Rowe, 1; W. C. Payne, 2.
Sir J. Rowe, 1; W. C. Payne, 2. Sow in milk: E. M.
Betts. Champion prizes, boar and sow: J. Rowe. Small
White-Boar: J. Rowe, land 2. Sow: J. Rowe, 1. Sow
in milk: J. Rowe, 1. Champion prizes, boar and sow:
J. Rowe. Black breeds, sow: J. Johlay, 2.
Poland China—Boar: W. J. M'Keown, 1; W. Mills,
2. Sow : W. H. M'Keown, 1; W. Mills, 2. Champion
prizes, boar and sow : W. H. M'Keown. Berkshire—Boar: E.
Wilson, 1; A. Bennett, 2: G. Yeo, h.c. Sow : B. Bush, 1 ; G.
Challis, 2: W. Harsley, h. c.; J, Slocombe, h.c. sow in milk :
M. Porter, 1; E. Wilson, 2. Pen of three breeding sows :J.
Rowe, 2. Champion prize for sow : M. Porter. Three bacon
pigs : £. M. Betts, 1. Three porkers :G. Cochrane, 2.
POULTRY, PIGEONS, AND CANARIES
_ Judges : W. Beattie, S. Hordern, H. C. Hudson, and C.
Freeman, for pigeons ; J. Rowley, A. Davies, and Wilson,
for Spanish poultry ; J. Wright for Cochins, Brahmas,
and Dorkings ; Rev. £. C. Pritchard, M‘lntosh, H. Halls,
and P. Sheridan, for ornamental poultry. E. Greville and
W. Bradley, sen., for ducks and geese; R. Ander-
son, R. A. Johnson, R. Cunningham, G. Deusbury,
and W. Stapleton, for canaries. Stewards : Messrs. A. J.
Gray, W. Beattie, and J. Crane. This section formed a
striking feature of the show, and the exhibits were open to
inspection in a dual phase—at their best and at their worst.
Paradoxical as the remark may be to laymen, connoisseurs
will admit its correctness, the moulting season being,
unfortunately, the time chosen for the Exhibition. The
lack of feather, however, tended to reveal the true outlines of
the birds to practised eyes, and thus a capital opportunity
for judging as to their “points” are afforded. British
game were well represented, and some really splendid
birds were shown. Pigeons were numerous, varied, and
well worth inspection. In point of fact the poultry and
pigeon sections were twice as large in quantity, and very


much higher in quality, than the displays of last year.
British birds predominated amongst the fowls. The canaries
formed but a mediocre display, although a good many fine
birds were caged. Subjoined is a list of the awards .
Black Spanish cock and hen: W. H. M^eown, 1 ; Dickson
and Jones, 2; ditto, h. c. Black Spanish cock: W. H. M keown,
J. Wright. Cochin China buff or cinnamon cock and ben . .
H. Webb, J. E. Pemell. Ditto, cock: Walter Hope, 1;
J. E. Pemeil, 2; J. E. Pemell, h. c. Cochin China
partridge or grouse, cock and hen: W. C. Foster. Ditto, any
other colour, cock : J. E. Pemell, 1 and 2. Ditto white, cock
and hen: J. E. Pemell, 1 and 2; same, h. c. Ditto, blackcock
and hen: W. Hope, h.c. Brahmapootra, light, cock and hen.
Dickson and Jones, 1; W. Hope, 2 ; J. E. Pemell, h. c. Ditto,
light, cock, R. C. Woolcombe. Ditto, dam, cock and hen.
J E. Pemell, 1 and 2; ditto, h. c.; Walter Hope, c.
Ditto, dark cock : J. E. Pemell, 1 and 2. Dorkings, silver grey
cock and hen: J. Mayhew, 1; M. Nancarrow, 2: Dame, h.c.;
and W. Hope, h. c. Ditto, coloured cock and hen: M. Nan-
carrow, 1 and 2. Malays, cock and hen: William Carson, 1 and
2. Ditto, cock: William Carson, 1 and 2. British gaine, black-
red cock and hen: W. H. Weob, 1; C. Churchwood, 2. Ditto,
blaek-red cock: G. Hayward, 1; S. Francis, 2. Ditto, duck-
wing, cock and hen: John Dilling, 1 and also Centenary prize , S.
Francis, 2. Ditto, anv colour, cock and lien; \\. Hope, 1 ; t>.
Francis, 2. Ditto, any colour, cock: W. Guilfoyle, 1 ; S. Francis,
2. Australian (colonial) game, black-breasted red, cock
and hen : W. H. Webb, 1, also Centennial Prize ; G. Hayward,
2. Ditto, black-breasted red cock: W. Guilfoyle, 1; J. R.
Thew, 2. Ditto, white cock and hen :J, Matter.-on, 1; ».
Francis, 2. Ditto, any other colour, cock : W. H. M-Keoy , 1
and 2. Ditto, hen-feather cock: G. Hayward, 1 ; W. Pratt, i.
Hamburg silver-spangled cock and hen: S. Francis, I ana z,
A. P. F. Wilkie, h. c. Ditto, golden-spangled, cock and hen . 8.
Francis, 1; A. P. F. Wilkie, 2. Ditto, silver-pencilled, cock and
hen: S. Francis, 1 and 2. Ditto, golden-pencilled, cock and
hen: W. Hope, 1; S. Francis, 2. Ditto, black cock and
hen: S. Francis, 1; W. Rudd, 2. Polish, golden-
spangled, cock and hen : A. P. F. Wilkie, 1; 8. Francis, 2.
Ditto, silver-spangled, cock and hen: S. Francis, 1 and 2. Dit■ ,
white-crested, black cock and hen :A. P. F. Wilkie. 1 , •
Hope, 2. Houdans, cock and hen : W. Hope, 1 ; W. H. Webb.
2. S. Francis, h.c. Bantams, game, black-breasted, red, cock
and hen : Captain Breach, ship Av.emore (imp.), 1; 8. Kigg. A
also Centennial prize; F. A. Mackenzie and Captain Breach h.c.
Ditto, game, black-breasted, duckwing, cock and hen : 8. Kigg,
1 and 2. Ditto, game (piles and whites), cock and hen : Captain
Breach, 1 ; S. Rigg, 2. Best two hens, any vanety, other than
game: Dickson and Jozes, 1 and 2; J. Mayhew (21, h.c.
Best pair British game hens, any colour: H. Bartlett. 1,
also Centennial prize; W. H. Webb, 2; 8. J l- ?’
Best two Australian (colonial) hens, any colour. G. Haywaid. 1,
also Centennial prize ;W. Pratt, 2. Plymouth rocks, cock and
hen- E L Samuel. 1 and 2; W. Hope, h.c. Leghorns, biown,
co k and he"ckson and Jones, 1 ; W. H. Webb, 2; J. Moss,
h.c. Ditto, white, cock and hen : T. Hall, l >T. Hall a.so tw l 5?
h.c. W. Rudd, 2. Langshans, cock and hen : W. H. M keown, 1,
W. Harris, 2 ; W. H. M‘Keown, h.c. Andalusians, best pairs :G.
Hunter, 1; W. Hope, 2. Any other fowl, cock or hen: Captain
Breach, 1 W. Hope, 2. Ducks, Aylesbury, duck and drake.
W H Webb 1 and 2, also Centennial prize. Ducks, Buenos
Ayres."duck and drake: W. Rudd, 1, and ditto Muscovy, duck and
drake :H. N. Fleming, 1; A. J. Gray. 2, also special P n *®-
Ditto, any other variety: C. Mosley, Pekins, 1 and 2. _ Geese,
Toulouse, goose and gander : W. H. Webb, 1, also special; A.
Thompson, 2. Ditto, any other variety, goose and Balder :A.
Cooper, 1; A. Thompson, 2. The Centennial prizes which were
so far awarded yesterday in the poultry section fell to J. L.
Pemell, cochins; W. Hope, biahamapootras ;J. Ma>hew,
dorkings; W. Hope, Hamburgs; W Hope, houdans J. E.
Pemell, Plymouth rocks; Dickson and Jones, leghorns, A. H.
F Ca h rrierCa r ny e coi*ur: J. W. Missent, l, also Centennial prize;
A. Campbell, 2. Pouters, cock and hen : H. E. Sullivan, 1 and 2,
also special. Barbs, cock and hen: G. W. Lavcuder. l amn,
same two h. c. Beards, long-faced, any colour: H. E. Sullivan,
I, and also special; H. Bunting, 2; J. M • Missent, h c.
Beards, short-faced, any colour: _J. W. Missent. l and 2.
Baldheads, cock and hen: J. W. Missent, 1; H. E. Sullivan, 2.
Nuns, any colour, cock and hen: J. Martin, 1; H. E. Sullivan, 2.
Priests, any colour: H. E. Sullivan, 1; A. J. Turner, 2. Ilag-
pies, any colour, cock and hen : A. P* P» Wnkie, 1 ,
L. R. Jarrett, 2. A. P. F. Wilkie also special prize.
Dragoons, cock and hen, other than white: Wm. Addis, 1, ana
special; H. E. Sullivan, 2. Ditto, white, cock and hen : G. Free-
man, 1; V. Davis, 2; A. J. Turner, h.c. Antwerps, short-
laced, /iny colour, cock and hen : L. R. Jarrett, 1 ;
J. Maude, 2; H. E. Sullivan, h.c., also Centennial
prize. Ditto, long-facea. any colour, coek and hen: J. Wright, 1;
H Bunting. 2; H. E. Sullivan, h.c. Almond tumblers, coek and
hen: A. J. Turner, 1 ; W. Pye, 2. Owls, cocfc and hen: J. W.
Missent, 1 and 2. Jacobins, cock and hen: W. Hope, 1; A. J.
Turner, 2; G. W. Court, h.c. Turbits, cock and hen; G. W.
Lavender, 1 and 2. Tumblers, short-faced, cock and hen : F„ A.
Cooper, 1. Ditto, long-faced, cock and hen : Z. Anslow, 1; A. J,
Turner 2; J. Matterson, h.c. Fantails, cock and hen: E. C.
Barker, 1; W. Hope, 2; G. Hughes, h.c. Trumpeters, cock and
hen: J. W. Missent, 1: A. J. Turner, 2; H. E. Sullivan, h.c.
Any other variety, cock and hen: R. C. Charles, 1 and 2.
Turkeys—Any variety, cock and hen: A. H. Faithfull (bronze),
1; A. Bennett fbronze), 2.
Canaries.— Clear yellow Norwich :E. Terry, 1; H. G. Lamb, 2;
G.W. Johnston, highly commended. ClearbutfNorwich: E.Terry 1
and 2- H G. Lamb, highly commended. Evenly-marked yellow
Norwich :H. G. Lamb, 1; G. W. Johnson, 2. Evenly-marked
bntf Norwich: E. Terry, Ist and only. Ticked yellow Nor-
wich: E. Terry, 1 and 2. Ticked buff Norwich: E.
Terry, 1 • C. T. Pierce, 2; C. T. Pierce, ditto, highly com-
mended. ’ Variegated yellow Norwich: G. W. Johnson, 1;
G i udball, 2; John Gamble, highly commended. Variegated
buff, Norwich: G. W. Johnson, 1; E. Terry, 2. Crested yellow,
Norwich, or clear body, with clear, gray, or dark crest: E.
Terry, 1 and 2. Crested buff, Norwich, clear body, with clear,
grey, or dark crest: W. Pratt, 1; T. Crane, 2: J. Gamble, highly
commended. Crested yellow, Norwich, ticked, with clear, grey,
or dark crest: W. C. Skarratt, 1 ; E. Terry, 2. Crested yellow Nor-
wich, ticked with clear grey dark crest: H.G. Lamb, I,and only.
Crested b iff Norwich, unevenly marked or variegated, with
clear, grey or dark crest: W. Pratt, 1, and only. Best four
Norwich canaries, in one cage, irrespective of colour: H. G.
Lamb, Petersham, 1. Belgian Classes-Belgian yellow, clear or
ticked: E. Terry, 1, and only. Belgian buff, clear or
ticked: E. Terry, 1, and also Centennial Prize. Yorkshire
classes: Yorkshire clear, yellow or buff: C. T. Pierce, 1 ;
J. Givvins, 2. Yorkshire variegated, yellow or buff: E. ferry,
1. c. T. Peirce, 2, also highly commended. Lizard, gold or
silver-spangled, broken caps : C. F. Peirce, 1 and 2.
Cinnamon Classes.— Cinnamon yellow : E. Terry, 1 and 2.
Cinnamon buff: E. Terry, 1 ; C. F. Peirce, 2. Cinnamon
yellow, evenly marked or variegated : E. Terry, 1,
and only. Cinnamon buff, evenly marked or variegated :
E. Terry, 1 and 2; W. C. Skarratt, highly commended. Best
four cinnamons in one cage, irrespective of colour: C. T. Pierce,
I. Manchester coppy classes:—Manchester coppy, crested,
yellow: T. Crane, 1. Manchester copy, crested buff: W.
Pratt, i • T. Crane, 2. Manchester coppy, plain head,
velloiv •’ T. Crane, Ist and only. Manchester coppy,
plain ' head, buff: T. Crane, 1 ; L. Mathews, 2 ;
Miscellaneous Classes: Crested buff, other than Norwich, clear
body, with clear, grey, or dark crest—J. Gamble, 2. No first
prize awarded. Crested buff, evenly marked, ticked, or varie-
gated, other than Norwich, with clear, grey or dark crest: J.
Gamble, 1 and 2. Anv other variety of canary, not previously
specified: E. Terry, 1; L. Mathews, 2. Goldfinch: W. C. Skar-
ratt, 1: L. Mathews, 2. Mule, any variety :W. C. Skarratt, 1 ;
J. Gamble, 2. The Centennial Champion Prizes in connection
with this section were awarded as follows:—Best exnibit, Nor-
wich classes: E. Terry, W, Pratt. Belgian classes: E. Terry.
Yorkshire classes: C, T. Pierce. Cinnamon classes: E. lerry.
Manchester classes: T. Crane. Miscellaneous classes: W. C.
Skarratt.
DOGS.
Stewards: Messrs. A. J. Gray, R. Baldwin, H. Halls,
and A. G. Chapman. Judges: Messrs. C. Lynott, E. F.
Stephen, T. Smith, ft. B. Baynes, W. Crane, T. Tye, G.
Hill, jun., D. Cobcroft, Holborow, E. Halls, J. Yeo.
There were nearly 400 exhibits in the dog classes, and
the section was a fairly good one. Fox terrriers were
largely represented, but with the exception of
prize winners the exhibits were not above medium
quality. Messrs. T. Cadell and H. Moses showed some
exceedingly good animals. The black and tan terriers were
not numerous, and did not come up to a remarkably high
standard. The Skyes, Dandie Dinmonts, broken hair, and
toys were well represented, the two latter classes containing
some really high-class dogs. The poodles were not
numerous, but were a nice class; and the Italian grey-
hounds, which were well represented, were headed by an
excellent two-vear-old dog, the property of Mr. E.
De Lange, of Waverley. The pugs bore examina-
tion, Mr. H. T. Orr’s champion dog fully deserv-
ing the award bestowed upon him. The King Charles, as
usual, were few,butthe prize winners'were remarkably good,
the champion being the property of Mr. G. Dempster, of
Tasmania. The other spaniels, with the exception of Mr.
•J. S. Brunton’s champion exhibit, were only of moderate
quality. The St. Bernards and mastiffs were good animals,
and in Newfoundlands Mr. J. E. Pemell showed up well
with his imported stock and their descendants. Dr.
Belisario, as usual, carried off the honours for bulldogs


with his veteran Tom Sayers, and Mr. J. Lloyd, of Pad-
dington, for sluts; while Mr. Soden, of Petersham, and
Mr. E. H. Scott, of Pitt-street, were allotted premier posi-
tions for bull terriers. The colley exhibits were
fairly numerous and good, Messrs. Pemell and C.
A. Nathan, of Lewisham, being the first prize takers.
There were not many cattle dogs, Mr. Cameron, of Waverley,
being the chief prizetaker. There were more greyhounds
than are usually seen at such exhibitions, Mr. T. Partridge’s
Midnight, by Pretender—Loo, the first prizetaker for dogs,
being a very shapely animal. The pointers were few and
only moderate; but the retrievers and setters were numerous
and the exhibits of a good type all round. The prize for
the best fox terrier and centennial prize was won by H.
Moses; black and tan terrier, A. Cooper; dandie dinmont,
ft. J. Hogg; bulldog, Dr. Belisario; bull terrier, P. Soden.
The following are the awards: —
Fox-terriers, smooth haired, dogs: H. Moses, 1; H. Roberts,
2; J. R. Gair, h.c. Ditto, sluts: H. Moses, 1; T. Cadell, 2.
Fox-terriers, wire haired, sluts : W. Johnston, 1 ; Fox-
terriers, sluts under 12 months old: T. Cadell, 1; H. Moses,
2; S. Glanville, h.e. Terriers, dogs, smooth black-and-
tan: A. Cooper, 1; F. T. Bartlett, 2. Ditto sluts,
J. Neil, 1; Kitchener, 2. Terrier dogs, Skye: R.
Dean, 1; A. Malin, 2. Ditto sluts: J. Mackav, 1;
Terrier Dogs : Dandie Dinmont. R. J. Hogg, 1; G. Coubitt, 2.
Ditto, sluts : R. J. Hogg, 1 and 2. Terrier dogs, broken hair :J.
Matierson, 1; J. Bryan, 2 and h.c. Ditto, sluts: J. Matterson,
1; A. Cooper, 2; C. Wainwright, h.c. Terriers (toys), sluts,
smooth hair, under 71b: H. Buckley, 1; J. Neil, 2. Ditto, dogs,
broken hair, under 81b.: W. Beattie, 1 and 2; W. Carson, h.c.
Ditto, sluts: J. \V. Burton, 1; J. B. Allpress, 2.
Terriers, any other variety: J. B. Allpress, 1 and h.c.
J. Matterson, 2. Poodles, dogs: A. G. Lewis, 1; M. Nancarrow, 2.
Poodle, slut: G. Webb, 1. Italian greyhound, dog: E. de Lange,
1; S. Hoekings, 2; H. J. Bourne, h.c. Ditto, sluts : Mrs. P. Hart,
1; L. Y. Miller, 2; R. Ware. h.c.; H. J. Bourne, h.c. Pugs, dogs:
H. T. Orr, 1; Mrs. E. Walton, 2; Miss Cree, h.c. Pugs,
sluts: H.„T. Orr, 1; J. P. Dowling, 2; A. John-
stone, h.c. King Charles or Blenheim, dogs: G. Demp-
ster, 1; M. Nancarrow, 2. Ditto, sluts: M. Nancarrow,
1 and 2. Other Spaniels, dogs: D. Gleeson, 1; P. O’Shannasy,
2; J. Babre, h.c. Ditto, sluts, P. O’Shannasy, 1; O. Mackay, 2;
A. Gray, h.c.; Mrs. A. P. F. Wilkie, h.c. Spaniels, large size,
dogs: J. S. Brunton, 1; R. Anderson, 2; W. J. Sloan, h.c.
Ditto, sluts: I'. Fox, 1; Dickson and Jones, 2. Spaniels, sluts,
under 20ibs.: R. Marshall, 1. St. Bernards, rough-
coated: W. R. Dickinson, 1 and 2. Ditto, smooth-coated:
W. Williamson, 1 ; G. Satchell, 2. Mastiffs, dogs,
R. Mayor, 1. Mastiffs—Sluts :S. Proctor, 1; A. 11. M'Donald,
2. New foundland dogs : J. E. Pemell, 1 and h. c.; T. H. Fleury,
2. Newfoundland sluts: J. E. Pemell, 1 and 2; 11. Pateson,
h. c. Bulldogs—Dogs: Dr. C. Belisario, 1 and h. c.; V. Busine, 2.
Bulldogs—Sluts: J. Lloyd, 1; W. T. Jacombs,2; C. Churchwood,
h. c. Bull-terriers—Dogs: P. Soden, 1 ; S.Stewart,2 ;C. Parker,
h.c.; E. F. Willmore, h.c. Ditto, sluts: E. H. Scott, 1 ; J.
Matterson, 2; G. Cochrane, h.c. Collies, dogs : C. A. Nathan,
1; W. C. Payne, 2; Mrs. F. Bennett, h.c. Collies, sluts: J. E.
Pemell, 1 ; F. E. Long. 2; J. H. Dobbie, h.c. Cattle dogs: M.
Cannon, 1 and 2. Cattle sluts: M. Cannon, 1 and 2. Grey-
hounds, dogs: T. Partridge, 1; J. Readman, 2. Greyhounds,
sluts : W. Gaw, 1 ; W. Peterson, 2; J. Redman, h.c.; A. Mighell,
h.c.; Dr. Shewen, h.c. Staghounds, dogs: Mrs. M’lnnes, 1;
M. 11. Berry, 2. Pointers, dogs :A. Asprev, 1; H. T. Garde, 2.
Pointers, sluts: F. A. Terry, 1 ; H. S. Garde, 2. Retrievers,
black cprly dogs : F. Gannon, 1; T. E. Castle, 2. Ditto, sluts:
G. T. Husband, 1. Retrievers, other coloured dogs:
W. H. Fox, 1; R. Dean, 2; J. Mayhew, h.c. Ditto,
sluts: J. West, 1; W. C. West, 2; W. E. Corben, h.c.
Setters, dogs, English: J. Glenn, 1 and h.c.; A. D. Roberts, 2.
Ditto, sluts: J. Glenn, landh.c.; J. M’lntosh, 2. Setters, dogs,
Sussex : A. J. Fleay, 1. Setters, dogs, Gordon: W. J. Halloran,
1 and h.c.; F. Gannon, 2. Ditto, sluts: J. Clulow, 1; W. A.
Alderton, 2. Setters, dogs, Irish: W. J. Halloran, 1. Ditto,
sluts; W. J. Halloran, 1 ; J. H. Willmott, 2. Any other variety:
W. J. Ilalloian, 1; C. F. Philip, 1; W. R. Dickinson. 1; A. Lof-
berg, 2; S. It. Wheeler, 2; A. J. Kelly, 2; W. R. Dickinson, h.c.
Centennial champion prizes.—ltalian greyhound: E. De Lange.
Pug, dog or slut: H. T. Orr. King Charles, Blenheim, or other
toy: G. Dempster. Spaniel, large-sized: J. S. Brunton. St.
Bernard: W. Williamson. Mastiff: R. Mayor. Newfoundland:
J. E. Pemell. Greyhound: T. Partridge. Staghound: Mrs.
M’lnnes. Pointer: F. A. Terry. Retriever: F. Gannon. Eng-
lish setter: J. Glenn. Sussex setter: A. J. Fleay. Gordon
se’ter: W. J. Halloran. Irish setter: W. J. Halloran.
THE WORKING DAIRY.
Judges : Professor Ivey, M.R.A.C.; Professor Pudney,
M.R.A.C.; J. L. Thompson, Professor Lowrie, J. Lind-
say, M. Murphy, W. £. Ash.
Ihe dairy started in full operation on the 25th ultimo,,
and undoubtedly was one of the most successful parts of
the exhibition.
Inside of the building there was a central space of 55ft. by
30ft. entirely covered by machinery in motion. All the best
kinds of separators known were working. Lassetterand Co.,
in an allotment 12ft. by 30ft., had an expert dairymaid
dairying in the old system, She was surrounded by
every useful appliance known to modern dairying.
The next space, 15ft. by 30ft., was covered bv
Messrs. Waugh and Josephson, who displayed all kinds of
Laval separators, from the simple, small, but effective
Baby, which does its 12 gallons of milk per hour, to the
factory machine, which treats 90 gallons per hour.
Further on, the interest was well maintained by Messrs.
James Martin and Co., with three systems of dairying—
the Danish and hand being remarkably well illustrated.
The Danish are remarkably powerful separators, and
work very smoothly. At the extreme back there was
a cold room, 14ft. x 9ft., shown by Hudson Bros. In this
the Witt system of ventilation and cooling was shown
in full operation. Nearly all the members of the Govern-
ment inspected the dairy. The Minister for Mines, who
takes a deep interest in the advancement of agriculture,
and the Minister for Education, examined the machinery
very closely, and expressed themselves as thoroughly satis-
fied with the display.
The dairy closed on Saturday evening at a late hour, the
lateness being consequent upon the largeness of the demand
for sample jars of the factory butter. It is pleasing to know
that the efforts of the committee of the section were fully
and fairly acknowledged by the visitors to the exhibition.
"W hat two months ago was a risky experiment has proved to
be one of the most successful parts of the exhibition.
Other colonies are likely to follow the example of Sydney.
A first-class dairy is promised for Melbourne at the next
show held there, and New Zealand visitors say they will
not be behind Australia in the matter. A few details of the
working dairies which were shown may interest several
readers.
Messrs. James Martin and Co.’s working dairies com-
prised the Danish, the Laval, and the hand systems, and
covered a space of 30ft. x 30ft. Their principal exhibit was
of course the Danish separator, which was awarded the
20-guinea Sydney Mail Centennial Cup and £2O in prize
money. This separator, although new to many of our
readers, is well known in the south-coast district—the
Pioneer Factory at Kiama use three of the largest size,
each with a capacity of 200 gallons per hour. The Omega
factory also use three large Danish, and the Mittagong
factory a like number; so with three Danish factories
in full operation near Sydney this system has had
a thorough test. The principle of the Danish ia
easily explained. The bowl is made of the very
best quality of steel of larger diameter than
most other makes, and fitted with three vertical plates.
The speed of this bowl is only 3500 revolutions per minute,
compared with 7000 revolutions of other makes. The milk
having passed into the bowl through the feeding tubes,
the centrifugal motion throws the skim-milk to the circum-
ference, the cream remaining near the centre, and the
skim-milk as it rises to the top of the bowl is conveyed
away by the skim-milk tubs, and at the same time the
cream is conveyed into the cream can through the cream
tube. In the Danish this operation is within view of the
attendant, so if it is desirable to make any alteration in the
feeding or in the thickness of the cream, it can be
done whilst the machine is in motion. The capacity of the
medium size Danish separator is 105 gallons per hour,
and an ordinary horse can work it quite easily, as one
special feature of it is its safety intermediate, which not
only prevents the possibility of an accident, but if the at-
tendant happens to be away at a time when the speed is in-
creased beyond the desired number of revolutions, the
intermediate rings a bell, and thus gives warning. The
next exhibit in Messrs. Martin’s working dairy was their
.American Square Factory churn, made of Michigan clear
pine, and fitted with a patent tin-lined lid and improved
fastenings, air vent, fast and loose pulleys, adjustable
stays for sides, and several other important improvements
in detail. Next, there was the “Delaiteuse” or centri-


fugal butter worker, which thoroughly extracts
everv particle of buttermilk, and leaves the butter
“ t-rainv” and in the best possible condition for
market From the “Delaiteuse” the butter is then
passed en to Martin’s self-weighing butter press which
at one operation adjusts the weight, presses the pot,
and delivers it ready for sale. There were also shown
Martin’s butter packages for holding lib., 21b., or 51b. ot
butter, and suitable for retailing; also, the export boxes
and ordinary butter kegs. Of course, in addition to the
machines and appliances enumerated, Messrs. Martin and
Co. placed the usual number of butter pats, prints, scales,
milk buckets, churns, butter workers, &c., &c., and looking
at their collection as a whole, it seemed almost impossible
to want anything in a dairy or butter factory that could not
he found on their stand. . ......
Messrs. Waugh and Josephson, engineers, of this city,
made an admirable complete display of factory appliances,
the greater number of which, were kept in constant opera-
tion. They won the second prize, £2O. Their list of ex-
hibits is as follows: ..... .. ,
Three De Laval cream separators, complete, with intermediate
motion, &c.; one emulsor machine, for mixing fat into separated
milk for the purpose of making cheese from the skim milk ; one
lactocrite, for immediately testing any milk being supplied to fac-
tory for per-centage of butter contained. In connection with the
lactocrite the testing glasses, boiler, &c., are shown, also a lac-
tometer and test glasses. A square box-churn, ot type without
beaters, much approved in our coast factories for cleanliness and
general handiness. Water was laid on conveniently over churn,
and a trough placed below, to prevent buttermilk from splashing
about floor, and conducting buttermilk to waste-pipe. A Ifeloi-
teuse, or buttermilk extractor, with bags and knives, or scrapers,
for removing the butter after finishing in centrifugal;
an Albany butter-worker or salting machine, for finish
ing butter; a trough mounted on wheels, for handily taking
the butter from churn, &c., to butter-workers or room.
A butter press, with self-weighing gear ; a wash-up trough,
with steam and water laid on, for scalding utensils and general
cleansing purposes; a fan and cold chamber, for blowing co d air
into butter-room, or where required ; a weighing machine, for
weighing suppliers’milk; a vat, fitted on weighing machine, to
contain milk whilst weighing; the vat is fitted to discharge into
main supply tank; the weight of vat, ete., is balanced on weigh-
bridge to avoid having tare to deduct after weighing; a crane
and winch, for raising milk to required height to get it into sup-
ply vat; vat for receiving milk, fitted on stand; a cooler, for
cooling cream as it comes from the separators, with required
■connections ; a Lawrence cooler ; butter packages, butter-
ladle, pats, &c.,ice chest; oil drums and save-alls; sample pages
of books used at factories for entering daily supply and suppliers’
pass-books; 2 De Laval’s “Baby” separators, capacity 12 gal-
lons per hour; 1 horizontal Hood separator, capacity 35 gallons
per hour; 1 vertical Hood separator, capacity 25 gallons per
hour; IA. H. separator, 150 gallons per hour capacity; 1 model
of separator; and 1 model square churn.
Messrs. Lassetter and Co., Limited, occupied the first
square. In this they made a splendid display of dairy ap-
pliances. They included 30 churns of colonial manufacture
suitable for the home or the farm, and several other varieties
of large steam and horse power churns from makers in
England, who have secured the honours at the great agri-
cultural shows there. Five different types of butter-
workers were shown, in sizes to suit the wants of all classes
of users; some elegant iron and wooden milk-pan
stands such as are used in home dairies of the most
modern type. In this collection were also to be seen many
of the different apparatus now used in connection
with the testing of milk, cream, and butter.
Some very fine transit cans for the conveyance of milk
by railway or steamer, also those most useful butter
boxes known as the “ Preston ” for use in sending small
family packages of butter from the farm or country house
to the city. As a whole the collection was very complete, and
was much admired.
The following awards were made: —
Cows giving the greatest quantity of milk.—Country prize.
Competing animals kept or pastured for three months prior to
coming on to the show ground, beyond a radius of 15 miles from
Sydney Post Office : A. W. M*Minn, 1 ; S. M-Minn, 2.
Metropolitan Prize.—Cows giving the greatest quantity of
milk, shown by metropolitan dairymen, or persons keeping cows
within a radius’of 15 miles of Sydney Post Office : J. L. Pemeli,
1 ; F. A. Mackenzie, 2.
Cow yielding the greatest quantity of butter (open to all classes
of exhibitors) : T. L. Peate, Bowral, 1 ; J. E. Pemeli, Randwick,
2.
Special prize for best dairy band : Lassctter and Co.’s Dairy-
maid. „ . , ... ..
Judges highly commended Hudson Bros.’ coolroom -with its
Witt machinery.
Factory system, the Sydney Mail Cup: Jas. Martin
and Co., 1. For the 'Danish system, Waugh and
Josephson, 2. Hand dairy : F. Lassetter and Co.
Factory churn: Jas. Martin and Co. Churn to make 30 to
to 100 ib. butter: Jas. Martin and Co. Household churn: Jas.
Martin and Co., 1 ; Lassetter and Co. (No. 6 Centennial), h.c.
Milk backet: F. R. Robinson and Sons, 1; J. Martin and Co.,
h.c. Butter-worker: F. Lassetter and Co., Waugh and Joseph-
son, and James Martin and Co., equal. Collection of dairy
utensils: M‘Gregor, Harris, and Co., 1; Lassetter and Co., 2;
W. Gow, recommended for special prize. Vessel to convey milk
bv rail: Martin and Co., 1; F. R. Robinson, h.c. Most-approved
butter package: Martin and Co., 1; "Waugh and Josephson, 2.
Farm refrigerator or milk-cooler: Fresh Food and Ice Co.,
Martin and Co., and F. Lassetter and C., equal.
The prizes being principally special should be mentioned
in this report. The following is the list of subscribers
Agricultural Society, £BO ; proprietors of the Sydnetj Mail ,
£2l; Lassetter and Co., Limited, £lO 10s.; M’Gregor,
Harris, and Co., £5 55.; Waugh, Josephson, and Co., £5
55.; J. P. Dowling, £2 25.; lnglis and Sop, 827, George-
street, £5 55.; G. Hiss and Co., £2 25.; Brown Brothers,
£2 25.; the Country Milk Company, £6 65.; F. A. Bad-
gery, £2 25.; T. L. Peate, £2 25.; J. E. Pemeli, £2 25.;
H. Pateson, £2 25.; 12 h.p. Ransome engine lent by Las-
setter and C*., Limited; shafting and pulleys erected by
Waugh and Josephson.
FARM PRODUCE.
Stewards: W. Bragg and W. Lovegrove. Judges:
W. F. Martin, Myles M‘Crae, W. C. Robinson, P.
R. Larkin, Valentine Heaton, Andrew Farnsworth,
Jacob Knight, John See, M.L.A., M. Boylson, P.
Hogan, J. Black, H. D. Cooper, A. H. Prince. In
the tenth section, which embraced farm and dairy pro-
duce, there was a vast improvement in every respect
on the last show, both as regards the number and
quality of the exhibits—the former being 342, while in the
matter of superiority, in most cases there is no comparison.
The Centennial special prizes, of the value of £440, divided
under various heads, had no doubt much to do with bring-
ing together so many exhibits and exhibitors, and the fine
season we have experienced of course had much to do with
their excellent quality, though a still finer display might
have been anticipated had it been somewhat later
in the season. It was last year a matter
of reproach to our farmers and growers that
they made such a miserable exhibition, but this year
they have more than wiped out such reproach, and the
various portions of the colony, as well as the colonies of
Victoria, South Australia, and New Zealand, are to be con-
gratulated upon the spirit shown by them in coming to the
front as they have done. In the matter of butter, cheese,
and bacon, and produce of various kinds, they have shown
that they have little to fear from outside competition. At
the same time, the competitors from other colonies have much
to do with the success of this portion of the show.
As in former years, the exhibition of farm and dairy pro-
duce was held in the pavilion, which in its enlarged form is
a great improvement on the old state of affairs, and affords
ample accommodation for the most convenient and ap-
propriate placing of the exhibits belonging to this section.
A special note of praise is due to the stewards of the
pavilion, Messrs. Lovegrove and Bragg, both of whom
worked for weeks to meet the great strain which
the immense collection of pavilion exhibits imposed.
Under the heading of white wheat, three bushels, with a
guarantee that it w T as a fair sample of at least 50 bushels
grown by the exhibitor, there were seven entries, one of which
came from Victoria, and tw'o from Bouth Australia. In
white spring wheat, three bushels, there were three
exhibits, one of from Victoria, and one from South
Australia, the third coming from Camden. Only one
sample of red wheat was shown, and that by the Council of
Agricultural Education, Dookie, Victoria, which competed
in many classes. In rust-proof w'heat there were five ex-
hibits, of which one was also from the council mentioned,
and another from Hart Bros., of South Australia. There


was a capital assortment of maize shown, and under the
wi° f . lar £? yeHow or flint, a dozen cobs, and a
bushel threshed, thirteen exhibits were displayed, principally
Shoalhawn, the Clarence district, and South Aus-
!or’ * - a smaller , Slze tbere were four entries, and of
earliest maize a similar number. Some excellent samples
were shown notably that by Mr. Paling, of
Camden, both in cob and shelled. Mr. John
Monaghan, of Terara and Mr. Bailey, of Gerringong, also
exhibited some very fine samples. Some well grown white
maize was also exhibited, there being three exhibitors in
this class. There were a few exhibits of malting and Cape
barley, and a few of rye and oats, but not many. Peas
figure to the extent of nine bushels in three bushel ba°-s.
1 here were two entries for horse beans and one for linseed
Sorghum in gram was represented by one bushel and 12
heads. For the most valuable new grain, exhibited in the
half Y Ja l me l sHa - vter > of Camden, exhbited
half a bushel of skinless barley; Hart Brothers, of Para-
dise, South Australia, the same quantity of carob beans,
described as excellent feed for stock; and Mr. D. Manson
r Par h a so , showed , two samples. Of cut ensilage,
exhibits of not less than one hundredweight, there was a very
fair snow, amongst the exhibitors being Hart Brothers,
rfnnbfo 1 v- A i US^ ra “ov. an<i the Council of Agriculture of
Dookie, Victoria. Ihere were some dozen or more samples
of grass seed of various kinds, rye, prairie, and cocksfoot
predominating Lnder the head of roots there were some
very excellent displays, swedes, white turnips, mangolds,
and carrots. Of the potatoes shown there were many ma°--
nificent samples of various kinds; exhibitors, too, showing
/ f >f e tbls , p* ass - Ih the class for one variety, of
one hundredweight each, there were 13 entries
two of which come from Grafton, and two from
South Australia, Shoalhaven also standing well in the pro-
duction and exhibition of this nutritious vegetable. For
potatoes, collection of not less than onecwt. of each variety
and not less than four varieties, there were seven exhibits
S °L Whl ? Were e fr ? Grafton, two from Shoalhaven
' AiK- from r. S , oUth , Australia » the sixth being
T™ « blon Park - 311(1 the seventh from Windsor,
wo fine collections of table pumpkins were
f A° m Callan Park bein ? particularly good.
Lnder the heading of new fodder plant, exhibited'for the
f nip J eS j !on ? ls l t ing'of roots, at least six, if hay one
truss half-hundredweight, there was only one exhibit. This
dhnrrn' A f *. 1 olcker8 > of Grafton, and consisted of
dhurra, or Egyptian corn, a perennial fodder plant for
all stock. It is used as meal for bread or as food
or poultry, &c.; but in this case there was no award
There were half-a-dozen exhibits each of lucerne and oaten
hay, and the samples sent were all remarkably good. There
was cons'derable competition in the matter of the Centennial
pecial Prizes for farm produce. These were of an aggregated
value of £440, were open for competition to agricultural so-
not re, P m ’ate exhibitors and firms, who should
not necessarily be the growers. The exhibits were
grouped together in trophy form, and much pains
was taken by the various exhibitors in this respect
the result being in many cases of a highly
artistic character. For the best collection of farm
WAWP gr ° Wn m t the northern district of Mew South
Gi he w™ft one Competito - Mr - Geor « e Crispin, of
ft K ?! 8 collectlon consisted of maize, shelled and in
the cob, potatoes, marrows, gourds, bottled fruits, tapioca
arrowroot, sugar, cheese, onions, tobacco, &c’
display was an excellent one and attracted muchatten-
uon. tor the best collection of farm produce grown in the
outhern district of the colony there were 10 entries, the dis-
Park T, m W f ,C « 0y C £ me bem £ Yass » Camden, Albion
ffj k ’ I , UII ‘ ut ’ Sutton Forest, Milton, Shoalhaven, and
j Tk" 0 ' 1 th f 6 M tte i > ex f l^ lt belnp shown b y Messrs. Boyd
and hing, of Moorbank, but it was non-competitive. The
ItZi e £ ll (’’ and L , Soc i placed a very fine collection,
l consistcd of some splendid samples of potatoes, swede
sunflowers, very large and of various
coloured seeds, from a pure white to a dark
purple, some excellent hams and sides of bacon,
cheese, butter (including a case of lib. rolls), all sorts of
horse-carrots, maize and wheat, yellow and red beans,
& ,"r *t»l« most fast,.folly
“«^• < ±S“4SfF 3^* ss&?
r h a p r. b ss v i c - ™Srs
mrnmimm
mwsmm
whcst. Hart Bros 1 anrl 9 •
award. Rust-proof wheat l W « hea { 2 "°
yellow maize : J. M‘Donald, 1; AVm ’ Bailev 2 • n m Large
highly commended. Small yellow mui/p'- Wn?’.. D> , M ? Mon )
iS“S; ws?x. 'hs^ 1 r "ss
sa
an
2. Perennial rye-m”ss feeder »° thei ' s > ’ "'alterLamb
Bailey, 1. White tuK • w m Manson ’ 1- Swedes: W.
W. Bailev, commended ' 'rva*s? ley * commended. Carrots :
mended. Table pumpkins • H Ri.li.^?’, ’S' C j' l8 P in > com-
D. Manson, commended. ’ Best collecUot' oTfarm *“2 clat,on » 3 .*
in any other colony : Hart Brother- ar . m P rodl >ce grown
tennial Champion pnze. Blothers * 1 5 and winner of the Cen-
DAIRY PRODUCE.
Stewards: William Elliott, A. L. Nelson, D. Garrard
JE Vance K t l dman - John Mellidav, jl
M'.La ’s. H K.m t
EB*“ h”“f
& sss as
factories 0 Be k?!ffiV here TT U exhibits fr ° m different
laLtones. Ihe chief competitors were the Fresh Food and
Ice Company and the Allion Park Dairy Company each
of whom sent two exhibits. Much of the butter sent bv
h “2 other exhibitors was really of a splendid character 7
In the next c ass (butter, separator, produced by exhD
bitor, one package not less than 201 b., open to Private
dairymen, companies excluded) there were no ?ess than 2?
exhibitors and 25 exhibits. The class for kcg butter hand-
made, not separator, and not less than 501 b., open to all
brought forward 26 competitors, and fresh roll butter with
SJ U of Ba ’ 3 31b ‘ blocks - splendidly represented,
selection hvH* ° f / Uch an even quality that the task of
selection by the judges was a most difficult one. There
was ako a splendid show of cheese, hams, and bacons New
Zealand,, as usual, entering with spirit into competition
lTst h oDen° C to maker u V nder the Centennial special prize
st, open to agricultural societies and private exhibitors
firms, and companies, which provides for the exhibited
f!h-v P n d 1 t ° eether ! n .trophy form, for best collections of
dairy produce, consisting of fresh and salt butter, cheese
hams, and bacon, the whole to be the produce of
the soutnern district of New South Wales there
were seven entries. These displays were of fir ™
offemd for tho Prizes were aiso
°“ e r ed , fo * the best collection of dairy produce
produced and manufactured by any one private exhibitor


or firm in Australasia, and in response there were two
exhibits, viz., that of John Lindsay, of Unanderra, and
that of David Wilson, Mount Egerton, Victoria, the latter
taking first prize. The awards were
Produce, the product of any of the seven colonies of Austra-
lasia except where otherwise specified.—Butter factory, one
package, not less than 501 b., made at any factory
working not less than two separators, no private
dairy being allowed to compete : Fresh Food and Ice
Company, 1; Woodstock Dairy Factory, 2. Butter, separator,
produced by exhibitor, 1 package of not less than 201 b., open to
private dairymen, companies excluded : Edward Graham, 1 ;
W. J. Vard, 2; H. Yard, highly commended; 11. Graham,
highly commended; Williams Brothers, highly commended.
Butter, keg, hand-made, not separator, not less than 501 b. (open
to all) : H. Kennedy, 1; J. Lindsay, 2; T. W. Vance, highly
commended. Butter, fresh roll, without salt, in 31b. blocks,
smooth surfaces, no print or brand (open to all) : Fresh Food and
Ice Company, 1; Fresh Food and Ice Company, 2. Butter, fresh
roll, with salt, in 31b. blocks, smooth surface, no
print or brand (open to all): Fresh Food and Ice Company, 1 ;
D. Kennedy, 2. Butter, fresh roll, with salt, got up for table
use, in lib. or Jib. pats, not less than 51b., quality and appear-
ance to be both considered (open to all): H. Graham, 1; W. H.
Warden, 2; D. Kennedy, highly commended. The champion
prize in the preceding six classes was awarded to D. Kennedy, of
Milton Single cheese, not less than 301 b.: D. Wilson, 1. Hitto,
not less than 101 b., and not exceeding 301 b.: W. C. Robinson, 1;
T. Binks, 2. Cheese, not less than 81b., and not exceeding 141 b.:
No award. Single cheese, not exceeding 81b. : J. Lindsay, 1.
Cream cheese, not less than 31b.: No award. Hams, two
machine-cured and smoked : 11. T. Green and Co., Christchurch,
New Zealand, 1; L. Geoghegan, 2. Two hams, hand cured and
smoked ; C. J. Arnold, 1 ; G. Murphy, 2. Bacon, two sides,
machine-cured and smoked: L. Geoghegan, 1; T. Alexander, 2.
Bacon, one side, hand cured and smoked; W. Hay-
wood, 1 ; G. Murphy, 2. Centennial Special Prize, open to
agricultural societies and private exhibitors, firms or
companies who need not necessarily be the producers. Con-
ditions: 1. Exhibits to be grouped together in trophy form ; 2.
Exhibits competing cannot compete in any other class. For the
best collection of dairy produce, consisting of fresh and salt
butter, cheese, hams, and bacon (quantities of each at option of
exhibitor), produced in the Southern district of New South Wales
—South Coast and West Camden Co-operative Company, 1; Ulla-
dulla A. and H. Association, 2. Centennial special prizes for the
best collection of dairy produce, produced and manufactured by
any one private exhibitor or firm in Australasia, exhibits to be
grouped in trophy form, and exhibits competing cannot compete
in any other class; two entries—David Wilson, Victoria, 1; John
Lindsay, Unanderra, New South Wales, 2. In consequence of
there not being sufficient competition in these last two classes,
the Centennial Prize of £5O was not awarded.
WOOL.
Steward: Mr. W. P. Mvlecharane. Judges: Messrs.
Thomas Thorpe, William Allen, and P. N. Trebeck.
Owing to some misunderstanding the exhibits of wool—
-92 in number—were not judged until a late hour on
the 26th, and as the public were excluded until the
judging takes place, but little information was obtain-
able respecting them. The annexe in which the
exhibition took place was signally inadequate for the
purpose, as the parcels were inconveniently crowded
together, and the light was very defective. In some sec-
tions the classification was open to a considerable amount
of dispute, which is invariably the case when judges do not
agree as to the definition of fine combing, heavy combing,
and clothing, as made by the exhibitors; still, on this
occasion, there was little to complain about, and the
schedule was much better drawn than it has
been on many previous occasions. It can hardly
be said that the was as keen
as it has been on former occasions, nor were the exhibits
as numerous, but the condition was beyond anything we
have seen in similar competitions for many years. With
the exception of Messrs. Marshal and Slade, who repre-
sented Queensland, and Mr. Thomas Warner, who did
similar office for South Australia, the competitors were con-
fined to the flockmasters of this colony. Messrs. Faithfull
of Goulburn, Austin and Miller, of Deniliquin, and
the Collaroy' Company figured largely in the prize
list, and Mr. H. L. White fully maintained the old pres-
tige of the Havilah flocks with a special exhibit, which
showed but little departure from the old lines of breeding
laid down by the late Mr. N. P. Bayly. The same
remark of retaining a distincl type applies with equal
significance to the exhibits from the Collaroy flocks, it
will be remembered by those who were in the habit of wit-
nessing the sheep contests at Mudgee 20 years ago, that
the flock under the direction of the late Dr. Trail was the
first one west to make a departure from the fine French
combing wools which were so particularly affected by the
breeders there. Dr. Trail introduced a strong amount of
Rambouillet, and it was at the time considered that this
sacrifice of quality to length of staple was a gross mistake,
as density went to the wall as well. An examination of the
Collaroy exhibits was especially interesting, as the
old strain has not been got rid of, but the gradual change
by acclimatisation has got rid of all the harsh qualities of
the old Collaroy wool of 1866, and the fears then expressed
have proved groundless. The sheep from which the wool
is taken are said to be a pure strain without foreign
admixture for years past. Marshal and Slade, as usual,
showed a splendid deep-grown staple, and the same
remark applied to the exhibit of Messrs.
Austin and Millar. A number of the exhibits
were from the Adelaide Exhibition, and they appear
to have suffered from handling, but, taken as a whole, the
display was very geod, and might be more instructive if the
surroundings for examination were more favourable.
There was a very interesting exhibit from Camden Park, on
which property John Macarthur founded the first flock in
1800. It would have been still more so had the public an
opportunity of seeing alongside it a fair sample of what the
merino wool of that day was, for the purpose of showing
what Mr. Macarthur did to improve it, and upon what
unpromising material he commenced his labours as the
pioneer of the Australian sheep-breeding industry.
The following were the awards: —
Fine Combing Wool.—Six fleeces, unskirted: Marshall
and Slade. 1; A. L. Faithfull, 2. Six ewes’ fleeces, un-
skirted : A. L. Faithfull, 1; F. R. White, 2. Six ewe
hoggets’ fleeces, unskirted, first shearing : No first
prize; F. R. White, 2. Heavy Combing Wool.—Six ra ns’
fleeces, unskirted : Marshall and Slade, 1 ; Collaroy Com-
pany, Limited, 2. Six ewes’ fleeces, unskirted, Collaroy
Company, Limited, 1. Six ewe hogget fleeces: T. L.
Richardson. Wool in bale.—ln grease : Guildford D. Hay,
2. Scoured : A. Sloane, 1 and 2. Extra, unclassified;
Hangar Brothers, bale of first combing wool, special prize :
Hangar Bros., bale of first combing hognets’ wool, special
prize; F. R. White, 12 fleeees black and grey wool, special
prize; H. C. White, wool grown from sheep of pure Havilah
breed without any admixture of other blood for many years,
special prize. Centennial champion gold medals.—Combing
wool, in grease, best six rams’ fleeces: Marshall and Slade. Best
six ewes’ fleeces: A. L. Faithfull. Scoured wool.—Best bale,
not less than 2501 b.: A. Sloane. Collection of New South
Wales wool exhibited at the Adelaide International Exhibition
Merino wool, in bales, unwashed. Fine combing wool,
not less than 30#lb. from not over 100 fleeces, skirted, from ewes
previously shorn : C. H. James and Gray, 1 ; G. J. Mulholland, 2.
Merino wool, unwashed, from sheep fed only on in-
digenous grasses or herbage—Best and most valuable
six fleeces, unskirted, from rams previously shorn :
Austin and Millear, 1; Collaroy Co., Limited, 2 ; J. C. Manchee,
commended. Best and most valuable six fleeces, unskirted, from
ewes previously shorn: Collaroy Co., Limited, 1; H. R. F. Hume,
2. Best and moct valuable six fleeces, unskirted, from two-tooth
rams previously shorn: Austin and Millear, 1. Best and most
valuable six fleeces, unskirted, from two-tooth ewes, previously
shorn: Austin and Millear, 1 ; H. C. White, 2. Long
wool, unwashed.—Six fleeces, unskirted, from ewes of any
age, previously shorn: E, B. Woodhouse, 1 and 2. Merino wool,
unwashed, six fleeces, unskirted, from ewes of any age previously
shown : T. Warne, 1 and Centennial champion prize, gold medal";
A. Sloane, silver medal; W. Macgregor and Co., bronze medal;
J. F. and H. White, two bronze medals. Centennial champion
gold medals—Combing wool in grease, six rams’ fleeces : Austin
and Millear. Six ewes’ fleeces : Collaroy Company, Limited.
FLOWERS, FRUITS, AND VEGETABLES.
Judges: Pot plants, Mr. J. M‘Ewen, Mr. Geo. Ilur-
wood, Mr. Luke Woolf; cut flowers, Mr. F. Fergusson
sen., Mr. W. Paradise; fruits, Mr. D. Shepherd, Mr. R.
Herrod, Mr. E. Whitaker.
The features of this section were decidedly the foliage and
pot plants, and the cut flowers. The entries in any of the
horticultural classes were not remarkably numerous, and
a considerable proportion of the exhibits entered did not


make their appearance. The show of vegetables was just
to the right of the pot plants. The fruit was found at the
hack of the building-, in the left-hand corner The interest
of this department centred in two tine large exhibits of
miscellaneous specimens. One of these, shown by Mr.
M. F. Yollmer, of Pennant Hills, who was awarded
first prize, included some magnificent grapes, peaches,
and apples. The other was a non-competitive ex-
hibit by the New South Wales Fruitgrowers’
Union. This union sent in no less than 150 varieties of
splendid produce from about half a dozen Cumberland
orchards. Ihe Cainden grown plums shown were a
marvel, and would secure, by themselves, the first prize
awarded to this exhibit. The nectarines are also very fine.
The cut flowers were placed at the right hand end of the
back wall of the pavillion. They present a very creditable
display. The following are the awards in these sections :
Fifty miscellaneous plants, arranged for effect: J. baptist, 1 ;
Shepherd and Co., 2; Searl and Son, 3. Twenty-five miscel-
laneous plants, arranged for effect: C. Bisset, 1. Twelve mis-
cellaneous pot plants in flower: C. Bisset, 2nd only. Six ditto :
J. Marks, 2nd only. Twelve gloxinias: C. Bisset, 2nd only.
Fiity ferns and lycopods: J. Marks, 1. Twenty-five
ditto: C. Bisset, 1; H. Blaxland. 2. Twelve calsdiums:
C. Bisset, 1. Twelve dracaenas ; Searl and Son, 2nd only. Six
crotons: Searl and Sons, 2nd only. Twenty adiantums in pots or
baskets: J. Marks, 1. Fruit.—Miscellaneous collection: M. F.
Vollmer, 1. Collection, not necessarily grown by exhibitor: W.
11. Nixon, 1. Collection of rock melons : H. Blaxland, 1. Col-
lection of tropical or sub-tropical fruits : H. A. Volckers, I. Col-
lection of mangoes: G. Crispin, 1. Vegetables.—Miscellaneous
collection : Allenn Brothers, 1; H. Blaxland, 2. Cut Flowers.—
Miscellaneous collection (named): Searle and Sons, 1; 11. Blax-
land, 2 ; T. Cope and Son, highly commended; Treseder and
Bartlett, recommended for special prize. Collection of roses:
Tieseder and Bartlett, 1; Dahlias, not less than 50 varieties,
Shepherd and Co., 1. Twenty-four dahlias: Bradley and Pitt:
Ist only. Twenty-four gladioli: T. and F. Cope, 2nd only.
1-loral device: Searl and Sons, 1; D. S. K. Miller, 2. Bridal
bouquet: Searl and Sons, 1 ; Treseder and Bartlett, 2. Hand
bouquet : Searl and Sons, 1; D. S. K. Miller, 2. Table bouquet:
T. and F. Cope, 1; Searl and Sons, 2. Six button-hole bouquets:
Searl and Sons, 1 ; Treseder and Bartlett, 2. Six breast sprays :
Searl and Sons, 1; Treseder and Bartlett, 2. Basket of flowers :
Treseder and Bartlett, 1; Searl and Sons, 2: D. S. K. Miller
highly commended.
SUGAR AND SUGAR-PRODUCING PLANTS.
Judges: J. Kidman, H. Harris, £. Ramsay, J. M'Far-
lane, and A. E. Elkington. There was so little competi-
tion in this class as to call forth the following remarks from
the judges:—We do not consider that sufficient interest
has been taken in this exhibit, and in the absence of com-
petition we do not feel justified in awarding a prize. We
have to report, however, that the sugar exhibits are of ex-
cellent manufacture. We regret the want of enthusiasm
shown by the manufacturers. The cane exhibits, however,
are worthy of the highest commendation. The judges
stated the exhibits of Mr. J. Gayland in classes 404
to 411 meritorious ; and, as a collection, award
a centennial silver medal. The judges also award
a certificate of merit to Mr. Gayland in classes 412 to
414. In class 413, the judges award Centennial bronze
medal to Mr. Boultcn. The cane exhibits are worthy of
the highest commendation; and, in addition to the above,
we award exhibitors in classes 416 to 423 and extra class, a
silver medal for the general excellence of their collections.
The exhibitors referred to are—Messrs. A. H. Garven
Palmer’s Island, Clarence River; Medlicott and Banks,’
South Woodburn, Richmond River; and David Sharpe
Ballina. * ’
WINE AWARDS.
Judges: P. F. Adams, W. H. Hint*n. Steward: W.
Bragg. The following is a list of the wine awards:
Class 361, best light white wine, an vintage : Bouffier Brothers,
K'um’krH,.' 1, Munro, shiraz, 1885, 2; Bouffier Brothers
hock, 1882, highly commended. Class 362, best full white wine
any vintage: A. Munro, pinean, 1884, 1; C. F. Lindeman!
varieties, 1884, 2. Class 363, best red wine (claret type) :
A- M " nr °. hermitage, 1885, 1 ; C. F. Lindeman, hermitage,
Li £ L T lcman ; hermitage, 1884, highly commended.
3 , 64 V b^ t r T e ? , wine ' burgundy type: A. Munro, burgundy,
1880, 1; C. F, Lindeman, burgundy, 1883,2; Bouffier Brothers,
burgundy, 1885, commended. Class 365, best sweet white wine
any vintage : C. F. Lmdeman, varieties, 1883, 1; Bouffier Brothers,
muscadine, 1880, 2; Bouffier Brothers, tokay, 1882, highly com-
™en ojL C u F - Lindeman - varieties, 1883, highly commended,
uass 366, best sweet red wine, any vintage : Harbottle, Alsop,
and Co., muscatel, 1883, 1 (no other award in this class). Class
,7, best sparkling wine : L. Frere, 1 (onlv one exhibit in this
class). Centennial Champion Prize : A. Munro.
FOOD SECTION.
Patterson. The awards in connection
with this section, were as follow:
Ckbkals.—Wheaten flour, first quality : W. Thomas and Co.,
Port Adelaide, 8. A., 1; C. C. Palmer 2. Oatmeal :No award.
Maizena :J. Wade and Co. Bread, bakers’ : John J. Quine, 1:
Frederick Hinds, 2. Collection of pastry: C. B. Abel, 1 •
F. Hinds, 2; J. J. Tuine, highly commended. Dried
“• West and Co., 1. Preserved fruits in svrup :
\\ oodstock Fruit Company, 1; Mrs. John Allah, 2.
Preserved fruits in water : Woodstock F'ruit Co., 1; Mrs. John
Allan, 2. Jams and jellies: Gertrude F. C. Fisher, 1; Woodstock
Fruit Co., 1. Collection of pickles: A. Cooper, 1; W. Frank-
\ m \r' Centennial Special Prizes —Best 121 b. sections of honey :
Italian Bee Co., Centennial special; Thomas Jones and Allport and
Seabrook, highly commended. Best Gib. sections: Italian
Bee Co., Centennial special; Allport and Seabrook, highly
commended. Best large frame of honey: Italian Bee Co.,
Centennial special Allport and Seabrook, highlv com-
mended. Best small frame of lionev: Italian Bee Co., Cen-
tennial special; Allport and Seabrook and W. H. Emmett,
highly commended. Best frame of Italian bees, with queen in
observation hive: Italian Bee Company, Centennial special;
best frame of black bees, with queen in observation : Allport and
Seabrook, Centennial special; best sample of extracted honey in
121 b. jars, Italian Bee Company, Centennial special; Allport and
Setbrook, highly commended; best display of “honey bees at
work,” together with collection of hives and other things per-
taining to bee-keeping: Allport and Seabrook, Centennial
special; Italian Bee Company, highly commended; collection of
bee material, hives, honey extractors, bee smokers, &c., non-
competitive : John Wade and Co., Centennial special.
IMPLEMENTS, MACHINERY &c.
Stewards: Messrs. A. T. Pringle and James Martin.
Judges.—Classes 563 to 566, and 568 to 575 : Messrs. J.
Black, B. Conlon, H. D. Coker, and W, Corty. Classes
567, 592, and 593: Messrs. W. Fishburn, J. Ahern, J.
Monie, and Hastie. Classes 576 to 580: Messrs.’ j!
M'lnerney, W. Black, Bradley, and N. Graham. Classes
581 to 587, 590 to 591: Messrs. G. Rowlands, J.
Flanaghan, J. Knight, G. Bonnor, N. Selfe, and C.
Ross. Classes 588, 589, and 596 to 598 : Mr. D. Sinclair.
The entries in this section were very numerous, and without
doubt they formed the most comprehensive show of imple-
ments and machinery that has been seen in Sydney since
the great exhibition of 1879. Most of the’ Melbourne
makers and a number of South Australian and New
Zealand manufacturers were represented. The exhibits of a
few of the New South Wales makers were also to bo seen
within the enclosure set apart for the display of
machinery and implements. Although this Centennial
Exhibition had for its special feature, the display of
Australian manufactured articles, as was to be ex-
pected, there was also to be seen a very large assortment
of imported English and American ’goods, principally
entered by Messrs. F. Lassetter and Co., Limited ; Messrs.
James Martin and Co., Sydney; Messrs. M'Lean Brothers
and Rigg, Limited, and’others. It maybe stated that
Messrs. Hudson Brothers, Limited, were perhaps the largest
exhibitors of agricultural machinery manufactured in the
colonies, and this firm had a very creditable display. The
judging in the various classes in this section did not com-
mence until after 2 p.m., and as the engines were so nume-
rous, the work was found to be very heavy. In class 593
(wheel earth scoops), Mr. Hugh Lennon, North Melbourne,
was awarded the first prize; Messrs. T. Robinson and Co.,
Melbourne, being second. The judges felt some diffi-
culty in awarding the prizes offered for wheel scoops with-
out witnessing tests; but as they were compelled by the
rules to make their decisions on Tuesday, they offered a
special prize of £3 3s. to be competed for
by the makers of scoops in a month’s time.
In class 567 (ploughs, tank or dam), the first prize was
awarded to Mr. Wili am Ritchie, of Granville, Messrs.
M'Lean Bros, and Rigg taking the second prize. Messrs.


Lassetter and Co.’s exhibit of machinery was a very large
one this year. Their collection was to be found inside the
oval, about the centre of the ground. One of Ransome’s
16-h.D. double-cvlinder portable engines was working on the
corner of the section. This engine supplied the motive
power for driving a Walter A. Wood light steel-wheel har-
vester and string binder, also Reid and Gray’s portable
chaffcutter and bagger, and by means of a counter-shaft
and pulleys a very highly-finished stripper made by J.
Martin and Co., of Gawler, South Australia, was shown in
motion. A novelty in corn-husking machines was also
to be seen doing its work. There was a very large
collection of single, double, and three furrow ploughs.
Nearly all the leading makers, both English and colonial,
were represented by Lassetter. Ransome s,
Howard’s, Hornsby’s, Deere and Co., and Eckert, and the
Ames’ Plough Company were the most noticeable of the
English and American; whilst Lennon (Melbourne),
Reid and Gray and Booth M'Donald (of New
Zealand) were the colonial makes shown. Buncle’s
(Melbourne) travelling cutter, with bagging arrange-
ment, was at work, driven by a 4 h.p. portable engine.
This piece of machinery is peculiarly well adapted for tra-
velling about the country and cutting up the stacks ln tb o
fields. The chaff can be placed in bags all sizes. This ,
implement is capable of cutting two tons per day. Ibis
firm also exhibited a large assortment of squatters’ requisites,
and in connection with the working dairy a Ransome s
12 h.p. double-cylinder portable engine was driving
the different cream separators. I he magnificent
collection of agricultural implements and machi-
nery shown by Messrs. James Martin and Co., of
Svdney, at once attracted the attention of the visitor. This
firm had several specialties in this line, built by the leading
manufacturers of the colonies, and a large display of Eng-
lish and American manufactured goods. . A noticeable
feature in this exhibit was the chaffcutter with automatic
baggers made by Messrs. Andrews and. Beavin, of .New
Zealand. These were shown in operation ; the bagging
apparatus being, entirely self-acting, requires no attention
whatever as there is a most ingenious contrivance for
shutting off the supply when the bag is full, and starting
again when the next bag is put on. A tree and
stump extractor, built by Messrs. Dacey and Co.,
of Sydney, was also shown. This is an excep-
tionally strong and powerful implement, and it will
pull out almost any tree or stump. The Hornsby Cold
Medal Steel String Reaper.and Binder was also to be seen at
work. Another noticeable machine was one of M/Comas
Water Lifters, which can be had in all sizes. With its aid
one man can lift 30 gallons per minute from a distance ot
35ft., and the larger sizes will raise immense volumes ot
water, thus rendering them invaluable for irrigation, sheep-
washing, &c. Several windmills and a large variety ot
agricultural implements and machines ot all descriptions,
including reaping and mowing machines, horse rakes, ohatt-
cutters, corn crackers, corn shellers, disc harrows, clod
crushers, steam threshers and winnowers, and various
others, were also on view. Messrs. B. F. Avery and Sons,
of Louisville, America, placed an extensive collection ot
their specialties. Almost every variety ot plough used in
agriculture was shown and as several of these were ot
novel design, agriculturists were doubtless pleased
to see them. Many of the ploughs are fitted with tne
new improved pulverising mouldboards, and as this
system is rapidly coming to the front in agricu -
ture, these implements are worthy of attention.
Hudson Bros.’ exhibit comprised the full muster of culti-
vating implements—ploughs, harrows, &c., and notably a
new type of disc harrow, and some fine 2 and 3 furrow
ploughs. The horse hoes of this firm are also fitted with,
chilled shares of their own manufacture. The. Hudson
harvesting machine was in full force, and we are informed
that the record of strippers and winnowers during the past
harvest has been excellent. It would be impossible to
notice in detail all the implements on this stand (furnished,
with very few exceptions, from the Clyde works), but a
Corporation road roller forms a special feature, and the
Maiden patent gate hinges and catches manufactured
by the firm for the patentee attract attention.
Mr. R. F. Ritchie, of Auburn, shows a good collection of
farming implements, among which are an improved Hunter
River pattern corn-sheller, zig-zag harrows, single-furrow
ploughs, horse-hoes, and dam and sub-soiling ploughs.
Mr. W. Elder, of Pvrmont, had a good display of his
garden-seats in different parts of the ground, for the con-
venience of visitors. As these seats can be had in different
sizes, perhaps it would not be amiss if the society purchased
a few of them and allowed them to remain within the en-
closure for the comfort of lady visitors. Mr. J. Manners,
of Taree, showed a number of ploughs suitable for use in the
preparation of soil for the cultivation of maize; also
a special line in horse-hoes for work on light soil.
The exhibits of the well-known firm of Mellor Brothers,
Adelaide, included a pony stripper (with several improve-
ments), and patent slump jumping ploughs, and a wheat
separator or screen, which can be regulated for various
samples. A stand containing some fine models of the stump
jumping ploughwasalso shown, and in addition to this there
was a model exhibiting the advantages of Adamson’s patent
belt, which should prove very useful in all cases where
machinery is used. Messrs. T. Robinson and Co., of
Melbourne, had no less than 68 separate exhibits on
their stand. A stripper, with a patent to stop choking,
and with perfected pulleys preventing slippage in the
belting; a patent cultivator and seed-sower combined,
which will go into the ground from lin. to sin. and
work 10 acres per day, are worthy of attention. Messrs.
Reid and Gray, agricultural implement makers, of
Dunedin, New Zealand, had a good display of farming
implements, including a chaffcutter and bagger com-
bined. Mr. Hugh Lennon, of North Melbourne, displayed
a dry weather stripper, fitted with patent automatic brake and
false comb for raising lodged grain ; double and treble furrow
ploughs, fitted with new disc coulters worked on the swivel
principle; also a good collection of tank-sinking ploughs.
On the adjoining piece of ground Messrs. Coleman and Son,
wheelwrights, of Sussex-street, displayed a number of well-
made drays, waggons, and cabs, all good specimens of
colonial workmanship. Messrs. J. Nicholson and Co., of
Melbourne, were next with a damp weather stripping
machine, and horseworks for driving chaffcutters or any
kind of pumping gear. An Excelsior corn planter, patented
by Mr. G. A. Jordan, of Queen-street, Grafton, was shown
on the next stand, and following after this Mr. G. Sloman,
of Granville, exhibited a winnower made after the pattern of
the principal Adelaide manufacturers. A useful article was
shown by Mr. J. F. Wilson (of the Great Western Flour-
mills, Orange), viz., a combined black oat extractor. This
was said to be the only exhibit of its kind on the ground. It
can be made to work 50 bags of wheat per hour, and it takes
up all dust, chaff, and other impurities from the wheat.
The patent Centennial distributor, made by Messrs. Willacy
and Hornbv, Cameron-street, Paddington, is to be seen on
the next stand. It can be' used for sanding streets or for
sowing grain, or distributing artificial manure upon the soil.
The same firm also exhibited a useful watering machine,
which should be of value to agriculturists generally.
On the other side of the way Mr. Alfred Taylor, of Par-
ramatta-road, Auburn, had erected one of his patent tree
and stump extractors (with a huge ironbark stump at-
tached). This machine will extract trees, roots, and stumps
from the ground without the aid of the axe, pick, or shovel,
and it is well spoken of. Mr. James Martin, of Adelaide,
exhibited a number of strippers, winnowers, horseworks,
chaffcutters, and seedsowers. A specialty is the damp-
weather stripper, which is well adapted for stripping
grain during dull or wet weather. These im-
plements have been awarded prize cups and first
prizes in all the colonies. The whole of the prizes
awarded to the firm for these strippers are on view in the
interior of the machine, the sides of which are of glass. On
entering the grounds the visitor perceived the display of
engines shown by Messrs. John Fowler, of Sydney and
London. Among other things the firm was showing a port-
able tramway (similar to that used by the Colonial Sugar-
Refining Company in Queensland), and a direct traction
6-furrow balanced plough. Messrs. Roberts, Chalmers, and
Co., of York-street, had a good display of gas engines and
sulkys. They also placed a substantially-constructed colonial


made safe, and a petroleum engine, which should prove
exceedingly useful in districts where gas cannot be obtained.
This engine can be taken to pieces and transported to any
part of the colony with the utmost ease. Adjoining these
latter exhibits Mr. F. Flood, of Melbourne, showed a water
lift and machinery adapted for purposes of irrigating
large areas of land. The display made by Messrs.
Macgregor, Harris, and Co. included a goodly number of
useful articles, such, for instance, as the “boss” pump,
fire engines, water carriers, refrigerators, gas stoves, colonial
ovens, &c. The firm also exhibited one of Williams’s patent
self-acting wool-washers. This wool-washer has been
successfully used in various parts of the colony, and is
well spoken of. Messrs. M‘Lean Bros, and Rigg were ex-
hibiting the M'Cormick new steel reaper and binder, a
steel mower, and the No. 1 iron mower. All these imple-
ments have the latest improvements. The Halliday wind-
mill, Marshall’s engines and threshers, and Hunt’s horse
gears and chaffeutters were also to be found on this stand.
A little further away Messrs. Briscoe, Drysdale, and Co.
were showing a semi-portable Robey engine of 12 horse-
power, and a compact horizontal Robey of 14 horse-power.
This latter engine has a very large fly-wheel, being 9£ft.
in diameter. Hoisting engines and a collection of wood
working machinery were also exhibited. A vineyard plough,
with shifting handles (in order to keep close into the vines),
four-furrow ploughs, scoops, and a combined harvester for
cutting, threshing, winnowing, and bagging in the one
operation, all well-finished articles, were shown by Mr.
William Ritchie, of Granville. Messrs. May Bros, and
Co., of Gawler, South Australia, exhibited their new
patent damp-weather stripper, which is largely used in the
colonies: a new broadcast seed-sower, a crushing mill, and
their patent oil-well lubricators and naves for road wheels.
All the implements manufactured by this firm are well
spoken of.
Amongst the prizetakers are the names of several
well-known implement manufacturers and importers
of farming machinery, including those of Messrs.
Hudson Brothers, Limited, Sydney; R. F. Ritchie,
Auburn; William Ritchie, Granville; John Wright,
Sussex-street, Sydney; John Paul. Pennant-street,
Parramatta; F. Lassetter and Co., Limited, Sydney;
James Martin and Co., Sydney; James Martin and Co.,
South Australia; Hugh Lenno'n, North Melbourne; T.
Robinson and Co., Melbourne; M’Calman, Garde, and Co.,
North Melbourne; Reid and Gray, Dunedin, N.Z.;
and Buncle, Melbourne. The special exhibits, non-
competitive, of Messrs. James Martin and Co., Sydney,
included nearly everything that is required ijy
the farmer and cultivator, amongst which may be
mentioned Martin’s “ Reliable Ridging Plough,” with
expanding and contracting mouldboards and screw adjust-
ment; the “ Hornsby-Martin Reliable Treble Furrow
Plough;” “Reliable Cultivators,” for one, two,
or more horses, with moveable shares; the “Diamond”
and the “ Challenge ” mowing machines, improved
manual delivery and self-acting side-delivery reaping
machines, the latter fitted with mowing at-
tachment and new patent automatic rakes; the
Hornsby “ Gold Medal ” steel-string binders, threshing
machines (all kinds), and winnowing machines.
Messrs. F. Lassetter and Co.’s exhibit was a splendid one in
every respect. A large collection of Deer and Co.’s
(America) ploughs, Hunt and Co.’s horse gears and
chaff cutters, Hornsby’s single, double, and three furrow
ploughs, watercarts, wellbuckets, and seed-sowing machines
was to be found on this stand. The various articles shown
by this firm occupied a large area of ground. There
were several exhibits of special interest to station-
owners upon the stand of Hudson Brothers. The new
hinges and catches patented by Mr. George Maiden, and
which were manufactured for him by the Clyde Company,
were to be seen here. It is said that a lady when riding or
driving can without alighting open a paddock gate in front
of her, and close it when she has passed, with perfect
ease, the catch making it a mechanical impos-
sibility for the gate to swing past without
fastening. Another interesting exhibit was a set of wheels
in which each spoke can be tightened, or in case of break-
age replaced in a few minutes, even though it be in the
bush where nothing but a sapling and a good jack-knife
are to hand, and the tyre can be kept tight, or removed and!
replaced in 10 minutes without being cut. The wheels'
were manufactured by Hudson Brothers for the in-
ventor and patentee, Mr. Spring, who also shows awheel
which has been running eight months, and part
of that time in Cobb’s coaches, no slight, test
of its value. The Reid wire-strainers, “Titan”
and “Triplex,” made by Hudson Brothers, for
Mr. Reid, of Dunedin,' N.Z., were also shown.
These inventions have been placed in the hands of the
Clyde Company for manufacture, owing to the reputation
which their malleable and steel castings have obtained.
And of these, too, in various forms examples are shown,
and should command attention from all those engaged in the
mechanical trades. M‘Lean, Brothers and Rigg Limited,
George-street, Sydney, had a line collection of farming
implements and machinery on the ground. A number of
traction and portable steam engines, together with
horizontal fixed engines, were also shown. The M’Cormick
improved new steel harvester and binder, with square tube
frame, was to be seen in full work upon this stand. Nearly
everyone knows the value of these machines, which are
said to have taken the highest honours at every
international exhibition from that of Loudon in
1851 down to that held at Buda-Pesth. It has
also obtained 130 first prizes in the Australasian colonies.
Among other things, Messrs. Macgregor, Harris, and Co.,
George-street, had the Williams patent self-acting wool-
washer on view; also a water or earth carrier, by the aid of
which a boy can lift 2cwt. or 3cwt. of water or earth, and
carry it wherever he likes, fceveral other useful implements
were placed upon this stand. Messrs. Bennett and Speechley,
of Sussex-street, Sydney, exhibited a Marcolino patent quartz-
crusher in working order. Each of the boxes is separate,
and the machine is portable, and can be conveyed
across rough country in an easy manner. It is
also claimed for this crusher that the whole of the quartz
is under treatment when it is placed in the machine.
The crusher was worthy of inspection. Messrs. Holds-
worth and Co., of George-street, exhibited a “Match-
less ” washing-machine, the first of its kind, invented and
made in the colony. It was constructed by Mr. Webb, a
working-man, residing at Glen Innes. It is a very handy
article, and as its price is within the reach of most persons,
it should prove a useful acquisition to every household.
The fine collections of ploughs and harrows shown by Mr.
William Ritchie (Granville) and Mr. R. F. Ritchie
(Auburn) were inspected by a number of farmers and others.
The celebrated damp-weather stripper, shown by Messrs.
James Martin and Co., Limited, of Gawler, South Aus-
tralia, attracted a considerable amount of attention. This
machine is very well spoken of. Messrs. May Brother- and
Co., of the Gawler Engineering Works, South Australia,
exhibited some very useful machinery, including their patent
stripper, the “ Premier;” anew broadcast seed-sower, which
appears to be a most perfect and durable article; a new
crushing-mill, windmill, hand-pumps, &c. The seats
constructed by Mr. W. Elder, of Pyrmont, and
placed in different parts of the ground, proved very
acceptable to the visitors, especially the ladies.
The models of the stone and stump jumping plough shown
by Messrs. Mellor Bros., agricultural implement manufac-
turers, of Adelaide, were inspected with evident interest by
a number of country visitors. A trial of the plough took
place during the afternoon. Some experiments were mads
with a model of Adamson’s patent belt for preventing slip-
page. The tests were of a very satisfactory nature. A
quantity of Lancashire patent belting, used to drive
machinery, was exhibited by Messrs. Campbell, Guth-
ridge, and Co., of Clarence-street, Svdney. The patent tree
and stump extractor, shown by Mr. Alfred Tavlor, of
Auburn, attracted general attention. It is said that at a
public test of this extractor made at Newington a stump
7ft. 6in. in girth was taken from the ground in 10 minutes.
The awards were as follows:
Class 561—Ploughs, garden and vineyard, Hudson Bros.,
Limited, 1;R. F. Ritchie, 2. Class 564—Ploughs, one-horse,
William Ritchie, 1 ; John Paul, 2. Class 565—Ploughs, two


horses, John Wright, 1; R. F. Ritchie, 2. Class 566
Ploughs, heavy land, John Panl, 1 ; William Ritchie, 2.
Class 567—Ploughs, tanK or dam, Wm. Ritchie, 1 ;
Hugh Lennon, 2 ; R. F. Ritchie, highly commended.
Class 576 Ploughs, double furrow, M* Caiman, Garde, and Co., 1;
Hugh Lennon, 2. Class 571—Ploughs, three furrow, M’Calman,
Garde, and Co., 1; Hugh Lennon, 2. Class 572—Zigzag Harrows,
M‘Caiman and Garde, 1; Reid and Gray, 2. Class 574—Horse
Hoes, R. F. Ritchie, 1; John Wright, 2 ; Class 575—Cultivators,
Wm. Ritchie, 1; Hudson Bros., Limited, 2. Class 576—Hay
Rakes, T. Robinson and Co., I; Hudson Bros., Limited, 2. Class
577_Mowing and Reaping Machines. Hudson Bros., Limited (The
Clyde), 1: T. Robinson and Co. (4- wheeled mower and reaper), 2;
Class 578—Simple Strippers, T. Robinson and Co., 1; Improved
Light Draught Stripper, by J. Martin and Co., S. A., and exhi-
bited by F. Lassetter and Co., 2. Class 579 Damp Weather
Strippers, the “ Standard,” manufactured by J. Martin and Co.,
S A., and exhibited by F. Lassetter and Co.. 1; May Bros, and
Co., 2. Class 580—Winnowers, improved, manufactured by
Bagshaw and Sons, S. A., and exhibited by James Martin and
Co Sydney, 1; Hugh Lennon, 2. Class 581—Horse Gears, for
driving chaffcutter, &c., made by J. Martin, South
Australia, and shown by F. Lassetter and Co., 1 j T. Robinson
and Co., 2 ; Hudson Brothers, Limited, highly commended.
Class 582—Chaffcutters, Bagging, Buncle’s (Melbourne) chaff-
cutter, on wheels, with elevator and bagger, 1; the Canter-
bury” (Andrews and Bevan), shown by J. Martin and Co.,
Sydney, 2. Class 583—Chaffcutters, for power, the “ Canter-
bury,” shown by J. Martin and Co., Sydney, 1; Martin’s (South
Australia) improved, exhibited by F. Lassetter and Co., 2. Class
584—Chaffcutters, for hand, Buncle’s (Melbourne), shown by I.
Lassetter and Co.. 1. Class 585—Hand or power Corncrackers,
May Brothers and Co., 1; Martin’s (South Australia), shown by
F. Lassetter and Co., 2. Class 586—Corn-huskers, Melchior and
Bennett’s for horse-power, exhibited by F. Lassetter and Co., 1.
Class 587—Corn Shellers, hand or power, Hudson Brothers,
Limited, 1; Walker’s elevator (shown by Lassetter and Co.), 2 ;
Hudson Brothers, highly commended. Class 590—Hand Hay
Presses, T. Robinson and Co., 1; Hudson Brothers, Limited, 2.
Class 591—Hav Pressers, power, Hewitt’s (shown by Lassetter
and Co.), 1. Class 592— Slide Earth Scoops, Lassetter and Co.,
1; T. Robinson and Co., 2. Class 593—Earth Scoops, wheel,
Hugh Lennon, 1 ; T. Robinson and Co., 2.
MINERALS.
One of the most valuable and, at this particular stage of
mining enterprise, exceedingly interesting features of the
exhibits as a whole was the collection of New South Wales
minerals, which was to be found in the main pavilion.
The public had an opportunity for examining the
whole of the choice exhibits which were recently on
view at the Adelaide Exhibition. lhe collection
apart from its intrinsic value of several thousands of
pounds, was, in an educational point of vie w, one of the lead-
ing ones on the ground. Space is too limited to enumerate
the specimens. The public, particularly intercolonial visitors,
have judged for themselves. In addition to the Governmental
display, many private firms and mining companies were added
to the list. The Golden Gully Mining Company, Limited,
Ironbarks, showed a case of extremely rich quartz specimens,
many of which fairly bristled with solid gold, and
give indications of a rich property. The Cobar Copper
Company had a huge pyramid of copper m gots
and ore specimens; and the Wheal Australia Tin
Mining Company, Stannifer, was to the fore with a collection
of tin ingots, reef, ruby, alluvial, boulder, and nugget tin
and crystals, which should serve to ingratiate any tyro into
the mysteries of the natural occurrence of the metal. Anti-
mony ore, from the Eieanora mine, near Armidale, and
“ star” antimony, from the Kempsey mines formed an
attractive display near at hand. There was also on
view a magnificent collection of gold, the property ot o
Government, inclusive of the justiy famous “ MaiUanobar
nugget, the value of which is between £l3OO and £l4OO. A
section of Hunter River coal was on view, from the mine
of the Waratah Coal Company. Fossils and minerals ot
various descriptions were set out in abundance, and, as
above-mentioned, the mineral section was a feature mitse .
COACHB UILDERS’ AND WHEEL WRTGHTS’
WORK, SADDLERY, FARRIERT, AND
MISCELLANEOUS.
In this section no less than 423 entries were catalogued,
164 of which consisted of coachbuilders’ and wheelwrights
exhibits. A number of the best finished phaetons, landaus,
sociables, and buggies were exhibited in a large marquee,
whilst the heavy waggons, drays, and carts were shown
in the enclosure "set apart for machinery and agricultural
implements. Messrs. Hudson Brothers were exhibiting
a collection of vehicles, comprising in all nine descrip-
tions, including omnibuses, hansom cabs, one and
two horse lorries, road waggons, and express waggons, all
of which were of excellent finish and manufacture, ihe
same firm was also exhibiting a buggy and dogcart. Mr.
Charles Glencross had a number of excellent exhibits on
the ground, including a new design of phaeton, amd hansom
cab The phaeton was beautifully upholstered, and the
cab’was fitted with a number of improvements. lhe
same exhibitor was also showing a dogcart, which was highly
finished, and which weighed not more than 3cwt. Messrs.
Lassetter and Co. were exhibiting in this section a spring-
dray with seedsower attached, and there was also a waggon
bv J. Martin and Co., of South Australia. Messrs.
Hudson Brothers were also exhibiting in the same enclosure
a collection of wheelwrights’ work, including a collection
of dray, carriage, and waggon wheels. Mr. Henry Good-
win had a large collection of exhibits on the ground, in-
cluding a heavy road waggon said to have taken
the first prize at the Adelaide Exhibition. Messrs. William
Vial and Son exhibited a number of celebrated
styles of vehicles, including the “ Hyde Park buggy.
This vehicle was shown in three different styles, the first
being an ordinary double seat buggy, the front seat of
which is in two sections, fitted with hinges so that it may
be easily lifted for the convenience of ladies wishing to pass
from the front to the hind seat. In the second style the
back seat is reversed, and the vehicle is turned into a dog-
cart. It can also be turned into a single seat open
bug°r or light waggon. The miscellaneous exhibits
included in the section, and which in some instances
°*ave a very good idea of the smaller colonial
tries, were, with a few exceptions exhibited in the
laro-e new pavilion which has been erected on the
side of the hill. Owing, however, to the small
amount of space allotted to exhibitors, many articles of colo-
nial manufacture were not seen to as great advantage as they
should be, and complaints were being made by exhibitors and
others of the disadvantages under which thev had to suffer
for want of proper accommodation. The collection ot colo-
nialland imported saddlerv was remarkably good. There were
not more than five entries, including a non-competitive
collection by Messrs. John Brush, Son, and Co. I his col-
lection reflects the highest credit upon the firm, lhere was
also an excellent collection of saddlery exhibited by Messrs.
A. Gregory and Co., for which they obtained the
Centennial prize. There were 13 entries m the class tor
colonial and imported harness, including a non-competitive
collection exhibited by Messrs. John Brush, Son, and Co-
Several excellent sets of harness were exhibited by
Mr. Robert Sharp, and there was also a very creditable dis-
play of imported harness by Messrs. A. Gregory and Co..
Mr J C Ludowici was showing a good assortment ot
leather’ mill belting, and hose. In the same division
were also collections of excellent specimens of photo-
graphy by Messrs. Charlemont and Co., Creel-
man and Co., J. H. Newman, Channon and
Co., and Morgan and Kidd. All the photographs were
highly finished, and some of the exhibits in the class com-
prfse enlargements on permanent paper and opal by the
argentic gelatino-bromide process invented by Messrs.
Morgan and Kidd. Messrs. Beale and Co. exhibited a
number of pianofortes. There were only two entries in the
soap exhibits. The first was an exhibit of self-acting soap
by Mr. Sohn T. Kianecane, and the second was a block of
common soap, which was exhibited by the Illawarra !~>oap
company. Both exhibits were worthy of notice. The
“self-acting” soap which is manufactured by the exhibi-
tor should, if it really has all the qualities it is said to
possess, be very much sought after. The manufacturer
claims that his preparation will, by simply placing a
sufficient quantity into a washtub with the clothes, remove
all grease or other marks from the clothes without the
rubbing and friction usually required. There were also a
number of washing-machines, mangles, and wringers,
exhibited by other competitors who vie with one another


in endeavouring to produce labour-saving machines.
There was a large assortment of stoves and cook-
ing apparatus which reflect credit upon the
colonial manufacturer. In this section Mr. James Ward
placed several really excellent pieces of workmanship,
amongst the collection being a large cooking range,
which attracted a considerable amount of attention. It
embraces four large ovens, which can be conveniently
heated by two fires. The ovens are of an exceptional
depth, and in addition to them the apparatus includes a
large grill, which is suspended in such a manner as
to make it easy of access and removal. There is also
another cooking range, which combines an improved plate
warmer with other conveniences, a self-acting grill, and a
jacketed stock pot, the latter being manufactured for the use
of steam only. Amongst the other exhibits were speci-
mens of eucalyptus oil by Messrs. Colemane and
Sons of Cootamundra. There was also an excellent
„ exhibit of joinery by Messrs. Chidgey, Fay, and Berry.
Messrs. Farmer and Co. placed an ’excellent suite of
dining-room furniture; and Messrs. Hordern Brothers, of
Pitt-street, had a good display of imported goods, such as
carpets and cornices. Messrs. M’Gregor, Harris, and Co.
exhibited a collection of firearms, centennial watches,
stoves, washing-machines, mangles, ovens, water-carriers,
corn measures, and wheel-barrows. The Kaiapoi Woollen
Manufacturing Company, of Christchurch, New Zealand,
displayed a large assortment of tweeds, blankets, flannels,
tartans, and rugs. The following a » ards were also made:—
Firf. Engines, Registering Instruments, &c.— National
cash register (self-adding), Mackrell, Mills, and Co.,
1 ; horse hose-reel, J. Hulbert, special prize; fireman’s
ladder carriage, J. 11. Marsh, special prize. Blacksmiths’
work : Ornamental wrought iron entrance gates and 2 pairs
wicket Rates. E. H. Kichard, Ist and Centennial prizes;
nuts, bolts, &c., S. Firkin. 1. Models : Busts fmale and
female), It. Bushby, 1 ; merchant ship’s gig, Chidger, Fav, and
Berry, 1 ; self-acting wire fence forrivers and creeks, G. Edwards.
i Proprietors of the Evans Combination truck, 1 ; swing
plough, A. M. Gordon, 1 ; saws, S.'Newbold and Co., Limited, 1;
locks, hinges, &c., D. Moritz, 1. Any other variety of tools or
machines: Lassetter and Co. (self-adjusting incubators), I;*K. T.
Barlow (automatic door-holder), 1.
CARRIAGES.
Steward: Mr. J. R. Hill. Judges: Messrs. W. Fleming
John Rowley, J. de V. Lamb, and Edward Miller.
An angular phaeton, with extension hood, by M. Moore,
was specially commended, and a pony dogcart by W.
Vial and Son, was noticed in a similar %vav. The follow-
ing were also commended Haining and Schimel, for
Stanhope and Victoria phtetons; M. Moore, for single-
seated buggy ; W. Vial and Son for Hyde Park double-
seated buggy, Sydney Victoria, varnished patent Putnam
and N orfolk dog-cart. A hansom cab, of new design, by
C. Glencross, was specially commended.
COMBINATION TRUCK.
Judges: Hon. R. H. Roberts, Mr. A. H. Cox, Mr. 11.
Larance.
First prize awarded to Mr. W. B. Wilkinson; second prize Mr
Evans.
CENTENNIAL PICNIC TO THE ROMAN CATHOLIC DIGNITARIES.
A complimentary picnic was given on the 25th by
the Roman Catholic laity to the archbishops, bishops,
and other ecclesiastical dignitaries on a visit to the city
in connection with the Centenary celebrations. The fine
steamer Bunya Bunya had been chartered for the occasion,
and shortly after 11 o’clock she left the Floating Jetty,
Circular Quay, with about 200 gentlemen on board, among
those present being Cardinal Moran, Archbishop Carr,
Archbishop Dunne, Archbishop Reynolds, Bishop Murray
Bishop Lanigan, Bishop Torregiani, Bishop Byrne, Bishop
Dunne, Bishop Doyle, Bishop Corbett (Sale, Victoria),
Monsignor Rigney, Hon. N. Fitzgerald, M.L.C.,
Hon. J. G. Duffy (Victoria), Judge Casey, Dr
Brownless, Dr. Maurice O’Connor, Dr. Power
Dr. Gregory O’Neill, Messrs. Slattery, Dowel, Toohey,’
O’Connor, O’Mara, Dalton, Ms.L.A., Dr. O’Haran, Aider-
men Hart, J. D. Young, Manning, M'Mahon, Messrs. J.
G. O’Ryan, M. J. Caraher, Butcher, J. J. Curran, P. T.
Riley, Quinlan, Dunford, M'Bride, A. B. Riley, Flanna-
gan, J. G. O’Connor, W. Dolman, F. J. M'Carthy, John
Bridge, M‘Sharry, Ramsden, J. Hourigan, P. R. Larkin,
Hughes, J. Brady, Hogan, T. Curran, M‘Mahon, Glynn,
M.L.A., of Adelaide, Captain O’Hagan, of .Brisbane, a
number of the clergy, and others. The vessel’s head was
pointed down the harbour after clearing the cove, and
steaming past the men-of-war in Farm Cove she went
inside Garden Island, and skirted the shores of the bay
down as far as the Heads, when she turned and
proceeded up Middle Harbour. The weather was
beautifully fine and cool, and the water perfectly
smooth, and as the shores of the bay never pre-
sented a greener or more attractive appearance, the
harbour was seen at its best, and evoked expressions of
admiration from all the visitors. The pleasure of the out-
ing was markedly increased by the presence on board of the
band of the Naval Artillery Volunteers, which at intervals
played selections of music in a highly creditable manner.
Iheßunyaßunyawentup Middle Harbour as far as the float-
ing magazines, and then started back again for Cabarita, on
the Parramatta River, where luncheon was to be held. On
the trip oysters and refreshments were served, and were
keenly enjoyed, the oysters being particularly fresh and
good. Before the steamer reached the wharf at Cabarifa
the Government steam launch Nea came up, with the Hon
W.B. Dailey, P.C., the Hon. P. G. King. M.L.C., the
Hon. Sir John Hay, Mr. Augustus Morris, and
Dean Donovan on board, and a good deal of cheering took
place. On landing, the party was joined by Mr. John
Harris, Mayor of the city, Alr.'j. P. Garvan, M.L.A., and
other gentlemen, who had already arrived there. They
then proceeded to the large pavilion’ in which luncheon was
laid in Mr. Correv’s best style, the tables presenting an ap-
pearance creditable alike to him and his assistants. The
Hon. W. B. Dailey presided, having on his right Cardinal
Moran, and on his left Sir John Hay, the prelates, together
with the Mayor and Mr. Fitzgerald, being also seated at the
principal table. After luncheon, which' was well cooked
and well served,
The Chairman, after expressing the regret they all
felt at the absence of Mr. .T. T. Toohey, who had been
largely instrumental in bringing about that memorable
gathering, gave the toast of “ The Queen and all the
.Royal Family,” which was warmlv drunk.
Mr. D alley then said: My Lords and Gentlemen, —
There are some men who seem to be sent into the world
with the beautiful mission of simply’ making themselves
agreeable and delightful. They are endowed with those
rare qualities which find their own happiness in widely
diffusing it, they discover the fascination of unselfishness,
and the perfect felicity of devoting life to the work of
making: it more attractive to those who enjoy it, and more
tolerable to those who suffer. -I hey are the missionaries of
true courtesy—preaching in every action of their lives the
beauty of goodness, of kindness, of consoling words,
and generous actions. The world, which in spite
of all (Heaven forgive me for the heresy of making
so unorthodox a statement in this holy company),
is not a bad world to those who love it, receives
these missionaries with welcome, and rewards them with
love. . Now, in the person of our Governor we have a
beautiful example of one of them ; and Heaven, which has
showered upon him many blessings and many qualifications,
has given to him a partner who industriously labours to
help him in the performance of the great work of making


mankind happier and better. For my part, much as I join
in aspirations for a more exalted form of national life, I
humbly pray that I shall cease to take any profound
interest in the delights of social life when we shall have
changed our arrangements so as to give us a great local-
elected politician, with all his and our own perils, in
the place of the graceful, courteous, noble gentleman,
Imperially commissioned to reach us the art of loving and
being loved. I give you the health of Lord and Lady
Carrington.
The toast was drunk with enthusiasm, and cheers were
given for both Lord and Lady Carrington.
Mr. Dalley then rose and said: My Lord Cardinal,
my Lords, Sir John Hay, and Gentlemen,—lt is now my
pleasing duty to submit to you the toast which we have all
assembled here specially to honour on this interesting occa-
sion. I give you our most distinguished guests, his Emi-
nence the Cardinal and their Lordships the Archbishops
and Bishops of the Catholic Church in Australasia. (Ap-
plause.) lam sure you will bear with me if I avail myself
of this opportunity to make some reference to the history of
our faith in these Australian colonies. (Applause.) . It
will be impossible indeed to let such an occasion pass with-
out recalling the deeply interesting circumstances which
have marked the great triumphs of the Catholic Church in
this part of her Majesty’s dominions. It is nearly
90 years ago since the trials' and sufferings of Ireland gave
her first Catholic missionaries to this Australian continent.
They came not as the objects or instruments of the wisdom
or provision of humanity of Governments to be the
teachers and consolers of tlieir poor flocks; but they came,
those manacled missionaries, as transported convicts for an
alleged share in what was called the Irish Rebellion. And
it may be remembered that they had as companion in exile
a Protestant clergyman, who was pronounced to be
guilty of the same offence and who incurred
the same punishment. This companionship in calamity
may have happily prefigured the liberality which has
characterised our intercourse —political, commercial, and
social—with our fellow-colonists of other persuasions.
(Applause.) The poor priestly prisoners had scarcely
landed in their place of exile when it was discovered that
in the case at least of one of the convict confessors a
grievous mistake had been committed, and that the Irish
tribunals of that day had in an excess of confused loyalty
convicted an entirely innocent man. (Applause.) An ex-
tremely superficial acquaintance with the history of legal
proceedings in connection with political offences in that
country will familiarise us with numerous and serious ex-
amples of similar mistakes. (Hear, hear.) Ihe victim of
this blunder was at once pardoned, and returned to Ireland.
But, most providentially for ns, no similar mistake had
been acknowledged to have been committed in the case of
the others, though there is a strong probability that they
also were the victims Of excessive zeal and extremely doubt-
ful testimony. One was sent to Norfolk Island and
the other remained here. It is 84 years since that holy
man was permitted to undertake the duties ot the
priestly office by the then Governor of the colony,
in obedience to a direction from the Imperial secre-
tary of State. He then, that poor, gentle, priestly conVict
(you can read the testimony to his inoffensive character in
the formal proclamation, dated 19th April, 1803), humbly
represented the Church which to-day finds its representa-
tives in the glorious hierarchy which on this historical
occasion, after a space of little more than the ordinary
duration of human life, honours you by the acceptance ot
your splendid hospitality. (Applause.) It is with slightly
different circumstances, not uniike the pathetic beginnings
of the faith in Ireland itself, whither its consolations were
carried by an apostle who was an exile and a prisoner.
(Applause.) In the case of our first confessor, it may be
remarked that he was subjected in the service of religion to
the severest official supervision. His minutest movements
were regulated bv authority, the place and times at
and circumstances under which he could minister
the consolations of his faith to his peop e
were ordered and directed by the Government. riis
successors to-day enjoy the most absolute freedom of action
and administration, the most complete independent spiritual
authority which it is possible for them to possess or the
State to' sanction. (Applause.) In the solemnisation of
their most sacred functions; in the full development of all
the holy institutions of our Church; in their services to
society of all kinds, their zeal is the only limit of their
authority, and they can do all things which religion in-
spires their saintly ambition to undertake and sustains
them to complete. It is well that, in marking by these
centennial festivals the marvellous progress of the colony,
you as Catholics should have contributed for your own
consolation, for the information of the world, and for the
glory of your own Church, this page, not only-
in the history- of Australia but of universal Christianity—
(applause)—that you should have reioiced at the
triumphs that have been achieved, the mercies
bestowed, and blended your happiness and gratitude with
the svmpathies of your fellow-colonists. (Applause.)
Apart'from the triumphs of your religion, your share in
the civilisation which we have reached is a large one. \ou
have softened the ferocity of manners, you have elevated
the objects of society, founded and most generously sus-
tained institutions of charity, tended the afflicted and the
suffering, rescued abandoned childhood; at the cost of
countless sacrifices you have educated your youth,
kept the faith with courage and vigilance and without
offence, and now, after less than a century, you can look
proudly abroad and rejoice at the prospect which manifests
the labours and the love and the victory of those who nnd
at this board their not unworthy successors. (Applause.)
It is to-day, in the midst of this glorious company, in the
presence of your distinguished guests, that you indulge in
no violation of humility, no sinful complacency, but on the
contrary reverence and preserve history in recalling to \ our
minds the spiritual triumphs that have been achieved since
the days of those souls “calm and brave,” as one of the
greatest modern French Catholic writers has said, “ uptight
and lofty as well as humble and fervent, souls such as
Pascal calls perfectly heroic.” (Applause.) For since those
days of gloom and trial and suffering
Another race hath been and other palms are won,
Thanks to the human heart by which we live,
Thanks to its tenderness, its joys and fears.”
That poor priest to whom I have referred, and who practi-
cally represented here the Universal Church, has his place
occupied to-day by five ecclesiastical provinces Sydney,
Melbourne, Adelaide, Brisbane, and New Zealand ; by six
apostolic vicariates —Cooktown, Central Oceanica, Fiji,
New Guinea, Samoa, and New Caledonia; by one
Cardinal Prince of the Church; by four archbishops and
21 bishops. (Loud applause.) The public worship
of his Church is celebrated in 1140 churches by 1000
priests—(applause)—and there are 225 brothers of religious
orders and 2191 nuns. (Applause.) There are 20 colleges,
850 schools of all kinds —(applause)—21 institutions for
the orphans and the abandoned, 23 other cnaritable institu-
tions, homes for aged and consumptive persons, &c., and
two servants’ homes. T. here are i 0,000 children re-
ceiving Catholic education —(loud cheers)—in Catholic
schools, and there is a Catholic population of
nearly 700,000. (Applause.) In this metropolitan
province alone, comprising the whole of this
colony, there are 32,991 children receiving Catholic educa-
tion, and there are close upon a quarter of a million of
persons belonging to the Catholic Church. (Applause.)
We have nearly all the Catholic nations of the world repre-
sented on this Continent, in New Zealand, and in Oceanica,
among the Bishops and priests of the Church of God—
Spaniards and Italians, Frenchmen and Germans, men and
women of all religious orders. The publication from
which I have carefully compiled these figures which 1 am
now giving you—which is the Catholic Directory of this
year—contains the most marvellous tribute to our power
and influence in this hemisphere which could have been
written by the most powerful and eloquent of writers.
(Applause.) Apart, however, from the information con-
tained in it, I have ascertained from the proper authori-
tative quarters that in this diocese alone since 1821
a sum of £2,000,000 has been expended since
Father Therry began old St. Mary’s Cathedral
(applause)—in that year in support of institutions of


religion, education, and charity, and that the expenditure
in the whole of these Australian colonies in the
works of religion and education has considerably exceeded
£5,000,000. (Applause.) All this, it must be understood,
is apart from the enormous cost of bringing out priests
and nuns and establishing them, and the payment of
current working expenses. And now, your Eminence, my
Lords, and gentlemen, let me make but a single reference to
our relations with society in these Australian colonies —
let me relieve you of the burden which 1 have been com-
pelled to inflict upon you, and say that it is the inex-
pressible privilege and distinction of Catholics in these
colonies to be associated on this memorable occasion, in
this glorious review of their triumphant past, with those
fellow-citizens who, differing from you in religious convic-
tions, still admire your courageous consistency, are affected
by your sacrifices, appreciate your liberality, and rejoice in
your happiness. (Loud applause.) It is a great honour
and a greater reward to you that they should join with you
on an occasion of this kind. They recognise in the most
emphatic way that there is not only nothing in the main-
tenance of your holy religion to estrange their sympathy
from you, but that your very fidelity to the best teachings
of your Church is your title to their respect. They have
discovered that the temples in which you have worshipped
your God are the schools of pure charity and tender for-
bearance, of justice and mercy and peace. They have
learnt that you know and, when you are made sensible of
your obligations, that you practise your duty to your
neighbours of all creeds, and that as you become richer in
the material development of numbers and institutions and
power and influence, you are richer also in those gifts and
endowments which elevate, adorn, and sanctify true citizen-
ship. (Cheers.) 1 propose to you the toast of “ His
Eminence the Cardinal and the rest of the distinguished
guests, the Hierarchy of Australasia.” (Loud applause.)
Cardinal Mohan, who was received in the heartiest pos-
sible manner, said: Mr, Chairman, —Whilst I thank you
for the compliment you have paid me, I beg to assure you
that it affords me the greatest pleasure to be associated with
my Catholic fellow-citizens in greeting, with heartiest wel-
come, the illustrious prelates who have come amongst us to
add lustre to our celebrations on these festive days. (Ap-
plause.) Ido not know that in any church of Christendom
you will find a brighter array of archbishops and bishops,
enlightened, earnest, generous, devoted in their self-sacri-
fice, inculcating, by word and example, divine lessons of
morality and virtue, and diffusing the blessings of peace,
truth, and charity throughout the length and breadth of
this fair Australian land. (Applause.) If there be one
special feature which is characteristic of Australia’s
sons, it is their unquenchable love of liberty. (Hear,
hear.) The fathers of many of them quitted
their native land and chose the hardships of exile rather
than hug the chains with which the statesmen of the hour
would fetter their freedom. (Applause.) The sacred tree
of liberty, transplanted to Australia, has found a genial
soil—(Applause)—and it needs no spirit of propheev to
foretell that it will at no distant day produce rich and
abundant fruit. It is Australia’s destiny to become a great
nation, a bulwark of Christian liberty, and a home and
refuge for true civilisation. But we must not forget that
liberty, without social order and religion, is but an empty
name. (Hear, hear.) Like the stream that overflows its
channel, and instead of wealth and fertility brings
ruin and desolation in its course, so it is with
liberty without religion. (Applause.) And perhaps
such false liberty is the greatest scourge with which heaven
can permit a nation to be scourged. When at the close of
the second century of Australia’s history, men shall look
back on the grand things achieved in our days in building
up this great nation, those prelates whom we honour here
to-day shall not be forgotten. (Applause.) Their names
shall be found inscribed in the brightest roll of the friends
of freedom, and they shall be reckoned among the trusted
champions of the nation’s rights, the best benefactors of
this loved land of our adoption. (Applause.)
Dr. Carr, who was also very heartily received, likewise
responded. He said that, though his sojourn had not been
very long in the country, he had found' ample evidence of
what those great and good priests were represented by the
chairman to have done in this land of Australia. (Hear,
hear.) He had come expecting a great deal, for he had
heard and read much of this island-continent before he set
his foot upon it; and he must say this, after having viewed
it on his arrival—its scenery, its material resources, the men •'
who compose its population*, their social bearing, their his-h
culture, their friendly reception to every stranger—he must
say this, that, high as his expectations were, and great as
was the idea he had formed of Australia, he had to confess
that the idea which he had formed, and the information he
had received, fell far short of the reality. (Applause.)
And if that had been the case with regard to p&rts of
Australia which he had visited, and it was the case,
he need not tell them that, during the last few days,
while he had been residing in Sydney, all that he had
seen, all that he had heard, culminating in that festive
scene, had added still further to the idea which he
had already formed of the true, the good, and the noble
character of the people of this country. (Applause.) It
was not wonderful, therefore, that he* should feel deeply
grateful to those who had kindly honoured him among
the bishops who had come to Sydney to take part in the
Centennial celebrations. (Applause!) To the last day of
his life the impressions made on his mind during the last
few days would remain with him He regarded the cir-
cumstances connected with the beginning of the second
century of the existence of these colonies as
omens of the happiest kind. He trusted that
while the Catholic Church in these colonies
would pursue its even and peaceful way, while its ministers
would labour zealously, they should always take care so to
live, so to act, i s to secure the friendship of those who
differed from them in religious belief. (Anplause.)
Dr Reynolds, of Adelaide, also responded, and said
that the three priests referred to by the chairman were all
innocent men, and all were pardoned. He had for the past
30 years been collecting facts in regard to the foundation of
the Church in Australia, and he hoped that in a short time
a high and distinguished ecclesiastic, and not unknown as
a historian, would take the matter up, and they should then
have a proper history of the Church in Australia.
Dr. Dunn, Dr. Murray, Dr. Lanigan, and Dr. Tor-
reggtani also responded.
His Honor Judge Faucett, who was unable, owing to
a previous engagement, to be present until some time after
the proceedings began, gave the toast of “ The Centenary.”
He referred to that portion of the chairman’s speech which
he had heard in terms of eulogy, and regretted that he had
not heard it all. A portion of what he had intended to say
had already been said therein, and he need not, therefore,
go over it again. He briefly sketched the main features of
the history of Australia during the past century, referring
particularly to our marvellous progress in material wealth,
and to the absolute freedom we enjoy, both political and
religious, and concluded an interesting speech by express-
ing the hope that the connection with the mother country
would long continue.
Mr. D. O’Connor having spoken to the toast,
Mr. F. B. Freehill proposed “The Parliaments of
Australia.”
Sir John Hay, who was cordially received, said, in
response, that he was glad to be present with his fellow-
citizens that day, to do honour to the priesthood of their
faith. (Hear, hear.) He must acknowledge, however,
that he came there with a great deal of pleasure to hear one
of the first speeches that might fall from his friend the
chairman after his recovery from the illness from which he
had been suffering. (Ap'plause.) He thanked them for
the honour they had done Parliament in drinking the
toast, and said he hoped they would always combine with
their fellow-citizens of other denominations in sending in
only the best and most patriotic men to represent them.
(Applause.)
Mr. JP. Garyan also responded,
the toast of “ The Mayor and Aldermen” was proposed
by Mr. P. J. Hourigan, and briefly responded to by Mr.
Harris, Alderman M‘Mahon, and Alderman Manning.
Mr. James Toohei' proposed, “ Our Distinguished Lay
Guests.”


The Hon. N. Fitzgerald, who responded, said the
visitors would carry away with them only the pleasantest
recollections of their stay in Sydney. It was the wish of
the other guests, as it was his, that through the length and
breadth of the colonies of Australia, there would be always
but one sentiment —that noble and patriotic one of joining
together, not in pettv rivalries and jealousies, but to ad-
vance the different interests of the country. (Applause.)
The stronger and greater the unity that existed between
the various divisions of this great continent, the stronger
would be the tie which binds us to the great Kmpire of
which we form a part. (Cheers.)
The Hon. J. G. Duffy, Dr. Brownless, and Mr.
Glynn also responded.
Mr. T. M. Slattery proposed “ The Press,” and Mr.
J. G. O’Connor responded.
Mr. T. C. O’Mara then, in a speech that was charac-
terised by force and brilliance, and was loudly cheered
throughout, proposed the toast of “ The Chairman.”
Mr. Dalley, who was cheered to the echo, gracefully and
eloquently replied, and the proceedings terminated shortly
after 7 o’clock.
The prelates and others of the party were then pboto-
graphed in front of the pavilion by Mr. Maguire, of
George-street, and by Mr. John Roarty, and afterwards
proceeded to the steamer, and returned to Sydney, the trip
down the river being very enjoyable. The Circular Quay
was not reached until half-past 8.
DISTRIBUTION OF CENTENNIAL GIFTS.
The distribution of Centennial gifts to the poor
of Sydney was commenced at 6 o’clock yesterday morning,
and 'continued until a quarter-past 11 o’clock. The
work of distributing the various rations, which formed
the substance of the gifts, was carried on at Mr. James
Kidiran’s depot, in James-street, and was under the
personal supervision of Mr. Thomas Jessep and otner
members of the committee appointed to organise Cen-
tennial gifts to the poor. The Government con-
tractor for the supply of provisions (Mr. James
Kidman) was also in attendance during the day, watching
over and directing the labours of his workmen, who were
most assiduous in discharging the onerous and difficult
duties entrusted to them. Permission had been obtained
by the contractor from the civic authorities to close
James-street to traffic on both the 25th and 26th instant,
so as to facilitate the work of distribution.
The western end of James-street was partitioned off by an
improvised fence of galvanised iron. At the ends of this
were fitted two doors, that were in charge of the ticket col-
lectors and check clerks, whose duty it was to receive the
printed order from the applicant when he or she presented
it at the gateway, and, after noting the conditions of the
docket, hand the candidate a pass, which, according to its
colour—vellow, pink, or blue—was interpreted by the
assistants to mean half, full, or double allowance. Armed
with this square of tinted paper, as a guarantee of his or
her bona fides, the applicant drew up alongside the
counter, over the ample top of which a supply of
fresh and healthy looking vegetables was passed with any-
but a niggardly hand. After obtaining all that was
required from that department, the grocery stall was next
visited and a number of articles, whose names and
properties are familiar to every housewife, neatly
packed in brown paper, were delivered to each applicant.
A few paces on, a well-appointed butcher’s shop was
situated, whose rapidly-diminishing stock was being con-
stantly replenished bv continual arrivals of whole carcasses
of beef and mutton, fresh from the abattoiis. Near at
hand a couple of vans filled with loaves of beautifully white
bread were stationed, and from which the hampers of the
poor were largely augmented. Proceeding a few steps
further, and turning from James-street into Bourke-street,
a scene of bustle and activity was seen prevailing, iwo
carts laden with large fountains of milk were drawn
up to the kerbing, and the persons who had charge of
them seemed to be fully assured that their position was no
sinecure, as the incessant demands made upon them to
attend to the wants of their customers fully testified. As
the supply of milk contained in tne enormous tins showed
signs of diminution other large cisterns recently arrived
from the country were opened, and the contents
rapidly transferred to the numerous vessels, of all materials
and patterns, that were grouped round the almost inces-
santly flowing tap. Closely adjacent were packed cases of
fresh well-flavoured butter, thoroughly iced, and of the
consistency and firmness that characterises the article when
manufactured in the cold months of winter. Several assis-
tants were busily engaged doling out the little pats care-
fully wrapped in moistened cloths, and placed in simple
yet ingeniously contrived trays, to the various claimants,
who were also made the recipients of the regulation amount
of prime quality cheese.
At 9 o’clock in the forenoon there were about 1600 per-
sons in the vicinity of the gates near Palmer-street,
and until the afternoon had somewhat advanced that
number was fairly well sustained, the places of
those who retired on receiving their share of the
bounty beiiis* tilled by new B>rnvB.ls« Oxford - street &nd
all the other avenues of traffic converging into the square
opposite the Darlinghurst Courthouse were thronged with
men, women, and children, either going to _or
returning laden from tbe centre of distribution.
For the purpose of conveying the provisions to
their destination, nearly every conceivable mode of con-
veyance was called iDto requisition. Baskets, bags, tins,
bottles, and jugs are only a few of the very ordi-
nary receptacles used to carry the goods home.
All manner of wheeled contrivances, from a peram-
bulator to a dray, and even including cabs, were pressed
into the transit service. Taken as a whole the persons who
applied for rations seeminglv represented the thrifty poor
of the city, and evidenced by their conduct and
bearing that they were not ungrateful for the con-
sideration that had been shown to them on this occasion.
Some few instances of persons not in circumstances of ab-
solute indigence availing themselves of the liberality of the
Government were noticeable, but these were only excep-
tions. The quality of the provisions given out was first-
class, and the recipients were all evidently well satisfied
with what they received.
All the arrangements made by the contractor reemed to
work satisfactorily until about 8 o’clock in the evening.
Apparently, owing to some miscalculation, the sup-
ply of bread then ran short, and the reci-
pients of the Centennial gifts had to wait
until a quarter past 9 o’clock before another baking of
the staff of life could be procured. Meanwhile the bearers
ot orders remained in James-street, and as the influx of
fresh arrivals was very great, the enclosure soon contained
something like a thousand people, borne of the holders
of orders became impatient, and left with the goods
they had secured instead of waiting for their share of
bread. A fresh supply of bread—steaming hot from
the oven—arrived at a quarter past 9 o’clock, and several
hundred people, princiDally women, at once surrounded the
van which contained the bread, and clamoured for that for
which they had been waiting so long. At a later
period the supply of milk stopped, and later still
the butcher’s shop became empty. The bearers
of orders were given the opportunity to take other provisions
instead of meat and milk, and in a large number of instances
this was done. About a quarter-past 11 o’clock it was
decided to suspend operations until 6 o’clock this morning,
and that resolution was acted upon, and a large number of
people who still remained unserved were told to come back
again in the morning.
The distribution was continued on the 26th, and al-
together about 11,000 rations were issued.


THE SALVATION ARMY.
The Salvation Army celebrations in connection with the
Centennial demonstrations of the week commenced last
evening, shortly before 7 o’clock, when there was
a large muster of “officers and soldiers,” male and
female, outside the “war office” in Castlereagh- street.
A procession was formed, consisting of Commissioner
Howard and about a dozen “ officers” on horseback, large
numbers of “ officers” and soldiers on foot, and with bands
playing, cymbals sounding, voices singing, and banners
waving. The procession, numbering several hundreds, moved
off to the barracks in Goulburn-street, preceded, encroached
upon, and followed by thousands of the public. The bar-
racks, which were gaily decorated, were very soon
crowded in every part—platform, galleries, and
body of the hall alike—a large proportion of
the audience consisting of “Hallelujah lasses.” Among
those present were the Commissioner and Mrs. Howard,
Colonel Barker, Colonel Pollard, Major Lindsay, Major
Barritt, Major Wright, Staff-Captain Jeffris, D 0., Staff-
Captain Spratt, D. 0., Staff-Captain Quick, D. 0., Staff-
Captam Hodges, A.D.C., Staff-Captain MThee, Staff-
Captain Lee, Staff-Captain Matthews, Staff-Captain
Hendy, Adjutant Yeal, Staff-officer Gallant, and about 150
“ full officers.” After introductory singing and playing
by the bands and “ knee drill ” the Commissioner delivered
an address, describing the rise and progress of Salvationists
colonies since they first came into existence in
Adelaide some seven years ago. There were now over 600
men and women set apart as officers for salvation work.
I hey meant to make this their anniversary week. Amongst
other things which they intended to do during the
year was the establishment of a central training home for
those engaged in salvation work, and they hoped great
things of it. Another thing thev were going to do
was to open an attack upon Western Australia, which
was the ouly one of the colonies in which they were not
yet established; then they were going to organise and work
a Maori Contingent upon native lines and in the nativolan-
guage, to be sent among the neglected and dying New Zea-
land race. There were men begging and praying to be let
loose at this work. They intended, too, to trv and work
among the aboriginals of Australia, also the kanakas in
Queensland, and likewise the Chinese throughout the
colonies, for it was not right that while we had missions in
China the Chinese in Australia should be left to grope in
darkness. There were many other things they intended to
d°, out he would not go into further particulars, but at once
call upon them to subscribe liberally to the fund for the,
establishment of the training home he had referred to. A
collection was then taken up, and afterwards there were
many more addresses and much music, both vocal and in-
strumental.
OPENING OF THE CENTENNIAL PARK.
THE DEDICATION.
FRIDAY, JANUARY 27.
The second great event in the programme of the Cen-
tennial Commission, the opening of what the Premier
happily described as the People’s Park, took place yes-
terday, and the ceremony of dedication formed a
feature in the week’s celebrations at once unique
and splendid. Sydney awoke that morning and
found herself a century old, and on the shore, barren
and inhospitable then, upon which for the first time Captain
Phillip unfurled the Union Jack a century ago, a million
flags waved gaily over mast and spire and pinnacle,
and 300,000 citizens joined in festive rejoicings.
City and harbour throughout the day presented to admir-
ing visitors a perfect panorama of beautv. The town
was gay with the varied tints of many-coloured flags, and
its streets, clean and attractive, were enriched by the tender
green of scores of triumphal arches. The business people
enjoyed a day of rest. It was the first of the Centennial
holidays, although the third of the celebrations, and they
rejoiced in the fresh air and glorious sunshine. The great
attraction was of course the opening of the park, and at an
early hour in the morning the gathering of the people
began. On the hills and flats of the erstwhile Lachlan
Swamps, extending far in variations of contour, were
moving crowds of people, mustering round the enclosure
where the dedication was to take place as bees cluster
in swarming. The scene was more picturesque than that of
the unveiling of the statue of the Queen. The bright,
clear sky, and settled appearance of the weather, tempted'
thousands of fair faces to the ground, and made
everything bright and beautiful. All sorts and conditions
of men were congregated on the grassy slopes hours before
the ceremony, and made up an assemblage almost as mul-
tifarious as the army of Hannibal, but eminently respect-
able and well-conducted. The strains of music from the
military bands and the pleasure of congenial society were
sufficient to keep them in good humour until the spectacle
of the day began. With his usual punctuality his Excel-
lency the Governor arrived, and took his position on the
dais erected for the vice-regal party. His popularity, as
well as that of Lady Carrington, was once more attested by
the hearty cheers which greeted them as they took their
places in front of the dais. Everybody was delighted
with the ceremony, and the completeness of the
arrangements was the theme of general commendation.
The weather was gloriously fine.
THE SCENE AT THE PARK.
It is hardly probable that the colonists who manv years
ago established the scheme for the supply of water from
the Botany Dams ever anticipated the manner in whic h the
Centenary of the colony would be celebrated on the site of
their labours. No one in those days could have foreseen
that in the year 1888 a gathering, equal perhaps to the
entire population of Sydney in those days, would have met
together to inaugurate the conversion of the Lachlan
Swamps and the adjoining heights into a grand
Centennial Park, well fitted, from the natural beauty
of its surroundings, to remain for ever as a memorial unto
the people of the colony of their 100th anniversary. What-
ever may be thought of the State House proposal, fortunately
abandoned, the idea of forming a splendid park at this spot
was certainly a happy one, for which the originators deserve
all due credit. Yesterday was in many respects a fortunate
day, more especially since nature, as represented bv the
state of the weather, deigned to smile in the most
kindly manner on the whole affair, vouchsafing
us one of those lovely Australian summer days
only too rare, even in this sunny climate of ours and no
unseemly disturbance or untoward event occurred to mar
the entire harmony of the proceedings. Until yesterday
the Centennial I ark was, even to Sydney residents, almost a
Ur-ro incognita, heard of only dimly, through the oc-
casional reports which have appeared in the press with
regard to the progress of the work; but now, for the first
time, the public, who after all really pay for the park, have


been admitted to full and free possession of their great
national property. The Paddington entrance to the
park, the only one used, was decorated for the
occasion with a splendid arch of evergreens, and for some
hours before the ceremony commenced, a throng of happy
sightseers steadily poured in through the entrance, and
dispersed themselves throughout the park. No vehicles of
any kind, except those forming part of the vice-regal pro-
cession, were admitted to the park, and thus the specta-
tors were enabled to take up any position which seemed best
to them, without fear of being disturbed by a passing
vehicle. Perhaps the best point of vantage from
which to obtain a bird’s-eye view of the entire proceedings
was the flagstaff near the Waverley-road, which, being
placed on the highest elevation on the ground, naturally
commanded an uninterrupted view of the whole of the
park and its surroundings. Seen, as it is at present, in a
partially finished state, the park only indicates in a shadowy
manner the lines of its future beauty, for there are many
spaces which, now necessarily barren, will in the course of
another season be covered with verdure. However, although
the park may be improved upon, the beauty of the
surrounding scenery, in which, like a diamond, the park
itself is set, cannot be added to or altered, and luckily so,
for nature has in this respect performed a great work,
which it is impossible for us to emulate. From the above-
mentioned flagstaff a panoramic view of the whole of the
park and the surrounding country can be obtained. Beneath
the observer’s feet lies the whole vast expanse of-the
park, sloping rapidly downwards to the Botany dams,
which will eventually be formed into artificial lakes.
Far away on the right the view includes a large portion oi
Sydney and the suburbs, and directly in front the whole
expanse of Botany Bay is visible over the intervening low
hills, the opposite shore of the bay being distinctly seen.
Immediately at the foot of the park is the Rand-
wick Racecourse. On the left hand the view is
bounded only by the green heights of Randwick,
prettily dotted with white villas, half hidden amidst
the surrounding foliage. Soon afier 11 o’clock the
heights were almost covered with spectators, whose
number was being continually added to, until at last every
rock or patch of sward had its group of occupants. Below,
in the more select part of the ground, the scene also began
to get animated, and the triangular reserve which had
been set apart for the more important visitors, as
distinguished from the common herd, gradually began
to fill. This reserve, which played such an important
part in the day’s ceremony, consisted of a three-cor-
nered plot of ground between the main circular drive
round the park and a smaller road, and being situated
about half-way up the hill, it occupied a very central
position. Admission was hy ticket only, but no very strict
supervision over the issue of the tickets appeared to have
been exercised, for all sorts of people seemed to possess
them. The space inside this reserve, measuring perhaps
two or three acres, is at present perfectly barren ; but
those in charge of the park seem sanguine that
some day or other a grass crop will evenuate there.
All around the reserve were stuck small trees, ready to be
subseouently planted in the sandy soil by the distinguished
visitors. Above the reserve a band, or indeed several
bands, served to keep the public interested until the cere-
mony commenced. At noon the crowd reached its largest
extent, every part of the heights being covered with specta-
tors, who also occupied a large portion of the lower ground
surrounding the reserve. In such a case as the present it
is extremely difficult to form any reliable estimate
of the number of people present, no record
of any kind being kept, but probably the total reached
somewhere between 30 and 40 thousand souls. In the
reserve itself there were almost a thousand persons, includ-
ing many visitors from the other colonies, and all our own
distinguished politicians and citizens. '1 here were also
many ladies present, whose charming summer toilets and
gay-coloured parasols lent an additional variety to the
scene. At last, after much patient waiting, the crowd
stirred itself into life again, when the military and naval
forces arrived,and took up their position on the level ground
below the reserve, and very shortly afterwards the en-
trance of the Governors cortege , preceded by a troop of
Lancers, indicated that the real business of the day was
about to commence. The people, as “became a duly loyal
crowd, heartily cheered his Excellency when he ascended
the dais which had been erected for the use of the vice-regal
party and others. This dais, placed at the front of the
reserve, was a sort of sanctum sanctorum set apart for the
use of the favoured few, and many were the heartburnings
and disputes occasioned by this fact. The whole of those
who had been admitted to the reserve naturally considered
that they had also a right to share the dais with vice-
royalty, and no doubt they would have done so had consider-
ations of space permitted. However, as the platform would
only accommodate two or three hundred people, it soon be-
came uncomfortably packed, and the police were obliged to
put a peremptory check on all further entrance to the
coveted spot, much to the disgust of those who were kept
outside. The ceremony of opening the park, as performed
from the platform, occupied only a very short space
of time, a commendable feature being the extreme brevity
of the speeches. The vast majority of the spectators who
were stationed in the heights at the rear could, of course,
hear nothing of the words which were said, only those
immediately in front of the platform having any idea of
what was going on, and, therefore, it was a wise arrange-
ment to make this part of the ceremony as brief as possible.
The park having been duly opened, and the big guns
above having boomed out their greetings, the
vice-regal party, accompanied by most of those present,
turned their attention to tree planting. The little trees
above mentioned were each placed in little holes in the
ground, whilst the spectators stood round in a ring and
watched the proceedings at a respectful distance. After
this nothing remained but the march past of the troops,
which proved a very interesting part of the day’s
events, for it served to practically illustrate the
fact that we possess the small nucleus of an
army in our own midst, independent of any outside aid.
Lord Carri gton left the dais, and, having mounted, took
up a position directly in front in readiness for the march
past. This military manacuvre. as viewed from above, was
decidedly the most picturesque portion of the
ceremony, the red and blue uniforms of the
troops contrasting admirably with the white sandy
soil over which they passed. Lady Carrington,
prettily attired in something cream coloured,
watched the march past from the centre of the platform,
and around her were gathered the Governors of the other
colonies and many other notables, perhaps one of the most
distinguished groups ever seen in this colony. When the
march past was finished, Lord Carrington rode off, accom-
panied by his escort of lancers, amidst repeated cheers,
which showed the popularity in which he is held amongst
the masses; and then Lady Carrington, as she left in her
carriage, came in for still more enthusiastic cheering.
The other members of the vice-regal party took up their
places in the procession, which slowly moved off, and the
ceremony of opening the Centennial Park, which after all
had occupied only about an hour, was practically completed.
Two large marquees were erected in the reserve, in which
refreshments of a light and suitable character were pro-
vided. Notwithstandingthe great number of persons present
no disturbance of any kind occurred, and it seems almost
a truism to say that the crowd was most orderly, this
being so thoroughly characteristic of any large Australian
gathering. The Centennial Committee are especially to
be congratulated on the successful manner in which all the
arrangements for the day’s event were carried out.
THE PARK.
The Reserve out of which the Centennial Park has been
formed, and which was formerly known as the Lachlan
Swamps, formed at one time the only, and for a number of
years the chief, water supply for the city of Sydney.
It served the purpose of a water supply for the city for up-
wards of 50 years. In 1824 Mr. John Busby, who had
received the appointment of mineral surveyor, arrived in
the colony, and turned his labours to a search for water.
He reported in 1826 in favour of the Lachlan Swamps, and


the work of driving a tunnel from Hyde Park to the swamp
was commenced in September, 1827. The undertaking was a
tedious one, and it was not until June, 1837, that it was
completed. The tunnel, however, began to supply Sydney
with water as early as 1830 from drainage from the sur-
rounding rocks. The length of the tunnel is 12,000 ft., or
upwards of two and a quarter miles, with an average w'idth
of four and five feet. The catchment basin of the Lachlan
Swamp is about two square miles. The tunnel received half
of the drainage of this area, and supplied the lower parts of
Woolloomooloo, and a portion of the city along Darling
Harbour, between Bathurst-street and Erskine-street. The
delivery was between 300 and 400 gallons per day, which at
the time the tunnel was opened was considered a fair supply,
as the population then numbered only some 20,000 people.
As the population increased the supply was found inade-
quate, and the authorities were compelled to search for a
supplementary supply of water. This was found at Botany,
at which place pumping-engines were set to work in 1858,
and for a number of years the city and suburbs were sup-
plied with water from the Lachlan reserve and the Botany
water sheds. In consequence of the great demand made
upon these sources and the fear of a water famine arising
from continued droughts, the authorities were a compara-
tivelv short time ago induced to make an effort to secure an
independent supply of water for the city and suburbs.
This led to the development of the Nepean scheme, which
rendered Sydney quite independent of all other sources, and
consequently there was no further necessity to keep ihe
Lachlan Swamps as a water reserve. The suggestion to
turn the reserve into a park was first made by his Excel-
lency Lord Carrington, who shortly after his arrival in the
colony was surprised to find Sydney, with all its natural
advantages, without a park in which the citizens might ride
or drive. He pointed out the advantages which
were to be obtained in this respect in such cities as
London, Dublin, Paris, and New York. His Excellency
was subsequently informed that the Lachlan Reserve was
capable of being turned into a park suitable for the pur-
poses he had mentioned. This was in November, 1886.
Plans and sketches of the ground were subsequently pre-
pared, and on the 22nd of November Lord Carrington,
the Hon. Lady Carrington, Sir Robert Fowler, members
of the Government, representatives of the metropolitan
and suburban municipalities, and others, paid a visit
to the water reserve for the purpose of making
preliminary observations in connection with the pro-
posed park. After having made a thorough inspection of
the place his Excellency expressed himself highly satisfied
with what he had seen, and expressed surprise that with
such facilities so near at hand the people of Sydney should
so long have done without a beautiful park, such as that
into which the reserve could be so easily turned. The
matter was taken up by the Government, and it was con-
sidered that his Excellency’s proposal might not only be
carried into effect, but that the opening of a Centennial
Park might form one of the chief celebrations in honour of
the Centenary. Subsequent visits were made to the reserve
by the Premier, Sir Henry Parkes, and other
members of the present Ministry. Plans were
then matured, and on the evening of Tuesday,
June 28th, 1887, Sir Henry Parkes laid the Centenary
proposals of the Government before Parliament. The
proposals embodied a scheme for converting the Lachlan
Swamp into a park, the intention being to lay out the
grounds in tasteful parterres and bosquets planted with
trees. Advantage was to be taken of the abundant supply
of water to form lakes and cascades, fountains, and basins.
It was proposed that, skirting the higher ground upon a
medium level, there should be a grand avenue about 2j
miles long, with carriage drives and walks faced by elegant
mansions, with gardens and railings in front, and that the
undertaking should be carried out with proceeds derived
from the sale of building frontages on the outskirts of the
enclosure. The principal approach was to be nearly oppo-
site the Zoological Gardens. The grand avenue was to be
80ft. wide on one side, with an equestrian path 26ft.
wide on the other side. These were to be supported with
two plantations each 6ft. wide, with a path 12ft. wide
for foot passengers in the centre. Ihe total area of the
land forming the promenade was to be 22 acres. In addi-
tion to this there was to be a site set apart for the erection
of a State House. The proposals were adopted by
Parliament, and an Act was passed making the necessary
provision for carrying out the work. The proposal of the
Premier to erect a State House met with a considerable
amount of strenuous opposition in Parliament, and was so
unfavourably commented upon by the public that Sir
Henry Parkes abandoned his intention of celebrating the
centenary of the colony by having the foundation-stone of
the proposed building laid on Anniversary Day. and it is
believed that he has abandoned the idea of erecting the
building at all. The work of giving effect to the
proposals was commenced almost immediately aft£r
their adoption by Parliament. The superintendence of t-he
scheme for laying out the grounds was entrusted to Mr.
Charles Moore, of the botanic Gardens, whilst the forma-
tion of the main drive was entrusted to Mr. Bennett, the
Commissioner for Roads and Bridges. The work of cut-
ting down the bush and clearing the land was commenced
about the beginning of July last, when a number of men
from the ranks of the “ unemployed ” were set to work on
the ground. On the 6th of November Mr. A. J. Riley,
M.L.A., who was then Mayor of Sydney, accompanied by
Mr. C. Moore, Mr. Trevor Jones (city engineer), and other
gentlemen visited the reserve, and turned off the water
supply from Busby’s Bore. The event was not marked by
any formal ceremony, but in cutting off the water supply,
and thus terminating the existence of the reserve as a
water reserve, the Mayor stated that he was shutting off
from the city a waterworks which had been of the greatest
service to the citizens of Sydney for just 50 years. He re-
lated briefly the history of the water reserve, and in doing
so paid a graceful tribute to Mr. Busby’s memory. As
the Mayor closed the valve three cheers were given. From
that lime up to the present active operations have been
carried on, and very satisfactory progress has been made.
The work of transforming the watershed into a re-
creation area has been almost completed. The
area of the park is equal to about 1000 acres
and is one of the most picturesque spots to be found near
Sydney. In the centre are four or five lagoons, with an
abundant supply of water. The plateau is surrounded by
a girdle of hills, intersected in one or two places by valleys.
The surroundings of the park are exceedingly attractive,
and from some of the hills of which mention has been
made a charming view of the whole park, as well as consi-
derable portions of Paddington, Waverley, Randwick,
Botany Bay, and even the mountain scenery which forms
the background to the National Park may be obtained. The
grand drive and promenade, which is 112 ft. in width, and
about 21 miles in length, and which skirts the base of the
hills, has been formed. It is about 20ft. above the level of
the water, and has been almost levelled through-
out by cutting through rock and clay. One por-
tion will be metalled and the remainder will
be turfed. The chief entrance is from Moore
Park. There are also entrances from Oxford-street, Pad-
dington, near the tram waiting sheds; also, from Ocean-
street, Woollahra, and from Randwick. A road skirts the
western, and another the eastern boundary of the park, and
there is a semi-circular carriage way, which commencing
hear the Paddington tram waiting sheds, and skirting the
base of the principal hill in the park, extends to a point op-
posite Ocean-street. There is also a wide carriage way
which commences at the north-western corner of the park,
and extends in a south-easterly direction for about 14
chains, branching off right and left at its termination with
arms leading to the main drive. The north-western section
of the reserve has been formed into a series of sloping lands,
which have been sown with English grasses and with clover.
Around the northern boundary of the park will run a
dwarf wall surmounted by iron palisading. It will be ex-
tended for a distance of about two miles. The footing of
the wall, which is partly finished, is of white freestone,
whilst the coping-stones are of yellow freestone,
with dabbed faces. The lagoons or lakes, which form the
central feature of the park, cover an area of 40 or 50 acres,
and nestle in a plain of about 60 acres. On the left of the
plateau are several hillocks covered with natural vegetation.


A laro-e area of the surrounding land will be planted with
trees end shrubs I to
enclosed with iron fences, and the trees -which are to oe
planted in different portions of the ground will be
protected by hurdles. To save the expense of employ-
ing men to trim and keep the grass down, it is
intended to follow the practice adhered to at the \ictona
and Wentworth Parks by turning stock in npon it. In
consequence of the high winds which prevail m the l° cal 'iy
a number of bush fences or break-winds have been erected
to keep the sand from driving over the surface. An
immense amount of labour has been expended upon the
ground to bring it to its present state, and some time will
have to elapse before it will assume the appearance
which it is intended to present.
THE ASSEMBLAGE. —ARRIVAL OF THE \ ICE-
REGAL PARTY.
From a comparatively early hour in the morning people
commenced to take their way towards the chief thoroughfares
leading to the park, and the tramway terminus and the various
waiting-rooms along the line were thronged for some hours
by anxious and expectant crowds. To say that the tramway
authorities were unable to cope with, or control the glut of
traffic would be but to express mildly the real state of
affairs; but it is satisfactory to note that, notwithstanding
the extreme pressure, the department took every precaution
to minimise the risk of accident. Many of the trains were
completely crowded before they left the terminus and con-
sequently did not stop until the journey was almost com-
pleted. Those trams which did stop at some of tne waiting-
rooms en route were rushed by an eager and excited crowd,
and were speedily filled by women and children and strong
men, all pushing, tugging, and “ scrimmaging for seats
There were some thousands of persons who preferred to
walk the distance instead of waiting for the trams and put-
ting up with the risk of being left Debind altogether and
each of the footpaths in Oxford-street, from Hyde Park all
the way to the Paddington tramway waiting-sheds, was
thronged by thousands of pedestrians hurrying as fast as
possible to the scene of the celebration. As seen from one of
the trams the sight was exceedingly animated, and one
which will not be forgotten by those who witnessed it tor
some time to come. Men, women, and children were to be
seen wherever the eye could reach, hurrying and perspi
in the sun. By 11 o’clock some thousands of persons had
entered the park, but up to noon the P eo P le con-
tinued to arrive on foot and by tram from .>>
and also from the eastern suburbs. Some hundreds
approached the reserve from the JJo°re Park-
road, whilst others entered the park bv the Cleveland
street entrance. Judging from the numbers who arrived
by tram, those who rode out in private
those who walked to the park, thene> musthave been shortly
before noon between 30,000 and 40,000 spectators on the
ground A large triple arch, tastefully dressed with
Sons and buntmg, was erected over the niam en mce
which was guarded for some distance on mde by
upwards of 100 constables. The entrance was kept quße
clear bein°- reserved for the passage of the military and the
aSal of'the vice-regal pa'rty. The troops c—ced
marching in about 20 minutes past 11 o clock. 1 he route
from the entrance gates to the tTiangular enclosurem iihich
the dais was situated was lined by spectators five and 8
deep on each side. Some thousands of spwhere^hev
on the flat immediately in iront of the , *_
could obtain an excellent view of those in the triangular
closure. An equal advantage was obtained by some 10,00C> or
12,000 people who congregated upon the general
posed State House. This position, so far as the geneml
public was concerned, was, perhaps, the surrounding
obtained for viewing the proceedings and the surn)u ulm
scenerv of the park. From this northern bill, which is one
of the W elevations on the ground, a nia^ 1 ' f c + e ?,
can be obtained, not only of the park, but also of Botany
Bav and the mountain scenery in the vi ic * nlty
National Park. Some thousands of P t erß " ns ri } S ° fl^a^„e
the hill which forms the background to the old rifle range,
and watched the proceedings throughout from that vantage
ground. At a quarter to 12 o’clock the approach of the
vice-regal party was announced by a salute of 17 guns, and
immediately after the Governor and escort entered the park
through the triumphal arch. His Excellency proceeded
down "the right-hand branch road to the Queen s drive,
where he was received by a general salute from the troops.
Cheers were given, and Lord Carrington dismounted and
proceeded up the wooden steps to the dais, where he was
received bv the Hon. John Lackey, M.L.C., president, and
other members of the Centennial Commission. In the
meantime, the Hon. Lady Carrington, who had entered the
enclosure accompanied by a body guard, had been re-
ceived by the president and members of the commission.
Besides'the vice-regal party, the dais was occupied by
Sir John Hay (President of the Legislative Council), the
Hon. J. F. Burns (Colonial Treasurer), the Hon. C.J.
Roberts, C.M.G. (Postmaster-General), the Hon. J. ±l.
Young (Speaker of the Legislative Assembly), the Mayor
of Sydney (Alderman J. Hams, M.L.A.), Messrs. R.
Burdett Smith, T. M. Slattery, p. °’Connor, S. Burde-
kin A J Riley, J. H. Want, Ms.L.A. (all members of the
Centennial Celebration Commission), E. Fosbery (Inspec-
tor-General of Police), and James Barnet (Colonial Archi-
tect); the Attorney-General (Hon. B. R. Wise,, an
Minister for Works (Hon. John Sutherland), the Minister
for Mines (Hon. F. Abigail), the Minister for Justice
(Hon. William Clarke), the Minister for Pudlic Instruction
Hon. James Inglis), the Most Rev. the Primate (Dr.
Barry), the Bishop of Brisbane, the Chief Justice (Sir
Frederick Darley), Mr. Justice Owen. Mr Justice Win-
deyer, Mr. Judge Docker, Hon. A. H. Jacob, Hon. Dr.
Garran, Hon. E. Barton, Hon. John Davies, Hon. E.
Knox, Hon. G. B. Simpson, Hon E pickery, Hon S. A.
Joseph, Hon. P. G. King, Hon. W. J. Tnckett, Hon. G.
Thornton, Sir John Robertson, Sir Patrick Jennings,
Messrs. C. R. Burnside (secretary to the Centennial
Celebration Commission), G. R. Dibbs, M.L.A., G. H,
Reid, M.L.A., J. C. Neild, M.L.A , the Revs Dr. bellors.
Geo. Pickering, C. R. Graham, and R. Stewart; the Rev.
Mm. Bain, Moderator of the Presbyterian Assembly
of New South Wales, and the Rev. Henry Macready.
The following visitors from Victoria were present: Sir
James M‘Bain (President of the Legislative Council),
Hons. F. Ormond, J. Balfour, T. F. Cumnnng, l. Bent,
C. E. Jones, Colonel Sargood, Professor Pearson, C.
Young, C. J. Ham. and M. H. Davies (Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly), Messrs. J. M. Highett, J. 1 lerce, J.
G. Duffv, and Mr. L. L. Smitn, Ms.L.A. (Alderman B.
Beniamin (Mayor of Melbourne), and E. G. I-itzgibbon
(town clerk). The visitors from Adelaide. Sir E. I.
Smith (Mayor of Adelaide), Chief Justice \\ ay, Hons. 1.
Plavford (Treasurer), J. C. Bray, R. A. larlton M.
Saloni, W. Wadham, S. Tomkmson, W. A. E. West-
Erskine, J. Bosworth, C. C. Kingston, and J. Ramsay,
Brigadier-General Owen, D. Cockburn ; Messrs. D. Bews,
Gould, and Furner, Ms.P., and J. Langdon Bonython.
The following visitors from Tasmania were present. Ihe
Hon B. S. Bird i Colonial Treasurer), the Hon. A. J. Clarke
( Attorney-General), Mr. Alfred Crisp (Mayor of Hobart),
Alderman Dillon, Messrs Belbin, E. H. Sutton, Ms.P.
There were present from Queensland: Samuel Grimth.
(Premier), the Hon W. H. Groome (Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly), the Hon. W. H. Wilson (Post-
master-General), Alderman Hipwood (Mayor of Brisbane;,
and Colonel French.
THE NAVAL AND MILITARY PARADE.
The assembly of naval and military forces at this cere-
mony was the first general parade of the year. A mobilisa-
tion "of the whole military force of the colony was originally
proposed, but as the Centennial festival approached and it
was decided that the military operations could not be ex-
tended over one grand field day, the authorities considered
that the expense would not be justified by the result and the
parade was limited to a representative assembly of a purely
ceremonial character. The function of the bulk of the force
was nracticallv that of a large guard of honour. I tie
Governor’s escort and a saluting battery were provided from
their respective branches.


Ihe general mass of the troops assembled in the Outer
Domain at about 9.30 a.m., and formed up by regiments in
suitable spots among the trees. They then formed in
column, facing south, in a well-dressed formation, in the
following order:—Permanent Artillery; Volunteer Artil-
lery and reserve artillery; Torpedo Corps; Engineer Corps;
Ist Regiment Infantry; 2nd Regiment Infantry; sth
Regiment Infantry (Sydney Scottish Rifles); 6th Regi-
ment Infantry (suburban and country reserve companies) ;
Naval Artillery Volunteers; and the' Naval Brigade (with
colours). The bands were well represented, and took their
places at the head of their regiments for the route march.
At about 10.15 the column moved off in fours, and left the
Domain by the Bent-street gate, wheeling to the left into
Macquarie-street, headed by the Major-General command-
ing, and his staff, in the following order:—Captain Cuthell,
musketry instructor; Surgeon-Major Williams, P.M.O.
and Captain Bouverie, Adjutant of Reserves ; Major Mac-
kenzie, Assistant Adjutant-General, and Major Bunbury,
R.A. , Major-General Richardson, C. 8., commanding the
Military horces; Colonel Roberts, C.M.G., commanding
the Artillery Forces. The route lay along Macquarie-
street, College-street, and Boomerang-street, into William-
street, where the column could be seen to advantage, reach-
ing from Cook Park to Darlinghurst-road. With all the
bands playing, and all uniforms, arms, and accoutrements
in capital order, the scene in William-street was
remarkably attractive. From William-street the
column passed by Victoria-street to Oxford-street,
wnere it found the 3rd Regiment of lnfantrv
waiting to join it, having been delayed for an hour on the
train journey. The regiment took its place in rear of the 2nd
Regiment, and the march continued along Dowling-street
and Botany -street into Park-road. Here again the troops
presented a pretty sight, as the stretch of the road enabled
the greater part of the column to be seen at one glance.
Points of interest would attract attention here and there,
such as the stirring music of the Permanent Artillery Band,
or the picturesque Sydney Scottish, with their band of
pipers, or the glittering bayonets of the Naval Brigade.
I nousands of people were scattered along the route, and
windows and balconies were crowded. Everyone was look-
ing at the soldiers ; and on either ■ ide of the column there
was the inevitable swarm that always marches with the
colours, but not under them. Along Park-road the march
proved hot and dusty, and there were few in the column
who had not by this time developed a genuine Centennial
thirst, but, excepting the Naval Artillery Volunteers, none
ot the regiments had had the foresight to bring water-
bottles. The column halted at the gate of the park at ten
minutes past 11.
Ihe saluting battery from \ ictoria Barracks was already
m position in the park under the union jack raised on the
commanding bluff on the left of the gateway. Its duty
was to fire three salutes at particular stages of the pro-
ceedings. Ihe battery consisted of four nine-pounder
rifled field ffuns, horsed, under the command of Colonel
Spalding, C.M.G., with Lieutenant Le Patourel and
Lieutenant Le Mesurier in the divisional commands.
Ihe 1 üblic School Cadets, under Major Strong, were
also on the ground, having marched from the Barracks
independently. The cadets were all of the infantry branch,
and, except one metropolitan company, came from the
country districts, namely:—lnverell, Glen Innes, New-
castle, Wagga, Junee, Young, Penrith, Goulburn, Dubbo,
Blayney, Bathurst, Grenfell, and even from as far as
Bourke. Much credit is due to the cadets for turning out
a respectable muster of 435 from all parts of the colony,
and from great distances. They were drawn up in line on
the right of the road leading to the enclosure.
Ihe column from Sydney now marched into the park by
this road, and passed down the slope and round the en-
closure on to a fine open space, where a splendid view of the
parade was obtainable. It was noticeable that some of the
volunteer officers omitted to return the salute of the cadets
m passing. The troops wheeled into line, the regiments
formed column of companies; points were taken, and the
regiments marched on their markers, completing their new
formation in line of quarter column immediately opposite
the enclosure on the opposite side of the road. All this
looked well, and was fairly well executed, the newly-made
ground being rather heavy for such movements. The bands
v ere massed in rear, numbering about 200 instruments,
from the Permanent Artillery, Volunteer Artillery. Ist,
2nd, and 3rd Regiments of Infantry, Naval Artillery
Volunteers (brass and fife and drum), and the Naval
Brigade. The strength on parade was 2300 of all ranks
and arms, and the assembly was thus a fair representation
of the forces of the colony. This strength was composed of
the following regimental totals, and the list includes the
names of the officers present :
Permanent Artillery, 146: Colonel Roberts in command,
Colonel Spalding, Colonel Airey, Major Airey, Captain
Murray, Captain Baynes, Captain Savage (adjutant), Lieu-
tenant Le Patourel, Lieutenant Bridges, Lieutenant
Kyngdon, Lieutenant Le Mesurier.
"V olunteer Artillery, 175: Colonel Wells in command,
Major Remington, Captain Chapman, Captain Wigram,
Captain Mackinlay, Captain Airey, Captain Scott, Captain
Nathan (adjutant), Lieutenant Lester, Lieutenant Smail,
Lieutenant Pringle, Lieutenant Orr, Lieutenant Wells,
Lieutenant Williams.
Reserve Artillery, 77: Captain Phillips (Balmain),
Captain Boyd (Botany), Lieutenant Dunne (Balmain), Lieu-
tenant Blake (Botany).
Engineer Corps, 90: Lieutenant-Colonel Rowe in com-
mand, Major Parrott, Lieutenant Cansdell, Lieutenant
Copeland.
Torpedo Corps, 86 : Lieutant-Colonel Cracknell in com-
mand, Major Walker, Captain Wilson, Lieutenant
Broughton, Lieutenant Hammand, Lieutenant Nelson,
Lieutenant Alexander, Lieutenant Bedford, Lieutenant
Talbot, Lieutenant Logan.
Ist Regiment Infantry, 227: Lieutenant-Colonel Farrell
in command, Major Wilson, Major Johnston, Captain
Morris, Captain M‘Cutcheon, Captain Cranna, Captain
George, Lieutenant Anderson, Lieutenant Brereton, Lieu-
tenant Miller, Lieutenant Leggatt, Lieutenant Oldershaw,
Lieutenant Holmes, Lieutenant Mason.
2nd Regiment Infantry, 215: Lieutenant-Colonel
Goodlet in command, Major Longfield, Major Norris
(Adjutant), Captain Burnet, Captain D. Fraser, Captain A.
i raser, Captain Mulholland, Lieutenant Stack, Lieutenant
Chilcott, Lieutenant Gilchrist, Lieutenant Mason, Lieu-
tenant W ilkinson, Lieutenant Shipway, Lieutenant Ander-
son.
3rd Regiment Infantry, 194: Lieutenant-Colonel Hol-
borow in command, Major Waddell, Captain Linsley,
Captain vV . J. Hill, Captain Ferris, Captain Guest, Cap-
tain J. Hill (Adjutant), Lieutenant Anderson, Lieutenant
Mitchell, Lieutenant O’Reilly, Lieutenant Pye, Lieutenant
Watt.
Naval Brigade, 258: Captain Hixson in command, Com-
mander Lindeman, R.N., Commander Lewington, Lieute-
nant Deloitte, Lieutenant Jackson, Lieutenant Cohen,
Lieutenant Milson, Lieutenant Connor, R.N., Sub-Lieute-
nant Gilfillan, Sub-Lieutenant Broomfield, Sub-Lieutenant
Church, Sub-Lieutenant F. W. Hixson, Sub-Lieutenant
H. Hixson.
Cavalry, 32: Major Macdonald in command, Captain
Dodds, Captain Knox, Lieutenant Vernon, Captain
Mil ward, R.A. (Acting Adjutant).
Naval Artillery Volunteers, 124: Commander Lee in
command, Lieutenant Keating, Lieutenant bell, Lieutenant
Newsham, Sub-Lieutnant Walsh, Sub-Lieutenant Wil-
liams, Sub-Lieutenant Cheffyns, Surgeon T. B. Clune,
Paymaster Cavill.
Scottish Rifles and other reserve infantry, 226 : Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Eden, commanding the Metropolitan
Western and Southern reserve infantry, in command ;
Captain Bayly (Adjutant) ; Sydney Scottish, Captain
Campbell in command, Captain Baynes, Lieutenant Pearce.
Hunter’s Hill : Lieutenant Watson. Ashfield: Captain
MulJarky, Lieutenant Liggins, Lieutenant Butler. New-
town : Captain Sparkes. Marrickville : Lieutenant Wise-
man. Campbelltown : Lieutenant Grice, Lieutenant Moore.
Camden : Captain Downes. Picton : Captain Antill.
Cadets, 435 : Major Strong in command, Lieutenant
Lumsden, Lieutenant Read, Lieutenant Rickard, Lieute-
nant Pearce, Lieutenant Larkin, Lieutenant Shawelhood,


rr *
T)
T3
rr
U
fcc
Distribution.
U
O
u
o
a?
Pm
g
o
Pm
| Captains.
c
1
o
o
| Subaltern
£
3
2
O
«
5
W.Os.anc
o
&
£
d
H
'd
§
|
Total.
| Guns.
| Horses.
General Staff
5
i
2
8
Permanent Artillery
1
3
i
ii
2
128
146
4
22
4
4
Partially paid:—
Medical Staff
Volunteer Artillery
3
2
5
6
14
8
140
175
Engineer Corps
1
1
2
5
1
80
90
Torpedo Corps
1
1
6
8
1
69
86
1st Regiment V. I
2nd Regiment V. I
3
3
4
4
7
17
17
7
7
189
177
227
215
3rd Regiment V. I
4th Regiment V. I
3
4
!!!
i
4
19
6
158
210
194
258
Naval Brigade
6
8
7
2
22
2
Reserves: —
Cavalry
1
2
1
2
1
25
32
Artillery
2
2
6
4
63
77
i
8
2
106
124
5th Regiment (Scottish) t
1
-
8
23
8
179
226
6th Regiment )
Infantry Cadets
1
9
39
1
385
435
Grand Total 28 33
2
69
7
6
196
50
1909 2300
422
Lieutenant Shropshire, Lieutenant Dart, Lieutenant
Galagher.
The Sydney Lancers were on escort duty in attendance on
his Excellency the Governor, and paraded independently.
That portion of the Permanent Artillery acting as infantry
paraded with the general body. It was under the com-
mand of Lieutenant-Colonel Airey, with Major Airey,
Captain Murray, and Captain Baynes.
The following is the field state in detail: —
The brigade stood at ease till the arrival of the Governor,
when it was called to attention, and received his Excellency
with a general salute. The Governor, as commander-in-chief,
received from General Richardson a copy of the field-state,
and then ascended into the enclosure. Later in the day his
Excellency was presented with a beautifully-illuminated
memorial card giving the field-state and order of march,
prepared by Mr. C. E. Murray, an officer of the engineer-
ing branch of the general staff. During the proceedings in
the enclosure the troops stood easy. The sun bore down
rather severely on some of them, and a few had to fall out
from weakness. These emergencies brought to light the
fact that no medical officers of the Volunteer staff wer e
present, nor were there any ambulances or water-carts.
THE PROCESSION FROM GOVERNMENT
HOUSE.
The progress of the vice-regal procession was invested
with more interest, and called forth a greater degree of
enthusiasm, than was the case on the occasion of the un-
veiling of the statue of the Queen. This was due not to
any alteration in the respect or feelings of the people
towards the representative of the Queen, but rather to the
fact that the day was observed throughout as a close holiday,
and this enabled many people to congregate at various points
along the route, and the inspiration of numbers gave to the
tokens of approval with which the procession was from time
to time received a larger degree of magnitude and more
intense heartiness. The route chosen was from Govern-
ment House gates, along Macquarie-street, by way of Col-
lege-street, to Oxford-street, and thence via the Pad-
dington entrance to the neighbourhood of the enclosure
wherein the trees were afterwards planted. The most im-
posing part of the route was Oxford-street, which was
spanned by four massive arches, and was also decorated with
bunting of almost every conceivable colours, as well as with
festoons composed of thousands of prismatic lamps. The
vice-regal procession was practically divided into two
section; or at any rate the interval which elapsed between
the first portion of it leaving Government House gates and
the second passing through them was so great as to mark a
division. The first part of the procession had as an escort
a fine body of the mounted police. Following the first half
of the escort was a four-horse barouche driven by
postillions. In the carriage were Lady Carrington,
Lady Carnarvon, the Governor of Victoria (his Excellency
Sir Henrv B. Loch, K.C.8., G.C.M.G.), and the Governor
of New' Zealand (his Excellency Major-General Sir
William Jervois, C. 8., G.C.M.G.). In the second carri-
age—a driving barouche—were the Governor of Queens-
land (his Excellency Sir Anthony Musgrave, G.C.M.G.),
the Governor of South Australia (his Excellency Sir
William Robinson, G.C.M.G.), the Governor of Tasmania
(his Excellency Sir Robert Hamilton, K.C.8.), and the
Governor of Western Australia (his Excellency Sir Frede-
rick N. Broome, K.C.M.G.). In the third carriage—a
landau—were the ex-Governor of Fiji (Sir Charles
Mitchell, K.C.M.G.), the Earl of Carnarvon, and the Hon.
Rupert Carington. The fourth carriage—a landau—which
was followed by the second section of the escort,
contained Captain Keith Falconer, Captain Pritchard, Mr.
Robinson, and Major Fhillimore. The first portion of the
procession (with its guard of police troopers), which issued
from Government House Domain about half-past 11
o’clock, had advanced to opposite the Crown Law Offices
before the second half appeared in Macquarie-street. This
consisted of his Excellency Lord Carrington and two
members of his staff (Major Gascoigne and Lord Bertie),
all mounted. Major McDonald, officer commanding the
Light Horse and Cavalry, rode on one side of the Governor
and Captain Knox on the other. The troop of
Lancers, which was formed up in half sections,
was under the command of Captain Dodds. In-
cluded in the second section of the guard were four
orderlies from Government House. Much enthusiasm
was manifested in favour of Lady Carrington as she passed
along the line of route, and the respective demonstrations
which from time to time marked the advance of her
carriage had hardly subsided before there was a renewal of
them, and the spring of cordiality having again commenced
to flow, it was allowed to partake more of a national
character than was the case before the appearance of the
Lancers, with their honorary colonel, who, by the way, was
in mufti. People on balconies and at windows waved their
handkerchiefs, while others raised their hats. The lines of
people on the pavements manifested their pleasure in
a variety of ways, cheering of a lusty character, accom-
panied by the ’ flourishing of hats, being very frequent.
The Governor seemed quite delighted with the tributes
paid to him by the people, and turned from side to side of
the street, now looking up to the occupants of a balcony or
a window, and then to the pavements on each side of him,
to return the salutations so freely accorded him. As his
Excellency and his military escort arrived opposite the
Paddington tram waiting rooms, cheer after cheer rose
from the concourse of people assembled in the neighbour-
hood of the entrance to the Centennial Park.
THE DEDICATION CEREMONY.
Directly the clocks began to chime 12, his Excellency the
Governor, who was received with enthusiasm, stepped for-
ward to the front of the dais and declared the park dedi-
cated to the enjoyment of the people of New South Wales
for ever, and the announcement was followed by cheers,
the waving of hats, handkerchiefs, &c., and other demon-
strations of joy, while the band played “God Save the
Queen.”
Lord Carrington said, —I have now great pleasure in
declaring that this great park is dedicated to the enjoyment
of ttie people of New South Wales for ever—(cheers) —and
I have further to announce that the formal opening of this
park will not be able to be completed for some months.
His Excellency then called for three cheers for the Queen,
and three more, which were heartily given.
At the instance of persons in the crowd, three cheers were
then separately accorded to the Governor, Lady Carrington,
Sir Henry Parkes, and Lord Carnarvon.
A salute of 21 guns was commenced at the conclusion of
his Excellency’s announcement, and continued during the
acclamations. . _ . u-.c*


Sin Henry Parkes, who was received with loud
cheers, said : My Lord, your Excellencies, ladies and
gentlemen,—The most distinguishing feature of modern
civilisation is the beneficent provisions made for the enjoy-
ment and the health of the people—(cheers) —and this
great park, which has been created as by the touch of a
fairy’s hand, in the course of the next two or three years
will be converted into a place of beauty and a joy for ever.
(Renewed cheers.) It will be yours, and so long as the
land shall last it will be for you, and it is a great obligation
that rests upon you as a free people to see that no power,
no combination, invades your rights in the enjoyment of
this great boon. (Cheers.) It is emphatieally the people’s
park —(continued cheering)—and you must always take as
much interest in it as if by your own hands you had planted
the flowers ; and if you take this interest in it, and if you thus
rise to the full appreciation of its great beauty and your
great privileges, the park will be one of the grandest adorn-
ments of this beautiful country. (Cheers.) 1 compliment
his Excellency on being here as the representative of our
august Sovereign on this interesting occasion, when we
commence—we say no more of the past —a new century,
which will lift us to the first rank of nations. (Renewed
cheers.) Nothing can bar our way ; no adverse influence
can warp our destiny; we are on the high road, and
at the end of another generation we shall be able to hold
our own against the world. (Cheers.) May I express, be-
fore this great company, as I have expressed on many
another occasion, the hope that the red line of kinship will
unite us to England for generations to come. (Hear, hear.)
I can see no happier destiny for a free people, and I trust
year by year that Britons all over the world will carry their
great national flag, and the cause of progress, until there is
no spot on the earth where British freedom does not reign,
and where our flag does not glance. I wish you every
prosperity, and 1 know that with your united strength
you will preserve this great park for ever and ever. (Much
cheering.)
At the conclusion of Sir Henry Parkes’s remarks, and on
the call of the Hon. J. Lackey, three hearty cheers were
given for his Excellency the Governor, for “ Our Guests,”
and for Lady Carrington.
PLANTING THE TREES.
The planting of the trees was the most exciting part of
the proceedings. The favoured ones inside the triangular
plot of ground ran from tree to tree after the Governor and
his party in the wildest fashion. The sight was a very
curious one, and not unlike an obstacle race, in which the
competitors were so numerous as to be the obstacles them-
selves. There were ladies in great numbers crowding round
Lady Carrington and Lady Carnarvon, members of
both Houses of Parliament and clergymen elbow-
ing their way to have a look at what was going on.
The most amusing thing, as seen from the distance, was
the great number of white helmets visible here and there
and everywhere in restless agitation. The police were
trying hard to keep the crowd back, so that the vice-regal
party might have at least breathing room, and they failed
in the task. The crowd they had to deal with was not
the crowd that attempts force. They worked their way
in by persuasion, and after the first two or three
trees were planted the police were completely conquered.
In some cases the order of arrangement set down was not
followed, and worse confusion was the result. The ladies
and gentlemen who were to plant the trees formed in a
procession two deep and endeavoured to pass in that order
from tree to tree. But the intermediate spaces were soon
filled up and the procession had to assimilate with the crowd.
When one tree was planted a rush was made in another
direction—the police always being in the van. Twice they
were seen very busy, clearing a ring round trees which had
already been planted, and the subsequent discovery
embarrassed them not a little. It was a sandy soil under-
foot and the dust, stirred up principally by the ladies
dresses, was anything but pleasant. After the general
salute and dedication of the park the ceremony of the
planting begun. Lady Carrington, leaning on the
arm of Sir Henry Parkes was in front, fol-
lowed by Lady Carnarvon, leaning on Sir John
Hay, and then came Lord Carrington, the Governors of
the other colonies, several members of the Government,
the Hon. John Lackey, M.L.C., and other gentlemen
of the Centennial Commission. The plantation is in the
shape of an almost equilateral triangle, a straight line from
the base to the apex of which would be something over one
hundred yards in length. It was surrounded by a wooden
fence, covered with ti-tree brush to keep the sand out..
Here the trees—some thirteen in all from the nursery at
the Botanical Gardens—were laid out in nice order, and
fixed in holes ready for the ceremony. The bands under
the baton of Signor Zelman, were playing livelv music,
thousands of eyes were rivetted on this auspicious triangle,
there was a cloudless blue sky overhead, and though the
sun was shining out brightly, his rays were tempered
by a cool sea breeze. Lady Carrington, under these
happy and unusual circumstances being handed a spade
by Mr. Moore, the curator of the Botanic Gardens, proceeded
to plant the first tree. bhe used the implement like an
experienced gardener, and very soon had the roots covered
up with soil. The Countess of Carnarvon was next. She
planted her tree with equal grace and skill, and both ladies
were applauded for their performance. The trees planted
were, respectively, a Cook’s pine and a silky oak,
the botanic names being Araucaria Cookii and Grevillea
robusta. The other trees were planted as follow:
Lord Carrington, Araucaria excelsa; Sir Henry B.
Loch, Tristania conferta; Major-General Sir William
Jervois, Ficus mumtia; Sir Anthony Musgrave, Syncarpia
laurifolia; Sir William Robinson, Quercus macro-
carpa; Sir Robert Hamilton, Quercus virens; Sir Frederick
Napier Broome, Pinus Halepensis; Sir Charlos Mitchell,
Ficus macrophylla; the Earl of Carnarvon, Araucaria
Cunninghamii; Sir Henry Parkes, Stericulia acerifolia; and
the Hon. John Lackey, president of the Centennial Commis-
sion, Eucalyptus obliqua. These trees, oaks, pines, figs, &c.
it is almost" unnecessary to say grow well in this climate,
and the soil in which they stand is well adapted to them.
In less than a score of years hence this triangle will pro-
bably be known as the Centennial triangle, and many will
recall the occasion of the plantation of these trees with
pleasant memory. Cards are attached to them giving the
botanic name of each, and the names of the planter, and
special care is to be taken of them. May they flourish!
THE MARCH PAST.
When the ceremony taking place within the enclosure
reached the stage appointed for the march past, the parade
was called to attention, and the troops were massed in rear
of the right battalion, from which formation they formed
into column on the road, dividing the companies down to
the limit of the full width of the roadway. In this position
a long and tiresome delay took place, which proved trying to
condition and temper of everyone in the column, where,
especially in the ranks, the effects of heat and dust together
were very unpleasant, and several more men fell out. I he
cases were attended to by the Surgeon-major, the surgeon
and ambulance party of N.A.V., and the ambulance party
of the Naval Brigade. The water bottles of the Naval
Artillery Volunteers were generously shared with
those who were beginning to feel the effects
of that most exhausting and cruel feature of
military display—standing idle under a scorching sun.'
At last everybody was ready, and the column moved off.
The Lancers’ escort was drawn up on the sidewalk in front
of the enclosure, where the Governor took his place, and
the massed bands directly faced them on the opposite side
of the road. The staff marched in the following disposi-
tion:—Captain Cuthell, Surgeon-Major Williams and
Captain Bouverie ; Major Mackenzie and Major Bunbury ;
Colonel Roberts; Major-General Richardson. The order
of march occupied by the regiments in the column of
route was preserved in the march past. As the
various divisions came up to the saluting point,
the massed bands, conducted by Bandmaster Devery, of the
Permanent Artillery Band, performed a specially selected
series of regimental inarches. For the Permanent Artil-
lery they played the Soldier’s Chorus from “Faust;” to


the Volunteer Artillerv they gave a strain called the
“Gunners’ March,” changing to the lively measure of
“ Garrvowen ” as the Ist Regiment came past, and the fine
swing of “Ninety-five” to the tread of the 2nd. With
the 3rd Regiment in view the music was ‘ Abschenken,
giving wav to “ A Life on the Ocean Wave as the Naval
Artillerv Volunteers came insight; and the appearance of
the Naval Brigade was the signal for the opening ot a
medlev of nautical airs. The marching was fairly good,
considering that the road was ankle deep in loose earth, and
only in process of formation. The progress of the
column elicited no demonstration from the spea-
tators until the Scottish Rifles came in view and
this regiment, together with the other infantry
reserves, appeared to be very popular, and was
cheered and applauded as it passed. Ihe Naval ArtiUery
Volunteers were also cheered, and the Naval Brigade had
its share of applause. The troops saluted the Governor
as they passed him, and continued their march away to the
left on to the main avenue. They now marched at ease,
until opposite the Agricultural Society’s ground, when
they were called to attention, and turned their march on to
the grassv stretch in front of the show-ground. The
column now halted, and the parade was dismissed. Xhe
troops were withdrawn from the ground in detachments
under the company officers, who then finally dismissed
their men, and the military movements of the day came to
an end.
THE MUSICAL PROGRAMME.
Much of the attractiveness of the proceedings was due to
the music discoursed by the band, the gay strains of wmch
could hardly fail to enliven the spirits of the large concourse
of people. 'The band was placed on a little eminence some
way from the dais, and the full body of tone resulting from
the" efforts of the large number of performers was such as
to make the music distinctly audible at aconsiderably d
tance. Immediately after the formal by his
Exoellency was pronounced, Zelman s Grand March
was played, this being the first item on the programme i fie
March itself is an admirable composition, effectively'in
strumentated, having plenty of variety as regards
ideas and treatment. Reasonable doubt mi„ht have
existed as to whether so huge a band would not prove some-
what unwieldy, seeing that it was composed of so many
elements, and* consisted of performers who were neither
known to nor by the conductors, and who were,
to nlavinsr together in such large numbers. Howe e ,
everythin- went off with almost mechanical precision, and
alfconcerned m'e deserving of high praisefa: the excellent
effect produced. The second piece was Caron s Austral
asian Hymn,” arranged by the composer from his Natmnal
Cantata of which particulars were recently gnen in our
SSS. Th, tofmg was thoroughly"-Jf
music evidently caught the attention o P •
can be little doubt that the music is of tiie right kind to
though the melody is sufficiently simple to b wjthm the
grasp of even untutored performers, its solid harmonies a
striking rhythm will satisfy musicians, and the spirit of the
composition is just what almost compulsorily evokes a feel-
ino, ot enthusiasm in performers and audience alike. Each
of these compositions was conducted by its composer, and
Messrs. Zelman and Caron were warmly received and ap-
plauded. Mr. W. Gildea then assumed the office of leader,
and with much skill conducted the “Hallelujah Chorus”
and Hutchinson’s “Centennial Quick March.” Both
pieces were well played, and in the latter there were many
noticeably pleasing points. All the performances were
heartily cheered by those in the vicinity, and were evi-
dently much enjoyed.
PRESENTATION OF AN ADDRESS TO THE
GOVERNOR.
On the return journey His Excellency Lord Carrington
was met under a magnificent triumphal arch, which spans
the roadway opposite the Paddington Council-chambers,
by the Mayor and aldermen of the borough. The Mayor
presented the following address to the Governor :
— “ To Excellency the Right Honourable Charles
Robert Bayon Carrington, P.C., G.C.M.G., Governor and
Commander-in-Chief of the colony of New South \V ales
and its dependencies.—May it please your Excellency,—W e,
the Mavor and aldermen of the borough of Paddington, on
behalf of the corporation and inhabitants, tender you our
hearty congratulations upon the great national event which
we all join in celebrating, and assure you of our loyalty and.
attachment to her Most Gracious Majesty. We are pleased
that it has been vouchsafed that the celebration of such a
momentous event as the Centennial of Australia should
take place during the administration of one so worthy of
such an exalted position as that tilled by your Excellency.
We desire to join with our fellow-colonists in lifting our
voices to the Founder of Nations in thankfulness for the
peace prosperity, and unprecedented development which
have attended this portion of her Majesty’s realm. We
venture to express the hope that the success which has
marked the first hundred years of the colony will even be
surpassed in the future, and that Australia will advance,
and become a name powerful in the world’s history, and an
honour to the British Crown. Charles Camprell,
Mayor. Geo. E. Blackmore, Council Cleik. Padding-
ton, January 26, 1888.” . ~
Lord Carrington replied m the following terms : —Mr.
Mayor and Aldermen of the borough of Paddington,—l
have to return my most respectful and my most grateful
thanks for this proof of attachment and devotion towards
the person of her Majesty the Queen, and I joyfully receive
it as another earnest of the loyalty which exists not only in
Paddington, but all over the colonies of Australasia. As
regards myself 1 shall say nothing, save I hope during the
time I have the happiness and honour to live amongst you
1 may never do anything to forfeit your good opinion.
Cheers having been given for the Queen, and for the
Governor, and also Lady Carrington, the proceedings ter-
minated.
THE STATE BANQUET.
COLONIAL FEDERATION-SPEECHES BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNORS.
FRIDAY, JANUARY 27.
The State banquet, which was held yesterday evening in
the Exhibition Building, was probably the mos 1 P
event of the kind which has ever taken place m this or any
other of the Australian colonies. Not only w “ s J
as being the 100th anniversary of the settlement of
Australia, a most memorable one, but the
the event was added to by the presence o colonies
and leading statesmen of the various Australian colonie
and of many of the men of light and leading m
New South Wales. The occasion was justly regarded
as an important one, and great preparations
had been made to make the banquet worthy
of our centenary. The Exhibition Building was by
means of a liberal use of decorative materials, almost
magically altered from its usual barn-like appearance, into
a hall of exceeding beauty. The sides and roof of the
building had been freshly painted, and the ends of the hall
were screened off with red and white calico, so as to hide


the blank walls of the building. Festoons of evergreens
were hung between all the pillars, and suspended from the
galleries, and each of the columns supporting the galleries
was enveloped in spiral wreaths of evergreens, and was
decorated with the flags and arms of the various
nations. At intervals along the railings of
the gallery, which were lined with red cloth
there were placed well executed portraits of the following
gentlemen whose names have been intimately associated with
the history of New South Wales. John Macarthur, William
Bland, George R. Nichols, Dr. J. D. Lang, William
Charles Wentworth, and Edward Smith Hall. At the
north end of the gallery, immediately under the organ were
the words “ Welcome home,” in large blue letters on a white
ground, with the Royal arms between the words,
and at the other.end of the hall was the motto “Australia
United.” Various pieces of statuary, flags, &c., were
placed at intervals round the hall, conspicuous being a life-
size statue of “ Plenty ” at the north end. The hall was
- brilliantly lit by means of both the electric light and the
ordinary gas lamps, and the tables were arranged lengthwise
down the hall, the cross table being at the north end,
and extending in a crescent shape across the whole
width of the building. The vice-regal party and the other
principal guests, entered through the north door, and the
remainder of the guests entered at the south door. The
vestibule and ante-room at the north end were beautifully
furnished as ieception rooms for the use of the distin-
guished guests, the furniture being specially provided bv
Messrs. James Lawson and Sons, of William-street. All
the arrangements for the banquet were carried out by
Mr. W. G. Cassidy, Parliamentary steward, and the
catering was entrusted to Mr. Baumann, of Pitt-
street. The menu cards, executed by Messrs. S. T.
Leigh and Co., were in themselves works of art of a
noteworthy description. The front page of the card, litho-
graphed in several colours, represented in an allegorical
manner the rise and progress of Australia, a female
figure being shown standing on a portion of
the globe, as if rising from the darkness of
night, the typical Australian constellation—the Southern
Cross—shining out brilliantly from the dark background.
Around this central picture were beautifully executed small
views of the capitals of the Australian colonies, including
views from Piji and New Guinea. The inside portions of
the card were devoted to the menu and the toast list,
and on the fourth side of the card there was a
miniatuie view of the Exhibition Building, where
the banquet was held. During the evening the Sandhurst
military band, under the leadership of Mr. Marcus Hume,
played a choice selection of operatic airs. The Vice-
Regal party was escorted from Government House by a
detachment of the Sydney mounted police; and on their
arrival at the Exhibition Building they were received
with the usual honours by a guard of honour, consisting
of 100 rank and file of the Permanent Artillery, with
the usual proportion of officers and the regimental band.
Their Excellencies were received in the ante-rooms by
the Centennial Celebration Commission, and shortly after
their arrival the banquet commenced.
The chair was occupied by his Excellency Lord Carrington,
and on his right there were Sir Henry B. Loch, K.C.8..
G.C.M.G. (Governorof Victoria), Sir Anthony Musgrave!
G.C.M.G. (Governor of Queensland), Sir Robert Hamilton,
K-C.B. (Governor of Tasmania), Sir Charles Mitchell,
K.C.M.G. (ex-Governor of Fiji), Admiral Fairfax, C. 8.,
the Primate (Dr. Barry), Mr. Justice Higinbothain (Vic-
toria), the Premier of New South Wales (Sir Henrv Parkes
G.C.M.G.), the Premier of Queensland (SirSamuefGriflith),’
the Colonial Treasurer of New South Wales (Hon. J. F.
Burns), the Colonial Treasurer of Tasmania (Hon. B S
Bird), the Attorney-General of New South Wales (Hon!
B. R. Wise) Hon. J. L. Ramsay (South Australia),
the Hon. Professor Pearson (Victoria), the Min-
ister of Mines for New South Wales (Hon. F. Abigail).
xr° n L - E ' ,-!?■* P; Braddon (Tasmania), Sir James
Macßam (\ ictoria), Sir John Hay (President of the
Legislative Council of New South Wales), Sir Wm
Fitzherbert, the Duke of Manchester, the Roman
Catholic Archbishop (Dr. Reynolds), Sir John Robertson,
K.C.M.G., Mr. Justice Faucett, and Mr. Justice Webb.
On the left of the chairman were Sir William Jervois, C.B.
G.C.M.G. (Governorof New' Zealand), Sir William Robin-
son, G.C.M.G. (Governor of South Australia), Sir Frede-
nek N. Broome, K.C.M.G. (Governor of Western Aus-
tralia), the Chief Justice of New South Wales (Sir Frede-
rick M. Barley), Cardinal Moran, Chief Justice Way (of
Skiuth Australia), the Hon. Duncan Gillies (of Victoria),
the Hon. Thomas Playford (Premier of South Australia),
the Minister of Justice for New South Wales (Hon. W.
Clarke), the Minister of Justice for Victoria (Hon. Henry
Cuthbert), the Minister of Works for New South Wales
(Hon. John Sutherland;, the Hon. W. H. Wilson (Post-
master-General of Queensland), the Minister for Public In-
struction for New South Wales (Hon. James Inglis), the
Hon. C. C. Kingston (of South Australia), the Post-
master-General of New South Wales (Hon. C. J. Roberts,
C.M.G.), the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Melbourne,
the Speaker of the _Legislative Assembly of Now South
\V ales (Hon. J. H. \oung), the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria (Hon. M. H. Davies), the Hon. Lee
Sceere (of Western Australia), the Earl of Carnarvon, Mr
Justice Windever, Mr. Justice Owen, and Mr. Justice
Deffell. The vice-chairmen were Mr. S. Burdekin,
M.L.A., Hon. R. E. O’Connor, M.L.C., Mr. J. H. Want,
M.L.A., Mr. D. O’Connor, M.L.A., the Mayor of Sydney
(Alderman J. Harris), Hon. J. Lackev, M.L.C., Mr R
Burdett Smith, M.L.A., Mr. James R." Fairfax, Mr. A. J
Riley, M.L.A., Mr. T. M. Slattery, M.L.A. There were
in all about 900 guests.
Lord Carrington said: Tour Excellencies, my Lords,
and Gentlemen,—Before I propose the toast of “Her
Majesty the Queen,” I beg to read a telegram which has
arrived this afternoon from her Majesty herself. (Cheers )
“The Queen warmly congratulates the Australian colonies
on the splendid material and social progress achieved during
the past hundred years. She deeply appreciates their
loyalty, and she has watched with sincere interest the
excellent administration of their Governments, and she
prays that their prosperity and close attachment to the
mother country may continue to increase as hitherto.”
(Cheers.) I now have the honour to propose the toast of
Her Majesty the Queen.”
Ihe toast was honoured in a very enthusiastic manner,
and the band played the National Anthem.
Sir Henky Parkes said: My Lords, your Excellencies,
and Gentlemen,—l have been requested on behalf of the
Commission to present a medal to his Excellency Lord
Carrington as connecting his name with this memorable
event. (Cheers.) This is the first medal struck, but lam
informed by the commission that a similar medal will be
presented to each of the representatives of the Sovereign
who have done us the great honour of attending here on
this occasion. (Cheers,) Without further remark I beg to
present you, Lord Carrington, this, the first medal struck in
commemoration of this event. (Cheers.)
Lord Carrington proposed “ The health of the Prince
0i rru eS ’ the Frmcess ' and tho rest of the Royal family.”
Ihe toast was honoured in a most enthusiastic manner,
and the band played “ God bless the Prince of Wales.’’
Lord Carrington said : I have now the honour to pro-
pose to this distinguished company “The health of the
other Australasian Governors who have favoured us with
their presence here this evening”—(cheers)—and in the
name of the mother colony I bid them a right hearty
welcome. (Cheers.)
The toast was drunk with much cordiality.
Sir Henry B. Loch, Governor of Victoria, who was
received with cheers, said : Your Excellency, my Lords and
Gentlemen, I thank you sincerely for the manner in which
you have received the toast of my health, which is
evidence of the kindly feeling' this great colony
entertains towards the sister colony of Victoria. (Cheers.)
A feeling which I can honestly and truly say is heartily
reciprocated oy that colony. (Cheers.) The occasion of
our being present here to-night is one of the most interest-
ing, as it will be one of the most memorable in the life and
history of Australia. (Cheers.) In commemorating
the centennial advent of the Anglo - Saxon
race into this vast continent of Australia,


we do so not only to enable us to pause for a moment
amidst the turmoil and busy strife of life and look back
with pride upon the progress and development of the
country during the past hundred years, but we do so also
to enable us for a brief time to calmly speculate
upon its future progress. It is most appropriate
on an occasion like the present for the other
colonies to gather round this colony, from which,
it may be said, they all radiated. (Cheers.)
But at the same time this great gathering has a significance
and meaning of its own, which extends far beyond the
limits of the locality in which it assembles. (Hear, hear.)
It is Australasian in its representative character, and I
venture to think it is indicative of the importance which all
the colonies attach to the encouragement of those feelings
which should unite these colonies in the common bond of
union and fellowship. (Applause.) In makiner that ob-
servation I would not wish it to be thought that I am
taking advantage of this opportunity of speaking upon the
question of colonial federation, however much my own
personal opinion may be in favour of such union
as being a tentative approach to greater results. I allude,
however, to the far greater and more important ques-
tion—that of the establishment of a great power in this
part of the world, not antagonistic but in close alliance
with, not with divergent interests, but with concurrent views
with those of the mother country. (Applause.) I firmly
believe that there is an earnest desire on the part
of the large majority of the people of these
colonies in favour of maintaining the closest touch
with the mother country, and in harmony with other parts
of the Empire of which we ourselves form so important a
part. These feelings are given expression to by some by the
term of Imperial federation, but 1 do not know of any term
upon which a greater number of interpretations are placed;
but one which I venture to attach to it, and the only one
as it seems to me that can be placed, at all
events for years, upon it, is that of a close
union between the colonial and Imperial forces for the pro-
tection of the kingdom and the defence of the commercial
and other interests of it—(applause)—each preserving at
the same time its separate existence, whether represented
by single colonies or by groups of colonies federated to-
gether or independent and autonomous and having
independent privileges. The first step was taken
by the Right Hon. W. B. Dailey towards the
establishment of a federation such as that of which I speak
by the despatch of the Contingent to Egypt, and that far-
sighted policy which has been adopted by the eminent
statesmen of this bright colony and the other colonies, and
the action of Parliaments in passing the Naval Defences
Acts is the second great step towards the accomplishment of
the same end. (Cheers.) I have observed that this year will
be marked in the annals of the history of Australasia as a
most important one; and Victoria, anxious to assist in the
celebration of the year, acting in concert with New South
Wales, continues the celebration of the centenary by the
opening of her exhibition in Melbourne on
August 1. (Hear, hear.) Speaking on the part
of the colony of which I have the honour to be
her Majesty’s representative, I venture to express the hope
that many visitors from this and the other colonies may be
present in Melbourne on that occasion. (Applause.) I
thank your Excellency and this great colony for the hos-
pitality of your reception of me and the members from
Victoria here to-night. Seldom, in the history of the
Empire, has it been more important than at the present
moment for England and her colonies to present a united
front, when flbe great Powers of the world,
armed to the teeth, are standing facing each other; and
it is therefore with special interest that I view this great
gathering, the centennial commemoration of the nation,
the offspring of, and united to, the mother-country by all
the ties of our common nature. (Applause.) These colonies
have a bright future before them, and the love and affection
which should unite them with the mother country will
make their future none the less bright. Call this federa-
tion, or what you please, the result will be the same, the
mother country united to and supported by her colonies will
maintain her commercial supremacy for the safety and
security of all parts of the empire. (Cheers.)
Sir W. Jeryois said:—My Lord Carrington, your
Excellencies, my Lords and Gentlemen,—l cannot
adequately express the pleasure which I feel at
being present here this evening ; and I greatly regret,
though not more than they themselves, tliat ray
Ministers have found themselves absolutely precluded
by urgent public business from taking part in this great
centenary celebration. It is now nearly 11 years since I
first came to Australia to advise the Governments of these
colonies respecting their defences ; and it affords me the
greatest satisfaction to bear my humble testimony to the
exertions that have been made by several Governments
since that time with the object of placing their principal
ports in a position of security against attack. W hilst thus
the outlets of the wealth of the several colonies are made
safe, the harbours become well defended bases of opera-
tions for the action of our naval forces in these seas. I
must also refer with the utmost gratification to the fact that
all the Australian Governments (except, indeed, Queensland,
which I doubt not will soon pursue a similar course) have re-
cently passed Acts by which they engage to share with the
mother-country the cost of the maintenance of the squadron
necessary for the protection of commerce in these waters.
1 cannot but regard this as an important historical event,
and as one by which the principle of Imperial federation is
recognised to the greatest extent possible at the present
time. It must, however, be remembered that Australasian
trade is not restricted to a given area, but is world-wide.
Hence, in order that the defence of this trade shall be
effective, it is absolutely essential that tbe routes of com-
merce from one part of the globe to another shall be well
guarded. Evidently, therefore, Australasians are vitally
interested in the protection of these routes. The Australasian
squatter who desires an outside market for his wool, the
agriculturist for his wheat, and the miner for his copper,
his silver, or his gold, are as much interested in the security
of these routes as they are in the security of the railway, the
road, or the other means of communication by which their
fleeces, their grain, or their precious metals are transported
from the Australasian interior to the Australasian sea-
board. Everyone, therefore, in these countries will view
with satisfaction the steps taken by the Imperial Govern-
ment for placing these lines of maritime commerce in an
efficient state of defence. Great Britain has from
time to time spending millions and millions in
erecting fortifications, furnishing armaments, and main-
taining garrisons for the defence of the strategic
positions on these routes. She also, I need hardly add,
maintains the greatest navy in the world to uphold British
supremacy on the sea. Further, she has of late years un-
dertaken to protect the defences of several of our coaling
stations, and to fortify others previously left to attack, and
has subsidised swift steamers—some of a speed of from 17
to 19 knots—for the guardianship of our lines of
ocean trade. The mention of the part which
the British navy takes in the defence of these
countries leads me to congratulate this great assembly
on the presence here this evening of an honoured guest
who has been conspicuous in advocating certain measures
with which the operations 5f that navy are intimately con-
nected. I allude to my noble friend, Lord Carnarvon.
Lord Carnarvon has earned a lasting and world-wide repu-
tation as Secretary of State for the Colonies, but he is less
well-known as the Chairman of the .Royal Commission,
which_ for several . years studied and advised upon
the important subject of our Imperial maritime
routes of commerce. By his labours on that
commission, and by untiring exertions in other
ways, Lord Carnarvon has contributed more than
any other living statesman to excite public attention to this
vital question. But though I have thus far referred only
to the action of the Imperial Government, no one can ap-
preciate more highly than myself the enlightened and
patriotic policy of Australasian statesmen and legislatures
who have seconded and supplemented that action—who have
recognised that their prosperity is in constant danger of
attack if they do not, as they have done, are doing, and I
trust will continue to do, take active measuses for their own
defence. Settlement is good, and development is good, but
defence must crown all. It was the work of the Great
to take these colonies, it was the work of the colonists


(and nobly they have done it) to make them ; it is the work
of this and of coming federations, with the old country at
their back, to keep them. (Loud cheers.)
Sir Anthony Musgrave, Governor of Queensland,
said: Your Excellency, ladies, and gentlemen,—l thank
you heartily for the compliment which you have paid to me
in common with my brother Governors, and for the invita-
tion which was sent to me on behalf of the colony to be
present on this memorable occasion. (Cheers. ) It gives
me great pleasure to be here at a celebration which must
always be notable as marking the first centennial period in
the growth of these populous and prosperous British com-
munities from a beginning in many respects unpromising;
from which, indeed, few a hundred years ago would have
ventured to predict the results which have been ac-
complished even in one hundred years. (Applause.)
It is not, however, upon the past that I desire to
dwell. You have already heard often, and will
hear often again, paens of laudation of all your
prosperity and successes. They have been great, especially
during the past 50 years of the Queen’s reign. (Cheers.)
Fifty years ago New South Wales, the mother colony, her-
self was but the germ of what she has since become—(re-
newed cheers) —while neither Victoria, South Australia,
nor Queensland had any existence. What we now know as
Australia has practically been the growth of the Queen’s
reign, and now, on the morrow of her Majesty’s
jubilee, and on the centenary of the birth of this daughter
of Great Britain, we may fitly pause and look around us,
and gaze forward—to take the bearings of where we
are, and have regard to our prospects for the future.
I claim to have some special interest in and affection
for Australia. My acquaintance with this part of the
world dates from some lb years back. (Applause.) I have
resided in one or other of the colonies for eight years
altogether, and two of my boys aro born Australians.
(Hear, hear.) I take only the liberty of an old friend,
therefore, when I suggest that while we have a great deal
to be proud of, and much to be thankful for in the past, there
is much in the outlook upon the future to cause thoughtful
consideration of the present circumstances of Australia.
Analogies cannot always be made very close, but the position
of Australia on this, ‘her 100th birthday, seems to me to
be somewhat analogous to tfiat of a young fellow
who has arrived at man’s estate after a youth which has not
been without follies and extravagances, and something of
the vaingloriousness which is often attendant upon early
life; but now he is a little wiser, and with assistance from
his mother, who has lent him a good deal of money, he
stands fairly well, and is about to enter upon a new stage
of life with more experience. The question which, as it
were, leaps to the lips, is that which the late Lord Lytton
gave as a title to one of his great novels, “ vVhatwill hedo
with it?” What will Australia do with the future whichlies
open with so fair a promise, and apparently with such great
potentialities, if prudently used. There is an observation of
Bishop Butler’s, which has always seemed to me to be preg-
nant with wisdom. “ Things and actions,” he says, “ are
what they are, and the consequences of them will be what
they will be, and why, then, should we seek to deceive
ourselves.” Or, in other words, I suppose what he meant
was, that we should take heed to what we do, for we cannot
escape the inevitable consequences, however much we may
persuade ourselves to the contrary. As I should be dis-
posed to say to my imaginary young man entering
upon the life of manhood, so, I think, I should say to
Young Australia. Look at facts in the face; do
not deceive yourself about them by throwing dust
into vour own eyes; be circumspect, be cautious,
don’t put on too much side; don’t quarrel with your
mother, from whom you may want a good deal of valuable
assistance, not to say protection, yet; and, above all things,
remember that union is strength, and that a house or a
nation divided against itself meets with nothing but con-
tempt. (Cheers.) Now, 1 am one of the strongest possible
unionists, while I am constrained to admit that I have
never seen my way to any practical form of what is called
Imperial federation. It seems to me that complete union
already practically exists between the different
parts of our great composite nation, which could
only be weakened by any formal, so-called
Imperial federation. It strikes me that few pause to
remember that in population, to say nothing of wealth,
England alone is more than equal to Scotland, Wales,
Ireland, Australia, Canada, and South Africa put together.
No political machinery or arrangement appears to be con-
ceivable in which she would not possess, and could not
justly claim to have, the predominating influence which she
has now, and which is only now used for common pur-
poses. And it may be doubted whether any other part of
our great union could stand by itself without old England
at its back. (Cheers.) But, besides this, the questions
involved are not capable of being settled by the use of
geographical terms. It is now, after the long period during
which the people living in these places have become mingled,
by migrations and intermarriages, impossible to say
definitely as to race who are Australian or Canadian,
English or Irish, Scotch or Welsh. (Applause.) They
have become so essentially one people, as regards language
at all events, that even in Ireland only about 18 per cent,
can speak anything but English—only lj per cent, speaking
Irish only, and in Scotland less than 65 per cent, can speak
Gaelic at all. But, leaving on one side all argument
touching Imperial federation, when we speak of the
Federal Union of the Australian colonies for purposes
of mutual benefit, we are thinking of quite another
matter, important on other grounds. Here we have a
group of communities of absolutely the same origin, existing
under almost precisely the same circumstances, in respect
of which it cannot be doubted that common laws and com-
mon regulations with regard to many departments of human
affairs would be of the greatest practical advantage.
(Cheers.) And these cannot effectively be obtained without
a united Legislature, and more especially a central Executive.
(Hear, hear.) As regards these colonies, I entertain no
conviction more certainly than that in this second century
of their life there is nothing more essential to their future
welfare and to the happy adjustment of their relations with
the other parts of the great nation to which we are all
proud to belong, than the closer union of the
whole Australian population under a central
federal Government and Legislature having power
to deal with matters of common interest. This is no new
opinion of mine. In 1876—11 years ago—when I was
Governor of South Australia, at the Mayor’s banquet in
Melbourne, I urged my confederationist views in support
of some remarks made just a little time previously by Sir
Hercules Robinson at Albury. A little later, when 1 was
leaving Australia for Jamaica, at a farewell entertainment
given to me by the Legislative Houses in Adelaide, I again
pressed upon their attention the importance of this subject,
and pointed out what I knew, from my own experience in
North America, to have been the beneficial effects of union
in the case of the North American provinces—how much
less difficulty lies in our way in Australia than had to be
overcome in Canada —and hiow many matters there are, in-
cluding local defence, which can only be handled satisfac-
torily by a central Government. And much more recently
I ventured to refer to the subject at a dinner given
to me in London when I was absent from my Government
last year on leave. There I referred to what
I believe to be the case, that the difficulties in the way of
Australian federation are much overrated. As one instance,
it seems to be assumed that a uniform tariff must precede or,
at all events, accompany any federal union. But in point
of fact this is not necessary to the establishment of a federal
Legislature or of a federal Executive authority, any more
than it is inseparable from the existing Federal Council,
though I have little doubt that uniformity of the tariff
would very soon follow any such arrangement. Looking
around us at present circumstances, forecasting what may
be possible in the future, I would again urge upon you here
ana now, that in this beginning of the second century of her
life Australia can have no more worthy object of solicitude
than promoting the growth and strengthening the union of
her members into one harmonious whole. (Hear,
hear.) No subject would better reward the atten-
tion of the statesmen of any of this group of colonies,
and I believe that the younger communities would cheer-
fully co-operate with the mother-colony, and loyally follow


her lead in any effort which she may make for consolidating
the strength of Australia and cementing her union into one
solid block in the structure of that great Empire which
encircles the globe, whose morning drum-beat, as was said
by the great American orator, Daniel Webster, is heard
following the rising sun and keeping company with the
hours. (Cheers.)
Sir William Robinson said:—Your Excellency, my
Lords and Gentlemen, —One of my duties when I am at home
in my own colony of South Australia is to preside at
the annual meetings of the Literary Societies’ Union. The
young gentlemen who are members of that union are
allowed five minutes each in which to try their hands at
extempore speechmaking, and it falls to me, as president,
to clang a bell ruthlessly at the close of each five minutes,
and often, it may be, to cut short a fine peroration or some
sentiment which the speaker may have particularly wished to
express. I presided at one of these meetings about two months
ago, and little did I think that within so short a time I
should myself be experiencing the sensations which I then
communicated to others. However, your Excellency, most
things are good in their way, and certainly I by no means
complain myself of this rule which limits the speakers to
a few minutes to-day, except this, that it may be difficult
to express, within so short a time, all that one feels of gra-
titude for the reception accorded to us on this important
occasion, or all that one would like to say in the way of
congratulation to the mother colony on the wondrous and
splendid success which has marked the first 100 years of her
existence. To “hold out the right hand of fellowship”
is an expression with which we are all familiar. In our
own case the friendly process is limited to one, or at most
two hands; but, using the language of metaphor, and
speaking not of individuals but of countries, no such limita-
tion need exist. Now, my lord and gentlemen, if you will
turn mentally to the map of Australia you will see that the
central colony, which I have the great honour to represent,
stands in this unique position—that it is conterminous with
every other colony of the continent of Australia, On the
left we adjoin the rising and extensive province of
Western Australia, on the right we are in touch
with the great and important colonies of Queensland. New
South Wales, and Victoria, and we are consequently in a
position to hold out to them, not two hands of friendship
only, but four hands; and believe me that we stretch out
those four hands of friendship and goodwill across your
four respective borders, and clasp those offered to us in
return with a strong desire to cement and strengthen the
amity which already exists between us, with a strong desire
to work with you all for the lasting good of this portion of
the British Empire. Yes, my lord, and for myself I
think I may venture to say, without in any way
encroaching on the ground of debatable politics, that the
dearest wish of my heart as regards Australia is that
those hands, already clasped in friendship above and across
our respective frontiers, may bend lower and lower
under the weight of public opinion, until finally
touching the ground they shall jointly obliterate those
lines which now separate us from each other, and efface
them, so far as anything selfish or unneighbourlv shall be
concerned, from the face of the earth for ever. This is not
the time or the place to explain that I do not contemplate
a federation which shall in any way diminish or destroy
the individuality of these great provinces. With-
out going to that unnecessary length, there is
still much that may be accomplished to strengthen
the bonds of union between us, and to increase our. weight
as a community ; but the question is too vast to be discussed
on such an occasion as this, and as my limit of time is
nearly, if not quite, exhausted, 1 must hasten to thank you
deeply and cordially for the high and perfect honour which
you have conferred on my own well-loved colony in the
person of her very imperfect representative. One little
word in conclusion ; if we want to know what the future
of Australia is to be, let us look at what she has accom-
plished in the past. There are periods in the lives of
countries, as in the lives of individuals, when things go
wrong for a time; but in the case of the Australian colonies
these checks must ever be transcient and passing, and when
we compare the conditions of this magnificent colony, of
South Australia, of Victoria, and of Queensland, with the
state of things that existed 100, 50, 40, and 20 years ago,
we can pretty well estimate the future which is in store for
Australia. Your Excellency, the foundations of national,
of social, and of artistic progress have been laid both broad
and deep in all these great communities; and I for one am
confident that those foundations will solidify and strengthen
till the weight of Australian opinion shall be felt in the
councils of the nation, till the Empire shorn of Australia—
God grant that day may never come—would not be the
Empire which we so revere and love to-day. (Loud
cheers.)
Sir Robert Hamilton, who on rising was loudly
cheered, said :—Your Excellency, my Lords, and gentle-
men, —I thank you much for your reception of this toast,
and for your reception of my name in connection with it as
her Majesty’s representative in Tasmania, the next
oldest colony in Australasia. Tasmania takes great
interest in these Centennial celebrations, and when
I received the invitation of your tiospitable and
justly popular Governor to attend this banquet,
I accepted it with alacrity both as a pleasure and duty.
When, however, I was asked to summon the Federal
Council of Australasia to meet at Hobart on 16th January
I began to fear that I might not be able to be present.
But when the Council assembled I found that every member
of it had made up his mind to be here to-day and to take
part with all the rest of Australasia in doing honour to
Sydney on this occasion. (Cheers.) Out of a Cabinet
of five Ministers three were present on that
occasion. In this, at least, there is undoubted
unanimity throughout Australasia. And a memorable
occasion this is. What strikes me most is the
thought that, if starting from nothing, 100 of years ex-
istence should have done so much, what may not
be done in the next 100 years, starting from
the present high vantage grounds ? (Hear, hear.)
But as regards the successes of the past and the
prospects for the future, you will be addressed to-night by
many eminent speakers, among: them my valued friend
Lord Carnarvon, one of the most far-seeing of English
statesmen. Sir W. Jervois has already referred to the part
Lord Carnarvon has played in the matter of naval defence.
(Cheers.) Having been a member myself of the Royal
Commission on Colonial Defences, of which Lord Car-
narvon was chairman, and the present Secretary of State
a member, I endorse every word Sir William has said. It
has been mv privilege also to act with and under Lord
Carnarvon in the old country in other matters of difficulty
and in times of great anxiety. I think, therefore, that you
will admit that I have some right to refer to him specially
to-night. Lord Carnarvon is, I believe, the first statesman
of Cabinet rank—anyhow, he is the first Secretary of State
for the Colonies—who has visited Australia. Not only so,
but being a statesman of world-wide reputation, his name
adds a lustre to the distinguished roll of names of those
who have held that high office. (Cheers.) Although not
in office now, there is no living statesman whose views on
colonial subjects have more weight with the public at
home. It is matter of congratulation that he should be
present at this magnificent gathering, and while we listen
to-night to his words of wisdom as a statesman of the old
country, we may feel assured that equally wise and weighty
words will be addressed by him in the old country when he
relates his experiences of this great and glorious community
—among which experiences I feel sure he will give a high
place to these Centennial celebrations. (Cheers.) I will
not detain you longer. On behalf of myself I again thank
you for your reception of me, and on behalf of Tasmania I
offer her greeting to Sydney on this memorable and auspi-
cious occasion. (Loud cheers.)
Sir Frederick Napier Broome rose amid cheers, and
said: My Lord Carrington, your Excellencies, my lords, and
gentlemen, —I have the honour to rule over the largest ter-
ritory of this continent, but I will promise not to make the
longest speech of the evening. (Cheers.) Western Australia
is represented here to-night, not by myself as Governor
only, but also, I am glad to say, by some of the worthiest
of her own sons—(cheers) —and I can assure you that we
all have journeyed from the other side of this continent to


assist at this great and memorable occasion animated en-
tirely by filial and affectionate feelings towards the mother
colony of New South Wales, to whom we wish, from the
bottom of our hearts, a long continuance of that pride of
place, eminence, and prosperity which she has so long en-
joyed among the States of Australia. (Loud cheers.) Wes-
tern Australia may, perhaps, be regarded at this high and
splendid festival somewhat as the poor relation of a wealthy
family. (No, no.) But if we are poor, it is not because
we have nothing of our own, for we have a good deal—
(cheers) —but because your communities of the East have
prospered so amazingly, have so wonderfully increased in
wealth, production, and population, that it is impossible for
us to equal you except by adding another wonder to the
world. (Cheers.) This we have not been able to do, but
we are getting on, nevertheless, and pretty rapidly.
(Cheers.) I make bold to say that my colony has made a
contribution to this Centennial celebration of no
small importance, and, what is more remarkable,
has made it on this day, for you have read in this
morning’s newspapers that her Majesty’s Government
have expressed their views on the question of responsible
government for Western Australia, and is it not of singular
importance that the very day on which the century of
Australia’s colonisation has been completed should witness
steps being taken to extend free political institutions to the
furthest regions of this continent ? (Cheers.) 1 have no
doubt whatever that a very short time now will bring this
about, when every inch of Australian soil, every individual
of its population from north to south, east to west, will be
committed to the guardianship of Australian electors, Aus-
tralian legislators, and Australian statesmen, and when
these institutions, so dear to the hearts of the British race
throughout the world, will completely prevail throughout
this continent. (Loud and prolonged cheering.) And now,
in conclusion, and on the part of every man, woman, and
child of the community I represent, I offer our congratula-
tions to New South Wales, the ever young mother of us
all, and if it is not looking too far into the centuries, we of
Western Australia wish her many happy and fortunate
returns of this, her centennial fete day. (Loud and pro-
longed cheers.) .
Sir Chakles Mitchell, who was received with loud
cheers, said: Lord Carrington, my lords, and gentlemen,—
On behalf of the youngest portion and the smallest of the
Australasian colonies, I have the honour of tendering you
my hearty thanks on her behalf for the reception that you
have given to her representative. (Cheers.)
Sir Henry Paukes, who was received with loud and
prolonged cheers, said: Great as is the honour of being
permitted to stand before an Australasian gathering of re-
presentative men like this, I can only assure you I would
gladly have escaped the duty and responsibility.
(No, no.) I have to ask you to drink senti-
ments which I trust will have some influence in
uniting these young Australian States. (Hear, hear.)
On the 26th January, 100 years ago, a small band of men
landed only a few yards from where we are assembled now.
In that quaint old book written by David Collins we get
the first glimpse of who these men were; and in that book
we are told that they had just arrived under the blessing
of God after a voyage happily completed in eight months
and one week. (Laughter.) Perhaps no passage of history
can present to the mind a stronger and more clearly
defined contrast to the present day. (Cheers.)_ Eight
months and one week this band of exiles had been journey-
ing across the world to plant the great empire of Australasia.
(Cheers.) They arrived, as we all know, only a few miles
from here, and, as we all know, they left to find a more
commodious harbour and a safer anchorage—(cheers)—
and Collins tells us that they found a spot at the head of a
cove near a running stream of fresh water which flowed
silently through a thick wood. That was the place where
there is all reason to believe the British ensign was first
hoisted, and that is the place so long known to us as tne
Tank Stream, and that is the beautiful cove known
by the name of Sydney to this day. (Ap-
plause.) Then we have ‘a very graphic descrip-
tion by Lieutenant Watkin Trench, who was in
charge of the marines, of ho w these poor exiles landed.
Lieutenant Trench tells us in his journal: “ Our passage to
Port Jackson took up but few hours, and those were spent
far from unpleasantly. The evening was bright, and the
prospect before us such as might justify sanguine expecta-
tion. Having passed between the capes which form its
entrance, we found ourselves in a port superior in extent
and excellency to all we had seen before. We continued
to run up the harbour about four miles in a westerly
direction, enjoying the luxuriant prospect of its shores,
covered with trees to the water’s edge, among which many
of the Indians were frequently seen, till we arrived at a
small snug cove on the southern side, on whose banks the
plan of our operations was destined to commence.” I hope
you will pardon me for reading this extract, because I know
of no better way to do what 1 desire to do, namely,
to bring as vividly as possible before your minds the
helplessness of the founders of this great Empire.
(Applause.) The first blow struck by the
hands of these English exiles on the rough ironbark was
in reality the salute of civilisation to the new world. What-
ever adverse circumstances shrouded the assembly of that
poor group of men, they unconsciously were laying the
foundation-stone of what I believe will be the greatest
Empire in the world. (Cheers.) I will, before 1 conclude
my task, with your permission, give you a reason why I
think that the future Empire of Australasia will be superior
to all that has gone before us, and just for a moment I
must dwell upon the progress of this one colony, and only
for a moment. Twenty years after the landing of Captain
Phillip and his first band of exiles the population was only
10,000 souls. For 41 years the colony of New South Wales
was the only representative of civilisation. About 41
years after the foundation of the colony Western Australia
was founded, and a year afer that event the colony wasstill
only 97,912 souls. In 1843, which is a memorable year,
when representative Government was first introduced, the
population was only 165,451 souls. In 1856, when we first
obtained our present constitution, and when the other
colonies obtained theirs, the population of the colony was
only 286,873 souls. Last year the population of our one
colony was 1,044,000 souls. (Applause.) At the close of
last year the shipping of this one colony numbered
11,287,485 tons, and of steamships the tonnage was 128,544
tons,and their value £2,265,000. At the present day the
population of Australasia is 3£ millions at least. From a
calculation, which I believe is based upon the most trust-
worthy data, at the end of another generation the popula-
tion of Australasia will be 12,000,000 souls. (Applause.)
That would be in the year 1922. Now, I have done with
New South Wales, and I think I have done with our past
history, except to say that we have no reason to
turn away from the peculiar character of our early
struggles. We have no reason to blush or for a moment
to desire to avoid comment upon those early years of exile,
and 1 venture to say that during those early years many
heroic acts were done which go intimately into the founda-
tion of nations. (Applause.) Let it be at once re-
membered when we turn to the early history of this
one colony that so long as the offenders of
England were sent here, the offences for which they
were sent out were such that entailed no punishment
at all to-day. (Hear, hear.) Many a man was sent here
for offences which could hardly be said to reflect upon
his moral character, and it is impossible not to imagine the
most heroic suffering, the most complete repentance, and
the most noble fortitude displayed by many of the unknown
exiles who laid down their lives in those dark days. (Hear,
hear.) The part some would strike out from the
history of the early founders of Australia is the
work they performed in the hard battles and trials
bordering on starvation, and the enlightenment they sought
to accomplish in planting new industries upon this con-
tinent. (Hear, hear.) Taken all in all, we have no cause
to turn away from a calm and quiet contemplation of those
early years. That then is all I say of our past history.
We now stand on a different footing altogether. We are
7; five in this continent. The tight little island of Tasmania
and the coronet isles of New Zealand make 7 young States,
which may be said to be a nation, and now at tbe close of
this banquet we start a new race for another hundred years.


(Cheers.) It will then be for us not to turn back to the
hundred years that have passed, but look steadily to the
future over the hundred years that lie before us,
and it is my belief that at the end of that
hundred years the population of • these colonies
will be at least 60,000,000. (Applause.) You talk
of the growth of America with her 55,000,000 of population
to-day, including her negro population, the conditions of
life are so favourable here, the conditions for the propaga-
tion of the race are so favourable that we shall show an in-
crease of population which had never been seen in any
other part of the world. (Cheers.) We have none
of the biting snowstorms, none of the iron-frosts
that are so hurtful and detrimental to the
progress of human life in many parts of the United States
of America. Go where you will, to the north or the south
boundary, throughout the forests of the interior, and you
can hardly reach a place where the conditions of life are
not eminently favourable, more favourable than in any
other part of the world. Then there can be no ravages
upon us from without—and may there never bo any
and I hope that there will be no internal
disorders that threaten human life in other countries.
I think, therefore, that we may hope to see a more rapid
increase of the human race in Australasia than in any other
country in the world. (Cheers.) Then as to what the
United States has done in the way of extending the popula-
tion, we shall do much more, and as sure as the sun rises
upon the first day of our second centenary to-morrow, so
sure at the close of that centenary shall we be one of the
greatest peoples on the face of the earth. (Applause.) It
matters little—and I say this before the representatives of
our beloved Queen —it matters little to us what is the form
of our future Government. We shall be loyal Britons still
under whatever form the Government may be, and in
all reasonable probability we shall never try to solve the
problem of Government, or try to find a happier
connection than the present union with the parent
State. What we have to do, above all
other considerations, is to be loyal to the trust imposed upon
us here by doing the best we can for the development of
our grand resources, by doing the best we can to build up a
stalwart people, and to do the best we can to preserve the
institutions and liberties which, happily, we possess, without
bloodshed, almost without struggle, due to a large extent
to the enlightened beneficence of the mother State. (Cheers.)
This brings me then to the future of these colonies, and I
trust that we shall, in the course of a very short time, be
able to tread under foot all paltry rivalries, and in one
broad spirit of Australian union unite together - not to
work out a better future for Victoria, or for this
country, or for South Australia, or for Tasmania,
but to work out a high, grand, and enduring
destiny for the whole of Australia. (Hear, hear.)
Clearly this time ought to be the time of a new departure,
of a greater and more clearly-defined and more cordially
and powerfully allied nationality, and if the robust and
vigorous young state of Victoria, and Queensland with her
boundless resources, and South Australia with her wealth
beyond the power of calculation, will only unite one and all
to maintain the interests of a United Australia, we cannot
go wrong. (Applause.) When we rise from this table to-
night, my lords and gentlemen, it will be no ordinary
rising. (Hear, hear.) Most gatherings of this
kind bring men together, they make a few
speeches, they enjoy each others company, and
they depart and think no more about it. But we
here to-night fairly represent the whole of these great
colonies, and when we leave this hall, let us not for-
get the teaching which its memory ought to bring h°m e to
every one of us. (Cheers.) That teaching is that we
should live more for our own country, than for any P ar "
ticular division of that country in the future. (Hear, hear.)
We are old enough to take this higher course, we have suffi-
cient national blood amongst us to enter upon this grander
career of political greatness, and if we lay aside all paltry
jealousies, if we seek to consider the interests of each other
as equal to our own particular interests, and if we enter
upon the path of the next century with these broad views
in this resolute spirit, our destiny is in our own hands.
(Hear, hear.) The changes which lay before us
are so manifest that we ought not to close
our eyes to them. There must be great changes,
and that very soon, in the condition of Europe,
and in these changes the mother country cannot expect to
be entirely untouched; but whatever changes take place in
other parts of the world, they will be but trifling as com-
pared with the development in this new world of ours -
Our riches are so boundless, our application of power is so
completely in our own hands, that if we do
not become rich and prosperous, as well as
free, the fault must lie at our own doors.
England has shown one thing beyond all doubt—
that what she wants us to do most is to guide ourselves in
an honourable course to an honourable destiny. (Applause.)
She has shown beyond all doubt or possibility of suspicion
that the last thing she desires is in any way to interfere
with us. We are in fact so many republics without the
dangerous polity of a real republic. (Hear, hear.) We
have under the present rule a greater freedom than we ever
could enjoy under any form of republican government
known in the world. (Hear, hear.) The bonds which
unite us to the Imperial power are bonds of
silk, but the bonds which ought to unite us together are
made of steel and gold, with a magical thread of consan-
guinuity interwoven in them, which never can be severed.
(Hear, hear.) Whilst we remain loyal to the parent State,
as 1 trust we always shall do so, let us be loyal to our-
selves, as true descendants of the British stock, and do our
utmost in times of season and out of season, in times of
adversity still more than in times of prosperity, with a
consistent purpose, so that we shall not be carried away by
its wave. Let us do all this at all times, so as to assist
our own Government in the light of the British Constitu-
tion. (Hear, hear.) There are no teachers of ancient or
modem times equal to the teachers of our own country,
and there are no guides equal to those which we may find
under the shadow of our British Constitution for our future
course, and if we will only adhere in this spirit to the firm
purpose of working out our own destiny in connection with
the mother-country, let whatever happen, we shall have the
consciousness of having fought our course well, and depend
upon it, if a time of danger shall arise to the Empire, we
shall be in a position to be her worthy colleagues and defen-
ders. (Applause.) 1 for one make no boast of my attach-
ment to the British Constitution, at the same time
seeking to fulfil my just responsibilities. _ If
we are to be part and parcel of the British
Empire, we must be prepared to take our fair share of its
burdens and dangers, and we are entitled to share both its
honours and its dangers. It is in this spirit that I wish to
maintain our position in the future as thorough Austra-
lians, and being thorough Australians, most consistent and
patriotic Britons. (Applause). I am glad to think that at
this gathering to-night we have amongst us representatives
of the great colonies which belong to the group, and l trust
that a feeling of united hope and action will be established
amongst us which will not be readily suffered to die out.
(Hear, hear.) One word more, and 1 shall detain you no
longer. Let us hope that as time rolls on we shall be able
to agree on a policv which by its essential principles wilt
unite us all, as well as the feeling of kindred. At present
we are united by feelings of kinship chiefly, but the rail-
ways which have been made through several of these
colonies have had a marvellous effect in still more closely
uniting us ; and if we can only enact laws which shall be
applicable to all the colonies’ alike, and if we hit on the
lines of a broad national policy which shall be applicable to
all the colonies alike, then we are at once, as it were by the
wand of a magician, created into a great nation. (Hear,
hear.) If the calculation 1 venture to put before you, that
in another generation we shall be some 12 millions strong—
and I believe it is under the mark—be sure we shall be able
at any time, if attacked from without, to sweep the in-
vaders into the sea. Even now, if we had a wise
military organisation—an organisation which would
press all the flower of our young men into the patriotic
service of their country, even now in a time of terror we
could raise an army against which no foreign invader could
stand for a moment. Sir William Jervois has told us that


development and prosperity are as nothing without defence.
Well, the defence of these free countries ought to
consist in the right arms of our young men,
and we have now a population sufficiently numerous
to provide for all the purposes of public defence,
and without resorting to standing armies or unnecessary
parade we could easily organise the means of protecting
ourselves and defending our shores from the invaders,
without placing any very serious burden on the people of
this country. I make no doubt as to the glorious future of
this country, it will be beyond the most rosy colours of a
beauteous dream, beyond the most beautiful crea-
tions of the most fanciful philosopher, rude as the
materials are in many respects, yet there is a refining and
loving feeling running through all, which will lift up the
great public spirit of the country to be equal to any occa-
sion, even if danger threatens, and what is more, to over-
come the difficulty. I consider it my duty to detain you no
longer,, but I have to propose to you a toast, “ Australia,
her Trials and Triumphs in the Past, and her Union and
Progress in the Future.”
The toast was drunk with great enthusiasm.
SirF. M. Darley, who was received with cheers, said:
Your Excellencies, my Lords, and Gentlemen, —I have been
highly honoured by being entrusted with the proposal of
such a toast as “ The Distinguished Visitors of the Mother
Colony”—a toast on which, did time permit, one might be
tempted to dilate. We have as our visitors men who
have taken, and who are taking, an important part in
that high mission with which every citizen is, according to
his abilitv, entrusted —a mission which consists in the for-
mation of all these Australasian colonies into a great
nation—(Cheers)— a nation which, with wise laws justly
administered, may become the most important factor of the
twentieth century in the solution of those great problems
as to how the human race may attain to the greatest pos-
sible happiness consistent with its position here on earth.
(Cheers.) This mission our visitors are, in their different
fields of labour, carrying out to the best of their ability. The
Right Hon. Earl who will be so good as to first respond to
this toast has filled the office of Secretary of State for the
Colonies in two different Administrations. During the last
he introduced into the House of Lords and moved the
second reading of a Bill for the Confederation of the British
North American Provinces —a step towards Canada’s becom-
ing that which she also must become—a nation. Let me
express the hope that he will again permit himself to assume
a similar office, so as to give to England and to England’s
colonies the benefit of that experience he has been so good
as to come here to seek, and which he has gained. (Hear,
hear.) The different Premiers, Judges, Ministers, and
statesmen who have done us the honour of attending these
festivities, which mark an epoch in the history of their
colonies as well as ours, may be trusted to do their share;
and they will, I have no doubt, be succeeded by equally
able men, all pressing forward to the consummation
to which 1 have alluded, a consummation the present gene-
ration inav not see, but which will assuredly come if we
only do our duty. (Cheers.) Your Excellency, without
further preface, 1 give the toast, “ The Honoured Guests
of the Mother Colony.” (Cheers.)
The toast was honoured in an enthusiastic manner.
The Earl of Carnarvon, who was received with
cheers, rose to respond to the toast. He said : My Lord,
your Excellencies, and Gentlemen, —I am very sensible of
the great honour done in connecting my name with the
toast in this vast and brilliant assembly, in which all
Australasia finds a representation such as never was
gathered before for any common purpose. We look up and
down the stream of time, and to-night we. not only cele-
brate the hundredth year of your public life, its trials over-
past, and its triumph's achieved, but we perhaps indulge our
fancy in imagining what and how great may be the fortunes of
this colony in yetanother century. It is the makingof history.
But it is also a page of English not less than of Australian
history which we are writing—of that history which,
through Stuart and Tudor and Plantagenet, goes back
for nearly 2000 years to Dane and Saxon, and even to
Roman—that history which a great writer has said is one
of the only two histories in the world worth studying.
(Cheers.) This history indeed is rich beyond compare
in the chronicles of literature and art, in the moving events
of peace and war, in the reconciliation of law with liberty,
in the vast transactions of commerce, in the generous tra-
ditions of self-government. But perhaps its greatest record
is to be found in the annals of its colonisation. (Cheers.)
The spirit of colonisation has never been absent from the
world. Other nations in other times led its van. Spain
and Portugal arrogated the right to divide the New World;
France at one moment overshadowed the American conti-
nent ; Holland still retains some of her ancient greatness;
and proportionately to the circumstances of society there
were then geographical tracts almost as large, and
wealth almost as great, as now. But those colonies
knew no real liberty abroad, and they were united
by no ties of common sentiment at home. Affection
for the mother-country, willing loyalty to the
Crown, and the thousand subtle influences and bonds of
intercourse that unite Britain with her colonies, were want-
ing in their case. (Cheers.) Our fortune has been a
happier one. We have become the great colonising power
of the world; our sons are scattered over land and sea ;
we yet retain our unbroken unity of race, and in great mea-
sure a unity of purpose; whilst, consciously or uncon-
sciously, as different members of a great family, we exer-
cise in our mutual relations a boundless influence upon
the fortunes, the characters, and the institutions of each
other. In such a celebration as this we naturally call to
mind the stout pioneers of heart and head and limb, from
the days of the gallant sailor who discovered these lands
and died by the hand of an unknown savage, to those who
are still fresh in the memories of this generation. But
when we see difficulties mastered, the crooked ways made
straight, the wilderness blossoming as a garden, stately
towns adorned by all that wealth and art and
culture can bestow, we recognise, I think, the
more than human Power which has entrusted to
our race a great mission, and one, as I fully believe, only
half accomplished; and we may breathe the prayer that the
moral progress of our new world may keep pace with its
material prosperity. (Cheers.) As your guest here to-night,
but also as one who has been privileged to hold high office
in connection with the Australasian colonies, I venture to
speak for the old country whence I come, and to which in
a sense everyone that I see here belongs. (Cheers.) I
speak not for any one part or party; I speak for the
great United Kingdom ; and I venture in her name, if it be
not too bold a presumption, to offer you her greeting and
good wishes. I venture to assure you that her children
in New South Wales are as dear to her as those
close at home—(cheers) —that she watches their
progress with pride; and that she rejoices to
count their hundred years of public life as an
integral part of her own stately and almost immemorial
history. (Cheers.) And in truth she is with you in
thought to-night. In better words than I can command I
may say—“ Though absent, you seem to be together; you
shake hands as over a vast sea, you embrace as it were from
the ends of opposed winds—May the heavens continue your
loves ! ” (Cheers.) On such an occasion as this it does
not become me to dwell on personal things or feelings;
but, also, I cannot forget the welcome which I have
received in every one of the colonies of this great
Continent. The recollection of that welcome will never be
effaced from my mind; and I shall ever be a debtor to
Australia for unceasing private kindness as for unnum-
bered public courtesies. (Applause.)
The Hon. Duncan Gillies, Premier of Victoria, who
was received with great applause, said: 'Your Excel-
lency, my Lords, and Gentlemen,—lt was only this evening
that I was asked to be one to respond to this toast, and I
gladly avail myself of the opportunity. This is a great day
for Australasia, and a great day for the mother colony-
Years ago some of her people left her, and have
since then grown into great colonies; they are this
evening met together once more within her boundary
and are desirous not only of shaking hands with her as part
of Australasia, but of bidding her welcome—such a wel-
come as they would like to get for themselves. (Applause.)
I was pleased when I saw at the bottom of this hall “ Aus-


jtralian unity.” This is represented here this evening by
probably a greater representation of Australian citizens and
probably more representatives than ever occurred in a
gathering in these colonies before. (Hear, hear.) The
mother colony ought to be proud of this gathering, for all
here to-day feel and all here to-day know the most
distinguished career which has marked her last 100
years not only by the greatness of her men,
but I will venture to say the greatness of her
efforts, and when I say she ought to be proud, deeply
proud, of this gathering—(applause)—that pride ought to
be as great as the pride of England at this moment in the
existence of her great and grand colonies. These colonies,
which are the offshoots of the mother colony some years ago,
venture to come here this evening and show (heir sense of
what she has done during the time they have been absent
from her, and she has reason to be proud of them, as Eng-
land is of her colonies, and if the work they have done has
not been a similar work, it has been in some respects as
great a work as the mother colony has done here.
(Cheers.) They have introduced and raised a population
such as she herself scarcely can boast, and I know she is
proud of the colonies that have grown up outside her own
boundaries, and I believe the day is not far dis-
tant when she will be proud to have them united to,
her again in a United Australasia—(great applause)
led, I will even hope to see, by the mother-colony herself to
a still greater future than she has yet been able to attain.
(Cheers.) I had not the good fortune to hear all that Sir
Henry Tarkes said this evening, but i can assure him that
in all*his aspirations for the future 1 believe there is not
a gentleman from the other colonies here present but will
join him to the acclaim (hear, hear) —and there is not one
solitary proposal he may make for the union of the Austra-
lasian colonies, and for their progress and civilisation, but
which they will be prepared to join—(cheers)—and to do
everything which within them lies to carry out that great
purpose. W e all know what union means and what disunion
means. Disunion has been exhibited on several occasions
by the colonies, certainly not to our credit; and I believe,
whatever differences of opinion we entertain, that all the
great colonies of Australasia ought to be united, and the
sooner they are united for a great many important common
reasons, the better, and when they are united they will be
better able to speak with a more perfect and more useful
voice than ever they could'separately. (Cheers.) I thank
you for having been permitted to say these few words this
evening, and I can only say to the gentlemen of New
South Wales that I can speak confidently for the colony
1 represent, and nothing will give her greater pride and
greater satisfaction to join, not only with the mother
colony, but with all the others in all good works which
help towards their civilisation and their progress. (Loud
and prolonged applause.)
Three cheers were then given for Australian federation
Sir William Fitzherbert, Speaker of the Legislative
Council of New Zealand, said: Lord Carrington, my Lords,
and gentlemen. ln responding to this toast my first duty
is to deliver to you a message which I specially received
from the Premier of the colony of New Zealand. He
desired me to say to you, on the first opportunity that 1
had of saying it, on behalf of himself and colleagues, that
they deeply regretted their inability to be present personally,
and to offer their congratulations to the people of this great
colony on this auspicious historic occasion. I have a
further message to deliver to you. It is a message which
I feel justified in assuming, because, as a colonist of nearly
50 years’ standing in the colony that 1 have the honour to
represent, I am sure that I can confidently speak the senti-
ments of my fellow-colonists, and assure you, in delivering
the message from the men and women of New Zealand to
you, their brothers, and sisters in this, the oldest colony
of Australasia, that they desire to offer you their sincere
congratulations and their heartfelt sympathy on this great
occasion. Nor can it be wondered that they should so feel,
because this ancient colony, comparatively speaking, of this
new world, has ever manifested to the people of New
Zealand in their troubles, and when they wanted assi-tance
and sympathy, the greatest, the heartiest, and the most
practical aid. It is not. out of place to mention that some
40 years ago, in response to a letter sent from a humble
settler like myself and another settler who has joined the
majority, addressed to the Governor of this colony, stating
the difficulty in which we were and asking for assistance,
a troopship with a company of 100 soldiers was sent
to our aid, and arrived most opportunely. And it was the
same good feeling and true sympathy that this great colony
has shown year after year, which not so long ago induced
her to send "to the Soudan a contingent, the doing of which
created a thrill of sympathy throughout the whole British
Empire—(cheers)—and I believe from what I have heard
of it, and all the great men here to-day talking of and
enjoying one glorious union of the colonies with each
other, and of the colonies with the Empire and mother
country, that the great colony of New isouth Wales has
created a greater effect in contributing to the promotion of
such a grand patriotic idea than anything ever did before.
lam not going to trespass upon your time at this hour of
the night. 1 feel it an honor to have been permitted to
address you on this occasion. 1 came here solely for that
opportunity to express to you the love, admiration, and deep
sympathy that the people of New Zealand have for you.
(Loud cheers.)
Sir Samuel Griffith, who was loudly cheered, said:
My Lord Carrington, your Excellencies, my Lords, and
Gentlemen—l feel it, indeed, an honor to have the oppor-
tunity, as the guest of the mother colony, to stand before
this great and distinguished company this evening to re-
turn thanks for the welcome that the colonists of the young
colony of Queensland have received at your hands. (Hear,
hear.) I feel tor myself, and lam sure I express the sen-
timents of a very large number of residents of the younger
State to which I may claim to belong, that in coming back to
Sydney we come with the feelings of a man who has
started life on his own account, but who comes back from
time to time to his own paternal roof. (Cheers.) As many
of my friends who are here now know, I at one time
belonged to New South Wales, and received my earlier
education at your great University —(cheers;—and to the
teaching I received there under our old friend, Dr. Woolley
I owe in a great measure the success that I have attained
in life. I know in expressing these sentiments lamby no
means singular. 1 can assure you that whatever difference
of opinion may have existed between different colonies they
are after all only very small quarrels, and our sentiments
towards one another are sentiments of most sincere affec-
tion. (Cheers.) Does it not strike anyone who sees this
great assemblage meeting together from all parts of Aus-
tralasia —all visibly one in sentiment as one in birth—that
it is absurd that we'should be divided by small differences,
and that we should no longer regard ourselves as one? I
don’t deprecate for a moment differences of opinion—l
thinK that there can be generous rivalry between the dif-
ferent members of the same family—but these will in no
way interfere with our action in the great things that we
have before us. (Hear, hear.) I have already said
that we have no grander duty cast upon any
of us at the present day than that of taking- a share in
framing the destinies of the great nation that will be estab-
lished on this continent; and 1 sincerely believe that we
are all actuated by the same motives. I am quite sure of
that so far as Queensland is concerned. (Cheers.) ISome
of my friends sitting here think that Queensland is an
unruly child. (Laughter.) Wei, Ido not think so. We
entertain the same feelings of affection to New South
Wales that New South Wales entertains towards its own
mother country, and that we all entertain towards the
mother country of us all. (Cheers.) We shall have in the
century that is coming—in the near part of it to work out
the question of Australian unity; and may I not be per-
mitted to say that one great step in bringing
about a general scheme of Australian unity would
be an endeavour on the part of the colonies to know a little
more of one another? (Hear, hear.) It was only a few
days ago that i was in another part of Australasia, and the
people who lived in that part expressed their regret that
they could not come to Sydney to celebrate this
occasion on account of its terrible climate. (Laughter.)
lam afraid that there are some people in New South
Wales who are afraid to visit their northern


sister on account of the terrible climate. (Renewed
laughter.) Yet the terrible climate of that part
of Australia is no more different from that of Sydney than
the terrible climate of Sydney is from that of the southern
colony to which I refer. (Hear, hear.) In order to carry
out the idea of Australian unity we want more
means of knowing one another. The continual intercourse
of the public men of Australia will do more to bring about
a solution of the problem that we have to solve than any-
thing else. (Hear, hear.) I will conclude by expressing
the hope at this festive table that the legendary king hoped
of his own round table, that this may be “a fair beginning
of the time.” (Loud cheers.)
Mr. Pla yeo ud, on rising, was received with cheers. He
said: Your Excellencies, my Lords, and gentlemen,—On
behalf of South Australia I have much pleasure in respond-
ing to the toast. South Australia, in common with the other
Australian colonies, owes no small debt of gratitude to New
South Wales. The shores of your beautiful harbour
were fhe first to witness the success of Australian colonisa-
tion. (Cheers.) The most sanguine who assisted m the
establishment of that colony, could not have anticipated
the splendid results which have been achieved during the
century, the close of which we celebrate to-day. These
results, so far as New South W ales is concerned, have been
graphically described by previous speakers, and are ap-
parent to all to-day in your splendid city,
this magnificent assembly, and the evidences
which we everywhere meet of progress and pros-
perity. On all this we South Australians congratulate
the people of New South Wales most heartily. (Hear,
hear.) And it is no idle wish that I express when
I say that I trust that the successes of the past may
fall into insignificance when compared with the
successes of the future. (Cheers.) I have said that,
in common with the other colonies, we are indebted to
New South Wales for the example of what may be done in
Australia. I would, however, add that we South Austra-
lians owe her a special debt of gratitude for the assistance
rendered in the early days of our colony, when men, such as
Howden, M‘l arlane, Bonny, Munday, Finness, and the two
Messrs. Dutton, and other heroic New South Welshmen
came over to South Australia at the risk of their lives, with
their flocks and their herds, which supplied welcome
food to our people, and assisted in laying the
foundation of the pastoral industry of our colony.
Not only did these gentlemen render aid in the way I have
mentioned, but some of them took a leading part in political
affairs, and aided us in achieving our present position. But
time will not permit my attempting to do j ustice to the
great variety of reasons that prompt us in enter-
taining the kindliest feelings towards the good
people of New South Wales. Suffice it to say
that these feelings do undoubtedly exist. It is, however,
impossible to refrain from referring to the great interest
which she and our other sister colonies have taken in the
celebration of our jubilee. (Hear, hear.) With these re-
collections fresh upon our minds we hail the opportunity
which your centenary affords of visiting your city, and of
increasing the intimacy of our relationship, of "thanking
you for the hospitality of our reception, and the cordiality
of the sentiments that have been expressed towards us, and
of assuring you as members of the great Australian family,
fast developing into the dignity of a nation, we South
Australians cordially reciprocate those sentiments. I again
thank you for the mode in which the sentiments I have re-
ferred to have been recognised, both in the proposal and
reception of the toast, and trust that the splendid success
which attends the inauguration of your second century
may continue for all time. (Cheers.)
Mr. Bradden said : It is very difficult for any speaker
on a great historical occasion like this to speak with proper
moderation, to touch the right chords in the hearts of those
present, and at the same time draw a rigid line
between platitude and sentiment, and to escape
from the Scylla represented on one hard by
the figures of the statistician, and Charybides re-
resented on the other hand by the dreams of the enthusiast.
(Hear, hear.) If this were not done, the statistics of Aus-
tralia must well intoxicate the most sober-minded man.
These statistics show that within a century and almost
within the span of human life, a few pioneers have grown
into village communities, and these villages have grown
into towns, and the towns swelled into nations. If one com-
pares the statistics of the first hundred years of Australia,
with the first century of America, even dating the century
from the settlement in Pennsylvania, and not from the
original settlement, everything is greatly in favour of
Australia. It should be borne in mind that we live in a
century of enormous progress, and we know what the pro-
gress of America has been during the latter part of the
century. We must hope, I think, not that Australia has
as yet accomplished her task, but that she
has only given us a good earnest of what
she will do in the century to come. No doubt
Australasia has done very much; but I am one
of those who wish that among the feats accomplished one
had been the federation of the colonies. (Cheers.) She
has not done that, although that is within measurable
distance of the present time; but she has proved her prowess
in every possible way. Her sons are not unworthy
descendants of her race, as had been proved on the
cricketfield, on the river, and more gloriously still
when this colony sent her contingent to help the mother
country. (Cheers.) She has done very much—she has
kept abreast of Western civilisation even in her infancy.
She has produced her artists, and I am happy to say that one
of them hail from Tasmania. The pictures of her painters
might well find their place in the galleries of England.
(Cheers.) She has produced her poets, whose genius equals
that of any of modern times. But more than that we have
people who are loyal to the throne and flag of England—
(cheers) —who have maintained the liberty we enjoy under
our glorious constitution—have kept their liberty and
proved that they deserved to have it. (Cheers.)
Mr. Lee Stere, who was cheered on rising, said: My
Lord Carrington, your Excellencies, my lords, and gentle-
men, —I am here as a representative of Western Australia,
and on behalf of that colony I beg to thank you for the
unexpected honour of associating my name with the toast,
I am a member of the Executive Government of that colony,
and it is probable that that is the reason why I have been
asked to reply on behalf of my colony. I think that
the general feeling that has actuated us in that far distant
colony was that we should join with you in celebrating the
centenary of Australia, and in taking part in your festivi-
ties. (Hear, hear.) It is a singular fact that on this very
day a despatch should have been received from the Secre-
tary of State to the Colonies stating the conditions upon
which the Imperial Government are willing to grant re-
sponsible government to Western Australia. (Cheers.)
I am inclined to think, however, that the terms
upon which it is proposed to grant it to
us are not such as the public men of my colony will be dis-
posed to accept. The people of that colony were
anxious to obtain responsible government, but they
have been offered by the Imperial authorities a
stone, but no bread. They have been offered respon-
sible government without control of the lands.
It is wonderful to consider the strides which Australia has
made during the last hundred years, and none of us, per-
haps, can foretell what the next hundred years may bring
forth. Although not a native of Australia, I consider my-
self from long residence almost an Australian, and I have
a great belief in the future of Australia. I believe
that in the next hundred years Australia will become
a united land, and I hope that the united
nation will be a very powerful one indeed, equalling in
power the mother country at the present time. I thank
you for having invited me to be present on this occasion,
which I shall always remember as a most memorable one.
(Cheers.)
Sir John Robertson, who was cordially received, pro-
posed “ The Australasian Press and Australasian Liberty.”
He said : I presume that the reason why 1 am called upon
to propose the Australasian Press and Australasian Liberty
is because I am one of the oldest residents in the colony at
this assembly. At any rate I am one who has seen
the early struggles here for the liberty of the press. I
was here when the struggles for the liberty of the press


were made by the then Chief Justice and by Wentworth,
Dr. Lang, and other great men of those days. These
men battled for liberty and fair play for what was
then Australasia—New South Wales. (Hear, hear.)
I say it was then Australasia. At that time there
were no other colonies at all. And no new colonies had
sprung up claiming the right to control us We had great
men here then. Since then other colonies have been formed,
and our neighbours are equally in the front in their battles
for the liberty of the press. I have heard many men
in my time express the opinion that the press
had too much liberty, but I do not thing so. I suppose I
have been about the best-abused man in this country, but I
never minded a bit, and it never did me any harm. I say
that all the colonies have done well towards supporting the
liberty of the press, and I maintain that, however we may
differ from the press, and however much they may he
to blame when they attack me, we must admit that they
have done an immense amount of good for all the colonies.
With regard to Australasian liberty, I have seen the day
when the word liberty was not known on tnis continent,
and when the word was not understood. Now we have
won liberty and freedom by battles fought for us by our
great men, and the result is that we are now the freest
conntry in the world. All the colonies are perfectly
free, and every man in this colony who keep?
within the law is protected in reference to
both his life and property. No one colony had
reason to find fault; and, thank God ! we had liberty yet in
our own colony. No colony or body of colonies can trample
upon the rights of any other colony, and 1 hope they never
will have the power ; and I would re-enter public life
to do battle against any attempt to lower our colony
by any cabal between the other colonies. Let us
all have liberty, and we will all go on together
in as friendly a way as we did before. As to federation,
why we belong to the greatest federation the, world has
ever seen. These colonies belong, in common with the
rest of the British Empire, to the greatest federation of
freedom and liberty that has ever been seen in
this world. (Applause.) What we wanted was to
be left alone. This colony wanted liberty, and she
would maintain it against all the world, so far, at any i ate,
as in her power lies. I give you the toast of “ lhe Free-
dom of the Australasian Colonies, and Australasian
Liberty.” (App-lause.)
The toast having been duly honoured,
Professor Pearson responded to the toast. He said, I
consider that no country owes more to its Press than Aus-
tralia, for in other countries which have attained to a lite-
rary growth there is a well-developed literature. In Aus-
tralia, however, the literature has so far consisted to a
great extent of journalism, and has been assisted
and inspired by journals where it ha.s no
consisted of journalism. The New South Wales poe
Kendal, the Queensland poet Stephens, the South Aus-
tralian poet Gordon, who' has so admirably described the
Australian bush; and Marcus Clark, whom we Austra-
lians are proud of, were all men who were contributors to
newspapers, and who were lifted into fame by journa ism.
I think that it may be claimed for the Press ot Australia
that its writings, for solid thought and incisiveness of
style, are well worth many hundred books borrowed from
circulating libraries. No doubt the journalist writes only
for the dav, and he spends his best thoughts and s y e up
the question of the moment; but it must take a grea crisis,
as well as a great nation, to develop a solid literature.
Meanwhile, I think I may claim for this country that it
has the journalism which it deserves, a journal-
ism worthy of a great people, and that in tem-
perance of style, fairness of reporting, and the energy
with which it caters to the wants of the populace, Aus-
tralian journalism may challenge comparison with that ot
any other country, and certainly with any journalism but
that of the most advanced country. Sir John Robertson
has spoken with greater experience than I can possibly boast
of of the great service which the Press rendered in the early
davs to Australian libertv. That need has now passed away,
but we still find the Press leading the country on great
questions such as our railways or our relations with the
mother-country or foreign nations. We know that in
every country wherever a great right has been won it has
been ably championed by the Press; and if this country
should have to pass through its trials, _we
may he certain that the Australian communities,
accustomed as they are to the English privileges,
of speaking out freely what they think on the platform or
the Press, will discuss the great questions of the day
through the columns of their journals before they arrive
at a mature decision, by which they must stand or fall.
Mr. D. O’Connor, who was received with cheers,
said :—Lord Carrington, your Excellencies, my Lords, and
gentlemen,—l have the honour to submit a toast to this
assemblage that requires no advocacy from me to recom-
mend it to the enthusiastic reception of a cultured
assemblage such as 1 have now the honour to address.
My Lords and gentlemen, we are celebrating the
Centenary of Australasia. It is 100 years ago
since one of the profoundest thinkers of his time—a great
English statesman, an Irishman by birth —(cheers; —the
illustrious Edmund Burke, impeached the great Empire
of France for not drawing their swords in defence of one
of the loveliest women that God Almighty ever created and
endowed with purity and intellect. (Cheers.) I hope,
my lords and gentlemen, that as the years roll
by, whether you mention them by tens or centuries,
such an impeachment will never be successfully sus-
tained against the sons of Australasia. (Cheers.) We
have heard to-night men who have attained distinction in
this country, and very properly so, by their splendid services
—they have pointed out most eloquently and power-
fully how nations grow and flourish, they have
laid down that which none of us can dissent
from; hut I put this forward and challenge
its contradiction, that great as your orators, as philosophical
as your statesmen are—great as you are in the army and
nayy—it is not those that preserve the glory of the
Empire, but it is the exalted and pure womanhood
of our mother country. (Cheers.) While we talk
often with assumption which has astounded me of what
great men have done in their contribution to the history
ot the world, I would like to point out that although
the very foundation-stone of England’s greatness was
laid by a noble man, England’s King Ethelbert, who paved
the way for Augustine ; it was a woman who was in-
strumental in bringing about the civilisation of
northern Europe—who by her splendid example
was the means of converting the great king and
paved the way for the glorious achievement
which drove back the Turks and preserved the purity of our
civilisation in Europe. 1 know there are here men who
have travelled the world, who have seen the high civilisa-
tion that belongs to the old and cultured nations of Europe
—I know we have a man of high standing and observation
in Lord Carnarvon amongst us—but in making
an apology for the men of this country, I say
we have no occasion to make any apology
for the daughters of Australasia. (Cheers.) We are proud
of this great land. We are proud of her marvellous gifts
and of the splendour of the soil and climate—the extent of
her territory and her splendid natural advantages, hut that,
which we are more proud of is the pure and noble women
of Australasia, and it requires no advocacy on my part to
induce you gentlemen, with all the chivalry of your nature
and the culture of your race, to drink this prominent Cen-
tennial toast, “ The Women of Australasia.” (Cheers.)
The toast was honoured with much enthusiasm.
Mr. G. H. Reid said: I have been asked to respond on
behalf of the ladies of Australasia. In their name, and
speaking, I am sure, with their cordial concurrence, I
heartily thank my eloquent friend who proposed, and you
who so enthusiastically honoured, the toast. After the pro-
longed and varied, and, if I may venture to say so, the un-
paralleled oratorical treat with which we have been
favoured this evening, you will forgive me if I reserve
my peroration for a considerable period—l mean, some
future occasion of a similar kind.
Sir John Hay (President of the Legislative Council)
said: The feast has been well played out, we have celebrated
the first century of the existence of this colony, and I


tlimit we have done it well. To-morrow we will rise, I
hope, with fresh hearts and high hope to fulfil our duties in
the second century of our existence, and do it as well as
those who have gone before us have done in the first
century. The toast which I have the honour to propose is
one which, in order to properly finish the festivities on this
auspicious occasion, you are bound to drink with all the
enthusiasm it deserves, and that is the health of .Lord Car-
rington—(cheers)—our Governor, and the chairman of the
present meeting;. I have nothing to add to the many kind
things that have been said with regard to our Governor, but
to say that he deserves them all. I think of all the
Governors who have been sent out by our Sovereign to
represent her in these territories, no one has administered his
duties better, or more to the satisfaction of the colonists,
than the present Governor. (Applause.) You all know
his good qualities as Governor as well, if not better, than I
could describe them, and I shall not add a single word in
that respect; but I am sure you will acknowledge the addi-
tional-duty he has performed by presiding so efficiently over
this magnificent meeting. (Hear, hear.) 1 ask you to
join me in drinking the health of our chairman, with all
honours.
The toast was drunk with three cheers.
The Chairman said: I beg your Excellencies and the
gentlemen present to accept my 'most grateful and sincere
thanks for the compliment you have paid me, as represent-
ing her Majesty the Queen in this colony. God preserve
Australasia; God bless New South Wales; and God save
the Queen. { Applause.)
After more cheers had been given for her Majesty and
the Governor, the very successful gathering came to an
end.
LIST OF GUESTS.
The following is a list of the names of those
who accepted invitations to the banquet:— William
Anderson, M.L.A., Victoria; Alfred Allen, M.L.A.,
New South Wales; William Allen, M.L.A., Queens-
land; William Anderson, M.L.A., Victoria; R. P.
Abbott, M.L.C., New South Wales; A. R. Arnold,
Clerk Assistant, Parliament, New South Wales;
John Armstrong, Mayor of Narrandera, New South Wales;
Rev. Dr. J. Abrahams, Rabbi, Melbourne, Victoria; John
Anderson, Councillor, Melbourne, Victoria; Amess,
Alderman, Melbourne,Victoria; M. de Azevedo ; G. W. F.
Addison, S.M., Sydney, New South Wales; C. R. Austin,
Mayor of Manly, New South Wales; T. K. Abbott, S.M.,
Sydney, New South Wales; Boyce Allen, New South
Wales ; John Alger, New South Wales; John T. Annear,
M.L.A., Queensland; Captain Avellan, H.I.M. corvette
Rynda, New South Wales; A. Amoss, 263, George-street,
New South Wales; Dr. Eben Atherton, 139, Macquarie-
street, New South Wales; R. D. Adams, Circular Quay,
New South Wales; F. Adams, A. J. S. Bank, New South
Wales; Hon. Francis Abigail, M.L. A., Minister for Mines,
New South Wales; W. J. Allen,M.L.A.,New South Wales;
Hon. B. S. Bird, M.H.A., Treasurer, Tasmania; J. T.
Brown, M.L.A., Victoria; A. S. Bailes, M.L.A., Victoria;
Hon. J. C. Bray, M.H.A., South Australia; M. P. F.
Basedow, M.H.A., South Australia ; S. Burdekin, M.L.A.,
New South Wales; Hon. J. B. Beaney, M.D., M.L.C.,
Victoria; Hon. Jas. Balfour, M.L.C., Victoria; E. J.
Blackhouse, Clerk to Parliament, South Australia; John
Wesley Bowes, M.L.A., New South Wales; R. J. Black,
M.L.A., New South Wales ; Hon. Frederick Brown,
M.L.C., Victoria; Hon. William Byrnes, M.L.C., New
South Wales; Hon. E. C. Braddon. M.H.A., Minister
Lands and Works, Tasmania; Rev. William Bam, Mode-
rator, Presbyterian Church, Newcastle, New South Wales;
John Black, Mayor of Molong. New South Wales;
Hon. J. E. Bosworth, M.L.C., South Australia;
J. Barker, Clerk, Legislative Council, Victoria; S.
W. Brooks, M.L.A., Queensland; Bowen, Council-
lor, Melbourne, Victoria; Hon. H. E. Bright,
M.L.C., South Australia; D. Bews, M.H.A., South
Australia; J. F. Buckland, M.L.A., Queensland;
Hon. Dr. Bowker, M.L.C., New South Wales;
Alexander Britton, S. M. Herald ; Wm. Belbin,
Tasmania ; Richard Baker, M.L.A., Victoria ;
Robert Barbour, M.L.A., New South Wales; L. J.
Byrne. Shorthand Writer, Parliament, Queensland;
Right Rev. Dr. Byrne, Bathurst, New South Wales; Peter
Bennett, Mayor of Wickham, New South Wales ; N. G.
Bull, Mayor of Liverpool, New South Wales; Benjamin
Benjamin, Mayor of Melbourne, Victoria; Buxton,
Councillor, Melbourne, Victoria; W. C. Bennett, Roads
and Bridges Department, New South Wales; J. Barnet,
Colonial Architect, New South Wales; Right Rev. Bishop *
Barry, D.D., New South Wales ; R. T. Bellemev, Mayor
of Newtown, New South Wales; A. C. Budge, Clerk
Executive Council, New South Wales; John Bowden,
Maitland, Warden, New South Wales; Lord Bertie,
A.D.C., Government House, New South Wales ; H. Beale,
Mayor of Darlington, New South Wales ; Thomas Buck-
land, Sydney, New South Wales; Hon. Edmund Barton,
M.L.C., New South Wales ; A. P. Backhouse, District
Court Judge, New South Wales : Dr. L. Bernstein, Mayor
of Lismore, New South Wales ; W. R. Beaver, Clerk of
the Peace, Now South Wales; F. C. Brewer, Editor of
Echo, New South Wales; Alfred Bennett, Evening
News, New South Wales ; Frank Bennett, Evening
News, New South Wales ; Christopher Bennett,
Evening News , New South Wales; J. C. Beale,
Alderman, Sydney, New South Wales; J. N.
Brunker, M.L.A., New South Wales; David Buchanan,
Strathfield, New South Wales; H. S. Badgery, Sydney,
New South Wales; Dr. G. Bennett, Sydney, New South
Wales; Burton Bradley, Sydney, New S r outh Wales;
Alexander Bowman, M.L. A.,'New South Wales: Bony-
thon, Advertiser, South Australia; C. H. Buzacott, Brisbane
Courier, Queensland; S. J. Bryan, Mayor of Hill End,
New South Wales, H. L. Beyers, New South Wales;
Captain Broomfield, Marine Board, New South Wales; E.
Bennett, barrister, New South Wales; Jas. Balfour,
National Bank of Australasia, New South Wales; Hon. F.
T. Brentnall, M.L C.. Queensland; T. Butler, Freeman's
Journal, New South Wales; J. Bosworth. M.L.C. ; T. F.
De Courcv Browne, M.L.A., New South Wales; Henry
Bonnard, New South Wales; Hon. John Fitzgerald Burns,
M.L.A., Colonial Treasurer, New South Wales; J.
Bathurst, Melbourne Age, Victoria; F. Buckle, Alderman,
New South Wales; John Booth, Balmain ; T. Broughton,
Bradley, near Paddington ; D. Brown, New South
Wales; G. B. Barton, New South Wales; J. Bosisto,
C.M.G., M.P., Victoria; Bethel; Russell Barton;
Edwin Berry, Mayor of Redfern ; E. A. Baker ;
Edward Carlile, Clerk Assistant of Parliament, Victoria ;
T. Cooper, M.L.A., Victoria; J. J. Calvert, Clerk to
Parliament, New South Wales; Michael Chapman,
M.L.A., New South Wales ; Dr. William R. Cortis,
M.L.A., New South Wales; Hon. Geo. Campbell,
M.L.C., New South Wales : Hon. Samuel Charles,
M.L.C., New South Wales ; Ewen Hugh Cameron,
M.L.A, Victoria; A. P. Clapin, Assistant Clerk
to . Parliament, New South Wales; Hon. James
Chisholm, M.L.C.. New South Wales ; Bon.
George H. Cox, M.L.C., New South Wales ; Angus
Cameron, M.L.A., New South Wales; Joseph Creer,
M.L.A., New South Wales ; Dr. Cockbrnm, M.H.A.,
South Australia ; Hon. John M. Creed, M.D., M.L.C.,
New' South Wales; Hy. Clarke, M.L.A., New South
Wales; Hon. J. H. Connor, M.L.C., Victoria: Thomas
Colls, M.L.A., New South Wales ; Dr. E. L. Crowther.
M.H.A., Tasmania; A. J. Clark, M.H.A., Tasmania:
T. Carrington, representative Melbourne Argus, Victoria ;
Hon. William Copley, M.L.C., South Australia; H. H.
Cooke, M.L.A., New South Wales; C. E. Chubb,
M.L.A., Queensland; L. Cohen, M.H. A., South Australia;
P. A. Cooper, Judge, Queensland; Hon. Audley Coote”,
M.L.C., Tasmania; Chancellor of the University, Mel-
bourne, \ ictona ; Henry Conwav, M.H.A., Tasmania ;
Henry Copeland, M.L.A., New South Wales ; Right Rev!
J. W. Corbett, Bishop of Sale, Victoria ; G. T. Chambers,
Mayor of East Maitland, New South Wales; George
Cowlishaw, proprietor of the Telegraph, Brisbane, Queens-
land ; Hon. Alex. Campbell, M.L.C., New South Wales;
William Cain, Councillor, Melbourne, Victoria ; Mons. A.
Conil, Mess. Maritime, New South Wales ; W. R. Camp-


bell New South Wales ; Hon. H. E. Cohen, barrister.
New South Wales ; Charles Cowper, Sheriff, New South
Wales - William B. Caldwell, Mayor of Campbelltown,
New South Wales ; John R. Carroll, Mayor of Kogarah,
New South Wales ; G. O’Malley Clarke, S.M., Sydney,
New South Wales; Acting-Consul for Sweden, Sydney,
New South Wales ; George Chandler, Mayor of Deniliquin,
New South Wales ; Earl of Carnarvon ; Daniel Cooper,
New South Wales ; Hon. H. Cuthbert, M.L.C., Victoria ;
T. Coghlan, Government Statist, New South Wales ; E. C.
Cracknell, Superintendent Electric Telegraphs, New South
Wales ; Acting-Consul for Holland, New South Wales ;
G. Cupings, Mavor of Cudgegong, New South Wales; L.
E. Ciibborn, New South Wales; J. H. Carruthers,
M.L.A., New South Wales; G. J. Cohen, New South.
Wales; S. Cook, Sydney Morning Herald, New South
Wales; P. J. Clark, New South Wales; Most Rev. Dr.
Carr, Archbishop of Melbourne, Victoria; W. Coles,
Colonial Architect’s Office, New South Wales; william D.
Cruickshank, Marine Board, New South Wales; Rev. D.
Clancey, Aloysius College, New South Wales; Alfred
Crisp, Mayor of Hobart, Tasmania; Captain G. K. Camp-
bell, Scottish Rifles, New South Wales; Hen. Thomas F.
Camming, M.L.C., Victoria; Right Rev. Dr. Camidge,
Bishop of Bathurst, New South Wales; Edward Bowes
Cargill, New Zealand; Rev. W. Currie, chairman Congrega-
tional Union, Victoria; W.Cumow, editor Sydney Morning
Herald, New South Wales; W. Cooper, Rose Lay, New
South Wales; J. R. Carey, 257, George-street, New South
Wales; Hon. William Clarke, M.L.A., Minister for Jus-
tice, New South Wales; Hon. Rupert Carrington; W.
0. Close, Mayor Balranald, General Post Office, New
South Wales; Captain Clayton, H.M.S Diamond;
G E. Cass, New South Wales; Charles Collins,
Hon. Alfred Deakin, Chief Secretary, M.L.A., Victoria ;
Hon. Fredk. Thos. Derham, Postmaster-General, M.L.A.,
Victoria ; Hon. Matthew Hy. Davies, Speaker, M.L.A.,
Victoria; Hon. John Gavan Duffy, M.L. A., Victoria ,
John Donaldson, M.L.A., Queensland ; Thomas Dalton,
M.L.A., New South Wales ; Hon. James Robert Dickson,
M.L.A., Queensland ; Hon. John G. Dougharty, M.L.C.,
Victoria ; Hon. Jno. Davies, C.M.G. M L C New South
Wales : W. L. Davis, M.L.A., New South Wales , W. S.
Dowel, M.L.A., New South Wales ; Hon. John Dunn,
jun., M.L.C., South Australia ; John Donaghy, M.L.A.,
Victoria; Sir’ F. M. Darley, Knt. Chief Justice New
South Wales ; Sir John W. Downer, K. C. M■ G., M. H.A.,
South Australia ; George Day, M.L.A., Smith
Wales; Rev. A. B. Davis, Rabbi, Sydney, N ew South
Wales; G. H. Deffell, Judge, New South Wales, A.U
Douglas, Under-Secretary, Postal Department, Tasmania
T. J. Dickson. Mayor of Waverley, N ewSo "^ al ®’
T. J. Dunn, Mavor of Glebe, New South Wales , Hy.
Dawson, M.L.A., New South Wales ; Right Rev. J. J.
Doyle D.D., Bishop of Grafton, New South M ales , John
Dawson, solicitor, New South Wales;
Alderman, Sydney, New South Wales; A. A. Dangar, N
South Wales; H. J. Damd.iown Clerk, Sy d " e y< e .
South Wales; Hon. A. Dodds M.L.C., New South a e ,
Most Rev. Dr. Dunne, Archbishop of Quee .
land; Right Rev. Dr. Dunne, Bishop of Sale, Victor ,
Thomas Dillon, Alderman, Hobart, Tasmama, S. .
Dowell, Mayor of Muswellbrook, New South Waies, .
A. Dibbs, Commercial Banking Co of N
South Wales; Duke of Manchester England, J.
Macgregor Dunn, New South Wales, •
Ignatius College, New South Wales; Vincent Dowling.
New South Wales; Walter Douglas; Fletcher Dixon, E.
S. andA.C. Bank, New South Males; H " \ \
Bede Dailey, Q.C., P.C., M.L.C., New South M ah*,
J. H. Davies, Evening News ; J. A. Delanv, New -
Wales - E B Docker, District Court Judge, Hon. 1 • •
Davies,’ ; Editor of Mdbourne, Vrctona ;
J. C. Ellis, M.L.A., New South Wales ; Henry Evans
Mayor of Adamstown, New South Wales, Editor /
Telegraph, Melbourne, Victoria; Editor TtyiapK*™*
bane. Queensland; Charles EUis, Mayor of Coonamble
New South Wales ; Liehtenant-Colonel Eden, New South
Wales; W. H. Eldred, Consul for Chili New Soum
Wales; T. T. Ewing, M.L.A., New South Walee, Editor
Australian -Star, New South Wales ; Editor Daily Tele-
graph, New South Wales; Dr. 0. S Evans,Balmain, New
South Wales; Lieutenant Erskine, H.M.S. Nelson;
13. J. Fink, M.L.A., Victoria; The Hon. N. Fitzgerald,
AI L.C., Victoria; L. L. Furner, M.H.A., South Aus-
tralia; Frank Farnell, M.L.A., New South Wales ; John
F. G. Foxton, M.L. A., Queensland; Fenwick, Coun-
cillor Melbourne, Victoria; Colonel G. A. French, Defence
Force, Queensland; Hon. William Forrest. M.L.C.,
Queens’and; David A. Ferguson, M.L.A., New South
Wales; Richard Ferley, representative Brisbane Courier,
Queensland; James Squire Karnell, M.L.A., New South
Wales- Hon. W. John Foster, Q.C., M.L.C., New Soutti
Wales; Sir W. Fitzherbert, K.C.M.G., New Zealand ; H.
B. Fitzhardinge, Mayor of Wagga, New South Wales ; C.
L. Forrest, M.L.A., Victoria; J. Ferguson, M.L.A.,
Queensland; Edmund Fosberv, J.P., Inspector-General of
Police, New South "Wales; A. C. Fraser, Under-Secretary
Department of Justice, New South Wales ; Lieutenant and
Commander Field, H.M.S. Dart; Lieutenant-Colonel W.
T. Farrell, Ist Regiment Volunteers, New South wales;
Fox Councillor, Adelaide, South Australia; his Honor
P. Faucett, Judge, New South Wales; A. M. Fisher,
SM Sydney, New South Wales; J. R. Fairfax, New
South Wales; Thomas Forsyth, Mayor North Willoughby,
New South Wales; Joseph Ferguson, M.L. A., Victoria;
J P Franki, Mort’s Dock, New South Wales; William
P. Faithfull, New South Wales; Ernest F'avenc, New
South Wales; J. O. Fairfax, New South Wales; G. E.
Fairfax New South Wales; GrantleyFitzhardinge, New
South Wales; E. G. Fitz-Gibbon, Town Clerk, Melbourne,
Victoria; Rev. J. H. Fletcher, Stanmore, New South
Wales; Rear-Admiral Fairfax, C. 8., England; The Hon.
Lieutenant J. W. Fortescue, A.D.C. to Governor of New
Zealand; W. J. Ferguson. New South Wales; Judge
Forbes ’s. J. Foskett, Mayor of Alexandria, John
Forsythe, New South Wales; Carl Fischer; Hon.
Duncan Gillies, Premier, Victoria; Hon. Sir S. W.
Griffith, K.C.M.G., Colonial Treasurer, Premier, Queens-
land; John Govett, M.L.A., Queensland; Samuel Grimes,
M. Queensland; Hon. James Howlin Graves,
ML A Victoria; Jacob Garrard, M.L. A., New South
Wales; ’James Gordon, M.L.A., New South Wales ; Hon.
W. H. Groom, Speaker M.L.A., Queensland; William
Gilbert, M.H.A., South Australia; A. C. Groom, M.L.A.,
Victoria; George Graham, M.L.A., Victoria; Hon.
William Grahame, M.L.C., New South Wales , P. Glynn,
M.H.A., South Australia; Hon. Henry Gore, M.L.C.,
Victoria; Hon. Andrew Garran, LL.D., M.L.C., New
South Wales; A. J. Gould, M.L.A., New South Wales;
Charles L. Garland, M.L.A., New South Wales; H. H.
Gill, M.H.A., Tasmania; W. J. P. Giddings, S. si.
Advertiser, South Austialia; Godfrey, Councilloi,
Melbourne, Victoria; Garton, Councillor, Melbourne,
Victoria; John Gale, M.L.A., New South Wales; B.
Gould M H.A.. South Australia; Thomas H. Griffin,
Mayor of Albury, New South Wales; David
Gaunson, M.L.A., Victoria; John Gardiner, M.L.A.,
Victoria; Geddes, Councillor, Melbourne, Victoria;
G W. ’Griffin, Consul for United States, Sydney, New
South Wales; C. A. Goodchap, Commissioner for Rail-
ways New South Wales ; Wm. Gilmour, Mayor of
Wailsend, New South Wales : T. Greiner, Acting Consul
for Germany, • Sydney, New South Wales; Major Gas-
coigne, A. New South Wales; Colonel J. H. Goodlet,
Second Regiment Volunteers, New South Wales; Laurence
Grayson, M.L.A.., South Australia; Joseph Graham,
Mayor of Marrickville, New South Wales; T. Grierson.
Mayor of Lambton, New South Wales; Professor S.
Gurnev, New South Wales; S. W. Gray, New South
Wales; J. Gormlv, M L.A., New South Wales; Hon.
F T Gregory, M.L.A., Queensland; Edward Greville,
New South Wales; Rev. A. St. John Gray, King’
School Parramatta, New South Wales ; N. F. Giblin,
Bank of New Zealand, N.S.W. ;E. C. Gray: Isaac
Gorrick, West Maitland, New South Wales ; M. Gotthelf.
Moore-street, New South Wales; J. B. Gibbs, Illustrated
Sydney News, New South Wales; W. Gray, New
Zealand; Hon. Thomas Garrett, M.L.A., Minister for
Lands, New South Wgles; Captain Gourdon, French Man-


of-war; Henry Gullet, Daily Telegraph ; Hon. W. H.
Groom, Speaker of the Queensland Legislative Assembly ;
H. W. Hawker, M.H.A., South Australia ; Chas. Lumlev
Hill, M.L.A., Queensland ; Geo. Wilson Hall, M.L.A.’,
Vietoria ; Joseph Harris, M.L.A., Victoria ; John Hurley,
M.L. A., New South Wales ; Nicholas Hawken, M.L.A.,
Hew South Wales; Hon. Richard Hill, M.L.C., New
South Wales ; Alexander Hutchison, M.L.a., New South
Wales; John Moore Highett, M.L. A.. Victoria ; Albert
Harris, M.L.A., Victoria ; W. A. Horn, M.H.A., South
Australia ; Hon. F. T. Humphery, M.L.C., New South
Wales; Thomas Hunt, M.L.A., Victoria; Hon. J. C.
Heussler, M.L.C., Queensland: Hon. Alex. L. Hay,
M.L.C., South Australia; Wm. Henson, M.L.A., New
South Wales ; Hon. David Ham, M.L.C., Victoria ; James
Hayes, M.L.A., New South Vales; D. Hyam, Mayor
of Central Shoalhaven, New South Wales; his
Honor G. Higinbotham, Chief Justice Victoria; Jno.
Hodgson, Mayor of Bowral, New South Wales;
„ Hon. C. J. Ham, M.L.C., Victoria; J. H. Howe, M.H.A.,
South Australia ; G. Hutchinson, Mayor of Forbes, New
South Wales; John Hamilton, M.L.A., Queensland; P.
K. Haydon, Mayor of Morpeth, New South Wales; T. C.
Humphrey, Mayor of Junee, New South Wales; GeOree
Holmes, Mayor of Armidale, New South Wales; John
Hamilton, M.H.A., Tasmania; R. W. Hardie, Mayor of
Burwood, New South Wales i William Von der Heyde,
Mayor of Strathfield, New South Wales; Lieut-Col.
W. H. Holborow, M.L.A., New South Wales;
H. Hallaran, C.M.G., New South Wales; Captain
Hixson, New South Wales; R. H. Hunt, Royal Mint,
Sydney, New South Wales; P. Hill, Mayor of Kempsey,
New South Wales; Robert Henry, Superintendent of
telegraphs, Tasmania, John Harris, Mayor of Sydney,
New South Wales; Hazledorn, councillor, Adelaide,
South Australia; James A. Hogue, editor Evening News,
New South Wales; A. W. Howitt, Police Magistrate,
Victoria; J. F. Hart, New South Wales; L. J. Harnett.
Sergeant-at-Arms, New South Wales; F. Hill, Controller
Government Savings Bank, New South Wales; A.
Hoffnung, Hawaiian Consul, England; P. J. Holdsworth,
Treasury, New South Wales; John Hardie, alderman, New
South Wales; Col. W. H. St. Hill, M.H.A., Tasmania:
Fredk. S. E. Holt, New South Wales; Henry Hudson,
New South Wales; J. Hawthorne, M.L.A., New South
Wales; Matthew Harris, alderman, New South Wales:
C. Huenerbein, New South Wales; Hon. William Halli-
day, M.L.C., New South Wales; J. J. Horrocks, New
South Wales; H. H. Havter, C.M.G., Victoria; his Ex-
cellency Sir Robert Geo. Crookshank Hamilton, K.C.8.,
Tasmania; Sir John Hay, K.C.M.G., President of Legis-
lative Council, New South Wales; A. Hellicar, Bank of
Australasia; W. T. Hurling, Mayor of i lattsburg; W.
A. Hutchinson; W. bredk. Hume; —Hamilton, commander
H.M.S. Nelson : Rd. Holdsworth; M. J. Hammond’
Hammill,R.N.,captain H.M.S. Nelson; Wm. Hezlet, Ash-
field; W. J. Hogan, Mayor of Cobar, New South Wales;
W. H. Hinton; James Hill; John Hughes, New
South Wales; S. H. Hyam, New South Wales;
M. E. A. Iceton, Mayor of Yass, New South Wales; I. E.
Ives, M.L.A., New South Wales; levers, councillor,
Melbourne, Victoria; Charles John Ingrey, Mayor of
Grenfell, New South Wales: G. Ives, Mayorot Macdonald-
town, New South Vales; Hon. J. lnglis, M.L.A., Minister
of Public Instruction, New South Wales; Hon. J. C. F.
Johnson, Minister of Education, South Australia; Hon.
A. h. Jacob, M.L.C., New South Wales; G. H. Jenkins,
J.P., Clerk of Parliament, Victoria; Hon. S. A. Joseph,
M.L.C., New South Wales; C. E. Jeanneret, M.L.A.,
New South Wales; Hon. C. H. James, M.L.C., Victoria ;
J. G. Jenkins, M.H.A., South Australia; C. E. Jones,
M.L.A., Victoria; S. W. Jones, late Clerk of Parliament,
New South Wales; E. Johnson, Under-Secretary Public
Instruction, New South Wales; J. S. Jamieson, J.P., New
South Wales; J. F. Josephson. New South Wales; James
W. Johnson, solicitor, New South Wales; B. Jenkins,
Mayor of St. Leonards, New South Wales; F. W. Jack-
son, Union Steamship Company, New South Wales; Dr.
P. S. Jones, New South Wales; W. Johnson, S.M.,
Sydney, New South Wales ; Rev. Jas. Jelferis, Congrega-
tionalChurch, Pitt-street, Sydney, New South Wales; Evan
Jones, alderman, Sydney, New South Wales; Sir Patrick
Jennings, K.C.M.G., New South Wales ; E. L. Jones, New
South Wales; W. H. Jennings, contractor, New South
Wales; L. A. Johnstone, Queensland National Bank,
Sydney, New South Wales ;• Trevor Jones, New South Wales;
Hon. Chas. Cameron Kingston, M.H.A. (Attorney-
Generel), South Australia; Hon. Wm. Kellett, M.L.A.,
Queensland; Hon. P. G. King, M.L.C., New South
Wales; Hon. A. T. Kerr, M.L.C., New South Whiles;
Chas. Kimber, M.H.A., South Australia; Hon. Ed. Knox,
M.L.C., New South Wales; F. King, Mavor of South
Singleton, New South Wales; Alderman W. Kippax,
Sydney, New South Wales; Rev. Dr. Kinross, St.
Andrew’s College, New South Wales; the Very Rev.
Archdeacon King, New South Wales; H. E. Kater, New
South Wales; John King, Victoria; Arthur S. King,
Victoria; Captain Keith-Falconer ; W. Essington
King, New South Wales; Captain H. C. Kane,
H.M.S. Calliope; Rev. James Kennedy, New South Wales;
Rev. W. Kelynack, New South Wales; Canon Kemmis,
Hon. J. F. Levien, M.L.A., Victoria; Thos. Langdon,
M.L.A., Victoria; Hon. G. D. Langridge, M.L.A., Vic-
toria; S. E. Lees, M.L.A., New South Wales; George
Lee. M.L.C., New South Wales; Hon. G. A. Lloyd,
M.L.C., New South Wales; Right Rev. Dr. Lanigan,
Bishop of Goulbum, New South Wales; Hon.
William Long, M.L.C., New South Wales; A.
H. Landseer, Mayor of Molong, New South Wales;
Hon. John R Lucas, M.L.C., New South
Wales; R. W. Leftwich, alderman, Brisbane, Queens-
land; John Laurens, M.L.A., Victoria; Leonard,
Melbourne, Victoria; Hon. Francis Lord,
M.L.C., New South Wales; William Laidley, New South
Wales; E. Lichtner, Austro-Hungarian Consul, New
South Wales; S. H. Lambton, secretary, General Post
Office, New South Wales; Michael Long, Mayor of Pen-
rith, New South Wales ; A. Lakeman, M.L. A., New South
Wales; Ed. Lee, barrister, New South Wales; Rev. G.
Lawes, F.R.G.S., New South Wales; Harry Levy, New
South Wales; Commander Lee, New South Wales Volun-
teer Artillery, New South Wales ; Hon. W. F. Lambert,
M.L.C., Queensland; Right Rev. S. Linton, Bishop of
Riverina, New South Wales; C. A. Lee, New South
Wales; O. H. Lewis, New South Wales; Hon. Geo.
Leeke, M.L.C., Western Australia; Hon. John Lackey,
M.L.C., New South Wales; Hon. Lee-Steere, M.L.C.,
Western Australia; Major Lee-Hanning, England; J.
Graham Lloyd; Ed. Lee, woolbroker, Circular Quay;
Rev. Geo. Lane; Captain Lindeman; G. C. Lough-
nan, N.W.C.; Charles Lyne, S. M. Herald ;
John M‘lntyre, M.L.A., Victoria; B. A. Moulden,
M.H.A., South Australia; John M‘Master, M.L.A.,
Queensland; A. M‘Donald, M.H.A., South Australia;
Edward Murphy, M.L.A., Victoria; A. Morgan, M.L.A.,
Queensland; Hon. Sir J. Macßain, K.C.M.G., M.L.C.,
Victoria; William Fraser Martin, M.L.A., New South
Wales; Hon. Henry Moore, M.L. C., New South Wales;
Samuel W. Moore, M.L.A., New South Wales; Hon.
William Macleay, M.L.C., New South Wales; S. M.
Mowle, Usher of the Black Rod, New South Wales; Hon.
William M‘Culloch, M.L.C., Victoria; J. H. M‘Coll,
M.L.A., Victoria; John Murray, M.L.A., Victoria;
Matthew Mellor, M.L.A., Queensland: Hon. Henry Mort,
M.L.C., New South Wales; Right Rev. J. M. Murray,
Bishop of Maitiand, New South Wales; Hon. J. D.
Macansh, M.L.C., Queensland; Hon. Hy. Moses,
M.L.C., New South Wales; W. E.' Mattin-
son, M.H.A., South Australia; Mayor of Goulburn,
New South vVales; Mayor of Gosford, New South
Wales; Mayor of Mudgee, New South Wales;
Mayor of Young, New South Wales; Hon. Chas. Moore,
M.L.C., New South Wales; Hon. John L. Macintosh,
M.L.C., New South Wales; William M‘Millan, M.L.A.,
New South VVales; F. Myers, representative of Melbourne
Ary us, Victoria; Hon. A. B. Murray, M.L.C., South
Australia; Hon. D. Murray, M.L.C., South Australia;
Baron yon Muller, Victoria; Hon. Wm. Moore, M.L.C.,
Tasmania; Mayor of Richmond, New South Wales;
Mayor of Brisbane, Queensland; Mayor of Cootamundra,


New South Wales; Mayor of Dubbo, New South Wales;
A H. M'Cullooh, M.L.A., New South Wales; Mills,
Councillor, Victoria; C. J. Mackenzie, M.L.A., New
Zealand; E. O. Moriarty, Engineer-m-Chief Harbours
and Rivers, New South Wales ; his Eminence the Cardinal
Moran, New South Wales; Dr. H. N. MacLaunn, New
South Wales; Lieutenant-Colonel J. M‘Donnell, Queens-
land; Mayor of Redfern, New South Wales; Mayor of
Granville, New South Wales; Major-General Sussex Mil-
ford: D V. Marano, Consul of Italy, New South Wales;
Harold Maclean, Comptroller-General of Prisons, New
South Wales; Major M. M. Macdonald, Sydney Lancers,
New South Wales; T. W. Mortley, Mayor of Ashfaeld,
New South Wales; Donald Munro, Mayor of ’Vic-
toria, North Shore, New South Wales; Charles
Moore, Director Botanic Gardens, New Wales,
Mayor of Parramatta, New South Wales; Mayor of
Leichhardt, New South Wales; George Merriman, M.L. A.,
New South Wales; Major Mackenzie, A.A.G., General
Staff, New South Wales; W. M'Burne, Mayor of East
St. Leonards, New South Wales; Mayor of Balmain, New
South Wales; W. M‘Court, M.L.A., New South Wales;
Mayor of Tenterfield, New South Wales; Mayor of
Bathurst, New South Wales; G. A. Mansfield, New South
Wales; Mayor of Paddington, New South Wales; Mayor
of Concord, New South Wales; J. Moule, M.H.A., South
Australia; Mayor of Rand wick, New South Wales-;
Alderman P. MacMahon, J.P., New South Wales, J.
M‘Farlane, M.L.A., New South Wales; G. M’L. Mathe-
son, M.L.A., New South A\ales; John Mac far lane,
M.L.A., Queensland; F. J. Mortley, Mayor of Windsor,
New South Wales; Mayor of Bega, New South Males;
J. M‘Donald, Mayor of Narrabri, New South Wales; M.
J. M'Mahon, Mayor of Uralla, New South Wales; A.
Milsop, Mayor of Hurstville, New South Wales;
T. Mackenzie, New South Wales; A. H. Macarthur,
New South Wales; Mayor of Wallsend. New
South Wales; Mayor of Prospect and Sherwood,
New South Wales; Alex. Mackellar; Mayor ot
Narrandera; Mayor of Ashfield: Alderman J-
Meeks, Sydney, New South Wales; Alderman
W P. Manning, Sydney, New South Wales; Mayor
of Wollongong, New South Wales; Milbourne Marsh,
SM Sydney, New South Wales; J. Moses, Mayor ot
Glen’lnnes, New South Wales; Dr F. Milford, New
South Wales; Josiah Mullens, New South Wales ; J. S.
Mitchell, New South Wales; Mayor of Alexandria, New
South Wales; Captain G. K. Mann, New South Wales;
E. Macdonald, Federal Bank, New South Wales; Augustus
Morris, official assignee, New South Wales; Mayor of
Rvde, New South Wales; Montague Marks, New South
Wales; George Miller, Bank of New South Wales, New
South Wales; Judge E. C. Mein, Queensland; John
M‘Leod, New South Wales; £. W. Moon, Consul for
Costa Rica, New South Wales; James Marks, New South
Wales' J. Y. Mills, New South Wales; R. I. Moodie,
New South Wales; E. L. Montcfiore, Pacific Insurance
Company, New South Wales ; Mayor of Five Dock, New
South Wales; Mayor of Hunter’s Hill, New South Wales,
W H G Marshall, Town Clerk, Brisbane, Queensland;
A*G* Milson, New South Wales; J. Sheridan Moore,
New South Wales;'C. C. Metcalfe, New South Wales;
Captain Mecham, M. Metcalfe, B. Molineaux, Hon. James
Norton, M.L.C., New South Wales; H. F. Noble, Mayor
of Kiama, New South Wales; Hon. James H. Neale,
M.L.C., New South Wales; James Newton, Mayor ot
Hay, New South Wales; Hugh M Nelson, M.L A.,
Queensland; Alderman Nash, Adelaide, South Aus-
tralia; J. C. Neild, M.L.A., New South Wales; M.
Neill, City Bank, New South Wales; C. A. Neale, New
South Wales; Randolph Nott, New South Wales,
Hon. F. Ormond, M.L.C., Victoria; A. R. Outrun,
M.L.A Victoria; D. O’Donovan, Librarian, Queensland,
D. O’Rourke, Mayor of Cooma, New South Wales; Briga-
dier-General Owen, R.A., South Australia ; E. W. O Sul-
livan, M.L.A., New South Wales; Alexander Oliver,
M. Parliament Draughtsman, New South Wales ;C. J.
N. Oliver, Under-Secretary Lands Department, New South
Wales; Charles Ogg, Moderator, Presbyterian Church,
Queensland; His Honor Wm. Owen, Judge, New South
Wales: J. G. O’Connor, New South Wales; Rev. Dr.
Denis F. O’Haran, New South Wales ; James Orr, Union
Bank, New South Wales; James L. Ogilvy, New South
Wales; Alick Osborne, New South Wales: Daniel
O’Connor, M.L.A., New South Wales; R. E. O’Connor,
M. A., barrister, New South Wales; Dr. M. O’Connor, New
South Wales; J. Oxley, Manly, New South Wales;
Hon. C. H. Pearson, M.H.A., Minister Public Instruction,
Victoria; Hon. James Playford,- Treasurer, South Aus-
tralia; W. G. Palmer, Sergeant-at-Arms, Victoria; J. W.
Peirce, M.L.A. and councillor, Victoria; Edward Palmer,
M.L.A., Queensland; Hon. J. B. Patterson, M.L.A.,
Victoria; Hon. W. H. Pigott, M.L.C., New South
Wales; Hon. T. Macdonald Paterson, M.L.C., Queens-
land; J. M. Paul, Mayor of Orange, New South Wales;
the proprietor Melbourne Herald , \ ictoria; Hon. Alfred
Page, M.L.C., Tasmania; J. Penzer, M.L.A, New
South Wales; Varney Parkes, M.L.A., New South
Wales ; the proprietor Daily Telegraph, Melbourne, Vic-
toria; J. Powell, Collector of Customs, New South
Wales; Robert Philp, M.L. A., Queensland; E.
M. Paul, Consul for Russia, New South Wales;
John Pope, New South Wales; Rev. A. Phil-
lips, Rabbi, Queensland: Dr. Plummer, Victoria;
proprietor Sydney Morning Herald, New South Wales ;
Lieutenant-Commander Pelly, R.N., H.M.S. Undine ; J.
Pigdon, Councillor, Melbourne, Victoria; Packer,
Councillor, Adelaide, South Australia; Pullin, Councillor,
Adelaide, South Australia ; Lieutenant-Commander Pike,
R.N., H.M.S. Harrier; Alderman Benjamin Palmer,
Svdney, New South Wales; Alderman J. Poole, Sydney,
New South Wales; Chas. Potter, J.P., Government Printer,
New South Wales ; his Honor Judge G. W. Paul. Queens-
land; Alderman T. riayfair, Sydney, New South Wales;
Vincent Pyke, M.L.A., New Zealand; W. T. Poole,
ex M P., Redfern, New South Wales; F. G.
Panton, New South Wales; W. H. Paling, New
South Wales; H. G. Parker, S. M. Herald ; Dr.
Pranglev, Robert L. Pudney, Victoria ; Louis Phillips,
New South Wales; Stephen Hv. Parker, M.L.C.,
Western Australia: Captain H. C. Pritchard, A.D.C.,
Governor Queensland, Queensland; Hon. Sir. Henry Parkes,
G.C.M.G., Premier, New South Wales ; Gerard Phillips, C.
J. Pawsey, H.M.S. Nelson; Major Phillamore, R ; A., A.D.C.
to Governor of Western Australia; L. Parker, Union Club;
Hon J. G. Ramsay, M.L.C., Chief Secretary, South Aus-
tralia; Chas. Robinson, principal shorthand writer, New
South Wales; Rowland Rees, M.H.A., South Australia;
R. D. Reid, M.L.A., Victoria; Hon. R. H. Roberts,
M.L.C., New South Wales; Dr. Ross, M.L.A., New South
Wales; Hon. Arthur Renwick, M.D., M.L.C., New South
Wales; Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G., New South
Wales ; Hon. W. H. Roberts, M.L.C., Victoria; J. M.
Richardson, Mayor of Raymond Terrace, New South
Wales; Most Rev. C. A. Reynolds, Archbishop of Ade-
laide, South Australia; .James Russell, M.L.A., Victoria :
G. H. Reid, M.L.A., New South Wales ;R. W. Robertson,
second clerk assistant, Parliament, New South Wales;
Hon. J. B. Rundle, M.L.C., New South Wales ; J. S.
Rogers, Mayor of Carrington, New South Wales; Lieut.-
Colonel E. C. Rowe, New South Wales; Rev. W. Ross,
Presbyterian Church, Victoria; Christopher Rolleston,
C.M.G., New South Wales; Wm. Roberts, sen., solicitor,
New South Wales; H. A. Russell, Government Astrono-
mer, New South Wales; Colonel Roberts, New South Wales;
John Rae, Under-Secretary for Works, New South Wales;
Francis W. Reay, J.P.. Mayor of Hamilton, New South
Wales; Marquis de M. Le Rostaing, Vice-Consul for
France, New South Wales; F. E. Rogers, barrister, New
South Wales; W. W. Richardson, barrister, Chairman
International Exhibition, New South Wales; —Roberts,
Councillor, Adelaide, South Australia; Rooney, Coun-
cillor, Adelaide, South Australia; Sir Alfred Roberts,
M.D., New South Wales; Charles Rogers, Parliamentary
Librarian, New South Wales; Major-General J. S.
Richardson, New South Wales; Captain Rountree, N<‘W
South Wales; H. Raymond, Acting Brazilian Consul,
New South Wales; Robert Reid, vice-president, Chamber
of Commerce, Melbourne, Victoria; James Ryan, Mayor
of Numba, New South Wales; A. J. Riley, M.L.A., New


South Wales: Rev. A. R. Rivers, New South Wales: Dr.
E. P. Ramsay, curator, Australian Museum, New South
Wales; J. C. Read, governor, Darlinghurst Gaol, New
South Wales; Hon. Charles James Roberts, C.M.G.,
M.L.A., Postmaster-General, New South Wales; H. W.
B. Robinson, A.D.C. Governor, Tasmania; C. W. Roberts ;
Hatton Richards, A.D.C. Governor, South Australia; P. T.
Riley, New South Wales; R. A. Ritchie; D. Rvrie,
New South Wales; R. Ryan, Mayor of Dubbo; William
Salkeld, M.L.A., Queensland ; Charles Smith, Councillor,
M.L.A., Victoria ; C. Staehelin, Consul for Switzer-
land, New South VVales; Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.8.,
New South Wales; Count de Seguier, Consul for France,
New South Wales; Professor Anderson Stuart, M.D., New
South Wales ; T. M. Slattery, M.L.A., New South Wales;
Ernest O. Smith, Consul-General Portugal and Peru,
New South Wales; C. B. Stephen, New South Wales;
Shaw, alderman, Adelaide, South Australia ; Solo-
mon, alderman, Adelaide, South Australia; Stevens,
councillor, Adelaide, South Australia ; Frank Senior, J.P.,
New South Wales ; F. Jago Smith, M.L.A., New South
Wales: John Scholey, Mayor of Waratah, New South
Wales ; Rev. Canon Sharp, St. Paul’s Colleg-e, New South
Wales; E. T. Smith, M.H.A., South Australia; Walter
Sydney Smith, President Chamber of Commerce, Brisbane,
Queensland; W. W. Stephen, Attorney-General’s De-
partment, New South Wales ; Hon. Lieutenant-Colonel
Smith, M.L.A., Victoria; Hon. L. L. Smith, M.L.A.,
Victoria ; Richard Stevenson, M.L.A., New South Wales;
S. T. Staughton, M.L.A., Victoria; Hon. P.
L. C. Shepherd. M.L.C., New South Wales ;
Frank J. Smith, M.L.A., New South Wales;
J. R. Street, M.L.A., New South Wales; Hon. D. C.
Sterrv, M.L.C., Victoria; S. Solomons, M.L.A., South
Australia; W. F. Schey, M.L.A., New South Wales;
William Smyth, M.L.A., Queensland; John See, M.L.A.,
New South Wales; Hon. Colonel Sargood, M.L.C., Vic-
toria; Hon. S. A. Stephen, M.L.C., New South Wales;
Hon. W. H. Suttor, M.L.C., New South Wales; William
Stephen, M.L.A., New South Wales; Hon. M. Salom,
M. South Australia; Hon. G. B. Simpson, Q.C.,
M.L.C., New South Wales; Hon. W. K. Simms, M.L.C.,
South Australia; John Stevenson, M.L. A.. Queensland;
E. Seccombe, Mayor of Nowra, New South Wales ; David
Syme, Melbourne Age, Victoria; E. H. Sutton, M.H.A.
Tasmania; E. Saluff, Mayor of North lllawarra, New
South Wales; Lieutenant-Colonel Sheridan, M.L.A.,
Queensland; J. J. Smj'th, Mayor of Gunnedah, New South
Wales; A. Stokes, M.L. A., New Seuth Wales;
Sydney Smith, M.L. A., New South Wales; John
Smith, Mayor of Blayney; New South Wales;
B. S. Simpson, Mayor of Carcoar, New South Wales; W.
J. Smibert, Under-Secretary Postal Department, Victoria;
Lieutenant-Colonel C. I‘. Stokes, 4th Regiment Volun-
teers, New South Wales; Norman Selfe, M.1.C.E., New
South Wales: Captain C. Smith, New South Wales; J.
Steele, Oriental Bank, New South Wales: Albert Spicer
New South Wales; Charles Shard, Comptoir Des Compte
de Paris, New South Wales ; A. W. Sutton, Mayor of
bive Dock, New South Wales; Sutherland, London
Chartered Bank, New South Wales ; C. C. Skarratt, New
South Wales; R. Burdett Smith, M.L.A., New South
Wales; Hon. John Smith, M.L.C., New South Wales;
W. H. Smith, Town Clerk, Hobart, Tasmania; William
Speer, New South Wales; G. H. Sparkes, Mavor of
Camperdown, New South Wales; William Small,' sen.,
New South Wales; Edward Scott, M.L.C., Western Aus-
tralia ; Robert F. Sholl, M.L.C., Western Australia;
Henry Shiell, City Coroner, New South Wales; Hon.
J. Sutherland, M.L.A., Minister for Public Works, New
South Wales; Mr. Justice Stephen, Harold H. Stephen,
Ilev. Dr. Steel, Rev. Dr. Sellors, J. Shepherd :
lion. George Thorn, M.L.C., Queensland; Hugh Taylor,
M.L.A., New South Wales; Hon. George Thornton,
M.L.C., New South Wales; Hon. R. A. Tarlton, M.L.C.,
South Australia; Hon. W. J. Trickett, M.L.C., New South
Wales; Dr - W - F - ’faylor, M.L.C., Queensland;
J. E. lonkm, M.L.A., New South Wales; Right Rev. S.
Thornton, Bishop of Ballarat, Victoria; Hon. A. L. Tucker,
M.L.A., Victoria; W. F. Tribe, Mayor of Tamworth, New
South Wales; James M. Toohey, M.L.A., New South
Wales; It. W. Thompson, M.L.A., New South Wales;
Terry, councillor, Melbourne, Victoria; Hon. C Todd,
C.M.G., Postmaster-General, South Australia; Hon. A.
Thynne, Queensland; Hon. N. Thorn ley, M.L.C..
Victoria; E. Deas-Thomson, New South Wales; John Tait,
New South Wales; A. Tange, consul for Denmark, New
South Wales; Hon. S. Tomkinson, M.L.C.. South Aus-
tralia ; J. Malbon Thompson, New South Wales; J. Taylor,
alderman, Sydney, New South Wales; Right Rev. Dr.
Torreggiani, Bishop of Armidale, New South Wales; pr.
1 arrant, New South Wales; P. H. Throsby, New South
Wales; James Thomson, New South Wales; William
Teece, M.L. A., New South Wales; W. Grigor Taylor, New
South Wales; Julian Thomas, representative of Melbourne
Age, Victoria ; T. F. Thompson, New South Wales ; Quong
Tart, New South Wales ; W. H. Uren, M.L.A., Victoria;
R. T. "Vale, M.L.A., Victoria; Hon. Ebenezer Vickery,
J.P.. M.L.C., New South Wales; W. L. Vernon,
architect, New South Wales ; R. M. Vaughn, M.L.A.,
New South Wales; H. W. Venn, M.L.C., Western
Australia; Critchett Walker, Principal Under-Secretary,
New South Wales; his Honor W. C. Windeyer, Judge,
New South Wales; Colonel Wells, Volunteer Artillery,
New South Wales; John Woods, New South Wales;
Jas. Warner, Sergeant-at-Arms, Queensland; Wilcox,
Councillor, Adelaide, South Australia; Thos. Worsnop,
J.P., Town-clerk, Adelaide, South Australia; Sir Robert
Wisdom, Q.C., K.C.M.G., M.L.C., New South Wales;
R. S. Warry, Alderman, Brisbane, Queensland ; John Ed.
West, President Trades and Labour Council, New South
Wales; Rev. J. E. T. Woods, D.D., New South Wales;
Hon. W. H. Wilson, Postmaster-General, Queensland;
Alex. Wilson, M..L.A., New South Wales; Ebenezer
Ward, M.H.A., Chairman of Committees, South Aus-
tralia; Hiram Wakefield, M.L. A., Queensland; his
Honor S. J. Way, Chief Justice, South Australia; Hon.
E. Webb, M.L.C., New South Wales ; Hon. W. Walker,
M.L.C., New South Wales; F. W. Webb, Clerk of
Assembly, New South Wales; T. Waddell, M.L.A., New
South Wales; J. H. Wheeler, M.L. A., Vic
toria; Hon. Jas. Watson, M.L.C., New South Wales;
Hon. John B. Watt, M.L.C., New South Wales; R. B
Wilkinson, M.L.A., New South Wales ; W. C. Wilkin-
son, M.A., M.L.A., New South Wales; Hon. James
White, M.L.C., New South Wales; George Withers,
M.L.A., New South Wales; Peter White, M.L.A.,
Queensland ; Hon. W. Wadham, M.L.C., South Australia;
Hon. West-Erskine, M.L.C., South Australia; John
Wilks, councillor, Melbourne, Victoria: Hon. W. Irving
Winter, M.L.C., Victoria; Right Rev. W. C. Webber,
Bishop of Brisbane, Queensland ; Hon. Jas. Williamson,
M.L.C., Victoria ; his Honor G. H. F. Webb, Judge,
Victoria; Hon. John Watchorn, M.L.C., Tasmania;
Lieutenant-Colonel Wilkinson, Northern Reserves, New
South Wales; R. H. D. White, New South Wales;
George Webb, Mayor of Newcastle, New South Wales;
Rev. Joseph Walker, Chairman Congregational Union,
Queensland; Wright, Mayor of Queanbeyan, New
South Wales; E. W. Wallington, New South Wales ; E.
Grant Ward, Registrar-General, New South Wales ;
Harrie Wood, Under-Secretery Mines Department, New
South Wales; W. Wynne, Daily Telegraph , Sydney, New
South Wales; James Weir, manager P. and O.
Company, New South Wales; H. M. Wood-
house, Consul for Persia, New South Wales ;
John Whitton, Engineer-in-Chief for Railways, New
South Wales : Professor Warren, University, New South
Wales ; J. Wheeler, Mayor of Petersham, New South
Wales; G. F. Want, New South Wales: R. C. Walker,
Free Public Library, New South Wales; his Honor G. H.
F. Webb, Judge, New South Wales; J. Williams. Mayor
of Mereweather, New South Wales; Henry Wise, Savings
Bank of New South Wales, New South Wales ; John
Williams, New South Wales; Sir Henry Wrenfordsloy,
K.C.M.G., Western Australia; J. T. Wilshire, New South
Wales; P. O. Williams, New South Wales; Rev. S.
Wilkinson, New South Wales; S. Whiddon, New South
Wales; —Wilkins; P. B. Walker, Electric Telegraph
Department, New South Wales; John Henry Want,


M.L.A , New South Wales ; Hon. Bernhard R. Wise,
Attorney-General, New South Wales; Ed. Wrench;
C. H. Woolcott; S. Y. Winter; R. E. Walker, New
South Wales; C. S. Wilkinson; C. Young, M.L.A., Vic-
toria; A. Young, M.L.A., Victoria; G. S. Yuill, Orient
Steam Navigation Company, New South Wales ; John
Young, New South Wales; Montague Tounger, New
South Wales; John Douglas Young, alderman, Sydney,
New South Wales; Hon. James Henry Young, Speaker,
Legislative Assembly, New South Wales; JonnZeven-
boom, councillor, Melbourne, Victoria.
THE INVITATION CARD.
The invitation card to the State banquet is of a unique
and beautiful design. The card is rectangular in form,
18in. in width by lli in depth. The design is executed in
chromo-lithography, and necessitated no less than lo print-
ings. The most striking feature of the card is a portrait ot
her Majesty the Queen enclosed by a wreath of laurel, and
surmounted by an Imperial crown. This portion of the
design is flanked by trophies of flags, composed of the
Royal Standard and the ensigns of the seven colonies,
and from these depend a golden fleece, which is sus-
pended over the motto, “ Orta recens quam pura mtes.
The vice-regal portrait and trophy of flags form the upper
section of a border, which encloses a tinted space intended
for the inscription. The tour corners of the border are
occupied by charming little sketches. That in the upper
left-hand corner represents the landing of Captain Cook
at Botanv Bay; that in the upper right-hand corner
Sydney Cove in 1788, as it appeared on the arrival of the
first fleet; that in the lower left-hand corner H.M.S.
Sirius and her consorts entering the Heads ; and that in the
lower right-hand corner Port Jackson as it appears now.
The centre of the lower section of the border contains an
admirable representation of Circular Quay, taken from
Milson’s Point This picture is flanked by heraldic shields
bearing the Imperial Arms and those of Australia. Ihe
centre of the left-hand side section of the border bears a
medallion of Captain Cook, whilst the centre of the opposite
section of the border is rendered conspicuous by a portrait of
Governor Phillip, the first Governor of this colony. Above
and below each of the medallions already described are
flowing ribbons, inscribed with the names of all the
Governors who have presided over the destinies of this
colony-as well as that of Lord Carrington. The remainder
of the design includes Australian flowers—epacris, wattle,
waratah, and native rose. The card was printed at the
establishment of Mr. John Sands, of George-street, the
winner of the Ist, 2nd, and 3rd prizes in the prize competi-
tion for an appropriate design. The designer was Mr. 1.
F. Curtis, and it was executed in a most artistic way by
Mr. H. J. A. Baron.
THE HOLIDAY IN THE CITY.
THE APPEARANCE OF THE CITY DC RING
THE DAY.
It was not very difficult to guess, at a comparatively early
hour in the morning, that not only was the day one which
had been set apart for holiday-making, but that the occa-
sion had been specially marked out for general rejoicing,
and everybody seemed bent upon deriving as much pleasure
as possible from the festivities. The great characteristic
with Sydney people upon a day set apart for relaxation
from the ordinary duties of life, a brief but delightful
abandonment of business cares, is the promptness with
which they turn out, and the anxiety they display to shake
off the dust of the city as quickly as may be. This is not
surprising considering the charming marine resorts that can
be reached so readily by tram, trap, and steamer and
terdav the exodus was very large indeed. I rom 9 o clock
in the morning, until 1 o’clock in the afternoon, the stream
of holiday makers pouring down Pitt and George streets,
was almost continuous; but, of course, towards the approach
of the hour last named, the pressure had considerably
diminished, many thousands of people b^ d
conveyed down the harbour. A very heavy contingent had
also departed by tram to Bondi, Waverlev, and Coogee,
either to witness the ceremony of dedicating the Centenni
Park, or to ,h \tf “Sod S 7 »hio“w«
colonial cricket match. ihe congesicu . t f
observable at Circular Quay and other ™
several hours during the morning then existed no longer, and
after the luncheon hour the city was pretty well deserted, and
few persons, save the incorrigible 0UI) »® r them-
had not the wherewithal to place a few miles betTetrolTs
selves and the city, seemed to remain in the ™ et ™ Pol J
How any stranger standing on the Circu ar the rah
way station, or any of the tramway waiting rooms, m t e
morning, could arrive at any positivedeternmatmaso
what portion of the great concourse of
rano-p of vision iustly came under the denomination or
“ poor and destitute ” it would be hard t 0 '™ a^ e
was certainlv no outward and visible signofpovcrQs
the contrary it was evident that even what are known as
the C poorer^*classes had “sed° th^best*
dav tbnrmic-lilv in the manner that pleased them oe
The iv prominent fact was that a considerable P™P? rtl ™
of the holiday-makers, especially paterfamilias, with his
huge basket and numerous olive branches, appeared to b»
making somewhat a toil of pleasure, but this is probably
the case all the world over, and it is just as well that the
human mind is susceptible to such unconscious self-decep-
tion for if people could only realise that they frequently
undergo a day’s severe labour in the search after enjoy-
ment, they would in all probability stay at norne. Ihe
thousands of well-dressed and happy-looking people who
passed through Sydney during the day was a very striking
contribution to the general commemoration of the cen-
tenary of the colonv, and the fair sex consciously or uncon-
sciously heightened the effect by appearing in light summer
costumes tastefully trimmed with blue and other coloured
ribbons. The appearance of the city during a portion of
the day was thus eminently satisfactory, and will probably
be remembered for many years to come.
The decorations of the city were completed by morning,
and in some places with very striking effect. As the main
details are furnished elsewhere, nothing beyond a few general
remarks are necessary here. George-street was of course,
the centre of attraction, and it was not surprising to note that
hundreds-perhaps thousands-of people, as they passed
along the main thoroughfare, were compelled to pause in
order to enjoy the novel and picturesque beauty of the scene.
Standing at the intersection of George and Bridge streets,
and looking to the southward a delightful vista is open to
the view The decorated arch at the corner of Bridge-
street is in itself an attractive piece of work, but onward in
the direction of the Town Hall the eye meets line upon line
and festoon after festoon of brilliant colours broken occas-
sionally bv the handsome arches which span George-street.
The row’ on each side of Venetian masts covered with
crimson cloth have a very pretty* effect but they are sub-
ordinated to the immense number ot tiny nags ot all
nations which flutter gaily in the breeze across the street
or paral’lel with each pathway. The effect is exceedingly
good and at a distance the idea is conveyed of a succession
of rainbows rapidly appearing and disappearing as the
miniature bunting coquettes with the wind. Ihe number-
less Chinese lanterns, too, add to the charm ot the picture,
while the large ensigns and other flags which tower above
them in a dignified and patronising sort of way from the
banks and other public buildings serve to increase the
pleasing 11 * 1 tout ensemble. The Town Hall is also
gay with bunting, but beyond this point to the


Redfern Station the attempt at decoration appears to
be only spasmodic. Lower George-street can boast of a
fair display of bunting, and Pitt-street, though it has not
received the same Governmental attention as George-street,
presented a very attractive appearance. The only other
thoroughfare that need be mentioned is Oxford-street, and
here the evidence of considerable care and some expenditure
is apparent. There are three well-built arches composed of
native shrubs, and the decorations of many of the shops
seem to have been carried out upon an extensive scale. The
decoration of the Government offices, as far as bunting and
coloured devices are concerned was also carried out in a
most complete manner, and very little in this respect was
left to be desired.
HARBOUR EXCURSIONS.
The weather being so beautiful yesterday it was to be
expected that there would be an exodus of holdiay folk
from the city to the charming pleasure resorts which are to
be found within the unrivalled haven of Port Jackson.
From a comparatively early hour in the morning until long
after the sun had crossed the meridian, the Circular Quay
was the scene of great bustle and activity, as large crowds
of people wended their way to this place—the point of
departure for the various picuicing grounds—from all parts
of the city and the outlying suburbs. A glance round
that portion of the harbour lying between Goat Island and
Bradley’s Head revealed a scene of surpassing loveli-
ness. The shipping in Sydney Cove—the place where, 100
years ago, the “First Fleet” dropped anehor—made a
splendid display, every vessel of note being dressed with
flags, which stretched from stem to stern, and from the
truck to the waterline. Chief among the mercantile marine
may be mentioned the O. S. N. Company’s fine steamer
Orizaba (the flagship for to-day’s regatta), which looked
the picture of neatness and cleanliness, and the P. and 0.
liner Shannon. Both these steamers were profusely decked
with bunting, and the fine appearance of these “ cruisers
of the main ” attracted general attention. The M. M.
steamer was also decorated with flags and streamers,
while the sailing vessels Torridon, Deveron, Avie-
more, and others also celebrated the Centennial
by showing quite a cloud of colours. The fine
ship Torridon, lying near the floating jetty, in
addition to making a brave show of flags, had a floral
device bearing the inscription “ Prosperity to New South
Wales, 1788-1888,” surmounted by a coloured shield at her
gangway, the approach to the side of the vessel being
through an avenue of green bushes. The tasteful manner
in which the “ Torridons ” had decorated their noble craft
reflected great credit upon all concerned. All the shipping
on the western side of the quay, near Dawes Point, at
Miller’s Point, and in Darling Harbour displayed flags and
gay-coloured streamers. Long lines of flags were also to
be seen at Blue’s Point, Lavender Bay, Kirribilli Point,
and Neutral Bay, while the old-time fortress which stands
in the middle of the harbour was radiant with bunting.
Looking across the water from Fort Denison to the
Domain and the Botanic Gardens, the sight presented to
the eye of the spectator was exceedingly grand.
The great warships, the representatives of the majesty
and might of Britain, with long lines of flags depending
from every masthead, were to be seen riding at their respec-
tive moorings in Farm Cove, while a little further down
the harbour the French and Russian vessels of war, each
fully dressed with flags, were visible. As the morning
passed away, the waters of the landlocked haven were
furrowed by the prows of numerous steamers, while stately
yachts, with their white sails spread to the freshening
breeze, resembling huge sea birds, glided to and
fro in every direction, and the whole harbour
became literally alive with sailing and rowing
boats of any and every description and size.
The various harbour and river picnics which had been
organised for the day, were largely patronised, and numbers
of steamers—many of them laden to the water’s edge—
were engaged in conveying the happy-looking holiday folk
to their destinations. Manly attracted a vast crowd of
people, both lines of steamers being kept exceedinglv busy.
Arrived at “ Our Village,” the visitors, many of' whom
were from the country parts, amused themselves in different
ways, some by picnicing in the bush, others by strolling on
the spreading sands, and others bv visiting the Aquarium
and the other places of interest to be found at this favourite
marine resort. It is stated that more than 8000 persons
travelled to Manly. Watson’s Bay was thronged with
visitors, the majority of whom passed a portion of the day
upon the rocky headlands overlooking the broad Pacific.
Ihe Salvation Army held a monster picnic at Pearl Bay,
Middle Harbour, which was attended by more than 1500
persons. On the other side of the harbour at Clontarf, the
members of the H, A. C. Benefit Society held their picnic,*
which was postponed from Boxing ' Day on account
of the unfavourable weather. About 250 members of
the society assembled at St. Francis’ Church, Haymarket,
in the early part of the day, and marched from thence to
No. 2 Jetty. The splendid banner belonging to the
fraternity was carried in the procession, and the members
were clad in full regalia. The picnic was attended by fully
4000 persons. Good music was provided at Clontarf,' and a
capital programme of athletic sports was carried out. The
fifth annual picnic of the Sydney Wharf Labourers’
Union took place at Chowder and proved an undoubted
success, there being about 3500 persons present. The
temperance picnic at Cremorne was attended by about
1000 persons. Fern Bay attracted about 1000 excur-
sionists, and the various holiday resorts ‘‘up stream,” such
for instance as Correy’s Gardens, Cabarita, and The
Avenue on the Lane Cove River, were extensively pa-
tronised. The traffic on the Mossman Bay, Neutral Bay,
and North Shore lines was exceptionally large, and it is
estimated that considerably more than 20,000 persons spent
Anniversary Day at the "different harbour and riverside
holiday resorts. Good order was maintained, and ft is satis-
factory to note that no accidents were reported to have occurred.
BOTANY.
As usual on holiday occasions, there was a large attend-
ance at the Sir Joseph Banks Pavilion and pleasure grounds.
A great proportion were women and children, who appeared
to thoroughly enjoy themselves. There were all kinds of
sports for old and young, and the Tom Thumb steam
engine had an exceedingly busy time of it. There
were a large number of dancers in the pavilion
and the excellent string band of the Alhambra Music
Hall provided the music. Dancing was kept up with
great spirit until 6 o’clock, and as usual the best of order
prevailed. In the afternoon there was an excellent variety
entertainment given in the Sir Joseph Banks Theatre,
which was highly successful. Taking the whole of the
entertainments at Botany, thev were of a most enjoyable
character throughout.
NEW BRIGHTON RECREATION GROUNDS,
LADY ROBINSON’S BEACH, &c.
These favourite grounds were very largely attended,
which is not much to be wondered at considering the
numerous attractions of which they boast. The
band of the Naval V olunteer Artillery performed
m the grounds during the day, and dancing
was very extensively indulged in in the spacious pavilion.
In the Assembly Hall there was fun and amusement of
various kinds going on throughout the day, and the Rock-
dale Assembly Band furnished the music "for the dancers in
the New Brighton Hall. Then Saywell’s sea baths were
largely patronised, and there was much fishing and boating
in the waters off Lady Robinson’s Beach. In the evenin'l-
- was skating in the New Brighton Hall, and the
New Brighton Hotel was crowded throughout the
day. In the afternoon great interest was dis-
played in the £5O Sheffield Handicap, 150 yards,
which came off in the recreation grounds, at which some of
the best runners in Australia competed, in the presence of
about 3000 spectators. There were altogether 40 com-
petitors, and the race was run in heats, the
final one taking place at 5 o’clock, and resulting as
follows :-W. Hethrington (20 yards), 1; J. Armstrong
(22 yards;, 2 ; L. Hope (16 yards), 3; T. Gatterill (20?
yards), 4. 1 Vi 10 ’ seconds. Mr. T- R. Smvthe noted
as judge, and Mr. J. Davis as starter.


THE ILLUMINATIONS.
The outward and visible form of a national rejoicing is,
far excellence , an illumination. Beautiful were the hours
of daylight yesterday, and much were they enjoyed by the
populace; but the evening had its attractions also. The
lighting up of the city was a fitting close to the day’s festi-
vities; and, as will be seen from the details appended, it
was carried out m no meagre style. A satisfactory feature
of a display of this character is that it is the work of the
citizens. Government assists only to a limited extent. It
;simply sees that the national buildings and the national
grounds are decorated at least equally as well as those, of
private firms. It rests with the people themselves—with
the commercial men and tradesmen especially—
to make the event one worthy of the occasion.
So long as they do their part, an enthusiastic, holiday-
making, sight-seeing public can be depended upon to ap-
plaud. An illumination on a large scale is not arranged in
a few hours. To bring about a good effect combination
.and good will are necessary, and there has to be a large ex-
penditure of private energy as well as of private money.
All concerned, however, are to be congratulated upon the
result of this prominent feature in the Centennial
celebrations. How different was the appearance"
of the city in the day and in the evening.
During the day the shops were rigidly kept closed, and the
streets were practically deserted. 1 he banks and offices had
their shutters up. Employees and assistants alike enjoyed
a holiday. Displays of bunting and the exhibition of
strange arrangements in piping alone spoke of the grandeur
so near at hand. As it became dusk forms appeared at the
topmost windows, and one after another the shop fronts
were illuminated. Soon there was a glorious circle of light
that unfolded both heaven and earth. The entertainment
was free, and there was, therefore, no lack of spectators.
People coming in from every side soon made up a large
bustling crowd. The “music of humanity” could be
heard in the hum of thousands of voices. After
all, holiday making is hard work. Many of those
met with were finishing up a day’s outing. But
■enjoyment stops where indolence begins, and it
is as w ell to make a day of it whilst one
is about it. Void, for the time being, of the care and strife
of business, everyone seemed happy. Good humour pre-
vailed, and although occasionally there was a little crush-
ing and squeezing, there was no disagreement or ill-will.
George-street, Pitt-street, Oxford-street, and one or two of
the other principal streets were a “sea of heads.” One
could just move along without beine stifled. Ihe decora-
tions were seen and admired. They were of an ex-
tensive and varied character. Flags of all nations
and of all sizes floated in the air. Variegated lights
twinkled like stars in the distance. Large devices blazed
brilliantly. Good wishes to Australia, aloag with her age
—IOO years—were traced literally in words of tire. There
were visions of glorv generally, and an abundance of gas.
The only drawback was that rather a strong wind was
blowing,* and, after a time, many of the gas jets went out.
Ihe Chinese lanterns, however, weie not so easily extin-
guished. Transparencies, bearing pictures suitable to the
occasion were very popular. Captain Cook was represented
as discovering Australia in every conceivable kind of vessel,
from a modern man-of-war to a North Shore ferry-boat
Streets vied with streets as to which should have the best
show. Oxford-street looked exceedingly pretty. Those
interested in decorating this thoroughfare combined then
forces, and the result was most pleasing. Ihe decora-
tions of George-street might have been more ambitious,
but those in the highway to Paddington were certainly
more unique. The public buildings loked grand tor some
time —then they suffered from the effects of the wind. Hyde
Park, rejoicing in the possession of a band, was a great
attraction, and was the resort of thousands, the uses
were crowded, and the trams were filled to suffocation; but
the main thoroughfares were barricaded, so that the foot
traffic was not interfered with. The policemen stuck to their
parades as a matter of duty, and tried, with their best en-
deavours, to appear as if they did not enjoy the fun; but,
beyond directing the current of the crowd, there was little
or nothing for them to do. Everything bespoke the national
holiday of a contented and prosperous people. There were
merrv faces and light hearts in tens of tiiousands, where a
hundred years ago the kangaroo and wallaby reigned
supreme. ' Thus matters went on for three or four hours.
Then the multitude thinned ; the waiting-places for trams
were taken possession of, and people and vehicles streamed
steadily towards the suburbs. Finally the gases were put
out, and the little lamps went out of themselves. A t mid-
night only a few loiterers were left behind in the city, and
the Hags and banners waving overhead in the darkness were
all that remained to lend enchantment to the scene. Below
will be found particulars of the illuminations:
FROM THE POST OFFICE TOWER.
By far the best view of the illuminations in the city and
its surroundings was obtained from the summit of the
dome on the tower of the Genera) Post Office. Perched at
an altitude of 240 feet the spectator could note the principal
features of last night’s display without being compelled to
move onward with the ever-shifting tide of humanity
which surged through the streets. The whole of the sea-
girt city and its beauteous suburbs lay at his feet, present-
ing a magnificent and unrivalled panorama, the sight of
which once seen could never be effaced from the memory.
Looking out from the dome, beneath which were the apart-
ments in which the electric lights were burning and shed-
ding their brilliant rays far and wide, the onlooker was
enabled to take in at a glance nearly the whole of the
splendour of the fairy-like picture, and watch the move-
ments of the armies of Lilliputians who appeared to be
contending with each other beneath the soft light of the
swinging lamps and the greater brilliancy of blazing-emblems.
The illuminations appeared to be confined to the centre of
the city and its immediate surroundings. The suburbs were
enshrouded in semi-darkness, the only sign of life or
festivity in any of them being afforded by the flight of an
occasional rocket into the air, or the bursting' of a shell at
some distance from the house-tops. George and Pitt streets
were evidently the chief centres of attraction. The former
thoroughfare presented an enchanting appearance. Long
lines of many-coloured Chinese lanterns stretched awav to
the north and south on both sides of this street, and as they
swayed to and fro under the influence of
the freshening and invigorating breeze which was
blowing right in from the mighty Pacific, each looked
instinct with life, and seemed to whisper “ Hail to the
Centennial of Australia.” The actual illuminations (the gas
devices and such-like) did not show to good advantage—m
fact they appeared decidedly “ patchy.” 1 his wa doubtless
due to the force of the wind, which extinguished
several of the emblems. Many of the gas stars and
mottoes shone out brilliantly, to the evident satisfaction of
the vast multitude in the principal thoroughfare. The
triumphal arches looked tolerably effective, especially when
coloured fires were ignited in close proximity to them :
but perhaps the most novel sight was the sea of upturned
faces with the multi-coloured lights playing over all. At
times the people seemed locked in firm embrace, and ever
and anon the sound of their voices would float sky ward in a
mighty volume, which was like the noise of breaker.-
on a distant shore. A moment or two
sufficed to separate the crowd, and then all went on as
before. The‘illuminations in Pitt-street appeared to show
to greater advantage than did those in the main street,
doubtless owing to the fact that the buildings were more
sheltered from the wind. Gazing southward from the Post
Office, the lines of fire stretched right away to the railway
station, and in the direction of Newtown; but the Town
Hall, which would have been the best illuminated building
in Sydney had the evening been calm, was at 9 o’clock
almost enveloped in darkness. The blaze of light in Ox-
ford-street was distinctly visiole, and the illuminations in
Hyde Park looked 'well, the effect produced by
the intermingling of the coloured lights with


the foliage of the trees being very beautiful.
Looking northward the illuminations appeared to extend as
far as Bridge-street, but beyond that point there was a ae-
cided blank until the eye rested upon the lights shown by
the Orizaba, the Shannon, and the Torridon, lying in
Sydney Cove. During the evening several of the ships in
Port J ackson burned blue lights. The most brilliant pic-
ture of all, however, was that presented by the harbour by
moonlight, the water of which could be seen stretching
from the weather-beaten Heads to Balmain, and looking-
like a vast sheet of burnished silver. Before the clock
struck the hour of 11, the majority of those who had filled
the thoroughfares began to retire to their homes, and the
city resumed its wonted aspect of peace and quietude. The
people had seen the illuminations, and it is to be feared
that many were somewhat disappointed with what they had
witnessed; but then it is to be remembered that they did
not look down upon the city from the dizzy height of the
Post Office tower.
PUBLIC OFFICES AND RESERVES.
The public offices fronting Macquarie, Bridge, and Phillip
streets were brilliantly illuminated, so that the whole of the
architectural beauties of the structure were invested
with peculiar charms. Over the entrance to the Colonial
Secretary’s Department there was a huge Brunswick
star enclosing the arms of the colony. The main
entrance in Philiip-street was made conspicuous by a large
crown, and to the east and west of this were stars 6ft. in
diameter, one indicative of the commencement of the
colony’s Centenary, and the other of the close of it. Above
this was a figure of Britannia, with an eight-pointed star,
the whole design measuring 13ft. in diameter. The recessed
or arcaded portions of the front were lighted up—that on
the east with the head of George HI. enclosed in a radia-
ting star, and tiiat to the east a similar star, the centre of
which was the head of Queen Victoria.
The Treasury buildings, opposite the entrance to Govern-
ment House, were brilliantly outlined by thousands of
Pain’s prismatic lamps, intermixed with festoons of lanterns
and diamond lights; and from time to time the whole of
the building was thrown into bold relief by the combination
of coloured fires. Over the porch was a large crown out-
lined with prismatic lamps.
The Mines Department, Philiip-street, was illuminated
by a large Brunswick star, associated with figures denoting
the beginning and end of the first century of the colony’s
existence.
The Lands Offices in Bridge-street were set off by five
gas representations of the colonial badge within Brunswick
stars. The centre design was surmounted by a crown.
The Royal Mint, in Macquarie-street, was appropriately
illuminated by a large crown flanked with two letters
“ A,” signifying Australasia. 'The crown was a magnifi-
cent design, and displayed with great vividness all the
details of the royal symbol. The design covered a space of
9ft. in width, and of the same length.
Parliament Houses, which are on the same side of the
street, had the main entrance rendered conspicuous by two
blazing suns, one of which enclosed a profile of Governor
Phillip and the year " 1788,” and the other one of Governor
Carrington with the year " 1888.” The diameter of each
of these devices was Bft.
The Crown Law Offices, nearly opposite the Mint, were
illuminated with a large crown, below which there was a
ribbon inscribed “ 1788 —1888.”
The reserve in front of the Department of Public In-
struction was festooned with strings of fairy lamps. Appro-
priate devices were erected over the entrances, and the
grand contour of the huge Moreton Bay figtrees was shown
through snail-like wreathings of streams of diamond
lights, which intertwined the trees and spread out amongst
the foliage and branches in every possible direction.
The General Post Office presented an exceedingly bril-
liant appearance. The international mission which the
Department carries out is shown on the northern front
by a series of carved heads typical of various nations.
This feature was further brought into prominence
by the national colours of each country being placed
above its distinctive carving. Various trophies, pro-
uuced by graceful grouping of flags over orna-
mental shields, were also used to set off the
structure. f rom points of the roof hugs standards
flaunted in the wind. Gilded and decorated banners were
suspended from the columns and colonnades; and from the
summit of the tower groupings of flags were thrown
forward. At night-time the tower was lighted with electric
lights of dazzling brightness. Designs in gasworks
were also freely used. The Pitt-street front was illumi-
nated with a large figure of Britannia and an eight-pointed
star, measuring 13ft. in diameter. Lighting up .the
statuary over the main entrance of the northern front was
a large Brunswick star. To the right and left of this were
radiating designs, enclosing in one case "Phillip, 1788,”
and in the other "Carrington, 1888.” On the George -
street front there was the badge of New South Wales
within a Brunswick star, measuring about 12ft. in
diameter.
Hyde Park was brilliantly illuminated. Captain Cook’s
statue, and the statues of the Prince Consort and the Queen,
were surrounded with artificial temples, ornamented with
rows of glittering prismatic lights, so arranged as to convey
the impression that each statue was enshrouded in a veil of
crystal prisms. From the highest point of the temple
enclosing the statue of Captain Cook radiated 32 lines of
Japanese lanterns arranged as a compass to symbolise the
travels of the circumnavigator. The 15 entrances to Hyde
Park were distinctly illuminated by means of festoons of
lanterns and Pain’s prismatic lights, as well as by
appropriate devices. One of the great features of the
illumination of Hyde Park was the ornamentation of the
main avenue, which is half-a-mile in length. The whole
of this was rendered into a charming vista of fairy lights.
Above these again was a canopy of Chinese and Japanese
lanterns. The flower beds wore made to display artificial
bouquets formed of coloured lights. From time to time
masses of coloured fires were burnt in various sections of
the reserve, and produced a transforming effect of great
beauty.
Wynyard- square afforded magnificent scope for the
artistic decorative talents of the Messrs. Pain. The re-
serve was converted into an illuminated pavilion, the ribs
and other outlines of which were composed of streamers of
Japanese lanterns. The kiosk was converted into a brilliantly
illuminated temple.
THE BANKS.
Though the illumination on the part of the banks and
insurance offices was perhaps not so general as at the Jubilee
festivities, the depression having had something to do with
the matter, yet the display was in many cases even more
brilliant, and the absence of a few insurance offices from
the ranks of those who rejoiced in this way on our attain-
ing our hundredth year was most likely not noticed by those
who witnessed the j übiiee illuminations. As will be seen
from the appended descriptions many of the institutions
must have gone to considerable expense; but if giving
pleasure to the multitude be a recompense, they were more
than rewarded, for the general verdict was decidedly
favourable and gratifying.
One of the most attractive bank buildings was the City
Bank. Over the portico was the Australian coat of arms,
with “Advance Australia” underneath, encircled in
laurel leaves ; and immediately below this was the word
" Centenary.” On each side of the building from the
ground floor to the first floor were gas jets representing the
waratah, and festoons of laurel from there to the top of the
building. A star was placed in each of the four windows
andone over the main entrance, intended to represent the
Southern Cross. The design, which was purely Austra-
lian, was composed of nearly 7000 gas jets.
At the Union Bank, the top of the building along both the
Pitt-street and Hunter-street fronts was draped with brass
perforated jets, and attached to these graceful festoons
were large ornamental tassels. The pediment immediately
underneath was also ornamented with perforated jets, and
in the windows on the first floor were five stars of different
designs; while over the main entrance there was a large
wreath, surmounted by a crown, in the centre of which
were the figures “ 100.” Immediately underneath, that and


in bold letters, was the word “ centenary,” and the columns
on each side of the main entrance were fluted with gas
jets, while the letters “A ” “A,” representing “ Advance
Australia,” were placed at the extreme ends of the build-
ing. This was also a very tine display.
At the Bank of New South Wales, the illuminations were
in gas, and consisted of the letters “ A” “ A” on each side
of the front of the building, with four stars in between;
also above these the figures “ 100,” surmounted by a crown,
which was setoff to gieat advantage by a reflector. On the
first floor was a row of jets running the whole length of the
building, and also along the parapet.
The Mercantile Bank looked exceedingly brilliant with
rows of gas jets all round the building just above the
lower windows, and a star at each corner of the front, and
one adjoining Messrs. J. Sandy and Co.’s. There was also
a crown in the centre, with the figures “ 100 ” above it, the
whole being gas illumination.
Although in a narrow thoroughfare, the Government
Savings Bank was illuminated in a very striking and
beautiful manner, gas being used throughout. On the top
of the building there was a large wreath and an 8-pointed
star, and immediately under this were the figures, 6 feet
high, “ 1788.” Below these were two stars, and “ N. S. W.”
in letters 6ft. high. In the front over the main entrance
was “ 1888 ” in Bft. letters, and the six columns upholding
the porch were fluted with gas jets, completing an effect
that formed the subject of admiration to the large crowd of
sightseers.
At the Commercial Bank the display was a most at-
tractive one. In the centre was a crown, surmounted by a
Maltese cross and a globe, and underneath was “ 100.” A
line of lights extended along the centre of the face, and
from this depended at intervals perpendicular lines of
lights, the whole being in gas. There were three trans-
parencies on the George-street face of the English,
Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank illuminated by
gas. The centre represented the royal coat of arms, that
on the right the Australian coat of arms, and that on the
left the Scottish coat of arms, with the mottoes below “ In
defence,” “Nemo me impune lacesset.” On the King-
street face of the building was a star, with the letters
“ V. R. ” in the centre.
The Commercial Bank of Australia, in Pitt-street, had a
crystal star in the centre of the building with V on one
side and R on the other, which looked very well.
The Federal Bank looked well. Its illuminations con-
sisted of two radiating brilliant stars on the Pitt-street
side, a star over the principal entrance with transparencies,
the arms of England and those of England and Australia.
The King-street side was illuminated with prismatic lights,
with fancy devices, surmounted by a crown and draperies
of flags, &c.
The Havmarket branch of the Commercial Bank was
illuminated with the words “ Advance Australia ” in gas,
and the Savings Bank in the same locality had a star over
the entrance. The Australian Joint Stock, at the corner of
George and King streets, is certainly one of the finest
buildinsrs of its kind in the whole of the colonies, and last
night the illuminations with which it was embellished were
in correspondence with the magnifioent structure. The
George-street front presented a perfect picture. Over the
main entrance was a crown, with “ V ” on one side and
“ R ” on the other; on the right was a Maltese cross with
the figures 1888 in the centre, and on the left were the
figures 1788 in the centre of another Maltese cross. Close
to the latter was a second crown with “ V ” on one side and
“R” on the other, and then followed four stars of dif-
ferent designs, with the letters A. J. S. B. in the centre.
In addition the windows were outlined with coloured lamps,
the building presenting a most gorgeous and imposing
spectacle. , . .
The principal corners and outlines of the 13ank ot Aus-
tralasia, George-street, were lit up by means of rows ot
numerous gas jets, while over the principal entrance was
displayed a large crown of foliated design, and containing
upwards of 2800 gas jets.
A. crown, with V» on one side and xv. on the otner,. was
displayed at the Queensland N ational Bank, and the National
Bank of Australasia had a crown with “1788” on one
side and “ 1888 ” on the other.
The London Chartered Bank of Australia, in addition to
being illuminated with festoons of gas jets, had a
transparency in the centre showing Sydney Cove as it was
in 1788, and as it is at the present time, enclosed in a circle,
surrounded with the rose, shamrock, and thistle, and native
flowers and trophies of flags. Underneath were the words
Peace, progress, and prosperity, 100 years. On the top of
the building was a star with the figures 100, and a kangaroo
and emu in centre.
The Commercial Bank of Australia in Pitt-street had a
crystal star in the centre, and “ V. R.” also in crystal,
and as this style of illumination was not common it attracted
a considerable amount of attention.
INSURANCE OFFICES.
The offices of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the
United States at the comer of Hunter and O’Connell
streets, presented a very pleasing spectacle. Double rows
of gaslights ran round the whole building, with a row of
prismatic lamps as a relief, and in the centre was a crown,
also in gas jets, with stars and the letters “ Y.R.” on each
side. The figure at the corner, representing the Company’s
device, stood out boldly from amidst a border of prismatic
lamps, and completed a display that was in every way
creditable.
The Australian Alliance office was decorated by means
of fairy lamps and other coloured lights following
the architectural outline of the building, some being inside
and some outside, and as several buildings in the
vicinity were not illuminated, it was quite conspicuous.
The magnificent pile of buildings occupied by the Austra-
lian Mutual Provident Society, as at “ Jubilee time,” was
among the most beautifully-illuminated buildings, and the
spectacle elicited warm praise. The illuminations consisted
of a row of gas-jets the whole length of the building, and
over the main entrance, returning thence on the fancy stone
cornice. The letters “A.M. P. 5.,” 2ft. high, were placed
on top of the jets, and round the stone pillars was a wreath
of lights, surmounted by a crown 4ft. high, and the letters
“A. A.” on each side of the crown. On the top of the
building there were two oft. Victoria stars, and one garter,
6ft., with “ 1888” in the centre.
The offices of the Mutual Life Assurance Society of Aus-
tralia were illuminated by a transparency exhibited on the
George-street front, representing Australia as a maiden
draped in classical costume, with the word “Australia”
showing on a sash which was suspended from
the shoulder to the side. Her right hand rested
on a shield, emblazoned with the Australian coat of arms,
and with her left raised above her head she pointed to a
scroll bearing the figures “ 100,” as indicative of the com-
pletion of the first century of our existence as a colony.
Underneath the figure are the words, “ God bless our
native land,” and below this again was a portrait of Captain
Cook, with cherubs on either side. The base of the trans-
parency was occupied with the Australian Coat of Arms,
“ Advance Australia !” being prominent underneath. The
device of the Company, consisting of several figures, &c.,
over the doorway, were also illuminated.
The Mercantile Mutual Fire Insurance Company’s pre-
mises in Pitt-street were beautifully lighted up. The
whole outline of the building was followed by gas jets,
about 7000 altogether being employed for the purpose; the
columns at each side were fluted with gas jets, and in the
the centre were the figures “ 100,” with a star underdeath,
and a crown farther below and immediately over the main
entrance.
The Australian Mutual Fire Insurance Society’s build-
ings, at the corner of Pitt and King streets, was, as at
Jubilee time, one of the features of the display, and
the illuminations there were greatly admired. Instead
of the Queen’s head being represented at the corner,
as on that occasion, the Australian Coat of Arms
was conspicuous, with “Advance Australia” under-
neath. In King-street were the figures 1788, in-


stead of “ V,” with scrolls on each side; and in
Pitt-street were the figures 1888, in place of the letter
R,” also with scrolls on each side. On the tower at the
comer was a prismatic star, and the bronze figures on the
pediment were lighted up with stars and horseshoes,
each figure also holding out a flaming torch.
Among the buildings in George-street, the premises of the
United Insurance looked exceedingly well. Over the
George-street corner was a crown with 1788 over and 1888
underneath it, and the letters “A. A.” one on each side; over
the Hunter-street entrance to the same building was
a six-point star, with a fine point (Australian star)
in the centre, the latter standing out in bold relief
The Mutual Assurance Society of Victoria, Limited, had
their building at the corner of George and Margaret streets
very effectively embellished with illuminations. On the
George-street frontage, in the centre of the building, was a
transparency of the Queen surrounded with coloured lights
lit by gas. and a large star in gas at the top of the trans-
parency and the letters “ V.R.” at each side. In addition to
the above gas illuminations the George-street cornices of
the building were all illuminated with coloured prismatic
lights, the effect being very pretty.
The Victoria Insurance Company had a large crown and
two stars in gas on the front of their building.
The Liverpool, London, and Globe Insurance Company’s
offices, at tne corner of Pitt and Spring streets, were
illuminated with prismatic lamps, the whole of the coping
and the windows being outlined in this way; and as the
wind had little or no effect upon them, the building
altogether looked well.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL HOUSES.
Undoubtedly among the many displays in Pitt-street,
that in front of the fine premises of S. Hoffnungand Co.,
near the General Post Office, was one of the best. A line
of jets ran immediately under the first storey along the
whole of the building, with a gas star, half-circled
in a wreath of leaves at either end. Somewhat
higher up, and in the centre, was a beau-
tiful transparency of the Australian shield, prettily
constructed of prismatic lights. Between this and
the southernmost star, were the figures “ 1788 ” in
gas, while to the right of the shield was the date “ 1888,”
and under the shield ran the lettering “ God bless our
land.” Both stars were of the well known Arabian type,
and looked extremely handsome. On the next storey a
double line of parti-coloured prismatic lights ran the length
of the building, and higher si ill, at equal distances, were
three single rows of the same character, while a number of
the windows were outlined with lamps, the effect generally
being very striking.
Farmer and Company’s fine block of buildings
facing Pitt and Market streets respectively, also
came in for a large share of admiration. Fronting the
latter thoroughfare, and over the main entrance, was a
stained glass (known as a “lead light”) portrait
of her Majesty the Queen, and this presented a very rich,
not to say brilliant, appearance. The portrait was bordered
with a circle of flowers, consisting principally of the rose,
shamrock, and thistle. In the portrait itself the gems and
jewels of various kinds in the crown and other emblems of
royalty, stood out with glistening effect. At a short distance
from this picture, and at a higher elevation, was a brilliant
star, in the centre of which were the numbers “ 100 ”
which blazed out with much spirit, considering the size of
the figures. A large crown, some 7ft. in diameter, also
fronted Market-street, while above these floated flags
which made an admirable finish to the picture. Round
the comer in Pitt-street Messrs. Farmer continued their
illuminations. The bust of the Queen, which stands upon
a pedestal facing this thorou -> hfare, was surrounded by a
star that threw a halo of brilliancy over her Majesty. In
the centre of this frontage was another large star, enclosin'l-
- figures “ 100,” and still a third star, having a crown
within. Flags, projected well from the upper portion of
the building, and did much to lend effect to this frontage of
Messrs. Farmer’s, and this effect, so far as the Hags at
least were concerned, was doubly heightened by the strong
glare thrown upon this front by the electric light of
Her Majesty’s Theatre.
Messrs. Cater and Dillon showed a star, and Messrs.
Harris and Ackntan’s premises were quite refulgent with a
richly-wrought central crown of gas, supported on either
hand with the “ V.” and “ R.,” which formed such a
prominent feature on every hand.
Hordern Brothers had a very long line of gas jets above
the verandah, with a crown in the centre, surrounded on
either hand with a V ” and “ It.”
Charles Moore and Co., of 123, Pitt-street, showed a ga%
star with the letters “A. A. ” (Advance Australia) on
each side.
Richardson and Wrench, nearly opposite, had a very
brilliant 10-pointed star enclosing the letters “ V. R.,” anil
on the apex the number “ 100.”
Messrs, Riley Brothers, at the comer of George and
Bathurst streets, made a very handsome show, though not
on so extensive a scale in some reepects as upon the occa-
sion of the Queen’s Jubilee. There was a double line of
prismatic lamps in the windows, and each of the three
floors extending along the whole fronts of George and
Bathurst streets, and the effect was very pretty. There
was a line of transparencies extending also round both
streets, and these were typical of the various industries of
New South Wales, and of the changes that have taken
place within the last hundred years. The trans-
parencies were, on the whole, similar to those
shown on Jubilee night.
Messrs. Myers and Solomons opposite the Town Hall
also had a very pretty display, wholly of prismatic
lamps in fanciful designs, with shields and groups
of flags, the central space being taken up bv a
very handsome star of lights enclosing an appropriate
emblem. All the windows were outlined with lamps, and
a line of the same ran along the coping of the building ;
while the general effect was enhanced by festoons of Chinese
lanterns hung up so as to set off the other works of
ornamentation.
One of the prettiest and most artistic displays
in the whole of George-street was in front of tiie
building of Messrs. M'Lean Bros, and Riggs,
opposite to the Central Police Court. It would
be difficult to conceive anything prettier or more
effective than this display of various coloured
buckets or glasses lighted with gas. Much skill and tact
had been shown in the beautiful blending of the colours.
On the foot floor were two very large stars, with a laurel
wreath, and the New South Wales coat of arms repre-
sented on a transparency in the centre. On the second
floor were two plumes, with a large scroll medallion and
coronet, and on the third floor were also two very large
stars and a laurel wreath, the whole being surmounted by
an exceedingly large crown. There w r ere in addition a
magnificent glass-drop crown, and a “A' ” and an R ”
over the verandah. This building was quite a centre of
attraction, and the handsome and very brilliant illumi-
nations were much admired by the crowd. They were
quite unique, and a novelty that spoke loudly on their be-
half.
The establishment of Holdsworth and Co., iron-
mongers, 448, George-street, was a blaze of gas over the
whole front of the building above the shop, in strong
brilliant letters of fire were the words “Australia at the
wickets—loo up.” Seeing that Mr. N. Holdsworth
deals very largely in cricketing materials this design was
most appropriate, and was much commended by the crowd
as it passed along. Over and in front of the verandah
were the loyal letters V R, with a scroll of gas tunning
from one to the other.
Messrs. Lassetter and Co., on the opposite side of the
way, had no illuminations according to the ordinary
acceptation of the word, but they had fheir shop windows
brilliantly illuminated with the electric light, which showed
up to great advantage the many beautiful things with
which the windows were filled.
Messrs. Nicholson’s piano establishment, at the corner
of George and King streets, made a brave show in a
quiet and subdued way ; that is to say, it was


artistically illuminated with prismatic lamps of
many colours. With these the outlines of the
building were beautifully displayed. The lamps ran along
the whole of the fronts in King and George streets at the
first and second floors, and along the upper outline of all:
the whole of the windows on the two floors were framed
with lamps, and at the corner fronting both streets hand-
some shields were exhibited, surrounded by these pretty
lights, over. 2000 of which were used in the decorations of
this firm.
The Coffee Palace, on the other side of George-street,
showed a brilliant star; and John Brush, Son, and
Co., of 403 in the same thoroughfare, had on the first floor
elevation two very large and handsome ornaments of a
similar character, besides a crown, and the usual “ V.R.”
on either hand. There was a vivid transparency in front
of Mr. Stedman’s, the confectioner’s, with a portrait of
Captain Cook in the centre, and on each side was a picture
of “ our beautiful harbour.” one side showing it in 1788,
the other in 1888. In addition, there were side illumina-
tions, showing his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales and
the Royal Arms, and Lord Carrington and the Australian
coat of arms respectively. Marshall Brothers, druggists,
also showed an illumination descriptive of the landing of
a party of whites in Botany Bay in 1788 with a fanciful
account of an attack on a party' of aboriginals.
In front of .Messrs. George Robertson and Sons. 361, in
the same street, there was a very brilliant gas illumination
showing “Advance Australia” over the shop line, an
exceedingly handsome star in the centre at a higher level,
and the figures “ 1788” and “1888” on each sido
respectively. Messrs. Paling and Co. also exhibited a very
beautiful star of unusual brilliancy, enclosing the letters
“ V. R.;” while next door was a huge transparency, de-
scriptive of the advances made of late years in connection
with sewing machines, with especial reference to the
“ Moldacott.”
Macgregor, Harris, and Co. showed an exceedingly
ornate and artistic piece of gas decoration. In the
centre was the transparency of a coat of arms, and
on each side were brilliant representations of the native
flower, the waratah ; beneath the transparency there being,
in addition, a profuse display of Australian flowers,
with the words underneath "them, “ Advance Aus-
tralia.” while below the whole blazed forth
the words, “ Our Sunny' Land.” To the right
and left of the handsome" centre-piece were stars of gas,
while a large and brilliant emblem of the same kind
centred the front at a higher elevation, enclosing the letters
“ V. R.,” and with larger letters of a similar kind on
either side.
Peate and Harcourt, lower down the street, showed
these same letters above a coat of of arms with a
line of gas beneath, and the words “ Advance Australia ”
occupying the whole length of the front. J. Johnson
and Co., at the corner (if George-street and Charlotte-
place, testified their appreciation of the arrival of the
Centenary by the exhibition of a gas star enclosing the
figures of the centennial year.
"Amonsr the very few places illuminated in York-street
was the fine building occupied by Messrs. A. M‘Arthur and
Co., whose front presented a very brilliant and attractive
appearance. Along the line of the first story the words
“ Advance Australia ” blazed in fiery gas, with the figures
“ 1788 ” and “ 1888 ” upon a circular elevation, the centre
beinsr occupied by a very handsomely worked crown. At
the ends of the line and on a level with the crown were t\\ o
stars, which, with the other portions of the illuminations
by this firm, made this portion of the street as light as
dav. .
Messrs. J. F. Holle and Co., tailors, or 280, George-
street, illuminated their premises by means of numerous
coloured prismatic lamps, which were arranged in lines
along the front of the building, and so as to form a frame-
work of coloured light around the windows. Messrs.
Gibson and Co., tailors, of 289, George-street, had also a
line of coloured lights along the stringcourse in front ot
their premises. Messrs. Hume and Co., chemists, at the
corner of George and Hunter streets, exhibited a brilliant
gas star in a prominent position. Messrs. L.
Moss and Co., of Hunter-street, had a bright il-
lumination in the form of a large gas star over the centre
of their establishment, the tigures 100 being displayed in
the centre of the star. Messrs Dalgety and Co., of
Bridge-street, showed above the doorway of their office
an effective device in gas. Amongst the various business
firms, one of the most striking displays was made by the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company, the front of whose ex-
tensive premises in O'Connell-street was almost covered by
gas devices. Along the stringcourses there were lines of
gas jets, with large gas stars on each wing of the building.
In the centre was a large semi-circular design
bearing the words, “ A century of peace,” sur-
mounted by a crown and the letters “ V.R.” On either
side of this motto were the dates 1788-1888. The whole
produced a very brilliant effect, more especially as there
were no other illuminations near the display to divert
attention from it. Baumann’s Cafe, in Pitt-street, was
decorated with a crown, in gas, over the doorway. Messrs.
Vickery and Co., of Pitt-street, showed a large and fanciful
design in coloured gaslamps over the front of their pre-
mises. The design was of a somewhat novel character,
each gas jet being enclosed in a coloured glass shade, and
the various lamps being arranged so as to form a
many-coloured wreath. A large transparency of the
Queen was exhibited by Mr. Eve in King-street.
Messrs. Partridge and Co., colonial oven manufacturers.
Bathurst-street, went in for illuminating their premises on
a grand scale. A large transparency in crystal glass
formed into the shape of a crown was shown over the prin-
cipal entrance, and all the windows were outlined in pris-
matic-coloured lamps. Messrs. C. Davis and Co., close by,
exhibited an illuminated device, representing Australia both
in 1788 and 1888. The Country Milk Company placed a well
executed transparency, representing the place where Captain
Cook landed, over the front of their shop at 182, Pitt-street.
The new Colonnade which is now in course of completion
in George-street was splendidly lit up with lines of gas iets,
which followed and outlined the principal architectural
features of the building. At the top of the building
several large gas stars completed the illuminations. Messrs.
Anthony Hordern, of the Haymarket, placed some gas
devices over the principal corner of their Emporium. In the
centre was a crown with the letters “V.R ”, and on either
side were large stars. Messrs. T. E. Geddes and Co.,
Haymarket, displayed an illuminated device representing
Captain Cook and the discovery cf Sydney Harbour. The
outside of the Sydney Arcade was also illuminated by
means of large gas stars, placed over both the King-street
and George-street entrances.
Boyd and King, at 90, Pitt-street, displayed a trans-
parency, with Captain Cook on one side and Lord Carring-
ton on the other, and with a central picture showing the
progress of the colony in the rural districts. Mills and Pile,
at 130, showed the figures “ 100,” very large, in the centre,
with a star on each side, in addition to the letters “ V. R.”
Samuel James, wine and spirit merchant, of 178, Pitt-street,
displayed a star enclosing the well-known and much-used
letters “ V. R.”
Biddel Bros., confectioners, of 505, George-street, cele-
brated the occasion with a gas star, and the initial letters
“ V. R.” in gas. H. H. Groth and Co., at No. 529, showed
a double transparency, one side representing Captain Cook,
and the other side depicting her Majesty seated in her
royal robes, and with crown and sceptre on head and
hand. M‘Clelland and Roach showed a gas star.
The Haymarket Permanent Land, Building, and Invest-
ment Company showed a large transparency of their
new offices, with the head lines “ A century of peace and
progress.” On the left of the new building (in the trans-
parency) a group of aboriginals were actively engaged in
some native pastimes ; while on the other side was a
picture of “our beautiful harbour.” Messrs. Stephens
and Co., tailors, showed a star, C. F. Priddy, hatter,
also showed a transparency. In the centre it bore a
coat of arms, with the words “ Advance Australia ” be-
neath, and on each side some appropriate mottoes; E.
Millett, at 317, George-street, exhibited a large star, the
circle of which enclosed the figures “ 100.” The offices of
the Peninsular and Oriental Company at the corner of


George-street and Margaret-place showed the upper half of
an Arabian star, with a crown beneath, and below that again
the letters “ V.R.,” there being also an excellent display
of flags from these premises, as also from those occupied by
W. E. Smith’s steam printing works.
The Picturesque Atlas Publishing Company, in Wyn-
yard-square, had their building ablaze with the electric light,
there being some six of these powerful illuminators in
frosted glasses in front of the building, while there were
two of the lights, in all their glittering brilliancy, entirely
uusubdued by coloured glass, at some distance above the
roof.
THE TOWN HALL.
The Town Hall was perhaps the most beautiful sight of
the evening. As on the occasion of the Queen’s Jubilee
illuminations, it won more admiration than any other
building, and was a veritable fairy palace. One could well
imagine that it was inhabited by some weird beings differ-
ing from us in shape and form and having attributes which
we do not possess. The facade of the building, with its
pillars, arches, tower, and turrets, and windows environed
with beautiful ornamentation, is a splendid subject for
illumination, and standing back as the building does from
the street, a view of the whole was had by the numerous
spectators with ease, comfort, and pleasure. The
windows fronting George-street were outlined
with Pain’s patent prismatic lamps in various
colours, the whole blending with the happiest effect.
The portico and main entrance were illumined by lines and
graceful curves formed of coloured lights. The supporting
pillars were entwined by snake-like wreaths of tinted glass
lamps, while festoons of diamond lights were suspended
from above. Over this entrance was the City Corpo-
ration coat of arms, with the motto ”1 take but
1 surrender” brilliantly represented by a huge trans-
parency. This design was completed with the figures
” 1788 ” to the left, and “ 1888 ” to the right, in a mass of
light. From the tower were suspended Japanese lanterns
and coloured lamps to all the various turrets, looking like
streams of light floating in the air. Flags were flying from
various points, and the building was made more radiant
still by the continual combustion of tinted fires. The Town
Hall was a jewelled palace for the time being, lit up with
the lustre of diamonds, pearls, rubies, emeralds, and all the
other precious stones.
TRIUMPHAL ARCHES.
Perhaps never before in the history of the colony did
George-street present a more attractive appearance than it
bore yesterday evening. The display made was sufficiently
effective to reflect the greatest credit upon Messrs.
M ‘Gregor, Harris, and Company, and Mr. Denton, manager
for Mr. James Pain, under whose joint supervision the
work of decorating was carried out. It is to be regretted
that the amount of money voted by the City Council and
subscribed by the more enterprising of the business people
in George-street was not sufficient to allow these gentle-
men to carry out their original design by erecting two
additional arches, one at Bridge-street and the other at
Bathurst-street; but, notwithstanding this, they did
remarkably well with the money and the time at their dis-
posal, and produced a really picturesque effect. The chief
feature in the decorations, and that which called forth the
admiration of city and country folk alike, was
the grand triumphal arch which spanned George-street,
ar the intersection of King-street. It was to this centre
that the moving masses were inevitably drawn, and the
grand arch was consequently the most criticised and best
admired decoration in the city. The arch, which was
about 40ft,. in height, was a broad one constructed in two
spans. On the pillars were shields, backed hv trophies
of flags, and bearing the names of those gentlemen who
had occupied the civic chair during the past 12 years. On
the top of the arch was a model of Captain Cook’s ship,
the Endeavour, with a medallion of Captain Cook under-
neath. The top of the arch was dressed with national
flags—the Royal standard, the Australian flag, and the
Union Jack fluttered in the breeze. The pillars were
draped with crimson curtains, and in the centre was sus-
pended a large blue banner, on which was imprinted in
letters of gold the motto, “ Advance Australia.” This was
surrounded by a deep golden fringe. The supports of the
arch were covered in crimson and blue cloth. On the front
was an elaborately painted canvas, and the whole was taste-
fully dressed with festoons. Looking from either side of
the arch towards Bridge-street or towards the Town Hall,
the thoroughfare appeared to be one blaze of light, relievejl
here and there by the gorgeous dressings and trappings of
some of the more important buildings. From Bridge-street
to the Town Hall on either side masts covered with crim-
sons cloth and surmounted with gilded tops or boses
were erected to a height of about 30ft. Each
mast supported a banner, and between each mast
there was an extensive and most effective display of bunt-
ing. National flags fluttered on every hand, and these,
mingling with the various devices and transparencies which
furnished the decorations of the buildings, forming the back
ground, presented a sight of brilliancy and splendour that
will live in the imaginations of those who witnessed it for
many years to come. Along the lines on both sides of
the street were shields and rows of many-coloured
Chinese lanterns, forming one continuous line of variegated
lights. At distances of about 100 yards were lines of flags
suspended from the windows and parapets of the buildings,
and stretching across the street. These were intersected
with extensive banners of crimson and blue, on which were
appropriate mottoes. Seen from either end of the street,
the eye was treated to an exceedingly grand spectacle.
The decorations in Oxford-street, which were the outcome
of the efforts of a managing committee of the trades people
of that thoroughfare, and which were executed by
Messrs. Gibbs, Shallard, and Co., on behalf of Messrs.
Brock and Co., of the Crystal Palace, were worthy of the
occasion. Three artistically-decorated triple arches
formed the chief attractions of the thoroughfare.
The first spanned the street from one comer
of the business premises of Mr. Mark Foy, and imme-
diately faced the corner entrance to Hyde Park. On the
city side of the arch were placed the arms of Lord Carring-
ton, and on the reverse was given a portrait of his Excel-
lency, and the words, “ Oxford-street’s tribute to the
Centenary,” and also the motto, “ Let unity prevail.”
These were blown in coloured letters on a transparency.
The woodwork of the arch was covered with ferns and
greenery. The second arch, which was similar in size and
appearance, was situated opposite the Post-office. On one
side, on a coloured transparency, were the words, “ Ad-
vance Australia,” and on the other side, “ May Oxford-
street flourish.” The letters were shown very prominently
on a black ground. On the sides of the arch were the
royal coat of arms and the colonial coat of arms. The
arch was tastefully decorated with ferns. The
hird arch spanned the street in front of the
establishment of Messrs. Riley Brothers. On the
transparency was shown a portrait of Captain Cook, and
the words “ May his Name Live for Ever.” On the re-
verse side was a portrait of Governor Phillip, and the words
“ One Hundred Years are Past.” This arch was also
decorated with ferns. Masts were erected on each side of
the street, and were gaily dressed with bunting; and along
the lines were fixed prismatic lamps, Bengal lights, and
Chinese lanterns. Coloured lights were also suspended
across the street from mast to mast. The masts were
covered with centennial blue, pink, and red cloth. The
street when fully lit up presented a magnificent sight. The
decorations were executed under the supervision of Mr. \V.
A. Clarson and Mr. J. G. Warr.
THE HERALD OFFICE.
The Pitt-street frontage was lit up by five small stars,
and one 7-ft. star, with St. George’s cross in the
centre. The Hunter-street frontage by one 6ft. Gin. star,
with the figures “ 100 ” in the centre through the top
story window, and the words “ Advance Australia ” along
the line of windows of the second story, and a 7ft. star,
with a crown in the centre, with an emu and kangaroo along


the line of the first story, with a row of gas jets 'around
the entire building, that is on the Pitt, Hunter, and O’Con-
nell street sides.
THE OLD QUARTERS OF SYDNEY.
The northern, and in point of fact the original, quarters
of the metropolis presented during yesterday, and in the
evening, a comparatively deserted and forlorn appearance.
This circumstance was not without its suggestiveness ; and
its significance—as indicative of the march of local progress,
and of the ebb of the fashionable tide towards more, pre-
sumably, aristocratic sections of the suburbs could not have
failed to strike the attention of the observant. A tour
through the oldest of Sydney’s main thoroughfares, such
as Gloucester-street, Cumberland-street, and along Church-
hill, and in and out of its environs, evidenced the fact that
(whatever the increased value of the rateable property
thereabouts may be) the pall of quietude has fallen upon
the neighbourhood. The circumstance is readily explain-
able, inasmuch as the main attractions of centralised Sydney
left but little hope for residents in the outlying streets to
have their displays—if any—examined ; and the proba-
bilities, doubtless, were that householders, had
looked forward to the enjoyment of participating
in the general enjoyment, in preference to attending
to the decoration of localities and premises which have been
for many vears relegated to a, comparatively speaking,
well-earned solitude and quietness. In several instances,
however, banners and ornamentations were freely displayed.
The Observatory was capped by the Union Jack, beneath
which fluttered the stars and stripes of America; while
from the two adjacent main flagstaffs, which face the ocean
entrance to Port Jackson, a perfect sea of ensigns, bunting,
and international insignia crowned the crest of the hill. Im-
mediately below the walls the mastsof the shipping presented
a gaudy and holiday appearance by a dense festooning of flags,
bunting, and other decorations of every describable size
shape, and colour. At the bases of the adjacent harbour
escarpments private “ house flags,” ensigns, and streamers
hung from the roofs of stores, wharves, wool, warehouses,
produce sheds, and at all points from the massive agglomer-
ations of mercantile piles which now flank the water’s
edge, on sites where, almost within the recollection of our
“ oldest living inhabitants,” eucalypti once grew, and
facing which the aboriginal canoe formed as essential a
factor in harbour traffic as do now the leviathans of ocean
mail services, international merchantmen, and ponderous
men-of-war of all countries. From the Lord Nelson Hotel
to the Victoria Arms —perhaps two of the oldest hostelries.
in the colonv —a gay stream of flags shaded a portion of the
road leading to the water’s edge. b urther down, along
Miller’s-road, Windmill-street, and amid the scores of
adjacent sinuous thoroughfares, by wavs, and allevs, dis-
plays, more or less attractive, and of colonial significance,
were to be seen. Retracing one’s steps , towards thicker
populated quarters, the well-known “Chinese Quarters
were reached. Confucius evidently had been nodding.
His adherents in this particular localitv appeared to ha\e
made feast amongst themselves. At all events “?eir exter-
nal demonstations in connection with tbe 100th birthday ot
their adopted land fell absolutely short of evidencing a
desire to share with the general rejoicings The area ot
George-street which they have taken unto themselves was,
with but very few exceptions, dark, dull, and all but un-
patronised by the public.
LOWER GEORGE-STREET.
The illuminations and decorations of Lower Geoige-
street, were exceedingly meagre, and unfortunately, tne
effect of the few that had been arranged was very materially
marred by the wind, from which the whole of the illumina-
tions greatly suffered. Flore’s Hotel, at the corner o
Bridge-street, showed a gas star and a large number o
Chinese lanterns and flags. On the other pide of George-
street, the prismatic lamps of the P. and O. Company
burnt pretty well, despite the wind; and Johnsons gas
star, at the corner of Charlotte-place, also showed
up well. For a considerable distance further towards
the Quay the only lights exhibited in honour
of the occasion were a few Chinese lanterns here and
there, and the lamps of the various hotels, which also
came out strong in the matter of flags. Alexander M‘Lean,
brass-founder, near Circular Quay, showed a gas star and
a line of parti-coloured lamps ; the P. and O. Hotel,
opposite the Sailors’ Home, exhibited a gas star and the
line in gas, “Advance Australia.” The Sailors’ Home,
evidentlv strong in the instincts of the British race, had up
in front of it in gas the motto “ Britannia rules the waves,”
sand there were a few lights in the various
windows of that institution, while several of
the salts temporarily located there livened up
this portion of the thoroughfare at times by burn-
ing coloured fires. Mr. Thomas Playfair, butcher,
had a very prettv gas illumination, which showed out well
in three lines—the top one consisting of the word “ Aus-
tralia,” the second of the figures “100,” and the third of
the word “Years.” On the whole. Lower George-street
not show as much light as it generally does on an ordinary
week night, and certainly there were but few more people
about, the darkness apparently discouraging the people
from wending their way in that direction.
FROM CIRCULAR QUAY TO KING-STREET,
AND FROM GEORGE-STREET TO THE
DOMAIN.
Macquarie-place also presented a brilliant spectacle. The
Exchange, of course, was the main feature of the display
in this part of the city, and, as will be seen from the follow-
ing description, it would have been a splendid sight, but,
as with other places, the high wind blew the jets out as
soon as they were lighted, and only a faint idea could be
had at intervals of what, a happy result the time and labour
expended in preparation had achieved. Thousands of
people congregated before tbe building, and waited in the
hope that the wind would go down and enable
them to see the illuminations, but unsuccessfullv; and
shortly before 10 o’clock the gas was turned off. The
illuminations were in gas, the whole of the columns being
wreathed with jets, the cornices festooned and the general
design the same as on the occasion of her Majesty’s
Jubilee. Over the doors were the words “New South
Wales—loo,” along the cornice between bands of light
appeared “ God bless Australia.” on either side, were 1788
and 1888. Surmounting the whole was a splendid southern
cross, 12ft. by Bft., also in gas. It is intended to light the
illuminations of this building again in order that the
public may have the opportunity of witnessing them.
Messrs. Ostermever. Dewez, and Co. (the offices of the
Belgian Consulate) had their nremises illuminated by a
transparency representing the Belgian coat-of-arms, sur-
mounted by a star and with a line of lights below f and
the offices of the Compagnie des Messageries Maritimes,
adjoining, were similarlv decorated. Messrs. Curcier Adet,
and Co. had a star in the front of their building on the
second floor. Messrs. Dangar, Gedve, and Co. had the
words in gas jets, in the centre of the front of their
offices, “ God bless our land.” the words describing the
segment of a circle, and over this were a crown, a star on
either side, and a line of lights underneath. At the
New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency Co.’s,
Limited, offices was a transparency of the Queen, with
coloured lights surrounding it. in the centre of the
building facing Bridge-street. Messrs. Marshall and Co.’s
premises, adjoining Dangar, Gedve’s. also looked well. There
was a line of prismatic lamps along the second story, a gas
star of pleasing design in the centre, and a line of gas jets
beneath. The Circular Quay was not so brilliant as on
Jubilee night, but the Paragon Hotel, as on that occasion,
was beautifully lighted. The letters “ V.R.” were dis-
played at the corner of the building facing the Circular
Quay, there was a large star over the eentre. both
in gas, and the building being outlined with coloured
lights and Chinese lanterns and flags tastefully
disposed gave completeness to the tout ensemble. One
prominent feature of the Jubilee illumination on the Circular
Quay was missed on this occasion. Messrs. Mort and Co.’s
warehouses, from which a very brilliant effect was secured
bv means of some thousands of candles in the windows, are


at present filled from top to bottom with wool and tallow,
and candles on the inside could not therefore be used with
safety. A large device was, however, displayed on the
outside facing the Quay, with the appropriate cen-
tenary sentiment, “Many happy returns'of the day.”
Several of the ships burnt coloured lights, gnd rockets were
exploded; but the general effect in this part of the city was
duil compared with the display made at Jubilee time. At
the offices of the Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company
great efforts had been put forth by the Messrs. Willis, and
the result must have been as gratifying to them as it was
agreeable to the thousands of sightseers. In the
centre of the building facing Pitt-sireet was
a transparency, 12ft. by Bft. In this Australia
and Tasmania were represented as maidens classically
The whole of the face of the Orient Steam Navigation
Company’s offices was illuminated by lines and festoons
of prismatic lamps and Chinese lanterns with flags at
intervals, and on the centre pediment was a trophy of flags.
On the third story, in the centre, were the words “ Orient
Line ” in prismatic lamps, with 1788 on one side and 1888
on the other, and draped, with the words “Tasmania greets
Australia ” underneath. In the centre was a large paint-
ing of the Tasmanian Company’s finesteamship Pateena, with
Hobart and Mount Wellington as a background, and the
words “ May our friendship increase with our years.” In
a shield underneath the steamer were two lines from
Wentworth’s well-known poem, “ And Australasia float
with flag unfurled, a new Britannia in another world.”
Below this weie two transparencies representing the En-
deavour, with the figures 1788 on one side, and the com-
pany’s magnificent 6000 tonner Orizaba and 1888 on the
other, showing at a glance the remarkable strides ship-
building has made during the past century. A star and
anchor over the doorway completed the scene, which was
not only effective and telling, but very beautiful. Turning
from Pitt-street into Bridge-street, the only building
lighted up between that street and George-street was the
South British Insurance Company’s office, which had
“ Advance Australia ” on the top, a star in the centre,
and a line of jets along the second story, which looked
exceedingly well. Proceeding into George-street. the
illuminations and bunting there looked splendid,
and the thousands of people who were parading up and
down weie free in criticism of the most favourable character,
despite the fact that the wind had an unfavourable effect
on Ihe gas, leaving the “illuminations” at times In total
darkness. Messrs. Peate and Harcourt’s establishment was
specially noticeable on the right; and what with the arches,
the Venetian masts, flags (which occurred at intervals), and
the lanterns which were displayed on both sides of the
street along to King-street, the scene was a most attractive
one. The Bank of Australasia looked very well, and the
transparency exhibited at the London Chartered Bank was
certainly one of the best “bits” oi illumination in the
city, and reflected much credit on the artist. Macgregor,
Harris, and Co.’s ironmonger’s shop was also most
creditably illuminated, taste and skill being displayed
in the whole design. As one approached King-street
the crowd of people grew denser, but their
behaviour, as might have been expected from the
memorable scene witnessed at Jubilee time, was admirable,
and extreme politeness was eertainly more observable than
any conduct which might be termed rude. The Post Office,
with the powerful electric light flashing from its lofty
tower, and the numerous gas illuminations, attracted more
than passing attention, but not so much that a glance could
not be given to the display at Halle’s, Gibson and
Sons’, and at the Cafe Franoais, which were all creditably
lighted. Paling and Co.’s made a brave show, as
did also the banks opposite, including the Savings Banks
in Barrack-street, George Robertson’s, and theE S.and A.
C. Bank. Nicholson and Co.’s pianoforte warehouse, at
the corner of 1\ ing and George streets, lighted with pris-
matic lamps, added materially to the appearance of that
part of the city by its effective show, and the Cafe Monaco
looked very pretty with a mixed design of lamps and gas.
The Federal Bank showed well, and the hotels in King-
street also displayed a good deal of taste in their illumina-
tions. In Macquarie-street nearly all the private residences
were lighted up with Japanese lanterns, and the publi o
buildings—viz., the Crown Law offices, the Mint, th e
Houses of Parliament, the Treasury, and the Colonial
Secretary's offices were great sources of attraction to the
spectators, who were almost as numerous here as in
George and Pitt streets. Turning from Macquarie-street
into Bridge-street once more, the Colonial Secretary’s
Offices, facing that street, were open, and numbers of
people took advantage of the opportunity of entering and
inspecting the statue recently erected there. The trees in
the reserve fronting the Minister of Education’s Offices
were very brilliantly illuminated, and it is certain the giant
tree there never had so many eyes upon it before as it had
last night. Passing along the pedestrian was next attracted
by the Lands Offices ; but the whole of the Bridge-street
face of this building was almost in darkness, owing to
the gas being blown out, and it was only in Spring-
street thnt they could be seen. Mort's starue
on the right had thoughtfully been decorated with foliage
and flags, and the effect would have been improved
had it been lighted as were the other statues. From
Bridge-street to King-street Pitt-street was shorn of part
of its glories owing to the wind. The Australian Mutual
Provident Society’s offices were in darkness most of the
time, but some of the other buildings were seen to advantage,
notably the Herald Office, the Union Bank opposite, and
the City Bank, the latter meeting with unqualified praise
for its chaste and beautiful, while thoroughly Australian,,
design.
FROM KING-STREET TO BATHURST-
STREET.
The two thoroughfares of George and Pitt streets carried*
the bulk of the traffic in this area, although George-street
was the more attractive. The attempt at decorating
George-street upon a set design was a new and success-
ful idea, and the simple festoons of lamps hung on either
side of the street, joined and led up to the large points
of light, and gave completeness to the whole scene. This
effect was further assisted by the triumphal arches, and
the experience of this celebration, while in marked con-
trast with the detached and fragmentary efforts of past
occasions, points to fine effects when more fully
developed. The chief centre of light in this
part of George-street was at the Royal Hotel,,
where the lamps of the Royal blended their
rays with the bright gaslight of Messrs. John Brush and
Sons across the street, and Mr. W. Stedman’s transparency
on the same side. Messrs. F. I.assetter and Co. turned the
occasion to account, and helped in the illumination at the-
same time, by lighting up their windows. Tuttle’s vesti-
bule was also brightly lit, ;jnd attracted much attention.
The Crown and Anchor Hotel at the opposite corner had a
good decoration concentrated on a bay window, which had
an admirable effect. The Royal Arcade had a bright
monogram of V.I.R. in a star, in gas, with flags tastefully
arranged. Messrs. M‘Lean Bros, and Rigg’s beautiful dis-
play of prismatic lamps was one of the attractions of the-
evening; and it was noticeable that every lamp burned
perfectly all the time. This illumination will be-
repeated to-night. At the Town Hall, on the other
side, the lamps were not all successful, but the design
attracted attention and admiration. Messrs. Riley Bros’,
transparency of the colonies, and the lighted windows,
added to the blaze of light at this spot. On the other side
of Park-street a conspicuous display was that of Messrs.
Myers and Solomon, with variegated lamps on the windows,
and in designs placed upon the walls. Mr. J. Partridge’s
establishment at the corner of Bathurst and George streets,
made a bright show with lamps round every window, a
transparency on the corner, and a great crown of glass at
the other end. The Sydney Permanent Building Society
displayed two transparencies, one having an historical and
the other an allegorical subject. The office of the
Inspector of Weights and Measures, in Bathurst-street,
was illuminated with lanterns and a gas star. In Pitt-street
the crowd was not so dense, and the extra air space avail-
able made it a pleasant relief to escape there out of the hot
squeeze of George-street. A very bright light centre- was-


formed by the combination of the electric lights of Her
Majesty’s with the gas illuminations of Messrs. Farmer
and Co. Along towards King-street the light of some gas
letters, “ V.R.” and a crown, showed in front of Messrs.
Hordern Brothers; and similar subjects were displayed by
Messrs, Harris and Ackman. The chief illumination in
Market-street was at the office of the Evening New a and
Town and Country Journal, where prismatic lamps
were freely employed on the windows and the lines of the
building. Mr. W. Goulston had a small but effective
display. Castlereagh-street had practically nothing in the
way of illumination, but in Elizabeth-street an attractive
design was shown at the Albion Hotel, and smaller illumi-
nations were shown at houses along the street southward.
The whole of the cross streets in this part of the city were
thronged with people moving between the main thorough-
fares, but all went on smoothly. Now and then a band of
rollickers would charge through the crowd in a solid body,
snouting and singing and blowing horns, or flourishing-
parasols and top-hats and flags. This was really the only-
way of getting about from place to place quickly, and the
noisy battalion would be met again and again forcing its
way through the streets on a tour round the town. The
whole proceeding was good humoured, however, and, while
it pleased the boys, it did not seem to do any harm. In
some cases, certainly, small knots of larrikins went about
maliciously pushing everyone who was in their way, and,
although these rascals well deserved the blackthorn, they
apparently escaped punishment; and it must be said that
the good order and quiet behaviour of the immense crowds
were very remarkable.
FROM BATHURST-STREET TO THE UNIVER-
SITY.
The illuminations in this part of the city were very scat-
tered. It was only here and there that any attempt at a
display was made. Some of the buildings in the vicinity
of Bathurst-street were much admired, and notably Par-
tridge’s galvanised iron store. The windows were outlined
with bottle lights of all colours with most beautiful effect,
and on the Bathurst-street facade a lovely crown of white
glass lighted up with gas was very prominent and attrac-
tive. Further south some of the larger buildings pre-
sented devices in gas light and large transparencies illus-
trative of the progress of the colony ; but there was no
harmony of arrangement for a general display. George-
street from this point to the neighbourhood of the Alhambra
Music Hall was thronged with people. Therewas anynumber
of family parties who tried in vain to go hand in hand.
The people were certainly most orderly and well disposed,
but they insisted in disrespecting the rules of the street.
To go to the right is a simple rule, and should be generally
known, because it does wonders in facilitating pedestrian
traffic, and especially on such occasions. The people last
night followed no system, snd the result was that there
were innumerable collisions, and the comfort of all was
interfered with. You could not stand to gaze on any par-
ticular place, and if you gazed and proceeded simultaneously
it was at your owm peril. There was dust also blowing
about, and this annoyed the eyes very much. The street
was crowded more or less nearly all the way to the railway-
station. It lessened from Goulburn-street going south,
but the spare room was well filled by the vehicular traffic.
Indeed, with omnibuses, cabs, and carriages, the people ran
great risk ot being trampled under foot by the horses any
minute, and there was no one to regulate either vehicular
or pedestrian traffic. Confusion was even greater at the rise
between the junction of George and Fitt streets and the
railway station. There was quite a perplexing whirligig
of vehicular traffic here, including over-packed
trams, and the people were crossing and recrossing
in great numbers in the midst of it all. The wonder
is that they escaped danger so well. Flags were flying from
various places of business up to this point, but onward to
the University there was nothing except the unusually
large traffic to indicate an exceptional occasion or event.
A t some few private houses Chinese lanterns were sus-
pended in the balconies or verandahs. Belmore I’ark was
in darkness except for the circus, and nothing bright was
to be seen in or near Victoria Park and the University sav
the lights of the cabs on the cabstand. At 10 o’clock th°
people were flocking homewards in crowds as great as those
seen coming in to the city two hours before, and expressing
the opinion that the illuminations were not as good, gene-
rally speaking, as those of Jubilee night.
HYDE PARK.
It was no doubt on account of Hyde Park being the
main artery connecting the city and its most important
and populous suburbs, extending from Paddington east-
wards, that all energies were devoted to making its illumi-
nations a feature in the attractions of Sydney last night.
Preparations had been steadily proceeded with for some
days past, so that the public were w-ell aware of the treat
that was in store for them on Anniversary night. The
best spot to catch a first glimpse of the park was on
entering Chancery-square from King-street. The
Queen’s Statue first appeared to the view in the
midst of a maze of delicately subdued coloured
lights from Chinese lanterns and incandescent lamps.
Then the statue of Albert the Good and the main entrance
to the park, with the myriads of coloured lights twinkling
in all directions amid the trees, caught the eye. The statue
of the Prince Consort was most elaborately decorated with
Chinese lanterns and incandescent lamps, the whole design
forming a brilliant framework of light in all imaginable
colours, which harmonised well with the variations ot shade
and colour at the entrance and the background of green
foliage. The figures “ 1770” and “1.880” were shown
very prominently by incandescent lights in a pretty com-
bination of colours. Passing into the park, the Lovers’
"Walk was found to have been converted into a
veritable fairy avenue. The close foliage of the trees
lining the walk on each side, met almost overhead,
and excluded the rather bright rays of the moon. Rows of
incandescent lights in all imaginable colours extended as
far as the eye could see. The effect was simply dazzling
and bewildering for a brief period. Lights, the colours of
which apparently merged into each other in the distance,
formed a most harmonius and beautiful sight, and extended
in all directions till reaching Park-street, where there was a
slight break in the line of illuminations owing to the road-
way intervening. Both the flights of steps at each entrance
contained an effective centrepiece, consisting of a
brilliantly-coloured star, with background of heraldic
design. The line of twinkling coloured lights were
continued to Macquarie-street South, and on
several of the side paths; but all these, pretty as they
were, were lost sight of in the dazzingly pretty view which
was afforded by Captain Cook’s Statue on the one hand,
and the doctors’ terrace in College-street on the other. The
statue was illuminated very much on the same principle as
the Prince Consort’s Statue, viz., rows of incandescent lamps
of all colours on a framework extending over and round the
statue, with lines of Chinese lanterns, forming a complete
outer design, which set off the smaller light in the inside
rows in the most beautiful manner. The entrance from
Oxford-street was also very effective, and the same might
be said of all the entrances right round the park.
The two, however, at the intersection of Eliza-
beth and Park streets were the prettiest; and
considerable pains must have been taken over the
execution of the designs. On one side of the Park the
motto “ Advance Australia,” was the centre of the most
harmonious blending of colours; while on the other side
were coloured stars with backgrounds of coats of arms.
The lighting was almost completed about 8 o’clock, and at
that hour the crowd commenced to pour into the
park from Oxford-street, and made its way city-
wards. A constant stream of human beings kept passing
through the principal pathway in one dense mass
for nearly an hour. As all were moving one way there was
very little inconvenience, except at the exit at’Chancery-
square. There the crush was excessive. About 9 o’clock
there were two streams, one going towards Oxford-street,
and the other moving the opposite way. The trouble com-
menced then. At Park-street there was simply a mass ot
men, women, and children wedged closely together, the


crush extending tor a considerable distance into the path-
way in the park on either side of the street. The difficulty
was added to by steps having to be negotiated on
each side. The crowd was, however, very good,
humoured, and the crushing and various tugs of war which
ensued as to whether one portion of the crowd should get
in or the other out were taken in good part. At one time
a broad-shouldered colonist would be seen with extended
elbows and firm-set frame making a way for his mate and
olive branches. Then a chivalrous youth would essay to
stem the current in order to enable a damsel to get through
into safety. How the ladies (and many of them with children
in arms) got through the crush was surprising.
Chancery-square and portions of the park surrounding
it were literally packed when her Majesty’s statue was
being illuminated by coloured fires. As the people got
tired with their long tramp through the city, impromptu
seats were made on the grass in all directions. The park
was crowded until about 11 o’clock ; after that hour the
number thinned considerably, and at midnight was almost
deserted. Bulch’s Model Band, from Ballarat, which is to
take part in the band contest, voluntarily took up a posi-
tion near the Prince Consort’s statue, and rendered a num-
ber of selections in a manner which gained for the mem-
bers considerable applause, more especially when it became
known that the performers were from over the border.
OXFORD-STREET.
One of the most lively and most lavishly illuminated
thoroughfares about the city was Oxford-street, where
there was an almost unlimited exhibition of transparencies,
flags, lamps, and lanterns. Both sides of the street were
festooned all along with small lamps of variegated
colours, and with an elaborate display of hunting.
The triumphal arches stood out in great splendour,
the motto transparencies showing with good effect. Messrs.
Riley Brothers’ establishment looked particularly gay with
the verandah columns draped with flags, and with the
underneath portion of the verandah embellished with
numerous lanterns. Above appeared a portrait of her
Majesty the Queen, and the motto, “ Advance Australia,”
with the figures 1788 and 1888 on either side. The pre-
mises occupied by Messrs. C. E. Wigzell and S. Whiddon,
which are adjacent to one another, looked very brilliant
indeed, rows of blue and white lamps being arranged
at all the windows, and the verandah supporting a long row
of circles of evergreens enclosing Chinese lanterns. Another
intere.'ting spot was Mr. R. B. Smith’s establishment, in
the front of which a mechanical star Bft. in diameter had
been erected. The effect was produced by clockwork, by
which means a large disc was kept in motion, causing the
star itself to radiate, and changing the size of numerous dia-
monds and other devices. Beneath this there was exhibited
a transparency, representing Captain Cook and Sir Joseph
Banks. The Westminster chimes were also periodically
given forth on a peal of bells. There was a liberal amount
of bunting at Mr. Mark Foy’s premises. Close by, Mr. T.
Dixon had a large transparency suspended, illustrative of
the landing of Captain Cook. King Bungaree and one of
the members of his tribe appeared in the foreground, the
former being made to extend a welcome to the visitor in the
expression “ Budgerce Cook.” At the base of the repre-
sentation were the words “Australia—The Future
Europe.” A quantity of branches of the gum and
geebung, together with some flags and lanterns, com-
pleted this exhibit, which, at times, was illuminated
with white and red fire. Mr. J. T. Austin had a large
triangle of evergreens surmounting his verandah, with
lanterns depending at intervals from the artificial structure.
“Welcome, Sunny Australia—our Centennial,” figured in
the fore part of Mrs. E. M. Mills’s premises, while those of
Messrs. Bouffier Brothers and Lidgey and Son were shown
to some advantage. Mr. R. Williams had on view a large
transparency delineating the heads, in the base of which
was written “Welcome all Nations to our Centennial.”
Flags and lamps embellished Messrs. Levy and Scott’s
warehouse. Transparencies revealing the line “ Advance
Australia, 1888,” were to be seen on the premises occupied
by Messrs. C. Carugati, W, C. Hind, and A. Theodore and
Co. A gas star, with the figures 88 in the centre, was
affixed to Messrs. Elder and Falconer’s establishment.
Messrs. Cooper and Sons. M. Connery, H. Abrahams, 11.
and E. Wenban, J. Freeman, W. Harris, A. Fear,
and Neustadt and Co. also exhibited some choice
work. The figures 100, neatly made of geebung,
appeared at Mr. J. Roberts’s premises, where there
was also the motto, “ God Bless Our Queen,” followed by
“Dieu et mon Droit” and “Advance Australia.” Mr.
G. Everard’s, Mr. M. J. Foxall’s, and Messrs. Hawkins
and Co.’s establishments were the other principal spots
of interest.
THE HOTELS AND CLUBS.
These representative institutions made a substantial bid
for prominence in the display of light and colour. Several
of the largest had prepared very striking illuminations,
and, taking them all round, they provided a marked variety
of design. At Petty’s Hotel the balcony and pillars were
brightly outlined in prismatic lamps, chiefly green, placed
close together, and the trees in the garden were hung with
large, bright lanterns, which made a good contrast with the
lights behind. The gateway was decorated with a combi-
nation of both descriptions. Pfahlert’s Hotel had the
windows and the verandah hung with glass pris-
matic lamps; the spaces between the pillars carried
festoons of lanterns. In the open ground adjoining the
hotel were long drooping lines of lanterns and a trans-
parency showing a large and splendid building designed by
Messrs. Loweish and Moorhouse, and ahout to be erected
on this spot as an hotel. The Grand Hotel displayed some
very large lanterns, with small ones arranged between
them for the sake of contrast. The Royal had a good
show of lines of lanterns along the balconies. At the
Crown and Anchor the illumination was confined to the
hay window at the corner, which was artistically framed in
prismatic lamps of deep tints. The Oxford set out two
lines of green prismatic lights, that on the verandah
being looped into festoons, and that on the balcony
running straight, with coloured lanterns placed at intervals.
The white light of the portico combined well with this
arrangement. The decorations of the Aihion Hotel in-
cluded outlines of prismatic lights of alternating colours
on the windows, and yellow lights on the coping, with an
Australian arms transparency on the comer of the building.
Flags were stretched across the street. The effect of the
whole design was excellent. Other hotels made slight dis-
plays. Coming among the Clubs, the Retorm may be men-
tioned as carrying a good arrangement of the dates
of the century on either side of the initials of the
colony, aud a transparency portrait of her Majesty framed
in prismatic lamps of various colours, with the letters
V. R. in gas lights. At the Warrigal Club the balcony
and pillars were tastefully worked up in coloured lights,
with a large crown in the centre. The Australian Club
made a fine display, exceeding its remarkable illumination
of the Jubilee. The whole of the balconies were ablaze
with pink light from 600 variegated lanterns, arranged 200
on each floor in two lines, one straight and one festooned.
Over the main entrance was a crown containing 150 varie-
gated lights. The appearance of this building was splendid,
and it attracted well-deserved admiration. The Union Club
also made special efforts. The garden plots at each end of
the buildings were profusely hung with ropes of light-
tinted lanterns, and the front of the building was very artis-
tically decorated with flags. Three large ensigns floated
over the portico, and one at each wing, and lines of small
flags were gracefully drooped between them. The corridor
round the dining-room was festooned with lanterns. The
New South Wales Club displayed a gas-lit star.
NORTH SHORE.
No combined attempt was made to decorate or illuminate
the thoroughfares or public buildings of this beautiful
suburb, and few individual efforts were made to mark the
Centenary of the colony by illuminations. This apparent
want of enthusiasm was probably due to a knowledge of the
fact that anything of the kind attempted at the North
Shore would certainly be eclipsed by the greater splendour


of the city illuminations. Nevertheless, it is to
be regretted that those living in the large cen-
tres of population in this Antipodean* Brooklyn
did not display a little more public spirit and take steps to
erect a few triumphal arches or illuminate the several
public buildings. As there was little if anything to be
seen within the precincts of the various boroughs “ across
the water,” nearly the whole of the inhabitants migrated
to the city during the evening to feast their eyes upon the
fiery devices and the blazing stars and other attractions
which were exhibited outside the buildings in the crowded
streets of Sydney. It should be stated that the exterior of
the dwellings of many residents of North Shore were effec-
tively lighted by Chinese lanterns of all c lours, shapes, and
sizes. A fiery device bearing the words “ Advance Aus-
tralia,” and having the dates 1788 and 1888 upon either
side of the lettering, was shown by Messrs. Godwin and
Co., plumbers, opposite the Wesleyan Church, St. Leonards.
A few gas stars were also displayed at intervals, and a
number of juveniles amused themselves with letting off a
quantity of fireworks.
BALMAIN AND PYRMONT.
At both of these important suburbs the decorations and
illuminations were more conspicuous by their absence than
by their presence, as very little preparation had been made
to produce any great local display. The inhabitants were
apparently more inclined to patronise the festivities in the
city than to attempt anything on their own account, conse-
quently the streets and thoroughfares in both centres pre-
sented a rather deserted appearance. During the day
several of the private houses and shops exhibited a few'
flags and bannerets, and some of the vessels moored in the
bays that skirt the two peninsulas were gaily dressed in
bunting. The various wharfs, during the early morning
and evening hours, presented a scene of bustle and anima-
tion as each ferry-fioat “ put off” from the landing with its
complement of sightseers, all bound citywards. A large
number of the residents also found their way to town by
omnibus and other means of conveyance. During the
evening a few residences were adorned with Chinese lan-
terns and coloured lights, which, viewed from the harbour,
looked very pretty.
EASTERN SUBURBS.
The various suburbs to the eastward of the city were not
slow to realise the effect of display, judging- from the num-
ber and design of the different decorations that were obser-
vable in almost every street. Shops and private resi-
dences all contributed their quota to the general effect;
and some of the exhibitions were most tastefully arranged.
Evergreens and cornstalks entered largely into the work of
constructive decoration, and, combined with the varied
colours of the flags and bunting, contributed to give
a pleasing and happy contrast. William-street presented
a very agreeable appearance, as a considerafile num-
ber of business places in that populous thoroughfare
were set off with an abundance of decorative adornment,
emblematical of various events and periods in the history
of the colony. At several places a line of flags was sus-
pended over the street, and in some instance the flags
alternated with evergreens worked into various
patterns and ornaments. At night the view from
College-street, looking towards Darlinghurst, was
particularly beautiful, for the vista as far as
the eye could see appeared studded with all kinds of multi-
coloured lights that twinkled and shone with an agreeable
brilliancy. In College-street the facades of several of the
tall buildings were lighted up with fairy lamps, and in
Liverpool-street some very pretty displays were made with
Chinese lanterns.
WESTERN AND SOUTH-WESTERN SUBURBS.
Among the various suburbs along the railway line to
Parramatta the decorations and illuminations in honour of
the Centenary were carried out very successfully.
During the day flags and bunting of all descriptions
and colours were to be seen in every direction,
and several of the principal streets in the different centres
were rendered quite gay by the presence of numbers of
cunningly-devised and many-coloured streamers and
bannerettes. In the evening fairy lights and Chinese
lanterns took the place of the bunting displays, and in-
numerable coloured lamps and lanterns were to fie observed
on every side. On some of the stately residences along the line
several very effective combinations of light and colour were
displayed, and viewed from the carriages of the passing
trains the sights were indeed very pretty. The railway
stations at Burwood and Hyde were tastefully decorated
with evergreens and drapery, and after nightfall they were
illuminated with a profusion of Chinese lanterns and other
lights, which produced a most pleasing effect and was ad-
mired very much.
HARBOUR ILLUMINATIONS.
Nothing very striking in the way of the illumination took
place in the harbour last evening. The Orient Company’s
R.M.S. Orizaba was one mass of light at her berth at the
Circular Quay. The electric light, which had been arranged
along her forecastle rails, showed most prominently.
The general effect from the other side of
the Quay was most pleasing. The P. and O.
Company’s R.M.S. Shannon also displayed a considerable
amount of light, and at times, and simultaneously, numerous
blue lights were burned. The various ships of the fleet in
Farm Cove looked exceedingly bright and gay, although no
attempt was made at any extra illumination. Captain
Shepherd, of the ship Torridan, had several indications of
illumination; a bright light was run up to each masthead, and
another was placed on the very end of the jibboom, while
above the port rail were numerous Chinese lanterns. The
general effect was very good, and called forth general ex-
pressions of admiration on the part of passers-by. Beyond
several lockets and bluelights being burned here and there
on board a distant ship, no extra display of illumination
took place on the waters of Port Jackson.
THE BAND CONTEST.
The Carrington Grounds were well attended yesterday
afternoon, large numbers of people having been drawn
thitber to hear the opening of the intercolonial band
contest, which was announced to commence at 2 o’clock.
At these grounds there is seating accommodation for
several thousand people, so arranged that everyone can see
clearly what is going on ; and, as the whole place is either
covered with permanent roofing or with awnings, the spec-
tators are pleasantly sheltered from the sun. It was so
late when the morning band performance in the Centennial
Park was concluded that punctuality could hardly be ex-
pected, and it was somewhat late before a start was made.
At abouthalf-paßt2 the Cumberland (Parramatta) Bandas-
cended the centre platform, amid cheers, and under bandmas-
ter Waters played three pieces, so as to provide the audience
with music to wile away the time before the contest began.
The items were “Forget and Forgive” (quick marchj, a
cornet-duet polka (“Alliance),” and a bright overture, bv
H. Round, named “ Victory,” all being well performed
and much applauded. By this time it was evident that
some hitch in the proceedings had occurred, and it pre-
sently transpired that the bandmasters had meanwhile held
a consultation, and had come to the conclusion to postpone
the actual competition until this morning, commencing
at 11 o’clock. The bandsmen were all more or less
wearied from their morning exertions, and their long
exposure to the dust and glare and heat had unfitted them
for competition. Beside ail else, the majority of the bands
had come direct from the Park without even having bad
any refreshment; and it was therefore not unreasonable
that the performers should object to playing yesterday
under such unfavourable conditions, seeing that those bands
whose turn might not come until this morning would have
the advantage of a night’s rest, which would enable them
to bring fresh vigour to their task. So that the audience
should not be disappointed, the afternoon was filled up by
excellent performances of the several bands: and doubt-
less it mattered little to those present whether or
no the competition was actually in progress. It will
suffice to say that a high standard of excellence


was generally exhibited, and that the performances were
without exception both creditable and enjoyable. The
Albury Band, the Ballarat Baud, Northcott’s Sandhurst
Band, St. Joseph’s (Launceston) Band, and that of the 4th
Regiment each played several pieces. The vociferous ap-
plause which was frequently bestowed showed a very
hearty appreciation of the musical selections, and even it
no better playing were heard during the competition than
what was presented yesterday, ample proof would be afforded
that military music in Australia has progressed satis-
factorily. To-day’s arrangements will include the special
solo competition at" the Protestant Hall in the evening, as
"'ell as the morning and afternoon performances by the bands
at the Carrington Grounds.
the new south wales centennial regatta.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 28.
In many respects yesterday, regarded as a Centennial
holiday, was one of the most successful of the days which
have yet been devoted to the celebration of this great event,
for the occasion was essentially a people’s holiday, and, as
such, nothing was wanting to make it thoroughly enjoy-
able. When, as in yesterday’s case, we have magnificent
weather, a public holiday, and abundance of every kind
of recreation available, it is only the confirmed misanthrope
who can refuse to yield to the surrounding influences, and,
throwing aside for the while all cares and anxieties, join
the happy band of revellers bent on making the most of
their brief period of relaxation. We have already, during
the week, devoted several entire days to the celebration of
the Centenary by means of formal and impressive cere-
monies of deep national import, but yesterday we threw
aside all formality and officialdom, and celebrated
our hundredth anniversary after a manner peculiarly
dear to the hearts of the aquatic-loving citizens
of Sydney; that is to say, in plain English, we
held a grand Centennial Regatta, otherwise an enlarged
and rejuvenated edition of the Anniversary Regatta
usually held on the 26th of January each year. The
liberal additions to the prize-list, which had been received
both from public and private sources, made the regatta
quite an important sporting event, and assured its success.
The appearance of the principal city thoroughfares during
the forenoon indicated at first sight the unanimity
with which the city residents, and many country visitors,
availed themselves of the holiday, for the streets were
thronged with parties of gay and happy excursionists, each
one hurrying onward with an evident desire to commence his
day’s outing as soon as possible. The regatta was, of course,
the great attraction of the day, but the cost of admission to
the flagship rendered a good view of the races available
only to the favoured few who could afford to spend half
a guinea on the attainment of this object. Many therefore
had to content themselves with the view obtainable from the
shore; Fort Macquarie, Dawes Point, and every other place on
the harbour from whence anything could be seen, having its
eager crowd of spectators. The great mass of the people,
however, went their way independently on one or other of
the numerous harbour excursions, and it somehow seemed
as if all the city was afloat on Port Jackson enjoy-
ing to the utmost Sydney’s magnificent heritage of
beauty. Every craft of any kind which could be floated
and propelled in some way was pressed into service
to meet the exigencies of the event, from the humble canvas
dingy to the gigantic Orizaba, and passenger steamers
plying on the harbour required careful navigation to avoid
a collision with one or other ot the innumerable smaller
boats which were darting about in all directions. The
Circular Quay—the great centre of the harbour traffic—was
a scene of the utmost animation during the greater
part of the day; and, in addition to the ordinary
lines of ferry steamers, special excursions of all kinds
appeared to be perpetually on the point of starting for
every popular resort in the harbour. Crowds of bewildered
excursionists blocked up the roadway round the edge of the
quay, unable to find the steamer they required, or un-
decided whither to turn their footsteps, until at last they
were beguiled by the blandishments of the gentlemen who
sell tickets on the sidewalk taking you there and back
for 6d., invariably on the fastest boat in the harbour.
In other directions the traffic was equally great, the trams
conveying large numbers of persons to the popular resorts
of Bondi, Coogee, Botany, and numerous other places: and
of course many, especially those interested in agricultural
pursuits, found their way to the agricultural show at Moore
Park. The various beautiful spots on the Illawarra line,
which have of late become so easily accessible, were
extensively visited, and at the National Park a very
successful picnic was given to a large number of newsboys
and otner working lads, which enabled many of these hard-
working and hard-faring youngsters to break the monotony
of their lives by a happy day spent in the open air amidst
the beautiful scenery of the park. Many other excursions
and picnics, too numerous to mention individually here,
took place ; and in addition, for those of a sporting turn of
mind there were the Kosehill Jlaces, with which
direct railway communication has now been established,
and the intercolonial cricket match at Moore Park.
In the city itself, after the excursionists had passed
away, things became a little quieter, and during the mid-
day hours the traffic was not much greater than on ordinary
occasions. Those who made use of the streets were prin-
cipally visitors from the country, and, judging from the
change in the character of the people met with in the main
thoroughfares, the town was peopled with strangers, the
Sydney residents having apparently abandoned their noisy
and dusty streets tor the day. Certainly, during weather such
as prevailed yesterday, there is no great hardship or self-
sacrifice involved in a retreat from Sydney to some cool and
shady harbour retreat, and the only wonder is that so many
peopie can be found willing to remain in town. Although
the day was a public holiday, the shops were nearly all
ouened, hoping, perhaps, to catch a little holiday trade,
but they did not appear to be overwhelmed with work. The
last remark does not apply to the hotels, which naturally
did a good trade during the day, and a better
trade still during the evening, when the crowd of
weary and thirsty excursionists returned from their day’s
pleasuring. The flags and banners and centennial decora-
tions, so plentifully displayed on every side, gave the day
a thoroughly carnival air; George-street in particular, with
its apparently endless rows of red-covered poles, banners,
Chinese lanterns, triumphal arches, &c., stretching away in
the long bewildering many-coloured vista, presenting a re-
markably lively appearance. In the evening, most of the
illuminations were again re-lit, and crowds of people
thronged the streets enjoying the brilliant scene until a
late hour in the evening. The crowds were of a re-
markably orderly character, and but few drunken or dis-
orderly persons were to be seen in the streets.
THE REGATTA.
Patron : His Excellency the Right Hon. Baron Carring-
ton, P.C., G.C.M.G. President: His Worship the


Mayor of Sydney, Mr. John Harris. Vice-presidents:
Hon. J. B. Watt, M.L.C., Sir Patrick Jennings,
K.C.M.G., Mr. W. G. Laidley, Mr. John H. Want,
M.L.A., Hon. George Thornton, M.L.C., Hon. C. J.
Roberts, C.M.G., M.L.A., Hon. W. J. Trickett, M.L.C.,
Mr. J. R. Fairfax, Mr. J. P. Garvan, M.L.A., Sir
Henry Parkes, G.C.M.G., Hon. J. F. Burns, Dr.
Milford, Mr. A. G. Milson, Mr. I. J. Josephson,
Mr. P. J. Clark. Officers.—Sailing Races: Starters,
I. J. Josephson and P. C. Trebeck ; timetakers,
E. M. Dietrich and W. J. M‘l.eod. Rowing
Races: Starter, W. G. Anslow; judge, J. E.
Myers; umpire, P. J. Clark. Hon Treasurer: C.
Bros. Hon. Secretaries : C. Medcalf and A. Green.
Sailing Committee: Messrs. E. W. Knox, A. Fairfax,
P. W. Creagh, E. M. Dietrich, G. Hellings. Handi-
cappers: Rowing—Messrs. J. Blackman, C. A. Bros,
C. C. Medcalf; sailing—Messrs. A. Fairfax, E. M.
Dietrich, G. Hellings. Committee: Messrs. E. W.
Knox, P. W. Creagh, E. M. Dietrich, A. Green, W.
Cope, A. Ickerson, C. H. Goddard, J. Blackman, Major
Gascoigne, Messrs. J. R. Drewett, R. Shute, W. Cubitt,
A. Hale, P. H. Sullivan, W. J. M‘Leod, Chas. Bros,
G. Hellings, E. P. Simpson, W. J. Merriman, G. Snow,
J. H. Myers, A. Fairfax, H. Cornwell, C. C. Medcalf,
F. Bennett, T. E. Creswell, W. M. Maclardv, W. G.
Anslow, A. Cormack, P. R. Pedley, R. Moodie, IV.
Cordeaux, E. A. Gaden, W. Reeks, H. H. Robey, V.
R. M‘Dermott, J. R. Love, F. J. Smith, M.L.A., A.
Goodyear, T. Keary, T. R. Thompson, Chas. Cameron,
P. C. Trebeck.
The regatta, which was held yesterday as part of the
celebrations in honour of the centenary, was worthy of the
occasion, passing off in a manner that on the whole re-
flected credit on all concerned. True January weather
prevailed, tne sun shining out with great force, and a
strong wind blowing from N.E., which made the water
very broken and rough for the rowing races, though it was
just what suited the sailing boats. By the kind permission
of Mr. G. S. Yuill, the manager in Australia of the Orient
line, and of Captain Conlan, the commander, the magnificent
liner Orizaba, was placed at the disposal of the committee
as flagship, and she was accordingly taken from the Circular
Quay to moorings off Farm Cove, whence a splendid view
was obtained of the racing throughout the day. For the
past week Captain Conlan had been hard at work getting
the Orizaba trimmed up and decorated for the occasion ;
and but one opinion seemed to prevail amongst the crowd
of people on board yesterday as to the success achieved.
The vessel, gaily decorated with bunting, was a perfect
picture of neatness and taste inside and out, and with her
splendid fittings and furnishings was the admiration of all.
Captain Conlan and Mr. Lindsay Hay, the chief officer, Mr.
Theodor Hellery, the purser, and others of the executive on
board, were not'only courteous, but went to great personal
trouble and inconvenience to make the visitors as comfort-
able as possible. The North Shore Ferry Company ran
steamers at intervals from their jetty at the Circular Quay
to the flagship, and under the superintendence of Captain
Summerbell, their manager, the traffic, which was very
great, was carried on without a hitch. By noon the flag-
ship looked her best, crowded as she was with an
aesemblage of ladies and gentlemen such as perhaps was
never seen here beforeon such an occasion. Among those who
were then od board or came soon afterwards were: —Hon.
T. Garrett (Minister for Lands), Hon. J. F. Burns
(Colonial Treasurer), the Hon. C. J. Roberts, C.M.G.
(Postmaster-General), the Hon. J. H. Young (Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly), the Mayor of Sydney (Aider-
man J. Harris), Messrs.'R. Burdett Smith. T. M. Slattery,
D. O’Connor, J. P. Garvan, W. J. M'Millan, C. Jean-
neret, the Attorney-General (Hon. B. R. Vise), the
Minister for Mines (Hon. F. Abigail), the Most
Rev. the Primate (Dr. Barry), the Bishop of
Brisbane. Mr. Justice Windeyer, Hon. W. Halliday,
Hon. W. J. Trickett, Hon. G. Thornton, Sir John Robert-
son, and Admiral Fairfax and officers from the squadron.
The following visitors from Victoria were present:—Hons.
T. F. Gumming, T. Bent, Mr. J. G. Duffy and Mr. L. L.
Smith, Ms.L.A. The visitors from Adelaide were:
Hons. T. Playford (Treasurer), J. C. Bray, J. G. Ramsay,
Hawker, and Furner, Ms.P., Hons. C. C. Kingston.
The following visitors from Tasmania were present:—
Mr. Alfred Crisp (Mayor of Hobart). Alderman lfillon.
There were also present Messrs. Charles Todd, C.M.G.,
Postmaster-General of South Australia: Lieutenant-
Colonel .T. M‘Donnell, Under-Secretary Postal Depart-
ment, Queensland ; Colonel Roberts, C.M.G., Dr. Brown-
less, Chancellor Melbourne University; G. S. Yuill, C. B.
Fairfax, Captain Hammill, A. Bennett, J. Thomas, J. See,
Captain Tillett, J. C. Keerg, Wilshire, Ac. The band of
the New South Wales Permanent Artillery was at one end
of the upper deck and the band of the training ship Vernon
on the other, and both played selections throughout the
day, adding thereby materially to the general pleasure.
The harbour presented a magnificent sight from
early morning until sunset. Every sort and condi-
tion of craft that was at all seaworthy
seemed to have been pressed into the service for the day,
and the result was a display certainly never surpassed in
the history of aquatics in the southern hemisphere. Boats
under a press of canvas that threatened momentarily to
cause them to capsize, and on several occasions actually
brought about that result, shot past the flagship with
lightning-like speed; others cruised about in various
directions; rowing boats flitted hither and thither, and
steamers of all sorts and sizes crossed the vision at short
intervals, the whole making up a scene that is probably un-
rivalled. Farm Cove, with all the war ships moored there,
looked well, and in other parts of the harbour bunting and
other signs of holiday-keeping served to complete the
picture. There was an immense gathering of people on
Mrs. Macquarie’s Chair, at Forr Macquarie, Dawes Point,
and on the various other headlands from which a view of
the regatta could be obtained, and there must have been as
many more on the water. So far as could be ascertained
there were no accidents of a serious nature, and
beyond complaints regarding the catering for the
general public on the Orizaba, which was done by the
Sydney Catering Company, the whole affair was in every
way successful. The boys from the Vernon, as usual,
formed the firing party, and carried out their duties well,
and the various officers of the committee. Ac., worked
zealously to bring about a satisfactory result, Messrs,
i ireen and Medcalf, the secretaries, being particularly
noticeable in this regard. Mr. P. J. Clark followed the
various rowing races in the steam launch Leila, and was
accompanied by members of the Press, to whom every facility
was afforded for the performance of theirduties. The rowing
races were all well-contested. Kemp won the All-comers’
race in outriggers; the Laidley Sculls were appropriated
by Mr G. J. Ruwald, and the senior fours fell to the lot
of No. 2 Sydney Rowing Club, No. 1 being second. The
man-o’-war race excited a good deal of interest, and was
won by the Naval Brigade easily. The Coasters’ Race and
the great yacht race were the most important events on the
programme, and what could be seen of them from the flag-
ship was watched with much interest. A full description
of these and all the other events, together with a report of
the speeches at the luncheon, will be found below. It was
expected that his Excellency Lord Carrington, together
with the Governors of the other colonies, would have
paid the flagship a visit at noon, but it was
not until a considerable time after that hour that
the Nea steam launch, with the vice-regal party on board,
ranged up alongside the flagship. His Excellency was met
on the floating stage by the Mayor and the reception com-
mittee and Captain Conlan and his officers, and after the
formal greetings had been exchanged, Lord Carrington
and the other Governors (who were all present except Sir
Henry Loch), together with their respective staffs proceeded
to the saloon, where refreshments were served and toasting
followed. The Mayor presided.
The Chairman proposed “ The Health of the Queen,”
which was drunk right loyally.
The Chairman’ next proposed the toast of “ His Excel-
lency the Governor Lord Carrington.” (Cheers.) He said
that we had never had so popular a Governor as Lord Car-
rington. (Cheers.)


Lord Carrington, who was very heartily received, said :
Mr. Mayor, your Excellencies, ladies, and gentlemen,—l
return you my most respectful and grateful thanks for the
compliment you have paid me this morning as the repre-
sentative of her Majesty the Queen. The Mayor in
speaking of me has been far too complimentary alto-
gether —(N o, no) and has said that I have
been a popular Governor. (Cheers.) Well, I can only say,
Mr. Mayor, that that is my object and my mission, and
I trust that I shall always be popular in the proper sense of
the word—in touch with, in sympathy with, and trusted by
the people of this colony. (Loud cheers.) I also return
our grateful thanks to Captain Conlan for putting his mag-
nificent ship at the disposal of the visitors that have
honoured the colony with their presence during the Centen-
nial celebrations, and while deeply regretting the accident
which has temporarily indisposed him, trust that he will be
soon restored to his usual state of health. (Cheers.)
A hundred years ago, and five years after England had
signed the peace of Versailles, by which she lost all her pos-
sessions in the North American continent, save Canada and
Nova Scotia, Governor Phillip addressed the 1030 persons
who formed this colony in the following words :—“ We are
here to take possession of this fifth division of the globe on
behalf of the British people, and to found a State which we
hope will not only occupy and rule this great country,
but will also be the beneficent patroness of the entire
southern hemisphere.” (Cheers.) Six years after
this important event England again signed a treaty—the
Treaty of Amiens—by which she surrendered all her con-
quered colonies with the exception of Ceylon and Trini-
dad. She gave back Malta to the Knights ol St. John,
and acknowledged the Cape of Good Hope to be a neutral
port. Sixty years ago the Punjaub was independent, Canada
unsettled and half rebellious, and England herself was taxed
to the utmost, and the position of affairs was lamentable in
the extreme. But fortunately, what some people still call
“ the good old days” came to an end. (Hear, hear.)
Then came the days of huge railway extensions; the
Bank Acts gave a stable money; gold was dis-
covered in California and Australia; steam shipping be •
gan to develop; telegraphs and submarine cables were laid;
raw materials and food became cheaper; barbarous laws
were repealed; religious persecution ceased; slavery was
abolished in America; our constitution was prac-
tically established; and the star of Great Britain’s
glory kept steadily rising. In no part of the world, I ven-
ture to think, is the changed order of things more remark-
able than in Australia. In 1835 New South Wales, which
then comprised the whole of Australia, owned 250 vessels
(inclusive of Government transports), of a tonnage of 63,000
tons; in 1886 the total tonnage was 4,000,000 tons. In 1835
the imports and exports amounted to two millions; in 1886
they amounted to forty millions, and we may fairly say that
Britons have the carrying trade of the world. (Cheers.)
We still occupy this great country, which is becoming the
‘ ‘ beneficent patroness of the southern hemisphere; ” her own
early trials and troubles are over; and as England has
flourished and progressed, so have her sturdy sons across
the seas settled down in peace and contentment. But the
world knows that the cubs of the old Lion have become
strong and well-grown—(cheers)—resolute to retain their
glorious inheritance; and with regard to the present posi-
tion of England and her colonies and her Indian possessions,
it seems as if not only the prophetic words of Governor
Phillip had come to pass, but also that the old prophecy of
the Psalmist King had been fulfilled :—“ Her sons are
like the arrows in the hands of the giant. They shall not
be ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the
gate.” (Cheers.)
Sir Henkv Parkes, who was heartily cheered, said: 1
have been asked to propose a toast to you which I am quite
sure you will receive with enthusiasm. This city of Syd-
ney at the present time must be the capital of the colony of
Australia—(laughter and applause)—for we have got all the
Governors here— (cheers) —and my toast is “The health
of their Excellencies the Governors of the other Australian
Colonies.” (Cheers.) 1 can scarcely trust myself to say
much in support of tbe toast. We have become somewhat
acquainted with gentlemen who represent the Queen in
our separate colonies, and it seems as if in reality instead
of one we had seven governors—(laughter)—commissioneu
by her Majesty to take care of the elder colony who is
the host on this auspicious occasion ? (Applause.) We
already know of the talents with which these gentlemen
are gifted, and I suppose I can hardly say a better thing
for their respective colonies. I give you “ The Governors of
the other Australian colonies. (Cheers.)”
Sir Anthony Musgrave said: I have the honour, on
behalf of my brother Governors, to return our sincere
thanks for the kind manner in which you have received
the toast, and also for the kind and generous hospitality
with which you have greeted us. (Cheers.) The present
will be an event to keep green in our memories, to look
back upon with pleasure, to be remembered, that we were
able, in this Centennial year, to be present with you.
(Cheers.) We have all of us had so much speech-making
of late that I will not detain you long now ; but I am glad
of the opportunity of thanking you, in this comparatively
informal manner, for the great kindness vou have shown
to us all, and of congratulating you on the splendid Queen’s
weather we are having. (Cheers.)
Lord Carrington proposed “ The health of the Chair-
man,” and said it gave him very great pleasure to do so. This
was, he believed, the fourth time that Mr. Harris, whom
he now met for the first time publicly, Rad been chosen to
represent the citizens—(hear, hear)—and that he was
Mayor when the citizens were honoured by a visit from the
grandson of the Sovereign. (Applause.) Since that time
he had gone on increasing in the estimation and confidence
of his fellow citizens. (Cheers.)
The toast was duly honoured, and after it had been
responded to by the Mayor the vice-regal party, accompanied
by members of the committee, Captain Conlan, and others,
walked over the ship, and spent a short time in witnessing
the splendid scene around. They then took their departure,
and were heartily cheered as they left. About half an
hour afterwards luncheon was served in the saloon, and
when the meal was over toasting began.
The Chairman gave “The Queen,” and, after it had
been honoured,
Mr. D. O’Connor proposed the toast of “The Minis-
try.” He need not tell a distinguished assemblage like
that that this toast did not apply to individuals. Although
we were only celebrating our first centenary in this distant
part of the world, we had institutions in these colonies as
free as those of the most enlightened countries of Europe—
(hear, hear)—and one of the most potent powers that we
possessed was that manifested in a free Govermment, as
expressed in the possession of a Ministry. (Applause.)
The Hon. B. It. Wise said a toast like that seemed to be
almost out of place, for they came there to forget
the cares and disturbances of politics. However,
he welcomed the opportunity of replying to the toast,
which he accepted rather as expressing an opinion on the
part of those present that in any assembly such as that it
was fitting to pay a slight tribute to those whoever they
might be, and whatever might be their party, who were for
the time being entrusted with the administration of the
affairs of the country. He thanked them on behalf of his
colleagues for the way in which they had honoured the
toast. He felt especial pleasure in having been called upon
to respond to this toast on that occasion, because he believed
he was the only member of the Ministry in any way
identified with yachting. (Cheers.) He thought the
Ministry had acted not unwisely towards the yachting com-
munity, not only of this colony, but throughout the whole
of Australasia, in founding a prize which they hoped would
be the means of stimulating yachting and vacht-building
throughout the whole of the colonies. (Cheers.) They
hoped that the Australian Challenge Cup would become to
Australia what the Queen’s Cup had been to America and
to England— (cheers)—that it might prove a worthy object
of rivalry between the colonies, and that regulations in
regard to the competition for it would be so framed that any
boat might compete for it at any time, and the holder be
compelled to race. (Cheers.) If' this result were attained
the object of the Ministry would be achieved, and then they
might look forward to competing for the Queen’s Cup,


and win it back from America. (Cheers.) He again
thanked them.
The Hon. W. J. Trickktt said : It is my privilege on
this occasion to propose a toast which I am sure all present,
whether they be Australian-born, those who have made
Australia their adopted home, or visitors to Australia, will
respond to with deep enthusiasm, namely, “The Bay we
Celebrate ” —(cheers)—for although we are holding our
annual regatta this year one day later than usual, in con-
sequence of other engagements which filled yesterday’s
programme, still we may look upon to-day as a continua-
tion of yesterday’s festivities, and are met here to celebrate
in a manner peculiarly Australian not only the anniversary
of the colony but also its 100th birthday. (Cheers.)
Since the birth of this colony, a period short in the history
of a nation, but long in that of individuals, what
an immense deal has been accomplished ! (Hear, hear.)
The foundation of an empire have indeed been laid. Hun-
dreds of thousands of people have been welcomed from the
older countries of Europe. 'The increase of our population
has steadily gone on, and we have adopted many of those
institutions which have led old England to the foremost
position amongst the nations of the world. (Cheers.) All
around us we see the march of progress, aud more particu-
larly in this great city of Sydney, where everywhere the
old is giving way to the new. We are the freest
community under the sun (Cheers.) We have -no
privileged aristocracy, no dominant Church—(cheers)— -no
tithes, no political exclusion, no distinctions of any kind
but such as inevitably arise from the variety of human
character and fortune ; and I am glad to say that though
many vicissitudes of fortune, of position, and of prospect
have changed the face of the colony at various times,
although chequered has been the onward course of the
colony, yet has it been ever onward still —(cheers) —and it
is now no empty boast to say that Australia at the present
time is the observed of all observers, and the bulk of its
inhabitants enjoy a prosperity and freedom having no rivals
—(applause)—and with all this prosperity and freedom we
still remain part of that great and august Empire of Great
Britain, we still remain true to the country from which we
sprung. And I ask fearlessly, and knowing that no one
will gainsay it, where is the true Australian that does not
desire with all his heart to see unsullied the honour and
supremacy of Great Britain ? (Applause.) Where is the
true Australian who would not regard the enemies of Great
Britain as his own ? (Applause.) Coming more closely to
the toast, I may say that not only is the 26th of January
the natal day of Sydney, it is the birthday of New South
Wales ; it is not merely the birthday of New South Wales,
it is the anniversary of the foundation of a great colonial
empire—the day on which the morning star of Australia
was first seen in the sky. Other colonies have their sepa-
ration days, but this colony alone has what
in the strictest sense of the word is an anniver-
sary, on which we celebrate the actual foundation
of a colony. As to our present mode of celebrating our
national holiday, none could be more appropriate than by a
regatta—(hear, hear)—and in speaking of our advancement
generally, we may well be proud of our prowess in the
world of sport, and young Australia has shown in many
ways that she is a formidable rival, more particularly in
the aquatic world, where our oarsmen have helped to make
us world-renowned by wresting the championship from the
old country (Applause.) If there is one place more than
another where the inhabitants can and do enj oy a holiday
in a united and rational manner, it is Australia ; and if
there is one place in Australia where sports of all kinds
have developed and become part of the life of the
people, it is Sydney. (Cheers.) I hope the day
we are now celebrating will long be marked by this
annual regatta, which presents an aquatic carnival un-
equalled in any part of the world. (Cheers.) I am aware
that this is not the occasion for long speeches. It is im-
possible to crowd all one feels on this occasion into an
after-dinner speech. I ask you to join with me in drink-
ing to the toast, “ The day we celebrate.” May prosperity
still continue to smile on us—may good government, added
to all the advantages the country possesses, be our lot—and
may we, ere long be able on this our national holiday to wel-
come our neighbours— not as neighbours from other colonies,
but as part and parcel of ourselves, and drink, ere long, to
the prosperity of federated Australasia ! (Loud cheers.)
The Hon. George Thornton, M.L.C., was called
upon to reply. He said : In these days of universal holi-
day, enjoyment, and enthusiasm, it will be difficult to avoid
using phrases, or even words, which have not already been
abundantly spoken at our many gatherings at this festive
season; but even with this fact fully before me, 1 will not
bo deterred from my duty on this occasion. This is the
birthday of Australia, a great nation and people of the not
distant future. Whether it is to be a monarchy, an em-
pire, or a republic is not for me—whatever my opinions on
the subject may be—to attempt to foreshadow on this occa-
sion ; but Australia, the continent of Australia, peopled by
the Anglo-Saxon race, formed, directed, and forced onwarcl
by their strength, courage, perseverance, and skill, must
and will become a Greater Britain.” (Cheers.) The
26th of January was the day-dawn of our existence,
and has been marked and set apart from the first as
a day to be observed and enjoyed as a holiday. Who
of all that are now living can foresee or foretell what this
Australia shall be at the end of the next hundred years, or
even the next fifty years ? I remember being (although
only a small boy at the time) one of a number of Austra-
lians who, on the 26th January, 1838, met at a public
dinner at the old Royal Hotel, in George-street,
Sydney, to celebrate on that day the colony’s jubilee.
(Cheers.) Who of that assemblage on that occasion could,
even in his liveliest imaginings, have foreseen or foretold
what the state of things in these colonies would be 50 years
afterwards —as we now see them to-day ? (Cheers.) This
is a big theme, but I will not now enlarge upon it. lam
privileged at a meeting of distinguished citizens, to be held
next Monday night, to have a better opportunity of ex-
pressing myself thereon. “Advance Australia,” the
chosen motto of one of the earliest newspapers published
in the colony, is now our motto and watchword. We
will all combine in one universal effort to let that
be our text and guide. (Hear, hear.) Another word
comes lovingly, acceptably, and beautifully upon us—a
word I hope to see venerated, accepted, and appreciated in
all our hearts, and to be so held by our people for all time.
I mean the “ Queen’s message.” In that assemblage last
night of distinguished men—Governors, statesmen, digni-
taries, and others from our own colony and from the other
colonies—that great telegraphic message from our loved
and noble Queen came suddenly and so acceptably—like a
streak of beauteous and brilliant light, upon the assembled
thousands of distinguished people whose privilege it was to
hear it read by his Excellency Lord Carrington. Itcan never
be forgotten. The 26th January in every year will be our
Australian national holiday, growing with our growth, and
strengthening with our strength. I thank God we are per-
mitted to do our utmost upon this occasion, and that the
26th January of every year, whilst time itself shall last,
shall be in Australia, “ The day we celebrate.” (Cheers.)
Mr. J. PTG arvan proposed “The Press,” and Mr. H
G. Parker responded.
The Hon. J. B. Watt proposed “ The Health of Captain
Conlanand his Officers,” referring in terms of praise to the
splendid vessel and the kindness of Captain Conlan and his
officers not only on that occasion but also whenever any
one travelled in his ship. (Applause.) He had had the
good fortune to make one voyage with him, and the best
compliment he could pay him was to say that he would
like to make another. (Cheers.)
Captain Conlan, in responding said the Orient Line,
invariably supported by the Government of the colony, had
done its best to keep up with the wants of the trade—
(applause) —and some evidence that they had done so
successfully was to be found in the fact that other com-
panies were following in the Orient Line’s footsteps. (Ap-
plause.) He thanked them for the honour they had done
him and his officers, and concluded by proposing the health
of the ladies.
The “ Health of the Chairman ” concluded the list of
toasts, and the party then returned to the decks.


THE ROWING EVENTS.
First Race.—Youths under 18, in light skiffs, single
sculls. Course: From flagship round Goat Island, and
back to flagship. First prize, £10; second, £5. Entrance,
10s. Gd. E- Meadows, 1; vv. M‘Master, 2; T. Hopwood,
3. Other starters: W. Ryall, H. Yates, J. Anderson,
Henry Jones, and G. C. Anderson. J. Sullivan came to
the scratch, but was left on the post, consequently he
entered a protest against the start. A pretty good start
was effected, and Meadows, who is said to have learnt his
rowing when acting as assistant caretaker at the Mercantile
R. C. shed, at once took the lead, M'Master and Hopwood
following in the order named. At Goat Island, Meadows
had increased his advantage to such an extent that the race
was virtually over. M‘Master and Hopwood followed him
home to the flagship, keeping close to each other at inter-
vals, Anderson coming next. Meadows pulled well right
through the race.
Second Race.—Maiden Fours, string-test gigs. Course:
From Flagship round Goat Island and back to Flagship.
Prizes: Trophies valued, first £ls, second £5; entrance,
£2 2s. Mercantile Rowing Club: A. C. Hollingworth
(lOst), C. T. Morath (lOst. 61b.), W. C. M‘Donald (list.
71b.), N. J. M‘Donald (lOst. 31b.), S. Ferguson (cox), 1;
Glebe Rowing Club: G. F. Tindale (lOst.), \V. A.
Walker (lOst. 121 b.), J. Leeds (list. 41b.), Alf. Edwards
(lOst.), M‘Gregor (cox), 2; Sydney University Rowing-
Club: A. Thomson (9st. 81b.), E. H. Wilkinson (list.),
T. Hungerford (list. 61b ), V. B. M'Dermott (lOst. 51b.),
Hellings (cox), 3; East Sydney Rowing Club: W. Jacobs,
F. Boshell, J. M‘lvor, W. G. Higgs, Chate (cox); Sydney
Rowing Club: W. Armitage (9st. 101 b.), P. Norton (9st.
101 b.), A. Godfrey (list.), D. S. Walker (lOst. 21b.); J.
Hellings (cox). The starter got the crews away well
together. The Sydney men at once took the lead, being
closely attended by the University and Glebe crews. After
passing Fort Macquarie the University men, who were
rowing well together and putting all tbeir weight on, drew
ahead and beat the Sydneys. Dawes Point was passed in
the following order:—University, Sydney, Mercantile,
and Glebe, the East Sydney men being in
the rear. From this place to the island
A good contest ensued, the Mercantiles, if anything,
appearing to work too hard, as they pulled rather wildly at
times. Rounding the island University kept well ahead,
the Mercantiles coming next, still rowing very hard, Sydney
being in third place. At this point the stroke of the Sydney
crew caught a crab, which allowed the Glebes to forge
ahead a little, the S. R. C. representatives falling behind,
and the East Sydney men being far away in the rear. A
great race took place on the northern side of the island,
University being about a length and a half ahead of the
M. R. C. men, the Glebes and Sydney coming next in the
order named. East Sydney retired from the contest about
here. On the return journey a large steamer crossed in
front of the boats, and University and M. R. C. had to
make quite a detour in order to avoid being swamped. The
Glebe men, who were behind, made the best of their oppo-
nents’ ill-luck, and forged ahead for a while. By this time
all the crews had settled down to real hard work, and it was
evident that the race would be fought out with determina-
tion to the end Off Milson’s Point the Glebes showed fine
form, and putting on a spurt they took the lead, M. R. C.
l niversity following, Sydney being last. On reaching
Kirribilli the Mercantile stroke shook his men up a bit.
1 he crew responded to his call in gallant style, and passed
the flagship first after a desperate race with the Glebes,
this event was one of the best of its kind ever witnessed in
Port Jackson, and was a great contest all through for a
maiden race.
Third Race.—Laidley Sculls, wager-boats. Course:
From flagship round Goat Island, Fort Denison, and back
to flagship. First prize, Laidlev sculls and medal; second,
trophy valued £5. Entrance, £1 Is. G. J. Ruwald, lOst.
51b., 1; W. Matterson, lOst. 121 b., 2; J. Thomson, 9st.
51b., 3: G. J. Robertson, list., 0 ; F. Ives, 9st. 21b., 0 ;
John M‘Rae, 0. Ives rowing a fast stroke dashed off at
Ihe start and maintained the lead for a good while.
Thompson, Ruwald, and Robertson got entangled shortly
alter starting, and Matterson who was on the northern side
and well out of the way of passing steamers, kept alone;
very comfortably. A transit boat crossing from the
North Shore now impeded the competitors considerably. Off
Dawe’s Point, Ives, Matterson, Ruwald, Thomson, and
Robertson were in the order stated, all being “ spread out”
pretty much. Thomson, who is a good oarsman, rowed in
a very taking manner, his style being greatly admired.
Ruwald, who also pulled very well, led at Goat Island,
followed by Matterson, Thomson, and Ives. At Blue’s
Point a lump of a sea was running, but Ruwald, who Is
used to rowing in broken water, pulled a long, steady
stroke, and got plenty of pace out of his boat. Thomson,
who passed Matterson after leaving the island astern,
rowed in splendid style as far as Milson’s Point, and then
allowed his opponent to go up into second place again. At
Kirribilli Ruwald had a long lead. Matterson now put on
a spurt and dashed clean awav from Thomson, the men
finishing as indicated after a well-contested race. Ruwald
pulled very consistently all through.
Fourth Race.—All comers, in light skiffs, handicapped.
Course : From flagship round Goat Island, Fort Denison,
and back to flagship. First prize, £3O ; second, £10;
third £5. Entrance, £2 2s. W. Anderson, lOst. 101 b
(201 b.), 1 ; J. M. Bai-nes, lOst. 101 b. (301 b.), 2 ; H. Mes-
senger, list. Gib. (401 b.), 3 ; J. Brown, list. 21b. (121 b.), 0;
R. Green, lOst. (201 b.), 0; R. Matthews, Bst. 101 b. (121 b.),
0 ; R. J. Banks, list, (feather), 0. Matthews dashed
to the front at the start, and off Kirribilli Barnes and
Messenger, the weighted men, were nearly run down by a
steamer. At Dawes Point Anderson led, Matthews, Barnes,
and Messenger following hard after him. The steamer
Illawarra now got right across the men, and knocked them
all out of shape, the wash from her paddles nearly sinking
some of them. After awhile they managed to pull them-
selves together, and started away again. Anderson had a
long lead at the island, which he maintained till the finish.
There was a good race between Barnes and Messenger for
second place.
Fifth Race.—Merchant ships’ boats, pulling five ash
oars; boats to belong to the vessel entering, and the crew
to be on the ship’s articles. Course : From Dawes Point
round Fort Denison, and back to flagship. Prize, £ls.
Entrance, nil. Aviemore, 1; Thos. Stephens, 2: Murrum-
bidgee, 0. One of the Torridon’s boats entered, but did not
start. This was a well-contested race, but the competitors
were sadly interfered with by rnssing sailing boats and
steamers. The Aviemore had a lead of about two lengths
at the finish.
Sixth Race.—Senior tours, in string-test gigs. Course :
From flagship round Goat Island, Fort F'enison, and back
to flagship. Prizes: Trophies valued £IOO. Entrance, £5
ss. Sydney Rowing Club, No. 2—N. Johnson, lOst. 21b.;
J. G. Kennedy, list. 91b.; J. E. H. Kennedy, 12st. 91b. ;
C. Dobson, lOst. 91b.; Chate, coxswain—l. Sydney Row-
ing Club—S. A. Tiley, lOst. 61b.; E. O. Griffiths, list.;
W. F. Kloster, list. 21b.; C. A. Bros, list. 21b.; J.
Ilellings, cexswain—2. Mercantile Rowing Club—G.
Seale, lOst. 121 b.; H. R. Pickering, list.; W. C. Free-
man, 12st.; G. M‘Gill, list. 41b.—3. Balmain Rowing
Club —J. Collins, list. 81b.: E. W. Martin. 12st.: J.
Frazer, 12st 41b.; F. Bellbridge, list. 101 b. This
race was started just as the Governor’s party boarded the
Orizaba. Bros’s crew went off with tho lead, rowing very
fast. Sydney No. 2 then shot up, followed by the M .R.C.
and Balmain. A large steamship now bore down upon the
competitors and caused the boats to spread out a good deal.
Both the Sydney crews rowed extremely well,
although they had their share of lumpy water.
Off Dawes’ Battery, the M.R.C. coxswain let
go one of his lines', which caused him to steer
a bad course, and threw the crew out of position.
Going up to Goat Island, Bros obtained a good lead,
Sydney No. 2 and M. R. C. being second and third re-
spectively, the Balmain representatives, who had a boat
which proved unfit for rough water, bringing up the rear.
Sydney No. 2 had a palpable lead at the island, the M.R.C.
and Bros’ crew being about level, and racing together in a
splendid manner, Bros giving his men a good steady stroke,
and M‘Gill taking his crew along very well. Rounding the


island, Sydney No. 2 had a long lead. The rowing in this
boat was splendid, Johnson and the two Kennedys doing
grand work all the way. Off Blue’s Point the M. R. C.
stroke seemed to be “ done up,” and for a moment the crew
threatened to “ go to pieces;” but recovering their wind,
they pulled themselves together and gained upon Bros’s
crew, the Balmains having retired from the contest. Dob-
son’s crew had the race in their own hands after passing
Milson’s Point, and they won rather easily, having rowed
well together and displayed good action all through the
contest. Bros woke up considerably after rounding Fort
Denison, and he came home at a terrific pace, the boat
fairly flying across the wavelets. The Mercantile men did
not put life enough into their work. Just as the latter
crew rowed under the stem of the Orizaba, their boat,
which must have been bursted badly during the race, broke
in two, the occupants being thrown into the water.
»Seventh Race.—All Comers, in wager boats; course—
from flagship round Goat Island, Fort Denison, and back to
flagship; prize, £75; entrance, £4 4s. Peter Kemp, Colo,
list. 21b., 1; W. Hearne, New Zealand, list. 71b., 2;
C. Nelson, lOst. 101 b., 0. This contest attracted a con-
siderable amount of attention. Kemp went away with the
start, rowing about 30 strokes to the minute, and showing
brilliant action in the rough water, which was thoroughly
unsuitable for wager boats. Nelson, who rowed with great
determination, was second, the New Zealand oarsman
(Hearne) being a length or so behind him. Kemp, who
pulled a long steady stroke, had very little difficulty in
keeping his lead. Rounding.tbe island the New Zealander
went up smartly and took second place, but the pace
proved too fast for him, and he soon fell back into his old
position. The homeward journey, made in the teeth of a
nor’-easter, proved exceptionally trying to the oarsmen,
whose frail boats were knocked about in all directions by
wind and waves. The Hawkesbury sculler held steadily
on his course, occasionally displaying excellent form.
Kemp rounded Fort Denison in a very clever manner, and
then rowed home an easy winner. Meanwhile Nelson and
Hearne were keeping on after the leader, the former being
three iengths ahead of the Maorilander, when a steamer
(the Invincible) deliberately crossed the scullers and threw
Nelson out of his position altogether, thus allowing Hearne,
who was about tired out, to obtain second place.
Eighth Race.—Junior Fours, in string-test gigs. Course:
From flagship round Goat Island and back to flagship.
Prizes:Trophies valued—First, £25; second, £5. Entrance,
£3 3s. Mercantile Rowing Club, A. C. Hollingworth,
lOst.; C. T. Morath, lOst. 61b.; W. C. Macdonald, list.
71b.; N. J. Macdonald, lOst. 31b.; S. Ferguson, cox., 1.
Glebe Rowing Club, G. T. Tindall, lOst.; W. A. Walker,
lOst. 121 b.; J. Leeds, list. 41b.; Alf. Church wood, lOst.;
J. M ‘Gregor, cox., 2. Sydney Rowing Club, E. W. Senior,
lOst. 71b.; W. H. Bros, 105t."41b.; F. J. Payne, list. 21b.;
H. E. Butchart, lOst. 21b.; J. Hellings, c0x.,0. This was
a good race. Sydney had the best of the start, M. R. C. being
second, and Glebe last. M. R. C. and Glebe rowed with
much vigour at the island, Sydney leading by two lengths.
At Blue’s Point the S. R. C. increased their lead to six
lengths, Glebe being almost the same distance behind M.
R. C., last. The water was exceedingly rough in Lavender
Bay, and baling had to be resorted to. Just as they neared
the flagship the gig of the Sydney crew, who were leading,
was swamped, and the M. R. C. 'came in first, Glebe being
second. These crews had their work cut out to keep their
boats on top of the water until they reached the winning
post, and they were also swamped shortly after the gun was
fired.
Ninth Race.—Manual Labour Amateurs, single sculls, in
light skiffs, handicapped. Course : From Kirribilli round
Goat Island and back to flagship. First prize, £lO, and
trophy valued £10: second, £5; third, £3. Entrance, £1
Is.—W. Lewis, 15st. (151 b.), 1; E. Bailey, lOst. 101 b.
(151 b.), 2; J. Gleeson, lOst. 101 b. (301 b.), 3; C. Dutch,
12st. (feather), 0; S. Davis, lOst. 101 b. (301 b.), 0; A. Cor-
mack, list. 21b. (201 b.), 0. Dutch capsized shortly after
he had started. Gleeson led at the island, Davis, Bailey,
Lewis, and Corinack following in the order mentioned.
Bailey, who hails from New Zealand, pulled a fine race, and
Lewis and Gleeson gave a good exhibition of rowing. After
pulling a steady race, Lewis put on a great spurt, and won
rather easily.
Tenth Race. —Man-of-War Service Whaler Race,
including British and foreign, Naval Defence Forces,
and Lifeboat Service, rowing five ash oars. Course:
From Dawes Point round Fort Denison, round
all men-of-war in Farm Cove, and hack to
flagship. First prize, £ls; second. £lO. Entrance,
nil.—Centennial, 1; Lily, 2; Nelson, 3; Rapid, 0;
Undine, 0; Dart, 0; Never Won, 0; Newcastle, 0; Opal,
0; Diamond, 0; Calliope, 0; Duchaffaut, 0; Duchaffaut
No. 2, 0. Quite a fleet of small steamers followed this
race, which proved of considerable interest to the spectators
afloat and on shore. The boats got away to a fairly good
start. The Centennial soon took up the lead, being closely
attended by the Lily, Nelson, and one of the French boats.
As the whalers passed the various warships the crews were
heartily applauded by the seamen congregated in the bow
of the vessels. The Centennial won easily.
Eleventh Race.—All Manual Labour Amateur Fours, in
stringiest gigs. Course: From flagship round Goat Island,
Fort Denison, and back to flagship ; prize, £25.; entrance,
£2 2s.—Dawes Point, H. Winter, 9st. ; A. Latta, 9st. 21b.;
J. Adams, lOst.; W. Chinnery, 9st. ; M'Gregor, cox., 1.
Balmain, S. Davis, lOst. 101 b.; J. Backhouse, list. 41b. ;
J. Johnston, 12st.; A. CortxaCk, list. 21b. ; J. hellings,
cox, 2. White Horse, P. Duggan, list.; H. Bishop,
list. 61b.; J. Bishop, list. 61b.; W. Backhouse, list.
61b. ; D. Ferguson, cox.
The W'hite Horse boat swamped while the crew were
getting ready to start. A splendid race ensued between the
two remaining crews, both rowing with energy and deter-
mination. On reaching the flagship Dawes Point spurted
in fine style, and obtained a slight lead, which was main-
tained until they passed the winning post. The Balmain
boat filled and sank at the termination of the contest.
Twelfth Race.—Vernon boys. Course : From Dawes
Point round Nelson’s buoy and back to flagship. First
prize, £10; second, £5. Entrance, nil—lst cutter, 12 oars,
1; 2nd cutter, 8 oars, 2; galley, 16 oars, 3; 3rd cutter, 8
oars, 0; 4th cutter, 12 oars, 0. This was an exciting race,
and the youngsters entered into the spirit of the thing with
heartiness and pulled their hardest to carry off the coveted
first prize. The finish was very close.
SAILING EVENTS.
Challenge Cup Yacht Race.— Yacht Race, the
One Hundred dears’ Challenge Cup, value £SOO, pre-
sented by the Parliament of New South Wales. Terms of
Challenge : To be sailed for on the 27th January, 1888,
and succeeding National Regattas; to be won twice by the
same yacht. Time by rating. Course: Flying start
between starter’s boat and Blue’s Point, thence to and
round Shark Island, back to and round boat off Goat
Island, thence round a boat off Long Reef, thence
round a boat off Long Bay, and back to flagship.—
Era, A. G. Milson, rating 40 tons, scratch, 1; Magic, J. R.
Fairfax, rating 26 tons, 11m. 35., 2. Other starters being—
Mistral, W. Buckingham, rating 29 tons, Bm. 11s., and
Waitangi, F. Milfora, M.D., rating 26 tons, 11m. 3s. A
great deal of interest was centred in this race, possibly
owing to the number of entries (four), it being an unusual
sight to see so many of our larger craft under racing canvas
at one time. If the course had included a little more inside,
and less outside, the spectators on the flagship and
elsewhere would have had the pleasure it must
be to all lovers of aquatics to soe our big
yachts, with their beautiful white sails, moving gracefully
up and down the harbour. Shortly after 10.30 the yachts
were ready and waiting to start, Era. Magic, and W aitangi
with jackyarders set, Mistral with squareheader. all anxi-
ously watching the flag. On the signalbeihg given, Magic
and Waitangi crossed together at 10.35, Era at 10.36, Mis-
tral some two minutes later, all going off on the starboard
stretch, wind at the time making from N.E. and tide strong
ebb. Era was first to come about working the ebb ; Mistral
following on her weather, Magic and Waitangi standing in
under Milson’s Point, latter obtaining weather position.


Mistral, about on starboard, stood for northern shore. Era
bringing Garden Island, Waitangi and Magic on the port
stretch, following leader, the latter being crossed bv Mistral,
all now standing down in line. Era first round on star-
board, going well out into mid-channel, was soon about,
Waitangi following these movements, and sailing
nicely. Magic standing well under island, came
about, and meeting Mistrel crossed her, former stand-
ing well across. Era, with strong lead, bringing
to leeward of Shark Island. Waitangi, coming about off
Clark Island, stood across for Bradley’s, thence round
again towards Shark Island. Magic and Mistral about,
stood down mid-channel; Era now rounding island at
llh. 16m. Bs. Waitangi, bringing to leeward of buoy, had
to make a short leg, passing at llh. 19m. 30s. Magic
bowling along on the port stretch, Mistral in her wake,
both cleared latter place, jibing round island at llh.
20m. 555. and llh. 21m. respectively; the three leading
boats setting jib topsails and balloon foresails for the lead
up to Goat Island, Mistral latter sail only, balloon
foresails being boomed out by Waitangi, Magic, and
Mistral when nearing flagship, Era gradually increasing
her lead to the boat, which was rounded by Era at llh.
45m. 10s.; Waitangi, llh. 51m. 405.; Magic, llh. 53m.
405., and Mistral, llh. 54m. 305., all standing towards
Blue’s Point,* Era round, and brought to windward of
Nelson’s buoy, thence to starboard tack to weather of
flagship, Waitangi tacking short off Kirribilli, came about
for a short stretch, both going away on port, Magic
working tide down, Mistral following their move-
ments, Era about bringing to leeward of Bradley’s
stood out into mid-stream. About again, standing in for
Chowder, Waitangi rounded to weather of Clark J sland,
looking well up for Bradley’s. Magic standing down on
port stretch being crossed by former, Mistral going down
midstream, Era standing across for Bottle and Glass,
Waitangi coming out on port stretch got into rather close
quarters with Magic, latter on starboard. The former
throwing round stood for Taylor Bay, her bohstav carrying
away, and losing her some considerable time' Mistral
coming down on starboard working tide and sailing very
well. Era, round again, stood to weather off George’s
Head; thence, about again, stood to sea. Magic stood
down mid channel, thence to Watson’s Bay, a short stretch
taking her clear of South Beef, she quickly leaving Mistral
and Waitangi; the latter, with bobstay gone, sailing under
difficulties. Mistral, now all aback off the Old Man’s
Hat, with weather rigging gone, was soon put about,
mainsail stowed, and a course shaped for home.
Era, well clear, was seen to come up in wind, the
throat halyards parting, brought the gaff up and down the
mast. The foretopmen, with their usual agility, jumping
on the cross trees, the mainsail being lowered, she was put
about, getting along at a great pace under headsails onlv.
Magic stood well clear of North Head, thence round to
windward of Honeycombs, thence seaward: Waitangi still
plugging on, Bobstay carrying away again in the short jump.
Eva down off Curl reset mainsail; Magic, with good
lead, well to windward, standing towards boat off
the reef the former stood out to port. Waitangi
coming about to leeward of Curl, stood out, Magic round-
ing boat at 2h. 19m. 505.; Era at 2h. 23m.; Waitangi
carrying away bobstay again, peak halyards following, she
being then squared away for home; Magic set balloon fore-
sail, Era following with same and jib topsail, for
r»p to boat off Long Bay, Era passing Magic off the
light, latter getting topmast on end, and setting
jib header the boat being rounded by Era some
three minutes ahead; both stood in, working short
stretches along the land until off Bondi, Magic, then going
seawards for a change, not improving her position. Era
setting balloon foresail before entering Heads. The run to
finish at Flagship being accomplished in good time by
Era at 6h. 31m. 455., and Magic at 7h. 7m. Former
thus winning by 23 minntes 58 seconds, and was
well sailed by her owner ; the M agic being well handled
by Mr. P. O. Williams.
Yacht Race, open to all yachts Handicap: First boat
in, of either class, saving her time to take first prize; but
in the event of the second boat in saving her time, being of
the same class as the winner, then the second prize to go to
the first boat in saving her time of another class. Such
classes to be under 10 rating, and over 10 but under 20
rating. Course: Flying start between starter’s boat and
Blue’s Point, round Fort Denison, back round a boat off
Goat Island, thence round boat off Long Reef, round flag-
ship, round Shark Island, and hack to flagship, first
prize, vice-president’s cup; second prize, £2O. Entrance,
£3 3s. —Assegai, 6 tons, W. P. Smairl, 30 minutes, 1;
Sirocco, 10 tons, E. W. Knox, scratch, 2; lolanthe, 6 tons,
W. M. Maclardy, 25 minutes, 3. Other starters :
Pleiades, W. B. Mitchell, 40 minutes; Tritonia, P.
Ward, 45 minutes; ’Possum, A. Oliver, 50 minutes.
The start of this race was rather unsatisfactory, as the tide
being strong ebb, and the wind very light from the north-
east, the lolanthe drifted past the line and had to round
the starter’s boat again, which lost her a lot of
time. The Sirocco fouled the Pleiades, putting
her jibboom right through the latter’s mainsail,
which caused a delay of some minutes. The yachts
got away from the start in the following order:
Assegai, Tritonia, ’Possum, Sirocco, with Pleiades and
lolanthe a long way astern. For the trip to Fort Deni-
son Sirocco and Assegai carried square-headed topsails,
and the remainder jib-headed topsails. The Fort was
rounded by the Assegai 12h. 16m. 325. ; Sirocco, 12h. 19m.
40s. ; ’Possum, 12h. 20m. ; Pleiades, 12h. 21m. 205.;
Tritonia, 12h. 21m. 30s. ; lolanthe, 12h. 21m. 40s. The
lolanthe passed the Tritonia in rounding, and the Pleiades
in the run up to the Island. Tritonia setting her spinnaker,
passed lolanthe and Pleiades. Assegai carried her spin-
naker. The others carried squaresails. The Tritonia was
putoutof her course by an ocean-going steamer, which ran
her some distance to leeward. After rounding the boat
at Goat Island, the yachts took advantage of the
tide, and worked down the middle of the channel.
The lolanthe passed the ’Possum, Tritonia, and Pleiades
in the work to Bradley’s Head, and the Pleiades, although
handicapped with a split mainsail, was sailing well, and
succeeded in passing the Tritonia before Bradley’s
was reached. Bradley’s Head was passed by the Assegai,
Sirocco, lolanthe, Plieades, Tritonia, and’Possum in the
order named. On the work to the Heads the Assegai chose
the northern shore, while the Sirocco and lolanthe worked
across the harbour. The Pleiades, Tritonia, and ’Possum
followed suit. On standing seaward between the Heads,
the Assegai was passed by the Sirocco, which,
with the lolanthe, stood well up to North
Head, while the Assegai stood straight to
sea until she was able to make Tumble Down. After clear-
ing North Head the Sirocco and lolanthe stood to sea, and on
coming round cleared Bluefish. The remaining three yachts,
after a short trip to sea, gave up the contest. The wind
had now increased to a strong north-easter, with a nasty
short sea, which compelled the yachts to shorten sails.
The Sirocco changed her square-headed topsail for a jib-
header, lolanthe and Assegai sending their topmasts down,
made snug for the thrash to the reef. The Assegai, which
was sailing in splendid form, still kept to sea, while
her rivals stood inshore, the Sirocco making Curl Curl
Head, and on going round picked up a N.W.
slant, with which she improved her position. The lolanthe
was not so fortunate, as she got into the doldroms off Curl
Curl. The Sirocco, after leaving Curl Curl Head, stood to
sea, and on the next stretch made Dee Why Beach, and
from there came within about 50 yards of the fiagboat,
having to make a short stretch to clear it. The lolanthe
also worked close inshore, and on standing out passed the
Assegai, which had been working more to sea, and cleared
the boat, the Assegai following half-minute later. Times at
Long Reef were as follows : —Sirocco, 3h. 20m.; lolanthe,
3h. 28m.; Assegai, 3h. 28m. 30s. For the run hack the
Sirocco set a squaresail and jibheader, lolanthe
a small spinnaker, while the Assegai sent her
squareheader aloft, and off North Head she managed
to pass the lolanthe. The yachts now had as
much sail as they could carry (the lolanthe having set her
square-header). Off Lang’s Point the Assegai set a spin-
naker, but was compelled to take it in again. The flagship
was rounded as follows:—Sirocco, 4h. 20m. 155.; Assegai,


4h. 34m. 50m.; lolanthe, 4h. 35m. 25m. At the flagship
topsails were taken in, and after a short stretch the yachts
laid their course to Shark Island. During the trip down
the lolanthe passed the Assegai, the latter fouling the
former, and carrying away the ironwork from her
boom. Shark Island was rounded as follows:—Sirocco,
4h. 39m.; lolanthe, 4h. 56m. 355.; Assegai, 4h. 57m. 40s.
For the run home, topsails and balloon foresails were set,
and the flagship was passed as follows :—Sirocco, 4h. 55m.
305.; lolanthe, sh. 12m. 415.; Assegai, sh. 14m. 20s.
Thus the Assegai wins the cup. Sorocco as first boat of
another class, taking second prize. The winning boat was
sailed by Mr. T. Dudley, while the Sirocco and lolanthe
were in charge of Sam Richardson and Mr. S. Wilson.
Coasters’ Race, time for registered tonnage. Course:
From line between Kirribilli Point, and steamer Lady Loch,
round Shark Island, back round Fort Denison, round boat
moored off Long Reef, and back to flagship. First prize,
£75: second, £25 ; third, £10; entrance, £3 3s.—Bound
to Win, 32 tons, Thos. Shakeshaft, 1 ; Endeavour, 44 tons,
D. M‘Lennon, 2; Clara Jackson, 32 tons, Jackson Bros., 3.
Other starters : Jane Moorehead, 49 tons, Thos. Moore-
head ; May Flower, 56 tons, Giles Jenkins; Ettie,
44 tons, J. G. Koadie; Prince Alfred, 56 tons,
S. Dickson; Emanuel, 64 tons, Chas. Johnson;
Echo, 55 tons, Geo. Spears, Julia, 56 tons, Edwd.
Davies; Agnes Rose, 35 tons, B. Lloyd and Mrs. J. Starr,
Tuggerah, 62 tons, T. Davis. Great delay was caused at
starting, owing 1o the starting point having been altered
after most of the competitors had taken up their moorings
in Neutral Bay. All came to the scratch, and at 10.25
a.m. were sent off, the start not being by any means a good
one, Clara Jackson and Prince Alfred getting the worst of
it, their cables getting foul. They went off on the star-
board tack, Jane Moorehead with a good lead, followed by
the Emanuel, Echo, Ettie, Bound to Win, Agnes Rose,
Julia, Tuggerah, Clara Jackson, and Prince Alfred, in the
order named. The Emanuel, however, was sent back to
cross the line. The Moorehead stood well into Neutral Bay,
others not standing in so tar, thence worked mid-channel
withstrongebb tide down to Shark Island, which was rounded
by Jane Moorehead first, at 11.30 a.m., with Ettie, Bound
to Win, close up. Then followed Echo, Endeavour. Agnes
Rose, Clara Jackson, and Prince Alfred, with Tuggerah,
Julia, May Flower, and Emanuel some distance astern. On
the run to Fort Denison the leading boat mistook the course
and rounded the flagship instead of the Fort, thus allowing
Boulnd to Win to assume the lead. The times rounding
Denison were as follows :—Bound to Win, llh. 32m. 10s.;
Ettie, llh. 32m. 575.; Echo, llh. 34m. 505.; Endeavour,
llh. 35m. 405.; Jane Moorehead, llh. 39m. 155.; Agnes
Rose, llh. 40m. 505.; Clara Jackson, llh. 44m. 55.;
Prince Alfred, llh. 44m. 10s.; Tuggerah, llh. 46m.;
Emanuel, llh. 50m. 405.; Julia, llh. 57m. 505.; May
Flower, llh. 58m. 15s. Off Bradley’s Clara Jackson had
worked into fifth position, and the Heads were cleared by
Bound to Win at 12.45 p.m.,sailingsplendidly and increasing
her lead. Then came Ettie and Jane Moorehead, the latter
carrying away her topmast off the Hornsby light, and re-
tired. Off Curl Curl Bound to Win was still in command
of the fleet, with Clara Jackson second, and Endeavour and
Agnes Rose close up, and others very much scattered. The
boat at Long Reef was rounded as follows:—Bound to Win
at 3h. 9m.; Clara Jackson, 3h. 22m.; Endeavour, oh. 24m.;
Agnes Rose, 3h. 27m.; and Ettie, 3h. 21m. All set square-
sails for the run home, Endeavour hoisting raffee and
watersail also. The breeze being rather hard, they came
along at a rattling pace, Bound to Win being first to enter
the Heads at 3h. 45m. p.m.; Clara Jackson, 3h. 55m.;
Endeavour, 4h.; and Agnes Rose close up. The leading
boat increased her lead to the finish, and the race for
second place between the Clara Jackson and Endeavour was
most exciting, the latter securing it by a few seconds only.
The finishing times were —Bound to Win, 4h. 13m. 55.;
Endeavour, 4h. 25m. 385.; Clara Jackson, 4h. 25m. 505.;
Julia, 4h. 26m 245.; Ettie, 4h. 32m. 40s.
Canvas Dingies, 14ft., no boat to rank under 10ft. :
time allowance, li minute per foot; amateur crews.
Course: From moorings in Lavender Bay round Clark
Island, round flagship, round Clark Island, and back to
flagship. Fort Denison to be passed each way on the
northern side. First prize, £l2; second, £5; third, £3.
Entrance, 10s. 6d. Pearle, 14ft., J. Hayes, scratch, 1 ;
Violet, 14ft., 0. Taylor, scratch, 2; Thomas Punch, 14ft.,
J. Smith, scratch, 3. Other starters: Daisy, 13ft., C.
Crinks, 1& minute; Blanch, 14ft., C. Cowel, scratch;
Julia, 12ft. W. Rodick. 3 minutes; Verena, 13ft., F. W.
Birch, 1£ minute; Estrella, 14ft., G. Snow, scratch; Acme,
14ft., S. Small, scratch; Cygnet, 14ft., J. Biown, scratch;
Young Jack, 14ft., J. T. Robinson, scratch; Chance, 14ft.,
Slater and Foster, scratch; Bessie, 14ft., T. Mulhall, scratch.
There was hardly enough wind to move the boats along
when the signal to start was given. Pearle and Violet got
all the best of the start, and took up a good lead, followed
by Chance. On the beat to Clark Island a great race
ensued between the first three boats, the order passing the
Denison being Pearle, Chance, Violet, Thos. Punch, Acme,
Young Jack, and Estrella. Violet closed on Chance,
and Thos. Punch gained on the leaders, as also did
Estrella. After rounding the island balloon jibs were hoisted,
for the run to the fort, which upon reaching, square sails
were substituted for the short run to the flagship, which
was rounded as follows Pearle, llh. 16m. 205.; Violet,
llh. 17m. 255.; Chance, llh. 17m. 40s. ; Thos. Punch,
llh. 19m.; Acme, llh. 20m. 305.; Estrella, llh. 21m. 10s.;
Young Jack, llh. 21m. 255.; Bessie, llh. 22m. 10s.;
Daisy, llh. 22m. 30s. Going round, the Violet and Chance
were left in the lee, the latter fouling the anchor chain, thus
loosing the very good chance she had of taking the prize.
The race was now virtually over, the Pearle sailing over her
opponents. The times at the finish were as follows :
Pearle, llh. 51m. 235.; Violet, llh. 52m. 145.; Thos.
Punch, llh. 53m. 125.; Chance and Bessie. The winner
was weil handled by Thos. Leach.
Fishermen’s Race, bona-fide net and line boats, having
been licensed six months, crews limited to four, handicap,
working gear, sailing only. Course: From moorings in
Lavender Bay, thence to boat moored off Long Reef, and
back to flagship. First prize, £l5. Entrance, £1 Is.—
Hero. 22ft., F. Newton, 4 minutes, 1; Admiral, 23ft., Geo.
Newton, scratch, 2; Victor, 24ft., E. Meffln, 2 minutes, 3.
The Hero led all through the course, the finishing times
being as follows:—Hero, 4h. 57m. 305.; Admiral, 4h. 58m.
505.; and Victor.
Dingies Under Canvas, not exceeding 16ft. in length,
sft. beam, and 20in. in depth, anv crews. Course: From
moorings in Lavender Bay round flagship, round boat off
Goat Island, thence round Shark Island, round flagship,
round Fort Denison, and back to flagship. First prize,
£l5; second, £5. Entrance, £1 Is.—Our Boys, 16ft., G.
Fletcher, 1; Our Own, 16ft., W. Pacey, 1; Sophia,
16tt., C- G. Cameron, 2. Other starters:—Our
Girls, 16ft., G. Bell; Sunbeam, 16ft., H. Gil-
bert. A good start, all getting away well together.
The order rounding the flagship was—Sophia, llh. 47m.
575.; Our Own, llh. 48m. 305.; Our Girls, llh. 48m. 335.;
Our Boys, 1 lh. 48ra. 355.; and Sunbeam, llh. 49m. 525.
Squaresails were hoisted for the run to Goat Island, Our
Boys running into third place crossing Farm Cove. After
rounding the boat at the island, they stood over to the
northern shore, the Sophia and Our Own increasing their
lead. The breeze seemed a little too much for Sophia, as
she staggered under it a lot, but Our Boys went along in
fine style. The Sophia was still leading, passing
the Denison with Our Own and Our Boys on
about even terms, the former holding weather position.
For the run to the flagship from Shark Island
all set topsails, and when off Fort Denison Sophia hoisted
balloon jib. The Our Own sailed up to leeward of Sophia
just before reaching the flagship, and they lay becalmed for
some time under the ship, when Our Boys came up level
with them. The latter caught the wind first, and was
well into it before the others made any progress. Our Boys
and Our Own stood over to Kirribilli, while Sophia went
about at the stern of the ship, and made the Denison, but
had to make a short board to clear it. She
did not catch the others. The times on rounding
were—Our Boys, lh. 17m. 205.; Our Own, lh. 17m. 305.;
Sophia, lh. 17m. 505.; Our Girls, lh. 19m. 30s. From
here to the flagship the positions were unchanged, and


they finished as follows: —Our Boys, lh. 20m. 10s.; Onr
Own, lh. 20m. 155.; and Sophia, lh. 20m. 355. The
winner was sailed by George Fletcher, Our Own by Tom
Colebrook, and Sophia by George Ellis.
All Boats, 20ft. and upwards, limited crews. Handicap:
Under 22ft., four hands; 22ft. and under 24ft., five hands;
24ft. and upwards, six hands. Flying start, between
starter’s boat and Blue’s Point. Course: Round Shark
Island, round Fort Denison, round lightship and Sow-and-
Pigs, and back to flagship. First prize, £25 ; second, £10;
third, £5. Entrance, £1 10s. Varuna, half-open, 22ft.
(William Paul), 7 minutes, 1; Tempest, open, 22ft.
(A. Gale), 7 minutes, 2; Triton, half-open,
22ft. (J. H. M‘Kinlay), 3 minutes, 3. Other
starters: Buttercup, half-open, 22ft., H. Carpenter,
7 minutes; lanthe, half-open, 20ft.. E. W. Hey wood, 10
minutes: Wingadee, half-open, 20ft., H. Pollock, 8
minutes; Adelphi, open, 24ft.. M. A. H. Fitzhardinge, 1
minute; Irene, half-open, 22ft., H. Bevan, 4 minutes;
Millewa, open, 20ft., R. C. Gordon, 8 minutes; Irex, open,
22ft., N. A. Johnson, 3 minutes; Young Dick, 20ft., W.
Bull, 8 minutes; N. A. V., open, 32ft., V. W. Williams,
10 minutes; Hermione, half-open, 20ft., W. Clark, 5
minutes; Sea Breeze, open, 24ft., F. Rae, 7 minutes ;
Waveney, open, 22ft., H. Woolnough, 5 minutes; Naval
Brigade, open, 32ft., W. Rickwood, 8 minutes; Moewe,
open, 24ft., Dr. J. Elliott, scratch; Our May, half-
open, 24ft., W. Stannard, 4 minutes ; Ariadne,
half-open, 27ft., H. Stevens, scratch; Cynthia,
half-open, 20ft., C. J. Saunders, 5 minutes;
Vacuna, half-open, 22ft., J. B. Wilson, 6 minutes:
The start of this race was a rather pretty sight, the entries
being so numerous. The starter got them away well
toarether, and passing the flagship the order was—Triton,
Varuna, Tempest, Adelphi, Cynthia, Sea Breeze, Ariadne,
Buttercup, lanthe, Irex, Waveney, Our May, Moewe,
Hermione, Wingadee, Millewa, Varuna. On the wav to
Shark Island and back the positions changed, Adelphi as-
sumed command, Ariadne ran into third place, and the
times rounding Fort Denison were as follows:—Adelphi,
lh. 24m. 455.; Triton, lh. 24m. 505.; Ariadne, lh. 25m.;
Moewe, lh. 25m. ss. ; Irex, lh. 25m. 75.; Varuna, lh. 25m.
14s. ; Sea Breeze, lh. 25m. 20s. ; Cynthia, lh. 26m. 455,;
Our May, lh. 275.; N. A. V., lh. 27m. 405.; Wavemey,
lh. 27m. 505.; lanthe, lh. 28m. 285.; Irene, lh. 29m. 255.;
Young Dick, lh. 29m.555.; Buttercup, lh. 30m.; Vacuna, lm.
32h. 40s. Going down to the lightship the Ariadne and
Adelphi had a foul, which put them out of the race. The
finishing times were as follow:—Mowe, 2h. 35m. 305.;
Varuna, 2h. 36m.; Triton, 2h. 37m. 55.; Irex, 2h. 37m.
10s.; Tempest, 2h. 37m. 205.; Our May, 2h. 40m. 515.;
Cynthia, 2h. 41m. Os.; Wavemey, 2h. 41m. 435.; lanthe,
2h. 46m. 435.; and Vacuna, 2h. 49m. 535. Thus the Varuna,
well handled by her owner, takes first prize by time allow-
ance, Tempest second, and Triton third.
Canvas Dingies, 10ft. and under, to be manned and
sailed by youths under 16. No two boats of same class to
take prizes. Course: Flying start from Lavender Bay,
round Clark Island, round flagship, round Clark Island,
and back to flagship; Fort Denison to be passed each way
on the northern side. First prize, £7 5 second, £3; third,
£2. Entrance, 10s 6d.—Young Ethel, 10ft., W. Holmes,
1; Our Boys, Bft., E. Bell, 2; Endeavour, 10ft., P.
Summerbell, 3. Other starters: Neva, 10ft., and Nereus,
10ft. Young Ethel got away at the start, and led
throughout the race, the finishing time being as follows:
Young Ethel, 2h. 27m.; Endeavour, 2h. 32m. 585.; Neva,
2h. 34m. 95.; and Our Boys, 3h. 2m. 30s.
Half-decked Boats over 22ft. handicap, under canvas,
amateur crews. Course: from moorings in Lavender
Bay, round Fort Denison, round boat at Goat Island, round
It. S. Y. S. buoy at Manly, and back to flagship. I irst
prize, £3O ; second, £5. Entrance, £1 10s.—Pixie, 33ft.,
M. R. Evans, scratch, 1; Miss Maud, 23ft., C. Messenger,
7m., 2; Wilfred, 24ft., P. Roberts, 7m., 3. Other starters:
Lotus, A. Leigh, lm.; La Belle, 33ft., C. Binnie, sm. ;
Eula, 24ft., C. Goddard, 7m. All got away well
together, and they rounded Fort Denison as follows :
Pixie, Lotus, La Belle, and Wilfred. All set baloon jibs
for the run to Goat Island, Wilfred getting hers into the
water. On the beat to Manly Pixie proved too good for
the others, and at Manly had a long lead and the race all
her own way. The finishing times were as follows :
Pixie, 4h. 44m. 65.; Miss Maud, sh. 4m. 455.; and Wil-
fred, sh. sm. 355. The winner was well sailed by Mr. R.
Moody.
Dingies, 14ft., wooden, amateur crews. Course: From
moorings in Lavender Bay, round Clark Island, round flag-
ship, round Clark Island, and back to flagship. Fort Deni-
son to be passed each way on the northern side. First prize,
£10; second, £5. Entrance, 10s. 6d.—Hero, 14ft., J.
Drake, 1; Our Roy, 14ft., T. H. Snowdon, 2; Young
Victor, 14ft., J. Abram, 3. Other starters: Vision and
Thistle. Hero got the best of the start and at once sailed
clean away from the others and won as she liked, being
well handled by Mr. C. P. M‘Convil!e.
Open Boats, 20ft. to 21ft., handicap, amateur crews.
Course: From moorings in Lavender Bay round Fort
Denison, round boat off Goat Island, round R.S.Y.S. buoy
off Manly, round flagship, round Fort Denison, and back
to flagship. First prize, the Mayor’s prize; second, £10;
third, £o. Entrance, £2 2s. Rosetta, 22ft., E. Clark,
1| minute, 1; Xarifa, 24ft., H. B. Pickering, scratch, 2;
Pomona, 20ft., J. M. Firth, 9 minutes, 3. Other starters:
Planet and Ellie. Rosetta got away with the lead, and
was never caught. The finishing times were: Rosetta,
sh. 39m. 225.; Xarifa, sh. 41m. 75.; and Pomona, sh.
55m. 19s.
Half-decked Boats, 20ft. to 22ft., handicap. Course :
From moorings in Lavender Bay round Fort Denison, round
boat off Goat Island, round R. S. Y. S. buoy at Manly, and
back to flagship. First prize, £25; second, £lO- Entrance,
£1 10s.-Genesta, 20ft., C. G. Cameron, 5 minutes, 1;
Myosotis, 22ft., J. Flynn, 8 minutes, 2 ; ltonia, 20ft., H.
Carpenter, 5 minutes, 3. Other starters : Guinevere, 22ft.,
H. Dinham, scratch; Carissima, 22ft., J. A. Tibbey, 8
minutes; Florrie, 22ft., A. M. Castle. 10 minutes; Velox,
22ft., W. Uhr, 8 minutes; Nereus, 20ft., F. G. Russell, 6
minutes. The Myosotis was first away, followed by Guine-
vere, Genesta, Velox, ltonia, and Carissima; Genesta
with a second suit on, and ltonia with one reef down. They
jibed round the Denison as follows: —Genesta, Velox,
Myosotis, ltonia, and Carissima. The Guinevere capsized
while jibing. After rounding, Velox assumed command,
and passing the flagship one of the crew fell overboard, and
was picked up by George Ellis in the Genesta. On the way
up from Goat Island M yosotis took up premier position,
with Genesta second, and ltonia third. Genesta passed
M yosotis, and they finished as follows : Genesta, 6h. 7m.
265. ; Myosotis, 6h. 14m. 455; and ltonia, 6h. 15m. 9s.
The winner was handled in first-class style by George
Ellis.
OFFICIAL DINNER AND EVENING PARTY AT GOVERNMENT HOUSE.
His Excellency the Governor gaye an official dinner at
Government House last evening in honour of the dis-
tinguished visitors from the Australasian colonies who are
now in Sydney for the purpose of taking part in the Cen-
tennial celebrations. The chair was occupied by Lonl
Carrington, and there were present—His Excellency Sir
Henry Loch, Governor of Victoria; his Excellency Sir
William Jervois, Governor of New Zealand; his Excellency
Sir Anthony Musgrave, Governor of Queensland : his Excel-
lency Sir William Robinson, Governor of South Australia ;
his Excellency Sir Robert Hamilton, Governor of Tas-
mania; his Excellency Sir Charles Mitchell, late


Governor of Fiji; Sir Henry Parkes, lremier of
New South Wales; the Hon. D. Gillies,
Premier of Victoria; Sir S. W. Griffith, Premier
of Queensland; the Hon. T. Playford, Premier of
South Australia; the Hon. Sir Frederick Darley, his
Eminence the Cardinal, the Chief Justice of Victoria, the
Hon. Sir John Hay, the Earl of Carnarvon, Sir James
Macßain, the Archbishop of Melbourne, Mr. Justice
Faucett, the Archbishop of Adelaide, the Mayor of Mel-
bourne, the Mayor of Hobart, Major-General Richard-
son, Captain Avellan, Captain Kane, the Rev.
Dr. O’Haran, Lord Bertie, Captain Meehan,
the Hon. B. R. Wise, the Hon. Sir William Fitzherbert,
the Hon. William Clarke, the Hon. J. G. Ramsay, the
Hon. Francis Abigail, the Hon. A. J. Clarke, the Hon.
Henry Cuthbert, the Hon. E. N. Braldon, the Hon. F. J.
Derham, the Hon. C. Todd, the Hon. Speaker, of \ ictoria,
Lieutenant Erskine, Mr. Robinson, Captain Keith 1 alconer,
Admiral Fairfax, the Most Rev. the Primate, the Chief
Justice of South Australia, the Hon. the Speaker of New
South Wales, his Grace the Duke of Manchester, the
Bishop of Queensland, Mr. Justice Windeyer, Mr. Justice
Webb, Mr. Justice Deffell, Mr. Justice Mein, Mr. Justice
Owen, the Mayor of Adelaide, Captain Clayton, Captain
Gourdoy, Captain Musgrave, Mr. Carington, Mr. Fortescue,
: he Hon. J. F. Burns, the Hon. B. S. Biid, the Hon* John
Sutherland, the Hon. C. Q. Kingston, the Hon. James
Inglis, the Hon. C. H. Pearson, the Hon. C. J. Roberts,
the Hon. C. F. Johnson, the Hon. D. M. Davies, the Hon.
W. H. Wilson, the Hon. the Speaker of Western Aus-
tralia, Colonel Roberts, Captain Hammill, Major
Phillimore, Mr. Prichard, Mr. Wallington, and
Major Gascoigne. Sir Alfred Stephen, Mr. Justice
Stephen, the Right Rev. the Archbishop of Brisbane, the
Right Hon. W. B. Dailey, and Mr. Justice Innes, were in-
vited to be present, but they were unable to attend.
After the dinner there was an evening party at Govern-
ment House, at which about 2000 guests were present, in-
cluding the gentlemen who attended the official dinner.
Amongst the company were—Lady Carnarvon, the Misses
Darlev, Miss Stephen, Miss Parkes, Miss Faucett, Lady
and Miss Hav, Mrs. Garrett, Mrs. W. Clarke. Mrs.
Sutherland, Mrs. Abigail, Mrs. Windeyer, Mrs. Deffell,
Mrs. Richardson, Mrs. Roberts. Sir Patrick and Lady
Jennings, Sir Robert and Lady Wisdom, Sir John Robert-
son, Sir Edward Strickland, Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Fairfax,
Major and Mrs. Hanning Lee, Mr. and Mrs. W. Curnow, Mr.
and Mrs. Tooth, Major Mackenzie, the officers of H.M.b.
Nelson, Calliope, Rapid, Diamond, Lark, and Dart, the
officers of the Russian corvette Rynda, and ot the trench
warship Du chatt'aut. &c. Lady Carrington received the
guests in the drawing-room, and the arrangements
for their entertainment were of the most sumptuous
character. The charming gardens were crowded through-
out the evening. The brilliant illuminations of the vessels ot
war and of the harbour were greatly admired. Ihe grounds,
illuminated with electric light, were bright and beautiful.
The band of the Permanent Artillery, under the direction ot
M. Devery, performed the following selections of music .
March, “The Englishman,” Devery; overture, 4 Zampa,
Herold ; valse, “ Dream on the ocean,” Gung 1: selection.
Op. ‘-Faust,” Gounod; serenade, “Farewell, Herfurth,
gavotte, “Le Bijou,” Kotham: fantasia, 44 From East to
West,” Browne; valse, “Deutsche Lieder, Ziehrer,
galop, “The Wallaby,” Devery; mazurka, Arm m
arm,” Strauss; God save the Queen.
WORKING LADS’ PICNIC AT THE
NATIONAL PARK.
Not the least interesting event in connection with the
Centennial celebration was the treat given yesterday at the
National Park to some 3400 working lads connected with
the tobacco and other factories, the milk and news vending
trades, and other branches of labour in which the lower
class of our juvenile population are engaged, ihe idea
originated with Mr. George Lewis, by whom it was com-
municated to the Centennial Commission, who at once
fell in with the view, and submitted it to the Colonial
secretary, who very cordially approved of it, and arrange-
ments were proceeded with accordingly, without delay.
Committees were appointed tf provide for the amusement
and entertainment of the lads (whose age was to be limited
to 17 years), called a sports committee, a provision com-
mittee, and a ground committee. The duties of the latter
consisted of the care and oversight and transit of the lads
to and from the Park, the preservation of order at the park,
and the general well-being and behaviour of all
concerned. The convener of the committee was
the Rev. J. A. Clarke, who was ably assisted by
the Rev. Mr. Beck and Messrs. John Davies, M.L.C., Mr.
Wilson Robjohns, and 27 other gentlemen. When it is
considered that no less than 3400 lads visited the park yes-
terday the extent of the work of this committee will be at
once fully appreciated. The sports committee consisted of
Mr. T. Corbett as convener, and Mr. C. Wisehart as secre-
tary, assisted bv Mr. Herbert Fairfax and 27 others. In
reference to the prizes given in connection with the sports,
it is a matter worthy of note that a simple personal
appeal to the city warehouses was responded to by no less
than 57 of them who gave a large number of articles of the
character generally prized by boys. The provision com-
mittee consisted of Mrs, .Robjohns as convener, assisted by
Mrs. Pottie, Mrs. Lewis, Miss Wilson, Miss Wilkinson, and
Mrs Selby; and in addition there were no less than 55 ladies
and a few gentlemen, including Messrs. Condy and Widdon.
This large number of ladies belong to that class af the good
hearted women of this city who are always willing
to assist in works of this kind. The provisions
were obtained from ths establishments of Messrs.
Bruce, Lovely, Kidman, Condy, Griffiths, Biddeil, and
Starkey, and were the best of their class. _ They consisted
of buns, meat and sausage rolls, sandwiches, cakes and
confectionery of all kinds, ginger beer, tea and coffee, and
bread and butter. .... , ,
About half-past nine o’clock two special trains left the
Redfern station, crowded with the young excursionists,
each of whom had been supplied with a ticket, and all of
whom were in the very height of youthful spirits. These
trains also contained the whole of the ladies and gentlemen
who had given their services for the occasion. A third
special train left at 10 o’clock with Sir Henry Parkes and
party, and also about a hundred youngsters, who had
missed the earlier specials. The weather was all that could
be desired, and during the runup the boys seemed delighted
with their trip out, and the various cars and carriages were
a perfect Babel of voices. .
The site selected for the picnic was close by the l.ottus
station on a bald eminence, on which is erected Mr.
Kidman’s store depot in connection with the unemployed.
In this store the whole of the provisions had been placed in
baskets, boxes, &c., ready for handing out. At a short
distance a number of long rough tables had been erected,
each one having an awning placed over it; and about 20
barrels of gingerbeer were ranged near these, ready to be
drawn into buckets for distribution.
Shortly after the boys had arrived, word went
round that Sir Henry Parkes would be among
them in a few minutes to make a speech,
and it was resolved to give him a fitting
reception. A little later the special arrived, and Sir
Henry, the Hon. Thomas Playford (Premier of South
Australia), the Hon. J. G. Ramsay (Chief Secretary of
South Australia), the Hon. F. Abigail (Minister of Mines),
and the Hon. Thomas Garrett (Minister tor Lands),
stepped on to the platform, and were greeted with several
rounds of cheers.
A few minutes later Sir Henry Parkes addressed a few
encouraging words to the boys, and in the course of his
remarks said it was not because they were now poor
that they might not aspire to the’ highest positions
in the land. Many of the greatest men who had ever
lived sprang from'very lowly stations, and he specially
instanced the greatest among them all in one respect
President Lincoln, who had liberated no less than five
millions of slaves. (Cheers.) Lincoln had sprung from
the poorer classes, but had worked hard with a conscious
rectitude of purpose and a noble ambition. He read


himself up for the Bar, and became a lawyer,
and one of the bright traits in his character
was that he would never take up a case in
which he did not think justice was in his cause. (Cheers.)
That was a noble thing, and a noble example for the boys
before him to try and emulate. (Cheers.) There were
many lads in that audience who had it in their power to
rise in life—it all lay with themselves. It was no disgrace
to be poor—indeed, it might be an honour to be poor if
honour and integrity were preserved. Though all could not
expect to he presidents of a republic, or kings or emperors,
yet each in his own particular sphere might be remarkable
for a life of simple integrity. There was no
phase of life more needed in these colonies
than honesty, truthfulness, and uprightness.
Given these, and they must inevitably succeed in life, and
become remarkable in that sphere where their lot might be
cast. Should they be guided in such a path and fall into
adversity they would never want friends, or those who
would stand true to them in times of trial; and they would
always be found developing the truest manhood—he did
not by this mean in the shape of brute force, but that
manliness which was true, even to the weak, as
well as to the strong, and they would also
develop the phase of character that would prove a
source of confidence to all whom they might meet in life.
(Cheers.) While wishing them all the happiness that the
day and the beautiful scenery around them could give, he
would also say to them, “ God bless every one of you, my
lads.”
As Sir Henry concluded, one of the boys in the body of
the crowd cried out, “ Three cheers for Sir Henry Parkes,”
and they were given with a strength of voice that spoke
volumes for the health of the boys’ lungs.
Shortly afterwards Sir Henry and party took their
departure, having other engagements elsewhere. As the
train left the platform it was again loudly cheered.
The next feature of the day was giving each boy a tin
pannikin and some sringerbeer, which was served from pails
which had been filled from the casks. There was a good
deal of difficulty over this, as the big boys rushed the little
ones; and the same may be said of the after distribution of
victuals. Notwithstanding the large number of gentlemen
and ladies who took part in this distribution there were very
considerable difficulties in the way, in consequence of the
presence of a number of larrikins, who would have been far
betterengaged elsewhere. The age of the guests was supposed
to be limited to 17 years, but there must have been hundreds
who were 19 and 20, while several were grown men
with fully developed moustaches, who should never
have been included in such a general invita-
tion. So great was the rush at one time that
had it not been for the ladies anything like a fair distribu-
tion could never have been made. However, ultimately
things were placed in a satisfactory groove, and everyone
succeeded in getting as much as he wanted ; and the same
may be said of the afternoon tea. With the exception of
tho struggling referred to, pretty good order prevailed,
there not being a single fight during the whole day, which,
considering the large number of boys present, and many
from rival establishments, is a matter for satisfaction.
I he programme of sports was a very long one, embracing
swimming (in which some of the little fellows showed them-
selves quite adepts, and the different events were well con-
tested, there being several tiqp), fiat races, throwing the
cricket ball, hurdle races, hop-step-and-jump races, Siamese
races, high jumps, apple races, walking matches, long
jumps, sack races, somersaults, wheelbarrow races, walking
the greasy pole ever water and climbing it on land, and
kicking football. In consequence of the large number of
events, and the early hour at which the last train left the
“ finals” were not decided in many of the races; but, in
consequence of the number of prizes in hand, the com-
mittee will be able to give awards for all the different heats,
and these will be presented at a special meeting to be held
one evening next week. The whole of these events passed
off without a hitch, for which great praise is due
to Messrs. C. Wiseheart and Corbett and the large com-
mittee assisting them. The only accident that happened in
connection with these sports was to a little fellow who was
in one of the swimming races, and who fell on the back of
his head on a stone as he was walking across a shallow part
of the river. He was not, however, badly hurt, and his
wound was attended to at the camp of the National Park
trustees. During the day there was a case of sunstroke and
a case of epilepsy, but they were mild forms of attack and
the patients soon recovered. At the same time it is only
right to suggest that upon such an occasion there should
have been a medical man present, or upon any occasion
where there is a large assemblage of people at a distance*
from the city under such circumstances.
The band of the Russian man-of-war now in harbour
had been kindly lent for the occasion by his Imperial
Highness Grand Duke Michaelovitch, and accompanied the
party. During the day they played almost without inter-
mission, and it is only fair to say that the band is one of no
mean merit, and such a one as is seldom met with in the
colonies.
There were three or four policemen present, but fortu-
nately they were not called upon to do any very active
service. A boy was apprehended with a strap in his
possession that had been torn off one of the carriage doors,
and taken before Mr. John Davies, M.L.C., who as a J.P.
accepted his explanation that he had picked it up, and
ordered his discharge, especially as the story bore an air of
probability. It might be here mentioned that Mr. Davies
looked after the trains, and did much efficient service in that
and other ways. A number of naval artillery men tendered
valuable assistance in the distribution of food and keeping
the youngsters in order ; and, as for the ladies, it is not too
much to say that much of the success of the whole affair
was due to their untiring efforts. But chief among all,
who worked like a horse almost without a moment’s inter-
mission, was Mr. George Lewis, to whom, however, it
seemed a labour of love. The Rev. Mr. Clarke, too,
showed incontestibly that he is a muscular Christian, for
at times he was placed in a position where much of his
strength was required in resisting the encroachments of the
crowds of boys. Mr. Burrowes, the National Park super-
intendent, also gave a good deal of valuable assistance, and
the same might be said of nearly all who had so
thoroughly taken up this matter, and seemed determined
to work it to a successful issue.
Shortly after 5 o’clock the return journey was com-
menced, and Sydney was safely reached before 7, so bring-
ing to an end one of the events in connection with our Cen-
tennial celebrations that is not likely to be forgotten for
years to come by those who took part in it.
THE BAND CONTEST.
The band contest was commenced in earnest yesterday at
about noon, and was continued, with hardly any inter-
mission, until late in the evening', at the Carrington
Grounds. The “ grand contest selections ” were all played
excepting that by the Cumberland (Parramatta) Band,
which was not present. The weather was well suited for
the performance, the wind not being too boisterous, and
there was ample accommodation provided for everybody.
The attendance was not very large in the morning, but was
much increased during the afternoon. The adjudicators
(Messrs. Zelman, Caron, and Gildea) were accom-
modated in one of the side buildings, close to
the band-stand, which was entirely covered in, so
as to screen the bands from view—the judges not being
allowed to know the names of the several bands, and agree-
ing to make their award entirely according to the merits of
the several performances, known to them bv numbers only.
The order of playing was decided by lot, and the name of
each band as it came forward was hoisted on the board,
together with a number corresponding to the title of the
piece of music as set down on the programme. The
numerical strength of each band was strictly limited to 25,
and while only some played with the full complement, yet
nearly all came within two or three of the limit—the
average being about 22. The general playing was really
astonishingly good, and when it is remembered that the
competition is strictly confined to amateur players, and that
the performers are those who do not follow music


as a calling, and who have but little leisure
for its study, the more credit must be given. In some cases
the performances were nearly perfect in every department,
and at least six bands showed such a high standard of ex-
cellence, that there will be no cause to be ashamed on the
part of those who may not gain the first place in the judge’s
list, for even the winner of the fourth prize will not be
compelled to feel that he is far from the first so far as
honour is concerned. This competition will certainly do
much good; for it not only teaches us that there are better
amateur military bands in Australia than most people
would expect; but also the opportunity it affords
for the several bands to hear the excellences ana the
failings of others, can hardly fail to cause a further ad-
vance in the standard already attained.
The Albury Town Band (Mr. D. Pogson, bandmaster)
played first, a fantasia; Balfe’s “ II Talismano ” being
the chosen selection. This band showed much delicacy,
but the piece gave small opportunity for the exhibition of
the more dashing qualities of style. The tune was generally
good, and much attention was given to expression. The
next to appear was the St. Joseph’s (Launceston) Band,
under Mr. W. T. Bates, “ Maritana ” being the piece
played. There was some uncertainty of attack, and slight
sharpness of intonation at times ; but some of the sostenufb
passages were decidedly good, notwithstanding a slight
tendency to fail as regards pitch in the opposite direction.
The finale was excellently played, however, and was most
effective. The Band of the Fourth (Newcastle) Regiment
was the third in order of performance, and under Mr. W.
Barkell acquitted itself remarkably well. The selection
from “ Ernani ” afforded scope for every performer to show
what he could do, and one and all did full justice to
their parts. Refinements of light and shade, excellent
precision and attack, and perfect balance of tone, were all
noticeable—indeed, there was much to admire on all counts.
The band was hailed with loud cheers on retiring. North-
cott’s (Sandhurst) Baud played next a capital arrangement
of subjects from “ Rigoletto.” Some of the cornet playing
was particularly fine, and the phrasing was neat; but there
was less mellowness ot tone than in certain other cases, and
the blend of instruments was not always good. The
Mudgee Town Band (Mr. A. W. Sheppard, bandmaster)
played only 15 strong, and so its selection, “The Gospel
Trumpet,” could hardly fail to suffer in effect inconse-
quence. This band is entirely composed of youths, and
therefore the highest standard could hardly be expected of
them. L he South Australian Militia Band, under Lieutenant
R. V. Squarise, played “ La Forza del Destine,” and would
have secured perhaps greater applause only that the open-
ing was considerably out of tune, for there was much
otherwise to admire in the performance. “ Der L reischutz”
was played by the Eastern Suburban Band (South Aus-
tralia), under Bandmaster Mr. A. Heath, and there were so
many points of noticeable excellence that it was to be
regretted occasional failings in tempo militated against
general success. The Sydney Naval Brigade Band, under
Mr. J. Devlin, chose a most difficult piece in their selection
from Wagner’s “ Rienzi,” and the ensemble was good,
while the baritone solo also attracted much attention. 1 he
Hobart Garrison Band chose “ Lucrezia Borgia, and
acquitted themselves well under Mr. W. f. Bates.
The clarionet and horn were excellent, but flatness
of the second cornet spoiled other effects.
Bulch’s Model Band, from Ballarat, though only recently
formed, gave a splendid performance of “ Gems of Weber.
The expression seemed at times slightly exaggerated, but
with this exception the whole piece was admirably ren-
dered, and the cornet and euphonium soloists, acquitted
themselves splendidly. The overture to ‘‘.William i ell
was also finely played by the Launceston City Band, under
Mr. W. A. Wallace. The difficult opening movement was
not altogether successful, and the finale was somewhat
hurried, but otherwise the performance was admirable. 1 he
piocolo of this band is specially deserving of praise, while
the clarionet-playing was also good.
In the evening the solo competition took place at the
Protestant Hall, Castlereagh-street. The attendance of
the public was only moderately good, but the friends of
the several performers mustered in good force, so that the
audience was fairly numerous. A large number of competitors
came forward, the instruments for which entries were
received being clarionet, cornet, euphonium, and trombone.
In the clarionet department there was very excellent play-
ing, although most of the performers seemed to think per-
haps too much of execution, and too little of purity and
mellowness of tone, which is so all important as regards
this instrument. Two performers stood from the rest,
viz., Mr. Allison, of the Eastern Suburban Band, and Mr.
Munro, of the Hobart Garrison Band; and between these two
probably lie the choice for first place. But others also per-
formed well, from the military standpoint, and the clarionet
exhibition was the best of the evening. There was less to
notice about the cornet performances, although the entries
were more numerous, as there was but little refinement
shown in most cases. The euphonium players, as a rule,
produced only an indifferent tone, although considerable
facility of execution was frequently apparent. The per-
formances last evening showed, however, that the amateur
bands of Australia possess a variety of members who can
give excellent account of themselves as soloists in their
several departments, which is a highly satisfactory addition
to make to the record of general excellence of the bands (as
a whole) which has been referred to in our notice of the
contest performances of the morning and afternoon.
So much enterprise has been shown by the promoters of
this band contest that it would be gratifying to see the
public take more interest in the affair. The labour must
have been immense, and the expense must also have been
very considerable, before bringing together these seventeen
bands from the various colonies. And as the performances
are certainly as enjoyable as they are creditable, it may be
hoped that the public will, for their own sakes, attend in
larger numbers.
THE ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION’S
CENTENARY EXCURSION.
In connection with the Centennial celebrations, and tak-
ing advantage of the presence in Sydney of representatives
of the other colonies, the Engineering Association of New
South Waleß arranged a series of excursions, including visits
to various industrial establishments. The first of these trips
took place yesterday. The company met at 10 a m., on
board the steamer lllawarra, and set off for a trip round
the harbour, which, with all the boats afloat for the
regatta, presented a scene which greatly pleased the visitors.
The gentlemen present were the following 'The president
of the association, Mr. W. Cruickshank ; the vice-president,
Mr. S. A. Key; the members of the council, Messrs.
R. Pollock, J. Richmond, A. D. Nelson, W. Shellshear,
H. W. Kerle, N. IlargraVe, and G. Fischer; the treasurer,
Mr. J. Sands; the secretary, Mr. W. E. H. Nicolle; and
the fo lowing members, Messrs. N. Selfe, H. Selfe, W.
Greenwood, P. Hunter, W. Scott, R. Scott, S. Poolman,
A. Christie, H. Vale, G. A. Morell, J. Wildridge, A. D.
Marshall, J. Lang, Professor Warren, J. P. Franki, J.
Touch, R. W. Finlavson, H. G. Sands, O. Blacket,
H. Perdriau, W. Milne, H. P. Howe, J. Proctor,
J. T. Haycroft, H. Ford, W. Grant, Dr. Storer,
J. A. Leahy, J. M. Dunn, E. H. S. Nicolle, J. Elder,
W. H. German, T. Stewart, J. F. Carson, and A. S.
Hinder. Intercolonial visitors: Mr. J. E. Edwards, Mr.
O’Hanlan, Mr. J. 13. Garde, Mr. E. Phillips, Mr. J.
Guillan, Mr. P. R. M'Dougall, Mr. John Buncle, Mr. D.
Mackenzie, Mr. Wise, Mr. M‘Killop, from Victoria;
Mr. F. May, from South Australia; Mr. E. W. Robert-
son, Mr. R. Macdougall, Mr. J. Booth, from Queens-
land ; Mr. W. Branstone, from New Zealand. Other
guests: Mr. J. Kelsey, London; M. Louis Violette,
France; Mr. J. Macnamara, Cork; Dr Bernstein, Lis-
in ore; Mr. G. Harrison, Hay; Mr. p'. A.
Franklyn, Mr. O. Bagge. Mr. Irvine, and Mr. C. M.
Stephens, Clarence River; Captain F. H. Trouton,
Captain Broomfield, Captain Vine Hall, Captain
Heselton, Mr. A. Blackett, Mr. Smith (of Messrs. Smith
and liowel, Mr. G. Cowdery, and Mr. T. R. Firth, of the
Railway Department; Mr. A. B. Portus, Harbours and


Rivers; Mr. C. VV. .Lang and Mr. Marritot, New Eng-
land ; Mr. Ryland (of Messrs. Ryland and Morse), Mr. E.
C. Bett, Mr. Taylor, Mr. Hudson, junior, and Mr.
Muir and Mr. Fisher (of the Colonial Sugar Com-
pany) . The Illawarra steamed out of Sydney Heads and,
having turned in the entrance, came back to Sydney waters.
Passing on from the lively picture off Farm Cove, the
steamer went round to Pyrmont, and stopped at the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company’s Works. The party landed
and went through the establishment, witnessing in
operation the strange and numerous processes which few
who use the finished article think are neces-
sary to its production. The huge stacks of raw
sugar in tbe storehouse waiting for treatment attracted
attention, and the refining process was followed with great
interest. After returning to the steamer, the company had
an excellent luncheon in the saloon. During lunch, the
president announced that there were to be no speeches, and
• this welcome departure from the beaten track of after-
dinner misery was greeted with a storm of cheers. The next
place visited was Mort’s Dock and Engineering Works, at
Balmain. Here the great steam hammer was seen at work
on a heavy shaft, and various other interesting machines
were inspected. A noticeable feature was found in the new
plate rollers, lately imported and now just erected. These
rollers will turn out plates 18ft. wide, and with this fine
machine and a new hydraulic riveter, now being put up, it is
expected that the establishment will be able to do any work
that may be wanted for some years to come. The party
returned to the steamer and then went up to the works of
the Atlas Engineering Company, opposite Cockatoo
Island. It was originally intended to visit th Government
Docks on the island, but the programme was altered, the
attraction being the new floating dock just completed
by the Atlas Company on a plan entirely new to
these colonies. The dock consists of a series of
pontoons, which raise and carry the vessel, baliyiced
by a counterpoise, the pumping and other machinery
being enclosed in a walled space in the centre. This
dock lifts a 2000-ton ship clear of the water in 25 minutes.
At a short distance off pontoons were in course of construc-
tion for continuing the dock to double the length. An
attractive operation here was the use of the hydraulic rivet-
closer. Locomotive boilers for the Government were seen
in various stages. This completed the day’s excursion, and
the Tllawarra returned to her wharf. On the way down
the president, Mr. Cruickshank, said a few words
on behalf of the association, welcoming their visitors, and
expressing the pleasure of the members at having the
opportunity of entertaining them. Mr. Buncle acknow-
ledged the compliment on behalf of the Victorians and
others, and emphasised the value of such friendly meetings
in promoting intercolonial federation. Mr. Robertson, of
Queensland, also replied. The guests generally warmly
expressed their thanks for the pleasure of the day’s enter-
tainment. The party landed at about 6 o’clock.
TRADES AND LABOUR DEMONSTRATION.—THE NEW TRADES HALL.
MONDAY, JANUARY 30.
On Saturday the principal ceremony in connection
with the Centenary was carried out by the sons of
toil, who assembled in the manner peculiar to them-
selves to celebrate the Centenary of Australia—
not as mere passive spectators but as the actors in
a demonstration, the most successful of its kind ever
held in the colonies. Great events had gone before in
which those high in place and power had taken a fitting
part, but Saturday’s spectacle interested the masses more
than any proceedings of the week that saw Australia
launched upon the second century of her existence. This
was natural and proper, for the occasion was the laying of
the foundation-stone of a building which is to be the
bureau, the meeting-place, the library and reading-room of
the working men of Sydney. In our last issue we
gave an illustration and description of the Trades
Hall. In order to eive eclat to the ceremony,
no less than 28 industrial organisations assembled
and formed themselves into a procession, and punctu-
ally at the appointed time, and in the manner laid down in
the official programme, set out from Cook Park and moved
on through the prescribed route to the Trades Hall site, by
way of Macquarie, Bridge, and George streets. Every
society was preceded by its band and banner. There were
first the carpenters and joiners, with their models, and the
ironmoulders, with locomotive boiler, The tobacco manu-
facturers showed four carts covered with barrels and cigar-
boxes, adorned with the green weed. The Seamen’s Union
—hundreds of healthy, cheerful men, in straw hats, and
wearing the Centennial ribbon, looking every inch heroes of
the sea—was a striking feature of the procession. Follow-
ing these came the Typographical Association, with j rinting
presses of Gibbs, Shallard, and Co.’s, printing on the way.
Plumbers and gasfitters, boiler-makers, and farriers formed
a goodly array. The Stonemasons’ Society was preceded
by the Scottish Volunteer Band, in full highland costume,
and the martial strains of the bagpipes mingled
harmoniously with the music of the brass instruments.
Five carts loaded with barrels and vats of various sizes
typified the cooper’s industry. With the wharf labourers
came a dray, drawn by gaily decked horses, with a tableau
vivant of nine persons in past and present costumes, in-
tended to represent the landing of Captain Cook and
Australian progress since. Perched above all was a central
figure, representing New South Wales—a well-favoured
and jocund maiden, stepping on the threshold of woman-
hood. Then there was a six-horsed dray, with allegorical
figures representing Britannia, Neptune, Commerce. This
amused and delighted the crowds mustered in thousands
along the routes, who cheered the toilers to the echo. The
plasterers, painters, and tailors were all represented, and
the shipwrights carried model boats. There appeared next
bricklayers, coachmakers, engineers, amalgamated carpen-
ters, tinsmiths, cooks and stewards, and brickinakers with
trollies, upon which the making of bricks was exemplified
by the Eight-hours Brick and Tile Company. The
Licensed Drivers’ Union brought up the rear. The
thoroughfares traversed by the procession were thronged
with gay and happy holiday makers. The city was holding
high carnival. The scene in George-street was supremely
picturesque. Line upon line of brilliant colour, row upon
row of Venetian masts covered with crimson cloth, strings
of tiny flags fluttering in the breeze, ensigns
of every colour, towering high above the house-
tops, decorated arches and ar istic devices, opened a
vista delightful to the eye. The whole city seemed to line
the thoroughfares as the procession passed. The demeanour
of the crowd was decidedly orderly and good tempered.
The music of nearly 30 bands enhanced the effect of the
display, and contributed to the excellent spirits of all.
Vehicular traffic was suspended, and the procession
marched through the principal streets, no accident occurred
to mar in any way the proceedings.
Thousands of people weie congregated in the narrow and
somewhat unsavoury thoroughfares leading into Goulburn


and Dixon streets when his Excellency the Governor,
accompanied bv Lady Carrington, drove up to perform the
ceremony of the day. The vice-regal party included Sir Henry
Loch, Governor of Victoria; Sir Anthony Musgrave,
Governor of Queensland; Sir Frederick ]N apiei Broome,
Governor of Western Australia; Lord Bertie, and Captain
Keith-Falconer. Cheer after cheer rent the air with accla-
mation as the members of the party took their places on the
improvised and carpeted dais. The procession, whichhadbeen
awaiting in Dixon-street the arrival of his Excellency,
passed the site of the hall, led by a detachment of mounted
troopers, shortly after half-past 10 o’clock, and continued
the march through Goulburn-street, Regent and Cleveland
streets, to Prince Alfred Park. The bands played as they
fassed the representatives of royalty “ Advance Australia
'air.” The men of the Seamen’s Union presented specimen
hats to Lord and Lady Carrington as they marched by,
and his Excellency, amid great enthusiasm, removed the
ribbon from the hat and fastened it on the breast of his
coat. The bands and banners at length disappeared, and
thespectators crowded closer round the somewhat frail looking
platform. A grand stand immediately in front of the site—
bearing over it the mottoes “ Welcome our Guests” and
“May Peace and Unity Prevail” —was crowded, its occu-
pants’ being for the most part daughters of labour,
assembled to witness the ceremony. Mr. J. E. West
presented the Executive Committee of the Trades
Hall to his Excellency and Lady Carrington, and
then spoke at some length on the difficulties
that had been overcome, and the patient labour
required to secure a sum sufficient for the hall. In 1883
and 1884 meetings were held at which representatives were
present from some of the labour organisations, and these
culminated in a deputation to the then Premier, Sir
Alexander Stuart, urging for a grant to enable the com-
mittee to purchase land for a site. The request was de-
clined, and then followed a motion in Parliament author-
ising a sum not exceeding £6OOO for the purpose of cover-
ing the cost of a suitable block of land. The
site was secured, a company formed, articles of
association were drawn up, competitive designs for
a hall invited, a tender for the construction
of a part of the building accepted, and the initial
steps have been taken in the erection of the structure. Mr.
Smedley, the architect of the building, presented his Excel-
lency with a silver trowel and mallet with which to per-
form the ceremony ; and the stone, amid great cheering,
was placed in position. A sealed bottle, containing copies
of the Sydney newspapers and one of each of the current
coins of the realm, was placed in a cavity underneath the
stone. The inscription on the stone was, “Foundation
stone of the Trades Hall, laid by his Excellency the Right
Hon. Baron Carrington, G.C.M.G., 28th January, 1888.”
Lord Carrington performed the ceremony with the hand-
some trowel and elegant mallet, and declared the stone well
and truly laid. Three hearty cheers weregiven for the Queen,
for Ladv Carrington, and for his Excellency. An eminently
practical speech from I.ord Carrington followed, in which
his Excellency warmly recommended to. his hearers Mr.
Kiley’s scheme tor ameliorating’ the condition of the dwel-
lings of the working classes, and described the endeavours
of the Edinburgh building trades to cope with this question.
Two sorts of houses were, he said, required here for the
industrial population—first, four-roomed houses, at a weekly
rental of 125., to become in 12 years time the property of
the lessees; second, three-roomed houses, under the same
conditions, to be let at 10s. per week. It might be said that
these proposals were in advance of the times, but was t ere
not such a thing as being too late ? Sir Henry Farkes also
delivered an address in which, while he acknowledged t
usefulness of labour organisations, he warned them notto
entrench upon the rights of otners. ‘ ,° 1 ’
said Mr. Talbot, a prominent member of the Irades and
Labour Council. “ No, I know you don t, was the re-
minder of Sir Henry Parkes ; “ at least I hope you don t.
A speech from Mr. D. O Connor, a few more cheers, and
the proceedings ended. The crowd, as his Excel en y
awav, was enormous, and cheers were raised as the party
proceeded to the Prince Alfred Park. There was * lar„e
gathering at Prince Alfred Park when his Ex
cellency and a party from Government House arrived
about noon. Artisans with their wives and daughters
to the number of several thousands devoted
themselves to a day of pleasure. They gave Lord and
Lady Carrington an enthusiastic welcome, and the Premier,
.who entered the Park about the same time, was also loudly
cheered. The gathering had not assembled to listen to
speeches, so the addresses delivered were few and short,
and related principally to the ceremony of the morning.
An interesting feature in the proceedings was the presenta-
tion of a centennial commemorative medal to the
children in the Park. The little ones received the
gift with many expressions of pleasure. Sports and
games and dancing and other amusements were treely en-
gaged in; and in the afternoon the sight on the grounds
was animated and bright. The weather was refreshingly
cool, and all enjoyed themselves. The bands played dance
music in the Exhibition Building, and hundreds of young
men and maidens spent the afternoon in dancing. There
were the usual number of minor attractions—a Punch and
Judy performance, a merry-go-round, a lottery on the art
union principle. A good programme of sports was prepared
by the committee, who offered liberal prizes, and secured
large fields and good contests. Early in the evening tbe
gathering dispersed.
HISTORY OF THE MOVEMENT.
Some details in connection with the New South
Wales Trades’ Hall will be of interest. Taking the
history of the movement in connection with it at its outset,
it may be explained that formerly the Trades and Labour
Council of New South Wales appointed a sub-committee,
which was designated the Trades Hall Committee, with
the ostensible object of erecting and maintaining much-
needed “meeting rooms for the artificers, operatives, and
others in and around Sydney.” That committee continued
in existence for no less a period than 11 years,
until November, 1883. But having, so it is said,
made no satisfactory progress, its members were
disbanded, and a fresh set of committee-men
were selected. The original list consisted of Messrs. West,
Symons, Lawrence, Doran, Smith, and Ferrier. Fresh
blood having been introduced, it was decided to act entirely
indeDendently of the Trades and Labour Council, and to
work upon self-decided lines of action. With that end in
view, the assistance of the various trades organisations was
sought, and, as the sequel shows, was successfully asked
for. The members held their first meeting on December
14, 1883, on which somewhat memorable occasion the fol-
lowing societies were represented, viz.: —The Plumbers,
Stonemasons, Bricklayers, Coopers, Farriers, Journey-
men Tailors, United Painters, Typographical As-
sociation, Coacbmakers, and Tinsmiths. It was
then resolved that invitations should be issued to
various members of Parliament asking them to meet the
trade delegates in conference at the Town Hall, for the
purpose of requesting the Government to grant a suitable
site in the city on which could be erected a representative
Trades Hall. The conference was held on February 22,
1884, and the meeting proved of a highly successful nature.
A resolution was unanimously carried to the effect that a
deputation should wait upon the then Colonial Secretary
Mr. Stuart (afterwards, the late Sir Alexander Stuart). A
memorial was at the same time drawn up, which fully set
forth the wishes and requirements of the committee,
and this was read and presented to the Premier by a
deputationwhichwasintroducedbyMr. H.Copeland, M.L.A.
Accompanying the deputationists were Messrs. J. Garrard,
G. N. Griffiths, J. Harris, F. Abigail, D. O’Connor, J. B.
Olliffe, George Withers, and the Hon. J. Sutherland,
Ms.L.A. The answer given by Mr. Stuart was favourable.
He stated that he had been very much impressed by the
manner in which the deputation had put forward their
views. The movement, he conscientiously believed, was
one for the social and general improvement of a large sec-
tion of the community. Their request was a weighty
matter, which would receive the utmost consideration from
himself and those who were associated with him, and if the
leaders in the movement would indoctrinate him with


the full scope of the societies, he would lay the
whole matter before his colleagues. On May 16 a
letter was recived from the Government, informing the
committee that the authorities “ declined to accede to their
request.” It was thereupon unanimously, and without
delay, decided to have a contingent motion tabled in the
Legislative Assembly. Mr. Copeland was entrusted with
it, and on June 3,* 1884, he moved as follows, viz., —
“ That this House will on Friday next resolve itself into a
committee of the whole to consider an address to the
Governor, praying that his Excellency will be pleased to
cause to be placed upon the Supplementary Estimates of
the present year a sum not exceeding £6OOO, for the
purpose of covering the cost, either by resumption
or purchase, of some suitable block of land in
the city of Sydney, to be vested in trustees, to be appointed
by the'Governor and Executive Council, for the purpose of
erecting thereon a Trades Hall, the cost of such building to
be defrayed by public subscription.” This motion was un-
avoidably postponed from time to time, and shared the in-
evitable parliamentary “ slaughter of the innocents,” until
September 5 of the same year, when it was carried by a
majority of 23 to 7 votes’ against the Government. The
ayes on that occasion were—Messrs. Copeland, Garrard,
O’Connor, Garvan, Gibbes, Mitchell, Chapman,
Hammond, Day, S. A. Stephen, S. Smith, Ellis,
Luscombe, Hon. J. Sutherland, G. N. Griffiths,
James Fletcher, G. Withers, Poole, Burdekin,
Barbour, A. G. Taylor, Merriman, and Sir John Robert-
son. The voters in the negative were Mr. Stuart, Messrs.
J. P. Abbott, Dibbs, J. S. Farnell, R. M. Vaughn, Dr. Tar-
rant, and Andrew Lynch. After various long-continued
struggles and vicissitudes, which extented for almost two
years, matters commenced to assume a substantive form,
and the vote of £6OOO having become available, the com-
mittee purchased the present site of land for the sum of
£5950, at the corner of Dixson and Goulburn streets. Its
measurements are 130 ft. to the first-named thoroughfare,
and 82ft. to Goulburn-street. Nine trustees were appointed
by the Government, viz., Messrs. Copeland and Garrard,
Ms.L.A. ; William Ferrier, stonemason; JohnE. West,
plumber; John R. Talbot, irnnmoulder ; John Atkinson,
shipwright; Thomas Caddy, draper ; Richard Mooney,
journeyman tailor; and Hugh Patterson, boilermaker.
The committee then determined to float a limited liability
company, in shares of £1 each, with a capital of £15,000.
The societies represented, which ai that time had swelled
to the number of 17, at once took up 2000 shares. After
about £3OOO worth had been subscribed for, the committee
resolved to invite tenders for their building, and a number
of competitive designs were received, the prize for which
fell to Mr. Smedley, a drawing of whose proposed edifice
now hangs in the Temperance Hall. It shows a large and
ornate main hall, which will seat about 1400 people.
Twenty-five lodge rooms will be capable
of accommodating 80 persons each. There is
also to be a library and reading-room, in
addition to a labour bureau or “hiring room,”
the use of which will be rendered available to ali classes of
employers and employees for their mutual convenience.
This latter idea, it is thought certain, will provide a most
valuable and long-required accommodation, and one which
will be largely, and in fact almost universally, availed of
throughout the colony. It will, it is believed, be utilised
by masters and men alike, with benefit and saving to both
sides. It is further thought that, when once fairly
established, its ramifications will be of such a character
that the Government will be very largely relieved of
incidental trouble, clerical routine, and expense in con-
nection with matters appertaining to the “unemployed.”
Its existence will, it is urged, tend materially to make
working men of all grades more self-reliant, and more in-
clined to trust to their own individual efforts in the legiti-
mate quest of employment, in preference to being compelled
from force of circumstances, or otherwise, to act as so many
hangers-on to the benevolent coat-tails of successive
Administrations.
Taking the hall as a whole, its completion will prove an
undoubted boon. Hitherto a lamentable, and almost
crippling, amount of enforced disarrangement and
lack of accommodation has been nightly felt. Mem-
bers of lodges, and of various trades organisations, have
had to content themselves with the luxuries o f
dingy back parlours, isolated tavern bars, and nonde-
script, stuffy, malodorous haunts of almost every kind
in various parts of the city—a circumstance which has
engendered delays, by reason of the immediate inter-
change of deputationising business being rendered
practically out of the question. Press representatives, in «
their turn, whose duty is to nightly seek out and record the
doings of the score or so of committees which sit, will in
future be in a position to do greater justice to their by no
means sinecural labours so soon as the gatherings
are centralised. As the case just now stands, the
trades unions’ rende/.voux are so widely scattered that
to keep fully cn rapport with the everyday doings of the
lodges is a difficult, and not unfrequentlv an almost im-
possible, task. The first contract for the new building has
been let to Mr. T. H. Bell—viz., for the basement storey
alone, at a cost of £1686.
THE ASSEMBLING OF THE PROCESSION.
At an eailv hour—before daylight had fairly broken
the vicinity of Cook Park, College-street, and the Sydney
Museum was astir with the nucleus of that which two
hours later on proved to be about the largest representative
gathering of trades unionists and amalgamated labour
organisations which has ever assemble! in Australasia. The
executives of the various trades and labour lodges, affiliated
and non-affiliated with the central board, viz., the New
South Wales Trades and Labour Council, had evidently
allowed the apple of petty discord to remain aside,
and with a will, and with a downright earnest-
ness of purpose each and every individual
exercised himself in the freedom of adding to the
general effect and success of the historical and red-letter day
with respect to labour’s advancement. The marshalls and their
various henchmen were at work betimes, and the “ mar-
shalling of men, though not of arms,” had been fairly
completed towards eight o’clock. Matters of detail had
been prearranged with an exactitude which did credit to
those who were responsible for the day’s fitness of things.
At intervals along the pavements were black and white
painted boards, on which, in distinguishable type, was set
forth the name and number of the branch or society which
was expected to take its stand there. Consisting, as it did,
of probably about 9000 members, the procession was
handled admirably; and without more than more
passing hitches or delays, the men quietly fell
into their respective divisions, mounted banners,
formed file and rank, made space for their
accompanying bandsmen, ranged up in marching order,
passed the word that they fully understood the programme,
and then stood in expectancy of the order to advance.
This duly followed, and, amid the merry strains of about a
dozen full bands, each of which were sufficiently far
separated to obviate the discord of intermingling music, the
mammoth procession slowly commenced to wend its way, at
about 20 minutes after 9 o’clock, in the direction of the
Queen’s statue, and thence past the Sydney
Mint, the Mines and Law Departments, and the
Parliamentary buildings, towards the Botanical
Gardens, the Colonial Secretary’s offices, Govern-
ment House entrance, the Treasury, &c., into
Bridge-street. En route, the streets, footpaths, balconies,
and windows were, as the phrase goes, “ alive”—thousands
upon thousands of ladies, gentlemen, and children, throng-
ing each available point of view, while at intervals as tune
upon tune merrier than its predecessor swelled out, cheers
and waving of hats and handkerchiefs became incessant.
Beyond the unavoidable excitement and enthusiasm, there
were but few if any special features or incidents to note at
the outset of the column. Convalescent patients at the
Sydney Infirmary, in bandages, splints, and other hospital
regalia, lined the walls and railings of that indispensable iind
sorely overtaxed institution ; drawing a half-hour’s un-
disguised enjoyment, and, doubtless, shortening in no
inconsiderable degree the period of fheir continuance on
the sick list.


The original programme of the procession, as had been
decided by preliminary ballot, could not be strictly’ carried
into effect, and as the men actually marched the order was
as follows :
Nine mounted and fully accoutred New South Wales
troopers taking the lead.
Launceston (Tasmania) Band.
Progressive Carpenters and banner.
Ironmoulders and banner.
Cameron and Co.’s two drays of colonially-manufactured
tobacco exhibits.
Dixon and Son’s three trollies of tobacco, one of which
showed three hogsheads of raw American leaf, surrounded
by two enormous plugs of Conqueror tobacco.
Eight Hours Coopers, banners, band, and implements of
trade.
Seamen’s Union, in full force, the members wearing
white straw hats with nautical ribbons, and preceded
by a band and banner.
Messrs. Gibbs, Shallard, and Co., display of printing
presses, &c., in operation.
Amalgamated Plumbers and Galvanised Ironworkers
(with banner).
Boilermakers and Shipbuilders (with banner, implements
of trade, &c.)
A marine engine in full work cn a dray. •
Band of Highland Pipers (with bagpipes and musical in-
struments).
Masons’ Society (with students’models). .
Coopers (with an excellent and valuable display’ of handi-
craft).
Gas-stoker’s Protective Association (headed by band and
banners).
Sydney Wharf Labourers (with band and banner, and
accompanied by Newcastle delegates.)
Four-horsed dray carrying a tableau vivant of nine
persons, in aboriginal, and past and present costumes,
armour, and accoutrements emblematic of the progress of
Australasian civilisation since the advent of Captain Cook.
An aboriginal mounted stockman, in bona fide up-country
station costume.
A six-horse drav, with a second pose plastique , em-
blematical of Britannia, Neptune’s and Commerce’s
relationships and civilising developments.
Procession of about 300 banneret-bearers and carriers of
blue ensigns, headed by a merrily-playing band.
United Friendly, Trade, and Benefit Society of Painters
(with band and banner).
Tailors (with band and banner).
Shiprights’ Protective Union (headed by band and
banner, and followed by many valuable and interesting
models of steam and sailing vessels in various stages of
construction).
Coal-lumpers’ Union (with band and banner).
Operative Society of Bricklayers (with band and banner).
Coachmakers (with banner).
Fife and drum band. , ,
Amalgamated Carpenters and Joiners (with band and
Tinsmiths and Ironworkers (with band and
banner). . . ......
New South Wales Typographical Association (with band
and banner). , ,
h ollowing the main procession was a stretch, about a
quarter of a mile in length, of advertising exhibits and
exhibitors, the former of almost everv conceivable form,
colour, and character; the majority of them being conveye
upon two, three, four, or six-horsed waggons, and in spring-
carts and drays.
THE PROCESSION IN BRIDGE-STREET.
The procession reached Bridge-street at about a quarter
to 10 o’clock, and its approach was hailed with a consider-
able amount of enthusiasm by some hundreds of spectators
who had been standing in a state of expectancy on the side
walks between Pitt and George streets for some time. It
was signalled by the music of the bands, be
heard for some distance, and as soon as the first banner
came into view a joyful shout of “ Here they come
arose from the large assemblage of people at th e
corner of Bridge and George streets. By thi s
time all was bustle and excitement, and the people
commenced crossing and recrossing the streets with the
evident intention of getting as favourable position as possi-
ble for viewing the display. The (ieorge-street end of the
thoroughfare was perhaps the best vantage ground that
could be obtained for viewing the proceedings, and was only
excelled in this respect by the position obtained by a fortu-
nate few who had the advantage—always a great one on
such occasions—of viewing the procession from the top
stories of some of the more prominent buildings in the
vicinity. Up to within a few seconds of the approach
of the procession the trams were running in and
out at the terminus, but when the tram line was
reached traffic was entirely suspended until the procession
had passed. A large crowd of persons accompanied the
procession, and as the whole width of the street was
monopolised, all vehicular traffic had also to be stopped.
As seen from the George-street corner, the spectacle was
exceedingly grand and picturesque, the effect being con-
siderably heightened by the brave display of bunting
which formed the Centennial decorations of the Govern-
ment buildings, and also the numerous offices and
business premises on both sides of the street. The
numerous society banners were seen to great advantage
as the procession turned the corner at the Colonial Secre-
tary’s Office, and the descent in the line of march also
brought clearly into view the numerous flags and bannerets
which were carried by the artisans. The beautiful banners
which were carried by the carpenters and joiners, the iron-
moulders, united labourers, seamen, plumbers, and boiler-
makers were very much admired by everyone. The
progress of the proces ion was slightly impeded as
it turned into George-street, in consequence of some
of the banners having to be lowered in order to pass under-
neath the arch which spans George-street, almost at the
intersection with Bridge-street; and the seamen and coal
lumpers cheered lustily as they halted in front of the
premises occupied by coal and stevedoring companies.
Judging from the time that elapsed before the banner
belonging to the Typographical Association, which brought
up the rear, had turned into Bridge-street the van of the
procession must have almost reached the intersection of
George and King streets.
FROM BRirGE-STREET TO THE FOUNDATION
STONE.
Shortly before 10 o’clock the procession turned from
Bridge-street into George-street. A considerable number
of persons had congregated at the junction of the two
streets, and they watched with evident pleasure and delight
its progress towards where they were standing ; and when
it swept under the arch, with bands playing, banners borne
high aloft, and flags waving, the scene presented was one
that will not readily be forgotten by any of them. Look-
ing down George-street, a most picturesque and brilliant
sight met the eye. Bunting was displayed everywhere.
Festoons of small banners depended from Venetian masts
which extended along each side of the street; at intervals
flags were hung across the street, and from every flagstaff
ensigns and other flags were flown, while Japanese lanterns
which had been used for the illuminations still adorned
most of the buildings. A pleasant breeze from the south-
ward was blowing, and its effect on the countless flags and
the lanterns was as interesting as it was beautiful and
effective. The procession, headed by a body of mounted
police under Sergeant-major Thompson, who were mounted
on splendid chargers, came along in gallant style, and was
watched with the keenest interest by the thousands of
spectators, who not only lined both sides of the street, but
filled every window and balcony, and occupied
every coign of vantage from which a good view could
be obtained. At the Post Office the crowd was
very great; but owing to the excellence of the arrange-
ments on the part of the police and the marshals, ample
room was afforded the processionists, and nothing in the
shape of disorder was visible along the whole line of the
procession. The route was down George-street to Liver-


pool-street, thence along that street to Dixon-street, and
thence to the site of the future building at the comer
of Goulbuin-street. Seen from Liverpool-street the
S recession was a splendid and stirring sight as it came
own Brickfield-hill, and was probably seen to better ad-
vantage then than at any other time during the day. On
the arrival of the procession at the site of the building, it
was halted, and remained so until the stone had been for-
mally laid by his Excellency the Governor and the speech-
making had concluded. The march was then resumed
along Goulburn-street to George-street, and as each society
passed the vice-regal party and the other ladies and gentle-
men on the dais, they gave three cheers for the Governor
and Lady Carrington.
FROM GEORGE-STREET SOUTH TO THE
EXHIBITION.
It was expected that the procession would reach George-
street South between half-past 9 and 10 o’clock. A num-
ber of men, women, and children were collected at the
point where George and Pitt streets converge, and at this
early hour were patiently waiting to see it. This indeed was
the only indication that something unusual was about
to take" place. The shops were all open, business
was going on unrestrained, and the wide thoroughfare was
alive with vehicles passing up and down unceasingly. Ihe
noise was deafening. Fifteen minutes of this should
enough for anyone, but there is no sign of the procession
yet. Away down in the valley of George-street, and up
the gentle slope leading to the Town Hall, one can see
nothing but vehicles in the midst of two long rows of busi-
ness, houses meeting in perspective in the distance. Wait-
ing is weary work, especially in this confusion. The sur-
roundings are not pleasant either. The wood-paving has
not yet been completed, here and there are blocks, empty
cement casks, and rusty old tramway rails lying about.
The trams are stopping every few minutes, dropping pas-
sengers, and contaminating the morning air with thick black
smoke. To stand in thisplacemuch longer would fatigue even
Hercules. At any rate, the procession will come sooner or
later, and those gathered around seem determined to remain
till it comes. The best thing to do meanwhile is to act
Patience
“ Patience
Of whose soft grace I have her sovereign aid,
And rest myself content.”
Sit on one of these cement casks, watch the horses falling
on the greasy pavement, observe the people cleaning
their windows and sweeping out their shops oil the
opposite side, and generally take in the whole picture.
The ’bus drivers—when do they have a holiday ?—-are
evidently unaware of the approaching procession, and it is
amusing to see them urging their horses —it is seldom they
travel so fast—in the hope of picking up at least some of
us. It is 20 minutes past 10 now, and the scene begins to
change. Heads appear at the windows of the
upper stories, the photographer across the way is
fixing his camera on top of the verandah, young
ladies come out of the windows and get in position on the
verandahs, and everyone is looking round for a point of
vantage. The number of people on the rise and on either
side of the street has considerably increased, and away off
down George-street the vehicles are going to either side and
making a clear way in the centre. Further away
still—in this grey light the distance appears to
be magnified—the read is a mass of black and white
spots. No forms can be distinguished, no banners can
be seen, no music can be henrd, and but the
slightest motion is detected. A good field-glass would, no
doubt, find out the procession here. Every minute these
apparent molecules grow in size, they increase in motion,
they vibrate continuously, and now at last what seemed
to be amorphous specs of black and white have assumed a
definite shape. They have developed into and are recognised
as human beings in a great mass. The whole pavement
is hidden by them. Banners in sombre colours are coming
nearer and nearer to us—the organised procession is in the
centre of the road; but there is a procession of admirers on
either side, and it is these who fill up the remaining space
and block the vehicular traffic for the time being. The
sound ot drums and comets and the blast of trumpets and
trombones are heard, the banners look brighter, flags are
seen flying, gaudy costumes are visible, and they are all
approaching us merrily. The place is quite gay. The
business of an hour ago has ceased, and the footpaths are
thronged with spectators. “ Look at these mounted
troopers in front!” says one, “there is no necessity for
them.” Well, certainly they could have been dispensed
with, and their work done just as well, perhaps, by one of
the tradesmen on horseback acting as marshal. The people
of Sydney have shown themselves throughout the Centellary
week to be respectful and orderly. Indeed, many visitors
have commented with admiration on the decorum that
prevailed at all our large gatherings. The troopers are in
front, no doubt, to facilitate the passage of the procession,
and for no other reason. What a splendid view we have
of the procession now! The rise is reached; but there
you cannot see the full length of the line, for some have not
yet arrived at the angle down in the valley below. This is a
procession of peace. You look in vain for swords and
guns ; these are the men who live in a free country, and
who prosper in it. They are proficient in the use of the
trowel, the chisel, the saw, &c. They walk arm in arm
with capital, and, aided by capital, literally build up our
towns and cities. They are advancing jubilantly, happi-
ness in their faces and freedom in their gait, to celebrate
the first century of their country. They are going to
Prince Alfred Park and the Exhibition Building, where,
with their families, they intend to spend the day in recrea-
tion and wholesome amusement. Instead of the usual kind
of sports held at great distance from the city, they are, in
accordance with Sir Henry Parkes’ suggestion, about to
have a celebration something after the style of an
Old English fair. And now they go forward to
the spot in a strong body, displaying on
their wav their mottoes, and exhibiting the work
of their handicraft. The centenary celebrations would have
been very incomplete without this procession. Of course a
grand exhibition would have given the men a much better
chance of showing the progress made in the industrial arts
in this colony , but in the absence of that they are doing
the best they can, and considering the day is not a general
holiday', their procession is a splendid one. Very pro-
minent is a lorry drawn by several fine horses brightly
caparisoned. The printing-press is here at work, and
samples of the workmanship are being distributed amongst
the people. They are doing honour to the memory of
Gutenberg and Caxton. Other lorries are laden with
tobacco, and placards forth to the crowds the
hundreds and thousands of pounds that are consumed
annually—immense quantities that it would stagger
Sir Walter Raleigh to know of. The coopers
are displaying huge wine barrels that would make even
Bacchus blush. The tailors cleverly create a striking
contrast between the clad and the unclad by showing us a
picture of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, and
leaving us to draw our own conclusions as to the
good they (the tailors) have wrought in this world.
The shipwrights exhibit model ships, and so on,
with the various crafts represented in the .proceession.
There was abundance of matter for thought a.s these men
filed past with their banners and industrial exhibits. They
went on in good order, with numerous bands playing
the music which bespoke their rejoicing, were gazed on by
thousands of spectators from the windows and housetops in
Regent-street, and by thousands more in Cleveland-street.
Coming to the Prince Alfred Park the crowd was very
thick. The road was covered with the procession and the
myriads of spectators who seemed to have marched in
symathy with it from its source. The footpaths were also
densely covered, and hundreds of people looked down from
the numerous balconies facing the exhibition. A quarter
of an hour elapsed and the end of the procession had not
yet arrived. Just as it approached, however, five minutes
afterwards the memorable procession broke up on the
Cleveland side of the park and gradually melted away.
The lorries were driven off to their destination and the
processionists entered by the various gates to take part in
the fair. Arrangements were at once made to give a fitting
reception to the Governor, and not many minutes had gone


by when Lord Carrington might have been seen with his
carriage, accompanied by the Governor of Victoria (Sir
Henry Loch), and followed bv another carriage in which
rode Sir Henry Parkes and Mr. Burns (the Treasurer)
going to the fair.
THE CEREMONY.
The platform from which the ceremony of laying the
foundation-stone was conducted, was occupied by a large
number of ladies and gentlemen, including many of our
Centennial visitors. Amongst those present on the
platform were the Primate, Bishop Barry ; the
Bishops of Bathurst and Ballarat, the Hon. J.
C. Bray, South Australia; Sir Wm. Fitzherbert,
President New Zealand Legislative Council; the Hon.
Francis Ormond, M.L.C., Victoria; Alderman Hipwood,
Mayor of Brisbane, Sir Henry Parkes, the Hon. F.
Abigail, the Hon. J. F. Burns, the Hon. John Sutherland,
Hon, G. A. Lloyd, Hon. C. J. Robert, Hon. J. Davies,
Hon. T. Garrett, Hon. J as. Inglis, Judge Windeyer, Dr.
Garran, Alderman Harris, Mayor of Sydney; Dr.
Cockburn and Mr. J. L. Bonython, of South Australia;
Messrs. R. Burdett Smith, A. J. Riley, D. O’Connor,
F. Smith, Jeanneret, Haynes, Vaughn, Kethel, Fletcher,
Hutchison, Schey, M'Millan, Slattery, O’Sullivan, Dibbs,
and Burdekin, Ms.L.A.; Messrs. Barnet. W.H. Groom,
Speaker Legislative Assembly, Queensland; J. M‘Master,
M.L.A., Queensland; A. Morgan, M.L.A., Queensland;
Marshall, town clerk of Brisbane; J. Lucas, and Moule,
Mr. Fosbery, Inspector-General of Police ; and Mr. Burn-
side secretary of the Centennial Commission. Soon after
the ’ arrival of the Vice-regal party the pro-
cession, of trades societies marched past, and. at
its conclusion the actual ceremony of laying*
the stone commenced. Mr. J. Smedley, architect of the
new hall, first presented his Excellency the Governor with
a handsome silver and ivory trowel and myallwood mallet.
The following inscription was engraved on the trowel:
“Presented to his Excellency the Right Hon. Lord Car-
rington, G.C.M.G., Governor of New South Wales, by
T. H. Bell, contractor, on the occasion of his laying the
foundation-stone of the Industrial Trades Hall, January
28, 1888.” On the mallet the inscription was some-
what different, and read as follows Presented
to the Right Hon. Charles Robert Baron Car-
rington, P.C., G.C.M.G., Governor of New South
Wales, bv J- E. West, president of the Trades Hall com-
mittee, on the occasion of laying the foundation-stone.
Sydney, January 28. 1888. The trowel and mallet, both
of which were admirable specimens of art workmanship,
wore from the establishment of Mr. W. Kerr. A ®? aled
jar, containing copies of the Sydney Morning Herald the
Sydney Mail, the Daily Telegraph , a copy of the deed ot
trust for the Trades Hall, the current corns of the realm,
and a history of the Trades Hall, was laid under the stone,
which was placed in position ready for laving^
Mr. West then delivered an address. He said . My
Lords vour Excellency, ladies and gentlemen,—We have,
these events no greater national spirit has been
nmnifested than on the present occasion. (Hear, near.j
All the bone and sinew of the
the stone laid 1 mav tell vou that in the past trades
Of course, credit is to be given to whom credit is due, and
we have always desired to do that. 1 am not troin<r to go
into details with regard to the origin and progress of trades
unions, but every one knows that they have gone through
a great deal of trouble, and have made themselves a factor
in the community. Our fellow-workmen in the
adjoining colony have been more fortunate, as they have had
granted to them a piece of land 1£ acres in extent, and worth
something like £30,000. It took us 14 years in this colony to
impress upon those who were our representatives the
necessity of a site for the Trades Hall. It was then a
terrible fight to get the sum of £6OOO for the purpose, and
I feel sure that the gentlemen who voted for us on that
occasion now value the vote they gave, and those who voted
on the opposite side feel that they did a wrong to the
industrial classes of the community. The grant made
something like two and a half years ago arose out of a
small meeting, where we decided to ask the Government of
the day for assistance. They held out great hopes to us;
and I do not know whether a general election was on at the
time or not. (Laughter.) A piece of land valued at
£25,000 was offered to us; but we received in a short time
an intimation that the Governor could not com-
Ely with our request. We then, in our desire to
ave a meeting-place, got Mr. Henry Copeland—l
do not know why he is absent to-day to use
every means in his power to get a vote of £6OOO
passed through the Legislature. He succeeded in doing
this by a majority of 23 to 7, but it took all the energy of
the members of the committee here to-day to keep the
members of the Legislature in the House, so as to get the
vote passed. Many of the members represented country
constituencies, and it was a very hard thing for the com-
mittee to light a Government, which was the position then.
The present piece of land is the outcome of this vote of
£6000". With regard to the objects of the Trades
Hall, I am sure that you will all admit that
the body of men who passed here to-day in the procession,
and whom you see around you now, ought to have some
respectable and decent place of meeting. Large grants
have been made for Universities, which have probably
cost, if the value of the land and everything else
was properly put down some millions of
money, and ’ if it is essential for the senate
to meet in a proper House of Parliament of
their own, you will admit that the industrial classes
are entitled to some suitable place of meeting. (Hear,
hear.) 1 have to inform you that we intend to utilise this
piece of land to the best .’advantage. We will erect a hall
capable of holding some 1400 people, and there will also be
25 lodge-rooms capable of accommodating from 400 to 80
people each, for committee meetings, &c. We
will have every convenience for the comfort of
members, and when a great question comes on, and
they have to decide what course of action they will
take, it will be more satisfactory for them to meet in a well-
ventilated room of their own, where they will be able to
conduct their business far better and in a manner which
will be far more beneficial than was formerly the case. The
sole aim of the gentlemen who are here accompanying me
to-day is to make this hall a national monument. We
have had a great deal of trouble in raising the money for
the building, tor we got the land at a time when
prosperity reigned ; but since we started to
get the funds to raise the edifice we have had trials and
troubles. Our unions have suffered severely and cruelly
from the depression in trade; and I may say that one
union which passed us to-day has half its members out of
employment, and has recently paid away £4OO out of its
sinking fund towards the relief of its members. So that it
has been impossible for us to proceed with the structure as
fast as we desire. We expected, when the land was
obtained, to raise sufficient, either by vote or otherwise,
to proceed with the building at once, but bad times have
come, and now we are struggling with adversity. I feel
sure, however, that, sooner or later, with the return of
prosperity, an edifice will arise which will be a landmark
in the city, and which all visitors will be glad to see. I
would like to draw the attention of those present
to the plans of the new building, which show


the character of the proposed structure, and which
everyone will admit to be a worthy one.
I know very well that as your Excellency has many func-
tions to perform, the time at your disposal now is very
short, and therefore I will not detain you. One of the great
aims of the Trades Hall committee is to obtain liberty,
pleasure, and progress for the industrial classes. (Ap-
plause.)
Mr. Smedley, the architect, then presented to the Go-
vernor the trowel and mallet with which to lay the stone.
Lord Carrington expressed his thanks for the gifts, and
said he would always value them. The block of freestone
was then lowered, and his Excellency performed the usual
ceremony, and declared the stone well and truly laid.
Cheers were then given for the Queen, Lady Carrington,
Lord Carrington, Sir Henry Parkes, and the Trades Hall
committee.
Lord Carrington then delivered an address. He
said:—Mr. West, your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen
all, —Before I say one single word on this occasion, 1 must ex-
press the hope of Lady Carrington, and also of myself,
that trade may speedily revive, and we all soon may be in
full work again. I gladly take this opportunity of con-
gratulating vour president on the most excellent and sen-
sible speech to which we have had the pleasure of listening
to-day. (Applause.) He has told us the object and the
aim of the building which we are now inaugurating. He
has told us that the object and aims of this building are
liberty and pleasure and progress, aud that there is no person
on the whole of this great continent of Australia who could
produce a finer sentiment than that. He has also
told us that it is a national monument. So it is.
It is a national monument which must last for ever.
What we have seen to-day is a national monument of order
and self-government, and I trust it will be a national monu-
ment where all disputes may be amicably adjusted, and
where all misunderstandings may speedily come to an end.
Speaking before such a large and influential gathering, 1
hardly dare to take up your time for any considerable period,
but I should like for a few moments to speak
to you a few words on a subject I have very
much at heart. It is a subject upon which much attention
has been bestowed by ex-Mayor Riley, and which I have
the pleasure to know your present Mayor has entirely at
heart. I refer to the subject of improved dwellings for the
industrial classes. The question is: Is it not possible to
have some sort of arrangemeut by which persons
employed in industry shall be enabled in
some cheap manner to acquire freehold homes ?
The first hundred years of our nationul existence have
closed. We congratulate ourselves on what has been
achieved, but on such an occasion as this, when we are en-
gaged on a work which must be of lasting benefit to genera-
tions unborn, our thoughts naturally turn to the future. As
these colonies increase in wealth and in importance, so must
they increase in population; open spaces, good house accom-
modation, fresh air, drainage, and pure water are necessities
of life. The great gift of the Centennial Park has been
formally dedicated to the people for ever, but cheap and
healthy houses are the greatest ■ boon to people who work
hard. It is impossible to fortell the future of
this city. (Cheers.) Not only is it the naval centre
of the Southern hemisphere, but when the Illawarra
line and the Hawkesbury bridge are completed it will
become the largest coaling" station in the world. We shall
then find ourselves face to face with an enormous increase
of population. (Hear, hear.) We ought, therefore, at
once to grapple with the danger of overcrowding which
exists in London and in other great cities, and which, if
not taken in hand, must find its way to Australia. No
native-born Australian can possibly have any idea of the
horror of it. The evidence placed before an English Royal
Commission, which included the Prince of Wales, Cardinal
Manning, Henry Broadhurst, Lord Salisbury, and others,
was shocking in the extreme. According to the late
Lord Shaftesbury, “overcrowding in London was
more serious than ever,” and a statement that
“in the centre of it the average of five
families to six rooms” is under the mark rather than
an exaggeration. I think you all know what Mr. Pea-
body did for the industrial classes, who laud his memory as
one of the greatest benefactors the world has ever seen.
Years ago Mr. Peabody started his fund, which now
amounts to £850,000. He has provided 10,144 rooms, let at
an average weekly rent of 2s. ljd. a room, accommodating
18,500 persons. The income thus obtained is applied to
the construction of fresh buildings, so that the operation
admits of indefinite though gradual extension. I trust his
noble example may be followed by some of our rich men;
but I should like to bring before you what has been done
by the co-operation of the industrial classes themselves.
In 1861 the Edinburgh building trades, who were favour-
able to the nine hours movement, went out on strike. It
occurred to Mr. Colville, the chairman of the movement,
that instead of remaining idle they had better form them-
selves into a trading company, and build working-men’s
houses for themselves on co-operative principles. _ The
original capital was £IO,OOO. On this capital, taking an
average of 23 years, they paid 15 per cent. It is now all
paid off, and two years ago they had put £3500 to the re-
serve fund. They then had built 1400 houses, which ac-
commodate 7000 persons, at a rental of from £ll up to £25.
These bouses were sold by the company, and 21 years were
allowed to complete the purchase, though tenants can
pay up the whole sum as soon as they like. These houses
of two stories are built four in a block, two above and two
below, and tenants enter on different sides, and have
gardens on each side of the block. I speak without know-
ledge, and perhaps it may be presumption for me to speak
on a matter of which I know so little; but 1 would like
to ask, Could not something of the same sort be started
here ? Those well qualified to express an opinion say that
two sorts of houses are required here for the industrial
population —first, four-roomed houses, which would be-
come the absolute freehold property of persons who
paid a weekly rent of 12s. for 12 years ; second, three-roomed
houses, under the same conditions, let at 10s. per week.
The great economy in this would be that, under these cir-
cumstances, it is to the obvious advantage of the tenant to
keep his premises in good repair, and even to improve them,
as they ultimately become his own property, and this does
away with the necessity of paid agents and inspectors.
Hence the possibility of being able to offer houses so
much under the current price. I may be told that
these proposals are in advance of the times. But is there
not such a thing as being too late ? and before I leave
the colony I trust that this question may be taken in
hand by persons who have more prrctical knowledge, and
are better qualified to speak upon the subject than I am, as
I firmly believe that a country acquires an increased security
where "men live in freehold houses. (Cheers.) A tenant
who has been able to purchase his freehold has this advan-
tage —h e gains in self-respect, and self-respect is the
essence of all national life. (Cheers.) Self-respect per-
meates through the whole of a nation from the Senate to
the factory, and New South Wales, when she counts her
second centennial, will have saved herself from the
degradation of over-crowding, and all its consequent
horrors, a disgrace and a danger to the beautiful city which
has arisen on the finest site and position known in the whole
of the habitable globe. (Cheers.) One single word more,
and that is to express my grateful and respectful thanks to
this magnificent gathering for the cordial and the, I may
say, enthusiastic greeting you have not only given to me as
the representative of our beloved sovereign the Queen, but
also to my wife Lady Carrington. (Cheers.)
Sir Henry Parkes said: My Lords, your Excellencies,
ladies, and gentlemen,—l should not have presumed to
offer any remarks to you if your committee had not re-
quested'me to take this course. I came here, I can assure
you, at some little inconvenience, to bear my testimony to
the high, the Christian, the law-abiding qualities, and the
deep respectability of the mechanics and working classes of
this city. You have given us to-day a great demonstra-
tion of your organised power, and I know sufficient
of the great classes to which you belong to
know how deeply you rely upon these organisations,
but I shall venture to say a word or two to-day on the
incipient mischief that sometimes lies under them. (Hear,
hear). I appreciate these great companies as much as any


man, but there is one thing necessary to society, and what-
ever is necessary to society is in an eminent degree neces-
sary to the masses who form the broad basis of society.
There is one thing to be guarded against always,
and that is that individual effort, and indi-
vidualism as a basis of success, should never be
merged in any organisation whatever. (Hear, hear, and a
voice, “We do not do it.”) I know you do not, but I
merely wish to point out to you how extremely necessary
it is to keep that always in view. Probably a well-
organised army is the best illustration of organisation.
Take for example the great German army, which has been
so perfected that now two millions of men act together as
one great machine, and perhaps a military display of that
army is superior to anything we have ever known. Always
remember, moreover, that notwithstanding this perfection
of organisation, that the capacity for command,
and the electrical power of keeping in touch
with the sympathies and higher aspirations of the
people, are as necessary as the principle of
organisation itself. What 1 desire to point out is that you
should keep alive your individualism, however you may
act together in great bodies. (Hear, hear.) The pure and
full vitality of individual effort is really the saving power
of all civil societies. Your President said something,
which although well said, did not appear to me to be neces-
sary, as to the support you receive from all rationakmen
at the present day. Some of the very best men
living, some of the most highly-cultured and deep-feeling
men have been strong supporters of trades unionism.
(Hear, hear.) Need 1 recall to your minds the author of
that beautiful story, “ Tom Brown’s Schooldays,” one of
the manliest men who ever lived ; and he was a champion
of trades unionism. If I leave Mr. Thomas Hughes,
I can point among the Royal families of the
continent, to the Comte de Paris, who wrote
a splendid book defending trades unionism, and I can
mention the names of many other men of high standing and
refined and almost perfect culture, who have stood
by the right of the working classes to organise themselves
together for the purpose of protecting their own interests.
In some sense one of the greatest of British statesmen was
Sir Robert Peel. As you must know—many of you,
because I am sure many of you must know something of
British history—Sir Robert Peel was the greater part of
his life representing the great Conservative party of
England; and, as you will remember, he lost that position
because he obeyed and did homage to his conscience before
any other power in the abolition of the Corn Laws. Well,
Sir Robert Peel, in one of his greatest speeches, in alluding
to the working classes, called them the great class that lay
at the foundation of all other classes; and it is easy to see—
a moment’s reflection will conduct you to that issue— that
no other class could exist if it were not for the working
class. (Cheers.) When I have approached this noble city
which has been called into queenly existence within 100
years—when I have approached this noble city from any
elevation and seen the brilliant wilderness of stately
buildings extending for miles and miles—and when I
have reflected that every- brick and every stone and
every trowel of mortar which went to erect these noble
buildings was due to the working classes, then I have
realised that wise observation of th 3 great Peel—
that you are the foundation of every class in
society. (Renewed cheering.) Remember this just
and lofty sentiment, and in your individual lives
do the utmost you can to justify the noble order of labour
and to show that the man who in the sweat of his brow
works for his wife and family has a claim for respect in-
ferior neither to lord, nor squire, nor king, nor prince, nor
any living creature. (Loud cheers.) Gentlemen, I con-
gratulate you on this first step. I trust your hall will be
the centre of many friendly intelligent efforts to improve
your condition. (Hear, hear.) If I have one aspiration
more deeply rooted than another, it Is that
the prosperity of this young nation shall rest upon the
better condition of every man and every woman in the great
masses of society. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, I thank you for
the attention with which you have listened to me, and wish
you God speed in all your legitimate and dignified efforts.
(Loud cheers.)
Mr. D. O’Connor said:—Lady Carrington, your Excel-
lencies, my Lords, ladies and gentlemen, ! have been
honoured this morning by the Trades and Labour Council,
not through any merit of my own, but because of the in-
terest I took in the very earliest stages for laying the
foundation for the work which has led up to the greater
step taken this morning. It was with Mr. West (the presi-
dent), Mr. Talbot, and others that I had a conversation, in
the course of which I said I thought that an appeal ought
to be made to the Parliament of this country to recognise
the necessity for lifting the educational status of the
people of this country to enable them to boldly exer-
cise the supreme privileges of their citizenship. (Applause.)
I am one of those who • rejoice in the existence
of the Sydney University as a place dedicated to enabling
men to attain the higher education, and cast the most
lustre and dignity upon humanity. For the very same
reason, I said it was absolutely necessary we should' have a
college for the higher education of the working classes.
(Cheers.) I rejoiced to see the foundation-stone of this
building laid to-day—it is one of the most paramount acts
of the Centennial celebrations— by the representative in
this colony of her Majesty. Lord Carrington, one of the
best among so many brilliant men. It will appeal
not only to you, but to the men in Parliament,
to know that to-day representing here, as an Imperial
officer, the dignity of England, he has realised also prac-
tically that he is a citizen, and has the sympathy of the
classes which are here. (Applause.) I beg to congratulate
Mr. West and the labouring classes—the hives of industry
—of this colony on what they have achieved. This is an
institution where the working classes will be raised to a
position which will challenge respect; it is an insti-
tution in which will be solved vexed questions
which have puzzled the best thinkers of centuries.
(Cheers.) Capital and labour must go hand in hand;
and the relations between them must be as sacred as the
relations between husband and wife. Should there be dis-
ruption in the domestic circle, the house is thrown into a
state of unhappiness; and so in the case of capital and
labour, disruption brings want of employment, the loss of
income, and misery. There should be no hostility between
the two. I beg to express my hearty thanks for the
privilege of being here to-day. I congratulate the people
of Sydney on the prospect of having erected here a noble
structure which will not belong to any class but to New
South Wales. (Cheers.)
Lord Carrington announced chat he had been asked to
remind the gathering that the committee desired him to say
that they were perfectly ready to receive any cheques that
any gentlemen might choose to bring forward towards the
fund for the erection of the building.
Mr. W est then said : I know that there are many here
who would be pleased to have the honour of addressing this
audience, but I think it would be unwise to trespass too
much upon the time of his Excellency. I thank his Excel-
lency and Lady Carrington, and the whole company who
are present, for coming here to-day. I trust that in the
future the men who are legislating for the colony will
appreciate the real mission of these labour organisations. I
feel sure that we will be the better appreciated when we are
better understood. I thank you again for your kind at-
tendance, and I will ask you to give a vote of thanks to his
Excellency and Lady Carrington.
Hearty cheers were given, the vice-regal party drove
away, and the company dispersed.
AT PRINCE ALFRED PARK.
Shortly after 12 o’clock his Excellency the Governor
Lady Carrington, and a party from Government House’,
accompanied by the Premier (Sir Henry Parkes), and other
gentlemen, visited Prince Alfred Park, where they were
received bv Mr. H. Copeland, M.L.A. (senior trustee
of the Trades Hall), and the general secretary (Mr.
W. Ferrier), and conducted to a platform, which had been
erected at the southern end of the reserve. Lord Carrington
briefly addressed those present, and stated that he had per-
formed a great duty that day in laying the foundation-
stone of an institution which he believed would prove
beneficial to the people. (Loud applause.) Mr. H. Cope-


land next spoke, and gave a brief history of the movement
for the establishment of the Trades and Industrial Hall.
He wished the various societies every success, and hoped
the day was not far off when they would be able to
assemble in their own building. (Applause.) Sir Henry
Parkes also addressed those present. The proceedings
terminated with cheers for the Queen.
The crowd at the park in the morning was not a very
large one; but people kept arriving up till 4 o’clock, at
which time there must have been 6000 persons on the
ground. A considerable number of those present passed a
portion of their time in dancing in the Exhibition Building,
where good music was provided. Various amusements had
been arranged for the holiday-makers, and a good pro-
gramme of sports had been drawn up, the more prominent
items being an Aii-comers Handicap, 150 yards, for a first
prize of £2O; and other awards, the Centennial Industrial
Demonstration Handicap (150 yards), for a cup value lo
guineas, the inevitable tug-of-war, and other events. A large
number of people devoted their attention to the sports,
which, on the whole, were very good, some of the competi-
tions being keen, while others adjourned to different parts
of the park, and enjoyed themselves in their own peculiar
fashion. Just outside the Exhibition Building a phreno-
logist caused much merriment by “ reading the heads of
those who possessed courage enough to mount upon the
box which constituted his stand, and undergo the
operation of having their “ bumps ” felt by the
gentleman in the frock coat and the greasy hat, who
held forth to the multitude. A little further on
Punch and Judy proved exceedingly attractive to
a throng of merry juveniles, while many of those who
had evidently seen ‘‘ more than seven” summers laughed
most immoderately at the antics and contortions of the
figures. The swinging boats were well patronised, and the
various booths and stands appeared to be doing good
business, ice creams being in great demand. Ihe Art
Union, in which the;e were 86 good prizes, (the first being
a grand piano), was drawn during the evening. Earlier in
the day the children received a Centennial Commemorative
Medal, and also their share in the toy bazaar. A force of
25 policemen, under the command of Inspector Law-ess,
did duty on the ground, but their services were not re-
quired, as the large congregation of people were most
orderly and well-behaved. Mr. Arthur G. Smart, the
sports secretary, deserves a word of praise for the very
efficient way in which he discharged the arduous duties of
his office. The other officials also worked well.
The following are the details of the sports :
Youths’ Race Handicap, 100 yards—lst prize, cup value
3 guineas, presented by Evan Jones; 2nd, £l os.; 3rd, las.
G. Swan (5 yards) 1; F. Brown (scratch) 2; G. Cole
(scratch) 3. Sixteen competed in this race.
Three-legged Race (all-comers), 100 yards—lst prize,
£2 ; 2nd, £1 ; 3rd, 10s.—Davis and Wallington, 1 ; Walsh
and Adams, 2 ; Russell and Smith, 3. ,
Running High Jump (all-comers) —Ist prize, £1 ; 2nd,
£2 ; 3rd, £l.—Smith (aboriginal) sft. 3in., 1 ; Gagen, sft.
lin., 2; Stevens, 3. .. . „ ,
All-comer’s Handicap, 150 yards. —Ist prize, £2O; 2nd,
£7; 3rd, £3. C. Horder, 1; W. Neilson, 2; J. Pearson,
3. There were 17 entries for the event.
Centennial Industrial Demonstration Handicap, 150
yards, for members of societies represented on Demonstra-
tion Committee who have been financial on their societies
books three months prior to procession.—lst prize, Ctp,
value 15 guineas; 2nd, five guineas; 3rd, £2 10s. S.
Hutton, 1; C. Lester, 2; P. G. Pike, 3. The final in
this handicap was very good. Seven entries..
Sack Race (all-comers), 75 yards.—lst prize, £3; 2nd,
£1 ss; 3rd, 15s. A. Brennan, 1; J. Brennan, 2;
Hegarty, 3. . . . -n
Tug of War, open to all societies represented on Demon-
stration Committee; one team (10 meu only) from each
society.—lst prize, £8 ; 2nd, £4. Seamen’s Union, 1:
Gas Stokers, 2. Teams from the Wharf Labourers’ Union,
the Coal Lumpers’ Union, and the Shipwrights’ Union
also competed.
Fancy Costume Race, all comers, 100 yards. —Ist prize,
£3 ; 2nd, £2. R. Stevens, 1; T. Smith, 2; D. Flude, 3.
Dog-Jumping Contest.—lst prize, £2; 2nd, £1; 3rd,
10s. Searl’s Louise, sft. llin., 1; Paterson’s Beach, 2 ;
Dolan’s Diamond, 3.
Quoit Match Handicap, allcomers.—lst prize, £2; 2nd,
£l. Benfield, 1; M. Cooney, 2.
Dancing was kept up in the Exhibition Building until a
late hour.
GARDEN PARTY AT BISHOPSCOURT.
A very pleasant social gathering was held on Saturday
afternoon at Bishopscourt, the grounds of which are
exceedingly suitable for garden parties. In the garden
near the entrance to the Primate’s residence a large marquee
had been erected, and close by was the Vernon Band, which,
under its new master, played an excellent selection of music.
Dr. Barry received his guests, and they were next conducted
to the marquee, where refreshments had been laid out.
Some of the visitors strolled about the beautiful gardens,
while others gathered in groups and discussed various
social topics. The guests of the Primate numbered between
300 and 400. Amongst them were Lord Carrington, Sir
Henry Loch, Sir William Jervois, Sir William Robinson,
and Sir F. Napier Broome (Governors of New South
Wales, Victoria, New Zealand, South Australia, and
Western Australia), Admiral Fairfax, the Premier ;Sir
Henry Parkes), Sir Samuel Griffith (Premier of Queens-
land), Sir Edward Strickland, Sir Patrick Jennings, Sir
E. T. Smith (Mayor of Adelaide), Sir William. Manning,
Chief Justice Higinbotham (of Victoria), Chief Justice
Way (of South Australia), Mr. Justice Windeyer,
Mr. Justice Deffill, Judge Backhouse, Judge Docker, the
Hon. J. H. Young (Speaker of the Legislative Assembly),
Major-General Richardson, Brigadier-General Owen,
Major H. Lee (2nd Life Guards), the Hon.
J. C. Bray, (South Australia), the Bishops of
Bathurst, Brisbane, Ballarat. and Riverina, Dr.
Steel, Dr. Cameron, Dr. Kinross, Dr. Jefferis, Dr.
Kelvnack, Dr. Sellers, Dr. Z. Barry, Dr. Corlette,
the Rev. C. Bright, the Rev. J. H. Fletcher, the Hon.
William Clarke, the Hon. James Inglis, the Hons. E.
Vickery, G. A. Llovd, "W. H. Pigott, J. B. Rundie, G.
H. Cox, E. Knox, Ms.L.C., Messrs. M'Millan, A. J.
Rilev, R. Burdett Smith, R. B. Wilkinson, W. J. Foster,
Dr. 'Wilkinson, Ms.L.A., Mr. W. Curnow, Professor
Anderson Stuart, Mr. S. Cook, Captain Hammill, Lieuten-
ant Erskine, Colonel Airey, Major Gascoigne, Major Mac-
kenzie, Mr. E. Deas-Thomson, Mr. H. C. Russell
(Government Astronomer), Mr. Addison, S.M., Mr. W.
R. Beaver, Mr. R. L. Tooth, Archdeacon King, Canon
King, Canon Moreton, Minor Canons Rich and Beck,
Archdeacon Hales (of Launceston), the Revs. H. J. Rose,
J. D. Langley, A. R. Bartlett, James Hill, H. L. Jack-
son, D. Murphy, W. Hough, A. W. Pain, A. C. Cor-
lette, and J. Barnier.
ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION’S CEN-
TENARY EXCURSIONS.
The second of the series of excursions organised by the
Engineering Association of New South Wales took place on
Saturday last, when about 30 members of the association,
and about an equal number of visitors, left Redfern station
by the 9.20 a.m. ordinary train on a visit to Messrs. Hudson
Brothers’ works, at Clyde. On arrival of the train at Clyde
platform the party were met by Messrs. H. and R. Hudson,
J. C. Alexander, and J. Hutchison, and were afterwards
conducted over the large engineering establishment. The
malleable iron and steel foundry was first visited, where
castings were being produced whose tensile strain was equal
to wrought iron. The gray iron and the brass foundries,
together with the smiths’ shop, were also inspected, and
special interest was manifested in the drop-hammers for
steam forgings. The large Corliss engine, which


•drives the shafting in the waggon-making shops
and the saw-mill, was the subject of considerable
•attention. Lunch was laid in the office, and at the con-
clusion of the feast the president of the association (Mr.
Cruickshank), on behalf of the visitors, thanked Messrs.
Hudson Brothers for the kindness that had been extended
them. Mr. Henry Hudson briefly replied on behalf of the
firm. All the visitors expressed themselves highly pleased
with everything that they saw and heard at the works, and
later on they left by train to pay a visit to the Govern-
ment engineering workshops at Eveleigh. Arriving
there about 2 p.m., they were met by Messrs. \Y. Scott,
R. Scott, and J. Cobb, of the Railway Department,
and by them escorted over the entire shops. The various
kinds of work that were being done were generally admired,
and special interest was taken in, and admiration expressed,
at the completeness and magnitude of the gigantic estab-
lishment, which is fitted up with all manner of labour-
saving machines of the most improved patterns and work-
manship. The various mechanical contrivances for
boring, riveting, cutting, and punching, all
worked by hydraulic power, attracted a deal
of attention, and during their workings were closely ob-
served. The fitting and erecting sheds were also inspected,
and the class of work that is being executed there was
•closely examined, and favourably commented upon. .The
repleteness of the establishment was a topic that the
visitors greatly indulged in, and they all expressed them-
selves as very gratified and entertained by what they had
witnessed. A vote of thanks was passed to Mr. W. Scott
for his kindness in explaining to those present the various
works in connection with the esta'olishment. The party re-
turned to town shortly after 4 o’clock, after having
thoroughly enjoyed the day’s outing. The association will
visit the Mortlake Gas Works and Messrs. Lysaght’s
Wire Works to-day, and to-morrow they proceed by early
train to view the Eskbank Iron Works andLithgow Pottery
Works.
THE BAND CONTEST.
On Saturday the band contest was continued at the
’Carrington Grounds, lasting from about 11.30 in the
morning until nearly 11 o’clock at night, soon after which
the awards were made known. The attendance of the
public was but small; and, though the weather was
unpleasant in the evening, having every indication, too, of
being worse than it was, still the rain would hardly account
for the almost deserted appearance of the grounds. It is
not easy to understand why the public has shown so
little interest in this affair, for hundreds and some-
times thousands flock to the Gardens and squares on
ordinary afternoons where bands perform gratis. Here,
for a’ merely nominal sum, a most attractive
entertainment was provided. Some of the very best
bands in Australia and Tasmania have come to Sydney,
each having come to perform its very best selections in its
best possible style. It must certainly be extremely dis-
appointing to the visiting bands and to the promoters to see
such manifestations of general lack of interest in the
gathering; and we certainly share the feeling of disappoint-
ment, as the fact cannot fail to give a bad impression
regarding musical appreciation in Sydney. The only,
explanation of the fact that occurs to us is that possibly
the public mistook the nature of the occasion, and perhaps
forgot that the competition itself fas a technical test of
skill) concerned none but the performers and the judges,
while the musical effect would be all the better and all the
more enjoyable in consequence. Perchance there will be a
better gathering this evening at the Protestant Hall, where
a grand concert is advertised to take place, and when Lady
Carrington will present the prizes to the several winners.
The Cumberland (Parramatta) Band played on Saturday
the selection which had to be omitted on Friday, because
the performers were then absent, having a prior engage-
ment for that day. Thus they played last, although drawn
for the first in order. Their chosen piece was “ Ernuni,”
the same which had been previously so magnificently per-
formed by the band of the 4th (Newcastle) Regiment, and
the coincidence could hardly do otherwise than tell against
them, because, though by no means bad, it was less good
than that referred to. The performance of this completed
“ Test A,” which was concerned only with the contest
“selections.”
“ Test D” was that which was taken second in order,
comprising the performance of “ Quicksteps on the March.”
In this most of the bands not only played well, but had a
thoroughly military style and appearance. There can be
very little to speak of musically in this department,
as ordinary quicksteps are not remarkable for musical
qualities at the best of times, and when a dozen
of them are presented successively, each one being played
twice through, such a feast is more than enough to blunt
the sensibility of the most enthusiastic. There were some
which were better than others, it is true, and some which
were better played than were others, as the awards will
show, but individual mention is quite unnecessary, beyond
the remark that both as regai’ds the composition and the
performance the best was that which was given by the
4th Regiment, and aptly named (as it happens) “ Chef
d’CEuvre.” The composer of this is Mr. Buich, of Ballarat,
whose “Model Band” is one of the competitors. The fol-
lowing is the order in which the bands played, the names
of their marches being added: —l, S. A. Militia, “Sophie;”
2,4 th Regiment, “Chef d’CEuvre;” 3, Cumberland, “True
till Death;” 4, Bulch’s, “The Typhoon;” 5, Naval Bri-
gade, “ Vandalia;” 6, Hobart Garrison, “Distant Greet-
ing;” 7, Northcott’s, “The Challenge;” 8, Laun-
ceston City, “The Allies;” 9, Eastern Suburban,
“Preciosa;” 10, Alburv, “Australasia;” 11, Mudgee,
“No Surrender;” 12, St. Joseph’s, “Always Ready.”
The tempo was generally fairly good, ranging from about
116 to 126 per minute, so that even the extremes did not
vary much from 120 (the standard), while the majority
were as close as about 122.
The evening was taken up by the contest dance selections
—test B—when there was some excellent playing. Some
of the pieces were really good music, and most* were attrac-
tive in style and inspiriting as regards effect. The follow-
ing was the order observed : —l, Hobart Garrison, “ Krolls
BallKlange;” 2, Eastern Suburban, “ Lie Hydropaten; ”
3, Fourth Regiment, “ The Don” (quadrilles) ; 4, Alburv,
“Tit Bits” (quadrilles); 5, Launceston, “ Baden Baden:”
6, S. A. Militia, “ Stella Mia;” 7, Naval Brigade, “ Caro
Fior;” 8, St. Joseph’s, “ Amorettanza;” 9, Cumberland.
“Youth and Beauty;” 10, Northcott’s, “Fortissimo”
(quadrilles); 11, Bulch’s, “ Hommage aux Dames;” 12,
Mudgee, “Boccaccio.” All the selections were waltzes,
except the three which are otherwise marked.
At half-past 10 the contest was thus far finished. Some
doubt yet remained whether or no the “sight-reading test”
was to be taken, and a meeting of bandmasters and the
promoters was held to decide the matter. This being
settled in the negative, the judges handed in their papers,
and the marks were added up and the points allotted to the
several bands. Excepting for the marching test, the judges
had been all the time in a screened room, so they knew
the bands only by number. Each of the judges made a
separate award, allowing a maximum of 10 marks each
for execution, time and style, tune, balance, precision, light
and ahade, and standard of music with special reference to
its difficulty. This was the order pursued in regard to
the grand selections, which were naturally the chief things
to be judged. The lists were subseqently added together,
by which means any advantage which any band might
gain from slight difference of opinion, if it existed, -was
duly recorded. Thus the maximum for each department
was really 30, making 210 in all. The marches were less
important as tests, and were judged in conclave, with 10
points as maximum. In the dance selections the three
most prominent heads of judgment were taken, each with a
maximum of 10 marks ; 90 being thus the total maximum
obtained by the addition of the three award lists. The
highest number of points possible of attainment was there-
fore 310. It was nearly 11.30 o’clock on Saturday night


Name of band
and
bandmaster.
Name of selection (A)
and number
on programme.
Order
of
play-
ing.
Number
of
marks.
1
Total.
A
D
B
A
D
B
Fourth Regiment, W. Barkell
Ernani
8
3
2
3
182
10
82
274 1st
Bulch’s Model, J. E. Bulch...
Gems of Weber
11
10
4
11
167
8
61
236 2nd
Launceston City, A. Wallace
William Tell
9
11
8
5
160
8
66
234 3rd
Eastern Suburban, A. Heath
Der Freischutz
4
6
9
2
144
7
68
219 4th
Hobart Garrison, W. T. Bates
Lucrezia Borgia ...
6
9
6
1
133
6
58
197
S. A. Militia, Lieut. Squanse
La Forga del Destino
5
7
1
6
132
8
47
187
Northcott’s, J. Northcott ...
Rigoletto
7
4
7
10
111
8
56
175
St. Joseph’s, T. Harper
Maritana
12
2
12
8
111
9
52
172
Albury Town, D. Pogson ...
11 Talismano
1
1
10
4
112
7
49
168
Cumberland, W. Walters ...
Ernani
2
12
3
9
116
5
45
166
Naval Brigade, J. Devlin ...
Rienzi
3
8
5
7
116
6
29
151
Mudgee, A. W. Sheppard ...
Gospel Trumpet ...
10
5|11
12
54
4
16
74
when the award was made known, the details being as
follows :
The prize for the drum-and-fife bands was awarded to
the Naval Volunteers, the unsuccessful competitors being
(in order) the Botany Band and the Young Workmen’s,
these three being all that came forward, though there were
five entries.
In the solo competitions Mr. Allison, of the Eastern
Suburban Band, gained the highest award, honourable
mention being made of Mr. Munro (Hobart Garrison), who
was a close second. The cornet playing was only good in
the case of Mr. Grant (Eastern Suburban), who, therefore,
was awarded the prize. In the euphonium and trombone
class there was only one competitor for the latter instru-
ment ; and Mr. Fenguson was awarded the prize for
euphonium, his tone being far better than that of the
others.
Perfect confidence appeared to be generally felt that the
judges’ awards would be made strictly upon the merits of
the performances, and the ability of Messrs. Zelman,
Caron, and Gildea was naturally beyond question. Of
course, there was disappointment in certain cases when the
result was made known, but the award was received in good
part. The successful bands were heartily cheered by those
who were present; and a vociferous cheer was raised for
the adjudicators. The contest throughout was very keen;
and perhaps this fact may have influenced the result to
some extent, as bands composed of or containing “ old
hands ” are less liable to nervousness than those made up
of performers to whom a contest is a new and formidaDle
ordeal. Buf even though certain bands may have a reason-
able feeling of being able to do better at other times, the
award may be accepted as a faithful record of the relative
merits of the performances during the competition. We
append a short resume of the chief remarks contained in
the report, so far as they refer to the “ selections; ” having
added thereto, for convenience of our readers, the names
of the bands to which the numbers in the report refer, and
the total marks gained in each case.
Judges’ Repout.
At this contest, where 12 military bands and three fife-
and-drum bands have passed in review before us, we have
made careful and true judgment to the best of our ability,
making our award in ali cases by marks and judging by
points, without regard to the personnel of the performers,
who were indeed entirely unknown to us in all the more
important parts, and only seen by us where individuality
was quite immaterial, as in the march tests. One band
lias certainly stood out prominently from the rest, and to-
that we have duly awarded the first prize. We have also
had no doubt in the awarding of second, third, and fourth
prizes; but, at the same time, we desire to make special
mention of two other bands, which followed, as fifth and
sixth, very closely. And, above all, we wish to express our
very high sense of appreciation of the general excellence
shown by the bands which have come before us from all
Earts of Australia, for the performances all round have
een thoroughly creditable.
No. 3 (the Albury Town Band) gained 112 points for fhe
selection, Balfe’s “11 Talisinano,” with a total of 168.
The instruments were somewhat out of tune, especially the
clarionets. The euphonium soloist was weak and timid. The
best feature of the selection was the comet solo, which was
well played, and deserves better support. No. 4 (St.
Joseph’s) gained 111 points for the selection, with a total
of 172 points, choosing “Maritana” as its piece. The-
comet deserves special mention for his good quality of tone
and generally good expression. The drum being too loud
destroyed, to a certain extent, the balance of tone, 'i he
tempi were in most cases misunderstood. We must give
honourable mention to the euphonium player for his excel-
lent tone. No. 5 (the Fourth Regiment) gained 182 points
for their selection (“ Emani”), having a total of 274, thus
gaining the first prize. The good qualities were so numer-
ous that we cannot but acknowledge that the band was
almost perfect. The precision of attack, the tune, the
light and shade, the balance of tone, and the execution
were one and all excellent. It is still more creditable as No. 5
is entirely a brass band. All concerned deserve great praise
and we have much pleasure in giving, in this case, what is
due to the leader, namely, our most sincere congratulations.
No. 6 (Northcott’s Sandhurst Band) played “Rigoletto,”
gaining 111 points, with a total of 175 points. Nothing
here deserves special mention except the trombone player,
who really deserves recognition for his accuracy of tune
and style. The selection would have been improved
if correct tempo and tradition had been observed.
No. 7 (the Mudgee Band) chose “The Gospel
Trumpet,” gaining 54 points, with a total of 74. No. 9
(the Eastern Suburban Band) gained 144 points, with a
total of 219, and therefore takes the fourth prize. The selec-
tion, “Der Freischutz,” was indeed very good all round,
although, unfortunately, many effects were lost through a
want of attention to the traditional tempi. No. 10 (the
South Australian Militia) gained 132 points for the selec-
tion, with a total of 187. “Ea Forza del Destino ” was a
good selection, with much good playing in it, but the in-
struments were not well in tune, nor was the time always
good. No. 8 (the Sydney Naval Brigade) played a selec-
tion from Wagner’s “ Rienzi,” gaining 116 marks for
it, with a total of 151. This was the most difficult piece to
play and to grasp; but while we give credit for attempting
a piece of so much merit as a composition, we regret that
the band seems not to grasp the true character of the
music. We must accord honourable mention for the
baritone solo, which was played with good quality of tone
and good expression. No. 11 (Hobart Garrison) gained 133
marks for “ Lucrezia Borgia,” having 197 as total. In this
case the selection was, on the whole, fairly played; and the
clarionet deserves high praise for his neatness of execution,
and the share he had in the general rendition of the selection.
Unfortunately, certain instruments lost their place, and
were one bar ahead in “ Come e Bello.” The balance of
tone was unequal, but the horn was excellent and deserves
recognition. No. 12 (Bulch’s Model Band) takes the second
prize with 167 marks for “ Gems of Weber,” gaining a
total of 236. The opening movement was a trifle slow, and
so was also the well-known “ Mermaid’s ” theme. Cornet
and saxhorn were good, the former especially so; while the
horn also deserves praise, as well as the euphonium. No. 2
(Launceston City Band) gains the third prize with 234
marks, of which 160 were for “ William Tell.” The open-
ing movement was not in true time, and wanted expression
and colouring. The piccolo deserves very prominent men-
tion, although the movement was hurried. The allegro
movement was played with great spirit. No. 1 (Cumber-
land) played “ Ernani,” gaming 116 points for it, having
a total of 166. The performance was not on the whole
happy, the time not being perfect, while light and shade
were indifferent. The cornet was excellent, and euphonium
was good, only that it was colourless.


—
C. of E.
R. C.
Pres.
Weslyn.
Total.
General Staii...
Permanent Artillery
Volunteer Artillery...
Engineers
Torpedo Corps . v
1st Regt. Infantry ...
2nd Regt. Infantry..
Artillery Reserves ...
Infantry Reserves...
6
104
106
29
40
71
79
50
105
40
13
"2
15
"2
16
*2
"i
16
6
161
119
29
42
98
79
50
107
o
o
o
72
18
11
691
CENTENNIAL RELIGIOUS SERVICES.
UNITED SERVICE IN THE EXHIBITION
BUILDING.
There have been few, if any, larger congregations at a
religious service in this colony than that which met yester-
day at the old Exhibition Building, to celebrate the
Centenary of Australia with the united voice of the Pro-
testant Churches. The assemblage of ordinary attendants,
accommodated on the floor of the building, was probably
about 8000, and several thousands unable to obtain room
were distributed outside the building. This great congre-
gation represented every branch of the clergy and laity of
the Protestant Denominations of the Church of England,
the Presbyterians, and Wesleyans.
The occasion was used as a military church parade, and
about 700 members of the defence forces attended. The troops
assembled in the Outer Domain at about 2 o’clock, and
formed up by regiments, after which they were formed in
column, and then marched off in fours, led by the Perma-
nent Artillery Band. A noticeable novelty was that some
officers paraded mounted. The actual strength on parade
was 691, made up as follows :—Permanent Artillery, 161,
under Lieutenant-Colonel Airey ; Volunteer Artillery and
Reserves, 169, under Captain Chapman; Engineers, 29,
under Lieutenant-Colonel Rowe ; Torpedo Corps, 42, under
Lieutenant Broughton ; Ist Regiment Infantry, 98, under
Lieutenant-Colonel Farrell 2nd Regiment Infantry,
79, under Lieutenant-Colonel Goodlet; Reserve In-
fantry, 107, under Lieutenant-Colonel Eden. The parade
was under the command of Colonel Goodlet. Captain
Cuthell did duty as adjutant, assisted by Captain Bayly.
The column marched in the following order :—Permanent
Artillery, Volunteer and Reserve Artillery, Torpedo Corps,
Engineers, First Regiment Infantry, Second Regiment In-
fantry, Fifth Regiment Infantry (Scottish Rifles), Sixth
Regiment Infantry (Suburban). A party of Roman
Catholics from the Permanent Artillery followed the march
along Macquarie-street to St. Mary’s Cathedral.. The
Roman Catholics belonging to the other regiments
remained in their ranks and attended the united
service at the Exhibition Building. The route of march
was alone Macquarie-street to King-street, thence
into Georgl;-street and on to Devonshire -street, and thence
to the place of worship in Prince Alfred Park. The bands
of the Permanent Artillery and the 2nd Regiment played
some very good marches, and the column marched in ex-
cellent form. On arriving at the building the troops were
marched upstairs into the gallery which was set apart
exclusively for their use. The officer commanding the
military forces, Major-General Richardson, C. 8., was
among the congregation, together with Colonel Roberts,
C.M.G., commanding the artillery forces; Lieutenant-
Colonel Baynes, the paymaster; and Major Mackenzie, the
assistant adjutant-general. . .
The following is the parade state, giving the denomi-
nations :
Upon the floor of the building extensive preparations had
been made. The united choirs, under the direction of Mr.
P D M'Cormick, occupied a large terraced stand at tbe
north end, immediately adjoining the platform on which
the service was conducted. The organists were Mr M.
Younger and Mr. Albert Fischer. In front of the platform
were seated a numerous body of ministers, including repre-
sentatives of the various denominations. The greatei part
of the floor space was occupied by holders of tickets for this
reserved area, anion*? these being: a large proportion of
ladies ; and outside of this space, the building was crowded
by thousand of the general public. A portion of ,the ground-
floor space in front of platform was reserved and seated for
the vice-regal party.
His Excellency and the party from Government House
arrived about 3 o’clock, and as they entered the choirs sang
the National Anthem. The vice-regal group consisted
of Lord Carrington, Lady Carrington, Lord Carnarvon,
Lady Carnarvon, Sir Henry Loch, Governor of Victoria;
Sir \Villiam Jervois, Governorof New Zealand; Sir Robert
Hamilton, Governor of Tasmania; Sir Charles Mitchell.
ex-Governor of Fiji; Major Phillimore, Major Gascoigne,
and Mr. Wallington.
The Primate, Dr. Barry presided. Beside him on the
platform were—the Ven'. Archdeacon King, the Rev.
Dr. Steel, the Rev. Dr. Jefferis, the Rev. Dr. Kelynack,
and the Rev. Dr. Cameron.
The order of service, giving the words of the prayers and
hymns and the programme of the choral work, were printed
and distributed among the congregation.
The service was commenced by singing the 100th Psalm
to the tune “ Old Hundredth,” after which the Ven. Arch-
deacon King read the prayer of thanksgiving printed in the
order of service.
The Primate then read the 67th Psalm, after which he
delivered a brief address. He said he desired to leave it to
others to touch upon the directly centennial subjects,
and to glance (as had been arranged) successively at the
growth of the past, the conditions of the present,
and the hopes of the future. He simply wished to put into
a few plain words what he believed was impressed by their
assembling together that day upon the hearts of all of
them. Their service was pre-eminently a spontaneous
service, the free outburst of prayer and thanksgiving. It
grew out of the deep and instinctive feeling that our cele-
bration must not pass without some common offering of
ourselves and of our country to God. It grew up without
one moment’s doubt or hesitation, freely, into the
simple harmony of the day, of praise, of teaching,
and prayer. He thought that it was the expression
of something lying at the bottom of the hearts
of our people as undisturbed by the blasts of
dispute and the heavings of doubt as the depths of ocean
were undisturbed by the surface waves —the belief that,
after all, the life of a nation was guided, and quickened,
and inspired by God, and that, therefore, in our national
celebrations pride should be transfigured into thankfulness,
and hope for the future should be solemnised by prayer.
Theirs was a universal service. Looking round at that
great congregation he could not see any class not repre-
sented there. High and low, rich and poor, learned
and simple, soldiers and citizens, all met in com-
mon together—all were upon one common ground.
In the speeches of the past week he had observed that
address had to be made with variety and gradation of title ;
but he would speak to them simply as brethren united in
the common worship of our one Father and in the name of
our one Saviour. There was in the very sense of a great
multitude of living souls stirred by one impulse an almost
indescribable power of grandeur and pathos, and a man’s
heart must be cold indeed if it were not moved within him
when, as on that day, from all voices, rang out the well-
known “ Hymn of Praise” to God. Their service was one of
Christian unity—a unity not of vague colourless com-
promise, but the free unity of a common grasp, which after
all made up the life of our life, the Fatherhood of one
God, the salvation of the one Lord, the inspiration of the
one Holy Spirit. Those who were to address the congre-
gation would speak the clearest truth that they knew,
and yet in their utterances there should be no distinctive
variation of principle, there should not be a word said that
would not strike a chord fit to vibrate in sympathy in the
hearts of all. In the dear old hymns in which they would


join they were lhat day Christians and nothing but Chris-
tians, as they hoped they would one day be in Heaven.
On all grpat days of national enthusiasm, the frost-
work of division is quelled as by a glorious flame;
but how much more when such enthusiasm was so kindled
by the divine fire from the altar of God that it went up in a
great cloud of incense to the heavens, where all were one in
Him ? Freedom under a moral necessity, unity of action—
a unify ultimately in God—were not these exactly the
forces which, under his providence, would make for
national blessing and greatness, such as they could desire
for a young country just growing to a knowledge of its
capacity and destiny ? Of all these might their worship
that day be not only the symbol, but in its measure the
means. So far as it was real and fervent, it would not pass
away. It would live in them after they separated and re-
turned to their homes, and to their own spheres of action
and duty which were their contribution to the common his-
tory. It would be, he trusted, accepted and blessed of Him
who watched over and guarded us all. Whatever lav
before us in the century to come—and we should remember
■that in a community, as in an individual, manhood had
trials and dangers which the safer growth of earlier days
never knew—he hoped that God would strengthen and bless
us. The Primate concluded by stating that the Cross was
the sacred symbol to man of the law of self-sacrifice, which
was the law of humanity, and, therefore, true greatness,
and it was the symbol yet more sacred of the infinite love
of a God—not a dim awful abstraction too high for us to
know or feel, but a Father who knows the very heart of
His creatures, and calls their weakness into the fellowship
of a divine strength to work together with Him.
The hymn “ Praise the Lord, ye Heavens adore Him,”
was then sung to the tune “ Austria,” after which an
address was delivered by
The Rev. Dr. Steel, who spoke upon the subject of
“ What hath God wrought for Australia ? ” After making
some introductory remarks having reference to astrology
and the science of astronomy, he said it was the conjunc-
tion of a star with the sun which occasioned Captain Cook’s
great voyage and led to the discovery of New South Wales.
The scientific world had waited for the transit of Venus
across the sun’s disc in 1769 as one of the most important
means of calculating the distance of the sun, but in the
counsels of the Most High, “ who telleth the number of
the stars, and giveth them all their names,” Venus was the
morning star of a brighter day to the southern hemisphere
when the ships of the isles of the far north-west sailed to
Australia to found a new empire. The Bible taught us to
hold a national thanksgiving. The chequered history of
the children of Israel was made the theme of grateful
hallelujahs and wrought out by sanctified genius into
national psalms. The Israelites made their contrasts of
experience songs for the worship of the All Wise Disposer
of events, and this gave the Hebrew psalter a cosmopolitan
character to guide and exemplify national gratitude. We
might learn from it to-day how to review a century of toil
and discipline, of blessing and of progress. Our past had
been chequered, too ; we had been in bondage and had had
our trials and hardships ; but we had had numerous bless-
ings from the divine goodness and great success. It had
pleased God to remember our low estate at the first and to
grant ns deliverance. Hazardous as was the experiment of
founding a colony of such materials as were brou ht in the
“ first fleet,” doubtful as sometimes were the issues be-
tween crime and cruelty, shocking as were the developments
of sin and vice, few as were the examples of pure morality
and consistent piety, it was matter for grateful acknowledg-
ment to God that amidst all so much progress was achieved,
so many discoveries made, so many settlements secured,
and so many characters reformed. God had blessed the
efforts of the humane and the Christian in philanthropic
work among ttie prodigals of humanity, and for this they
had cause to be thankful. Dr. Steel then sketched some of
the incidents of early colonial history as illustrating the
good which had been accomplished among lawless men by
those who laboured to bring about their reformation.
Allusion was also made to the great advances which had been
made on all sides during the second half century of the colony’s
existence. Coeval with the founding of the colony was the
rise of modern missions. The movement struggled, as the
colony did, for some time; but it revived the Church, and
now, by the blessing of God, as they looked around they
saw organised churches, the land covered with places of
worship, the city a depot for mission ships, and already 300
isles of the Pacific owning Christ. After dwelling upon
the work of the Christian missionaries who carried the
Gospel to New Zealand and Fiji, he concluded by saying
that this colonial experience might be but “a lantern in the
stem,” but it illumined a century, and we might well raise
our Ebenezerand sav, “Hitherto hath the Lord helped
us.” ' «
The hymn commencing “ All hail the power of Jesus’s
name ” was then sung. At the conclusion,
The Rev. Dr. Kelvnack spoke. Going back, he said,
in imagination, to the beginning of settlement in the green
woods of Port Jackson, and tracing all the mighty results
that have developed from the same, we found a history
that had surpassed the expectations of the most sanguine,
and became more than the translation of a poet’s dream.
And our hearts must be cold indeed if they do not thrill
with thankfulness and high resolve as we realise the
grandeur of our inheritance, the splendour of our
position, and the greatness of our work in this fair land of
the Sunny South. Nor was the Anglo-Saxon settlement
of this land without significance. On the broad page of
history we might read the lesson that God has selected
his agents according to the work they were to fulfil.
And we might read with equal clearness the
Divine intent in relation to ourselves, and that
is, that our intellectual foice, our governing
power, our great colonising faculty, should reproduce the
glory of ■ the parent stock, but in a more extended sphere,
and make this land a centre from which shall radiate an
influence that shall be the joy and inspiration of humanity.
Ihe freedom of the constitution and government under
which we live is at once a matter for congratulation and a
trust to be wisely used. It must never be forgotten by us
that intelligence and virtue are the necessarv conditions of
democracy if it is to be a rule of blessing. If power is so
widely diffused it is all the more necessary that the body
politic should have its lifeblood circulating from a heart
that is true in its pulsations and healthy in its tone. If we
glory in the freedom of our franchise, we must not drag it
in the mire for personal or party ends, but the watchword
of all who exercise it must be always and everywhere the
supreme well-being of the State. ‘ If the doors of our
Parliament are open to the representatives of the
people, despite the accident of rank or wealth,
we must have a care that the men who stand
in that supreme court of legislation shall be
marked by allegiance to the eternally right, in distinction
from the politically expedient;—that our laws shall
be such as to guard the claims of public morality, and to
foster the cause of all that tends to make a nation great and
strong. One thing that may j istly stir our patriotic
pride to-day is the munificent provision that has been made
by the .State in the cause of popular education. Wo have
thus affirmed that the curse of ignorance shall not rest upon
the land, and that we are keenly alive to the claims which
the future citizen has upon the State that he may be fitted
for the efficient discharge of his duty. Add to this the pro-
vision that this system makes for moral training,
and then .we saw that what is aimed at is
not only intellectual development, but, with that,
moral force to regulate and guide it. But if
we might be justly proud of our educational institutions
we might with almost equal reason boast the activities of
religion, as these assert themselves for the uplifting and
purification of the whole realm of social life. It was but
the utterance of a truism that is attested by the evidence of
universal history, that a nation is powerful according as it
enthrones conscience in the place of supreme power, and
according, again,as conscience exerts that power in obedience
to an authority that is higher than its own—even the will
of God. What we want, therefore, to ensure a future
for the land is to make Christianity the royal force to which
all other forces must bow. The results that other influences
have brought about we can find all adown the stream of
time. But if we want to see what deference to a Divine


law will do, and what attempts, although imperfect,
to strive after a Divine ideal will accomplish,
we may find it in the great country we are
proud to call Fatherland, and among peoples that belong to
the same race as ourselves. Democracy will become a
power for good in so far, and only in so, far as it it is pene-
trated and inspired by Christianity. As it is man’s highest
glory that he can commune with the Divine One, so one of
the most ineradicable principles of his being is his craving
for the spiritual and unseen. The highest service we
could render to the land we live in was, therefore, to
diffuse abroad the religious sentiments, and with that the
religious life, for in proportion as this is done we shall
make Australia great and free. What will be the character
of our future history in many respects the keenest vision
may not discover. But this the dullest of us might be
bold to affirm that, in proportion as Christianity
shall purify the life of the individual, and sweeten and
hallow the domain of home, and exalt and direct the
activities of trade, and inspire tlie power of the press and
govern the politics of statesmanship, and become the one focal
point to whieh all things converge, and from which they
receive their life-giving and ennobling influence—in that
proportion shall these young commonwealths rise to occupy
that throne of glorious empire to which they are divinely
called, and go forth upon their kingly mission to enlighten
and subdue and bless the world.
After the singing of another hymn, “ The Church’s
One Foundation,”
The Rev. Dr. Jeffekis delivered an address. He said
we entered on the second century of our national life with
profund trust in God as the ruler of our people. In no pre-
vious period in the history of the world had there Deen
greater need for seeking Divine leadership and help. A
great and unknown future stretched before us. The past
century had seen the most wonderful progress ever made by
men. The giant forces of nature had been brought under
our dominion. Science had revealed and partially explored
new continents of being. Despotisms a thousand years
old had been broken and disgraced. The human
mind had been delivered from falsehoods that
for ages impeded its advance. But the greater
the light the deeper the shadow. Many complex forces
were at work, for evil as well as good, in our modern
civilisation. We were beginning to understand the tre-
mendous powers entrusted to our manhood. We not only
inherited the past, we were shaping and controlling the
future. Our lives were cast upon one of the great seas of
humanity. The destiny of ages depended on our conduct
now, and who among us for little or much, alone or to-
gether, was sufficient for these things.' The strain was
too great, the responsibilities too many for us to depend on
our own strength and wisdom. "W e Christians believed
that the universe was the product of the mind of God, and
that only God knew how to bring order out of confusion,
a prosperous future out of this chaotic present. lo Him
we committed our cause. M e cast our burden on the Lord.
We had no gift of prophecy, and not much of prediction,
but it was permitted us to anticipate and forecast the future
We were but three millions, but what ground we
occupied in race and space of time 1 M e belonged
to the section of the world’s population which was
multiplying as none other was. In 1700 the Anglo-
Saxon race numbered 6,000,000. In 1800 it was
21,000,000. To-day it numbered 110,000,000. There
never was populating power like this. But numbers
alone would be of little moment. In this race there were
centred the noblest ideas, the most practical and hence the
most powerful thought, the freest goeemment, the purest
faith. Through the colonising instincts of our people we had
been brought across the watery wilderness to this land o
promise, a land with a favourable climate and fertile soil,
with lofty mountains and deep cleft valleys,
with rivers and streams and subterranean wa us,
a land with mines of inexhaustible wealth, with
corn like that of Egypt, with grapes like those
of Eschol, with boundless plains for our sheep
and a thousand hills for our cattle. Bin o e n c ? n ur^
our hundreds of people had become millions. But even
now we had only fringed the coast with our settleme s,
and pushed our advance guard into the interior. In a land
like this, what did our race want but room for expansion,
and there was room for numbers not to be told. But what
would our future be ? Should we spend a turbulent and pas-
sionate youth, captived by its joys, indulging in its vices,
to die in our adolescence or perish in our prime ? There were
dangers that threatened as well as honours to be won.
Nations were like men. Temperance and chastity, the re-
straint of self, obedience to God, these were required of us
as much as freedom and courage and intelligence. We
dared not hope that our progress would be by peaceful de-
velopment only, as in the century j ust closed the fatal war
spirit had seized upon some of the noblest of our brothers,
who in turn had infected many with their madness. Our
Constitution, which they should have died rather than
violate, was deliberately broken to show to Europe and the
wor'd that we were the descendants of the Vikings. As a
people we had thrown down the gage of battle, and
there were nations waiting to take it up. Petro-
polowski and Noumea were a standing menace
to Australia. Let us mourn over the heart-
burnings and jealousies between the colonies. We stood
too much upon our separate rights. Federation was too
lont;- delayed. Before the first century of her independence
had ended America had seen hundreds of thousands of her
sons slain in civil war. If we were not soon united we
would drift further apart, and the second century of our
national existence might not pass without conflict and
bloodshed. With the multiplication of our wealth,
we need to remember the wise saying ‘‘He that
maketh haste to be rich shall not be inno-
cent.” Our wealth, as in the old country,
was already breeding poverty. Society had two dangerous
classes, the abnormally rich and the abnormally poor. One
of the greatest problems of the day was how to create
wealth without creating poverty. If this democracy could
not solve it. and present tendencies prevailed there would
be a war of classes before 1988. “ Revolution in Eng-
land,” said the Bishop of Manchester, “ is kept down only
by fear of the military.” Australia would have
no soldiers for work like this. Our security de-
pended solely on justice and that sense of brotherhood that
came with Christ. On what should we place our chief de-
pendence for building up a commonwealth of freedom,
justice, virtue Legislation might guide, poetry might
refine, art might soften, science might instruct, literature
might ennoble ; but at the last, and in the highest, it was
religion alone that could purify and save. Everything de-
pended on Christianity. The teaching and the rule of
Christ would be the chief factors in our national prosperity.
The churches might fail, and did fail. The human, as
well as the divine, found expression in them. But Christ
never failed, and Chistianity was for all ages. To-day the
omens were favourable, and our hearts beat high with hope.
No new nation ever entered upon ils larger history with
brighter prospects. Let us be true to our mission, and help
in founding a nation, in strengthening an empire which
should prove to the whole race that equal justice and un-
fettered freedom and brotherhood in Christ were the divine
appointments for human life.
Prayer having been offered by the Rev. Dr. Cameron,
The Hallelujah Chorus was given by the united choirs.
During the rendering of this magnificent production, a col-
lection was taken up, the proceeds of which, after defray-
ing expenses, will be divided between the Sydney and
Prince Alfred Hospitals.
The service terminated with the Benediction, and the
singing of the hymn, ” God bless our native land.”
When the service was over, the great congregation
gradually found their way out of the building through the
various doors. The military forces were marched out and
formed up on the southern side of the building, and the
parade was dismissed. The regiments were taken off the
ground separately and marched to suitable places in different
directions; and the men were then finally dismissed.
ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
There was an overflowing congregation at St. Andrew’s
Cathedral last night, when the Right Rev. Dr. Barry


preached from 2nd Corinthians, 12th chapter, and 9th
verse, and from the Epistle to the Colossians, 2nd chapter,
and 19th verse, “My grace is sufficient for thee.”
“And not holding the head, from which all the
body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered,
and’knit together, increaseth with the increase of God.”
The Primate, before beginning his sermon, said he was
asked to give notice that the offertory would not be for the
Church Centennial Fund, but for the cathedral debt, which,
he might say, was the only hindrance that prevented the
chapter from contemplating that enlarged cathedral, which
was greatly needed. He was also requested to announce
that they should be glad that evening, in addition to the
regular offertory, to receive any promises on the papers
scattered through the pews for the centennial
fund. He then began his sermon. Last Sunday
they had considered how “strength perfect in weakness ”
with a faith relying absolutely upon God was the secret of
national life in all its phases—physical, intellectual, moral,
and spiritual. That night, speaking as he designed to do
of the life and growth of the Church in this land, he could
add a more explicit description of the main principle of life,
“ Grace of God all sufficient” in the headship of the Lord
Jesus Christ. It was true that his special subject was that
life and growth during the past century in their own Church
of England, andjon someof the peculiar characteristics of that
church he might have something to say hereafter—but
fundamentally and ultimately they had always to consider
it, not in respect to these, but in its essential character as a
branch of the Catholic Church of Christ. Grace, as a
Christian understood the word, was simply the indwelling
of Christ, both for salvation from sin and regeneration to
higher spiritual life, in the whole nature of man, individual
and social, and therefore in the church. The New Testa-
ment recognised Him successively as the head of each
individual man, as the head of the whole church, and as
the head of all humanity, which should be, and in God’s
good time would be, drawn within that church.
“Holding the head” under all these aspects
was the inner life of faith, as it is the
faith of all actual life. In the special view which they had
to take that night, it was the one principle of vitality and
progress in their own or any other branch of the Church of
Christ. At all times it was a “ grace sufficient for us ; ”
in itself it was a divine force unchanging because un-
changeable to us, according to our varying degrees
of need and capacities of rceception—now fuller
and brighter, now diviner and less abundant, yet
always sufficient to those who made it fully their
own. The stream in itself was, and must be
always, the same, although it was measured to us by the
capacity of the channel by which we received it. In the
quicker duller times of the church that stream
flowed slowly on, half hidden from the eyes of
the world. In the swifter times of revival it
seemed to swell and overflow and sweep all before it. But,
under all conditions, it was sufficient, because “ the suffi-
ciency is of God.” It might be a higher privilege and re-
sponsibility to live and labour (as perhaps they did) in the
bright flood time. But each individual soul, if only the
grace of God were given, had really its peculiar
blessings. And that all-sufficient grace was perfected in
weakness. In the religious history of a Church, as of a
life, we sighed when we saw how much was taken up with
the records of weaknesses. In the first 50
years of the century, the growth of the Church,
like that of the community itself, was slow
enough. First, a solitary chaplain, ministering under
scant encouragement to a small and half unwilling con-
gregation. Then a few fellow-workers—for years but two
or three —taking up a ministry so utterly beyond their
power, that the settlement pushed out, remained for
years uncared for from a religious point of view.
Next some vague attempt was made at organisa-
tion, after nearly' 40 years, as an archdeaconry,
forsooth, of the diocese of Calcutta, how many thousands of
miles away he could not say ; and at last, 48 years from the
first landing, the first bishop of the whole continent of
Australia was appointed to direct some 17 churches and
chapels, and perhaps some 20 clergy. Wonderful
the contrast in the next half century, in which
again the swift growth of their Church at least kept
pace with the progress of the whole community. From the
coming of the first bishop, a vigorous and far-seeing man,
with many elements of greatness in his character, the work
took that impulse which it never failed to take from the
supply of an independent episcopate. Gradually, out of this
vast diocese, 73 had grown up, and at this moment three or
four more were needed, and would have to be supplied at no
distant future. The 20 clergy have multiplied to at least
700, the churches to many—he knew not how many—but
far above a thousand. The aid once given by the State to
churches and schools had been gradually withdrawn; but
the withdrawal, whatever its effects of good or evil—or he
thought of both combined—had certainly not checked
the growth of the church itself. The synodical
action, which meant not only self-government but govern-
ment by authority in right order and degree of the whole
body of the Church, had spread from diocese to province,
from province to the whole of the Australian churches,
anticipating, as has been often said in their own as in other
communions, the unity which in things civil is still
only a hope and an aspiration brought out into
auspicious prominence in that centennial week.
They honoured the names of Johnson, of Marsden, of
Cowper, of Scott, and of Broughton, who laboured in
the earlier days of slow and difficult progress; and he
uttered the sentiment that while in course of time that
cathedral will have given place, as he supposed it would,
to one greater and more in accord with our enlarged
future greatness, may their children’s children re-
member with reverent affection, the worship of that
time. He urged the claims of the Centennial Fund upon
all the members of the church, which he eulogised, and
said had a great future in this land; and concluded with an
eloquent peroration.
ST MARY’S CATHEDRAL.
Yesterday, at the Roman Catholic Cathedral, the
special Centennial religious service was held. A
procession of prelates preceded High Mass, which
was commenced at 11 o’clock, the congregation being
exceedingly large. Besides Cardinal Moran, who
presided, there were present:—The Most Rev. Dr.
Carr, Archbishop of Melbourne; the Most Rev. Dr.
Dunne, Archbishop of Brisbane; the Most Rev. Dr.
Reynolds, Archbishop of Adelaide; the Right Rev. Dr.
Murray, Bishop of Maitland ; the Right Rev. Dr. Lani-
gan, Bishop of Goulbum; the Right Rev. Dr. Torreggiani,
Bishop of Armidale; the Right Rev. Dr. Byrne, Bishop of
Bathurst; the Right Rev. Dr. Dunne, Bishop
of Wilcannia; the Right Rev. Dr. Doyle, Bishop of
Grafton; the Right Rev. Dr. Corbett, Bishop of
Sale, Victoria; and the Right Rev. Dr. O’Reilly, Bishop-
elect of Port Augusta, South Australia. The following
clergymen were also within the sanctuary:—The Very
Rev. Alphonsus O’Neill, Superior of the Passionists; the
Very Rev. P. Slattery, Superior of the Franciscans; Very
Rev. Dean O’Donovan (Mudgee); the Right Rev. Mon-
signor Rigney, the Very Rev. Dean M‘Carthy, the
Venerable Archpriest Sheehy, the Very Rev. Father
Merg, M.S.H., the Very Rev. Dr. O’Haran, the Very
Rev. Dean Slattery, and the Rev. Fathers P. Cor-
coran ('Morpeth), J. Clune (Goulburn), J. M. Curran,
T. O. Reilly, J. O’Reilly (Brisbane), C. O’Callaghan, \V.
Coffey, T. Long, T. Barlo.v, J. J. Byrne, E. F. O’Connor,
M. Glasheen, E. M‘Donnell, M'Connon; Tressalet, S. M.;
Sinisty, S. M.; P. Byrne, Piquet, S. M.; P. Ryan, A. J.
Walsh (Goulburn), Lawler, Madden, Gaynor, and Noonan.
Bishop Corbett was the officiating prelate of the High Mass,
his assistants being the Rev. Fathers Byrne and O’Connor.
Under Mr. J. A. Delanv’s direction Gounod’s “Messe
Solenelle ” was performed with fine effect by a choir of
nearly 100 voices, accompanied by the organ and an
orchestra of strings and reeds. Mrs. F\ J. Riley, Madame
Merz, Miss Stafford, Mr. P. Barrett, and Mr. D. Clancy
were the principals, and at the offertory the first-mentioned
lady sang most expressively an “ Ave Maria,” by Bauer.
During the service Romberg’s “ Te Deum ” was rendered,


and at the close the “ Hallelujah Chorus” (Handel) was
given.
C ardinal Moran preached on the text “ Divine wisdom
reacheth from end to end mightily, and disposeth all things
sweetly.”—Book of Wisdom, Bth chapter. He said during the
festive celebrations of the past days our orators and states-
men have set before us the marvellous material blessings
which Providence has lavishly bestowed upon this favoured
land. One hundred years ago this island-continent was
little better than a dreary wilderness. To-day it is in
great part clothed with loveliness, rich and radiant as a
smiling garden. The first explorers found its shores so
sterile and inhospitable that they shrank from the thought
that it ever would become a civilised land. Now
Australia has unlocked untold treasures of silver and
gold. A hardy, intelligent race has developed its industries
and commerce beyond precedent in the record of nations,
and already we recognise the fair features of a great
nation destined to be in this southern world a bulwark ot
civilisation and a home of freedom. It is meet that we
would lift up our hearts to God, from Whom all good gifts
proceed, to bless His holy name, and that we would offer
the public tribute of our gateful thanksgiving for these
gifts of His bounty. But it is to us in a special way
a matter of thanksgiving and rejoicing that the
blessings of Christian civilisation have become the
inheritance of this fair land, that the light of divine
truth is spread from shore to shore, and that its in-
telligent people are enriched by the spiritual treasures
of God’s mercy. A hundred years ago Australia was spell-
bound in the'darkness of the vilest superstition, and her
people were enslaved in the most degrading forms of
paganism. To-day the standard of Catholic truth is un-
furled in every district of the land, and throughout the
length and breadth of Australia the sacrifice of praise is
offered up, and hymns of adoration and thanksgiving arise
to the glory of God. It was the mission of Ireland in the
golden ages of her history to preach the faith of. Christ
in distant lands. Her sons evangelised Caledonia and
Britain ; they brought the faith to Gaul, Germany, and
Switzerland. The writers of those days attest that it was not
individuals alone who set out on such missionary enterprise,
but that it would seem as if the whole nation would
migrate as missionaries to the shores of Europe. They
passed the Danube and penetrated into the German forests,
and erected there the trophies of religion, and civilised and
sanctified the barbarian tribes, whilst many of them
secured the martyr’s crown. They won the hearts of the
barbarians by their affectionateness no less than by their
loftiness of soul, and by the sublime austerity with which
they practised in a heroic manner the virtues which they
preached. They crossed the Alps, and even in the heart of
Italy founded great monasteries, which for a thousand
vears continued to be honoured as centres of religion and
learning. The mission of Ireland was then the outcome of
her sanctity, for Ireland in those days was the island of
sages and saints. In our own time that marvellous
mission has been renewed. Twenty years ago, at
Vatican Council, there were present 120 bishops,
representatives of the Irish faith. At present
there are in the Church no fewer than
160 such bishops. All through the vast territory of the
United States the sons of St. Patrick have built up the
Church of God ; they have spread the faith throughout the
Dominion of Canada ; they have preserved all that remains
of it in England and Scotland; they have conferred its
priceless blessings upon our own Australian land. _ Ihis
missionary fruitfulness of Irish piety in latter times is e
outcome of the persecutions which for three centuries
Ireland with unparalleled heroism suffered for the faith,
was not merely individual martyrs that she sent
to heaven ; she became a nation of martyrs,
power of England has extended from territory
territory till it now encircles the globe, and it may
justly be said that since the da V s of Imperial
Rome the world has not seen so widespread a dominion.
But wherever the flag of British conquest has been un-
furled, there the standard of the cross was soon erected bj
1 rish zeal and Irish piety. The paths of commercc became
the highways of the Christian faith, and the ambition and
intrigue of British statesmen, as well as the armies and
fleets of England, have been made subservient to God’s
designs and to the triumphs of divine truth. It was through
hostility to the Catholic Church that the sweet Celtic lan-
guage of our fathers was exiled from the schools and
crushed and proscribed at home. Even this became an
agency for good, for if the Irish people did not use the
English tongue, they could not be the missionaries
of the world at the present day. It was through
the same hatred of the faith that the Irish
people were impoverished by unjust laws, and treated
as aliens in their native land. And yet it was
these very deeds of injustice and persecution that forced
them to seek a home in distant countries. Wherever they
went they erected a house of God. It may have been for a
time only a wayside shanty, but soon a statelier religious
edifice arose, and the victims of unjust laws became the
victorious soldiers of the cross and the planters of the
Christian faith. But when I say that it has been the
mission of the Irish race to diffuse the blessings of Catholic
truth throughout this great nation, let no one suppose that
1 ignore the merits of those who have come to us from other
lands. All praise to the valiant sons whom England and
France, Germany, Spain, and Italy have sent to fight the
battles of the faith, and all praise to the efficient
workmen who have come from other countries to
cultivate this vast missionary field. First of all,
I would name with eulogy the illustrious Ullathome. who,
after 40 years of episcopate in England, is still at his post
on the watehtowers of his native land. During the few
years which he spent in Australia he laboured with all the
zeal and devotedness of an apostle, and he shall ever be
reckoned as one of the pioneers of the faith amongst us.
What shall I say of John Bede Polding, whose memory
shall ever be held in benediction so long as the blessings of
religion shall be the inheritance of Australia’s sons ? He
was the first Vicar Apostolic, first Bishop, first Archbishop
of Australia, and his name shall be written in letters
of light upon the golden pages of our ecclesiastical
history. By his " gentleness and meekness, his
saintly life, his unwearying labours in the sacred
ministry, he achieved glorious triumphs in the cause of
religion, and rendered services to the Church which in that
day none other could have rendered. France also has sent
a numerous band of zealous missionaries. They planted the
faith in New Zealand and the Pacific Islands. They have
long laboured with devoted zeal among ourselves, and long
may those labours, so fruitful of blessing to our people, be
perpetuated amongst us. Through the heroic piety of one
of their body, the Ven. Pere Chanel, it has been their
privilege to add the first wreath of martyrdom to the glory
of the Southern Cross, and we confidently look forward to
the not distant day when his name shall receive the honours
of the altar. Spain, too, sent gifted sons to our
shores, some of whom, after bearing the burden and heat of
the day for 40 years, are still at their post promoting the
glory of their Divine Master. They have laboured with
devoted zeal in Western Australia to impart the blessings
of civilisation and religion to the aboriginal races, and
alone of all such attempts their unselfish labour has been
crowned with success. Anyone who has visited the grand
settlement at New Noicia cannot soon forget the energy
and piety and industry of the aboriginal families who are
there clustered around the illustrious Bishop Salvado and
his brother Spanish Benedictines. Italy and Germany and
Poland have also done their part in the work of evan-
gelisation, and have added many names to the roll of
honour of the Australian Church. But admitting
all this, it nevertheless remains true that to the
apostolate of the Irish race we are indebted for the blessings
of the Catholic faith. It is the children of St. Patrick who
have erected our churches and colleges, our convents and
our schools. They are our priests and nuns. They are
our congregations, our benefactors, our devoted people.
Set aside this missionary apostolate of Ireland’s sons and
their descendants and the Church will at once become little
better than an empty name throughout Australia. Some of
Ireland’s best and purest patriots, sent as exiles to these
then inhospitable shores, became, in the beginning of the
present century, the first fruit’s of Australia’s piety. And


here I am reminded how the great apostle, St. Patrick, was
in his youth tern from his home and friends and sold
as a slave, and, for seven years was kept in
cruel bondage in Ireland, and thus his captivity
became in the ways of God a preparation for his apostolate.
It is meet that for such manifold blessings we return
solemn thanksgiving to God; and let it be our prayer that
these blessings may for ever be the cherished inheritance
of this fair land. May it ever be Australia’s destiny to be
a bulwark of true Christian civilisation, a home of freedom,
a centre of intellectual light, a sanctuary of piety. May
her sons never relax their energy, their devotedness to
everything that is honorable and just; and may they ever
cultivate a spirit of sacrifice, of self-denial, and of every
virtue. Thus shall peace, with the blessings that follow
in its train, continue to smile upon us; and in time to
come generations yet Unborn shall joyously salute the
Southern Cross as the standard of victory, the sign of hope
and mercy, the symbol of that religion which alone can
make nations truly happy, truly great.
The service concluded with* the bestowing of the Papal
blessing. In the afternoon a demonstration of United
Roman Catholic Total Abstinence Associations took place,
at which Archbishop Reynolds delivered an appropriate
address.
THE GREAT SYNAGOGUE.
\ esterday afternoon, a choral and instrumental service
was held in the Great Synagogue, Hyde Park, to initiate
an annual hospital Sunday service, in celebration of the
centenary of the colony. There was a fairly large concourse
of people present. The Rabbi (the Rev. A. B. Davis)
officiated, and was assisted by the Rev. A. D.
Wollonski. The choir, numbering 36 voices, was supple-
mented by an orchestra of 22 professionals. The
soloists were—Miss Simmons, Miss Phillips, Miss
Hollander, Mr. A. Isaacs, and Mr. A. J. Davis.
The service was commenced with an orchestral introduc-
tion, after which the following items were gone through :
How goodly are thy tents, O ! Jacob,” solo and choir
(S. Moss); Psalm lxvii., by the Minister; Psalm c., solo
and choir (S. Naumbourg); “And when the Ark set
forward,” minister and choir (Saqui); a prayer for the
Royal family, introducing aria from “ Queen Elizabeth’s
Virginal book,” choir (S. Moss); “ His glory is above the
earth,” choir (S. Moss); Psalm xxiv.; “ And when the
Ark rested,” trio and choir (G. Meyerbeer); “ The Lord
hath ever been mindful of us,” solo and choir (F. Halvey).
The musical portion of the service was ably carried out
under the direction of the choir-master, Mr. Sydney Moss,
L.C.M., by whom the symphonies were added and the
music scored The sermon was preached by the Rabbi,
who, in his opening remarks, said that the’ love of our
native land is a feeling deeply implanted in our hearts.
Our land is to our mind the first flower of the earth and
the best gem of the sea. Other lands may be grander;
but this is our sentiment. To a patriot his own land is
the best, and it is his policy to make it prosper. This is a
land where liberty to all creeds is allowed, and where the
highest offices of the State are open to all who are com-
petent to fill them. Thus those present, and all
living in the land, must be willing to make
some sacrifice for its institutions. The centenary of the
colony was just being celebrated, and people were rejoicing
at what had been achieved. But, was ttiis happy time to
come and pass away and leave no memento of itself ‘i
While banquets and various contests were being held,
should they not find some method of turning this season of
gladness into one of sympathy, and do something for those
not so well placed as themselves by devoting some of their
store to acts of benevolence '{ None might with impunity
withhold that charity that they were well able to bestow.
Of all the objects most commendable in charity is to minister
to the wants of the unfortunate, and to those who are
kept to a bed of sickness. I he case of the sick poor must
be our first care. Iherefore, it had been resolved to make
a collection on behalf of the hospitals. Much good work
was being done by these institutions, and, with increased
support, more might be accomplished. In conclusion, he
urged that ladies with leisure at their command should
visit the hospitals and assist the nurses by speaking w ords-
of comfort and sympathy to the suffering, and thus bring a
ray of sunshine into the hearts of the afflicted. In this
way the patients might be considerably helped on to
convalescence. There were many who did this,
but he would that the number of th ese-
angels of mercy might increase, and also t hat
the subscriptions of the public might take the same course,
so that our centenary should be found to leave a splendid
memorial. After a choral rendering by a trio and choir of
the piece, “ Universal Lord,” a collection, amounting to
about £l5O was taken up. One of Mendelssohn’s marches
was played, and the service shortly afterwards closed.
CHURCHES GENERALLY.
Special Centennial services were also held at a large
number of other buildings. A united religious service was
held in the afternoon at the Ashfield School of Arts, in
connection with which it had been arranged that addresses
should be given by the Revs. Dr. Corlette, J. Auld, M.A.,
and W. Mathison, B.A. The collection was for the poor.
A united religious service was also held at the Congrega-
tional Church, Petersham, and led by the Rev. J. Robert-
son, M.A., and the Rev. George Martin. There was also
a united religious service at the Temperance Hall,
Gladesville, in connection with which addresses were-
given by the Revs. D. Jackson, G. H. Stowell,
G. R. Glasson. and W. Lumsdaine. Centennial seivices
were also held at the Y. M. C. A. Hall and at the Eliza-
beth-street Church of Christ. The Anglican Church
devoted special attention to the advocacy of
the Church of England Centennial Church Extension
Fund, in connection with which it had been
arranged that sermons should be delivered as follows:
St. Andrew’s Cathedral: Morning, the Bishop of Ballarat;
evening, the Most Rev. the Primate. St. John’s, Darling-
hurst : Morning, the Most Rev. the Primate. St. Mara’s,
Darling Point: Morning, Rev. Canon Kemmis; evening,.
Rev. A. li. Rivers, M.A. St. Michael’s, Surry Hills:
Morning, E. D. Aladgwick; evening, Rev. E. I). Madg-
wick. St. David’s, Surry Hills: Morning, Rev. J. Har-
grave; evening, Rev. J. Hargrave. Holy Trinity,
Argyle-street: Morning, Yen. Archdeacon King, 8.A.;
evening, Rev. Cecil J. King, M.A. St. Philip’s, Church-
hill : Morning, Rev. W. A. Charlton; evening, Rev. W,
E. H. Percival. Christ Church, St. Laurence : Morning,.
Rev. C. G. Robinson, M. A.; evening, Rev. Canon Kemmis.
St. Paul’s, Cleveland-street: Morning, Rev. F. B. Boyce;
evening, Rev. W. A. Charlton. St. Luke’s, Sussex-street:
Morning, Rev. W. E. H. Percival; evening, Rev. F. B.
Boyce. St. Mary’s, Balmain: Morning, Rev. M. Arch-
dali, M.A.; evening, Rev. M. Arclidall. M.A. St.
Thomas’, Balmain: Morning, Rev. John Dixon; evening,
Rev. John Dixon. St. John’s, Balmain: Morning, Rev.
A. Turnbull; evening, Rev. A. Turnbull. Christ Church,
St. Leonards: Morning, Rev. A. Yarnold: evening, Rev.
A. Yarnold. St. John’s, Parramatta: Morning, Yen.
Archdeacon Gunther; evening, Rev. J. D. Langley. Harris-
Park, Parramatta: Evening, Rev. G. Darcy Irvine.
Christ Church, Enmore: Morning, Rev. A. C*. Mosley;
evening, Rev. A. C. Mosley. St. Thomas’, Enfield:
Morning: Rev. S. Hungerlord; evening, Yen. Archdeacon
of Launceston. St. John’s, Ashfield: Morning, Rev. Dr.
Corlette; evening, Rev. Dr. Corlette. St. Luke’s, Bur-
wood : Morning: Rev. Canon Moreton; evening, Rev.
Canon Moreton. St. Matthew’s, Botany : Morning, Rev.
F. T. Trivett; evening, Rev. F. T. Trivett. St. Stephen’s,
Penrith : .Morning, Rev. G. Brown. R.D.; evening, Rev. G.
Brown, R.D. All Saints’, Parramatta : Morning, Rev. J,
D. Langley; evening, Rev. J. Done. All Saints’, Peter-
sham: Morning, Rev. A. J. Wheeler; evening, Rev. A.
J. Wheeler. St. Peter’s, Cook’s River: Morning, Rev. J.
N. Manning, LL.B. : evening, Rev. J.N. Manning, LL.B.
St. Jude’s, Randwick: Morning, Rev. William' Hough;
evening, Rev. A. D. Mitchell. St. Nicholas’, Coogee:
Morning, Rev. Canon King; evening, Rev. William
Hough.


THE ILLUMINATIONS.
The city was again illuminated on Saturday night, and as
the sky was cloudy and the wind light, the illuminations
were more successfully carried out than on either of the two
previous nights. The display in George and Pitt streets
was very effective, and the parks, with their long lines of
coloured lamps and Chinese lanterns, appeared more than
ever like Fairyland. In Oxford-street also there was an
unusually effective spectacle. The people in the streets
were not so numerous as on Thursday night, but the crowd
of sightseers was, nevertheless, very large.
ELECTRIC LIGHT ILLUMINATIONS.
In connection with the illuminations during the Ceu-
tenary celebiations, the following are the details of the
electric lighting arrangements, which were carried out
under the direction of Mr. E. C. Cracknell, Superin-
tendent of Telegraphs. At the State banquet on January
26 the building was electrically lighted by means of 13
Brockie-Pell lamps, the generator being a 16-lighter Brush
dynamo, driven by a 16-h.p. Farmer, Robey, and Brown
engine, kindly lent by Messrs. Roberts, Chalmers, and Co.
On the same date the tower of the Post Office was lit by
means of six Brush and five Weston are lamps, the current
being produced by a Brush dynamo driven by a 12-h.p.
Otto gas engine. Parliament House was illuminated
by a very pretty design—“ 100 Years,” surrounded by
bright stars produced by means of 100 incandes-
cent and four Gulcher arc lamps, the current
for which was furnished by one Gulcher and
two Gramme machines driven by one 25-h.p. Robey engine.
On the 27th January the Post Office and Parliament House
were illuminated as on the previous evening. The grounds
of Government. House were illuminated by 13
Brockie-Pell lamps, which were supplied ’ with
electric current from the dynamo at the Circular Quay,
driven by a Robert Fowler 20-h.-p. compound engine. On
the evening of the 28th January only the Post Office
tower was included in the electric light illuminations, and
the arrangements there were similar to those of the preced-
ing evenings. The Government House grounds were again
lit up on February 1 as on the former occasion; but, in
addition to this, the lights at the Circular Quay were run
from the same dynamo. All the arrangements were carried
out most satisfactorily, and the lights burned, without ex-
ception, with a steadiness which cannot but speak well for
the character and condition of the dynamos, engines, and
lamps which were brought into operation.
THE NEW HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.
TUESDAY, JANUARY 31.
LAYING THE FOUNDATION STONE.—IMPOSING CEREMONY.
The State-appointed ceremonies for the celebration of the
centenary were brought to a close on Monday, when the
foundation stone of the new Houses of Parliament was
laid. The morning broke cold and cloudy, with a grey sky
and gusty wind, but a dazzling sun smiled upon the proceed-
ings at noon. The gathering round the enclosure in the
vicinity of Governor Bourke’s statue in the Domain, was
nearly as large as at the most imposing of last week’s
celebrations. Tram and train, and omnibus, brought
thousands from the suburbs, and rivers of people flowed
along Macquarie, Hunter, Bent, and Bridge streets. In
front of a grand stand, which was crowded to its utmost
capacity, there was a brilliant and diversified spectacle.
Broad banners waved from the crimson coloured flagstaff's
around the stand, and strings of bannerets fluttered merrily
in the breeze. At the foot of the long tiers of steps were the
prettily-dressed school children. Ladies in rich apparel, and
gentlemen in broadcloth and silk hats, crowded the dais,
which was carpeted with crimson and draped with crimson
and gold, as at the unveiling of the Statue. Beyond, there
was the military in full dress uniform, and the people
crowding round. Picturesque groups filled the Domain at
every point—ruddy schoolboys enjoying the scene, if they
understood not its full significance; stalwart labourers,
with the thews and sinews of the Viking of old time; brisk
apprentices and shop assistants, making the air ring with
jests; elegantly-dressed ladies, enjoying the fashions worn
by eaoh other with true scientific proportions; fresh jolly-
looking country folks, merchants, lawyers, and legislators
mingling together as interested spectators of the proceed-
ings. It was a vast multitude, but eminently good-
humoured, passing occasionally a jocular remark as the
privileged ones passed into the enclosure. Once only was
hero an approach to ill-humour, and it was on the part of
some half-dozen larrikins, who began to hoot while the
Premier was speaking of the loyalty of the colonists. A
few scathing sentences, and the ill-mannered ruffians were
constrained to silence. The surpassing magnificence of the
site chosen for the new Ii ouses of Parliament evoked ex-
pressions of admiration from the visitors, and well it might
do so, for a more beautiful panorama it would be impos-
sible to conceive. The building is to be of massive propor-
tions, with a hall appropriately designated to mark the
centenary of the colony. It will overlook the Domain,
with a frontage towards Macquarie-street. Beyond the
graceful sweep of the encircling woodlands which girdle
Farm Cove can be seen the smooth glittering waters of the
harbour, outspread like a map, mirroring dozens of vessels,
stretching right down to the Heads, and flanked with
green hills dotted with innumerable dwellings. A noble
picture it truly is, and should the buildings prove
worthy of the site they may well challenge
comparison with the legislative halls of any country in the
world. The ceremony of laying the foundation-stone was
performed with the customary time-honoured formalities
by his Excellency the Governor, in the presence of Lady
Carrington and all the distinguished visitors who are now
in Sydney. The vice-regal party were loudly cheered as
they took their places on the dais, and the Naval and Mili-
tary Bands played the National Anthem. Addresses
appropriate to the occasion were delivered bv the Premier,
by the President of the Legislative Council, and by the
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. The Colonial
Architect gave a brief description of the proposed buildings.
His Excellency then stepped from the dais, took the richly
mounted trowel and mallet presented for the purpose, and
laid the stone amid the tiring of cannon and the playing of
bands. The stone was declared well and truly laid, Lord
Carrington delivered an address, the National Anthem was
sung by the school children, and the proceedings terminated
with hearty cheers for the Queen, for his Excellency and
Lady Carrington, and our guests. In connection with the
laying of the stone, it may be mentioned that the prolimi-


nary work was entrusted to Messrs. F. and H. M‘Leod.
The carpets and floor cloths used on the dais, and the
drapery adorning the grandstand, were supplied by Messrs.
Hordern Brothers. The sub-committee of the Centennial
Commission, who directed the arrangements, consisted of
the President of the Legislative Council, the Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly, Mr. R. Burdett Smith, M.L.A.,
Mr. T. M. Slattery, M.L.A., Mr. D. O’Connor, ML.A.,
Mr. J. Barnet, Colonial Architect; and Mr. E. Fosbery,
Inspector-General of Police.
HISTORY OF THE MOVEMENT.
For many years past an agitation in favour of the erec-
tion of new Houses of Parliament has been carried on, and
time after time various Governments have taken the pre-
liminary steps towards the accomplishment of this event,
without, however, getting beyond the preliminary stage,
so that the Legislature of the country has been compelled
to occupy the present unsuitable building up till now, and
will probably continue to occupy it for some time to come,
until the new buildings, for which the foundation-stone
was laid yesterday, are completed.
Even so far back as 1859, when Parliament consisted of
only 72 members, the necessity for new Parliament build-
ings was clearly recognised, as is shown by the
fact that the House voted the sum of £IOOO
to be given in premiums for the best designs for
a new building, to contain the Houses of Parliament and
the public offices. A committee, comprising the following
gentlemen, was formed to deal with the matter : —The
Colonial Secretary, the President of the Legislative Council,
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, the Secretary for
Lands and Works, Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart., Sir Wra.
Macarthur, the Hon. E. Deas-Thomson, Captain Ward,
R.E., and Captain Martindale, R.E. The sum of £6OO
was offered as a premium for the best design and £3OO for
the second best design, and every opportunity was given to
architects in Europe, America, and the colonies to enter into
competition, and some 20 designs were submitted to the com-
mittee appointed to enquire as to their relative merits. The
first prize of £6OO was awarded to Mr. Henry Lynn, of 64,
Upper Sackville-street, Dublin, for the design bearing the
motto “ I bide,” and the second prize of £3OO was given to
Messrs. Stent and Lavier, 127, Great Portland-street,
Portland Place, London, for that bearing the design “ Hora
e Sempre.” A short time ago these old designs were
brought to light, and were shown at the Colonial Secretary’s
office, but of course they are only now interesting as
matters of history, the purpose for which they were
■designed having been long ago abandoned. The
designs were prepared for an extensive range of buildings,
to be used for Government offices as well as Parliamentary
buildings, which were to cover the whole of the frontage to
Macquarie-street, between the Hyde Park Barracks and the
Governor Bourke statue. The conception was a grand one.
and worthy of having been carried out; but the erection of
the Government offices elsewhere has of course rendered
the plans over which so much money was spent obsolete.
After the committee had given their decision upon
the plans, Mr. W. M. Arnold, ■who was then Minister
for Works, placed upon the Estimates a sum of £IOO,OOO
for the purpose of erecting the building, but, owing to the
financial depression which then existed, the vote was with-
drawn, and nothing further was done in the matter. For
nearly 20 years after the whole question remained in abey-
ance,until in 1879 the Government of the day introduced a
bill to resume the whole of the land between the Parlia-
mentary buildings and the Outer Domain for the purpose
of a site for the new Houses of Parliament. A number of
houses, including a large terrace, and a variety of smaller
buildings, had been at various times erected on this
piece of land, and still remain there. The Free
Lending Branch of the Public Library is a'so situated
on it. The large sum of £70,691 was paid
as compensation to the possessors of freeholds or leaseholds
on this resumed area, but up to yesterday nothing had been
done towards clearing or preparing the site.
It seems a somewhat extraordinary thing that for so
many years the members of the Legislative Assembly and
the Legislative Council should have been content to go on
occupying their present cramped and unsavoury quarters,
when a large piece of land adjoining had been resumed
at great expense in order to provide a site
for the new structure. But the fact is a creditable
one to the various Parliaments who have sat in this time-
honoured structure, for it shows that they have placed the
country’s general welfare far above the consideration of
their own personal comfort. Perhaps, also, there was a
sentimental feeling of regret at abandoning for ever the use
of the old building, around which so many of the noblest
associations of this great colony are centred. b>ir Henry
Parkes, in particular, has frequently confessed a
lingering fondness for this old building, to
which for many years his political career has
been so closely associated. The memory of the
many great politicians whom New South Wales has known
and honoured lingers around these benches, on which at
various periods of their lives they have all occupied seats,
some, as in the case of our present Premier, for the best
part of a lifetime. However, in this, as in all other worldly
matters, sentiment has been obliged to give way to the
practical considerations of health and comfort. It may
interest many who have not been long in the colony to
learn that for a number of years this building was
popularly known as the “Rum Hospital,” owing to the
peculiar circumstances which were associated with its erec-
tion. It was constructed in 1811, when Governor Mac-
quarie ruled the colony, and an agreement was made
with Messrs. Wentworth, Blaxland, D’Arcy, and
Riley to erect the original structure. The asso-
ciation of the ardent spirit rum with the building
arose from the fact that the contractors were partly paid in
this species of currency, they agreeing to do the work con-
ditionally on receiving a considerable quantity of rum from
the King’s store, together with the right of purchasing and
retailing 15,000 gallons of spirits for four years. The por-
tion of the building now occupied by the Parliamentary
library was originally used for the storage of rum. The
Legislative Council then consisted of only six members, but
as its number increased the storage of rum in the building
was abandoned, and in 1843 the present Legislative As-
sembly Chamber was built for the use of the
first Parliament. Since then the accommodation provided
has remained practically at a standstill, although the As-
sembly has increased its numbers from 36 at that period to
124 now. Of course the old building has been altered,
renovated, and added to as far as practicable, until the out-
side limit of accommodation has been reached, and
still everyone using the building is incommoded
by the cramped and insufficient arrangements.
Between £BO,OOO and £90,000 have been spent on
these improvements in the endeavour to keep the old
structure together, and the only thing to regret is that it
was not abandoned long ago, before so much money had
been wasted in useless repairs.
THE MILITARY PARADE.
This was the last occasion on which the military forces
paraded in connection with the Centenary celebrations.
Their presence at this ceremony was purely ceremonial and
representative, although their bright uniforms and the
military music greatly added to the picturesque features of
the scene, and helped'to render its surroundings attractive.
Display parades are always tiresome, and as this was the
fourth within a week, arid the work of the city had been
resumed, there was only a small muster of the volunteer
branch, but still enough to keep up the representation of the
force, which was all that was really required. The detail
for the parade was made out on the same principle as that
for the parade at the unveiling of the Queen’s statue, pro-
viding for the representative portion of the enrolled strength.
In actual fact, the attendance was considerably short of
this, owing to the circumstances already mentioned, the
Volunteer strength on parade being about 120, which, with
the Permanent Artillery guard of honour and band, brought


the total to about 240. The duty of providing a guard of
honour was officially allotted to the Permanent Artillery,
but the other troops were practically engaged in a similar
capacity. The Permanent Artillery detached 100 men and
five sergeants for this duty, under Captain Murray,
Lieutenant Bridges, and Lieutenant Kyngdon. They also
provided a saluting battery of four 9-pounder guns under
Colonel Spalding, which was placed on the slope
towards the middle of the grounds, facing east.
The troops parading as infantry fell in by regiments
in the Domain, near the St. Mary’s gate. They
included the guard ot honour from the Permanent
force; the Volunteer Artillery, under Captain Wigram;
Torpedo Corps, under Lieutenant Logan; Ist Regiment,
under Captain M'Cutcheon; and the 2nd Regiment,
under Captain D. Fraser. The parade was under the com-
mand of Colonel Roberts, C.M.G., officer commanding the
Artillery forces; 1 Jen tenant-Colonel Eden, officer command-
ing the Reserve Infantry, being in command of the volunteers
other than Artillery. Major-General Richardson, C. 8., the
Commandant, was present,accompanied by Major .Mackenzie,
the Assistant Adjutant-General; CaptainCuthell, Musketry
Irstructor; Captain Mihvard, R.A.; and Captain Bayley,
Adjutant of Infantry Reserves. Colonel Baynes, the pay-
master, was also present. W hen the usual preliminaries of
assembly had been completed, the regiments marched off in
fours, led by the Permanent Artillery Band, each regiment
taking up its place in column on the march. They halted
at the enclosure, and formed line on the right and left of
the entrance. According to the programme issued by the
commission, the Royal Navy was to be represented, and the
men from the ships would have taken up their positions
along with the local forces, but the blue-jackets did not put
in an appearance. They would have been warmly wel-
comed by the public both now and at the un-
veiling of the statue, and it is probable that the
officers and men of the navy would have been pleased to
join with the colonists in celebrations which have an in-
terest for the whole Empire, but it appears that the navy
was not invited to take part in the proceedings. The troops
stood at ease till about 10 minutes to 12, when the Gover-
nor arrived. The bugle called the brigade to attention, and
his Excellency was received with the general salute. The
ceremony was then carried out, including the firing of the
salute by the field battery, and on the departure of his Ex-
cellency the brigade again saluted. The parade was then
dismissed ; the regiments rapidly completed their distribu-
tion.
THE SCHOOL CHILDREN.
The assembly of children from the Public schools, for
whom a stand was reserved, was not large, as the attendance
could not have numbered more than 400. The following
schools were represented:—Newtown Superior Public
School, Redfern Superior Public School, Camperdown
Public School, Pyrmont Superior Public School, Castle-
reagh-street Superior Public School, Paddington Public
School, Surry Hills Public School, and William-street
Public School. The singing of the National Anthem was
conducted by Herr Hugo Alpen.
THE VICE-REGAL PARTY.
The vice-regal party proceeded in four carriages to
the site where the ceremony was to take place, and were
accompanied by a strong escort of the mounted police under
Sub-Inspector Thompson. The route chosen was along
Macquarie-street and via St. Mary’s entrance to the
Domain. In the first carriage were his Excellency Lord
Carrington, Lady Carrington, and his Excellency Major-
General Sir William Jervois (Governor of New Zealand).
In the second carriage were his Excellency Sir Frederick N.
Broome (Governor of Western Australia), and Sir Charles
Mitchell (ex-Governor of Fiji). The third carriage
contained the Hon. Rupert Carrington, Lord Bertie, Mr.
Fortescue, and Major Phillimore. In the fourth carriage
were Admiral Fairfax, Captain Hammill (of H.M.S.
Nelson), and Flag-Lieutenant Erskine. On arrival at the
enclosure surrounding the site of the proposed Parliament
Houses, the party was received by the guard of honour with
a general salute, and was met by the President (Hon. John
Lackey) and other members of the Centennial Celebration
Commission, and by them escorted to the dais. Amongst
the gentlemen who occupied seats on this structure were
Sir John Hay (President of the Legislative Council), the
Hon. J. li. Young (Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly), the Hon. C. J. Roberts, C.M.G.,
Messrs. A. J. Riley, S. Burde'kin, T. M. Slat-
tery, D. O’Connor, R. Burdett Smith, Ms.L.A.,
E. Fosbery (Inspector-General of Police), J, Barnet
(Colonial Architect), Sir Henry Parkes (Premier), the Pri-
mate (Dr. Barry), Sir Samuel Griffith (Premier of Queens-
land), Sir E. T. Smith (Mayor of Adelaide). Sir John
Robertson, Sir Patrick Jennings, Sir James Macßain (Presi-
dent of the- Legislative Council of Victoria), the Hon.
W. H. Groom (Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland), the Hon. M. H. Davies (Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly of Victoria), Sir William Manning,
Hon. B. S. Bird (Colonial Treasurer of Tasmania), Hon.
A. I. Clarke (Attorney-General of Tasmania), Sir William
Fitzherbert, Hons. F. Ormond, N. Fitzgerald, and C. J.
Ham (Victoria), Dr. Brownless (Chancellor of the University
of Melbourne), Dr. Carr, the Roman Catholic Archbishop
of Melbourne, Rev. Dr. Abrahams of Melbourne, Mr. G. H.
Jenkins (Clerk of Legislative Assembly of Victoria),
Alderman B. Benjamin (Mayor of Melbourne), Councillors
G. A. Terry, Buxton, Geddes, and Godfrey (of
Melbourne), Mr. E. G. Fitzgibbon (Town Clerk of
Melbourne), the Hon. J. F. Burns, the Hon. F. Abigail,
the Hon. Jas. Inglis, the Hon. T. Garrett, the Hon.
B. R. Wise, the Hon. W. Clarke, the Hon.
J. Sutherland, Dr. Reynolds, the Archbishop of
Adelaide, Dr. Dunne, the R. C. Bishop of Wilcannia,
Chief Justice Way (k.A.), Mr. Justice Owen, Mr. Justice
Windever, Mr. Justice Faucett; the Bishops of Riverina,
Bathurst, and Brisbane ; the Rev, A. B. Davis, the Hon.
J. C. Bray (S.A.); Mr. R. B. Sheridan, M.L.A. (Queens-
land) : Mr. C. R. Burnside (secretary of the Centennial
Celebration Commission), the Mayor of Sydney (Alderman
J. Harris); Mr. S. T. Staughton, M.L.A. (Victoria);
Mr. S. M. Mowle (Usher of the Black Rod), Mr. L. J.
Harnett (Sergeant-at-Arms), Mr. J. J. Calvert (Clerk of
Parliaments), and Mr. F. W. Webb (Clerk of the Legis-
lative Assembly).
THE SPEECHES.
Sir Henky Pakkes, who was well received, said: My
Lords, your Excellencies, and ladies and gentlemen,—l did
not know until I arrived here five minutes ago that my name
was in this prominent place on the programme of the pro-
ceedings. We are assembled to lay the foundation-stone of
new Houses of Parliament. Well, I confess at once that I
have not been amongst the most earnest advocates for this
step. It has always appeared to me that it is far better to
have a good Parliament than grand buildings to put them
in —(cheers)—and 1 should have been quite content to have
gone on for some years with the old historic building in
Macquarie-street. [Sir John Robertson: “Hear,
hear.”J I have always regarded the building in which the
representatives of the people assembled in this particular
colony as the only real historical building we have in all
Australia. It was in that Chamber where the first Legis-
lature took its seat, and that is some long time ago.
Even in the days when the doors were closed
against the people, when the press was not
admitted, still all the legislation done on the face
of this vast continent was done in that building, and it was
there that Wentworth and Bland and the other early advo-
cates of the rights of the people took their 'seats
(cheers)— and it was there that the noblest battles were
fought that have ever been fought in anj' part of Austral -
asia. For it must not be forgotten, and my friends from
the other colonies will forgive me for alluding to it—it must
not be forgotten that the real battle for constitutional free-
dom was fought, not in Victoria, nor South Australia, nor
Queensland, and least of all in (New Zealand, but it was
here on this very spot where we are assembled now.
(Cheers.) We fought the first battles for the whole series
of colonies which exist to-day, and for that reason—and a


grand reason, it appears to me—l would have been quite
content to have gone on a little longer with that building.
Butother gentlemen,including my enthusiastic friend Mr. R.
Burdett Smith have been very anxious to have a grand
building in which to assemble, and as this is the time when
we are going to have a new departure, we agree to-day to
lay the foundation stone of the new houses. That involves,
of course, a large expenditure ; but it involves something
more, it involves the elements of taste, of correct architec-
ture in the construction of these buildings ; and it involves
something more, the moral responsibility of commencing a
new career in the work of legislation itself. I am to be
followed by gentlemen who, I think, ought to have pre-
ceded me, the President of the Legislative Council and the
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. They officially and
properly represent the whole people of this country, and
on an occasion of this kind, identified with the Parliament
of the country, it does appear to me that they should be ad-
dressing you now and not me. But what I desire to
impress upon this splendid company, and if my voice could
travel beyond that, upon the entire constituent body from
one end of the country to another—is that in commencing
to erect new Houses of Parliament, make up your minds
firmly and intelligently to elect only the best men to repre-
sent you in Parliament. (Cheers.) The grand structure
wiII be a great thing in itself, it will be a great honour to
the country, and it will worthily represent the spirit of that
free Government under which we live, and it is of in-
finitely more importance to study the real in-
terests of the country and to throw aside all
other considerations at the ballot-box, and only
elect the best qualified men to sit there. (Hear, hear.)
I cannot allow tbis opportunity to pass without connecting
with the project of erecting new r buildings the much higher
and grander purpose of having a Parliament that will
worthily represent, the intelligence, wealth, and poverty, as
well as other interests of this great country. (Applause.)
The occasion on which we are assembled is one of great
abiding interest, and I do not envy the human being
who departs from these great gatherings—gatherings
such as we have had during the last few days—
without new inspiration and new aspiration of firm
purpose to do his duty as a resident of this free and rapidly
rising country. (Applause.) It is impossible to draw any
picture of the future that would be an exaggeration of our
noble destiny. Nothing is clearer—not even the beautiful
light we are clothed in this moment—than that our noble
destiny overshadows that of any country that ever existed.
We have had no wars, no contentions, no bloodshed, no
cabals; but we have won our glorious inheritance by peace-
ful means with the consent of our beloved mother country
—(cheers and groans)—and without causing any dissension
in any part of the world. (Renewed cheers.) We are all
except a few, who are a drop in the ocean—(laughter)
all loyal people—(applause)—and dutiful subjects of one of
the greatest sovereigns that ever graced a throne in the
world. (Applause.) Depend upon it the stamina of this
great country will ever be loyal to the constitution of the
mother country, and at the same time unflinch-
ing in their loyalty to themselves. If there is
a single half - dozen who object to any state-
ment of this kind they are simply in the position
of the wolves who object to the presence of the lion. No
doubt they have reason to object to all that is good and
elevated and lofty; but we who inherit the grand institu-
tions of the mother-country, her wealth of science, her
noble literature, her imperishable laws and divine religion,
will be true to ourselves, and erect here a commonwealth as
great as hers, free from her mistakes, and adorned by all her
historical virtues. I have great pleasure in taking part in
these historical proceedings, and I am sure you will listen
with all possible respect to the gentlemen who occupy the
next place on the list to me—Sir John Hay, the President
of the Legislative Council; and Mr. J. H. Young, the
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. (Loud applause.)
Sir John Hay, who was received with cheers, said:—
Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,—l have to say a
few words now in a position which has been assigned to me
by the celebration committee, and I take leave to say that
they have assigned me the proper position, and that they
also assigned to Sir Henry Parkes, the Premier, his proper
position in asking him to introduce the proceedings on the
present occasion. (Cheers.) The ceremony we are about
to perform is surely one of the most important which can
attend the celebration of our Centenary. (Cheers.) It is a
fit consummation of what has gone before, and particularly
of the unveiling of the statue of our most gracious and well-
beloved Sovereign—(cheers)—by which the celebra-
tion was inaugurated; and of the opening of the
Centennial Park, which is to be devoted for ever
to the enjoyment of the people. (Cheers.) The build-
ing of which the foundation-stone is now to be laid
will, we trust, be raised, adorned, and preserved for the
accommodation of that great body of representatives
through whom, and by whom, the liberties and welfare of
this country must be protected. (Cheers.) This building
is intended to enshrine the body to which f have referred,
and I may say that there never has been and never will be
a better security for the independence and greatness of a
people than Parliamentary institutions. (Hear, hear.) I
hope it will never be forgotten that this is our grandest
inheritance, and that it is our bounden duty to maintain
it with all our strength—that it is our duty to
put forth every effort we possess to maintain the
greatness and purity of these institutions in this country.
(Cheers.) They have been handed down to us with all the
glory which has attended the history of the mother-
country for so many hundred years, and it is our duty in
the position which we now hold to see that in this colony
they are maintained in the same loyal state as they have
been handed down to us. (Cheers.) A generation has
passed since Parliamentary institutions were established in
this country upon the very broadest principle of reasonable
freedom. (Hear, hear.) And now, indeed, in the com-
mencement of our second century, we arc called upon to
provide a building befitting the future greatness, useful-
ness, and importance of the body for whose accommodation
it is intended. (Cheers.) I think that on this building
you should not hesitate for a moment to expend what
treasure you can att'ord to complete it, with all the archi-
tectural skill which you can command, to adorn it with all
your resources of art. (Cheers.) Standing at
this magnificent site looking out upon the broad waters of
Port Jackson and on to the great Pacific Ocean, I may
safely say there is no site in the world which could be finer
than this. (Cheers.) There is no situation more worthy
of a great building, and there can be no body more worthy
of that building than your representatives, upon whom you
must depend for your welfare, protection, and greatness in
times to come. (Cheers.) I think it would be superfluous
to detain you in order to call your attention to what these
institutions represent. You know how the)- have been
handed down to us, and how we have to preserve them in
the future as well as I do. We are convinced of the
magnitude of the interests involved, we are convinced that
the time has come, however well we have been accommodated
in the past, however well our interests have been main-
tained, and our battles fought in the Houses where 1 have
so long occupied a position, where we ought to provide a
greater and a grander House, and a more fitting memorial of
the commencement of the second hundred years of our
existence. (Cheers.) By the time this building is raised
and fit for occupation, 1 am quite sure that the House which
we have so long occupied and so much to tae honour of
those who have gone before us, will be unfit for occupation
any longer. Time in the natural course of decay will have
set its hands too strongly upon it, and by that time we shall
be in a position, or rather those who may succeed me, for I
shall have very little opportunity of doing so, will be able
without anything like inconvenience or disturbance to the
business of the country, to move into this, which I venture
to hope, and I am sure" everyone here hopes, will be a build-
ing of which Australia may be proud, and which may be
conserved in all future ages. (Cheers.)
The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly said: Your
Excellencies, Lady Carrington, ladies and gentlemen,—The
position of one who has to speak third on any single sub-
ject can scarcely be considered a very happy one at any
time, but more especially is this the case when the two pre-
ceding speakers are gentlemen so eminent, so able, ana so


distinguished as are Sir Henry Parkes and Sir John Hay.
Both of these gentlemen have been in the parliamentary
life of this country for nearly an average life time, and
they are therefore peculiarly fitted to address such a dis-
tinguished assemblage as the present on the subject on
which they have spoken, and any poor words ot mine must
suffer by comparison. In my opinion a very wise and ap-
propriate step has been taken in making the lay-
ing of the foundation-stone of our new Houses
of Parliament a part of our Centennial celebration—we
must all recognise as an universal law of nature that old
things must pass away and give place to new, and in a city
like this, which has been of late years almost entirely re-
built, and in a country like this, increasing day by day in
wealth, population, and importance, at a rate which, when
it is understood, is actually astounding, it is not to be ex-
pected that buildings erected soon after the commencement
of the present century, and then for another and quite
different purpose, can much longer be considered fit to
remain the theatre of our legislative life. Wherever we
go—whether to the other Australasian colonies or to
the great cities of Europe or America—we find that
the legislative buildings are pointed to with pride as
specimens of the highest architecture, and I feel sure that
the actual commencement of these buildings by the laying
the foundation-stone to-day will be hailed with approval by
every thinking man in this city and in this country—
(cheers) —and I hope that in a very short time the city' of
Sydney will be able to point out to visitors the great
beauties of the Houses of Parliament of the colony of New
South Wales. I must confess to a slight feeling of regret
in giving utterance to some of my thoughts on this occasion
—when people are quite young, and perhaps for
a considerable time after that, they can speak
and think with great equanimity and pleasantness
of the time when, in obedience to the universal
law of nature of which I have spoken, their elders and
superiors must give up their high offices and make way for
the rising generation -but when one has, perhaps, passed
the meridian of life, and sometimes, indeed, before that;
when he sees beside him some much-loved member of his
family whose failing powers remind him that a career must
soon be closed, a time comes, I say, when anything which
emphasises the law of nature must of necessity carry some
sadness with it. I have no desire, however, to dwell on
this subject. I would rather, if you will allow me, bring
before you in a very brief way some of the scenes which have
been enacted in the present Houses of Parliament
—(a laugh)—as a fitting prelude to expressing the
hope that the triumphs and glories of the past
may be grafted on the memories and und r-
standings of those who may succeed us. I may,
perhaps, be allowed, in passing, to congratulate this
great country that though we have now completed the first
century of our history, so far, all our great and honoured
men have been men of peace. Other countries have among
their most conspicuous names those of great military andgreat
naval men, and the names of their battle fields and naval
victories are handed down from generation to generation.
We, too, have our defence forces, and among them, I do
not doubt, are very able and devoted men,
who would, if the opportunity occurred, achieve dis-
tinction in the path of public service to which they have
devoted themselves; but in a higher spirit of patriotism, I
‘el sure that they will all join me in the hope that that
opportunity will never present itself on the soil or on the
coast of Australasia—(hear, hear) —and that we may for
many generations content ourselves with the naval and
military heroes of the mother country, than whom no
greater can be found in the annals of the world. (Ap-
plause.) But for our connection with that great country, I
am quite sure the past hundred years would not have been
so peaceful, and I fervently pray that that connection may
long continue. Though the old" must give place to the new,
there is, I am glad to think, no law under which the virtues
or the good and noble qualities of the old should
be forgotten. I have, indeed, sometimes thought that
we are frequently unjust to those who are still among us,
and when making comparisons are given to unduly magnify
the virtues and abilities of those who have gone over to the
great majority, and live only in history. The great poet
has said, “ The evil that men do lives after them, the good
is oft interred with their bones ”; but for the credit of
human nature, I am pleased to say that with regard to
public men, we act more frequently on the motto which
teaches us to “ say no ill of the dead,” and we remember
only their worthy aspirations, their good and noble deeds.
That many worthy acts and deeds have been enacted within
the walls of our old Parliamentary building, the most severe
critic will not have the hardihood to deny;
that many very able and highly gifted men have
there played their part everyone must admit. Need I
remind you that it was here the great Wentworth displayed
the patriotic statesmanship which culminated in the passage
of the Constitution Act —an Act which conferred freedom
on the people of this country—freedom to think, freedom to
vote, freedom to manage their own affairs untrammelled by
the opinions or interference of those who, living at the other
side of the world, were not in a position to judge of what
laws were most suitable for us. (Applause.) It was within
those walls that Darvall and Lowe, Donaldson and Cowper,
Arnold and Murray, Plunkett, Nicholl, and Lang gave
evidence of their great ability, and attained a place in the
history of the colony which I am pleased to think will never
be effaced. (Applause.) And coming to later times,
it was here that the gifted Deniehy—(cheers)—
was listened to with wrapt attention, and that Martin’s
great and massive intellect was devoted to the service of the
country. On an occasion like the present Ido not think
that L should be restrained by any fanciful delicacy from
adding to the list of those who have distinguished them-
selves within the walls of our Parliament —some who are
still among us. (Cheers.) Not one of those I have men-
tioned stands on a higher niche of fame than does the
Right Hon. William Bede Dailey—(great cheers) —and in
the estimation of the people of this country no one has
better earned the distinction bestowed on him by her most
gracious Majesty. No one in the history of the past has
a greater claim to the gratitude, the respect, and
undying memory of the people of this country than
my much-esteemed friend and at one time colleague,
!Sir John Robertson. (Applause.) His efforts to settle a
prosperous yeomanry on the soil were praiseworthy beyond
measure, and 1 for one believe they were in a large measure
successful. No one could have better tilled the high
offices which have at various times been committed to him
than my excellent friend Sir John Hay ; and certainly no
one has attained greater prominence in Australasia.' No
Australian has received greater recognition as a statesman
beyond the limits of Australia than has our present Pre-
mier, Sir Henry Parkes. (Cheers and groans.) A care-
ful study of our Statute book will show that he has at all
times had the welfare of the people at heart, and that he
has shown great ability inframing Statutes to help that wel-
fare forward. (Renewed cheering.) These are names, your
Excellency, Lady Carrington, ladies and gentlemen, which
we may well believe will never be forgotten in this favoured
land, nay, may we not with confidence anticipate that, as
years roll on, the halo of glory which now surrounds them
will be increased and intensified; and, though some may
think that the memory of their words would have a greater
influence on succeeding generations of legislators, in the
very halls in which they were uttered, and which have been
graced by their presence and electrified by their eloquence,
may we not hope that in a larger and more suitable build-
ing as high a pitch of excellence may be struck, and that a
still greater benefit may come to the people of this country.
(Cheers.) In conclusion, I may be allowed to thank
your Excellency for so kindly consenting to lay the
foundation-stone of our new Houses of Parliament, and I
feel sure you will join me in the hope that the spirit of
patriotism and self-sacrifice, accompanied as these may
very well be by a noble ambition, will always induce the
very best of Australia’s sons to offer themselves for the
service of their country in Parliament; that a just discern-
ment, will always be given to constituencies to enable them
to select the best who present themselves for election, and
that the deliberations of these chosen people may at all
times be so guided by Divine Providence as to lead to the
highest happiness and prosperity of the people of this
country. (Cheers.)


Mr. J. Bahnet, Colonial Architect, then read the
following document: “ Foundation-stone of New
Houses of Parliament. —The necessity for new and
more suitable Houses of Parliament than those at
present occupied has been felt for many years,
and so far back as 1859 the then Governor, Sir
William Denison, invited the attention of the Executive
Council to this want, suggesting that premiums should be
offered for the best competitive designs for the two Houses
of the Legislature, the plans to provide also for the different
departments of the Executive Government. With this
suggestion the Council concurred, the premiums being
fixed at £6OO for the best, and £3OO for the second best,
plan of the proposed structure. In January, 1860, notices
to this effect, accompanied by conditions to be observed in
connection with the designs, were forwarded to all the
colonies, England, and America. During the year
following 20 designs were received, and their
merits having been duly considered by the board appointed
by the Council for the purpose, prizes were awarded to the
best and second best designs, the members of the Doard
being:— Mr. Charles Cowper (Colonial Secretary), Sir W.
W. Burton, succeeded by Hon. W. C. Wentworth (1 resi-
dent of Legislative Council), Mr. John Robertson (Secre-
tary for Lands), Mr. W. M. Arnold (Secretary for Works),
Hon. T. A. Murray (Speaker of Legislative Assembly),
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart., Sir William M‘Arthur,
Hon. E. Deas-Thomson, C.B , Captain Ward, R.E.,
Captain Martindale, R.E. Nothing was done with regard
to adopting either of the prize designs, it being subsequently
considered undesirable that the legislative and executive
departments should occupy the same building, which the
designs provided for. In this view of the case, some years
later, buildings were erected for Colonial Secretary s,
Public Works, and Lands Departments ; the remaining de-
partments, provided for in the plans, being otherwise
arranged for. The building, therefore, now proposed to be
erected, for which this foundation-stone is about to be
laid, will provide accommodation for the Legislature only,
consisting of the two Chambers and necessary offices,
library, refreshment-room, smoking-rooms, bathrooms, &c.,
&c. There will be one main entrance opposite Hunter-
street, leading into a grand hall, which, if desired, may be
appropriately designated to mark the Centenary of the
colony. Another main entrance will be in the Domain,
fainting the harbour. The frontage of the build-
ing to Macquarie-street will extend about 350 feet from the
main entrance, towards the present legislative buildings,
standing back from the street about 60ft., with about the
same frontage in the Domain facing the harbour, the
ground upon which the old School of Industry stood being
portion of the site that will be occupied by the proposed
new buildings. 30th January, 1888.—This foundation-
stone was laid on the 30th day of January, 1888, in the
51st year of the reign of her Most Gracious Majesty, V ic-
toria, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, and Empress of
India, &c., by his Excellency the Right Honorable
Charles Robert, Baron Carrington, a member of her
Majesty’s most honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand
Cross of the most distinguished Order of Saint Michael and
Saint George, Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the
colony of New South Wales and its dependencies ; the
Ministers forming the Government being,—Sir Henry
Parkes, G.C.M.G. (Colonial Secretary), the Hon. J.F.
Burns (Treasurer), the Hon. Jas. Inglis (Minister for
Public Instruction), the Hon. W. Clarke (Minister
for Justice), the Hon. B. R. Wise (Attorney-General),
the Hon. Thos. Garrett (Minister for Lands),
the Hon. John Sutherland (Minister for Works),
the Hon. C. J. Roberts, C.M.G. (Postmaster-General), the
Hon. Francis Abigail (Minister for Mines), the Hon. J. E.
Salomons, Q C. (Vice-President of the Executive Council),
James Barnet (Colonial Architect).”
THE CEREMONY.
Immediately after Mr. Barnet had concluded his descrip-
tion of the building, x ~. ~ . . ,
The Hon. John Lackey, president of the Centennial
Commission, said, addressing his Excellency the Governor :
Your Excellency,—l am very pleased to present you with
the trowel and mallet, and to ask you, as you have already
promised, to kindly lay the foundation-stone of the future
Houses of Parliament of this country.
Lord Carrington, amidst the cheers of the spectators,
then descended from the dais to the spot where the stone,
still suspended from a crane, was to be lowered into the
position in which it will probably rest for centuries. The
formal preliminaries having been completed, and the stone
loweied into its place,
His Excellency said, in a loud tone, “I declare this
stone to be well and truly laid,” an announcement that was
received with loud applause, the firing of a salute of 21
guns by the New South Wales Permanent Artillery, and
“ God Save the Queen” from the united bands. His
Excellency then addressed the assemblage. He said: Sir
John Hay, Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen,—Through these
two honorable gentlemen I speak to the people of New South
Wales. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, our Centennial week is
over. It is happily over, and it has been a complete
success. (Cheers.) We began the week, as loyal citizens
should do, by unveiling a statue of her Most Gracious
Majesty the Queen. (Hear, hear.) We were honoured, and
highly honoured, during.the week by the presence not only of
all the representatives of the Crown in all the Australian
colonies, but with very few exceptions, unavoidable
exceptions, with almost every leading statesman and
citizen in the whole of Australasia. (Cheers.) We
have finished the week which was so well begun;
and we now lay the foundation-stone of what shall
be the temple for ever of your national liberties. (Cheers. 1
1 am laying the foundation-stone of a building which will
to all time represent the independence and self-government
of the colony of New South Wales. (Cheers.) This right
is now secured, and I think it can never be jeopardised
or impaired bv the connection which exists with
the old country—(cheers)—on the contrary, as
independence has its chief safeguard in peace, I hold that
it is guarded and strengthened by that union. (Cheers.)
I believe that the peace of the world depends very much on
the union of the English-speaking races, as our policy is
one of defence, and not of aggrandisement. (Cheers.)
This is not the age of small nationalities; and
though in years to come Australia will be taking
her place amongst nations, the sight of the great
countries of Europe following old England’s colonising
policy and greedily annexing the few remaining portions of
the habitable globe clearly shows that we cannot delude
ourselves in relying on the immunity of isolation which fell to
the lot of the founders of the American Republic—(cheers)—
though we have no frontier, and the sea is our sentinel.
(Hear, hear.) It is evident that without the support of
England the 3,000,000 who hold the 3,000,000 square miles
of this great continent would be put to great struggles and
sacrifices in resisting the land-hunger of the great military
nations of Europe. We should soon see the foreign flags
flying on our coasts, while remonstrances from these colonies
would be met by stern reprisals —and “ Australia for the Aus-
tralians,” instead of an accomplished fact, would be an empty
dream. (Hear, hear.) Under present circumstances,
however, there appears a glorious future for this country’.
(Hear, hear.) It is advancing and expanding, and as it is
true that “the old order changes,” so some of the outward
symbols, which, to the superficial observer, seem to consti-
tute the real bond of union between the two countries, may
disappear. But if the enemies of England or Australia
count on this they would indeed reckon without their host;
they would have a rude awakening. (Cheers.) Should the
mother country be in any serious danger, the world knows
that Australians would not stand idly by, and it knows also
that Britain herself would send her last ship and spend her
last shilling to help the fine body of Australian troops
which I see before me, and to help you, the young men of
the colony, to drive into the sea any persons who might
presume to menace the liberties of this fair land. (Cheers.)
The world knows that the mother country would look upon
a descent on the Australian shores in the same way as they
would upon a landing in Hampshire or in Kent, and they
would no more tolerate a hostile foreign flag flying within
the three-mile range before Sydney than they would
in Southampton water itself. (Cheers.) I have laid the


foundation-stone of this building, where in days to come the
Government of the country will be carried on, with the
fervent hope that the blessing of God will rest on it; with
the confident trust that the country will send representatives
who will keep up the dignity of Parliament, and pass good
and useful laws, and prove themselves worthy successors of
Wentworth and Martin, who, in the old building, won the
Constitution which we now enjoy, and whose bright example
of statesmanship and patriotism will always remain one of
the glories of this grand colony, which they helped to
create, and which they served so faithfully and so well.
(Loud cheers.)
At the conclusion of Lord Carrington’s address the
school children, who were seated on the left of the dais,
rose and sang two verses of the National Anthem, very
sweetly and in excellent tune and time, and their singing
was greeted with a considerable amount of applause.
On the call of his Excellency, three hearty cheers were
given for the Queen ; and, in response to Mr. Lackey’s
request, his Excellency, Lady Carrington, and the guests
were similarly honoured, as was Mr. O’Connor’s call for
three cheers for the ladies of Australia. This terminated
the formal part of the proceedings, and his Excellency and
the other members of the vice-regal party immediately
afterwards left the dais and proceeded in their carriages to
Government House, escorted by the mounted police. The
military in attendance then took their departure, but it was
some time before the general public dispersed.
The mallet and trowel presented to Lord Carrington were
very beautiful specimens of the goldsmith’s art, and well
worthy to be used on such an important occasion. The
manufacturers were Messrs. Hardy Brothers, of Hunter-
street, and it is worthy of remark that both articles
were the product, pure and simple, of New South Wales.
The handle of the trowel is of myall wood, surmounted
with a gold coronet, and is connected with the blade by
large Waratah leaves and flowers in gold relief. Below
this is the badge of tbe colony, also in relief, viz., the cross
in red enamel on a white enamel ground ; and the wreath,
lion, and four eight-pointed stars in gold. The badge is
surrounded with the ribbon and motto engraved, also in
relief. On either side of the badge are medallions of
George 111. and Queen Victoria, slightly relieved, and
underneath the medallions are the monograms and dates
engraved in large type. Immediately below the badge
come the inscription in distinct style, as follows :
“ Presented to the Honourable Charles Kobert Baron
Carrington, P C., G.C.M.G., Governor of New South
Wales, on the occasion of his laying the foundation-stone
of the new Houses of Parliament, Sydney, in the Centen-
nial year, 80 th January, 1888,” and underneath this is
Lord Carrington’s coat-of-arms. The border or the blade
consists of engraved Waratah leaves and flowers, and the
blade itself is of polished gold, with all work in relief
of rich coloured gold. The mallet is of myall wood,
surmounted with a coronet as on the trowel, and a gold
shield on the side bearing Lord Carrington’s coat-of-arms.
The jar, which was placed under the stone, contained a
list of Governors, Premiers, and guests; the Ministry,
Constitution Act, Electoral Act, Land Act, Education Act,
Gazette , Sydney Morning Herald , Sydney Daily Telegraph ,
Hansard , list of Members of Parliament and officers.
Centennial Commisssion, table of fixtures and programmes,
banquet card and menu, photographs of statue, &c., alpha-
betical list of names and addresses of the members of the
Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly; the follow-
ing coins—sovereign, half sovereign, five-shilling piece,
four-shilling piece, half a crown, two-shilling piece, florin,
one shilling, sixpence, one penny, half-penny, altogether
amounting to £2 os. lfd.; and the following papers—cere-
mony of laying the foundation stone of the Houses of Par-
liament, dedication of the Centennial Park, precis respect-
ing building new Houses of Parliament, and the laying of
the foundation stone, and two centennial medals.
CITIZENS’ CENTENNIAL BANQUET.
INTERESTING SPEECHES.
The citizens of Sydney celebrated the centenary of the
colony on Monday evening by a banquet, in the Town Hall,
which was attended by about 150 gentlemen. The vesti-
bule of the Town Hall, in which the banquet was held,
was tastefully decorated for the occasion with flags and ferns,
and the catering was carried out by the Compagnoni Co.
During the evening the band of the South Australian
Militia played a number of choice selections. The chair
was occupied by Alderman John Harris, Mayor of Sydney,
who, contrary to the usual custom, occupied a seat in the
centre of the hall, instead of at the cross-table at the top.
The vice-chairs were occupied by Messrs. J. Wiltshire,
George Pile, and A. Bennett. Mr. G. R. Dibbs occupied
the seat on the right of the chairman, and the Hon. George
Thornton sat on his left. Amongst thegentlemen present were
Aldermen A. J. Riley, J. D. Young, Evan Jones, Playfair,
Dr. Fieldstad, Messrs. J. J. Josephson, R. N.
Sadlear, F. Farnell, M.L.A., Carruthers, M.L.A.,
Frank Smith, M.L.A., Geo. Pile, J. Pritchard, J.
Smedley, Hyain Hains, Fred. Jones, J. Allison,
G. W. Thornton, Kidd, Hezlitt, J. T. Wiltshire,
F. Gannon, W. J. Lyne, M.L.A., J. C. Neild, M.L.A., F.
A. Wright, Walter Bradley, John Shepherd, and John
Wilson. Apologies for their inability to attend were read
from Sir John Robertson, S. Smith, M.L.A., R. B.
Nicoll, J. M‘Gregor Dunn, John Young, and Henry
Copeland.
The toast-list was opened by the Chairman proposing
tho toasts of “ The Queen ” and “ The Prince of Wales
and the rest of the Royal P'amily,” which were cordially
received, and accorded musical honours.
Mr. Geo. Pile, vice-chairman, proposed the toast of
“ The Governor,” which was enthusiastically honoured,
with cheers for Lady Carrington.
The Hon. George Thornton then rose to propose the
toast of the evening, and was warmly applauded. He
said: In an assemblage of distinguished and influential
citizens now combined and present here to celebrate this
very interesting part of our Australian history—our having
attained our hundreth year—l regard it as being a personal
compliment and a great honour to be appointed to propose
the toast of the occasion. (Hear, hear.) You, gentlemen,
have resolved that this 26th January, 1888, shall be noted
as an important epoch of this colony’s history. (Hear,
hear.) Take your thoughts back to that initial period of our
career—the 26th January, 1788. On that day about 1000
persons—free, military, and bond—were brought together
by the then first Governor, Phillip. Imagine if you can
the feelings and thoughts which occupied the minds of
these people, just landed, after a long, weary, trying, and
dangerous voyage—nearly nine months—separated for ever
as it were from all society and civilisation in a wild and
unknown land, inhabited, as far as they were able to judge,
by savages. Imagine these poor creatures who left their
country in the first fleet of ships with hundreds of dangers
and sufferings in almost unknown seas ; with the poor
appliances then in use on board ship; no coppered
bottoms, poor food, no vegetables or pure water, no chain
cables, no proper charts. What a relief to have reached
land. But, having reached land, what were their pros-
pects ?—want, hunger, tyranny, cruelty; no hope but
death. How little could anyone of that crowd have


imagined the state of things existing in the same land 100
years afterwards. History has told us that Governor
Phillip drew a poetic and prophetic picture ot
the future of the colony; but I tor one
regard the circumstance of Governor 1 hillip having so
spoken as being apochryphal, and I believe that the speech
was made for him some years after. Even in the dark and
gloomy days, whilst this was a Grown colony, the 26th
January in each year was dedicated to observance as a
holiday 7 for enjoyment. I was present at the jubileejele-
bration on the 26th January, 1838—just 50 years ago at a
dinner given bv Australians at the old Royal Hotel in
Svdney Who,' of the persons then met together, could
have foretold the marvellous progress and advance now to
be seen on this 26th January, 1888. (Applause). I believe
it to be unparalleled in the history of the world,
and who of us now here present can predict what will be
the state of Australia—federated Australia-a 100
vears hence? (Applause.) I hope, and I believe this will be,
one of the great nations of the earth; and 1 feel sure every
one now present wishes that it will have maintained and
preserved our noblest andgreatest inheritance -our allegiance
and unbroken connection with the grand and dearold l'ather-
land—(hear, hear)— that whilst Great Britain shall still
exist and hold her pride of place among the nations ot the
earth, we shall not have lost our nationality, though we
may be a Greater Britain. (Cheers.) Look what that
great people, the Republic of the United states of America
was 100 years ago. Look what it is now in these
•days of progress, invention, enlightenment, with the
new and powerful aids of steam, electricity, gas, and many
other potent material advantages. How much more can be
done in the next 100 years, when these resources are handled
and utilised by people of the Anglo-Saxon race. (Applause.)
The extraordinary natural resources ot these colonies too,
the precious metals, gold, silver, gems of the rarest. and
richest varieties, copper, tin, iron, coal are all potent factors
in our efforts to make a rich and great nation; a climate
with every variety of temperature, with soil that can
produce everything required, from heat, cold, or the
medium, but above all, a climate by ™ tare *°
beautiful and enjoyable that I do not doubt
it will in time produce illustrious men and women—(hear,
hear)—poets, painters, philosophers, statesmen, orators,
musicians, and a brave and patriotic people. (Hear, hear.)
And this Centennial vear is also to be regarded as an epoch
. —and an illustrious'epoch—because our great, noble, and
loved Queen has not thought it beneath her dignity to send
from her high and distinguished position a centennial
■ congratulatory telegraphic message—(hear, hear)—a
great compliment to a loyal people—as welcome and as
appreciated as it was sudden and unexpected. (Applause.)
We can joyously congratulate ourselves upon having
reached this eventful period of our history. (Hear.) We
do it to-night emphatically and heartily by this gathering
of our citizens here present. We are entitled to predict that
100 years hence it maybe said of us, “ 'these our forefathers
of 100 vears ago were a worthy race to spring from—(hear,
hear)—we are Australians to-day, as they were then, and
even we may be remembered with honour. (Applause.)
I now have the privilege to propose the toast which has
been entrusted to me, “ The livent we Celebrate-the
Centenary of the colony.” (Applause.)
The toast was drunk amid loud cheers.
Mr. Dibbs responded to the toast. He said: Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Thornton, and gentlemen,—The committee
who have taken upon themselves to celebrate, on behalt ot
the citizens, the 100th centennial of the colony, have chosen,
1 think very properly, the oldest Australian they could
find, in the person of my friend Mr. Thornton, to propose
this speech. (Applause.) I say this, speaking
of him as an old friend of many years
standing, whom 1 have always looked up to, and respected
in later life as a political colleague. The committee could
not have chosen a gentleman more identified with the
-olonies, or who has proved himself a more worthy Austra-
lian, than him. (Applause.) As a son of the soil I rejoice
and am pleased and gratified that the committee gave me
the opportunity to-night of saying a few words in connection
with our hundredth birthday, because the words which will
be said here to-night will be recorded by the press, and will
probably be said by our great-grandchildren who will follow
after us on the occasion of the second Centennial ot tne
colony. They will probably revert to the fact that my old
and esteemed friend Mr. Thornton proposed the toast, and
a middle-aged Australian followed him. (Cheers.)
Regarding the matter from an Australian point
of " view” I would like to say a few words,
not to be too severe critically, with regard to the
celebration which has taken place within this
colony during the last few days. (Applause.) I be- .
lieve that I speak the mind of the people throughout
the colony when I say that the celebrations have not been
of a character in which the people of the colony
as a whole could participate. (Mr. Smith: that
is political stuffing, drop it.” Cheers, and other
voices: “He is speaking the truth;” “Go on. )
I am speaking to-night, not as a politician, but as a citizen
and a native of the soil. (Cheers.) Whether my words
give offence to my political friend or not, I repeat that the
celebrations have not been of a character thoroughly
representative of the people of the colony. (Applause.) i
will admit that the arrangement of the programme tor the
Centenary of the colony was a matter of very great difficulty,
but still there has been no national meeting of the people.
(Hear, hear.) The nearest approach to this I find to-night,
when the citizens, the bone and sinew of the city, come here
to-night at their own expense. (Mr. F. Smith: ‘Lou
were invited (o the State banquet, but you did not go. ) 1
wish that mv hon. friend would not interrupt, as in the
course of a few days he will have an opportunity
in another place of criticising what 1 have
said, without interruption. (Applause.) I came to
this banquet to-night in no sense as a politician,
but as one of yourselves—(great applause)—ot the
people and with the" people. What my friend says is per-
fectly true. I was invited to the State banquet, but tor
reasons which are notorious, and which were stated through
the press, I declined to attend it. (Applause.) I admit
the difficulties of the question, because we are here Austra-
lian-born natives, living in the colony, and taking
after the old Anglo-Saxon type of the thorough
Englishmen, and Englishmen, of all people, know
least of all how to enjoy themselves in the shape ot a
national demonstration. You may go to France, Germany,
Switzerland, America, and there the people have some idea
of a national gathering. Beyond the races in the harbour
and the races at Randwick, we have had no national cele-
bration where the people could meet. I would like to see a
national gathering, and would like to see steps taken to
have an annual gathering of the people, where all classes
could meet and where all class feeling could be thrown
aside, to show that the people were animated by the
same feelings and desires. lam not going to talk politics,
as I have washed my hands of politics until the sessior
commences, and I do not stand amongst you as a politician,
but as a native born in Sydney, not one hundred yards
from where we stand, and as a citizen of Australia.
(Applause.) I would not use my position here
to-night to attempt to criticise the actions ot
the Government, or to make this a political gathei-
ing One or two things have struck me with
regard to the Centennial celebration. We have not suc-
ceeded in bringing the people together as a people, ihe
dedication of the Centennial Park was the nearest approach
to this, where there was a large gathering, but still we have
had no gathering where the people have been fairly repie-
sented. I will throw out a suggestion now, but not by way
of criticism on the issue of the grocery and provision tickets
on Kidman. (Applause.) I would like to see the legitimately
infirm and weak amongst us, from each asylum m the
colony, have at least one feast to show that as Australian-
born people we have a soft place m our hearts for the
infirm and distressed. I would desire that even those under
sentence from the law should have a concession from the
Government in the shape of some reduction of their time ot
imprisonment; and for this if for no other cause,
that one touch of nature makes the whole world kin.
Whatever we do as Australians, if we be worthy descendants
of the Australian race, we should let mercy and justice go


hand in hand together. Mr. Thornton has given you an
eloquent graphic description of the early days of the
colony. Within the last 50 years of my short life I can
remember well when the Circular Quay was a
beautiful sandy beach, with the tide flowing up
as far as Bridge-street. The colony has ex-
panded greatly; and why ? Because she was peopled
by the greatest colonising race the world ever knew. The
T rench and German do not make good colonists—(hear,
bear) —but the English people make the finest colonists,
and the proof is that we stand here now, in the year 1888,
surrounded by all the comforts and luxuries of life, all
brought about during the short period of 100 years, with
the wilderness cultivated and the desert blossoming like a
rose, thanks to the energy of the people who have culti-
vated the colony. One hundred years is a long time to look
back on, and there have been generations after generations
of Australians bom during that time, but the future of
New South Wales and Australia is to be found in the de-
scendants of those originally reared and bom on the soil.
(Applause.) I remember when it took us 160 days to come
from England to Sydney, but to-day a man can
go from Sydney to London and return through
America in three months. All this grand development
has been brought about by the fact that the wonderful re-
sources of New South Wales have been developed by the
energetic pluck and vigour of the people of the soil. Tn
everything material this colony shows, and will show to
the world in future, what a colony the Anglo-Saxon race
can form, especially when they become acclimatised and
become born Australians. We have succeeded in every-
thing material, and cansend our cricketers, our Tricketts and
Beachs to win the “ blue ribbon,” and to prove that Aus-
tralian muscle is capable of winning the prizes of the world.
Young as we are as a nation we can yet claim to have won
fame even upon the battle-field. (A voice : Where ?) I
have said that Australian blood has been shed upon the
battle-field, and I have only to mention the name of Colonel
Coveney, who was an Australian, to remind you of the tact.
(Cheers.) And our own Bench and own Bar testify to the
fact that the Australian youth is capable of filling the
highest positions in the State. (Renewed cheers.) Then
some of the prizes of the Universities of the old world have
been carried off by Australian-born sons. (Applause.)
Nevertheless, while the material progress of this continent
has been such as to make the world envious, I do not think
that intellectually we have yet taken up the position we
ought to. It is true that we have produced some states-
men— Wentworth and W. B. Dailey, for example—but the
liberties of the people of this colony have been secured
mainly by men from the old world who had settled here.
Our own native-born youth have shown in Parliament and
in the country that they possessed talent of an ex-
tremely high order. (Hear, hear.) That thought
brings' me back to the celebration of the Centenary.
I noted with extreme regret that amongst all the speakers
there was only one native-born Australian whose voice was
allowed to be heard. Now, I think that when the close of
the second Centenary arrives it will be difficult to find filling
the higher offices of the State, or presiding over the Cen-
tennial celebrations, one born outside of New South Wales.
(Cheers.) Our future is a grand one—grand because of
the stock whence we sprung-grand because of our re-
sources—grand because we have a climate second to none in
the world—and grand because we enjoy the greatest amount
of liberty experienced by any people in the world.
Not even the oft-boasted-of country, America, enjoys the
same liberty of thought, of speech, and of action as the
people of New South Wales. Let us endeavour to rival
the world in intellectual accomplishment. Let the rising
generation cultivate the highest feelings of patriotism and
loyalty, and then Australians will become one of the
greatest nations of the earth. For the last hundred years
we have practically lived at the apron strings of the
mother country —we have been tied with the bonds of love
and fellowship; but we must develop beyond what we
have done up to the present moment for the material
resources of this colony by following the destinies of our
cousins in America, and by creating l for ourselves instead
of importing from abroad where we have the material.
(Applause.) Gentlemen, I thank you for having patiently
listened to me in an impromptu speech. I have been suffer-
ing from a complaint which renders thinking almost an
impossibility. I rejoice to see so many fellow-citizens—so
many fellow-countrymen—at this gathering. A hundred
years hence this country will be peopled by 50 millions of
Australian people, second to none in the world, following
in rapid strides the past lessons taught us by our American
cousins. Then Australia will flourish as one of the greatest
nations on the earth. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. Thornton here rose and drew attention to the presence
of, in hale and hearty condition of mind and body, Mr.
John Bolton, 71 years of age—(applause)—Mr. W. Bvme,
80 years of age—(cheers)—and last, but not least, the
oldest living Australian bom, Mr. William Small, now 92
years old—(loud cheers) —who was born at Kissing Point,
now called Ilyde, in 1796.
These old natives were received with great enthusiasm.
Not one of them looked his age by 20 or 30 years.
Mr. Thornton referred to Mr. Small’s full possession of
all his faculties, excepting a slight loss ot memory, and
mentioned especially that this healthy old man of 92 had
never tasted spirits or smoked tobacco in his life. (Ap-
plause.) Mr. Small’s family consisted of nearly 300 lineal
descendants —(cheers) —and he was a great great grand-
father. His sister, the late Mrs. Oakes, of Parramatta,
who died a few years ago, would have been 97 years old
now, if she had lived. She was the first female of Euro-
pean parentage born in Australia, and the second European
of either sex, the first being a man, Anthony Rofe, but he
died while only 17 or 18 years of age, and Mr. Small was
now the oldest living Australian-born man. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. Small related some personal reminiscences of early
days. He mentioned some of the hardships which the earliest
settlers experienced, and the fact that at one time food was
so scarce that he had gone out with an apron, cut off the
ears of corn, and rubbed it so that with the grain bread
might be made for him and his family.
Mr. William Byrne, born in 1808, also narrated some
personal reminiscences, and in proof of the fact that the
climate of this colony was conducive to longevity he men-
tioned that his mother lived till the age of 84, his step-
father to the age of 86, and that his oldest sister and oldest
brother were respectively 88 and 86 years of age. Many
of his other relations had reached 80 years of age.
The toast of “The Ladies” was then proposed by Mr.
Walter Bradley, and acknowledged by Mr. F. Famell,
M.L.A.; and the toasts of “ The Press ” and “ The
Chairman” concluded the list.
MINISTERIAL CENTENNIAL DINNER.
SPEECHES BY COLONIAL GOVERNORS
AND PREMIERS.
The Premier and Ministry of New South Wales enter-
tained the Governors, Premiers, Ministers, and dis-
tinguished visitors from the other colonies who are now in
Sydney at a centennial banquet in the Parliamentary re-
freshment rooms last evening. The Houses of Parliament
were brilliantly illuminated for the occasion, and the popu-
lar Launceston City Band was in attendance, and played
very fine operatic selections during the evening.
Inside the room there were floral decorations
on a style of magnificence seidom surpassed.
The tables were adorned with choice plants and artistic
devices made up of the choicest flowers of the season. The
company numbered 111 guests. The chair was occupied
by Sir Henry Parkes, G.C.M.G., who was supported on
the right by Sir William Jervois, Governor of .New
Zealand, and Sir Charles Mitchell, late Governor of Fiji ;
and on the left by Sir Frederick Napier Broome, Governor


of Western Australia, and Sir James Macßain, President of
the Legislative Council, Victoria. There were also pre-
sent—the Hon. M. H. Davies, Speaker of the Victorian
Legislative Assembly; Sir Samuel Griffith, Premier of
Queensland; the Hon. T. Playford, Premier, South
Australia; the Hon. E. J. Ramsay, Chief Secretary,
South Australia; the Hon. J. H. Young, Speaker New
South Wales Legislative Assembly: his Honor Sir Frederick
Darley, Chief Justice of New South Wales; Sir John
Hay,' President of the New South Wales Legislative
Council; the Bishop of Sydney; the Hon. Chief Justice
Way, South Australia; Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G.;
Sir E. T. Smith, M.L.A., South Australia, and Mayor of
Adelaide; Mr. A. Inglis Clerk. Attorney-General,Tasmania;
Sir William Fitzherbert, President of the Legislative Council,
New Zealand; Mr. C. C. Kingston, Attorney-General, South
Australia; Hon. J. F. Burns, Colonial Treasurer, New
South Wales; Hon. T. Garrett, Minister for Lands, New
South Wales; Hon. J. Sutherland, Minister for Works,
New South Wales; Hon. F. Abigail, Minister for Mines,
New South Wales; Hon. W. Clarke, Minister for Justice,
New South Wales; Hon. C. J. Roberts, Postmaster-
General, New South Wales; Hon. B. R. Wise, Attorney-
General, New South Wales; the Hon. Judge Casey,
C.M.G., Victoria, and Chancellor of Mel-
bourne University; the Bishop of Brisbane ; Mr. W.
Cumow, editor, Sydney Morning Herald; Sir Henry
Wrensfordley, Victoria; Hon. J. Lee Stere, Speaker of
tne Legislative Council, Western Australia ; Lieut. Prince
Pontiratme and Captain Avellon, Lieut. C. Niloff, R.1.N.;
the Hon. Mr. Justice Mein, Queensland; Mr. A. H.
Landseer, M.L.A., South Australia ; Mr. J. M. Highett,
M.L.A., Victoria; Mr. John Barker, Clerk of Parliaments,
Victoria ; Hon. T. Macdonald Paterson, M.L.C., Queens-
land ; Major R. Gascoigne, aide-de-camp to his Excellency
the Governor; Mr. W. Smyth, M.L.A., Queensland;
Captain J. R. Gladstone ; Mr. G. H. Jenkins, Victoria ;
the Hon. J. W. Fortescue ; Mr. J. C. Bray, M.L.A.,
South Australia; Mr. A. S. Bailes, M.L.A., Victoria;
Hon. C. Young, M.L.A., Victoria ; Mr. C. L. Forrest,
M.L.A., Victoria ; Mr. J. Donaghy, M.L.A., Victoria ;
Lieut.-Col. J. M‘Donnell, Postal Department, Queens-
land; Hon. W. Horatio Wilson, Postmaster-General.
Queensland; Lieut.-Col. R. B. Sheridan, M.L.A.,
Queensland; Mr. M. Miller, M.L.A., Queensland; Mr,
Wm. Salkeld, M.L.A., Queensland; Hon. M. Salom,
M.L.C., South Australia; Hon. W. H. Groom, Speaker of
the Queensland Legislative Assembly; Mr. J. H. Howe,
M.L.A., South Australia; Mr. J. T. Annear, M.L.A.,
Queensland; Mr. N. Fitzgerald, M.L.A., Victoria; Mr.
C. J. Ham, M.L.A., Victoria; Hon. Jas. Balfour,M.L.C.,
Victoria; Hon. Chas. H. Jameson, M.L.C., Victoria;
Hon. Francis Ormonde, M.L.C., Victoria; Councillor
George Godfrey, Melbourne ; Mr. R. T. Sholl,
Western Australia; Mr. J. M‘Master, M.L.A., Queens-
land; Mr. H. H. Hayter, C.M.G., Government Statist,
Victoria; Mr. John Macfarlane, M.L. A., Queensland;
Mr. Edward Scott, Western Australia; Hon. 1,. L. Smith,
Major Phillimore, A.D.C. to the Governor of Western
Australia; Colonel Sargood, Victoria; J. W. Pierce,
M.L.A., Victoria; George Thorn, M.L. A., Queensland;
W. Kellett, M.L.A., Queensland; Mr. J. F. G. Foxton,
M.L.A., Queensland; Hon. T. Henssler, M.L.C.,
Brisbane; Mr. F. W. Ward; Hon. R. A. Tarlton,
M.L.C., Adelaide ; Mr. T. H. Hatton Richards,
A.D.C., South Australia; Mr. Lumley Hill, M.L.A.,
Queensland; Hon. W. Irving Winter, M.L.C.;
Hon. J. G. Dougharty, M.L.C.; Mr. H. W.
Venn, M.L.C., Western Australia; M. G. Leake, M.L.C.,
Western Australia; Mr. Charles Willcox, Adelaide;
Mr. Councillor Stevens, Adelaide; Mr. Councillor Packer,
Adelaide; Mr. Councillor Pullin, Adelaide; Mr. Coun-
cillor Rooney, Adelaide; Mr. Councillor R. 0. Fox, Ade-
laide ; Mr. Councillor Andrew Geddes, Melbourne; Mr.
Councillor J. T. Buxton, Melbourne; Mr. Councillor G.
A. Terry, Melbourne; Mr. S. Grimes, M.L.A,, Queens-
land; Mr. H. Wakefield, M.L.A., Queensland; Mr.
Benjamin, Mayor of Melbourne ; Mr. R. Carrington ; Mr.
Gibbon, town clerk, Melbourne; Hon. B. Stafford Bird,
Treasurer, Tasmania; Hon. G. H. Sutton, M.L.A., Tas-
mania; and Mr. A. Young, M.L.A., Victoria. The cater-
ing, which was entrusted to Mr. Cassidy, was carried out,
considering the heavy and unexpected strain made on the
resources of the refreshment rooms, in a highly creditable
manner.
Sir Henry Parkes formally proposed the toasts of
“ The Queen ” and “ His Excellency the Governor,”
which were cordially received.
Sir Henry Parkes then proposed “ The Governors of*
the other Australasian Colonies.” (Applause.) He said :
lam very glad to say that 1 have no speaking to-night. I
am going to take the extreme pleasurable course of listen-
ing to others, but 1 must say one or two words in proposing
this toast. I have sitting on my right a gentleman
who is distinguished in many walks of great English
service. (Hear, hear.) Sir William Jervois is a soldier,
and a great authority on military defence—(hear, hear) —
and he has proved himself a high Civil servant. And in
that illustrious role of servants of the Crown in the various
outlying parts of the Empire there are very few men more
eminent than the gentleman who has graced this table by
his presence here to-night. (Hear, hear.) He now fills
the office of representative of the Crown in a
singularly interesting colony. New Zealand is a
colony of such fine natural resources that a
very brilliant philosopher has foreshadowed that at
some future time the Sovereign of the world will be a most
beautiful lady, and that her throne will be New Zealand.
(Sir William Jervois : “ Hear, hear.”) I hope Sir Wil-
liam Jervois will live to see that day. (Hear, hear.)
Well, New Zealand had in the humdrum office of Colonial
Secretary a gentleman who has proved himself a poet. I
believe many gentlemen here know the name of the gentle-
man to whom I allude—the late Alfred Domett. That
beautiful poem of his embodies all the Maori traditions, all
the war struggles, all the beautiful romances of that in-
teresting people. New Zealand is in many other respects
one of the most interesting countries in the world—(hear,
hear) —and I cannot but think myself that it is most
worthily represented here to-night in the person of its
excellent Governor, and in the person of our honoured
friend, Sir William B'itzherbert. I have also on
my left Sir Frederick Napier Broome, who presides
over the largest of all these Australasian territories.
(Hear, hear.) From some cause or other—and I think it
may arise from some ill-fated fairy who has a charm over
the land of Western Australia—it has not made any pro-
gress commensurate with its vast resources; but I
am sure that the time cannot be far distant when
some wonderful development will take place to justify
the vast resources of that interesting country.
(Hear, hear.) Then we have here his Excellency
the Governor or late Governor of Fiji. Whether he be the
present or the late Governor does not matter. If he be the
late Governor he is in the best possible position to give us
some information as to that interesting group of islands,
and if he is the present Governor he can do no more. In
any case I am sure we must feel honoured in having the
presence of three servants of the Crown, three repre-
sentatives of the English Government in the colonies,
who deserve every honour at our hands. Without saying
more, I beg to propose the toast. (Applause.)
The toast was enthusiastically received.
Sir Wm. Jervois (who was received with applause)
said: —With all sincerity I return my heartfelt thanks
for the toast which you have just drunk, and for
the manner in which you have received it. I think
it is impossible to imagine a more interesting occasion
than that upon which we are assembled together, and I
believe that this meeting is amongst the most, if it is not
the most, interesting occasion connected with those cere-
monies which we have been going through during the past
week. I speak to you, gentlemen, if you will allow me,
not only as the Governor of New Zealand, but also as one
who has a great interest in this country, for, like many I
dare say of those present, I happen to be a bloated squatter.
(Cheers and laughter.) I have shown my interest and my
belief in this country not only by the fact that I have held


an official position here now for nearly 11 years, but by the
fact that I have engaged in the pursuits of this country—
(Hear, hear) —and that I am deeply interested in its welfare.
(Applause.; But, gentlemen, as Governor of New Zea-
land, it would ill become me if 1 did not refer to the
fact that I believe I happen to be a Governor of the
finest colony on the face of the earth. (Cheers and
laughter.) Gentlemen, that country is sure to become
during future years the great playground of Australasia.
The whole of New Zealand is open to the public. Its
mountain districts are visited, its lake districts are visited,
and its beautiful scenery is visited by Australians from
time to time, who thus learn more and more of the value of
New Zealand, and will come more to regard it as the
centre of Australasia. But, gentlemen, I cannot forget
that that colony, splendid as it is, and great as its future
will sure to be, was nevertheless less than 50 years ago a
dependency of New South Wales - and yet it has gone on
pari passu with the other colonies in the work of progress
and civilisation. (Hear, hear.) I congratulate the people
and the Government and everybody concerned in New
South Wales upon the wonderful progress that has been
made during the period which we are now met together to
celebrate. We have heard so much during the last
week of the great progress which has been made in Aus-
tralasia that it would ill become me to take up your time by
referring to it. But 1 may venture to say that, splendid as
the progress has been, we should not forget that it has been
largely due to British enterprise; and that, thanks to British
genius, a union has been created throughout the world which
has revolutionised it. These colonies—New Zealand included
—formed part and parcel of an empire the prestige of whose
name runs throughout the globe—an empire of whose enor-
mous wealth you have been enabled to avail yourselves
of to the extent of 150 millions sterling—an empire whose
naval power was the greatest the world had ever seen, and
whose navy protects the commerce and soil of the Austra-
lian colonies from aggression—an aggression from which
you would not be exempt if that protection were removed.
I look forward hopefully to the future of these great colonies,
and especially would I refer to the grand spirit of enter-
prise which has possessed them, and which has developed
their commerce and naval and military defences. I trust
all these colonies will act with prudence and economy, and
I am certain that, if they do so, they are certain of a great
future. I would then look forward—and I believe it is no
Utopian idea —to the possibility of the time arriving when
there may be an English-speaking federation, which would
be a guarantee for the peace of the whole world. (Cheers.)
Sir F. Napier Broome said: I need scarcely say that,
as an officer of the Crown in another colony and as a guest
of this colony, I feel most deeply the honour of having my
health proposed in this assemblage of politicians and
statesmen, who are treading in the footsteps of those
who have made Australia what it is, and who
were engaged in making Australia the nation of
the future. The colony I represent has not, as the
Premier of New South VV ales has observed, made that
progress which it might have, considering the extent of its
territory, but I think that lately we have been moving
along. (Hear, hear.) Tou have no doubt read a few days
ago of our gold discoveries, and that they promise to turn out
something considerable. Western Australia promises to
make good progress in the future, but what she wants
is the introduction of enterprise from outside. You
all remember how when the great statesman Pitt sent
Wellesley out to India he told him that his mission was
to create an empire in the East which would compensate for
the loss of the West—the United States of America. We
all know what he did there, but I think every reflecting
mind will agree with me that the recompense for the
loss of America was not so much the Empire of
India as Australasia—(cheers)—and to use the words
of Canning we have called into existence a new world to
retrieve the balance of the old. At present Australia has
not retrieved the balance of political and military power, but
there are some signs that it will do so in the not very far
distant future, and it was now at any rate relieving
the weight of an overburdened population in
England, as witness the hundreds and thou-
sands of happy homes. (Cheers.) I thank you from the
bottom of my heart for the honour you have done me in
proposing my health. (Applause.)
Sir Charles Mitchell also briefly responded.
Sir John Hay proposed the next toast, viz., “ The Par-
liaments of the other Colonies,” and said: This is a toast
which I propose with all my heart, because I have
been a colonist in Australia for many years; in
fact, for nearly a jubilee of Australian time. (Cheers.)
And I have seen much, not only in New South Wales, but
in the neighbouring colonies. I have been for some time a
colonist of Victoria as well as of this colony, and I have
been a colonist of Queensland also. In this way I have
known the colonies and the early colonists from the
beginning, and I theiefore feel every sympathy with
the aspirations of the representatives of the colonies
assembled here to-night on this auspicious occa-
sion, and I congratulate them on the celebration of the hun-
dredth year of the existence of Australia. I give you from
the standpoint of an Australian the toast entrusted to me.
I have for a long time—since ever 1 have thought upon
political subjects—considered with regard to Australia that
the future of that country would be of very little import-
ance unless the whole of it felt itself more as one, attaining
a national character as one only way of sinking petty feel-
ings which one entertains towards another. Unless we sink
all these feelings and band together as Australians, I have
felt that we can be as nothing amongst the nations of the
world, and that we would be only a bane to those who
might come after us; and lam confident that with that
high feeling alone could we attain that greatness
which I now hope and fully believe we are destined to
possess in future ages. As to the present, I think that the
best thing that we can do for these colonies is to show that
we are living in amity, that as far as possible we will join
in any exeat effort made for our own advantage, that we
will sink unnecessary differences, and join in any great
undertaking for our own good ; that while the great empire
from which we are sprung is prepared to remain united to
us—not by any false bands, but through the
golden link of the Crown of Great Britain -
as long as we can form a great federation;
and when the necessity occurs, be it now or within the next
hundred years, let us prepare ourselves for that necessity,
and live together as one nation throughout the whole of
that time—(cheers) —and when Ihe necessity arises, if evil
times should overtake the great country from which we are
sprung, or if we should have to adopt measures for our own
particular defence in the Southern seas, events will find us
prepared for them. (Cheers.) In that way we may
enjoy our several institutions; and there is no reason
why we should not enjoy them, and be as far as possible
like brethren living amicably together. It is in these terms
that I propose the toast which I now submit with the best
of feelines. So far as this colony is concerned, we cannot
do betterlthan pledge ourselves to remain connected with
the parent country. (Hear, hear.) Let us now feel after
these celebrations that we are more and more as brothers.
We have attained a connection that we never had before.
We have the railway coming up from Adelaide and Mel-
bourne on to Svdney and Brisbane. We have the whole of
Australia connected by the iron road, which will, in the
course of a few years, bring us more and more together.
We will have an opportunity of seeing what is done by
one another; we will have an opportunity of joining in
the same enterprises, in following out the same course of
proceedings. (Hear, hear.) There is an electric band
connects us with one another, enabling us to communi-
cate in a few moments with each other from
one end of Australia to the other. We
are not tied down by that, but we can communicate with
the great colony of which Sir William Jervois has spoken.
With those sentiments I beg, without further observation, to
propose “ The Governments and Parliaments of the other
Colonies.” (Cheers.)
The toast was cordially drunk.
Sir Samuel Griffith, who was received with loud
cheers, said : Sir Henry Parkes, your Excellencies, and
Gentlemen, —It has been, lam sure, a source of the most
profound satisfaction to all visiting from the


neighbouring colonies on this occasion to receive
the hearty welcome and the kind hospitality
which has been everywhere afforded us. (Hear, hear.)
And 1 am sure that you colonists of the mother colony have
felt equal satisfaction in seeing us coming to accept the
kind invitations that you have given. (Cheers.) And I do
not know that we have received any more gratifying token
of the feelings entertained towards us and the other colonies
by you and the mother colony than the eloquent speech
made by Sir John Hay, who, as he has just said, has been
here for nearly a jubilee, having tilled the offices of
Speaker of the Assembly and President of the Coun-
cil, and who stands in the reversion of the administration
of the Government of the colony as well fitted
as any man in the Australian colonies to review
what had taken place during bis long presence in
Australia. 1 sometimes wish that I could project myself
into his place and look with his long experience upon the
changes which have taken place in Australia, and
what has taken place during these 50 years in these
thriving and prosperous colonies. The changes that
have taken place within the memory of many of us
are marvellous, and what may be within the next
50 years it would be impossible to predict. In the few
moments at my disposal I would like to say a few words
regarding the other colonies, and the other Parliaments of
the Australian colonies. I believe we are all Australians at
heart. A great proportion of us in Australia are natives of
Australia, but we feel that we are all Englishmen, that we
are all thoroughly British, and it is idle to suppose that
because a man is an Australian he ceases to be British.
(Cheers.) It has been the fashion for the last few months
to use the epithet imperialistic as applied to ideas of which
the writers apparently have little knowledge of the mean-
ing. The epithet is supposed to be opprobrious, at all events
it is used in that sense. But I see nothing in the term
“imperialistic” that is inconsistent with loyalty; and as
a loyalist is an imperialist, every man in this room must be
an imperialist. We Australians have before us a great task
in working out the destiny of Australia in the several
Governments and the several Parliaments, each of which
has its work to do, although under different circumstances.
I know that my friend Sir Henry Parkes for many years
has warmly cherished the desire for closer union on
those matters upon which we can be united. There
are many matters on which we must go our own way, and
perhaps it is well that we should go our own way; but there
are many other matters on which we might stand shoulder
to shoulder and help one another. (Sir Henry Parkes:
“ Hear, hear,” and cheers.) It seems to me that those who
have experience of government in the several colonies know
how difficult it is for us to work together. Perhaps two or
three Governments may have comparative leisure; perhaps
they have no troublous times at home ; and if they have
comparative leisure they can attend to their own affairs, and
also look beyond to the' other colonies, or to the empire, or
even to the universe itself. Others have less time, and are
oppressed bv matters of their own which require all
their attention, i have had myself an experience of some-
thing like nine years in office, and I have been in
office now for a period as long as most men in Australia
have been, namely, four years. During that time I have
seen how difficult it is for me to deal with questions
which are not essentially connected with our
own welfare. What we might call the res angusta
domi have, perhaps, occupied our attention unduly,
and we shall require to look at the wider
range which we shall find in the future. I shall always be
glad to communicate with the statesmen of the different
colonies, to work together with them: for there are a great
many pressing matters upon which we might do each other
good, such as the importation of Asiatics from the north.
I know there are matters upon which it would be idle
to endeavour to enforce anything like uniformity
in the different colonies of Australia. (Cheers.) I believe
that these celebrations which have taken place during the
past week will be looked back upon with the greatest
pleasure. (Cheers.) We shall none of us have the
pleasure of celebrating anything like it again during our
lifetime; but we may wish in any other celebration that
some one will say of us, and that it will be deserved, a
panogyric similar to that which the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly of New South Wales pro-
nounced this morning upon the great statesmen of
New South Wales in days gone by. (Cheers.)
The Hon. Thomas Playford said : Sir Henry Parkes,
your Excellencies, and Gentlemen,—On behalf of the colony
of South Australia, I thank you very much for the pleasure
you have afforded me in responding to the toast which has
just been drunk. Sir John Hay said we ought to take a'
lesson from this colony, that is alluding to New South Wales;
but I think I can say that if the colony of Victoria and the
colony of New South Wales were to take a lesson from the
colony which I have the honour to represent in various
matters, they would do well. (Hear, hear.) I will tell you
a little incident which occurred during my passage from
Melbourne here, which will give you an idea of the mean-
ing of the words which I have addressed to you. I
was in the train in the company of one of the leading mem-
bers of the Opposition of Victoria, and on inquiring of him
how the legislative work of that colony had progressed
during the last session, 1 was told that they were in this
position, that the Opposition had been able to dictate to the
Ministry, that they had succeeded in getting all their
measures passed, and that they had successfully opposed
all the measures introduced by the Ministry. This, I
consider, is a most disgraceful state of things. (Laughter;
and a voice, “No politics here,” and another voice, “ Mind
your own business.”) That is why I think both the colo-
nies of New South Wales and Victoria might take a leaf
out of the book of South Australia, by adopting standing
orders similar to those that we have had in force
from the inception of Parliamentary government in
our colony—orders which prevent any such conduct
on the part of members of the Opposition. (Cheers and
interruption.) I don’t intend to pursue the subject any
further—(a voice: “I don’t think you ought”)—because
I find it grates on the feelings of some gentlemen
present. (Laughter, and a voice, “You ought to
know better.”) I don’t wish to raise any discord
in an assembly of this sort. We are all bound
to the parent country—that is, all Australians
are all loyal subjects to Queen Victoria. I don’t think that
in any part of her Majesty’s dominions will be found more
loyal subjects than in New South Wales and the sister
colonies: and one of the best examples to the world, giving
proof of her loyalty to the Empire, was New South Wales
sending the Soudan Contingent to fight the battles of the
mother country, thus showing that if at any time the
assistance of Australia is required by the mother country
it will be afforded. (Cheers.) The result of the Soudan
Contingent was that more attention has been paid
to the Australian colonies than had ever been paid
before—(hear, hear)—that more attention is paid
to Australian affairs, which culminated in the con-
ference in London, which has led to the greatest
possible results. That conference has resulted in all the
colonies, with the exception of Queensland, having agreed
to share in the expense with the mother country to unite
with her to protect this country against a foreign foe.
Another subj ect which I wish to say a word about is federation.
We have, as you are aware, a Federal Council that met a
short time ago in Tasmania. The greater question of
federation, however, will have to be decided in the future.
At the present time we are not represented in that federa-
tion. The colony of Victoria, as some of its statesmen say,
is ready for the adoption of federation in order that
we may adopt a uniform tariff—protection against the
world, and free trade between the colonies. But, as
regards the colony that I represent, we are not ready for
that. We have had no time to build up manufactures yet,
and if we were to adopt the policy of Victoria, the chances
are that it would be a losing game for us, although it
might be for the advantage of that colony. lam exceed-
ingly pleased that we have been invited to take part in
these proceedings, and 1 speak on behalf of my colleagues
in Parliament and thank you for the very handsome
manner in which we have been received, and for the
attention which has been paid to us while we have been
here. (Cheers.)


Sir James M‘Bain, who was received with cheers,
said: Sir Henry Parkes, your Excellencies, and Gentle-
men, —I have always considered it a very high honour to be
called upon to reply to the toast of “ The Parliament of
’Victoria,” but never so much as on the present occasion.—
the most important that has occurred in the history of
Australasia. I should have liked the Prime Minister of
Victoria to be present, but I understand that his health
and business engagements prevented his remaining until
this event was over; and I have to tender the Government
of New South Wales and the Centennial commission, on
behalf of the Legislature of Victoria, hearty thanks for
their kind invitations and generous hospitality. I have
only visited Sydney twice before the present occasion, and
I have had to complain on each of those occasions that not
only were you generous in your hospitality, but you very
nearly killed me with kindness. (Laughter.) I believe every
gentleman presen ton thi s occasion wi 11 go a way from the colony
of New South Wales with the feeling that every attempt
has been made to kill him with kindness. (Laughter.) I
reciprocate the kind feelings which have been expressed by
our worthy, respected, and esteemed friend, Sir John Hay ;
and I will only say that there is hardly one man in these
colonies who deserves the esteem of his fellow-men
more than Sir John Hay. I would like to refer
to one matter suggested by his remarks. Where are our
pioneers of settlement, and what are said respecting thefh ?
A great many people have forgotten them altogether.
(Hear, hear.) I say that we do not estimate the pioneers
of settlement as we ought to do. Those men fought
the battles of settlement in the country, and
we inherit the fruit of their labours. (Cheers.)
We have a worthy statesman here in“ Sir John Hay. He
was one of the pioneers of this colony, and I pray that God
may bless him, and that his days may be happy during the
remainder of his life. On the subject of federation,
I do not see why we, living in Australia, should
cavil about things we have no business to cavil
about. We ought to be united hand-in-hand for
the joint good of the colonies. Whatever fiscal
policy may be adopted, and I am not going to advocate
either free trade or protection, we all ought to be agreed
upon the subject, and work in unison with the rest of the
British Empire. 1 believe the time will come when no one
colony will attempt to arrogate to itself the right to adopt
a policy which will inflict an injury upon the parent State,
and when the colonies generally will see good reason why
they should adopt a uniform fiscal policy throughout.
(Hear, hear.)
Sir William Fitzherbert (New Zealand), the Hon. A.
Clarke (Tasmania), and the Hon. J. Lee Stere (Western
Australia) also responded.
Mr. W. PI. Young proposed “Our Federal Guests,”
expressing the hope that the future result of these celebra-
tions would be that the public men of Australia would
know more of one another.
The toast was cordially received.
Mr. Chief Justice Wav, in responding, congratulated
Sir Henry Parkes and those who were engaged
in the celebrations on the glorious success that had
attended their efforts. During the past week the world
had looked with admiration upon Australia. (Hear, hear.)
Those who were federal guests wanted to know what was
to be the outcome of all these magnificent celebrations, and
they called upon Sir Henry Parkes to place himself at the
head of the movement. (Loud cheers.) The logic of the
Premier of South Australia was altogether wrong, but his
heart was right, and if he and others followed the old man
eloquent—veteran statesman of Australia—a federated Aus-
tralia would be accomplished in one of the first years of the
second century of its existence. (Hear, hear.)
Colonel Sargood also responded, expressing a hope that
there would be a federal muster of the military forces of
Australasia in connection with the Melbourne Centenary
International Exhibition.
The H on. N. Fitzgerald, in responding, warmly advo-
cated Australian unity and consolidation, without which
it would be impossible for these colonies to progress.
Mr. M. H. Davies, in acknowledging the toast, re-
marked that reference had been made to the manner in
which legislative business was conducted in Victoria. He
could only say that the whole of the colonies had a good
deal to learn from each other, and Victoria might be able to
teach the mother colony something.
The Hon. W. H. Groom also responded.
Sir F. Napier Broome proposed “ The Press of Aus-
tralasia,” and said that the reason why he took particular
pleasure in proposing this toast was that he was struck with
the admirable manner in which the Press of this city had
performed the duty of reporting these great celebrations.
He also spoke in high terms of the manner in which the
newspapers of the metropolitan cities of Australia were con-
ducted.
Messrs. W. Curnow (S. M. Herald) and F. Ward
(Daily Telegraph) responded.
Sir William Jervois proposed the health of “ The
Chairman, Sir Henry Parkes.” (Applause.) He had
known him for the last 11 years, but he had been known a
much longer time than that to many present, and the good
Sir Henry Parkes had done in this country and for Aus-
tralia had been of incalculable service to the community.
He therefore joined most heartily with his friend—his
Honor Mr. Chief Justice Way—in expressing the hope
that Sir Henrv himself would head the movement for a
united Federal Australia. (Cheers.)
The toast was received with enthusiasm.
Sir Henry Pakkes, who, on rising, was received with
much applause, said he thanked them most sincerely for the
kind manner in which they had been pleased to drink this
toast. As to his putting himself at the head of a movement
for the federation of the colonies, he would ask what were
they doing now? (Hear, hear.) Had they not taken
that step ? Who could look around on each side of the
tables without feeling the conviction deep within his inner
nature that here were the materials for a great Federal ■
Parliament. He was certainly one of those who would
yield to no one in their desire for a federated Australia; but
he could not at present convince himself that they had
started on the right lines. They must have in any move-
ment for the union of all these great colonies the power
to take up the very largest questions and those
which involved so much self-sacrifice, so much honourable
and patriotic feeling, and the setting aside provincial and
local questions in favour of those which were of national
importance. They had the material for a national Parlia-
ment here, and every year they would gather the harvest
which would result from that gathering; and if the time
was not ripe now, it must be ripe in a very short
time for the Dominion of Australia. Then, he
trusted, they would have a great Southern federation
affiliated to the mother-country. At present,
however, they had not arrived at that standard, but the
time would come when the colonies would be drawn closer
together in the general interest of the whole, and they
would assist each other in building up a nation in this part
of the world under the bright constellation of these southern
skies which would be a crown of glory and of civilisation.
(Cheers.)
Three cheers were then given for the Queen, and the
proceedings terminated.
HERR ALPEN’S CANTATA.
The Centennial Cantata, the joint work of Mr. John
Plnmmer and Herr Hugo Alpen, was produced yesterday
afternoon at the Exhibition building, before an enormous
audience, numbering, as was estimated, about 5000 people.
His Excellency the Governor and Lady Carrington, with
Sir William Jervois, were present, besides a large number
of prominent citizens and visitors. The Hon. the Minister
of Public Instruction acted as chairman. The hall had a
tasteful appearance, to which the nicely-dressed children
largely contributed. Fully 1500 children were seated upon
the raised orchestra ; the girls being dressed in white,
with coloured ribbons, sashes, &c.—the first trebles wear-
ing blue, the seconds red, and the boys being decorated
with white rosettes, the national red, white, and blue being
thus fitly represented. At the top of the orchestra space
was left for the Permanent Artillery Band, which assisted;


the central platform being occupied by a special selection
of chorus-singers, with the soloists in front, The orchestra
was accommodated on the floor of the hall in front of the
platform, on either side of the conductor. Altogether there
were about 1850 performers; for beside the orchestra and
soloists, there were nearly 300 adult choralists in addition to
the children. At 4 o’clock his Excellency and party
arrived, and they were duly greeted by the “ National
Anthem,” performed by orchestra and chorus in combina-
tion, after which the cantata was at once proceeded with.
Herr Alpen, who holds the position of superintendent
of the teaching of singing in the Government schools of
Sydney and its environs, conceived the idea of bringing
about a large school festival in connection with the centen-
nial celebrations. This necessitated the production of a
work written for the occasion, as nothing of sufficient
length suitable for children was available. As it happens,
this is the only such work produced at this juncture, and
thus it has gained a prominence which originally was never
intended. But in accepting this as “ The Centennial
Cantata,” it is only fair to the composer that these facts
should be both stated and considered, for a work written
simply for children can hardly be weighed in the ordinary
balance. That which might be considered trivial in another
place becomes here appropriate, and an absence of con-
trapuntal development which elsewhere might be deemed
an admission of weakness may here be viewed as an
evidence of wisdom. The choral portions in this can-
tata are all of the utmost simplicity, and are pre-
sented without elaboration of any kind. The rhythm
is always plain and straightforward, while the melody and
harmony are generally idiomatic, consisting of phrases
such as may be easily assimilated by juvenile tastes. No
cavilling at the adoption ot such a principle in the composi-
tion of the cantata can well be made; but yet the children
did their part of the performance so intelligently that it is
clear they could have given a good account of themselves
and their teachers in more difficult music, and, therefore, it
may be regretted that the composer so rigidly confined
himself to this course. However, some of the solo parts,
written for adult voices, show the powers of the composer
to more advantage, and some of these give distinct evidence
of the possession of musicianly qualities. The scoring of
the work is not by any means always effective
and shows signs of haste, 'ihe general effect, however,
of the cantata is really very good and it certainly
served the purpose for which it was conceived; and
the public were thoroughly pleased in consequence. Herr
Alpen may be congratulated on the successful result of
his labours, not the least ot which was the bringing to-
gether of so large a body of children and producing such
steady sinering from juveniles, who are unaccustomed
to the excitement of public performance, and who rarely
have anything beyond little school songs to sing, where
hardly more than a tenth of their numbers ever join
together at any time. Despite occasional slips, the
singing was generally steady and well attuned; and
more than this could hardly be expected where vocal
trainine - does not come within the course of school teaching.
The overture commenced with a quiet andante in G major,
scored for strings and flute, and is followed by a confuoco
movement in E minor, which soon changes into the tonic
major, this time being presented in a more gentle manner.
After a recurrence of the minor theme, bell-chimes are
heard, the precise object of which is hardly evident, and
the effect might have been the better dispensed with, as
the chimes had no possible key relationship with their sur-
roundings. The theme of what subsequently turns out to
be “the Chorus of Nations” is then introduced as a
march. This was led off by the Permanent Artillery
Band behind the stage, and joined in by the
orchestra when the band had reached its allotted place.
The introductory chorus, “ The song of our beautiful
land,” was then sung by the children, who showed a ready
obedience to the baton, and it was thoroughly successful,
except where the composer had taken the voices too high,
for, though the notes may be reached, tone cannot be
expected as high as G and A from uncultivated voices.
This remark equally applies to the other choruses ;
and, indeed, in this particular the composer has
certainly acted unwisely, as a greater compass is
never looked for even in the case of chorister boys, where
(as in church and cathedral choirs) voice-training is, or
should be, so carefully attended to. “ Australia asleep ”
was well sung by Mr. J. Thomson Brown. This number
is a pastorale movement in nine pulse rhythm, and is an
effective and musicianly composition, the pathetic and
dreamy melody being accompanied by thoroughly appro-
priate harmonies. The solo part of the “ Mariner’s Song ”
was well rendered by Signor Vittorini ; but the humming
accompaniment of the children’s chorus somewhat failed in
its effect. After the recitative, “ Raise high the flag,” a
short strain, “ Rule Britannia,” was introduced, and
would have been effective had not the cornet-player
entered two bars too soon. “Australia awakened”
was capitally rendered by Miss Moon, save where
the passages proved too florid for clear execution, and the
piece itself would be deserving of warm praise only that it
is too suggestive of Donizetti. The whole scena is,
however, well conceived, and is certainly pleasing in style.
Perhaps the best number is the “ Song of Agriculturists
and Pasloralists,” where the theme is led by the bass (Mr.
Hallewell) and answered by the chorus, echoed in turn by a
quartette. A pretty valse theme is sung by the children as
the final verse. The “ Gold-diggers’ Song ” is set as a
chorus for children’s voices unaccompanied, which, how-
ever, proved comparatively ineffective, perhaps because the
tone was not good, though both time and tune were accu-
rate. Mr. Hallewell had an effective piece in “ The
New Nation,” which narrowly escaped an encore.
Following this came a “ Centennial Anthem and
Chorus,” of which the words are by Mr. J. B. Barlow,
the piece having originally appeared in the Prize
Cantata which Herr Alpen composed for the Juvenile
Exhibition which was to have been held some years ago in
the Garden Palace, only that its destruction by fire pre-
vented the performance. This piece was deservedly en-
cored, and was repeated. In “ Federal Australia,” the
composer availed himself of a little picturesque symbolism
to enforce the effect, it being arranged that as the little
vocalists who represented the several colonies came forward
each tosing its contributing “ strophe,” a banner was un-
furled bearing the name of the place; and as New South
Wales replied, referring to “the flag that waves above,”
the Australian flag was held aloft, having thereon stars so
arranged as to typify the Southern Cross. The solo part
was capitally sung by a young vocalist, dressed in “ Cen-
tennial blue,” who, we understand, is a daughter of the
composer—Miss Ada Alpen. This piece was also encored.
“ The Chorus of Nations ” has been already referred to as
being introduced in the overture. The final chorus is a
more solid composition than any other; and though the
harmonies of the opening part strike us as being somewhat
crude, the whole number w r as encored and repeated.
THE CENTENNIAL BAND CONTEST.
PRESENTATION OF AWARDS.
Last evening, at the Protestant Hall, the presentation of
prizes to the successful bands and successful soloists at
the Centennial Band Contest was made by Lady Car-
rington. Previous to the arrival of her Ladyship, a short
programme of vocal and instrumental selections was given
in the presence of a meagre audience. Mrs. J. A. Dobbie
sang three popular songs with very good taste, and Mr.
Alex. Edward contributed three also, in which he displayed
a vigorous voice and good style of singing. The winners
of the prizes for solo playing—Mr. Allison, Mr. Grant, and
Mr. Ferguson—each played a solo on the clarionet, comet,
and euphonium respectively. All these performers were
loudly applauded. On the arrival of Lady Carrington, ac-
companied by Lord Carrington, the band of the 4th Regiment
played the National Anthem. As well as the vice-regal
party there were on the platform Mr. D. O’Connor,
M.L.A., Mr. Consul Griffin (United States of America),


Mr. Leon Caron, and Signor Zelman. Lady Carrington
presented the awards as follows, and in doing so shook
hands with and congratulated each bandmaster and soloist:
Band 4th Regiment, Bandmaster Barkel, first prize, f 100 ;
Bulch’s Model Band, Bandmaster J. E. Bulch, second prize,
£6O ; City of Launceston Band, Bandmaster Wallace, third
prize, £35; Eastern Suburban Band, South Australia,
Bandmaster Heath, fourth prize, £ls: Naval Artillery
Volunteer Drum and Fife Band, fifth prize, £5. Solo
competitors: Clarionet, Mr. Allison, Eastern Suburban
Band, South Australia, £5 55.; cornet, Mr. Grant, Eastern
Suburban Band, South Australia, £5 os.; euphonium,
Mr. Ferguson, Bulch’s Model Band, £5 ss.
Mr O'Connor called on the audience to pass a hearty
vote of thanks to Lady Carrington. (Immense applause.)
The country was fortunate in having so distinguished and
noble a gentleman as Lord Carrington for its Governor.
Amongst the many Governors the colony had seen, none
had shed such a lustre as Lord Carrington, assisted by his
gracious lady. (Tremendous cheering.)
The vote of thanks was carried with acclamation, and
three cheers were given for Lady Carrington.
Lord Carrington said:—“Ladies and gentlemen, Lady
Carrington wishes me to express to you her hearty appre-
ciation of your kindness to her, and also to express the ex-
treme pleasure with which she accepted the courteous in-
vitation to come here this evening and present the prizes to
the successful bands and solo competitors.” (Loud ap-
plause.)
His Excellency called for three cheers for the Queen, and
met with a hearty response.
Cheers were also given for Lord and Lady Carrington,
and the proceedings closed with the National Anthem,
played by the bands.
ENGINEERING ASSOCIATIONS CENTE-
NARY EXCURSIONS.
The third excursion arranged by the members of the
Engineering Association of New South Wales, in honour
of the Centenary of the colony, took place yesterday. The
party, which numbered about’so gentlemen, and included a
number of intercolonial visitors, left No. 4 Jetty, Circular
Quay, at 10 o’clock in the morning, on board the steamer
Alathea, and proceeded to the Mortlake Gasworks, on
the Parramatta River. En route a stoppage was made at
Cockatoo Island, and a hurried inspection of the large
graving dock there was made. General surprise and
admiration were expressed at the magnitude of the work
which is being carried out on the island. The journey was
soon resumed, and on arrival at Mortlake jetty the party
were met by Mr. Peacock, the manager of the gaswmrks,
and by him were shown over the establishment.
A deal ot interest was centred in the retort house,
where a charge was drawn, and the retorts re-
charged by means of the mechanical stokers ; and the
large gasometer also came in for a share of attention.
The visitors afterwards re-embarked and steamed to Messrs.
Lysaght’s wireworks, over which they were conducted by
the proprietor, who explained the various mechanical pro-
cesses employed in the manufacture of various kinds of
wire. At the conclusion of the inspection of the premises,
the party adjourned to the steamer, and were soon under
weigh for Sydney, which they reached about 4 o’clock.
The visitors wrnre all highly pleased with what they wit-
nessed at the different places that they visited, and appeared
to thoroughly enjoy the day’s outing. The members of
the association and their friends leave Redfern station by
special train at 8 o’clock this morning on a visit to Eskbank
and Lithgow to see the iron and pottery works at those
places.
THE NATIONAL PARK.
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 1.
MINISTERIAL PICNIC.
On the invitation of the Government, about 100 ladies
and gentlemen yesterday accepted invitations to an excur-
sion to the National Park. In accordance with previous
arrangements, a special train conveying the guests left the
Redfern railway station at 10 minutes past 8, and, after a
pleasant run of about three-quarters of an hour, it reached
the platform at the entrance to the park, whence the party
were conveyed to Audley Camp in vehicles which were in
waiting when the train arrived. The weather during the
early morning had a threatening appearance, and about 8
o’clock light rain fell in the city, but by the time
the park was reached all signs of rain had dis-
appeared and the remainder of the day was
bright and warm, though the heat was not
oppressive. The following were among those present :
Sir Frederick Napier Broome, Governor of Western Aus-
tralia ; Sir John Robertson (president), and Messrs. G. F.
Want, J. Graham, A. H. M'Culloch, and J. Williams,
trustees of the park; Mr. Critchett Walker, Principal
Under-Secretary; Mr. J. Hurley, M.L.A.; Mr. John
Barnet, Colonial Architect, and Mrs. Barnet; Mr. Justice
Windeyer, Miss Windever, Mr. and Mrs. Alban J. Riley,
Mr. Charles Cowper, sheriff; Mr. G. Durham, Mr. M.
Hughes, J.P. The Hon. C. J. Roberts, Postmaster-
General, and the Hon. B. R. Wise, Attorney-
General, were present, representing the Government.
The following visitors were from the colonies named:—
Victoria: Dr. Brownless, Chancellor Melbourne Univer-
sity; Judge Casey; Hon. D. Ham, M.L.C.; Messrs.
Donaghy, Forrest, L. L. Smith, and Bailes, Ms.L.A. ;
Councillors Pierce, Godfrey. Geddes, and Buxton; Mr. J.
T. Davev. Adelaide: Hon. Thomas Playford, Premier;
Hon. J. G. Itamsay, Chief Secretary; Hon. R. A. Tarlton,
M.L.C. : Messrs. Landseer, J. G. Jenkins, and Soloman,
Ms.L.A.; Councillors Wilcox, Stephens, Rooney, Packer,
Pullen, and Tosy; Mr. T. Hatton-Richards, aide-de-camp
to the Governor, Sir W. C. Robinson. Western Australia :
Mr. 11. F. Sholl, M.L.C.; Mr. George Leake, M.L.C.
Queensland : Messrs. W. H. Groom (Speaker), S. Grimes,
W. Smyth. M. Mellor, H. Wakfield, J. M'Farlane, W.
Salkeld, Lumley Hill, and R. B. Sheridan, Ms.L.A.; Mr.
A. E. Holioran, sheriff. It was at first intended that no
ladies should be present, and in consequence of this several
visitors to the colony who were invited declined to go. The
Government, however, afterwards decided that ladies would
be welcomed, but this decision was not come to until
Monday evening, and although intimation of the fact was
given as much publicity as possible, the time was so short
that some who would like to have been present under the
altered condition were unable to attend, and were corre-
spondingly disappointed. Soon after the arrival of the
guests at the camp breakfast was served in the pavilion
under the superintendence of Mr. J. W. Cassidy, of the
Parliamentary refreshment-room, and during its progress
the Centennial Band, which had accompanied the party
from Sydney, and was under the conductorship of Mr.
George Vassie, rendered a choice selection of music.
The wants and wishes of the guests were carefully


studied by Messrs. Fred. Want and Critchett Walker, who
were unsparing in their exertions to make everybody com-
fortable and happy from the beginning to the finish of the
day’s proceedings. After breakfast the party went down
to the river, where the park launch, the Cymea, was lying
with steam up, and no fewer than eight boats fastened
astern. The boats were quickly filled by the visitors, and
soon afterwards the procession started down the river,
under what proved to be the skilful pilotage of Mr. Want.
The scenery was greatly admired, and the trip proved most
enjoyable. On reaching a little below “Waterfall,” or
the Deer Park, the Government steam launch Premier was
found to be in waiting. She had been sent down from Sydney
on the previous day; and her bright, clean, and generally
attractive appearance was a welcome sight to the visitors,
who were quickly transhipped to her. The Premier then
went down almost to the Heads, and those onboard enjoyed
themselves even more than before. Light refreshments,
including some splendid oysters, were served, and the
guests, with appetites sharpened by the outing, gave un-
mistakable signs of the appreciation they felt for
the attention thus bestowed upon them. Returning
to the Waterfall, they re-embarked in the boats,
and went back to the camp, where . luncheon,
served in the pavilion, was found awaiting them.
The Hon. B. R. Wise occupied the chair, and the Hon. C.
J. Roberts the vice-chair. After the formal toasts of
“The Queen,” “The Prince of Wales and all the Royal
Family,” had been disposed of,
The Chairman gave “The health of his Excellency the
Governor.” He said, in asking them to drink that toast
he was asking them to drink to the health of a man who,
to us in New South Wales, had been long well known and
appreciated—(hear, hear)—and who during the past week,
he ventured to say, had become known to all the visitors
from the other colonies as one possessing in the highest
degree the firmness, the tact, and the judgment which so
eminently qualified him for occupying the high position he
filled. (Loud cheers.) He would also include in the toast
the name of Lady Carrington. (Cheers.)
The Chairman then said: Upon this occasion we do not
desire to have a lengthy toast list. We have come here to
see, and it is our pleasure to be able to show, the natural
beauties of one of the most beautiful parts of New South
Wales. (Cheers.) We desire that you should have every
opportunity of witnessing these beauties rather than
have your time occupied by listening to speeches
which can only imperfectly express the plea-
sure we derive from seeing you here. Still it would
not he right that this occasion should pass by without our
expressing the great satisfaction we feel at seeing you, and
expressing it in a more informal manner than we have been
able to do during the past week. (Cheers.) I hope that
all the visitors to New South Wales will feel, when they
return home, that they have made acquaintances here, that
they have got to know our public men and feel the better
for it—(hear, hear)—be able to do important work in their
own colonies; and that they have learned something from
what we were doing in this important part of the continent.
(Cheers.) 1 give you the toast of “The Guests.” (Cheers.)
Sir F. Napier Broome has kindly undertaken to reply on
behalf of the whole of the guests’ and I ain sure tho reply
will not suffer in his hands. (Cheers.)
His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia,
who was very warmly received, said: Mr. Chairman,
Ladies, and Gentlemen,—l am sure that neither speech
nor language is required to assure our hosts of the great
enjoyment which they have given us to-day, and of our
feelings towards them for it; and on our being partakers
day after day of the magnificent hospitality of the people
and Government of New South Wales. (Cheers.) I
think our host must have noticed as we proceeded down the
river this morning how we were enjoying ourselves; he
must have heard the strains of music wafted from some of
the boats—(laughter and cheers, and a voice: “South
Australia ”) —and that we so gallantly boarded the steamer
Premier. I think he must have noticed also how we
added another chapter, or, I may say, a tragedy in colonial
history, when we saw, encountered, and defeated “the
natives ” with great slaughter. (Laughter and cheers.) I
allude of course, to the magnificent oysters of this river-
In addition to the pleasure which we have experienced, it
has struck us all this morning not only what a beautiful
country this is; but what a grand idea it was of the Go-
vernment of this colony to reserve this National Park for
the future enjoyment of the people. (Loud cheers.") 1
say future enjoyment advisedly, because, however we may
enjoy it now, the country is not yet so fully populated as to
make it of such value and importance as it will be in time
to come; and in securing this magnificent and glorious
tract of country, so full of natural facilities for enjoyment
and pleasure for the use of the people, the Government
had placed the future generations of this colony under
a deep debt of gratitude. (Cheers.) It was a
national idea worthy of the statesmen of this great colony.
(Cheers.) I will not say more, except that we ought to
thank our hosts from our hearts—(hear, hear) —and that,
in time to come, when we hear music which we have just
listened to from the band ringing in our memories, we will
for ever associate it with the delightful trip in “ Auld Lang
Syne,”—our visit to the National Park of New South
Wales. (Loud cheers.) Before I sit down I would like to
propose a toast. You will probably recollect that in one of
Disraeli's novels, one of the lesser politicians, at the time
her Majesty is supposed to have ascended the throne, ap-
proaches his chief at a great crisis during a general election,
and announces that he has invented a new election
cry, “ Our voung Queen and our old Constitution.”
I have just discovered a new cry, and it is this—“ The old
colonv and its young Attorney-General.” (Cheers, and
“For he’s a jolly good fellow.”)
The Chairman said: On behalf of my colleagues and
myself I beg to thank you. Ido not feel equal to replying
to the toast. Our old country speaks for itself, but lam
afraid our young Attorney-General has a great deal to do
before he can speak for himself. I repeat that the greatest
pleasure, and perhaps the greatest benefit, which we as
Ministers have enjoyed during our term of office, has been
the privilege and advantage of receiving so many visitors
from the other colonies, who enlarge our ideas by inter-
course with them. (Cheers).
The proceedings at the luncheon then terminated, and
the guests were taken up the river as far as Lady Carring-
ton’s bower, the trip being even more enjoyable than
the one down the river. On going back to the camp, wine
was opened, and Mr. L. L. Smith, in gratefui terms,
proposed “ The Health of the Trustees of the National
Park,” and it was drunk with enthusiasm. Mr. Graham,
who responded, regretted that Sir John Robertson, the
“ father and originator” of the park, had left to catch the
train, as the duty of replying to such a toast could be so
much better performed by him. H e paid a warm tribute
of praise to Mr. Want for his unselfish and unceasing
efforts to beautify and improve the park. Mr. Want like-
wise responded, and at the close of his remarks called for
three cheers for Sir John Robertson, which were very
heartily given. A start was then made for the train,
which was reached in safety, and the party were landed in
Sydney shortly before 6 o’clock, thoroughly delighted with
their outiDg.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE PICNIC.
The members of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce pave
a picnic at Chowder Bay of an original and pleasing
character yesterday evening, to a number of the dis-
tinguished visitors at present in Sydney, in connection with
the centennial celebrations. By a happy inspiration the
novel idea of holding the picnic by moonlight in the even-
ing, instead of during the heat of the day, was hit upon,
and the result Droved most encouraging. Instead of
the visitors seeing the harbour under the many
discomforts attendant on a trip during the heat of the day,
they were enabled to enjoy an excursion in the cool of the
evening, and to return home by moonlight, thus seeing the
harbour under the most favourable conditions, with all its
loveliness amplified and intensified by the brilliant moon-
light. The party left the Circular Quay' about half-past 5,
in the Government steamer Thetis, and proceeded as far as


the Heads, and then for a short distance up Middle Har-
bour. Whilst in Middle Harbour a little diversion was
afforded hv the breakdown of the steering-gear, but the acci-
dent, fortunately, was easily repaired. The party num-
bered altogether' about 100, amongst those present being
the Hon. S. A. Joseph, chairman Chamber of Commerce;
Mr. J. H. Storey, vice-president; Mr. Gotthelf, hon.
treasurer; Lieut.-Colonel Sargood, Hon. J. F. Burns,
Hon. James Inglis, Hon. B. R. Wise, Hon. Barker,
M.L.C.. (Western Australia), Hon. C. H. James, M.L.O.
(Victoria)! Mr. Thomas Mackenzie, M.H.R. (New Zea-
land), Hon. G. A. Lloyd, Messrs. John Alger, H. C.
Fraser, W. M'Millan, M.L.A., F. Lassetter, Thomas Lit-
tlejohn, ft. T. Remington, W. J. Ferguson, J. C. Reming-
ton, Larmour, and H. C. Mitchell, secretary of the Chamber.
Chowder Bay was reached about 7 o’clock, and the com-
pany at once sat down to an excellent dinner in the
pavilion. The chair was occupied by the Hon. fc. A.
Joseph, Mr. Burns occupying the seat on his right hand,
and Lieutenant-Colonel Sargood the seat on the left.
The usual loyal toasts' having been proposed and
honoured,
The Chairman', in proposing the health of the Ministry,
said the toast was not a party one and had no party signi-
ficance, as it was proposed simply with the desire to express
appreciation of these gentlemen who undertook such
arduous duties for their country. It had often struck him
as remarkable that gentlemen possessing the necessary
qualifications to enable them to satisfactorily conduct the
business of the country could be found willing to
relinquish their ordinary pursuits, and to devote their time
and energies to the work of government, which must be
done at very great personal sacrifice. He was sure that if
these gentlemen had devoted their time, energy, and abili-
ties to the ordinary pursuits of colonists they would have
been very much better off. (Applause.) He regretted
exceedingly that the veteran leader of the Government, Sir
Henry Parkes, was unable to be present to-night, as
no man had introduced more useful measures
of legislation, or had done more to secure the liberty of the
people of the country. (Applause.) But if the Premier
was not here, we had the Colonial Treasurer, the At-
torney-General, and the Minister for Public Instruction.
On an occasion like this it was right to have the. Minister
for Finance and Trade present, because he presided over
the commercial interests of the country, and he felt sure
that the fiscal policy of his hon. friend the Colonial
Treasurer was that which accorded with the feelings
of certainly the majority of the members of the Chamber
of Commerce. It might be that the commercial systems of
the colonies were in an experimental stage, but he hoped
that before the next decade the experimental stage
would be over, and that then the whole of the systems
would be in accord with the Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
The Attorney-General had also done good work by passing
an effective Bankruptcy Bill which the commercial classes
had been trying to get for a long time, and the Chamber of
Commerce were also greatly indebted to his efforts
for legislation in this direction. The Attorney-
General would confer another benefit on the
commercial community if he would endeavour to insist on
80iu6 reform in the system of administration of the law as
relating to commercial suits. The law itself was just and
equitable, but what the commercial classes complained of
was the not always correct application of the law and its
slow and tedious application, and consequently many com-
mercial men had to put up with gros • and grievous
injustice, because they could not afford the time and
cost of the tedious remedy they had to seek at
the hands of the law, as it now existed. (Cheers.) In
conclusion, he remarked that they were honoured with
the presence of representatives of the different legis-
lative bodies of the various colonies, all existing under the
same flag and speaking the same language. He trusted
that the members of the different legislatures would devote
their energies to the formation of the colonies into one
united, grand, and federated Australia. (Applause.)
The toast was drunk with great enthusiasm.
Mr. Burns responded. He said that he was gratified
by the evident enthusiasm which had been displayed by
that laro-e and distinguished company in relation to the
toast of “ The Ministry.” (Applause.) He believed there
was no class in this community better qualified than the
members of the Chamber of Commerce to form an en-
lightened and unbiassed opinion on the conduct of the
Government. They all knew something of the condition of
the colony and of the state of their public affairs when this
Government entered office a little more than a year ago. 1 beir
credit in England had been impaired by the great and rapid
extension in the amount of the public debt, which in a few
short years had expanded from £18,000,000 to £41,000,000.
It had also been lowered by the imposition of taxation,
which interfered with their commerce, and diverted trade
from their shores. It was also known that their ordinary
revenue was far below their ordinary expenditure, and that
there was an accumulated deficit of at least £‘2,500,000. He
thought he might fairly claim that the Government had
accomplished much, despite unexampled difficulties, towards
reviving public confidence and in freeing their commerce
from restrictions which had operated to its prejudice.
(Cheers.) They bad, without experiencing much incon-
venience, abstained from launching a new loan, which had
no doubt raised their credit, which had been exemplified by
the marked increase in the value of their
securities. In January, 1887, when this Govern-
ment took office, the 3£ per cent, stock of New
South Wales was worth only 94. It was now worth 102,
and there could be no doubt that, owing to the high credit
of the colony in London at the present time, they could
easily float a 3£ per cent, loan at par if they required it
for public purposes. (Cheers.) Their tariff had already
been made the simplest and fairest for all classes and
interests yet adopted in the Australian colonies, and he hoped
it would ere long be further simplified and shorn of its
remaining unfair proportions. (Cheers.) It was only
under such a tariff that even justice could be meted out
under their fiscal laws. It was the mission and hope ol
this Government to place all classes upon an equality m
relation to taxation, and to prevent any return to a system
which, for the benefit of a few, would, as in protectionist
France, Prussia, and Russia, which had large armaments to
maintain, place the majority of their people, and especially
their farmers and labourers, under great disabilities, it
was only in seasons of depression and financial embarrass-
ment that the fiscal policy to which this Government was
opposed would be tolerated. Hence it was their desire to
reduce the public expenditure to reasonable limits. I hey
had made large reductions in the estimates of expenditure
for 1888, but he feared that they could not hope for much
relief from retrenchment till they passed their Railway
Bill, which would minimise the evils of political patro-
nage—(cheers)—and their Local Government Bill,
which would remove from the central Government
duties and obligations which could better be
discharged under local supervision. (Cheers.) He
hoped it would be the good future of this Government
to be associated with changes which would bring the ordi-
nary revenue up to the ordinary expenditure, and the
restoration of the condition of the colony to a state which
would afford no pretext for the advocacy of schemes which
flourished best in seasons of adversity, and would receive
no quarter in times of prosperity. (Loud applause.)
Mr. Wise also responded to the toast.
Mr. Storey proposed the Parliaments of Australasia,
which was responded to by Mr. James, of the Victorian
Legislative Council, Mr. Parker, of the Western Australian
Legislative Council, and Mr. Mackenzie, of the New Zea-
land House of Representatives.
Mr. Macmillan proposed the toast of the Chambers
of Commerce and Commercial Union of He
referred briefly to the original progress of the Sydney
Chamber of Commerce, which commenced m an insigni-
ficant manner, and a long period elapsed before it
took any position in the community. Seven years
ago the Chamber of Commerce had been put on a
broader basis, and had risen in three or four years
from the insignificant number of oO or w
members to 220 members. The Chamber of Commerce
had continually kept before the Government ol the
country some of the most salient reforms required in com-


mercial matters, and their exertions had culminated in a
most important reform, the present Bankruptcy Bill. With
regard to the Commercial L T nion of the colonies —(hear,
hear), —they would perceive that in the Legislature of this
country we were gradually getting out of the municipal
topics of former years, and getting into the harder work
of statesmanship and real legislation. The difficulties
surrounding the question of a closer union between the
colonies were simply enormous, and he wished to point out
that there was no analogy between the geographical position
of the various states of America or Canada and that of the
Australian colonies. The former states were interdepen-
dent one on the other, and nothing but absolute free trade
could possibly be found under such conditions, but here we
had separate colonies, each with its own seaboard, and
with all the possibilities of great nationalities.
It was this fact which made it all the more necessary' that
we should not delay this commercial and governmental
union of the colonies. (Applause.) He maintained that
the commercial union of the colonies must be based on a
uniform tariff, and we in New South Wales considered
that the only rational basis for this tariff was that of free
trade. (Applause.) The next point was the necessity for
uniform commercial legislation, and in this respect
he considered that a great deal might be done by the
free interchange of ideas amongst the different commercial
chambers of the colonies. He welcomed heartily those
gentlemen from the other colonies who had done them the
honour of attending, and he trusted that free trade would
also be adopted by the other colonies, so that in the future,
with political union, we should also have commercial union.
(Applause.)
Lieutenant-Colonel Sargood responded, and in the
course of his speech referred to the advantages to be
derived from tbe Chambers of Commerce keeping them-
selves in touch with the Ministry of the day. He expressed
a highly favourable opinion of the new Bankruptcy Act,
and said that he would see if he could not induce the Vic-
torian Government to follow the good example thus set.
Hon. G. A. Llovd briefly proposed “The Guests,”
which was responded by Mr. Alger, and the toasts of “ The
Press ” and “ The Chairman ” terminated the proceedings.
The party then returned to Sydney in the Thetis.
THE SAILORS’ FESTIVAL.
Of all the Centenary celebrations, the triumph in hearti-
ness and geniality belongs to the Sailors’ Festival, origi-
nated by Mr. J. S. Shearston, the devoted seaman’s mis-
sionary, and carried out by him and a body of enthusiastic
ladies to a most successful issue in the Exhibition Building
last evening. The building was very handsomely deco-
rated ; the raised platform underneath the organ
was draped with flags and the dais in front car-
peted and decorated with plants and flowers; a bronze
statue of the Queen occupied the front centre, and this was
wreathed in flowers; the gallery railing was lined with
deep scarlet, and from every pillar flags waved, while below
they were draped in effective trophies. Opposite the
dais were the Australian coat of arms and flags,
flanked by the banners of Russia and France.
The floor of the building was occupied by
tables, measuring more than half a mile in length, and
these were spread with all the necessaries for a good meal,
attractively set out. There was much variety in the deco-
rations. Each table was in charge of two ladies, seated
at either end, with a band of ready helpers, who had
striven to display their resources to the best;
at the head of one a beautiful model of a
ship was placed on a stand and surrounded by flags and
flowers; on another, in scarlet flowers, the words “God
bless our sailors; ” a third had a band of ivy leaves with
double gaillardias; at a fourth bands of red and blue
ribbon, crossed at intervals down the centre with ferns and
flowers traced upon them, and stars of flowers filling
the spaces. Mottoes, with the words made in
nuts and chocolate drops, ornamented others ; and
vases of flowers of many colours and shapes
were employed. The catering, which was most satisfactory,
was undertaken by Mr. J. S. Smith, and included sand-
wiches, meat pies, mince pies, cakes of many kinds, and an
abundance of fruit; and, in addition, a supply of tobacco,
cigars, &c., was furnished for each sailor. About 2000 blue
jackets, marines, and merchant sailors were present, in-
cluding those from the French and Russian ships of war.
There were several ladies who conversed freely with the
former in their own language, to the great pleasure
of the sailors, and efforts were made to talk with the Rus-
siaus in French and German, but only a few were able to
answer, though more seemed to understand. A small
bouquet was given to each sailor, and also a New Year’s
card, with, on the reverse side, printed in Centennial blue,
“A Memento of the Sailors’ Festival in Celebration of the
Centenary of Australia, held in the Exhibition Building,
Sydney, N. S. W., January 31, 1888.” Over this the
arms and motto of New South Wales, and below
the texts, “ Thy way is in the sea and thy path in the great
waters ; ” “ Acknowledge Him in all thy ways and He
shall direct thy paths.” The tea began at half-past 6, and
all seemed thoroughly to enjoy the provision made. Most
of the young ladies wore white dresses with ribbons of
Centennial blue, and a badge of blue with a cross of red on
a white ground, four stars, and the lion in gold upon the
cross. The galleries were crowded with spectators andfriends,
and after tea the platform and the space in front of the dais
were soon filled with ladies. At a quarter past 8 o’clock
his Excellency the Governor and Ladv Carrington arrived
with a numerous suite. The distinguished visitors were re-
ceived by the Primate and Mr. Shearston, and soon his
Excellency appeared on the platform, followed by
Lady Carrington, with Admiral Fairfax, the Grand
Duke Alexis, Captain Hammill (Nelson), Cap-
tain Musgrave (Rapid), Captain Clayton (Diamond),
Captain Kane (Calliope), Lieutenant-Commander Pike
(.Harrier), Lieutenant-Commander Pelly (Undine), Com-
mander Hamilton, Fleet Paymaster North and Lieutenant
Bayly (Nelson), Flag-Lieutenant Erskine, Lieutenant
Gedge (Dart), an officer of the Rynda, the Marquis de
Rostaing (Vice-Consul for France), Mr. Paul (Consul for
Russia), the Hon. W. Clarke (Minister for Justice), Arch-
deacon King, Mr. James R. Fairfax, Captain Deane, Rev.
Mr. Oram, and other gentlemen. The band of H.M.S. Nelson
played the National Anthem ; and a British sailor pre-
sented Lady Carrington with a beautiful bouquet of
flowers. Directly afterwards a Russian sailor, on behalf of
his countrymen, presented a superb bouquet, tied with
Russian colours; and as her Ladyship shook hands with
him, he gallantly stooped over and kissed her hand. The
band played the grand Russian anthem, and immediately
afterwards the “ Marseillaise,” amid great applause.
His Excellency then rose and called for three cheers for
the Queen, which were right royally given, and it was some
minutes before the enthusiasm subsided.
Lord Carrington said : Admiral Fairfax, ladies and
gentlemen all, I congratulate you, sir, on this
magnificent meeting. This magnificent meeting seems
to be an entire success. I venture to think there is
one thing wanting, and that is the gentle face of
Mrs. Fairfax on this platform to-night—(applause)
—the wife of our admiral, whose kindly heart
and whose sympathies are always with those
in sorrow and distress. (Cheers and applause.)
In Lady Carrington’s name, I am commissioned to thank
the sailors of the English squadron for the bouquet which
they have kindly presented to her this evening, and the
kindly thought that prompted them to give it is all the
more appreciated when we know that it was presented by
one of "the bravest of England’s sons, George Beare.
(Great applause.) Lady Carrington also returns her most
hearty thanks to the sailors of the Russian ship
for the compliment which they also have so
unexpectedly and so handsomely paid to her. (Cheers and
applause.) We welcome into the waters of Port Jackson
the gallant ship Rynda, we welcome the gallant sailors
who sail under the blue cross ot St. Andrew, and we
specially welcome—though we are not permitted to do so in
an official manner—that distinguished officer who is on board,
a close blood-relation of his Majesty the Czar. Though


not permitted to offer him an official welcome, we offer
him a right royal welcome with all our hearts. (Applause.)
We are also proud and pleased to see the tricolour flying
alongside our ships, and we also offer to them a right hearty
welcome. (Cheers and applause.) It is a great satisfac-
tion to us to see the men-of-war’s men sitting around these
tables to-night, but our meeting would not be complete
without our good Australian seamen, whom we are so
proud to see. (Great applause.) We have heard a great
deal about the improvement the world has seen in
the last hundred years. All nations congratulate
themselves on the improvement in their ships.
Of all the changes which have taken place in the last half-
century. I fancy nothing has altered so much as the Royal
Navy. I believe when the Queen came to the throne that
all the steam vessels in the Royal Navy put together did
not equal in tonnage or in horse-power one single first-
class ship of the present time. The displacement
of the largest vessel in a fleet of 129 ships
of war was 4000 tons. We then had 26,000 seamen; we now
have 61,000 seamen, exclusive of 25,000 of the reserves ;
and out of the fleet of 191 ships the largest of them have
a displacement of 12,000 tons. The trade in the Pacific in
those days was not of sufficient importance to demand
special protection. Now, in addition to a strong fleet of
ships in the China Seas, we have a formidable Aus-
tralian squadron, shortly to be reinforced by more
ships, provided at the cost of the British
Government, and maintained for the protection
of our coasts and commerce by the Australasian
colonies tnemselves. We can fairly congratulate ourselves
on a wonderful improvement in ships’ speed, armament,
and in science; but I venture to think that our highest
reason of congratulation is in the truth of the compliment
which, as Governor of New South Wales, I am able to pay
to the Admiral on the wonderful discipline and good con-
duct of the men-of-war’s men on shore. (Cheers.! It is
not too much to say that these men show a moral example
which truly makes the Royal Navy the credir and the glory
of the whole nation. (Loud cheers.)
Admiral Fairfax expressed his sense of obligation to his
Excellency tor presiding, to Lady Carrington for her
presence, and to Mr. Shearston for his kind invitation, and
remarked that in the speeches of the past week no reference
had been made to the navy; yet the history of Australia was
inseparably connected with the navy; an English naval
officer had discovered our harbour and the bays
of East Australia. A naval officer had founded
and governed the colony, and during the last
100 years the navy of Great Britain had
protected the commerce of this country and the lives of
those who had gone forth to the South Pacific islands. The
navy, he felt, was considered by Australians as the strongest
link in the chain which bound them to the mother
country; he dwelt upon the mutual affection between the
navy and the people, and thanked the arrangers and con-
tributors of the feast and the Royal Naval Artillery for
their band.
The Primate followed, quoting his Excellency’s remark
on a former day that Australia’s “ sentinel is the sea, she
depends on the navy for safety and on the mercantile
marine for wealth;” referred to the feeling of brother-
hood between the sailors of England and the sailors and
people of Australia, and reminded the sailors that the great
strength of the men was in their character, and that
the bravest of the naval warriors of old were
God-fearing men, whose aim was to do their
duty simultaneously to their country and their
God, and that from time immemorial, as an old sailor had
said, our sailors “because they feared God so much, feared
nothing else in the world.”
The musical programme was necessarily much curtailed.
It contained 25 items, but half the number only were given.
These included part songs, “ Lovely Night,” and “ Nancy
Lee,” by gentlemen amateurs ; in the latter the whole
company took up the chorus. There were five local solos
by ladies, of which we are, in spite of gallantry, com-
pelled to say the end did not justify^,the means. The
acoustic properties of the Exhibition Building are so de-
fective that voices really effective elsewhere are powerless
there, and the best intentions are frequently worthless
wtien the singers are unaccustomed to the building. A
violin solo of popular airs by Miss Winstanley was much
approved; also “The Old Brigade,” sung by a seaman;
“ On Deck,” by Mr. Walshe, with “ Let me like a soldier
fall,” as encore; and “One hundred years,” by Mr.
Beaumont Read. Mr. Fletcher also gave great pleasure
by his comet solo, and was encored; and Mr. Charles
Huenerbein, in the rig of a Jack Tar, did excellent service
at the piano.
Captain Clayton returned thanks to Lord and Lady
Carrington for their presence, and to the ladies and gentle-
men who assisted to make the festival a success At the
call of the captain three cheers were given for “ Our Aus-
tralian friends,” and one cheer for the ladies. Cheers were
also given for Mr. Shearston, and the proceedings ter-
minated with the singing of the National Anthem, in which
all joined.
The National Anthem was sung by all present
(about 4000) in excellent time and tune, led by
Mr. Huenerbein on the piano, and the Governor,
Lord Carrington, then called for three cheers
for the Queen, when arose what may be termed a mighty
sound, which so worked on his Excellency that he called
for three more, and three after, and then the proceedings
terminated.
The committee are indebted to Messrs. Hudson Brothers
for the tables; to Turberville Smith and Norton for the
carpets and furniture; and to Alexander Moore and Co.
for giving the chairs at half price. The whole festival was
indeed a magnificent success, and will be long remembered
by all present.
ENGINEERING ASSOCIATION’S CEN-
TENARY EXCURSIONS.
Yesterday saw the successful completion of the last of
the series of excursions organised and carried out by the
Engineering Association of New South Wales, Lithgow
Valley and its factories being the objects of the final excur-
sion. The party, numbering about 90 gentlemen, among
whom were the Hon. John Sutherland, M.L.A., and
several Continental visitors, also some of the officers
belonging to the Russian warship Rynda, left Red-
fern railway station at 8 o’clock a.m. by special train
and arrived at Lskbank at about 1 o’clock. The carriages
were drawn up at the Ironworks siding, where the visitors
were received by Mr. Sandford, and afterwards conducted
over the iron-rolling mills, where the usual opera-
tions were going on. Thereafter they proceeded
to the Lithgow Valley Company’s extensive fireclay
and pottery works, where, under the guidance of Mr. Gale,
they had every opportunity of seeing the varied processes
of manufacturing that are now being carried on so success-
fully. A visit was also made to the tweed factory, where
the different kinds of machinery employed in converting
the raw wool into the textile material were inspected. Dur
ing the afternoon the party was entertained at a banquet at
Corbett’s Imperial Hotel, when a list of toasts was
honoured and a number of complimentary speeches
given. Astonishment was expressed at the wonderful
mineral resources of the district, and a great future
for Lithgow was predicted. The members of the associa-
tion and their friends left on the return journey at 6 p.m.,
and reached Sydney shortly after 11 o’clock last night.
Throughout the day the weather was all that could be
desired, and the guests expressed themselves highly satis-
fied and pleased with the enjoyable outing they had been
permitted to participate in, as the last excursion was voted
the most delightful of the series.


ILLUMINATION OF THE HARBOUR.
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 2.
BRILLIANT DISPLAY.
Last night, in connection with the Centennial cele-
brations, a grand pyrotechnic display and illumina-
tion of the harbour took place. The weather was
charming—a fine, cool, clear night, with a soft
breeze blowing—all that the entrepeneur could desire
to give effect to his display. The harbour was alive
with steamers and boats. Thousands of people were assem-
bled in the vicinity of Fort Macquarie, Dawes Point,
Kirribilli Point and the Tarpeian Way. The spectacle
itself was of surpassing magnificence. The whole
of the vessels forming the Australian Squadron
now in Farm Cove, and the Russian corvette Rynda, were
outlined with prismatic fires, which had a picturesque effect.
Yardarms, booms, and bowsprits were manned by sailors
carrying coloured fires. The first illuminations of the ships
took place about 8.40 p.m., when, by a precon-
certed signal given by Captain Hammill, of the
Nelson, the whole of the vessels joined in a
simultaneous display of light. At the same time Fort
Denison and the grounds surrounding the residence of
Admiral Fairfax at Kirribilli Point and a portion of the
grounds of Government House were turned as if by a magic
wand into a brilliant mass of fire. Particulars of the display
are given below. The whole of the arrangements, which were
admirably carried out, were executed under the personal
supervision of Mr. James Pain, assisted by Mr. Denton.
THE DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.
The display commenced by a discharge of 100 gun-cotton
rockets, otherwise known as aerial guns, fired from Fort
Denison. Hardly had the last echoes of the reports died
away from amongst the surrounding hills before the whole
of the men-of-war in the harbour, together with the
Russian man-of-war, were outlined by Pain’s prismatic fires.
The first illumination took place at 8.40 by a preconcerted
signal given by the Nelson. Fort Denison was brilliantly
outlined, and the grounds surrounding the Admiral’s
house, together with portion of the grounds surrounding
Farm Cove, were turned into daylight. A body of 20 men
was placed on Garden Island with three tons of loose
coloured tire. At the different intervals when these were
lighted, the whole of Sydney Harbour for miles around was
perfectly visible. A flight of shells each of 24in. in
circumference formed magnificent peacocks’ plumes. Other
shells displayed the national colours of the red, white, and
blue. Flights of mammoth bombs, each 48in. in circum-
ference, formed jewelled clouds. There were flights of
combination shelis. Each shell on attaining its extreme
altitude discharged 3000 tinted stars of every colour known
to the artist. At the same time they discharged seven other
shells, each one of which showered down clouds of silvery
rain amidst thousands of falling stars. Fiery rockets
ascended 40001 t., and then each discharged 14 other rockets
in every direction, upwards, downwards, and sideways.
Each rocket left three stars floating in the air, the floating
being brought about by means of small parachutes. Of
floating asteroids there were 400. These floated by means
of heated air. Enormous flights of aerial devils, or a combi-
nation of hissing serpents, were discharged in huge bunches,
weighing from 50 to 75 lb. each. Each, on obtaining
an extreme altitude, exploded, throwing out a
multitude of fiery serpents. At a quarter to
9 o’clock the first of a flight of rockets was dis-
charged from Kirribilli Point. This consisted of 1000
rockets, fired instantaneously by means of the lightning
fuse. The second flight of rockets was fired from Fort
Denison, and consisted of 1500, forming a great aerial
sheaf. The third and final flight was fired from each point
so as to commingle the different tints of colours and effects.
These consisted of 2500. In the meanwhile from every
point and from every ship in the harbour hundreds of
rockets were continually fired, and the whole of the har-
bour was brilliantly illuminated. There were shoals of
fiery flying fish, which were most wonderful. There were
mammoth spreaders which were wonderfully pretty. Flights
of fiery wragglers were followed by nests of hissing ser-
pents. Pleiades, or three sister stars, of red, white, and
blue, floated until lost to sight in the distance; and electric
shells were most dazzling. Altogether 12,000 rockets were
discharged, 2300 large shells were despatched, three tons
of coloured fire was burned, and two tons of coloured
lights.
THE SCENE FROM FORT MACQUARIE.
Somehow or other, whenever we celebrate any great
national event in Sydney, we always fall back on the har-
bour as a means of display, and take special pride in setting
off her wondrous beauties by artificial illuminations. We
may wander away, as we occasionally do, into other paths,
and hold celebrations of various kinds, but eventually we
always come back to our old love, Port Jackson, where tne
heart of the Sydney people really is, finding that, after
all, our Jubilee or Centennial rejoicings are not complete
unless the harbour is included in them. There are many
points of view on the harbour from which such an
illumination as was given last night may be advantageously
seen, but probably the best point is Fort Macquarie, which
from its peculiar position, jutting as it does right into the
centre of the harbour, enables spectators stationed
there to command an unequalled all-round view of
whatever is going on. Hence, as the public are
fully aware of this fact, it came about that Fort Mac-
quarie was very largely availed of by sight-seers, and even
before dusk set in crowds of people found their way
thither, anxious no doubt to obtain a good place. As the
light in the west gradually faded away, and the lights on
the opposite shore and on the shipping in the harbour
began to show forth, so the crowd gradually increased,
until by 8 o’clock almost every inch of the level space of
ground in front of the Fort was occupied. The crowd was
a good-natured one, partaking more of the character
of a private than of a public gathering, and the
people seated themselves quietly on the smooth
grass, awaiting with exemplary patience the com-
mencement of operations. The wind was fresh and
cool from the N.E., and the niarht was dark and slightly
overcast, so that all the conditions for the display were ex-
tremely favourable. The first warning note of the approach-
ing illumination was given by the ambitious crew of a small
boat near the Fort, who let off several very ineffectual
squibs, to the intense delight of the crowd, many of whom
imagined the display to be of an official character. The
assemblage now began to stir itself into agitation, and those
in front were forcibly and earnestly adjured to sit down, so
that those in the rear might have a chance to see what was
going on. By this time the crowd extended right
away round to the Botanical Gardens, and along
the Tarpeian Way, every place from which a
sight of the harbour could be obtained being
occupied. A band stationed somewhere in the rear in Fort
Macquarie could be faintly heard against the strong N.E.
breeze, playing stirring airs, and so the time wore on, until
at last, after much patient waiting, the crowd were re-
warded by the commencement of the illuminations. The
ball was opened at Fort Denison, which hitherto had been
only distinguishable by the red light which marks the spot,
but now a flight of aerial shells, sending forth as


they burst wondrously variegated showers of coloured stars,
illuminated the whole of the centre of the harbour. Kir-
ribilli Point opposite followed suit, and then Fort Mac-
quarie itself commenced the discharge of these shells, until
at last the spectators on the point hardly knew which way
to look in order to obtain the best vision of the display.
One peculiarity of Fort Macquarie as a point of
view was that it was impossible to see the
displays from each of the three points—Kirribilli,
Fort Denison, and Fort Macquarie at once. Thus a
peculiar perplexity of enjoyment arose, as no sooner was
attention attracted by some splendid discharge across the
harbour, than another explosion behind caused everyone
to turn around in order to see the shower of rockets and
stars sent up behind them. For some time the splendid
effects produced were watched in a state of suppressed
rapture, shown only by the occasional “ ahs ” and “ ohs ”
which broke from the lips of the more enthusiastic
amongst the otherwise silent crowd. The rockets and
stars, and other wonderful aerial fireworks ceased for a
moment, and then far away across the dark harbour
a sudden light shot up, which developed into a brilliant
row of white and coloured lights, illuminating the rugged
outlines of Fort Denison, and casting them into relief against
the dark background. Fort Macquarie, and the Inner
Domain, and then Kirribilli were lit up in the same way,
the lights constantly changing from white to red or green.
The splendid effect produced by these three points of bril-
liancy, lighting up the dark space of the harbour waters
between, was added to by the sudden illumination of the
numerous fleet of men-of-war lying in I arm Cove, the
Eresence of which, as they lay hidden in the darkness, had
itherto been almost unnoticed. Each mast and yard was
almost simultaneously outlined by means of white
lights at the yard arms, afterwards changing
to red, and then a number of rockets were sent
up by the men-of-war, which, however, made but a poor
show after Mr. Pain’s triumphs of the pyrotechnical art.
The men-of-war having faded away into darkness, more
rockets, aerial guns, &c., of every variety of colour and
effect, were sent up from each of the three points of main
display. It was but a poor night for the stars of heaven,
which, although shining much the same as usual, were
quite eclipsed by the many-coloured stars shed forth from
the bursting rockets. Perhaps the most beautiful effect of
all during the display was that produced by the illumi-
nated smoke from the rockets and stars, which drifted
away before the breeze across the dark sky, assuming as it
passed overhead infinitely quaint and fantastic shapes. Ihe
men-of-war were once more illuminated, and the coloured
lights again exhibited from the shore, a different effect
being produced each time by a skilful variation of the
colours; and then some magnificent showers of rockets
of all kinds foreshadowed the termination of the display,
which by this time had lasted nearly an hour. The spec-
tators were almost, if it be allowable to say so, satiated with
the wonderful beauties of the scene, and the eye refused to
take in, or the brain to appreciate, any more of the startling
combinations of form and colour which they had been wit-
nessing for the last hour. It was therefore hardly with a
feeling of regret that they heard the last detonations of the
aerial guns which announced the termination of the dis-
play and took their hasty departure from the spot where
during the last hour they had stood almost entranced wit-
nessing a scene which for picturesque effect has been but
seldom equalled.
KIRRIBILLI POINT.
No better position was, perhaps, obtained for viewing the
illuminations than that which was afforded at Kirribilli
Point, and it is not surprising, therefore, that some hun-
dreds of persons crossed the harbour and made their way
as near as possible to this firing point. Between
half-past 7 and half-past 8 o’clock the North
Shore Ferry steamers did an exceedingly lively
business. On each trip between the time stated and the
firing of the centenary salute the steamers were well filled
by spectators eager to get to Milson’s Point and other
landing places in the vicinity of the firing. Those who
were on board the steamer which left the jetty just as the
opening salute was fired were favoured with a magnificent
view of the illuminations on Kirribilli Point. From the
time the steamer started until Milson’s Point
was reached, Kirribilli and Fort Denison appeared
to be one blaze of light. The whole point
with its coloured fires belching forth immense columns of
smoke, assumed the appearance of a huge burning mountain
or volcano, the grandeur of which must have filled the
spectators with a thrill of delight. The expressions of
admiration which this picture called forth from young
and old alike may be better imagined than told.
The wonderment and surprise shown in the up-
turned features of the hundreds of juveniles who
were out with their parents or other guardians,
to witness the display, were well worth noting, whilst the
praise which was freely bestowed by the older folk and
those who were capable of judging the sight upon its
merits showed clearly that there was but one opinion with
regard to the success of the entertainment. People as-
sembled in hundreds on Milson’s Point, from which vantage-
ground a good survey of a large portion of the harbour,
including Kirribilli Point, Fort Macquarie, Fort Denison,
and the large fleet of vessels in Farm Cove, was obtained.
At a quarter to 9 o’clock the first of a flight of 1000
rockets was discharged from Kirribilli Point, the firing
being done instantaneously by means of the lightning fuse;
the scene had an equally electrifying effect upon the
people along the North Shore. Cheers arose from some
groups of spectators, and expressions of admiration were
heard on every side. The brilliancy of the scene was in-
creased by the hundreds of rockets which took
their flight from Fort Macquarie, to almost meet
some hundreds of others which were discharged
simultaneously from Fort Denison, and which,
bursting high up in the heavens, descended in showers of
golden and silvern rain intermixed with purple, red, and
green. A short interval elapsed and Kirribilli again pre-
sented a grand spectacle, being lighted with immense
coloured fires, the predominating colours being white, red,
and green, the reflection showing up very clearly
Admiralty House and grounds, and the hun-
dreds of spectators who lined the various points
on the North Shore. The fleet in Farm Cove
presented a very pretty sight as seen from N orth Shore,
Each of the vessels was every now and again illuminated
by numerous coloured lights. The reflection upon the
water brought out very distinctly numerous small steamers,
launches, and little boats, all of which were crowded with
sightseers. A large number of aerial guns, firing serpents,
and aerial devils, which for brilliancy and colour could not
be surpassed, were discharged from Kirribilli, and created
much excitement amongst the spectators, as did also the
grand display of rockets fired as a termination to the pro-
ceedings.
FROM MRS. MACQUARIE’S CHAIR.
From early in the evening people began to assemble in
the Domain, coming in at all the entrances; and as the
hour approached at which the illuminations were an-
nounced to begin, the moving crowd increased in volume,
the main centre of attraction being Mrs. Macquarie’s
Chair and the slope facing Farm Cove. By 8 o’clock there
was an immense assemblage of well-dressed, orderly people
on the point, and their numbers continued to be largely
added to every moment, until there was scarcely more
than standing room. - All vehicular traffic was
stopped in the Domain, a provision that
met with general approval, as the crowd was so large
and the proportion of children so great that had vehicles
been allowed to come in there would have been
great danger of an accident. Sub-inspector Hvem,
with a body of police, was on duty in the
Domain, but the behaviour of the crowd was such
that there was very little for him to do. By half-past 8,
when the steamers, which had been coming from all parts
of the harbour, had taken up their separate positions, the
signal was given to begin the display, and amid exclama-
tions of delight and pleasure, the salute of 100 aerial guns
thundered and blazoned forth. This was the prelude to a
display that was in every way successful and beautiful, and


gave unqualified satisfaction. Seen from Mrs. Macquarie’s
Chair, Government House, illuminated by means of
electricity, presented an exquisitely soft and beauti-
ful picture, the pale yet penetrating beams of the
illuminating agent showing the stone work very
distinctly, while the trees and shrubs in front stood out in
bold relief. At Fort Macquarie, Kirribilli Point, and Fort
Denison, and in Government House grounds, rows of
coloured lights were shown in quick succession,
rockets and other pyrotechnic devices were let off,
while the men-of-war ably seconded the efforts
made on shore, their black hulls standing out
very markedly in the general blaze. Suddenly a signal
from her Majesty’s ship Nelson was given, and imme-
diately afterwards all the ships in Farm Cove, together
with the French corvette Duchaffaut and the Russian
corvette Rynda, hurst into light, a sailor standing at the
end of each yardarm and on the jibhooms holding a torch,
the effect being most brilliant, especially when the lights
changed from white to red and then to green. Fort Deni-
son and the other points were in the meanwhile giving out
fresh surprises which evoked criticism of the most favour-
able kind, and though the display on the whole was not so
varied as on the occasion of the Queen’s jubilee yet many of
the rockets and other mysteries of the pyrotechnic art shown
were even more beautiful than those exhibited then. The
only drawback was that the high wind which was blowing
during the evening carried the smoke and dust from Fort
Denison and some of the ships over towards Mrs. Mac-
quarie’s Chair, causing a little discomfort, and at times
obscuring the view. The ships were illuminated three
times with the coloured lights, and throughout they kept
up an unceasing fusilade of rockets, the Duchaffaut and
the Rynda being quite as active in this respect as the ships
of the Royal Navy. About half-past 9 a tremendous ex-
plosion from Fort Denison was followed by a sight
which quite enchanted the spectators, who were equally
delighted by a somewhat similar show from Kirribilli Point
immediately afterwards. The strains of “ God Save the
Queen ” from the band of the flagship Nelson followed,
and the spectators taking that as an indication that the
proceedings had terminated began to leave the Domain.
For a short time afterwards, however, rockets continued to
ascend from Fort Denison, Kirribilli Point, and Fort Mac-
quarie, and the various steamers kept up a deafening noise
with their whistles and “ sirens.” So far as could be ascer-
tained there was no accident or untoward circumstance of
any kind in the Domain, and the people who assembled
there in such strength appeared to be generally well
pleased with the illuminations. The reserve was not
cleared of the people until a late hour.
THE SCENE FROM FORT DENISON.
Fort Denison played a prominent part in the harbour
illuminations last night as the station which led off with
the opening signal and formed one of the points in the dis-
play. From this point, as from a head centre, the whole of
the splendid illumination could be observed in the fulness
of its effect. The right way to see these harbour-displays
is to go afloat, in some craft or other. Everyone knows how
many kinds of floating arrangements a Sydney aquatic gala
will bring out. They seem to become more various and
fantastic every year. So we go afloat. A fine open sailing
boat, for instance, is to take out a party. The mast is un-
shipped and all gear removed, and with four long sweeps at
work we skim merrily over the water. Nor is the enter-
tainment to be a feast for the eye only, for some truly
aesthetic member of the party has conveyed on board the
materials for a delightful fruit soiree. Laughing and
singing, we row to Fort Denison, threading our way through
the crowd of aforesaid very miscellaneous craft of the
abovementioned Sydney Harbour. We are just in
time, as it happens, for we have scarcely got out our anchor
than the fire-king on the fort opens his window punctually
at 8.30, and bombards the sky with a great attack of aerial
guns, whose sharp reports cut the air for miles around.
The wind carries the fiery tail of the rockets into a twist
that lengthens out to a curve away northward, and then
comes the quick explosive “ bang.” The fort was then lit
up with limelights on the tower and battlements, and as the
lights flamed out the fort looked as if it were the burning
witness of a fiery fight. Then Fort Macquarie blazed out
with red flaming lights, and Admiralty House at Kirribilli
took up the signal with a blaze of prismatic fires that turned
the darkness into day. Ihe splendid display was now fairly
begun, and for over an hour it maintained its lively
changes. Kirribilli was a charming picture, with the
coloured fires glowing on the clouds of smoke; with the
dark lacework of the trees standing out among the vapour,
and the solid dark lines of the staircases and balconies
showing here and there. Rockets hissed and curved in
every direction, breaking into those lovely tints which show
their reflection in the water in indescribable beauty. Now
the men-of-war lit up their yards with gleaming fires that
changed their colours from white to red and green, and
rockets went up from the decks. Great flights of rockets
were sent up now and then from the Fort and Kirri-
billi Point, bursting in the air into a thousand
sparks of all colours in a bath of golden dust,
falling in a spattering rain of fire on the black
water, where it drifted along in the wind-like fiery scud.
When the rain of golden drops fell near the boats, shouts
of laughter rang out among the murmurs of admiration,
and the gleam of the fires lit up for a moment the thousand
of faces and the masts and hulls and oars. Volcanoes
opened out on Fort Denison and Kirribilli, and shot their
fires in fountains of glittering colour; or swarms of
wriggling fiery serpents fought and crackled in mid-air; or
great white lights of piercing gleams lit up every form on
land and water. So round and round it went, from Fort
Denison to Admiralty House, to the warships in Farm
Cove, to the parapet of Fort Macquarie. All
round this area hundreds of lights glittered on
skiff and steamer. The space was spread over with a pale
bluish haze, which thickened into smoky clouds here and
there, with a lurid glare upon them; and the booming,
banging, and cracking of fireworks filled the air with
sound. From point to point the fire play ran, never flag-
ging, always pretty, ever changing in its beauty of form
and colour. Those who remember the harbour pyrotechnics
of the Jubilee season think this night’s display much better
arranged in this, that it was continuous in its changes, and
never left us time to lose interest in weary waiting. No;
all went on merrily, without a pause. And so it went on,
never giving us a chance to tire, but ever
charming the eye with fresh beauties, till
the scene had reached its full impression on the sight and
memory of everyone. At about half-past 9 a glorious
fountain of coloured sparks rose from Fort Denison and
Admiralty House, and some sharp-sounding guns in the
air proclaimed that the display was over. Then came a
boisterous trumpeting and whistling of the steamboats all
round in the darkness, and the voices of the boatmen, and
the splash of the oars, and the hiss of the steam, and the
rumble of the screw blended in a roar of happy-toned
bustle as we all turned for home. A tew more fires
and rockets were lit here and there, but they
were merely remnants, and the brilliant scene
was now a thing of the past. And now, Nature
triumphed over human art; and in her sweet, cool light,
the moon rose over the wooded slopes of the northern shore.
But in that quiet, peaceful gleam of moonlight there was
the happy sentiment of a fitting sequence to the things that
had j ust been done, and a bright, steadfast hopefulness for
what has yet to be done. May it be a happy omen for our
second century !
THE AUSTRALIAN SQUADRON.
The ships comprising H. M. squadron, viz., the Nelson,
Calliope, Rapid, Diamond, Undine, Harrier, Dart, now at
anchor in Farm Cove, all took a very prominent part in last
night’s harbour illuminations. At stated intervals the
yards were manned and different coloured lights
were burned at the yard arms. At the same
time the decks were also lighted up with Pain’s
prismatic colours, and a most brilliant spectacle
was the result. As the various changes in the colour took
place the effect was most dazzling, and to those persons who
were thoughtful enough to view the illuminations from


Fort Macquarie, the sight was one that will long be remem-
bered. To see such fine ships brought out in bold
relief against a dark sky, when almost every
rope was discernible, was a picture in itself. From
the very commencement of the proceedings, and in
fact all through them, the fleet came in for quite its full
share of admiration, for at such times as the yards were
not manned, some of the very best rockets seen during the
whole display were fired from the decks of the squadron.
The Russian corvette Rynda was equally conspicuous to
those spectators stationed on Mrs. Macquarie’s Point, and
at times she was so brilliantly lit up that her exceedingly
perfect model was seen to perfection.
THE VIEW FROM THE DECK OF THE S.S.
NEWCASTLE.
Those who were fortunate enough to secure positions on
the deck of the steamer Newcastle enjoyed a magnificent
view of the harbour illuminations. This fine vessel, which
was well filled with ladies and gentlemen, left the Lime-
street Wharf at 7.30 p.m. in charge of Captain Adams,
and took up a commanding position in the harbour on the
southern side of Fort Denison. From this point the whole
of the illuminations were visible. Viewed from the pro-
menade deck of the Newcastle, the pyrotechnic display
looked very brilliant—indeed, the spectacle was, at times,
wondrously beautiful. Coloured fires of almost every con-
ceivable hue illuminated the heaving waters and lit up the
foreshores of the noble harbour of Port Jackson, revealing
the many beauties of its charming surroundings and the
foliage of the hills which on its northern side slope down
to the edge of the majestic haven. The shipsof war in Farm
Cove presented a splendid sight, especially when the chang-
ing lights were seen at the yard-arms of the stately vessels.
Perhaps the prettiest scene of all was the illumination of
Fort Denison with coloured lights. This was followed by
flights of rockets, fiery serpents, and Roman candles, the
effect of the whole being exceedingly fine. The open spaces
near the harbour were seen to be thronged with people, who
appeared to be considerably astonished at the beauty of
some of the fireworks ; and as the golden and sapphire
streams shot into the air, and then fell into the water with
a graceful undulatory motion, the masses gave vent to their
surprise by loud exclamations of approval. The people
seemed to be everywhere, and when the many-hued fires
illumined the heavens and shed a bright glow on the spires
and towers of the “city by the sea ” the upturned faces on
land and water could be counted by thousands. After the
last grand flight of fiery serpents, what might perhaps be
termed the “Centennial chorus” was rendered bv the
various steamers in the vicinity of Fort Denison as a finale
to the whole display. The Newcastle then got under way,
and steamed up the harbour at a slow rate of speed,
the wharf being reached at about a quarter-past 10
o’clock.
A BIRD’S-EVE VIEW.
Ambitious people, who generally prefer to have an elevated
view of any remarkable spectacle, very often forget the fact
that to attain the desired advantage requires a considerable
amount of physical labour, and in some instances nerve.
The sensation of shooting into space by means of a balloon is
described by those who have tried it as anything but an
unpleasant one. To the amateur aeronaut the earth appears
to be sinking under him, and he probably only realises that
the balloon is really the moving object when he reaches a
rarefied atmosphere, and thinks it time to return to terra
firma. No hallucination of this kind, however, exists when
one has to mount to the top of the Post Office tower in
search of novelty. No question can possibly arise as to
which is the moving body, and when once the desired
goal is reached the complaint is not of a thm
atmosphere, but a want of breath. The Post Office
tower is 240 ft. from the ground, and to get to
the summit, from which such a magnificent view
is obtained in the daytime of Sydney and miles of surround-
ing country, the venturesome sightseer has first to negotiate
a long flight of steps which conducts him to the top of the
building proper, and thence he has to pass on by a spiral
staircase which seems interminable. When the joumey s
completed, however, the panoramic picture which the
visitor to the tower obtains is more than adequate com-
pensation for the exertion. Last night, by the courtesy of
the Post Office officials we were enabled to secure from the
tower a bird’s-eye view of the pyrotechnic displays and
illuminations in the harbour, and the scene during
the hour between 8.30 and 9.30 from that altitude was cer-
tainly a brilliant one, although the comfort of the specta-
tor thus elevated above the glare and bustle of the city was
somewhat interfered with by a strong north-east wind,
which rushed through the open spaces of the clock
tower with the usual want of respect for the dignity
of those who had to face it. “ Rude Boreas, ” in-
deed, appeared decidedly to resent the presence
of one or two mortals in his dominions, and he therefore
made the hour as boisterous as possible. Previous to the
time fixed for the commencement of the fireworks, the
watchers in the tower had time to admire the gratifying
scene beneath them, which was simply furnished by the
multitudinous gaslights within the reach of vision. The
Post Office tower was not illuminated, and thus the effect to
a spectator located in that advantageous position was most
striking. At half-past 8 o’clock a shower of rockets
announced that the evening’s entertainment had commenced,
and the almost simultaneous illumination of the men-of-war
and the Admiral’s residence at Kirribilli gave a most
dazzling and gorgeous effect. Then the rockets and bombs,
as they burst into a combination of brilliant silver, rose,
red, green, and blue, appeared to a spectator whose point of
observation was almost level with the apex of flight to be a
mass of the choicest flowers, and all too evanescent. The
true beauty of the entire display could be seen to the greatest
advantage, and one of the best effects produced was
the dropping of the fiery showers upon the waters of the
harbour. At times a golden fall would be seen slowly
descending into the gloomy shadows thrown by the fore-
shore, but upon suddenly coming into contact with the
water the idea was vividly conveyed of a fire running
through an expanse of dry grass. This illusion, of course,
was only momentary, and then a few seconds of almost
absolute darkness would supervene, presently to be broken
by a blaze of prismatic lights and the explosion of rain-
bow-coloured rockets in mid-air. At times, especially
when a silver shower threw a strong light over the har-
bour, the masts of the various vessels stood out in bold re-
lief, and the gear looked like delicate tracery; while in the
background, represented by St. Leonards, Neutral Bay, and
Mossman’s Bay, the houses and trees were strongly
outlined. For an hour, almost without intermission, the
harbour seemed to be brilliantly illuminated, and the even-
ing’s entertainment, as viewed from the Post Office tower,
was brought to a fitting terminatoin by the in-
stantaneous discharge of numerous rockets and bombs
and the exhibition of various coloured fires.
Then the steamers afloat, either by way of rejoicing or as
an indication of a desire for an encore, set up such a de-
moniac screech with their whistles that the spectators, who
for an hour had raised themselves above all things
mundane, were forcibly reminded that they had to make
the return journey to the busy streets.
THE SCENE FROM DAWES POINT.
Certainly not fewer than from six to eight thousand of
men, women, and children witnessed the display from the
convenient heights of Dawes Point and its adjacent ridges,
escarpments, and window-frontages. The whole of the
causeway from Circular Quay to the extreme limit of the
point was lined by an unbroken procession of cabs, omni-
buses, and private vehicles, the occupants of which
strolled onwards to eventually form part of an immense
mass of struggling, panting, over-heated, but withal good-
humoured humanity which had collected at the sites from
which the more advantageous views of the harbour were to
be obtained. The scene was a memorable one—historical
alike in point of incident and antecedent the
locality, above all other Sydney localities, being
one upon which the earliest gatherings of New South
Wales, and, in fact, of Australasian pleasure-seekers and
commemmoration-demonstrators, first set foot. From the


ridge-crest of the all-too-neglected pleasure-ground, if
pleasure-ground it may be legitimately designated, down
to the water’s edge, an unbroken phalanx of human
beings, perspiring, struggling, elbowing, ejaculating,
and in other forms giving vent to combined expressions with
respect to their appreciations of pleasure or of delight, filled
the vacant spaces on every side. The pyrotechnical dis-
plays, as seen from the spot, were admirable, although a
complete view of the harbour illuminations was not ob-
tainable.
THE TRAFFIC IN THE HARBOUR.
As was anticipated, given a fine night, a great number
of steamers, from the stately s.s. Newcastle, of the New-
castle S. S. Company, to the little kerosene launch Lur-
line, were afloat loaded with spectators to get a more
open view of the pyrotechnic display last evening than
that to be had by those on shore. In consequence
of the large number of craft afloat, the Marine Board
had cautioned masters of steamers and others in charge of
boats to exercise great care in navigating their vessels
during the display. The speed was not to exceed six knots, and
all orders received from the officers of the Marine Board and
the Water Police officials were to be obeyed under a penalty.
It is gratifying to be able to relate that notwithstanding the
very large number of vessels and steamers afloat last evening
not a single accident occurred. The various vessels as
they arrived upon the ground were allotted a portion of the
harbour, wherein they could swing, and at the same time
give every one on board an excellent view of the pro-
ceedings. Several members of the Water Police were
afloat in their boats, besides Captain Maides and other
officers from the Marine Board Office, all of whom were
kept very busy in their very arduous duty of regulating the
movements of so many vessels, and at the same time
keeping the fairway clear for any oversea steamers
entering or leaving the harbour. Nearly all the steamers
were well patronised, and in some instances stand-
ing room only was available, while on others the crush was
not so great. The steamers returned to their respective
wharfs, and up to a late hour no accident had been
reported.
TRAM AND TRAIN TRAFFIC.
The number of persons who patronised the tram service
last night was unusually large, being the greatest number
that has been registered during any of the Centennial holi-
days. The demands made for accommodation taxed the
resources of the department to their utmost, and even then
the supply was not equal to the calls made by the travelling
public. The tramway officials, in anticipation of a heavy
influx of suburban visitors to view the illuminations,
carefully husbanded the resources at their command in
order to expedite and facilitate as much as possible the work
of transit; 12 special trams were run to meet the
additional requirements on the Waterloo, Leich-
hardt, Newtown, and Waverley lines, and the ser-
vice was kept in active operation until midnight.
The various tram stopping-places, particularly at Bent,
Hunter, and King streets, were literally thronged with
people even long before the illuminations ceased, and the
work of those in charge of the different trams was
rendered extremely difficult, and at times dangerous.
The crowds at each of the stopping-places had to be
kept in position by members of the police force, other-
wise they would have entirely blocked the line. As it
was, a great deal of scrambling and crushing to
obtain a footing on the cars took place, and it is indeed
surprising that no accidents were reported as having
occurred. With regard to the number of sightseers who
came by train to town, it was not very large. One special
train was laid on from Parramatta, and brought in
a good complement of passengers. The ordinary time-
table was suspended after 9 o’clock, in order to make pro-
vision for any additional increase in the rush of returning
excursionists. The arrangements proved most complete,
and all the passengers wcro conveyed to their destination in
good time, without any hitch or mishap.
EXCURSION TO THE ZIGZAG.
By invitation of the Government of New South Wales, a
number of ladies and gentlemen, mostly intercolonial
visitors, made a pleasant excursion to the Zigzag yesterday.
The party, in all about 80, departed from Sydney by
special train at 7.35 a.m., took breakfast in the the train at
about 9 o’clock, and arrived at the Zigzag at noon.
Thence they returned to Blackheath, where they
were welcomed by the residents, who made it
a holiday, and appeared at the station in large numbers.*
The children of the Public school and the local drum and
fife band played the “ National Anthem,” and Mr. James
Daly, on behalf of the people, welcomed the visitors. Mr.
Inglis, as representative of the Government and the party,
returned thanks, and requested that the school children
should receive a half holiday. Some 20 buggies, each
with a pair of horses, were in readiness at the railway
station to take the part}' to Govett’s Leap Falls. Sur-
mounting the railway gates was a triumphal arch, with
the words, ‘‘Welcome to Blackheath,” in bright colours.
The houses in the neighbourhood paid a compliment by
the flying of flags, gaily-coloured ribbons and streamers,
and along the road to the Falls were other triumphal
arches, with the words, “ Welcome to Govett’s Leap Fails.”
At the termination of the road, some two miles of the station,
was a marquee admirably situated amongst the bushes, and
looking down into the bold, precipitous, and awe-inspiring
gorge known as Govett’s Leap. The visitors were charmed
with the grandeur of the scene. The marquee, which was
erected under the direction of Mr. Commissioner Goodchap,
of the New South Wales Railways, was also amongst the
many objects of admiration. It was spacious—being 60 x
30ft.—was comfortably arranged, and was pleasing to the
eye. Lots of flags were flying about it, the various
entrances were marked by a display of ferns, the interior
was decorated with flags, and embellished with bangalow
palms and shrubs. A banner with two allegorical figures
of ladies representing N. S Wales and Victoria joining
hands, used at the famous Albury banquet, had a con-
spicuous place immediately behind the chairman. The
British and Australian coats of arms and various mottoes
were also displayed. The tables, which were wide enough
to give plenty of room, were beautifully laid out, and the
catering was well done by Mr. Baumann. The decorations
alluded to were planned by Mr. G. Fvans, stores superin-
tendent N. S. Wales Railways. There were upwards of 80
ladies and gentlemen at the luncheon, which was a great
success. The band of the Permanent Artillery added to
the enjoyment by playing selections of music during the
banquet.
At the luncheon the Hon. John Sutherland presided, and
the Hon. James Inglis, Messrs. D. O’Connor, and S. Bur-
dekin, Ms.L.A., occupied the vice-chairs. To the right of
the chair were Sir Charles Mitchell, K.C.M.G.; the Hons.
Lee Stere (Speaker of Assembly, Western Australia), G.
Leake, Venn, and Barker, Western Australia; and Mr. W.
Curnow, editor Sydney Morning Herald ; and to the left
were the Hons. j. H. Young (Speaker New South Wales
Assembly) and George Thorne (Queensland), Messrs. J.
Hurley, M.L.A. for the district, and Colonel French
(Queensland). There were also present Hons. J.
C. Heusler, M.L.C., Queensland; W. A. E. West-
Erskine, M.L.C. ; A. H. Wadharn, M.L.C. ;
Captain Hatton Richards, A.D.C. to Governor of South
Australia ; Messrs. J. H. Howe, M.L.A., and Councillors
J. C. Wilcox, Roberts, Stevens, and Fox, South Australia;
Messrs. L. L. Smith, Forrest, and A. S. Bailes, Ms.L.A.,
Victoria; Councillors G. Godfrey, Geddes, and Buxton,
and Messrs. T. J. Davey and Arthur Graham, Melbourne;
Hopwood, Mayor of Brisbane; D. O’Donovan, F.R.S.L.,
Brisbane; J. G. Ward, M.H.R., New Zealand; other
visitors, and some of the local residents, including Mr.
James Daly.
The Chairman proposed the toasts of “The Queen”
and of “ The Prince and Princess of Wales ” and of “ The
Royal Family,” and they were drunk with musical
honours.
Mr. Inglis proposed “Our Guests.” He said the
great festivities to celebrate our very important national


epoch were now drawing to a close. He would not like to
be thought a Marplot, but yet one very obvious reflection
forced itself upon him, and that was as to what was to be
the result of all the enthusiasm employed—was it to become
flat, stale, and unprofitable, or was it to be a new departure
of kindly feeling and of more federal spirit ? (Applause.)
Was it to create a more widely extended brotherly sym-
pathy or truer Australian sentiment than existed in this
glorious land during the last century of her history ? He
hoped all whom they had been delighted to see here, and
whom they had tried to welcome in a brotherly spirit, all,
both men and women, would go back to their respective
spheres of labour carrying with them not only pleasant recol-
lections of past pleasures, but a noble emulation of duties
to come, and a desire to foster the spirit that had prompted
their meetings, so that we might become united in
brotherly sympathy, one of the grandest nations of
modern times. (Applause.) On behalf of the Government of
New South Wales, he thanked them heartily for their
attendance that day, and he hoped they had seen some of
the majestic beauty of the land. He would ask the mem-
ber for the district to bid them alia hearty welcome, as that
gentleman represented in Parliament the people who re-
sided on these rugged mountain heights. (Loud ap-
plause.)
Mr. J. Hurley, M.L.A., supported the toast, and.cor-
dially welcomed the visitors, who, he felt sure, were grati-
fied with the reception accorded them. (Applause.) If
time had permitted, they would have been able to show the
visitors other and more beautiful scenery, such as the Pish
River Caves, which were second to none in the world.
(Applause.)
The toast was drunk with musical honours.
Sir Charles Mitchell, in responding, said he felt sure
he was only representing the feeling of the majority when
he returned most cordial thanks for the splendid hospitality
shown to them that day. (Applause.) Mr. Inglis had
touched the keynote of the occasion when he said that he
hoped the enthusiasm that had carried them so far would
have the vim to carry them on to its apotheosis, which
would be the union of the Australian colonies. (Applause.)
The time appeared to be most propitious ; both the home
country and the colonies seemed to think the time had come
for that union, so much longed for. He thanked them
very much for having brought the party to this splendid
scene. The hospitality of New South Wales could not be
excelled in any country. (Applause.)
Mr. Lee Stere also responded. They felt deeply
thankful to the Ministry for the kind treatment they had re-
ceived. (Applause.) He had read in a certain newspaper
the remarks of Dr. Cameron Lees, in which he said
that it was not worth while visiting Sydney to
see its harbour. He did not think any of them had
that feeling. (Applause.) He believed that it was
worth visiting Sydney to see its harbour, if nothing else.
(Applause.) It was no credit to the people of New
South Wales that they had this beautiful harbour, for
nature gave it to them. What he thought they might be
proud of was that they had an engineer who had made this
railway over the mountains, which had enabled them to
enjoy scenery they would never forget. (Applause.)
Mr. J. H. Howe responded for South Australia, the
Hon. George Thorne for Queensland, and Councillor
Godfrey for Victoria.
Mr. Goodchap proposed the toast of “The Ladies,” to
which Captain Hatton Richards and Mr. Burdekin re-
sponded.
Mr. D. O’Connor proposed “ The Railway Authorities,
and Mr. W. V. Read, traffic manager of the railways, re-
sponded.
Hon. George Thorne proposed the toast of “ The
Chairman.”
Mr. Sutherland, in reply, said he attended the excur-
sion to try to give the visitors some pleasure. They had
simply called their sons and daughters together to celebrate
a great event in their lives—(applause)—and it was a
matter of great pleasure to the Government of the colony to
give pleasure to their children gathered round them.
(Loud applause.)
Three cheers were then given for the Queen.
The party were driven back to Blackheath, and the return
train departed thence about 4.30 p.m. The bold scenery
about the mountains was very much admired, and the day
being fine and sunny with a lovely blue sky, it was
certainly seen to advantage, The breakfast and refresh-
ments served in the train were attended to by Mr. Cassidy
and his staff from the Parliamentary Refreshment Rooms.
The visitors, who were loud in praising the kindness and
attention shown to them by Mr. Sutherland, Mr. Inglis,
and Mr. Goodchap, reached Sydney at about 7-40 p.m.
MINISTERIAL PICNIC TO THE HAWKESBURY.
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 3.
By the invitation of the Government a large number of
ladies and gentlemen, chiefly visitors from the other colo-
nies, who have visited Sydney for the purpose of witnessing
the Centennial celebrations, made a very pleasant excursion
to the Hawkesbury River yesterday. The party, which num-
bered about 230 persons, included the Hon. J. Sutherland,
Minister for Works; Hon. F. Abigail, Minister for Mines ;
the Hon. W. Clarke, Minister for Justice; Mr. R. Burdett
Smith, M.L.A. ; the Hon. J. H. Young, Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly; Mr. Sydney Burdekin, M.L.A.;
Mr. D. O’Connor, M.L.A.; the Bishop of Riverina (Dr.
Linton), Mr. VV. Curnow, Mr. F. W. AVard, Hon. AV. H.
Groom, Speaker of the Queensland Legislative Assembly;
Mr. Landseer, M.L.A., South Australia; Mr. Commis-
sioner Mellor, South Australia; Captain Hixson, Dr.
Brownless, Chancellor of the Melbourne University; Mr.
John Williams, Crown Solicitor; Mr. A. C. Mountain,
City Surveyor, Melbourne; Councillor Buxton, Melbourne;
Dr. J. M. AVarren, Tenterfield; Councillor Rooney, South
Australia; Councillor Geddes, Victoria; Mr. Lumlv Hill,
Queensland; Mr. AV. Hughes, Sydney; Mr. W. Smythe,
M.L.A., Queensland; Mr. J. M'Master, M.L.A.; Rev
Dr. Currey, Melbourne; Signor Azevedo, Portugal; Mr.
M‘Gregor; the Hon. D. Ham, M.L.C., Vic-
toria ; Mr. J. G. Ward, member ot the
House of Representatives, New Zealand; Mr. A. Graham,
Victoria; Mr. Wickham Spearman, of England; Mr. R.
B. Sheridan, M.L.A., Queensland; Hon. H. W.
Venn, M.L.C., Western Australia; Hon. J. Lee
Stere, Speaker ot the Western Australian Parlia-
ment; Hon. H. S. Parker, Western Australia;
Hon. R. F. Sholl, M.L.C., Western Australia; Mr.
Charles Moore, director of the Botanic Gardens;
Councillor Packer, South Australia; Alderman Beare, Mr.
G. Durham, Mr. W. S. Smith, President of the Chamber
of Commerce, Brisbane; Mr. J. W. Peirce, M.L.A., Vic-
toria; Mr. J. Hurley, M.L.A.; Mr. W. Stephen, M.L.A.;
Mr. J. Barnet, Colonial Architect; Mr. L. L. Smith,
M.L.A., Victoria; Mr. Bailes, M.L.A., Victoria;
Judge Casey, Victoria; Alderman Godfrey, Victoria;
Mr. A. H. Wadham, South Australia; Mr. Ward,
Chairman of Committees for the South Australian
Parliament; the Hon. West-Erskine, M.L.C., South
Australia; Mr. D. O’Donovan, Brisbane; Mr. H. Wake-
field, M.L.A., Brisbane: the Mayor of Brisbane (Aider-
man Hipwood): the Hon. George Thorn, M.L.C., Queens-
land; the Hon. H. Heussler, M.L.C., Queensland; and


Colonel French. The party left Sydney at half-past 8 o’clock,
and journeyed by special train to Peat’s Ferry. Breakfast
was served on board the steamer Narrabeen, which had
been engaged for the trip. The excursionists were con-
veyed up the river some distance beyond Wiseman’s Ferry,
and an opportunity was afforded them in the afternoon of
seeing the waters of Broken Bay. The charming river
scenery, which has been pronounced equal to any in the
world, was greatly admired.
The comfort of the visitors was well looked after by Mr.
R. Burdett Smith, M.L.A., Mr. D. O’Connor, M.L.A.,
and Mr. S. Burdekin, M.L.A., who were unceasing in
their attentions. The band of the Vernon training-ship
played selections of music during the day. A capital
luncheon was provided by Mr. Baumann, on board the
Narrabeen, under the supervision of Mr. Cassidy, the
caterer for the Parliamentary refreshment-rooms. The
chair was occupied by the Minister for Works, who, after
the repast, proposed the toast of “ The Visitors.” He said
that the visitors had been invited here as the chil-
dren of New South Wales on the occasion of
the Centenary of the colony, to rejoice upon the progress
that the old family had been making at home. (Cheers.)
He hoped that the Government had done what they could to
make the stay of the visitors here agreeable, and that they
had been able to show the progress made by New South
Wales during the first century of her existence. They had
shown them the progress of the industries of the colony,
the beauties of the mountain scenery, and had taken
them at last to the Rhine of Australia. (Hear,
hear.) He hoped the visitors would carefully analyse
what this colony had been doing in order that
if they saw anything neglected it might be attended to. If
the Government had succeeded in pleasing the visitors, they
were quite satisfied with what had been done. (Hear,
hear.)
Mr. L. L. Smith, who acknowledged the toast on behalf
of Victoria, referred to the magnificent scenery which the
visitors had seen during the past iew days, remarking that
it would bear favourable comparison with the choicest
natural scenery in England, Scotland, or Ireland. The
visitors had enjoyed hospitality such as had never before
been displayed in any of the colonies. (Cheers.)
The Hon. W. H. Groom, on behalf of the Queensland
visitors, returned thanks for the hospitality extended to
them. He was one of those who believed that very great
results would accrue from the large gathering of represen-
tative men here in connection with the celebrations.
(Cheers.)
Mr. Ebenezer Ward, Chairman of Committees in
South Australia, and Mr. Lee Stere, Speaker of the Legis-
lature in Western Australia, also responded.
Mr. D. O’Connor proposed the toast of “ The Ladies,”
which was acknowledged by the Hon. W. A. E. West-
Ersfcine.
Mr. Burdekin proposed “ The Chairman,” and the
toast was suitably responded to by Mr. Sutherland.
The party left Peate’s Ferry about 5.45 p.m., and Sydney
was reached shortly before 8 o’clock.
GRAND UNITED SUNDAY SCHOOL DEMONSTRATION.
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 6.
The last of the great public events in connection with the
Centenary of the colony passed off most successfully on
Saturday afternoon, when a Grand United Sunday School
Demonstration and Service of Song was held in the Agri-
cultural Show Grounds in Moore Park. It was a happy
idea on the part of those who had the ordering of the
centennial arrangements to choose this ceremony as the
final one, for it provided a graceful and fitting termination
to all the more elaborate festivals which have been held
during the last fortnight. The remembrance of an
event of this kind sinks far deeper into the mind
of the juvenile than into that of the grown
person, and hence it was only proper that our Sunday
school children, by a demonstration so peculiarly their own
as this one, should mark their sense of the importance of
the event which we have lately been so busily occupied in
celebrating. The presence of his Excellency Lord Car-
rington, who kindly attended, gave an additional importance
to the event, and the clergy were represented by the
Primate and many reverend gentlemen from the different
denominations. The demonstration was carefully planned
and ari ranged, the vast body oi over 6000 chil-
dren being handled in a manner which reflected great
credit on the superintendents and teachers in charge of the
various schools. The weather was very favourable for the
event, as the heat of the summer sun was tempered by a
cool sea breeze, but notwithstanding this fact many of the
children suffered severely from the heat through being
exposed for so many hours to the direct rays of the sun,
no shelter of any sort being provided for them. Most of
the children walked from the schools to the park, but others
were conveyed in special trams, and those resident in the
railway suburbs travelled to Redfem by a special train.
The general public attended the demonstration in consider-
able numbers, and a small charge was made for admission to
the ground and grand stand, the proceeds being given in aid
of the children’s hospitals of Sydney.
THE MUSTER IN MOORE PARK.
The schools were marshalled together in Moore Park,
near the Zoological Gardens, where the most careful and
systematic arrangements had been made to prevent any con-
fusion arising. There was abundance of room available for
the purpose, and the place ot meeting was divided off
into regular spaces indicated by large numbers, which
corresponded with the number carried by each school.
Thus it was an easy matter, as the schools arrived, for them
to find and settle down into their allotted places, there to
wait quietly until the order was given for starting. The
plan worked admirably, and the vast masses of children,
always difficult to control, were in this way gathered
together in order without delay or confusion.
The children commenced to arrive on the ground
shortly before 2 o’clock, school after school, all carrying
gay banners and flags, and some of them headed by bands,
entering the park from all directions. The scene was a
pretty and animated one on this fine summer afternoon, and
furnished a splendid practical illustration of the deep hold
which our admirable Sunday-school system has upon the
vast body of the people. The children of every age and size
were all clean and respectable looking, and wore their
best clothes, the girls, of course, looking best in their new
white frocks and blue sashes, and each child wore proudly
on his or her left breast a large blue rosette. This last
item of ornamentation was evidently highly valued, for it
served as a distinguishing mark, and indicated that its
possessor belonged of legitimate right to the procession of
schools, and was fully entitled to share in all the privileges
and enjoyments of the demonstration. The expression on
the children’s faces indicated that they were really enjoy-
ing their outing, notwithstanding the necessary constraint
which was placed upon them. The teachers, many of
whom were present, had a busy time of it to keep their
little flocks from breaking out of the ranks and enjoying
themselves on the smooth green grass which stretched out


so temptingly n front of them, during the long
period of waiting which unavoidably ensued before all the
schools were gathered together. Nearly every school carried
its own banner, a somewhat difficult proceeding on account
of the strong breeze which blew over the park, and almost
every child carried little flags or bannerets, of the kind so
common during the late Centennial decorations, which
fluttered bravelv in the breeze and added greatly to the
eaietv of the scene. The numerous bands which accom-
panied the schools continued playing sacred airs
after their arrival at the park, the result, however,
being anything but harmonious. The arrangement of the
children prior to starting was carried out with great ability
bv Mr. William Woods, superintendent of the procession,
who was actively assisted by the Eev.J. Mac Neil, ®; A -’
and Messrs. W. H. M'Clelland and A. Firth, and these
gentlemen soon succeeded by their exertions in getting the
schools in order. One gentleman in particular, who
was mounted on a fiery charger, deserves especial
mention for the reckless manner in which he risked life and
limb by riding at full speed from one end of the line to the
other, conveying orders, arranging schools, and acting
generally as adjutant of the forces. A strong body oi
constabulary, under Sub-Inspectors Hyam and Beil, were
stationed on the ground, and rendered valuable assistance
in arranging the schools in order.
THE PROCESSION.
About half-past 2 o’clock the children began to march in
procession towards the show grounds. The following was
tihe order of the procession, together with the number
of teachers and scholars as supplied by the secretaries :
No 1 St Paul’s, Redfem, Church of England, 40 teachers,
600 scholars; No. la, Waverley, Presbyterian, 12 teachers,
125 scholars; No. 2, Balmain, Wesleyan,l2 teachers, 100
scholars * No. 3, Primitive Methodist, 60 teachers, 630
scholars; No. 4, Bethel Union, 14 teachers, 50 scholars;
No 5 St. Paul’s, Canterbury, Church of England, 10
teachers, 60 scholars; No. 6, Glebe, Presbyterian, 10
teachers,* 150 scholars ; No. 7, Leichhardt, 6 teachers, 30
scholars ; No. 8, Chippendale and Darlington, \V esleyan,
25 teachers, 230 scholars; No. 9, Scots Church, Presby-
terian, 10 teachers, 40 scholars; No. 10, All Souls,
Leichhardt, Church of England, 15 teachers, 150 scholars;
No 11, Pitt-street. Congregational, 13 teachers, 100
scholars; No. 12, St. Thomas’, Enfield, Church of England,
16 teachers, 55 scholars; No. 13, Paddington, Wesleyan,
10 teachers, 150 scholars ; No. 14, Newtown, Congrega-
tional, 20 teachers, 100 scholars; No. 10, St. Davids,
Church of England, 48 teachers, 400 scholars ; No. 16,
William-street, Wesleyan, 12 teachers, 150 scholars; No.
17 St Andrew’s, Church of England, 14 teachers, 150
scholars; No. 18, St. Mark’s, Church of England, 7
teachers, 70 scholars ; No. 19, St. Jude s, Church of Eng-
land, 10 teachers, 70 scholars; No. 20, Pyrmont Presby-
terian 18 teachers, 140 scholars; No. 21, Bourke-street,
Congregational, 20 teachers, 200 scholars; No. 22, Point
Piper-road, Congregational, 20 teachers 100 scholars ; No.
23 Waverley, Wesleyan, 10 teachers, 120 scholars ; No. 24,
Gladesville, Presbyterian, 6 teachers, 40 scholars; INo. 25,
St. Barnabas’, Church of England, 45 teachers, 600 scholars;
No. 26, Burton-street, Baptist, 15 teachers, 100 scholars;
No 27 Devonshire-street, Congregational, 14 teachers, 105
scholars; No. 28, St. John’s Darlinghurst, Church of
England, 14 teachers, 130 scholars; No. 29, Leichhardt,
Congregational, 10 teachers, 60 scholars; No. 30, Mount
Lachlan, Wesleyan, 20 teachers, 200 scholars; No. 31, St.
George’s, Presbyterian, 7 teachers, oO scholars: No.
Castlereagh - street, Baptist, 6 teachers, 50 scholars; No.
33 Bathurst and Harris streets, Baptist, 18 teachers, 120
scholars- No. 34, Leichhardt and Marrickville, Baptist,
14 teachers, 64 scholars; No. 35, St. Saviour’s, Redfern,
Church of England, 6 teachers, 100 scholars; No. 36,
Holy Trinity, Church of England, 16 teachers, 60 scholars;
No. 37, Surry Hills, Wesleyan, 25 teachers, 300 scholars;
No" 38, St. Stephen’s, Presbyterian, 12 teachers, SO
scholars; No. 39, St. Peter’s, Woolloomooloo, Church of
England, 24 teachers, 400 scholars; No. 40, Waverley,
Congregational, 6 teachers, 60 scholars; No. 41, branco-
Australian, 4 teachers, 50 scholars, iotal, 694 teachers,
6639 scholars.
A considerable number of spectators were present in
the Park and also along the line of route to the Agri-
cultural Society’s grounds, and they watched with eager
interest the sturdy way in which the youngsters trudged
along the dusty road under a broiling sun. L nder the
circumstances it would not have been too much to expect that
some provision would have been made to water the route to the
grounds from the meeting place in the park ; as it was, the
children, as well as their elders who had to be present,
suffered unnecessarily from the dust, aggravated by the
heat. On the procession entering the grounds, a water-
cart was seen to have apparently just begun to water the
road from the gates to the space in front of the grand stand,
but even this was not finished before the procession inter-
rupted the work. The children marched round the grounds,
and were drawn up in front of the grand stand, the first to
enter the space taking position on the right, and the others
following until all were ready for the service of song to
begin. The sight presented at this stage was both beauti-
ful and impressive.
AT THE AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY’S GROUND.
It was arranged that the service of song should take
place in the grounds of the Agricultural Society, and
here the children came in a long procession after tramping
through the dust. The grounds were dry and cheerless
looking, and there were no trees to shade the little ones
from the rays of the burning sun. They marched
in and assembled in front of the grand stand. It
was now about 3 o’clock, and the children had
come from long distances and travelled all the way to
Moore Park, where the forming of the procession com-
menced about 2 o’clock. An hour had thus been passed,
during which the children were on their feet almost con-
tinuously and exposed to the sun. Would it not have been
kind and considerate under the circumstances to have
admitted them, after their march, to the grand stand to
eniov rest and the shade? Ihis was, however, found
impossible. The stand was set apart for those who were
willing to pay one shilling each admission, and the
children were drawn up outside the fence which environs
the stand, and from this position, entirely unshaded, had to
go through a considerable programme of service of song.
Ten hymns were sung after an address by the Primate.
I Lord Carrington was announced to give an address, but ne
refrained from doing so. He told the children he would
not keep them one minute, and he did not break his
promise. A few words of thanks for the reception
accorded him were all that he uttered. The ser-
vice of song had scarcely been commenced when a
little girl was carried from the ground to the coveted shade
of the grandstand. She was found to be in a faint, and
steps were taken to revive her. Dr. Rutledge, who attended
to the child, said she was in a very deep faint, and even-
tuallv Lord Carrington sent for a cab to take her home.
Two other little girls were lifted over the fence, with pale
faces, looking quite exhausted, and were refreshed with
cool water and the shade. This is no doubt a small number
out of some 6000 children, and the wonder is that there
were so few, but the result of the day’s work will
perhaps have told on many others since. In this aspect,
then, the committee cannot be complimented for the
arrangements made for the comfort of the children, though
it was a big demonstration, and a large number of children
had to be provided for. .
The Primate, in receiving Lord Carrington, said,—
My Lord, it becomes my duty as chairman of the
united committee to tender to your Excellency our
very warmest thanks for the honour and favour ot
your presence on this occasion. We should not have
ventured to ask for it after all the celebrations of the week
if we did not think that this gathering represented some-
thingnot unworthy of your Excellency’s deep interests, xhe
moral attaching to our Sunday schools, to these children and
tens of thousands of others whom they represent, is that we
believe them to be one of the most important influences in
the moral welfare of that community over which you are
called on to preside. We believe, moreover, that it is the


. f that common Christianity in which
SSSU 2&S. has «„cd v»«r top m SS ,
a f a > W hS’ S a great ana
S>ty Our he^D.7 i.t Z
that secular teaching, the teacu , tion- 0 n the
v ’«£ -ss
and more Us i arKer and larger measure. (Applause.)
your superintendents and teaches, but J 0 be
are three things for you to d , > - learn to do
what they ought to be. You have first ot aU to team 0
your very best in the lessons s t b i ’ > discipli a e
what you are told, and to Keep 1 whicb must he
KS U u»oi”oSrSves and
?Lrar^srte.r’V™VsX
iS^oh\ihL B to“SSla.“No , », t »yd»r
single minute. 1 am oni. g p. every happiness,
„f music, I am desired to .ay tot
regrets tot he » umjbfcto mit P one of us who does not
occasion. lam sure mere sad cause
‘Mtenc. proceed*.
(Applause.)
the service of song.
The service of song then began, after whidi
reign,” ‘‘When molten of Mem, So ld, t rs,”
tion,” “Jesus loves me, , ,pj band of the Ferma-
and ‘‘God bless our native land- The bana of
nent Artillery played the tunes, chUdren>
voices and instruments McCormick, sang nicely in
under the direction of Mr. P- U. “JJ 1 ™ 10 ■ w fe as a
tune and kept good time. . - Queen twice
success. Three cheers were given
three cheers for the hig depart ure while
SZSi played Antom A. about 4 „ dock
t», -as
mained, and, havin 0 sear the buns, cakes, and
Kt’ffiKyWi clouttS
supply of water on the gr for their return
others under the guidance
of their teachers.


CENTENARY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD, TUESDAY, JANUARY 24, 1888.




THE CENTENARY OF AUSTRALIA.
PERMANENT RECORD.
1888.
CONTENTS
THE ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF AUSTRALIAN SETTLEMENT.
Page
Scope of the Centennial Supplement .. . • 5
Introduction _
Australia: Geographical ‘
Climate..
Explorations ~
The Aborigines fy
The Fauna and Flora of .. • • 11
The Australasian Capitals.—Sydney-Mel-
bourne—Adelaide — Brisbane P erth. Hobart
—Wellington _ rid'
Nomenclature. —The Mother Colony—The
Younger Colonies—Distinguished English-
meli_The Early Governors —Native Names.. 16-1/
The Press. —Early Ventures —1 ho Sydney
Morning Herald— Other New South Wales
Journals —Journals of the Other Colonies—
The Good Old Times—The Achievements of
the Press •• •• •• • * •• •• 17
Population—lncrease of Immigration .. . • 20-22
New South Wales.- Historic View .. .. 25-24
Parliamentary Government .. .. •• 24-2/
The Civil Service.—Original System ot Pa-
tronage —A Superannuation Act—-The Act of
1884—A Uniform System—Vacancies—
Discipline—Holidays - School Teachers and
•'•■'.Officers—The Board—The Act of 1887—l'he
' * Strength of the Service the New Commis- .
sion
The Land Question •• ou-55
Pastoral and Agricultural—Pastoral-
Quality of Stock —Smailness of the Begin-
nings Past and Present Agriculture
Agricultural Settlement ——Wheat Produc-
tion—Maize-growing—Dairy Farming—The
Sugarcane—W ine-growing—Fruit—Gardens 03-57
J O MINING.—First Signs of Minerals- Coal—Gold—
mar Silver—Tin— Copper--Iron—Other Minerals 37-40
ommerce. F.arlv Drawbacks Expanding
Trade—Chief ‘liadirx* Centres— I Tanits
Banks of Issue-Other Monetary Institutions
—Market Rates .. .. • • • • • • {;J" 2
Manufactures .. •• •• ••
Larour. —Occupations of the I eople —Wages
Hours of Labour—Trade j Unions—Condition
of the Working Classes—The Domestic Ser-
vant —Governesses —Legislation .. ••, 43-4 o
Communication.— Travelling in Old Times—
Our Modem Steamships —Local Commumca-
tion . •• 4o * 1
Education.—Small Beginnings—lhe Origin of
Public Instructiou —The Act of 1867 The
Act of 1880—The Department of Public In-
struction— Secondary and Higher Education
—Middle Class Schools—The University—
Technical Education —Schools of Arts .. 4/-50
Ecclesiastical.—Free Churches in Free States—
The First Chaplain—Other Denominations—
Concurrent Endowment The Church of
England—The Roman Catholic Church-
Presbyterian Churches—Methodism—lnde-
pendents—Baptists —Smaller Sects Ecclesi-
astical Statistics .. .. .. • • • •
Charities. —-The Absence of a Poor Law lhe
Prevention of Abuses—Unaided Institutions 52-5 o
The Administration oe Justice. —Early Pro-
cedure —Judges Past and Present Amend-
ments in the Law—The Minor Courts .. 53-5 0
Naval and Military.—Our Three Lines of
Defence —The New South Wales Fleet—The
Naval Brigade —The Imperial Squadron—The
Second Line of Defence—The Third Line of
Defence .. .. .. • • • • • • 55-56
Page
Local Government.—The City, Suburban, and
Country Municipalities—Areas .. .. 56-58
Water Supply,—The Tank Stream —A Royal
Commission—The Nepean Scheme—Water
Conservation .. .. 58-66
Sanitation 60-61
Public Health. —Death-rate—Disease Preven-
tion-General Hospitals—Mortality in Town
and Country 61-62
Art.—Difficulties in New Countries—Progress of
Art in New South Wales—The Art Gallery
—The Art Society—Australian Academy of
Arts —A Brighter Future 62-63
Health and Pleasure Resorts. —Caves —
Parks, Gardens, Beaches, and Reserves—
Hyde Park and the Domains—The Botanie
Gardens—Other Resorts.. .. .. .. 63-65
Yachting and Sailing .. .. .. .. 65-66
The Turf.—A Nation of Horsemen—Prominent
Breeders—Best Records—The Australian
Jockey Club .. .. .. .. •• 66-67
Athletics and Field Sports .. .. 67-70
The Other Colonies :
Victoria 70-74
South Australia 74-76
Queensland 76-79
Western Australia .. ' fl *Bl
Tasmania 81-84
New Zealand 84-86
The Latest Official Australasian
Statistics .. .. • • •• • 87
The Australian Centennial Celebrations ;
Unveiling op the Queen’s Statue .. .. 88-94 '
Lady Carrington’s Reception 94-95
Public Meeting at St. Mary’s Cathedral .. .. 95-97
Australia 100 Years Ago 98
The Centennial Intercolonial Agricul- .
tukal Exhibition—The Banquet .. .. 99-116
Centennial Picnic to the Roman Catholic
Dignitaries H 6-119 j
Distribution of Centennial Gifts
The Salvation Army 1201.
Opening of the Centennial Park .. .. 120-1../
The State Banquet: Colonial Federation —
Speeches by the Australian Governors .. 127-143 *
The Holiday in the City.—The Appearance
of the Citv during the Day—Harbour Ex-
cursions—Botany—New Brighton Recreation
Grounds, Lady Robinson’s Beach, &c. .. 143-144
The Illuminations: Illumination of the Har- J
bour 145, 155-204, 20 &
The Band Contests .. 155, 156-166, 167-177, 178-198, 199-
The New South Wales Centennial Regatta .. 156-164
Official Dinner and Evening Party at Government
House I
Working Lads’ Picnic at the National Park .. 165-166
The Engineering Association’s Centenary Excur- \
sioBS •• % , •• 108“1 /Ojl7 / “Udj *vt)
Trades and Labour Demonstration—The New
Trades Hall 168 *j76 I
Garden Party at Bishopscourt {7b
Centennial Religious Services .. .. ..I*9-136
The New Houses of Parliament: Laying the .
Foundation-stone 185-191
Citizens’ Centennial Banquet 191-19/
Herr Alpen’s Cantata.. .. .. .. .. I'^-IJBH
The National Park : Ministerial Picnic .. 199-200,
Chamber of Commerce Picnic 200-202 :
The Sailors’Festival .. YF 202:203 J
Excursions to the Zigzag 208'209
Ministerial Picnic to the ’ 'rs .. .. 200-210
Grand United Sunday-scm. mnstration .. 210-21-.
