

f/oah
THE GREAT
Queensland Strike
1891,
“ Freedom of Contract,” Diary of the Strike, Etc.
ISSUED BY THE UNITED PASTOR A LISTS’ ASSOCIATION
OF QUEENSLAND.
PRINTED BY BLACK, KEID, & CO., ADELAIDE STREET.
MDGCCXCI.


@ON JPENTS.
Introduction
Freedom of Contract
Contract and Unionism
The Right to Break Contracts Honestly Made
What is Intimidation
Working Men Leaders
A Visitor’s Opinion
On Sundowners
Hospitality to be Continued
What the Judges Say
Close of Strike
Pastoralists’ Manifesto
Shearing Agreement
Rules
Agreement for Employees engaged during Shearing
Diary of Shearer's’ Strike, 1891
Pagk,


THE GREAT
Queensland Strike
1891,
“ Freedom of Contract,” Diary of the Strike, Etc.
ISSUED BY THE UNITED PASTOR A LISTS'' ASSOCIATION
OF QUEENSLAND.
Brisbane:
PRINTED BY BLACK, KEID, & CO., ADELAIDE STREET.
MDCCCXCf.
M 335? / P| Oohf


SHE Brisbane Courier , of July 1, states that the following
speech ‘ ‘ contains sentiments entitled to some weight,
from a traditional Queensland radical,” the Hon. W.
Brookes, M.E-C.
“ I believe that the working classes of Queensland are at heart sound and
loyal to Her Most Gracious Majesty, and are as law-abiding and as peace-
loving a lot of people as any colony can show. But lam more anxious to
take this responsible opportunity of expressing these opinions because I
speak here not to lion, gentlemen only, but, through the reporters, to the whole
colony ; and I would say further that if we search into the matter and try to find
out the real cause of the trouble and the strike, we will find it in the labour
leaders and nowhere else. The masters and men behaved well during the strike.
Let me say a word for the station-owners. I have been supposed to be as hostile
to the squatters as Hannibal to the old Romans ; but circumstances have come to
my personal knowledge which have shown clearly that in the most disturbed
districts the working classes had no more constant, faithful, liberal, or better
advisers than the station-owners ; and their conduct under the name of the Pas-
toralists’ Association shows that there was a dignity and kindness and conside-
rateness in all the manifestoes of that association which I am sure cannot fail to
have a good effect upon those to whom they were addressed. But when we come
to see such a state of things as we have seen, when sedition has been preached from
waggons in the open air in Brisbane, and treason of a still worse character in the
outlying districts, where the authorities were not so strong—when we see such
things as these —then I think the time has come to deal with the matter properly.
Were I inclined, and I am not particularly inclined, to find any fault whatever
with the Government, as I have already given them high praise for their conduct
of public affairs, if there was one spot on which I could put my finger it would be
this, that the Government did not put these labour leaders in gaol half soon enough.
They should have been taken one by one, like rats in a trap, and put into silence
on the most abstemious diet known to gaolers. With reference to the ill-feeling,
that is a very congenial paragraph also in the speech. I believe that the ill-feeling
will die out. I think the working men will never again allow themselves to be
subjected to such an Egyptian bondage and taxation as was imposed upon them
by the union leaders. One of the labour leaders has said that good will come out of
the strike. But there is one thing which will come directly out of it, and which
has already come out of it. The working classes know it well, and will act upon
it in future, and it is this, not to lend too greedy an ear to the ignorant, reckless
men who have nothing to lose, and whose personal ambition overrides every other
consideration. They will carefully abstain from following such bad advisers in
future. Moreover, another good will come out of it, that they will remember in
future not to endanger their own little properties, their peace, and their wives
and children, by submitting to taxation amounting to such large sums of money,
of which they stood in sore need, and depriving themselves of the opportunity of
discharging the liabilities upon their properties at the command of the union
agitators called labour leaders. The working men will surely have seen that while
they have been pinching and remaining in debt to their butchers, bakers, and
grocers, these self-constituted leaders have been living on the fat of the land in
clover, so that I think that good will come out of the strike in that respect, and
any ill-feeling will die out with the increase of intelligence. The masters will find
that their interests are not different from the interests of their men, and that it
is really to their own pecuniary interest to study the welfare and comfort, mate-
rial and moral, of their men. And, on the part of the men there will arise a desire
to give honest work for hard money, and lazy and desultory work will go out of
fashion amongst the working men themselves. There is one thing, in regard to
which I feel I may be touching upon irrelevantly, but 1 will ask lion, gentlemen
to bear with me while I express the opinion which I have held very strongly dur-
ing the last two or three years I have been in retreat, as it were. I have care-
fully avoided any public contact with this agitation. I was often asked, but I
carefully abstained from having anything to do with it, yet still I would have
liked to have had a finger in the pie ; that is my nature, I suppose. Ido observe
one remarkable want. There seems to be somebody wanted in Brisbane to call
the attention of the working men to the only way in which they can benefit them-
selves, and that is by resorting to the good old-fashioned rules of strict sobriety,
industry, and thrift. If working men will carry out those rules, there will be no
need whatever for them to go to politics for remedies.”


the Ireat Queensland Strike of 1891.
SHE prominent point in the present dispute is that which finds
expression in the phrase “ Freedom of Contract,” and although
it might reasonably be expected that no man of average in-
telligence would find any difficulty in interpreting the phrase, the
leaders of the labour party have chosen to assert that they do not
understand it, and have clamoured for definitions of it. Pastoralists’ and
employers’ associations have set themselves to furnish these desired
definitions, and they have issued them, couched in slightly varying
language, but all of them uniform in their meaning. That adopted by
the pastoralists of Victoria, N.S.W., and Queensland, and also by the
Employers’ Union of N.S.W. and Victoria, is as follows:—“The
employer is free to employ whom he chooses, and the employee is free
to engage or to refuse to engage to work as he pleases ”■—which was
in ore fully defined to mean the right of any person to give or accept
employment without interference or molestation. The latest defi-
nition is that issued on 20th May by the Quarterly Council of the
Federated Employers’ Union of Queensland, and runs : —“ The right of
any worker to accept work from any employer, and the right of any
employer to engage any man wanting work, that is the right of any
person to give or accept woi’k without interference or molestation.”
This definition is clear, compact, comprehensive, and should satisfy
those who clamour for a definition, but like all the rest it approaches
the subject from the positive side. It is possible something may be
done by approaching the matter from the other, or negative side.
This demand for which the pastoralists are fighting, and in that fight
spending money and risking property and even life, had its origin in a
certain condition or state of things of a very unsatisfactory nature, but
all arising from what is designated “ recognition of unionism.” What
this meant lies at the root of the present demand of the pastoralists, and
freedom of contract means, in general, the direct opposite of recognition
of new unionism. This recognition of unionism has meant many things,
it has meant that no man outside the various sheai'ers’ and bush
labourers’ unions shall be allowed to work in any shed ; it has meant
that certain men, some of them of a very objectionable sort, in their
rambling up and down the country, are at liberty to visit any shed,
and may not merely throw the work out of gear, but may call the men
•ofi’ their work without notice, even though the men themselves may be
perfectly satisfied with conditions and pay ; it meant in a word that


these men assumed a position higher than that of the man who paid!
the wages, and had all the risk of the business. “ Freedom of contract ,y
then, approached from the negative side, means the opposite of all this ;
it means that men who are not members of any union may be employed
by any station owner or manager, and it means that no longer shall union
delegates usurp the position of station managers, but that employers-
shall manage their own business, and be no longer subject to the
dictation of men who bear not the slightest share of financial responsi-
bility. That this claim is as right as it is reasonable, should, it might be
thought, be admitted by every man whose mind is unwarped by
prejudice. In fighting to secure this claim, that the pastoralists have
had the sympathy of the general community, has been very clearly
manifest during the late unfortunate struggle.
| The following collated letters, etc., on the subject have been reckoned
worthy of preservation, and the annexed “ Diary” of the strike will also,*
it is believed, prove acceptable as a permanent record of the struggle..
§T a meeting of delegates of the Associated Chambers of Com-
merce in England, the Marquis of Salisbury, who was one of
the speakers, said : —“ These fights between labour and
capital, of course, have their inconveniences, but they are contro-
versies which, I suppose, must take place ; and our business—cer-
tainly the business of Her Majesty’s Ministers—is to look at them in a
spirit of absolute neutrality, only desiring that that result may be
achieved which may be for the greatest interests of both the parties
who are concerned. Ido not think it is just to say that the existence of
unions, trade unions, federations, or bodies of that kind, can be
looked upon as a danger or an unexpected eul by the commercial
interests of this country. Union is not the discovery of agitators. It
is not invented by any particular men, or the result of any set of
political institutions. The people who made trade unions and
employers’ federal ions were Watt, who made the steam engine, and
Wheatstone, who invented the electric telegraph. They are the
result of the easier communication which exists between all mankind
compared to what existed in the days of our grandfathers; and, apart
from all questions of politics and questions of agitation, it must needs
be that as the means of communication increase, men w r ho have the
same interests and are fighting with common dangers will unite
together more and more, and combine their interests in common
action. All we have to hope is, not that this spirit shall abate, but that it
shall go on and have its perfect w r ork, and that all who are united by*
common interest shall be guided by common counsel to do that which


is wisest and best for themselves and the community in their judg-
ment. But the correlative of unions is perfect freedom not to have
unions. The corollary of liberty of uniting is the absolute liberty of
refusing to unite, and the State, all who bear office, or who exercise
influence in this country, are bound to do their utmost that each man,
in his own discretion, may use his own liberty to dispose as he thinks
best of every commodity, including that greatest of all commodities,
his labour, according as he may judge his own interest to be.
That is not a mere controversial proposition ; it lies at the base of our
national character and our nation’s existence. Either Englishmen
must absolutely change their characters, so that they shall be unlike
anything which they have ever been before, or they will continue to
require that each man shall be free in his own actions to carry on his
own industry. You may have what political movement you please—
you may have what vicissitudes of parties or changes of Government
you like —you will find that in the long run facts will be stronger than
sophistries or theories, and that the facts will require that men shall
work as they please, and not otherwise. I know that there once
existed a different state of things. I know that in France something
more than 100 years ago it was impossible for anybody to work unless
he joined the union of his particular trade, and submitted to its rules.
But this state of things produced such a tension among classes, and
such an impoverishment of every industrjr, that it was swept away in
the catastrophe with which it overwhelmed all other institutions of the
State. I do not believe at this time of day that abuses which the
French Eevolution swept away will be deliberately set up in our midst.
The following is for the most part taken from a work called “ The
State in Eelation to Trade,” by T. H. Farrer, and as this author has
some claim to be considered an authority, you may perhaps deem it
worth publcation:—
Every act of buying and selling unless completely executed at once
constitutes what lawyers call a contract, which, if legitimate, the State
—if either of the parties fail—steps in to complete. Freedom of
contract only exists in fully developed form in highly organised com-
munities. It is often spoken of as if it were the same thing as simple
freedom of action or disposition. It is no such thing. Contract
involves obligation, which is the opposite of freedom. When a man
makes a contract, he gives up a portion of his freedom, he gives a
promise which, if binding in the eye of the law, society will with all
its power enforce. At page 187, Pollock on Contracts, the following
appears“ Every person not subject to any legal incapacity may
dispose freely of his actions and property within the limits allowed by
the general law. Liability on a contract consists in a limitation of
this disposing power by a voluntary act of the party which places
some portion of that power at the command of the other party to the
contract; so much of the party’s individual f■ eedom is taken from
him and made over to the other party to the contract.” The doctrine


of contract is an interference with individual action. It is the
reverse of freedom. But it interferes with a man only when he has
made a promise. The system it replaced interfered with a man
whether he had made a promise or not. His freedom consists in his
being able to make, or to abstain from making a binding promise.
When he has made it, the State in the interest of all, prevents his
free action. It compels him to abide by the promise he has made,
but takes care also that this power is limited and not abused, and it
defines the conditions under which, and the manner in which, a man
may make such a promise as the law will enforce. The difference in
the system of free contract, and the system which it has replaced, lies
not in the absence of obligation, but in the presence of a self-imposed
obligation for an obligation imposed by some external power. This,
then, is freedom of contract, as elaborated by the wisdom of our
ancestors, and protested against by the unwisdom of some of the
present generation, who, however, offer us nothing of their own as a
substitute, save tyranny. In times past the actions of the individual
were fettered by feudal, family, tribal restrictions, by protective
industrial associations, by guilds and rules —many of which perished
at the time of the French —and which made a large portion
of a man’s life depend, as it does now in India and the East generally,
not on his own individual choice, but on rules and regulations laid
down and determined for him by society, by custom, by law. The
substitution of the rights and duties arising from the free contract of
the individual, for the duties arising from status and relation is one
feature in the history of the development of the individual which is no
less marked in the allied domains of political, social, and religious
liberty. Freedom is increased not by abolishing obligation, but by
substituting for an obligation devised by law or custom, an obligation
imposed by the individual himself. It thus appears that freedom of
contract is an integral portion of civil liberty, and it is nothing less
than a piece of intolerable and ignorant presumption to demand a
discussion whether men are in the main to manage their own affairs
individually, or whether they are not, whether they are to enjoy free-
dom or become slaves. We might just as well have a meeting to
discuss the fundamental principle of civil and religious liberty, and to
decide whether the cut of our clothes, the manner of our food, and
the nature of our religious beliefs are to be decided by our own
individual choice and convictions, or by receiving the mandate of the
secretary of the Australian Labour Confederation, assisted by those
liberty-loving and law-abiding citizens, Messrs. Murphy, Taylor,
Forrester, and Fanning.
When, according to Pollock, “ every person not subject to any legal
incapacity may dispose freely of his actions and property within
the limits allowed by the general law,” the demand of one. section of
the community to discuss freedom of contract, is on the face of it
absurd, for it is a proposal to discuss wdiat no good citizen will admit
to be an open question, whether or not the law of the realm is to be
obeyed. In the particular instance wdiich has been of late attracting
attention, the issue is whether a man shall obey the law made by the


whole community, by constitutional methods, or the rules made by a
small section of the community in defiance of constitutional methods
—whether, in short, he shall be law-abiding or lawless. I hold that
this is no question for discussion.
Had the employers granted the conference pressed upon them by
well-meaning persons, who appear to know little of the issues at stake,
then the members of a debating society might have argued to all
eternity without coming to a conclusion whether the executive of the
Employer’s Association or the directors of the shearer’s strike had in
this business shown themselves the chiefest asses. As long as the
employers maintain their present position, defending as they do their
own interests and equally the rights of public liberty, there is no
room for discussion so far as they are concerned. As for the ability
displayed by the strike leaders, Mr. Champion’s opinion is on record,
and is receiving daily further confirmation —I am, sir, &c.,
D H. Dalrtmple.
Brisbane, 16th April.
Contract and Unionism
Mb. W. E. Abbott, of Win gen, contributes the following to the
discussion on the above subject: —One of the labour leaders, com-
menting on a letter of mine under the above heading, has said : “No
reasonable employee can deny the right of sin employer to employ
whom he pleases, within certain limits.” He does not say what are
the limits, but we know from the past action of the shearers and other
unions that this expression means within the limits of the members of
that union and the unions federated with it. We refuse to recognise
any limits to our liberty, except the limits imposed by the laws of our
country, which represent the will of the whole community, and we
refuse to recognise the right of any executive or committee outside
the law to say who may or who may not work in Australia. We
claim for ourselves precisely the same liberty which we are ready to
concede to all other members of the community, of which we form a
part —the right to manage our own affairs within, and subject to the
limits imposed by the law, and subject to no self-constituted or irre-
sponsible authority outside or above the law. And that liberty we
mean to defend in our own interests and in the interests of the whole
community. We refuse to allow ourselves to be made a lever whereby
all workmen, and ourselves into the bargain, are to be forced into sub-
mission to the self-constituted leaders of the Shearers’ Union, who, if
they really represent anybody, represent only a section of the work-
men of Australia (who are themselves only a section of the community
whose interests are threatened), and who are elected in some hocus-
pocus way, of which the community has no cognisance or control.
The claims made by the unions that they shall have the right to say


who may an 1 who may not work in Australia, and to compel workmen
and employers, under penalty of starvation or ruin, to obey their
orders, is one that cannot be admittedly consistent with the existence
of a free people or of a civilised community. In Queensland we have
now the spectacle of the Shearers’ and the General Labourers’ Unions
of that colony, which claim to number 8,000 men, openly and avowedly
endeavouring to destroy the chief source of production by which the
community of nearly half a million of people lives, secretly endeavour-
ing to wreck trains, and commit wholesale murder, burning wool
teams, and shooting working bullocks belonging to non-union carriers,
insulting women when they can safely do so in the absence of men,
and threatening the unprotected wives of railway lengthsmen with
arson, for the purpose of extorting so-called subscriptions to the
unions, all because the pastoralists there will not concede to them the
right to make rules which shall supercede the laws of the country.
And the labour leaders of Queensland have sanctioned such actions,
and remitted funds to assist it, as have also the labour leaders of New
South Wales and Yictoria. 1 do not say that all unionists, nor any
considerable portion of them, are of the same character as these
fellows, who have no claim to be called men ; but if honest men will
associate themselves with such ruffians they at once become re-
sponsible for all their acts. The state of things described undeniably
and admittedly exists in Queensland, and I think would justify the
Queensland Government in giving the position sought to that aspiring
labour leader, and allowing him to exercise his talents on a consider-
able number of his fellows in that and other colonies. In every free
and civilised community tljere must be a vast majority in favour of
maintaining law and order, because every honest man wants his own
life, liberty, and property protected (be the latter little or much) ; and
he also wants to be allowed to follow his calling in peace, and free
from interference or molestation. If this were not so, no free and
civilised community could have grown up, as the very existence of the
community and its power to produce the wealth, on which all subsist,
depends on the maintenance of law and order. Being so, the party
of disorder which would object to the protection of life and property
can only consist of those who, in the absence of protection to life,
would become murderers, and in the absence of protection to property
would become thieves. A very small minority in Australia, I should
say.
The Bight to Break Contracts Honestly
made .
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Si h, —There are only two things just now which prevent an amicable
settlement between the members of the Shearers’ Union and the
sheep owners, who are carrying on the great, and almost the only
productive, industry of Australia, by which the greater part of our


population, either directly or indirectly, lives. The first is the claim
set up by the leaders of the A.S.U. that none but members of that
union shall be allowed to shear in Australia; that, if a man be not a
member, he must be dismissed from all sheds, or compelled to join,
preparatory to being allowed to follow his calling in free Australia.
Virtually, that these leaders shall be allowed to say who may and who-
may not work, and on what conditions ; and also that they are to be
given power, with the help of the sheep owners, who are first to be
subjugated, to fix the amount that is to be levied on each man’s
earnings to provide them with fat billets. Ail this is to be effected
by starving free workmen and destroying the property of the sheep
owners. This might be got over if the leaders of the A.S.U. would
give up their claim, or if the sheep owners would submit and starve
the free labourers into submission; but behind there is another claim
even more difficult of settlement. The leaders of the unions, in
evidence before the Eoyal Commission, have claimed that they must
have the right to break any contract or agreement that may he mutually
made , and also to compel all union men to do likewise , and Mr. Temple
has asked the pastoral unions to agree to this, and offered for hi&
union to admit the same right to break agreements to the sheep
owners. Of course, I cannot suppose that Messrs. Spence and
Temple do not see the absurdity of asking people to make agreements,
and in the same breath claiming the right to break any that may be
made. That must be clear to them as to me or to any of your readers,
and the inference I draw is that those leaders do not want a settle-
ment, and would not agree to anything that might possibly lead to-
settlement. Whatever there may be in the first claim, the second is
meant to make settlement impossible by destroying the value of any
agreement. The reason for this is plain. While things are kept in a
seething state, there must be large sums of money passing through
the hands of these disinterested leaders, who, as their rules say, “ are
to be paid for their services such sum as the committee may direct,”
the committee consisting of themselves ; and any close inquiry about
receipts or disbursements of funds is met by the statement that to
publish such information at a time of strife would be injudicious, and
might do harm. Of course, if the trouble were over, men who had
been paying uncomplainingly out of their scant earnings might begin
to ask inconvenient questions, and insist on full and explicit answers
being given, and they might even go further and put the law in force,
as was done in the case of the Premier Building Association in Mel-
bourne, with the result that beautifully prepared balance-sheets would
be subjected to a keener scrutiny than that of a couple of friendly
auditors or a few working shearers. This must be avoided; hence the
formulation of the impossible claim mentioned above. By claiming
that members of the A.S.U. must have the right to break any agree-
ments which they may make, the leaders have made it impossible that
any should be made, and that, I honestly believe, was their intention
in making the claim.—l am, &c.,
W. E. Abbott.
Wingen, May 21.


What is Intimidation ?
The judgment pronounced by the Justiciary Appeal Court, Edin-
burgh, on Monday, 9th February, upon the decision of the Sheriff-
Substitute in the case of the complaint against the secretary of the
Dundee branch of the Dockers’ Union, charging him with unlawfully
intimidating men at work on board of the steamer Moravia in Dundee
harbour, is (says the Scotsman ) of extreme importance in its bearing
upon the interpretation of the law of conspiracy as applied to trade
disputes. The court had not to decide upon any question of facts,
but simply upon the view which Sheriff Campbell Smith had taken
of the meaning to be attached to the words of the statute of 1875.
In this aspect the question differs from that which we may assume
will be raised in the appeal that may be made against the verdict of
the jury iu the Leith case of intimidation relating to the same vessel.
Here the sheriff had found that, in addition to setting forth that
violence or intimidation had been used, the complaint before it can be
deemed relevant, must aver that the intimidation took effect. As the
prosecutor declined to amend his complaint in this sense it was dis-
missed on the ground of irrelevancy, and the appeal has been made to
ascertain whether the Sheriff-Substitute has taken a right and
reasonable view of the statute. The unanimous opinion of the four
judges is that he has gone wrong. The point raised is exceedingly
plain, and, from an non-legal point of view, entirely free from doubt.
We are now justified in believing that the law is here in accord with
common-sense. The words of the Act declare that the person who
wrongfully and without legal authority “ uses violence to or intimi-
dates ” any other person, or injures his property, “ with a view to
compel him to abstain from doing or to do what he has a legal right
to do,” shall be liable to certain penalties. The acts and words
averred against Munro will be generally held to amount to such
violence or intimidation. He is alleged to have threatened dock
labourers employed in discharging the Moravia that they would
■“ wear sore bones,” that men would be got “to throw them into the
docks ” if they did not desist from work. It is not alleged that these
threats so far took effect that the men abstained from working in con-
sequence of them. The Sheriff-Substitute’s decision amounts to this,
that under the Act no kind of threat or intimidation is an offence
unless it produces the effect which the intimidator desires it to have —-
that the crime lies not in the act of intention, but in the result. The
Lord Justice Clerk and his three colleagues have emphatically and
unanimously repudiated this view. They adduce reasons and ex-
amples which will convince the public that their judgment is as sound
in law as it is salutary in its practical effects. The intention of
Parliament is plain upon the face of the statute. The object is to
prevent and to punish intimidatory action or threats employed towards
those who are doing what they have a legal right to do, and the rubric
of the clause, and founded on it, describes its contents as “penalty for in-
timidation or annoyance by violence or otherwise.” It would be a pre-
posterous thing, and a defeat of a chief end of the clause, if it were


established that threats of personal violence and other forms of intimi-
dation and annoyance ean be indulged in with impunity, or so long as
those against whom they are directed have the strength of mind and
sense of duty to resist them. It is the purpose of the Act and the
interest of the public and of the working man that law-abiding
subjects should be protected from annoyance and bodily fear, as well
as that property —the property of the workman in his labour and of
the employer in his means and capital —should be preserved from injury.
Working Men Leaders .
VIGOROUS SPEECH BY MR. B. DOUGLAS.
The following report was telegraphed on Thursday last from Mel-
bourne to the Sydney Daily Telegraph Mr. B. Douglas, the president
of the Eight-hour Pioneer Association, in laying the foundation-stone
of the eight-hour memorial on the 22nd instant, said that no one in
the community regretted more than he did that the Mayor had not
accepted the position which the pioneers of the eight-hour system
had offered him. He was the chief magistrate of the city, and the
pioneers as citizens felt that they had a claim on him in that capacity.
(Hear, hear.) He looked upon that ceremony as one of the greatest
events in the history, not only of Victoria, but of the world. The
monument which would be placed on that spot would be the first that
had been raised in honour of the dignity of labour. (Cheers.) That
was an occasion on which they might all rejoice. It was the achieve-
ment of a great triumph which was initiated 55 years before. The national
holiday which they were that day enjoying was one of the greatest social
reforms that had ever been accomplished, and the benefit of the eight-
hour system would extend to the benefit of the whole world. (Cheers.)
It was due to the pioneers that the abridgement of the hours of labour
had been accomplished. The reform was not attained by tyranny of
any description or by the pernicious process of strikes, but by the
force of moral suasion. (Cheers.) It was secured by men who
recognised their rights, and were prepared to maintain them. (Cheers.)
If they desired to attain any reforms in the future, they would have to
get them, not by threats and coercion, not by the closure, but by the
force of moral suasion. (Cheers.) He regretted that the pioneers
had not received the credit to which they w r ere entitled from certain
persons, but he attributed that to jealousy. They were grateful for
the assistance they had received in the accomplishment of the national
movement they had undertaken, but to enable them to go on as they
begun they w’auted the practical support of the public, and they quite
expected that they would get it. (Hear, hear.) Eor their part they
intended to leave no stone unturned. The speaker then described the
monument, and pointed out that the porphyry marble from Talanga-
mite for the pedestal had been given them, and would have been there
but for the difficulty experienced in transporting it over the ranges.
It however might be received during the present or next week, and
when it was in position they would be gratified to find that such stone


was produced in the colony. He appealed to the magnanimity of the
public to allow of the accomplishment of the work, which he declared!
marked an epoch in the history of labour. (Cheers.)
At the banquet at night, Mr. Douglas, in submitting the toast of
“ The day we celebrate,” expressed his deep regret that the position
of affairs had so altered since the last occasion on which they had met
together. Then the affairs of the colony were bright and prosperous.
Trade was good and money easily obtained. At present trade was
depressed and money hard to get. In a few months the colony had
been brought to a condition of comparative dilapidation. (No.).
He attributed that to the unsettled state of the labour market,
brought about by the machinations of a few mischief-making agitators.
(Hear, hear.) He said this fearlessly, and as a pioneer he was not
afraid to speak his mind, either in the presence of those men or in
their absence. As a matter of fact he would not be allowed to say
anything before them with which they disagreed. If he attempted to
do so he would be howled down. (Hear, hear.) That was what they
called “an intelligent democracy.” Those men encouraged strikes;
they led their fellow-men astray, and hundreds and thousands of men
were groaning under the tyranny of those men who so falsely led
them. (Cheers.) He advised his fellow-working-men no longer to
follow those agitators, who were parasites on the institution which the
pioneers had created. (Hear, hear.) Many of them lived on their
wits, and not by honest industry. He would challenge some of those
mischievous leaders to prove that they had ever done an honest day’s
work. (Cheers.) They had had too much sway long enough,
and the time had arrived when they should he exposed and their
nefarious conduct in leading their fellow-men into difficulties revealed-
(Cheers.) When an honest, hard-working mechanic drew attention
to the way in which these men wex*e acting, and by constitutional
means tried to secure the reform of a certain institution, how was he
met ? With howling and derision. The question was never allowed
to be debated. (Cheers.) The cloture was applied to strangle dis-
cussion. Like the boycott, the cloture was un-British and tyrannical.
(Cheers.) One Yictorian statesman, who had departed and was for-
gotten and unmourned, had ruined his reputation by introducing it.
(Cheers.) It had been used too freely amongst the working-men, but
they were now beginning to feel that those who had so often used it
for their own ends would lead them astray unless they were got rid of.
(Hear, hear.) Victoria was indeed a paradise for the working-men
until those individuals developed, and he urged the labourers to allow
wisdom to prevail, to exercise a little common sense in the conduct of
their affairs. Then the present state of things would pass away, and the
colony would revert to the position it held 12 months before. (Cheers.)
Notwithstanding all they had done the pioneers had been insulted by
those men who were reaping what they had not sown, and enjoying
the fruits of the exertions of the men that they now flouted. (Cheers.)


A Visitor's Opinion .
In the mail to hand we find in the Pall Mall Gazette o£ 28th April
this letter by Mr. J. Troubridge Critchell, under the head o£ “ Labour
in Australia ” : —“ The following remarks written by the Eev. Charles
Clark —in the course of an article published to-day (25th April) in the
Middlesex County Times —are an interesting commentary on the late
great strike of labour in the Antipodes, and confirm the wisdom of
Mr. Champion’s position. Mr. Clark is now lecturing all over Aus-
tralia. His words are to my mind the strongest condemnation I have
read o£ the attitude assumed by the labour unions of Australia,
because they proceed out of the mouth of a man whose enthusiastic
advocacy of the rights of the worker and the rights of all classes is
well known in this land and in our Southern colonies. Mr. Clark is
as good a Eadical as he is an orator. Writing from G-reymouth (New
Zealand, he says:— ‘ I hear on all hands of the trouble, losses, and
damage to trade caused by the strike, and am assured that the effect
will be felt for years to come. Eeally, I have not words to express
my indignation at the insensate selfishness of the working men. The
conditions under which they work, and the monetary results of their
labours, are the best in the world, I should think; and yet for the
merest trifles, almost without a reason for any dissatisfaction, they
throw themselves out of employment, inflict shocking privations on
their wives and families, utterly dislocate trade and throw the whole
country into confusion. It is enough to make a man turn Tory to
think of it. lam sure I have always championed the cause of the
worker, but I am utterly ashamed of him, now that I see the follies of
which he is guilty, and the gross and casehardened selfishness which
dominates his dealings. He deserves to suffer, and will suffer, for the
driving away of capital and the suspension of business must make life
harder for any class, but especially for the wage-earning class, which
has no dependence but the labours of its hands. There will be harder
times in store, and I can hardly find it in my heart to pity men who
sin, perhaps in ignorance at first, but whose ignorance refuses to be
enlightened by the teachings of experience. The proverb says ‘ Ex-
perience makes fools wise.’ What must they be who, while the scars
of hard fortune are still unhealed, will plunge afresh into the same
excesses which have wrought their misery, and harden their hearts
against the sufferings of their own flesh and blood P When it comes
to a struggle, labour must suffer much more acutely than capital, and
suffer in the way which is hardest of all to bear. But they will not
hear terms, and must take the consequences.’ Heaven only knows
what will become of Australia, unless the working men there can be
brought to their senses. Does the British public know that when the
last mail left Queensland there was an armed camp of unionists at
Barcaldine, over 1000 strong, pitched at that spot to prevent by force
of arms the neighbouring squatters from employing free labour
imported from the other colonies ? The camp contains 500 tents and
three streets, each half-a-mile long, with a parade ground in front,


where the men are drilled daily by old soldiers. The Queensland
Government have had to despatch a considerable force, including
artillery, to the scene of action. — Observer, I7th June, 1801.
On Sundowners .
Sujtdownees are a class of men peculiar to Australia. They
travel from one station to another in the interior of the colonies
ostensibly looking for work. They carry the whole of their belongings
on their backs. They have no homes, are almost always without
money, and they depend upon the bounty of the station-owners for
their food. They are not particularly anxious to obtain employment,
and will only accept it when offered to them, and when the work
offered is one wherein hard work is not required and when they wish
for a spell or rest. As a rule, they demand the highest wages, and
give in return the least possible amount of work. When travelling
they arrive on a station about sundown, hence their name “ sun-
downers.” They go straight to the travellers’ hut, put down their
swags, and then apply to the storekeeper for a bit of rations. This is
invariably given to them. They then retire to the hut to cook their
food and to spend the night. In the morning they again appear at
the store for sufficient food to carry them on to the next station ; this
also is given to them. They then disappear, and on the following
evening similar applicants appear and receive the same treatment.
This goes on from one end of the year to the other, and on stations
situated on main roads the average number of men arriving and to be
fed is about from ten to twelve daily. During the present strike
these “ sundowners ” are nowhere to be seen on the stations in
Queensland. Where are they ? They are to be found in the strike
camps, living on the strike funds. They are enjoying themselves, and
are saved the trouble of walking from station to station. The bush
strike is an actual godsend to them, and they are not likely to leave
the camps as long as the people in the South are supplying them with
the means of getting their food without doing anything to earn it.
They are also the most determined of unionists, and will never give in
until they ere obliged to work or walk for a subsistence.
Hospitality to be Continued.
It is understood that the pastoralists, where they can possibly afford
to do so and have the supplies on the stations, intend as far as possible
to abide by the rules of hospitality which have actuated them in the
past to give rations to all bona-fide travellers looking for work.


What the Judges Say t
The following portions of the summing-up of Mr. Justice Harding
in the conspiracy cases at Bockhampton, and remarks to prisoners
when sentencing them, are pertinent and important: —
Having read the section of the Trades Union Act referring to the
matter, his Honour said that meant that any number of men could
combine for peaceable means to use argument or persuasion to other
men in matters relating to their trades. Every man’s liberty was his
own, and he had the right to sell his labour and his talents where he
wished to. There were three great rights which they possessed as
British subjects—the right of personal liberty, the right of property,
and the right of their reputation. A man’s personal liberty was not
secured to him if his mind could be tampered with, A man’s liberty
was not secured to him if he could not exercise his talents and his in-
dustry freely, as he liked, without coercion. If a man liked to join with
other men, and form a union, he could submit his will to a committee,
or to a leader, and it was legal that he should do so ; but, on the
other hand, other men might not care to do so, and they remained
free to do whatever they liked. A man, he repeated, had the right to
his personal liberty. His Honour read extensively from various
authorities on tbe subject of coercion and intimidation, and then
remarked that, apart altogether from conspiracy, there was the docu-
mentary evidence, and every letter which had been put in was
evidence against the man who signed it. So likewise were the acts of in-
dividual men evidence against them. Now, you have been found guilty
of obstructing the business of other parties—what_ are called free
labourers and what are called pastoralists, such interference and
obstruction being deemed to be carried on by illegal means. Judging
from the facts which were before me in this case, it appears that some
time since a strike arose, and it was a strike by certain workers
known as shearers and labourers. That strike still continues.
Whether or no that strike will be beneficial or not is not part of my
duty to consider. I have nothing, nor has this court anything, to do
with strikes between capital and labour. It does not lie with me to
pass any censure upon them. The law allows them, if they are
carried on in the way you heard me direct the jurymen yesterday.
During the evidence it appeared that you complained that the power
of the Government had been brought against you. From all
that I have seen 1 do not agree with that. From my posi-
tion I know well what is the duty of the Government of this
colony. It is the duty, and it is the first object of
the Government, to keep the peace, to protect each man in
his rights, and to prevent those men who interfere with them from
doing it. So that, wherever there is a disturbance, the arm of the
Government ought to be sufficiently strong to protect the peaceable.
The most sacred of our rights is that of personal liberty. If we can-
not go about with safety, what are our comforts ? If our lives are in
our hands, so to speak, where is our comfort? From the evidence it


appears perfectly clear to me that this conspiracy which has been
proved against you, and which you appear to have carried on, or your
puppets, was planned for the purpose of destroying all things in this
colony which value peace and order. Now a man’s personal liberty
is not to be interfered with except by the due course of the law, and
those who interfere except in that course are dealt with by the law.—
Capricornian, May 23.
At Townsville, on June 4, 1891, when sentencing Irwin and
Jeffries to seven years’ imprisonment for arson, Mr. Justice Cooper
said, “He had no means of knowing whether the prisoners were
merely the dupes of scheming, selfish, vain, and unscrupulous
agitators; ignorant, stupid, misled men filled with senseless class
hatred. The offence of which they had been found guilty was
punishable by 14 years’ imprisonment. He was about to pass a
heavy sentence, and he hoped that, during the time of tribulation
which was before the prisoners, they would profitably reflect upon the
crime and folly into which they had been led. The English law
upholds right against wrong, protects the weak against the strong,
and all look for protection to the law, which is the only protector of
the friendless. The law looks with especial abhorrence upon all
offences of conspiracy. Things which when doae by individuals may
be trivial, the law regards as grave offences when committed by a
number of persons who conspire together to terrorise and disturb
society. The law will not put up with organised crime of any des-
cription, or for any purpose whatever. The penalties which the law
inflicted were as much to deter others from crime as to punish those
who had committed it. He hoped the sentence he was about to pass
would have the effect of deterring others from the commission of
similar crimes. The law, his Honour continued, will exterminate
and annihilate persons who conspire and combine together for the
commission of crime.”' —Northern Age , June 4,
Close of Strike
Men, however loyal to unionism, get tired of contributing to a
hopeless struggle. Eor weeks past the collapse of this strike has been
a forgone conclusion by all rational observers. But the men who lead
the strike organisations have both billet and reputation to protect.
So to bolster up a lost cause, and bluff suspicion of failure, they mis-
represent facts, defame truth-speakers, impose on the credulity of
those who furnish their salaries ; utter with unblushing shamelessness
the most shameless of falsehoods ; cover the ignominy of their own
blunders and incapacity by denunciations of those voluntary and con-
stitutional agencies which have thwarted their schemes of vengeance.
Any dishonour publicly done to truth and justice is a permanent
injury to a community. Such dishonour the labour leaders have done.


They have justified their own flagrant blunders by wilful defamation
of their opponents; by seditious diatribes against State authority,
modified only by a regard for personal exemption from the incon-
venience and disgrace of incarceration; by conscious misrepresentations
of the scandalous misdeeds done by the advanced guards of strikers, and
by brutal sneers at the alleged cruelty and avarice of assailed em-
ployers, who have simply defended and protected their own interests.
All the time those very agencies which they so viciously denounced
were saving the country from the violent ravages and lawless dis-
turbances of the strikers. Had not the strong arm of the law been
stretched out, rifle in hand, the entire western country would have
been devastated by marauding bands of men, seeking, in the abused
name of“ justice,” to avenge their fancied grievances against law and
authority, property and capital. This perverted sense of rights and
wrongs has been instigated and educated by the labour leaders. It is
the natural outcome of the pernicious doctrines disseminated in this
colony through the official organ of the A.L.F. Upon the editor of
that journal rests the culpability of so many men being in gaol for
trying to put his doctrines into practice. Upon the General Council
of the A.L.F. rests the responsibility of paying that man to sow the
seeds of social dissension and trade discontent, of inciting insurrection
agaiqst authority and violence in methods of retaliation. But
paroxysms of malignity and convulsions of turbulance often defeat
their own ends. The chagrin of failure must eat like a cancer into
the soul of the rampageous instigator of civil commotion. A number of
sullen men, with sickened appetites, must have dined off “ humble
pie ” yesterday. The “ day of rest and gladness ” brought no repose
to their spirits, no joy their souls. Sackcloth and ashesbest became them.
But their chagrin and woebegoneness have been ensured to them
more by men whose interests they profess to champion than by the
employers whose greed and tyranny they have denounced. They are
both distrusted and defied by a very large section of their own class.
Here lies the bitterness of mortification. To be defeated by a stronger
force of assailed foes is a mortification with some compensation in it;
but to be defeated mainly by the very classes in whose alleged
interests and for whose alleged benefit the whole strike movement is
organised and maintained is a mortification devoid of a single element
or atom of consolation. It is a rude slap in the face ; an emphatic
disclaimer of official disinterestedness; a hot rebuke of the palpable
communism of the Lane-cum-Seymour-cum-Hinchcliffe-cum-Glassey
junta; a topsy-turvy, boot-toeing castigation of such ferocious
adjustors of labour’s wrongs as Casey and Reid, Taylor and Ryan.
Repudiators of paid officials have come forward in hundreds to work
in defiance of junta authority. Queensland pastoralists are supplied
with enough free labour for the present year. Still it comes, with a
rush of eagerness and a scramble for precedency of chances to work.
Federation of labour is a limping cripple. Thousands of workers are
proud of their individual independence. The veil of illusion has been
torn from their eyes. Their sense of manliness has overcome their terror


of unionistic vengeance. Modern militant unionism is recognised as
the greatest inquisitorial machine of torture and vengeance concocted
in the current century. At first only the boldest protestants against
unionistic despotism dare venture into the stronghold of intimidation
and violence. All credit must be given to those pioneers of labour
liberty ; they entered the arena of peril when the strikers were arrogant
and vindictive. There was a lot of peril then ; for the strikers meant
mischief and revenge. But as soon as it became apparent that the
Government meant to defend men in the exercise of their independent
right to labour where they chose, the terror of unionistic vengeance
was allayed, and hundreds of men came forth eagerly and pressingly,
even clamouring for work. Several times the men were on the point
of fighting for the first chance of engagement. A few pleaded pite-
ously for their hungry wives and children. Under such a pressure of
labour what chance was there for the success of the strike ? The
most ardent disliker of communistic unionism could not desire any
stronger proof of its impotency than was supplied by the eager,
earnest crowds of work-seekers who thronged the offices and vestibules
of the headquarters of the pastoralists’ executive. The ill-advised
aggressors have raised their own Nemesis. They confess to having
broken up the bush unions, Por years to come it will be necessary for
federated capital only to show a bold front when attacked, to marshal
its forces with skill, and then to win by the help of allies in the form
of free labour. But free labour must be respected, because it is free
and courageous. It has fought unionism and has conquered. It must
be protected and conserved. It requires courage to assert freedom in
face of organised intimidation. Manifestly militant communism, in
the guise of federated unionism, is repugnant to thousands of working
men. They can see that its ever-aggressive exactions are driving
capital out of trade, and making work scarce ; they can see also that
the avarice of paid officials is quite as keen as the condemned avarice of
employers ; they can further see that the ultimate aim of labour place-
hunters is not justice to workers, but the concentration of power over
both workers, employers, and Parliament in their own hands. The
flower of their patriotism is neither so pleasant in its perfume nor se
stainless in its colour as it was once thought to be. —Daily Telegraph,
Brisbane, June 15,1891.
Another staggering blow, the second within the year, has been
delivered against the cause of Australian labour by its own stalwart
arm. As all along predicted by the “ lying capitalistic Press,” the
shearers’ strike, based on a foundation of sand, buttressed by lawless
violence, and deserted by the common sense of the people, has come to
an ignominious end. At a mass meeting held in the union camp at
Barcaldine, three days ago, it was announced that the delegates of the
unions and the district council had resolved that the strike be
ft declared off.” The immediate cause of the collapse is the failure of
funds. It is useless to dwell on the characteristic effrontery which the
very day before the failure was announced spoke of the funds as


plentiful, and specified large suras as just having been received, and
about to be received. In this and the representations of a similar
kind, which have all along been made, there is worse than effrontery;
there is deliberate deception practised on the men, who, on the
strength of promised support, have been induced to absent themselves
from their proper calling, and to fold their arms while others stepped
into their places. It it not wonderful that they who see themselves
left destitute, with their old billets filled, should be indignant, as they
are reported to be at several shearing centres, with the leaders who
have so injured and humiliated them. Whether the issue be ascribed
to stupidity, to obstinacy, or to selfish retention of place and power
in spite of known facts and clear results ; whether the leaders are fools
or rogues—and they have demonstrated themselves to be one or other
—it is difficult, in view of the loss and misery they have inflicted on
the country, on the labour classes, and on the shearers themselves, to
speak temperately of their ill desert. If the man who, by foolish or
fraudulent management of his business squanders the money of a
small circle of creditors, is thought worthy of punishment, what do
they deserve who have sqandered the hard-earned money of thousands
throughout the colonies, have thrown thousands more out of employ-
ment, have arrested industry, multiplied bankruptcies, and grievously
injured the public credit ?
But it is too early to estimate the enormity of the losses occasioned
by this most insane of strikes. Our present business rather is, if
possible to prevent further insanity. In the announcements made of
the want of funds in the Brisbane mass meeting of Saturday, in the
“ declaring off ” at the Sunday mass meeting at Barcaldine, it has yet
been explicitly ordered that the men must not recognise “ freedom of
contract ” or work on other than union terms. Could there be a more
palpable folly or greater cruelty than the imposing of such a con-
dition at such a time ? This has been a strike against freedom of
contract, or the signing of the pastoralists’ agreement. What is the
meaning of declaring the strike off, and at the same time declaring
that these concessions are not to be made ? It can only mean that the
men who have been brought to destitution by the strike are to be
prevented escaping from destitution. There remain the sole alterna-
tives of beggary and robbery. And, incredible as it may seem, these
are the courses to which the shearers lately on strike, who are popu-
larly spoken of as numbering 10,000, are deliberately and openly
advised. Anarchist Casey, in his detailed advice to the ‘ repulsed”
unionists at Barcaldine, did not use stronger language than that
deliberately used by the Strike Committee on the Friday previous.
He told his hearers that there were but three things left for them to
do —to work under the pastoralists’ agreement, to starve, or to go to
gaol. Clearly as this statement shows the result of refusing the first,
Mr. Casey was not ashamed to repeat the counsel against it, and urge
his hearers to accept one of the two latter alternatives. Anyone can
see what these mean. The starvation alternative is a sensationalism
for seeking help from G-overninent or from the charitably-disposed.


The speaker called on the destitute shearers —destitute through their
own and their leaders’ obstinacy—to demand from the Government
either work or rations. If this demand was not listened to, the only
thing to be done was to commit acts which would put them into the gaols;
and a resolution was actually carried at the meeting binding the dis-
persing shearers to one or other of these two last alternatives. The very
men who “ claim the right to live by their labour without sacrificing
their liberty ” —this is the euphemism for refusing proffered work—
resolve in the same breath to sacrifice their liberty rather than live
by their labour! The extent to which Government can listen to the
demand for relief is easily decided. No man can be allowed to starve ;
but neither can any man be allowed to sorn upon the country. The
Government will give two or three days’ rations to those who are
starting out to work, but those who decline to go to work will receive
nothing. The same rule must govern private charity. Iniquitous as
it is that for the second time within a few months the country should
have placed on it the burden of supporting men impoverished by the
strike mania, such support will be freely given if strike tactics are
abandoned. Tor the rest the old law must hold that if a man will not
work neither shall he eat. And for whatever crime and retribution of
crime may result from the counsel to abstain from work, the heavy
responsibility lies upon the wicked men who have given the counsel
and who cannot shelter themselves behind the consent of their
followers. It is hard to believe even yet that counsel so atrocious is
•seriously given or will be extensively followed, but the work of the
Government will not be over till it is demonstrably abandoned.
One other consideration comes to the surface now as condemnatory
of the course pursued. Have the unionist leaders considered the sig-
nificance of the fact that the funds have failed ? They have boasted
all along of the approval of the country and of the solidarity of the
union support. Not often, indeed, has the union tongue been moved
against the strike; though in many quarters, and even in the highest,
there has been strong suspicion of a gag. But deeds are greater than
words. And deeds in this case have incontestably condemned the
strike or the strike conduct. More decisive than all the rain of
speeches, resolutions, and manifestos, more decisive than a thousand
ballots conducted as ballots have been, is the simple fact that the
unionists throughout the colonies have stopped the supplies. And it
must be observed that this stoppage condemns not only the strike to
which it puts and end but the preposterous course adopted now. It
proclaims that in the view of Australian unionism itself the shearers
should return to work on the terms offered them. They who in place
of this return counsel pauperism and crime must face the fact that they
have not only the Government and general community opposed to
them, but the very unions which have hitherto supported them, and
which now withhold their help. The labour candidate who should
offer himself to-day with the policy of the Strike Committee in his
mouth would by labour itself be sent to Coventry. —Brisbane Courier ,
June 16, 1891.


Pastoralists ’ Manifesto ,
THE EESTTLT OF THE FEDERAL COUNCIL
The following resolutions were passed by the Pastoralists’ Federal
Council of Australia, in Brisbane, on 16th, 17th, and 18th March:—
1. “ That the Pastoralists’ Federal Council of Australia adheres to
the determination arrived at by the several pastoralists’ unions of New
South Wales, Yietoria, Queensland, and South Australia, of granting
a conference to the Shearers’ and Labourers’ Unions, provided that
‘ freedom of contract ’ be first admitted, and the subjects for debate
specified, a conference on any other terms being impossible to the
employers, and a great injustice to the free labourers of Australia, but
in no case will any conference be held while the present lawless pro-
ceedings continue in the disturbed districts, which constitute a demand
for conference under threat of armed force.”
2. “ That additional shearers and laborers be obtained in accordance
with the following notice :
Notice to Queensland Sheaeebs and Woodshed Hands now on
Steike.
On 6th February the Executive of the Queensland United Pastor-
alists’ Association advertised for shearers and rouseabouts willing to
work under the pastoralists’ agreement. Their advertisement is still
regularly appearing in the local papers throughout the pastoral districts,,
and the following is an extract therefrom :
The pastoralists have no wish to engage outside labour if Queensland men are
willing to accept the liberal terms offered. No reduction in the rates of shearing or
wages.
Nearly six weeks have elapsed since that advertisement first appeared
without any adequate response being made thereto. On the contrary,,
all the men connected with bush labour unions have been ordered to
leave their employmeut on the 23rd instant, and drastic penalties are
threatened in the case of those disobeying the mandate of the unions.
An attempt is further being made to persuade the bush unionists
that when the present strike is over they will be “ victimised.” If this
term means, that after peace is restored, unionists, as such, will be sub-
jected to persecution by employers, the Pastoralists’ Federal Council
of Australia (representing the owners of three-fourths of the sheep in
Australia) hereby gives any such statement an absolute and emphatic
denial.
Should the present hostile attitude of the bush unions be abandoned
the desire of the pastoralists is to let bygones be bygones, and to engage
men on their merits as workmen without enquiring or considering
whether they belong to any union or not.
The great majority of bush unionists now on strike are respectable
hard-working men, from whom the pastoralists have been sorry to part,
and whom they would welcome back to their employ. If the bush
unions, however, persist in their present determination of calling out
all members of their organisations, the pastoralists will have no alter-


■native other than to introduce additional labour, in so much as they will
be compelled forthwith to take steps to procure hands for the pro-
tection of their stock and property.
They, therefore, very reluctantly give notice to all shearers, rouse-
.abouts, and station hands now on strike, or contemplating going on
-strike, that after the 25th instant additional men will be engaged to
take the place of those who have left or may leave their work. More-
over, when engaging these additional men the pastoralists will have to
give them a guarantee of extended employment, so that there will be
no employment available for the unionists should they subsequently
desire to go to work.
Issued by order of the Pastoralists’ Federal Council of Australia.
(Signed)
Frederick: Ranson, Secretary United Pastoralists’ Asso-
ciation of Queensland.
Whitelet King, Secretary Pastoralists’ Union of .New
South Wales.
Edmund Mitchell, Secretary Pastoralists’ Union of
Victoria.
H. C. Baker, Acting Secretary Pastoralists’ Union of
South Australia.
Brisbane, 18th March, 1891.”
3. “ That the Grovernment of Queensland be informed of the fore-
going resolutions, adopted unanimously by the Pastoralists’ Federal
Council.”
The next morning a meeting of the Federated Employers’ Union of
Queensland was held, at which the resolutions embodied in the above
were unanimously and warmly approved of. Telegrams received from
the Employers’ Unions of Victoria and New South Wales also indicate
that similar motions of approval have been passed by them.
Shearing Agreement
To be used in New South Wales, Queensland, and the Northern
Districts oe South Australia.
Adopted by the Intercolonial Conferences held in Melbourne, 7th November;
and in Sydney, 22nd December, 1890.
AGREEMENT made this day of 18 between
herein called the employer of the one part, and the
undersigned shearer of the other part. The terms of this Agreement are that the
undersigned shearer hereby agrees to faithfully serve the employer by shearing
with all reasonable dispatch all the sheep required of him by the employer or his
agent during the present season in a good and workmanlike manner and to the
satisfaction of the employer or his agent, the total number of sheep required to be
shorn by the whole of the shearers employed during the shearing to be not less
than thousand nor more than thousand.
1. The price of shearing wethers, ewes, and lambs (including ram lambs under
six months old) to be at the rate of twenty shillings per hundred for all such


sheep shorn ; rams at the rate of forty shillings per hundred for all rams shorn ;
money to be paid by cheque on a local bank, or exchange to be added.
2. The shearer shall be at the Station or run ready to commence
shearing on the day of 18 , and the employer agrees to be
ready to commence shearing on that date, and to keep the shearer fully supplied
•with sheep, unless prevented by weather or by some unforseen cause.
3. The employer shall, during the whole of the time the shearer is engaged
shearing, provide him with hut accommodation, cooking and table utensils, wood,
and water free of charge.
4. The shearer shall not absent himself from work, but in case he leave before
the completion of shearing, owing to sickness, accident, or other such unavoidable
cause, or by the permission of the employer or his agent, he shall be paid in full
for all sheep shorn by him, but shall be charged 15s. per week for his board
and lodging, cook’s remuneration included, such sum to be deducted from the
amount due to him and placed to the credit of the shearers’ mess account.
5. If a shearer be discharged, as he may be, for breach of this Agreement, or of
the Rules endorsed hereon or attached hereto, he shall be paid for the number of
sheep shorn by him up to the time of such discharge, but he shall be charged 20s.
per week for his board and lodging, cook’s remuneration included, which amount
shall be placed to the credit of the shearer’s mess account.
6. Once a week, on a day to be named at commencement of shearing, on demand
the employer shall pay to the shearer any sum not exceeding 50 per centum of the
amount due over and above one week’s earnings at the time of such demand,
except in case of the shearer breaking this Agreement.
7. The employer and the shearer shall conform to the rules endorsed hereon or
attached hereto, which Rules it is hereby agreed shall be taken and deemed to be
and form part of this Agreement.
As Witness the hands of the parties the day and year first before written.
Signed by the Employes in the presence of
Signed by the Shearer in the presence of
Rules .
Embodied as part of Agreement.
1. The shearing shall be carried on under the direction and supervision of the
employer or the person placed by him in charge of the shed.
2. Before commencing work the shearer shall draw lots for his pen, and shall
abide by the result of such drawing, the person in charge of the shed having the
right to make any alteration deemed advisable.
3. All the sheep must be taken carefully from the pen to the shearing board and
be shorn closely and in a fair and workmanlike manner, and to the satisfaction of
the person in charge of the shed, the belly wool to be taken off first and laid aside.
4. In opening the fleece at the neck and belly, both blades of the shears or the
machine to be kept under the wool and close to the skin so as to avoid twice
cutting, and the shearer shall not be allowed to run the shears or the machine
through the fleece so as to break it down the centre or the back, and shall not
stand on the fleece.
5. In ease the said shearer turns out a sheep badly cut or insufficiently tarred,
he shall at once sew and tar such cut or wound, in his pen, or otherwise dress or
treat such sheep as directed by the person in charge of the shed.
6. The shearer shall not be allowed to kick or otherwise injure or illuse any
sheep, and in case he seriously injure or illuse any sheep, or cut the teat of any
ewe or pizzle of any wether or ram, he shall immediately report same to person in
charge of the shed ; and he shall pay to the employer the mess rate for the sheep
so injured, and if the sheep be fit for food it shall go to the shearers’ mess, the
employer to have the right to refuse such payment and keep the sheep.
7. The shearer shall not be allowed to catch any sheep from his pen while it is
being filled, but shall during such filling shear from any pen or pens that may be


allotted to him by the person in charge of tlie shed. No sheep to he caught after
the signal has been given to cease work by the person in charge of the shed.
8. The prices to he charged by the employer for rations and shearers’ requisites
shall not exceed cost prices, with 10 per cent, and cost of carriage added.
9. Each shearer may have free run for two horses, hut the employer accepts no
responsibility for them.
10. No shearer shall bring, or cause to he brought, any intoxicating liquor on to
the station ; no profane or obscene language or singing shall be allowed in the shed,
11. The employer shall provide at least one grindstone for every ten shearers
employed.
12. Shearers shall provide their own cook, except where cooks work conjointly
for shearers and the employer, in which case the cook shall be engaged by the
employer, and the proportion of mess account and of cook’s remuneration shall be
matter of mutual agreement.
13. In all sheds where shearing machines are provided, shearers shall pay for
cutters and ccmbs a price not exceeding cost. In case of stoppages through breakage
or otherwise, shearers shall, if required, go on shearing with hand shears.
Agreement for Employees engaged during
Shearing .
Adopted by the Intercolonial Conferences held in Melbourne 7th November, and in
Sydney, 22nd December, 1890.
AGEEEMENT made and entered into this day of between
of hereinafter called the Employer of the one part, and
hereinafter called the Employee of the other part.
Whereby the Employee agrees to work as a generally useful hand at
Station during shearing season of 189 ; to obey all lawful commands of the
Employer or his agents ; to continue so working from day to day till the whole of
the sheep and lambs that the Employer desires to shear, which, in number, will be
not less than nor more than , are shorn; and to be diligent
and of good conduct.
In consideration of such services being duly and faithfully performed, the
Employer agrees to pay the Employee wages at the rate of per week
for each and every week the Employee shall have worked in accordance with this
agreement; and the Employer further agrees during such service to provide the
Employee with hut accommodation, cooking and table utensils, wood and water, free
of charge, and also to supply him with rations as endorsed hereon —the cook to
be engaged and remunerated by the Employer.
Once a week, on a day to be named at commencement of shearing, on demand,
the Employer shall pay to the Employee any sum not exceeding 50 per centum of
the net amount due over and above one week’s earnings at the time of such
demand, except in the case of the Employee breaking this Agreement, money to be
paid by cheque on a local bank, or exchange added.
Signed by the Employer in the presence of
Signed by the Employee in the presence of
Diary of Shearers' Strike , 1891.
January 3.—Pastoralists’ new agreement published simultaneously in
Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia.
January 27. —The Pastoralists’ Union of New South Wales issue a
statement by way of explanation of agreement. Shearers at
Logan Downs and Gordon Downs refuse to sign agreement.


January 29.—Pastoralists decide to bring free labour from Victoria
and New South Wales.
February I.—Successful engagement of men in Melbourne. Central
District Council of Australian Labour Federation issue a pro-
clamation of strike.
February 4.—The s.s. “ Derwent ” left Melbourne with free labourers.
February 9—First company of free labourers landed at Bockhampton
from s.s. £i Derwent.”
February 10.—Wolfang free labourers hustled at Clermont by
unionists ; five men intimidated.
February 11.—Gordon Downs and Logan Downs free labourers reach
Gordon Downs Station ; linch-pins of waggons removed; two
men defected. Cbarleville Carriers’ Union declare Logan
Downs non-union.
February 11. — Meeting of 1,000 union shearers at Barcaldine;
resolved to use force to prevent free men working. 150 men
sent to Peak Downs.
February 16.—0 n receipt of information above, Colonial Secretary
issued special instructions to police magistrates, &c., and
ordered to Clermont certain picked police.
February 17. —Fifty-eight armed police sent from Brisbane to
Clermont district.
February 19. —Seizure of ammunition at Emerald Railway Station,
Shearing began at Wolfang.
February 20.—'Major Jackson with 60 permanent artillery with 1
field-piece left Brisbane by s.s. “ Burwah ” for Clermont.
February 21.—Major Ricardo with 50 Moreton Mounted Infantry
left Brisbane for Clermont by “ AVodonga.” Rockhampton
and Mt. Morgan mounted infantry left for Clermont.
February 23. —Proclamation calling on camps to disperse, issued by
Government. Mr. Ranking appointed Government agent in
disturbed district. Union delegates visit Logan Downs and
threaten free labourers, who refused to come out, whereupon
said, “ Well, within 48 hours, you will be very sorry you did
not do as we asked ; you will be skulking like ratsiu hollow logs.”
February 24.—50 free shearers crossed border at Mungindi for
Australian Pastoral Company, Noondoo Station.
February 26.—A1l station hands in Western country called out for
the 23rd March. Australian Labour Federation wire to Sir
T. Mcllwraith from Rockhampton. Sir Thomas replies thereto.
February 28. —Sir S. W. Griffith and Mr. F. R. Murphy burnt in
effigy at Clermont.
March 2. —Australian Labour Federation again wires to Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith, Sir Thomas replies. Commercial Hotel, Clermont
(Mrs. Mullins), boycotted, because proprietor refused to dismiss
a Chinese cook.


March 3.—Manifesto issued at Rockhampton by Australian Labour
Federation.
March s.—Fences at Ravensbourne Station fired. Pastoralists’
executive at Rockhampton issue reply to manifesto of Aus-
tralian Labour Federation.
March 6.—Woolshed at Maneroo Station burned.
March 7.—Riotors assault on Pastoralists’ executive at Clermont.
March B.—Arrest of men in connection with assault at Clermont.
March 9.—Statement in relatim to agreement and strike issued at
Brisbane by executive of the United Pastoralists’ Association
of Queensland.
March 12. —Wide Bay mounted infantry left for Rockhampton.
March 15. —Attempt to wreck train carrying troops, near Barcaldine,
by placing two crowbars on rails. Unionists threaten free
shearers at Oakwood.
March 16.—First meeting of Pastoralists’ Federal Council at Brisbane.
Toowoomba mounted infantry called out.
March 19. —Attempt to wreck a train, near Retro Crossing, by placing
on rails a log 7ft. by 16in. Grass fired wherever it would burn,
and some fences on Langton station. Woolshed at Lome
Station burned. Grass fired between Lome and Terrick Downs
drafting yard. Interception of free labourers en route to Peak
Downs ; decisive action of Sub-inspector White. Manifesto
issued by the Pastoralists’ Federal Council at Brisbane.
March 22.—Biddenham and Oakwood runs fired in many places.
Martin delivered seditious speech at Barcaldine.
March 23. —Arrest of 9 men who had rushed Sub-inspector White’s
party on 19th. 68 riotous unionis's left Minnie Downs for
Langlo, firing grass along road. Unionists gather at Oakwood,
firing grass, breaking gates, and cutting netting fences on road.
50 unionists threaten to “ skull drag” men of Claws, a drover,
if they would not join the union. Arrest at Clermont Railway
Station of delegate Taylor and Stewart (chairman of Sandy
Creek Camp). Important papers on Taylor seized. Brilliant
night ride of Lieut. Spencer Browne, and 20 picked infantry,
from Gordon Downs to Clermont.
Mai’ch 21.—Arrest of Barcaldine Strike Committee, and seizure of
papers.
March 25.—Grass and fencing round Augathella fired. 11 bullocks
of Weller, a non-union carrier, shot near Blackali. All rail-
way officials sworn as special constables. E. H. Murphy,
labour leader, arrested at Roma ; papers seized.
March 26.—60 men of Queensland Moreton Regiment, and 50
Volunteer Rifles, under Colonel French, leave Brisbane.
35 men, Maryborough mounted infantry, leave for disturbed
district. Townsville mounted infantry leave for Hughenden.


March 28. —Smith Bany arrested at Clermonb Delegate Forrester,
Camp Sergeant Daisey, and Secretary Clark arrested at
St, George. Unionists attack free labourers at Boorabah,
seriously injure one.
March 29.—Six men intercept messenger to Northampton Downs,
demand papers he was carrying. He escapes them. Delegate
Fanning and six others arrested at Charleville. Fences burned
and gates broken at Langlo Downs. Colonel French, with 243
men and 15 officers, left Rockhampton for Barcaldine. In-
spector Stuart reports arrest of 21 unionists at Augathella,
after reading of Riot Act.
March 30. —Two hundred unionists intercept free labourers near Oak-
wood. Collision imminent, and averted only by order to load
rifles. Seven men arrested. Brilliant lide of Captain King to
Biddenham, following unionists. Attempted wrecking of rail-
way bridge at Ebor Creek; piles and headpieces sawn. Nive
Downs woolshed, with 150 bales of wool, burned.
April 2. —Attempt to wreck a train at Capella.
April 7. —James Kearney, late J.P., called out all hands at Caiwarra.
Eleven men left in consequence of intimidation by him.
April 10. —Considerable damage to properly at Katandra and Oon-
dooroo, Shearers’ hut and contents destroyed.
April 11. —Bastard ballot at Barcaldine on “ freedom of contract ”
1,195 against, 7 for. Colonel French left camp.
April 13.—Public meeting at Town Hall to press conference. Second
lot free workers land at Rockhampton.
April 15. Gumbardo woolshed, with 576 bales of wool, burned.
Milo woolshed, with 80 bales of wool, and huts, burned. Men
forcibly taken to union camp.
April 16.—Intimidation of free workers at Coreena.
April 19.—Attempt to destroy Clermont Court-house. Flying column
of infantry, in charge of Lieutenant R. Spencer Browne, ride
from Alpha to Tambo —109 miles; 32 hours in saddle, with
one meal.
April 21. — Throats of five horses cut at Aberfoyle
April 22. —Fanning and Brennan sentenced at Charleville; three
months’ imprisonment.
April 23.—Grass atWaroonga fired.
April 24. —Arrival of flying column, under Spencer Browne, at Ada-
vale ; a lerrible march through flooded country.
April 26. —Dillon arrested at Adavale camp on charge of conspiring
to intimidate men guarding Milo woolshed.
April 27. —Goods shed at Amby Downs Railway Station, with a truck
of wool alongside, burned.


Ap il 28.—Waggon, with over 60 bales of wool, from Keeroongoola and
Mount Morris, fired and destroyed, 18 miles from Charleville.
April 30.—Two hundred unionists intimidate labourers and obstruct
teams at Langlo aid Mount Morris stations. Sentry on duty
at Delta fired on. Dour prisoners found guilty at Eockhamp-
ton of rioting, and two of unlawfully assembling. Unionists
brutally maltreat hands at Tbylungra; made to walk 100
miles; not allowed to catch horses. Unionists steal flour at
Clermont. Conspiracy trials commenced at Rockhampton
before Justice Harding.
May I.—Two thousand unionists in procession at Barcaldiue and
Charleville.
May 2. —Delegate Stephens, Barcaldiue, sentenced to three months.
May I.—Dree labourers start from Hughenden for Cambridge Downs,
are met by 800 unionists ; Eiot Act read and bayonets fixed.
Men remain firm. Charges of cruelty to unionist prisoners
officially repudiated.
May s.—Marathon waggon burnt. Bierbank Station team burnt 12
miles from Charleville; driver taken forcibly to union camp.
McElroy and Hewitt charged with burning Gumbardo shed —
committed.
May 6.—Attempt to burn Biddenham woolshed. Mick, an aboriginal,
confessed firing under compulsion on sentinel at Delta.
May 7. —Attempt to burn woolshed at Darr Eiver Downs. Union
camp at Clermont demand strike pay. Dor grass burning at
Waroonga —three men sentence s to three months’ imprison-
ment, four to one month, and several fined Twenty special
constables from Brisbane reach Barcaldiue for Muttaburra.
Dillon and McGrath, Barcaldiue unionists, sentenced to six
months’ imprisonment with hard labour, for assaulting mili-
tary ; several fined for abusive language.
May B.—Dillalah out-stations (3) burnt by unionists. Euudalla
woolshed surrounded by unionists. Mabbot retracts statement
as to ill-treatment of unionist prisoners. Dourteen unionists
take away the only man from Tillboora; attempt to burn
Cambridge Downs.
May 9.—Patrol sent to Dillalah ; disturbance expected. Men at
Bogadoon resumed work and sworn in as special constables.
May 11.—Townsville branch of Queensland Typographical Association
refuse to make levy in aid of shearers, and secede from District
Council of Australian Labour Dederation, and also request the
Queensland Typographical Association to withdraw therefrom.
May 7 12. —Twelve men identified as implicated in rict at Eavens-
bourne. Stations about Cunnamulla visited by unionists, who
intimidated and called out station hands and rabitters. Kewley
arrested for perjury.


May 13.—100 bullocks driven out of Granada paddocks on 7th, and
left five miles from fence. Three men arrested in connection
with burning of Milo shed.
May Id,—Twelve prisoners committed for trial for arson at Lome
shed —bail refused. Eumoured intention to burn new rail-
way station.
May 15.—Carriers at Barcaldine decide by 50 against 3d to return
to work. Letter from Australian Labour Federation to
Premier, demanding immediate passing of an absurd labour
bill. Unionists visit Diamantina Station, and threaten to
remove employees by force.
May 16.—Frank Reynolds, a member or Barcaldine District Council
of the Australian Labour Federation, expelled for expressing
opinions adverse to strikers. Union delegate at Cunnamulla
called upon unionists at a distance from that town to deposit
their tickets with the chairman of control. Eighty-eight free
labourers left in “Wodonga” for Rockhampton. Blackall
meeting of sympathy with C. Carkeek, who had been deposed
from the magistracy for public manifestation of sympathy with
Kewley when arrested for perjury.
May 17.—Strike Commiteee at Barcaldine refuse to sanction resump-
tion of work by carriers.
May 18.—Unionists destroy about a mile of marsupial netting fence
at Burenda. Premier replies to letter of Australian Labour
Federation ; nine unionists committed at Blackall for firing
Lome woolshed, March 19th.
May 19.—Raid on Chinese gardens at Barcaldine by unionists.
May 20.—Freedom of contract defined by Council of Federated
Employers’ Union of Queensland as “ the right of any worker
to accept work from any employer, and the right of any
employer to engage any man wanting work ; that is, the right
of any person to give or accept work without interference or
molestation.” Jury at Rockhampton agree ; Ryan and Fry
acquitted; verdict of guilty on all counts against George
Taylor, organiser central district; W. Fothergill, secretary
Central District Council; H. O. Blackwell, secretary Labourers’
Union, Barcaldine; W. J. Bennett, member strike committee,
Barcaldine ; A. J. Brown, member strike committee, Barcaldine ;
R. Price, W. Hamilton, J. A. 8. Stewart, chairman Sandy Creek
camp; P. J. Griffin, chairman Capella camp; H. C. Smith-
Barry ; E. H. Murphy, agent Maranoa branch Shearers’ and
Labourers’ Union ; Alex. Forrester, organiser Maranoa district.
Sentence : —Three years’ imprisonment, and recognisance for
good behaviour for further 12 months; failing recognisance
continue in gaol. Peak Downs rioters —sentenced : —T. Lowry,
three years’ imprisonment; D. Murphy, three years’ imprison-
ment ; J. T. Heathcote, three years’ imprisonment; P. J.


May
May
May
24. —Valuable stack of hay burned at Thurulgoona.
Dobbyn, two years’ and a-half imprisonment; W. Dover, two
years’ imprisonment; D. J. Bowes, one year and a-hal£
imprisonment; all to find sureties for good behaviour for one
year or stop in gaol; J. Martin, for sedition, sentenced two
years’ imprisonment, and find surety for good behaviour for
two years.
21.—J. Toohey fined £l5 or three months’ imprisonment for
attempting to communicate with prisoners in Blackall Gaol.
Intimidation cases at Adavale. Waldrick sentenced eight
months’ imprisonment, and Wm, and Fred Smith three months’
each. Of thirteen men charged with raiding Chinese gardens
at Barcaldine, three discharged, two sentenced one month’s, and
nine to three months’ imprisonment.
22. —Beport that unionists killing cattle on runs about Charle-
ville. J, Graham and J. K. Williams charged at Roma with
firing Amby Railway goods shed.
28.—Free labourers struck at Coreena against emplovment of
two unionists, before settlement of freedom of contract. New
Carriers’ Union found at Barcaldine on free contract basis.
25.—Argentine co-operative settlement scheme unfolded at
Barcaldine by W. Lane.
2d.—Kewley, of strike committee, arrested as “ accessory before
the fact ” in burning of Lome woolshed. Unionist endeavour-
ing to import arms and ammunition from N.S. Wales over
border. Unionists at Glenarilf and Rockwood, when travelling up
Tower Hill Creek, cut down fences, destroy and burn gates,
and otherwise destroy property.
27—Two unionists captured in act of destroying fence and
firing grass at Lammermoor Station. Government Analyst
reports that water from bucket at Mitchell Downs more than
fully charged with strychnine.
28.—Conspiracy and other prisoners from Rockhampton landed
at St. Helena. Unionists reported destroying and burning
fences on main Charleville and Cunnamulla road. M. Leigh,
one of jury in conspiracy cases, maltreated at Mount Morgan.
29.—J. White sentenced to two months’ imprisonment for
assaulting Sub-inspector Dillon, at Clermont, March 7. 42
special constables sworn in at Jundah.
30.—“ No true bill ” found in case of P. M‘Elroy and G. Hewitt,
committed at Adavale, on charge of arson at Gumbardo wool-
shed ; and in case of J. Jermvn, committed at Charleville on
charge of unlawful assembly. Rabid speech at Rockhampton
of G. Casey, organiser Australian Labour Federation. Unionists
organise a system for “ safe ” destruction of property. All
gates from Charleville to Coongoola resumption destroyed,
except two on Mangalore Station.


May 31. —Violent speech at Barcaldine by G. Casey, organiser.
June I.—D. K. Eussell, publican, at Hughenden, boycotted by
unionists. At Blackall four men sentenced three months’
imprisonment for intimidation. Two of Lome rioters com-
mitted for arson at Minnie Downs and Lauglo Downs. Kyan,
one of the two acquitted of conspiracy at Eockhampton,
resumes chairmanship of strike committee at Barcaldine; he
counsels constitutional, rather than violent, measures.
June 2.—Much intimidation in St. George district. Unionists threaten
to burn Whyenbah shed when shearing commences. Several
rifle shots fired at Burenda wool-shed ; tracks of footmen found
and followed. Dias, labour leader, arrested at Hughenden for
threatening incendiarism. Williams and Graham committed
at Eoma on charge of firing railway goods-shed at Amby.
June 3.—Unionists at Cunnamulla endeavour to negotiate for supply
of goods on six months’ bills. Augathella : Six men sentenced
to five months’ imprisonment for having mutton in possession
they could not account for. Six men arrested on charge of
assault on Lee at Mt. Morgan.
June 4.—C. Anderson sentenced at Charleville three months’
imprisonment for intimidation at Eiversleigh. A. Irwin and J.
Jeffreys sentenced at Townsville by Justice Cooper to seven
years’ penal servitude for arson on Lammermoor Station.
June s.—Sirike pay, at 3s. 2d. per man per week, substituted for
rations at Barcaldine. Major De Yoeux proceeded from
Barcaldine for Charleville.
June 6. —Over 230 free shearers and labourers left Brisbane in s.s.
“ Aramac ” for central district. Taylor and Delve convicted of
assault on Lee (one of the jury in conspiracy cases) at Mount
Morgan fined each £5 for assault, £2 for destruction of
property, and £2 10s. for value of damage. T. McKenzie, a
unionist, arrested at Clermont on charge of being concerned
in the cutting of the Ebor Yale railway bri'ge in March;
much sickness in camp at Barcaldine. Eeported 50 free shearers
left Melbourne for Queensland in s.s. “ Wodonga.” Waggon,
16 sets of harness, and 16 bales of wool, belonging to Burenda
Station, burned by unionists on Augathella and Morveu road.
June B—Kewley, member of strike committee, committed at Black-
all for trial at Eockhampton, on charge of aiding and abetting
in burning Lome woolshed. Some men in all camps returning
to work.
June 9.—Unionists applying for work in several districts, offering to
sign agreement; general impression strike about to be declared
“ off.” Attempt to burn the shop of N. J. W. Neilson (secre-
tary of Warrego Pastoralists’ Association), at Augathella.
Boundary rider’s hut and some fencing burned at Thurulgoona
Station.


Jtine 10.—Arrest of Patton, a unionist, and three others, also unionists,
for grossly indecent assault on black woman, at Amby Downs.
62 free labourers left Brisbane for Townsville in s.s. “ Cintra.”
Arrest of G. Pont on charge of burning Lome woolshed.
June ll.—Various camps announce “no more funds advise men to
go to work, but not to recognise freedom of contract.
June 12 —Conflicting statements of Australian Labour Federation as
to official declaration of closing the strike. Wool store, and 165
bales wool at Pinkilla Station, Bulloo Eiver, destroyed by fire.
June 18. —Alleged outrage by free labourers at Hooper’s public-
house, Alice Eiver, proved in true. Distress and discontent at
all camps reported.
June 14.—Mass meeting at Barcaldine camp ; violent speech, and
ridiculous bravado by G. Casey, organiser Australian Labour
Federation.
June 15. —Colonial Secretary sanctions supply of rations to all men
seeking work. H. Eiley, a unionist, arrested on Mackenzie
Eiver, on charge of being concerned in the cutting of Ebor
Creek railway bridge (See 6th). Procession of unionists at
Cunnamulla, with disturbance; another violent speech by G.
Casey at Barcaldine; he proposes a ballot, “ gaol ” or
“ starvation.”
June 16. G. Casey arrested at Barcaldine on charge of inciting to
commit arson (advising men to burn the premises of a store-
keeper, lately secretary Carriers’ Union). About 50 unionists
propose to form a co-operative village settlement on Alice
Eiver.
June 17. — General breaking up of camps.
June 18. —Carriers’ Union decide to resume work; railway navvies
notify contractors they are willing to resume work.
June 19. —Courier publishes proposal for a union republic coup d'etat .
Unionists at Charleville refuse to engage except on weekly
basis; pastoralists, therefore, resolve to engage free labourers.
J. B. McDonald, who bad been arrested on a charge of com-
plicity with McKenzie and Eiley, in cutting Ebor Creek rail-
way bridge, turns “ Queen’s evidence ” at Clermont.
3 1508 014^|f




