



UNCLE KOALA’S SOWING CHART
Here is an idea, Kiddies! Get out your paints or crayons and colour the
drawings to your fancy
PUBLISHED FOR AUSTRALIAN KIDDIES BY
ARTHUR YATES & CO. PTY. LTD.
AUSTRALIA’S GREATEST SEED HOUSE
184-186 SUSSEX STREET, SYDNEY
[COPYRIGHT]


INTRODIIOTIOM
Lucky Mr. Koala Bear
Has a garden all his own.
Every day he tends with care
All the seeds that he has sown.
People come from far and near,
Come to see the flowers he grows,
Saying, “ Please we want to hear
Why you win at all the shows.”
“ Let me tell you then,” said Bear,
“ If you really want to know,”
“ Buy your seeds from Yates each year,’
“ Choicest flowers you then will grow.”
If you’d like a garden too.
Follow what the Bear relates,
But there’s one thing you must do—
Always buy your Seeds from Yates.


“ Gumnut Villa”
Acacia Street,
BUSHLAND.
January Isr.
Dear Boys and Girls :
1 am sure you all wish to grow up big and strong and I know of nothing
better to make you healthy than gardening.
There is such fun in raising your own little plants from seeds, and think how
mother will be pleased when you are able to show her some lovely flowers for the
house and some nice, crisp vegetables, all grown by your own little self.
lam very fond of Iceland poppies, pansies, stocks and lupins. Then there are
phlox, zinnias, carnations, French marigolds and sunflowers, as well as many
others. All these pretty flowers can be sown now.
In the vegetable part of your garden, French beans, beet, silver beet, cabbage,
carrots, lettuce, parsley, and radish are all so nice to eat and so easy to grow from
1 ales' 1 Reliable Seeds. Why not make a start now. lam sure daddy will give
you a corner of his garden and if you ask him nicely, he will buy you a hoe,
rake and spade in just the right sizes for you to use.
January is usually very hot, but you could dig up your garden beds in the
early morning or in the cool of the evening and you will enjoy doing it. Now I
will tell you what to do. First pick a nice sunny corner and water the ground
until the soil is nice and moist. Then mix the seeds with a little sand and scatter
them on the ground. Press the seeds into the soil with a piece of board, or the back
of your spade would do. If the seeds are big, sift a little more fine soil on them,
but not too much. It is a good rule to cover the seeds about twice their own depth.
The soil should always be kept moist and should be watered very lightly so as not
to wash the seeds away. Don't forget that plants need water just as much as you
and I do. Shade the seed bed from the hot sun and when the plants have about
four leaves they will be big enough to be moved into their proper place in the
garden.
Well, good-bye until next month. With fondest love from


Now, let’s see what we can sow.
Lots of seeds can go in now.
Pansies, Marigolds and Stocks,
Lupins, Gay Sweet Peas and Phlox.
Vegetables crisp and green,
Lettuce, Cabbage and French Bean
Peas and Beans sow in a row,
Seeds from Yates will always grow.


“ Gumnut Villa”
Acacia Street,
BUSHLAND.
I st February.
Dear Boys and Girls :
Dearie me ! How the time does fly. It doesn't seem a month since I last wrote
to you, but the calendar says it is February, and the calendar is always right.
Well, children, if you followed my advice, am/ / am hoping you did so, you
will have well laid-out garden plots with dainty little seedlings lifting up their
heads to the morning sun.
February is such a busy month for the garden. So many kinds of seeds can
be sown, and, of course, the weeds must be kept down. Perhaps some of the seeds
you put in last month were eaten by the birds, or maybe you forgot to water them.
These little things will happen, you know. If so, you will have to sow a few more
seeds and try again.
As well as the lovely flowers and nice vegetables I told you about last month,
there are such a lot of other kinds. Antirrhinum ( Snapdragon ) makes a very
pretty sight when you have a nice bed of it. Calendula, which is the English
Marigold, is bright and showy. Candytuft are really easy to grow, and, of
course, we must not forget to try little Pansies. Be sure the seeds are Yates'.
I suppose you have all noticed the pretty flowering bulbs which are to be
seen in so many gardens, and such big names they have. You will find it hard
to get your tongue round them. Ranunculus, Anemones, Daffodils and Freesias
are just a few of them. This is the month for planting them, and they are easy to
grow. Yates' keep them.
In vegetables, you might like to try cress. It makes such lovely sandwiches,
and it only takes a very few weeks to grow. Then there are peas and all the other
vegetables I told you about last month.
Wishing you all good luck with your garden.
With love from
Here is an idea, Kiddies ! Get out your paints or crayons and colour the drawings to yourfancy


FEMIUAMT
Now the days are warm and dry,
Why not Iceland Poppies try ?
Shade the boxes from sun’s glare,
“ Ask for Yates’,” says Mr. Bear.
Hyacinth and Daffodil
Should at least one corner fill.
Bulbs from Yates are sure to please
For they specialise in these.


“ Gumnut Villa”
Acacia Street,
BUSHLAND.
ist March.
Dear Boys and Girls :
I suppose by this time you are all fully-fledged gardeners and can tell one
kind of seedling from another. Don't you find gardening interesting ? lam sure
you do.
Now, I am going to tell you something about sweet peas, for March is sweet
pea month. Everyone admires these dainty blossoms with the lovely perfume.
You will find that they are not hard to grow, if you do what I tell you and use
Yates' seeds.
Sweet peas like a sunny spot, protected from strong winds. The soil should
be well broken up and if it is too heavy, some sand should be added. Don't forget
to dig it up well and you should get down with your spade to a depth of 12 inches
for sowing. It is a good idea to mix with the soil some stable manure, or perhaps
some bonedust or blood and bone, but do this some time before you sow the seeds.
These manures help to make the soil richer.
When sowing the sweet peas, first soak them in cold water for about twelve
hours. This softens the hard shells and they come up much quicker. Some
gardeners cut a little notch in the seed opposite the eye, instead of soaking them.
Either way will do. If the seeds are planted against a fence, wire netting will
help them to grow up, but if they are in the open, then you will need sticks or
branches of ti-tree, if you have them handy.
Yates' sweet peas are noted for their lovely colours and for their sweet
fragrance. I can recommend them as being the best.
I hope that you will give them a trial, for I am sure you will love to see them
grow in your own garden.
With best love from


Antirrhinums Dwarf and Tall,
Bright Carnations loved by all.
Stately Lupins, Pansies dear,
All of these will flower this year.
I’ve a weakness, I confess,


Brown and white are eas’ly grown
If the seeds from Yates are sown.
Help along the young Sweet Peas
So that they can climb with ease.
Netting or some garden sticks
Are the easiest things to fix.


“ Gumnut Villa”
Acacia Street,
BUSH LAND.
ist April.
Dear Boys and Girls :
Phew ! IBs quite a relief to say “ Good-bye ” to the hot weather, although
we should not grumble, for the summer days are ideal for surfing, swimming, and
so many other sports.
Many gardeners think that autumn is the best season of the year, for the
ground is warm and plants grow very quickly, while the hot sun does not scorch
them like it does in summer.
Now, children, you must not forget to keep the soil nice and loose, for it helps
along the plants quite a lot. lam sure mother and father have been pleased with
what you have done until now and want you to do even better. Of course you
will have to make sure that you only sow Yates' seeds. You can always buy these
near where you live.
As there are so many kinds of vegetable and flower seeds that can be sown
now, I do not think I can do better than to give you a list of some of the better-
known sorts so that you may choose the ones you like best.
With heaps of love until next month,
VEGETABLE SEEDS
Beans (Broad)
Beet
Lettuce
Onions
Parsley
Parsnip
Peas
Radish
Spinach
Turnip
Cabbage (early varieties)
Carrot (early varieties)
FLOWER
SEEDS
Antirrhinum (Snapdragon)
Calendula (Broad-leaved
Marigold)
Calliopsis
Candytuft
Carnations
Dianthus
Gaillardia
Godetia
Ncmesia
Pansies
Phlox
Gypsophila
Hollyhock
Larkspur
Lupins
Marigold (French)
Mignonette
Nasturtium
Poppies (all varieties)
Staticc
Stocks
Centaurea
Sweet Peas
Chrysanthemum (Annual)
Clarkia
Viola
Wallflower (early flowering)
Delphinium


“ Gumnut Villa”
Acacia Street ,
BUSH LAND.
I st May.
Dear Boys and Girls :
Strawberries and cream ! The very words make you smack your lips. They
are so nice , and you cannot help being fond of them.
You will be pleased to know that strawberries are quite easy to grow. Let us
set about planting some. First we must dig the garden bed to a depth of 18 inches ,
the deeper the better , then enrich the soil by adding either farmyard or fowl manure.
If you cannot get this , superphosphate will do.
Strawberries may be planted from April to August. Place them close to-
gether as the leaves save the berries from being burned by the sun. I always place
mine 8 inches apart with 20 inches or so between the rows. Keep the soil moist
and keep down the weeds. Sprinkle a little straw on the ground when the plants
start to flower so as to keep the berries clean.
The strawberries should start to bear during the early spring and if they are
well looked after they will keep on bearing for several months. These plants are
not very dear to buy and the storekeeper from whom you get Yates' seeds will
order them in for you from Yates and Company.
My word ! I have said a lot this month , so I will close now.
With best love from


Soon the Winter months begin,
Daylight hours are drawing in.
Plants, you know, don’t grow so fast
Once the warmer days have passed.
Don’t forget to use the hoe,
Weed between each little row.
This will keep your garden neat,
Make the soil quite moist and sweet.
Shrubs and Ornamental Trees,
Roses, too, are sure to please.
Fruit Trees you might like to try,
Yates have all the best to buy.


“ Gumnut Villa”
Acacia Street ,
BUSH LAND.
Ist June.
Dear Boys and Girls :
Have you noticed how the days have drawn in ? Do you know that the shortest
day in the year is in June ? Give me the nice warm days , for the plants in the
garden grow much quicker in summer than they do in winter. Yet nature has
thought out what is for the best and the cold days and nights of winter give the
fruit trees , roses , and countless other plants a rest so that they will be nice and
strong for when the warm days come again. Just think how tired you get at night ,
and how well you feel after a good night*s sleep. It is the same with plants , only
they have their sleep in the winter.
June is a good month to clean up the garden so that you will have the soil
all dug up for the spring planting season. There are quite a number of seeds that
can be sown but I think it would be better if you left them for another month,
unless you live in Queensland or some other very warm district , when you can
commence doing everything I am telling you about in my next letter.
Pve such a lot to tell you all next month , so will close now.
With love from
Ibuz/e- Af&tL&L


Study Yates’ new Garden Guide,
This will help you to decide,
Where and what and how to sow
Seeds to make a nice Spring show
i
t
If you like Broad Beans and Peas,
Sowings may be made of these.
Rhubarb is well worth a try,
Roots of this soon multiply.
Gayest of the bulbs I’ve seen.
Gladiolus is the Queen.
I
V
Plant a few and you’ll agree.
Like a rainbow they will be.


“ Gumnut Villa ,"
Acacia Street,
BUSH LAND.
I st July.
Dear Boys and Girls :
I haven't had a cold all this winter, and Pm sure that it is my garden that
keeps me so well and healthy. You know, children, that exercise helps the lungs
to keep out those horrid little germs that are the cause of 'flu and colds.
There is plenty of spade work to he done in July for the spring planting
season. In July, I usually make small sowings of tomatoes. They are quite easy
to grow, hut the tender plants must he protected from the frost hy keeping them
under glass or some other kind of shelter.
Silver beet can he put in, and then there are cabbages, peas, radish and turnips.
In your flower garden, antirrhinum, calendula, carnations, gaillardia, mari-
golds, nemesia, phlox, poppies, sweet peas, and wallflowers can all be sown.
No doubt you all like rhubarb. Yates' sell nice roots and the storekeepers
who sell YATES' RELIABLE SEEDS will get one or two of these rhubarb
roots for you. After the first year, you divide the roots, for they multiply.
This is the main planting season for potatoes in the milder districts, but if
your winter time is very long, it may be better to wait until next month ; they
thrive in new ground, but if all your garden has been used before it doesn't really
matter for if you make trenches and spread wood ashes along them, you should
get good results. If you cannot get wood ashes, any manure that contains a little
potash will do.
Cheerio, till next month.




Until next month , with love from
// /y s?
VEGETABLE SEEDS
Asparagus
Beet
Beet (Silver)
Carrot
Cape Gooseberry
Celery
Cress
Cucumber (mild climates)
Herbs
Lettuce
Melons (mild climates)
Mustard
Parsley
Parsnip
Peanuts
Peas
Radish
Rhubarb
Tomatoes (sow under cover
in frames)
FLOWER SEEDS
Turnips
Roots, Tubers (sec Yates’
Current Price List)
Artichoke
Asparagus
Chokos
Herbs
Potatoes
Rhubarb
Acroclinium (Everlasting)
Ageratum
Alonsoa
Antirrhinum (Snapdragon)
Arctotis
Asters
Begonia (Tuberous)
Brachycome (Swan River
Daisy)
Calendula
Calliopsis
Candytuft
Carnations
Centaurea (for cool climates)
Chrysanthemum
Delphinium
Dianthus
Didiscus (Blue Lace Flower)
Dimorphotheca (African
Golden Daisy)
Gaillardia
Geum
Globe Amaranth
(Gomphrcna)
Gypsophila
Helichrysum (Straw Flower)
Hunnemannia (Mexican
Poppy)
Lupins
Marigold (African)
Mignonette
Pea (Perennial)
Phlox
Poppies (cold districts only)
Saponaria
Scabious (Pin Cushion)
Statice (Sea Lavender)
Stocks (cold climates only)
Verbena
Wallflower (Annual)
Zinnia (in warm climates)
"■ Gumnui Villa"
Acacia Street ,
BUSH LAND.
Ist August.
Dear Boys and Girls :
Spring is here. Isn't the warm sun just lovely ? And don't we all appreciate
it after those cold biting winds ?
Now j kiddies , as August is such a busy month in the garden , 1 am going to
do what I did in my April letter and give you the complete list of Yates' seeds
that can be sown this month.
If frosts are still likely , delay sowings of summer-growing plants until
September. Plant out the tomato seedlings when they are about six inches high
and put a strong stick to each plant so that the wind will not blow them over .
If you take my advice you will make a good sowing of carrots and parsnips.
They help to make such nice soup.


AUGUST
In each garden should be seen,
Well-kept lawns of verdant green.
Sow Yates* Lawn Grass, it’s not dear,
Mixed to keep green all the year.
If you’re sowing Mignonette,
One thing you must not forget.
Don’t transplant. Be sure and sow
In the place it is to grow.
August winds are most severe.
Quite the worst of all the year.
Shelter seedlings all you can.
Bags will do, or hessian.


“ Gumnut Villa”
Acacia Street
BUSHLAND.
Ist September.
Dear Boys and Girls :
My garden is a picture and it has well repaid me for the little work and
trouble I have put into it. Such lovely blooms —such crisp vegetables—and all
grown from Yates' seeds.
No doubt, you are just as pleased with your efforts, and I'm sure mother and
dad are glad to know that you are giving them a hand to keep the house in flowers
and vegetables.
Now, children, this month I am going to recommend two very pretty border
plants. Phlox is well known to you already, and perhaps you have seen rosy
morn petunias. Both of these can he sown now, and they are very easy to grow.
They are two of the nicest bedding plants I know for flowering during the summer.
Dahlias can he sown as seed, or bulbs can he planted this month. They like
a very rich soil and it is a good plan if planting the bulbs to dig up the ground
to a depth of twelve inches and mix in plenty of rotted manure and bone dust.
A strong six foot stick should he placed against each bulb, so that the plants can be
tied to it as they grow up. Otherwise the strong winds might blow them over and
break the stems.
Give my love to all at home,
Yours


SEPTEMBER
Treading close on Winter’s heel,
Spring is coming, can’t you feel ?
Hasten now, it’s time to sow,
If you want a Summer show.
Plant some Larkspurs, Cosmos, Snaps,
Zinnias, Salvia and perhaps
You would like Delphiniums blue.
Seeds from Yates’ are good and true.
Vegetables don’t forget,
Peas and Beans can now be set.
Marrows, Melons, Carrots too ;
Quite a busy month for you.


“ Gumnut Villa”
Acacia Street,
BUSHLAND.
I st October,
Dear Boys and Girls,
»
In the spring a young bear's fancy lightly turns to thoughts of gardening.
Of course, Pm not really young as bears go but I must confess I think the
spring is the best gardening season of the year. I suppose you have found it the same.
Unfortunately for the gardener, creeping things like aphis, thrip, ants, spiders,
etc., also like the warm days, and unless you do something to stop them they do a
great deal of harm to the plants.
If they are bad with you I would suggest spraying with nicotine sulphate ;
for all leaf-eating pests such as pumpkin beetle, caterpillars, grubs and snails
use arsenate of lead. As both of these sprays are deadly poisons, a:k daddy to
do the mixing and spraying for you, because he knows more about them than you do.
Portulaca is a very pretty little border plant and stands up well to the coming
hot days. It can be sown this month. In the vegetable section there is still time to
sow melons, vegetable marrows and squashes, as well as many other nice sorts.
Love to all.


This is just the month for weeds,
So when you are planting seeds,
See the ground is nice and clean,
Pull out weeds as soon as seen.


“ Gumnut Villa ”
Acacia Street ,
BUSH LAND.
Ist November.
Dear Boys and Girls ,
The plants in my garden simply love these warm sunny days and you can
almost see them growing.
What do you think ? I'veforgotten to sow my African marigolds but lam going
down to the storekeeper who sells Yates' seeds to get some at once. African mari-
golds flower so well during the hot summer , and they look so nice in the garden ,
that I must have them. I would advise you all to try a packet too.
Then there are zinnias. These pretty flowers like the sun and you should sow
them in a warm sunny place. I have noticed that the bulbs which I planted last
February are now dying back and lam going to pull them up this month. lam then
going to store them in a dry place until next planting season . My word ! how
they have multiplied. I will have quite a lot to put in next February , and such
a picture they have been. I think all the bears round the district came round to
admire the lovely colours. No doubt you were just as pleased with yours. Any-
thing that Yates' sell is good.
Just at this time , tomatoes sometimes get a disease called “ wilt " which
causes the leaves to go brown , and the plant soon loses its healthy look. If you
notice this “ wilt " in your garden , burn the plants that have it , otherwise it will
spread to other plants.
Love from
Here is an idea, Kiddies! Get out your paints or crayons and colour the drawings to yourfancy


MOVEMK.ER
Happy we should be indeed
If the snails ate only weed,
But they seek expensive fare,
Not like Mr. Koala Bear.
Don’t put salt upon their tails,
Try a spray that never fails.
Arsenate of Lead will do,
Yates’ advise and sell it too.


“ Gumma Villa”
Acacia Street,
BUSH LAND.
Ist December.
Dear Boys and Girls,
Hurrah for Yates' I—for with the help of the firm who only sell the very
best of seeds, I have won First Prize for the Best Garden in Bushland , and didn't
Uncle Koala feel pleased when he was presented with a lovely Silver Cup.
Looking back over the last eleven months, it is nice to think that in spite
of a few disappointments, and every gardener has these, I had good results from
almost all the vegetable seeds and flower seeds that I sowed, and, after all, the
little work I did was really good exercise, for it kept me healthy and strong.
My advice to all kiddies is to do what I have done and start a garden, if
they haven't one already. Here's a little sum for you to work out
A little work, add a little garden
Take away sickness, and the answer is
Happiness.
I hope, dear children, that Santa Claus will be kind to you all this Christmas,
and that the New Year will bring you the best of Good Luck in your home life
and school life.
With love from


DECEMBER
Now, my dears, if you just think,
How the plants must need a drink.
Standing in the heat all day ;
They can’t hide or run away.
3 1508 02248765 1


Uncle Beat reclines in sleep
In his barrow wide and deep
Gardens gay with pretty flowers
Show how he has spent his hours.
NATIONAL ÜBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Wholly set up, engraved and printed in Australia by W. T. Baker & Co. Pty. Ltd., 190 York Street, Sydney
