

PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.
THE
GOLD EN
YANKEE.
BY
HAROLD W. H. STEPHEN.
SYDNEY:
J. J. MOORE, GEORGE STREET.
1877.


JACKSON & MORTON,
; attop and J|erters,
110 KING STREET,
SYDNEY.
G. F. JACKSON'S long experience in tills and the old
countries enables him to give his customers
Garments Gat in all Styles 8; Modes,
Particularly those built on the
LATEST AMERICAN PRINCIPLE.
All Garments Well Shrunk and made by
the Best Workmen.
EVERY REQUISITE IN
Note the Address:
lio KZITTG- STREET,
SYDNEY.


THE GOLDEN YANKEE
9 Calf of
LIFE AND ADVENTURE ON THE DIGGINGS.
TO WHICH IS ADDED
UNCLE GABRIEL’S LEGACY;
OR,
WANTED A WIFE. - - ; -' 4 ‘ ! :
BY
HAROLD W. H. STEPHEN.
SYDNEY.;
T, J. HOOKE, 560 TO 564 axd S6BY George Street.
1577. -


SYDNEY*.
t*. CL’NNf.VGKA.ME AND CO., PRfNTSRH,
1W i‘tTT STREET.


CONTENTS.
The Goldex \axkee: A Tale of Life nnd Adventure
on the Diggings
Chaptes. Page,
i.—The Mayday Hills. .. .. .. .. .. I
ll. —The Dentil Family : Hocv to provide for a Stupid
Sou ; Pretty Polly; A Runaway Match : A
Great Alliance ; Gold-fever; Off to Australia.. 3
in.—At trie Diggings; Billy Bowes; The Diggers’
Delight; An Honest Publican; Working on
Tribute. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
iv. —Totsy’s Reception; White Lies; Billy Bowes’s
Tale; Rowdy Seth and the Biaenose: a Free
Fight; Shot in his Tracks; Lynch Law. .. 20
v, —Billy Bowes’s Tale concluded; The Tombstone;
The Second Inscription; Providing for the
Future; At Ballarat; The Golden Yankee.;
Is it a Ghost ? .. .. .. .. 33
vi.—The Drought; a Good Samaritan; The Fatal
Leap 38
vn.—The Rest Morning; Totsy’s Troubles; Dot, the
Consoler; hvo Credit ; Con and the Golden
Yankee; the Coat of Mail, .. .. ~ 4;


Ch a l j t f.k . Page.
vin.—A Morning Visit; C5O; The Storm; Robbing
Sluice-boxes. .. .. ..62
jx.—The Ball; Found at Last ; Fire! .. .. 71
x.—The Dove-cote; the Gorilla and her Friends;
The Chinaman’s Offer, .. .. .. .. 84
xi. —The Abduction; The Golden Yankee to the
Rescue ; Fight at the Dove-cote. .. ~ 91
xii. —After Ten Years; The Actors’ Picnic at Pearl
Bay; The Lovers; An Embarrassing Situation. 99
MU. —Seth’s Adventures : a Surprise; Conclusion .. 1 16
Uncle Gabriel’s Legacy; oe, Wanted a Wife .. 127
IV
CONTENTS.






THE GOLDEN YANKEE.
A TALE OF LIFE AND ADVENTURE OS THE DIGGINGS.
CHAPTER I.
MAT-DAY HILLS.
GwpjjD
pSsHEEB moons ago the solitude of a primeval
forest reigned over the May-Day Hills.
(|||W A solitude unbroken by the noise of man,
tT-lf >• save when, perchance, a wandering warrior
of some native tribe woke the slumbering echoes by
his shrill cries as he bounded along in pursuit of a
kangaroo or wallaby.
White men nominally owned the land, but the
sterile soil, composed of crumbled granite, yielded
little sustenance to the flocks, and as yet the lordly
squatter needed not to trouble or care for a thousand
acres or so—where there was none to dispute the
ground, it mattered little if half Ms run were unused
and unproductive.
So that portion of the range known as the May-Day
Hills lay still as desert as when Cook first landed on
these shores.
B


Here and there a creek wound in and out amongst
the hills, marking with silver thread the course of a
gully : dashing, splashing, and gurgling over the
stones ; now a mimic water-fall, now gliding calmly on
mid mossy hanks overhung by shrubs and huge
boulders of grey rook.
Bare ferns and lichens peeped timidly out from
amongst these boulders, and everywhere patches of
delicately-tinted heather flecked the sward, whilst
the subtle fragrance of the wattle-blossom loaded the
air with overpowering sweetness.
All around, in tangled masses, grew the ti-tree.
whilst shade was everywhere, for the ironbark, bos
and honeysuckle trees had not yet been thinned to
supply the wants of destroying man.
Let the curtain fall for awhile,
& v.- v.:
Eaise it again, and what do we see ? The smoke
of a thousand fires proclaims the advent of the white
man, and the wilderness is teeming with life.
The pleasant slopes are disfigured by huge mounds
of earth; the silvery creeks are yellow and turbid,
and sounds of work and revelry are heard where once
the warbling magpie reigned supreme.
The May-Day Hills are no more, and Spring Creek
Diggings have arisen in their place.
2
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


CHAPTER II.
THE DENZIL FAMILY. —HOW To PROVIDE FOR A STUPID
SON. —PRETTY POLLY. —A RUNAWaY MATCH. —A
GREAT ALLIANCE. GOLD-FEVER. —OFF TO AUSTRALIA
RTHUE Denzil was one of the first victims of
the gold-fever. When the wonderful news
AT*? reached England that sold had been dis-
imi covered in Australia, he was smitten by the
desire to try his luck at the diggings, and as mail
after mail brought more and more startling accounts
of fresh discoveries, this desire became uncontrollable.
He was the youngest son of a country squire of
comfortable means, but whose income did not admit
of his making any very considerable provision for Ms
sons. Arthur had been sent to the University, and
it was understood that, on his admission to a pro-
fession, lie would have to depend upon his earnings
for a livelihood.
The Uenzils were of that large class of English
landed proprietors who occupy a middle station
between the farmer and the wealthy country gentle-
man. They were admitted into the best society of
their county, but, as they were not able to accompany
their wealthier neighbours on their yearly migrations
to London, they never came to be considered as being
“ in society,” and were necessarily prevented from,
making any of those aristocratic alliances which would
have entitled them to billet their younger sons on
the country.
Arthur’s career at the University was not on the
whole unsatisfactory; for, if he gained no honors,
neither did he acquire an evil reputation; he was
simply “ stupid,” and so his college tutor did not


hesitate to inform his father, when the old sqm re-
asked how it was that such a steady young man was
so unsuccessful.
On his return home after the above conversation,
the elder Denzil summoned a family council, to con-
sider what should be done with his stupid son.
Evidently he would have no chance of succeeding
at the bar ; whilst commercial pursuits were equally
out of the question. Arthur would have liked to go
into the army, but the price of a commission was a
serious consideration, and after allowances would be
an impossibility.
The ladies of the family were of opinion that he
was intended by nature to be a parson. They argued
that his stupidity was not of the slightest consequence,
as no one ever knew or cared whether a clemwman
was clever ; all that was wanted was that he should
be “ nice.” Then Arthur had small, white, hands,
and crisp, curling, locks, both eminent qualifications
for the clerical office.
The Squire objected that livings were not to he
picked up in the street, and that all the patronage r-f
his friends was already promised, for years to come,
to younger sons of their own families : and so this
project fell to the ground.
Mrs. Denzil vaguely hinted that something might
he got for poor Arthur in the Foreign, or Colonial
office, or some other refuge for the destitute scions of
the aristocracybut papa again interposed by remark-
ing that though his son was quite stupid enough to
make an admirable civil servant, he knew of no-one
who would exert his influence to procure the voung
man a billet.
At last, Arthur, who had hitherto refrained from
offering any suggestion, mildly remarked that “ he
should think it, din nt take much brains to make a
fellow a decentish sort of farmer.”
4
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


His lather, who, like all country gentlemen, prided
himself not a little upon his farming, was at first
exceedingly enraged at this proposition, which he
combatted with considerable vehemence: but no
further suggestions were made, and so, after much
discussion, it was decided that Arthur should hare
his wish.
In pursuance of this resolution, he was soon after-
wards consigned to the care of a well-to-do farmer in
the neighbourhood, to whom was entrusted the task
of “ breaking him in. :!
In the house of Farmer Sturgis something
happened which was not calculated upon by the
Squire or Mrs. JJenzil:—Arthur fell in lore.
Sow it must not be supposed that either of his
parents would hare knowingly exposed a son, and
especially a stupid son, to the fascinations of the
female sex, unless the Female Sex in question was
sufficiently dowered to make an alliance with her
desirable. Ho—they had selected Farmer Sturgis
because he was a bachelor, whose household affairs
were managed by a crusty old virgin aunt of fifty.
They did not know that the farmer was about to
taka unto himself an orphan niece, and that this niece
was very pretty, and as stupid as Arthur himself.
Had they been aware of these facts, be sure those
tender parents r, ould have taken all sorts of care to
shield their young one from danger, but unfortunately
the fatal truth came to their ears altogether too late
for practical purposes ; for they never heard of the
existence of Mary Sturgis until she had ceased to
exist, and Mary Denzil walked the earth in her stead.
Yes—that wretched, stupid, Arthur actually had
the audacity to run away with the pretty Polly, and
was further idiotic enough, after a short honeymoon,
to bring- her to the Hall in order to introduce her to
his family.
5
EBEAKIXG HOI IX.


This -was too much. Coming unexpectedly as it
did (for Farmer Sturgis had been too frightened to
report the missing couple) it was altogether too dread-
ful a shock, and the lemale members of the Denzil
family incontinently went off into violent hysterics,
whilst Denzil pero swore till he became purple in the
face, and Henry, the son and heir, shook his fist at
hia misguided brother and fled the scene.
To this young man the shock was perfectly ap-
palling. He had just arrived with the joyful tidings
of his engagement to the Honorable Anastasia
Yietoria Brigitta O’Callaghan, eldest daughter of The
O’Callaghan, Earl of Ballyshanassy; a young ladv
with red hair and classical features (“ faytures,” she
called them) who, after a long series of London
seasons —she was “ toeherless,” the O’Callaghan
estates being, as all the world knows, mortgaged “ ut>
to the hilt”—had determined to bestow herself and
her charms upon the heir of Denzil Hall.
Nearly a century had elapsed since a Denzil had
intermarried with the nobility, and it was whilst ther
were in the act nf rejoicing over the news of this
most desirable alliance that the stupid Arthur and
his bride broke in upon the family.
Poor little Polly, who had looked forward to this in-
terview with Arthur’s relations with mingled feelings
of longing and dread, when face to face with the
alarming reality, lost all command over herself, and
hung sobbing round the neck of her husband.
How this unlucky couple managed to make their
escape neither of them ever knew, Arthur, indeed,
always insisted that he made a graceful and digni-
fied exit, but as, in his progress to the hail door) he
had to sustain a little ladv very much overcome
it is possible that his statement was some-
what highly colored.
Fortunately for the young people the cab which
6
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


had brought them to the Hall had not vet departed,
and they were therefore enabled to avail themselves
of its services for their return. As they drove away
the Squire rushed out, and, standing in the gravel
walk, cursed them both; not in the orthodox stage
fashion, it is true, but still quite coherently and
vehemently enough to produce the desired impression.
Two hours later a very different scene was enacted
in the best parlor of Homebush farm-house, when.
Farmer Sturgis, after a proper amount of contrition
had been shown by the culprits, formally bestowed
upon them his blessing, coupled with the assurance
that he would “pull them through.”
At this comforting announcement the erring Polly
dried her eyes, precipitated herself upon her uncle,
and commenced a series of kisses, whose dampness
was their only drawback. Meanwhile, the old aunt,
feeling it incumbent upon her to take her part in
this affecting scene, took her newly-made grand-
nephew to her bosom, and held him there till Polly
rescued Mm.
Parmer Sturgis, secretly rejoicing at the grand
opportunity afforded him for displaying his superior
generosity, then proclaimed it a holiday, and issued
instructions for a feast on a grand scale.
And so the fatted calf was killed for the stupid
prodigal, and he and his wife found a home.
They abode at Homebush farm for some eight or
nine years in peace and contentment, until the fatal
news of the discovery of gold in Australia came to
England.
In the course of these years no attempt at recon-
ciliation with his family had been made by the stupid
Arthur, who averred that his pride would not submit
to the degradation of submission after such an insult-
ing reception as he bad received on the memorable
occasion of the visit, the particulars of which have
been narrated. Farmer Sturgis, however, who, as
7
THE FATTED CALF.


time wore on, had acquired a tolerably correct
estimate of his nepliew-in-law’s character, said that
was all nonsense, and that Arthur would have tried
to make it up long ago had he not been afraid
Fortunately for the peace of the household, this
view of the matter was not entertained by the women
folk, to whom their Arthur was a hero in all things.
Polly, of course, like a loving little wife, believed in
her husband; and the old aunt, when, a certain kittle
stranger named Mabel Denzil had folded her wizen
neck in a pair of chubby arms, became not less
enthusiastic in admiration of the father of the
prodigy.
This same young lady, who is destined to play no
unimportant part in this narrative, had made her
appearance on the scene some eight years before her
stupid father took it into his head to migrate to the
land of gold. She was the first and last olive-branch
that was vouchsafed to the Denzils, and was the idol
before which the whole household at Homebush farm
bowed down and worshipped.
Strange to say, notwithstanding the spoiling process
to which she was subjected, Mabel, or Totsy, -as she
was more familiarly called, did not develope into an
enfant terrible, but grew day by day more loving and
loveable. She was a docile, gentle, child, with, an
exceeding sensitiveness of disposition, and a larger
stock of brains than had fallen to the lot of a Denzil
for many a long year.
V ery cautiously did the stupid Arthur feel his way
before he ventured on the astounding announcement
that he intended to try his luck at the diggings.
Many a long winter's night did he spend in reading
aloud tne marvellous accounts of the new El Dorado,
and it was not until he had succeeded in infecting the
whole family with the gold-fever that he spoke out.
J nen, so well had he managed, that nobody felt in
toe least surprised. He was stupid, it is true, but
8
THE GOLDEN' YANKEE.


stupidity and canning are more often allied than is
generally believed.
Farmer Sturgis was, of course, furious. It really
was very hard on him after all he had done for the
young couple. He lost Ms cause, however, through
the very vehemence with which he pressed it. Had
he been content to draw a melancholy picture of his
deserted fire-side, and himself descending lonely and
uncared-for into the grave, even Arthur himself, who
was by no means ungrateful or bad-hearted, would
have given in. and temporarily, at least, abandoned
his cherished project. But when he broke our into
violent denunciation of the base ingratitude of the
viper he had nourished in his bosom, the viper’s
wife turned upon him, and battled so vigorously in
her husband’s cause that there was nothing for it but
resignation.
Poor Sturgis had not the heart to cast these young
ingrates adrift, as most other uncles would have
done—he simply stormed till his passion wore out,
and then lapsed into a lit of despondency which lasted
until the eve of their departure.
One faint effort he did mate to persuade Polly
that she and little Totsy ought to remain at home, at
least until Arthur was settled; but of course Polly
would not hear of such a thing. What ? Desert her
husband'? Leave him to fight with strangers in a
foreign land ; with no .one to sympathise with Mm in
his success, or sorrow with him in his defeat ? No —
never—never !!; She would die a thousand deaths
first! It was cruel—monstrous —to hint such a thing,
and she wondered her uncle was so wickedly hard-
hearted, &0., &c.
So the farmer resigned himself to the inevitable,
and only put in a mild protest against the proceed-
ing by taking no part in the preparations for the
voyage, and quietly ignoring the whole subj eot.
9
THE VIPERS WIFE.


There remained the one faint hope that Arthur
would not be able to find money encash for his wild
venture. Alas ! once again the farmer was doomed to
disappointment. The misguided young man had
actually made provision for the event, and out of the
liberal salary paid him. by the unfortunate farmer,
he had succeeded in saving nearly two hundred
pounds. This, however, was not quite enough, so
Arthur, rendered desperate by his hunger for gold,
appealed to his father, pointing out the advantages
that would accrue to the family by his departure to
the Antipodes, and promising to change his name
and never come back again if he were but helped on
this occasion.
Old Denzil, counselled thereto by the Ladv
Anastasia, who by this time was the ruler of the
family, at once complied with the request, and sent
his erring son another two hundred pounds, in a cool
note, wishing him good-bye and warning him not to
forget his promise.
Mama Denzil would have liked to embrace her
son once more before he set out on his tremendous
journey, but the Lady Anastasia at once quit her veto
on their meeting, and so the old lady was obliged to
be content with a kindly message, conveyed in a
postcript.
Nothing now stood in the way of the accomplish-
ment of Arthur’s wishes, and in a very short time he
and his wife and child bade farewell to the shores of
Jbingland.
At the very last the farmer’s reserve broke down,
and he and the old aunt descended to arqect entreaties
to the truants to stay at home ; but all in vain, and
disconsolate and heart-broken, they wended their
way back to their desolate fire-side, which would
never more be the cheerful gathering-place it was of
old.


CHAPTER III.
AT THE DIGGINGS —BILLY BOWES.—THE DIGGER'S
DELIGHT.—AN HONEST PUBLICAN.—WORKING
ON TRIBUTE.
business was Billy Bowes’s
y.Kik- business. Now when a gentleman takes
under his especial care the affairs of his
McVf* friends, it usually happens that his own are
apt to get into disorder. It is no wonder, therefore,
that Billy, who took a deep and engrossing interest
in everything that concerned his neighbours, did not
in his own person appear as a shining example of his
capacity for business.
His antecedents were shrouded in mystery. All
that was known of him. was that he had turned up
at the first rush at Forest Creek, and that since then
he had regularly turned up at every other rush; so
that his appearance among the first-comers at Spring
Creek was only what might have been expected.
Arriving always whilst there was plenty of ground
to choose from, it might have been supposed that he
would usually hare secured a payable claim, but
somehow or another he never did do so ; or at least
none of his claims were ever known to have paid
him, though in some instances his successors had
done very well indeed out of claims which Billy had
abandoned as duffers.
At Spring Creek Biliv pegged out a claim ngiit in
the bed of the creek, and for awhile, as was usual
with him, worked hard and made money. He
gradually, however, began to look about him and
take an inteiest in Ids neighbours’ affairs, and his


earnings dropped off accordingly. This did not
trouble him though, for, as he justly remarked, he
was used to it, and he made no effort by increased
diligence to do better. As long, as he could buy
grog and tucker that was all he wanted, he said,
and he really could not stand around and see men
making fools of themselves without giving them a
word of advice in season.
So Billy became the confidential adviser of all the
idle men, and, as might have been expected, it was
to him that Arthur Denzil, or Arthur Grant, as he now
called himself, applied for advice when he arrived at
the diggings.
The voyage from England had not been without
its discomforts to the Ifenzils, but nothing in any
way worthy of being recorded oocured to them until
they camped on Spring Creek.
On his arrival in Melbourne, Arthur had at once
searched the papers for information as to the latest
rushes, and the Ovens* being at tiiat time the Al-
exei ting theme, he had concluded to try his luck at
Spring Creek.
Bor the trifling consideration of one hundred pounds
he agreed with a waggoner to convey him and his
family and baggage to the diggings, and, after an
uneventful journey of over three weeks, they arrived
there in due course.
Now it happened that Billy Bowes, who knew
everybody, was the first person to greet the teamster
as they toiled into the township. He was lounging
under tae verandah of one of the numerous grou--
shanties when his attention was attracted by a cloud
of dust, through which dimly loomed the white canvas
• Spring Crunk is a tributary of fur Orens River, and is situated in
the Orcas District of Victoria.


covering of the waggon, and being eager for news
had at once made off to meet the new-comers.
Billy’s appearance necessitated a halt and anobbler,
and Arthur Denzil was of course invited to join in a
visit to the shanty, the which he was nothing loth to
do, being anxious to obtain information, which he
rightly conceived would be nowhere better attainable
that at a public bar.
“ Well, mate,” said Billy to Arthur, after they had
been duly supplied with refreshments, “ where do
you hail from ? ”
“Old England,” answered Arthur. “We only
arrived three days before the waggon started.”
“We only arrived? Who’s we?” asked Billy.
“Are there any more of yer? Why didn’t you
bring your mates in ?”
“I mean my wife and daughter,” said Arthur,
“ they are in the waggon.”
“ Tour wife and daughter ? ” repeated Billy, in
great amazement —“ You don’t mean to say you’ve
been such a confounded flathead as to fetch them
along here ? ”
“I am afraid I have,” replied Arthur, good-
humouredly. “ What harm is there in that ? ”
“Well,” said Billy, “it aint no business o’ mine,
and I makes a pint of not interferin’ with nobody,
but when I see a full-grown white man, with all his
senses around, cartin’ his wife and kid about the
diggin’s, why—phew! I can’t get over it ; it goes
clean ahead of me by chalks.”
“ They are not likely to come to any harm here ? ”
asked Arthur, anxiously.
“Well—when you say ‘ harm’, perhaps not, but
that’s as may be ; any way these diggin’s aint no
kinder place to fetch decent women to. But you’re
a new-ohum, and in course ignorant. Ah well, it
wont be long before yer eyes ’ll be opened. "Why who


is she agoin’ to associate with ? We aint got above
twenty women altogether in the camp, and they is a
nice lot; aint they, Tommy ? ” asked Billy of the
barman.
“You may say that,” was the reply, accompanied
by a knowing wink. “May be the gentleman ! ud
like to ask some on ’em in to tea —there’s the Gorilla
and Woolshed Bess in the back parlor now. They’ve
got Johnny Dwyer in tow—he’s just washed-up, and
beginnin’ his spree. Guess if you want areal reg'lar
snorter of a kiok-up, mate, you can’t do better than
jine ’em.”
“Thank you,” said Arthur, smiling, “I prefer
postponing my spree till after we are settled. But
now, tell me, where had I best pitch my teat ? ”
The barman, to whom this query was addressed,
was about to reply, when he was interrupted bv
Billy.
“ See here—” said that worthy— “ I’ve kinder taken
a likin' to yon, young feller. You’re precious green
but nothin’ else aint to be expected from a new-chum,
and blame me, if I allow innocence like yourn to
coma to grief on this here diggin’s. No, sir— Billy
Bowes isn t the man to stand by and. see a stranger
plundered by the sharks as is prowlin’ around this
camp. You come along o’ me.—You talk about pitch-
ing yer tent! Do you know what it does when it
rains in this country ? ”
“Why I suppose it rains,” replied Arthur.
“Doit? loure smart—precious smart, youno-
feller. Bains, does it? I tell you what it does—h
pours cats and dogs by the bucketful And it
thunders—•by gosh lit thunders like ten million big
cannons a-bustm all at once. And as for li• , htniil
once you see it a-lightnih here you’ll fanoy°the devil
was celebratm his twenty-first birthday with a
display of fireworks—WoshaE and Oremorne is a
fool to it,”


Having concluded this alarming description Billy
vociferously demanded another “wet,” declaring that
the very thought of the lightning made him thirsty,
“ What shall I do then?” asked Arthur, rather
anxiously—“l was told I’d have to put up with a
tent, and I see plenty of other people do. I suppose
there are no houses to let?”
“ Houses to let I ” ejaculated Billy, “you bet there
aint. As for livin’ in tents, that’s all very well for
strong, able-bodied, men, but tents aint no ways the
kind o’ shelter for delitit females. Now look
here —l’ve got a house, or leastways a hut, which is
at your sarvice.”
Arthur was commencing to thank Mm for Ms kind
offer when. Billy again interrupted Mm.
“Itis at your sarvice—on terms. Them terms is,
you gives me your tent and twenty pounds cash.
And that’s about as liberal a offer as you’ll meet
with on these diggin’s, aint it, Tommy? ”
“It is so,”said the barman. “Billy’s hut is quite
new and water-tight, and worth double the money.”
Arthur saw that the offer was at least worthy of
consideration, and so invited Ms new friend to ac-
company him to the waggon, proposing then to go
with his wife to inspect the premises.
After Billy had been formally introduced to
Mrs. Denzil, or Grant, as we had better call her for
the future —to whom his politeness was somewhat
overpowering—and to Totsy, who was half afraid of
him—the little party set out on their tour of in-
spection.
Billy’s hut was situated on the side of the hill
opposite the township, and was about as eligible a
residence as could be procured on the diggings. It
consisted of the usual two rooms, and was, as the
barman had said, new and water-tight.
15
TEST VERSUS HUT.


Mrs. Grant, to whom the idea of living in a tent
had always been extremely distasteful, was only
too glad to accept any alternative, and so, after a
little bargaining, by which it was agreed that certain
fixtures in the shape of a table and a sleeping-bunk
should he given in, the purchase was concluded.
Leaving Billy to pack up his traps, the Grants
then returned to the waggon, and by night-fall were
fairly installed in their new abode.
The nest morning Arthur set to work to look about
him. This “ looking-about ” process is usually
thirsty work, so it was but natural that he should
fortify himself by a nobbier before starting.
For this purpose he crossed the creek and made his
way to the nearest public-house, which happened to
be the “Digger’s Delight,” kept by Cornelius
Brumm.
This was one of those patent galvanised-iron sheds
which were in great demand at that time, being both
portable and easy of erection. It had a frontage of
about sixty feet, of which some twenty were devoted to
the bar whilst as many more were taken up by the
store, for the spirited proprietor of the “Digger’s
Delight ” did not confine his operations to the liquor
traffic, but combined therewith the sale of groceries
and haberdashery.
Cornelius, or Con as he was more familiarly termed,
was a German, who for his sins was expatriated, and
compelled to pass his existence amongst benighted
foreigners, to whom the excellences of Sauer-kraut
and Lager-bier were unknown. He revenged himself
by making money out of them, and was" by way of
becoming a rich man.
His establishment at Spring Creek was largely
patronised by the diggers, being indeed by far the
most pretentious of its kind. Having just a little
more sense than the average publican, he had
16
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


determined that it would be better policy to secure a
large trade by selling good liquor, than to seek
greater profit from a smaller number of customers by
the sale of the fearful concoctions which were usually
supplied under the name of spirits. So at the
“ Digger’s Delight ” the quality of the liquor was so
good that Con obtained a great name on the diggings,
and was looked upon as that rara avis an honest
publican.
As a matter of course the world argued that a man
who dispensed good liquor, would also sell equally
reliable tea and sugar ; so the trade at the store was
as brisk as at the bar; though Mr. Con was not
quite so careful as to the quality of the goods he
supplied, for he calculated that whilst men were
thoroughly competent judges of liquor, it took a
woman to pronounce on the merits of groceries and
flannel stuff; and, as has been said, the gentle sex
was as yet but poorly represented at Spring Creek.
So Con’s store was scarcely less extensively
patronised than his bar, and each establishment
brought custom to the other.
Thus nothing was more natural than for the tired
digger, after procuring his week’s supplies, to adjourn
to the adjoining building for refreshment. And the
worthy Con took good care that the omission of this
ceremony should in no case proceed from forgetfulness,
for should his customer show signs of retreating
without the customary nobbier, he would invariably
suggest that “ all this buying and selling was dry
work,” and offer himself to “ stand a drink ” after
the exertion. Con knew that a “ shout ” from the
landlord always involved a return in kind ; and what
ordinary digger with the taste of rum in his month,
and coin of the realm in his pocket, could stop at
the second glass ?
c


An cl then, what profit did he not obtain from the
unwary toper, staggering out of the bar to cool his
heated brain in a clearer atmosphere, whom he would
cajole into buying supplies which rarely by any
chance reached their destination ?
Oh, he was a knowing file was ilr. Cornelius Bnimm,
and thoroughly understood the weaknesses of digger
nature.
As Arthur entered the bar, he was somewhat
surprised to see Billy Bowes, who treated him to a
vociferously affectionate greeting, and at once invited
him to drink.
Billy had on the previous evening- removed his
traps to the Digger’s Delight, where he had taken up
his quarters, having disposed of his tent and cooking
utensils to another new arrival.
“"Well, young feller,” said Billy, “'how do you
find yerself this morning ? Find the nest snug, eh. ?”
Arthur thanked Mm, and said they were as com-
fortable as could be expected, not being, so to sav,
settled, jet.
‘‘And what’s your lay this morning, my boy?”
asked Billy, ever on the look-out for information!!
“Well, you see,” replied Arthur, “I came up here
to dig, and the first thing is to find a place to dig in.
Can you tell me of a likely spot ?”
This query threw Billy into convulsions of laughter.
’When at last he recovered his breath, he began :
“ iotmg feller, you’ll be the death of me yet. Of all
the owdacious,regular out-and-out, new-ciiams, you’re
the new-chummiest I ever saw ! Why, you galoot,
there’s nigh twenty thousand men on this eamt). and
you ask for a likely spot to dig in ] Oh my ! On Lor!
Oh Gracious!” And Billy went oh into another
series of eachinnations, whilst the abashed Arthur
vainly attempted to elicit an explanation.
At last Con came to the rescue.


“Toong Teller,” said lie, gravely —Con never
lauglied at his customers, it was bad policy —“How
de plazes you dink to vind a man vot'U dell you
There to tig ? Ten a man knows vhere to tig , vhy
he tigs himself, you pet.”
“Just so,” added Billy, “but don’t be down in the
mouth, mate—Billy Bowes isn’t the boy to see you
stunk up if he can help it. Now you just take my
advice, go to work on wages till something turns up.”
“ Shtop a pit,” interrupted Con, “ de yoong Teller
looksh to pe a decentish yoong Teller, und also he
hash a rife und shild —I dells you vot —I cot a glaim
down the greek, you vorks him vor me on dribute.”
“ On tribute?” asked Arthur —“ "What is that?”
Billy hastened to explain that to work on tribute
meant to give the owner a certain percentage of the
returns. Said he, not unwilling to ingratiate himself
with the landlord, “if Con fakes you by the hand,
you’re all right; so close with him while you’ve got
the chance.”
Some further talk ensued, and at last they came to
terms, and, before the day was over, Arthur had taken
out a miner’s right, and found himself one of a party
of four, new-chuma like himself, working a bank
claim on tribute.


CHAPTER IV.
TOTSY’S RECEPTION. —WHITE LIES. —BILLY BOWES'
TALE: ROWDY SETH AND BLUENOSES. —A FREE
FIGHT. —SHOT IN HIS TRACKS. —LYNCH LAW.
or some all Trent well with the
■i b. f Grants.
The climate was magnificent, and the
’■ novelty of the life gave it s rare charm.
So far, the returns from the claim had been
satisfactory ; that is to say, Arthur had made enough
to pay his way, without the necessity for trenching on
his slender stock of money. Sooth to say, he and* his
mates were not earning the ordinary rate of wages
for day labor, but then they lived in hopes of better
things, and digger-like, were always hoping to make
a rich haul some fine morning. Con had known what
he was about when he let them the claim on tribute:
it would not have paid him to employ hired labor to
work it.
Mrs. Grant did not, as Hilly Sowes thought she
would, pine away for lack of female company, for she
had plenty of work to do, and Lad besides alwavs
with her the most charming of companion® little
Totsy.
This young lady was in her glory at the diggings,
for lite seemed to her one long pic-nic. She was not
allowed to go away from home, bat she did not lack
visitors, for she soon made friends with the diggers
who lived near by, and at last she began to hold a
regular little reception every evening .-'"’for it came to
be considered the correct thing to drop in at Grant's
after supper, and smoke a pipe under the little
verandah.
20
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


Here Totsy sat enthroned in state on a three-legged
stool, whilst her admirers lounged about, and told
yarns of thrilling interest-.
Mrs. Grant did her best to encourage these pro-
ceedings, for, on their first arrival, Arthur had been
in the habit of strolling down to the Diggers Delight-
of an evening, and she hoped to wean Mm off this
bad practice by providing him with congenial society
at home.
It was upon one such occasion that Billy Bowes,
who was a constant attendant at these soirees, was
called upon to relate his history.
“Weil, ladies and gentlemen,” said Billy, whose
ordinary loquacity by no means extended to what
concerned himself, for he was singularly reticent with
reference of the past, —My history aint worth tellin.
I never done nothing remarkable, and aint noways
the stuff heroes is made of.”
11 Oh, yes, you are, Billy,” said Totsy, “so tell us
all about it at once,” and the little lady settled
herself on her stool in an attitude of attention, which
seemed singularly discomposing to Billy, who foresaw
that there was no escape.
“ Well,” tie began, “since you must have it, here
goes. I was born of humble but respectable parents,
who, as soon as I could speak, taught me how to lie—
from that circumstance I date my success in life.
There aint nothing to snigger about,” continued Billy
as some of bis auditors began to laugh.—“ You
fellers is mighty smart now—maybe you aint liars,
eh ?”
“ Xu—no—certainly not I” shouted several of the
bystanders.
“Xo —so X should think,” resumed Billy, “for
none on yer aint got the right to say you’ve been
successful, any way.”
21
TAUGHT TO LIE.


This astounding logic proved too much for the
simple diggers, and no-one had a word to say in reply.
“ Look around yer,” said Billy, erasing oratorical,
and-waiving his arm in a comprehensive manner. —
“ Look at all the rich men you know.—How did they
get rich? By tellin’ the truth?—Hot much, I guess.
Lies was the foundation upon which the} 7 builded up
their fortunes, and lies it was as made ’em rich and
successful. Tou goes to a rich man to borrow a
fi 1 -pun-note. ‘ .Really, I’m so sorry, ’ says he, l if you’d
only come a minute sooner I’d’ve given it yer with
pleasure ; but I jest gave a cheque which’!! drain out
my account at the bank, and I make it a rale never
to overdraw.’ Tou believes that man a lot, don’t ver?”
His auditors gazed blankly at one another :—Billy
was proving his case most indubitably. They did not
exactly agree with him, but his arguments were
unanswerable.
“ How, that rich man would never have been rich
if he’d always lent money when he was asked, so to
save himself he tells, not one lie, but five.”
“How do you make that out, Billy,” asked Arthur,
who was much amused at Billv’s logic.
“ Why this way. The first lie is when he says he’s
sorry not to be able to give it to yer—he don’t care a
cuss about it. Second lie,” continued Billy. keeping
tally on his fingers—“ He'd never gave given yer the
money, even if you'd come an hour sooner, let alone
a minute. Third lie: he didn’t give no cheque a
minute ago. I'ourth lie : he’s got more monev lying
at. the hank than he's likely to draw out in a hurry.
Biftli lie :he d've overdrawn his account anv time if
there was money to be made by it, and ten to one has-
made all he has got by overdrawin’.”
Biavo, Billy ! said Arthur. “ Aon certainlv are
not far wrong as to tire usual way of refusing
22
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


applications for loans, but custom has sanctioned
■white lies in business/’
“Custom be hanged I ” said Billy—“I don’t see
nothin’ about custom in the Ten Commandments.
Your business white lies is told to deceive, and there-
fore cheat, and is as big and as black: a crammer as
ever was told by the father of lies himself.”
“ Papa, I think Billy is right,” said Totsy, gravely.
“He is that, little missy,” said Billy, “and
therefore I thank my pious parients wot taught me to
lie in my early youth.” So saying Billy reverently
removed his hat and east his eves upwards devoutly,
whilst an altogether indescribable expression at the
comers of his mouth alone betrayed that he was not
in earnest.
But Totsy noted the inconsistency and cried out
“What a shame ! You’re only laughing at us, sir 1
Now, go on with your story —go on. or —” and she
shook her fore-finger at him. in a manner indicative
of the pains and penalties which would fall upon
him in the event of non-compliance.
“Well, the fact is,” said Billy, deprecatingly, “I
aint got nothin’ to tell. Yet—hold on—would a
yam about another man suit this honorable
company ? ”
Totsy. as President, looked round to see whether
this offer appeared to be acceptable to the majority
and then graciously gave her consent, mentally
determining to make him tell his own story after-
wards.
Billy then began his tale.
“ Near about the most remarkable character on
Dead Man’s Plat in 1549, was Seth Harriet. “Dead
Man’s Flat,’ ’’ he explained, “was a gold held in Cali-
fornia on which I located, when I went tot lie diggin’s
fust. Seth was a right-down Y anliee, and the
rowdiest, drinldn’est, spreein’est shootin'est, knife
23
BEAD MAX'S FLAT.


stickin’est, cuss, you. ever hearn tell off. He and liis
pardner iiad dropt on to the likeliest spot on the flat,
and was rollin’ in money. His pardner was a poor,
undersized, washed-out, Bluenose —-jest the last sort
of feller you’d think that rowdy Seth would cotton to.
Yet they was as thick as thieves, and wherever Seth
went, you bet that little Bluenose crawled after him.
He didn’t have no other name—or leastways I dis-
remember it—we alius called him Bluenose, seem he
was a Bluenose, and came from St. John’s. Well,
one night there was a big spree on, and free fightin’
all over the township. Now, mind you, a free light
in California them times wasn’t altogether what it is
here in Victoria. Bowie knives, knuckle-dustevs, and
slung shot, was flung around promiskus, and nobody
didn’t think nothin’ of haulin’ out a revolver when
things got a little mixed. Seth was, as you might
guess, in the thick of it; hollerin’ and cusshr and
ragin’ around, more like a wild Injun than a white
man. Of course, too, where Seth was, there was his
shadder, that weak-minded Bluenose. Hi didn’t
holier or rage around—he only jest took his litker
when lieker was a-goini, and now and then he’d ask
the crowd to drink, or remark quite plaintive that
‘we was havin’ a lively time.’ Now, there’d been
tnree or four chaps prowlin’ around the camp for some
days, a-layin' for the green-horns and cleanin’ of
them due at draw-poker and other innocent little
games, and they was matin’ nigh as much noise as
Seth Harnet himself, though they didn’t offer to tight
much when the nghtin’ began. It happened that in
the thick of the row one of these fellers got shoved
up agin Bluenose, who was doin’ nothin’ hut dodgin’
about _to escape gettin’ knocked on the head, and
hollerin' out to the boys to keep cool and come and
have a ariok. Tins gambler, out of sheer devilment,
made a blow at Bluenose, and taught him an uglv


lick on the mouth. The little man jest put up his
hands, and was agoin’ to mate for the gambler, when
the crowd split asunder, and Seth Harnet came
a-plungin’ through, roarin’ out to them to let him at
the chap that struck his pardner. Now the gambler,
his name was Hawkins, knew Seth, and knowed also
that it ’ud suit him better to clear; so clear he did,
and pretty quick too, you bet. Seth tried to make
after him, but Hawkins’s mates crowded in between
’em. and he got off. Tou jest oughter heard Seth
swear then—by thunder, it was as good as a play'—
He cussed so hard that the boys stopt fightin’ and
scrougin’ to listen to him, and when he wound up hy
takin’ a big oath that he'd have Hawkins’s scalp fust
time he met him, there wasn’t a single white man in
the room as ’ud have changed shoes with Hawkins
for a thousand dollars. Well, that spree come to an
end after a while, and things was pretty quiet for
some time. When it was all over Seth took a look
around after Hawkins, but he and his mates had
cleared out for parts unknown, so to say, so Seth was
obliged to let his little affair stand over. Now jest
about that time the Tigiiance Committee was started.
You see there’d been an awful lot of thievin' of late,
and the boys was determined to put it down with a
strong hand, so a Committee was formed, and an oath
taken to lynch every man that was caught red-handed.
Some of us, too, began to think everybody was gettin’
a little too free with pistols and knives, and it was
generally agreed that if a man got killed, onless it
was in a regular fair fight with seconds and every-
thin’ proper and accordin’ to rule, the man as killed
him should be treated as a murderer. It was remarked
afterwards that Seth Hornet was awfully down on this
clause, becos, he said, when a man got into a mess he
didn’t have time to look around for a second, and for
bis part he didn’t want any one to hang the man as


shot him—he allowed he could take care of his own
skin, any where. —Some months passed and things
was so quiet on the Hat that people called it the
model diggin’s, and some of the hoys wanted to build
a Church, hecos, they said, we only needed that to be
quite respectable. Well, one evenin’ some five or
six of us was strollin’ around the camp when suddenly
we heard a noise of barneying, and then two shots
fired quick, one after the other. Off we rushed to
where the noise came from, and there we found two
bodies a-lyin’ on the ground, and three or four men
a-grapplin’ with Seth Harnet. When we arrove fhev
drew off, and then Seth rushed to one of the men
which was down, and lifted Mm up. It was Biue-
nose—he was shot somewhere® in the shoulder—the
other was HawMns, which was as dead as a herrin?.
“ ‘ Gentlemen,’ said one of the fellers as was fightin’
with Seth, ‘you jest come in time—here’s this mur-
derous villain and his pal set on poor Hawkins and
shot him in his tracks.’
“ ‘lt’s a darned lie !’ shouted Seth, springin’ to his
feet. a
says Colonel Skinner, the President of
the "Vigilance Committee, as happened to come up
with us, 1 this is an affair for J udgo Lynch. Tha Court
will sit at ten to-morrow. Meanwhile, Mr. Harnet,
I’ll trouble you for your weepons,’ and so savin’ he
steps up to Seth as hold as brass,'and holds “out his
hand for the revolver, which Seth was a-fingerin’ as
if he’d moreM two minds to let fly at the lot of ns.
“ ‘Brayvo, Colonel I ’ shouted the hoys, pleased at
the grit he showed. To every body’s surprise Seth
said nothin , hut after a minute or two jest handed
over his six-shooter as quiet as a lamb, and then knelt
down by the side of his mate. Some of the boys then
put Hawkins s body on a sheet of hark and earned
it off to the nearest store, and Colonel Skinner, after
26
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


tellin’ some of tlie Tigilanee Committee who had
come up. to watch Seth, went off to his tent. He and
one or two others stopt behind with Seth, not liking
to leave that foolish Bluenose lyin’ there on the
ground. So we got a blanket and hysted him into it
and carried him off to his tent, Seth walkin’ by his
side, hut never savin’ nothin/ except to tell us to
walk gently were the ground was rough We got a
chap as know’d somethin’ about wounds to look at
Bluenose, and then went home, leavin’ a guard at
rhe tent.
‘ • The nest mornin’ was just like Sunday. Nobody
went to work, but all the boys turned out in clean
shirts, and many on ’em with plug hats and black
coats. The court was held under a big tree, and
Colonel Skinner was the President. After a jury
was sworn, the men as was strugglin’ with Seth when
we came on the ground was called to give their
evidence. They were, jest as we all thought,
Hawkins's old gambling pals, and what one said all
of ’em swore to. The fust as was examined said that
Hawkins had arrived with them last night, havin’ a
fairish lot of gold with him tied up in a shammy
leather bag. "While they were a-puttin’ up their tent,
he strolled out into the bush, and presently they
heard a row, and ran up jest as the shots was fired,
when they saw the two men down and Seth a-matin’
off with the bag of gold.
“ At this Seth started forward and shouted that he
lied—the gold was his own.
“ The gambler replied by askin’: ! How was it that
no matter how the claims on either side of ’em did,
Seth Harnet and his pardner always did well.’ Said he,
‘ Hr. President, these men are the thieves who have
been pretending to find the gold they have stolen.’
“Now Seth being pretty free with his weapons
wasn’t altogether popular in the camp, and the boys
27
THAT FOOLISH BLUENOSE.


began to look at one another, as if they wondered
they had never thought of this before. As for Seth,
he foamed at the mouth, and would Lave rushed at
the witness, had not three or four of ihe Vigilance
men seized holt of him.
“ The other gamblers was examined then, and
every one on ’em swore to the same story. Finally
the bag of gold dust, which was found in Seth’s hut.
was produced, and sworn to by all of them. The
ease began to look very black for Seth and his mate,
and murmurs were heard in the crowd that hangin’
was too good for them.
“ "When Seth was called upon for his defence, he
said that the only evidence agin’ him was the evidence
of a gang of swindlers, who had perjured themselves
in order to git holt of the bag of gold, which he and
bis pardner had got from their claim by honest work.
He said he and Bluenose was a-walkirr home when
they met Hawkins, who, d’reotly he saw who it was,
pulled out his revolver and fired, shoutin' Bluenose.
Seth said he, seeing- Hawkins’ hand go to his hip as
if after a weapon, hauled out his revolver and fired
immediately afterwards. The gamblers then came
up and assailed him in a body.
“ Whilst he was fellin' his tale, there was frequent
interruption from the crowd, who evidently disbelieved
every word of it: and when he was finished, there
arose a pretty general shout of 1 lynch him ! ’
“Colonel Skinner then arksed Blueuo.se what he
to say. That unfortunate critter had been
earned on a stretcher to the ground, not bein’ able to
walk, by reason of his wound.
“ When tne Colonel spoke to him he raised hisseif
on his elbow, and looked around for a minute or two
quite vacantly. Then, with a weak smile, he wiped
his lips and began; ‘Hr. President, them gamblers
has been a-lyin’ awful. The gold is ourn, which we
28
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


■panned it our our tiro selves yesterday afternoon—
tut vilien you come to the shootin’ bizniss, nobody
don’t seem to hev got the hang of it quite correct.’
Here he looked around, and smiled at Seth, who
stood glaring at him as if he could hardly believe his
senses. ‘ You see,’ continued Bluenose, in a sort of
apologetic torse, ‘ when, a man as don’t know yer, and
as you never done no harm to, hits yer in the mouth,
it feels orkard. Mebbe some on you gentlemen ’ull
remember that night down at O’Mahoney’s when
things got a little bit lively and mixed. Well that
night the deceased, which being a corpse is not to be
spoke of disrespectful, lunges out and fetches me a
wipe over the chops. I don’t say it was done
intentional, gentlemen,—mebbe it was playfulness,
mebbe it was a mistake altogether, —but you see it
was ruther rough on me, bein’ as I was a-doin’
nothin’ to the deceased at the time, and in fact, so to
speak, wasn’t on taims with him. Well, Mister
President, I didn’t say much then, but I thought a
powerful deal about that blow, and I allowed that if
ever X come across the gent as hit me, and things was
convenient, I'd make it even with him; so when I see
him a-comin’ through the moonlight all so jaunty
and gay, I jest lets him have it, and he goes down,
but not afore he’d fired at me in return : which,
gentlemen, meanirt’ no disrespect to the corpse,
showed he was ready hisself, and was a goin’ fur me
anyhow,’
“ As Bluenose finished bis statement, he sank back
exhausted, and raised his hand to his mouth —when
he withdrew ir. we could see that his fingers was
stained with blood.
i; lh ore being no more evidence the crowd was
ordered to stand back while the jury deliberated on
their verdict, the prisoners bein’taken away, strongly
truarded.
29
xo disrespect to the corpse.


“In about half-an-hour Colonel Skinner announced
that the verdict had been agreed upon, and then the
foreman gave in the finding. The jury found that
there was not sufficient evidence to show that Seth or
Bluenose intended to steal the gold, which, however,
they believed to have belonged to Hawkins and his
mates. They acquitted Seth Harnet, though they
said his part iu the affair was highly suspicious, and
finally, brougiit in Bluenose as guilty of murder.
“As the foreman concluded, Seth Harnet, withe,
yell of rage, broke loose from the men who were
holding him, and rushed up to the table at which the
President was seated.
“ ‘ What is this mockery ? ’ said he, 1 that poor
fellow never shot Hawkins. He hasn’t the heart to
kill a mouse. It was I—l tell you I shot the man —
not before he had fired at my pardner—but I : d 've shot
him anyhow and anywhere, as you all know I vowed
I would that night at O’Mahoney’s.’
“‘Seth Harnet,’ said Colonel Skinner, ‘the jury
have fully considered your statement, and perhaps
fortunately for you, have declined to believe it. The
verdict cannot be impugned, We have all a solemn
duty to perform, in accordance with our vows. The
sentence of the court is that you, the man known as
Bluenose, be hanged at once. Lynch law gives short
shrift, even as murderers give short shrift to their
victims.’
“I shall never forget the scene that followed.
They bore Seth away, struggling and foaming at the
mouth, and filling the air with fearful denunciations
of vengeance against any man who dared to put a
finger upon his pardner.
“Bluenose raised himself on his elbow and gazed
anxiously after the group, in the midst of which Seth
could be seen, fighting Hke a wild with tooth
and nail. ‘ Poor fellow 1’ he murmured, ‘ Poor dear


old Seth.! Good-bye, old pard—good-bye V With
that he sank back, and a thin stream of blood trickled
from his lips.
“ I was standing by his side, and somehow I could
not believe him guilty. ! Bluenose,’ I whispered,
‘ tell me truly—did you really shoot Hawkins ?'
“ He shook his head, and smiled faintly, murmur-
ing, ‘ By-and-bye, by-and-bye !’
“Presently some of the "Vigilance Committee
approached and bore him, still lying on the stretcher,
underneath the tree, over the limb of which a long
lariat had been cast, in readiness for the execution.
“ As they were lifting him up, he seized my hand
and said, anxiously, ‘ Stay by me till the last ? Ton
will ?’
“I pressed his hand, and walked on by his side,
still holding it—l could not speak—l felt choking.
“When, we halted, a difficulty arose; —who were to
be the executioners? According to custom every
man was hound to take part in the execution, but
Lynch law was new to most of us, and there was
something horrible in the idea of hanging a man who
was evidently in a dying state. The Colonel fussed
around, and spoke to first one and then another, but
nobody made a move; at last a little body of men
detached themselves from the crowd, and announced
their willingness to perform the dreadful ceremony.
They were the gamblers —Hawkins’s mates.
“When Bluenose saw them approach, he shuddered,
but presently murmured 1 ’Tia best so—much best—
my blood will be on their heads.’
“ I could not stand it any longer, and I began to cry
out that it was a murder they were contemplating,
when Bluenose, who had not left go my hand, drew
me down to him with a force of which I could not
have believed Mm capable, and whispered : ‘ Hush !
Let them do their work- Don’t you see I am dying
already ?’
31
LYNCH LAW.


“Here I was roughly pushed aside by one o£ the
gamblers, and in a minute or two the dreadful pre-
parations were completed.
“When they told the Colonel they were readv,
Bluenose asked to be allowed to give the signal him-
self by dropping his handkerchief, and the permission
was accorded him. He then beckoned me to lean over
him, and whispered, faintly: l lf I had not said I did
it, they would have hanged Seth. Tell him not to
forget my wife and little ones—he knows the address—
I never was much account, and now I am dying, so it
don’t matter much, any way. Good bye.’ He smiled
faintly, whilst I started back in horror, and screamed
out to the Colonel to stop the execution.
“Too late!—Whilst the words were passing mv
lips, the bloodstained handkerchief fluttered to the
ground, and all was over ! ”
Billy’s auditors drew a long breath, and gazed at
one another—this was not the kind of yarn they
expected. Totsy was sobbing quietly, whilst several
suspicious sniffles showed that the feelings of others
of the little company were not less touched by the
grim recital.


CHAPTER V.
BILLY BOWES’ TALE CONCLUDED:—THE TOMBSTONE. —
THE SECOND INSCRIPTION.—PROVIDING FORE THE
FUTURE. —AT BALLARAT.—THE GOLDEN YANKEE.
—IS IT A GHOST ?
SITTER a short pause, Billy began again in the
nasal drawl which was habitual to Mm, but
wMch he had abandoned when he came to
the more pathetic passages of his story.
“ Wa-al—” said he, “ When the boys heard the truth
of the case there was a rare shine, and it was generally
agreed that it ’ud be a fair thing to string up them
gamblers; but bless yer, they knowed too much to
wait, and, when we come to look for ’em, we found
they’d cleared out d’rectly after the execution. When
Seth was let go. which was not till the followin’
momin’, he didn’t say much—a night in bonds had
quietened Mm so’s nobody hardly knowed Mm. He
only axed what they'd done with his pardner’s body,
and when he was shown the grave, he jest sot down
on it and motioned the hoys off. After a day or two
he commenced to go about agin as usual, but not
matin’ no row-—he was, so to say, deadly quiet, and
them as knowed Mm allowed he was twice as danger-
ous as in the old time when he was rowdy and ram-
pagious. He’d go up to a bar and stand there drinkin’
for hours, all by himself, never takin’ no notice of
nobody, unless any strangers was present, and with
them he’d be pretty free, axin’ all manner of ques-
tions, a-tryin’ to find out what had become of the
gambling crowd. One day some-one asked Mm what
he intended to do if he met any of those fellers. He
D
DEADtT QXJXET.


didn’t reply, he only jest smiled ; but sech a smile 1
and bowie-knives -was lurking in every
■wrinkle of it. So it come to be generally understood
that Seth intended to make it pretty lively for
Hawkins’s mates when he kem across ’em. After
awhile a marble monnyment kem up from ’Frisco,
and Seth had it put up over Bluenose’s grave.
Some of the boys was rather riled at the inscription,
which set forth as how Bluenose had been murdered
by Lynch Law, but nobody cared to interfere, and I
dent suppose Seth ever heard anythin’ about it. Not
that he’d ’ve cared — it was of no arthly consideration
to him what any man said or thought about him, and
it’s my belief he’d’ve shot clown the President of the
United States if he’d caught him meddlin’ with that
tombstone.—ln old times Seth use n’t to bust himself
by too much work ; now he was at it morning noon,
and night, and the gold he got from his claim was
somethin’ marvellous. WelC one day when the coach
come in from 'Frisco, there gits clown off of the box-
seat a foreign-lookin’ cove, with thick black beard
and moustaches. Seth was a-standin’ by, and no
sooner did that feller touch tne ground than Seth had
him by the throat, and threw him on his knees. Some
of ihe by-sianders, thinkin' Seth wus gone mad,
rushed up, and was a-goin’ to lay holt on him. when
he jerks off the stranger’s hat, and tears his hair and
beard all off in one lump. Then everybody recog-
nized one of the gamblers, and nobody thought It
worth while to interfere. The poor wretch set up
screamin’ awful, while Seth was coolly cookin’ his
iSvclver. But he didn’t shoot—after a minute he
fetched the gambler a kick— ‘ Git up,’ sez he, ‘you
shall have a rair trial, and u you're found guiltv we’ll
hang yer cpiite comfortably on Bluenose’s tree, and
with the sen-same rope-—l've kept in a-purnus.’
The boys was reg’lar tickled by this notion, and a


Court was summonsed at once. The proceeding didn’t
last long, for Bluenose’s confession had satisfied
everybody that the gamblers had lied, and before
nightfall one of his murderers had gone under. The
next day Seth set to work and sculpt on the tomb-
stone under Bluenose’s name— 1 Sacred also to the
memory of John Stormy , hanged for the above-mentioned
murder. —That was the only one of the murderers as
ever turned up at Deadman’s Mat, but I heerd after-
wards that three more inscriptions went up on that
tombstone, so that prob’bly Seth got quits with them
in some fashion or other. There was jest one other
feller left, but I never heerd whether Seth found him
oat or not • any way his name didn’t figure on the
tombstone in my time.—When Deadman’s Flat got
pretty well worked out, Seth went off somewhere else,
and I lost the run of him for three or four years. It
was in ’Frisco that I next heard of him. One day I
happened to meet two or three fellers as had worked
in the next claim to me on the Flat, and nateraliy we
got talkin’ over old times. ! What do you think
about Seth Harriet's little game’ ? sez one on ’em. I
said I’d never heerd nothin’ at all about that in-
dividooal fur years : and then he up and told me as
how Seth was the talk of the whole town. It appeared
he’d made an awful pile at the diggiu’s, an’ come
down to ’Frisco with a bank account long as my arm.
Now what does that extr’or’nary critter do ? In course
he has a spree—not one of the good old sort, but a
savage, melancholy kind o’ spree, all to himself. He
waltzes around all the kens in ’Frisco for some days,
drinkin’ like mad, and fightin’ whenever he gets the
chance; and gamblin’ and winniri money like as the
devil was at his elbow. Suddenly he knocks it all
off, and walks into the bank where his money was.
‘ How much stands to my credit ?' he axes. He was
told a little better’ll a hundred thousand dollars.
With, that he axes to see the manager, and hands


him a paper matin’ over the money in trust, all but
a couple of thousand wot he kep’ fur himself. He
then scoots, leavin' no trail: and nobody knowed
where he was gone. ‘The paper,’ sez the cove as
was a-tellin’ me all this, ‘ was the ourousest doeky-
ment ever you heerd tell off. It was all right and
reg’lar, bein’ drawed up by a lawyer. It said as
how fifty thousand dollars was to be made over to
Bluenose’s widder and children: which was only
proper, as Bluenose was his pardner, and xnebbe
saved Ms life ; but what call he had to purwide fur
the others licks me.’—‘Wot others?’ sez I.—‘Jest
Hawkins and Stoney, and that crowd,’ sez the man
from the Elat; ‘ he’s bin and made over ten thousand
a-pieoe to the families of those cusses, so's thev
should’nt come to want by hia means.’— ‘ But there
was only five of ’em, and that only makes ninety
thousand,’ sez I; ‘who got the other ten?’—‘Ah,
that was the curousest bit of the lot,’ sez he; ‘ the
other ten was to be held in trust fur the next o’ kin
of the other gambler wot got away.’— ‘ Had he killed
him then? ’ I axed’—‘Nary bit he aint killed him/
was the answer, ‘ but he calkilated he’d wipe Mm out
some day, and so made purwision fur the future.’—
Now there was style! What do you think of that fur
an aristocrat ? asked Billy, turning to the company.
“It strikes me your friend Seth Harnet will end
by getting hanged Mmseif,” said Arthur, who had
been much interested in the story, wMeh had lost
nothing from Billy’s quaint manner of telling it.
“I guess you dont know Seth,” replied Billy—
“ However, 1 aint _ done with him yet. When The
diggin s broke out in Australia X come over with the
fust lot from California, and after a few ups and
downs, I fetched up at Ballarat, "Who do you tlifnV
I should meet there hut my noble Seth ! a-doiM it up
grand, and Melon up a rare dust. He’d, been round


■everywheres, and every wheres lie went he’d only got
to drop a pick into the ground and it ’ud strike gold.
He was that lucky that folks thought he was in league
with the devil, and he got the nickname of the
* Golden Yankee.’ Me an’him had a rare good time,
for I was flush, and he was as free with his cash as
a prince, and seemed to have got over his doldrums,
for he was as rowdy as ever, though p’r’aps not quite
so jolly. One day I axed him if he’d ever met that
other gambler feller.—D’rectly I did it I was sorry,
for a shadder seemed to pass over his face, andhe
ground his teeth as he muttered: ‘ Not yet! ’ I
■did’nt pursoo the subject, and we parted soon after.
The nest mornin’ he was gone —vamosed in his usual
manner, without never a word to nobody. I guess
my question had reminded him of that gambler and
he’d put out after the poor devil,”
“ That was the last heard of him ? ” asked Arthur.
“The very last,” replied Billy—-“ From that day
to this I never set eyes on him.—Gosh!” and
he started from the stool on which he was sitting
and stared, with a frightened glare in his eyes, down
the gully,
“ What on earth is the matter P ” asked Arthur.
“ Matter ? ” stammered Billy—“ as true as I’m a
livin’ man, I see that Seth Hornet a-walkin’ right
past the door,—Leastways if it was’nt Mm, it was his
ghost,” he continued in an awe-struck tone, still
peering out into the gathering gloom.
Billy so evidently believed what he had said that
no one ventured to doubt him, and, the harmony of
the evening being effectually disturbed, the meeting
broke up.
Said Totsy to her mother, as she was being tucked
up in her little bed : “I think I should love that
Golden Yankee, Mamma; would’nt you ? ” Which
proves that the little lady was very human, after all.
37
II WAS HIS GHOST.


CHAPTER VI.
THE DROUGHT. —A GOOD SAMARITAN.—THE FATAL
LEAP.
S|®j|o3!£E months passed, during -which Arthur and
mat6s worked hard, but with poor success.
'fifryjl During the whole period their average
weekly earnings did not amount to the
ordinary rate of wages, and they found the royalty
they had to pay to Con a very serious tax. Towards
the close of the summer the water began to run
short, for there had been very little ram, and the
Stored water was nearly exhausted.
To Arthur and his mates, who had relied upon the
creek for a supply, this drought was ruin. Alluvial
surface-working without water is an impossibility,
and most of the diggers on Spring Creek were
compelled to remain in idleness till the rain came.
Now idleness, to Arthur, meant ruin. At first he
only grumbled like the rest, thinking that rain must
come soon, and that meanwhile he"had still a few
pounds with which to keep his household supplied
with food. The time came, however, when these few
pounds were all spent, and still the rain did not come.
The heat was fearfully oppressive. Day after day
the sun rose in a cloudless sky, and set in"that heat-
mist which is so terribly significant of what may
be expected on the morrow. Tales reached the camp
of how the cattle were dying by hundreds, and a
famine seemed imminent.
At last the diggers began to be seriously alarmed,
and not a few of them leit for Alelboume, preferring
to abandon their claims rather than be starved out.


The exodus of these men put the finishing stroke
to the work. The store-keepers, who lest largely by
the departure of their creditors, took fright, and
declined to sell except for cash payments.
Up till this time Arthur, since all his money was
spent, had been enabled to procure supplies from
Cornelius Brumm on credit—when the edict went forth
that “trust was dead,” he and hundreds more were
reduced to fearful straits.
To obtain food it now became necessary to Sell,
first jewellery, then furniture, wearing apparel and
even tools. The establishment of Mr. Cornelius
Brumm began to assume the appearance of a second-
hand warehouse, for he did the principal traffic in
this line of business.
The day came when Arthur learnt from his wife
that there was absolutely nothing left to pawn or sell.
He went down to the store, and asked for a small
supply of flour on credit.
Mr. Brumm was sorry to be obliged to refuse him/
but could not depart from the course he and the
other storekeepers had decided upon adopting.
Arthur returned home and told his wife, and they
went supperless to bed.
The nest morning, little Totsy stole out before her
parents were awake, and went to the hut of some
diggers who were among her most special friends.
She returned with a loaf of bread— all they had to
spare, for they too were hard pushed.
That day Arthur did not stir out, but sat gloomily
brooding, whilst Polly, affecting a cheerfulness she
did not feel, engaged in all manner of lively debates
with little Totsy, who ably seconded her mother in
her efforts to drive care away.
On the following morning, Totsy made another
begging trip, but came back disheartened and
frightened. She found her friends to be as badly off


as themselves—the poor fellows had given her their
last loaf the previous day.
Starvation stared them in the face, and Arthur
determined to make one more attempt to move the
storekeeper to compassion.
On. his arrival at the “ Diggers 1 Delight,” he found
the bar crowded with haggard-looking men, who
were lounging about, idly speculating on the all-
absorbing topic, the advent of rain.
In former days he needed only to have put his head
in at the door to be asked to take a drink, but now
the majority of Con’s customers required all their coin
to supply their own wants.
Oon himself was standing- behind the bar, washing
tumblers, and Joining in the universal growl of
discontent.
Let me present him to the reader.
Imagine to yourself a short, thick-set, figure, with
long hairy arms, terminating in fingers which
irresistibly remind you of claws. His hair and beard
are blue-black, and the latter hides so much of his
face that little beyond a bulbous, scarlet-hued, nose,
and two red, ferrety, eyes, is to be seen.
To this gorilla the delicate-featured English
gentleman addresses himself, and humbly demands a
private audience.
“Got any dings to shell ? ” asked Cun, in just such
a voice as you would expect to issue from those
coarse lips.
Arthur hesitatingly mu.rniuied that he had some-
thing particular to say which could not be communi-
cated in public: and, with a curse, and a kick to an
unoffending dog which lay in his way, Con. walked
into tlie store.
Here they were met by TToolshed Bess, a lady
v nose name has been before mentioned in these
pages. She, with a rough ‘ ‘ hi: .ruin'passed into the
bar, leaving them alone.
40
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


Arthur then told Ms pitiful tale to Con, and prayed
hard for enough to tide them over the next few days.
He might as well have talked to the animal the
man so much resembled. Con moved hastily away,
scarcely giving him, time to finish.
5 ‘ I dells you, no I Yot der tyfel you come pestering
me for ven I peen tole you tventy hoondert dimes, no ?”
“ But Con, we are starving,” said Arthur, piteously.
“ Have mercy upon us—give us just a little flour.
The rain must come soon, and then ITL pay you ten
times over.”
“ Look here,” replied Oon, pointing to his ledger.
41 Here is dree-hoondert beoples in dat hook vot
waits to bay me till de rain comes. Now ven it don’t
come—vot den"? I lose more dan dree tousand
hound. Poof! ” and he closed the hook viciously,
“ I don’t run dish shtore on gredit no more. Yot I
shay to von I means for all.”
While he was speaking, two or three hungry-
looking men entered, evidently bound on the same
errand as Arthur, and it was for their benefit that
Con had made the last remark.
Seeing the hopelessness of any farther appeal,
Arthur rushed out of the store, not daring to remain
in an atmosphere loaded with the appetising per-
fume of that food which ho so much needed.
His weakness was so great that he staggered as he
came out into the open air, and would have fallen
had he not clutched at a post of the verandah.
After a minute or two he again started, and walked
mechanically towards a stump which stood some
hundred yards down the road, upon which he sat
down, and burying his face in his hands, wept.
Presently he felt a light touch on his shoulder,
and ha looked up.
It was Woolshed Bess.
“Why, mate, what’s the matter?” asked Bess
in a sympathizing tone.


“Matter? said Arthur dreamily—Pm starving—
that’s all.” And once more he hid his face in his
hands.
“Starvin’! ” said Bess, “no, sure it aint so had as
that! Now just you hold on a minute, I’ll he back
directly.”
So saying, Bess tucked her shirts under her arm,
and ran off to the “ Digger’s Delight,” from whence
she returned in less than five minutes hearing in
her arms in triumph a loaf of bread.
“ See here,” she resumed, “I gave Dutch Con my
wedding-ring for a loaf of bread—you shall have
half —” and she hastily broke the loaf in two and
handed, be it remarked, the larger portion to the
famishing man.
Poor Arthur was too overcome to speak, but he
seized the hand which was extended to him, and
covered its horny surface with hisses and tears.
“ Don’t— don't now !” said Bess, struggling with
her tears—“don’t, I tell you—it hurts!” and she
snatched her hand away, and covered it up with her
ragged, shawl- “No man aint kissed my hand like
that since—since—God help me !—since I needed
not to be ashamed for any man to kiss it.—But eat —
eat, I tell yel—Why don’t yon eat ?” So saying she
fiercely thrust the bread against his mouth, till his
lips were cut, and the snowy -white of the loaf was
tinged with crimson.
“Ah!” said Bess, “I have hurt you—l am so
sorry. But please eat; there’s a good fellow.”
Arthur did not speak, hut casting upon his
henfactress a look of ineffable gratitude, he did as
she told him.
Then Bess sat down hy his side and began to eat
her portion.
After a mouthful or two, Arthur stopped eating.
“ What’s up now !” asked Bess.
42
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


“ Why, you see,” said Arthur blushing crimson,—
“it chokes me—l can’t eat it. —To sell your wedding-
ring ! ”
“ Oh, is that all! ” said Bess, coolly.—" Well you
jest go right a-head, and make a good square meal.
You see I went this mornia’ to that shanty with jest
two shillings in my pocket, intendin’ to buy some
bread ; being as I didn’t have nothin’ paxtickler to
eat since yesterday momin’. When I got inside,,
some how or other I didn’t feel hungry no more,
but oh ! I felt so thirsty—-so dreadfully thirsty ! and
the rum smelt so good—there was some fellers
a-drmkin’ rum in the bar—that I thought I’d have a
nobbier instead. Now jest d’reckly as I come out
agin I begins to feel hungry, and wishes I’d bought
a loaf instead. When I sees you a-aittin’ here, I
knowed I’d done wrong; so I went right back, an’
when I found that miserly old skunk wouldn’t trust
me, I jest whips off the ring and flops it right down
on the counter and grabs a loaf. 1 Keep that till I
pays for the duff,’ says I, and I hoots it.”
“ But to leave your wedding-ring—it seems so
awful,” said Arthur, still hesitating.
“Oh, that don’t matter,” replied Bess.—“ The man
as put that ring on my finger warn’t o’ no account at
all. Why, three weeks after we was married he
hooked it along of a Tasmanian gal, as come over
to Melbourne with the Op’ry Company. Ah ! he was
a real bad lot, he was. I’d’ve blewed that ring long
ago, on’y you see we women doesn’t like to be seen
without a wedding-ring—it don’t look well.”
As Bess made this avowal, she actually blushed,
and for a moment Arthur could see that she must
once have been very pretty. She was still young,
and under happier circumstances might have been
still pretty, but Woolshed Bess had crowded a life-
time into a few years of wild, exciting pleasure, and


now looked as if she belonged to a previous genera-
tion.
After the above explanation, Arthur did not
hesitate to proceed, and in a very few minutes had
finished his share of the loaf; whilst Bess sat by,
munching in silence, thinking of the forgotten past,
and the husband who had deserted her.
Suddenly Arthur started up with a wild cry of
agony.
“Why what on earth’s the matter now? ” exclaimed
Bess.
“My wife—my child! ” screamed the wretched
man.—“ I have feasted whilst they are starving! Oh !
Wretch—beast, that I am ! ’ ’
“ And have you a wife and a child here ?” asked
Bess, wonderingly.
“ Would to God I had not! ” was the reply. “ Oh,
by heaven, I shall go mad! ”
Here-upon the unfortunate man rushed frantically
away, leaving his companion speechless with
amazement.
She was recalled to her senses by a footstep, and
turning, beheld Billy Bowes, who greeted her after
Ms usual noisy fas Mon.
“ Oh, Billy,” cried Bess, seizing his arm—“ You’re
not a bad sort—for the love of heaven catch that
man, or he’ll do himself a mischief! ”
“ it' 3 Grant! ” said Billy—“ What’s his little
game ? Horrors ? ”
“ Ho, no, said Bess—“He said he was starving
so I give him some bread, and he ate it, and then he
jumps up and screams out that his wife and Hd were
starving too, and then he runs off! ”
„ n • 'whistled Billy. “ I always thought that
toiler ud come to grief. But never you mind, old
gal, i 11 start after him and soon put things straight.”
44
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


With, that, Mr. Bowes did start, but at a somewhat
leisurely gait, for he calculated that there was no
hurry, as Arthur was making towards his home,
where he would he quite safe, for a while, at least.
For a few minutes Woolshed Bess stood, shading’
her eyes from the glare of the sun and looking after
them, then, with a sigh, she wrapped her rags closely
around her, and went her way to the miserable bowel
she called home.
Meanwhile Arthur ran wildly on till he reached the
creek. Here he paused for a moment, as if in doubt
whether to cross the little bridge or not. Suddenly
he threw his arms up into the air, and with a wild
cry, sprang over a cutting, falling heavily some ten
or twelve feet on the rooks and broken stones below.
Some diggers, who were at work hard by, ran
hastily to the spot, and when Billy Bowes arrived
upon the scene, he found that they stood around a
corpse.
Thus miserably perished Arthur Denzil, a victim
to that fatal gold-fever which has hurried so many
thousands to ruiu and death. Whether his fall was
accidental, or he had wilfully intended to commit
suicide, must ever remain a mystery.
Gently and tenderly those rude men lifted the body
and laid it reverently on a sheet of bark, whilst Billy
went off to acquaint the widow with her awful loss.
Of the scene that followed I dare not attempt a
description.
Weakened by famine and anxiety Mrs. Denzil was
in no state to bear even far less horrible tidings with
fortitude, and her wild grief was terrible to witness.
At the sight of the body, which was shortly after-
wards carried up to the hut, she went off into violent
fits of hysterics, and it was not until nightfall that,
worn out and utterly exhausted, she became calm, and
fell asleep.


The rough diggers, all unused to such scenes, did
their best, and fortunately were aided by a medical
student, who was serving as cook to a party that was
camped close by. By his direction the corpse was laid
on the bed in the inner room; and, some laudanum
having been procured, he did not hesitate to
administer a strong dose to the suffering woman.
Poor little Totsy had at first given way to her
grief almost as violently as her mother, but when she
perceived the necessity there was for her to exert
herself, by au effort of self-control wonderful in such
a child, she dried her tears, and devoted herself to
consoling her mother.
When at last, however, Mrs. Denzil fell asleep,
her strength gave way, and she fainted.


CHAPTER VII.
THE NEXT MORNING. —TOTSY’S TROUBLES. — DOT, THE
CONSOLER. —NO CREDIT.—CON AND THE GOLDEN
YANKEE. —THE COAT OF MAIL.
Uf||f)OETS tell ua that the morning dreams of child-
fills hood are peaceful, happy, brain-fantasies,
g| ■wherein the disembodied spirit revels in the
<£§32® delights of fairyland, and all nature seems to
wear a brilliant garb, in glowing contrast to the sober
work-day tints to wbioh the grosser material eye is
accustomed.
Guess then what a terrible revulsion it must he to
wake from such a dream to the dreadful reality of a
heartfelt misery! Queen Mab delights in such
surprises, and it is a fact that the most charming
dreams are vouchsafed to those whose waking
thoughts are bitter as gall and worm-wood.
Such a dream, and such an awakening, fell to the
lot of Totsy on the morning after her father’s death.
The light of the happy smile of innocent enjoyment
died out of her face as her eyes opened to the world
and she remembered the fatal event of the previous
day. In its stead an unnatural grey pallor stole over
her features, and for a moment she was near fainting.
In the confusion no one had thought to take note
of the state of the larder, and the rough yet gentle
men, who had laid her beside her mother on a bed
improvised on the floor of the sitting room, never
dreamt that the bereaved pair would have to add the
pangs of hunger to the keener pain of mourning
thought.
Poor little Totsy lay for a while inert and helpless,
then, making a supreme effort, she jumped out of
47
BITTER AS GAIL.


bed quickly, yet quietly, and went to inspect the
cupboard, in the faint hope that some of her pitying 1
friends might have left there some food.
So used was the child to disappointment, that she
scarcely felt surprise when she saw that the cupboard
was as empty as usual. She closed the door with a
faint sigh, and then started off to tell her tale of want
to the neighbours who had before assisted her.
they were on this occasion able to
relieve her immediate need, so that she was enabled
to offer her mother, on her awakening, a cap of tea
and a crust of bread. These Mrs. Denzil partook of
in silence, tenderly waited on by Totsy, who carefully
avoided mating any allusion to their bereavement.
Her thoughts were full of it, but she choked down
her tears, thinking that she was following her mother’s
example of rare self-control. The fact was that Mrs.
Denzil was still stupified from the effects of the drug
she had taken, and it was not until she had both
eaten and drank that she even vaguely remembered
that something unusual had happened.
Then Totsy was dreadfully alarmed by her asking
what had become of Papa, and why he was not there
to share their breakfast.
t The poor little thing stammered out that it was all
right—he could not come—and was torturing her
brain to think of some excuse for his absence, when
she was immensely relieved by the entrance of the
medical student, who had come to look after his
patients.
The Doctor, as he was called on the Oreek, soon
saw what was the matter, and after a few minutes’
cheering conversation, administered an anodyne to
Mrs. Denzil which had the effect of sending her off to
sleep again almost immediately. He then begged
Totsy to come away with him, as the inquest was to
he held that morning, and she need not fear to leave


her mother, -who ■would be sure to sleep on till late in
the afternoon.
This, Totsy absolutely declined to do, and finding
all entreaty useless, he left her, after haying implored
her not to go into the adjoining room, nor remain in
the hut whilst the Coroner and jury were there.
As soon as he was gone, Totsy busied herself in
putting the breakfast things away and tidying up the
place. Then, when there was nothing more to do,
she resolutely opened the door of the forbidden
chamber and walked in.
Eor a few moments she stood trembling on the
threshold; then suddenly she ran forward and flung
herself on her knees by the side of the bed, and
buried her face in the bed-clothes, half choking
herself in the effort to prevent her sobs from being
audible in the next apartment.
But the brave child did not give way to her grief
very long. Everything was in disorder, and she was
sufficiently womanly in her instincts to dread the
idea of men entering a bed-chamber till it bad been
“redded-up” and made tidy. So she set to work, and
in an incredibly short space of time had put away all
the litter, and made the darkened room what she
would have termed “fit to he seen.”
When all was finished, with a piteous yearning
look back, she reverently closed the door, and taking
up some sewina: sat down to wait for the Coroner and
jury.
These came in due course and were received
courteously by Totsy, for whom every- one had a kind
word, and after a very brief stay went back to the
“ Digger’s Delight "’’where the inquest was being held.
At the dinner hour Billy Bowes came up, and
invited Totsy to come and dine with Mm; but even to
the solicitations of her prime favourite she was ob-
durate —her place was by her mother’s side, and she
E


■would not leave ter. So Billy in Ids turn departed
discomfited, after an awkward attempt at consolation.
By-and-bye, Mrs. Denzil awoke, feeble, but sensi-
ble. Totsy hastened to give her the remainder of the
tea, which she had carefully saved, and bustled about*
seeking by an affectation of hurry to put off the ex-
planation which she knew must come.
To the child’s surprise, Mrs. Denzil said little, but
received with a melancholy smile the tea which was
offered her, drinking it eagerly, for she was suffering
from a burning thirst, and was in fact in a state of
high fever.
She then arose from the rude sofa upon which she
had been lying, and walked with uncertain step to the
door of the bed-chamber.
Totsy interposed, praying her not to go in until she
was stronger, but Mrs. Denzil put the child aside,
saying that she felt much better and desired to be
left alone for a while "with her husband. She then
walked into the room and closed the door behind her.
IFor a few minutes Totsy listened, expecting to hear
some violent out-burst of grief, but there was no
sound, so she turned away and busied herself in
tidying the sofa. That done, it became necessary to
think about the future.
Something seemed to warn, the child that the chief
responsibility of providing for their necessities would
fall upon her, and she resolutely determined not to
grieve any more till she had decided what should be
done. So she sat down to consider the position.
But first, sad experience having taught her the
usual method of procedure in such eases, she drew
from the cupboard her father’s blotting book, and,
placing an ink-bottle and pen ready for such calcula-
as she deemed indispensable, opened it with the
gravity of a bank clerk commencina: his daily work
at his ledger..


Then, curling her tiny legs round the stool which
did duty for a chair in that humble establishment,
she planted her elbows on either side of the blotting
book, and, burying her hands in her hair, proceeded
to think.
The golden rays of the setting sun flickering in at
the open door, shone with softest radiance on her nut
brown hair, gleaming and glancing mid its ripples,
and producing shades and tints which even a Rem-
brandt would have despaired of transferring to his
canvas. Outside, the booming of a monster frog
supplied a grotesque bass to the shrill treble of the
buzzing cieadm.
Dot, a white oat of super-human gravity of demean-
our, lay basking in the sunlight, lazily licking his
paws, and now and again making a fruitless dab at
such flying insects as ventured within his reach.
A peaceful scene—in awful contrast to that which
was enacting in the adjoining chamber; for there the
bereaved wife lay prone upon the floor by the side of
the bed, writhing in silent convulsions of despairing
grief.
Money there was none in the house, that Totsy
knew well, and it remained only to ha seen what could
be pawned.
Totsy cast a despairing glance around—the whole
contents of the hut would not avail to procure the
where-withal for a week’s provision. All that was
valuable or ornamental had long since disappeared,
and nothing but the indispensable remained.
The child was fairly beaten, and a stifled sob broke
from her as she buried her face in her hands with all
the abandonment of utter despair.
Presently, a soft touch on her cheek reminded her
that she was not alone. Dot had not failed to remark
the perturbation of his mistress, and, like a faithful
51
THE GOLDEN RATS OF THE SETm'G sm


cat, did Ms best to allay the sorrow he could not com-
prehend.
“My poor Dot,” said Totsy, casting a loving arm
around the sympathising animal, “ doesn’t it like to
see its missis cry ! Well, 1 wont then—there! ” and
she hastily brushed away her tears, while the cat
purred and fondled her as only a cat can. “We mil
go to the store. I will tell Mr. Brumm what has
happened, and perhaps he will let me hare some-
bread and tea,”
She then arose, and, after carefully putting away
the blotting book and ink-bottle, walked to the door
of the inner room.
Here for a moment she stopped, and, as the recollec-
tion of her terrible loss came back to her, she leant
against the lintel and wept, bitterly but silently. At
last she gently turned the handle.
At this noise, slight as it was, Mrs. Denzil started
up, and angrily demanded why she had been dis-
turbed.
“I thought, mamma dear,” said Totsy, “that as
you are better now, I could go down to the store to
see if Mr. Brumm would let us have some things.
There is nothing to eat in the house.”
“Heaven forgive me !” said Mis. Denzil, “I had
forgotten. Give me my bonnet, child —I will go
myself.”
“Oh, no, dear mamma—please let me go/’ said
Totsy, clasping her little hands.—-“ You are not
strong enough. Besides,” she continued, hesitatingly,
“You know Mr. Brumm is a hard man—poor papa
used always to say so.”
“ And you think he would refuse to give me credit ?”
asked Mrs. Denzil.
“I think he would not like to refuse a little girl,”
was the reply.
“Well, perhaps you are right—go, but oome back
52
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


quickly —my child—my only one ! ” and the sorely-
tried woman clasped her little daughter tightly in her
arms, and kissed her with fond, tearful kisses.
Released from this loving embrace, Totsy lost no
time in putting her design in execution, and soon
stood at the entrance of the store, which seemed to he
full of people, for the inquest had caused some little
excitement, and the “Diggers’ Delight” had been
doing a (literally) “ roaring ” trade ail day.
Timidly edging her way through the crowd, Totsy
approached the counter, looking over which she was
just enabled to discern the enormous head and hairy
claws of the master of the establishment.
“ Yhy, G-ott plesh mine shorn, here ish a shild !
Now, vat do you vant, my leetle tear?” asked Con,
leering hideously in an attempt to look amiable.
“Please sir, I want some tea, and some sugar, and
a loaf of bread,” said Totsy, timidly.
“Oh, you vanish tea, und shugar, und pread.
Yell, where ish de monish, my tear? Ye can’t do no
trade mitout monish.”
“But I haven’t got any, please sir,” replied Totsy.
“ Den go avay,” said Con, rudely —“ go oud mit
yourself.—Didn’t I peen tole you dere ish no trade
mitout monish ? Bah ! I got no dime to vashte in
voolishments.” So saying, Con turned, and was
about to go, when Totsy, half-frightened at her
own temerity, again begged him to give her just a
little food, as she and her mother were starving.
Now at Totsy’s first entrance she had attracted some
attention from the crowd, but when they saw the
errand upon which she was bent, those diggers, with
a delicacy of which it would have been thought such
rude men would have been incapable, turned away
and strolled out into the verandah or into the adjoining
bar, so that Con and Totsy were left alone in the
store.
53
VOOIOSHMESTS.


This Mr. Brumm did not fail to note, and was
therefore at no pains to disguise the brutality of his-
nature. With a curse he ordered the child out of the
store, telling her that she and her mother might
starve and be —blanked —for aught he eared.
So Totsy crept shiveringly away, and walked
listlessly homeward, vainly striving to keep her tears-
from flowing.
“What’s up, little woman?” a cheery voice asked
just as she neared the very spot where her father had
met Woolshed Bess on the previous afternoon.
The speaker was a tall, powerfully-framed, man,
dressed, in the extreme of digger fashion, in a brilliant
scarlet shirt and black cloth trousers, sustained by a
scarlet silk sash, a tassel of which depended from
either hip. “ Tull share ” hats had not yet become the
mode, or most undoubtedly a gentleman of such
aesthetic tastes would have assumed such an exceed-
ingly becoming head-dress; as it was, he was obliged
to content himself with a cabbage-tree, which he wore
cunningly cocked on one side of his head, which, in
its turn, was garnished by brilliant black locks
depending in tight cork-screw ringlets upon, his
shoulders. His face was hard and sun-browned, and
two soft brown eyes, which yet seemed capable of
savage gleams, peered out from under heavy, lower-
ing eyebrows. His upper lip and cheeks were clean-
shaven, and a full view was thus afforded of his firm,
clean-cut mouth, round which time had engraved
sundry lines which proved that life to its owner had
not been all sunshine.
Not to keep the reader in suspense I will at once
admit that this individual was Seth Harriet, the
Golden Yankee, whose redoubtable deeds have
already been narrated by Billy Bowes.
Here it might not be amiss to state that Billy
had instituted a strict search after Seth on the-
54
THE GOiDEN TAJfKEE.


morning after he had seen him, or as he thought, his
ghost, but had only been able to find out that such
an individual had certainly passed through Spring
Creek on the evening in question.
Totsy gazed timidly up at the tall figure which
stooped over her, and, with the unerring instinct of
childhood, immediately recognized a friend.
She answered timidly that they had nothing to eat
at home.
“ Nothin’ to eat ? ” repeated Seth —“ Thet’s rough
—mighty rough on a leetle weeny thing like you.”
“ Yes, sir—and I went down to the store and asked
Mr. Brumm for some bread and tea and sugar —but
I had no money, so he would’nt give me any, but
ordered me out of the place.”
“ Ordered yer out of the place, did he ? Ordered a
babby like you out of the place ! Hell and furies I I’ll
fix this yer matter up pretty quick 1 ” roared Seth,
seizing Totsy's hand—“ You come right along o’ me
—guess I’ll see whether white folks’ ehildern is to be
let starve on these yer diggin s. —Wbf s the skunk’s
name ? ”
“ The—what did you say, sir? ” asked Totsy, half
frightened at his vehemence, and scarcely under-
standing what he meant.
“ Wolfs the name o’ thet skunk as ordered yer out
o’ the place ? ” repeated Seth, deliberately.
“Cornelius Brumm,” replied Totsy, “he’s the
landlord of the Digger’s Delight, and keeps a store
as well.”
“ Lan’lord o’ the Digger’s Delight, is he ?—l’ll
Digger’s Delight him ! —come along! ”
They were not long in reaching the store, which
was again crowded by diggers, most of the claims
having by this time knocked off work.
“Hello, boss! ” shouted Seth, as soon as he had
crossed the threshold—“ Doll up, you derned old
55
A ESETLB WEENY THING.


skunk —you’n ’me’s got to hev soma talk together."
So saying, he elbowed his way through the crowd
up to the counter, still retaining his hold of Totsy’s
hand.
At the first sound of the strange voice, everyone
had turned to look at the new-comer, and so the
curious effect it had upon Con passed unnoticed.
That individual had started violently as soon as he
heard Seth speak, and turned an ashen white, whilst
his hand furtively stole to a drawer in the counter
which was half open, and in which lay a revolver,
capped and ready for use.
liecovering himself with an effort, but not with-
drawing his hand from the drawer, Con answered, as
briskly as he could manage: “Yell, vot’sh de matter
now ? ”
Strange to say Seth, too, seemed slightly troubled,
for he gazed long and anxiously at the landlord
before he condescended to reply.
•‘What’s the matter?” he repeated at last,
slowly—“ starvin’s the matter. Hyur’s a gal—a
babby—as sez you wouldn’d trust her a loaf o’ bread.
—ls thet true ? ”
“ Thy, you see,” said Con, apologetically, “de
shild gomes py me ven I ish busy, und may-pe I
gives her a rough answer. Besides, ve don’t give no
gredit dese dimes,” he continued ; waxing bolder, as
he saw the necessity for maintaining Ids prestige.
“ If thefs the custom on these yer diggiu’s all I
Ida say is it’s a denied mean one. Mebbe I’m wrong,
bein' as I’m a stranger, but it seems to me ez it’s
playin’ it low down on the white folks ez run the
other stores, ter say they’d let a weeny little mite
like this, starve —credit or no credit.’
Con, who had by this time thoroughly recovered
himself, retorted ta his usual blustering manner;
“De vanuly owes me near dirty bounds, vot I
56
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


don't nefer egshpect to see now de fader’s gone dead—
I don’t got no inglination to let ’em have mine
brobherty for nix.”
“ Was you ever in ’Frisco ? ” “ asked Seth, eyeing
him suspiciously.
Con started, and again placed his hand in the
drawer.
“In’Yriseo?—Nein; I bin gome shtraight here
from Sharmany.”
“ And you never seen Deadman’s Flat ?” persisted
Seth.
“Didn’t I peen tole you I gomes shtraight here
vrom Sharmany ? ” said Con, with a slight tremor
in his voice, and carefully avoiding the eye of Ms
interlocutor. “ Yhv yon ask dem questions ? ”
“Oh, it don’t matter,” replied Seth, “only ef you
aint bin thar yerself, tirur was a chap tbar as like you
as two skunks out o’ the same nest. Mebbe it’s quite
as well fur you thet you aint the man,” he added,
in a tone which made Con shiver, as if cold water had
been poured down his back.
“But this aint wot I kem to talk about —jest hyst
over them groceries. Wot did you say yer wanted? ”
he asked, stooping down to Totsy, whose hand he
still held.—“ Tea, sugar, bread, butter, tezbacker,
sardines ?”—Not waiting for an answer, he turned to
Con;—“Look sharp, Dutchy, ef you don’t want yer
nose chawed off. —I aint got no time to stand foolin’
hyur.”
“Und who ish to bay for de shtores?” asked Con,
whose miserly instincts lent him courage.
“ Oh, snakes and alligators I ” yelled Seth, loosing
the child’s hand, and striking a violent blow with his
fist on the counter—“ You want to be paid, do yer?
By gosh, you shant be paid, jest fur yer bumin’
meanness! Make up the passel—quick; or I’ll let
daylight in on yer innards, you ugly Dutch dog! ”
57
SHAKES ASD ALtI&AXOaS.


As lie said this, Seth drew out a revolver and
levelled it at the head of the trembling Oon.
Totsj screamed, and strove to drag his hand down,
whilst several of the by-standers implored Con to do
as he was ordered.
At this crisis, Billy Bowes entered.
“ Hello ! What’s up now ?” he ashed—“ Grse-
whillikias! If there aint Seth Harnet—the Golden
Yankee ; How are you, old man ? ” he asked, eagerly
holding out his hand—“l thought I seen you, or
leastways yer ghost, some weeks back, but I couldn’t
git on to yer tracks, nohow.”
Seth turned and cordially shook hands with his old
acquaintance, and, as if ashamed of his violence,
restored his revolver to its hiding-place, a pocket
cunningly placed just behind the right hip.
“Wa-al, old hoss,” he replied, ‘‘l’m middlin’—
how’s yerself 1 ”
“Oh, prime I” answered Billy; “ but what’s the
trouble now ? ”
“Oh, we was nigh onto a little difficulty,” ex-
plained Seth; “ thet cuss ordered the kiddy out o’ the
place when she come for some grub and things, and
then, when 1 jest axed him civil and quiet to let her
have ’em, he commences to rair up and talk big ’bout
not givin' credit. Ez ef we was agoin’ to let ohildern
starve on these yer diggin’s ' ”
Billy then perceived little Totsy, who had been
hitherto hidden behind the stalwart frame of her
protector.
“ Why, it’s Totsy!” be said—“ What’s the matter,
little missy'?”
“ Oh, Billy,” she replied, “take me home, please—
Im frightened—he”—pointing to Seth—“is very
kind hat—but—”
“Yes, I know, my dear,” said Billy, “he’s as good
as gold, but rayther noisy when he’s roused, —aint
yer, Seth ?”
58
THE GOU3EN YANKEE.


“Wa-al,” replied that individual, apologetically,
“you must give in I dont make no row onless I’m
druv to it. Ye see, come to think on it, I was estry
quiet this time, considerin’ the provocation.”
At this juncture, Con pushed over a large parcel
towards them, and muttered sulkily : “Makes yoost
fifteen shillin.”
“ Hyur’s yer money, ye miserly skunk,” said Seth,
throwing a sovereign on the counter. “ Come on,
Billy, we’ll take the balance out in licker.”
These two characters then walked into the bar,
followed by Totsy and an admiring crowd of diggers,
to whom the deeds of the Golden Yankee had become
familiar through the agency of his friend Billy.
“So you thought I was a ghost, did yer?” said
Seth, as they were waiting to be served. “Ho ! ho!
—wa-al, I reckon I’m a lively sorter ghost at present,
anyhow. Hyur’s luck!”
After a minute or two they left the public-house,
and accompanied Totsy to the hut, bidding her good
night when they reached the door, in spite of her
entreaties that they would come inside and sit down
for awhile.
Seth declared he was bound to have a yam over
old times with his friend Billy, and so the two de-
parted and did have a yarn—and perhaps a drink or
two as well.
The sleeping apartment of the worthy host of the
“ Diggers’ Delight ” was situated immediately behind
the bar, and was a dark, dingy, den —just the sort of
place from which you would expect to see emerge a
hairy, big-headed, monster, whom you would imagine
to be lying in wait to pounce upon any foolish way-
farer who ventured within reach of his claws.
There the spider Con was wont to sit in leisure


moments ■weaving Ms villainous nets, counting over
Ms ill-gotten, hoard, and planning how to add thereto.
Especially of a night, after the bar was closed, was
it his delight to indulge in this luxury, whilst sipping
his rum-and-water and smoking a well-worn meer-
schaum. Here he kept his books and more valuable
property, locked-up in a large safe, which served him
also as toilet-table.
One side of the small room was taken up by a huge
press, which was filled with a heterogeneous collection
of clothes, left in pawn by impecunious customers. A
table, two chairs, a rude wash-stand, improvised out
of an old case, and a camp bedstead, constituted the
remainder of the furniture.
It may be remembered that the sight of the Golden
Yankee seemed to have a peculiar effect upon Con, to
whom he was apparently not quite a stranger. Cer-
tainly this discomposure did not last long, but the
after actions of the worthy landlord would" favor the
supposition that he had seen or heard something
unpleasant; for he was singularly short and snappish
in his answers to those of his customers who sought
to engage Mm in conversation, and, as soon as it
could be managed without attracting attention, he
made over the charge of the bar to his assistant, and
betook him to Ms private apartment.
His first act on entering was to close and lock the
door behind him, and put up some shutters in front
of the only window.
He then lit a candle, and by its light proceeded to
pull off his coat, waistcoat, and shirt. Thus stripped,
he looked more like a gorilla than ever, for his
immense chest was covered with coarse red hair, such
as is seldom seen growing on a human being.
Having extracted from some secret Mding-place
the key of the safe, Con then unlocked it and took out
a small box. Therefrom he pulled out a light flexible


jacket, made of fine steel rings, and lined with, thick
flannel. This lie subjected to a rigid scrutiny, and
apparently satisfied that it was in perfect order, he
proceeded to put it on.
After he had locked up the safe and resumed Ms
clothes, he took down the shutters, and rejoined the
company in the bar, very considerably improved in
spirits, as they remarked to their satisfaction.
The acute reader will gather herefrom that Mr.
Cornelius Bruam entertained some lurking suspicion
that an occasion might arise when defensive armour
would prove of service to him: for it is not to be
supposed that he would have worn such an under-
waistcoat without good and sufficent reason.
61
DEFENSIVE AEMOT3K.


CHAPTER VIII.
A MORNING VISIT. — £50. —THE STORM. —ROBBING
SLUICE-BOXES.
»T an early hour ou the following morning, Seth,
who had taken up his quarters at one of the
numerous ‘‘'hotels,” set out to visit his little
friend, whose winning manner bad made sad
havoc with his heart.
He found Totsy actively engaged in preparations
for breakfast, in the which meal, after a cordial
welcome, he was invited to join. Mrs. Denzil was
lying on the sofa, dressed, but still, seemingly, asleep.
Totsy told him that her mother had not lain down
until after midnight, and that even then she had re-
fused to take off her clothes, saying that she “ might
be wanted.” The child added that she feared her
mother had received so severe a shook that her reason
was affected.
Seth was attempting condolence, when Mrs. Denzil
interrupted him by saying, in a weak voice, that if
she had been ill she was quite sensible now, and
would lil e a cup of tea.
Totsy flew to supply her mother’s wants, and then
formally introduced the visitor, saying that it was to
his kindness they owed the food they were eating.
Seth here broke in hurriedly : “Not at all, mann
—nuthin’ of the sort—any-ways it aint o’ no con-
sequence at all. Xe see I happened to be moseying
around when X kem acrost your little gal, and we
somehow dropped into conversation, in the course o’
which she let on accidentally as how the storekeeper
—a yellow - livered galoot, mam, savin’ your


presence —had been, so-ter-say oncivil to her. In
course, bein’ of a meddlesome disposition, mann, I
undertakes to fix thet matter up, and fix it up I did,
inarm—and right glad I am to see you lookin’ so peart
and sassy this momin’—and —and —bevin’ very per-
tiokler bizness down to the ho-tel, marm, PU get you
to excuse me.”—So saying, Seth made a dive for the
door, but was stopped by Totsy, who had divined his
intention.
“Are you going without your hat?” said she,
amilinaf.
“Nowl declare to goodness it aint oni ” said Seth,
feeling his head with both hands to assure himself of
its absence. “Well, well —bein’ in a hurry, you see
—but where is that hat ?” he asked, after looking
around the hut. “ I’d go nigh to take my oath I hed
a hat, but things is gettin’ so mixed with me since I
come on these yer diggin’s, that sometimes I dunno
rightly whar my head is, let alone my hat.”
“ Here it is,” said Totsy, holding it up to view for
a moment and then quickly replacing it behind her
back—“ Here it is, but you don’t get it till you’ve
finished breakfast. So, sit down—sit down at once! ”
“Wa-al,” drawled Seth with an awkward grin,
“ On’y to think o’ thet now! Why she orders me
about as sassy as a little queen I”
“ Pray sit down and stay with us for a little while,”
said Mrs. Denzil, over whose worn features a faint
smile stole aa she noticed Seth’s embarrassment.
“As you say, marm,” replied Seth, resuming Ms
seat.
When the frugal meal was concluded and Totsy
arose from her seat and proceeded to clear the table,
Seth also got up, and asked permission to depart,
stating that he really had important business to
attend to.
Leave being graciously accorded to him by Totsy—


who adopted towards Mm a high, and mighty tone
which seemed to cause him the most intense delight—
he obtained possession of his hat. and was about to go
out, when he stopped suddenly, and addressing him-
self to Mrs. Denzil, said :
“ Blame me, ef I didn’t come near forgettin’' Te
see, inarm, there’s a heap o’ rogues cruisin’ around
these yer diggin’s. Night and day there’s a crowd of
chaps a-moocMn’ around, layin’ for greenhorns, and
fellers as is careless with their money. "Why, I’m
jest a-gwine now right off to hire somebody to watch
onr sluice - boxes nights, the boys bein’ tired o’
takin’ their turn at it after the day’s work. I’m
camped down to a shanty where there’s jest dead
loads o’ them fellers hangin’ about all the time : so
I thought mebbe, bein’ as I’m noways keerful, and
not by no means to be trusted with too much money,
that perhaps you wouldn’t mind lookin’ after it for
me.” Here Seth pulled out a leathern bag and
placed it on the table. “ There’s just fifty pounds in
thet pooch, marm ; and ef so be you’d conderscend to
make use of it fur a few months,“till I want it, I’d be
reel glad and happy, and a load ’ud be took off of my
mind—yes,” he repeated, evidently pleased with this
last remark—“ yes, a load ’ud be toot off of my mind ;
and I’m thet weak in the upper storey thet I’m not-
fit to bear no loads on my mind, not nohow you tin
fix it.”
At this generous offer, so thinly concealed under
the flimsy pretest of desiring to have his money
“ taken care of, ” the tears started into Mrs.
Denzil’s eyes, and it was in a voice choted by sobs
that she thanked the Golden Yankee and accepted
the money.
According to all rules and precedents, I am aware
that Mrs. Denzil ought to have, kindly but firmlv,
refused to accept of this loan; as no doubt she would
64
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


have done had she been one of the high-toned heroines
of fashionable fiction. The proper course for her to
have pursued then would have been, after Seth had
left, to have clasped her child to her heart, let down her
back hair, and make a series of beautiful remarks,
tending to show that even starvation would be prefer-
able to receiving alms from a stranger. But Polly
Denzil was not a high-toned heroine at all, but a
simple little woman who had experienced the first
stages of starvation, and was content to stop at that,
and put her pride in her pocket.
So she took the money, and thereby gladdened the
heart- of the donor, and saved herself and her child
from much misery and discomfort.
Little Totsy, whilst this scene was enacting, looked
on with glistening eyes, and, as her mother finished,
ran up to Seth and caught him by the hand:—“ Will
you kiss me?” said she, looking up in Ms face, and
pouting out her cherry Kps.
Seth thought that the world was coming to an end.
What! A great lubberly galoot Kke Seth Harnet
actually requested to kiss the prettiest little mouth in
creation ?—He could not believe his ears ; but there
stood the winsome little fairy, still clinging to his coat
sleeve and holding up her face in expectation.
It must be a dream, he thought, as he slowly bent
down and felt those tender Kps vibrate in response to
his own—such bKss could not be sober reality.
But Totsy had vet another honor in store for him :
she said she would walk with Mm as far as the bridge,
and sMpped off for her hat, leaving the bewildered
Seth staring after her till Ms eyes threatened to start
from their sockets.
Soon she was ready, and after an embrace for
Mama, she pushed Seth out before her and closed the
door.
“ Mister Seth Harnet,” began Totsy, as they walked
down the road.
r


“Yes, my lady,” replied Seth, who persisted in
bestowing upon her this title, not a little to the little
maiden’s delight.
“I know all about you—you are a Tery wicked
man.”
“Yes, my lady,” said Seth, mournfully, but affirma-
tively.
“Billy Bowes told me all about the gamblers, and
the monument, and poor dear old Bluenose.”
“He didn’t say a word agin my old pard'? ” asked
Seth fiercely.
“You needn’t get into a passion—Billy spoke no
harm of him at all—it was you the harm was told of.”
“Than I don’t thank that Billy Bowes to go a
meddlin’, and a-autobiographyin’ about other people’
goin’s-on. He aint got no call to put on frills, he aint.
I wonder how he’d look ef I was to tell some of his
little games ! It’s not doin’ the square thing by an
old friend, and so i shall tell him when I see him.
I know I’m a shy lot, but I never done him no harm,
anyway,”
Seth was so evidently deeply annoyed that Totsy
hastened to console him, telling him that after all
Billy had said nothing very much to his discredit, and
that, at any rate, she did not think there was abetter
man in the world. She then startled him beyond
measure by saying that she had come out with him
that morning expressly to ask him to engage her as
night-watchman for the claim in which he held a
share.
“You see,'"' she continued, “ we must earn money
somehow ; for we can’t live on your charity for ever,
you know. Now I can sit up and watch the claim,
and give an alarm if anyone comes, just as well as a
grown man. So you’ve got to engage me.”
Seth remonstrated, but to no avail.—Totsy insisted
that she should like it above all things, and left him
66
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


no resource but to promise tliat lie 'would speak to Ms
mates about it.
It now became necessary to obtain ber motber’s
consent to the scheme, but bere Totsy experienced
less difficulty tban sbe expected.
Mrs. Denzil was seriously alarmed about their
prospects. Of course she intended to write borne and
acquaint ber uncle with their position; but many
long months must pass before an answer could arrive,
and in the meantime it was absolutely necessary that
money should be earned in some way or another, for
the £-50 so generously placed at her disposal by Seth
Harnet would not last very long. Out of it the
funeral expenses would have to be discharged, and
food of all Muds was so dear that they could not live
under an outlay of £3 per week. On consideration
she determined that it would be better to remain
where they were rather than risk going to Melbourne.
The cost of the journey would have monopolised a
large portion of their slender means, and there was
little chance of her being able to obtain employment,
for the city was at that time thronged with unfor-
tunates in a similar position to themselves.
"When therefore Totsy broached her scheme, she
found her mother well inclined to embrace any honest
means to earn money. Mrs. Denzil, however, sug-
gested that it was she, and not the child, who should
undertake the work.
To this Totsy strongly objected, urging that she
was fully capable of doing what was required, and
that her mother’s health would not admit of her being
exposed to the night air.
Eventually a compromise was effected, and it was
agreed that they should take the duty in turn. This
resolution was communicated to Seth later on when
he came to tell them that his mates were willing to
abide by his decision in the matter, and it was


arranged that Mrs. Denzil should commence her vigil
on the following evening.
Some weeks passed without anything of interest
occuring to the Denzils, who gradually became
accustomed to their night-watch, which was made as
easy to them as possible by Seth, who managed that
they would not he required to go on duty till ten
o’clock, and always relieved them at break of day.
At last the long wished-for rain came, and all was
again activity on the diggings.
It was a wild, stormy, night. The wind whistled
and roared in the ironhark forest on the ranges ; then
whirled madly down the gully, howling on its way
like a very legion of fiends, and dashing and tearing
away the bark roofs of such huts as the parsimony or
carelessness of the owners bad left but partially
secured. The rain fell in torrents, and a perfect sheet
of water descended the side of the hill on which the
Golden Yankee’s claim was situated, pouring into the
already swollen creek in such volume that a flood
seemed inevitable.
Totsy sat coiled up on a leg, under a bark gunyah
which the forethought of Seth had caused to be erected
for her shelter. A small terrier dog, which had been
given her by Billy Bowes, shared her watch, and she
was further provided with a dark lantern and a Colt’s
revolver, with which to give alarm in the event of
anything suspicious occuring.
It was after midnight, and the storm still raged,
making so much upiroar that it seemed as if a veritable
"Witches’ Sabbath was being held on the hills.
Suddenly the dog jumped to its feet and began
barking furiously. Totsy sprang up, and sheltering
herself behind the sheets of bark which composed the
68
THE GOEDEJT YANKEE.


walls of the gunyah, turned the light of her lantern
towards the sluice-boxes, which were about ten yards
lower down the hill.
In a moment she perceived a figure bending over
the sluice-boxes, whilst another stood near by, looking
on.
Without hesitation she lifted her revolver and
fired, unconsciously aiming at the figures.
She fancied she heard a cry in reply, but the
thieves had vanished, and for a minute or two she
was seriously alarmed.
Then she heard the noise of footsteps, and Seth
and two of his mates came running up.
In reply to their eager questioning Totsy told them
what had happened, and taking the lantern, they
proceeded to explore the ground.
Near to the sluice-boxes they came upon footmarks
which were easily identified as having been made by
Chinamen, or at least persons wearing Chinese shoes.
They followed these tracks down to the road, where
they became mingled with so many others as to be no
longer recognisable, seeing which they gave up the
search, and returned to Totsy, whom they found
shivering with cold and fright.
Seth incontinently took the little girl up in his
arms and carried her home, and did not leave her
till he had lit up a roaring fire and put some water
on to boil.
The next morning some of the police paid a visit
to the Chinese camp, where they unearthed a disreput-
able Chinaman who had a newly-made bullet-wound
in his shoulder. Eor our purposes it is sufficient
to say that this individual, when taxed with the
attempted robbery, acknowledged his guilt, and
betrayed his associates, two other Chinamen, as
disreputable-looking as himself. These worthies
were tried in due course and sentenced to a lengthened


term of imprisonment, and for some time sluice-box
robberies were not heard of at Spring Creek.
In recognition of Totsy’s services a public meeting
was held, at which Seth made a most elocjuent speech,,
and a sum of money was raised by subscription, with
which the stock and good-will of a small store were-
purchased and presented to Mrs. Denzil.


CHAPTER IX.
THE BALL.—FOUND AT LAST.—FIRE !
■0 the other attractions of the “Diggers’
Delight,” Con had recently added a ball-
room. He was a gentleman of experience,
and well knew the unmeasured pleasure that
diggers take in saltatory exercise. So he built an
annexe of some forty feet long by twenty in -width ;
furnished it with benches round the walls and a
second-hand piano, and engaged the services of a
pianiste and four young ladies. These last were
supposed to make themselves generally useful during
the day, and dance with whomsoever asked them at
night.
By this time there was regular coach communica-
tion with Melbourne, and the female population of
the diggings had largely increased, both in number
and respectability, so that the advent of four dashing
young damsels did not create a very great sensation;
though, as in duty bound, everybody made a point
of looking in at the ball-room and “ prospecting” the
new-comers. There were other dance-houses (as
they were called) on the Creek, but from the very
first the “Diggers’ Delight” took the lead, being
better appointed, whilst the quality of the drink
supplied was, in the main, greatly superior.
One fine evening, not long after the occurrence of
the events narrated in the last chapter, there was a
great gathering at the “ Diggers’ Delight,” the
occasion being a ball given by the landlord.
It must be explained that, whilst on every evening
in the week there was “dancing” at the hotel, a
71
FOEE DASHDTG TOCXG DAMSELS,


“ball ” was of mud: rarer occurrence. At a dance,
all the refreshments were paid for by the visitors; at
a ball, a liberal supper was provided by the landlord,
and the liquids only were charged to the guests.
Iso charge for admission was made to these balls, but
invitations were issued to all the regular customers
of the house, whilst it was generally understood that
any gentleman was at liberty to bring a friend of the
male sex, ladies, for various reasons, being in-
admissible.
On such an occasion, the feminine staff of the
establishment was usually supplemented by such of
their own friends as were available, but great
caution was always used in the issue of such invita-
tions.
Of course the ladies were in great demand, but those
gentlemen who did not succeed in procuring partners
of the gentler sex did not for that reason refrain from
dancing—they had come there to dance, and dance
they would, and did; and if the fair Jenny was
engaged, why, there was Tom, an excellent dancer,
and quite ready and willing to enact, for the nonce, the
part of lady. So Jack and Tom would solemn!}- place
each the right arm round his partner’s waist, and rest
the left hand caressingly on his partner’s shoulder,
and so revolve, slowly yet rhythmically, round the
room, to the seducing strains of the “ First Love,” or
some other waltz of that antiquated period.
To see the slow waltz danced to perfection one must
still visit the dancing-halls of what are called the
“lower’”- 1 orders. The deux-temps ot fashionable life, in
which skirts are torn, ankles exposed, and collisions
of frequent occurrence, is an abomination in the eyes
of the unsophisticated “lower” class, who see no
Lovro;-; —An An.-traHan t'-nn for " [looror." L-jv.’ur claves uro
ofo'jil rsfjttyr broil onil Lo.-tt-ir bfh:ivc.-L T.iion the: uojttr. but. lituv do u-_>i tirc-.0-j
so svX'ii, and cLa: i; aiaken all tiie didUroucu.’-'
72
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


grace, and find no satisfaction, in a mad romp. So
they, even in these days, twirl, teetotum-like, in
stately revolutions which it would puzzle the most
accomplished exquisite to imitate.
No doubt there is something- eminently ludicrous
in the spectacle of two stalwart young men in colored
shirts and cabbage-tree hats, dancing together in that
half-embrace which the naughty waltz necessitates ;
but habit uses us to all things, and the frequenters of
ball-rooms on the diggings soon learn to forget the
incongruity, and look upon such scenes as natural,
and nothing more than might be expected.
It is supper-time.
The long table in the dining-room of the hotel is
covered with edibles, in profusion, if not variety.
There are fowls, turkeys, hams, roast and boiled beef,
salads, cheese, fruit, jam-tarts, cakes, and biscuits,
massed together in heedless neglect of convention-
ality ; whilst from the walls depend huge bunches of
fern and branches of wattle-tree.
At either side of the narrow table are seated such
of the guests as have been able to secure places
amongst the first batch, and Con himself presides at
the top, brandishing a formidable carving-knife, with
which lie is dissecting a monster turkey.
Be sure the ladies are well placed, at the table, and
•carefully waited upon by their attendant cavaliers.
It is quite edifying to see how solicitous the worthy
landlord is for the welfare of these damsels. He is
continually pressing, now one, now another, to take a
little bit of fowl, or try a slice off the breast of the
turkey. The girls generally decline his offers, but
invariably wink at one another, as who should say
“Isn’t he polite ' He wasn’t quite so civil this after-
noon when we were laying the table.” Nevertheless
they recognise the demands of society, and reply to
him with dignity and affability.


Our old friend Billy Bowes officiates as Vice-
Chairman, having on either hand a fair damsel,
between whom he divides his attentions with strict
impartiality, thereby exciting to mortal jealousy the
gentlemen who have taken these ladies in to supper
and consider themselves therefore entitled to a
monopoly of their conversation during its progress.
Billy is in great form to-night. He has danced
waltzes, polkas, schottisohes, mazourkas, varsovianas,
quadrilles, lancers, Caledonians, and even the
Circassian circle —a most intricate affair, something
like a cross between the Spanish waltz and the
Caledonians ; and on each occasion he has been lucky
enough to secure a lady-partner. You see, Billy
lived in the house, and so possessed an inestimable
advantage over his less favored rivals; whilst his
captivating manners made him such “ good company ”
that he was in great demand among the ladies, every
one of whom was in love with him, and firmly believed
that her affection was returned.
Oh, he was a sly dog that Billy Bowes ! He would
sit by a maiden’s side during the interval between
the dances, whispering “ soft nothings” into her ear,
till her tender little heart would pit-a-pat as bad as
if she were doing the grand round in the Caledonians.
Then, too, his flatteries would be so mixed-up with
sarcastic sneers at the dress, figure, style of dancing
&c. of the other young ladies, that the one he honored
with his attention for the time would have been ready
to swear to his constancy. She could not know, poor
little lamb, that the wolf Billy would whisper just
such diverting nonsense in the ears of the golden-
haired Maud, during the progress of the next
quadrille, and that he would further seize the oppor-
tunity of taking a turn round with black-eyed Maggie
during the grand promenade, to express to her Ms
opinion that she was without a doubt the belle of the
ball.
74
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


Billy was a male flirt, and played Just such tricks
■with the fair sex, 0 male reader, as yon and I have
tried-on in our time —with less success, though—at
least on my part We have, however, nothing] to
reproach ourselves with, for none of the girls ever
believed us, and every one of them retorted in kind,
and with far greater effect.
For some twenty minutes everybody was busily
engaged in eating; then, when the more solid pro-
visions had ceased to interest, and lighter trifles in
the way of fruit and pastry came into demand, there
was a call for a song, and Con was himself solicited
to commence the vocal entertainment.
Now Con rather prided himself upon his singing
as, be sure, the company well knew; and so he did
not hesitate more than was considered necessary
under the circumstances. In a deep bass’growl, he
bea:an :
THE G-EEMAN PEDLEE.
I gomes vrom de land of Sauer-kraut,
There ye trinksh of de Lager-bier ;
End I bees a Deutscher shentelman,
Dough I’m noding bartickler here.
Dey galls me a- Sharman pedeler
Ash mit vatches raid glocks I coes rount —
Der tyfel knowsh it’sh little I care,
Tor at home I’m a shreil und a Count.
t: Gurus —You shelly togs ! ”
Hei-sa-sa! Hop-sa-sa!
Jetzt ist’s mir gnt!
Denn Tanzen und Saufen.
Warmea das Blut.
Dese shtoopid beopks I dishpises,
End monish makesh no shentelman —
Bide avay den in your carriages
Peddlin’ Jake’s de petter man.
Ob, shnobs you are und efer vos.
For all your tirty money pags;
End shnobs you surely strays rill pe.
Tressed in xslvet or in rags.
Gorus—Hei-sa-sa 1 &c.. &e.
75
THE GERMAN PEDI-ER.


As in duty bound, everybody joined in the chorus,
but as both air and words were strange to all, the
effect produced, however conducive it may have been
to promote the general harmony of the evening, could
scarcely have been said to be otherwise of a harmo-
nious character. But the great object was achieved ;
the noise was prodigious; and so everybody was
•satisfied, and the conclusion of the song was the signal
for loud applause, and cries of “Brayvo!” “Angcore!”
and other appreciative ejaculations.
Con, having the “ call,” now demanded a song
from Mr. 'William Bowes.
At this Billy expressed the most intense surprise—
the deceptive dog knew he would be called upon next,
■and had actually been clearing his throat, and taking
a sort of preliminary canter whilst Con was speaking
—and said it wasn’t fair, &c. &c., but his objections
were over-ruled, and so he began, in a mellow, yet
powerful tenor—
THE MAIDEN’S WHISPER.
“ Bonny maiden, brown-eyed maiden.
Tell me whither wouidst thou fiv ?
To meet thy loyer, naughty maiden ?”
She whispered softly : “No —not I!”
ts Say, little one, hast lost thy heart ?
Dost love, thou timid fluttering dove ?
Nay—tell me quickly ere we part— J:
She whispered, sighing: “ What is love ? ”
41 Child, ignorance they say is bliss —
I know not whether 1 do right—
Yet, dear. Til tell thee with a kiss—”
She whispered, quaintly: “Nut to-night!”
“Yes, to-night, dear, ere we sever ;
My love for thee thou’lt surely guess—
Wilt thou learn to love me ever
She whispered faintly ; “ I think —yes I”


It is needless to say that Billy’s song was much,
admired and most liberally applauded, for not only
was he a general favorite, but lie really sang well —
indeed, so well, that it was whispered he had at one
time been a professional.
There was then a slight intermission—during which
the waiters (two gentlemen hired for the
one being the Doctor alluded to before in these pages,
and the other the youngest son of a baronet, who
had been sent out to Australia to gain “colonial
experience”) attended to the orders of the guests and
supplied them -with more liquor. After a while, one
of the ladies, who was known to possess a sweet voice,
was persuaded to sing, and gained much applause
for her rendering of the popular song “ I’ll be no
submissive wife,” which she sang with great vivacity
and expression; the other young ladies looking very
gravely down on their plates all the time she w as-
singing, and one and all setting her down as a
forward minx who ought to have known better
than to make a show of herself in such a manner.
Nevertheless these same young ladies were not at
all backward in their congratulations of the fair
singer, which they accompanied by the sweetest smiles,
and conveyed in the most aifectionate language.
Billy Bowes now tapped vigorously on the table
with the handle of his knife, and demanded silence.
“Ladies and gentlemen,” said he, “I have now
a pleasing duty to perform—charge your glasses, if
you please. lam about to propose the health of the
generous giver of this feast. You all know him.—
Many of you have been in the habit of purchasing
your weekly supplies at his store, and have become
familiar with Ms features as associated with tea and
sugar. Did he ever give you short weight ?—I ask,
did he ever give any of you short weight?”—Cries
of “No, no!” —“Did he ever sand his sugar, or
77
A FORWARD 3HKS.


practice any other of the little dodges by ■which un-
scrupulous tradesmen seek to increase their profits ? ”
•—A voice : “ Not as we know’d on! ”
“Not as you kuow’d on! 1 ’ repeated Billy iu
indignant tones. I ‘ls it possible that there is amongst
ns an individual so lost to shame and decency as to
harbor such suspicions iu his breast, even while
he is in the act of partaking of this, I may say, regal
hospitality! ”
General uproar, and cries of “ No, no ! Shame I" &c.
“ I thought it could not be.—Gentlemen, yon at
least have had opportunities of tasting our host’s
dicker—is it not of the best quality to be obtained on
the Creek ? Does he not surround himself and
his customers with all that is calculated to charm the
senses, and lure a man into temporary forgetfulness
of his miseries? I have only to look around this
table, and to be reminded of the charming partners I
have danced with to-night, to find ample evidence of
onr worthy host’s consideration for his guests and
customers. With good lioker, substantial prog, and,
above all, beauty and wit combined in the persons of
the young ladies who grace this board by their
presence, a man must be a dull dog indeed if he
does not enjoy himself. All this we owe, and much
more—”
“I believe you, my boy!” interrupted the same
irreverent voice.
Drowning indignantly, Billy went on: “I scorn
the interruptions of the individual who just spoke,
I repeat, all this and much more—awd much more !
we owe to our worthy host, Mr. Cornelius Brumm.
I therefore ask you to join me in drinking Ms jolly
good health.—Here’s health and prosperity to Mr.
Cornelius Brumm! ”
Of course everybody stood up, and the toast was
drunk with great enthusiasm, and musical honors,
Billy himself leading the chorus.
78
THE GOEDEN YANKEE.


Order having been at length restored, Oon stood
up to return thanks.
“ Laties und shentelmens,” he began,—“l don’t
peen ushed to shpeak in pooblic, so you cot to
egscoose me ven I preats town.
“Hear! Hear!'”
“ Laties und shentelmens, you vos blease to shoud
■“Hear, Hear!’; vor mine bart I vos bleased to see
you here.”
This brilliant witticism provoked much laughter,
and renewed cheering, whilst the speaker looked
modestly down at the table, upon which he seemed to
be performing a species of Devil’s tattoo with the
tips of his fingers. He resumed:—
“Yen I gomes firsht on de Greek it was a vild
vashte—now dere dont pe no vashte here at all, onless
maybe it ish de licker vot Mishter Pilly Powes
knocksh ofer mit his elpows.”
More laughter; and discomfiture of Billy Bowes,
who had upset a tumbler, whilst reaching over to pnll
a cracker with the damsel on his left.
“In mine oontry, in Sharmany, ve has de
pewdivool gustom of enderdain our vriends on our
birsday—to-day is yoost mine birsday, und so I ashks
nil mine vriends to meet me.”
This announcement, which the wily Oon had
reserved as a brilliant surprise, or coup de theatre , of
course called for more cheering, and cries of “ Many
happy returns of the day,” &c. Oon went on:—
“Laties und shentelmens, I ashks you now to
triuk mit me. Yaiter! Ashk eferybodys vot dey
vill have.—l don’t peen have so goot a dime since I
vos in Galifornia.”
“ Since you was where ?” shouted a hoarse voice.
Everybody turned to see from whence this question,
put in such an angry tone, had proceeded ; and Oon
recognised the pale face of Seth, peering in at the
doorway.


Immediately lie too turned pale, and Tainlj strove
to reply.
Whilst he was still hesitating and stammering.
Seth sprang into the room, and yelled out:
“ You dont need to speak I You dont need to sav
another word ! By thunder ! I thought I reobonised
yer ugly mug, soon’s ever I see yer, for all the black
hair and beard you’ve growed since you was on Dead-
man’s Flat. Jacob Fritsch, you black-hearted dog,
take that in memory of Bluenose !”
Quick as lightning, Seth drew out a revolver, and
fired.
It is scarcely possible to give any idea of the
confusion that ensued. Con had fallen, apparently
lifeless, upon the floor; the women shrieked, and
would have fainted if they had had time, and the men
shouted out “ Murder 1” and attempted to take refuge
in flight. But they were baulked, for the door was
blocked up by new-comers, who came crowding in to
see what the row was about.
Seth alone kept his wits about him. In the full
belief tha t his enemy was dead, he dashed to one of
the windows, and, bursting out the whole sash with
one blow of his arm, leapt through and disappeared.
Meanwhile those in the immediate neighbourhood of
the landlord called out for a doctor, and attempted to
clear a space round the fallen man, who lay prone
and inert, and to all appearance dead.
When, however, the crash of the breaking glass
and the cries of the bystanders showed that Jieth had
made his escape, Con opened his eyes, and asked, in
a faint voice, whether Seth was really gone. Evidently
much relieved at the reply, he staggered to Ms feet
and sate down in his chair.
The Doctor (who it may be remembered had been
officiating as waiter) now bustled up, and would fain
have looked for the wound, but Con stopped him.


declaring that he had not been hit, hut had fallen
hack in order to escape the bullet. Then, saying
that the fall and fright combined had given him a
rare shock, he asked to be excused for retiring, and
prayed the company to go on with the dancing, as he
was all right, and not a bit hurt.
This announcement was received with mingled
feelings by Con’s auditors. Some of them, no doubt,
were really glad that their host had escaped, but not
a few were disappointed. Under the circumstances
they had every right to expect a more tragical finale,
and they felt aggrieved that there was not even so
much as a speck of blood to ha seen on the floor.
Nevertheless, the idea of leaving the house never
entered the head of any one of them, and as Con was
supported into his chamber, preparations were already
under progress for a set of quadrilles.
The departure of the landlord was the signal for a
burst of questioning as to what could have been the
motive for this outrage, and Billy Bowes was beset
by a crowd of eager inquirers, who naturally looked
to him for an explanation.
Billy asked, sententiously : —“Didn’t I tell you all
about Blnenose and the gamblers atDeadman’sI’lat?”
“ Yes, yes ! ” was the reply.
“Well, then, it appears Con is the gentleman whose
name has not yet gone up on the tombstone.”
Here was a romance, indeed ! Con the gambler
who had helped to hang a dying man ? Impossible—
and yet —well, everybody knew that the landlord was
not a very genial kind of fellow, and certainly his
appearance was against him, &c., &e.
After this fashion did Con’s guests comment upon
this curious affair ; where-from it may he gathered
that popular sympathy inclined to the side of the
aggressor.
But the warning chords of the orchestra (composed
G


on this occasion of a piano. violin, and cornopean)
proclaimed that the dance ■was about to begin, and
there was a general rush for partners and places.
Ta-ra-ta-ta-ta !—Off we go !
But what is this ?
“Eire! Fire!! Fire!!!”
The music stops. The dancers gaze blankly at one
another.
Fire ! Fire !! Fire !!!
In a minute the ball-room was empty.
Flames were rushing out from a stack of buildings
which stood some hundred yards up the road, and
the whole camp was in an uproar.
Billy Bowes, who had had experience in fires,
having at one time been a distinguished member of
a Yolunteer Fire Company in New York —shouted
to some of his friends to come with him, and hastily
seizing an axe from the store, rushed off to the scene.
Here he found a dense crowd of diggers assembled,
whilst the most indescribable confusion prevailed, for
nobody seemed to know what to do, and everybody
seemed bent upon getting into everybody-else’s way.
The main body of the flames issued from a small
store which opened ou the road, but the roofs of three
or four adjacent buildings had already caught fire,
and as there was no fire-engine on the Greek, and no
water to work with if there had been one, it at once
became apparent that nothing could be done to stay
the progress of the flames.
Seeing this, Billy rushed round to the hack of the
store, and burst in the door of one of the out-buildings,
the roof of which was already in a blaze.
Followed by one or two venturesome spirits, he ran
into the building, and proceeded to drag out some of
the furniture.
Suddenly he was arrested by screams which pro-
ceeded from an inner room, bursting open the door


of "which, he perceived Totsy, in her night-dress,
striving to drag her mother out from under a blazing
beam, -which had fallen upon her.
To seize the child and pass her out of the room
was the work of a second, and then Billy—in great
■danger himself, for the roof had partially fallen in,
and the whole room was in a blaze —did his best to
save Mrs. Denzil.
Too late ! Another heavy fall of timber, followed
by fresh gusts of flame, drove Mm outside, and, in two
or three minutes, a blazing pile of bark and timber
lay above the unfortunate Mrs. Denzil.
It afterwards appeared that she and her daughter
had not been roused from their sleep till the flames
had actually attacked the roof of their room. They
had then hastly arisen, and Mrs. Denzil was
engaged in collecting some clothes and valuables
when the beam fell upon her. The building was
composed of slabs, lined with calico, whilst the roof
was of bark, so that it burnt like tinder.
When Billy had time to look around Mm, he
bethought him of Totsy, and asked what had become
of her.
The man to whom he had handed her told him
that he had given her to a woman, who had carried
her off in her shawl.
In a few minutes more the fire was out, the whole
block of buildings having been burnt to the ground
in almost less time than it has taken to write the
account of it.
# vf 3?
Con, not caring to acknowledge that he wore
defensive armour, had lied to his guests: Seth’s
bullet had struck Mm in the chest, and it was the
force of the blow that had caused him to fall. A
black bruise, and an indentation on the steel rings of
the jacket, proved that in all probability be owed Ms
life to his precaution.


CHAPTER X.
THE DOVE-COTE—THE GORILLA AND HER FRIENDS—
THE CHINAMAN'S OFFER.
Dove-cote was situated at tiie out-skirts of
the township. Externally it was a dirty,
W&0- ill-kept, hut, with a lean-to, or skillion, at the
(saffecS hack. Standing ail hare and alone, without
so much even as a fence to relieve it, it looked
uncanny and evil. At one side of the door there
was a large rude bench, upon which, at all times and
seasons, there stood a battered old wash-tub. Piled
up at the other side were some logs of firewood, on
the top of which a ragged, unhappy-looking, cat was
wont to roost, and spit defiance at the passers-by.
At the rear of the hut some discolored and many-
patched rags were suspended on a clothes-line ; whilst
everywhere around, within a radius of fifty yards,
were scattered rags, bones, broken bottles, sardine
tins, and garbage.
Entering, we find the furniture of the main apart-
ment to consist of an old bush sofa; a table, the legs
of which are embedded in the earth, which forms the
only flooring; two or three three-legged stools, and
an empty case which does duty for a side-board, and
supports a miserable collection of battered tin-plates,
pannikins, &c.
One of the doves that inhabit this nest is at home.
She is seated on a stool in front of the fire, into which
she is gazing with bleared, heavy, eyes. Her costume
is simple, apparently consisting of one nondescript
garment of a reddish-brown color. Her hair, coarse
and black, hangs down over her shoulders in
tangled masses, in which are buried two skinny


sunburnt paws on which her head is rested. This
dove is known on the diggings by the sobriquet of
“ the Gorilla,” but her intimates are in the habit of
addressing her as “ Sal.”
Lying on the sofa, smoking an opium-pipe, is a
greasy-looking Chinaman, dressed in the usual blue
blouse and trousers.
At the table, smoking and playing cards by the
light of a tallow candle stuck in a gin-bottle, are
seated two rough-looking men; nominally diggers,
in reality, ticket-of-leave men outside of their
district.
One of these, known as “ Yorkey,” suddenly turns
savagely to the woman, and demands, with an oath,
“ When that infernal woman ’nil be back with the
grog?”
The Gorilla, hearing herself addressed, turns round
and retorts:—
“ She’s gone to the fire, I expect—that’s wot’s
keepin’ her.”
“ Gone to the fire ? "What fire ? ” asks Yorkey.
“ Didn’t you hear the shine just now? There’s a
big fire down town —you can see the glare from
here.”
“ D n! ” shouted Yorkey, jumping up, “ Why
didn’t yer say so afore ? Come along, Jim—let’s git
down to the fire—there’s bound to be some pickin’s.
Anyhow, I’m sick of this infernal crib.”
“All right,” said Jim, stretching himself lazily.
“Dm willin’.—lt's deadly lively here to-night, wot
with that cussed Chinaman and his opium, and no
grog, and a infernal old Grimalldn-in-the-horrors like
Sal.”
“Take that for yer impidence!” said that lady,
starting to her feet, and aiming a blow at the speaker,
“You to talk of your horrors, you lazy drunken
brute ! ”
85
GBEttALKEf-ES-THE-HOEHOES.


“ Grently does it, old gal,” said Torkej, interposing,
—“dim didn’t mean no harm—it’s only his manner—
ain’t it Jim ?”
“ Then if it’s only his manner, all I’ve got to say
is that his manner’s a d d had manner, and he’s
got to alter it if he grants to he allowed inside this
shanty,” said the Gorilla, sulkily, hut suffering
herself to he pushed down into her seat.
Jim deigned no reply, hut lifting up the candle,
proceeded to light his pipe; having accomplished
which he walked to the door, telling Yorkey to come
on and let the old woman go to .
“Good-night, Sal,” said that individual. “We
shan’t come back, so there’ll be all the more grog for
you and Bess. By-by, Johnny,” he added, stooping
to knock the Chinaman’s hat over his eyes as he
passed the sofa.
“Dat welly fooliss man,” said the Chinaman, as
the door closed on the pair. “ Bym-by, some time,
Chinaman stickee knife in urn.” And his eyes
glittered so savagely that it was not difficult to divine
that he himself was the Chinaman he alluded to.
“Oh, hosh!” said the Gorilla, “you Jest lie over
and hold yer tongue. Why Yorkey could eat three
like you before breakfast.”
“ Maybe sometime one makes him welly sick,”
growled the Chinaman, as he resumed Ms pipe.
If may be as well to take advantage of the silence
that ensued to explain how this establishment came
to be dignified by the outrageously incongruous name
of “Dove-cote.” In the early days of the rush it
had been erected by a man named Duff, and some
wag had at once bestowed upon it this punning
appellation, which stuck to it long after the original
Duff, or Dove, had made his pile and departed to
1 ‘ knock it down ” in Melbourne, leaving the Dove-
cote as a legacy to the Gorilla. That lady occupied


it in common with Woolshed Bess, whose acquaint-
ance she had made at the Woolshed ; a neighbouring
diggings, from her connection with which Bess had
derived her title.
Some few minutes passed, and then the door opened
and Woolshed Bess entered hurriedly, bearing in her
arms, wrapped in a ragged shawl, the inanimate
body of Totsy.
Before entering into an explanation, she pushed
aside the canvas flap which served as door to the
bedroom and laid her burden gently on the bed.
She then walked into the parlor (if it can be so
termed) and sank down on the stool. She was out of
breath, and begrimed with smoke and ashes.
“ What have yer got there ? ” asked the Gorilla,
in a surly tone, being aggrieved at her companion’s
silence.
Bess did not at first reply, but lugged out, from
some mysterious hiding-place under her gown, a
square gin-bottle, from which she proceeded to
extricate the cork by means of her teeth. She then
reached down a pannikin and half-filled it with the
fiery liquor, which she drank off at one gulp. With
a long sigh of satisfaction, she at last condescended
to answer:—
“ A child.”
" A child?” retorted the Gorilla—“ And what in
the name of goodness do you want with a child ?
Whose is it? Where did you get it ?”
“ It’s the kid of that Grant as fell over the rocks.
I picked it up at the fire. They was burnt out, and
the mother’s killed.”
“ Grant’s kid ! Well, this beats me ! Have you
come into a fortin that you go a-ronsting up kids and
a-fetchin’ of ’em home, when we aint got enough to
eat for ourselves ? ”


“ Shut up, you brute ! ” said Bess, “I can do as I
like, I suppose.”
“ Oh, yes, ma'am —of course you can do as you like
—in your own house, of course, ma’am.”
It is impossible to describe the sarcastic emphasis
with which the Gorilla enunciated this word “ma’am”;
its effect however was visible, for Bess started up
violently, and for a moment seemed as if she was
about to fly at the throat of her partner.
“ Tou—you—devil!” she said, or rather hissed —
“so you’d deny a little burnt-out babby food and
shelter, would you ? Now, I’ll tell you what, Sal; —
if you and me’s got to quarrel, I’m agreeable; but
it’ll have to be to-morrow, for the kid is badly burnt,
and sbe’s got to be looted to at once. If you was a
decent Christian woman you’d be bilin’ the tittle,
and gettin’ ready a bath for the poor little thing,
instead of growling and grumbling like a bear with
a sore head. Come," she continued, iu a more
conciliatory manner, “ take a nobbier, and then bean
a hand with the tub, there’s a good girl-”
Half mollified, Sal condescended to accept the
nobbier, which she drank off as speedily as Bess had
done. The two women then set to work to fill the
kettle and build up the fire.
When the water was hot enough they poured it
into the wash-tub, which they had carried into the
bedroom, and then proceeded to wash little Totsy,
who had not yet recovered consciousness.
They found that the child was only slightly burnt
after all, the fright having been the principal cause
of her fainting, and the soothing effect of the warm
water caused her to open her eyes and ask faintly
where she was, and where was her mama.
“Never mind now, deary,” said Bess—“your
mama is down at the fire. Now you he a good girl,
and don’t ask any questions, but wait till to-morrow
88
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


mornin’. Me and Hus good lady”—indicating Sal
•with, a toss of her head—“ is a-goin’ to put some nice
cool flour on your burns, and then you shall have a
nice drink and go to bed ; and to-morrow you’!! be as
spry—as spry—as never was,” said Bess, at a loss for
a simile.
Totsy was too weak to persist, so she suffered them
to dress her wounds with flour and invest her with
her little chemise, over which Bess folded her shawl.
They then took her into the other room, and bade
her sit quietly by the fire till the bed was made ready
for her.
“Who’s that?” asked Totsy, pointing at the
Chinaman, who, his pipe being out, had composed
himself to sleep.
“ Oh, that,” said Sal, “ that’s a Chinaman—a friend
of ourn.”
“Tes, and he’s got to come out o’ that,” said Bess,
walking over, and unceremoniously pulling him into
an upright position. “ Come, Johnny—ronse up !
Get up and go home.”
Johnny rubbed his eyes, and looked vacantly round
the room. As his glance fell upon Totsy, Ms little
pig eyes grew brighter.
“Nice HUy gal,” he ejaculated, rolling Ms head
from side to side. “ Where you git dat one fEh ? ”
This question seemed to exasperate Bess, who by
way of rejoinder told him to clear out, or he’d get
more than he bargained for.
“All litey,” retorted Johnny, staggering to his
feet—“B’pose you want sellee lillygal, me buy um—
savvy ?”
This was too much for Bess’s patience, and she seized
him by the collar, and fairly ran him out of the room,
closing the door after him with an emphatic hang.
She had scarcely reached the other side of the
room when it re-opened, and Johnny popped his head
in.


“Makee lilly wifej for Johnny hym-hye,” he said,
nodding at Totsy—“ How muchee ? ”
He was not allowed to wait for an answer, for Bess
rushed out after him and hunted him off the premises
with a volley of imprecations, accompanied by a
shower of stones and such other missiles as were
available.
On her return to the hut, she made Totsy drink
some hot gin-and-water, and then put her to bed in
the inner room, telling Sal that she was going to sleep
on the sofa herself, and that her room, a lean-to at
the hack, was at her (Sal’s) service.
That lady grumhlinglj acquiesced in the arrange-
ments ; and the inmates of the Dcve-cote were all
soon fast asleep.
90
THE GOX.DEN YANKEE.


CHAPTER XI.
THE ABDUCTION. —THE GOLDEN YANKEE TO THE
RESCUE. —FIGHT AT THE DOVE-COTE.
||teN hour or two later two men might have been
SjmM. seen "talking along the road which led past
the back of the Dove-cote. They were evidently
cs&ea anxious not to attract notice, for their conver-
sation was conducted in subdued tones, and at the
slightest noise they would pause and listen attentively,
as if fearful of being pursued.
One of these, no less an individual than Seth
Harnet, was equipped in full travelling costume;
that is to say, he had inducted himself into a coat,
and bore over his shoulder's the well-known diggers’
“ swag,” consisting of a blanket tightly rolled round
the remainder of Ms wardrobe, &o. His companion
was Billy Bowes.
“It’s rough—mighty rough to hev to vamose all
along o’ shootin’ a derned skunk like thet Dutchman.
An’ they call this a free country ! ” said Seth ; “ I
guess it’s a nice specimen o’ freedom whar a man
duxsn't settle his own biznis without hevin’ a passel
o’ policemen on Ms tracks. And you say the cuss
aint dead ? ”
“Nary bit of it,” answered Billy—“he’s jest as
spry and aetyve as a buck rat.”
“It’s like my luck !” groaned Seth.—“lt’s jest like
my demed luck! How I come to miss the brute,
licks me—l tuk fair aim at Mm, and I oalkTated to
plug Mm plumb in the heart. My old six-shooter,
too—a heauty wot I’ve toted along this ten year and


more, I don't b’lieve it! ’Taint possible nobow —
the bullet must hev dropped out, or he’d a been, ez
dead ez mutton.”
“Well, it does seem strange,” mused Billy—“
could ’ye sworn I heerd the bullet hit somethin’.”
“It don’t make no diff hence anyways —he aint
been hit. But by Geehosaphat! nex’ time I gits a
chance at him, ef I don’t fetch him you may call me
a Greaser! ”
“Ton never missed yer man before,” said Billy.
“Not much I didn’t —an’ I’ye been around when
a man did’nt hev no time ter think ’bout takin’ aim,
onless he wanted a bullet in his own carkiss. Tell ye
what, Billy—my b’lief is thet feller’s in league wi’
the devil.”
“In league with your grandmother I” said Billy,
laughing. “You great jackass, do yon mean to tell
me you b’lieve in such nigger foolishness as leagues
wi’ the devil ? Bah! Git out! ”
“ Mebbe you’ve hed experience, and mebbe you
ain’t—but 1 hev, ennyway. I knowed a man down
to St. Jo wot jest went pardners wi’ the devil in all
he got, an’ every time he goes out prospectin’ he
finds—and rich too—-in a day or two. The boys used
ter watch thet feller an’ take stock of all his goin’s-on.
It wur jest the same at any game. He’d set down
to a game o’ poker wi’ the biggest sharps in the
country, and afore he’d done he’d hev ’em all flat
broke. It warnt no use stockin’ the keerds—he’d
chip in ez innercent ez a babby, an’ sure ez fate, when
it come to a show, he had the best hand. And
bluff! He’d bluff the best of’em, an’ then rile ’em by
chuckin’ up his hand, with mebbe only ten high in it.
But jest caff him—jest wait till you’d take yer oath
he was on the bluff—an’ he’d turn up a flush, or a
full hand, and rake in the dimes, smilin’ so’s you’d be
fit ter bust wi’ spite.”


“ And you really believed that man was in league
with the devil ?” ashed Billy.
“By thunder, the feller confessed it hisself! ” was
the answer.
“ "Well,” said Billy, seeing the futility of argument
—“s’posin’ we drop the devil for a bit, and talk
business. "What are you going to do ? ”
“I’m jest goin’ right straight across to Alb’ry, an’
from thar to Bathurst. I’ll write when I git settled.
But see here—wot’s frettin’ me is the Md.”
“ What bid ?” ashed Billy.
“Grant’s hid, yon galoot!” was the reply—“ Little
Totsy, ez you knows ez well ez me. Thur’s thet hid
right down on the bed-rock. Bather tumbles inter the
creek an’ gits busted, an’ now here’s the mother goes
an’ gits burnt. It’s mighty rough on the pore little
orittur. See here, Billy—fust time I see thet Totsy
I cottoned to her, and I reckon she ruther got ter
like me too—used to order me about ez sassy ez a
juke. I tole thet chile I’d stick to her, and I’m not
a goin’ back on my word. Here—here’s two hunderd
pounds—you take her right down to Melbourne, and
put her to a first-class school—none o’ yer one-horse
consams, but a reel slap-up genteel acadermy, as
they calls it. Pay the school-marm a year’s sub.
in advance, an’ tell her yon’ll ante-np reg’lar in
futur’. I’ll look arter thet part o’ the biznis. Ton
aint doin’ nothin’ now, so you kin easy spare time to
take her down.”
“ But what about her relations ?” asked Billy.
“ Burn her relashuns' ” replied Seth. “ Skelp her
relashuns ! Who knows whether she’s got enny ?
"You take her right away—nobody ain't agoin’ to
interfere, an’ it’ull be time enough ter talk about
relashuns when they turns up.”
Billy was about to reply, when he stopped
suddenly, and caught his companion by the arm.


"Hush!” said he—“ Didn’t you hear that noise?
Some one is coming through the scrub.”
Even 'while he spoke, three figures crept softly out
into the road, which here ran to within about fifty
yards of the Dove-cote.
The moon was shining brightly, and Billy at once
recognized Torkey and his mate, with whom was a
Chinaman. These worthies were evidently bent
upon some evil errand, for their suspicious glances
around showed they did not wish to be seen. For-
tunately they did not discover our friends, who had
slunk back into the shadow at the first noise of their
approach.
“ Halt! ” said Torkey, “ this is as good a place as
any to lay our plans. I propose the Chinaman goes
up to the hut and quietly wakens Sal, an’ offers her
a note for Grant’s kid. It’s no use rousin’ that she-
devil, Bess, who’d be bound to make a h 1 of a
row, seein’ she’s shook on the brat.”
“ ’Taint no nse,” said Jimmy—“ Bess has got the
Kd stowed away in Sal’s room, an’ she’s sleepin’ on
the sofy herself. Yon heerd her lock the door, didn’t
yer, Johnny ? ”
“Tis, me hear click-click, and Sal askee wot dat
fo’ ? —Bess say ‘All litey, you want come in, you
knock.’ ”
“Well then,” said Torkey, “let’s jest go np in a
body and asks her to let us in. If she wont, we’ll
bust the door in, an’ it wont take two minutes to gag
an’ bind that hag.”
So it was agreed, and they crept off towards the hut,
little dreaming that their plot had been overheard by
Billy and the Golden Yankee.
During the progress of this conversation Billy had
very great difficulty in restraining his companion,
who wanted to rush at the kidnappers at once.
“Go slow,” he said. “Wait till they git up to


the hut, and then we’ll tackle ’em. We shall have
Bess to help us; and, besides, a row out here would
be sure to attract somebody’s attention.”
“ How in thunder did those women git holt on the
kid ? ” asked Seth, chafing with impatience, but still
admitting the wisdom of Billy’s counsel.
“ Well, I guess it must have been Bess that took
her from me when I passed her out of the burning room.
It’s all for the best, though ; —that woman aint half
a bad sort; she'll look well after her, and there’ll be
the less likelihood of her being missed when I take
her away.”
The kidnappers had by this time arrived at the
hut, and, whilst one of them went round to the back,
the other two tried the front door. This appeared to
be unbolted, for our friends saw them walk in and
strike a light.
Immediately after, a stifled scream and the noise of
a souffle were heard, and then Seth and Billy rushed
np the incline, the more sober-minded Billy whispering
to his comrade to trust to fists, and on no account to
use his revolver.
When they entered the hut, they found Bess
struggling on the floor in the embrace of Jemmy, who
had thrown a blanket over her head so as to stifle
her screams. The Chinaman and the Gorilla were
talking apart, whilst Xorkey had just stepped into
the bedroom.
Seth, without any more to-do, aimed a terrific blow
at Jemmy, which, if it had taken effect, would have
probably laid that individual hors de combat; but he
had heard the noise of their entrance, and was just
in time to save himself by rolling over underneath
the table. Billy, meanwhile, had rushed into the
inner room, where he became at once involved in a
wrestling match with Torkey.
The force with which Seth had struck out being


expended in the air, he staggered, and, becoming
entangled in the blanket, from the folds of -which
Bess was striving to extricate herself, he too sprawled
on the ground, and, before he could rise up, the
Chinaman, armed with a knife, had thrown himself
upon him.
Seth managed to shield himself, but only partially,
for he caught the blow on his fore-arm, and received
a bad out. This did not, however, disable him, for
he was on his feet in a second, and, seizing a stool,
laid about Mm with such good-will that in less than
a minute he had knocked both Jemmy and the
Chinaman senseless.
Bess, by this time, had recovered her feet, and at
once rushed into the inner room, followed by Sal,
who seemed doubtful wMch side to take in the affray.
Seth, having finished with Ms assailants, also ran
into the bedroom. He found Billy sore pressed ; for
the women had turned upon one another and were
fighting furiously, andYorkey, ahull-throated ruffian,
framed like a prize-fighter, was altogether too much
for the somewhat slightly-feuilt Billy.
Seth arrived just in time to save Ms friend’s life, for
the big brute had got Mm down, and was compressing
Ms throat in a grip like a vice.
Once more the stool was called'into play, and as it
descended with a crash upon Torkey’s skull, he rolled
over with a hoarse groan, and lay insensible on the
ground.
Seth helped Billy to rise, and they then separated
the women, whose faces were streaming with blood
so that they could scarcely see.
During the few minutes that the combat lasted,
little Totsy sat up in bed, screaming violently, and
it was not until she heard the well-known voices of
Billy and Seth, and felt their caressing touches, that
she became quiet and subsided into a fit of convulsive
sobbing.


Billy looked ruefully around.
“ Here's a pretty go I ” said ke. “ I dont know
what the dickens to do.—If we stay here, you’ll be
nabbed, sure. Ton must hoot it at ones. Come,
pick up your traps, and scoot,” he added, pushing
Seth to the door.
“ Hold on,” was the reply. —“ Thur aint no sech
durnation hurry.”
“But I tell you there is,” said Billy—“the noise
must have been heard down at the camp, and in five
minutes there’ll he half-a-dozen policemen here.
You go, and leave everything to me—I’ll make it all
right, and, soon’s ever I can git away, I’ll make a
start with little missy for Melbourne.”
Seth turned to the child :—Good night, my lady,”
he said: “ and good-bye—I’m off to Bathurst, so yon
and I wont see one another agin'fur a while.”
Totsy stretched out her little white arms towards
him, and, in response to the mute appeal, he
bent over her and imprinted a respectful kiss on her
forehead. But this did not content the little girl, for
she drew his face down and kissed him several times,
sobbing out that he was her good angal who always
came to save her.
But Billy, who was seriously alarmed for his
friend’s safety, would not hear of any further delay,
so Seth reluctantly took his departure.
Billy had good reason to congratulate himself upon
his forethought, for even as Seth went down the hill
the noise of footsteps became audible, and a couple
of minutes later two policemen entered the hut.
When they heard what had occurred, these astute
gentlemen decided that the best thing to be done
would be to take all parties concerned into custody.
They, therefore, handcuffed Jemmy and the China-
man, who by this time had partially recovered
consciousness, and one of them remained in charge,
H


whilst the other marched off to the police station,
accompanied by Billy.
Other policemen were then dispatched to the scene
of the affray, and soon all concerned, with the
exception of Seth, were safely lodged, in the lock-up,
whilst Totsy was delivered over to the care of the
look-up-keeper’s wife, who made her np a bed on a
sofa.
In the morning there was an inquiry at the police
court, which resulted in the discharge of Billy and
the women, and the committal for trial of the three
would-be kidnappers.
It may be as well to state here that Yorkey and
Jemmy, being identified as convicts illegally outside
of their district, received heavy sentences for their
share of the night’s work ; whilst the Chinaman, who
had incited them to steal the child, got off with the
trifling punishment of three months’ imprisonment.
We must here take leave of the Gorilla and
'Wbolshed Bess, who have both made their last
appearance in this story. It is scarcely likely that
the reader will be interested in the fate of the
former of these ladies, she having shown herself in
anything but an amiable light in these pages ; but
poor warm-hearted Bess deserves some sympathy,
and the reader will not be sorry to hear that she
determined to mend her ways, and, by dint of hard
work and some good luck, succeeded eventually in
establishing herself in a little shop ; where she did so
well that when, after some years, her truant husband
found her out, he was pleased to beg to be once more
admitted into partnership, and did ever afterwards
conduct himself like a respectable citizen and virtuous
married man.


CHAPTER XII.
AFTER TEN YEARS.—THE ACTORS’ PIC-NIC.—THE
LOVERS.—AN EMBARRASSING SITUATION.
asHEISTMA.B Day. A "bright, cheery, day —real
| Australian Christmas "weather.
% The streets of Sydney are full of pleasure-
seekers, bound for the most part on excursion
trips down the harbour. All the vessels at the Circular
Quay are flying flags wherever a flag could be
legitimately suffered to fly, and everybody is in
holiday garb.
The dirty little steamers of work-day life have been
so scrubbed, holy-stoned, painted, and decorated with
flags and green boughs, that they seem to have taken
a new lease of life, and lie panting and throbbing at
their berths, as if eager to be off and show the world
what they can do at a pinch.
Brass bands, orange - women, old ladies with
baskets, young ladies with lovers, old gentlemen with
umbrellas, and young gentlemen with walking sticks,
are everywhere.
Cabs and omnibuses keep driving up in hot haste,
disgorging their loads, and starting off again in search
of more.
A constant stream of passengers pours on over the
planks which lead to the decks of the excursion
steamers, and it seems as if all Sydney was bound
for Olontarf, Manly, or Middle Harbour.
lu the little cabin of each of the steamers may he
seen, hung up in a nice gilt frame, a certificate from
the Marine Board, authorizing the vessel to carry,
say two hundred persons, whilst plying within the


Heads of Port Jackson. You read this, and sigh. It
is nice-—it is beautiful—but it is a delusion. Steam-
boats, like omnibuses and carpet-bags, are constructed
on such principles that there is always room for
more ; and who—above all days, on a holiday—would
venture to hint that the legal complement had been
exceeded?—Tour boat, bound, let us say, for Clontari,
is licensed to carry two hundred ; already some four
hundred people are sweltering, “ scrouging,” and
crowding on its decks, and, though the sea is still as
a mill-pjond, it rolls steadily, gunwale under, as if it
lay in the troubled waters outside the Heads. Yet
the skipper is not contented, for, although it is a
quarter of an hour after the advertised time for
starting, he still holds on, in waiting for more human
freight, and deaf to the remonstrances of those un-
fortunates who are already in his clutches.
At this early stage of the proceedings everybody is
too uncomfortable to be jolly. To arrive at Circular
Quay by ten o’clock, has necessitated extra-early
rising, and much domestic trouble in those house-
holds where the “ missus” does all the work herself,
or is assisted only by that most shiftless of beings, a
general servant.
Then the hunting-up of holiday clothes has not
been accomplished without much care and worry ;
buttons having been missing, and ugly stains and
grease-spots found, where the house-mother could
have taken her oath no such disabilities existed. So
Papa bas been compelled to wait, half-dressed, whilst
renovations and repairs have been made, and has
probably relieved Ms feelings by a little perfectly
superfluous profanity.
Dressed and ready to start, fresh disappointments
have arisen ; for omnibus after omnibus has rolled
by, “ full inside and misgivings as to the correct
time trouble Mama to such an extent that her usnal


placidity of demeanour lias given place to quite a
holiday irritability.
On board the steamer it is no better; for Johnny
will keep getting between people’s legs, and Cissy
has left her parasol in the omnibus, and the boat is
rolling so dreadfully that Mama is sure it will go
over. It is hot, too, for there is scarcely breathing
room; and altogether things are so very uncomfort-
able that Mama declares she will never again—no,
never again!—be induced to go out on a holiday.
But Mama has made precisely the same speech any
time these ten years, and by and by, when she has
been accommodated with a comfortable seat on the
sward, in the cool shade, and has had a glass of beer,
and the wing of a fowl, and a banana or so, she will
perk up, and confide to her dear friend Mrs. Styles
that she “do like to see the children enjoying
themselves”; and so Cissy and Johnny don’c care
tuppence for her tantrums on board the steamer, and
have full confidence in their ability to persuade her
into taking them to another pio-nic on Easter Monday
—at the latest.
But we have nothing to do with these common
excursion picnics ; our business is with a far superior
class of entertainment.
Moored far removed from the excursion steamers
lies a natty steam-launch, which is also gradually
being filled by a crowd of pleasure-seekers.
These, however, all seem to know one another, and
have come unprovided with baskets or hampers, so
there is good reason to believe that they are the
invited guests of some hospitable citizen.
A strange familiarity prevails amongst these ladies
and gentlemen, who address one another by diminu-
tives of their Christian names, and “my dear” one
another to an alarming extent. One motherly old
lady is called “Mama” by almost everybody on
101
OX BOARD THE STEAMER,


board ; but it would really be too absurd to suppose-
that she did in very fact stand in that relation to the
thirty or forty ladies and gentlemen who so term her..
Other peculiarities are noticeable : the ladies are all
nicely dressed, but most of the gentlemen look rath er-
as if they had slept away from home the previous
night, and had not had time to change their clothes
since. The greater number, too, are clean-shaven;
which is remarkable in these days of beards and
moustaches, and has not on the whole a pleasing
effect to the eye. Beards cover many irregularities
of feature, and moustaches seemed specially devised
to hide ugly mouths. To dispense with either is a
serious risk; to dispense with both is too often suicidal.
As a rule, a clean-shaved man has a suspicious
look about him : if he happen to be thin and lanthorn-
jawed, he must be a handsome fellow indeed if a
stranger does not set him down as a billiard-sharper.
Pity, then, the poor players, whose vocation demands
from them the sacrifice of the most useful of Nature’s
adornments, and who are compelled to brave the
world in a bare-faced manner. If the male reader
thinks he would not look suspicious if he were clean-
shaven, I would recommend him to try the experiment;
it would be safe betting that even to himself he would
look so mean that he would not care to face a looking
glass till his bear'd bad grown again.
It will be guessed that the occupants of the
steam-launch were for the most part members of the
theatrical profession. They were, in fact, the com-
pany belonging to the Olympic Theatre, who were
being treated to a Christmas picnic by their employer,
the manager and lessee of that temple of Thespis.
Other guests were there, too ; two or three personal
friends of the manager ; a couple of dramatic authors,
and, of course, the theatrical critics of the various
papers.
102
THE GOtDEX TASKEE.


Let me call your attention to a little group of
persons who have taken up their station abaft the
wheel.
Seated in the centre is a young lady, whose beauty
is so remarkable as to arrest tba eye at once. She is
of medium height, and slenderly but gracefully
formed. Her eyes, large and luminous, and of a dark
purplish gray in color, are fringed with long and
thick lashes, which impart to them at times a
wonderful expression of languor. Her features are
perfect—indeed, so perfect, that were it not for the
exquisite and ever-varying tints of her complexion,
you would be inclined to deem them absolutely too
statuesque. Long waves of rich brown hair are
banded gracefully around her charming little head,
but not so tightly but that cue or two semi-golden
ringlets are suffered to stray down on to her shoulders,
t’he is dressed, simply but tastefully, in some white
fabric, relieved here and there by knots of dark blue
ribbon. This is May Eusden, the leading juvenile
lady of the company.
By her side sits a jolly-looking dame, who can
scarcely be termed old, for she has not yet seen her
fiftieth birthday, hut who is known professionally as
the “ first old woman.” The world knows her as
Mrs. Benton, but in the theatre she is usually
addressed as “Mama,” by those whose position, in
the profession warrants such familiarity.
Under Mama’s wing is nestled Cissy Benton,
a laughing-eyed little damsel, who has just been
promoted to “Prince” parts in burlesque, and who
made a great hit last night, when the Christmas
pantomime was played for the first time. This young
lady has lovers by the score, but, be sure, she knows
how to keep them at a respectful distance ; and Mama,
for all her jollity, perfectly understands how to put
down a too intrusive admirer.


Around are grouped three or four gentlemen, who
are engaged with, the ladies in discussing the merits
and demerits of the new burlesque, “ Harlequin
Prince Charming and the Enchanted Dodo,” in which
Cissy Benton enacted the part of Prince Charming.
There is Johnny Lupton, the first old man, who is
especially great in burlesque parts, and fancies
himself, as indeed he is, one of the best character-
actors on the colonial stage. His figure is rather
against him, for he is short, but his features are
expressive, and calculated to “make-up” well.
Johnny is an inveterate old grumbler, and a walking
chronicle of the stage. It is generally admitted that
he has been unlucky, and, to use an Americanism,
he “travels ” on this reputation.
His especial abomination, the theatrical critic of
the Morning Thunderer., stands next to him. This is
a tall, thin, youngish, gentleman, of semi-military
appearance, attired in a grey suit of fashionable cut,
and wearing dogskin gloves, which he occasionally
pulls off to caress his moustache and exhibit the very
gorgeous rings which adorn his fingers. Across his
waistcoat meanders an unusually massive gold watch-
chain, from which depend many trinkets and charms.
Mr. Johnstone Stoker is a great swell, and a very
formidable personage, for, notwithstanding his
dandyism, he can write very cutting notices on
occasion. His intimates would judge that he is just
now in high fettle, for it is only at intervals that he
appears so bedizened with jewellery. Mr. Stoker is
of the 'Wemmick school, and believes in “portable
property,” which has the great advantage of being
easily realisable when necessity arises. So, when his
exchequer runs low, as is periodically the case, he is
in the habit of hypothecating his most gorgeous
decorations, and contenting himself with smaller
chains and less valuable rings.
104
THE GOLDEN TANKXE.


Another distinguished litterateur is seated at the
side of Cissy, to ■whom he is evidently striving to
commend himself. His name is Eobinson, but he is
commonly known as Mephistopheles Eobinson; a
sobriquet which he has acquired from his habit of
sneering at everything and everybody under the sun.
He looks like a gentleman, and is a. well-informed,
agreeable companion; but he is not popular, for he
is commonly regarded as “ heartless,” and, certes,
never was known to spare even his dearest friend if a
chance arose for getting off a witticism at his expense.
Meph. Eobinson is one of the ablest journalists in
Sydney, and excels in poetry of the Don Juan school.
“And the only chance I had was spoiled by that
little Stanley, who kept the stage waiting for full
five minutes while she was raddling her face with
rouge till she looked as if she was going on for ‘Blue-
skin, 1 ” said Johnny Lupton, winding-up a long,
criticism of the new burlesque by this characteristic
growl at his own part.
“ But then you know you never do have a chance,
Mr. Lnpton,” said Meph. Eobinson, in that fine,
supercilious, sneering manner, for which he is so
celebrated.
“ And whose fault is that, sir?” asks Johnny,
fiercely—“whose fault is that? I played leading
parts before the young puppies who get all the fat now,
were born. lam an actor, sir; which is more than
can be said of most of the gentlemen who walk the
boards now-a-days. Chance, indeed ! I dont know
who has got a chance in the i—But the public
dou’t care —they don’t want acting ; all they ask for is
scenery and legs.”
“Both very good things in their way,” said
Eobinson. “What do you say, Miss Cissy?”
That young lady seems to think this remark rather
naughty, for she Mushes, and answers with a giggle.


“ The time was when there were actors here who
could hare played ‘Hamlet ’ on a dining-table; and
played it so as to fetch the people,” continued Johnny;
“but now the profession is going to the devil.”
“ Now you know, Mr. Lupton,” said May Eusden,
‘ ‘ that you said exactly the same thing twenty years
ago. and twenty years before that somebody else said
it. The profession always is going to the Old Grentle-
man, but somehow it takes a long time getting there.’ 5
“ It’s all very well to say that, hut I stick to it all
the same —I'm not a gTumbler —”
“Oh ! Oh !! Oh !! T ” from his hearers, hut Johnny
went on without heeding the interruption ;
“ I say the profession is going headlong to the
devil.”
“Eh? What’s that?” said a stout, jolly-faced
man—who came bustling up as Johnny concluded—
“ going to the devil ? Who’s going to the devil ? ”
“ The profession, Uncle,” said May.
“Oh, I see! Johnny’s at it again! Nevermind,
old man,” said Billy Eusden, the first low comedian
and stage-manager —“never mind—it’ll last our
time, anyway.”
“Mr. Lupton seems to think he has been hadly
used in the burlesque,” said Meph, Eohinson.
“ Well, sir,” retorted Johnny; “ I have been badly
used. I never heard of a burlesque where the first
old man didn’t have a show—not even so much as a
decent local. My part is just good for nothing, but
to feed other people, and 1 was a fool ever to consent
to play it.”
“ But why did’nt you remonstrate with the talented
author,” asked Stoker, who had once been guilty of
a burlesque himself, and loved, with a fond tender
love, his brother dramatists.
“ Eemonstrate with the author! No, sir—that’s
not my style at all. I don’t go round wheedling


authors like some people I could mention. Besides
it’s not quite likely I’d say anything to that fellow I
How ever he gets employed, I can’t imagine! ”
'“Nor any one else, Johnny,” said Stoker. “I
suppose he does it for next to nothing, and worries,
the manager into employing him.”
“ I asked Provost the other night how he came to
give all his work to onr talented friend,” said Meph.
Robinson, “ and he said the public were too stupid to
appreciate good jokes, and Ohumpkins, being a fool,
iia- just the man for them.”
•‘Flattering for Chumpkins,” remarked Stoker.
"And even less complimentary to the public,”
said May. “ But unfortunately there is a good deal
of truth in it—the stupidity of a crowd is proverbial.”
“The fact is,” said Billy Eusden, “we judge an
audience by the noise they make, and forget that the
cleverest and most appreciative people are the least
demonstrative. "Four chaw bacon is always ready to
guffaw and clap his hands when he is pleased,
whilst it would puzzle Lavater to find out from the
countenances of you pressmen, and others of your
kidney, whether you axe amused or not.”
“Very true,” retorted Meph. Robinson—“but do
not forget that it is not good form for a pressman to
applaud too vigorously.”
“ Don’t you think, Mr. Robinson,” asked May,
“ that the real reason is that you gentlemen think
that your best method of impressing the world with
a sense of your superior ability is to affect imper-
turbability and sneer at everything ? ”
The faintest sonpc-on of a blush tinged Mepb.’g
sallow cheeks as be replied, affecting a languid tone—
“ I daresay yon are right. Everyone is a humbug
now-a-days, and no doubt I’m just as bad as the rest
of the world.”
107
A HUMBUG.


“ Hear ! Hear I ” said Stoker, delighted to witness
Ms brother journalist’s discomfiture—“ Open con-
fession is good for the soul, and sin confessed is half
repented. Certainly yon are a humbug, my dear
fellow, and I rejoice to see that you are not blind to
your own defects.”
“Is it better to be a humbug and know you are
•one, or to be a humbug and unconscious of it ? ” asked
May, archly.
“Now you’ve got it, Stoker,” said Billy—“ Let’s
consider the question settled—we are all humbugs,
whether we know it or not. But what’s this ? A
hail ? Who can that be, I wonder ? ”
The launch was, at that moment, rounding Dawes’
Point, and Farm Gove, with the magnificent tropical
vegetation of the Botanical Gardens, had just come
into view. Lying within the headland was a trim
man-of-war, over the stern of which a flag, displaying
the well-known Stars and Stripes, hung lazily waiving
to and fro in the dying breeze.
The appearance of the launch had evidently been
expected, for, as it hove in sight, two or three officers
hastened to the gangway, whilst a loud hail from the
stentorian lungs of the boatswain intimated their
desire to speak the pleasure-boat.
A slight divergence from its course brought the
launch alongside, and, as it touched the steps, two
gentlemen sprang on board.
The foremost of the two, Lieut. Maurice Stanton,
a young man of medium height, with the stalwart
frame and bronzed cheeks befitting a sailor, after
briefly saluting the company, walked up to the
manager, and apologised for having caused the delate
staring that he had not been able to get off in time
to join them at the Circular Quay. He then intro-
duced his friend Lieut. Ehett, whom he said he had
ventured to bring with him.
108
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


The manager, Mr. Provost, cordially -welcomed the
young men, and then the launch sped merrily on its
way, after a parting salute of cheers from the crew
of the man-of-war, to whom many of the company of
the theatre were well known.
The new-comers now made their way aft and joined
the little coterie whose acquaintance we have just
made.
As they approached, a faint blush stole over the
cheeks of May Eusden, and when she shook hands
with Maurice Stanton even the dullest of observers
would have suspected that something more than the
indifference of ordinary friendship existed between
tbem.
Of course the advent of these naval heroes involved
a change of conversation, and very soon Meph.
Eohinson and Johnstone Stoker, perceiving that their
“noses were completely put out of joint,” sauntered
off to bestow their attentions were they would be
better appreciated. Their parting remarks were
characteristic:
“ Brass buttons! ” growled Meph. in the ear of his
companion.
“ They’re all alike—brains count for nothing with
women, nowadays,” replied Stoker, savagely curling
np the end of his moustache.
(And it is just possible that these gentlemen
were not very far wrong, as far, at least, as the bulk
of our women-kind are concerned. Who does not
remember the Brass-button fever which committed
such ravages among the fair sex of Sydney in those
blissful and never-to-be-forgotten days when the
Galatea lay moored in Farm Cove, and Lords and
Lieutenants were as plentiful as bananas ?)
Johnny Lupton stayed. Not because he liked the
new-comers (or, indeed, anybody else), or thought
that their society would amuse him ; hut simply


because he belonged to that category of unfortunates
who always do stay when they are not wanted, and
are continually finding- themselves in the wrong place,
but are too gauche to extricate themselves gracefully.
So Johnny stayed, and grumbled to Hilly Eusden
—who laughed at Mm, and to Mrs. Benton—who
pitied him; whilst Lieut. Ehett devoted himself to
Cissy, and May and Maurice became involved in a
highly important and mysterious conversation about
the harbour, the weather, and other intensely inter-
esting subjects.
But now the band, which was established amidships,
struck up the overture to Era Diavolo, to the accom-
paniment of a popping of corks never contemplated in
the original score, and the less aristocratic denizens
of the forepart of the vessel added their voices to the
harmony.
The gracious beauties of the harbour were never
displayed to better advantage than on this Christmas
morning. Countless steamers, yachts, and skiffs,
skimmed over its glassy waters, carrying with them
sounds of mirth and innocent revelry, gleaming in the
sunshine and leaving behind them long furrows of
silver light.
Our ffieuds, to whom uoue of this was novel,
nevertheless failed not to appreciate the glory of the
scene, and ever and anon, as the launch rounded a
headland and fresh beauties were disclosed to view,
loud exclamations of delight broke from the more
enthusiastic admirers of this masterpiece of nature.
Soon they entered Middle Harbour, and, not many
minutes after, reached their camping-ground at Pearl
Bay.
And now began the fun. Whilst the waiters were
laying the tables under a long shed, the company
dispersed about the side of the hill, some trying their
skill at the inevitable “rounders;” others favouring
the dancing booth; whilst not a few strolled off in


pairs, latent on flirtation mid the bosky clumps of
mangrove and ti-tree.
Billy Eusden was in Ms element. Bor a few
minutes after landing, he was here, there, and every-
where; organising, arranging, commanding and en-
treating : until he succeeded in raising- the spirits of
the company to the proper pic-nic pitch. But it was
at rounders that he came out with the most astonisMng
force, enlivening the game to such an extent that even
Johnny Lupton for a while forgot Ms grievances, and
ran about and shouted, as vigorously as a school-boy
home for the holidays.
Meph. Eobinson and Johnstone Stoker alone
resisted the blandishments of the stage-manager, and
declined to take any active share in the sport; doubt-
less holding it beneath their dignity as journalists and
critics to mingle in such childish amusements. But
they exMbited no such disinclination to partake of
the more material enjoyments of their companions,
and displayed most commendable activity in drawing
corks and furnisMng supplies of liquid refreshment
to the hard-worked rounder-players.
At last the dinner-bell sounded, and there was a
general rush for the table, at the head of which Mr.
Provost presided, whilst Billy Eusden officiated as
croupier. It is scarcely necessary to say that full
justice was done to the viands, for the excitement
and exercise had made everybody hungry; as indeed
everybody should be at a pic-nio, especially when the
catering has been entrusted to Oompagnoni.
The reader will not require to be told that the
health of Her Majesty the Queen was drunk with
enthusiasm, and he will easily believe that with such
a band and chorus “ God save the Queen ” was sang
in such fashion as it is rarely heard on such occasions.
Other toasts followed, and were uniformly received
with uproarious applause, and drunk with musical
honors.
111
CmiiDISH AMUSEMENTS.


I fear to weary tlie reader or I would fain tell how
Billy Eusden, Mrs. Benton, and Lieutenant Ehett,
especially distinguished themselves as speech-makers;
how Chumplrins made a great sensation by a long
speech congratulatory of himself, in the course of
which he hinted that he was the dramatist of the day;
and how Meph. Eobinson and Johnstone Stoker, not
being called upon to air their eloquence, sulked and
sneered worse than over.
When at length-everybody was hoarse with cheering,
and all the prescribed toasts (and a few more) bad
been duly honoured, the company rose from the table
and again dispersed-in search of amusement.
We will follow May Eusden and Maurice Stanton,
who wandered off in the most innocent and accidental
manner possible-
Eor some time their conversation was common-place
and proper, but when at last they paused for a
moment to rest under the shade of a great box tree,
quite out of sight and hearing of the rest of the
company, there ensued an awkward silence which
neither seemed disposed to break.
At last Maurice, after peering anxiously around
and blushing vigorously, murmured hesitatingly:
“Do yon know” —
May turned her head, and he stopped suddenly as
her glance met his. She must have seen something
suspicious, for her cheek crimsoned also, and she
looked down, and commenced toying with the fringe
of her parasol.
Maurice began again: “I was thinking”—
Another pause.
How very awkward! May raised the parasol to her
lips, and bit a piece of fringe away quite viciously,
glancing the while out of the corner of her eye at her
stupid lover.
After the second false start Maurice became more


confused than before, and quite irrelevantly remarked;
“ Wiat a magnificent view ! ”
As the magnificent view was bounded on every
side at a distance of some ten yards by dense scrub,
this remark was exceedingly appropriate, and May
hastened to reply “ Delicious' ”
This style of conversation is very exhausting, so it
was but natural that another interval of silence
should supervene.
Maurice pulled out his knife, and, lifting up a dry
stick, began whittling vigorously.
May resumed her intensely interesting investigation
•of the parasol fringe.
Some five minutes passed in this manner, and then
the lady, appearing to awake to consciousness of the
absurdity of the situation, broke out into a little,
nervous, silvery, laugh.
Maurice dropped the stick, looked up, blushed
worse than ever, and then laughed too, also nervously.
“Tou were about to say?” asked May, innocently.
“ I was about to say that you are the most adorable
little darling in the world!” burst out Maurice, at
last conquering bis timidity.
This was more than the lady bargained for, and it
became her turn to look down and blush.
But Maurice, having broken the ice, threw off all
reserve, and in eloquent, passionate, language, told how
at his first sight of May he had fallen in love with
her; how that love had increased day by day since
he had enjoyed the happiness of knowing her ; and,
finally, how that things had arrived at such a pass
that he could not continue to live without her.
As this speech progressed the parasol sank slowly to
the ground, the fringe inspection apparently ceasing
to interest its owner, who trembled with a delicious
trembling as she heard in words that what she hoped
was indeed reality.
x


When, at last, Maurice ceased, there was another
interval of silence. It was evidently May’s turn to
speak, but she did not really know how to begin.
You see, that awkward Maurice had been voluble
enough in declaring the state of his heart, but had
not had the sense to conclude with a question
as to the state of hers. It really was dreadfully
embarrassing. Bid the stupid fellow think she was
going to follow hia cue, and break out into rhapsody
about the condition she had been reduced to for
love of him /—lt was too absurd —she couldn’t, and
teouldn’t, speak until an opportunity was afforded her
of replying in a becoming and lady-like manner.
Meanwhile Maurice began to grow uncomfortable.
Was it possible that he had mistaken her feelings?
Could it be that she was merely playing with him ?
It looked awfully like it!—Musing after this fashion
the young lieutenant grew pale: at last, in desperation,
he exclaimed;—
“ Miss Eusden, may I hope that you will condescend
to give me a reply ? ”
May looked up.
In another moment that audacious young man had
his arms round her waist, and was hugging her—
actually hugging her!—in the most unheard-of
manner!
May wanted to remonstrate, but did not know how
to begin, and the creature was so strong that she
could not break away from him.
While she was still debating as to what course she
should pursue, there was a rustling in the brushwood,
and, before she could extricate herself from the
lieutenant’s embrace, two figures literally bounded
into the centre of the little patch of open ground
were they stood.
Here was a situation !—May screamed and threw
114
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


herself, in a passion of sobbing", upon the breast of
Billy Eusden, the foremost of the new comers.
The lieutenant kept his ground, Mushing vigorously,
and stammered out something—what, neither he nor
his auditors could make out.
But Billy soon set matters straight. Bless you, he
had seen their little game from the first, and had
even expected the demumeni to occur on that very
day! So he gently soothed the trembling May,
shook hands with the lieutenant, and—with the only
bit of stage-play he was ever known to be guilty of
in private life—passed the young lady over to her
lover, ejaculating the stereotyped phrase; “ Take her,
my hoy—God bless you! Be happy!”
Hereupon Maurice did take her, and the hugging
process was renewed more vigorously than ever.
Now the excitement attendant upon these extra-
ordinary proceedings had been so enthralling, that
neither of the three performers had given thought to
the one uninterested spectator, who stood looking on,
grinning, chuckling, and rubbing his hands, more
like a circus clown than a rational being.
115
LIKE A CISGTJS CLOWN.


CHAPTER XIII.
SETH’S ADVENTURES.—A SURPRISE .—CONCLUSION.
■ILLY was the first to bethink him of the
stranger : “ Young people,” said he, “let me
introduce to you die Golden Yankee.”
May trembled and turned pale—“ls it?”
said she.
Our old friend Seth, who looked rather the worse
for wear, grinned from ear to ear. “Yes, my lady,”
he said, “it’s what’s left o’ me.”
Then the young lady —whom the intelligent reader
will long ago have recognised as “ Totsy ’’—burst
into tears for almost the last time in this history, and
incontinently flung herself upon Seth, and bestowed
upon him a series of fierce little kisses, interspersed
with sobs, and inarticulate ejaculations of joy and
surprise.
Lieutenant-Commander Maurice Stanton, of the
U. S. sloop of war Pensacola, looked on, wondering,
and not altogether satisfied that such very demon-
strative proceedings were justifiable under the
circumstances. He was just debating whether it
became him, to enter a mild hut dignified protest,
when May turned, and taking him by the hand,
led him up to Seth:—“This is Maurice,” said she.
“Jest so,” said Seth, giving the young man an awful
grip—“ He looks righteous, he does. I’m main glad
to make your acquaintance, young feller. You don’t
need to be jealous o’ me—why, lor bless yer innocent
heart! Iknow’d little missy thur when she wnm’t
knee-high to a goose! Ah ! them was times, them
was! ”
116
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


Maurice stammered a few words of welcome, and
then turned his attention to his right hand, every
hone of which felt as if it were broken; but he
heroically concealed his pain, and May was too
absorbed in her old friend to notice his perturbation.
“ Well now,” said Billy—whom I trust the reader
will have identified as Billy Bowes of Spring Greek—■
“ let’s sit down and hear what Seth's got to say for
himself.”
‘‘Yes, yes,” said May, spreading out her skirts,
and making an enormous cheese, as she sat down
on a little mound formed by the roots of the tree.
“ You sit there,” she continued, addressing Seth, and
indicating with her finger a place exactly opposite —
“I’ve got to keep my eye on you, you know, or you
might run away again ’ ”
Seth burst out into a roar of laughter, and did as
he was bid, murmuring that it was jest like ole times
to he ordered about like that, aud Billy and Maurice
seated themselves also, the latter somewhat nearer
to May than was altogether necessary, but, under
the circumstances, his conduct may be considered
excusable.
“Why, my lady,” said Seth, still grinning, “you’re
growed awful! You reelly air—an’ I’m open ter back
my opeenyun—a most beautiful young woman I ”
“Now, sir,” said the delighted May—“no non-
sense ! No flummery! You’ve got to give a full, true,
and particular account of all your doings for the last
ten years. That’s what you’ve got to do—so don’t
waste any time in flummery! ”
“ Lor sates! ” cried Seth, bringing his hand down
with a most emphatic slap on his thigh, “ aint she a
wunner!—No, my lady—it aint no sort o’ flummery,
nohow. Jest arks the lewtenant ef you aint a most
beautiful young woman' I reckon he knows it better
nor a ole galoot like me! Ho! Ho! ”
117
A MOST BEAUTTFUI YOUNG WOMAN.


Maurice was about to make some remark, doubtless
corroborative of Seth’s assertion, but May stopped
him promptly, saying “Now don’t you hegmtoo!”
Then, turning to Seth, she once more commanded him
to commence Ms story.
“Now, my lady,” said Seth, “bein’ as I’m outer
wind, and a stranger so to say, don’t you think it ’ud
be a sight better e£ you was to tell your tale fust ? ”
“ Well,” said May, willing to humour Mm, “ You
tell Mm, uncle.”
“ IJuele ! ” roared Seth —“Ho! Ho! Ho! So
Billy’s yer uncle, is he, my lady —waal thef s good—
thet’s rael, rightdown, good! Oh, you sly ole bam-
foozler! I guess you didn’t want to do it up grand
wi’ yer beautiful niece ! Hay! ”
“Nothing of the sort, sir,” said May —“ When I
went on the stage Billy thought it would he better
for me to pass as his niece. And a good old uncle
he has been too,” she added, smiling fondly at the
stage-manager.
“Waal, my lady,” said Seth, gravely, “fm right
glad to hear that. Bur ef so be as he hadn’t been a
good uncle to yer, he’d’ve desarved —what you bet
yer life he’d a got from this chile, ole tren’s as we
was these fifteen year an’ more. But I know’d Billy
wur the true grit, or I’d never’ve trusted Mm with
yer, my lady, the time you was burnt out up to Spring
Crik.”
“That being all settled,” said Billy, “I’d better
get on, if we’re to get through before the boat goes.
I may as well begin at the beginning. The day after
the tire, I looked to see if I could find any papers or
letters wMeh would give a clue to May’s relations in
England: but every shred in the place was burnt,
and nobody knew anything about them; so I didn’t
have any difficulty in getting leave to adopt the child.
In a week or so, in accordance with onr arrangement,
118
THE GOIiDES' YANKEE.


I took May down to Melbourne, and paid for one
year’s schooling for her at a first-class school at
St. Hilda. I then went on to Ballarat, having first
of all written to let yon know where I was going.”
“I got thet letter in gaol,” said Seth, “hut I
didn’t keer to answer it, cos I didn’t want to let you
know ez how I wur in trouble.”
“In gaol ? ” asked May—“ What did you get into
gaol for ? ”
“Go slow, my lady,” answered Seth—“it’ll he
time enough to explain when it comes to my turn.”
“Well,” resumed Billy, “twelve months soon
passed, and then I wrote to ask you for more money ;
for I was flat broke myself, and I wanted to pay up
the schooling in advance. When I got no answer,
I began to get frightened, so I just concluded to take
an engagement at the Ballarat theatre.”
“Then you was an actor, after all?” asked Seth.
“The hoys alius marvelled how it kern, that now and
agin you’d talk like a book. May be you remember,”
he added, turning to May, “as how Billy’s langwidge
was mostly pooty ornery and slangish, hut when he
forgot hiaself he’d rap out a passel o' fine words as ’ud
make yer bar stan’ on end.” .
“Just so,” said Billy, laughing. “ I was an actor
till I went to the diggings, and somehow I thought
the hoys would he always chaffing me if they knew
it, so I triad to talk as much like they did as
possible, until it came quite natural to me. Well,
from Ballarat I went to Melbourne, and then on to
Sydney, where I stopped until I went to fetch May
from school a year ago. When she learnt that I
was an actor, nothing would do her but she must go
on the stage too—and here we are, you see, both
engaged at the Olympic Theatre.”
“But you mustn’t think we had forgotten you,”
said May. “ Uncle tried two or three times to find
119
ON THE STAGE.


out what had become of you, but nobody he asked
seemed to know.”
“Ah ! ” said Seth, “I was mighty keerful to hide
my track. I didn't want you to find out anythin’’
about me till things was settled, and then, blame me
ef I cud git onto your trail, nohow.”
“'Well, you’ve found ns at last,” said May—“so
now tell us what you’ve been about all this time.”
“Wa-al, I aint been arter no good, I aint. Fuat
thing, I gits collared by the perlice fur shootin’ thet
dnrned cuss, Con. When I kem into Court I ups
and tells the jedge everythin’. He allowed it was
rough on me, but said I’d offended agin the majersty
of the law, and I was boun’ ter suffer for it. So he
gin me twelve months, arter pitohin’ a morial yam
’bout the cussedness of rewenge an’ seoh. X thanked
him, quite perlite, fur the trouble he took, an’ tole
him I know’d as how it war not the straight game,
but when you was a-playin’ wi’ sharps it wasn’t your
biz to treat ’em like white folks. I was sgoin’ on in
the same style a little longer, but a long perliceman
ketches holt on my arm and yanks me outer the-
dock, so I conolooded British j edges likes to hev all
the talk to theirselves.”
“And they sent you to gaol for twelve months?’"'
asked May, pityingly.
“They did thet, my lady—an’ ef so be ez my
mortals aint corrupted, it aint no ways the fault
o’ the British constitooshun.”
“But you know you did very wrong to shoot at
that bad man,” said May.
“Did I, my lady ? W r a-al, I reckon may be you’re
not so fur out. Revolvers is onsartin, toe be sure—
now I guess thur’d a been a different iynarly ef I’d
gin thet cuss three, or may be four, inches o’ cold
steel. Tes,” continued Seth, gravely shaking his
head—“ thur aint nothin’ so sure as a good bowie.”
120
THE GOLDEN YANKEE.


“ Oh, you wicked creature! ” exclaimed May—
“ You know I didn't mean that. Ton ought never
to try to kill anybody at ah, any way.”
“Ton think gougin’ wur good enough for the likes-
o’ him?” asked Seth, earnestly.
“Go on with your story, sir!” said May—“lseo
you’re quite incorrigible.”
“No, my lady—don’t say thet,” said Seth, reproach-
folly— “Dont use them dickshunary words to a
ignorant old chap like me. Well I know I aint the
clean pertater, hut I dont think—l raelly dont think
—l’m’s had ez thet.”
“You stupid creature ! I only meant that it was
no use trying to make you good,” said May, checking
her inclination to laugh, for fear of hurting Seth's
feelings. “ Now go on with your story.”
“Waal," said Seth, brightening up, “ef so he
thet wur what you meant ier say, you wasn’t for out,
my lady. Many’s the time the gaol parson he’s
tackled me, and wrestled wi’ me in prayer, as ke
called it, but it wurn’t not a bit o’ good, an’ he seen,
it at last, and chucked up his hand.”
‘ ! Did what ? ” asked May.
“ Chucked up his hand—passed outer the game—
guv it best, so ter say. Waal, when I come outer
gaol, I goes back ter Spring Creek, which was called
Deechworth then, and I makes right straight for
Mr. Con’s store. He wur a-stannin at the door as
I kem up. ‘ Mornin’,’ says I—Geewhillikins! you
oughter seen thet critter jump! He jest turned
yaUer wi’ fright, and runs into Die har like thur was
a painter or a eattymonnt at his tail. When I walks
in, quite cool and comfortable, thur he was a-holdin’
a revolver, and shiverin’ like a nigger wi’ the ager.
I didn't make no bones at all about it, but I jest
goes for him. You bet yer life, thur was a shine!
The bar-keep, he runs out hollerin’ fur the perlice,


but the people as was drinkin’ seed it was a private
affair an’ moved off quiet, leavin me to settle wi’ Oon.
Td jest got Mm down aorost the counter, an’ wi
a-reaeMn’ fur a knife to skelp Mm, when a big fat
eook, what kem mshin’ in, fetches me a clip over the
head with a shovel, an’ over I rolls like a log. They
guv me two year for thet bout.”
“Good gracious!” exclaimed May, “Ton dont
mean to say you got into gaol the second time ? ”
“I meantersay I done another two year, cool and
quiet, in Pentridge Stockade ; ” said Seth. “When
the boss see me a-comin’ in, ‘ Hallo,’ sez he— ‘ you’re
hack soon 1 ’ —‘ I hopes you’ll parding the intrusion,’
sez I, a-pullin’ off of my hat. ‘ What hev you been
a doin’ of now?’ sez he —‘Bustin’ up a grocery,’
sez I.—Waal, he wasn’t a bad sort, an’ I hadn’t seek
a had time altergether. WMle I was in gaol I got
thinkin' over things, an’ I allowed nest time I’d go
to work calmer like, and fix the thing up fur good
an’ all.”
‘ 1 Why, you bloodthirsty creature! ” said May—
“ Hadn’t you done the poor man enough harm
already ? ”
“No, I hadn’t done the pore man enough harm
already; but I calkilated I’d be able to cry quits wi’
Mm next bout. When they let me out thet time,
and I went to Beechworth, the cuss was gone!
Skedaddled a year before, an’ left no trail aMnt him.
Waal, thet got ruther a-head o’ me, an’ fur awhile I
didn’t know what ter do. At last I tuk a notion to
go to ’Brisco, an’ see ef the money I left had been
claimed. Besides, I know’d Oon hadn’t anybody
belongin’ to him ez ’ud claim Ms sheer, even ef I
bed the luck to rub Mm out, an’ bein’ flat broke I
reckoned I’d take up the hull pile. So I worked my
way over, tendin’ fires, an’ had a pooty hot time of
it, you bet. When I got thar, I found thur was


thirty thousand dollars left, •which I collared right
away, an’ after a bit of a spree, I left ’Frisco and
hem over to Australy, intendin’ to hunt you up.
Waal, the very day arter I landed, who should I see
but thet ole skunk, Con —a-peddlin’ oranges in the
Theayter It oval westibule! He was flat broke, and
white-haired an’ mis’rahul. Will you b’lieve me,
I hadn’t the heart to tech the critter ! On’y I bought
six-penny’orth o’ oranges, and as I give him the
money—for the pesky ole fool didn’t know me —
1 tole him he’d got his deaarts, and thet we was quits
at last. He didn't seem to understand, so I give him
a fiver and let him rip. Then I went back ter Beech-
worth and Ballarat, and tried the gals’ aoadermy at
St. Hilda, but nary track of yer cud I find till I see
Billy hyur, ez I was a-settin’ fishin’ in the boat, I
found snthin’ else though, fiir one day as I was
a-readin ! of the Argis, 1 kem acrost a advertysement
fur Arthur Denzil alias Grant or his wife or child,
which I answered right off. The lawyer chap, what
put it in, tole me as how a Mr. Sfcnrgia bed died, and
left twelve thousand pounds to Arthur Denzil, with
revarshun, as he called it, to Ms wife and child. So
you see you’re a hairess, my lady.”
“ Poor old uncle Sturgis! ” said May, as her eyes
filled with tears, ! ‘ I remember him quite well. We
were going to England to look for him as soon as we
had saved enough money.”
“ Shall I be considered rude,” asked Maurice, who
had listened to these revelations with ever-increasing
wonder—“if I ask what is this young lady’s real
name ? ”
“ I suppose you don’t like the idea of having a wife
with a string of aliases, like one of those interesting
ladies who figure in the police returns,” said Billy,
while May looked curiously at her lover.


“Nonsense ! ” ejaculated the lieutenant, very em-
phatically—“ May knows I ! d marry her if she hadn’t
any name at all, for the matter of that.”
The fond smile with which the young lady
rewarded him was quite sufficient compensation for
Maurice, who further availed himself of the oppor-
tunity to seize her hand and retain it in his own,
after first of all submitting it to a mumbling oscilla-
tory process which seemed highly satisfactory to
both parties concerned.
“Waal,” drawled Seth—“ The young lady whose
hand yer a-chawin ! of—”
“Oh! you dreadful creature!” exclaimed. May,
snatching her hand away, and blushing furiously.
“An’ what I meantersay is, it’s a mossel ez I’d
like ter hev the chawin’ of myself,” said Seth, with
an outrageous grin, as his eyes literally danced with
delight.
“Ee quiet, sir! ” said May—“ Ton ought to know
better than to go on like this on such an important-
occasion. My real name,” she continued, turning
to Maurice, “is Mabel Denzil—my father took the
name of Grant when we went to the diggings, and
May JSusden is my stage name.”
“And since it is as well you should know all about
ns at once,” added Billy, “I may tell you my real
name is William Bowes: and the gentleman to whom
you have been introduced as the Golden Yankee is
otherwise known as Seth Hamet.”
“ What! ” exclaimed Maurice, jumping to his feet.
“Don’t be sheered,” drawled Seth—“l wont hurt
yer. Ez Billy sez, my name —which mehbe I oughter
to he ashamed of it, but I aint—is Seth Hamet.”
“Were you ever in partnership with George
Stanton, of St. John’s ? ” asked Maurice, excitedly.
“Wuss luck fur him,” said Seth, mournfully—


“ I wur. Poor ole Bluenose ! You mind Blue nose,
Billy?”
Por a minute Maurice stood, as if gasping for
breath, and then seized Seth’s hand and wrung it
violently, vainly trying to speak.
“&o slow, young feller!” exclaimed Seth—“l
never see such a affeekshnnit critter in all my hom
days! ”
“Ton dont know —you dont know! ” cried Maurice,
inarticulately.
“What is it, Maurice?” asked May, trembling
with expectation.
“He—he—” stammered the young man, as he
wiped Ms forehead—“he has been our guardian
angel! Oh, how my mother will bless this day! ”
“ TVho are yon then? ” asked Seth, in a smothered
tone.
11 Maurice Stanton—the son of your old mate, George
Stanton! ”
Seth did not speak, but covered Ms face with his
hands.
“To that man,” continued Maurice, excitedly, and
pointing to Seth—“l owe all that I have in the world.
It was Ms generosity that enabled my mother to live
in comfort, and bring her children up respectably.
We have vainly sought Mm for years, for Ms name
is revered in our home next to that of our father,
who died by Ms side.”
“Let up!” said Seth, hoarsely— “ thur aint no call
to talk seoh tamal nonsense. I loved your father,
young feller, and would hev died fur Mm, ez he did
fur me—ez he did fur me! ” he repeated, burying
his face in his hands.
“ Look up, old Mend,” said May, laying her hand
reverently on his shoulder, while the tears trickled
unchecked down her cheeks. “We have not now to


learn how deeply you have sorrowed for your old
partner. See! His son waits with me for you to
bless our union! ”
They knelt hand in hand before the rude man who
had been the good angel of their lives, and the last
rays of the setting sun lit up their faces with ruddy
light as they bowed their heads to receive the blessing
of the Golden Yankee.
THE END.


UNCLE GABRIEL’S
LEGACY;
OR,
WANTED A WIFE.




UNCLE GABRIEL’S LEGACY.
was Christmas week, and I had come to
town to enjoy myself. Six months’ seolu-
sion on the Billabong, with no more intel-
lectual companion than the Scotch overseer,
3|K a ' a gentleman devoted to Burns and whiskey,
i had created within me a capacity for
amusement which I now determined to test to its
utmost extent.
I arrived in Sydney on Christmas morning, and
passed the two succeeding days in the wild dissipation
of pie-nics at Olontarf and Balmoral, with a crowd of
people to whom I was an utter stranger. On the
next day, which happened to be a Tuesday, I betook
myself to the General Post Office, in the vague expec-
tation of receiving a letter from home. I was not
disappointed. There was one from my sister Emma,
dated some eight months previously, and decorated
with the fancy black border indicative of the decease
of a relative. Seeing the writing, I was not alarmed.
Emma was the only relative X had on earth for whom
I entertained the smallest affection, and she could
not he dead, or her handwriting would not have been
on the envelope.
I give the letter in its entirety, premising, however,
that we are by no means a letter-writing family; and
Emma and I, the only survivors of our branch,
entertain a more than usually strong dislike to
K


trouble of any kind. We are, in fact, lazy—but
that has nothing to do with this tale.
Centrebit Rectory, Anslesea,
2nd Jlay, IS—.
Mt Beak Johx —'We are sll very well, and glad to hear that
yon axe getting on. You -will be surprised to hear that Uncle
Gabriel is dead, and has left you all his money. Come home
at once. He left £90,000 in the three per cent, consols. lam
■wild with delight at your luck. Excuse my writing any more,
as the mail is just closing. With lore from my husband and
the children (baby is such a darling, and has your eyes—bless
him!)
X remain
Your affectionate sister,
Emma Hasottp.
P.S.—Uncle Gabriel made it a proviso that you should only
inherit on the condition that you were married by the time you
were twenty-five. There will be no difficulty about this, if
you make haste home, as I know just the girl to suit you.
This was pleasant news. Yes, very ! But, then,
why did I crush my hat down over my eyes and
anathemise to such an extent that the passers-by
stopped to wonder how such a lunatic came to be at
large? Sorrow for Uncle Gabriel? Nothing of the
sort. He and I had never met, and I was not such
a sentimental fool as to bewail the death of a
stranger who had left me a fortune.
The case was very simple. The letter had been
lying in the General Post Office for over five months,
and the very next day was my twenty-fifth birthday.
Now, there was a pretty kettle of fish! Had I but
possessed—what too many men regard as an en-
cumbrance—a wife, I should, on the morrow, have
taken possession of the very comfortable little sum of
£90,000 Three-per-cent Consols. As it was, I
jammed my hat down over my eyes and started off
down the street at the rate of about seven miles an
hour.
130
UNCLE GABRIEL’S LEGACY.'


Here was I —in Sydney—an utter stranger to every-
body, possessing not even such, a thing as a letter of
introduction to a living soul. Had the news arrived
whilst I was on the station, I could have found a
wife fast enough. There was the half-caste cook, a
woman of irreproachable conduct and unapproachable
ugliness. There was, too, Miss McCarroll—a young
lady of Scotch extraction—with sandy hair, curly
teeth, bony wrists, red elbows, and other charms of a
similar nature. Either of the two would have jumped
at such a chance. I, John Morton, was in myself a
sufficiently good catch for such extremely unmarket-
able goods, but John Morton plus £90,000, was—
well—come, now —do you, yourself, know any young
ladies who would be likely to turn up their noses at
such a chance ? If you do, you must have a more
extensive acquaintance than anyone I ever met.
But, as I before remarked, I knew absolutely
nobody, and my prospects of touching my uncle’s
legacy seemed to grow less and less as I contemplated
them.
As a means for solving a difficulty, I know nothing
to equal a pipe. Hard walking is all very well, but
hard walking, combined with hard smoking, will
reduce one to a frame of mind when mountains appear
to he mere mole-hills, and the insuperable easy of
accomplishment. I started right off and walked to
the South Head and back again, consuming by the
way, a fig of Barrett’s twist (genuine —not the
abomination we have been treated to since the
American war) and four pints of British beer.
By the time I had arrived at the South Head I had
decided upon a plan of operations : I would address
myself to some gentleman of known respectability
who had marriageable daughters, state my case, and
offer myself as his son-in-law.
All the way back to Sydney I thought over this
131
A WALK TO TEE SOUTH HEAD.


plan, and the more I thought of it the more I liked,
it. I calculated that if my wife turned out an
unprofitable speculation (from a matrimonial point of
■view), I could easily manage so to behave as to induce
her to consent to a judicial separation, when I should,
to all intents and purposes, be as free as ever.
When I said I walked all the way back to Sydney,
I deviated from the truth (polite for “lied”). I got
a lift from Rose Bay, and arrived in town just as the
lamps were being lit. Hastening to my hotel, I
procured a directory, and, bribing a waiter with half-
a-crown, extracted from him all the information he
possessed with regard to some half-dozen gentlemen
whom I had ticked off as “ likely.” I accounted for
my curiosity by the assumption of the character of a
teacher of the pianoforte in search of “advanced”
pupils.
I was so anxious to set about my work at once,
that I could scarcely wait to take my dinner, and
seven o’clock had just struck when I knocked at the
door of Mr. Boredon, of Stiffun and Boredon, soft
goods warehouse-men, the owner of two daughters of
the respective ages of twenty-five and eighteen.
Mr. Boredon was at home and would see me in a
few minutes, being at that moment at dinner. Would
I walk into the drawing-room and wait ?
Thus the servant maid, and I walked into the
drawing-room accordingly, and waited. Tea, hut not
for very long. Half-past seven struck, and I rang
the bell and, informing the servant I would call again,
retired. My time was too valuable to waste on
uncertainty. Sitting in that drawing-room I made
the calculation that I had nearly thirty-five hours to
get married in. Thirty-five into ninety thousand
pounds gives a result of £2371 Bs. 6|d and six-seventh’s
of a farthing per hour. This was the actual value of
132
USCLB GABETEI/S LEGACY.


my time, and when I found that Boredon had already
cost me nearly £I3OO I concluded to depart.
The next gentleman I tried was the Hon. B. Thick-
head, M.L.0.; previous occupation and history
undiscoverable. Present position—possessed of sundry
stations, a town house and six daughters, all “arrived
at the age of maturity ” as the celebrated Toodles
would have remarked.
He (Thickhead— not Toodles) was more accessible,
and I was at once shown into Ms presence. Motion-
ing me to a seat, he waived his hand pompously, and
inflating Ms chest after the manner of a public orator,
demanded “ Might he Mnquire the nature of my
bizness ? ”
TMckhead was a fair sample of the hloated-
aristoeratic-parvenu, tall, Mg, and burly, and alto-
gether wearing an unwashed appearence, as if he and
water had been at issue for many a long. year.
X answered mildly by hoping that he and his family
were in good health.
He thanked me, hnt hinted that snob an enquiry
could scarcely he the object of my visit at so late an
hour.
TMs plain way of bringing me to the point rather
worried me. You see it is not so easy to go to a
man, to whom you are an utter stranger, and demand
the hand of his daughter. It may he all very nice in
theory, but in practice it is, to say the least of it,
embarrassing. X hom’d and ha’d, and stammered
out that I had come on a family matter.
“Ha!” said he, grasping my arm, “I see. Lean
over—we must not he over-heard —yon come for
her ? ” and he pointed with Ms thumb over Ms left
shoulder.
All tins was very mysterious, hut of course I was
not going to hack out, even if he had guessed my
133
THE HON. B. THICKHEAD, M.L.C.


intention, so I L.esitatingly admitted that I had come
for her.
Thickhead sighed, "blew his nose, and murmured :
“My poor Jane!” (he called it “pore”). “My
darling daughter! I cannot bear to part with you.
But you—you will he kind to her ? ” and he once
more clutched me by the arm, with more energy than
seemed either necessary or agreeable.
Of course I promised to be kinduess itself to the
dear creature.
“ Remember,” said he, “ she has been keerfully
brought up. Don’t you go to harrer up her feelin’s
by a-lettin’ of her hassoeiate with no low women.”
“Good Heavens! ” though I, “is the man mad?
Do I look the sort of person to let my wife associate
with low women?” I had not made up my mind
how to answer him, when he resumed:
! 1 Have you brought a kerridge ? ”
No, I explained, I had not; and he told me he
would order his carriage to be got ready at once.
This precipitancy rather alarmed me, but I had seen
Hoskins in “ The 3?ast Train,” and I concluded that
Mr, Thickhead had been taking a leaf out of his hook.
While Thickhead gave some instructions about the
carriage to his servant, whom he had summoned for
the purpose, I performed a sort of mental Hallelujah
chorus over the success of my venture, and, when the
servant left the room, I enthusiastically seized the
Hon. Thickhead by the hand, and, shaking it
violently, poured out my gratitude with overpowering
eloquence.
“ Six,” said I, “ you have made me the happiest
man in Australia. Sir, yours is the honest heart of
a man knowing no guile, who, pure himself, hesitates
not to place his confidence in the purity of others.
Words fail me to tell you how I love and respect you ! ”
The face of Thickhead during this oration would


have been a rare study to an actor. Astonishment,
rage, and, at last, fear, passed over it in quick
succession. Extricating Ms hand aa well as he was
able, he stammered out:
“ How dare you ? What do you mean ? Are you
mad ? ”
I was abashed at this unexpected reception of my
pretty little speech, but was spared a reply by the
entrance of a servant, who asked whether Miss Jane
was to get ready at once ?
TMckhead hesitated, and then, turning to me,
asked me in a severe tone whether he might trust me.
I ecstatically replied that no man ever lived on
whom his confidence might he better bestowed than
myself.
He eyed me somewhat dubiously, but apparently
making up his mind to chance it, directed the servant
to see that Miss Jane was prepared at once.
“ Now, look here/’ said he, as soon as we were
once more alone, “ don’t you go to abuse my confi-
dence, ’cos if you do, blame me! but I’ll make it
warm for you.” X began again with reiterated
assurances of my trustworthiness, wMch he cut short
summarily.
“ Stow that,” said he, “ and make your pre-
parations. She’ll start with us easily enough, but
there’s no knowing when she may turn restive.
Have you got —it—with yon ? ”
Here was another mystery.
“It?” said I; “what?”
“ Don’t you know your business yet ? I mean the
—the waistcoat.”
I clasped my head in my hands, and sank down
into a chair. I was getting very much bewildered.
Just then, the door opened, and a young lady
entered, followed by a servant. Thickhead ran to
meet her, and caught her by the arm, asking if she


would like to go out for a drive. Before she had
time to answer, I came to my senses, and advancing,
made the usual pretty speech about hoping that the
devotion of a life, &e., &c.
Miss Jane, who was rather a pretty girl, though
somewhat pale, and dreamy-looking about the eyes,
turning to her father, asked :
“ Is this my betrothed ? ”
Thickhead replied in the affirmative, nodding his
head, and winking in a most extraordinary manner.
Then pinching my arm, till I could scarcely refrain
from yelling, he whispered to me to “go in on that
suit —hot.”
This I did, apparently to the satisfaction of the old
gentleman; and the carriage being announced, we
proceeded down stairs. A difficulty was created, by
the young lady objecting to my sitting inside, and,
as she declined to give way to her father’s wishes, I
took my seat by the coachman, old Thickhead pre-
viously whispering to me to he ready if he called.
I regret that I cannot afford space to a narration
of the thoughts that occupied my brain for the next
hour. Suffice it is to say that I was in a maze of
bewilderment, rendered even worse by the refusal of
the coachman to enter into any conversation with me,
he having received instructions to that effect from
the old gentleman.
We had driven some distance out of town when a
yell was heard inside, the carriage stopped, and I
jumped down—to find my intended wife raging in the
arms of her father, whose whiskers she was evidently
trying to tear up by the roots !
I naturally concluded that this style of thing would
not suit me at all, but a moment’s reflection showed
me I had no other choice, and that any wife was
better than no wife; I therefore approached the
window and mildly remonstrated with hex on the


extreme playfulness of her conduct. She deigned no-
reply, hut her father yelled out at me to “ clap it on,
her at once.”
Now, as the reader has by this time discerned, I
am by no means of a suspicious nature, but this-
extraordinary request raised in my mind some doubts-
as to the sanity of the speaker, and I refrained from
taking any notice of him, but contented myself with
again imploring my betrothed to abstain from such
extremely peculiar conduct.
This time she answered me. Loosing her hold of
the old gentleman, who fell back exhausted on the
seat, she made one bound to the carriage window,,
and transferred her friendly attentions to me. That
is to say, she seized me by the moustache with one
hand and by the left ear with the other, and*
dragging my head towards her, attempted to bite off
my nose!
It was not until my nose was between her jaws
that I realised the full extent of my danger. Tip tiU
then I had thought it might have been that she-
contemplated bestowing upon me an embrace, or
some such similar mark of affection ; but, as soon as
I was aware of what she really intended, I took
vigorous means to save myself. By a superhuman
effort I succeeded in extricating myself from her
clutches, though not before she had torn away a good
third of my moustache, and left a mark upon my ear
which I shall carry to my grave.
“ Thickhead 1 ” cried I, “ take your daughter Jane L
I cry off the bargain. I have had more than enough
of her already.”
“ What! yon dam rascal,” said he, “do you mean
to say you won’t take her ? ”
‘‘Not much,” said I, —“I’m not on it.”
You ought to have seen Thickhead when I made-
this last remark. He positively foamed at the mouth.
137
A DEAL TOO AFFECTIONATE.


“Oh, you dam rascal!” cried he, “Ton infernal
nigger-driving tobacco-chewing Yankee! You think
to play Buck tricks upon an Englishman! "Why,
bless my eyes and limbs, but I’ll sue you for breach
of contract, if I have to cany it to the Privy Council! ”
“Doit!” said I, snapping my fingers. “That!
for your Privy Council I No one can compel me to
marry a woman who assaults me in such a manner
before the law has given her a legal right to do it.
Pooh! Try an action for breach of promise, and I’ll
bet sixpence you don’t get a fathing damages.”
Thickhead was about to reply, and, from the
workings of his features whilst listening to my last
speech, I do not doubt he had prepared a most
withering denunciation, when the young lady again
diverted our attention. She had taken her repulse
quite calmly, and had sat down as if to recruit
herself. By this time, as running men say, she
had gained her second wind, and once more was I
compelled to witness a most outrageous attack upon
her miserable father.
He shrieked, and swore, and again entreated me to
“ clap it on at once.”
I asked; “ Clap what on ? ”
“ Why, the straight-waistcoat, you fool!” roared
he; “Don’t you see she’s in one of her paroxysms ?”
The scales fell from my eyes at last! I saw it all.
Thickhead had willingly consented to my marrying
his daughter, because she was mad 1
This accounted for his mysterious enquiries as to
whether I had “ it ” safe, &e.
In a perfect frenzy of rage at having been thus
played upon, I tore open the carriage door, plucked
my lady from her father, and literally flung her out
into the road; I then seized the alarmed Thickhead,


and dragged him out after me. Shaking him by the
collar till Ms teeth rattled, I demanded how he dared
attempt to marry me to a lunatic.
“ Oh, you misbegotten idiot,’ 5 said he, “ who ever
wanted you to marry her ? Weren’t you sent by Dr.
Snatchem to convey her to Ms private lunatic asylum?
Oh, I’ll tell your master, young man! Eely upon me
for that.”
The scales dropped from my eyes once more, and
this time effectually; I saw what a miserable fool I
had made of myself, and, in a humble tone, apologised
for my conduct, telling the true nature of my errand.
Did you ever listen to a hulloek-driver exhorting
his team to the extrication of a bogged waggon ? If
you did, you may have some slight conception of the
nature of the language addressed to me by the
outraged parent. Standing in the middle of the
road, he literally swore until he got purple in the
face and incapable of speaking. Then he picked up
his daughter, whose excitement had abated and left
her weak and helpless, placed her on her seat, got
into the carriage, and yelling out to the coachman
the single word “Home ! ” drove off.
I concluded I would go home, too; hut here a
slight difficulty arose—l did not know the way. The
place was perfectly lonely—not even a star was to be
seen; and, to add to my misery it began to rain.
Did I give way ? No; the very first drop of rain that
fell upon my upturned face roused the native obstinacy
within me, and I determined to carry through my
adventure, in spite of all the rain and darkness in the
universe. I lit my pipe and doggedly trudged after
the carriage, arranging in my mind a plan of
operations to he brought to hear upon Boredon,
whom I decided to re-visit that night, even if I bad
to knock him up out of his first sleep ; for, looking at


my cratch, I discovered that it tv as already nine
o’clock, and that consequently I had wasted another
considerable moiety of my fortune.
It is unless your telling me, that, not owning that
fortune, I could not waste it, and that even if I did
eventually own it, it would not be in the slightest
degree diminished by my loss of time. As I before
remarked, I am obstinate, and your view of the case
did not suggest itself to me until my fate was finally
decided. I walked into town under the firm
impression that I was poorer by some thousands than
I had been that morning.
I reached Boredon’s house as the clock struck
eleven, and, without hesitation, rang the bell. After
a somewhat lengthy delay the door was opened and
a footman appeared. No sooner did he set his eyes
on me than he let out a fearful scream, and yelled at
the top of his voice :
“ Here is he! Master!! Police!!! Police!!!!”
Down the stairs, out of the doors in the hall, out
from the passage leading to the back premises—
poured a host of human beings. I had no time to
count them, but I calculated that there were at least
six old ladies in frilled night-caps, three young ladies
with their hair in curl-papers, seventeen old gentle-
men with bald heads and very scanty clothing, and a
hundred or so females attired in every variety of
costume appertaining to servant-galism. They all
made at me at once, and, before I could utter a word,
I was down on my back on the door-mat, with the
knee of that cursed footman planted upon my
chest, and eight or ten other wretches engaged in
pommelling me.
The women yelled, the men swore, and I screamed
to the best of my ability, and in the midst of the
uproar in marched a policeman.


“Now—hwhat’s the matter?” asked the new-
comer, whose accent betrayed him to be a foreigner,
“ Hwhat d’ye mane by this hullabaloo ?”
Boredon answered, that I, John Morton, was a
thief! Yes, he had the infernal effrontery to give
me in charge for having stolen a silver paper-knife
from off his drawing-room table I
By this time I was on my legs again; but tihe
battering I had received had so confused me that I
was incapable of giving any coherent account of
myself, or my object in calling at the house.
Said the policeman : “ Young man, ye’re dhrunk.
I arrist ye for robbery in a dwelling, aggravated, by
intoxication. Oome along wid yez!” and clapping a
pair of handcuffs on my wrists, he pushed me before
him into the street.
As the door closed on ns, I caught a last glimpse
of Boredon, standing in the middle of the hall with
some eight or ten dishevelled females clinging to him.
Suffering as I was, I still thought of Niobe and her
daughters, and registered a vow, that, if ever I had
the means, I would have the group sculptured.
That vow I have fulfilled, and a marble group of
figures, about four feet in height, is still standing in
my smoking room at but I must not anticipate.
Occasionally, when out of temper, I resort to the
smoking room, and there sit and curse that Boredon
till my rage has evaporated.
After this digression, I may as well tell you that I
was ignominiously marched through the streets to
the lock-up, and there thrust into a cell, after having
been previously entered on the charge-sheet as drunk
and disorderly, &c.
I passed a pleasant night. Every hone in my
body was sore, and my head ached as if it was going
to split. The companionship of some uproarious
drunkards in the adjoining cells, who made night


hideous hy their bowlings, did not in any way
conduce to render my detention more endurable.
In the morning, I was brought before the
magistrate at the Water Police Court, and charged
in the first instance with stealing a paper-knife.
Boredon was the first witness for the prosecution,
and his name was called. He did not appear for
some little time, and when he did, instead of taking
his stand in the witness-box, he went over to the
Inspector of Police, who was conducting the prosecu-
tion, and a whispered conversation took place between
them, at the close of which the Inspector rose, and,
addressing the Court, stated that the charge of
robbery must be withdrawn, as the paper-knife had
since been found. Although, of course, aware of my
own innocence, I was intensely relieved at this
intimation, as I was not at all certain that the Court
would believe the truth of my story of the motives
which led to my visit to Boredom
My satisfaction was not of long duration; for, by
the desire of the Inspector of Police, Boredon got up
iuto the witness-box and unblushingly swore that I
went to his house on the previous evening in an
advanced state of intoxication, and violently assaulted
both, himself and his footman!
In answer to my cross-examination he made
matters worse, by adding that I used language of the
most improper nature, and that, too, in the presence
of his -ivife and daughter, and several respectable
females engaged in his service. This last accusation
finished me off, and I ruined my cause by openly
telling the old brute that he was a liar.
After this it needed not the evidence of the police-
man to satisfy the Bench that I had most grossly
misbehaved myself, and the chairman, in freezing'
tones, sentenced me to pay a fine of 40s. with 60s.
damages, (alleged tearing of the footman’s coat) or


in default ten days imprisonment; winding up a fair
sample of magisterial eloquence by warning me that
I might consider myself lucky in escaping the more
serious charge of robbery; with intent to commit
which he and his brother magistrates were satisfied I
was guilty.
This was adding insult to injury, but I bore it
meekly, consoling myself by the reflection that ere-
long I might be in a position to make these gentlemen
regret their injustice.
I paid the fine, and left the Court with a stain upon
my character. As I made my way out, I noticed
that the Inspector whispered some instructions to a
long-nosed individual in plain clothes, who I had no
doubt was a detective, and who perseveringly dogged
my footsteps for the next twenty-four hours.
Returning to my lodgings, my first proceeding was
to take stock of the injury I had suffered, when X
discovered that I had a most nnmistakeable black
eye, together with numberless bruises and contusions;
and that my clothes were utterly ruined, being tom
to such an extent as to defy mending. I lost no time
in dressing myself in the only other suit I possessed,
and sallied forth to visit a hairdresser, with the
intention of getting my eye painted. My friend, the
detective, was planted outside, negligently leaning
against a lamp-post and trying to look as if be had
nothing in the world to do but loaf. I was not
deceived, however; and determined to give him some
work to do, as soon as I was in a position to walk the
streets without attracting too great a share of public
attention.
X got my eye painted—where, I shall not say, as I
am not going to advertise any hairdresser for nothing
—and then began a little game with the detective
which lasted me throughout the day, and famished
me with the only real amusement I had had that
143
DOGGED BT A DETECTIVE.


Christmas. Assuming a cautious, suspicious appear-
ance, glancing at intervals over my shoulder, and
starting every now and then as if under some lively
apprehension ox danger, I flatter myself I succeeded
in impressing that detective with the idea that I was
as arrant a jail-bird as he had ever come across in his
life. I walked the streets till night, choosing all the
back-slums and bye-ways I could find, and wherever
I went that unfortunate police-officer followed.
I was so interested in my amusement, that I com-
pletely lost sight of the grand object which had
caused the previous night’s mishaps; and gave no
more thought to my uncle Gabriel’s legacy than if I
had never received my sister’s letter. An occasional
glimpse at my follower showed me that he had
entered into the pursuit with all the ardour of the
detective nature. He walked along with the steady
pertinacity of the sleuth-hound scenting his prey and
waiting for a favourable opportunity to grab it.
At last, just as the street lamps were being lighted, I
remembered the legacy, and a pang shot through me
as I thought of the valuable time I had wasted. It
was now my birthday; and here was lin a worse
position than ever, as it was evident the detective
would not fail to warn the master of any house I
might decide to enter against admitting a thief to his
premises. I cursed my unlucky stars, and started off
with extra speed to my lodgings.
On the way, my attention was, for a moment,
attracted by the hills outside the Prince of "Wales
Opera House, which contained a glowing description
of the pantomime then in course of performance.
Suddenly I started, and could scarcely refrain from
hurrahing right out, for I saw, heading the bill, the
name of William H—k—s. This gentleman, whose
talent as an actor has gained him tolerably wide fame,
was under a debt of gratitude to me for a slight
144
UNCLE GABBIEL’S UEGAOV,


service I had. rendered Mm in Melbourne a year
previously, and I reflected that it 'would be in his
power to help me out of my dilemma, by recommend-
ing me to some gentleman, amongst his necessarily
numerous acquaintance, who might be induced to
believe in the truth of my tale, and give me a
daughter to wife.
On calm reflection, this supposition strikes me to
have been as absurd as was the rest of my conduct in
those days ; hut then I was acting under such excite-
ment that my reasoning faculties lay dormant, and
the wildest schemes struck me as practicable.
I went home, dined, and repaired to the theatre.
Making my way to the stage door I sent up my name
to Mr. H—k—s and received in reply an invitation
to walk up to Ms dressing-room. Under the gMdanee
of a gentleman attired in a close-fitting sMt of black
glazed cloth, after the approved fasMon of stage
demons, I was marshalled through sundry narrow
and dark passages, until the door opened, and I
found myself in the presence of my old friend.
A cordial greeting showed that he had by no means
forgotten me, or the service I had rendered Mm, and
I did not hesitate to request Ms attention for a few
minutes while I confided my difficulty to Mm. Not-
withstanding the great demand upon Ms time, he
listened patiently whilst I placed Mm in possession of
all I had done and suffered during the previous
twenty-four hours. He was much amused at tbe
narration of my adventures with Boredon and
TMokhead; hut Ms sympathy was aroused by my
account of the gross ill-treatment I had received, and
he indulged in a few observations with to
the stupidity of the administrators of justice, wMch
oould scarcely have proved satisfactory to those
gentry had they overheard Mm.
“ And now, my dear fellow,” said I, “I want you
L
145
M BY A STAGE DEMON.


to help me. You see, that cursed detective will not
fail to interfere to spoil any little attempt I may make
on my own account. I make no doubt he is at this
moment warning your door-keeper against me ” (as
was really the case). “Will you —can you —help me
to get married before midnight? Happily for me,
the law here requires no previous preparation or
unnecessary delay, and I don’t think I should have
any difficulty in finding a parson to buckle me up, if
I could but find the girl.”
H—k—s knitted his brow and considered for some
moments, during which I endured extreme tortures
of suspense, being satisfied that he alone could see
me out of the difficulty, and that this was my last
chance of obtaining my uncle’s legacy.
“By thunder !” said he, at last, “I can’t help you.
I wish I may be smashed up into eternal pieces by a
fire-engine, if I can remember a single girl of position
who would be likely to have you. You see, old boy,
I believe your yarn, but I don’t see my way to make
others believe it. Half the men I know would think
I was playing a practical joke on them if I suggested
you as an eligible son-in-law. But, stop—an idea
strikes me—suppose you take a look around among
our girls—perhaps you might be contented with one
of them. There are many in the theatre as pure as
any lady in the land, notwithstanding the temptation'
they are exposed to. In the meanwhile I’ll attend
to your friend the detective, and go bail for your
honesty.”
I did not quite like the idea, but still I saw no
other way out of the difficulty, so I thanked my friend
and said 1 would, look around among the girls. I
was very ignorant of all matters appertaining to the
stage : and am sorry to say I shared the too common,
though wickedly erroneous, belief that chastity and a
life on the stage are incompatible. lam writing the


history of a curious adventure in my life and not an
essay, or I could enlarge upon the theme, and point
out the gross injustice dealt out to people behind the
scenes by people before them. But as the nigger
orator says, “ let us return to our subject.”
Mr. H —k—s placed me in charge of the prompter;
a gentlemanly young man, who has since achieved a
position on the colonial stage, and I was taken, for
the first .time in my life, behind the scenes, and
initiated into some of the mysteries of that, to me,
unknown world. The curtain had not yet risen, and
the half-light that prevailed prevented me from form-
ing any opinion as to the beauty of the numerous
female faces I saw around me. All was hurry, con-
fusion, and noise. The people in front, too, were
getting impatient, and every now and then a shrill
whistle from the gallery betrayed that the “gods”
were mustering in force, and disinclined to pass the
interval before the curtain arose, in silence. At last
just as I thought in my ignorance that there was
going to he a riot among these gentry, the prompter
rang a small bell and the baud commenced the
overture.
When the curtain rose, I glanced eagerly and
searchingly at each female performer, seeking to
discover in her traits which might justify me in
making her my wife. I was standing in the prompt
entrance, and had a very good view of all that was
going on in the front half of the stage; though I
could only catch an occasional glimpse of the ballet
girls, their position being generally what is termed,
‘ up stage.’
I saw many pretty faces, but did not feel specially
attracted towards any of them, and so I told Mr.
H—k —’S, when he came to me for a moment to ask
how I was getting on.
“Take a walk all round,” said he, “there are


plenty to choose from, and you can’t see half the
girls from here.”
I followed his advice, and pushed my way round,
until J found myself behind the flats, which formed
the back-ground of the scene, where I came suddenly
on a group of girls, dressed in ballet costume, who
seemed engaged in lively argument. A somewhat
tall young lady, with handsome features and a very
liberal display of bust, was the first whose voice
caught my ear.
“Did the poor little dear object to show its pretty
legs?” said she, mockingly—“ Was it so dreadful
modest that it couldn’t stand being looked at! Bah! ”
she continued fiercely, “Xoufool! Don’t you he
trying on your moot modesty here! —” and she
flounced round as if she felt it difficult to restrain
herself from striking the object of her animadversion.
This last was a delicate-looking young girl, in
whose face a look of blended shame and anger
showed how bitterly she felt the taunts of her
companions.
I was interested, and approached nearer, hut my
foot-fall seemed to scare them all away, and I walked
slowly bank to the prompt entrance, determined to
make enquiry as to the young girl, whose modesty
pointed her out as a new addition to the corps de ballet.
It was some time before I got an opportunity of
speaking to Mr. H —k —s, and when I did, the
young lady in question was in the act of descending
from the flies, supported only by a few wires, whose
strength, in my inexperienced eyes, by no means
warranted such a burden. Pointing her out, I asked
if Mr. H—k—s could tell me anything about her,
stating that, from all I could see, I thought she
would suit me as well as any other.
“Ah,” said he, “not a bad choice. That’s Mary
Jones I think—though I don’t know all their names


yet. She joined us about a fortnight ago and this is
only her third appearance. Well, I know nothing
of her, except that she is pretty and modest, and
apparently very poor. But I’ll introduce you to her
and leave you to fight your own battle.”
As soon as the scene changed I was formally
presented to Miss Jones, and did my best to make as
favorable an impression as possible. Surrounded as
we were by a crowd of actors, supernumeraries,
ballet girls, stage carpenters, &c., &c,, it was
impossible for me to address to her more than the
merest common-place remarks, and I regretted to
observe that her answers were all made as short and
cold as possible, and that she took no pains to conceal
her determination not to encourage me in any way.
It was evident the poor girl regarded me in the light
of one of those tempters, to whose attentions her
present position laid her open. I would have given
something to undeceive her, but the close proximity
of so many other people rendered this impossible ;
and I was obliged to make what way I could, and
keep my conversation within strictly orthodox limits.
It was plain that the other young ladies regarded me
as a miserable spoon, for they shrugged their
shoulders as they glanced at us, and whispered
disparaging comments in sufficiently loud tones for
both my companion and myself to overhear.
Altogether, when Miss Jones left me to go on
again, I felt that the interview had not been a
success; but the little I had seen of her had
determined me to risk my luck on this last venture,
and stand or fall by her decision.
I do not believe in love at first sight, but I do
believe iu a strong interest so arising, which needs
but opportunity to ripen into love. Such an interest
I felt for Mary Jones; and, even then, I had no
doubt but that I could, and should, fall in love with
her eventually.


As the transformation scene came to an end, I left
the theatre and took up my station at the entrance of
the lane leading to the stage door; having previously
ascertained that Miss Jones was not engaged in the
comic business, and that, in all probability, she would
be leaving for home as soon as she had changed her
dress.
Standing just outside the bar of the puhlie-honse
at the corner, were three or four young men of the
genus swell, who seemed to have drunk quite as much
as was good for them, and were making as much noise
as if the place belonged to them. They were soon
joined by some flashily-dressed women, and the little
coterie then commenced chaffing and insulting every
person who came within their range of fire.
I was so much occupied in watching them that I
did not notice a little figure which advanced timidly
under the archway. It was Miss Jones on her way
home, carrying a bundle which contained the dress
she had worn that night in the burlesque. As she
was coming up the entry, one or two of the women
made some sneering remarks about her mock
modesty; and, just as I turned to see who they were
alluding to, a young swell, clad in the very extreme
of the fashion, dashed out from amidst Ms fellows
and offered his arm to her, with a suggestive remark
about “ seeing her home.”
She gave a little cry and drew herself up proudly,
desiring him to let her pass. The insolent boor
laughed jeeringly, and attempted to put his arm
around her waist, but in the act fell very suddenly
on to the pavement, impelled thereto by a blow
straight from the shoulder, which caught bim some-
where about the ear and effectually put a stop to Ms
gambols for the night. As the reader has no doubt
divined, it was my fist which floored the gentle
youth; and never in my life did I derive greater
pleasure from the exertion of my strength.


As soon as the rest of the eminently respectable
crowd of roysterers beheld the fate which had
befallen their companion, they made a simultaneous
rush at me and Miss Jones —which young lady had
of her own accord seized my arm, and was thanking
me, with tears in her eyes, for the aid I had afforded
her.
Fortunately, Mr. H—k—s and two or three of the
actors came up at this juncture, and I did not stay to
see the result of their interference, but hurried off
with my companion as quickly as I could.
On the way to her home, I elicited from her the
story of her Hfe. It was a sad one. She was the
only child of a newspaper reporter, whose evil star had
led him, on the death of his wife, to seek his fortune
in Australia. He had been unable to procure
employment, and was now dangerously ill in a poor
lodging-house in Wooloomooloo, It was not, my
companion informed me, until they were at the last
extremity, that her father would consent to her
joining the ballet at the theatre. She had tried in
vain to procure a situation as nursery-governess or
companion; and, being unacquainted with the
working of sewing machines, she was unable to get
her bread as a seamstress.
All this the little maiden told me as we walked
towards her home, naively adding that she was so
glad she had me with her, as the loneliness of the
walk, and her natural exposure to insult from any
fast young men who might chance to meet her,
formed the principal terror of her present em-
ployment,
I said not one word on my own account ; hut as
soon as we had arrived, I asked her to admit me to
an interview with her father, stating that it was hut
right that he should have an opportunity of hearing
my version of the night’s adventure.


“ And of thanking you for the share you took in
it,” said she, with a smile. “ Well, come in. Our
home is poor enough, hut ■we have done with shame
on that score.”
I found her father to he a gentlemanly man, a
little past middle age, and wearing on Ms face the
trace of many a hitter struggle with poverty and
disease.
Having heard of my rescue of Ms daughter, he
warmly thanked me, and expressed his deep regret
that their dire necessity compelled him to permit her
to pursue an occupation through wMch she must
necessarily be, to some extent, exposed to such insults.
At tMs, I saw my opportunity, and, in as few words
as possible, told Mm my story; winding-up hy
making a formal proposal for Ms daughter’s hand,
and requesting his consent to our immediate union.
The utter amazement of both father and daughter
at the story and request may be better imagined than
described, hut I was happy to see that no shadow of
doubt crossed either of their faces, and that my
proposal was at least to he considered, if not
accepted. The young lady blushed too, and I Justly
regarded this as a favourable sign.
I will spare the reader the lengthy argument
which ensued; suffice it to say that 1 put the affair
in such a light to the old gentleman, that he was
reluctantly compelled to admit that it was a chance
Ms daughter ought not to throw away, if she could
hut force herself to do violence to her native modesty
and consent to an immediate union with a stranger.
Miss Mary blushed, hesitated, stammered, and
finally hurst into tears and fled the room. It was
then agreed that I should at once go in search of Mr.
H—k—s, and that if I could succeed in inducing him
to come hack with me and pledge Ms word for my
good faith, I might regard the matter as settled.




ELVY & CO.’S
PIAWOFOETB GALLERY,
ORGAN SHOW-ROOMS,
AND
MUSIC WAREHOUSE,
321 GEORGE STREET.
ELVY & CO. invite attention from INTENDING PUR-
CHASERS to their recently received
BEAUTIFUL PIANOFORTES
by those reliable and high-class makers, so well-known in the
stock of ELVY & CO.
ELVY & GO. are shewing the perfection of
SEMI-GRAND PIANOS,
in Walnut and Rosewood,
while the specially-modelled
COTTAGE PIANOS
are of a quality in tone to excite the highest admiration.
ELVY & CO.’S reliable importations are peculiarly adapted
for the country, as they combine PORTABILITY with all
necessary strength.
ELVY & CO. have an INSTALMENT SYSTEM of an
equitable character; it has been largely used since the
establishment of the business, and E. & Co. adapt it to the
convenience of those who desire to make periodical payments.
ELVY & CO.’S Latest Models of the MASON & HAMLIN
OR&AN are worthy of special notice for a great facility for
beautiful COMBINATION and EXPRESSION of
TONES, and for elegance of design.
ELVY & CO.’S SELECTED STOCK OF MUSIC
of all kinds, for Voice or Piano, is at
HALF-PRICE—HALF-PRICE.
ELVY & CO.


MANLY BEACH.
THIS fashionable 'Watering Place possesses peculiar natural
advantages to recommend it to the public, and intending
visitors trill be glad to leant that Art has been called in to com-
plete what Nature has begun, so that even- modem requisite and
luxury is obtainable as easily as in the Metropolis itself.
Visitors will find the accommodation afforded by the
PIER HOTEL
is of the first quality, and at a moderate scale of charges.
THE BILLIARD-ROOM
Contains an admirable table and appointments in keeping.
THE LIQUORS
Dispensed at this Establishment are all of the best brands pro-
curable, it being the aim of the Proprietor to content himself with
SMALL PROFITS AND QUICK RETURNS.
Til PEE¥ATI imETSIITB
Are well furnished, and families can enjoy every comfort of a
home, combined with a privacy rarely obtainable at an hotel.
G. F. BARNETT, the Proprietor of the PIER HOTEL
respectfully invites visitors to Sydney to make trial of the truth of
these allegations.


cP
k VINEYARD gpy.
osA'
JOHN. WILKINSON,
°Af
■o>
PBOPEIETOE. -m
// 7" SUSSEX-ST.,
Communications to he addressed to Depot,
117 SUSSEX STREET.


MOULTON’S
WILL CURE
in One Minute
„ Five „
3 3 3 3
~ Twenty,,
~ Five ~
~ Twelve Hours
~ Ten Minutes
Toothache and Earache
Headache
ITeuralgia
Sore Throat and Sprains
Cramp and Colic Pains
Diptheria
Pain in Back and Sides
Diarrh.ee, Cholera and Cholera Morbus in One Day
Bad Colds and Coughs .. ~ in One Day
■Rheumatism .. in from One to Eight Days
Bronchial Affections, Piles, Catarrh, Contracted
Cords and Muscles, Inflammation of Kidneys,
Dyspepsia, Congestive Chills, Group, Stiff and
Enlarged Joints, and all other diseases of a
Nervous or Inflammatory Nature.
A GEETAII CUES for GHOLEM
And. all Summer Diseases -
THIS WONDERFUL PREPARATION
Acts directly upon the nervous system and allays pain instantly, by virtue
of its sedative properties. It is also s po.>erfui dllfusire stimulant, very
penetrating in its nature, and when applied to any part of the system
affected with, pain or swelling, it finds its way at once to the seat of the
disease, and assists nature to remove the cause. It restores the equilibrium
of the tluids of the system by regulating the secretions and excretions, an
obstruction of which is the immediate cause of all pain. Incredible as it
may seem that one medicine should be adapted to the treatment of such a
variety of complaints, it is nevertheless a fact that, practice and experience
have proved to be true what theory would seem to deny; for in hundreds
of cases where this preparation has been used, it has saved life, after
science and shill bad been completely baffled, all hope abandoned, and the
patient’s life despaired of. It is safe and sure, does its work quickly and
effectually, is the most reliable remedy in use for all painful affections, and
just the article needed in every family.
Wherever this 3kd>cin e is freely andfaithfully applied, it is im
possible for Fain to continue to exist for any considerable time.
SOLD BY ALL CHEMISTS AND PATENT MEDICINE DEALERS.


COLONIAL OINTMENT
(Protected by Act of Pasxiament)
The result of the Inventor’s 52 years’ Medical and Chemical
experience in the Colonies,
Is the Best and Cheapest Family Eemedy (for outward appli-
cation) ever offered to the Australian Public.
No louse is the Cote ihoild k without a Stilling Fol of it,
Many a Doctor’s Bill, and much suffering, would be avoided by
a timely application of this invaluable, tried, and proved
Healing Agent to Bums, Scalds, Sores, Eruptions, Chilblains,
Boils, Tumours, Abscesses, Itch, Mumps, Pains in the Chest,
Joints or Limbs, &c.
HENRY’S OINTMENT was the first and is the only article of
the kind invented, prepared and offered to the Colonial Public
by an Australian Chemist— ln Lid Pots at Is. each.
HENRY’S AUSTRALIAN WORM POWDERS,
A never-failing Eemedy for ’Worms in Children and Adults.
Eeeounnended by the Faculty, Patronised by the Public, and
approved of by all.
Price, 6cl. each; or in packets of 3 Poivders,
for any age. Is. per packet.
HENRY’S VEGETABLE (TASTELESS)
ANTIBILIOUS PILLS,
Which are the best articles of the kind to be found in the
Australian Colonies, and are the result of the Inventor’s 32
years’ Medical and Chemical experience in the Colony.
Sold by all Chemists, Storekeepers, and Wholesale Houses; also
by the Inventor and Proprietor,
J. HE2TBY, Chemist,
m°754: GEORGE STREET SOUTH,
Fourth door from Commercial Bank Comer,
HAYMARKET, SYDNEY.


TEKFZJB COUET OELLAES,
’ KING STREET, SYDNEY.
G. H. STEPHEN & Co,
Wiae &o.
“IVANHOE” PRIZE WINES.
"WINES specially selected from the
ALBURY, HUNTER, WILLIAMS, & PATERSON
DISTRICTS.
WINES IN BULK,
From 2 to 10,000 Gallons.
WINES IN BOTTLE,
i years old, from 12s, per dozen,
Delivered Free of Charge in City and Suburbs.
Imported Ales and Porters, &c.


THE ONLY HOUSE IN SYDNEY
FOR
Genuine Singer Sewing Machines.
CK J. WELLS, (late Stanford & Go.)
Sole Agent fo? ill iisiiis Sisge?'i tu\m
REDUCED CASH PRICE, JG'T'-IS -O.
The dearest proof that these are Tlis Best ever offered the Public
is contained in Che fact that the Sales for the Last Tear amounted to
249.852, being double the Sales of any Competitor.
Singer’s Manufacturing Go., New York.
Singer’s Sawing Machines have universally received at the various
Exhibitions la Europe and America recognitions of Their Excellence
sad Superiority. Upwards of 120 First-Class Medals and other
Awards hare been given this Machine for the Excellence of their
Manufacture and Strength and Beauty of Work done. TEE OLD
TRIED and GENUINE FRIEND whose name unsuccessful Vendors
make a call-bird of to mislead the unwary by false notices.
Beware of Imitation.
Our TIME PAYMENT is on the Most Liberal Terms to meet the
demands of the Public. Parties make their own arrangements at from
2s 6d. per week, and 10s. deposit.
NOTE THE ADDRESS G.J. WELLS [Late Stanford* Co.)
No. 1 HUNTER-ST, North, Sydney (not in George Street).
Established 1560.


Tho First House in Sydney for Pianofortes.
NICHOLSON S ffISFMG
MUSIC PUBLISHERS,
MAHHPA(rnm.KKIi,
(FACTUUY AD IHU'iSUEN)
IMPORTERS OF PIANOFORTES,
Cabinet Organs, Harmoniums, Harps,
Ami (jvtiry'dcMcrijitiiiuof Musical Inrtrumout ami
MUSKO,
Invitu attoution'of iutuudmg jmwhaauwi to immooi the nw
iuul liciuitiiul Htouk nt Instrument* now. unpnokinK in tl»i;r
nmv Humic Wimdum»u ,
317 GEORGE STREET,
iijA't'b .1. a, cljAukh's.)
PIANOFORTES and CABINET ORGANS
At vary Lowest ITioo for Ciuth, or <m tho
VMMUBm-JPA ‘XMKSNT SV&VKJtg,
Applicable to ovoty oltiaa of iuntmmout from tho PifwttßlA
lo tiw Concert Grand.
Instalments from 255. Monthly.
s
HiCSOLSON & ASCB3BRBSRGK
317 GEORGE STREET.
4d * 17 COLLINS STRUCT, MKLBOUUNK.
