

r7OS$
MINISTRY OF THE GOSPEL,
IN THE DISTRICTS OF
MURRURUNDI AND SCONE,
BY THE
KEY. A. BLACK,
OF THE
SYNOD OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
DURING A PERIOD OF THREE YEARS
FROM MARCH, 1851 TO 1854.
■WITH AN ABSTRACT OP THE
TREASURER’S ACCOUNT,
SHOWING THE AMOUNT OP FREE CONTRIBUTIONS ACCORDED TO THE
SUPPORT OF THE INTERESTS OF RELIGION BY THE CHRISTIAN
PEOPLE OF THESE DISTRICTS.
SYDNEY:
PRINTER I!7 READING AND WELT,BANK,
BRIDGE STREET.




H 5*55 j f 70S
REPOR T.
On the application of Mr. Brodie and others,
on behalf of some Christian people in the district
of Murrurundi, for a Minister of the Gospel, the
Rev. A. Black was recommended by the Synod
of New South Wales, and settled at Murrurundi
in March, 1851. He was then the only resident
Minister in the place.
The occasional visits of Ministers of different
denominations afforded the only opportunities the
inhabitants had of observing the appointed public
worship of God. The Lord’s Day was more
frequently a blank than occupied with the en-
gagements proper to the Christian Sabbath. This
state of comparative religious destitution was
much felt and deplored by those who had been
accustomed, in the Mother Country, to enjoy all
the blessings of Christian ordinances. Removed
from their salutary influences, they found Reli-
gion to languish in the spiritual wastes. But the
evils resulting to such persons from this state of
matters were, perhaps, less dangerous to their own


spiritual state and prospects than to those of their
children and such members of the community as
never had had any opportunity of enjoying, or
even knowing, the benefits of a preached Gospel.
The inhabitants of these thinly-peopled districts
were chiefly from different parts of Great Britain
and Ireland. The denomination for which this
Ministry was more particularly designed was that
of the Presbyterian: the application for minis-
terial service had been made principally on their
part, and on them the duty of maintaining it
principally devolved. Yet it never was contem-
plated or desired to confine the Ministry to that
or any other denomination exclusively. The cha-
racter of the service was to be wholly unsectarian,
being more of an Evangelism than intended for
the propagation of the tenets of a party. All who
would might avail themselves of it, and its basis
was sufficiently broad to permit of their doing so ;
thus endeavouring to afford the blessings of our
common Christianity without desiring to enforce
the peculiarities of any Sect, or, on the other
hand, to deny whatever importance might attach
to a conscientious and scrupulous attention to
them, knowing that “ in Christ Jesus neither cir-
cumcision nor uncircumcision availeth anything,
but a new creature. And as many as walk ac-
cording to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God.” Gal. vi. 15, 16.
The catholicity of the spirit of Christianity, the


circumstances of the people, and the maintaining
of the cause, appeared alike favourable to project-
ing the work upon a broad Christian basis. To
meet the general spiritual necessities of -the com-
munity, Evangelism, rather than the Churchism
of any sect, was sought, as the great object and
the proper preparation for the formation of a
Christian Church. The time when such an event
would transpire depended on the blessing of God
on the means of grace employed. The Gospel
has for three years been proclaimed, and, however
feebly, we trust faithfully. The grand design has
been to make known the riches of God’s grace,
as unfolded in the Gospel of His Son, not simply
in the letter, but in the power and demonstration
of the Spirit. It has ever been an object of soli-
citude that such might be the result of our labour,
and we may venture to hope that in some measure
the effort has been successful, in the awakening
in some of a salutary concern for the interests of
the soul, and in others, it is humbly trusted,
in confirming or leading to the possession of the
blessings of the Gospel of Peace, and that such
are prepared and disposed for Church fellow-
ship, having fellowship with the Father and with
his Son Jesus Christ.
During the first year of this Ministry the ser-
vices were, according to pre-arrangement, divided
equally, and almost entirely, between Murrurundi
and Scone. It was afterwards found impossible


6 I2l> * <2s>t-<tc
F 70 5
to continue the frequency and regularity of these
visits to Scone; and for the last two years that
place has been visited less frequently, arising,
however, not from any abatement of interest or
effort on the part of the Christian people there to
secure and maintain the Ministry of the Gospel
amongst them.
The services have been more confined to this
place, with occasional visits to the neighbouring
gold-fields, at the Hanging Rock and other sur-
rounding places.
That invaluable Institution to the young and
rising generation—a Sabbath School—was opened
here three years ago by members of the congrega-
tion, which is at present in a very promising con-
dition.
The work was undertaken in simple reliance on
what we are persuaded is the only Scriptural
principle for the maintenance and propagation of
the Christian religion in the world—the principle
ordained by the King of Zion, in the New Testa-
ment, and which He and His Apostles exemplified
in their lives, namely, that His Kingdom was to
rely for its power both of aggression and of
conservation on the zeal and efforts of His fol-
lowers, springing from their faith and affection
towards Him as their Redeemer, who became poor
for their sakes.
The work has been sustained without any aid
from any compulsory legal provision, without any


assistance from any association or church. It has
depended entirely on local support, and that in a
comparatively recently settled and thinly peopled
district.
On the recommendation and partial assistance
of this congregation, the Rev. W. Ridley, B. A.,
was led to his invaluable and unwearying labours
in the far interior, which he is now pursuing with
a zeal and disinterestedness so precious to the
Church of God.
There has also been a successful effort made
here to provide for the building of a suitable place
of worship in place of the temporary one hitherto
occupied. Contributions have been made nearly
equal to our requirements, and shortly we expect
to see another Bethel in the Wilderness. It
would be unbecoming to boast of what has been
done, or of sacrifices made in doing it: after our
best doings, we have cause to acknowledge that
we are but unprofitable servants. Yet may we
gratefully and joyfully thank God, and take
courage that thus hitherto the Lord hath helped
us.
By the friends of Yoluntary Religion the move-
ment cannot but be regarded with interest and
satisfaction. The Voluntary Principle, abetted
by no adventitious aid whatever, but tested under
circumstances in a great degree unfavourable, has
proved successful. The history of Christianity
proves that a free will and an affectionate heart


are the best, and only proper reliances of Chris-
tianity. Instead of £28,000, which the law pro-
vides for Public Worship in this Colony, £lOO,OOO
might be realised voluntarily, without the feeling
of a burden to any one, were the Christian people
of this country to imitate the example of Christian
liberality of the few inhabitants of these remote
districts.
ABSTRACT OF TREASURER’S ACCOUNT.
1851 -52. Murrurundi 70
„ Scone 22
„ Surrounding Districts ...10
£lO2 0 0
1852-53. Murrurundi 85
„ Scone
„ Surrounding Districts... 10
£llO 0 0
1853-54. Murrurundi 95
„ Scone 25
» Surrounding Districts 15
£135 0 0
Printed by Heading: and Wellbank, Bridge-street . Sydney.
