

THE CM Y OF THE CHILD MEN.
(Reprinted from the “ Launceston Examiner ,” September loth, 1885.)
TO THE EDITOR.
“ Do ye hear the children weeping, O my brothers,
Ere the sorrow comes with years P
They are leaning their young heads against their mothers',
And that cannot stop their tears.”
“ Do you question the young children in their sorrow,
Why their tears are falling so ? ”
vv- \\ •
They will tell you, “ We’ve a grammar task to-morrow,
That we shall not, cannot know ! ”
—Mrs. Browning’s “ Cry of the Children ” (with a difference).
Sir, — I am moved by a recent occurrence to make a confession of faith —or, as it may be deemed by
some, of unfaith and sheer heresy —on a matter of education. I have long held the opinions I now reveal,
but in comparative silence, which I resolve to break, in the hope that amongst other educational reforms
and changes now mooted in Parliament a relief bill for the children may find a place
Sitting one evening, with grandchildren round me, I requested a dear little girl to repeat to us “ Gray’s
Elegy in a Country Churchyard,” which she had learned, and appreciated, some time before.
“ Oh ! that dreadful thing ! ” cried my eldest grandson, in a dismal voice, from the other side of the
room.
I turned, in terror, fearing, I knew not what—snake —scorpion —speftre !
“ Where ? What is it ? What dreadful thing ? ”
“ That thing, grandma—that horrid thing you said.”
“ I said a horrid thing ! I said nothing but to desire Louisa to repeat “ Gray’s Elegy.”
“ That’s it, grandma; and it is a very horrid thing. We’ve had to parse it at school, and analyse it,
and turn it inside out, and upside down, and cut it up, and pull it to pieces in all sorts of dreadful ways, till
I hate the very name of it. I’ll go out of the room, please grandma, whilst Louisa says it. It makes me
feel quite sick.”
Here was a pretty result of the march of intellect and superior education !
An intelligent boy, of good average capacity and rational character, is made “ quite sick ” —and looked
so —at the bare mention of one of the most beautiful poems in our language, one which, in proportion to its
length, is “as full of quotations ” (that is, of passages perpetually quoted) as the auditor, unfamiliar with
Shakespeare, found the play of Hamlet itself; a poem which, as a chain of word-piftures, rife with inspiration
for the artist, stands perhaps unrivalled. And this glorious work, by being subjected to a sort of linguistic
vivisection at the bidding of pedants, who can possess no more capacity to appreciate its beauties than if it
were a demand for rates, or a washerwoman’s bill—this touching, exquisite poem is rendered so nauseous by
being passed through the parsing machine, and flavoured with all manner of unsavoury, enigmatical epithets,
that it turns an honest schoolboy sick only to hear it alluded to!
I consider it a cruel shame. Are there no fragments of solid (not to say heavy) literature to be found—
ads of Council or legal documents to wit —which might be made available for such anatomical processes,
and be chopped up and stewed down, and peppered exceedingly with words of fifty-diftionary-power of
hardness, without the writings of any great poet being tortured ?
As a member of our Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, I am of opinion that steps should be
promptly taken to prevent such cruelty to authors as is now in this way perpetrated ; but of infinitely greater
importance is it that our children should be emancipated from the barren, useless drudgery they suffer, in
the study of Morell’s Grammar.
What parent reads the story of poor little Paul Dombey, over-crammed and bewildered almost to idiocy
by the Blimber-confusion style of education, without his laughter being half choked by tears of pity for the
lamentable yet ludicrous intellectual complication of the poor little victim's brain ? But the puzzle, “Whether
six Romuluses made a Remus,” or if “ Hie hcec hoc were troy weight,” reads as a diverting amusement when
compared with the dreary rigmarole of a Morell excercise.
Will intelligent fathers and mothers—who peruse these lines, and perhaps are disposed to condemn my
presumption in attacking a now time-honoured institution, or to pity what they deem my ignorant impertinence
—examine such of their children as attend schools, public or private, look over the tasks they have to master,
question them as to their interest in the several lessons and their difficulty of achievement, and then see
what proportion of benefit to labour is borne by the Morell studies ? I think they will be constrained to
admit that every other lesson is done with comparative pleasure, certainly more profit. Of course there is
diversity of taste and opinion among young people as well as older ones. Some children (wonderful,
most meritorious children, to my thinking) are fond of arithmetic; and I have also found women of otherwise
irreproachable taste say that mending stockings was more delightful than the most fascinating fancy work.
In like exceptional category may perhaps be found scholars who enjoy the subtle intricacies of Morell; but
to the average boy or girl his book is a veritable book of martyrdom.




Did not Addison, Junius, and Macaulay write as good English as anyone can desire to read ? Yet they
knew not Morell! Nor am I aware that he attempts to show error in their styles, or proposes any praftical
alteration in the writing of English, but insists that the method of learning how to write correftly shall be
rendered complicated and abstruse. To use a homely illustration —the pudding is to be made as of yore,
but in the recipe given to young cooks, every ingredient is to be called by a new and original name, and the
simple old mode of putting them together must be hampered by distraftingly elaborate rules and prescriptions.
I well know that I lay myself open to the charge of crass ignorance in this matter, and will forestall my
opponents by the frank avowal that I know very little indeed of Morell’s theories, and do not propose to look
further into them. But 1 contend that the grammatical teaching which prevailed in my own childhood, and
which sufficed to enable me and millions more to speak and write our beloved mother tongue with accuracy
and intelligence, is profound enough for the use of all elementary schools, and is most assuredly so for
those established by Government for the education of the middle and labouring classes. The book we used
to know as “ Murray’s little grammar, is in my opinion sufficient for all needful instruction, and a couise of
exercises on its plain, simple rules, would, I sincerely believe, produce better results than the present system,
and with one-twentieth part of the time and labour now expended. # ft
Clear and strong as have been my own convictions for some time, I have not presumed to “air my
heterodoxy on this subjeft without asking the opinion of many teachers thereon. All, with one exception,
frankly avowed their concurrence; and that one only defended the Morell studies as being “ good mental
discipline.” But, seeing that mental discipline may be equally well enforced in the prosecution of studies
which would leave some practically serviceable residue behind, I deny that one dissentient proved his
The head-master of one of our chief schools told me long ago (when I expressed my doubts anent
Morell, and the modern manner of teaching English) that he found among his boys those who were the
greatest adepts in “analysis” exercises did not write the most intelligent essays on general subjects, but
that others, who were always behindhand and imperfeCt in those tasks, were by far the most eloquent and
satisfactory in original composition. .
Even granting—which Ido not—that a more thorough study of theory would give greater skill in
pradice, is not such excellence as that of the great authors I have named enough ; and would not the time
now wasted painfully in groping into barren depths of wordy erudition be more profitably occupied in the
acquisition of faCts —in gaining some systematic knowledge of national or natural history ? Because the
narrow range in our common schools does not supply the children with the educational turtle and venison
of classics and mathematics (which would be out of place and ridiculous), that is no reason why they should
be choked by a diet of husks and dry bones.
The course of instruction in the majority of schools might and ought to be made far more liberal and
interesting. Ido not advocate their being qualified to compete with private schools, by teaching languages
or accomplishments (except drawing, which is useful to artisans), but a wider field of general information
might be opened. I know school children of 12 and 14 whose arithmetic and “analysis " were quite beyond
my depth, who had only the very foggiest idea of English history—thought King Alfred and King John came
pretty near together—and had scarcely heard of ancient Greece or Rome. I have administered in some
cases small remedies in the form of epitomes of those latter, and it was quite pleasant to see how my young
prtients revelled in the grand, beautiful old stories, and read of heroic deeds with beaming eyes. Nor with
less delight, but greater wonder, were such revelations received as the faCts that butterflies were once
caterpillars, and that tadpoles became frogs.
“Oh 1 the pity of it.”
Surely some rational minds among prevailing powers and _ authorities will come to the rescue, and
ordain that our children shall be more beneficially employed than in racking their young brains over puzzles
which convey to them no meaning, and confer no benefit.
Yours, etc.,
GRANDMAMMA (Louisa A. Meredith).
4th September, 1885.
Since the publication of the above in the “ Examiner,” I have received many hearty assurances of entire
concurrence in the opinions expressed; and I am encouraged to believe that a more widely-spread and
earnest consideration of this subjeft must result in beneficial reform. I therefore again re-print my letter,
and ask my readers, both old and young, and especially those whose position and experience peculiarly
qualify them to judge the question in all its bearings, to favour me by communicating to me their opinions
freely, even tho’briefly. ..
1 Louisa A. Meredith.
Malunnah, Orford,
22nd September, 1885.
“Launceston Examiner “ and “ The Tasmanian " Office.


