

flit Eastern djutsti'on.
IN LIGHT OP UNFULFILLED PBOPHECY AND WARNING
“THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE COMING ON THE EARTH,
WITH DISTRESS OF NATIONS, AND PERPLEXITY.”
BY J. WOOD BEILBY,
AUTHOR OF “ EUREKA: AN ELUCIDATION OF MASTERIES OF NATURE THE PROBLEMS
OF SCIENCE,” “THE TRUE THEORY OF THE EARTH,” “AURIFEROUS DRIFTS
IN AUSTRALASIA,” “ REASONS SUGGESTIVE OF MINING ON PHYSICAL
PRINCIPLES FOE GOLD AND COAL,” ETC.
Reprinted from The Ovens and Murray Advertiser.
> ■ -kyu-
Copyright abandoned, and reproduction invited where large circulation
obtainable. /
■a/,
BEECHWORTH:
RICHARD WARREN, PRINTER, THE OVENS AND MURRAY ADVERTISER OFFICE.
MDCCCLXXXVII.
W iM&r . j, ■
/ J
'%'SA. '
S
H* '


■ ■


THE EASTERN QUESTION:
A STUDY,
VIEWED IN RELATION TO LATTER-DAY FULFILMENTS OF
SACRED PROPHECY.
Those things which are coming on the earth.”
Pabt I-
Our British nation has deep cause for
fervent gratitude to an over-ruling
Providence for the immunity granted to
our beloved Queen throughout the late
Jubilee demonstrations in London,
involving her public appearance in
streets lined with thousands of specta-
tors. To very many of her loyal
subjects here, as also, doubtless, in
Great Britain, that period was one of
unmixed anxiety, lest the Nihilistic,
Radical, Republican or Fenian elements,
ever struggling for the overthrow of
monarchical governments, should at-
tempt outrages, even with the prospect
of their partial or complete failure,
secured by presence of Her Majesty’s
large bodyguard, and the certainty tbat
the great majority of those forming the
surrounding and attendant crowds were
fervidly and inviolably loyal. Happily,
our nation’s anxieties are now, for the
time being of Her Majesty’s auspicious
Jubilee celebration, laid at rest.
But is no other danger looming over
us ? What mean those threats of joint
aggressive action by France and Russia,
probably aided by our vacillating ally,
the Turkish Saltan, if Britain retains her
hold upon Egypt and its canal highway
between her possessions in the eastern
and western hemispheres ? These hostile
countries appear to be jealous of the
vastly extended, and year by year
increasing, commerce gained by British
energy and enterprise in opening up
facilities for safe residence of her
merchants in, and intercommunication
and trade with, countries and nations
now eager to purchase our British
manufactures, though but a very few
years ago scarcely known or compara-
tively inaccessible, and their native
productions for the most part unmarket-
able. Have we then, as a maritime
nation, with outspread wings of colonial
possessions in all directions, no ade-
quate cause for alarm, and for the
most ample precautions, lest we, may-
hap, be taken unawares by the quick
stirring up of the demon of war ?
At present the balance of power is so
carefully maintained, and kinsmanship,
or connection by intermarriages of scions
of the reigning families of Europe, so
apparently warm, that all fears of any
one of these being a party to an inter-
ruption of the harmony, for any selfish or
local aggrandisement, or the forcible ex-


'tension of territory and plunder of states, of national wealth and city magnificence,
might well seem permanently allayed.
Proud autocrats, however, are all creatures
of circumstances, and amenable to their
country’s policy. The great seething
mass of the vast population of European
and Asiatic Russia, cribbed and confined,
presently, for adequately extended sea-
frontage to navigable waters, and con-
sisting, as well, of the flower of a
nation now well skilled in arts of war,
as also of the dregs of the more ignorant
classes, ever yearning to accomplish a
revolt against oppressions consequent
upon the prevailing forms of government,
must, from time to time, be allured from
civil disturbances, and be placated, to be
firmly kept in hand. Hence a war, for
extension of maritime facilities, and thus
increase of national wealth and the
coveted position of leadership of the
counsels of the Great Powers, with all
the treasure of loot to be acquired, may
appear politically and imperatively
necessary, as a wholesome counter-
irritant to prospective internal discord
and outrages threatening the life of the
Emperor of that vast kingdom. And a
very slight pretext of assumed affront to
either of the two now statedly allied and
threateningly aggressive powers, such as
British support to a disowned prince-
elect of Bulgaria, an attempt to share
active naval control at the New Hebrides,
or the repulse, by British aid to Afghan
soldiery, of a Russian attack on the
Afghan frontiers, or even some more
trivial cause of offence, no longer to be
adjusted diplomatically, may, as in a
moment, banish from us British, for a
prolonged interval, the blessings of peace,
which, thanks to a kind Providence, we
have so long and so advantageously
enjoyed. Britain, and each one of her
wealth-contributing colonies and depen-
dencies, would then be at once forcibly
aroused to a contemplation of the fact
that powerful fleets, with the most deadly
inventions of war, beyond arts heretofore
conceived, for accomplishing devastation
are almost übiquitously arrayed against
British possessions ; and that our semi-
continental colonial dominions, vast sea-
board, and scattered islands, in every
part of the inhabitable globe, with our
detached maritime and commercial in-
terests, are at the mercy of, and now
actually assailed by, a coalition of nations,
each of which, on sea or land, would be
a formidable foe.
The question of the fitting introduc-
tion of such subjects as national pre-
paredness for looming dangers from
internal discords or foreign hostility,
and of political subjects generally, into
the sermons of our clergy, has been
ably argued by the Rev, Mr Buchanan,
of Melbourne, and he reverently ad-
duces the value of sacred prophecy as
previsioning national histories. Its
voice, as proclaimed by the Prophet
Daniel, previsions dire calamities in
the latter days to the King’s Daughter
of the South. The description is com-
plex, but “ in the time of the end” the
northern king must for a time “ overflow
and pass over” with his troops, regard-
less of “ the desire of women”—those
of his household intermarried with the
reigning European families—“ and he
shall plant the tabernacles of his palace
between the seas, in the glorious holy
mountain.” . . . “ And at that time shall
be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a nation, even to that
same time ; and at that time thy people
shall be delivered.” Now, what are
we to understand from collateral pro-
phecy, as to “ thy people,” and riie
period of their deliverance ?
Quoting from sacred prophecy, we
have the declaration £ ‘ Fear not thou, 0
my servant Jacob, and be not dismayed,
0 Israel; for, behold, I will save thee
from afar off, and thy seed from the
land of their captivity ; and Jacob shall
return, and shall be in rest and at ease,
and none shall make him afraid.”
“ For the Lord will have mercy on


Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and occupancy in protection of her interests
set them in their own land.” “ I gave
Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and
Sheba for thee.” These phophecies are
as yet wholly unfulfilled, but their con-
summation approaches as visibly as the
dawn ushers in the full effulgence of the
sun-illumined day.
The policy of Great Britain now
appears to be to avoid, if honorably
practica' le, the calamities attendant
upon her involvement in war, while, at
the same time, making herculean efforts,
at great cost upon her revenues, to be
prepared for it at all points. And one
point of strategic advantage of vast
national importance is now deemed in-
dispensable, as a preliminary, namely,
a ship-transit canal, by a safe and
speedy route, from the Mediterranean to
the Indian Ocean, whence her Indian,
Eastern, and Australasian colonies and
dependencies can be reached. For this
important purpose, Britain’s present hold
upon and protectorate of the Suez
Canal is avowedly too temporarily
owned, as the canal is largely pos-
sessed by French shareholders, and
subject to jealous interference by their
Government. Moreover, it could at any
moment of the greatest need for Britain’s
navy to pass through quickly, be
absolutely stopped and rendered im-
passable for months, by the scuttling of
an ironclad by some unforeseen treachery
in its comparatively narrow channel.
Who, in this remarkable era of crime
and diabolical outrage, justified even by
representative Irish statesmen, while
members of the Imperial Parliament, can
safely aver that such a deed, made
calamitously effectual by an explosion
wrecking the vast hulk by dynamite,
could be rendered impossible ? Great
Britain’s present Egyptian policy and
Anglo-Turkish diplomacy seem to point
to a well-matured scheme in contempla-
tion, to be eventuated, if national peace
continues, within three years, the limit of
the proposed continuance of British
in Egypt, to be conceded by the Anglo-
Turkish convention if subsequent events
do not necessitate extension of time on
plausible bases. One condition of the
convention will probably, therefore, be
the exchange by Britain of subjugated
Egypt and the semi-pacified Sou-
dan, comprising Sheba and Ethiopia,
with Turkey, for the Holy Land,
with navigable right of the great
river Euphrates. Already the Island
of Cyprus is permanently assigned by
Turkey to Britain. This large island
commands the sea-way to the north-east
angle of the Mediterranean and the Bay of
Seleucia, the site of an ancient but long-
ruined city at the mouth of the Assy
River. _ From an inland angle of this
large river, construction of a direct ship
canal to the Euphrates would but little
exceed, according to recent charts, the
outlay and length of the Suez Canal;
the cross route being via a salt lake and
extensive marshes. In any case, British
wealth, engineering celebrity, and indo-
mitable enterprise and energy, would
probably suffice to overcome all the
difficulties incidental to formation of a
facile ship canal, the task being impera-
tive, as the Suez Canal can never be
more than a makeshift, nor permanently
retained solely under British control,
unless her navy be admittedly supreme
upon the seas.
What a grand central emporium for
the commerce of the world’s commercial
marine would a seaport city at the
seaboard mouth of this Euphrates canal
route, the Bay of Seleucia in the Medi-
terranean present, and “ wheresoever
the carcase is, there will the eagles be
gathered together.” “I will bring thy
seed from the east, and gather thee
from the west; I will say to the north,
4 G ive up,’ and to the south, ‘ Keep
not back,’ bring my sons from far, and
my daughters from the ends of the
earth.” There is no human probability
of an actual reinstatement of the whole


Jewish nation, within their once-beloved and increase, and they shall fear no more,
land, until it is in some way brought
about by the over-ruling providence of
the Divine Author of the prophecies
previsioning the infallible occurrence
that a powerful nation shall obtain
possession primarily, and, while auto-
nomy of its Government to the
Jewish nation is fully conceded, shall
exercise an adequate protectorate over
it. And who, of all the nations of the
earth, so likely to act this beneficent
part to the despised, outraged, plundered
and dispersed Jews, as those champions
of freedom and right, the Christian
people and Government of Great Britain,
the present virtual possessors of Egypt,
and its southern dependencies, Sheba
and Ethiopia ?
Again, humanly reasoning, and as the
Almighty ever apparently works by
available means, what inducement, but
to share the wealthy commerce of such
a mart for all nations, would suffice to
attract the money-changers of Israel from
the previous, sites of their lucre-gathering
from successful business, and literally
fulfil the prophecies as to their flocking
eagerly thither from ail parts of the
world? Great Britain, the patron and
protector of the ingathering nation,
retaining by treaty the exclusive fight
of ownership of lands on the ship canal
route via the Euphrates, would implant
multitudes of her enterprising sons
within the fertile valleys bordering the
great river and its tributaries ; and new
city markets, for the wealthy kings of
the east to interchange their countries’
productions, would speedily grow up in
importance and grandeur, crowded with
a mixed population, chiefly of Anglo-
Saxon origin, in co-fraternity with the
Jews.
But while prophecy indicates clearly
that some such inducement to location
of the Jews as a nation shall “ Gather
them from all countries whither they have
been driven, and will bring them again
to their folds, and they shall be fruitful
nor be dismayed saith the Lord,” “for I
will cause their captivity to return, and
have mercy on them,” “ and it shall be to
me a name of joy, a praise and an honor,
before all tbe nations of the earth, which
shall hear all the good that I do unto
themand this is one of the most clearly
indicated of the previsions of as yet
unfulfilled prophecy, yet a hiatus in its
progress of fulfilment under the auspices
of the British is indicated for, “ The
robbers of thy people shall exalt them-
selves to establish the vision, but they
shall fall.” This may prevision the
refusal of Turkey to ratify, or subse-
quent fickleness in observing, the Anglo-
Turkish convention, from dread of
Russia, and an attempt by the latter
power to wrest from Britain control of
Egypt, with the intention of carrying out
the programme of its barter for Palestine
and ultimate restitution thereof to the
Jews ; and Russia may, with her allies,
temporarily overflow and pass over
Syria and Armenia, and take Egypt,
planting the tabernacles of the Czar’s
palace between the seas on the moun-
tains of Palestine, yet “ He shall come
to his end, and none shall help him.”
Part 11.
There are very many wonderful pre-
visions of the occurrence of still future
events in the history of nations contained
throughout the writings of the sacred
prophets. When disentangled from
their apparently immethodical concaten-
ation in chapters and verses, one part
being sometimes referrent to one event,
or era, antecedent or subsequent to
those linked thus in with it, their study
by the well-read student of the universal
history of ancient and modern nations
cannot but be intensely interesting, as
divulging future history. To such an
one, duly appreciative of their intrinsic
testimony to their Divine inspiration, the
duty might well seem imperative, as on


the ancient prophet, to “write the vision positions of oceans and continent®
and make it plain, that he may run who
readeth it,” The moral, religious and
benevolent precepts deductible from a
right apprehension of the evanescence of
all things earthly, as welt to the passing
generation, as to those succeeding, in a
world where not only the pomp and
splendor of nations, but even the matter
of the earth’s formation, are ever decom-
posing and recomposing, should far more
frequently be the theme of the sermons
of the clergy. ’Tis true, some prophe-
cies are ambiguous, or seemingly contra-
dictory, such as the vision of the vile
spirits, like frogs, going forth to the
kings of the earth to gather them to the
final comsummating war of the end.
Such previsions pertain to events in the
spiritual world, which re-acts upon men
in the natural world by impressions with
which they are imbued from the spiritual
sphere. Previsions, therefore, such as
noted above, or the translation of saints
“ to meet the Lord in the air,” are not
to be expected to afford their counter-
part within the domain of the natural
world, but really pertain to the state of
spiritual existence entered upon by all
mankind at death of the earthly body, in
accordance with natural law.
Not only, however, are there to be
fulfilments of prophecies relative to wars,
invasion and subjugation of territories,
control by a powerful despot of the
treasures of gold and silver of the coun-
tries anciently known as productive of
these and other sources of wealth, and
many other striking and notable events;
but there are also provisioned, with
wonderful accuracy of description, a
series of physical changes, as well
meteorological, astronomical and geologi-
cal, with precisely their necessarily
recurring sequences. “ The treasures
of snow and hail, reserved against the
time of trouble—the day of battle and
war,” as a polar accumulation, in such
unequal proportions on segments of the
frigid zones as result from differing
supplying copious vapors, or radiating
dry heat to atmospheric currents, ever
passing polarly at high altitudes, appear
to be the factors of the clearly pro-
visioned catastrophe, as ultimately so
affecting the earth’s equilibrium, that
her axis of rotation must radically
change ;• the period of the occurrence-
being on the eve of a momentous attack
by a vast pagan army upon the Israelitish
nation when re-gathered into their own
land of Palestine. The danger passes,
however, “ as a dream of a night vision. ,r
“ Thou shall be visited of the Lord of
hosts with thunder, and with earth-
quake-and great noise, with storm and
tempest, and the flame of devouring
fire.” Obscuration of the sun and
moon, overflowing rains, great hail-
storms, breach of ocean barriers to vast
tidal waves, causing “ rivers and streams
of water to flow over- high mountains
and hills,” with transposition of oceans
and continents, the constellations ap-
pearing to fall from the firmament, every
wall and tower falling, are all severally
previsioned. “ The end shall be with a
flood and desolationsand as water-
decomposed j'ields explosive and com-
bustible gases, volcanic action in regions
upon the earth’s contour, though not a*
sole agent of desolation, is generated
with earthquake effects. But every
detail, so delineated, as visioned to
the inspired prophets, is but the counter-
part of those of the cataclysmal catas-
trophes which, according to advanced
geological and astronomical discoveries,
have, times and again, in the vast
antiquity of our earth, metamorphosed?
its exterior aspect, and position
of its polar axis extension within the*
celestial sphere, with reference to the
apparent position of the fixed stars. In
fact, to an awestruck finite being—if
such an one could be permitted to gain
a standpoint whence the appalling tra-
gedy cou ! d be observed and noted, the
description, if accurately given, would


be precisely that previsioned—with the Geology discloses as elsewhere aggre--
grandeur of divinely-inspired words to gated in masses of animal remains
the recording sacred prophets. And the
necessary sequence of the awful catas-
trophe must be, as delineated, the
sweeping off of countless myriads ©f
overwhelmed human beings by ocean
currents ; and stranding of multitudes
of corpses in a valley—probably that of
the Euphrates—traversed by “ pas-
sengers from the east of the seas” to
western lands, who shall, “during seven
months,” help to indicate these to the
men kept “ in continual employment”
to bury them. “I will lay thy flesh
upon the mountains, and fill the valleys
with thy height.” And prophecy de-
clares, with no uncertain voice, that not
only these passengers, but nations, shall
be preserved to re people the earth,
with the altered and renovated aspect
of a “ New Earthand that while
some groups of these have been saved
upon the mountains, nations may exist
in distant parts of the earth, who, until
informed, have had no conception of the
occurrence, and whose hearts are to be
vexed, prophecy declares, at disclosure
of the dire and appalling calamity. In
fact, mariners in ships approaching via
the coast of Chittim or Italy to northern
seaports will be there signalled that their
desired haven is lost to view, and that
there is now “ no house or entrance”
to formerly well-known harbors visible.
Those continents which for a cycle of
geological epochs have been the most
densely populated, will be more or less
submerged beneath ocean waters, and
all their seaport marts of commerce
obliterated in sea depths; while new
areas of continental lands will appear,
though long sunk beneath the ocean,
such as Plato’s Atlantis, of which the
Canary Islands, the Azores and Tene-
riffe are probably but the former moun-
tain tops, as are probably also the Pacific
and other groups of islands, the now
only discernible relics of primeval con-
tinents, the former organic life of which
beneath sedimentary deposits, or em-
bedded in ice on coasts of arctic seas,
as the mammoths are found in Siberia.
These, then, to us wonderful and
almost incredible changes of the aspect
of the earth’s contour, are recognisable by
the geologist as simply a recurrence of
similarly dire ©vents, which have very
many times during the vast antiquity of
our planet’s history, as one of the stellar
orbs of the firmament, been recapitulated,
On each such occasion portions of faces
or segments of the globe have been
devastated by the vast denuding, disin-
tegrating and subverting or contorting
action of an ocean whose equilibrium has
been shaken, and which has overleaped
its barriers. The cause, brought about
by a long-continued operation of natural
laws, and but the necessary and me-
chanical sequence thereof, can be sought
out and traced through all successive
links of the chain of such operation and
its inevitable sequences, up to the cul-
minating catastrophe, by any zealous
student of physical science, determined
to ascertain, with an unprejudiced mind,
the bases upon which the presently au-
thorised theories of that branch of science-
rest, and probe these for a surer foun-
dation.
The explanation of the apparent
mystery is that terrestrial gravitation is
a continuously operating force. If any
existing cause in nature result in the
slightest change in the centre of gravity
of the earth’s volume, made up of solids
and fluids, the watery or oceanic en-
velope must re-arrange its volume, so
that its surface on the globe’s superficies
shall, at each point thereof, be absolutely
rectangular to a vertical radius, thence
to the centre of gravity. And this
inevitable sequence of movement of the
oceanic waters, though only by imper-
ceptible films, not only follows, but
maintains, that is, prevents retrogression
of each change of the centre of gravity.


If, therefore, the primary cause of such 1 wa§ to submerge the now elevate®
change is continuous in operation, and
there is in nature a fully adequate cause
discoverable, the sequence of rise or
depression of ocean surfaces, ever main-
taining a surface sphericity, as at all
points equidistant from the globe’s centre
of gravity, must also be continuous ; and,
as so —though changes may be imper-
ceptible, except to observations at long
intervals—can be readily traced, by rise
or depression of shingle deposits upon
the former sea margins of coast lines.
These are patent to observation upon
every coast line throughout the known
world, as are also deposits of marine
products far inland, and to vast heights
on mountains, even to 17,000 feet of
elevation upon the Himalayan range.
But ocean waters could not rise so as to
deposit bones, or teeth of sharks or
whales, or shells, several thousand feet
high ®n the Himalayas, the Sierra
Nevada, or even the mountains of
Britain, without an oceanic submergence
of the low lands, upon which, especially
on former coast lines, and rivers, the
cities and concentrations of population
were. Now, discovery of the ancient
sites of such elevations of ocean waters
point out to us the absolute necessity of
a previous occurrence of change in the
centre of gravity of the earth’s volume,
for, even if such elevations of waters
upon lands, or elevations of continents
displacing oceans, could be primarily
caused by volcanic action, the displaced
oceanic volume must re arrange its
contour in accordance with the laws of
terrestrial gravitation, ever preserving
the perfect sphericity of the surface,
whenever that is oceanic. This is in
accordance with the absolute and in-
variable decree of natural law. Now,
change of the centre of gravity of any
rotating body implies change of the axis
of rotation, for, by mechanical law, such
axis must always intersect the centre of
gravity. Hence, if in former ages of the
earth’s antiquity the place of the oceans
continents, that implies a change of the
centre of gravity as now prevailing, and
also a changed position of the then polar
axis, and, necessarily, of all its parallels,
termed degrees of longitude, and hence
of their perpendiculars, the equator and
degrees of latitude, as now set in an
apparently permanent position by our
geographers, but apparently subject to
variation after intervals between obser-
vations, as is found to be the Idldeg. of
east longitude, our boundary with South
Australia.
But statedly different positions of
latitudes in ancient periods implied
alterations of climate necessarily, as also-
of the relative positions of the equinoc-
tial points with reference to what is;
deemed the sun’s path now —more
correctly, the plane of the earth’s orbit
of revolution around her central sun..
Astronomy testifies to observations of
annual changes of position of these-
intersecting points, which are termed
precessions of the equinoxes ; and
Geology discloses evidential proofs of by
past changes of climate, in fact, that
most places on our globe have- been?
alternately sites of tropical, temperate,,
and glacial climates, many times re-
peated, in former geological epochs...
Also, these changes, as of position
of oceans and dry lands, though recurring-
sometimes gradually, and, as now, in
our own day, almost imperceptibly,
through lapsing ages, yet were some-
times sudden and catastrophic to all
living creatures, in the sea or land, of
the face or segment of the globe worst;
devastated then by oceanic denudations
and depositation of the debris of disin-
tegrated formations in stratified layers
over the then submerged former earth
surface. The late Rev. Dr Chalmers, of
Edinburgh, in one of his series of
Astronomical Sermons, forcibly depicts
the awful result to the human family, on
a face of the earth so visited by over-
whelming ocean surges, the result of a


catastrophic change of the polar axis, “ Never shalt thou be any more/’
involving the chaotic desolation of the
whole land.
But even this dire condition, involving
so fearful a calamity to the human
family, in some portions of the earth’s
surface, would not necessarily devastate
all land surfaces. To submerge con-
tinents, the ocean volume must be with-
drawn from vicinity of other coasts,
which would seem elevated, and thus
save from destruction their living
organisms of animal or vegetable kinds.
Thus, such catastrophes in the by-past
history of our globe have not destroyed
such organisms everywhere, for, as the
dissemination of varied races of man-
kind over the ocean-severed con-
tinents, as well as the disclosures of
geology, teach us, animals, vegetables and
even fresh-water fishes and other or-
ganisms have been preserved through
each such visitation, to re-stock the
restored lands and lakes. Again, would
the seething ocean waters gradually be
calmed to occupy their positions, defined
by the all-powerful law of terrestrial
gravitation, as equidistant on all parts
of the superficies of the globe from its
centre of gravity ; the ocean would
gradually regain its former clearness
and comparative placidity, depositing,
in gradually fining layers, the earthy
matters commingling therein upon the
sea bottom ; thus preparing a new earth
surface, beneath which, as beneath the
loam-covered tumuli in many parts of
the continent of North America, all
Vestiges of the life and civilisation of its
former human inhabitants were buried
from view, until, perhaps, exhumed
archfeologically. And even when, in
recurrence of another convulsion, these
last submerged areas are again elevated,
by recession of ocean waters to con-
tinental areas, they shall in the words
of sacred prophecy, as regards the costly
works of man upon them, and their
former natural land-marks or seaport
position, “ be found no more at all.”
“ The land shall be utterly emptied and
utterly spoiled,”
Professor Ramsay, the geologist, has
shown that in Wales, during the drift
period, the submergence of the land had
amounted to 2300 feet ; and Dr Foster,
that then only the higher peaks of Great
Britain rose above the sea level. What
has been may occur again, by the con-
tinuity of operation of same natural
laws, or their effects, as the inevitable
sequences of a called-up Force in action.
As to the period of such recurrence of
these wondrous catastrophes, so vividty
previsioned to the sacred prophets, that
is only defined as succeeding, at no
distant date, the concentration of the
Jewish nation within their formerly
beloved land, at the era of a pagan
onslaught upon it, when there have been
“ troublous times,” a “ great tribula-
tion,” and “ men’s hearts are failing
them for fear,” being at length fully
aroused from apathetic scepticism as to
all that the sacred prophets have spoken ;
science also lending its aid to divulge
the fearful presage of approaching doom
to densely populated areas, so that all
civilised nations are “ looking for those
things that are coming on the earth
for it is declared, “ the wise shall under-
stand.”
Part 111.
Sacred prophecy, conveyed in pre-
visions to seers, empowered to perpetuate
the record of predicted tragical events,
affords many strikingly lucid delineations
of the appalling contest of natural forces
incidental to the war of elements,
evoked, apparently, by the culminating
catastrophe of a sudden and violent
change of the centre of gravity of the
earth’s volume. Whether this occurs
as the result of the continuous operation
of natural laws, or by impact on the
earth of a meteoric body, “ as it were
a great mountain, burning with fire,


east into the sea,” the effect would maintenance of the respective conditions
necessarily be a loss of the equili-
brium maintaining present ocean bar-
riers. The Divine fiat, through geologic
ages, has been “ overturn, overturn,
overturn, until He come, whose right it
is, and I will give it him.” “ The
earth reels to and fro, and staggers •”
“ the stars” appear to “ fall from
heaven and “ the elements melt with
fervent heat,” in localities yielding condi-
tions of volcanic action. It is, however,
an ambiguity that the apostolic delineation
of a destruction by fire differs from the
previsions of the early prophets that
though the end—meaning a future dire
event—“ shall be with a flood and
desolations,” “ the earth abideth for
ever,” and is to be remodelled as a New
Earth, wherein the empire of the Great
King “ shall be from sea to sea, and
from the river to the ends of the earth.”
The Sacred Word attributes design
throughout the creative works of the
great Architect of the universe, “ who
hath measured the waters in the hollow
of His hand, and meted out Heaven
with the span, apd comprehended the dust
of the earth in a measure, and weighed
the mountains in scales, and the hills in
a balance.” These are not mere flowery
metaphors, but indicate conditions, de-
signed to maintain equilibrium, adequate
to retain the oceans within decreed
limits, “ that the waters should not pass
His commandment, when He appointed
the foundations of the earth.” The
learned astronomical investigator,Kepler,
truly said, “ In the arrangement of the
heavens, the Creator had regard to the
principles of geometry.” Throughout
the celestial, as with the torrestial
universe, the gravitation of groups of
moveable matter, meteoric or stellar in
the celestial, and oceanic in the terres-
trial, towards respective centres of gra-
vity, while each orb is obedient to the
law of gravitation to one grand centre
of gravity of the whole vast universe of
God, appears to be necessary to the
of their dynamical stability. No other
agency adequate to accomplish the
historical flood of Noah, or any one of
the many epochal floods, testified to by
Geology, which have overspread large
sections of continents with a vast
boulder drift, and have evidently then
been withdrawn into sites of decreed
ocean limits, has ever been rea-
sonably conjectured by science. After
Noah’s flood, the Mosaic narrative im-
plies that the same check to continued
oceanic disruption by vast, breadths of
pulsating tidal waves, which we credit
now with preservation of the oceanic
equilibrium, then prevailed to curb its
aroused impetuosity, and give it placid
position within its new limits. “ And
the waters removed from off the earth in
going or returning,” or, “ to and fro,”
as subsequently translated.
A very minute comparative change of
the centre of gravity of our sphere, having
an oceanic envelope, bounded by elevated
lands, would fully suffice to make vast
alterations in the relative positions of
the areas now occupied by seas and
lands respectively. The diameter of the
earth being computed as under 8000
miles, and the principal cities of the
world being within a few hundred feet of
sea level, a change of the centre of
gravity, of the one hundred-thousandth
fraction of the earth’s diameter, would
cause such re-arrangement of the ocean
margins as would submerge very many
of the principal marts of commerce.
And such a calamity is clearly pro-
visioned in sacred prophecy in so many
plain statements, that thee cannot
intelligently be viewed as merely figura-
tive. Narrow-minded individuals, or
those utterly careless as to the destiny of
sections of our race, may decry investiga-
tion into the operation of natural laws,
in accomplishment, at a yet future day,
of an evident design of the Deity, which
we are endowed with intellect to con-
-1 template, in light of graciously accorded


previsions of inspired prophets, as to
the ultimate details of its accomplishment.
Is it not, however, man’s filial duty to
acquaint himself with the revealed will
and designs of God, as the all-pervading
and controlling Creative Spirit, and as
perceivable much more vividly and
benignly through His works, than in the
varied creeds “taught by the precepts
of man ?” But, though firmly holding
to Scripture, as emanating from the
Divine Spirit, we may rationally consider
that, as Paul, the apostle, said, we have
had the treasure transmitted through
“ earthen vessels,” and unless com-
munications and previsions were trans-
cribed at the instant of their reception,
their subsequent transcriptions and
translations must account for the im-
perfection we lament in their arrangement
and lucidity, as a likely result of the
very best efforts of all human amanuenses
in similar circumstances. Infallibility
is not Scripturally recorded as an
attribute even of the angels in heaven ;
how much less, then, is it to be expected
in poor finite man ?
The key to these provisioned physical
changes, desolating a section of the
earth, with overthrow and utter des-
truction of multitudes of its inhabitants,
at a period when the pagan nations
conspire against the restoration and
nationalisation ef the Jews, being now
available, as disclosed by comparison of
the coincidence therewith of cause and
effect of activity of physical forces,
that is, by the bringing towards their
elucidation, the testimony of the Two
Witnesses —natural law, with the inevi-
table sequences of its operation, as
divulged in Nature, and the previsions
of the Sacred Word —both emanations
from the one Divine Author, all who
accept the authenticity of the Word of
God have now before them a sublime
object of study, before which all other
grooves of thought for pulpit utterances,
pale, for lack of its manifest sublimity.
Besides, the cultivated theologian as a
Christian philosopher, is necessarily the
Church’s sentinel, and woe to him if he,
slumbering at his post, or retaining it as
a mere occupation, yielding maintenance
and emolument, is content to indo-
lently refuse to see danger depicted
in an ambiguous cypher, his position
calls upon him to study and elucidate,
or be worthy of anathema as the faithless
watchman described by the Prophet
Ezekiel.
The scoffers, so numerous throughout
Christendom, object sneeringly that “ all
things continue as they were from the
beginningand even scientists often
contemptuously, but erroneously, urge
that continuity of operation of the
natural forces, which originated the
primeval convulsions revealed by geology ;
has, in their opinion, long ceased.
They thus apparently deny all evidences
in nature of an ever active force,
while yet the astronomer, the geologist
and the physical geographer recognise
year by year, or at prolonged intervals
of observations, results denoting pro-
gressive movements, continuously of
same characteristics, the sequences of
operation of natural laws. They recog-
nise and note the apparent elevation of
certain coasts, or a strange shallowing
of the sea margin thereon ; while, in
opposite segments of the globe, the facts
are just the reverse—the sea-margin is
deepening, and the coast line appears
depressing. The astronomer notes and
adjusts computations for navigation on
his observations that, year by year,
there is a gradual increase of longitude
of the fixed stars, or northern constella-
tions, with reference to the assumed
extension of the defined polar axis
towards the celestial sphere ; as also the
annually recurring precession of the
equinoxes, marking a varying point of
intersection of the plane of the equator
by that of the ecliptic or sun’s assumed
path, gradually altering the length of the
tropical year, at defined positions in
longitude and thereby, eventually, their


climates'. There is- also the recognised
variation of the magnetic pole, and of
the central point of arctic frigidity, with
reference to the position, as geographi-
cally denoted, of the arctic pole ; and
also abundant evidences that the defini-
tions of early navigators of eminence,
of the position in longitude and latitude
of coasts, shoals and islands, are dis-
crepant with navigators’ observations
and definitions of the present day. For
instance, Port Jackson was first charted
two miles east of later definitions of that
coast line, and our South Australian
boundary, the 141 deg. east longitude,
is within forty years after its careful and
competent definition, found to be over a
mile east of present definitions of its
now alleged true site in longitude. We
have also the motive power producing
the flow and reflex of the tides, still a
problem to philosophy, though their
regularity of pulsation appears demon-
strably controlled by lunar attraction.
There are also the multiplicity of
evidences disclosed by geological re-
searches, that motive forces have epoch-
ally changed climates, and hence vege-
tation on successively buried earth
surfaces, and deposited masses of or-
ganic life, fishes in multitudes, animal
remains, shells and vegetable produc-
tions beneath sedimentary formations,
evidencing primary oceanic denudations.
“ Speak to the earth, and it shall teach
thee, and the (displaced) fishes of the sea
shall declare unto thee, who knoweth
not in all these that the hand of the
Lord hath wrought this, in whose hand
is the soul of every living thing, and the
breath of all mankind. , . . Behold
He withholdeth the waters, and they dry
up ; also He sendeth them out, and they
overturn the earth.”
Part IY.
The presently recurring minute axial
variations indirectly recognised by
astronomy (though as yet the cause and
its inevitable sequences are not), and
taken into calculations in the theory and
practice of navigation, as a processional
variation of equinoctial points only,
denote an actual movement of all longi-
tudes, as being the parallels of the axis,
and co-re-latively of those of the equator.
Of the former, the variation is westerly
in the northern hemisphere-, and easterly
in the southern, as ascertainable at each
site of observation, the actual meridian
time thereat, preceding, or being re-
tarded, as the sites may be- assumed to
advance or retrogress on the plane of the
sun’s path. Thus, every defined site in
longitude, including the now accepted
initial point at Greenwich observatory,
must vary as to its meridian time, and
hence also the data, upon which to com-
pute its longitude, if observations are
taken at sufficiently remote periods, to
give to continuously minute variations,,
an aggregate in quantity that is observ-
able. In view of his discovery of these,
workings of natural law, the author has
again and again officially submitted his
protest against the legislative concession
of an advanced easterly definition of the
longitudinal line of demarcation between
Victoria and South Australia, as being-
variable at each remotely succeeding
observation, based upon meridional time.
His researches in nature and science,
induce deductions in advance of presently
authoritative teachings, which may not
be accepted in his lifetime, but are of a
vast importance to man, as affording a
co-operation of scientific truths, with
inspired previsions of the certainty of
occurrence of “ those things which are
coming on the earth, yielding future
distress of nations, with perplexity.”
There is, unfortunately, in our age, a
too confident assertion of former hypo-
theses, originally only hazarded as pre-
adventures as to their truth, as if these
had been demonstrated by scientific
investigations to be perfectly reliable
theories. There is also discernable among
scientists, a want of a unity of purpose.


to thoroughly investigate developments
of natural law in action, if beyond their
usual grooves of thought, or scope of
their individual arenas. The geologist,
the astronomer, and the natural philoso-
pher, appear circumscribed respectively
within limits of scrutiny pertaining only
to the scope of each science. Hence
they do not appear to have fully com-
pared the reciprocities of operation of the
great natural laws of the universe.
Individually, they are too apt to decry
investigations by obscure, though zealous
inquirers, or paying attention to thought
in new grooves, or imaginative deduc-
tions therefrom, as disturbing the
teachings of our day, although, all
admitting that we are as yet, seemingly,
but on the threshold of actual knowledge
of scientific truth. Thus they too often
lightly allege that the above stated
phenomena of apparent minute variations
and ascertained discrepancies between
results of present and many much earlier
observations, betokening either remark-
ably persistent errors by competent
navigators, or certainly time—changed
positions, can have no connection with
the causes, which, throughout the vast
antiquity of our globe, resulted in
changes of position of oceans or con-
tinents, or alterations of climate of
countries, from tropical, to temperate, or
glacial, and vice versa, or to the over-
spreading of boulder drift, or massing
within sedimentary strata, sometimes
concreted into the rock formations of
chains of lofty mountains, of former deep
sea-bottom organisms, regarding which
the records of Geology largely testifies.
But such inconsistencies in prominent
and authoritative science teachers, so
discouraging to the advent of new blood
amongst the too few presently unbigoted
searchers into scientific truth, cannot
appear strange to the careful student of
the inspired prophecies, as such mani-
fested opposition or mental blindness
has been most fully provisioned, as to
be a feature of latter day times.
They may perhaps even say derisively
“ Let him make speed and finish His
work that we may see it;” - but “the
vision is yet for an appointed time, at
the end it shall speak, and not deceive,
though it tarry, watch for it; because
it will surely come, it will not tarry,” or
be stayed. “ The day of the Lord is
great and very terrible ; and who can
abide it.” “ The great day of the Lord is
near, it is near, and hasteth greatly
when “ the mountains saw Thee and they
trembled, and the overflowing of the
water passed by and “ there shall be
upon every high mountain, and upon
every high hill, rivers and streams of
waters in the day of the great slaughter,
when the towers fall“ and the multi-
tude of all the nations that fight against
Ariel, even all that fight against her
and her munition, and that distress heiy
shall be as a dream of a night vision.
The tragic consummation shall come
on the earth as unexpectedly to the hulk
of its population as the flood of Noah;
yet some of “ the wise shall understand
and, knowing from sacred prophecy,
that some are to be “ saved upon the
mountains,” for “ there shall be a hand-
ful of corn in the earth on the top of the
mountains,” “ as the gleaning grapes
when the vintage is done,” “ the holy
seed shall be the substance thereof,”
and that the command is urgent to
escape from indicated dangers, all who
accept (he authenticity of the prophecies
as inspired communications, will intently
watch the signs of the times, and the
advance of vast armies of pagan nations
from the east, “ the coasts of the earth,”
“ the rising of the sun,” “ to make the
cities of Judah desolate,” And when
intelligence is transmitted that the shrine
of Juggernaut, “ the abomination of de-
solation spoken of by Daniel the Pro-
phet, is set up in the Holy Place, or
upon the ramparts of Jerusalem,” and
human sacrifices are there offered to
Siva, the Hindoo god of desolations,
“ let them which be in Judea flee into


the mountains,” and the wise every-
where “ hide themselves as it were for
a little moment, until the indignation be
overpast;” for “if the foundations be
destroyed, what can the righteous do,”
but succumb, if exposed, “when the earth
shall disclose her blood, and shall no
more cover her slain.” Even “ the
kings of the earth, and the great and
rich,” as well as the poor and humble,
will then gladly seek refuge “in the
clefts of the rocks, and upon the tops of
the rugged rocks,” discarding their
treasures “ to the moles and to the bats,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory
of His Majesty, when he ariseth to shake
terribly the earth.” “In the time when
thou shalt be broken by the seas in the
depths of the waters, thy merchandise
and all thy company in the midst of
thee shall fall .. . thou shalt be a
terror, and never shalt he any more ;”
“ when I shall bring up the deep upon
thee, and great waters shall cover thee
, . . and I shall set glory in the
land of the living ; I will make thee a
terror, and thou shalt be no more ;
though thou be sought for, yet shalt
thou never be found again, saith the
Lord God.”
If the final catastrophe was that of
volcanic outbursts only, the sea-margins
and not mountain tops, would be indi-
cated as refuge sites. But “ the saved
shall be upon the mountains and with
lively faith in the divine promises, they
will await the issue of the appalling
tragedy, and “ shall have a song in the
night as when a holy solemnity is kept,”
for they can believe that “ though the
mountains be carried into the midst of
the sea,” “ their bread shall be given
them, and their water shall be sure”
upon the renovated surface of the earth,
which will be as a New Earth, with al-
tered position of its continents and oceans,
and the inland configuration of ancient
landmarks, with their aspect towards the
starry sphere. Whence shall food then
be obtainable ? “ The land shall be
utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled, for
the Lord hath spoken this word.” The
answer, prophecy previsions, is, “ Ye
shall eat this year such things as grow
of themselves, and in the second year
that which springeth of the same ; and
in the third year sow ye, and reap, and
plant vineyards, and eat the fruit
thereof ; and the remnant that is escaped
of the House of Judah shall yet again
take root downward and bear fruit up-
ward.” “ For out of Jerusalem shall go
forth a remnant, and they that escape
out of Mount Zion.” Then shall the
New Jerusalem be built, and “ the
escaped of the nations” will flock toward
it, and place themselves under protec-
tion of the Jewish national standard,
with costly offerings. Thenceforward
the laws of the federated nations of the
world shall be those of the Great King,
whose tabernacle will be conspicuous as
in the midst of His once more beloved
people, the descendants of faithful
Abraham, concerning whose seed His
covenant is being fulfilled.
Wherefore the persistent disinclination
on part of the clergy to earnestly attempt
the elucidatory study of sacred pro-
phecy ? They excuse themselves be-
cause so many have failed in attempted
definition of the periods when events,
as they read them, should occur. It
seems more than probable, by the signs
of latter-day times, and the mercifully
long deferred, but now looming indica-
cations of coming war, that the present
maturing “ generations shall not pass;
away until all these things be fulfilled.”
Are they being educated to trace the
consecutive links of the chain of the
gradual fulfilments of prophecy as
to the world’s future history, in which
they may be momentously involved ?
Who but the clergy should be competent
for this ? Alas ! the previsions of in-
spired prophecy indicate the cause of
their apathy. Who will rouse them to
a due sense of their responsibility on
this behalf? “The vision of all is


searched out beneath, I will also
cast
off all the seed of Israel, for all that
they
have done, saith the Lord.” “ The city
shall be builded upon her own hill,
and
their palaces shall remain , . ,
and
become as the words of a book that is
sealed, Which men deliver to one that is
learned, Saying ‘ Read this, I pray
thee ;’ and he saith ‘ I cannot, for it is
scaled-;’ and the book is delivered,
to him that is hot learned, saying,
£ Read this, I pray thee;’ and he
saith, ‘I am not learned.’ ” Will not this
now be admitted as an accurate previ-
sion of the present day reasoning, under
which sacred prophecy remains a mystery
unelucidated ? The savant will not in-
terfere with the province of the theolog-
ian, in biblical elucidation ; and to the
theologian, the matter appears so'Sealed
up in metaphorical representations, that
the meaning is deemed enigmatical, if
hot entirely incomprehensible. But,
though “ the wisdom of wise men shall”
thus judicially “perish, and the under-
standing of prudent men shall be hid ;”
yet, in latter days “ shall the deaf hear the
words of the book, and the eyes of the
blind shall see out of obscurity, and out
of darkness;” “ they also that have
erred in spirit shall come to understand-
ing, and they that murmured shall learn,
the doctrine.” “ Now, therefore, be ye
not mockers ; for I have heard from the
Lord God of hosts, a consumption, even
determined upon the whole earth,” i.e.,
probably, as in primeval eras, a face
of it containing the older continents.
“ He that formeth the mountains, and
creatcth the wind, and declareth unto
man what is His thought” . . “He
maketh the day dark with night, and
calleth for the waters of the sea, and
poureth them out upon the face of the
earth, the Lord, the God of hosts, is His
name.” Cease ye from man’s apathetic
ignoring of prophetic previsions, for “the
grass withereth, the flower fadeth, but
the word of our God shall stand for
ever.”
The Mosaic scriptures foretold, many
hundreds of years before consummation
of the events, the invasions, sieges,
sufferings, oppressions, dispersions, and
jet signal preservation, as a distinct and
separate race, of God’s chosen
the Jews. They were “to be” a sign
and a wonder for ever.” The lasting
promise to them is “ Fear thou not, 0
my Servant Jacob, saith the Lord,
neither be dismayed 0 Israel,” for though
“that day is gre.it, so that none is
like it; it is even the time of Jacob’s
trouble; but he shall be saved out
of it,” “ for 10, I will save thee
from afar; , . . . and Jacob shall
return, and shall be in rest, and be
quiet, and none shall make him afraid,
for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to
save thee ; though I make a full end
of all the nations whither I have scat-
tered thee, yet will I not make a full
end of thee.” “ Thus saith the Lord,
which giveth the sun for a light by day,
and the ordinances of the moon and of
the stars for a light by night; ...
If those ordinances depart from before
me, saith the Lord, then the seed of
Israel also shall cease from being a
nation before me for ever. Thus saith
the Lord, if heaven above can be mea-
sured, and the foundation of the earth
their nobles shall be of themselves, and
their governor shall proceed from the
midst of them.” When is this to be ?
“ Behold th® whirlwind of the Lord shall
fall upon the head of the wicked. The
fierce anger of the Lord shall not return
until he have done it, and until Tie have
performed the intents of His heart: In
the latter days ye shall consider it.
At this same time, saith the Lord, will I
be the God of all the families of Israel,
and they shall be my people.” Though
multitudes of foes gather “ in the valley
of decision,” and “ the sun and moon
be darkened, the stars withdraw their
shining, and the heavens and the earth
shall shake, in the great and terrible day
of the Lord “in Mount Zion and ia


Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the
Lord hath said, and in the remnant
whom the Lord shall call.” “ Judah
shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from
generation to generation,” for the Lord,
henceforth, “ dwelleth in Zion.” Thence
shall the law issue, for the government
of the remnant of the nations. The
veneration —not the fear—of God, who
is worthy of man’s absorbing admiration,
loving worship, and reverent adoration,
shall no longer need the precepts of men
to teach, for “ all shall know Him, from
the least of them unto the greatest of
them,” and “ there is no fear in love,
perfect love casting off all fears.”
FINIS.
E. Warren, Printer, Ovens and Murray Advertiser Office, Beechworth,
Jn conclusion, are not these themes
more worthy of being studied, taught,
and expatiated upon by the clergy, than
their often studiously elaborated analyses
of single texts, as simply whiling away
the brief Sabbath sermon periods, and
often thenceforth utterly forgotten ? But
all should, for themselves, search the
scriptures, and see if those things we
quote, are faithfully transcribed. Refer-
ence to quotations is easy to all having a
concordance. A large proportion of the
prophecies have reference to the closing
events of the existing dispensation, and
the restoration of Israel; and nearly all
now seemingly approaching fulfilment.
Q- I


