

THE STORY
OF
St. Thomas' Church,
PORT MACQUARIE.
BY THE REV. H. P. LO[?]
Vicar.




ST. THOMAS' CHURCH, PORT MACQUARIE.
EXTERIOR VIEW




ST. THOMAS' CHURCH, PORT MACQUARIE
INTERIOR VIEW.




THE STORY OF ST. THOMAS’ CHURCH.
Port Macquarie, situated at the entrance to
the Hastings River, is, with its beautiful in-
vigorating climate, one of the most healthy
and desirable residential towns in New
South Wales; 177 miles north of Sydney,
17 hours’ run by boat, and 12 hours per
train and car. It is rapidly coming into
favour as a pleasure resort, and is also
noted as a place of antiquarian and great
historical interest, and it is in connection
with the latter, particularly the old parish
church, that this deals. In March, 1821,
Captain Allman, of the 48th Regiment, with
certain others, sailed from Sydney to form
a settlement in Port Macquarie, the site
having been discovered by Lieutenant Oxley,
R.N., in 1817. In August, 1824, Rev. Thomas
Hassell was temporarily appointed chaplain
to Port Macquarie, and on December 8 of
that same year Lieutenant Carmac, the
Acting Commandant, laid the foundation
stone of St. Thomas’ Church, and the chap-
lain gave an appropriate address on the occa-
sion. Every Sunday the officers, soldiers
and prisoners would assemble on the Church
Hill, and Mr. Hassell would conduct service
in the open air, so that the people were not
left destitute without a knowledge of the
Word of God. It was on December 4, 1827,
news came to Port of the appointment of a


permanent chaplain in the person of the
Rev. John Cross, his appointment being
made by the Governor of New South Wales,
Sir Ralph Darling. The new chaplain was
expected to take up his duties about Febru-
ary, and as the church was not completed,
the prisoners, under xnilitary supervision
and guard, had to labour incessantly day
and night to get the sacred edifice ready
for the opening service. On Monday, Febru-
ary 18, 1828, Mr. Cross arrived at Port
Macquarie in the Government barque “Lucy
Ann,” and iu the same boat Mr. Hassell,
who had been appointed to the district of
Cooke, returned to Sydney. The new chap-
lain brought many Church requisites with
him, including Communion vessels and a
bell. On Sunday, February 28, 1828, the
church having been sufficiently finished, was
opened by the chaplain, who also delivered
a stirring address from 2 Cor. 12 chap., 10
verse: ‘ ‘ When 1 am weak then am I
strong. ’ J
The church is a very large brick building,
capable of seating 700 people. In the cen-
tre of the western wall there is an imposing
Norman tower 60 feet high, and is a promi-
nent land mark familiar to travellers either
by land or by water, especially the latter,
and few there are who are privileged to step
ashore at this almost forgotten old seaport,
which has figuredjso bravely as an important
place in the infant days of the State; and
to see the inside of the curious old Church
of St. Thomas. Port Macquarie undoubtedly
represents in Australia an age which is
gone, never to return, and hence, as already
stated, its antiquarian interest. The history
of Australia has made such rapid strides,
and what may be considered a recent period
in England is a remote age in Australia, and
so within one century has been crowded all
the different stages of development which
in the Old Country would be represented by
a lapse of hundreds of years, and thus it
is that although Port Macquarie was only
founded 98 years ago, a period which would


be thought as yesterday in England, yet the
town is distinctly ancient, for the type of
life which made Port Macquarie important
has as completely vanished away from Aus-
tralia as has that type of life which built
the castles and abbeys of the Homeland.
One is not favourably impressed with the
gloomy aspect of the outside of the church,
but this feeling is dispelled on entering the
building, with its high, square pews or
boxes. The same kind are now very seldom
seen in the oldest churches of England, due
in part to the devastating hand of Thomas
Cromwell, but more particularly to the busy
renovating and modernising hands which
have swept away most of the relics of the
past. Port Macquarie is certainly very
interesting, for this at least, that we have
one of the few remaining samples of how
an English church looked in the early days.
On walking up the wide aisle to the east
one can see the grave of Captain Holland,
who was Commandant of this district. If
report is true, it was not because of his
saintly nature that he was buried there.
However, his remains, concealed by a huge
slab of stone, bearing the broad arrow, lie
immediately in front of the huge towering
pulpit. On the north and south walls are
many tablets telling how this one and that
one had served in His Majesty’s Army dur-
ing the Peninsular Campaigns, and had fin-
ished their lives in Port Macquarie. In
the sanctuary there is a beautiful stained
window representing St. Thomas, the Patron
Saint, and dedicated to the memory of the
Hay family. The Altar and Altar railing
were given in memory of Mr. and Mrs
Wilkins. There are also two windows in
the southern wall, one dedicated to Honoria
Brown and the other to Rev. John Cross,
Dr. Mclntyre, and Henry Harding Parker,
Esq. On the sanctuary wall are two tablets
about 10ft by 3ft 6in each, on which are
written the Lord’s Prayer, Apostles’ Creed,
and the Commandments. The first musical
instrument was a seraphim, and was sold
for £37, which went towards the purchase


of the present organ, which cost £126 in
London, in 1856, and was played in the
parish church for the first time by Mr. J.
Simpson, July 11, 1857. It may be of in-
terest to know that the freight on the
organ from London to Sydney Avas £ll 4s
3d, and the freight from Sydney to Port
Macquarie Avas £lO 15s 6d, and the packing
cases cost £l3 10s.
On entering the south aisle, one can see
a tablet over the vestry door which is
placed there to the memory of the Rev. John
Cross, Incumbent of the parisli for 30 years.
There is also a family peAv dedicated to his
memory, and still occupied by relatives of
the much-beloved clergyman. We have
already seen that the church took four years
in building, as well it might, when every
brick was set and every hod of mortar car-
ried by poor creatures whose weary limbs
were weighted by heavy falling legirons.
Well might it be said that this church was
built in tears and blood. For thirty years
the Rev. John Cross worked indefatigably
among all classes, every Sunday the bell
would call bond and free, officers and sol-
diers, innocent and guilty, to come and
worship the Great Creator. The popula-
tion in 1828 was a little over 800 souls, and
of this number only 153 were free persons.
Only four pews were in the church which
were for the Commandant, clergy and offi-
cers. Around the north, south, and west
Avails were forms for the sentinels, who were
armed with muskets, and outside each door
stood tAvo sentinels also armed with muskets.
Between the first and second bell the con-
victs, in their yellow garments, Avould be
marched to church, and made to stand
shoulder to shoulder in the Avide, open space
in the building; the guards, with their
bright red uniform, tile in toav facing them,
their muskets loaded and their bayonets
fixed. What a strange congregation, so
motionless and silent! Soon the Command-
ant, in gorgeous uniform, arrives. He is
accompanied by his attendants. The bell
which has been tolling for a second time


ceases. The service begins. From hearts
of all descriptions, some proud and gay,
others weary and heavy laden, ascend the
same words of prayer and praise to
Almighty God. There are present men who
have done yeoman service to the Empire,
and there are men who rightly or wrongly
.are regarded as the pariah of society. Did
ever such a motley congregation assemble
together in a Christian church for worship?
The service is over. There is the same
ostentation of military display as on enter-
ing. The same clinking of hekvy legirons
as the prisoners move away, and the huge
church is soon silent again. What a con-
trast there is between the present-day con-
gregation that worships in the church, and
that which must have met together in the
olden days! But is it not better that the
past is dead and done with, even though
it was seemingly beautiful and great ? There
was unfortunately a dark side to that
picture. There are few places in Australia
that show so unmistakably the imprint of
a past history as St. Thomas’ Church, Port
Macquarie, and it would he a great pity
to see the old building pulled down 01
modernised. The best and brightest days of
Port Macquarie are to come. It is, there-
fore, to be hoped that the parishioners and
other interested church-goers will never
allow the present building to crumble away
or be modernised, but will see that it stands
as it is, a curious old monument of the past.


A FEW INTERESTING ITEMS.
1829. There is a faculty from the Bishop
of Australia, authorising the Rev.
John Cross to put extra seating
accommodation in the church. The
record is fairly well preserved.
1854. Taken from Register: Mr. Jobling
allowed to sit in Mr. Hayward’s pew
near his father’s tablet, and Mr. Hay-
ward allowed to sit in Mr. Jobling’s
pew.
1857. The church purchased 6000 ft cedar,
which cost £7l 5s
1873. Mrs. Simpson left the church a
legacy of £lOO.
1879. The Communion offertory, ss, pre-
sented to the officiating priest.
1880. A summons was issued for recovery
of pew rent, but the summons was
withdrawn, the rent having been
paid.
1897. The East wall was blown in and por-
tion of the roof blown away by an
easterly gale.
The following words are inscribed on the
Chalice: —“Presented by Mrs. Gosehen to
the English church at Dresden on Trinity
Sunday, 1866, A.D.”
The number of children baptized in the
parish is 3319.
The following is a list of Vicars:—
Rev. John Cross 1824-1854
Rev. Thomas 0 ’Reilly 1854-1860
Rev. E. R. Kemp .. i. 1860-1877
Rev. Gr. A. C. Innes ... 1877-1878
Rev. W. A. Saunders ~ 1880-1884
Rev. H. Dunlop 1885-1887
Rev. R. H Kelly .... 1887-1888
Rev. R. W. Wilson .... 1888-1892
Rev. W. Kemmis .... 1893-1895
Rev. W. A. J. Wells .. 1895-1898
Rev. 0. M. Thomas .... 1899-1904
Rev. H. C. Barnes .... 1904-1907
Rev. Canon Morrish ~ 1907-1913
Rev. H. P. Lomas .... 1913-


HOURS OF SERVICES:
Ist Sunday.—Port Macquarie, 11 a.m., H.C.; Children’s Service, 2.30 p.m.; Evensong, 7.30
p.m.; Hamilton, 4 p.m.
2nd Sunday .—Upper Plains, 10.30 a.m.; Telegraph Point, 3 p.m.; Port Macquarie, 7.30 p.m.
3rd Sunday-—Port Macquarie, 7.30 a.m., H.C.; Evensong, 7.30 p.m.; Stoney Creek, 11 a.m.;
Blackman’s Point, 3 p.m.
4th Sunday.-—Lower Plains, 11 a.m., H.C.; Telegraph Point, Children’s Service, 2.30 p.m.;
Evensong, 3 p.m.; Port, 7.30 p.m.
sth Sunday. —Port, 7.30 a.m., H.C.; Evensong, 7.30 p.m.; Telegraph Point, 11 a.m., H.C.;
The Hatch, 2.30 p.m.
Holy Communion, Saints’ Day, Port Macquarie, 7.30 a.m.
Matins, Port Macquarie, Daily, 8.55 a.m.
Vicar:
The REV. HERBERT P. LOMAS.
Donations to the Restoration Fund may he placed in a hox near the door or sent
to the Vicar.
EXAMINER Kninl.i URAFTON.




