

l* ‘‘ THE WISDOM Of THIS WORLD STULTIFIED
I BY THE lISBOI Of GOD," . |
J :■ a.- it epi: y. ‘. tf
deli VERB]) IN
h JJt. (John’s Jhurch, Jaalnceston, rf>
¥| ON W
SUNDAY MORNING, AUGUST 19, 1883, Tj
8 by the pj I
IECZUTV. G-A-USTOZUT BBOWNBIGG, ®
LECTURE on “ The Relations of Modern Science with IMj
the Christian Churches,” |SS
AJ DELIVERED AT ® H
SCOT S’ CHURCH, MELBOURNE,' (T;
M\ . August 2, 1883, by
fV 3MC3R.. JXJSTIC3SI 3E3E-I<3-IIT33O , T3BEitM,
Under the Auspices of the Scots’ Church Literary Association.




££ riIHE WISDOM OF THIS WORLD
JL STULTIFIED BY THE
WISDOM OF GOD."
A REPLY
Delivered in St. John’s Church, Laun-
ceston, on Sunday morning, August 19,
1883, by the
Rev. Canon Brownrigg,
To a Lecture on “The Relations of
Modem Science with the Christian
Churches,” delivered at Scots’ Church,
Melbourne, August 2, 1883, by
Mr Justice Higinbotham,
Under the auspices of the Scots’ Church
Literary Association.
(Published hy Request.)
“ Where is the wise? Where is the scribe?
Where is the disputer of this world ? Hath not
God made foolish the wisdom of this world ?
For after that in the wisdom of God, the
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased
God by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe.” I. Cor., i, 20, 21.
The philosophic spirit of highly intel-
lectual and educated Corinth, while yet it
lives, is in the present day as impotent to
secure man’s highest good, as it was some
nineteen hundred years ago. This hum-
bling fact, admitting as it does of easy
and intelligent solution, is capable of the
clearest demonstration ; and such demon-
stration is supplied to us in a recently
published lecture on “The Relations of
Modern Science with the Christian
Churches.”
That lecture, I have reason to believe,
has been extensively and approvingly
read, and doubtless the talents, reputa-
tion, high social and judicial position of
its author will secure for it a considerable
influence over many minds.
Under these circumstances, and on this
account, the lecture in question demands
the attention of the Christian churches,
and such attention should find expression
either by some open and fearless acknow-
ledgment of the force and soundness of
the opinions therein set forth, or by some
equally open and fearless disavowal of the
same.
Now a close analysis of the lecture leads
me to this conclusion, that if its teaching
be sound, the dogmatic teaching of the
Bible must be set aside, excepting only—
to use the words of the lecturer—“the
central principle or dogma of the exist-
ence of God, and his relationship to man,
together with the primary and secondary
rules of human conduct founded on and
springing out of that relationship.” In
proof of the conclusion thus stated, I will
proceed to represent the grounds on
which principally it is based.
After a few preliminary remarks
in reference to the circumstances out
of which the lecture arose, the
first point handled is that of the
position op the laity in reference to
“ burning questions of religious thought.”
The chief particular noted under this
head is the growing division between the
minds of the clergy and of the educated
thinking laity in the Christian churches.”
He takes “it to be certainly true that
the intellects of the great majority of
thinking and educated laymen at this day
lie wholly outside the influence of the
intellectual teaching of the Christian
clergy.” He tells us that “in all
countries professedly Christian the laity
evince by their conduct in reference to
great public questions, such as education
and the relations of the State to the
churches, a growing and profound distrust
of all church systems of religious and
moral belief. In all the churches the
clergy display more and more unwilling-
ness even to allude in their addresses to
the laity to the intellectual bases of reli-
gious truth and of moral obligations. In
all the churches in all Christian countries
the adult male laity, by whom the affairs
of the world are managed, on whose
judgment of mind and character the
highest interests of mankind in the
present and in future generations mainly
depend, remain intellectually untaught by
those whose mission, if they have any
mission, it is to teach. And to teach
adult, thinking laymen, I will add, rather


than women and children. For is it not widely different from that humble and
a keen and yet a most just reproach to all
adult laymen that we have abandoned to
other and strange hands the duty of
teaching wives and children, which plainly
devolves by natural obligation on our-
selves? We have an excuse indeed; I
do not mean to say that it is a justifica-
tion. We ourselves are untaught, and
we are consequently incapable of per-
forming a duty which demands a know-
ledge of the most difficult of the sciences
and the most delicate of arts, 1 moan
the science and the art of educating and
training the undeveloped mind of the
child and the receptive and dependent
mind of the woman. But where shall
the responsibility be laid for the unedu-
cated and untrained condition of the
layman’s mind with respect to the highest
truths ?”
What then are the allegations and com-
plaints herein contained ? It is alleged
that there is a “growing division between
the minds of the clergy and of the edu-
cated thinking laity, ” —that ‘ ‘ the intellects
of the great majority of educated and
thinking laymen at this day lie wholly
outside the influence of the intellectual
teaching of the clergy”—that “the laity
evince a growing and profound distrust
of all church systems of religious and
moral belief”—that “ the adult male laity
remain intellectually untaught by those
whose mission, if they have any, it is to
teach,” and that the “adult male laity
being untaught” are “consequently incap-
able of educating and training the unde-
veloped mind of the child, and the recep-
tive dependent mind of the woman.”
Now, on the assumption that these
allegations are founded in fact, it will not
be denied that they reveal a most
unhealthy, and, therefore, a most unde-
sirable, state of things, and give point to
the question, “where shall the responsi-
bility be laid for the uneducated and
untrained condition of the layman’s mind
with respect to the highest truths ?”
But while pondering over these alle-
gations, and that question to which they
lead, one is forcibly reminded of the
attitude of the Corinthian philosophic
mind, as represented by the apostle in
those few suggestive words —“the Greeks
seek after wisdom”—a state of mind
which the apostle not obscurely hints at
as presenting a formidable obstacle to the
reception of the “ highest truths,” and
docile spirit, which the great Teacher of
Christianity propounded as essential to
an entrance into, or the reception of,
the kingdom of heaven, even “as a
little child,” or “become as little chil-
dren.” —Matt, xviii, 3.—Mark x, 15.
In examining, however, the answer
supplied by the lecturer to the question
he has himself proposed, I fear that
answer must be characterized as in some
measure wanting in consistency, and in
fact, that it leaves the real answer practi-
cally untouched. For example, in one
paragraph we are informed that “ every-
where in all Protestant churches, dog-
matic truth is either not presented at all
to the intellects of educated laymen, or it
it is presented in such a manner
as that the large majority cannot under-
stand, and will not accept it.” If this be
fact, does it not occur to one as something
remarkable and inconsistent that the
educated layman can venture to hand
over the teaching of wives and children to
“teachers ” (if the title in this connection
be not a misnomer), “ who either do not
present dogmatic truth at all, or present
it in such a manner that even the more
vigorous intellect of the large majority of
educated laymen cannot understand it ?”
But while this serious reflection upon
either the unfaithfulness or the unintelli-
gibleness of religious teachers is repre-
sented in one paragraph, a change of
sentiment, shifting the responsibility from
the clergy and placing it elsewhere, is
expressed in another almost immediately
succeeding. There, in reply to the
question “What is the cause of this
waning influence as a teaching power of
all the Christian Churches ?”—the follow-
ing noteworthy answer is supplied ;—“ I
do not think that we should be justified in
tracing that fact to any deterioration in
the general body of the clergy,” and then,
after a eulogiumon the clergy, it is added—
“ Neither should we be at liberty to con-
clude that the clergy do not and cannot
teach the laity, because laymen generally
are at this day indifferent to religious
truth, and refuse to be taught.” The
conflicting nature of these sentiments is
surely apparent, but while the lecturer
would seem to suggest that the indifference
to religious truth, and the refusal to be
taught, are the consequences , may it not,
perhaps, rather be said that they are,
wherever manifested, the cause ot “the
2


waning influence as a teaching power of
all the Christian Churches.” What hope,
indeed, is there of any good influence
being exercised, wherever in respect of
the “ highest truths,” there is either
indifference or not simply unwilling-
ness, but refusal to be taught ?
It would appear, however, after all that
the lecturer would trace up the “ waning
influences of the churches,” to “ The
Influences op Modern Science.” “I
believe,” he observes, “that the best
answer to this question will be found in
the additions that have been made by
modern science to human knowledge, and
in the change, or rather the revolution
which those additions have made in the
mind and its judgments with reference to
subjects of religious speculative thought.”
Limiting his remarks to two great
branches of science, he adds, “ But
astronomy and geology, each exerting a
wide and indirect influence, have enor-
mously extended man’s conceptions of
space and of time in the minds even of
persons who know little or nothing of
either science, and in doing this they
have changed the whole character of
human thought upon the highest subjects
of speculative enquiry.”
These statements are advanced, as will
be presently seen, to prepare the way for
an assault upon the trustworthiness of the
Mosaic record of the creation, and of
Biblical revelation in general. How that
it is brought about, I proceed to show.
Speaking under the heading of
Scientific Revelations, astronomy is
properly appealed to in evidence of the
vastness of the universe, but geology is
appealed to as yielding evidence
“pointing,” it is alleged, “with reason-
able certainty that man has existed on
the earth during a period anterior to
history of about two hundred thousand
years,” and the effect of this teaching on
the part of astronomy and geology is
represented as giving enlightened and
corrective views of the Creator’s character,
as though Revelation had represented
“arbitrary dealing, capricious favor,
vengeful punishment, and sudden pas-
sionate changes” as attributes of the
Creator—ideas affirmed by the lecturer as
‘ ‘ unthinkable” by an educated layman in
regard to the Creator, and certainly I
would add not less “unthinkable” by an
educated clergyman, the insinuation to
the contrary notwithstanding.
It is, however, no new experience in
this age of so-called “ advanced thought,”
to find those who would attempt to under-
mine Revelation by the speculations of
science, treating scientific speculations as
though they were absolute and indisputable
certainties, and then assigning to them
an authority out of all proportion
to their due—an authority greater than
that which may be justly claimed for
Revelation. If, then, we are required to
credit the “ two hundred thousand years”
of man’s creation and duration on earth
“anterior to history,” we are honestly
entitled to demand something more
authoritative on that point than mere
speculation, however much an alleged
“reasonable certainty.” may be claimed
for the same.
But lest any should become alarmed by
the apparent aggressiveness of science (as
if it were possible that God, in His works,
rightly interpreted, and God, in His word
could involve a contradiction), the
lecturer, under the heading of Science
and Religion, proceeds to remark,
‘ ‘ There is, of course, no opposition or
conflict between modern science with it*
great results and the enlarged conceptions
which it has evolved in the human mind,
and religion.” Now while this appears
to be a satisfactory and reassuring state-
ment, it might be well to consider what
he means by “religion.” What, then,
does he mean by “religion”? Clearly
not those truths of paramount importance
which lead up to, and gather around, and
centre in the Person and work of Christ,
as God manifest in the flesh, and as the
Saviour of the world. By no place being
found for such truths in the definition of
“religion” which the lecturer supplies,
these would probably be classified among
the dogmas he elsewhere speaks of as
“revolting and odious to the natural
conscience and to the understanding of
man.” He tells us, however, that he
uses the word “religion” “in the sense
that points to the existence of the supreme
mind and the relations existing between
that mind and the derived mind of man,”
all which, when stripped of their eloquent
expression, simply means, only in a
Deistical sense !
Meanwhile, however, science is pictured
out as “affrighted by ecclesiasticism, and
its not yet exhausted terrors,” and there-
fore retaining an “attitude of reserve.”
And this representation is evidently
3


inade to prepare the mind for the revc.-Iu- ( reat Teacher taught in His system of
tionizing principles to be subsequently
expressed in which all church organisa-
tions, creeds, standards, and confessions
of faith should be swept away as be’ g
the present barrier to “enlightened pro-
gress”— the “march of intellect,”
“ advanced thought,” and so forth. But,
palpably in the mind of the lecturer, the
time is coming when science “ com-
pletely set free from its lingering fears,”
shall comeforth as the invincible champion
of evolution , a doctrine which, applied to
the question of the origin of man, in-
volves a conclusion quite opposed to the
plain and simple account of that origin as
recorded in the first chapter of Genesis—
a chapter from which it has been well
said, that a “ child,” and, I would add
also, the happily “ receptive and depen-
dent mind of woman,” may learn more in
one hour about the origin of things than
all the philosphers in the world could learn
without it to the very end of time.
Advancing now a stage further, the
lecturer affirms that “ there is no
opposition between modern science and
that system of religion which was com-
mitted to the world by the Founder of
Christianity,” Now, while most fully
agreeing in the fact which these words
may be employed to express, yet, the real
nature, and the true value of this affirm .
tion must be examined from what would
appear to be the lecturer’s standpoint.
In a passage noteable for its subtlety and
unsettling, and, I fear, I must add, the
pernicious effects it is calculated to pro-
duce upon weak and unstable and doubt-
ing minds, Christ’s system of religion is
professedly dealt with. But in what
light has the teaching of that “One
Voice” been represented? Simply and
only this—that Christ taught “ the exist-
ence of one God, and His relationship to
man, together with the primary and
secondary rules of human conduct,
founded on and springing out of that
relationship. And on these rules, he
answer proceeds to state, ‘hang all the law
and the prophets; 5 they contain the whole
practise and theory of the universal religion
which the teacher had himself sough'
for and found, none more comprehensive
than these exist. 55 The teaching of
Christ is thus to the narrowest
possible limits, and advantage is taken of
Christ 5 s reply to the enquiring scribe, as
though it embodied or expressed all that
religion. The practical effect of this
representation would be to establish the
idea that a belief in the existence of God,
coupled with the discharge of certain
moral obligations to Him as the Supreme
Being, and to man, as in respect of a
common brotherhood, constitutes all the
religion which Christ set himself to teach.
This partial representation of matters is
certainly dangerous and misleading, and
when in this connection it is affirmed
that “ there is no opposition between
modern science and that system of
of religion 55 taught by the Founder of
Christianity, the conclusion can scarcely
be avoided that the affirmation referred
to is designed to secure for science a
position and power in support of princi-
ples, which are good in so far as they
admit the existence of God, and recognise
moral obligations to God and to man, yet
are seriously defective in the utter ignor-
ing of the Deity of Christ, and His great
atoning sacrifice for the sins of the whole
world.
I have already referred to the revolu-
tionary scheme projected by the lecturer,
viz., that of abolishing all church organi-
sations, creeds, and standards of faith.
Looking to the exigencies of the case, he
feels no difficulty in assuming that the
Founder of Christianity “ intended to
establish a church which should propagate
and should for ever maintain His doc-
trine throughout the world, 55 but while it
may be readily admitted that ‘ ‘ no system
of Government was fixed by the Founder
of the church, no ritual was prescribed”
(with the exceptions, however, which I
would suggest, viz., that of Baptism and
the Lord’s Supper) “ no form of common
prayer was directed,” it is not to be so
i caddy admitted that the “ closet prayer”
He taught His disciples was constructed
“ almost verbatim out of the Talmud/ 5
“ The attempt of some critics, 55 remarks
the Dean of St. Pauls’, “ to derive the
Lord’s Prayer from the Zenda-
vesta is examined and refuted by
Tholuck. The supposition that our
*.'ord made use of existing Jewish forms
°f prayer, though in itself more probable,
i 5 deficient in historical proof ; except as
regards the first two petitions, which may
possibly have been adopted from an exist-
■og prayer of the synagogue, but which
also may have been directly suggested by
passages of the Old Testament.”
4


But the lecturer holds creeds and creeds ? Let us see. I have already inti-
standards of faith in abhorrence. “The
great bulk of the propositions of fact and
of belief in even the earliest creeds and
in all the later articles, confessions, and
standards of faith,” he tells us, “are un-
doubtedly additions to the primitive doc-
trine.” And here it may be fairly asked
—what does the lecturer mean by £ ‘ the
primitive doctrine” ? Regarding his
allusions elsewhere to the “central
dogma”—the existence of God—it may be
supposed that this exhausts his meaning
of “the primitive doctrine,” in which
case, in Ms view, the various articles con-
tained for instance in the apostles’ creed
might be “ additions to the primitive
doctrine,” but no amount of sophistry
will ever avail to prove them to be “ un-
authorised additions,” or other than the
clear and intelligible particulars of the
Christian religion as taught by the Founder
of that religion. For exatnple—Did
Jesus declare himself to be the Son of
God 1 In this surely he spoke the truth,
and shall that article be condemned that
expresses our belief that Jesus was the
Son of God ? Again, did Jesus affirm
that the Scriptures concerning himself
must be fulfilled, which spake of his
vicarious sufferings for the sin of the
world—the nature of the death he should
suffer—and the benefits to be thereby
secured to everyone who humbly believes ?
In this, surely, he did not deceive nor
was himself deceived. Shall it then be
said that those articles which express
the Christian’s belief in those par-
ticulars, are “ unauthorised additions
to the primitive doctrine” 1 Are
these the dogmas, which, to use the
lecturers own words, “ are revolting
and odious to the natural conscience and
to the understanding of man ” ? If so,
then mark these words of the Spirit of
God, ‘ ‘ The natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him ; neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually
discerned” (1 Cor. ii. 14).
But carrying on his crusade against
creeds, the lecturer tells us “that some
of the articles of these unauthorised
creeds have been undermined by recent
science.” As, however, we want proof,
and not mere assertion, to this effect,
before we can credit the statement made,
we may inquire does he furnish us with
any proof that science has falsified our
mated that the lecturer’s reference to geo-
logical science was preparatory to an
assault upon the trustworthiness of the
Mosaic record and of Biblical revelation
in general, and now it so appears. In
his lecture I find these words—“ The
ancient tradition that man was created
perfect, that the first man so created fell
by his own act, and thereby introduced
death for the first time into the world,
and entailed hereditary guilt and moral
ruin upon all his posterity, appears to
have taken some hold upon the Jewish
mind. The alleged historical fact, and
the dogma of hereditary guilt founded
upon it, are not so much as mentioned
once by the Founder of Christianity;
possibly they were included by Him
amongst the traditions which had been
the means, He said, of making the com-
mandment of God of none effect. But
both have found their way into the
majority of the Christian Churches, and
have lent a distinct color to most of the
Christian creeds.” It must be evident to
all that there is here a bold attempt to
throw discredit upon the Biblical doctrines
of the perfection of man’s original state
his subsequent fall—and its painful con-
sequences, and this, moreover, as if under
the san'ctioh of the Founder of the Chris-
tian religion, inasmuch as he says—■“ The
alleged historical fact, and the dogma of
hereditary guilt founded upon it, are not
so much as mentioned once by the
Founder of Christianity.” It is somewhat
remarkable that the weakness and insuffi-
ciency of this argument had not at once
presented itself to the acute and critical
mind of the lecturer. Can it be neces-
sary to remind Bible readers that Christ
spoke approvingly of Moses’ writings
without hinting at their being in any
particular, mythical or legendary 1 “Had
ye believed Moses, ye would have believed
Me ; for he wrote of Me,” said Jesus.
“ But if ye believe not his writings, how
shall ye believe My words” ? (John v. 45,
46). And again, “They have Moses and
the prophets ; if they will not hear them,
neither will they be persuaded though
one rose from the dead” (Luke xvi. 31).
But further, will any reasonable man con-
tend that any complete record of Christ’s
words has ever been presented to us—how
can it therefore, possibly be held that the
fall of man and hereditary guilt ‘ ‘ were
never so much as once mentioned by the
5


founder of Christianity ?” Did not, how- quence dates from the fall. But touching
On Si 4" T>o 111 W» An 4-1 /~\ 4- h nrirt ih T /UM 0 -Ll_ -11- .1 * 1 I* 1 ■ 1 •
ever, St. Paul mention these things 1
Did not he once say, “ The serpent
beguiled Eve ” ? (2 Cor. si. 3). Did not
he say, “ By one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin ” 1 (Rom.
v. 12). Did not he say, “ By one man’s
disobedience many were made sinners ” ?
(Rom. v. 19). Whence, I ask, did he
obtain that knowledge ? Who was his
instructor ? Let the apostle bear his
witness. “ I certify you brethren that
the gospel which was preached of me”
(and the truths referred to are inseparably
connected with that gospel) “is not after
men. For I neither received it of man,
neither was I taught it, but by the revela-
tion of Jesus Christ." (G-al. i, 11. 12),
Thus the authority of the Founder of
Christianity establishes the very dogmas
whose credibility is thus openly assailed.
But as the lecturer desires to support
his position by a reference to geology, let
us consider what he advances as from
that source. He says: “Now if there
be any general conclusions to which recent
geological science has forcibly drawn the
human mind, and to which, although
they may not be established by inductive
proof, laymen cannot, if they would,
refuse to accord belief, they are these—
that man at the first did not fall from a
higher state of existence, but that he
rose from a lower; and that what we call
death, or the change and dissolution of
the organic form in which life temporarily
resides, existed on this planet from the
time that life first appeared upon it, and
millions of years before the comparatively
recent date when man first came into
being. There is here irreconcilable vari-
ance between modern science and the
doctrine of the Christian churches.” A
few words will, perhaps, suffice to show that
the “variance” referred to is more seem-
ing than real in the particular of “death.”
It is not questioned that death, as a
natural event, existed on this planet from
the very earliest expession of life—for
successive forms of life taking the place of
older ones necessarily implies the existence
of death as a physical agent, and
in this respect there is no “ irre-
concileable variance between modern
science and the doctrine of the
Christian churchesbut it is affirmed
upon, at least, the indirect authority of
the Founder of Christianity, that in
respect of man, death as a penal conso-
the alleged evidence from geology that
man “rose from a lower ” to a higher state
of perfection, Professor Lyell, an eminent
geologist, holds no such view. In his
Manual of Geology, speaking of. the
doctrine of “successive development,” he
says:—“lf it were admitted that man
was created last of all, still we should by
no means be able to recognise in his entrance
upon the earth, the last term of one, and
the same series of progressive develop-
ments. For the superiority of man, as
compared to the irrational mammalia, is
one of kind, rather than of degree."
From science, then, whether it be that
of astronomy or geology, religion has
nothing to fear, but if the sure and well-
tried foundations of revealed religion are
abandoned, that the intellect alone may
be flattered and entertained, and the
speculations of science be more highly
thought of and credited than the dogmas
of revealed religion, it is no matter of
surprise that there should be unrest for
the soul. Under the heading of
Perplexity of Modern Thought, the
lecturer says :—“ls it not an astounding
fact—l take it to be an indisputable fact
—that at the end of the nineteenth
century of the so-called Christian dispen-
sation, a very large number of the most
cultivated, the most thoughtful, the most
sober-minded, and the most upright men
in all the civilised and Christian countries
of the world, are really unable to deter-
mine whether good and sufficient reasons
can be found for belief in the existence of
God, and whether there is any basis for
morality other than supposed personal
interest or utility 1 ?” On reading this
passage, one is strongly reminded of the
Apostle’s exclamation, “Where is the
wise 1 Where is the scribe 1 Where is
the disputer of this world 1" How is it
that “Modern Thought,” with all its
vaunted “advance,” has not been able to
set at rest the perplexed mind 1
“ Hath not God made foolish the
wisdom of this world ? ” Verily “ the
world by wisdom knew not Godbut
is there no remedy for the distressing
perplexity of modern thought ? In
the healing art it is of the first
importance that the disease should be
rightly diagnosed—that the nature of the
malady should be clearly revealed to the
mind of the physician. Now the lecturer
sets before us a terrible picture of what he
6


terms “mental paralysis,” and that this “ foolishness of God is wiser than men.”
evil is affecting all classes of the com-
munity. Confessedly we see the fruits of
this malady most widely spread, but to
what is it traceable ? Let that source be
discovered and one step is taken towards
the remedy, unless, indeed, that remedy
should be refused. In these words
following, which I quote from the lecture,
I find the secret of that “ mental
paralysis,” for to use another illustration,
‘ ‘the tree is known by its fruits—“ There
is no intellectual sympathy, no common
intellectual interest between them in
regard to a large number of the topics and
arguments which the clergyman is con-
strained to select for his pulpit utterances.”
If those “ pulpit utterances ” are to be the
utterances of the Ambassadors of Christ,
they must necessarily set forth such topics
as “Original sin,” “Hereditary guilt,”
“Imputed righteousness,” “The atone-
ment of Christ,” “ The work of the Holy
Spirit,” “ The love of God,” and “ Faith
evidenced by good works.” Shall these
utterances be deemed “foolishness?”
Then let it be remembered that the
If there be no “sympathy” with
such utterances, the fault is in the
heart and not in the head. Is
there then no remedy for the perplexity
of modern thought? Not until the in-
tellect of mail shall humble itself in the
very dust before God ; not until gifted
man shall come unto his God “ as a little
child,” then to the mind thus humbled,
and receptive God’s remedy for man’s
perplexity shall be applied. It pleases
God, “by the foolishness of preaching, to
save them that believe.” “ The preach-
ing of the cross is to them that
perish ” (that is, that are in a perish-
ing state), “foolishness; but unto us
which are saved, it is the power of
God,” and also “the wisdom of God.”
Well, therefore, may the Apostle exclaim,
with all holy confidence, as to the good
and eternally glorious consequences of the
Gospel received : “I am not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power, of
God unto salvation to everyone that
believeth.”
nsr o
ON THE DAYS OP CREATION.
Since delivering the above Reply I have
been asked the question—whether the Mosaic
account of the Creation demands the belief
that the six days are to be understood of six
literal days of 24 hours each ? This question
may, perhaps, be best answered in the fol-
lowing “note” on Gen. i. 5 by Dr. Harold
Browne, Bishop of Ely : —“ The vexed question
of the days of Creation cannot readily be
solved from consideration of the words of this
verse. The English version would seem to
confine it to natural days, but the original will
allow much greater latitude. Time passed in
regular succession of day and night. It was
an ingenious conjecture of Kurtz, adopted by
Hugh Miller, that the knowledge of pre-
Adamite history, like the knowledge of future
ages, may have been communicated to Moses,
or perhaps to the first man, in prophetic
vision; that so perhaps vast geological periods
were exhibited to the eye of the inspired
writer, each appearing to pass before him as
so many successive days.”
ON DARWINISM.
In his treatise on “The Descent of Man,”
Mr Darwin remarks as follows : —“ The main
conclusion arrived at in this work, and now
held by many naturalists who are well com-
petent to form a sound judgment, is that man
is descended from some less highly organised
form. The grounds upon which this conclusion
m s.
rests will never be shaken, for the close simi
larity between man and the lower animals in
embryonic development, as well as in innu-
merable points of structure and constitution,
both* of high and of the most trifling impor-
tance, —the rudiments which he retains, and
the abnormal reversions to which he is occa-
sionally liable, —are facts which cannot be dis-
puted. They have long been known,
but until recently they_ told us nothing
with respect to the origin of man. Now,
when viewed by the light of our know-
ledge of the whole organic world, their
meaning is clear and unmistakeable. The
great principle of evolution stands up clear
and firm, when these groups of facts are con-
sidered in connection with others, such as the
mutual affinities of the members of the same
group, their geographical distribution in past
and present times, and their geological succes-
sion. It is incredible that _ all these facto
should speak falsely. He who is not content to
look, like a savage, at the phenomena of
nature as disconnected, cannot any longer
believe that man is the work of a separate act
of creation.”
The “ main conclusion” thus arrived at by
Mr Darwin and the “many naturalists,” he
alludes to, as the result of “a sound judg-
ment,” is manifestly at variance with the
“main conclusion,” which a “sound judg-
ment” would reasonably derive from the
7


Mosaic account of the creation of man, Facts
may be one thing, while the right interpreta-
tation of such facts may be quite another. For
instance, “ the close similarity between man
and the lower animals,” may be facts beyond
question, but it does not follow that Mr
Darwin’s “conclusion ” from those facts is
equally beyond question. “ The close
similarity, ” of which he speaks, does not
neccessarily prove more than that man and the
lower animal creation have certain physical
properties in common ; and does not, therefore,
even yet tell us anything “ with respect to the
origin of, man.” I venture to affirm that the
doctrine of evolution utterly fails to account
rationally, and consistently with revealed
religion for the origin of man.
As a matter of fact, the human race either is
descended from the first pair of the human
species—the male and the female —whose
entrance into the world the Biblical narrative
ascribes directly to God, as a separate
and independent creative act, or, accord-
ing to Evolutionists, such human race, so far
from having this common origin, is the outcome
of some marvellous and gradual change in the
physical and mental condition of the Simian
family, not, however, in respect of some
favored pair of that family, but of countless
pairs thereof, and that those countless pairs
were of a sudden endowed with soul and the
wondrous gift of Reason, and that “ high
standard of intellectual power, and of moral
disposition,” which Mr Darwin himself admits
(though he vainly attempts to explain) to be
“ the greatest difficulty which presents itself”
to the conclusion he arrives at on the Origin of
Man.
But from whence do Evolutionists derive
Worrian ? What account can they give of her
origin? Should they reject the notion of the
human race, as it now is, being traceable to
countless pairs of superior apes, and ask
us to credit the “ conclusion” that one
ape, more wonderfully advanced than his
brother apes, was the favored subject
of that Divine gift—Reason—which has
raised the human family to heights immeasure-
ably above that of the mere brute creation—
the difficulty still has to be explained or
accounted for—By what means has the human
family descended from that solitary individual
ape? From whence came the “help meet ” for
that transformed and.thenceforth humanized
rational and soul-endowed ape ? When and by
what means did she come into existence ? This
difficulty which presents itself for evolution to
explain would of course present itself for solu-
tion in respect of any theory which would
account for the origin of man, and would in
fact have been beyond all explanation but dor
the Mosaic account of the creation.
PRINTED AT THE “DAILY TELEGRAPH” OFFICE, LAUNCESTON.
8
TAFp
Bt&uo
F 7591




