

The Prophylaxis of
Venereal Disease
A Reply to Sir James Barrett
BY
Mrs. James Booth
How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
makes ill deeds done.
—King John, act iv„ sc. 2.
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE A.C.S.E.
Norman Bros., Printers, 60-62 Elizabeth St., Melbourne


An Appeal.
X €.». (P.
(Association to combat the Social evil.)
In issuing this Pamphlet as part of its Educational Cam-
paign against the Social Evil the Committee relies with
confidence upon the active sympathy of those who realise
the peril which threatens the nation.
We invite the co-operation of parents, teachers and the
community generally in our fight against all forms of
sexual vice.
The Campaign will involve the Society in considerable
expense, and we therefore appeal to those who sympathise
with our aims and who appreciate the harm to the
community of sexual evils.
Cheques should be made out to —
MRS. JAMES BOOTH,
Tel. Central 2698. Hon. Organising Secretary,
220 Victoria Street,
North Melbourne,
REV. C. B. COCKETT, M.A.,
Hon. Treasurer,
Gordon Street,
Surrey Hills.


ynr£toor&
Is venereal disease a purely medical problem, such as
Small Pox, Typhoid, and other like plagues? It does not
seem so.
In the fight against disease generally, medicine attacks the
conditions which give rise to the trouble, but the medical
prophylaxis of venereal disease leaves untouched the chief
causal factor of its dissemination, promiscuity. Indeed the
advocates of medical prophylaxis declare the morals of men
are no concern of medicine and that is strictly
true. Here, then, is the great exception. Medicine does not
concern itself with promiscuity and the conditions giving rise
to it; these are the particular concern of social reformers and
sociologists. It is their right, therefore, to question the value
of any suggested remedy which might tend to support or in-
crease a pernicious social condition.


The Prophylaxis of Venereal Disease
MRS. JAMES BOOTH.
Informed opinion is undivided on the necessity for stamp-
ing out venereal disease, but there is a conflict of ideas about
the method of its achievement. On one hand it is claimed
that primary prophylaxis is the only certain remedy. The
opponents of that measure hold that primary prophylaxis may
be effective in certain conditions; should those conditions be
lacking, however, it will tend to be ineffective; but, effective or
not, they contend primary prophylaxis is immoral.'
Prophylaxis is a Greek word and means fore-guarding,
but, in connection with venereal diseases, the word has come
specifically to mean fore-guarding or prevention by certain
medical treatment. Primary prophylaxis means the application
of the treatment before exposure to infection from venereal
disease through irregular sexual union.
In a paper recently read before the Royal Society of .Medicine,
Sir James Barrett states of the Army in Egypt that “where
prophylaxis was properly applied, venereal disease was prac-
tically non-existent, and that out of four thousand five hun-
dred and eighty reported exposures to infection, only thirteen
infections resulted.” This and similar experiences are deemed
sufficient justification for the introduction of primary prophylaxis
into civil communities.
We do .not admit the justification since, in our opinion, the
position is based on a fallacy. The insanitary habits of ordinary


people forbid us to believe that primary prophylaxis will
achieve in civil life what it is claimed to have done in military
camps. The success of such treatment largely depends on the
care with which it is applied—a care only to be looked for under
a strictness of discipline and supervision, such as obtain under
military rule. In camp, for example, if after warning and
exhortation to report exposure, a large number of men were
found to be infected who had not reported, they would be
made to feel they had not played the game; that through
their indisposition they were threatening the efficiency of their
army. Such pressure of opinion and the fact that in military
camps acknowledged illicit intercourse incurs no social reproach,
are important checks against carelessness not operating in civil
life.
The experience of Langwarrin in this connection is informing.
In that camp, where the men’s liberty depended on their
cure, it seemed reasonable to hope that they might be trusted
to carry out simple treatment. But it was not so. Super-
vision was essential for the carrying out of directions no more
difficult than those for primary prophylaxis. If the procuring
of his liberty failed to make the ordinary man sanitary in
this regard, we may not believe he will be so, when under
sexual excitement and in the circumstances in which primary
prophylaxis would be generally applied. The advocates of
Regulation (an allied subject) contend, though regulation has
failed, it need not fail if . The “if ” presupposes a degree
of supervision impossible in civil life.
We submit that progress in sexual oonduct lies in control
of the impulse; that it is our obvious duty to make that
control possible. It is too early to say man will not be con-
tinent. Society has not required chastity of him. Historically
speaking, only to-day is it being asked, for in Western
civilisation it has been good form for man to sow wild oats.
He has not had a chance; on the contrary, his impulses
have been artificially stimulated.


Dr. Blaschko, of international repute, started his career as an
ardent advocate of Regulation. Experience of its failure caused
him to study more profoundly the conditions of Prostitution,
and, as a result, his opinions underwent a marked change.
It may be interesting to recall here what he wrote in 1914 re-
garding the morals of the army of his own country, Germany.
“If there are licensed brothels in a town, they should
be closed. The soldiers must be warned to live continently.
In some quarters it is proposed that soldiers should be pro-
vided with an apparatus for protecting themselves against
infection. In my judgment, this would be no more than a
stimulus to extra conjugal intercourse, and would not always
lessen the danger of infection.” Again he writes: “Many medi-
cal men consider it impossible to prohibit the soldiers consort-
ing with prostitutes. In my judgment, this is false. At a time
which entails such heavy sacrifices on everyone, it is not too
much to ask the soldier who can make ample use of his strength
in other directions to refrain from irregular living.”
In the “Military Surgeon,” March, 1914, in an article on
Sanitary Service in the Russo-Japanese War, translated by
Louis C. Duncan, Captain, Medical Corps, U.S. Army, we read:
“The Japanese made war for 21 months without a woman fol-
lower; it is a thing unique in history; while the Russian troops
brought in their suite a cortege of prostitutes, official and dis-
guised.”
ARTIFICIAL STIMULI ARE A GREATER CAUSE OF
INCONTINENCE THAN NATURAL INSTINCT.
While there is grave doubt of the efficacy of primary pro-
phylaxis in civil life,* there is no doubt of its powerful
influence in causing the youth of both sexes to adventure the
first sexual contact, thereby keeping up the condition of pro-
miscuity. Irregular living creates a desire for irregularity
*Langwarrin data showed 16 per cent, of primary prophylactic
treatments to be failures.


and, as Rousseau puts it, “it is the taste for variety rather
than desire which creates the libertine.” We believe that primary
prophylaxis, by removing a powerful inhibition, will help to
create the taste for irregular living; a taste which, once ac-
quired, makes fidelity in marriage difficult. There is much easy
talk of powerful instinct and ' elemental passion. Men and
women both are handicapped by these possessions. Gener-
ally speaking, however, these terms are used to cover a lack
of accurate knowledge. It is not so much the power of
instinct nor yet the uncontrollable nature of sexual passion which
is accountable for the great volume of incontinence. It is
the artificial stimulation of the instinct which has so much to
account for. Eminent opinion supports this contention. Writ-
ing on this point, Bloch remarks on “the volume of
incontinence, the result of habit caused by artificial stimuli,
which results in the phenomenon of men dissolute without
desire.” “In the big cities of Europe,” he again says, “the grow-
ing youth is characterised not by normal sexual development
but by an overstimulated sex activity.”
Investigation has shown, too, that the compulsion of com-
panions and the excitement of alcohol are weighty factors in
causing the first irregularity of conduct. Professor Neisser’s
inquiries showed less than half of the instances of first
sexual contact were due to native impulse, while 23 -6 were
due to alcohol, 29-4 to the compulsion of comrades. Mrs.
Bramwell Booth found out of too cases of men visiting houses
of prostitution l for the first time, 50 per cent, were due to
alcohol, and 20 per cent, to the influence of companions. The
evidence of the Health Department clinics supports these claims.
Great numbers of men form the promiscuous habit, not because
of the overpowering nature of the impulse, but through outside
pressure. If artificial stimuli and social compulsions have so much
to account for when the risk run is high, are we not justified in
believing the temptation will be almost irresistible when indul-
gence is said to carry no risk?


PRIMARY PROPHYLAXIS' VERSUS EARLY
TREATMENT.
We must stress the great difference between primary
prophylaxis and early treatment. The former carries
with it the sanction of society to irregular living; early
treatment does not. Early treatment by inducing men and
women of irregular habits to seek medical aid as soon as pos-
sible after exposure to infection says in effect: Though, you
have broken the moral law, public health requires we save
you and others from your folly. But to place primary pro-
phylaxis at the disposal of men and women is analagous to
saying to the burglar: Here are rubber gloves; if you use
them you will leave no trace.
The advocates of primary prophylaxis, when they do think
of women using the treatment, visualise only the prostitute. In
these days of freedom that which debauches male youth cannot
fail to contaminate girl youth also: there are not many who
can regard this contingency without misgiving. Yet is not
the chastity of the boy as important as that of the girl? They
are both equally important, though we may lack logical imagin-
ation enough to perceive it. What has hindered social per-
ception in this regard is the theory that the sexual needs of
men and women are different. Many still hold to this theory
even while deploring the increasing sexual laxity among women.
Because the impulse in woman does not take the explosive
form it takes in man, that is not to say the impulse is not
more persistent in woman. The sexual habits of civilised
woman are more restrained because there are centuries of
control behind her. As soon as the girl child begins to toddle
her lessons in decorum begin. Among primitive peoples
the evidence is that woman is the sexual equal of man.
Woman is not the physical assaulter among primitive peoples, but
her assault is none the less telling because it takes a psychical
form: she is the temptress. The need expressed in both


forms is the same, only it is expressed differently. The evidence
of free clinics shows that the majority of male patients have
not bought their indulgence. It has been freely given.
What does this show if it is not that when the girl is
freed from customary restraints her sexual activity is
not behind the boy’s; that her appetite once awakened, she
gives as freely as the boy takes. This fact and the evi-
dence of daily life forbid us to believe that primary pro-
phylaxis would remain the horrible privilege of male youth.
The outlook is so grave it would seem that a nemesis is over-
taking society; that if in the future men want pure women
they themselves must show the example of monogamous living.


Primary Prophylaxis.
PROS AND CONS.
The case for primary prophylaxis has been concisely stated in
the paper before referred to. Let us take the arguments in
order, and endeavour to reply to them.
Q. — (i) Is there any material difference from the moral
point of view in preventing venereal disease by the use of
measures adopted before, at the time of, or after exposure?
He who exposes himself knows that, in any event, he is prac-
tically safe.
A.—Yes; there is a great difference. Primary prophylaxis
carries with it the consent of society to sexual promiscuity;
early treatment does not. Early treatment says in effect: Though
you have broken the moral law, public health requires that you
and others be saved from the results of your folly.
Q. — (2) If morality is secured by fear of infection, why not
forbid treatment altogether?
A.—All treatment could not be forbidden without great
injustice. Numbers of men and women take the first step
in promiscuous living through conditions for which society and
not overpowering impulse is directly responsible. Society is,
therefore, bound to go to their aid.
Q. —(3) Is a morality which depends on fear of immediate
consequences worth very much?
A.—From the point of view of philosophy, this motive to
right action is not entirely desirable. Human beings are not
gods, however. If we consider the causes which influence
social conduct, the potency of sanctions and disabilities is
inescapable. Who can analyse the motives of his actions, and
not realise how much May and May Not influence what he Does


and Does Not. To question this is to question the restraining
power of law generally. An eminent criminologist has said: “If
every criminal knew absolutely that he would be caught, then
he would not commit the crime.”
Q. — (4) Is not the fundamental ethical fact which concerns
us the wholesale infection of the innocent which goes on at
present?
A.—Yes. The question is, which innocent? Chaste wives and
unborn children are not the only sacrifices to sexual irregularity.
To sanction or condone promiscuity which is prostitution means
the sacrificing of young girls to the trade. Where does the
commodity come from on which the commerce of prostitu-
tion depends—namely, young girls? From the vicious only?
From the feebleminded only? Not at all. The demand is
for attractive girls, and it is the procurer’s business to supply
them. Anything which helps to keep up irregular living must
keep up the debauching of young girls. Any trade ceases
so soon as its supply of commodities falls off—prostitution can-
not go on without young women.
The Paris police found (to quote a single instance out of
many) that, without the registration of minors, a substantial
registration list was impossible—had they refused to enrol
minors their lists would have collapsed. Between 1888 and
1903, of the 12,471 women who w T ere registered in Paris, 38
per cent, were minors at time of enrolment. Of a 1000 unregis-
tered girls arrested in the same city, 57 per cent, were minors.
In the same year, 1910, out of 1319 arrests, 823 were minors,
whose utter isolation was proved by the fact that all effort to
establish some sort of guardianship failed in 802 instances. Is
not the fate of such children the concern of ethics also?. This
destruction must go on, in greater or less degree, wherever
promiscuity is connived at.
Q. —(s) Is it not a fact that the Lex Talionis cannot be
enforced against the transgressor only, but is enforced with
terrible severity amongst the innocent?


A.—The history of prostitution gives the answer. Countless
innocent women have been sacrificed to the so-called needs of men
in the traffic of prostitution. We have personally known in
places where Regulation was in force, prostitutes who might
have been the mothers of splendid children. Their history ran
—Caught early, seduced, infected; taken by the police, registered,
and so branded for life : —The transgressors free: the victims pun-
ished. Again we ask, why not look at the other side of the
picture, and see the innocents who are made the means
of keeping up the traffic which spreads the disease?
Q. — (6) Why not frankly recognise the fact that the world
will not be rendered more or less moral by the extinction of
venereal disease?
A.—We do frankly admit this. We contend, however, that the
method of achieving this desirable end does matter. Any-
thing which places in the way of youth powerful temptation
to irregular living must matter to society.
Q. — (7) In practice, does fear of infection deter many men?
A. —lf the experience of men is evidence—Yes. Emphatically
our answer is Yes, when it is a question of preventing youth
taking the first step. We know also of young girls whose
resistances have been finally beaten down, by their lovers, under
the pressure—no fear of pregnancy, no fear of infection. The
safety, alas! was only imaginary.
Q. —(8) If, as Mr. Warren Low puts it, we discover to-
morrow a vaccine, as we may, a vaccine which will protect
those vaccinated completely against venereal disease, will anyone
forbid its use in the interests of morality?
A.—ln event of such a discovery, the situation would need
to be re-considered. At present it • would seem that only per-
sons of irregular life would seek vaccination. If the appli-
cation of the discovery meant supporting the commerce of
prostitution, with its debauching of girl youth, we answer this
question by asking another: What must the answer be if dic-
tated by a right communal consciousness?


But if we are wrong and the desires of men cannot be con-
trolled, then it is certain the women who supply the need are a
national blessing. In which case, we ask, how much longer will
women tolerate the ostracising of the girls who supply the service?
If the commerce is essential, men must decide whose daughters
are to supply the commodity required: no further evasion of
this point should be permitted by women. This question
can no longer be considered from the man’s point of view
only—a point of view which fails to count the cost of the
needs of men, a cost paid in coin of the nation’s womanhood.
Man, whose native modesty has not prevented his claiming
logic as his prerogative, has created and supported a condition
in which a man may debauch his neighbour’s wife or the
women of the household with impunity, but if any man
touch his own women, he regards himself as deeply wronged.
The inconsistency and the comedy both continue to escape
him.
We have frequently asked: What will civilisation gain
if venereal disease be eradicated at the cost of supporting
prostitution? We repeat: What will be gained if into the sewers
of that commerce girl youth is continually to be directed?
What will a nation have gained, while prostitution remains to
pervert natural instinct and make fidelity more difficult, nay,
almost impossible? If men sincerely desire the elimination
of promiscuity, let them begin by ostracising the debaucher of
other men’s children.
Is venereal disease the only evil which results from promis-
cuity, or is it even the greater evil? The nature of the
answer will depend greatly on the outlook taken on life.
Is not infidelity, by men rarely forgiven, with its anguish and
spiritual wreckage one of the greatest sorrows that can come
to man or woman? Are its baneful effects on the living
children of broken homes worse than the effect of venereal
disease which kills them before they are born? National
soundness depends on the soundness of the family; the sound-


ness of the family in this regard, on the personal conduct
of the parents. We contend primary prophylaxis by remov-
ing a powerful inhibition at the moment of strongest temp-
tation makes resistance more difficult and infidelity more easy.
“ Man can because he thinks he can,” is an old saying, and
Iwan Bloch warns us “of the false idea of safety which induces
men to begin irregular living who otherwise might have re-
mained continent.”
It seems certain that a percentage of men will be unchaste.
Experience of the power of habit compels us to think so.
It is not reasonable to expect that men, habituated to
licence will become continent at a moment’s notice through warn-
ing or good advice. We recognise that only the power of a
great idea or of a profound emotion can free them from this
tyranny. Yet we must not let this minority, the debauched
element of the community, block the whole horizon. We are
chiefly concerned with the mass of normal youth who desire
to live well.
No one can say what education may achieve, as it has not
yet been tried. It is unreasonable to expect man will respond
instantly; everything is against him; but our hope is in the
young. Meanwhile, for the person of promiscuous habit there is
early treatment. One thing is certain, however; we shall not
begin to see any reduction in prostitution until the man who buys
is ostracised, as is the woman who sells.
The elimination of prostitution is not a woman’s dream.
Bloch tells us he is a confirmed optimist. “I believe,” he says,
“in its elimination through medicine, social science, jurispru-
dence, and ethics. But we must keep up the fight against wild
love; the salvation of our people is not to be found in wild
extra-conjugal intercourse.”


Does it not seem that the scientific attitude to this problem
would be—
(a) To attack the conditions which disseminate venereal
disease?
(b) To prevent, as far as is possible, the entry of fresh
recruits to the ranks of the promiscuous; and
(c) To induce the promiscuous to seek early treatment?
To deal with the effects and leave untouched the conditions
which produce them is to take only half a vision of the problem.
