

«
■♦; ♦ :
PRICE : SIXPENCE
jti JJ|
Melbourne:
| J i;Bgl Rae Bros., Polygraphic Printers, 547 & 549 Elizabeth Street. JSji J i
: ,: iCTm&.x -x- Jfflßßmi
i : ■ 11




Jtye Story
OF THE
/T\issio9


Mr. and Mrs. Daniel Matthews and Family.


THE STOHV
OF THE
bfaloga Aboriginal Ipssion
(Gontinudli).
ILLUSTRATED.
ANNUAL REPORT WITH BALANCE SHEET.
DHNIEL MHTTH EAaZS.
Founder and Superintendent.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
nOclbouvnc:
Rae Bros., Polygraphic Printers, 547 & 549 Elizabeth Street
1893.




to -11
%\\ ta % goimg of
My Dear Young Friends.
Many years ago, when some of your fathers and mothers were
just boys and girls like yourselves, Mrs. Matthews and I began to teach
the black children of the Murray River. Since then we have seen a great
change among them. Besides getting on well in school, several of them
have given themselves up to Jesus, and are bright and happy little
Christians. This, you may be sure, gives us more pleasure than anything
else.
We have a lot of boys and girls at Maloga, and others will be coming in
from their wild and ignorant camps. A few are kind and easily managed,
but others are so very troublesome and disobedient.
Some years ago, a family or Sunday School would take an especial
interest in one boy or girl ; pray for such, and provide for their annual
support. As we intend working more among the children, and for their
benefit, we would be glad for other schools and friends to adopt a child in
this way, and so, perhaps, be the means in God’s hand of leading a little waif
from the bush into the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
The annual cost for the maintenance of each boy and girl is £lO, which
includes food, clothing, and education. This is not a large sum when we
consider the priceless value of one immortal soul for whom Jesus died.
A friend, who does not belong to Australia, has kindly offered to pay
£lO a year for the support of a boy, and his photograph has been sent to
him.
We wish also an interest in the prayers of all the Christian children of
this land for the black men and women, who are, in some cases, harder to
manage than the children.
You will be pleased to know that through the care we take of the little
ones their health is much better. It is rare for any of them to be
seriously sick, and we have not had a death for the whole year. Every
day we praise God for His tender Fatherly care and constant goodness.
I want you to hear His loving voice saying, “ Feed My lambs.”
I am, your sincere friend,
DANIEL MATTHEWS.
Maloga Mission,
via Echuca, Victoria.
(Will the Superintendent of the Sunday School kindly read this lett r
to the scholars, and any part of the report he may consider interesting ?)


SEVENTEENTH REPORT
OF THE
flDaloga fUMssicm to the Hboiigmes
Of AUSTRALIA.
“ When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee ; and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee : when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt
not be burned ; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For lam the Lord thy
God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour.” —lsa. xliii. 2, 8.
>iaiiaiiaiißiiaiißiiaiiaiißiißiißiißiiaiißiißnaiißiißiu
»ROM the outset of our work in 1874 the task has been laborious
and perplexing. As one and another.obstacle have been removed,
fresh ones, often of a more alarming character, have loomed up!
and we have been driven, as weary and tempest-tossed mariners!
clA 3 to seek refuge. To the tired and oppressed worker for Christ!
taere is only one calm retreat, one place of sweet retirement, under the
sheltering wing of the Eternal God.
April Ist, 1891.—Emerging at this time from a sea of trouble, that
arose mainly from harsh criticisms on the visit Mrs. Matthews and I paid
to Great Britain, we found our faces still turned in the direction of
missionary effort for the aborigines of the colonies. Our hearts pained at
their sad lot, we could not shake off the responsibility that rested upon
us to labour for their amelioration. Knowing so well the bitterness of
their life, and the sad fate that awaits them, a feeling has taken possession
of our sympathies that cannot be subdued.
Surrounded by our own children, who are in harmony with all our
movements, we mourned over the declension of the people who had been
the object of our solicitude for so many years. As far as I am abl>* I
help the men who come to me for advice and counsel. One man who has
a family of children came for employment, and got a contract from my
brother at clearing some land for £l2 10s. By this means he was able to
employ some other aboriginal men, who were in like manner benefited.
Sunday, April sth.—This time of waiting is more irksome to our
restless spirits than the hardest toil. From lack of mission funds I have
been unable to go abroad to the camps as I had done years ago, and my
own private means are not sufficient to enable me to do this ; so my dear
wife and I are led to quietly wait upon God until He open the way.
These days of rest give us much time for reflection, and are valuable in
affording us opportunities to train our children for missionary labour. At
ttie morning service to-day I dwelt on tbe “blessedness of unselfishness ”
and at night we studied the Bible—“ Christ in Prayer.”
Besides giving instruction in school morning and afternoon Mrs.
Matthews and I spend a good deal of time with our children in music
and singing, giving us happy and joyous evenings.


We get many encouraging letters from friends urging us to go forward
with our work. Some of these are from England and Scotland, one
from Jersey, and not a few from the various colonies.
May Ist, 1891. —The few blacks who are working at Maloga cheerfully
join with us in morning and evening family prayers. It is our joy to
bring before them daily the fundamental truths of the Bible in all
simplicity.
Some of the letters from friends contain financial help, so we are able
to do a little. Every night we have special prayer for Divine guidance as
to future steps on behalf of the Mission, At this time of waiting we
trust in the promises of God, and are willing that all His purposes should
be fulfilled in us and by us. “Be of good courage . . . and the
Lord will do that which seemeth Him good.” Our beloved children are
profiting by the discipline and instruction, and, with the blessing of Go i,
we look forward to lives of usefulness for them. They enjoy the daily
teaching in the school, and are making satisfactory progress under my
instruction.
May 15th,—In company with my eldest daughter and son, I left home
this morning for a missionary tour down the Murray. We drove about
thirty miles the first day, and were entertained at a sheep station.
Spending Sunday at another station, I held two religious services among
the employes and travellers. The singing was especially attractive to
these isolated people. The long journey across the vast plains was
monotonous, but relieved now and again by a lagoon, and the sight of
kangaroos, or a small flock of emus. A good part of the journey was
without a track of any kind. On the third evening after leaving home
we were quite lost, and obliged to construct a camp. Ihe country here is
wild and unsettled. Having rugs and a tomahawk we a
) ard for the horse, and made ourselves snug for the night. .To
keep warm we were obliged to have a large fire burning all night. On
awakening the next morning we found ice in the tin washing-bowl, and
even our blankets wet with hoar frost. Some hot tea and bread and
butter strengthened us, and we went on. We had to encounter several
dangerous creeks. Crossing one of these I had the misfortune to break
the buggy shaft. Fourteen miles of careful travelling brought us to a
station, the wife of the proprietor of which I knew when she was a little
girl living with her parents near Geelong thirty-seven years ago. She
kindly entertained us, and I was able to repair the broken buggy.
Further down the river, on Mellool Station, we saw a large camp of
blacks. Although living in their wild fashion, and sometimes roaming
from place to place, they get kind attention from the station-holder and
his wife. Among the aborigines are several interesting and apparently
intelligent boys and girls. I conversed with them, and held a brief
service, at which my children sang. It pleased us to watch their faces
as they sat at the gunyab fires and listened to the message—“ For God
so loved the world,” &c. The men were very desirous that a home should
be formed for themselves, and a school established for their children as
soon as possible. It became evident to me that certain outside opposing
influences were at work that would entirely frustrate any attempt on my
part to benefit the aborigines here for the present, much as they them-


Some of my earliest Echuca proteges, 1864 to 1874,


selves desired it. I got the names of eighty-four men, women and
children who are connected with this tribe and living in the district.
Thanking the proprietor and his lady for their hospitality, we pursued our
journey homewards the next morning, hoping that our visit would bear
some fruit with God’s blessing. I am impressed that the blacks have
more enemies than friends, and that they in their ignorance are the
greatest enemies to themselves.
On May 24th we reached home after a good deal of rough travelling,
satisfied that we had done our best, and could leave the rest with God.
A lady writing from Kent, England, says :—“ Your work among the
Australian aborigines must be one needing much patience ; but this will
not fail to be granted you, as it must be included in the ‘ whatsoevers ’
promised to God’s children, if asked'for in Christ’s name.
“The apathy and indifference of professing Christians in the colonies
regarding the spiritual needs of the blacks is certainly disheartening and
sad. If they could but be made to realise that each soul is precious in
God’s sight, whether owned by a black man or a white, they would be
roused to take an active part in their salvation.”
July 19th, 1891. —We generally get a good company of blacks on
Sunday. They come from the various stations where the men are
working, for Divine service and afternoon classes.
July 22nd. —Having a little money in hand from contributions, I set
forth from my home to-day in order to visit Sydney, and endeavour to
push on the cause of the aborigines.
Arrived in that city on the 25th with my brother Missionary, the Rev.
J. B. Gribble, who accidentally met me in the train.
While there I had frequent opportunities of addressing meetings on
Missions to the blacks of our own land.
At the end of the month the Rev. Mr. Gribble asked me to undertake
a lecturing tour for him, as he was desirous of hastening to Northern
Queensland to open a Mission Station on the Bellenden Ker Mountains.
On the 30th I commenced the missionary trip, and visited Manly,
Wallsend, West Maitland, Murrurrundi, Walcha, Uralla, and Armidale,
pleading the cause of Mr. Gribble’s new mission. I was kindly received
in all places, and lectures well attended.
The financial results were small, however, for after all expenses were
paid, I had only 17s. balance to hand over to the Treasurer.
At Armidale I visited gaol and hospital. In the former I found an
aboriginal boy incarcerated for a term of years, and in the latter a poor
native girl of about eighteen dying of consumpth n. In both these cases
I gave words of comfort and consolation as far as I was able to make
them understand.
At Singleton I saw a considerable number of blacks, some of whom
had known me many years ago on the Hunter and Paterson Rivers.
Poor creatures! Instead of looking like lords of the soil, they had the
appearance of a dilapidated crew of visitors from another land.
Spent the whole of August in Sydney and suburbs, sometimes visiting
the blacks in encampments at Botany and in Moore Park. The condition
of these poor things is deplorable beyond description. They congregate
on Saturday nights in “ Paddy’s Market,” Sydney, in considerable


numbers. Here, in this place of infamy as well as of business, intoxi-
cating drink is freely given to the men and women, and several of the
latter, and girls of youthful age, are companions of the lowest prostitutes,
and are fast drifting into lives of disease, and on to speedy death, I spoke
to upwards of twenty of these outcasts, but they themselves seem to have
lost all hope. It has often occurred to me that an important duty lies
here for those in Sydney whose particular office it is to attend to the
temporal and spiritual needs of the aborigines.
From my dear wife I have regular information of her labours and
perplexities ; her successes and joys. Her letters are always laden with
good cheer and hope. Our children’s, too, are of the same character.
For some months a lady in Sydney, who takes a friendly interest in
the aborigines of the Hastings River, about 300 miles north of Sydney,
has repeatedly begged me to unite with her in an effort to start a mission
in that locality. About two years ago she had some experience here, and
desired the co-operation of one who was likeminded. She and I sailed
for Port Macquarie in the steamer “Wellington,” on September 11th,
1891. The following evening we pursued our journey thirteen miles to
the village of Wauchope. On Sunday she conducted me to the camp of
aborigines near the township. Some of the bfack women met the lady
with rapturous gladness, and kissed her. An old blackfellow, named
“ Jimmy Forty Pounds,” with an arm weakened by an old dislocation,
came forward with a face all smiles and said—“ Thank God ! missus.
He answer mv prayer ; and you come back again.” In a decayed bark
hut, the best in the settlement, a young aboriginal man was instructing a
company of little boys and girls, whose sable faces were so full of attention
that they scarcely noticed me enter. They sang and prayed with singular
earnestness. Tears filled my eyes as one and another smod up to speak
for Jesus. None of these little ones had a hat or boot*, and scarcely
clothes to cover them ; but for all that they were full of praise to God.
Immediately following this an open-air meeting was held on the side of
t v >e hill, near the old black women’s camp. We were sheltered from the
sun by flowering shrubs and the wild raspberry, while tall and stately
trees lent a cathedral appearance to the whole surroundings. Upwards of
forty children of the forest assembled from their bark gunyahs, I stood
by with a heart filled with hallowed emotion as they sang their songs of
adoration, prayed to God in simple language, and one after another spoke
clearly (some in broke > English) of their love for the Saviour. It was a
scene that angels would rejoice over. Learning from my companion that
I was a missionary, I was asked to take part in their devotions, which I
gladly did. On Monday I again found my way to the camp, and in the
rain held a service under the cracked bark of one of the gunyahs. This
effort of mine, although appreciated by the natives, did not find favour in
other quarters, and I was rather severely reprimanded for my interference.
On Tuesday, September 15th, some of the men took me to the Hastings
River, with its lovely green banks, and thick undergrowth of brambles
and fl )wering creepers. Two of the Christian men expressed a wLh to
accompany me to Sydney, and then, if the way were opened, to Maloga
for a few weeks, returning again to assist in carrying on the work
here. Before 1 aving 1 suggested a committee of local Christian men


should be elected to aid in establishing and maintaining the work. I
called upon some with this object, and had a preliminary meeting, at
which my lady friend was present. At night I had another meeting in
the camp, and was delighted at the sincerity and simple faith of the
aborigines. The next day (16th), in company with Tom and Combo, I
bade farewell to the friends at Wauchope, and proceeded to Port Mac-
quarie, and the same evening took the steamer to Sydney. The wind and
sea were tempestuous, and we bad to drive along against both, tossed
about violently. In the afternoon of Thursday we ran into Port Jackson,
and shortly after landed in the city of Sydney. Here I found it difficult
to get my aboriginal companions housed, but through the kindness of a
friend, who is attached to the Salvation Army, I secured shelter for them.
Our experience in Sydney was a very trying one, for it rained nearly all
the time. I had two meetings in the city, but they were not successful.
On the fourth day after our arrival we took train to Albury. There was
a great difficulty in getting railway passes for the men, and it seemed as
if they were not to go ; but by dint of much effort we were able to get to
Maloga, after three days’ travel. Combo and Tom were very patient, and,
as Christians, felt for me in my struggles for their benefit. My wife
welcomed the aboriginal visitors, and made them feel at home at once.
To me it was a great satisfaction to be under ray own roof, and in the
company of those so dear to me, after such a succession of disappoint-
ments.
October Ist, 1891. —The two aboriginal men from the Hastings
quietly consented to the discipline and teaching of our Mission, and,
we believe, will be profited under them.
The Sabbath is a day of delight with us. We have much time for
Bible study and other profitable exercises. We find it hard to go on with
so little temporal assistance. My faith in God gets very weak, and am
led at times to the brink of determination to give up the work. _ln
recollecting the past goodness of the Lord, and His unfailing promises,
I am stimulated to renewed effort.
Our funds were so far reduced that I was obliged to borrow a few
shillings from our children, which they had saved from the sale of eggs.
They freely gave the money to buy stamps and other necessary items.
The straitened condition of our circumstances so frequently has done
much to take away any selfishness from them, and I believe they really
feel it a privilege to deny themselves for the cause of Christ. Tom and
Combo get lessons in reading and writing every day, and are improving;
in singing. They unite with us in special prayer for the advancement of
Mission work among their own people.
October Bth.—ln company with Combo and Tom I went to Bendigo,
and there held several meetings with more or less success. My aboriginal
companions were very clear in their Christian testimony, and gave
pleasure to their numerous hearers.
Passing on to Melbourne, we had a good number of pleasant meetings,
and were greeted and encouraged by many Christian friends.
On October 20th I took train with the aboriginal men for Sydney,
arr ving the next morning. Combo having been unwell for a few days,
went by steamer to Port Macquarie, while Tom stayed with me in the


city until November 20th, when we both sailed for the north in one of
the coasting steamers. The whole time I spent in Sydney was fully
engaged in awakening interest on the aboriginal question. Tom rendered
good service in nearly all my meetings. He sang with sweetness and
read the Bible clearly and distinctly. Owing to commercial depression,
the financial results were inadequate to our expenses, which caused me
some anxiety. However, the Lord, in whose service we were engaged,
did not suffer us to want.
I had, moreover, during my stay in Sydney, time and opportunity to
get the Mission accounts audited and thoroughly gone into by competent
men. This I felt necessary, not only for the satisfaction of contributois,
but to silence the mouths of those who lie in wait to attack us.
From November 21st to 30th I re-visited Port Macquarie and the
Hastings River. My experience here was a varied and singular one.
At Wauchope I met the lady who has undertaken (he cause of the
blacks in this locality. She was discouraged and somewhat disappointed
that I could not provide her with monetary help. I did all in my power
to promote the work spiritually, but the aborigines themselves are weary
of waiting for someone to take them by the hand. As 1 found an effort
v\as made to place the whole thing in the hands of the local Chmch of
England Minister, I felt my way shut up. The friends to whom I had
spoken previously were disappointed at this step, and the blacks were
not in favour of it. However, I held several services with the children
and adults, and won their affection. When they heard I intended going
home again to the Murray River, they begged me to stay. Some of the
men said : “If you will stay and teach us and our children, Mr.
Matthews, we will build you a house.” As I had no friend to find n e
accommodation, I was obliged to seek a bed at an hotel. The roughness
of this mode of living ill-accorded with my feelings. Late one night,
after I had been asleep, a knock came to my door. On opening it, three
drunken men came in and began attiring themselves in my clothes. I
ordered them out of the room, but finding them not disposed to oley,
I hastened to the police station, and was not long in getting a constable
to come. The publican was aroused, and finding the men were better
customers than I, asked me to change my quarters. This I gladly did
on the morrow. Candidly, I would rather be in the company of the
aborigines, or camp in the bush alone, than be at the mercy of such
riotous men.
Hearing from Mrs. Matthews that the aborigines near home needed
my attention, and seeing that my presence here was looked upon with
a certain degree of jealousy and suspicion, I took steamer for Sydney,
and got home on Thursday, December 3rd, 1891. It was hard to leave
the people whose affection I had won, and who had, during my brief
stay among them, listened with such zealous concern to the Gospel
messages I so often gave them.
I am hopeful by-and-by to re-visit these spots, and extend my
journey to the Richmond, Macleay and Clarence Rivers, where many
hundreds of blacks are still leading wild lives.


On reaching Maloga it soon became obvious that the blacks here on
the Murray demand as much of our attention as ever. After the
greatest economy, I found my funds reduced to one shilling and a half-
penny ; but the bliss of coming home more than compensated for all.
After supper we together thanked God for all His mercies, and enjoyed
an hour in singing. , „,
At the close of this year we were concerned about a debt of £5 2s, bd.
we owed for the Mission. This we have made a subject of earnest prayer
to God for many days. On the 81st December we got a letter with £5
from a lady in London, and £1 from a gentleman in Bristol, so we were
able to settle the account, and our minds were at rest. At the watch-
ni"ht service we sounded a note of praise to Jehovah, our King and
Deliverer, and read Psalm xxxvii. out of my father’s old thumb-marked
Bible. We asked the Lord to make the coming year one rich in blessing
to us and the aborigines, whose temporal and spiritual welfare is our
chief object and aim. .
January 14th, 1892. —I rode to Bama and in the direction of Moira
Lakes. Here I found eighteen blacks fishing along the banks of the river ;
living in rude camps ; earning a precarious livelihood ; drifting back into
dissipated and immoral lives ; and the children getting wild and vicious.
As far as I was able, I imparted religious instruction to them. Some of
these came and camped in our paddocks, in order to get the benefits of our
teaching and sympathy. It is almost as natural for the blacks to come to
us as our own children. .
The fruit from the orchard is a great help to us in the maintenance of
the place ; also the fish from the river is a boon we cannot be sufficiently
thankful to God for. ....
February Bth, 1892.—Hughy Anderson, with his wire and five children,
came to day, and begged me to take them into the Mission. As they
were some of our old Mission members, and nearly all the children born
here, we had not the heart to refuse them. They were all delighted to be
back to the old spot again, and attended the family prayers. The childien
immediately went to school with our boys and girls. It naturally con-
cerned me a little how we were to provide for so many new comers, and
to accommodate them with house room. By hunting and fishing, and
using the spare apartments of our own house, we are enabled to set
meals before them day by day in a way that is not less surprising to us
than to them. We plead the promises of God every day. “ The Lord
will provide,” and “ My God shall supply all your need, out of Hunches
in glory, by Christ Jesus.” .. „ , ,
Mrs. Matthews gave Ellen a reading lesson. She said— You read to
me * I can’t remember the words.” Mrs. Matthews said ‘ God can
make it easy for you, Ellen.” They prayed, when Mrs. M turned to
John Ist chapter. “ Now, find me all the ‘ ins.’ ” She laughed as she
pointed them out, and exclaimed—“ It’s just like fishing. Then she
prayed again, and asked the Lord that she and her husband might
become bright and happy Christians like they used to be. She, her
husband, and children were in complete rags, and without even a shirt,
when they came, and had not a single thing to change. We, as we
have often been accustomed to do, turned out our own wardrobes to give them


The Mission House at Maloga in 1884.
View of the River at Maloga Station.


something to wear for Sunday. We are singing a hew hymn that has
just been sent us from England:—
“ I do not ask for earthly store
Beyond a day’s supply,
I only covet more and more
The clear and single eye.”
Sunday, February 11th, was a happy day. Several additional blacks
came, and we had good congregations for Divine service.
During this mouth, besides the ordinary school exercises, I gave the
children special singing lessons, which have greatly improved their voices
and natural musical talents.
The fruit and vegetables from our garden are of great benefit to us, and
also are a source of profit for the Mission in providing funds for its
sustenance. Our meat supply is helped with game from the forest.
The numbers are considerably augmented from the blacks camped on
the river. Seven more came on the 25th to ask us to admit them. It is
reported that their lives are very much corrupted, and there can be very
little hope for them outside of genuine missionary restriction and teaching.
On February 28th (my birthday) we had a picnic. Quite a lot of
aborigines were there. We had plenty of good eatables, and lots of fruit.
Amusements, too, were indulged in, but we had a hearty prayer meeting,
in which some of the black women took part. They praised God for
bringing them again to their friends and old home.
March 26th, 1892. —We have frequent evidences of the wickedness of
the blacks’ lives in camps. With all the discipline and restraint of the
Mission, the evil comes out, and we have terrible times. The tempers of
some are very violent, and even dangerous, and a few of them are intensely
jealous. When matters reach a climax it requires all my authority to
preserve order, and much patience to restore unanimity. In such times
the wisdom that cometh from above is needed.
We find the children who have relapsed with their parents into camp
life very troublesome. They fight, use bad language, and tell lies without
the smallest compunction. We reprove and punish them pretty freely,
but it is only the grace of God that can change the heart and make them
new creatures in Christ Jesus. This we teach, and for this we labour.
For many years I have found cricketing, footballing, footracing, and
athletic sports generally most injurious to the aborigines. As a rule it
leads them into fast company, to drink, gambling, and every form of
irreligion, and ultimately leaves the men a moral and physical wreck. For
this reason I have strongly set my face against the men leaving the
station for “ matches ” and “ sports,” as they have a constant and
increasing attraction for them, and the rising youth of our Missions.
March 30th.—We had an addition of eight more aborigines. Some of
these are from the Coranderrk Station in Victoria. For many years I
persistently refused to admit any of the blacks from across the border,
because I knew the Victorian Government were expending large sums
annually for the support of the six stations under the jurisdiction of the
Board for the Protection of Aborigines in Melbourne. Latterly, how-
ever, in consequence of fresh legislation, and the compulsory alienation of
the half-castes from the homes they were compelled to occupy in child-


hood, I felt it my duty, as a Missionary to these unfortunate people, to
admit them as far as I could, especially when I saw that they were
drifting back into habits, and to a life that would probably became more
degraded and more dangerous to society than even that of their earlier and
. savage condition.
Keeping my original intention constantly before me, namely, of leading
the blacks on in the direction of self-support, I got a number of men and
women to make tents. This they did pretty successfully, under my
personal instruction. In addition to this, we were able to augment our
resources by the sale of the skins of wild animals. We found, however,
both these, although helpful for a time, uncertain, as the demand for both
was limited and often insufficiently remunerative.
It would assist us greatly if some of our friends would suggest any plan
that would further our projects in this direction.
This month (March) closes the seventeenth financial year of our
Mission. Although it has been one of the most trying in many respects,
there have been bright and happy days that have illuminated the months
of darkness and gloom that have so often enshrouded our way.
We are cheered by the thought that many earnest prayers ascend to
the Throne of Grace on our behalf daily, so we can with certainty look
forward to brighter and more successful reaping days.
“ Go labour on, spend and be spent,
Thy joy to do Thy Father’s will ;
It is the way the Master went,
Should not the servant tread it still ?
“ Go labour on ; ’tis not for naught;
All earthly loss is heavenly gain ;
Men heed thee not; men praise thee not:
The Master praises—what are men ?
“ Go labour on ; thy hands are weak,
Thy knees are faint, thy soul cast down ;
Yet falter not—the joy is near,
Thy Saviour soon will call thee home
“ Go labour on ; while it is day,
The long dark night is hastening on;
Speed, speed thy work, cast sloth away,
It is not thus that souls are won.
“ See numbers dying at thy side—
Thy brethren, kindred, friends at home ;
See millions perishing afar :
Haste, brethren 1 to the rescue come.
“ Toil on, faint not, keep watch, and pray ;
Be wise the erring soul to win;
Go fortn into the world’s highway,
Compel the wanderer to come in.
“ Work on, work on, soon shalt thou have
For labour, rest; for exile, home;
Soon shalt thou hear the Bridegroom’s voice,
The midnight peal—“ Behold ! I come.”
DANIEL MATTHEWS,
Maloga Aboriginal Mission, Superintendent-
via Echuca, Victoria.


17
Collection S. Army, Water-
loo, Sydney
1
0
8
»)
Collection Wes. Church,
Newtown, Sydney
1
4
0
)>
Collection Ragged School,
Bay Street, Sydney ...
0
4
0
11
Three Little Sisters, New-
town Syney
0
0
3
13
Collection Pres. Church,
Wauchope, N.S.W. ...
0
6
3
21
Collection Wes. Church,
Glebe, Sydney
0
18
4
22
Collection 8. Army, Goul-
burn, N.S.W
0
13
0
9
A. C. G., Benalla, Vic. ...
£0
10
0
13
Mrs. M., Coffee Palace,
Bendigo, Vic
Miss B., Bendigo, Vic. ...
1
0
0
H
1
0
0
if
Miss A., Long Gully
0
10
0
a
Mr. F,, Bendigo
0
5
0
16
Misses F., Surrey Hills,
Melb
0
5
0
Collection Y.W.C.A., Melb,
. 3
5
s»
17
Collection Mission Hall,
Kew, Melb
1
10
0
if
Collection Mission Hall,
Kew, Melb., Sunday
evening
1
0
4
20
Mrs. A., Albury, N.S.VV.
1
0
0
a
Miss N., Hobart, Tas, ...
1
0
0
f)
Collection S. Army, Ben-
digo, Vic.
1
2
6
fi
Collection Wes. School,
Eaglehawk
1
14
6
LIST OF
CONTRIBUTIONS
For the Year ending
April, 1891.
17 B. S. and Co., Melbourne,
per B. W. B £2 2 0
20 A. P., per M. K. P., Moon-
darra, Victoria ...10 0
„ W. R., Leichardt, Sydney
(omitted, Feb, 20th) ...110
£4 3 0
May.
10 E. W. 8., Melb., Y.W.G.A. 1 0 0
14 L. M. S. H., London ... 5* 0 0
£6 0 0
June.
13 G, C,, Birmingham, Eng-
land, per T. C., Sydney 10 0 0
15 K. B. Sunderland, Eng-
land 5 0 0
„ J. H., Reading, England 5 0 0
20 N. J. C., South Yarra ... 0 13 0
£2O 13 0
August.
18 E. N. and H. N., Darling-
hurst, Sydney 10 0
„ Collection Wes. Church,
Petersham, Sydney ... 0 15 10
„ Part Collections Bellen-
den Ker Fund..,. ... 0 17 3
27 Collection Wes. Church,
Ashfield, Sydney ... 0 14 9
£3 7 10
September.
23 Collection S. Army, Al-
bury, N.S.W 0 8 6
£4 15 0
AND SUBSCRIPTIONS
March jist. iBq2.
October.
„ W. D. B., Richmond, Melb, 110
„ Mr. A., Malvern, Melb. ...10 0
„ Collection Clarendon St.
Pres.Church, Sth. Melb. 13 0
£l7 7 1
November, 1892.
1 Mr. S., Abercrombie St.,
Sydney 0 5 0
3 E. S. O’B., “Douro,”
Yass 10 0
5 Mrs. G., Marrickville, Syd-
ney ... 10 0
„ E. 8. O’B., Sydney ...200
„ Collection St. Simon’s and
St. Jude’s, Sydney ... 1 0 4
16 Reader of The Christian,
London, per M. and S. 13 0 0
17 W. L. M,, Malvern, Vic.
(Collection) 3 3 6
„ Bay Street Ragged School
Children, Sydney ... 0 0 5
„ “ A Friend,” Petersham,
Sydney 0 2 0
„ Collection Congl, Church,
Redfern, Sydney ... 1 6 6
„ Harrington Street Ragged
School Children, Sydney 0 0 6
„ Collection St. Alban’s C.
of E., Darlington, Syd-
0 16 9


17 Collection Wes. Church,
Moorfields, Sydney ...£0 IB 11
~ Collection Open-air Meet-
ing, Prince Alfred Park,
Sydney 0 9 9
28 T. P., Wauchope, N.S.W. 1 0 0
£26 0 8
December.
14 E, H., Petersham, Sydney,
per M. and R., Glebe... 10 0
January, 1893.
15 J. J., per M. and R., Glebe,
Sydney
31 J., St. V. P.. Clifton,
England, per L.M.S. H. £1 0 O
„ L. M. S. H., London ... 5 0 O
£7 0 0
1 0 O
£lO 0


ACCOUNT SHOWING INCOME AND EXPENDITURE
For the Year ending March Blsf, 1892.
RECEIPTS.
EXPEND1TDBE.
To Amount of Annual Subscriptions and Donations,
By Balance
£34
0
2
from March 31st, 1891, to Maich 31st, 1892 ... £90 6 7
„ Provisions — Groceries, Flour, &c.
62
5
5
„ Sale of Fish ... ... ... ... 0 8 6
,, Meat
0
15
3
„ Sale of Rations ... ... ... ... 0 8 0
,, Clothing, Boots and Shoes
27
0
2
„ Balance ... ... ... ... ... 103 3 9
„ Printing Reports
11
12
0
„ Travelling Expenses...
32
16
3
„ Postage and Telegrams
7
6
5
„ Photographs
2
0
0
„ Stationery ...
1
b
0
„ Repairs ... ...
2
12
0
„ Ironmongery
1
18
5
„ Horse Feed ...
1
0
6
„ Exchange ...
0
6
0
„ Clerical Fees
1
11
6
„ Advertisements
1
3
0
„ Hire of Waggon
0
19
6
„ Office Rent ...
1
5
0
„ Wages to Aborigines ...
3
5
0
„ Freight of Parcels
0
9
6
„ Collections ...
0
15
9
£191 6 10
£194
6
10
Audited and compared with Vouchers and Petty Cash Book, and found correct.
F. G. T, NICHOLAS, F.S.A.A., Eng., 31 Queen Street, Melbourne,


Developments of the Mission.
1. General View from Victorian Side of the Murray in 1888.
2. The Original Camps in Early Days -1874.
3. The First Step in Civilization.


EIGHTEENTH REPORT
OF THE
baloga fllMssion to the Hborigines
OF AUSTRALIA.
“Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.” —
ROV. xiv. 34.
VIIBIIBIIBIIBIIBIIBIIBIIBtIBIIBtIBIIBUBIIBIIBIIBIIBIIBr
0 the ordinary observer, it is painfully evident that the Aboriginal
race of Australia is rapidly passing away. Various causes have
been adduced to account for the decimation of this unfortunate
*JI people. Only one true reason can in my opinion be advanced,
that is— sin. Evils of every form ; intoxicating drink, immorality
a all its accursed shades and aspects, lying, thieving, and innumerable
ther existing vices, have been thrust upon the blacks, and the wonder is
hat any of them are left alive. The righteousness that has exalted Great
Iritain and her dependencies has not been taught them, but the sins that
re our reproach have been forced into their lives, so that the Missionary’s
7ork instead of simply preaching the Gospel and looking for fruit, is to
grapple with these great sins, to teach the people they are sins, and that
here can be no joy in life, nor hope beyond the grave but through Christ
our Saviour.
During all this the blacks have to be with us under our protection,
for they need this more than I can describe in these pages. For the most
part of the year in their ordinary mode of life they are poor, and often
hungry, but as far as we are able, we feed and clothe them, and constantly
jray God to dispose the hearts of His children, particularly those of this
and, to extend their pity and Christian sympathy to those who have a
easonable claim upon us.
In spite of the perplexities associated with the Mission, and the
‘ shing persecution to which we have been subjected from outside
ences, God has not suffered our love for the Aborigines to wane. At
, the struggle is great and deliverance appears remote, I have
idppted to abandon the work ; but one ray of the brightness of God’s
/1 "fan act of His saving and rescuing power gives vigour and courage
rt^t-conflicts.
st, 1892. —For want of a better place, Mrs. Matthews and my
gave all the children,meals in our kitchen. Nineteen of these
table. It involves much work, but is better in every way for the
s, for they get good and regular food ; besides this, they sing or
grace before and after meals.


Developments of the Mission.


EIGHTEENTH REPORT
OF THE
flfealoga fllMssion to tbe Hbongines
OF AUSTRALIA*
“Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.”—
Prov. xiv, 34.
:iBIIBIIBIIBIIBIIBIIBtIBllBtiBliBHBflBIIBIIBI!BIIBr
•0 the ordinary observer, it is painfully evident that the Aboriginal
race of Australia is rapidly passing away. Various causes have
been adduced to account for the decimation of this unfortunate
people. Only one true reason can in my opinion be advanced,
<n s sJ that is— sin. Evils of every form ; intoxicating drink, immorality
in all its accursed shades and aspects, lying, thieving, and innumerable
other existing vices, have been thrust upon the blacks, and the wonder is
that any of them are left alive. The righteousness that has exalted Great
Britain and her dependencies has not been taught them, but the sins that
are our reproach have been forced into their lives, so that the Missionary’s
work instead of simply preaching the Gospel and looking for fruit, is to
grapple with these great sins, to teach the people they are sins, and that
there can be no joy in life, nor hope beyond the grave but through Christ
our Saviour.
During all this the blacks have to be with us under our protection,
for they need this more than I can describe in these pages. For the most
part of the year in their ordinary mode of life they are poor, and often
hungry, but as far as we are able, we feed and clothe them, and constantly
pray God to dispose the hearts of His children, particularly those of this
land, to extend their pity and Christian sympathy to those who have a
reasonable claim upon us.
In spite of the perplexities associated with the Mission, and the
crushing persecution to which we have been subjected from outside
influences, God has not suffered our love for the Aborigines to wane. At
times when the struggle is great and deliverance appears remote, I have
been tempted to abandon the work ; but one ray of the brightness of God’s
face, or an act of His saving and rescuing power gives vigour and courage
for new conflicts.
April Ist, 1892. —For want of a better place, Mrs. Matthews and my
daughters gave all the children meals in our kitchen, Nineteen of these
sit at the table. It involves much work, but is better in every way for the
young folks, for they get good and regular food ; besides this, they sing or
repeat the grace before and after meals.


All the members of my own family are well, and the blacks, by reason
of the regular mode of life in the Mission, are much better in health.
“ The blessing of the Lord it maketh rich, and He addeth no sorrow with
it.” We are constantly confronted with the ill-temper of some of the
men and women ; their petty jealousy, and the dangerous habit they have
acquired of going to every cricket match and “ sports ’’ within reach of the
Mission. We prevent as far as possible the children from running off on
these “wild-goose” expeditions. Invariably, on their return they are
more vain sour-tempered, and harder to deal with than before.
April sth. We found ourselves perplexed about dinner to-day, having
scarcely anything in the pantry, an empty store, and a family of about
forty-five to feed “in the wilderness.” I said to Mrs. Matthews, “ What
will you do about dinner ? ” She replied very cheerfully—“ I will make
up some kind of a meal out of three or four fishes’ heads I have in the safe.”
My heart sank within me for a moment, but the recollection that our
Heavenly Father had so often interposed in the time of need, and His
message still holds good—“ Be careful for nothing, but in everything by
prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
to God,” This we had done. A few moments after, an old blackwoman
came up from the camp to get something out of the store. She said—
“ Master me see big fish down ’long a bank ; you been tie ’im up, me think.”
“ No, Polly,” I replied, “ I nevertied up any fish ! Where did you see it ? ”
“ You come along, mine show it.” Following her a few yards on the
track to the river, to ray astonishment she pointed out a huge cod fish
caught in a snag. “ There, master, me no tell ’im lie.” One of my sons
put out a canoe, and caught hold of the fish, releasing it from its imprison-
ment, A black man assisted me in carrying it up the bank by thrusting
an oar through its gills, bearing it on our shoulders. A long procession
of big and little blacks admired the fish, and cried out, “ Hooray,” when
we placed it on the steelyards and found it to weigh 571 b. We had a
sumptuous dinner, and it was touching to hear the children sing—“ We
thank Thee Lord for this our food,” with genuine earnestness.
Sunday, April 10th.— One of the black girls, of about fifteen, who came
with her father, mother and sister to the Mission a little time ago, ran
away la*t evening. To-day a man was sent on horseback in search of
her, and he found her in company with a wicked black woman and a lot of
white men in a tent playing cards. At home we had peace and enjoyment
in all our services fur the day. Oh, how much we deplore the sin and
misery that exists in the miserable camps.
On Monday, Christina—the runaway—helped to wash the clothes,
seemed cheerful, but did not realise the sin of her conduct. She sings
nicely, reads well, and has a good knowledge of Scripture, but the girl’s
conscience appears never to have been dealt with.
April 16th.—To-day we were in receipt of £lO from a lady in New
South Wales ; £1 from a lady in Melbourne ; and 11s. from a Melbourne
servant girl, who came to visit us. For years this girl has been praying
to God that she might get to Maloga. The desire of her heart is ful-
filled. She comes to spend a month. With the money now in hand we
shall be able to pay a small debt, and get fresh supplies of food for our
increasing family of blacks. Some parcels of clothing, too, came by rail


from a lady in Melbourne, and another near Sydney. We are delighted
at these signs of the Divine favour, and lead the aborigines to look upon
God as the Giver,
Easter Monday (18th) was a holiday. We had a picnic, feasting, and
at night finished up with games in our diningroom—“ Snap Apple,”
“ Magic Music,” and other amusements. Everyone was pleased and
happy. We never had a more interesting time.
Saturday, April 28rd.—I was alarmed on returning from Echuca this
evening to find that Mrs. Matthews and the young lady from Melbourne,
having gone out for a walk early in the day, got lost, and were still in the
bush. As it was getting dark I felt anxious. Several of the blacks, with
our own children, were out searching for the wanderers. The coo-eying
of the searchers caught the ear of the ladies. They were wandering off
into a wide and extensive forest. Sitting on a log to rest themselves,
they prayed to God, and sang, “ He leadeth me ! oh, blessed thought!”
when they were discovered. Having no means of getting a fire, the night
would have been cold for them.' When they reached home there was a
general rejoicing at their recovery and safety.
The tent making and water-rat-skin business have brought us some
gain ; but both have declined. The first, because we have stocked all the
stores from whom we received orders with tents ; and the skins have
failed because the water-rats are beginning to hibernate.
The women and elder girls are growing in grace, and getting more
knowledge of God and of His wmrd, through the patient and loving instruc-
tion of Mrs, Matthews and the young visitor. Some fresh ones have
yielded up their hearts to Jesus.
Meat has been so scarce that we were obliged to make up meals from
the flesh of an emu some of the men shot.
We are greatly tried with the ingratitude and faultfinding of some of
the married people. There is constant jealousy and suspicion with them,
and my patience is scarcely enough to cope with these distinctive qualities
of the blacks.
Wednesday, May 18th, 1892.—Accompanied by my two eldest
daughters and an aboriginal boy and girl, I left to-day for a missionary
journey. We stayed for a night at several places on the way to Mel-
bourne, holding good meetings, and receiving kindness and sympathy from
Christian ministers and friends.
In and around Melbourne opportunities were presented for us to speak
of the Mission, and to sing for Jesus.
Having to pay so much for railway fares, an,d the collections small, left
the net receipts trifling ; but I had the satisfaction of knowing we did the
best we could, and perhaps removed some of the prejudice which has so
unjustly fallen upon us these last few months.
During the stay in Melbourne I had reports of our Mission printed, and
at the various meetings circulated them.
On Friday, June 18th we got back to Maloga, invigorated with the
change, and pleased with the results of the tour. All the time we were
away my dear wife, aided by some of our children, carried on the work at
home with ability and success.


Fierce attacks were made upon us, and our labours for God were
assailed in secular journals at Echuca and Moama. These being from
anonymous correspondents, we looked upon them as emanations from the
Devil, and therefore beneath our notice. As Shimei cursed David, and
cast stones at him—and he replied to those who would have taken summary
vengeance on his assailant—David said : “ Let him alone, and let him
cur9e It may be that the Lord will look on the wrong done
unto me, and that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing of me
this day.” So we “ let them alone.”
June 28th, 1892.—0ur faith is put to the test by many trying circum-
stances that seem to fall specially to the lot of a missionary to the
aborigines. Oftentimes we are short of meat, and the effort to keep
things going for such a large family, which numbers nearly fifty, is not
without care, needing forethought and management. The men take no
concern about anything, for it is not in their nature to do so. In my
deep anxiety I sometimes envy them the coolness and nonchalance that is
so characteristic of uncivilised people. A few of them are really indus-
trious, while the main body are fearfully indolent. We are now adding to
our garden, so that we may grow vegetables ajid fruits to sell and use for
the sustenance of the people. Those who are averse to this kind of occu-
pation go out hunting for game, and fishing, to help the culinary arrange-
ments of our establishment. They are, as a rule, very unsystematic
providers ; for some days we get a repletion, while, at other times, we long
for the taste of meat. .
July 3rd, 1892.—The aborigines are increasing on the station. Our
funds are reduced to two shillings. On Monday we had £1 Is. 3d. sent
from near Sydney. At evening prayers we sang, “In some way or other
the Lord will provide.” We want to lead our blacks to acknowledge God
as the Giver of every good gift. We always pray most earnestly for the
friends who remember us in our toil and isolation.
A week later we had not money enough to pay for stamping some letters
we had written, but by the English mail we had £2 2s. from a lady at
Macclesfield ; this will give us supplies of food, by economising, for
another week. We want “ Faith in God” to be our watchword.
July 14th. A lady in New South Wales sends us another contribution
of £lO. Praise the Lord ! Thus is our faith honoured and strengthened.
We had a splendid assortment of new and strong garments for girls,
boys and women from an old friend near Parramatta, the work of a band
of Christian ladies. At our services on Sunday all the people looked
bright and respectable, while we praised God for such kind friends.
July 27th.—A letter came from a dear old friend in Mornington,
Victoria, with £1 for the Mission. He says—“ lam pleased to be able
to help vou in any way, even by tittles. I need not assure you of our
continued interest in your circle. I fear you are having trying times, but
our Lord is almighty, and will make the oil to increase according to the
need and exercise of faith I can assure you we continue to
pray for you, and I believe the enclosed is in answer to prayer.” Later he
writes “ I have read and re-read the report with deep interest, because it
has placed me in possession of facts which I, in common with other friends
here, were in ignorance Oh ! dear brother, it does grieve me


that the children of God should frustrate the work of the Lord by the
readiness to find fault, and cast mud and stones, under the cover of zeal
for the Lord, at their brother and sister in Jesus, when the work is not
being done in their way, and according to their methods. The cry from
New South Wales and Queensland is heartrending to you and dear Mrs.
Matthews. lam sure we feel some small measure of the burden, and will
pray the Lord to so open the door and provide the workers and means
for carrying on that noble work. But oh, dear brother, to work depending
solely upon the Almighty arm ! I am positive that when the secular is
introduced, and ways and means sought from other sources than the
Lord’s children, there may be more bodily ease and apparent prosperity,
but less of building upon the foundation and Holy Spirit’s power and
WO rk It does my heart good to see the amount of faith you
both have been privileged to exercise amid such contrary and disheartening
circumstances. The Lord has need of you, and will yet make you reapers
as well as sowers.”
Thursday, August llth,—For several days my mind has been dis-
turbed about lack of means. We owe a little money in town, and that is
not in accordance with our principles. John Wesley says—“l would as
soon swear as fret.” We cannot swear, and we must not fret; our faith
can be exercised for all that.
August 18th.—This morning my dear wife and I considered whether it
would be better to send the blacks away for a time to their camps, or get more
flour and other necessaries from the merchants where we had been dealing.
We decided on increasing the debt a few pounds rather than send them
forth to a life of temptation and sin. Only £2 have come for this month,
and we have been compelled to keep the people on short allowance. It
seems so hard, but the Lord is teaching us and them a lesson ; still I felt
depressed about it.
Every day we give ourselves to earnest prayer, believing that our
Heavenly Father would interpose. Satan is taking advantage of this
time of perplexity, and is stirring up strife and malignity, especially
among the women. At the Sunday evening service I spoke unflinchingly
of the wickedness of evil speaking, and that God would surely punish us
for it. Just at this time a lady sent us a large Scripture card from
England—“ When He giveth quietness, who then can make trouble?”
We committed this all to the Lord, and soon a quiet calm settled down
upon us without any effort on our part. The aborigines now number
thirty-seven. Not having houses sufficient we are compelled to use tents.
August 27th.—In order to get some sugar and stamps, I had again to
appeal to our children for their egg money. They freely gave it up.
Some of the men have earned a little money at shearing, so they too were
able to contribute for the weekly expenses.
September Ist, 1892, —Yesterday we received £1 from a lady in
Hobart ; this is the first money we have had for nearly a month. It is
very, very trying, but still faith is not worth much unless it is tried. At a
little meeting we have with our children every day at noon, we get strength
by waiting upon God in prayer. We always read a chapter of Spurgeon’s
“Morning by Morning.” To-day we had a very sweet message on the
words—“ On Mine arm shall they trust.”—lsaiah iv. 5.


The first three weeks of this month times were hard ; it looked as if
cur Mission had come to an end. On the 14th, while digging and
raking in the garden I found a shilling ; this with another shilling from
cne of my children, I was able to get stamps to post letters. Some of the
black women were very quarrelsome and insolent. I never saw a more
vivid explanation of the words in James hi. 8—“ The tongue can no man
September 21st. —“ Hcpe deferred maketh the heart sick, but when the
desire cometh it is a tree of life.” A friend who was visiting us at this
time, being acquainted with our need, gave me £1 to buy a hag of flour.
When the mail bag arrived we found to our joy two sums of £o each
from friends in England. Now lam able to pay some of the money i
owe and get fresh supplies of provisions for the people. Our visitor from
Tasmania gives me much practical assistance in the garden, and helps in
managing and directing the men,
October 17th, 1892.—Last week and to-day we had £1 and £2 12s. bd.
from a lady near Sydney, whose heart was melted with compassion at our
need. She is an old friend and therefore understands our situation.
Friday, October 21st.—Seven shillings and sixpence from one friend
in London, and £lO from another, brought relief and help at this time
of deep need. The Lord be praised !
Thursday, November 3rd, 1892.—My children have a hard and solitary
life here, possessing many disadvantages in the way of society, &c.
Having this before me, and the need of change for myself from the con-
stant physical effort and mental strain, I organised a missionary party,
taking two of my own daughters, my son, who is the teacher of e
Mission School, and a party of six aboriginal boys and gtrls. With a
large open express waggon we began our journey in the North-eastern
district of Victoria, remaining away just six weeks. The distance
travelled was about 600 miles, and was a delightful change, for it brought
us in contact with much that was attractive both in persons and places.
We visited thirty-two towns and held thirty-five Missionary meetings.
Sinking was the principal feature. In most places the audiences were
large and composed mainly of young people, who manifested an interest
in all the proceedings that is not common. As on former occasions,
friends everywhere exhibited a hospitality that was highly appreciated.
Friday, December 16th.—After all our wanderings we were glad to get
home, where, although there may be perplexities and crosses, there is a
charm and sweetness that cannot be found in any other spot on earth.
Over and above the expenses of travelling we had sufficient funds con-
tributed to enable me to help pay debts, and assist in the maintenance of
the people on the Mission.
The Christmas and New Year festivities were good and well enjoyed
bv young and old. The blacks have a wonderful capacity for amusement;
even under the most unfavourable circumstances they are often merry an
light-hearted. . . , , • ,
January 12th, 1893.—The young aboriginals who went with me on the
last musical holiday campaign were so pleased with their outing ana spo e
of it in such glowing terms, that others have felt a desire that I should
give them a similar opportunity for enjoyment. The conduct of these


boys and girls had been so good at home that the step was feasible. Still
taking my eldest daughter as leader of the choir, I substituted two other
of my own children for those that had previously gone with me, and we went
forth scarcely knowing what direction to take. Mitiamo was the first
village we stayed at, and then we took place after place that came upon
our track. We had no settled plan nor destination. I had no real trouble
with the horses nor children. The weather was delightful all the journey
through. Instead of spending six weeks on the circuit as was my original
intention, we extended the journey to nine weeks.
The change proved beneficial to my mind, and to the health of all the
party, The financial results were satisfactory, considering the commercial
depression throughout the country. By the most careful methods I was
enabled to save sufficient out of the,receipts from collections and other
contributions to pay nearly all we owed in Echuca and Moama for supplies
of provisions, &c. This gave me more delight than I can describe, and
our little company often praised God as we travelled for giving us the
wisdom and opportunity to do this. We had rough experience here and
there in camping and driving over hilly country, but not the smallest
accident occurred to mar our pleasure.
I cannot speak in sufficiently high terms of the hospitality we received
wherever we went.
On Thursday, March 16th, we had our “Welcome Home”; the little
settlement was full of genuine delight, and we had a tea meeting in the
evening, followed by games. Then we blessed God for all His kind and
Fatherly dealings with us at home and in our travels. While we were
away Mrs. Matthews was ably assisted by her mother, a gentleman visitor
from Tasmania, a young lady from Melbourne, and our own two children.
The day school is kept going every day with satisfactory results.
Our associations with the children are always beneficial and happy. We
do not find this is the case with all the men and women ; many of them
are ungrateful, murmuring and dissatisfied ; when circumstances are most
favourable they seem more inclined to complain. Besides this we are
greatly harassed frequently by the interference of parents in the matter of
school and general discipline among the children. Mrs. Matthews made
a distribution of clothing to all the people from parcels given to us by
friends in various places, and especially new garments made up by ladies’
sewing meetings at Kelso and Castle Hill, N.B. W. An old black woman
wanted a dress ; the only one approaching her size was rather fashionable
and narrow in the waist. While my daughters were fitting it on, they found
the body difficult to meet on the natural form of their aboriginal sister.
She exclaimed in a tone of voice that showed she had been trying hard to
make the edges meet—“ Queeze me in, me got two shirts on.” Failing
to compress her enough, she said—“ Me not like whitefella lady.”
Monday, March 20th.—Mr. Frank Miller, of Tasmania, who came to
spend a month with us, has been here about seven months.
Although a stranger to us, except by repute, he has proved himself to be
one of the most worthy workers we have ever had. He, like ourselves, has
given himself to God for Mission work, and labours without seeking gain.
As he has thrown himself so energetically into the work, I persuaded him
to go back to his home for a month’s holiday. A good many of our men are


Some of the First Fruits—from 1874 to 1880.


away seeking employment in the district around ; they leave their wives
and children to enjoy the protection of the station and the teaching we so
constantly set before them.
March 28th.—Slanders and evil-speaking have been so actively spread
among the people lately, that I have determined to suppress them with a
high hand. On Sunday I addressed the people, confining myself almost
entirely to this giant evil. I spoke on Proverbs xxii. 10—“ Cast out the
scorner, and contention shall go out.” My plain speaking fell with
unpleasant effect upon the ears of some who had transgressed. I was at
once told it was cruel for me to offend them in this way, but I did not
spare them for.all that, because I was attacking sin. Two of the women
came and confessed with tears that they had done wrong, asking my
forgiveness, and seeking the Divine pardon. Four other women rankled
under the accusations, and stood out in bold defiance. One of these was a
Christian whose testimony and prayers were delightful, and yet possessed
vanity enough to think she could not offend with her tongue. I purpose,
God helping me, not to spare but to attack this sin that has done so
much to undermine our usefulness among the blacks.
And now, in closing this report, we know not what is before u°. Hav-
ing placed ourselves upon the altar of service for God, our intention is,
in the face of all obstacles, to spend and be spent for the uplifting of the
native blacks of Australia. There are at least 300,000 of these on this
island continent. The pitying cry comes to us from Queensland —“ Come
over and help us ” ; fain would we respond to that appeal if the way were
open. A gentleman in Jersey has kindly offered me a piece of land
to establish a mission upon at Toombul in Queensland. An alarming
flood has recently devastated this part of the country, and I have written
to a friend for information as to how far it is affected.
In closing this report we are glad to know so many of our old friends-
are adhering to us, and that their minds and sympathies are not affected
by the damaging reports that have been circulated respecting us and the
work of God in our hands. At no time in the history of our Mission has
there been greater need for earnest and prevailing prayer for us. We ask
the friends of all Missionary effort to pray much that we may be owned of
God in the uplifting and conversion of many of the sunken sons and
daughters of Australia’s dusky race.
DANIEL MATTHEWS,
V
Founder and Superintendent.
Maloga Aboriginal Mission, via Echuca, Victoria,
or Moama, New South Wales.


2
Collection Congregational
Church, South Melb. ...
£2
5
1
Mrs. H., Sydney, per M.
and K., Glebe
0
12
0
>1
M. and R., Glebe, Sydney
1
0
0
3
Collection Wesleyan Ch.,
Kew, Melb
1
3
6
..
“ Little Girl,” Kew, Melb.
0
1
0
9
Collection Wesleyan Ch.,
Hawthorn, Meib.
0
9
3
10
Collection Presbyterian
High Church, Geelong
1
0
0
11
J. P., Geelong
1
1
0
LIST OF
CONTRIBUTIONS
For the Year
April, 1892.
4 Mr*. J., Mornington, Vic. £lO 0
„ D. G. G., Mornington, Vic. 0 5 6
12 Mr*. K. J., senr., Melb.... 0 10 0
15 L. O. H., Stanmore, Syd-
ney 1 0 0
16 “ City Sparrow,” Melb.... 0 11 0
„ F. A. 8., Kelso, N.5.W.... 10 0 0
„ B. W. 8..Y.W.C.A.. Melb. 1 0 0
122 A. P„ Moondarra, Vic. ... 1 0 6
£l5 7 0
May.
2 Forest Street Wesleyan
S.S., Bendigo, Vic. ... £0 16 2
B B. S. and Co., Melb,, per
E, W. B 2 2 0
13 Collection Union Church,
Mathoura, N.S.W. ... 018 0
18 Collection Bible Christian
Church, Rochester, Vic. 15 6
19 CollectionAthenfeum Hall,
Elmore, Vic. ... ... 1 13 11
21 Collection Congregational
Church. Castlemaine... 112
„ Mr. W,, Castlemaine ...050
23 Collection Baptist Church,
Kyneton 1 11 4
24 Collection Mechanic’s In-
stitute. Woodend ... 1 7 10
Mr. F., Woodend ...10 0
25 Collection Presbyterian
Church, Malvern, Vic 5 0 0
31 CollectionY.W.C.A., Melb. 0 14 7
„ Mr. D., Woodend ... 0 2 6
£l7 18 0
June.
12 Collection S, Army, Gee-
1 8 0
ending Jlst March ,
August,
September.
October.
18Q3.
AND SUBSCRIPTIONS
14 Mrs. C., Mercer Street,
Geelong £0 5 0
15 Collection Congregational
Church, Ballarat ... 1 14 5
.. Mr. S. (stamps) ... ... 0 5 6
20 Mission Fund, St. Stephen’s
S.S.. Richmond, Melb., 210 0
22 L. M. S. H., London ...5 0 0
£lB 12 9
July.
10 “ Widower’s Mite,” Gee-
long ... ... ... £0 2 6
„ E. N, T., Castle Hill,
N.S.W 1 1 3
„ B. 8., Macclesfield, Eng-
land 2 2 0
12 F. A. 8.. Kelso, N.5.W.... 10 0 0
27 Green Island S.S., per
D, G. G 0 6 0
„ R. 0., senr., per D. G. G.,
Mornington, Victoria... 0 14 0
£l4 5 9
3 Mrs. J., Mornington. Vic. £1 0 0
4 M. K., Bast Melbourne... 1 1 0
31 S. N., Hobart, Tasmania 10 0
£3 1 0
21 G. C., Birmingham, Eng-
land £5 0 0
K, 8., Sunderland ... 5 0 0
M. 8., Mittagong, N.S.W. 0 11 6
Maloga Shearers 2 11 9
F. M., Launceston, Tas-
mania ...10 0
£l4 3 3
10 Member Y.W.C.A., Melb. £0 2 0
14 L. O. H., Stanmore, Syd-
ney 10 0
16 Mrs, C., per L. O, H. ...200
„ B. H., „ „ ... 0 2 6
~ A friend ~ ~ ...0100
21 C. L., per J. T. M., London 10 0 0
„ Highgate Road Baptist
Chapel, London, per J. C. 0 7 0
29 J. J., Hampton Park,
England 0 10 0
£l4 11 6


November.
4 Collection Meeting Kya-
brim £1 7 11
5 Collection Meeting Tatura 0 17 3
„ C. G., Tatura 0 5 0
7 Collection Meeting Shep-
parton 1 6 11
8 Collection Meeting Shep-
parton 010 6
9 Collection Meeting Moo-
roopna 1 15 0
10 Collection Meeting Mur-
chison 3 19 4
11 Collection Meeting Nagam-
bie 1 5 0
14 “ Friend.” Seymour ... 0 110
„ Collection Meeting Sey-
mour 1 14 3
15 Mrs. McA., Seymour ... 0 2 6
Collection Meeting Broad-
ford 1 1 6
16 Collection Meeting Talla-
rook ... 0 13 10
17 Collection Meeting Avenel 1 15 1
18 „ Long-
wood 0 17 1
21 Collection Meeting Euroa 3 15
~ H.W., Kuroa 0 2 6
22 Collection Meeting Violet
Town 2 6 0
23 Collection Meeting Badda-
ginnie 0 11 6
24 Collection Meeting Be-
nalla ... 018 2
Mrs. H., senr., Benalla ...0 2 0
26 Collection Meeting Glen-
rowan ... 0 11 9
28 Collection Meeting Wan-
garatta 1 16 7
29 Collection Meeting Spring-
hurst 12 8
30 Collection Meeting Chil-
tern ...10 0
£29 5 7
December.
1 Collection Meeting Barna-
watha £0 5 11
2 Collection Meeting Wah-
gunyah 0 11 4
3 Collection Meeting Ruth-
erglen ... 0 4 6
5 Collection Meeting Cor-
owa 2 8 7
6 Collection Meeting Yarra-
wonga 118
7 Collection Meeting Tun-
gamah 115
■8 Collection Meeting Lake
Rowan
0 14 1
9 Collection Meeting St.
James £1 6 4
10 Collection Meeting Deve-
nish ... 0 11 9
12 Collection Meeting Dookie 0 17 0
13 Collection Meeting Wun-
ghnn ... ... ... 0 711
14 Coilection Meeting Nu-
murkah 1 15 1
15 Collection Meeting Natha-
lia 13 3
£l2 8 10
January, 1893,
1 E. H., per M. and R,
Glebe, Sydney 10 0
5 Forest Street Wes. S. S.,
Bendigo, Vic 1 6 10
10 “ Minnie,” Y.W.C.A., Melb. 0 5 0
13 Collection Meeting Mitia-
mo 15 0
14 Collection Meeting Ma-
loga 0 18 3
16 Collection Meeting Pyra-
mid Hill 13 4
17 Collection Meeting Boort 15 4
„ Mr, A., Boort 0 2 6
J? iXJLtt ••• ... V ~ "
„ W. J. 8., Boort 10 0
18 Collection Meeting Mysia 2 0 10
19 „ „ Boning 13 0
20 Collection Meeting Korong
Vale 15 1
21 Collection Meeting Wed-
derburn 10 9
22 Collection Meeting Wed-
derburn, Sunday ... 2 19 5
23 Collection Meeting Rich-
mond Plains ... ... 1 18 0
24 Collection Meeting Wyche-
tella 0 18 6
Mrs. C., Wychetella ... 010 0
•• IU.IS, ...
25 C Election Meeting Yeun-
groon .. ... 0 15 5
~ Mr. W., Yeungroon ... 0 2 6
27 Collection Meeting Barra- v
kee 0 12 0
0 15 5
28 Collection Meeting Charl-
ton ... ... ... 0 9 6
29 Collection Meeting (Sun-
day School) Charlton 0 15 1
~ Collection Meeting (Sun-
day evening) Charlton 2 14 8
„ Collection Meeting
(Special) Charlton .. 010 0
30 Collection Meeting Gber-
rup Swamp 0 9 0
31 Miss H., Cherrup Swamp 0 5 0
„ Collection Meeting Donald 17 10
£27 2 10


February.
1 Collection Meeting Cope
Cope ... £0 16 7
2 Collection Meeting Swan-
water 10 1
3 Collection Meeting Avon
Plains 012 4
4 Collection Meeting St.
Arnaud 2 0 4
5 Collection Meeting (Sun-
day) St. Arnaud ... 2 14 4
6 Collection Meeting Coc -
noer Bridge ... ... 14 7
7 Collection Meeting Avoca
Forest ... 0 18 9
8 Collection Meeting Bea-
liba ... .. ...0 9 0
9 Collection Meeting Dun-
oily ... 18 0
10 Collection Meeting Tarna-
gulla ... 17 0
11 Collection Meeting Ingle-
wood ... 0 13 7
12 Collection Sunday School,
Inglewood 0 17 2
„ Collection Sunday even-
ing, Inglewood ... 1 6 6
13 Collection Meeting Bridge-
water ... ... .. 012 6
14 Collection Meeting New-
bridge 0 15 0
15 Collection Meeting Laane-
coorie ... 0 14 9
16 Collection Meeting Edding-
ton . . 0 10 0
17 Collection Meeting Bowen-
vale ... 0 19 3
18 Collection Meeting Mary-
borough 0 18 8
.. Mr. 0., Maryborough ... 0 2 6
19 Collection Meeting (Sun-
da y School) Mary-
borough ... ... 2 10 1
~ Collection Meeting (Sun-
day evening) Mary-
borough ... ... 4 15 0
20 Collection Meeting Caris-
brook .. ... ...16 0
21 Collection Meeting New-
stead .. ... ...10 0
„ Mrs. 8., Newstead ...0 5 0
22 Collection Meeting Guile -
ford 0 13 8
Friends, Guildford ... 0 4 0
23 Collection Meeting Camp-
bell's Creek 0 14 0
24 Collection Meeting Mal-
don £0 18 4
25 Collection Meeting Mal-
don 0 8 11
26 Collection Sunday School,
Maldon 1 12 3
„ Collection Sunday Even-
ing Service, Maldon ... 1 15 4
27 Collection Meeting Lock-
wood 0 7 6
28 Collection Meeting Kan-
garoo Flat 0 10 9
£B6 16 9
March.
1 Collection Meeting Golden
Square £0 7 10
2 Collection Meeting Long
Gully 0 7 3
3 Collection Meeting Cali-
fornia Gully ... ... 0 10 0
4 Collection Meeting Eagle-
ha'wk ... 0 4 6
Collection Meeting (Sun-
day School), Eaglehawk 0 14 5
„ Collection Meeting (Sun-
day evening), Eagle-
hawk ... ... ... 2 14 10
7 Collection Meeting Con-
gregational Churchßen-
digo 1 16 5
8 Collection Meeting
8 Collection Meeting
Marong
9 Collection Meeting Bap-
0 8 2
Collection Meeting Bap-
tist Church, Bendigo... 2 12 4
10 Collection Meeting Strath-
fieldsaye 0 13 9
11 J. E. 8., Bendigo ...10 0
12 Collection Meeting Maso-
nic Hall, Bendigo .. 1 6 8
„ Collection Meeting (Sun-
day evening) 4 17 0
13 Collection Meeting Huntly 13 8
14 „ „ Elmore 13 3
„ J. H., Huntly 0 5 0
yy J t 111 )11 Uiillj' ••• ••• V W V
~ W. B. R., Richmond,
England 10 10 0
„ E. B. R., Richmond, Eng-
land 10 0
Mrs. H., Maryborough,Vic. 0 5 0
~ ir-iia, jul., maij uuiuugu, v iu. u
24 Mrs. 8., Mitt ago ng,
N.S.W 0 5 0
£32 5 1


Bo any object to your methods and discipline ?
Yes ; sudden disaffection will cause them sometimes to rebel, and
in extreme cases we are led to dismiss one or more for the general
benefit of the rest.
Do you attach much importance to religion ?
Assuredly; because we believe and teach that “ seeking first the
Kingdom of God and His righteousness, all other thiags will be
added.” This we believe is the only remedy to prevent the race
from entire extinction.
Is the religious teaching of the Mission dogmatic?
Ko; we simply read the Bible, and reprove or encourage them as
necessity occurs.
What do you do about clothing?
Through the generosity of friends, clothes are sometimes provided.
The men and women buy from their own earnings, but very often
our stock is inadequate, especially in winter.
What kind of clothing is acceptable?
All kinds of men, women, and children’s, whether new or partly
worn.
Would pieces of cloth be of service, such as flannel, tweed, calico, print,
needles, cottons, &c. ?
Yes, and small pieces of material for patchwork, for nearly all
the women and girls cut out garments well, and are excellent
seamstresses with machines or by hand.
What denomination are you connected with?
Hone in particular, but we have friends and sympathisers in every
section of the Christian Church.
Do you hope to make the Mission self-supporting?
Yes, as the young people become educated and trained; but this
must be a work of time.
Are the men good at farming ?
Some are, but none a»e really steady and reliable yet.
What is the cost of maintenance?
From £8 to £l2 per annum per head would be sufficient on the
average; as the institution advances less would suffice. For
several months of this and last years the expenses per head did
not average more than £3 per annum, or rather more than one
shilling per week ; because of this I was compelled to support the
work largely out of ray own private means, produce of garden, &c.
Do you receive much assistance ?
Hot lately. Disaffection and the prevailing commercial depression
have seriously affected our finances.
How much have you received by subscriptions the last two years?
1891, £9O 6s. 7d.; 1892, £236 Os. 4d.
What do you do when your exchequer is low and circumstances pressing?
Make our requests known to God, who has promised to supply all
our need.
Do you send out appeals for money ?
Hot on any occasion.


How is the work made known ?
By the issue of annual reports, by public addresses from time to
time, and in any way that may be suggested apart from actual
begging.
Do you keep an account of income and expenditure ?
Yes, ever since we commenced the Mission.
Are your books audited ?
Yes, annually.
Are they open to subscribers ?
At all times.
Who is responsible for the payment of all accounts?
We are, personally.
How do you purpose increasing the number of aborigines on jour station?
By gathering them in from camps in the bush.
Do you ever invite the blacks from other Mission stations ?
Ho ; we never have to our knowledge.
Is it your wish to preserve unity with all other efforts to ameliorate the
condition of the blacks ?
Certainly.
Can you form an estimate of the results of your efforts in the cause of
the aborigines generally since you first began your Mission?
1. We have had between 300 and 400 blacks under our care
during that period.
2. Obtained from Government (through petition from the
aborigines) the 1800 acres of land now occupied by the
Cummeragunja Station ; fenced it in, subdivided and partially
cleared it.
8. The aborigines now residing on that station were nearly all
formerly under our care, and any success that may exist, we
consider is mainly due to our personal efforts in the past.
4. It is well known that the establishment of the Warangesda
and Brewarrina Stations in Hew South Wales are the direct
outcome of our example.
5. The formation of an active organization in the city of Brisbane,
for the benefit of the blacks of Queensland, was an immediate
result of a visit we paid that city in 1888. The Mission at
Stradbroke Island, in Moreton Bay, is an evidence of what is
being done in that direction.
Are you in favour of the aborigines going out to meetings to plead their
own cause and collect funds ?
I believe, in the hands of competent men, the aborigines may be
led out in this way, and much good may be done both for the
interests of the blacks and for the spiritual benefit of Christians ;
at the same time I am of opinion such a practice may be fraught
with danger, as the blacks become vain at success, may be
rebellious and unmanageable, and eventually greviously fall. This
is the common experience of Missionaries in all lands. I am
further of opinion that in no case should the aborigines, individu-
ally or in companies, be encouraged by ministers or others to hold
meetings unless under the leadership of some responsible Christian


white man or woman, as otherwise, in several cases that have come
under my notice, the results have been disastrous, and brought
contempt upon themselves and the best interests of their race.
What are your present requirements ?
We need a new school house, dining room and dormitories for
boys and girls, and several cottages for married people, the material
for which will not cost a large amount. Having the materials,
the black men, under my directions, can erect comfortable and suit-
able buildings, if they are provided with food and clothes as reward
for their labour.
How may contributions be sent to Maloga ?
From Great Britain by post office order, on Echuca, Victoria, or
by bank draft, payable to Mr" Daniel Matthews on the Bank of
New South Wales, Echuca, Victoria.
From any of the colonies, otherwise than Victoria, by post
office order on Moama, New South Wales, or bank draft, payable
to Mr. Daniel Matthews, as above.
From Victoria, subscriptions may be sent by post office order, on
Echuca, cheques, postage stamps, postal notes, or bank draft.
How may parcels, boxes, sacks, or other packages of clothing, books, toys,
&c., &c,, be forwarded to Maloga ?
By rail from any station in New South Wales or Victoria,
addressed—
“ Mr. Daniel Matthews,
Maloga Aboriginal Mission,
Echuca, Victoria.”
Per goods train.
Parcels are not carried free as formerly. We or the senders have to
pay freight.
If from friends in New South Wales and by rail— via Albury and
Melbourne should be added to prevent delay and additional expense.
If any one desires further information concerning our work , I shall
esteem it a favour if they will write me , and they shall receive as far as
possible a full and explicit reply.
DANIEL MATTHEWS,
Founder and Superintendent.
Maloga Aboriginal Mission,
Near Echuca, Victoria.


MUo
ptQ3>s2-


( bal
1 §:
nT £
=5 * O
( U
( a *
< a
a- <
'Sh £
<2 E
Cs> KN
I § s
< §
I a
( <*s> fe*
~ $
< ? B
< 2 !>
< «S - H
< 2- k-i
: s s
< <> tn
o 153
<
I e
I s <:
» <:
a P
< s k;
' s 15
< S
|*s S
< S 2,
( » t" 1
( a H
< !>
< » r-
< s
1
< S' t 3
{ s=l ►
< "• «
I S 9
< C 5 g; §
o sj i
«s
( 5.
5 * DO 5
/ t-t O
( g ®
{ C.
cc a>
o o
( so
) *
; s
{ -£


