

THE
DEATH OF
Captain COOK ,
A GRAND
SERIOUS-PANTOMIMIC-BALLET,
IN THREE PARTS.
As now exhibiting in PARIS, and Theatre-
Royal, COVENT-GARDEN, with
uncommon Applause.
WITH
The original FRENCH Music, New Scenery,
Machinery, and other Decorations,
AS PERFORMED AT THE
T HEATRE-ROY A L,
HULL.
HU LL;
PRINTED BY J, AND W. RAWSON


CHARACTERS.
Terreeohoo,King of the Wand, Mr 'Turpin,
l“„X I Lovers of Em*
Captain Cook, - Mr Chalmers,
His Lieutenant* - Mr J.Wilkinfon,
Lieutenant of Marines* - Mr Kennedy .
Pricft, - - Mr Warren «
Ernai, a Relation of the King’s* Mrs. Fawcett,
Englifh Soldiers and Sailors.
Iflanders of the King’s Party.
Wanders of Koah’s Party.
Women and Girls of the Ifland.
SCENE, The IJland of O-Why-e in the South
Sea .




The Death of Captain Cook,
PART I.
SCENE I.
A View in the Iland of O-Why-e.
EM A I enters from her hut in fearch of
flowers, of which flie is making a gar-
land, and in this employment goes off. -
Pareea enters from his hut, holding in his
band fome .firings of variegated fliells,'which
he carries towards Emai's hut.
Koah enters brifidy, and feizes Pareea by
the arm—-An altercation feems to take place,
and preparation for battle enfue.
Emai re-enters, and endeavours to recon-
cile them, by declaring Are will (at proper
time) chufe one of them for her hufband, and
retires to her hut.
The rivals are joyful, each flattering himfelf
to have the preference—They agree to come
again to Emai’s hut to know who flie will
chufe, and go off.
Emai comes out deflrous to know what is
Become of her lovers—not feeing them re-
enters her hut.
The lovers enter, each from his hut, with
a large beautiful fhell they go foftly to-
wards Emai’s hut, flop, and make three jumps
before the door, then retire quickly, and ft.op
at a.certain diftance.


A troop of young girls enter from the top,
and fmilingly obferye the rivals.
Emai enters from her hut, walks gravely up
to, and places herfelf between the rivals——
they both kneel, and fit down on their heels,
and offer each his ftiell,
Emai looking tenderly on Pareea, receives
his Ihell, and giving a look of fcorn on Koah,
flies rapidly into her hut——Koah throws
away his fhell with anger and difappointment,
and goes off.
Pareea, in tranfport attempts to follow Emai,
but is prevented by the girls, who draw him
a little diftance from the hut, from whence
Emai nifties out, and flies (laughing) towards
the country. Pareea purifies her with joy,
and the young girls all follow, making figns
of fatisfaftion.
SCENE II
Another View, with the Marriage Altar in the
Centre.
Koah enters, fullen and much grieved at the
preference given to his rival ; hears mafic and
rejoicing for the wedding, and retires with
precipitation, meditating revenge.
A troop of female natives, preceded By four
iflanders, come down two and two, dancing,
and range themfelyes on one fide. Two other
iflanders enter, the one playing the nofe flute,
the other the long tahor.


Enter Emai, carried by four men, attended
by young girls, and Pareea, carried by four
men, and attended by an old Pried, who,
Handing behind the altar, ftretches out his
arms towards heaven, and jumps three times
’ —The feveral attendants duller round Emai
and Pareea, and gently fet them down-
They Hand- at the lide of the altar, and take
eaqh a green garland from it, which they Peep
in their hands, during the cei'emony. The
company fit down on their heels, holding their
heads in their hands, their elbows reding on
their knees, and enjoy in filence the amafc-
ments the dancers give.
The Pried comes forward, places hirafelf
between Pareea and Emai, and offers them ,a
little white dick, of whidi they each take an
extremity,, and fignify their acceptance of
each other by breaking it.
Koah enters with an axe and dagger, defy-
ing his rival to combat by menacing geftures,
Pareea fetches his arms, fiercely giving the
like menaces, and they begin’ the combat,
wherein Eoah is overcome——The conqueror
takes his dagger to kill him, but Emai holds
his arm, and tells Koah to retire, who goes
away in a rage.
During the fight; and after it is finilhed,
the Iky is darkened by degrees- Lightning
flalhes—Thunder rolls, and the didant found
of cannon is heard—The natives, in great con-
dentation, look to the fea Ihore, and run off*
with their arms lifted up towards Heaven.


PART. II
SCENE,
The Sea Shore on the Island.
rip' H E Iflanders who went (:o the fea-fide,,
§ return precipitately by the fame way,
with marks of fear and amazement.
A flap then appears with Englifli colours,
Captain Cook (in uniform) on the forecaftle
with a fpying-glafs, with which he feems dis-
covering the country. He then takes a white
flag in his hand, which he waves repeatedly
towards the fhore.
Enter the King accompanied by the warriors
armed ; he holds in his hand a green branch,
which he waves oppofite the fthp His war-
riors range themfelves about him.
The military mulic of the Englifli is at firft
heard at a diftance, afterwards nearer ; then a
detachment of marines appear marching two
and two, with their Lieutenant, and the flag '
then the mulic ; after which. Captain Cook
comes on, followed by a party of Jailors arm’d.
Having marched a-breaft the King, Captain
Cook waves the white flag he holds in his hand;
the King rifes, and waves his green branch.
The King orders his warrior's to ground,
their arms ; Captain Cook does the fame,* they
advance and embrace, the King joining his
nofe to the Captain’s, as is cuftomary among
the Iflanders.


The Captain orders four failors, who carry*
two trunks with various articles, to come for-
ward. All the Iflanders exprefs their joy at
the contents ; the Captain prefents the King
with a medal, and a bunch or plume of red
feathers; gives axes to the warriors, and nails,
knives, &c. to the other inhabitants, and a
poniard to Koah, who receives it with ftrong
tokens of gratitude.
All the Iflanders go off, (except the King)
teftifying their extreme joy at the pofleflion
of their prefents.
The females arrive, and rufh on the chefts
of prefents. The King comes forward, and
orders them to retire.
They form a femi-circle: Captain Cook diftri-
butes different prefents of glafs collars, knives,
feathers, and a looking glafs, which affords
them much wonder and pleafure ; and parti-,
cularly, gives a looking glafs, and a glafs. or
bead collar to Emai; they go off in friendfliip,
and the fcene clofes. '
The King and Captain meet the Iflanders,
who bring prefents of bread, fruit. Cocoa-nuts,
&c, which they offe r to the Captain ; part of
which he accepts, and they give the remainder
to the failors and folcliers.
The King takes a piece of red and white
fluff, which he puts round the Captain, giving
the ftrongefl marks of friendfliip and regard.
The King gives a fignal, at which eight male
dancers appear in attitude before him and dance
according to the manners of their country :
B


th(3
giv^s,hishapd, tp the Captain K wlpnnyitos the
10ngapd ; his attemlapts.tp.fee tfcce %ip, vybich
is’ cpnfentedtp ;. thpypppg. girls, accompany;,
them, making theij;- geftiups to, tbp
falJprsitmd foldiprs.
T|he warriors wd>o. rpa*ah»-bphHifil*.
thpr.arms., and. an
inquietude at feeing their iti tjhe power
of ftrangqrSj,
Trim mufjp.of,the Ihip.is heard. afa. dhfecej.
The Captain appears on the deqk, hpldifig the
' xh|i w.ajTiorsp f htpr,.pwerjoyedto ;fqp,f heir ff ■»
vereign fo entertained, make. %ps,tp t|i6-i|ig-
-li%t thfy,will : {Q9n CQ : rpe ; hack, apd’.gp>al| iptf
t|sfiL 'Qwpq^te, fide withpp|, ; order,.. Thp King
retire- from;- t'hft deckfi-apd-, |jy,e
jjace. to .t|ie„ young , girls., .and, lWw>. wIN -eat ’
ahd;d|ink together.
t rf* fpl’4,iers, and girls o£the.if|ap,di
returning from the Chip, march along han|,.in
hand, g4ying,mntpal teftimony of regard f The
King aiid.Captain follow, and ,the ; of|pers ; and
foldiers finiHr the rnarch, after which Koah ap-
pears alone, withferious afpeCl, meditating re-
venge, perceiving Emai coming, he retires.
Emai enters , with ,a, looking-glafs, admiring
herfelf in the glafs. Pareea follows, and looks
over her fhoulder,; Ihe perceives his face, ip
the glafs, and is flruck with- wonder and- a-
mazement, until (lie obferves the caufe ; he
invites her to fit, and adjuils the flowers ..in
her hair, while fhe returns his tendernefs.


1
At the fafee tithe Koah appears iti the baft
grfeind, With fobr Warriors, his Friends. He
informs theih, arid demands their affiftanc'e in
the vertgfeahee he meditates, which tfifejr prd-
foife. He makes them hide themfelves in dif-
ferent places ttt be ready at theiifff flgttllj and
lays himfelf in Barbea en-
tering, petcfeiVes him,, ahd rdtis towards him.
Korah gives the fignal, and His four drnraies
eniir, and feiie Eafeed in ipite of his rfefiffahce,
Koah feizeS Ethai, arid attempts tb Force her
off} She refills, hut at la'ft faints away.
Captain Cdk appears : infcerifed at the violence
offered to Emai, he orders Kbahtb rclbfefehef,.
who refiifes to obey, arid threatens to ftah her
inffantly ; biM.thfe Captain feistes his arm, fed
lays hold of Emai. Kbah, in a fagfc, attacks
the Captain with His fee i the Captain brakes
Emai quickly* patS his left tide, draWs 'His Cwpffl,
parries off the ftrokes of his adverfary, and dif-
arms Mm, who* falls a't the Captain’sfeet, The
four warriors re-enter, add attacks the Captain,
till Pared returns with qffiflance. The four war-
riors and Koah fly—Pareea profffates hirhfeif
at the Captain's’ feet ; Ethai alfb embraces' his
knees, and Kiffes his hands; the Captain’ raffts
themy and puts’ Emai into the amis of h'er hhf-
band, recommendifig the greateft care and cir-
cnnrfpe&ion to 1 them,
ThfrJSitig enters hafltlj,- Etna! and Paffea- re-
late to him the great fery ice thb Captain’has
done thenfe they again fall aif hiisfeet, feff give
eatery fign of the feoff lively gfetffdde. ,


Ati IJknder hajlily enters, to anounce to the
King, that Koah, at the head of a coufiderable
party, were advancing to attack him. The
Captain tells the King he has nothing to fear,
and that he will protect him from his enemies.
Koah and his friends march in purfuit of
the. King and his party, who return inftantly
to face their enemies. They look menacing at
one another, and the battle begins, in which
Koah, and his party are victorious, and pre-
pare themfelves to purfue the others j but they
are prevented by the appea ranee of the Captain
; and his people, at light of whom they fly, and
are purified by the Englilh.
The King, with fame of his people, come
hack, and prepare themfelves to go to the af-
fiftance of the Englilh.
The Englilh return in triumph, having
Koah and another Klander priloneiv
The natives teftify their joy {it the victory
of the Englifli ; the King compliments the
Lieutenant, who delivers the prifbners over
to him, and marches off with his people to-
ward the veflel.
The King orders his warriors to bring wood,
pf which they make a funeral pile j after
which, two men erefl; a flake in the middle of
the flage, Koah and his companion (bound)
brought to the place of execution, the women
preparing fire for the piles. The men fit down
in a circle round the prifoners, and the women
make a double circle behind the men j brewing
much fatisfaCHon at the approaching torments
which are ail prepared, the women having


lighted torches for the purpofe of kindling the
pile; and the moment the prifoners are going
to be faftened to the ftake j the Captain enters
and procures the liberty of the prifoners, who
are thereupon unbound; one proftrates him-
felf before the Captain in a grateful manner,
but Koah calls a menacing look upon all, and
fullenly walks away.
The men Illanders retire, and the King im-
portunes the Captain to make choice of any
of the women, but he relifts all the entreaties
of him. and the women themfclves, who there-
upon retire.
Koah appears behind with a poniard in his
hand, but retires ; his defign is fufpefled by
Pareea and Emai, who tun to, andadvife the
Captain to be upon his guard againft him.
Four bailors are purfued by KoahV party.
The King and Pareea go to aflemble their
friends, leaving the Captain behind, who
draws to defend himfelf againll Koah and
his party, who attack him; he retires light-
ing with them, but foon returns without his
hat. ftill fighting, and making his enemies
give way, fome of whom prollrate themfelves
before him, and receive his*pardon; but Koah
at this moment, treacheroully fteals behind
the Captain, and with the poinard (given him
by the Captain) ftabs him in the back, and
flies. The Captain (tho’ mortally wounded)
fires his piftol at Koah and kills him, then
reels and falls againft a tree. One of Koah’s
party takes advantage of this Situation, and
ftabs him in the fide, and this is repeated


by each warmer, with a favage eagernefs,
featehing the dagger from each other, and
Ihouting and exulting in his Fall.
The Marines give a vi&orious fliout. The
warriors run off with Koah’s dead body. Ma»
yines. enter with the King’s party, who all
fhew violent marks of grief and defpair at the
breathlefs body of the Captain j they raife,
examine and prepare to bear him off, when
the curtain drops.
PART III.
SCENE,
4 MORAI, or Burying Place.
Mountain behind.
FUNiERAL march heard,.-—'The marines
enter with arms reverfed, preceded by
ixm- fawns, corned with black crape. ; they
march round: the ground, and depofi# the bo-
dy ol their Captain in the middle. When
they are ranged,/ two Tailors enter fcottdulfced.
.%■' apj officer 06 marines 1 ): ©ariyin'ga pole, hav-
ing the- following infcription on a board.—
To bh Mkmory! of Caftmn- Jams Cook, *4#
Mohmary,. *§■ placed on the
centre of the tomb, the Iflandnrs being fpee-
totorsr.of the.ceremony.'


Pareea, and Emai enter,,, overwhelmed with
grief,, and walk Howl)' and fiXently to the,tomb,
which, they, for fotne„momen.g, contemplate
with copfummabe Jpjipow. TRejj. lift up their
hands andey eg, towards Heaven, and let tliem-
IfelVes down on both fides of the tomb, weeping
the fate of their generous departed friend'.
Four Handers (carrying long Perches., to
which fculptured figures of human heads are
fattened, one above another, declining gradu-
ally in fuse, as a revcrfed enter, make
a tour round, andi fix their; perches at each
corner of the tomb, and then retire back.
Two natives, with each a long tabor, enter
before the Handers, who all, men and women,
come on with green boughs, and march down;
three others carrying bananas, cocoa - nuts,
and a roalled hog. The march is- clofed by
(he Sling, Prieft, and Mourner. They form
a fcrnicircic, the two extremities of which are
filled op by the women, the Prieft in the mid-
dle, who miles his hands towards Heaven, and
J ails on his knees, at which fignal the. Handers,,
two and two, go and place their green branches
round the Morai. The Prieft gives another
fignal, and they all fall on their fences, cover-
ing their eyes with both hands. The bearers
of the bananas, cocoa - nuts, and hog, place
themfelves behind the prieft, whs condufts
them to the entrance of the tomby where their
prefents are depofited, and they return to fcheit
places 5 then the detachment of marines: fire.
The prieft gives a fignal, and a ftvokc is given
with a little flick on the tabors ; they all raifc


their hahds towards Heaven, three feveral
times raifing and defeending. From the moun-
tain iJTues a thick fmbke, after which the
flames appear; and daftly, the Lava, which
runs down the mountain, amidft the uproar
of cannon, thunder, &c.
THE END.
