

CfoFP
13i ftU 0
THE ABORIGINES OE AUSTRALIA
f 9jn i /
K* l I PfX i (yg




THE
ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA
A PAPER
READ BEFORE THE AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY
BOSTON APRIL 30 1890
EDWARD G. PORTER M. A.
[Repbinted feom the Society’s Peoceedings]
PRESS OF CHARLES HAMILTON
311 MAIN STREET




THE ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
So few of our countrymen visit Australia that I venture to
believe that a paper upon the Aborigines of that country
may not be without interest to the members of this Society,
even though the subject may seem remote from the prov-
ince of our ordinary investigations. The continent of
America, naturally, furnishes most of the topics for our
proceedings, but I have noticed that we have always been
friendly toward ethnological and anthropological matters,
from whatever quarter they have come. When, therefore,
the president kindly invited me to give the Society at this
meeting some impressions which I had gathered during my
recent journey in the far East, I concluded that 1 could
otter nothing of greater value than some facts, not widely
known in this country, which came under my observation
during a pleasant sojourn of a few months last year among
the antipodes.
I visited all the Australian colonies but one (West Aus-
tralia), and saw their thriving capitals, many of the inte-
rior towns, some of the sheep and cattle stations, the larg-
est gold and tin mines and plenty of the bush and scrub.
It is indeed a wonderful country ; wonderful in its ex-
tent, its scenery and its products ; totally unlike any other
part of the world. Nowhere else have I seen tree-ferns
forty feet in height, and the proud Eucalyptus towering to
an altitude half as high again as our Bunker-Hill monu-
ment, considerabty exceeding the Sequoia r/iga.nlea of Cali-
fornia. In no other country have I been greeted by such
natural curiosities as the kangaroo, the wallaby, the emu,


the platypus, the lyre-bird, the black swan and the laugh-
ing jackass.
But while I would gladly dwell upon the strange appear-
ance of the country, its unique fauna and flora , and the
abundant evidences of an imported civilization which is
steadily advancing to subdue the continent, my object now
is simply to describe that lonely and mysterious race, still
found in the land, and, until recently, the only race that
could properly be called Australian. That name is now
being appropriated, with pardonable pride, by the new
occupants of the soil, just as we Americans call ourselves
by a name which, ethnologically, belongs to our predeces-
sors, whom we have ousted from their fair domain. It is
ever so. The dwellers are supplanted by the intruders;
the weak yield to the strong; the savage retires before the
civilized.
The traveller who to-day visits Sydney or Melbourne,
would not be likely to meet a single representative of the
Aborigines any more than he would encounter a red man on
the streets of Boston or New York. But there are vast
areas in the northern and western, as well as in the yet
unexplored central portions of that country, where the
original tenant still roams at will. The colonial govern-
ments have obtained an approximate estimate of the num-
ber of the blacks living in the more settled parts, and report
about thirty thousand, many of whom are classed as civil-
ized, being peaceably disposed, and in some cases, earning
their living as shepherds, stockmen or farm-hands. Some
roam about in bands like gypsies and are allowed to camp
for a month or two at a time on crown lands near the larger
towns, where blankets are furnished them once a year at
the police-barracks. Others are cared for at certain sta-
tions in each colony provided by the government, or by
benevolent societies. At these stations, instruction is given
in a few practical industries, also in the simple branches of


a common-school education, and in the fundamental prin-
ciples of Christianity.
A much larger number, it is believed, is still at large
in the bush; how many, it is impossible to say. Some
experts suggest one hundred thousand, and some a much
larger number. Of course there is no means of calculating
the probable number at the time the country was first
opened, a hundred years ago, but it is well known that
there has been a rapid decline wherever the black man has
come in contact with the white. In Tasmania, the last
representative of the Aborigines of that island died in 1876,
—Trucaninni, —a woman, whose skull I saw in the mu-
seum at Hobart.
The inquiry naturally arises : Who are these people and
where did they come from, and to what branch ot the
human family do they belong? Much learning and inge-
nuity have been expended upon the subject without clear-
ing up the mystery which envelops it. Something, how-
ever, has been gained. All observers are practically
agreed that the race is one of great antiquity, and de-
scended from a common stock. Their physical and mental
characteristics, the tribal languages, and certain widely-pre-
vailing customs show this conclusively. Their ancestors
probably landed at a remote period in the nolth or north-
west — on the coast of the Timor sea—and gradually
spread themselves in three directions, — southwest, south
and southeast.
They seem to have had very little intercourse with their
island neighbors in the surrounding seas, for they ditfer
radically from them all, whether Maories, Melanesians,
Papuans, or Malays. Are they Africans? Many would
think so. But the woolly hair, the thick lip and the pro-
jecting heel of the negro are wanting. Mr. Curr, one of
the recognized authorities, maintains the African theory in
part, but says that the negro must have been crossed by
some other race, what one he does not venture to suggest.


The Australian, while differing from the African in a few
important physical features, resembles him very much in
color, size, language, customs and superstitions. He may
have had his origin, I think, in some negro type of an early
time, before the negro race had developed its present
status in Africa. The Australian of to-day may resemble
the African of Ions; in lans-uasre and customs even
o o o o
more than the African of to-day does. Wallace inclines to
the opinion which several writers have recently held, that
these Aborigines may have come from certain hill-tribes in
Central India, as there are several physical and linguistic
points of resemblance. But this theory has not yet been
established.
The Australian is not quite as black as the negro, but
rather of a dark chocolate hue. His hair is usually jet
black, and curly but not woolly. Men and women wear it
of the same length, and often tied in a knot with grass or
feathers on the top of the head. The men wear fine bushy
beards kept rather short. The forehead is low and reced-
ing. The eyebrows are prominent. The eyes deep sunken,
the eyelashes long. The pupil is large and black, and the
white of the eye is yellowish and often blood-shot. The
expression of the eye seemed to me generally soft, lustrous
and animated. They have far better sight than we. In
fact, all their senses are keener than ours, owing of course
to their mode of life. Their nose is flat and triangular,
the nostrils are distended, and the septum is often pierced
for an ornament or the pipe. Their mouth is large, but
adorned with the finest teeth I have ever seen. Their
tones of voice are rather harsh, but more musical, I
thought, than the average Asiatic’s. Their neck is shorter
and thicker than ours, as may be seen when they wear our
coats and collars. Their skin is soft and velvety. The
odor is offensive, but, I should say, not as bad as that of
the African. Can any one tell me whether it is true that
the gradation of odors is in proportion to the degree of


darkness in the skin? Their legs and arms are slender.
The feet are flat and the heel protrudes slightly. They
usually pick up things with their toes to save stooping ; for,
be it remembered, this is a very erect and dignified race.
Their movements are easy and graceful, though I noticed a
tendency to walk, as savages are supposed to walk, with
their toes turned inward, unlike the Javanese, who always
walk proudly as if they were actors on the stage.
The average height of the Australian is less than the
English but more than the French. . He is much less mus-
cular than either. The women usually have small limbs,
a prominent abdomen and hanging breasts. The old
women, I must say, are veritable hags. Their little chil-
dren are pretty, but they soon outgrow their charms. A
woman will seldom have more than three or four children.
They are weaned late, and occasionally one is seen nursing
at the same time with a younger member of the same
happy family. Childbirth, it is said, causes but little
trouble among them. Infanticide is common for various
reasons ; but the mother generally seems fond of her child,
protects it, sings to it rudely, and carries it about in a
basket or on her shoulder, though sometimes, it must be
said, she takes it up by the legs as we do a chicken. As a
race they are all short-lived, seldom exceeding the age of
fifty years. Half-castes are not uncommon in the white
settlements. They resemble the native mother more than
the European father. They are considered, however, more
capable and promising than the ordinary blacks.
The Australians differ widely from other races in their
mode of life. They have never cultivated the soil, nevei
reared cattle, nor kept domestic animals, except their
mangy, half-starved dingo dog. They have never built
permanent dwellings ; have never boiled water for cooking ;
never have manufactured anything except their weapons, a
few ornaments and the scantiest kind of clothing. They
have never even had idols or sacrifices or any form of di-


vine worship. I doubt if there is another race on the face
of the earth, unless it be the Terra del Fuegans, who have
developed so few of the attributes of our common humanity.
For food, these people have always depended upon such
animal and vegetable products as nature furnished ready at
hand. Their menu is extensive and their taste by no
means epicurean. The choicest of their viands is the opos-
sum, though they never scorn the wallaby, or the kangaroo,
when they can get it. They will eat all manner of birds
from the emu down .to the wren. Fish of all kinds and
water-fowl, turtles and frogs, lizards and snakes, are
ranked among the staples. And, for side-dishes, they rel-
ish worms, grasshoppers, grubs, caterpillars, ants, moths,
and maggots. Their vegetable courses are not so varied,
Co CD
but include leaves, herbs, grasses, fungi and the roots of
bulrushes and wild yams. Their only drink is water which
they sometimes mix with honey.
The whole race is tainted with cannibalism, though the
practice disappears wherever the country is settled by
the whites. In the North and West it prevails, although
I believe not to the extent that is generally supposed. Its
origin may be traced to a scarcity of food; and who shall
say that any race, under the prolonged pressure of famine,
would be exempt from the temptation, horrible as it is !
We know that some of the escaped British convicts from
Botany Bay, roaming in the bush for months, and failing
to find ordinary food sufficient to sustain life, have found
themselves compelled to cast the fatal lot and select a vic-
tim of their own number to save the remainder from star-
vation. So far as I could learn, the native Australians
hold the custom in reserve for emergencies. Lumholtz,
the plucky Norwegian naturalist, who has just spent four
years in Queensland, chiefly on the Herbert river, has given
his book the rather sensational title, “Among Canni-
bals,” yet he does not record a single instance of the prac-
tice as having fallen under his own eye. No doubt these


poor children of nature would seek to conceal such things
from any white man, and in ordinary times they would not
he driven to the necessity of feeding upon human flesh.
With rare exceptions, they do not eat any of their own
tribe, but only their enemies. It is said that the white
man is not very palatable to them, being too salt for their
taste, while the Chinaman, whose food is chiefly rice,
makes a very acceptable meal. They roast or broil their
meat on hot ashes, skin and all, and eat it by tearing the
flesh with their fingers and teeth, devouring everything but
the bones. Sometimes a kangaroo or emu is roasted
whole. Hot stones are then placed inside the animal and
as it is turned on the fire, they roll about and give it an
effectual grilling. Green grass is often placed on the ashes
to protect the food. The teeth of many old people are
worn to the gums by the inevitable grinding of so much
dirt with their food. The whole process of eating re-
minded me of a political barbecue or a Rhode Island clam-
bake.
The old way of obtaining fire was by the friction of two
sticks usually of grass-wood (xanlhorrhasa) twelve to
fourteen inches long. Using one as a drill, they could
easily bore a hole through the other and catch the sparks
upon dry bark or leaves. This operation requires great
care to keep up a steady friction and prevent the chilling
of the wood. Faraday, referring to this in one of his lec-
tures, said he had never succeeded in the attempt, nor had
he ever heard of a white man who had done so. The na-
tives delight in the crack of our matches when they can
get them. In removing from one camp to another, the
women usually carry the fire-stick. They always keep a
fire burning in front of their tents, which open on the lee
side, and squat around it at rneal-time and through the
evening. When sticks require to be broken, the average
blackfellow will break them, not over his knee, as we
should, but over his head.


Their huts —or gunyahs , as they are often called are
easily put together in a single hour on the approach of cold
weather or the rainy season. A ridge-pole is supported
by forked sticks, and boughs or sheets of bark or opossum
skins are spread over it. One room answers for the whole
family, and they are usually very social when together. They
talk, laugh, tell stories, and sing in a melancholy way
after a fashion all their own, chiefly in half tones, very
high and then very low. Nothing escapes their observa-
tion. Many a good joke is enjoyed at the expense of some
white person. During the day, the men may often be seen
giving lessons to the small boys in the art of throwing the
spear or the boomerang. The women called lubras
or gins —keep by themselves most of the time. They
have to do the hard work, grubbing with yam-sticks for
roots, carrying their children whom they call piccanin-
nies— on their shoulders, and bringing in the daily sup-
plies in rude baskets. The young women often decorate
their hair with beeswax and feathers and cockatoo crests.
They usually wear a girdle of leaves or feathers, and
sometimes they adorn themselves with our civilized trink-
ets, such as necklaces, combs and mirrors, when they can
get them. Any single article of our clothing they will don
with great pride and consider it full dress. One of their
noted women, Queen Gooseberry, the widow of King
Dungaree, was often seen by the colonists with nothing on
but an old straw bonnet and a waist-cloth. Three black-
fellows were engaged by a friend of mine to work on a
farm, and when they arrived, they had one boot, an old
cravat and a waistcoat between them. Whatever clothing
they get from the whites, they will wear in turn, each one
of the tribe claiming a share of it. Both sexes scarify their
bodies, punch the nose, and anoint themselves with ’pos-
sum fat and red ochre. The tattooing is done by cutting
parallel gashes across the chest, shoulders and back, and
blowing wood-ashes into the wounds, which then swell into




ASCENT OF A TREE.
From a Sketch by John F. Mann.


permanent ridges. Sometimes they let ants walk about in
the sores thus created. Such flesh marks are supposed to
indicate rank.
These curious people dread the rain and will huddle to-
gether, whenever it comes, under any obtainable shelter ; yet
in the North, they are very fond of bathing. They can all
swim and dive, even the little children, and often they re-
main a long; time under water. One of their tricks to es-
cape observation, when pursued, is to lie down at the
bottom, with one end of a hollow reed in the mouth and
the other end above the surface. They are naturally very
skilful in spearing fish under water. In the South, where
the weather is colder, they do not take to the water so,
readily, and in fact they are very filthy for the want of it.
Their canoes are made of sheets of bark eight to twelve
feet long, about three feet wide and eight inches deep,
and are held open by cross-sticks. They draw but a few
inches of water and yet will carry a very considerable load.
Having no keel they overturn easily. The natives never
venture far out at sea. If pursued by sharks, they paddle
away with all their might for the nearest shore, throwing
out as they go, any fish they happen to have.
Nothing; in Australia interested me more than the tree-
climbing. These sons of the forest have always depended
upon the trees for many of their supplies, such as bark,
fungi , bird’s eggs and opossums. Often the lowest
branches of the gum-trees will be fifty to eighty feet above
the ground, and the trunk will measure twenty feet or
more in girth, so that it cannot be grasped with the arras
like the palm-trees of India. The Australian, however,
always finds a way to do what he wishes, and armed
with nothing but his trusty stone hatchet, and perhaps
with a ’possum-belt he will cut notches an inch or two deep,
step by step, two for his hands and two for his feet, and
ascend with surprising rapidity, by hugging the tree very
closely and inserting his fingers and toes in the notches.


It would be a perilous thing for any white man to under-
take. Sometimes the blacks use a long vine-rope, which
is passed around the tree and held tightly as a support in
climbing. Accidents seldom happen among these born
gymnasts. There are no keener observers of nature. A
broken twig, a displaced stone, notched trees or crushed
grass will be sure to reveal to them the presence of food of
some kind. Sometimes their instinct comes too near home
to be agreeable to the English squatter. Once when en-
couraged to plant potatoes, the blackfellows went out in
the night and dug up the seed and ate it. When expostu-
lated with, their only reply was “ Why bury good food?”
They never have had any idea of agriculture.
Some of their weapons are unique and ingenious, espec-
ially the boomerang, which has obtained a wide celebrity.
It is a wooden blade, shaped something like a scimetar,
curved in its own plane, from sixteen to thirty odd inches in
length, and from an inch and a half to three inches in width.
One side is plane, the other slightly convex. The edges are
sharp and the cusps rounded or slightly pointed. The
lower end is cross-grooved to aid in holding it. The
boomerang is cut from the natural bend of the heavy iron-
wood tree, and scraped down to the required thickness by
the use of sharp stones. The curve often approaches a
rmht angle and must lie in the wood itself.
C o
I could only admire the dexterity of the native youths in
hurling this their favorite weapon. Holding it in the right
hand, with the flat side down and the concave side forward,
the thrower will gracefully take his aim, and then, with a
run and a shout, he will fling his missile with all his might
off into the air. Up and away it goes to a great height,
like a bird with wings expanded. Sometimes, revolving
on its axis, it describes a great circle ; or it may take op-
posite directions, or even remain for a moment stationary.
It can be made to ricochet, and to spin against the wind,
and to return and strike a designated object near the start-


ing-point. No one but the thrower knows where it will
hit. It may be hurled with killing effect into a flock of pig-
eons or ducks. I heard of an instance at one of the camps
in which the projectile came in contact with a gentleman’s
hat and cut it off as clean as a razor would have done. He
was fortunate to escape with his head. Sometimes after
striking the ground, it will ascend again. Heavy boomer-
angs may be thrown low so as to roll like a wheel along
the ground with such force as to knock over a man or a
kangaroo. They often come in contact with an object
without being arrested and will fly off at a tangent with
apparently undiminished force. I have never seen any two
of these strange weapons exactly alike. Every native
knows the quality of his own boomerang, and will practice
a long time with a new one to be sure of getting familiar
with its peculiarities.
The boomerang has perplexed many learned mathemati-
cians in Australia and Europe. Several German observers
are now trying to discover the secret of its curious flight.
Herr Froebel, a manufacturer of toy boomerangs in
Weimar, claims that the curve must be broken near the
middle, leaving two arms of unequal length, in the propor-
tion of 4to 5. The longer arm must be pared down so as
exactly to balance the shorter one.
It is remarkable that so rude a race should have discov-
ered such an occult principle as seems to be lodged in this
unique weapon. One thinks of the old myth of Thor’s
hammer returning to the hands of its thrower, but there
can be no possible connection between the Norse warriors
and the Australian savages. Some writers have suggested
that the throwing-stick of the Dravidians in India was the
same as the boomerang, but Brough Smyth discredits the
idea, and says that the Australian weapon has no duplicate
in history.
The Aborigines never knew the use of the bow and
arrow, but the spear and wammera, or throwing-stick,


appear to have been a very good substitute. The spear is
made in a variety of ways. For war purposes, it is eight
or ten feet long and weighs about four pounds. Sometimes
it is barbed out of the solid wood and sometimes tipped
with flint or quartz. Such a spear can be thrown seventy
feet. For the chase, a lighter kind is made, which can
easily be thrown one hundred, or even one hundred and
fifty feet. The spear is hurled with great effect by means
of the wammera, a stick about three feet long and shaped
something like a long-handled spoon, the spoon part being
rather flat and frequently used as a paddle when fishing
from a canoe. By this simple gun-like contrivance, the
spear is thrown with unerring aim, but it is eluded in war
with surprising ease by the agility of the enemy, and by
the skilful use of the shield.
One of the recognized punishments among the tribes is
the “ordeal of spears.” The culprit, condemned for a cer-
tain crime, is obliged to stand oft' at a distance, perfectly
nude, but armed with a shield, and there receive from
twenty to fifty spears, according to the nature of his
offence. The spears are thrown only one at a time, but in
such rapid succession that the unfortunate victim has little
breathing space between. Yet ordinarily he will dodge the
spears or receive them on his shield with marvellous
facility. Sometimes the shots are fatal, but when a fellow
undergoes the ordeal in safety, he is completely absolved,
and elevated to a higher rank than he had before.
So accustomed are the blacks to the use of the spear on
all occasions, that they think they have a right to try it
upon anything that crosses their path, whether it be wild
or tame. So they instinctively let fly at wallaby or sheep,
emu or chickens, and often to the great discomfiture of the
English settlers. Women never use the spear.
The common shield, or heliman, is a stout sheet of wood,
oval-shaped, about three feet long and half as broad, and
three-fourths of an inch thick, usually retaining the natu-


ABORIGINAL IMPLEMENTS.
Drawn by John f. Mann.




ral curve of the tree. A heliman that has stood the test
of spears without splitting is considered a great acquisition.
It is often painted grotesquely with a device remotely
suggesting a coat-of-arms.
One of their most useful implements is the stone hatchet
or tomahawk, which is always at hand. The edge is ob-
tained by striking off flakes and grinding upon rocky
ledges. The handle is either a split stick, or a bundle of
twigs twisted together and secured by grass-tree gum and
fibre twine. No axes with holes in them have ever been
found. This is the ordinary tool for making spears,
shields, boomerangs and clubs, for stripping bark and cut-
ting ’possums out of the trees, and for many other every-
day conveniences of savage life, but it is seldom used in
battle.
The common meat-knife is made of a flat piece of wood
with sharp pieces of quartz fastened to the edge. Their
cutting-tools are mostly of flint and shells. They cut their
hair with clam-shells or sharp stones, or, quite as often,
burn it off* with a firebrand.
In addition to the spear and the boomerang, their com-
mon weapons are the waddy and the nulla nulla. These are
stout, big-headed clubs of the toughest wood, resembling
somewhat the celebrated “morning-star” of the Middle
Ages in Europe, and, I should say, equally effective in a
hand-to-hand fight. They are sometimes thrown at game
on the hunt. I have also seen the two-handed broad-sword
of hard wood, about five inches wide and very long. The
women are expected to gather up the weapons, and to pro-
tect a fallen warrior.
The blacks in their primitive condition are fortunately
not often sick, but when they adopt the habits of civilized
people, they succumb to many serious troubles. They will
perspire in woolen blankets all day to keep up appearances,
and then at night, when they need them, they will cast
them aside and enjoy the luxury of sleeping in the old-


fashioned way, naked. And so they get cold, and contract
fever, pneumonia or rheumatism, and may often be said,
literally, to die of blankets. They are generally kind to
their sick, and acquainted with the properties of certain
herbs and roots. Many ailments are relieved by rubbing
the body with the astringent sap of the bloodwood tree. A
counter-irritation is readily obtained by having the patient
stand on an ant-hill for a few minutes.
The*Medicine-man, or “Kooradgee” as he is called, often
fills his mouth with water and spurts it over the sore part.
One of their favorite prescriptions for a man with a diseased
limb is to sit with it buried in the ground until he recovers.
Fortunately their wounds heal rapidly. The Kooradgee
enjoys special consideration among the tribes, and cases of
dispute are referred to him as umpire. He is regarded as
a conjurer or wizard, and usually he carries a rock crystal
in his armpit, rolled up in dirty rags. This charm is sacred
in their eyes, and no woman is allowed to look upon it.
Any good piece of cut glass, like the stopper of a decanter,
will suit them just as well. Their surgery, it need hardly
be said, is of the rudest kind, but of great account in the
practice of two mysterious ceremonies universal among
these people; one, which confers the status of manhood,
and the other, sometimes called mika, a terrible rite, de-
scribed by Eyre, Lurnholtz and others, designed to prevent
an increase of the population.
From all that we can gather, the life of a young man
must be far from happy in those camps. He has to be ini-
tiated into all the mysteries of war, religion and the chase
by undergoing a severe ordeal called the bora. He has to
prove his ability by abstaining from food, by publicly
throwing the spear and the boomerang, by climbing the tall
Plucalyptus, and by having his two upper front teeth
knocked out with a tomahawk. Until this is done, he has
no social position.


The Aborigines have a very popular entertainment called
corroboree, which I believe is not known elsewhere. The
spectacle takes place only at night, and embraces music,
dancing and the drama. Men are the chief performers,
though women often act as musicians. A level spot is
chosen, and faggots and leaves are piled up all around and
set on fire, to throw a bright light upon the scene. The
dancers decorate their bodies fantastically with elaborate
designs in pipe clay, and brandish their weapons vigor-
ously. They spring from the ground, spread their knees
and draw up their legs like a jumping-jack, so that the
soles of their feet touch each other, then they all come to
the ground simultaneously with a heavy thud.
Their songs resemble somewhat those that are heard in
Asiatic countries, and consist chiefly of monotonous and
plaintive repetitions. Their tunes are, to my ears, less
guttural and more harmonious than those of the Turk, or
Arab. Several of their songs, including the Koorinda
Bria have been set to music by the late Mr. Nathan. I
shall not soon forget their pleasant cooey signal a loud,
clear call from the throat which can be heard at a great
distance. It suggested to my mind the iodel of the Tyrol-
ese, or, still more, the sweet barcarolle of the Dalmatians.
The rising or falling of the last note indicates which one
shall wait for the other. Their hearing, like all their other
senses, is very acute. They will detect the presence of
game or water like a dog. They find their way straight
through the bush with marvellous facility where a white
man would be bewildered or lost.
The different tribes are in the habit of sending messen-
gers to each other at certain intervals to convey or obtain
information. The message is carved in signs on a stick, and
carried in a netted band which is worn around the head.
The messenger’s life is sacred in peace or war. He is gen-
erally one of the older men. Light-bodied widowers are
said to be especially eligible to the office. They serve


without pay and are always treated with marked civility.
They travel fifty or a hundred miles, and are absent perhaps
a month or more. In approaching a camp, the messenger
advances cautiously, and when within forty or fifty yards,
he sits down in solemn silence until one of the tribe to
which he comes, lights a fire. This is a sign of hospitality,
and they begin to draw nearer together and exchange cour-
tesies and receive communications.
The Australians have no written language. Bleek di-
O O
vided their various dialects into three general divisions.
Northern, Southern and Tasmanian. The Southern is the
best known through the proximity of European settlements
and the study of the missionaries. Of the Northern, we
know, as yet, very little, and the Tasmanian has ceased
altogether. The grammar is somewhat developed, but the
verb is wanting in most of them, and there is no vocabulary
for expressing general or abstract ideas. There are suffi-
cient resemblances among them to show a common origin.
Along the Murray and Darling rivers, substantially one
language is spoken, but in the mountain sections of New
South Wales, there are many distinct dialects.
The names of places and things struck me as often very
euphonious; e. g., Paramatta , Illawarra, Terriboo , Larra ,
Yandilla, Bundara , Mooramoora , Yara Yara, Wallaroo.
It is amusing to notice how the English, here as in India
and China, have distorted some of the native names, as
Eurobodalla —a really beautiful word shortened into
Bodalla , to which there might be no objection, but when
the change goes on and we hear the colonists speaking of
“Boat Alley,” the pedigree of the word would hardly be
recognized. The blacks, however, it must be confessed,
have equal difficulty with our English words; e. g ., Cape
Howe they call “Gabo,” and windmill, “wooloomooloo.”
Their numerals are very limited, hardly exceeding three.
When they wish to express a higher number the word is


repeated, and the fingers are freely used. Thus on the
Northeast coast bolworra is the word for two. This is
shortened into bulla , and bulla bulla means more than two,
perhaps half a dozen. Cowal means plenty, and cowal
cowal a great abundance.
The religion of these poor savages is very obscure.
Those who have studied them the most assert that they
have no knowledge of the existence of a Supreme Being
and hardly any of a future life, and no idea of worship or
sacrifice, or even idolatry. But they believe in an Evil
Spirit which, when talking to the whites, they call “devil
devil,” and which they fear as malicious, cruel and vindic-
tive. They have various ways of describing him. They
say he has countless eyes and ears, runs very fast, has
sharp claws, and spares neither old nor young. They often
change their camp to evade this dreadful enemy. Some
old men are credited with having had personal encounters
with him, and are consequently held in great reverence.
Christianity has obtained but a slight foothold among them,
owing partly to their extreme degradation, and partly, I
fear, to the deplorable effects of their contact with unprin-
cipled whites, who have abused them in many ways, in-
flamed them with liquor, and taught them all the vices that
infest our civilization. The half-castes are stronger, physi-
cally and mentally, than the pure blacks, and as might be
expected, acquire our habits and faith more readily. They
are relatively numerous, and efforts are being made to
merge them into the general population.
The natives never speak of their dead, so they have no
history ; not even myths or legends. The oldest man they
can remember they consider to have been the first man.
The dead are disposed of in various ways. The body is
sometimes wrapped in bark or skins, and put under heavy
stones, or on a high framework of sticks, as a protection
against dogs. Sometimes it is placed in a hollow tree and


sealed up with clay. Sometimes it is buried and sometimes
burned. Occasionally it is dried into a kind of mummy,
in the sun or over a slow fire, and carried about with the
tribe or left in some lonely spot. The mourning lasts for a
few days only. The skull is often preserved as a drinking
cup. Those natives who have had much acquaintance with
the colonists are now inclined to bury their dead, and they
have mingled a little Christianity with a good deal of ambi-
tion when they say, as I have heard, “Blackfellow go in
ground, come up whitefellow.”
In a few localities near the salt water, mounds are seen
covered with earth, and evidently old. When excavated,
they are found to consist of oysthr and mussel shells.
Their rock-carvings, so called, are only outline sketches
of men, fish, animals, &c. They are sometimes seen on the
top of large, flat rocks. There is no symbolism or mystery,
I think, to be attached to them.
These strange people have no marriage laws. Wives are
obtained by strategem, purchase or abduction, and readily
exchanged on occasions. Polygamy is common among all the
tribes ; but consanguineous marriages they abhor. Kissing
is as rare as in Asiatic countries. A mother will show her
affection for her child, not by kissing but by smelling it.
A family clan numbers from twenty to thirty; a tribe, or-
dinarily, from two hundred to three hundred. The tribal
affairs are managed by a council of the older men.
Mr. Curr, who has studied the Australians closely, says
they cannot be raised to our civilization in one or two gen-
erations, but might, possibly, after a continuous training for
a long period. They are keener and more observant, he
says, than the European peasant. They have the qualities
of young children ; are fond of pictures and stories ; are
easily pleased or troubled; are wild from habit, capricious,
humorous, improvident, and live without much thought or
reason. Their lack of moral restraint has involved them in
many sufferings at the hands of the rough whites. Much of


-a
""s.
.
‘
J
>
M
r
ABORIGINAL DRAWINGS. on A ROCK BETWEEN BRISBANE WATER
SYDNEY COMMON.
AND
HAWKESBURY RIVER.




the mischief charged upon the natives might easity be
traced to the brutal conduct of ex-convicts and others, who
have often treated them like dogs, and shot them down
without the slightest cause.
Eyre and Sturt and Grey give many instances of their
honesty, justice and humanity. As for treachery and cun-
ning, they are in the breast of every savage, and are re-
garded as cardinal virtues lawful weapons, offensive and
defensive. But in judging of them, we must remember
that these qualities are not yet wholly rooted out of our
civilized races.
The colonial governments have provided liberally for the
protection of the Aborigines. A special department watches
over their interests, and distributes rations, clothing and
medicines. Large reservations have been set apart for
them, amounting in South Australia alone to 670,000 acres.
In Victoria, there are two government and four mission
stations. These mission stations, or farms, are supported
by voluntary contributions, and furnish educational, relig-
ious and industrial instruction for considerable numbers of
blacks, old and young. They live in neat cottages, do their
own work, enjoy a good degree of freedom, and are subject
to friendly and wholesome Christian discipline. The old
people make baskets and mats, and sometimes carve
wooden objects. The strong men work on the farm and
the children attend school. The regulations are enforced
by the superintendent, who lives with his family at the sta-
tion, and exercises a strong personal influence over the
whole establishment. They all pick up English enough to
understand the requirements of daily life. They are disin-
clined to severe labor, but when wisely managed, they do
very well at repairing buildings and fences, making roads,
raising crops, shearing sheep and tending cattle. They are
particularly fond of horses and ride like born cavaliers.
The children show a fair interest in their lessons, and I


thought their writing-books as good as the average in our
own schools. They are all fond of holidays, and often get
special favors in that direction as a reward for good con-
duct. They can run and hurrah, and play football, marbles
and leap-frog as well as any boys in the world. There is,
however, always a tinge of wild blood in their veins which
cannot be eradicated. I have heard of instances in which
young persons, who had received a good Christian training
for years, and were even admitted to the communion of the
Church, who yet after all, under the strange spell of hered-
ity, would secretly throw away their clothes and take to the
bush and disappear from the white settlements altogether.
The extinction of the Aborigines may be delayed in some
quarters for a time, but it is sure to come. They are
steadily fading away before the touch of the invading
Briton. Large as Australia is, it is not large enough for
these two races to exist side by side. The stronger has
come to stay. The weaker will have to go.


■


~[Af y
muo
j~~ 1 4-21 4?
t\)


■
j 1508 00110158 8


