

f>£TU P(WI
THE BURNING QUESTION OF TO-DAY WITH ENGLISH WORKING MEN,
~ is whether EMIGRATION does Better their Prospects and Circumstances, and about which some English
un sound.” This Broadsheet is issued to give Certain and Trustworthy Answers, by W. M. BURTON &J. H. WHITE.
Who compose the Bulk of the
Newspapers give an unfair and “
Nation
uncertain
EMIGRATION OF ICES, LACEBY, near GRIMSBY, November 9th, 187 S.
SPECIMENS OF NEWSPAPER OPPOSITION,
With. Comments.
From the “ Lincolnshire Chronicle.”
Reporting an emigration meeting at Mabletborpe, this
paper concluded its article —“Mr. White enlarged upon
bis subject to about forty hearers, the majority of whom
bad too much common sense to swallow bis assertions
and wild ravings. At the close, some pertinent ques-
tions were put to the lecturer by Mr. Gilbert Honlden,
of North Somercotes. . . . The meeting dispersed
without any disturbance.”
This is a sample of the want of fairness and courtesy with
which the press report the meetings of the agricultural
labourer and his friends. Any statements as to higher
rates of wages in New Zealand, easier acquirement of land,
and better prospect of provision for old age ; any strictures
on the ignorance, pauperism, and demoralisation into
which farm labourers as a class have been allowed to fall,
are sufficiently fearful, or sufficiently feared, to be dubbed
with the description, “wild ravings.” Then as to the
“ Pertinent questions ; ” Mr. Honlden stated that the sheep
in New Zealand only averaged two or three lbs. to the
fleece, whereas the government returns for one year give
forty million lbs. exported to England from the Colony,
which, if there were no other way of disposal, gives an
average of over 4 lbs. fleece to every sheep in New
Zealand ; but this is below the actual weight; still there is
no challenging of his . incorrect statement while it is
against emigration, probably owing to the writer’s ignor-
ance on the subject. Then, the last sentence is an unde-
served sneer, as disturbances are as unlikely at these meet-
ings as at any other kind. The only disturbance made at
onr meetings, has been the one made by a tipsy farmer at
South Eerriby, who in his right mind afterward made a
courteous and full apology, paying £2. 10s. as well, which
has been devoted to the help of some poor families who
could not otherwise have gone.
The “Hull and North Lincolnshire Times” also insinuat-
ed in one of its issues, that Mr. White’s w r ork was only
done because he received so much per head for those who
were induced to emigrate ; evidently this was measuring the
corn of another in the writer’s skep, as whatever some of
these papers insert, the question, which is evidently first
asked is, “Will it pay?”
The “ Grimsby Observer ” of October 13th
devotes a column to tbe subject, stating, “ When we see
men stumping the rural districts, and tempting agricnl- i
tnral labourers away from their home and country, it is :
our duty as journalists to place our readers in possession ;
of such information as nay reach ns from authenticated
sources as to the actual experiences of emigrants, who
have learned through privation and suffering the fallacy of
the statements which interested advocates may occasionally
make.” A quotation is then given from a letter, said to be
received by the friends of an agricultural labourer who left
Laceby, but so far, those of us who have lived years in
Laceby cannot for the life of ns find out who he is or when
he went ; in fact his existence would appear to be mythical,
which certainly his statements are. Again we read,
“ Winter more severe than any in England.” Why, this
is contrary to the geographical fact, and no intelligent
journalist would feel it his duty to publish a statement
which on the face of it is false, as information for his
readers. “In summer worked like a slave, in winter
nothing to do ; must tramp up the country through the
bush as well as we could,” . . . and finishes, “ What
can Ido ? My money is almost spent, but I hope by God’s
help to have a better year as soon as summer sets in, as I
can see nothing hut starvation for my wife and children
unless things soon alter.”
Then the writer of the leading article says, “ pictures
drawn by agents not unfreqnently lead to disappointment.
. . The statements prove illusory or greatly exagger-
ated,” speaks of onr statements as “ clap-trap,” “ grossly
overrated,” and refers to “ deceived emigrants.” He
quotes an invitation to Messrs. White and Burton to visit
the Colony, so that they may become better acquainted
with it; and again the writer gratuitously adds, “Messrs.
Burton and White, it seems, would know more about the
scenes they so graphically and glowingly described if they
would only take the trouble of first visiting them.” SO
WOULD HE! Mr. Burton has been there 22
years, and Geo. Cartwright, a Wesleyan local preacher,
who left Laceby with his family, writes —“ What Mr.
Burton said we are prepared to substantiate.” In fact,
the Observer has nothing in the shape of argument to offer,
and so fills its space with abuse, all built upon the solitary
letter which it published without attaching name.
Scores of letters have come from those who did leave
Laceby, and have been published with the name of the
writers, and without exception give good news, and tell of
satisfaction. The Editors of the papers are as much de-
pendent on testimony for their knowledge, as the agent,
how is it, that they invariably publish unfavorable reports
when they can lay hand on them, and never find room for
the good accounts, which, nineteen out of twenty, keep com-
ing to hand ? The fact is they are themselves “interested”
and prejudiced, and though “it is their duty as journalists” to
furnish information, so that their readers may “ hear both
sides," they themselves are so onesided that when Mr. Bur-
ton, in the Observer’s Case, offered to enter into a public
discussion in its columns, the Editor shut up the matter
with the single word, —“Declined.”
Who has a good Cause need not fear the daylight, and
Emigration to New Zealand, the more it is written against,
and the more made Known, the more it will grow, as it
dares challenge all enquiry, and nothing would better please
Messrs. Burton and White, than if some gentlemen in the
interest of the people, and of the truth, would attend their
meetings, and expose their so called fallacies ; or if pre-
ferred, would enter upon a public discussion on the whole
subject in some well conducted newspaper, and they are
confident, that where one argument, or one testimony, can
be brought against Emigration to New Zealand, they will
he able to bring on their part, two arguments or twelve
testimonies in its favour.
Daylight ! Daylight ! oh for daylight !
TESTIMONY OF EMIGRANTS THEMSELVES.
Dear Friend, —* * * I will tell yon we had a very good voyage :
we were 100 days on the water, and I can assure you we were glad when
we got landed. They behaved very well to us when we got landed ; they
found us plenty to eat till we got a house and some work. We are doing
middling well ; if you was to see us you would scarcely know us, the
children are looking so well. William has 4s. a day. with a thrashing
machine. James has never worked for no less than Bs. a day, of 8 hours,
so you will find this a better country than England
You would be surprised to see New Zealand; we live at the foot of a
range of hills a mile and a half high. Beef and mutton are very cheap,
they are from 4d. to 6d. per lb. JAMES TURNER.
Taran.uu, New Zealand, Juna ICth. 1875.
I have just sent these few lines to inform Mr. Burton, that we had a
pleasant passage out; were well treated on the voyage, and that in
every way I am well satisfied with the country I have come to, and the
treatment I have received since landing, as I got employment the next
day after landing I remain, yours &c.,
N King, Tailor, from Colchester, Essex.
Howkdown Station, June 17, 1875.
Dear Uncle and Aunt.—lt is with great pleasure that I write these
few lines, hoping they will find you in good health, as it leaves us all at
present except Enderby, and he is much the same as he was at home.
He is stronger than he was. Father and mother are very comfortable,
they look stouter than they were at home. Father is ploughman on a
station, he has all found and £65 wages for twelve months, and the two
youngest of the family is with them. Dinah is twelve miles from them
and has £39 a year. As for me, I have been six months in one place,
100 miles from them, and mother and father sent for me, so I have been
seven weeks carrying the swag, and working where I got the most
money. I think it is the finest country under the sun. There is no
need for a union here, for any man can be his own master in 18 months.
There is not a house in Otago but you could go and have a feed or two
if you wanted. Jack is as good as his master, and as Paddy has it, he
is a good deal the better. lam going to start ploughing for a man at
255. a week, for six months. lam 15 miles from Dinah, and 25 from
father. I can have a good horse any day and ride over to them. Father
says that if he had known he should bave been out here 10 years ago,
and he told me to tell you to come out with your family, and tell you
what prices things were in this country, so as to let you have an idea
what it is like. Clothing is as cheap as at home, and groceries and flour
the home price. Beef is from 2d. to 4d. per lb., but on the rise. Daily
men £2. ss. per week, or Bs. per day for 8 hours. Married couples
from £65 to £7O per year. Ploughmen £65, and there is plenty of
land for 2s. an acre. Farmers’ horses fetch from £25 to £35, and cows
£7 to £9, sheep 6s. to 12s. per head. Wheat is all sold by the bushel,
and other corn the same. Wheat 35., Oats ss. There are roadmen who
get £lO per month. Shepherds get £5O to £6O per year. Bush hands
and sailors £lO per month. Now you will want to know what sort of a
climate, it is the healthiest in the world they tell us, all the people look
well, and winter comes with May. August is the worst month in the
year. Harvest is about February. We had 3,000 emigrants landed in
Port Chalmers in one month, that is where we landed. There are 8
provinces in New Zealand, Otago, Nelson, Auckland, Wellington, Canter-
bury, Hawkes Bay, Westland, and Taranaki. There are the north and
south Islands—we are in the south, it is the coldest and best for pay,
and the most like the home weather, not so cold as home, but you can
see the snow all the year round on the hills, if you like. There is gold
all over the surface of the land and in the rivers. I have seen a very
large piece. I am going to break up some new land with a double plough
and three horses, near to father, and mother. All our love.
Yours truly. THOMAS PARROTT.
Written for Edward and Dinah Parrott, Howkdown station, Otago,
New Zealand.
WELCOME TO THE ‘ COLLINGWOOD ’
IMMIGRANTS.
{Extracted from the “ Taranaki Herald."
The immigrants by the “ Collingwood,” and others who
have recently arrived here, were entertained at tea in the
Freemasons’ Hall on Friday, the 6th of August. There
were about two hundred persons present, and the immi-
grants having been first attended to, the visitors after-
wards took their places at the tables. After the repast,
a public meeting was held, at which the Yen. Archdeacon
Govett presided.
The Chairman, on opening the meeting said he had been
unexpectedly called upon to act as chairman, but it gave
him great pleasure to meet those who came from the land
of their birth to settle in Taranaki. They had come to
one of the healthiest countries on the face of the earth,
and one of the healthiest provinces in that country. He
had spent the best part of bis life here, and had suffered
very little indeed from sickness. Those who had come out
here expecting to benefit themselves must be prepared to
work hard. At first there would be regret amongst some,
and especially amongst the women; but when the new-
comers had had experience of this country, they would be
of opinion that they had come to a land of good things.
There was an opening here for children not to be found
in their native land. In the name of Taranaki he gave
them a hearty welcome to their new home.
Dr. Rawson advised the new-comers that whether re-
ceived coldly or otherwise to make up their minds to
settle down. He came out, he said, many years ago, hav-
ing sent his three eldest sons as pioneers. On reaching
Taranaki, he was received with great hospitality. He
found that one of his pioneer sons had twenty acres of
land cleared, and twenty-two head of cattle. They had
built a bouse, planted two acres of potatoes, erected one
and a half mile of fencing, made a quarter mile of road,
and constructed a dam and mill-race. When about to
leave England, he thought he was about to forego the
pleasures and comforts of a home for ever, and he dared
to say many who heard him entertained the same feelings.
They were all subjects of one sovereign, all members of
one race, all blessed with the same liberal institutions.
He really found less trial in coming from England to New
Zealand than he did when he broke up his establishment
in Leicestershire, and went to practice in London. Home
comforts and joys did not depend on latitude or longitude.
He had seen true happiness in the shielings in the High-
lands of Scotland, and in the “whares” of New Zealand.
Home is a spot of earth supremely blest; dearer and
sweeter far than all the rest. He trusted they would let
the homes they were about to establish he dear to them.
Mr. F. U. Clebdhill then addressed the meeting as
follows : —I cannot say you have come to a region of gold,
as yon have just heard so exquisitely sung by the young
lady who has just sat down, but yon have come to a region
of labour, and it is a region where the labourer is well re-
munerated, Ton will only have to use the result of your
labour carefully, and yon will see it will produce you com-
fort in your homes, and will enable you to provide means
to purchase land in a short time for yourselves. The land
is cheap, so that any careful labourer can, if he chooses,
soon become a landowner. If yonr conduct be like some
of our old settlers—not all of them, I am sorry to say—
careful, steady, and industrious, yon will soon find your-
selves owners of farms and homesteads. In England you
might not have been able to acquire an acre of land as
your own, but would probably have bad to labour for small
wages, until overtaken by old age, when you might have
become dependent on the parish for support. You are the
first party who have arrived here under the selection of
Mr. and Mrs. Burton ; and this fact causes ns to feel more
deeply interested in yon than we should have done had we
not known that gentleman and his wife. Thé respect we
have for Mr. and Mrs. Burton naturally causes us to feel
for yon as we should not otherwise have done. I would
here express my regret that there could be found persons
(including even ministers of the gospel), who felt disposed
to vilely slander their characters, by cautioning the
labourers not to rely on the statements made by them,
as they had never been to New Zealand. “A more
Respectable Couple could not be found, either in the
Colonies or at home.” I mention this in order to show
you onr opinions of Mr. Burton and his Wife; and I trust
that those who may be acquainted with the persons who
have so mistaken their characters, will correct the report
which yon heard in England. No doubt the farmers, who
have been accustomed to employ men at eight or ten
shillings per week, would rather immigrants should not be
told that labouring men can earn, in Taranaki, from live
to Seven shillings a day, according to the nature of the
work. Carpenters, shoemakers, tailors, &0., earn from
seven to ten shillings per day, and that day much shorter
than the hours to be worked in the old country. If you
will be satisfied to do as the early settlers did when they
arrived here from Devonshire, the difficulties of a colonial
life will be felt to be light. The first settlers had no houses
to live in ; but, being handy men, they soon built them-
selves comfortable dwellings by driving posts into the
ground and making what I will call the walls, of ranpo (a
coarse grass). As I know there are several gentlemen who
are willing to speak, I will give place to them ; so I will
conclude by wishing yon a pleasant residence amongst ns.
Mr. Dingle, who was enthusiastically cheered as be
walked up to the Chairman, said be felt rather shaky with
so many looking at him. They might be expecting some-
thing which they would not get. He said he was a work-
ing man —a practical man. About forty years ago there
was a farmer in England who had a man who was a good
workman, and that man fell ill for two or three days, and
when the farmer thought of the loss he should sustain by
the man’s illness, he determined to send for a doctor, be-
cause, as be said, the loss of this man to him would be
greater than the loss of a horse. When the man con-
sidered the matter, he said to himself, “As I am valued
only a little betier than a beast, it is time to pack up and
be off.” His labour was all he possessed in England;—it
was his only property. The farmer got all the pickings out
of that, and looked upon labourers like so many horses and
oxen. When horses were wanted to work hard they got
extra food, and in harvest time when men were wanted to
work hard they got beer given to them, and by working
hard without the usual food, labourers were brought to
premature graves. England was a good old place, and the
people were like very good plants, fitted to go into any part
of the world. In England there was no land to plant them
out on, and it was hardly known what to do with them.
New Zealand could take all. Mr. Vogel saw what was
wanted here, and went to England to borrow money to plant
the country with men and women ; lor in England obey are
dwarfed and cramped, and were driven about like slaves.
To you who have come out to New Zealand, one and all, we
give you greeting —we receive you with plum cake, a hearty
welcome, and a good tea, because yon are just what we are.
At Exeter Hall meetings it was said that we in New
longer he lived in it the better he liked it. He believed
for this province there was a happy future. When the
spring arrived, and the birds began to sing, they would
then be able to Write to their friends of the pleasant spot
they had come to. He concluded by giving them a cordial
welcome.
Mr. Tapp, who came out in the “Waikato,” and had
been in the Colony about twelve months, said
he had done pretty well since he had been here, and had
been pleased with the reception given on his first arrival.
Labourers were recognised as men, and the grinding-
down which was experienced at the hands of farmers in
England was unknown in this place. Some of the friends
who came out with him had left town, and started on
their own account. He knew of some who now owned a
cow, and since he had been here one had got himself a
very good house. Mr. Tapp said he was satisfied with
the rate of pay, and concluded by wishing all the new
comers success.
The following letter has been handed to us (Taranaki
Herald) for publication :
New Plymouth, August 6, 1875.
In the name of my fellow-brethren, we all feel bound to make some
response to our kind friends in New Plymouth for such a happy recep-
tion as that given us. lam sure it far exceeded our expectations. The
h a PPy greetings, the cheerful countenances, and the hearty shake of |the
hand were all encouraging. Invitations came one after the other for us
to meet the friends at a public tea, where we went, and did justice to a
good cup of tea and also to the provisions set before us, after which a
fellowship meeting was held, and I believe all enjoyed it. Many thanks
to the people.
# Again, on Friday, the second night after landing, a good tea was pro-
vided especially for our reception, where again we did justice to our
sumptuous fare ; and I am sure we know not how to express our thanks
for the kindness we have received. We have been ready almost to pride
ourselves that we are first-class passengers.
The look of the country pleases us very much, and we have plenty of
good wishesTrom our new friends, who hope we shall prosper and do well,
which, under the blessing of God, we trust we shall. We have heard
Mr. and Mrs. Burton say a great deal about Taranaki, hut not too
much ; for what he has said we are prepared to substantiate. Let no
man say again that Mr. Burton is an impostor, for we have every reason
to believe that the statements he made are all correct. —I am, &c.,
GEORGE CARTWRIGHT,
On behalf of self and fellow-passengers,
INSTRUCTIONS TO EMIGRANTS.
First. — When you write, tell what sort of work you can
do, Number, Names, and Ages of Family, &c.
Second.' —Free Passages given to the Parents of a Fami-
ly and all children over 12, also infants under a year, and
three children between 1 year and 12. If more children
than the allowed number yon should write and ask about
it.—Single men and single women also free.
Third.— On receiving the “ Form op Application,” read
the printed matter carefully over ; sign the form on the
line under the words “I am, Sir;” fill in all the required
particulars ; keep the first half, and send back the second
at once to JOHN H. WHITE, Laceby, near Grimsby.
oxen. When horses were wanted to work hard they got Fourth. —On receiving the “ Certificate of Character
extra food, and in harvest time when men were wanted to Form,” get it signed by two of yonr neighbours who* are
work hard they got beer given to them, and by working householders and ratepayers, also by a Doctor, and last
hard without the usual food, labourers were brought to by a Clergyman, Minister, or Magistrate, all of whom must
piemature graves. England was a good old place, and the p U t the day of month when they sign. This must he also
people were like very good plants, fitted to go into any part sen t w hen filled up, without loss of time, to Mr. J. WHITE,
of the world. In England there was no land to plant them Laceby, near Grimsby.
out on, and it was hardly known what to do with them. Trrr „ W i nn a ? • i -ii i
\t™ i-j * n wr tt i i , Fifth. —When approved, of which you will have notice,
JNew Zealand could take all. Mr. Vogel saw what was +1 cn • fh i r> +nœ r* i
j xx-riijxi. o J.IJ. send the money tor the Ship Kit, by Post Office Order,
wHh Ti 1 * g g n ° borr 7 TY l plant also to Laceby ; after which, in a few days, you will receive
“l7’l - ürm 7 are the “Embarkation Order.” This must bo carefully kept
dwarfed and cramped, and were driven about like slaves. and be read to ent at the Hom ? or Depot m London
lo yon who have come out to New Zealand, one and all, we wben “ tbe £ e 1
give you greeting-we receive yon with plum cake a hearty Slx ' H ._f Tbe Rations on shipboard are liberal, each per-
welcome and a good tea, because yon are pst what we are. son over 12 being allowed 3| lbs. Meat, 8* lbs. Biscuit,
At Exeter Hall meetings it was said that we in New 3 1 i bs . Flour, | pint Peas, 2| lbs. Potatoes and Vegetables.
Zealand were a grabbing set ot people, and that we grabbed i i l, T > • • u rr i n o i n,'
nj.ii -, n b j L ’ Tj , o i lb. Raisins, 2 ozs. Coftee, ozs. lea, 1 lb. Sugar, i lb.
ail the land and murdered the Maoris. It was not so. We m i n ’ G ~ V. L T v ]n nvT fa é u
ii i , »,i I i i t reacle, o ozs. Suet, 6 ozs. Rutter, Pickles, Mustard, Salt,
were the best or the people who had come from hnoland. o t> i i i -i i i A i-y
.p, i • p -, F .. , . z, J c : Pepper, &c., weekly ; children half quantity: young chil-
ei . l ‘ s a ier 16 , ln a^ e wan dered cPren, an extra allowance of Condensed Milk, Eggs, Soup,
about till engaged, with four others, by the New Zealand Biscuits Qatmeal, g Ri F 1 and Sugar
Company He was one of the good plants, and had borne JoHN Kikg of Grimsby, writes thus to Mr. White, on
good fruit, and had stuck to the place through thick and Wd gHp « Chile”-“ When we are served with onr
d 1 C .o U r Se o v iT 0 / j i U p wa y week’s rations it is a puzzle for us to know what we
wor 'ec ai rom a y ig Of.7 e f rS ’ The first shall do with them, for we can’t keep ahead of the grub
settlers got on little by little. After a while he got married. at aIL It>B not the case bere as on i and , with a family
1 here was no money in those days, and labour was bartered of seven; as mine is . Three meals a day comes to 181
f° r f ° od : c } othm S : an d stock. He worked out one cow— per week) and find all these out of 18s. a week, and pay
6 , IS . ? _ e vei go or 3, and e was nearly three a ll other demands, would puzzle the cleverest statesman
months in doing so. Then he worked another out for £l3. in England ”
The cows had calves and then he got oxen, and a bit of Seventh -Don’t pack yonr luggage in too large boxes,
land, and paid £450 for it He then put 23 acres in pota- ag tha are awkwarc f to handle and sooner broken. Paint
°.®? ar, oA V 6a ian so .le potatoes for £2 10s, a ton, and y om . own name on each package, the name of the ship, and
within 20 months he paid off the £450 due for his land; the word “Wanted” on those boxes which contain
and aftei paying for oxen and labour employed he found his a thin want during the voyage, as boxes so marked
profit amounted to about £1 a day for his own labour. He Co 4e up about once a month, or oftener, the rest remain-
afterwards bought a piece of land for £650, and another ■ in r tbe hold all tbe time . Linen, &c,, for immediate
for £1000; then he put up a house, and another, and an- uge wants keeping in a canyas bag in your bortbs . Ask
AvlA even in the worst of times he had been able to Mrg . Burton as to wbat household and other things it is
add little by little to his property and family Men like he desirab i e to take. Have by themselves when reaching the
had been were just the men who were needed-men who Depot in London, Soap, Towel, Tea-cloth, Comb, and Brush
could face hard work, and who were careful and saving We and a tbin g you require f OP a night or two. Fifteen cubic
don t want men who say “ I can t do this and that, but feet of l uggage is the allowance for each adult passenger,
men who will tackle anything. „ , ° „ „ ~ ”
The Rev. Mr. Kirk, who is a Lincolnshire man, and had , Note.-The giving of a “ Free Passage means that yon
met amongst the immigrants some who knew his friends at pave uothmg to pay for the cost oi taking you from Lon-
home, delivered a very interesting speech, in which refer- *? New Zealand either now or after yon got there;
ence was made to the struggles and hardships gone through d all * d ° 18 turmshed w^ th OTdlcle f
by the early missionaries He related instances of men changes of Clothes for health. To pay yonr railway fare to
who, having come out poor, were now not only in comfort- tpe place from which yon sail, and about 18d a box for wharf
able circumstances hut wealthy men. He could easily charges and warehousing. To pay to the Government £1
t j -j -i i i „ nl tor each person over 12 years, and 10s. tor each child under
name a hundred such meu with whom he was personally , 0 1 , -.A ’ , -, , -, , ~ •
• il tt I j nin , j; ip n i 1”, except miants, which are uot reckoued ; aud tor this
acquainted, tie had travelled over mostet the Colony, ’ ’ v . -o T3l , .
\ • i • • . ~ , t , f -M C payment yon are supplied with Mattress, Roister, Rlankets,
and in his opinion there was no other part ot JNew g/ , J , 11 \ n .7 ’
Zealand equal to Taranaki. The rev. gentleman advised Sheets. Counterpane, Marine Soap, and all the various
the new comers to he sober, industrious, economical, and pessary for use in eating and drinking,
religions, and mentioned the advantages they would now (Observe ! These things are not merely lent yon for
have of placing their children in efficient schools. He on the voyage, but are yonr oivn property, and are
■ gave them a hearty welcome. takerL wit]l J ou 011 landing in New Zealand.)
The Rev. Mr. Dumbell, who was a later arrival than When yon goto London by the Great Northern Railway,
i the other speakers, gave an interesting and feeling ad- take yonr Ticket for Finsbury Park Station (not King’s
; dress, pointing out the advantages of sobriety, industry, Cross), and from Finsbury Park, trains go every few
, and religion, and hoped the immigrants would write home minutes to Blackwall, by way of Poplar ; and Blackwall
s to let their friends know of the kind of reception they Station is within 100 yards of the Emigrant Depot. The
- met with. He spoke well of Taranaki, and said J,the Fare from Finsbury Park to Blackwall is 7d.
In the Press, and will shortly be Published,
EMIGRATION TO NEW ZEALAND
(With. Illustrations),
Considered SOCIALLY, POLITICALLY, COMMERCIALLY, RELIGIOUSLY,
As it affects LANDOWNERS, CAPITALISTS, TENANT FARMERS, MECHANICS,
FARM LABOURERS, &c.
An International Subject!! By an Englishman and a Colonist.
price sixiiE’iEiisrciß.
This Book will contain a general Description of New Zealand, as well as of each Province,
arranged by Mr. Burton, also an Article of his, comprising much that every Emigrant should
know. In addition, there will be a number of Letters from Emigrants who have already gone,
tud an Essay on Labour, Union, and Wages, by Mr. White. Every labourer in the three
Kingdoms should possess a copy.—Agents wanted everywhere.—Post Free, Sixpence.
Printed and Published by H. WATSON & Co., at their Steam Printing Offices, Laceby, Grimsby.
WATSOhi’S FAMILY PILLS.
To Mr. Watson, —Dear Sir:— l must send you a Testimonial for your Family Pills, having
received great benefit from them myself, and also my wife and family, during our voyage to
New Zealand. I put this before you to make what use of it you like, for I believe them to have
kept down illness in ourselves and others also that have had them, and I must tell you that I could
have sold them, if I had some on the ship, I only wish I had brought more of them w 7 ith me ;
what we shall do when they are all done, Ido not know. I would recommend every intending
emigrant to bring a good supply with them, as I consider them one of the finest medicines to
carry on ship board. Now Sir, you must look out some means to appoint an Agent in New
Zealand, and in Taranaki too, they tell us it is the Garden of New Zealand.
I remain. Yours truly, GEORGE CARTWRIGHT.
K.ZZZ SSiT Ask for Watson’s Family Pills.
These Pills may be obtained of all respectable Medicine Vendors, in Boxes at ls. l|d., and
2s. 9d., each. Should any difficulty occur in obtaining them in remote places, enclosed 8, 14, or
33 Stamps to the Proprietor, Horace Watson, Pharmaceutical Chemist, Laceby, near Grimsby,
and they will be sent post free to any part of the United Kingdom.
FREE PASSAGES TO NEW ZEALAND
For Farm Labourers, Ploughmen,
Shepherds, Mechanics, Domestic Servants, Dairy Women, and Others,
ißg” Parties forming continually, and going at regular intervals.
It is expected that if “ Free Passages ” are then open, several large parties will leave Lin-
colnshire and the Neighbouring Counties in the Spring, at the end of the yearly engagements.
Wages for Farm Hands 6s. to Bs, Mechanics, higher still.
Days for Labour, 8 hours long.
Land Cheap, Good, and easily obtained by Industrious Men, with a Climate
the Healthiest in the World. All information on the subject may be had of
Messrs. BURTON and WHITE,
Emigration Offices, Laceby, Near Great Grimsby.
i H. WATSON, PRINTER BY STEAM POWER, LACEBY.
