

EI ( r T EEX .TEN (E.
Sjjtoug:
WILLIAM HADDOCK, 388, GEORGE STREET.


w N


“WA G G A WAGGA ADVERTISER”
PRIZE ESSAY
THE FUTURE LAND POLICY
NEW SOUTH WALES
BY SAMUEL COOK.
Sgtog:
WILLIAM MADDOCK, 383, GEORGE STREET,
1870.


WAGGA WAGGA ;
WILTON. PRINTER. FOB THE PROPRIETORS
ADVERTISER” OFFICE, TRAILL-STKEET.


PREFACE.
siss/rgs/r
In presenting* the following Essay on the Land question to the consideration of
the public, it seems desirable briefly to review the circumstances under which
it came to be written.
Several months ago, the Proprietors of the “ Wagga Wagga Advertiser,
impressed with the necessity of a radical change in the existing Land law, and
foreseeing the near approach of the time when public opinion would demand
what it had hitherto deprecated and even denounced, conceived the idea of
offering a prize of one hundred guineas for the best Essay on the Future Land
Policy of New South Wales. Their object, or rather their hope, in taking this
step, of course, was less to obtain from any one source the plan of a perfect
Land law than from a variety of sources to gather such a sum-total of ex-
perience and opinion, of fact and of theory, as might be of practical service in
any future legislative discussion of the question. Accordingly, in December ol
1868, a Prospectus was issued, inviting Essays on the above subject and setting
forth the conditions of competition. Several months were allowed for the pre-
paration of the Essays, the time being subsequently extended at the request of
intending competitors; and the following well-known gentlemen were re-
quested, and kindly consented, to undertake the arduous duty of deciding on
their relative merits, viz. :—Mr. W. Macleay, M.P. ; the Hon. Sir W.
Macarthur, M.L.C.; the Hon. Thos. Holt, M.L.C. ; the Hon. John Richardson,
M.L.C., and Mr. W. B. Dalley. The competition closed on the 20th May, 1869,
when it was found that no less than forty-eight Essays had been sent in.
Owing to the difficulty of dealing with so large a number of, for the most part,
very lengthy compositions, the award was not made until the following
December, when the prize was adjudged to the Essay of Mr. Samuel Cook —
the Essay which, having first appeared in the columns of the “Wagga Wagga
Advertiser,” is now published in the more generally convenient form of a
pamphlet.
How far the object of the competition has been attained may be judged
from the fact, that of the many Essays contributed a large majority are really
able productions —the work of men in every way competent to deal''frith suck a
subject, and who have clearly taken every pains to do so worthily. Thus, it
is evident, a great stimulus has been given to the consideration,of a questjoq *
* K


“Advertiser” Office,
Wagga Wagga, January 26, 1870.
B V.,/#
eminently requiring it, and a vast amount of evidence has been adduced that
would otherwise have remained latent. It may be remarked, too, that if the
object of the competition has to a great extent been realised, so also has the
foresight that suggested it been justified. The Land question is now, what it
was not, when these Essays were first invited, prominently before the country.
Public opinion, long ignorantly acquiescent in a specious fallacy, has veered even
sooner than was expected, and, if the hustings be a reliable political weather-
cock, threatens ere long to leave its old blind guides high and dry on the
summit of their own mountain of conceit. It is certain that a very few months
will find the Legislature busily discussing the future Land policy of the country •
and it is equally certain that so wide an expression of intelligent opinion as
these Essays signify, must have its influence on the result.
It is not, of course, contended that the Prize Essay, although adjudged the
best against so many rivals, is in itself the ne plus ultra of Land legislation,
still less that it is likely to please all parties. Many will, doubtless, dispute not
only the conclusions of the writer but his premises ; while to one party, at least,
both will probably seem little more than the rankest political heresy. Mr.
Cook, however, need care little for the denunciations of these interested critics,
provided they will only read his Essay. For them it was written, and it is
certainly not too much to say, that for them it contains a world of useful know-
ledge. The first step in the reclamation of a wild land is to clear away the
superincumbent rubbish ; and there can be no question of Mr. Cook’s trenchant
ability in dealing with the dense thickets of political ignorance which have
so long encumbered the Land policy of New South Wales. Readers of
his Essay, who may also happen to be legislators, will at least have no longer
the excuse of ignorance, if they persist in the blind folly he so thoroughly
exposes. Readers, on the other hand, who are not legislators, but the makers
of legislators, will be equally without excuse if they are still content to be the
blind led by the blind to their common confusion.


THE
WAGGA WAGGA ADVERTISER
PRIZE
ESSAY,
THE FUTURE LAND POLICY OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
By Mr.
Samuel
In this colony no question has been [
more largely discussed than that re-*
lating to the administration of the !
public lands. There is none out of ;
which more political capital has been
made—none in regard to which cant
has been more potent. Men have
magnified small grievances, and shrunk |
from providing a remedy for great :
ones. They have mourned over others !
which were merely the creations of |
fancy or the subterfuges of ambition. !
Politicians have fought, and the country i
has suffered. Noise and clamour have j
often drowned the voice of reason and
prudence. The ordinary common
sense which marks success in the
affairs of every-day life has not pre-
sided over our councils. Thus the
public estate has been maladministered,
and a system has been adopted un-
suited to the requirements of a British
colony—based on principles inconsist-
ent with sound political economy —in
a large degree unfavourable to the
preservation and development of those
civilising influences which are charac-
teristic of English society, and, in some
of its details, vicious in its tendency.
Cook,
The introduction of the representa-
tive principle into the legislature of
this colony—now nearly a quarter of a
century ago —was followed by prompt
and vigorous action to redress a variety
of grievances under which the colony
then laboured. One of the principal of
these grievances was, that the control
of the “ waste lands ” of the colony was
absolutely in the hands of the Crown,
and not subject to the local legislature.
By the 29th section of the sth and
6th Victoria, cap. 76 (an Act for the
Government of the colony of New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land)
the Council was not permitted to inter-
fere in any manner with the sale or
other appropriation of the lands belong-
ing to the Crown within the colony, or
with the revenues arising therefrom. It
was enacted —“ that the Governor of
the said colony of New South Wales,
with the advice and consent of the said
Legislative Council, shall have autho-
rity to make laws for the peace, wel-
fare, and good government of the said
colony, provided always that no such
law shall be repugnant to the law of
England or interfere in any manner with


the sale or other appropriation of the
lands belonging to the Grown within the
said colony , or with the revenues thence
arising .” It was recommended by a
committee, which was then appointed
to consider the best means of remedying
those alleged grievances, that the power
of dealing with these lauds and revenues
should be conferred by Act of Parlia-
ment upon the colony and legislature
of New South Wales. This resolution
was adopted and forwarded in the year
1850 to the Queen and both Houses of
the Imperial Parliament. In accord-
ance with the expressed desire of the
people of this colony, an Act was passed
by the British Government, and in due
course proclaimed in this colony. Pre-
vious to the dissolution of the old Legis-
lative Council, on the proclamation of
this new Act in the colony, a petition
to the Queen was moved to the effect
“that the revenue arising from the
public lands, derived, as it is, mainly
from the value imparted to them
by the labour and capital of the
people of this colony, is as much
their property as the ordinary revenue,
and ought therefore to be subject only
to the like control and appropria-
tion.”” By the passing of the Act which
conferred a new constitution upon us
in 1856, the waste lands, which had
hitherto been administered under
English statute and Crown regulations,
were handed over to the absolute
control of the colonial Government.
The use we have made of the power is
hardly creditable to our judg’ment or
to our experience as part of a nation
that has established so many colonies
and dependencies.
The candidates for election under the
new constitution were numerous ; and
in every address the subject of the
administration of the public lands was
one of the most prominent topics.
Having absolute control over the waste
lands of the Crown, and also over the
gross proceeds of the sale of such lands,
from whatever source arising, including
all royalties, mines, and minerals, the
mode of dealing* with this new and
extensive source of wealth was of course
an object of special solicitude. It may
be well at the outset to glance at a few
of the opinions then expressed, as
showing in some degree the state of
feeling which prevailed, and as afford-
ing a contrast to subsequent legisla-
tion.
In January, 1856, Mr. Forster, the
present Secretary for Lands, said :
“I consider the present system of
management and distribution of public
lands as in the highest degree faulty
and injurious to colonisation. I am
anxious for the extension and en-
couragement of small freeholds by
every fair and practicable method. I
particularly disapprove of public leases
and of a high minimum price. But I
can be no party to dishonest schemes,
involving violation of national faith,
nor can I acquiesce in the justice or
policy of any measures calculated to
shackle, for purposes of revenue, the
great productive interests of the in-
terior. In short, I am accustomed to
place wool-growers as well as gold-
diggers in the same category with
other producing classes, and would
impose no more exclusive restrictions,
in whatever form, upon either wool or
gold, than I would upon agricultural
or other industrial produce.”
Mr. James Pye, a candidate for the
representation of the same electorate,
said :—“ With respect to the Land
question, it might fairly be inferred,
from what I have already stated, that
I shall strenuously advance such mea-
sures as may be necessary to promote
the speedy settlement and allocation of
such lands as are suitable for agricul-
tural and horticultural purposes ; and
I believe that, by a system of proper
regulations for the sale of land, the
supply may be always kept up to the
demand, and this long-vexed question
may be settled to the satisfaction of the
agriculturists without doing any ma-
terial injury to the pastoral interests of
the colony.”


Mr. Augustus Morris, addressing the
electors of the pastoral districts of the
Liverpool Plains and Gwydir, ob-
served :—“ Although I look upon the
pastoral interest as of vital importance
to the colony, and believe that any dis-
couragement offered to it will re-act
most injuriously upon all other in-
terests, I would not demand for it any
exclusive privileges, nor permit it,
should such be its tendency, to retard
the development of the agricultural and
mineral resources of the country. These
three pursuits, however, are not only not
necessarily antagonistic, but are emi-
nently dependent one on the other. In
the mining districts the farmer and the
grazier hope to find those large bodies
of consumers which in older countries
are found in manufacturing communi-
ties,”
Mr. S, D. Gordon thus expressed his
views to the electors of the county of
Durham : —“ The subject of the waste
lands of the colony, which has for
years proved so fruitful a subject of
controversy, may now, I conceive, be
easily and satisfactorily settled, as by
a late Act of the Imperial Parliament
the entire control and management of
the Crown lands has been vested in the
colonial Legislature; and while the
undoubted claims of that large and
respectable body of our fellow-colonists,
the squatters, must be respected and
have justice done them —yet, if the
lease granted by the Queen in Council
should in any way interfere with the
progress and advancement of the
colony, I would be prepared to pay the
squatter a reasonable compensation for
his interest in the lands and improve-
ments ; so that no obstacle should be
permitted to stand in the way of the
public good, but that every facility
and encouragement be offered for
the occupation and improvement of
our waste lands by an industrious
agricultural people, and throwing them
open for selection and purchase as
soon as possible, in small lots, and at a
moderate upset price.”
The late Mr. Clark Irving, in his
address to the electors of the Clarence
and Darling Downs, said : —“One of
the most important questions to be
brought under consideration will be
the management of the Crown Lands ;
and on this subject I am of opinion that
the minimum price should be reduced
to ten shillings per acre, and that land
suitable for agricultural purposes in
the vicinity of towns should be surveyed
and laid out in moderate-sized farms.
For the purpose of affording the fullest
information to the public, I would have
plans of these surveys prepared and
exhibited at the police office in each
district, showing the lands open for
sale ; so that any one wishing to culti-
vate might select a farm without any
vexatious trouble or annoyance at that
price. At the same time, care must be
exercised, in order tha': the production
of the main staple of the colcny be not
injuriously affected —there being room
for the pursuits of all. If my views
as to the Crown lands were carried
into effect, I consider it would be one
of the best means ever adopted for the
encouragement of an immigration of a
O O
superior character; as the fact of our
holding out such highly favourable
opportunities to the industrious classes
in Great Britain would of itself be one
of the great means of turning in the
direction of these shores the tide of
immigration now going on to the
United States and Canada.!’
Mr. E. 0. Weekes, to the electors of
Northumberland, said:—“The squat-
ting question must occupy the early
attention of the new Assembly. While
I fully appreciate the importance which
is justly attached to the pastoral
interest, I cannot be insensible to the
injury inflicted upon the colony by the
imperfect management of our waste
lands under Downing-street authority;
therefore, for the sake of all parties, I
should deprecate hasty and crude
legislation on a subject of such magni-
tude. I should use my strenuous exer-
tions, however, to infuse into our new


land system a comprehensive and
statesmanlike policy, so as to afford
every possible facility for the productive
energies of our industrious population,
without unjustly interfering with the
claims of the present stockholder. The
continued influx of fresh population is
essential to the prosperity of the
colony, and unless we can offer increased
facilities for the sale and occupation of
land, we cannot hope to compete with
other and nearer fields of emigration,
where land can be obtained at one-
fifth of our minimum price.”
The late Mr. Merion Moriarty made
the following statement to the electors
of the Sydney Hamlets : —“ The land
question I do not profess to understand.
I believe very few do ; but I never could
comprehend why any man should for
any term have exclusive possession of
an extent of country exceeding the
largest counties in England for pas-
toral purposes solely, and that the very
terms of his lease should prevent the
use of agricultural means for supplying
food to the community. I will exa-
mine how far this is necessary for
the pastoral interest, and facilitate by
every means in my power the acquisi-
tion of small farms by the working
portion of the community.”
The late Mr. G. R. Nichols, when
invited to become a candidate for the
representation of the Northumberland
Boroughs, in October, 1855, thus stated
his views on the land question:—
“ With regard to the question of the
administration of Crown Lands, it is
one so wide and intricate that I shall
not attempt to enter into it; but I
shall very plainly state the principles
on which I shall act in respect to it: I
will never permit, while I can prevent
it, the interests of any class of persons,
however useful and valuable the enter-
prise of that class may have been, to
interfere with the occupation for settle-
ment of any lands in the colony ; and
I am further of opinion, that the more
simple and easy the means for such
occupation the better. At the same
time, the claims of a useful and valuable
class must be respected and met in a
spirit of justice. I believe that, by fol-
lowing out these two rules, the lands
may be thrown open to the people
without injury to the squatters or de-
triment to our valuable trade in wool.’ 7
Mr. Martin (the late Premier), in
his address to the electors of Cook and
Westmoreland, said : —“ln the course
of my legislative career, on more occa-
sions than one, a set has been made—
sometimes from ignorance, and some-
times from design —against that class
of colonists on whose exertions the
prosperity of the country mainly de-
pends—the squatters and agriculturists
of the interior, as opposed to the- mer-
chants, traders, and commission agents
of the towns. Without denying the
value of any class as a necessary com-
ponent of every large society, I have
at all times maintained that it is our
first duty to develope the resources of
the country, and to take care that no*
injurious impediments should be thrown
in the way of, but that every reason-
able encouragement should be given to,
those whose prosperity stands in the
same relation to the prosperity of all
other classes as cause and effect; know-
ing that all those evidences of high
civilization which we everywhere see
around us —cities vieing in splendour
and extent with the great cities of
Europe, buildings which would be
ornamental in nny capital, wealth
which would make its possessors men
of consequence in any part of the
world—have had their origin in the
soil. To those who supply us with the
products of that soil my first attention
has always been directed.”
Mr. William Macleay thus addressed
the electors of the Lachlan and Lower
Darling “ I believe that the progress
of the colony at large depends in a
great measure on the facility with
which land may be obtained, that such
facility has not hitherto existed, at
least in a proper degree, those who
have condescended to inquire into the


ffiatter are well aware is to be attri-
buted to the inefficiency of the Survey
Department, and not, as has been al-
leged, for the sake of getting up a cry
to the squatting system. Important
reforms are now taking place in that
Department, but I will at all times
keep a jealous eye upon its manage-
ment. I shall be prepared to insist
upon large anticipatory surveys, ex-
tensive commonage under proper pro-
visions for your towns, and the aboli-
tion of the system of selling Crown
lands by auction. I would give to all
the right of selection at the upset
price.”
Mr. Gideon S. Lang, in February,
1856, explained his views to the
electors of the united pastoral districts
of Liverpool Plains and Gwydir :
“ At the same time, it is the interest of
every man in the colony that this
should be done with as little detriment
to the pastoral interest as possible.
There is ample room for a very large
population without reducing the sheep
and cattle one head, and I firmly be-
lieve that none would gain more
than the squatters by such a judicious
unlocking of the lands as would turn
to this colony the tide of emigration
now flowing to America. I repeat, I
would give the most ample choice of
the best land to the agriculturist, no
matter whose sheep-run was cut up to
supply it. The remainder of the land
I would give on lease to the present
pastoral occupants until required for
agriculture, and when so required I
would repay every sixpence tfiat had
been expended directly and indirectly,
not only because to do otherwise would
be a robbery, but because without
security for such repayment no man
would invest capital in increasing its
productiveness.”
Mr. J. H, Hood, when a candidate
for the representation of the Darling
Downs, said : —“Although representing
a pastoral constituency, I shall consider
myself the advocate of no particular
interest j the prosperity of the various
sections of the community must advance
simultaneously. Nothing can be more
absurd than the ‘ parrot cry ’ got up
by designing and ignorant persons,
that the civilisation and settlement of
the country are retarded by the squat-
ters. None benefit more than they do
by the growth of an agricultural popu-
lation around them, and whilst I shall
oppose most strenuously any attempt
to break faith with the present occu-
piers of the Crown lands, I shall sup-
port every measure that may increase
the facilities to those desirous of engag-
ing in agricultural pursuits of obtain-
ing small farms at a moderate price,
and without harassing delays.”
Mr. J. N. Oxley said to the electors
of West Camden : —“With regard to
the Crown land regulations, I must
candidly admit that I am not prepared
at present to say what changes I should
suggest, further than that I certainly
think very much greater facilities ought
to be given to the labouring population
to acquire small farms.”
Sir W. M. Manning, addressing the
electors of the North Riding of the
county of Cumberland, said : —“ To the
very difficult subject of the manage-
ment of the Crown lands I will give
my best attention, with a determination
to do justice to all parties, and to put
both the pastoral and agricultural inte-
rests upon the footing best calculated
to promote the advancement and gene-
ral prosperity of the oolopy.”
Sir Daniel Cooper said, when addres-
sing the electors of the Sydney Ham-
lets : —“ The land question, whether
viewed in its immediate relations—
fiscally and socially, or in its political
bearing on the progress of the country,
is one of equal importance and difficulty.
If encountered with firmness, and in a
spirit of equity, I think, however, it
can be settled to the satisfaction of all,
and without inflicting injury on any
whose present interests are involved,
and so as greatly to accelerate the
general advancement, The minimum
price of land should be considerably


lowered-; Hie legal process of transfer
should be rendered cheap and expedi-
tious-; and every facility consistent
'with the general interest of society
should be afforded to the more provi-
dent und enterprising among the
labouring class to settle upon the
immense tracts of agricultural land
rendered by nature easily accessible to
industry, but kept by our present regu-
lations utterly unproductive. The fal-
lacy which, either from ignorance or
interested motives, was sought to be
-enforced, that New South Wales is not
’to a large extent capable of agricultural
■occupation, has now been thoroughly
exploded by experience ; and the new
Parliament, as the}'- will have the
opportunity, will also, it is to be hoped,
be sustained in the enlightened pur-
pose, to give rapid and full develop-
ment to the colony’s natural capabili-
ties.”
Mr. Richard Jones, to the electors of
Durham, said : —“Of the land question,
it is extremely difficult to speak clearly
and satisfactorily in a brief form. It
naturally presents itself under two
heads —occupancy and sale. The enact-
ments under which the lands beyond
the settled districts are now occupied,
and the contracts which have been
made under the authority of those
enactments, will, I apprehend, prevent
the squatting system from being effec-
tually modified until the expiration of
the leases originally granted. The
opportunity for revising this system
has, I conceive, been improperly de-
ferred for several years by the neglect
of the government of Sir Charles
Titzroy to declare that the leases,
whenever issued, should be considered
to have commenced from the date of
the applications for such leases. The
changes in the existing system of occu-
pation, which sound policy appears to
me to point out as necessary, are,
the extinction of the right of pre-emp-
tion, except as regards the occupier’s
homestead, the shortening of the term
of lease to about five years, with the
right reserved to the Government of
resuming during the continuance of the
lease, without any compensation except
the cost of actual improvements, any
portion of the run required for sale, the
rent for such resumed portion being of
course remitted, and the squatter re-
maining in undisturbed possession of
the remainder of the run ; the payment
by the occupier of an adequate yet
reasonable consideration for the use of
the public land ; and the exemption
from the squatting system of all lands
which, from quality and situation, or
for other reasons, are peculiarly suitable
for cultivation and settlement, and are
likely to be first required for sale. As
regards the sale of land, the changes
which to me appear to be roost urgently
called for are in the practical details
of management. A better system of
survey is required, with more strength
in the department, so as to ensure an
ample supply of land to meet existing
and probable demands ; and such an
improvement in the sale regulations as
will enable purchasers to satisfy their
wants without difficulty and without
delay.”
Mr. Thomas Holt, addressing the
electors of the Stanley Boroughs,
said :—“ I am decidedly of opinion that
the WASTE lands of the colony
should not, on any account, be retained
by the squatters for pasturage when
they are required by the agriculturists
for tillage. But existing agreements
must be respected ; and I would no
more think of breaking a contract,
because I was in an official position,
than I would do so in private life. If
the Government of this country were
once to break faith by acting dis-
honourably or dishonestly, who would,
henceforth, place any confidence in it ?
Who would purchase any of the Go-
vernment debentures if such a thing
were even thought possible, that
the Government would at a future time
repudiate them ? The same maxim is
equally applicable to Governments as
it is to individuals — : Honesty is the


best policy.’ Ido not believe that the
squatters would object to give up on
reasonable and equitable terms such
portions of their runs as may be leased
to them, if they were required by the
Government.”
It will be seen from these quotations,
which form a fair sample of some
hundred issued at the time—(that is,
of those portions which relate to the
public lands) —that there was an honest
intention on the part of candidates to
treat the matter fairly, with a due
regard to fiscal and social relations ;
to recognise every well-established
right, and to adjust with equity the
claims of all parties. There was
nothing to lead to the supposition that
in a few years a scheme would have
been adopted like that which became
law in 1861 ; and seeing that the
people returned the men ■who expressed
sentiments, such as those contained in
the foregoing quotations, we may
reasonably conclude, that in the mean-
time some influences must have been
exercised to warp the public mind.
By the Electoral Act of 1858 a franchise
was agreed to which amounts to al-
most universal suffrage. It is said,
with some show of truth, that the scale
was turned in favour of conditional
purchase and deferred payments by
the element last introduced into the
electoral body. There can be no doubt
that, during the elections which pre-
ceded what is now spoken of as “ the
Free Selection Parliament,” many falla-
cies were enunciated, and numbers had
their judgment perverted who have
since adopted more reasonable views,
and who, in any future election would
be likely to exercise their franchise
with more discretion, and support a
land policy more in accordance with
the public interests.
During the period of agitation which
preceded the passing of the Land
Acts, the most reckless statements were
made by men and by parties who
sought the honour of representing the
people in Parliament, and! aspired to
share in the Government of the country.
Perhaps one of the most remarkable
documents ever published on the sub-
ject was the manifesto of a body styling
itself “The Land League of New
South Wales.” The members o>f that
association sought to achieve a victory
for themselves and for posterity. As-
suming that the right of the people
in the land was denied, or, that at
that time the people did not really
possess it, in the words of Holy Writ
they appeal to the strength and courage
of the inhabitants of the colony. It
was asserted that through the great
difficulties which the Land Law then
existing placed in his way, it was next
to impossible for a small capitalist to
acquire a piece of land of his own. To
this was attributed the over-crowded
state of the city, and the high price o>f
city land. At that date (1859) our
population was 336,000, and the land
sales in that year amounted t0£252,627.
£252,627. There were 247,500 ; acres-
under cultivation, and at the end of
that year the total amount which had
been received by the colony for the
sale of its public lands since the year
1824 was £3,407,092 ! The state-
ments of the Land League afford a
fair sample of the kind of oratory with
which the colony at that time was
flooded, and which will, no doubt, in-
undate it again whenever an effort
shall be made to reform our Land Laws,
and administer our public estate more
in accordance with the dictates of pru-
dence. There were matters of real
grievance, and facilities for acquiring
land were not so great as they ought
to have been ; but notwithstanding
these drawbacks, in the year 1862,
when land was first taken up by con-
ditional purchasers, we had alienated
seven and a-half millions of acres
(7,500,000), and had still unalienated
between ninety and a hundred million.
In 1862, the population had increased
to nearly 367,500, and thus the land
alienated was equal to a little more


than twenty acres for every man,
woman, and child in the colony, in-
eluding prisoners, lunatics, and the des-
titute and infirm who are recipients of
public charity. Was this land held by a
few speculators and land-jobbers ?
According to the Blue Book, or rather
the Statistical Register, the freeholders
of land exceeding one acre (and, of
course, excluding the very large num-
ber of holders of town and suburban
allotments) numbered 14,431, or one
in about every 25 of the population, or
one family in every six or seven !
What, then, becomes of the statement
that the Crown lands of this colony
had hitherto been “ practically placed
as far beyond the reach of the great
body of the people as if those lands
had had no existence at all ? ” Men
argued as though the only mode by
which “ the public generally ” could
possess the land was by “ the public
generally ” settling upon it and culti-
vating it, as though every man ought
to be a yeoman, and as though his
settlement upon a given number of
acres would at once convert him into a
bold rustic, and make him the pride of
his country ! But if we are to be all
gentlemen-farmers, what is to become
of commerce, of manufactures, of arts,
of public works, of domestic service, of
the various departments of Govern-
ment ? It surely does not require any
great penetration to see that just rela-
tions must be observed in regard to all ,
those callings which are necessary to
give strength, wealth, and stability to
a people; —or, that our possession of
the land is real, and that to consider
exclusively the benefit of the agricul-
turist in dealing with it would be to
ignore the rights of others to partici-
pate in the advantages to be derived
from its use and alienation. It is clear
that men who raise such a cry as that
raised by the Sydney Land League,
.except they do it from ignorance, mean
really not that the lands have been
placed beyond the reach of the great
body of the people, but that the great
body of the lands have not been open
to a process of appropriation which can
only be properly designated a scramble.
We must frame our future policy
in view of things as they really
exist, and not be led away by random
assertions. The state of modern society
is inconsistent with every man being a
cultivator of his own land, and any
scheme which contemplates such a
result is a mere delusion. And even if
it were not, we should fail to gain any-
thing by such an arrangement.
M‘Culloch says, “ Nothing can be a
greater mistake than to suppose that
the well-being of a country is promoted
by dividing its lands into minute por-
tions, and covering them with cottages.
It is true,” he says, “ that large farms,
managed according to the best prin-
ciples, may not employ, or rather keep,
so many people as if it were split into
smaller portions ; but the large surplus
obtained from such a farm, and which
goes partly to the landlord as rent,
and partly to the farmer as profit, is
not retained by them ; they exchange
it for the various products of art and
industry for which they have occasion ;
so that in this way population is in-
creased proportionately to the increased
produce of the land, at the same time
that labour is properly distributed,
that indolence and apathy are banished,
and that provision is made for the suc-
cessful prosecution of all those arts
that improve and embellish society.”
The men who joined the Land League
admitted as part of their manifesto that
the first requisite in raising man “in the
scale of being, whether in a physical or
a moral —in a social or a religious point
of view,” was to place him in communi-
ties and surround him with all the
“ benign and elevating influences
which naturally spring out of settled
society.” This, no doubt, should be
one of the chief objects of our future
land policy; but the plan we have
adopted is to scatter abroad, to en-
courage men to locate themselves in
places where the influences of civiliza-


tion, go far as relates to external
society, can seldom reach them. The
League suggested “ free selection ” ;
payments of 10 percent, with deferred
payments of the balance extending
over 10 years ; sale by auction under
certain specified circumstances ; free
and common pasturage over the set-
tled districts to all freeholders residing
within the same, with an assessment
on all stock beyond a certain number
proportionate to the extent of the free-
hold ; and some other things which,
together, were said to be a modifica-
tion of the American system. The
main features are, however, repugnant
to that kind of adminstration which
ought to form the future land policy of
this country, having regard to its capa-
bilities, its population, and all its sur-
rounding circumstances. The notion
of many of those who advocated this
system was, that the mere fact of the
adoption of something like the Ameri-
can system of land administration
would secure for us a much larger in-
gress of population. They seemed to
overlook the fact of the difference in
distance, and the much larger costof im-
migration from Europe to this colony as
compared with immigration to America;
and, with strange inconsistency, some
of these men, who desired to reduce the
price of land to encourage immigration,
were opposed to the importation at the
cost of the country of labour which
would be competitive ; and, while they
sought large additional revenue from
the tenants of Crown lands, desired to
make great concessions to the free-
holder.
We must not look to the land re-
venue as a source from which to derive
money for the ordinary purposes of the
colony. There are some objects, how-
ever, in regard to which the propriety
of its appropriation will not be ques-
tioned by any man of sound judgment,
who takes an impartial and compre-
hensive view of our affairs. The money
derived from the rent and sale of our
waste lands may be properly spent on
immigration, on the improvement of the
public estate, and to carry on a vigor-
ous system of surveying. In the nature
of things this revenue is one which
must ultimately cease ; and we ought
so to administer it that, long before it
fails to be a source of direct wealth,
we shall be independent of it, so far as
the requirements of the State are con-
cerned. If wisely administered, it will
for generations to come be a means of
relief to the public revenue, inasmuch
as it will enable works to be performed
which are essential, and for which,
under other circumstances, it would be
necessary to make provision by means
of taxation. It is a mistake to suppose
that the Crown lands are the only
security of the public creditor; but
few will deny that they are a joint
security with our annual income, for
the repayment of our liabilities to the
capitalists who have lent us their
money, and to whom at the present
time, we owe nearly ten millions
sterling. Under these circumstances,
it is the duty of the State either to get
the full money value of the public
lands from those who purchase them,
or to see, if they part with them for
less, that they derive some compensat-
ing advantages in the promotion of
the general well being. These com-
pensating advantages cannot be de-
rived if we alienate our lands for less
than their money value, to persons not
likely to enter upon them under cir-
cumstances which would justify the
expectation of success. The cry that
we should offer encouragement to
industrious people to settle upon the
land and make homes for themselves,
no doubt, sounds well and always wins
applause. But when it is taken to
imply that the people already in pos-
session of land are not industrious, and
that mere industry is all that is re-
quired to qualify men to “ settle on the
land,” then it is a delusion and a snare.
We cannot alter the principles which
govern production. It is no use a man
settling on the land unless he can pro-


ducei something which will yield a fair
return for industry; and to do this he
must have capital and the requisite
knowledge. Labour is only one
element of production. It is no doubt
the first: the last is “land;” and
“capital” is placed between as the
medium by which the first can operate
upon the last. The increase of pro-
duction —the increase of the wealth of
the colony—depends on the properties
of these elements. It is thus laid down
by political economists. The increase
of production is the result of “ the
increase either of the elements them-
selves or their productiveness. The
law of increase of production must be
the consequence of the laws of these
elements, and the limits to the increase
of production must be the limits, what-
ever they are, set by those laws.”
Labour is the first element, but capital
is the second, and must be combined
with the first; and the small propor-
tion which our labour and capital bear
to our land (which is the third great
requisite of production) indicates the
large field we have for enterprise ; but
it is as impossible for labour to endure
without capital as for capital to increase
without labour. Therefore we must
have regard to these conditions in
alienating our public lands, and in the
application of the revenue derived from
them to the purposes of immigration,
we must seek to preserve the proper
relations between those two great
elements which are necessary to make
productive the national estate.
It is desirable that in dealing with
this question there should be in the
Legislature a large number of country
gentlemen well acquainted with the
counties they represent, and possessing
an adequate knowledge of the prin-
ciples which ought to be observed in
dealing with the interests of the public
in regard to the disposal of the public
lands” This is of importance not
because they have, in a national point
of view, any special interest in the
settlement of this question, but because
the information they could impart
would be of great value in preventing
errors such as would be otherwise
likely to arise from want of local know-
ledge and leading the House to sound
conclusions. The determination of this
subject on right principles is a matter
which, in view of the stability and pro-
gress of the colony, concerns every
man, woman, and child; and the public
interest will be promoted by removing
all unnecessary obstacles to the ready
acquisition of land by industrious, tempe-
rate, and law-abiding people, who will
so employ it as to benefit themselves
and the country in which we live. It
is desirable, therefore, that the legisla-
ture should come to the consideration
of this subject, if possible, on a better
system of representation, calculated to
counteract the influence of mere local
ideas. A practice has hitherto largely
prevailed which has proved highly
injurious, and betokened or
forgetfulness of that true political
economy which sees complete success
only in the well-being of the entire
body politic, and the development of
its various interests so as to form one
harmonious whole. In any future elec-
tion it must be our policy to support
the return of members who are sound
upon this important question. We must
be careful to choose men who will deal
with the subject of the administration
of the public lands without regard to
party politics; who will sink petty
differences, and put aside old prejudices,
and in dependance upon a higher
wisdom than their own seek to dis-
charge their trust like men who really
love their country —who desire to pro-
mote the peace, and harmony, and
prosperity of the people, and to mould
the affairs of the colony in a manner
worthy of its future destiny.
Considering the circumstances under
which the Land Acts were passed, a
radical chang’e should not be made in
their provisions until the matter has
been brought again before the people
by means of a general election. The


peculiar distinction has been claimed
for our Land Acts that they were
passed almost by the people themselves.
In a constitutional point of view, no
doubt, all Acts of Parliament are pre-
sumed to have been passed by the
people themselves. The public mind,
however, was directed specially to these
particular measures, but the calm voice
of reason was scarcely heard. Thousands
now know the value of many fine
phrases which then called forth the
cheers of the unthinking and deluded,
and public opinion appears to be
changed for the better in regard to
the administration of the public lands.
The merits and demerits of conditional
purchase can be estimated at their real
value in regard to agricultural settlers,
pastoral tenants of the Crown, and the
State itself. It has become clear that
if the element of uncertainty be taken
away from the leases of the squatters
during their currency, and if there be
no doubt as to the terms of renewal,
we shall be able to obtain from our
pastoral lands a much larger revenue.
It is equally clear that if land be open
to selection in limited areas, the system
of aggregation will tend to social com-
fort and facility of government. It
has also become clear that land with-
out capital is useless, and that no good
reason can be shewn why the Govern-
ment should put itself in the position
of a money-lender to the people, and
transact its business at a lower rate of
interest than that which is current in
public and private monetary institu-
tions, thus interfering with the ordi-
nary operations of supply and demand.
It has become apparent also, that by
creating an army of public debtors
an element has arisen which will in-
juriously affect our political relations.
Our future land policy should be so
different from that which is now in
force, in regard to alienation, that it
would be idle to talk of amending the
law. It is vicious in all its main pro-
visions, and ought to be superseded by
a measure based upon more enlightened
views of political economy and good
government.
Unlimited “ conditional purchase ”
(as it is termed by the Act) appears at
first sight best for the individual , and
no doubt in some isolated cases it is so ;
but it is not best for the country , inas-
much as it sacrifices, for the sake of
individuals, that which might be a
great and lasting benefit to the colony
if judiciously administered, but which,
in many cases, is only a burden and a
snare to its possessor. It is important,
no doubt, to settle on the land an
agricultural population, and the accom-
plishment of this object is worthy an
enlightened patriotism; but it is not
necessary in order to promote one in-
terest to sacrifice others which are
not inconsistent with it. The Crown
lands have been hitherto the mainstay
of the colony. The proceeds therefrom
have enabled us to carry on important
public works which otherwise could
not have been undertaken, and to
embark in enterprises upon which
so small a community could not have
ventured had it depended upon taxation
alone. A large quantity of this land
has undoubtedly passed out of the
hands of the Government for insuf-
ficient considerations ; but this should
only make us the more careful to
administer the residue in such a way
as to produce the largest possible
revenue consistent with the general
advancement of the colony. It would
be unreasonable to expect that mere
facilities for the acquisition oHand will
attract people from Europe to this
colony ; but we may so administer our
public estate as to make it one of
the elements of attraction. Without
diminishing the advantages of those
already here, we may hold out induce-
ments to people in other lands to join
us and aid in subduing the soil and
prosecuting other works equally essen-
tial to general prosperity. We should
thus have in an increased population a
larger basis of taxation, and the cost of
Government would be proportionately


cheaper. It was a stock argument of
one of our ex-premiers that during his
tenure of office the expenditure in
public works had increased while indi-
vidual taxation had decreased. With
a talent worthy of Paganini he played
for years on this single string. But
the census showed that all the time the
population had been increasing also ;
and as every thousand of the people
consume as much dutiable goods as
any other thousand, it is evident that
the diminution of taxation per head
was to be accounted for not by any
particular aptitude for Government,
but by accessions of population, which,
without being large enough to make it
necessary to incur additional expenses
for the purpose of Government, were
sufficient in number to make the ave-
rage cost of Government less per head
in proportion to the increase of
numbers.
The effect of unlimited selection has
been to make government more diffi-
cult. It has been to scatter all over
the country persons, the majority of
whom are, perhaps, benefitting the
State in a rateable proportion to the
amount of benefit they themselves are
obtaining from the use of the public
lands. But the system admits of much
fraud, and, if it does not offer a pre-
mium to perjury, there are certainly
instances where it would be apparently
to the profit of selectors to make a
false declaration. A Government re-
gardful of the morals of the people
will not unnecessarily place in the way
of any section of the people a tempta-
tion to the perpetration of perjury. It
is impossible, however, in the isolation
which is now the rule, for the Govern-
ment to have any proper supervision
over those who accept, upon apparently
easy but really rigorous terms, the
public lands. The duty of the Govern-
ment in dealing with the public estate
is analagous to that of trustees. Their
duty is to administer it to the best pos-
sible advantage of those who have a
right to reap its benefits, and for whom
they exercise their trust. It has been
the misfortune of the colony hitherto
that the administration of its Crown
lands has been embarrassed by a
variety of interests opposed to a calm
and judicious settlement solely in the
interests of the British nation.
The present mode of unlimited selec-
tion of land has led to a state of things
most unpromising for the future. It
has caused a waste of public money.
It has been the means of embarrassing
that which has been hitherto the most
promising enterprise of the colony. It
has made it necessary to incur large
expenditure on roads. It has made
police more numerous and municipal
incorporations more difficult. There
are many who praise the present
system of unlimited selection who would
at the same time restrict the labour
market —as though the agricultural
portion of 400,000 people required to
roam over a territory larger in extent
than Great Britain and Ireland com-
bined ! and as though agriculture could
flourish without an abundant supply of
labour !
There can be no better investment
of the proceeds of the sale of our public
lands than that a considerable portion
should be devoted to the introduction
of population from other countries, and
our future policy in this respect should
be of a decided and vigorous kind.
It is a fallacy, however, to suppose that
the mere price of land will encourage
immigration generally from the anti-
podes. The official returns show that
the present Land Acts have not been
in any way instrumental in attracting
population, notwithstanding the ser-
vices of the able lecturers who were
commissioned by the Government to
make known to the people of England,
Scotland, and Ireland the provisions of
our laud laws. Population will natu-
rally increase in and be attracted
towards those countries where the
general prosperity is great, and civili-
sation attains a high development. We
must look, for the largest and most


valuable aceessions to our population,
to those general benefits which may be
afforded by a well-governed British
community having possession of an
enormous quantity of rich land and a
climate of rare salubrity. It is a great
and well-established fact in political
economy that improvement in the con-
dition of the labouring classes causes
an immediate inflowing of those who
desire to share the prosperity which is
greater than their own. Even the low
rental at which squattages may be
held has not yet led to the occupation
of the whole of the lands available for
pastoral purposes. The terms on
which mining leases are to be had
have enabled enterprising men to
do something towards the development
of our mineral riches ; but of late years
these can hardly be said to have at-
tracted population from beyond the
limits of the sister colonies ; and the
state of the labour market is such that
our Coal lands and our Kerosene lands
pay nothing like that return which it
is to be hoped will be derived by those
who have turned their attention to
these matters. We do not want that
all our immigrants should be agri-
culturists, horticulturists, or vine-
growers ; but we want a fair proportion
of these as well as of mechanics and
artisans of various kinds. And as it
will be favourable to the general well-
being that each should pursue the trade
in which he excels, it should not be the
policy of the state to offer inducements
to skilled workmen to settle on lands
in remote places for alleged advantages
the value of which is uncertain. To a
carpenter, a plasterer, or a tailor, a
promise of twenty acres of land on
arrival in the colony would be worth
only its equivalent in money ; and,
except he were imprudent enough to
leave his legitimate calling and try his
fortune at amateur farming, his grant
would soon find its way into the pos-
session of the speculator, or else remain
useless to him and valueless to the
State. Our true stimulus to immigra-
tion will be found in promoting the
general prosperity of the people ;in
allowing industry to flow in its proper
channels ; in making people abroad
acquainted with the advantages which
the colony affords as a place of resi-
dence ; in the salubrity of the climate,
the high rate of wages to be obtained
by men of various callings, the pro-
fusion and cheapness of the means of
living. We must not only offer a
welcome to the honest and industrious
of other lands, but we must assist them
to come and cast in their lot among us.
We must do this, not as it has been
often erroneously said, by employing
the taxes paid by labouring men
to bring out competitors, but by
employing a portion of the proceeds of
that land which we hold in trust for the
whole British nation. And we must
keep in view all interests, whether of
traders or manufacturers, or producers
by labour in the field, on the “ run,” or
in the mine. If our gold-fields had
yielded only the returns of ordinary
labour, they would not have attracted
so many thousands to our shores.
They have, however, performed their
service in directing special attention
to these colonies, although the yield
approaches now too nearly the returns
for ordinary labour to offer any special
inducement to distant people. The
great incentive to immigration, in the
absence of any new and large dis-
coveries of the precious metal which
shall again rouse the cupidity of the
people and encourage a gambling
spirit, must be found in the orderly
administration of our affairs and the
general and steady prosperity of the
people. We must, therefore, hold out
a helping hand to the inhabitants of
other countries who desire a new field
for their industry, and show them that
by perseverance in well doing they
may hope to share equally in our well-
being. Our development, though
gradual, would be well sustained and
afford the best guarantee of a magni-
ficent national growth. Without assist-


ance, however, the stream of immi-
gration will continue to be too slow,
and a provision for this assistance
ought, therefore, to form an essential
part of our future land policy. If
people who clamour against this course
would only exercise their reason calmly
and dispassionately, they would see
thjat, while we are sending out of the
colony the proceeds of that to which
they have no exclusive right, we should
be at the same time introducing people
who, through the Custom House, would
pay their quota of taxes, and soon
contribute an amount to the Treasury
larger than that expended on their
introduction. The burden of govern-
ment would thus fall on more numer-
ous shoulders, and be lighter for each
individual to bear. And even if the
increased population, with its aug-
mented power of consumption, should
have the effect of slightly diminishing
the wages of labour, the decrease
would be compensated by other advan-
tages. The labourer would have a better
chance of regular employment, and a
decreased cost of the necessaries of life
would certainly not be incompatible
with the prosperity of the farmer.
Those who raise the cry of exclusion
should remember that
“ down-trodden millions
Starve in the garrets of Europe, and cry from
its caverns that they, too,
Have been created heirs of the earth, and
claim its division.”
It should be ours to help them to ob-
tain their inheritance. The particular
mode, however, in which we should
expend a portion of the proceeds of
our public lands for this purpose, is a
question entirely distinct from the
policy of dealing with the land,
and its discussion would not be
relevant to the subject of this essay.
It may, nevertheless, be proper to con-
sider the nature of the encouragement
which should be offered. The assist-
ance we give must be of a definite
money value, and not consist of land.
By offering money or, rather, its de-
finite equivalent, we shall place before
the people whose presence we desire
an encouragement of the value of
which they can judge accurately;
whereas, if we offer land, we propose to
give something the value of which is
undefined, of which we can give no
adequate description, and which may
lead to ultimate disappointment. Mere
land at a distance of sixteen thousand
miles is not sufficient to attract an un-
travelled population. Except for its
market value, it is no attraction at all
to thinking men who intend to follow
the trades and professions to which
they have been educated. As a matter
of experience, we find that conditional
purchase has not given any impetus to
immigration. If the people of Europe
want cheap land merely, they will go
to America. There is little doubt,
however, that by a moderate assistance
from the land fund, and by wise and
moderate government, the colony of
New South Wales will be able to com-
mand its fair share of the most desirable
class of immigrants, namely, those who
are attached to the British Government
who are "not afraid of severe toil, and
who have a special regard for British
institutions. If we were to reduce our
land nominally to five or six shillings
per acre to compete with other coun-
tries, we should be guilty of great folly,
because we should be really giving
away our territory without any com-
pensating return. Scarcely any im-
petus would be given to immigration,
and the selling price would be con-
sumed by the cost of survey and other
preliminary expenses ; or, if it were
not entirely absorbed, the amount
which would reach the Treasury would
be exceedingly small; and moreover,
it would not require a very large
capital to enable men engaged in pas-
toral pursuits and well acquainted with
the land to pick out those favoured
spots which in times of drought are
like oases, and thus secure undisturbed
possession, without cost, of immense
tracts of country, to the detriment of


the national estate. We cannot obtain
the immigration we desire by mere
land bounties ; but immigration we
must have, for it is of as much impor-
tance to preserve a proper balance be-
tween labour and capital as it is to
preserve a proper balance of trade.
We do not want labour in excess any
more than importations in excess of
the requirements of the colony. As
physical excess produces languor —as
excess in mental effort is followed by
depression of the mind —as excessive
importations produce stagnation, so
excessive immigration will be followed
by proportionate distress. The pros-
perity of the colony largely depends
upon the prudence of the Legislature
in determining the proportion of the
land fund to be set apart for the intro-
duction of immigrants, and the mode
in which that fund shall be adminis-
tered. The very disagreeable remedy
for the state of things which prevailed
between the years 1835 and 1840 was
known as “ Burton’s purge.” Our
past experience ought to teach us how
much better is a steady growth, though
somewhat slow, than spasmodic efforts
at development, which make it neces-
sary that at no distant date we should
“ suffer a recovery.” But the fact re-
mains true in regard to national pro-
gress as well as in regard to natural
development. There must be a proper
and continuous supply of all the ele-
ments which promote growth ; so that
while the root takes fast hold of the
earth, the trunk expands, and the
branches spread forth in rich luxuri-
ance, every part shares the aliment,
and the whole growth is one of strength
and beauty. The proportion of the
land revenue expended for the purpose
of immigration will, of course, require
careful regulation. Public opinion has
changed considerably in regard to this
subject during the last thirty or forty
years ; and such a change is natural
when we look at the altered circum-
stances of the colony. In 1835, a com-
mittee of the old Legislative Council
recorded its opinion (which was at
that time supposed to be in accordance
with the opinion of the colony gener-
ally) that the funds derived from the
sale of lands should be devoted “ ex-
clusively to the purpose of introducing
a moral and industrious population.”
They considered the appropriation
“ alike indispensable to the present in-
terests and future prosperity and
character of the colony.” In 1836, a
committee of the House of Commons,
appointed to consider the subject of
waste lands, affirmed that it was most
expedient that the “ net proceeds of
the land sales of these colonies should
be employed as an immigration fund,
each colony being furnished with immi-
grant labour in proportion to the
amount of its land sales.” And when
Sir James Stirling proposed to divert
a portion of these funds for other pur-
poses, the people were prompt in peti-
tioning against what they considered
would be a breach of the principle
already established. It was maintained
by them, as well as by the South Aus-
tralian Commissioners in 1840, that
in a new country to use the land
fund for the purpose of defraying
the current expenses of Government
was in effect to impose a tax upon the
introduction of capital, while the con-
trary course was to offer a bounty to
its introduction. The relations of
capital and labour, however, have very
much changed since those regulations
were in force. Still, we need a con-
tinuous influx of population, and it may
be reasonably assumed that if we obtain
immigrants who pay a portion of the
cost of transit, we shall have some
guarantee that they are thrifty and
self-denying. It is clear that the pro-
portion devoted by the colony to the
purpose of immigration must be regu-
lated with a due regard to the relative
conditions of labour and capital for the
time being. As the necessity for
labour increases, just in that degree
must the proportion of the land fund
devoted to the purpose of immigration


be enlarged, and when labour is plenti-
ful the proportion may be diminished ;
the Government may take advantage
of the favourable condition of the
labour market, and, while preventing
distress among the labouring popula-
tion, may push forward public works,
which will conduce to individual well-
being and national prosperity. It
would therefore be undesirable to define
the particular proportion which shall
be applied to any one object at any
particular time. This is a matter which
must be regulated periodically in
accordance with the requirements of
the colony. There is no doubt a
growing impression of the necessity
which exists for action in order to
recruit the ranks of labour in some of
its departments ; but the object will be
best accomplished not directly by land
grants or land orders, but by the appro-
priation of a part of the general pro-
ceeds derived from the general land
sales. The question qf the price of
laud, therefore, is one of considerable
importance; and scarcely of less conse-
quence is the mode of payment, not
only with regard to immigration, but
also as a matter of public policy.
All payments for purchased land
should be promptly made. The sales
should be cash transactions. It is a
great evil to have a number of crown
debtors in the very ambiguous position
occupied by our conditional purchasers
who have taken up land under the
system of deferred payments. If our
lands were sold for cash at something
like a fair price, they would be more
likely to be occupied under circum-
stances favourable to individual success
and national benefit. There would be
nothing in such an arrangement to
tempt on to the land people who know
nothing of agriculture. It is not likely
that under such a system we should
have many who would sow split peas
and pearl barley in the full expectation
of obtaining an abundant crop of similar
commodities! We have already suffered
much in the colony in consequence of
the diversion of labour from its legiti-
mate channels. The gold fields, even,
while they were profitable as incentives
to immigration, were for years highly
unfavourable to industries requiring
the co-operation of labour; and it is
now a question whether the gross
value of the gold produced would, after
defraying all expenses, pay to all who
have been employed on the gold-fields
anything like wages equal to those
which might have been obtained from
more steady and less exciting labour,
[f we would have a healthy state of
society, we must seek not to isolate,
but to encourage the combination of
labour ; and there is no greater “ bun-
kum ” ever talked to what are called
by their flatterers “the working
classes ” than that every man should
make a home for himself on the public
lands, and be his own master. Of this
a moment’s consideration will convince
the most obtuse; for the moment a man
has to manage more than a few roods
of land, he feels the need of labour, and
if he be possessed of capital he will not
fail to employ it, if he have faith in the
success of his enterprise. And, more-
over, he would feel it a hardship if he
could not obtain it. He would at once
call out lustily for immigration. The
talk of the stump has done much evil
in this regard. Sometimes we have
seen the blind leading the blind, with
the ordinary result; and sometimes
designing men have played upon the
public credulity. A few years of
steady, patient toil would enable sober
and thrifty men to put themselves in a
position to enter upon the land with a
chance of turning it to successful
account; but it cannot be to the
advantage of the State to give indis-
criminate credit without any regard to
ability or character, and to create a
body of debtors who, as they increase
in numbers, will exercise a large poli-
tical influence. Deferred payments
encourage a system of credit in which
undue advantages are offered to the
borrowers. The colony cannot obtain


public loans on equal terms. The rate
of interest charged by private estab-
lishments is much larger, and it is not
likely men will repay money which
they hold at a low interest when for
the same capital they can obtain two
or three per cent, more per annum, or
by its investment in industrial enter-
prises, procure a more profitable return.
Men have gone upon the land encour-
aged by this system of credit. It is
said that in many instances they have
had barely money enough to pay the
preliminary five shillings per acre.
They have had to borrow at a high
rate of interest. From circumstances
over which they had no control, such
as droughts and floods, or the lateness
or failure of crops, they have been
unable to meet their engagements, and
have become involved in difficulties
which bid fair to overwhelm them ;
and so, when they have isolated them-
selves from society for a time, in the
vain hope of achieving an independence,
their selections will fall into the hands
of the storekeeper or the Sydney mer-
chant. It must not be forgotten,
either, that under the present law we
give to the conditional purchaser three
years’ interest on 75 per cent, of his
purchase-money. A return published
towards the close of last year by order
of the Legislative Assembly, shows that
while we had received £365,000 from
deposits on conditional purchases,
the balances to be paid amounted to
£894,000, and the yearly interest
amounted in all to but £20,748, show-
ing that the colony has outstanding
credits to the amount of about half a
million which return no interest, and
that from the year 1862 we have every
twelve months foregone interest on
sums which a better policy would have
obtained from the price of the land,
namely : on £152,000 in 1862-8 ; on
£252,000 in 1863; on £320,000 in
1864 ; and so with all the deferred
payments until the expiration of the
term, when, in regard to the selections
in each year, the interest of 5 per cent.
begins ! Ifc is certain that in many
cases the balances will never be paid ;
and, unless the system be changed, we
shall find that we have parted with a
large portion of our best land for a
price which will not pay for the sur-
vey and meet other expenses incidental
to the system. The end must be such
a state of entanglement that either
private rights will suffer, or the Go-
vernment must forego the rights of the
public. The most probable termina-
tion will be the remission of the
balance of the purchase-money ; for
there are many who, when dealing
with a Government, think it right to
adopt a very different standard of mo-
rality from that which is recognised in
commercial life. The Government, for
instance, are asked to build a bridge
(say, over the Kepean). It is urged
that the work is one for which poste-
rity may pay, seeing that its benefits
will be transferred from generation to
generation, and that the tolls will yield
a fair interest on the outlay, A hun-
dred thousand pounds are expended ;
the bridge is built, and the tolls are
paid. By-and-bye, previous arguments
are forgotten, the tolls are irksome,
and an effort is made to abolish them
—'which some day will be successful.
We should in our future land policy
avoid the possibility of any such influ-
ence being brought to bear upon the
Government as that which will be sure
to arise if we continue the system of
deferred payments, and increase the
number of Government debtors until
they really become a great power in
the colony.
So far back as the year 1835, it was
determined by the Land Commissioners
that the condition of purchase should
be at the rate of one pound sterling
per acre, and that nothing above or
below the surface should be reserved
by the Crown. It was required that
5 per cent, of the purchase-money
should be paid at the time of making
the tender, and that the remainder
should be paid within one week of the


sale. It would be desirable to give at
least a month for the payment of the
balance of purchase-money; but it is of
great importance that, so far as the
Government is concerned, they should
sell land for cash only. It was well
laid down by the Commissioners more
than thirty years ago, that such a mode
of sale would have a salutary influence
on future operations. They said : “New
colonies planted in extensive countries
are apt to suffer from a want of hired
labourers. In many cases this want
has not been supplied, but has been
partly counteracted by the introduction
of slaves or convicts—a far greater
evil, in some respects, than the want of
labourers for hire. That want, where-
ever it has occurred, appears to have
arisen from the facility with which
labouring immigrants could obtain
land of their own. Though their pas-
sages were paid for them on condition
of their working for some time for
those who had borne that expense, the
instances are rare in which they have
not broken their engagements for ser-
vice ; and severe laws, for the purpose
of enforcing the contracts into which
they had eagerly entered, have been
found wholly ineffectual. By a few
months’ labour for hire they have
obtained sufficient stock to set up for
themselves; and being able to get land
for a mere trifle, or for nothing, they
could not resist the temptation to
become independent. But such inde-
pendence has generally proved most
disastrous to themselves as well as
to their former employers. It was
an isolated and solitary independence,
which soon ended in the loss of their
little stock. They have then returned
to their former masters asking for
employment; but by that time the
capital of their masters, which had for-
merly employed them, had perished for
want of labourers to use it, and at
length all classes have been reduced to
a state of privation and misery.” The
Land Commissioners, who published
not only their “ Regulations ” bat also
their “ reasons,” then speak more at
large of the advantages of preserving
hired labour constantly —though with a
frequent change of persons —meaning
that the labourer should follow his
vocation until he had saved money to
purchase land and to cultivate it, and
become in his turn an employer of
labour. A man without money cannot
go upon the land and cultivate it, even
though it be sold to him on terms
unfair to the community generally; and
it is not wise in any Government to
become a partner in enterprises so
illusory, and opposed to all teachings
of sound political economy. The Conn-
rnissioners add —“ With a constant
supply of hired labour, though cer-
tainly not without, capitalists will be
able to pursue those modes of produc-
tion which require the constant employ-
ment of many hands at the same time
in the same place. By means of thus
combining the labour of many hands
in each work the produce from picked
land will be great in proportion to the
labour and capital employed. And
produce, which is in proportion to the
labour and capital employed in raising
it, has these remarkable qualities : it
is sufficient in quantity to afford both
high wages to the labourer and high
profits to the capitalist, and may be
sold at a price sufficiently low to bear
the expense of distant carriage.” We
must abolish deferred payments because
they interfere in a pernicious manner
with the relations of labour and capital,
and involve the State in almost endless
difficulty. They act as an encourage-
ment to go upon the land to people
who have no experience in the art of
cultivation ; and, in our case, they
make the Government a sharer in the
risk of agriculture with persons who
have given no guarantee that they
possess any of those qualities which
are necessary to the successful manage-
ment of a farm.
As to price, our town lands should
not be put up to auction at less than
£lO per acre. The minimum price of


onr suburban lands should not be less
than £5 per acre. And it would not
be in accordance with sound wisdom
and discretion to sell, even with con-
ditions of improvement, and in limited
quantities, the best of our country lands
at less than £1 per acre. There are,
however some country lands which it
would be well to dispose of in blocks,
as soon as opportunities occur, at
almost any price which can be obtained
for them, after due publicity shall have
been given of the intended sale. They
will never be improved while they
remain in the hands of the Govern-
ment ; without the expenditure of large
sums of money, they will remain use-
less, and it is not likely that anyone
will be found to relieve the Government
of their charge at £1 per acre. These
are back and inferior lands, of which
the upset price might be reduced from
time to time until a purchaser should
be found ; the land, in the meantime,
being open to selection without compe-
tition, at the price which formed the
previous upset. This mode of gradu-
ated reduction of price is a provision
which it was proposed to apply to all
country lands (which, having been put
up to auction, remained unsold or un-
selected for twelve months) in a bill
of which the Hon. J. Hay, Esq., M.L.C.,
is supposed to have been the author,
but which was not submitted to Parlia-
ment. The Government ought not to
sell town and suburban lands in any
other way than by public auction. It
ought to put a fair upset price on them
for several reasons, the two principal
of which are (1) that they have attained
an artificial value of which the State
should take advantage on behalf of the
community generally, and (2) that by
disposing of them for less than the
market price they would affect the
market value of other lands in a way
that is not expedient. To reduce the
price of good country land in favourable
situations to anything less than £1 per
acre would be to impose an obstacle to
the development of that agricultural in-
terest which it is desirable to promote.
Seeing that no single pair of hands
can cultivate forty acres of land,
the facility with which labour can
be obtained at rates fair and remu-
nerative is to the small landowner a
necessity as real as that which forces
itself upon the squatter. Unless labour
at fair rates can be obtained by both,
their respective interests will languish,
and the country will be proportion-
ately a loser. The labour, too, must
be appropriate. If, however, every
man who can “ tickle the ground with
a hoe,” or walk at the tail of a plough
and produce a straight furrow, and
who in the course of a few months may
scrape together ten or twenty pounds,
is encouraged and assisted to go upon
the public lands as a freeholder, we can
only expect unprofitable results. Not
only shall we fail of agricultural success,
but relations which are undesirable
must continue to arise between the
Government and a class of persons
whose labour in other capacities would
be valuable to themselves and to the
State. This is, no doubt, contrary to
the teaching’ of orators who cry, “ The
lands belong to the people,” and ask,
“why should not ‘ the people’ possess
them ?”—who sneer at capital in the
abstract and clutch it whenever oppor-
tunity offers ; who would that all men
should be masters-—that “ seven half-
penny loaves should be sold for a
penny ; that “ the three-hooped pot
should have ten hoops ” ; and that it
shall be “ felony to drink small beer.”
We place our liberty in trust in the
hands of the Government, in order that
we may secure the advantages of
civilized life ; and so we entrust the
public estate to the Government to be
dealt with, not in the interest specially
of farmers or of squatters, but for the
benefit of the whole colony. There
are carpenters, and masons, and clerks,
and merchants, and manufacturers, who
have an equal interest in the public
land, and who naturally look for a
share in the profits to be derived from


them. To offer special inducements
to the impecunious to acquire the
property of the State without making
a fair return either in money or
its equivalent, would be to interfere
with the natural operations of labour
and capital in a manner not to be
defended even on the dangerous ground
of expediency. To sell the best lands
of the colony for less than £1 per acre
would be indefensible, except under a
state of things which is now impossible.
There are in this colony thousands
of men who have drunk thousands of
acres of land, and there are thousands
whose sobriety and steady toil have
enabled them to acquire the means of
purchasing a freehold. There can be
no good reason why we should place
within the reach of the dissolute and
improvident, on terms disadvantageous
to the colony, that which thrift and
industry will enable sober men to
acquire on terms mutually profitable to
themselves and to the State. It is no
doubt desirable that we should increase
the finances of the colony by the settle-
ment of an agricultural population ;
and if we adopt wise measures which
lead to the settlement of the country
under circumstances favourable to its
natural development in wealth and
comfort, we shall secure that result;
but if we pursue a policy which encou-
rages men to place themselves in a
false position and enter upon pursuits
for which they possess no adequate
means or are not properly qualified,
what we gain from the land we shall
lose from the general revenue. Having
made provision by which men of small
means may possess themselves of agri-
cultural land, and having thus offered
encouragement for such further culti-
vation of the soil as may be necessary
more abundantly to supply our wants
and gradually enlarge to meet those
which will be heareafter created, by
the gradual settlement of the land on a
principle consistent with good govern,
ment, we may leave those who possess
wealth and desire large estates to run
the gauntlet of competition. In this
way the Government would get some-
thing like a fair equivalent for the
property of the State, and obtain
a larger fund for the purposes of
immigration and internal improvement.
When the price of land was raised from
ss. per acre to 12s. per acre, in 1889,
although there was a falling off in the
sales, there was an increase in the re-
turns ; and from 1843 to the present
time, the minimum of £1 has been pre-
served with beneficial results. Our
inferior and back lands, however, will
never be taken up at such a rate, and
probably centuries may elapse before
they will be occupied by agriculturists.
They would not be worth having except
at a low price, such as would
pay interest on the capital required
to make them permanently fertile
and offer fair rewards for risks in-
curred ; because it is an axiom that
on such lands, in comparison with
others, an equal amount of labour
returns a smaller amount of produce-
And “ an increasing demand cannot be
supplied from them unless at an aug-
mentation of cost, and therefore of
price.” It is thus laid down by one of
our great economists : “If an addi-
tional demand could continue to be
supplied from the superior land by ap-
plying additional labour and capital at
no greater proportionate cost than that
at which they yield the quantity first
demanded of them, the owners or
farmers of those lands could undersell
all others, and engross the whole of the
market. Lands of a lower degree of
fertility, or in a more remote situation
might indeed be cultivated by their
proprietors, for the sake of subsistence
or independence, but it never could be
the interest of anyone to farm them
for profit. That a profit can be made
from them sufficient to attract capital
to such an investment is a proof that
cultivation on the more eligible lands
has reached a point beyond which any
greater application of labour and
capital would yield, at the best, no


greater return than can be obtained
at the same expense from the less
fertile or less favourably situated
lands.” It is clear, then, that if we
can exchange these lands for money
wherewith to multiply the labour and
capital necessary to cultivate and im-
prove the good lands of the colony, we
shall promote the general prosperity.”
The sale of our public lands must
be absolute. We must abolish all con-
ditions like those now imposed upon
conditional purchasers. Men would
then often purchase land without any
intention of immediate settlement on
it. They would prefer to put labour
upon it and to follow their urban
occupations until the roughest work
had been accomplished, when they
would take possession, and probably
spend the remainder of their days amid
the peaceful scenes of country life.
Thus, all would have an equal chance.
We should hold out no inducements
which would tend to demoralise the
people ; we should impose no condi-
tions to act as a delusion and a snare.
We should probably sell some land
which would not be cultivated for
years to come, but at the same time,
we should sell much that would be
more highly improved than any under
the present regulations. We should
get £1 per acre, cash, and be relieved
from the multiplication of what will be-
come eventually a great difficulty.
There is no reason, however, why in
changing the system of land alienation
the Government should forego its
claim to the balance of payments still
due by conditional purchasers. Those
who have made their purchases will
not be injured by the change, and it
would be well, so far as they are con-
cerned, to work out the experiment, so
that the State may have the benefit of
full experience, which will, no doubt,
effectually prevent any future recur-
rence to such a policy. It is premature
to say that the system of conditional
purchase has worked well, even ad-
mitting that it has been the means of
settling many people on the land ;
because in the large majority of cases
the conditions have not been so com-
plied with as to obtain the fee-simple
of the land. If it should turn out, as
it probably will, that instead of real
freeholders we have a large class of
Government debtors, that will be a
state of things anything but desirable.
It would be well if some improved
mode of survey were adopted. Recently
it was pointed out in the Legislative
Assembly by Mr. Farnell, that owing
to the variation of the compass some
undesirable results are likely to arise,
the same lines differing several minutes
in two or three years. No doubt they
could be calculated back and allow-
ance made for the variation, but this
is not in accordance with the Act.
Clause 17 of the Crown Lands Alien-
ation Act distinctly states : “ Crown
Lands unmeasured and having frontage
to any river, creek, road, or intended
road, shall, if within the first-class
settled districts, have a depth of not
less than 60 chains, and shall have
their boundaries other than the
frontages directed to the cardinal
points by compass, and if having
no frontage, as aforesaid, shall be
measured in square blocks and
with boundaries directed to such
cardinal points.” But then there is a
proviso that these boundaries may be
modified by the minister, if it should
seem to him expedient; so that there
is in fact no certainty in regard to the
matter. The necessity for a more
scientific mode of survey will hereafter
be apparent. As pointed out by Mr.
Farnell the result of the present mode
of survey would be to leave gores
between contiguous sections taken up
at different times ; and there can be
little doubt that in future, when land
becomes more valuable, considerable
disputes may arise in regard to
boundaries, and the adjustment of
lines may cost more than the original
purchase of the land. This mode of
survey was a subject of complaint


more than a quarter of a century ago.
In 1842 Sir George Gipps in the old
Legislative Council stated that nothing
■could be more unscientific than the
mode in which surveys had been made ;
and, by way of explanation he added—
“ They are all made by compass and
not by theodolite, and it must be well
known that everywhere there is a
variation of the compass, and that that
variation itself varies in time.” In
some places the force of local attraction
is so great as to make survey by
means of the compass alone very un-
satisfactory ; and this is not the kind
of survey which should be adopted in
regard to the holdings of men who
are expected to settle upon the land
and to make improvements. One of
the specified regulations in connection
with the South Australian land system
was that the surveys of all public
lands should, as far as possible, be
carried so much in advance of the
settled districts that there might at all
times be an extent of land surveyed
and open to purchase exceeding the
wants of the colonists. The object of
this regulation, we are informed, was
to give the utmost liberty of appro-
priation with respect to the quantity
and situation of land which colonists
might desire. Squatters in this
colony have spent fortunes in contest-
ing disputed boundaries. It may be
almost impossible, without a tri-
gonometrical survey to avoid “ over-
laps ; ” but where areas are set apart
for agriculture they may be so laid
out as to ensure the definiteness of the
lines, if only a moderate amount of
care be exercised by surveyors of
ordinary skill. There should in all
such cases be well-defined boundaries,
natural or artificial, and for every area
a local plan. Much litigation and loss
will be avoided if before we allow
persons to acquire rights in soil
Homestead Areas are laid out, either
by the ordinary process of surveying,
or, as in America, by meridians and
parallels. It was one of the argu-
ments in favour of unlimited “con-
ditional purchase,” that previously the
colony had suffered because the sur-
veyors had directed the course of
settlement. But the remedy was not
a sound one in view of the objection.
It does not follow that this matter
should be determined in the Survey
Department at all. It would be much
preferable to have in every district a
Land Board, consisting’ of the member
or members of the district associated
with justices of the peace, upon whom
should devolve the duty of providing’
for the requirements of agriculturists,
by selecting blocks of land and calling
upon the Government to proclaim them
“homestead areas.” It is said that the
people are themselves the best judges
of their own interests and wants. It
may be so ; but the question of Govern-
ment intervention in the work of
colonisation involves the future and
permanent interests of civilisation
itself, and far outstretches the com-
paratively narrow limits of purely
economical considerations.
The Homestead areas should be laid
out with a due regard to roads. The
value of produce must necessarily
decrease so far as the producer is con-
cerned in proportion to his distance
from a market, except under very
exceptional circumstances. But under
a system of unlimited selection it will
be impossible to provide roads for all,
and there will be a perpetual clamour
of conflicting interests. But where
communication is good, the growers of
corn, and oil, and wine, and tobacco,
and sugar will soon find at their own
doors a ready market for their produce.
It is important therefore to lay out our
Homestead areas along the lines of
railway and the banks of navigable
rivers, care being taken to reserve a
Government road along the rivers’
banks, and to preserve the margins of
lakes and lagoons.
All future titles to lands alienated
by the Government should be by
registration instead of by deed, in


order to avoid “ the same involvements,
uncertainties, and expenses, which
burden titles in the mother country,”
and we may add, in this colony also.
Speaking' on this subject in regard to
South Australia, Mr. Torrens said :
“ In a colony of yeoman-proprietors
of the soil they cultivate, and where
land, instead of being monopolised by
the wealthy, is the ordinary possession
of the masses, this was found to be in-
tolerable ; and accordingly, in the year
1856, a project for assimilating the
mode of dealing with property in land
to that which regulates dealings in
sheep and stock was devised.” This
project became law in 1858. It has
since been matured and attested by the
experience of nearly lour years, and
has been found effectual for every
requirement.” Subsequently the Real
Property Act was passed in this colony,
and the people have largely availed
themselves of its advantages. A return
placed before Parliament shows that,
at the end of 1867, the total area
under the Act was 644,813 acres,
representing a total value of £ 2,175,512.
For 1867 alone the amount of con-
sideration money for transfers under
the Act was £83,297, and the amount
secured by mortgage under the same
Act was £238,595.
The most serious defect in the pre-
sent land law is the 13th clause of the
Crown Lands Alienation Act, which,
under the guise of unlimited freedom
sacrifices the interests of all who are
unable or unwilling to avail them-
selves of its provisions. We certainly
require that people shall have liberty
to settle all over the colony ; but there
should be method in the settlement.
It ought not to be entirely uncon-
trolled. It should take place mainly
within prescribed limits. This is im-
portant not only for the purpose of
making the best of the other portions
of the public estate, but also because
it will facilitate good government. We
must, therefore, have in every county
where there are unalienated Crown
lands land of the very best quality open
to selection without competition. The
area should be even larger than the
probable requirements of each county,
so as to give an extensive range of'
choice. There would thus be selection
of land, or facilities for such selection
all over the colony, although not all
over every county. We should still
have the same range of climate and
the same variety of soils, and, so fair
as the colony is concerned, everything
would be done which ought to be done
to promote agricultural settlement. In
choosing areas, regard should be had
to their distance from existing towns-
and villages, and they should be se-
lected only from lands within which
conditional purchases may now be made.
If such areas were established, people,
who by thrift and carefulness had
saved a little money, might settle on
the land under more favourable aus-
pices than those under which they can
at present select their farms. Settling
in a district where they would be
known for their industry and honesty,
their credit would be good ; the settle-
ment being compact, they would be
sooner able to avail themselves of the
municipal system, and thus probably
they might be less importunate for
Government assistance ; a smaller
sum of money would provide them
with better roads than they could hope
to obtain under any system of isola-
tion ; they would have greater facili-
ties for the education of their child-
ren, and would participate to a
larger extent in all those blessings of
social life which result from association.
Many bona fide conditional purchasers
under the present Act are, no doubt,
doing a good work ; but they would
have been doing the same work if they
had been located in areas, while they
would have been more comfortably
circumstanced, and their labour and
combination would have been of greater
advantage to the State. It will be
impossible for cultivators of the soil
in many parts of the colony to carry


on their work with much success, unless
they expend considerable capital to
store water for irrigation. To do this,
combination will be necessary; then
races may be cut, and dams may be
constructed. Many conditional pur-
chasers under the existing Act are no
doubt in comfortable circumstances ;
but for the most part they were land-
owners before ; and it .is a fact worthy
of remark, that in all the returns asked
for the distinction has not been spe-
cified, and we cannot tell how many
people have been induced to go upon
the land for the first time by reason
of the provisions of the Act. Existing
landowners and cultivators of the soil
are not the class for whose benefit the
Land Act was passed according to the
most popular enunciations at the time
of the general election which preceded
the “ Free Selection Parliament.” It
is not to be expected that any man
will take up land and cultivate it for
the mere purpose of benefiting the
country ; his object is to cultivate it
with a view to profit, and the best
encouragement we can offer to him is,
that he shall have land of the finest
quality within the district in which he
chooses to make his home. He might
like to gratify his fancy, but the State
should not be called upon to pay for
any such gratification by adopting a
mode of settlement unfavourable to
true economy and good government.
In Homestead areas land should be
open to selection without competition
at £1 per acre, in blocks of not less than
40 nor more than 820 acres; but a
purchaser should have a right to en-
close twice the area of the land for
which he pays, contiguous or adjacent
to his holding; and he should have a
lease of this land for a term of years,
at a rate computed according to the
average rent of land in the district, or
by some other equitable mode, with a
right of pre-emption —in the same way
as squatters holding leases under the
Orders in Council have exercised that
right—over an area equal to his pur-
chased, land. If a selector purchased
the maximum, he might ultimately be-
come the owner in fee simple of a
square mile of land without competi-
tion : the first selection by purchase at
£1 per acre ; the second half-mile
without competition, but at a valuation
according to the present practice in
regard to pre-emption ; and the third
part (the second half of the grazing
lease) he might obtain by competition
in the open market (if he wanted a
mile and a-half of land, and had the
means to purchase it) ; or, if he did not
buy it, the 320 acres should again be
open to selection by persons who had
not previously selecte'd the maximum.
This plan of sale and occupation would
be favourable to the settlement of per-
sons who would take a position inter-
mediate between the small agricul-
turist and the squatter. Hitherto our
farmers have confined their industry
too much to one pursuit, and it is
thought to be desirable that men
should go upon the land who would
more extensively combine the occupa-
tions of grazing and agriculture of
various kinds. In process of time,
when farming is carried on more
scientifically, homesteads so obtained
may be subdivided by future proprie-
tors into small farms, from each of
which large returns may be made, by a
judicious rotation of crops, and the
most improved methods of cultivation.
Our exports will not much longer con-
sist so largely of tallow. We shall do
a large export trade in meat. The
weight of carcase will be a considera-
tion as well as the quantity and quality
of the wool. These intermediate gra-
ziers and farmers will find an important
field for their enterprise, and through
their instrumentality an impetus may
be given to general improvement,
which will increase our wealth by a
large per centage. If by more care-
ful farming we can increase the
weight and quality of the fleece
two or three lbs. per sheep, •as
is sometimes alleged, the increased


benefit to the colony will be in propor-
tion to the extent of our flocks, our
tables will be better supplied, and our
exports will be augmented. But if
pastoral people, conducting operations
small and large, are to aid in such
improvements and share the profits,
they must have guarantees that for
some reasonable time they shall not be
disturbed just when the reward of their
toil and judgment begins to flow in
upon them. Such guarantees, how-
ever, are incompatible with the present
system of unlimited conditional pur-
chase and that “ free grass ” which is
no grass at all. It may be said that
the selection of these Homestead areas
will open the door to much corruption ;
that it will place immense power in the
bands of the Ministers. But it is not
necessary to place any such power
absolutely in the hands of the Govern-
ment. The areas might be selected by
Boards consisting of the members of
Parliament resident in the districts or
representing them, associated with cer-
tain justices of the peace chosen for the
purpose in the same way as road trus-
tees are now elected, or nominated in
the same manner as members of local
public school boards are appointed.
The reserves recommended by these
gentlemen should be submitted to Par-
liament, and they should not be pro-
claimed until three months’ notice had
been given to the occupant or lessee of
the land about to be resumed, and until
three months’ notice of such reservation
had been given through the medium of
the Government Gazette. The squatter,
whose run might be taken in whole or
in part before the termination of his
lease, or whose rights might be in any
way curtailed, should be entitled to com-
pensation, which might be determined
by arbitration ; and such compensation
as might be necessary and equitable
should be paid from the proceeds of the
sale of the lands resumed, or rather,
be made a charge against the general
land revenue of the colony. Some
have suggested that a defined portion
of each squatting run should be devoted
to selection without competition by
agriculturists or by persons who express
a desire to go upon the land for the
purpose of cultivating it. This, no
doubt, would be some abatement of the
injury the country now suffers. The
tenure of the squatters would be less
insecure, and the profit from the public
lands would be greater to the public.
But in some aspects of the case the
plan would be as objectionable as
unlimited selection. It would be
attended with almost equal disadvan-
tages to the selector, and would be not
less unfavourable to good government.
The true policy would be to set aside
from time to time areas amply sufficient
to meet all demands, and in fact to be
in advance of the requirements of the
country, so as leave room for a reason-
able choice ; and to allow the pastoral
tenants to hold their runs not on any
better tenure so far as the conditions
of the leases are concerned, but with a
guarantee that the conditions of their
leases shall be observed, and that they
shall hold the land undisturbed until
it is wanted for purposes of settlement,
subject to periodical re-arrangement
in regard to the return made to the
State for its use. Unless this security
be given, and the rights of all parties
be properly defined and observed, we
shall only have jealousies and quarrels,
such as have existed from the days of
Abraham and Lot until now. Under
this system of Homestead areas, with
the right of grass and pre-emption,
the grazing right would be a reality
both to squatters and selectors, and not
as under the present law, a pure delu-
sion to both—a mere matter of chance.
The grazing tenure of the selector is
now as insecure as that of the squatter :
thus both are injured, and the country
is the loser. It is absurd to grant
privileges which are incompatible with
the conditions under which they are
offered, and which for the most part
exist only upon paper. In order that
this power of resumption of individual


squattages should not act as a bar to
improvement, it might be a regulation
that improvements to a certain amount
made after due notice to the Govern-
ment, and subsequent inspection by the
land agent of the district (who should
report that the improvement had
really been made and was of the
nature stated), should entitle the im-
prover to compensation according to
the nature and value of the improve,
rnent, and in a rateable proportion to
the period during which he had en-
joyed the benefits arising therefrom.
Thus, if land were resumed during the
first year after such improvement had
been made, the holder should be en-
titled to the whole value thereof. If
it were resumed at any other period,
during which the right to compensation
by reason of such improvement might
be operative, then the lessee should
receive compensation in the proportion
which the unexpired years bear to the
whole term. For instance, if a squat-
ter, on the faith of promised security,
should fence in his run with a fence
the probable durability of which was
ten years, and if it should be found
necessary to resume possession of the
land after the second year or after the
fifth, then the squatter should receive
four-fifths, or one-half (as the case may
be) of his outlay for such improve-
ment. In regard to back and un-
watered runs, the squatter who
makes permanent improvements such
.as canals, dams, or wells, should be
compensated in like manner ; and in
all such cases the land should be re-
sumed only when required for public
purposes, or when it may be a matter
of public policy to sell, and when there
shall be a reasonable probability that
within a limited time a quantity can be
disposed of sufficient to pay any just
claim for compensation out of the
difference between the original and the
improved value of the land. Unless
this could be done, it would be better
to allow the occupant to retain posses-
sion until lais claim to compensation
should be liquidated by effluxion of
time. Such a course would be
fair to the squatter, fair to
the agriculturist, and what is
of not less consequence—fair to the
public, for the squattages are in fact
the grazing land of the public ; and
the amount received by the people
generally not engaged in pastoral
pursuits should represent the true
current value of their present inter-
est in the public lands. They risk no
capital in consequence of scab in sheep
or pleuro-pneumonia in cattle ; they
suffer not from droughts or floods,
or fluctuations of the market; they
eudure no hardships, and it would
be unreasonable for them to claim so
large an amount of the profits as those
who share the toil and incur the risks
of an enterprise which, although at
times a source of great wealth, is
nevertheless uncertain in its results,
and peculiarly liable to seasons of great
depression. The establishment of
Homestead areas and the discourage-
ment of small and widely scattered
settlements, on no principle that can
be defended, would remedy the most
serious evil in our existing land policy.
The unnecessary isolation of the people
would be avoided, and we should have
the benefit of those advantages which
are to be derived from the influences
of aggregation. If areas of the best
possible land, in the most suitable
localities, were set apart all over the
colony for the purposes of location, the
thrifty labourer mig'ht take up his
residence under favourable circum-
instances; and even if immigrants were
indiscreet enough to go upon the land
without having first acquired colonial
experience, they would at least escape
some of the dangers to which they
would be liable by unrestricted choice.
And where there are largo numbers of
farmers together, the proprietors might
readily combine to execute works far
beyond the power of any one of them
acting alone. They might join to se-
cure effective drainage, to cut water-


courses, to make embankments and
dams for the purpose of storing water,
not only for ordinary use, but also for
irrigation. Our ideas in regard to
water are essentially English. In time
there will no doubt be a change. The
people of the Netherlands have res-
cued cities from the ocean, and the day
will come when the inhabitants of low-
lying districts, like the valleys of the
Hawkesbury and the Hunter, will find
means by embankments and reservoirs
to turn into a perpetual blessing that
which is now periodically a source of
loss and distress, and to many a cause
of absolute ruin. But large works of
this kind can only be carried on by
combinations of labour and capital in-
consistent with a system of unlimited
selection of land, like that which is
now scattering our population and
rendering valueless our greatest pro-
ducing interest. As to the scattering
of the squatters, that is inevitable, and
can form no good reason why we
should not seek to regulate other
interests which are capable of intelli-
gent direction. It has been often the
subject of remark by friends of the
squatting system, that the capital city
of the colony with its dense popula-
tion occupies vantage ground ; that
its inhabitants can readily combine for
any political object, and meet for pur-
poses of social intercourse and mutual
improvement. The system of Home-
stead areas ought to meet with the
favour of such men. The essential
difference between the existing system
and the one now proposed, is that
while by the former a few thousand
people would be scattered over hun-
dreds of millions of acres; by the
latter the cincture of society would
bind them together and place within
their reach all the requisites of civilisa-
tion and improvement. Under these
circumstances the power of emulation
would be felt. The man who farmed
with neatness would have an influence
for good upon the sloven. There
would grow up a friendly rivalry
which would do much to improve
cultivation and tend to success. More
attention would be paid to the quality
of the cattle and the breed of horses.
Fences would be more likely to be
kept trim and perfect. Horti-
culturists would pride themselves on
their gardens, and be able to assist
each other with seeds and cuttings of
plants and scions of trees of superior
qualitv. They would thus be more in
accord with the spirit of the age,
which is ever seeking for more per-
fect unity. It seems incomprehensible
that in any general system for the
permanent settlement of the country
people who advocate the railway and
the telegraph, who profess to seek
after that which is true in politics and
sound in political economy, should en-
courage a system of settlement which
leads ~to isolation, which gives great
facilities to men to place themselves
beyond the reach of social influences,
and practically puts obstacles in the
way of the rising generation in regard
to the acquisition of knowledge. It is
the duty of a good Government to
mould and control in some measure the
course of things ; but of late years the
most favoured policy has been to
merely hold the helm without guiding
the vessel of the State —toerely to re-
ceive and lavishly to spend the public
revenue. If any great and serious in-
convenience were likely to ensue from
the change of the system, or if it were
feared that the proclaiming of suitable
Homestead areas would be too long de-
layed, it might be so arranged that the
new Act should not apply to any dis-
trict until a suitable area had been
surveyed, and that only on the day of
proclamation of the new area con-
ditional purchase should cease. The
system of Homestead areas would tend
greatly to prepare the way for local
taxation in regard to matters of a muni-
cipal nature, which may relieve the
central Government of many burdens,
and be potent in the abatement of
many political evils which we now


endure. The mode of determining’
these areas (the selection being left to
several persons) would be preferable
to that of leaving the selection in the
hands of a Minister, who perhaps,
might desire the system to fail, or
who might not possess the requisite
knowledge, or who might, consciously
or unconsciously be influenced by
motives not consistent with the public
welfare. Even in the salt-bush plains,
where the land is dry and aluminous,
and said to be suitable for grazing
only, there should be Homestead areas
reserved. The same process which would
enable squatters to use them for twelve
months intead of three , might also
enable the agriculturist to turn them
to profitable account. Although it has
been said to be impossible to produce
a cabbage under such conditions of
soil and climate, they perhaps may
prove peculiarly fitted for the growth
of some other product infinitely more
valuable. Indeed, not very long ago
some remarkable oats, grown in the
salt-bush country, were exhibited in a
remarkable manner by an hon. gentle-
man whose speech will linger long in
the memory of those who heard it.
If the back and un watered lands were
sold, they would not remain from year
to year so destitute of means for the
collection and storage and distribution
of water ; but now, like almost every
other part of the country, they are
neglected. While an abundance of
water for the supply of hundreds of
millions of people, is sent for our use,
we make scarcely any effort to retain
it, but allow it to roll in huge volumes
to the sea. Then we have days of public
humiliation and prayer. Still after
each fresh supply we forget the trite
monastic saying, laborare est orare ;
and in process of time we have to humi-
liate and pray again, because we do not
dam.
Upon the question of squatting and
the leasing of Crown lands, and all
those matters included in the term
“ the pastoral interest,” opinions are
almost as numerous as thinkers —deep
and shallow. The enunciation of those
opinions is often ambiguous. A large
number find it more agreeable to receive
an opinion than to form one, as the
result of thought and analysis. Men
who see everything through a haze
try to make matters clear, and produce
that effect which is common when one
tries to teach another that which he
himself does not understand. The
listener nods acquiescence, looks wise,
and often, like a modern Hannibal,
swears eternal enmity to the squatters,
but without being able to give any
good reason for his antipathy. John
Stuart Mill, in his Essay on the
Liberty of Thought and Discussion,
says: “Truth gains more even by the
errors of one who, with due study and
preparation, thinks for himself, than
by the true opinions of those who only
hold them because they do not suffer
themselves to think.” The opinion is
open to criticism : but if this Essay
shall induce thought on the important
subject of the administration of the
public lands, even though it may not
be regarded as in itself true, it will
not have been written in vain. One
fact is clear —that, although we have
derived population and considerable
wealth by reason of our auriferous
deposits, our most valuable and per-
manent gold-fields are those capable of
producing’ the golden fleece and the
golden grain ; and our object should
be to distribute the lands among the
people, by alienation and lease, in such
a way as to confer the greatest pos-
sible benefit on the colony. It is often
said, with a feeling quite paternal,
that every man has a right to possess
land ! This may be quite true, but is it
expedient that every man should pos-
sess land either as an agricultural
homestead or as a pastoral holding
leased by the Crown ? Every man has
a right to possess a white elephant,
if his fancy should take a turn so
elephantine, and there are thousands


of persons to whom a white elephant
would be just as useful as a piece of
land ! That we make large importa-
tions of corn and flour is not owing to
the land of this colony being held as
squattages to the exclusion of agricul-
ture, but to the badness of the seasons,
the high price of labour, and the
superior attractions of other employ-
ments. It is useless to attempt to in-
crease the number of farmers beyond
the capacity of the market. No matter
what quantity of land be sold, the
ordinary operations of trade will still
regulate the amount of cultivation, and
our cereal produce will be in proportion
to the demand ; otherwise deluded
agriculturists will grow corn at a loss,
and while they forfeit the just reward of
their industry, the colony will be the
loser to the extent to which their
wasted energy might have been ap-
plied to profitable enterprises. Our
object must be to promote the favour-
able occupation of the public lands
until they can be sold and made more
remunerative. The effect of the legis-
lation of 1861, however, has been to
cripple and destroy that kind of occu-
pation. The existing laws must be
converted into statutes favourable to
the encouragement of pastoral pur-
suits within certain limits. We must,
no doubt, look forward to the aliena-
tion of the public lands for purposes
more profitable than grazing under the
present conditions ; but the change to
that more profitable occupation must
be gradual. There need be no violent
disturbance like that caused by a
thunderstorm, which, while productive
of some blessings, at the same time
tears up and destroys much that is
valuable. The transition should be
rather like that produced by the
operation of light and heat —silent but
effective, gradually changing the face
of the country. No man who is doing
a good work and adding to the wealth
of the country (even though he be a
leaseholder) should be disturbed in his
occupation, unless his place can be
fairly supplied by others who will benefit
the country in a larger degree. But
the Crown Lands Alienation Act is
playing havoc with that great interest
which has for many years been the
mainstay of the colony. It is doing
this for an object which is in itself
desirable, but which can be achieved in
a manner much more favourable to
individual prosperity and to the public
benefit. A large proportion of the
people of the colony have been taught
to look upon the squatter as an
enemy to the country —as one who
impedes settlement and stands in the
way of the general well-being. They
look neither keenly nor calmly at the
interest with which they have to deal.
In the year 1867, we sent from this
colony wool to the value of £1,711,000 ;
tallow to the value of £63,000 ; live
stock to the value of about £IOO,OOO ;
and hides and horns to the value of
about £70,000 —making a total of
£1,900,000. There is not any other
interest to compare with this as a pro-
ducer of natural wealth. The total
value of minerals raised from the
mines of the colony in 1867, including
gold, copper, coal, and kerosene shale,
was not so much bj; more than
half a million sterling, reaching only
£1,305,700. In that year we derived
by way of rent and assessment from the
squatters in the various districts
£265,000, while the total revenue we
obtained from the duty on gold in the
nature of rent, from leases for
mineral purposes other than gold, from
auriferous leases, miners’ rights, and
business licenses on the gold-fields, is
under £29,000! There has been,
since the general appraisement which
took place a few years ago, a consider-
able increase in rent and assessment.
In six and a half years, at the present
rate, we should receive by way of
rent and assessment from Crown
Lands £1,690,000, which is far
more than the total value of all
the lands sold absolutely under
the Crown Lauds Alienation Act


during the six and a half years
from January, 1862, to the 30th
June, 1868, the gross number of
acres selected by conditional pur-
chasers being 1,631,831. The total
amount of deposits on conditional par-
chases during all that time is not equal
to two years’ rent and assessment paid
by the pastoral tenants of the Crown.
The rent and assessment we receive
every year in full, and in advance ;
but on the 30th July, 1868, the
“balances” remaining to he paid by
conditional purchasers amounted to
£891,319 ! There is little justification
for the destruction of an interest which
is really profitable, to foster one which
multiplies Crown debtors, which opens
a wide door to dishonesty, and offers a
strong temptation to corruption, with-
out securing in any appreciable degree
the chief object for which the measure
was agreed to —namely, a speedy set-
tlement of the lands of the colony.
It was an unreasonable assump-
tion that it would achieve such
an object, taking into considera-
tion the circumstances of our colony
and the conditions of profitable settle-
ment, together with the circumstances
which bind people to other lands.
During the six years from 1862 to
1867 inclusive, the average intro-
duction of immigrants at their own
cost was annually 2700, and in all but
16,270 ; while in the years 1860 and
1861, before the Acts came into
operation, 22,000 people arrived here,
who paid their own expenses. The
natural increase by births over deaths
from 1862 to 1867, inclusive, was
68,334. This, added to the number of
immigrants who came at their own
expense, accounts for the increase of
papulation shown in our census from
367,495 in 1862 to 447,620 in 1867.
But during that same period we intro-
duced at the public expense 16,106 im-
migrants, of whom 6798 were male
adults. It is apparent, therefore, that
so far from our land laws being instru-
mental in attracting people from a
distance, there has been a considerable
falling off in immigration, and they are
not sufficiently encouraging to retain
those who reach our shores. Figures
show that since the passing of the Land
Acts we have lost 20,000 people who
have removed beyond our borders. We
are thus squandering the public estate
for no good results, and obtaining for
the land alienated under the present
system a sum insignificant compared
with the rent and assessment we an-
nually obtain for the use of the natural
grasses of the colony. Facility in ob-
taining land is not an attraction to all
who are desirable colonists ; and,
although it is highly beneficial when
those who possess land cultivate it
with judgment and industry, it is
idle to imagine that people will till
the soil or pursue any other calling
further than is warranted by the in-
ducement of profit. The State will
find its greatest good not in forcing
agriculture or any other pursuit, but
in the fair balance of all those in-
dustries which tend to increase the
national prosperity. Emigration is
now a-oina* on from England to some
O O O
of the American States, where the best
of the land has long since been
alienated by the Government of the
Great Republic. People have been
attracted and sometimes deceived by
the high rates stated as a true repre-
sentation of the current wages of
labour. As the population of this
colony increases, as it must from year
to year, we shall always find a fair
proportion willing and able to till the
land and make it fruitful. It is, no
doubt, our interest, to encourage the
settlement and cultivation of the colony
to the utmost extent consistent with
sound principles of political economy ;
bat to force settlements by improper
methods, to create difficulties which
will affect future legislation, and be a
bar to healthy growth and develop,,
ment, is to retard and not to promote
the best interests of the country.
An article which appoared in Fraser's


Magazine , last December, written by the
Reverend Edward Girdlestone, M.A.,
shows how little reason we have to ex-
pect that we shall be able to obtain from
the United Kingdom the kind of labour
most suited to till our soil, unless we
offer assistance and use appropriate
means. This gentleman, who is Canon
of Bristol, and who has manifested a
noble concern for the welfare of the
labouring classes, shows that in many
parts of the West of England the
wages of able-bodied, well-conducted
agricultural labourers range from 7s.
to Bs. per week, and that oat of this
sum they have to house, feed, and clothe
their wives and families —to provide
fuel and light, and meet the other
numerous demands of domestic life.
Women employed in the field occasion-
ally, have 7d. or Bd. per diem—a sum
which scarcely pays for the wear and
tear of clothes, and adds nothing
to the welfare of the family. But
farmers, in some instances, will not
employ the men unless their wives will
engage to work when their services
are required in the harvest field. “ A
labourer’s breakfast,” says Mr. Girdle-
stone, “ consists usually of nothing
better than teakettle broth, which is
made of slices of bread soaked in a
pint-and-a-half of hot water, with a
pinch of salt, sometimes an onion or
two, and half-a-teacupful of butter-
milk when it can be got, which is not
often ; his luncheon, of bread and skim-
milk cheese, hard and dry ; his supper
(the best meal of the day), of potatoes
and cabbage, flavoured with a very
small piece of bacon, if he is permitted
to keep a pig. Never, except on Sun-
days, and that very seldom, and in
small quantities, is butcher’s meat seen,
unless given by some one in better
circumstances,” The author of this
article has interested himself in trans-
ferring labourers from one English
county to another where they might
improve their circumstances. What
an elysium a colony like this would
be to such persons if we could
only obtain them ! Bat we cannot
hope to obtain them by the mere at-
traction of any land system, however
liberal its provisions. If we desire to
benefit the colony by the introduction
of these hard-handed, honest, in-
dustrious men, we must pay their pas-
sages. It is equally clear that, if on
their arrival they remain equally steady
and diligent, and if they do not entirely
forget the economy they were formerly
forced to exercise, a few years will
enable them to pay cash for land of
their own. The settling, of “ a happy,
prosperous, and industrious people ”
upon the land cannot be hindered by
leasing at a fair rental lands not re-
quired for present agricultural use, any
more than the sale of land by conditional
purchase will necessarily secure it.
If a man be not industrious, ho can
be neither prosperous nor happy ; if
he be industrious, and possess agri-
cultural tastes, he will soon qualify
himself to go upon the land on
more favorable terms than he who
takes his farm on credit, and at a very
early date finds how true are the
words of our great dramatist, that
“ borrowing dulls the edge of hus-
bandry.”
The present vicious system of aliena-
tion checks the more profitable sale of
land in a way never contemplated by
its framers. An instance occurred not
long ago. A squatter desired to pur-
chase a piece of land forming part of
his run. It was after some delay
marked out for sale. The intending
purchaser had made up his mind that
he would go as high as £3 per acre to
secure its possession. But before the
day of sale came round a number of
selectors entered upon the land and
took possession at a present payment
of ss. an acre. Thus the Government,
which needed the money, instead of
receiving one or two thousand pounds
cash, obtained little more than was
sufficient to pay the surveyor. The
contract price for surveying such lands
is 2s. 6d, or Bs. an acre. But in


addition to tlie actual survey, it is
necessary to connect the land with
some other measured portion. For
running- this line £2 per mile is the
sum allowed. An instance is mentioned
of a selector taking up 80 acres 20
miles from any measured block. In
that case, if the requirements of the
Act were complied with, the Govern-
ment would receive £2O for the land
and pay £5O for having it surveyed—
£4o for running the line from the
measured block to the selection, and
£lO for surveying the homestead taken
up.
It is high time that we abolished a
system so objectionable as that which
now prevails in regard to the public
lands. It is impossible to mend the
present Acts, because they are wrong
in principle. They were passed by a
House elected on a false cry. It was
assumed that the lands were monopo-
lised, and that freedom of acquisition
could only be obtained by unlimited
choice. But what is the fact ? We
have 207 millions of acres of land,
and there are not in the colony more
than about 50,000 at present who are
in a position to occupy them! The
estimated population of the colony on
the 30th June last was 456,372. From
this number must be deducted women
and children and those who have not
arrived at the age of manhood. At
the time this estimate was made the
number of electors (and every man in
a position to take up land is qualified
to be an elector) was only 123,418.
From these we must deduct about 1500
civil servants, 1500 members of
learned professions, 2000 teachers,
25.000 skilled workmen, and a large
number engaged in trade and com-
merce. This would leave about
80.000 persons ; but from these we
must take the aged and infirm and
those who have retired from the active
duties of life to enjoy their competence.
The number would be thus reduced to
not more than 70,000 ; and there are
ten or twenty thousand male adults
engaged in pastoral pursuits and em-
ployments intimately connected there-
with. We have therefore a very small
number capable of utilising the land
for purposes other than pastoral. On
the 31st March, 1868 (the same date),
the total number of occupiers of
land, not including those occupying
land for pastoral purposes, and not
including city and suburban land
owners, was 25,875 ! For whose ad-
vantage then are we pursuing our
present land policy ? or, what reason
was there for an outcry so loud, result-
ing in measures so violent ? There
were, no doubt, defects in the system ;
but these could have been remedied
without the process of destruction
carried on so recklessly. This was
admitted by Mr. Cowper, who, when
introducing his bill in 1857, pointed
out one of the principal remedies. He
said : “ When we have succeeded in im-
proving the Survey Department, most
of those things complained of by the
colonists, and which could not be other-
wise met, will then be remedied.”
We must without delay set ourselves
to the work of reform, and we must
do that which is at all times disagree-
able, if we would adopt a sound policy —•
we must retrace our steps and acknow-
ledge our errors. Extensive but
limited areas of the best land, in the
most favoured situations, will supply
all the wants of hona ‘fide agricultur-
ists ; and by making’ the leases of the
pastoral tenants worth having, we may
give an impetus to rural enterprises
which will increase the revenue derived
from the lands already under lease,
and facilitate the occupation of some
50 or 60 millions of acres of Crown
lands which are still unoccupied.
The first attempt to deal with pas-
toral holdings, after the passing of the
new Constitution Act, was on the sfch
March, 1857, when Mr. (the late Sir
Stuart Alexander) Donaldson, the first
Premier under responsible government
in this colony, moved the second read-
ing of a Bill to renew for one year the


Assessment on Stock Act. The general
object of this measure was to carry on
the system which had previously pre-
vailed in regard to Crown lands.
The Act for regulating the sale of the
waste lands belonging to the Crown in
the Australian colonies, as well as the
Act to amend that Act, and make
further provision for the regulation and
sale of waste lands, was repealed on
the proclamation of the Act conferring
a Constitution on this colony. The
Crown had, therefore, to a large extent,
been deprived of the power of protect-
ing the public estate. The right of
the Parliament to regulate all the
burdens to be borne by the pastoral
tenants of the Crown was distinctly
claimed —subject, of course, to existing
rights. In the 4th clause of the Act
repealing the previous Land Acts,
power was given to repeal and amend
the Orders in Council; but there is a
special provision enabling “the fulfil-
ment of contracts, promises, and engage-
ments, made by or on behalf of Her
Majesty, with respect to all lands
situated in such respective colonies ; ”
and, until so repealed, and subject to
any such alteration or amendment,
every Order in Council was to have the
same effect as if the Act had not been
passed. The Waste Lands Act pro-
vided that “ all regulations respecting
the sale or other disposal of the waste
lands of the Crown made under the
authority of the said recited Acts or
either of them shall be legally in
force in New South Wales, Victoria,
Van Diemen’s Land, or South Australia,
at the date when the present Act
shall take effect in the said colonies
respectively shall remain in force in
each of the said colonies respectively
until the Legislature of such colony
shall otherwise provide.” The circum-
stances of the pastoral tenants of the
Crown were then more flourishing than
they are at present, and it was thought
that the squatters would not object
to what was unquestionably a class-
tax, to the amount of about £30,000.
The desirability of prompt legislation
of a permanent character on the whole
question was admitted, but the Govern-
ment were too short-lived to carry into
effect their good intentions. It is not
in the spirit which dictated that mea-
sure that we must deal with the pas-
toral tenants. The pastoral interests
must be regarded as of higher import-
ance than a means of raising money
at a time of difficulty.
The next essay at legislation on this
subject was made by Mr. Hay. This
gentleman, on the 11th March, 1857,
brought in a bill to provide for the
alienation of Crown lands and for the
protection of Crown lands which re-
mained in the hands of the Government.
This also was regarded as a temporary
measure, and was accompanied with a
promise that in the ensuing session the
Government would deal with the entire
question of the sale, disposal, and
management of Crown lands. This
bill, in the face of some opposition,
was withdrawn, principally on the
ground of the late period of the session
and the little time there was then for
deliberation in regard to the measure.
On the 22nd October, 1857, a bill
was introduced by Mr. Cowper, who
was then Premier, for the sale, occu-
pation, and general management of the
Crown lands of the colony. His object
in bringing it up at that time was that
it might be discussed. So urgent
had the question become that in in-
troducing this measure to the House,
Mr. Cowper said, “ Landed property of
all kinds is unhinged, and can in fact
hardly be said to be of any value while
the question remains undetermined.”
The bill of Mr. Cowper’s Government
proposed to divide the land of the
Colony into four classes —town lands,
suburban lands, agricultural lands, and
lands unfit for agriculture. The
minimum price of the first was to be
£8 ; of the second, £2 ; the price of
the third, £1 ; and the price of the
fourth, ss. per acre. The sales were to
be by auction, and the purchaser was


to pay 10 per cent, cash, and the balance
within one month. It also proposed to
levy an assessment, and to alter the
tenure on which public lands were held.
Under the imperial regulations the
lands were divided into Settled, Inter-
mediate, and Unsettled Districts. In
the districts last mentioned the Governor
was empowered to grant leases for
fourteen years for pastoral purposes,
subject to rent and assessment. During
the currency of the leases no portion of
the land could be sold except to the
lessee, who also held a right of renewal
as well as pre-emption. The Govern-
ment, however, could make grants out
of such lands for public purposes, or
for facilitating the settlement and im-
provement of the country. In the
Intermediate Districts the lands were
let for 8 years. In the Settled Districts
the leases were annual, and the lands
could be sold at any time, the holder
having a pre-emptive right over 640
acres, at the price of the class of land
in which the run was situated. The
policy of the country, however, has
been to shorten leases to an extent
which has seriously interfered with
squatting interests, without conferring
any benefit upon the colony generally.
In 1857, the 14 years’ leases had been
reduced to 438, upwards of a thousand
of them having fallen in and been con-
verted into five-years’ leases. The
five-years’ leases had increased to 3,273
—and the annual leases to 8,500. The
object of Mr. Hay’s bill was to put
the squatting system on a sounder
footing ;to secure the settlement of a
more numerous population ; to provide
for a better distribution of land, and a
more equitable appropriation of the
proceeds, as well as the establishment
of a Board to effect a more uniform
administration of the public lands. The
promoters of the measures introduced
by Mr. Hay and Mr. Cowper, recog-
nised the primary importance of
colonisation, and the justice of seeking
to obtain something like a fair equiva-
lent for lands alienated ; but they failed
to satisfy that portion ot the public
which raised its voice the loudest, and
which certainly displayed a more active
interest in politics than those who had
more important interests to maintain,
but who confined their attention almost
exclusively to their own private affairs,
and showed their want of patriotism by
abstaining from any engagement in the
conflict. In any future discussion of
this question with a view to legislation,
those who do not desire to squander the
public lands must band themselves
together, and promulgate their opinions
and record their votes so as to make
their influence felt, and not allow noisy
agitators to have it all their own way.
The present Land Acts are the result of
politicians outliberaling each other
according to the popular view of
liberality. On the 16th November,
1857, there was a public meeting held
in the School of Arts, Sydney, of
persons unfavourable to the Land Bill
of the Ministry, because it did not
propose “to throw all unalienated
lands open to free selection by persons
intending to cultivate the same, in
farms surveyed or unsurveyed, of from
30 to 320 acres, without competition,
at a price not exceeding £1 per acre
(excepting town and suburban lands).”
So liberal were the speakers, and so
excited the people, that meetings were
held by the light of flambeaux in the
open air. It was at a torchlight meet-
ing, held in Sydney on the 7th
December, that the New South Wales
Land League was inaugurated. A
credit system was to operate, but it was
to be limited to five years ; there was
to be a tax upon land, and a special
tax upon uncultivated land ! It was
not seen that to impose such a tax
would be to put a premium upon all
lands previously purchased, and to still
further depress the value of Crown
lands. In the celebrated Manifesto
of the League the period of credit,
though greatly extended, was still
limited in regard to selections of un-
surveyed land. It is but fair to record


that Mr, Cowper sethis face steadfastly
against this system of credit. Credit
is no doubt considered necessary in
private transactions, but no one knew
better than the Colonial Secretary of
the day the great difference between
dealings with a Government and
dealings with private individuals, in
matters of small credit and extending
over a long period. It is scarcely an
exaggeration to say that the expense
of keeping the accounts, furnishing
“returns” such as those already printed,
and carrying on the necessary corres-
pondence would under the Government
be likely to eat up the balances before
they were paid. During the committal
of the bill of 1857, when Mr. Robertson
introduced to the notice of the com-
mittee the principle of deferred pay-
ments, Mr. Cowper used words the
truth of which has become every year
nearer to verification. “ At the end of
whatever term may be fixed upon for
the payment of land given upon credit,”
he said, “ a party will be formed which
will turn out any ministry that may
insist upon the payment ofthe balances.”
The time may come when a Quieting
of Titles Bill may be more effective
in New South Wales, in regard to con-
ditional purchasers of the public lands,
than it has been in Victoria with
reference to squatters. The unlimited
credit which now exists was not then
even thought of. The discussion on
the details of this bill, however, was cut
short by a motion that the Chairman
leave the chair, when the Committee
divided equally, and the Chairman gave
his vote with the noes. Under these
circumstances the Government did
not feel justified in proceeding, and
a dissolution followed. The quit-
rent system was a failure, and the sys-
tem of deferred payments had already
been tried and found inefficient.
Governor Brisbane, years before, sold
land to poor people who were desirous
of engaging in agricultural pursuits
for 25 per cent, cash, one-fourth in pro-
duce, and the remaining half at more
advanced dates secured by promissory-
notes. But it was found that some of
these notes could not be taken up.
The Governor then offered a large dis-
count, and some were paid ; but it is
said that some are owing to this day.
Whatever truth there might have
been in the statement of Mr. Cowper,
that landed property would remain
“ unhinged ” until the land law was
determined, there can be no doubt that
at the present time the same kind of
property is in a much more anomalous
condition than it was then. It is im-
possible to say what is the value of a
conditional purchase, the conditions of
which are unfulfilled, either to the
individual or to the State; and the
principal element of value is taken
away altogether from pastoral pro-
perty. What rent would any man
give for a farm or house unless he
could have the right daring the term
of his lease of holding against all
comers, or were entitled to compensa-
tion if his lease were suddenly deter-
mined by the lessor ? Cast a reason-
able doubt upon the title to any hold-
ing, and at once it has no clearly
defined or ascertainable market value,
What absolute folly then is it to des-
troy arbitrarily the value of 200 mil-
lions of acres of grazing land for the
sake of a very small number of
people who might be equally well
supplied by throwing open to selection
without competition suitable fractional
parts ! The bill introduced by the
Government of Mr. Cowper was not so
objectionable as the Act at present
in force, although it assumed at last a
shape highly vicious on account of the
enormous power it would have placed
in the hands of the Government—of
saying what lands should be sold at
the upset of £l, and what at ss. It
was similar in many of its provisions
to the bill prepared by Mr. Hay,
which would have put the squatting
interest on a sounder basis, and gene-
rally have improved our land adminis-
tration. In our legislation we should


not only tolerate pastoral occupancy,
but within certain limits we should
offer to it as much encouragement as to
agriculture, or mining, or manufac-
tures, with a view to obtaining for the
State the largest possible advantages,
and seeking to obtain these from the
prosperity rather than from the neces-
sities of the people. It is also a fact
to be remembered, in looking to past
legislation in regard to future advance-
ment, that the amount of assessment
which Mr. Hay’s bill would have im-
posed upon stock was even larger than
that favoured by Mr. Cowper—the
former proposing 3d.; the latter only
2 2/5 d. This mode of payment for
the use of Crown lands by rent and
assessment makes the question more
difficult. It arose, however, out of the
necessities of former times. The first
Act imposing assessment on stock was
passed to provide the means of police
protection to the pastoral tenants.
An application for police protection
was made to Sir George Gipps, in
1839 ; but according to his view of
the matter it was incumbent on the
squatters to protect themselves, in con-
sideration of the terms on which they
held the public lands. The assessment
was then a fixed rate, but the Orders
which came into operation in 1847
gave power to vary its amount. The
Act to impose an assessment on runs,
passed in 1858, recognised the import-
ance of a more definite system of pay-
ment, and it is probable that but for
differences of opinion in regard to
previously acquired rights, it would
have met with general acquiesence.
It was formally protested against by
several members of the Legislative
Council, on the ground that it was
a breach of contract in regard to
some existing lessees. The celebrated
despatch of Lord Caernarvon upon
the subject (which was made pub-
lic about twelve months after its
receipt) did not dispute this view,
but left the point open to litigation
for a time. The assessment, however,
was paid without an appeal to the
courts, and it may be said that the
difficulty was surmounted while the
despatch remained in its pigeon-hole.
The bill previously proposed by Mr.
Richard Jones, in December, 1857, had
for its object the imposition of an
assessment on runs in the Unsettled
and Intermediate districts, and the
increasing of the rents of lands leased
for pastoral purposes within the Settled
districts of the colony. At that time,
however, a deficit was apprehended in
the revenue of some £70,000 or
£lOO,OOO, and it was apparently the
object of the Government of the day to
tide over a financial difficulty by
promptly dealing with a matter which
in itself was not pressing. It was
regarded as a departure from just prin-
ciples of taxation, and was also objec-
tionable because it did not deal with
the question in such a way as to justify
the expectation, not of finality (for it
is unreasonable to expect finality in
regard to an interest in a state of
transition) but that for a considerable
time it would remain undisturbed. At
this time the right to apply the money
raised by assessment to general pur-
poses was asserted ; but the bill was
mainly opposed on the ground that the
proposed assessment would be really
an increase of rent, and consequently,
in regard to many holdings, a breach
of faith. It was in reality the same
objection as that raised to the bill sub-
sequently passed into law, andin regard
to which the formal protest was made.
In dealing with the pastoral tenants
of the Crown, their payments as
rent or in the nature of rent
should be as clearly defined as their
tenure ; and there should be a classifi-
cation of runs in regard to their
fattening qualities, and to the means
of communication with a market, as
affecting the price of stock and the
value of wool and tallow to the pro-
ducer. A classification of runs is not
less important than a classification of
lands. But it should not be left to the


option of any Government to increase
or diminish the rate of assessment.
The principle of obtaining 1 a fair and
simply expressed value by way of rent
is recognised in the 13th clause of the
Occupation Act in regard to leases
freed from assessment under the 22 nd
Yic. No. 17 ; but the distinction be-
tween the duties of the Executive and
the duties of the Legislature has
not been properly regarded in our
Land Acts, The Regulations ought
O O
not to be more numerous and important
than the Clauses of the Act. Although
the Crown Lands Alienation Act con-
tains but 31 clauses, the regulations
under that Act consist of 63 separate
sections, and embrace matters which
should form part of the text of the
Act itself. The Crown Lands Occu-
pation Act contains 37 clauses, and the
regulations under it number nearly 100.
Even the value of improvements which
are to be made as part of the conditions
of purchase under the Alienation Act
is a matter of regulation, and not of
legislative enactment. The Land Acts
cannot be said to contain within them-
selves anything like a fair statement of
the policy of the country. The course
of legislation in regard to these Acts
will be well remembered. It was on
the 28th September, 1859, that Mr.
Robertson obtained leave to introduce
to the Parliament, chosen under the
provisions of the Electoral Act of 1858,
bills to regulate the alienation and
occupation of Crown lands. They
were not proceeded with, owing to the
rejection of an Education Bill, and the
consequent downfall of the Ministry,
of which Mr. Robertson was a member.
In 1860, however, (after his present
colleague, Mr. Forster, had had a
short innings) Mr. Robertson again
entered upon official life, having
formed a ministry of his own; and
on the 27th September of that year he
a second time introduced his bills ; but
they were stopped by the prorogation
of the House. The next Session, con-
vened after a recess of six weeks, had
extended over only twenty-five sittings
when there was a dissolution. Then
came the elections, and the cry of
“ Free Selection,” the meeting of the
“ Free Selection ” Parliament, and in
its first Session (which began on the
10th January, 1861,) the passing of
the present Acts, which have inflicted
on the colony a serious injury, and the
ill effects of which will be experienced
for many years to come, even although
we take prompt measures to place
upon a sound basis the land policy of
the country. The stock cry was that
unfair action was taken by the wealthy
to prevent the acquisition of land by
persons desirous of forming agricul-
tural settlements. If this were so, with
special agricultural areas, and with
land at a fixed price without competi-
tion, it would be impossible for any
one, rich or poor, to stand in the way
of persons who desired, and had the
means, to go upon the land with a
reasonable prospect of success. “ The
land is the heritage of the people,” said
the orator ; and “ the people ” cheered
vociferously. But will it be said by
any honest man that the land belongs
exclusively to the few hundred thou-
sand people who are scattered over
an area capable of sustaining many
millions ? Certainly it does not belong
in any special degree to those who
have neither the means nor the ability
to cultivate it. The interest of all who
cannot derive personal benefit directly
from the land is to obtain indirect
benefits, through the medium of those
who are able to turn it to account by
their industry, skill, and enterprise ;
keeping in view the adoption of a
policy which at the same time will be
prospectively beneficial in the settle-
ment of people, who will contribute
their quota towards the cost of
Government, and be likely to build
up our colony on sound princi-
ples of political economy. It was
said that through the corruption
and inefficiency of the Survey De-
partment the public interests had been


sacrificed for the benefit of a few ;
that the rich had been able to pur-
chase the best lands, while the lands
sold to the general public were poor,
indifferently watered, and not well
situated. But if the administration of
the Survey Department was faulty, the
proper course would have been to have
reformed it. If there was corruption, the
proper way would have been to have
exposed it, and taken measures to pre-
vent a repetition of the evil. If tracts
of the very best lands of the colony,
and in the most favoured localities, are
laid out in areas and opened to agri-
culturists and others on terms more
favourable than lands can be obtained
otherwise, what better mode can be
devised to put it out of the power of
the rich to oppress, or the corrupt so to
order affairs as to hinder the acquisi-
tion of suitable land by men of small
means who desire to possess it ? The
idea of placing the “ poor man ” on
the land, in the expectation that he
will be able to cultivate it without
means, and ultimately to pay for it, is
generally absurd. The old Jewish
laud system, however, has been seve-
ral times referred to by our public
men, when speaking on this subject;
and it is a wonder that, in straining
after excessive liberality, some one
has not been found to propose that the
whole colony should be divided, like the
land of Canaan, and handed over abso-
lutely in rateable proportion to the
present inhabitants !
Having made ample provision for
the agriculturist, it is not less neces-
sary to make provision by which the
general public—the landlords of the
vast estate—should derive the greatest
possible advantage from those lands
which for many years to come
they will have neither labour nor
capital to cultivate. It is claimed
as one advantage of the present
system of conditional purchase, in
relation to the squatter, that no more
land will be taken from the pastoral
tenant than is shown to be really
wanted by persons willing to pay for
it ; but the system is adverse to the
public interest. Clearly, it would be
better for the country to take away
part, or indeed, if necessary, all the
lands of one squatter, and give him
compensation for any injury he may
sustain, than to make insecure from
day to day the tenure of every pastoral
holding. But it is said that men are
the best judges of their own wants.
This is no doubt true, generally. At
the same time, the State ought to be
the best judge of its own policy, and
better able to guard the public rights
than any individual guided by self-
interest. A more provident arrange-
ment, in view of the country’s good is,
however, opposed by some squatters.
Fearing to lose their runs altogether,
they are willing rather to share equally
the disadvantages which attend the
present holdings. The State should
require something further than that
land is wanted by some particular
selector, who may choose to go into the
middle of a large run, and thereby
diminish its value to an extent out of
all proportion to any benefits likely to
accrue from the establishment of a
small settlement which would be better
made elsewhere. We should be willing
to give to pastoral tenants the best
holding we can with a due regard to
the interests of the people in the
fee-simple of the land, preserving
proper conditions of lease, and pro-
viding for a gradually increasing rent
by periodical adjustment. It is only
by such a policy that we can secure
for the country a fair return for the
use of the public lands. It is useless
to rail against a rent of seven-eighths
of a penny per acre, exclusive of assess-
ment, or £2 a section, if we cannot
obtain higher rates. It is equally
useless to say reproachfully how much
better it would be to cover the
land with an industrious agricultural
population, when we can only by slow
degrees secure so desirable a result.
We can only make the best of our


circumstances, and wait for more
favourable times. Even the smallest
rent would be better than to allow the
lands to remain unremunerative. But
the rent and assessment obtained from
the pastoral tenants of the Crown,
although amounting to a large sum,
form but a small portion of the benefit
derived by the colony from that source;
and it is folly to unnecessarily destroy
an enterprise which has seen its vicis-
situdes, but which upon the whole has
been more largely productive of wealth
to the colony than any other interest
it contains. It appears from certain
recent proceedings in Queensland, that
in our youngest sister colony a more
secure and extended occupation of
Crown lands by pastoral tenants is
regarded by many as absolutely neces-
sary for the very existence of squatting
as a large and separate interest. They
have experienced there that with
which our own Crown tenants are
painfully familiar —a depreciation of
wool, and a diminution in the price of
stock. That colony is in fact enduring
a crisis which puts in a strong light
the disadvantages of insecurity or
rather uncertainty of tenure. Their
holdings, like ours, are not worth any-
thing as a security ; much of the laud
is almost worthless without the expen-
diture of considerable sums of money ;
but, as some of the Queensland squat-
ters have forcibly put it in a petition
to their Legislative Assembly, before
any sane man will sink money in im-
provements “it is absolutely necessary
that pastoral tenants should be able to
offer a more tangible security to capi-
talists than they at present possess.”
They propose an increased tenure
without an increase of rent ; but their
condition is somewhat exceptional, and
they seem to make their plea pretty
much on the same principle on which
agriculturists in the flooded districts of
New South Wales occasionally apply to
the Government for seed wheat in the
time of their distress. But the main
point is that the extended leases they
desire should be “ inviolable in spirit
as well as in letter.” This is a matter
of the greatest importance, for it is
unreasonable to suppose that prudent
men will invest their money unless
there is a fair prospect not only of re-
covering the capital they have ex-
pended, but also of obtaining a good
return therefrom by way of interest
during the time of its investment.
The pastoral tenants of the Crown are
generally spoken of in debate and on
the hustings as the most favoured of
men. Nothing is said of the dangers
experienced by the pioneers of civiliza-
tion ; nothing of losses by droughts
and floods ; nothing of the pressure of
bank interest or of litigation in regard
to disputed boundaries. To some,
squatting brings disappointment and
embarrassment—to the more fortunate,
wealth. But this wealth, it is said, is
made out of the natural grasses of the
colony ! The statement is a mixture
of truth and error. No doubt the
natural grasses are essenkal to lease-
hold pastoral enterprise; but they
would be utterly valueless without the
employment of labour, capital, and
judgment. But for these qualities,
combined with perseverance and con-
siderable risk of various kinds, there
are millions of acres in this colony
which would be of no more value to
us than the desert of Sahara, Men
who do not think for themselves are
misled by euphonious sophisms, as when
orators say they desire the “ greatest
good for the greatest number,” the
people cheer, not recognising the fact
that true and impartial justice would
claim equal good for every member of
the community, and such an adjust-
ment of all our interests as would be
calculated to bring about so desirable
a result. We must be careful that
by our mode of dealing with the
public lands we do not encourage
bitterness of feeling and unwar-
rantable jealousies between pasto-
ral tenants of the Crown and free-
holders engaged in agricultural pur-


suits. The labour of the one is as
honourable and as real as that of
the other, and both are valuable in
their degree to the State. In
this enlig-htened ag-e it would be
o o
hardly consistent to pursue a course
which would tend to continue old feuds.
We must administer our public lands
so as to secure a good feeling between
the keepers of sheep and the tillers of
the ground, and to endeavour to make
the labours of each subservient to the
welfare of the land in which we live.
It must not be forgotten either that
the Government is not the only land-
holder willing to alienate or to lease.
There are circumstances which induce
men to purchase private land at a
higher price than that of the Govern-
ment. There are also agriculturists
and graziers, who prefer to lease laud
from others rather than take up new
ground farther away from the influences
of civilized society. As to the acquisi-
tion of large estates, that is a matter
in regard to which the Government is
powerless. Large estates, if they are
not too numerous, have their uses in
every-community ; and, no doubt, here
as well as elsewhere, they will be ac-
quired by men who are more acquisi-
tive than their neighbours, and prefer
to invest their wealth in the purchase
of land. The great success which has
favoured individuals, and the large
estates acquired by others, have drawn
forth the jealousy of men, who if they
had had the opportunities would never
have had the courage and perseverance
and self-denial necessary to acquire the
one or to achieve the other. If the
country saw its interest more clearly,
it would look with less disfavour on
the enterprise of men who risk large
capital and employ a considerable
amount of labour in the production of
that which is the staple of our wealth.
And the fact must not be ignored, that
a certain value has been placed on the
privileges supposed to have been ac-
acquired by those who have been
“pioneers of civilization.” This, in
many cases, represents the difference
between the amount charged by the
State and the sums paid by one squatter
to another for the right to occupy
valuable lands which, but for the enter-
prise of the pioneer, would have re-
mained valueless. Many of those who
hold our public lands, too, have con-
ducted their operations on borrowed
capital, and we have thus to deal with
very complicated interests. There are
those who would magnify the rights of
the conditional purchaser, by denying
altogether the rights of pastoral oc-
cupants of Crown lands, forgetting that
the services rendered by the latter are
at any rate as great as those of
that large class which subsists by ex-
changing commodities and transmit-
ting them from one country to another.
Allowing, for the sake of argument,
that the squatters only utilise the
natural grasses without improving the
land in the slightest degree, their
services are not smaller than those of
other men who are not producers, but
who, nevertheless, perform a valuable
service in finding out the best markets,
and obtaining the most remunerative
price possible for the productions of
others.
The abolition of the system of un-
limited conditional purchase will re-
move the greatest obstacle in the. way
of dealing with the pastoral lands of
the country, in a way satisfactory to
the tenants of the Crown, and in a large
degree profitable to the colony. The
rights of all parties must be clearly
defined, for nothing affects so directly
the value of a holding—• freehold or lease-
hold—as the title to possess, or the
lease as affecting the tenure and its
duration. It is quite as important
that pastoral tenants should have their
rights clearly defined, as that condi-
tional purchasers should have doubts
removed as to their right to impound.
Certainty of tenure will increase the
value of runs and improve the credit
of their holders ; it will encourage im-
provements, and enable the holders to


pay a larger rent. Insecurity of tenure
on the part of a farmer would tempt
him to starve his land. Insecurity of
tenure in public officers is said to
encourage ministers of the Crown to
evade disagreeble duties, and to leave
them for their successors, as well as
sometimes to do things which they
might otherwise hesitate to accomplish.
It is unreasonable to expect from the
squatter more than experience has
taught us to look for in the farmer,
the clerk, or the politician. If the
squatters’ leases were on terms mutu-
ally satisfactory, the pastoral tenants of
the Crown would, in many cases, fence
in their runs, and thus increase the
pastoral wealth of the colony, for it
has been found that the more sheep
a‘re left undisturbed, the more prolific
•and thriving they become. But it is
hopeless to expect any such improve-
ment until there shall be security
against intrusion during the currency
of the leases (subject only to fair terms
of resumption by the Crown,) and
proper stipulations in regard to re-
newal. The most important point of
detail is to get a fair classification of
the public lands. This is a matter of
so much consequence that it ought not I
to be left to any one person, or indeed
exclusively to officials. It ought to
be made by district “ land boards,”
whose reports should be submitted
to the Executive, and laid before
Parliament, and adopted only after
due deliberation. It is said that the
best fattening stations are unwatered.
In the Crown Lands Occupation Act
ten years’ leases are given for un-
watered country. This, however, is
too short a period, and they should be
at least fifteen years, in order to give
men of capital an opportunity to make
improvements by constructing dams
and making artesian wells. If such
leases were granted they would enable
the lessees to make improvements
which would well repay them and the
country also, inasmuch as they would
increase its resources by encouraging |
enterprise, leading to the expenditure
of money and the employment of
labour. Liberal advantages must be
held out to the investor. In this
colony, where there are so many oppor-
tunities of obtaining a high rate of
interest for money, it is not to be ex-
pected that people will risk their capi-
tal on arid sheep walks in the far
interior unless there be a reasonable
prospect, not of a bare return but of a
substantial recompense. A quarter of
a century ago, the bad times expe-
rienced by flock-masters were attri-
buted to the facts that there was no
market for their surplus stock and
that there were too many sheep in the
colony. But there is now in the colony
a much larger demand for surplus
stock, and the market of the world is
open not only for our wool but also for
our beef and mutton. The latter will
develope into a valuable source of
wealth, and the falling off in the price
of our wool may be remedied in a
greater measure by more abundant
labour in preparation and the exercise
of sounder judgment in classification.
It is not unreasonable to hope for a
better market for our wool as well as
for our meat by the development of
new processes ; but our success will be
in proportion to the inducements offered
and the nature of the tenure on
which the public lands are,occupied.
In regard to inferior back lands,
however, it would be almost impos-
sible to devise any form of lease which
would lead to their improvement, so
as to make them of any appreciable
value to the country, and little advan-
tage can be hoped for by the Govern-
ment in retaining possession of such
lands. It would be much better to
sell them absolutely as occasion served
—or rather to offer them for sale after
due publicity at an upset price agreed
upon, and which might be reduced
from time to time until a purchaser
were found. If these inferior back
lands became private property and
were purchased by men of wealth and


enterprise, means would no doubt be
found to make them profitable, and the
country would be a gainer. To reduce
the price of all land below £1 an acre
would be at once to depreciate the value
of all property except that of cities
and towns ; but the inferior back lands
might be sold at a reduced price with-
out producing any but desirable results
so far as the interests of the colony are
concerned.
In regard to the taking up of new
runs there is room for improvement.
The system of “run hunting” is not an
unmixed good ; and people should not
be allowed to hold Crown lands un-
stocked for any long period, as against
those who would take them up and
use them. Men have sometimes tra-
velled more than a thousand miles in
search of new country, which, after all
the trouble and delay and risk and
expense, they have ascertained to be
taken up although not naturally occu-
pied. The present Act has done much
to check run-hunting in this phase of
it ; but a more effectual remedy would
be to compel every person who tenders
for a run and obtains permission to
occupy to stock it to a certain extent,
at least within a limited time, or be
liable to have his claim set aside by
any new tenderer who would be pre-
pared to fulfil the conditions. All the
difficulties which were alleged to exist
in regard to the obtainment of land by
agriculturists have been experienced
by pastoral people. They have had
to risk the chance of other applications
having been made for the same run.
They have had to endure the delay of
reports by the district Commissioners,
to whom their tenders had been re-
ferred by the head office; and after all
to take the responsibility of any error
in boundary or description, by which
some runs have been forfeited, even
though the fault has not been with the
tenderer. There is also too much cir-
cumlocution in regard to taking up
runs. Instead of communicating first
with the head office, and waiting for
official communication with the district
Commissioner, and for his report, the
applicant might be permitted to write
his request, in duplicate, and send it at
the same time to the district Commis-
sioner and to the head office. If the
district Commissioner were an active
and attentive officer, his report might
reach the head office very shortly after
the application ; and thus considerable
time would be saved. It would be a
great advantage, too, if in every district
there were a map showing the lands
already taken up, and those portions
which are still unoccupied. Duplicates
ought to be sent to the Survey office in
Sydney, and marked according to the
reports of the district Commissioners.
Thus in Sydney, as well as in the dis-
tricts, any person might readily as-
certain what quantity of land was taken
up, and form some idea of his chances
of obtaining a pastoral leasehold.
A judicious settlement of our land
administration may do much towards
conciliating distant parts of the colony.
The concentration of population at
certain points will tend to promote the
better means of communication, and
thus render it possible to extend the
blessings of good Government to those
remote districts where separation has
already been spoken of as a thing
in prospect. To retain Riverina, for
instance, it must be part of the
colony not in name alone. We must
facilitate intercourse, personal and
commercial, by means of the land, by
the settlement of population, and the
construction of railroads. It would be
worth while ascertaining whether, by
granting blocks of land along proposed
lines, capitalists could not be found to
undertake the construction of iron
roads at their own cost, and conduct
the traffic under their own manage-
ment. With this view, in any new
land Act, “ the construction of rail-
ways ” should be one of those objects
for which land might at any time be
resumed. We cannot well afford to
have the boundaries of our colony


farther circumscribed. At the same
time, we cannot expect to retain pos-
session of a larger populated area than
we can effectively govern, and tho
affairs of which we can equitably ad-
minster. The loss of “ Riverina ”
would be a reproach to the Govern-
ment, and a serious diminution of the
wealth of this colony, for the territory
now known by that name contains
about 150,000 square miles ; and
although there are not more than three
or four hundred square miles of pur-
chased land, the four or five and
twenty thousand people who occupy
that portion which is inhabited, pro-
duce about a million and a quarter
sterling per annum. We must devote
more attention to making our rivers
navigable and intersecting them with
our railways, and these works must be
aided to a large extent from the pro-
ceeds of our public lands. Nothing
would give greater encouragement to
people to settle on the lands than the
construction of a line of railway into
the far interior. The cost of such an
extension (which would be in the
nature of a permanent improvement,
and permanently increase the value of
the public domain) might be justly
defrayed by borrowed money, if suffi-
cient inducements were not offered to
private enterprise; but it would be ab-
surd to make such a line a charge
upon the public lands if we are practi-
cally to give the lands away, or sell
them on such terms that the cost
of survey is out of all proportion
to the cash deposited, and with a want
of certainty in regard to the completion
of the terms of sale, as well as in rela-
tion to the boundaries of the land
alienated.
It is not unreasonable to suppose
that some further legislation is now
possible. The quotations given in a
previous part of the Essay show that
there was an intention to deal with the
lands in a spirit of patriotism, and not
of party. It was not until the political
element became stronger and the cry
of “ free-selection” was raised that the
existing system was favoured by many
of the electors. When the land ques-
tion came on for special consideration,
and the official position of various sets
of men was involved, a number of
agitators appeared on the field, and
some of them exercised a baleful in-
fluence on public opinion. They have
now, however, disappeared; some have
ceased to be ; some have left the
colony; some have found their reward
in Government offices, the routine of
which is more agreeable to them than
labour on a “ conditional purchase”
under the Act for which on numerous
occasions they waxed eloquent. The
public mind, too, has undergone a
change. There has been time for
thought. People have seen that the
importation of an agricultural popu-
lation cannot be effected by a mere
reduction in the price of land. They
have seen that immigration is essential
to prosperity. They have discovered
that it can only be carried on in pro-
portion to the revenue derived from
the public lands, and that the larger
the amount obtained from sale and
lease, the greater will be the power to
introduce fresh population and bring
about more rapidly that transition so
much desired —from leasehold to free-
hold, and from pastoral pursuits to
those of agriculture and horticulture,
wine-making, and sugar growing, and
the fuller development of our mineral
wealth. Men who have taken up land
without having first acquired the means
to cultivate, now know by painful
experience how many are the disadvan-
tages, and how remote the prospect
of obtaining an unencumbered freehold.
Alarge body of the taxpayers musthave
seen that there is no reasoable expecta-
tion of deriving from the present pro-
cess of alienation or leasing anything
like the fair eqivalent, either in money
or other advantages, which they were
assured they might confidently antici-
pate. There have also been many
changes in political relations and


associations. Now, in the Govern-
ment, we have a Minister for Lands
who not only opposed the land bills in-
troduced by Mr. Robertson (the pre-
sent Premier), but also described the
system of “ conditional purchase ” as
“a mountebank system” —“a mere
piece of legislative quackery.” There
is also another member of the present
ministry who looked with no great
favour on the Land bills of his political
chief. It is impossible for one man to
know with certainty the inner work-
ings of the mind of another, and it is
only just to give the originator of the
present Land laws and those who sup-
ported him credit for an earnest desire
to benefit the country ; but if there be
any truth in the substance of this
Essay, with all their conscientiousness
and good intentions they have signally
failed. Taking these, and other cir-
cumstances into consideration, we may
hope that it is now possible, at least,
for the representatives of the people
to look upon the Land question with
something like that circumspection and
careful deliberation which business
men bring to bear in the direction of
their own private transactions. It will
be fortunate for the colony if it should
escape in the future the errors of the
past —if patriotism shall prove more
powerful than party influences, and
public obligations stronger than
personal interest. We cannot other-
wise hope for salutary reform.
Our future land policy should be, so to
administer the public land that its
revenue will be the largest consistent
with a fair encouragement to agri-
cultural pursuits, and without drawing
from manufactures and commerce
any of the elements of prosperity ;
so to expend that revenue as to pro-
mote to the utmost extent the general
well being; so to control the settlement
of population as to facilitate the ad-
ministration of good government and
increase the means of social comfort.
We cannot accomplish this by a mode
of land alienation which scatters and
isolates the people. We cannot achieve
it by encouraging a system of un-
limited credit, which lures men without
capital to attempt an economical im-
possibility. We cannot hope for it
by the imposition of conditions which
are onerous and offer temptations to
evasion and fraud, or by giving away
that which is in part security for our
obligations to the public creditor, and
theheritage of ourchildren. We cannot
expect the colony to flourish if we inter-
pose unnecessary checks to individual
prosperity in connection with enter-
prises of national importance. We
must expunge those pernicious clauses
which will not bear the test of im-
partial criticism, and which were agreed
to at a time of great excitement ; and
we must introduce a system which will
make our progress safe, and our pros-
perity steady and ever increasing.
Then may every man among us expect
to enjoy more rational liberty, and to
reap more abundantly the fruits of his
labour. Then, amid all the greater
blessings of civilization, will our barns
be “ filled with plenty,” and our
presses “ burst out with new wine.”


APPENDIX
The following extracts mark the stages of the competition from its first announcement in
the columns of the “ Wagga Wagga Advertiser ” to the presentation of the prize to the
winning competitor, Mr. Cook.
In the “Advertiser” of 2nd December, 1868, the following notice appeared :
“PRIZE OF ONE HUNDRED GUINEAS FOR THE BEST ESSAY ON THE
LAND QUESTION.
“It is granted on all sides that the Land law requires amendment : the Squatter
declares it; the Free-selector admits it; and the author of the present Land Act at last
confesses it.
“ The nature of the amendment required must be the great question of the next Session,
or rather, of the next Parliament. On this point, public opinion is still, as it always has
been, in a state of chaos. Opinions, in short, or “notions ” which pass for opinions, are as
various as there are interests to be affected, or political purposes to be served. Before a
question of such vital importance to the country is again submitted to the verdict of the
people, it seems desirable that some attempt should be made to sift these various and often
conflicting opinions—to separate the true from the false, the politically sound from the
politically plausible, and if possible to evolve from the mass of contradictions that happy
golden mean of legislative wisdom which each opinion now claims for itself at the expense
of all the others.
“With this view the Proprietors of this paper have determined to offer for the Best
Original Essay on ‘the Future Land Policy of New South Wales’ a prize of One
Hundred Guineas.
“ The conditions of the competition will be as follows :
(1.) The essays must be sent, with mottoes, on or before the Ist of March, 1869,
addressed to the care of the Australian Joint Stock Bank, Wagga Wagga.
(2.) A sealed envelope must be enclosed with each essay, containing the motto of the
essay and the name of the writer ; such envelopes not to be opened until after the
award has been made.
(3.) The essays shall be submitted to the decision of five gentlemen of recognised
position and ability in Sydney, whose names will be announced in a future notice.
(4.) The decision of a majority of these gentlemen shall be final.
(5.) All essays will become the property of the Proprietors of the Wagga Wagga
Advertiser.
(6.) The Prize Essay, and such of the others as the Proprietors may think worthy of
publication, will be published in this paper.
“N.B,—This competition is open to writers in all the colonies.”
In the “ Advertiser ” of the 29th November, 1869, the award was thus announced :—-
“ We arc glad to announce that a decision on the Land Essays has been arrived at.
The following memorandum was received yesterday :


“ ‘Australian Club, 24th November, 1869. — [memo.] —At a final meeting of the Judges
of the Essays on the Future Land Policy of New South Wales, it was decided by majority
that the Essay signed “Sphinx” was the best. It was at the same time unanimously
agreed that the Essay signed “ Magnum opus in manibus habeo ” was the only one which
caused the Judges to hesitate for any time before they awarded the prize to the author of
the successful Essay. William Macleay, Chairman.’
“The writer of the winning Essay, ‘Sphinx,’ is Mr. S. Cook, chief of the reporting
staff of the Sydney Morning Herald ; and of the second Essay, Mr, Charles St. Julian,
also long connected with the Herald, and well-known as an authority on all Municipal
questions. The ‘leading journal’ may be congratulated on taking what may be almost
called a ‘ double first’ against some fifty competitors,”
In the Sydney Morning Herald of the 31st December, 1869, and in the “ Advertiser ”
of the sth January, 1870, the following notice appeared :
“PRESENTATION OF THE PRIZE OF ONE HUNDRED GUINEAS TO
MR. S. COOK.
“On Friday last Mr. W. Macleay, M.L.A., and Mr. W, B. Dailey (who were
accompanied by Dr. Badham, of the Sydney University) waited upon Mr. S. Cook, at the
Sydney Morning Herald Office and handed to him the prize offered by the Wagga Wagga
Advertiser for the best Essay on the future Land Policy of New South Wales. The
cheque was enclosed in the following letter :
‘ Advertiser Office, Wagga Wagga,
December 29, 1869.
* Samuel Cook, Esq.,
‘Herald Office, Sydney.
‘ Dear Sir, —We have much pleasure in sending to you, through Mr. William Macleay,
M.P., chairman of the Board of adjudicators, our cheque for one hundred guineas, being
the amount of the prize offered by us, and adjudged to you, for the best Essay on the Future
Land Policy of New South Wales.
‘ While congratulating you on your success, achieved against many worthy competitors,
we desire to add our testimony to that of the judges, as to the sterling merit of your
Essay.
* Our object in inducing this competition was, as you are aware, to assist if possible in
the settlement upon a sounder basis than the present one of the Land Laws of the colony,
and we do not flatter either you or ourselves when we affirm that in your Essay alone we
see a fair hope of that object being to some extent achieved.
‘ That your opinions will meet with some adverse criticism is, of course, to be expected ;
but no one, we are sure, will dispute either the careful research and deep thought bestowed
upon their formation, or the ability displayed in their expression.
‘ With repeated congratulations,
‘ We are, dear sir,
‘Your obedient servants,
‘ Jones and Darlow.’
** The following is a copy of the reply forwarded by Mr. Cook to the donors :
* Frankfort Villa, Marriokville,
* 31st December, 1869.
'‘Gentlemen, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your cheque for one
hundred guineas (£105), which was handed to me this morning by Mr. William Macleay,
M.P., and Mr. W. B. Dailey.
x I thank you for your kind congratulations, and am pleased to learn that your opinion
of my Essay accords with that of the gentlemen who performed the arduous task of
awarding a prize for which there were so many competitors. It is gratifying to roe that
through your liberality I have had a share in directing public attention to what I conceive


would be a sound policy to adopt in regard to the alienation and administration of the public
lands of this colony. The Essay will be sure to meet with adverse criticism, because it
exposes some popular fallacies ; but if its facts be truly quoted and fairly discussed, I shall
have no reason to complain or to fear the result.
‘ It is unfair to say (as I have seen it stated) that the Essay was written to show the
overwhelming national importance of squatting. It shows the folly of destroying any
existing profitable interest until it can be replaced by another more beneficial ; but it was
penned in view of the welfare of the entire colony, in regard to the settlement of a most
important and difficult problem.
‘ Again thanking you for the very flattering terms in which you have been pleased to
address me,
* I have the honour to remain,
‘ Gentlemen,
‘Your obedient servant,
4 Messrs. Jones and Darlow, ‘Samuel Cook.’
&c., &c,, &g.’ ”
WAOQA WAGGA : E, G. WILTON, PRINTER, FOR THE PROPRIETORS, TRAILL-STKEET.


