

t" >v ' ■■?§!§ ! : flWS? . BB| f J^l
1 i M f SHE*
FROM THE GOLDEN BOOMERANG SERIAL


, ■ .a? ' 75/ « . -,
*
• •. ■ * 4 - 1 .
>
; '
» .
' / .*■ ■.• ' ■ ’ ■'■ 1 » i, . »- x ’* .
it,-' , . . » 4 I ♦ .
■ 4 ’ *• • ' , ■ ■,
' • ' ‘ ■
• :
, \
\\: . \ .. t
V '
x »
* t
v •
'
, >■ ■
.
.V I < ' .
; »
. • - * . * ' '
%
« *■ .
,1 •
■ *. •■; j ■
. N , ■ .
■ - ; ■ >. * Aia -s
i ' . V * • ‘ .
. : \ * ... ' ' . ' *■ ; ■ '
■ ; ,vv ; v . ■ • , : 1 ,; ; - ' v : '
■ . i '■ v '
- ’ . ■ - ■ . • -- . * ■ * *
■ , ' - < - ' . V '' ■ ’ > V ’
s'. ■ , . ' ■ v V '
\ . * , . * f i I ■
v 1 ■ • ■ • ’ ■ ■. . ■ »V
V V ' J • i
. .. • . V
%
- » f
. .. , ! ■ . I
' ' * 1 V •
1 * »
• *
'• * ; ' . \
• * . * ■*
■ t . • > v ■ ‘ . ■' ■ .
t , \ »
>♦ > ,t , . - t ■
* * - v . t ■
*
• ’ ■ •. . ' ■>.
.
.
' . ■ . “
» ■{ - . '' '
* ' , . I . 1 ■* ‘
■ •
.
-
• v
• i
’ ! ; -4 ' ' .
' « \ r
-- ■


m ml m Wmm iiii
'ip itimmmk •;■ : •
iiillSi Jmm. mmmMIMk
WPMPm \*g»'gals ; j
- p >«?
• %■
• .•■••;••■ hi * H*..., £ ,„.- jj^fei
m Mr M
w
JM, -4
•• : ■;
■ -<^^>y^:^c8w8>*fB«wwbtt»Wiw
K . .■ .,
iipBik A
; g %, ,j|^^, ¥ .
"THE LOST TRIBE"
GEORGE EDWARDS
George Edwards sends greetings to kiddies all over
Australia who listen to and enjoy “The Search for the
Golden Boomerang ” Radio Serial. Mr. Edwards has
great pleasure in making this book available to his
many friends.
MISS BINGHAM
Authoress of the Radio Serial and the book
u The Search for the Golden Boomerang ”
SYDNEY;
Printed and Published by WINN & CO.,
Printers, Balfour Street,


THE GOLDEN
BOOMERANG SERIES.
The Search for the
Golden Boomerang
The Further Adventures
of Tuckonie.
Boomerang Stories for the
Children.
The Lost Tribe.


“THE LOST TRIBE.”
CHAPTER I
The Qhost of a T^ingo!
ONE hot, dry afternoon, Angus, the Scotch
rouseabout who was employed by Betty
Kellaway on Windy Cattle Station, was
leaning over the gate of the road paddock lazily
smoking a pipe. Suddenly round a bend in the
road he saw three figures approaching —an old
swagman accompanied by two little kiddies. Angus
watched with interest as he had never before seen
a swaggy humping the bluey in company with
children. Moreover these children were widely
different in their appearance —one was a little girl
of about ten or eleven years with golden hair and
blue eyes, the other was an aboriginal boy of
about the same age. He wore a pair of short,
coloured trunks much the worse for wear, and
carried spears, a shield, and a boomerang. The
strange trio came on up to the gates of the Station,
and seeing Angus, they stopped.
“Good-day to you, mate,” said the swaggy,
“Any chance of a job on the place?”
“Aye,” said Angus, “there may be that! You’ve
struck us just at the right time. We’re badly in
need of hands on Windy Cattle Station. Come
along in and meet Miss Betty. She’s the prettiest,
nicest, cleverest girl in the whole of these parts.
She’s managed this Station ever since her father
died, and a fine job she’s made of it too until all these
strange things started happening on the place.”
“What strange things?” said the swaggy,
pricking up his ears, for he dearly loved adventure
or mystery.
“It’s not my business to be talking about it,”
was the reply. “Maybe Miss Betty will tell you
Suddenly round a bend in the road he saw three
figures approaching.
herself if she decides to take you on. Anyway,
what’s your name?”
“Dan,” said the swaggy. “I’ve been on the
roads since I was a young fellow and everyone calls
me Happy Dan.”
“Aye,” said Angus, “I think I’ve heard of
you. But what of the two bairns?”
“I’m taking charge of them for the time being,”
said Dan. “They were lost, poor little kids, and I
thought if I got a job here I could get in touch with
their parents and let them know the kiddies were
safe. This is Peggy Harvey, and the little boy is
Tuekonie, the son of Narkunda, Chief of the Arunta
Tribe.”
Peggy looked up into the face of the old Scotch-
man and smiled. “Tuekonie was travelling with my
Mummy and Daddy and some of our friends, and
one afternoon we went out for a walk and a sudden
storm came up, and we couldn’t find our way back.
We walked and walked and in the end we got lost.”
“Yes,” said the little black boy, “we were
out in the storm all night—although we found
some overhanging cliffs for shelter. But the next
morning the rain had washed away the tracks and
we couldn’t find the caravan anywhere.”
“That’s right,” said Peggy, “and it was when
we were walking round and round wondering what
to do that we found Dan and he’s taking care of
us now.”
“Ah well,” said Angus, “You’ll be right
enough here.”
By this time they had reached the verandah of
the old Station home and at that moment a pretty
young girl of about twenty came out through the
open door. “Hullo Angus,” she said, “visitors?”
“Not exactly, Miss Betty,” said Angus. “This
is Happy Dan and he’s after a job.”
“I think I can give you one,” said Betty, smil-
ing at Dan. “We’re very short handed lately. Can
you ride?”
“Yes,” said Dan, with a laugh. “I think I’d
be able to do most anything you’d call on a
station hand to do. But would it be all right for
me to keep these two kiddies here with me until
I can get in touch with their parents and see
what’s to be done with them?”
“By all means,” said Betty,
So she gave Angus instructions that Happy
Dan and the two kiddies were to be given quarters
and then taken round to the cook house where
Hannah the cook soon prepared a fine meal for
them. While they were eating, another little girl
wandered in. She introduced herself as Edie Black,
and soon the three children were chatting together
excitedly, but it was not long before Tuekonie and
Peggy discovered that Edie gave way very easily
to tears. The least little thing they said seemed to


hurt her feelings. By the time the meal was over
Tuckonie was beginning to wonder how they could
give Edie the slip for he did not fancy being
followed about everywhere by a crying child—but
it was useless —no matter where they went, Edie
was determined to follow.
“I do not think I can put up with much of this,
Peggy,” said Tuckonie to his little friend. “She
cries every five minutes.”
“Oh well, never mind, Tuckonie,” said Peggy.
“We must be kind to her. I know it’s terrible that
she cries so much, but maybe she’ll get better if we
let her join in all our games.”
As this conversation was going on, the children
were walking down towards the stables where a
horse had been got ready for Dan. Miss Betty had
promised the kiddies that she would look out for
two little ponies for them as soon as possible and
they were very pleased about this. They reached
the stables just as Dan was about to mount his
horse. He had been told to go and bring the cattle
back from a certain paddock. Dan. a little puzzled as
to why they should be bringing the cattle up so close
to the homestead instead of letting them remain
in the paddock for the night, questioned Angus.
“I suppose now that you’re working here there’d
be no harm in telling you” said the old chap. “The
fact of the matter is that we’ve been missing a lot
of cattle lately. Every dark night some of them
are stolen from the paddocks and we can’t find
out who is doing it. As the sky is clouding over,
Miss Betty thought they had better be brought up
nearer to the Station grounds.”
“But hasn’t she any idea of who is stealing the
cattle?” said Dan.
“No,” said Angus, “that’s the worst of it. We
never seem to be able to find the slightest clue.”
“Maybe I’ll have a bit more luck in that
respect,” said Dan, as he jumped on his horse.
However, it didn’t seem to be Dan’s lucky day, for
no sooner was he on the horse than the beast
reared up unexpectedly and pig-rooted violently.
Dan was thrown to the ground, and the two kiddies
rushed over to him anxiously.
“Are you hurt, Dan?” cried Peggy.
“I'm winded, Peggy,” gasped Dan. “I wasn’t
expecting the horse to play up like that.” Then
he looked towards Angus. “I thought you told me
that was a quiet horse,” he said. The old Scotch-
man was staring at the horse and scratching his
head in amazement.
“Aye, he said, “that’s just the funny part of
it. He’s one of the best behaved horses on the
place. I’ve never known him to do a thing like that
before.”
“That’s funny,” said Dan. “It looks as if he’s
taken a dislike to me, and yet horses generally take
to me pretty well.”
“I don’t see why he would take a dislike to
you,” said Angus. “I can’t think what’s gone
wrong with him. Anyway, I’ll unsaddle him and
put him away—he isn’t safe to be ridden while he’s
like this.” So Angus set about unsaddling the
horse. As he took the saddle and saddle cloth off,
he gave a low whistle. “I say,” he said, “just come
and have a look at this.”
Dan limped over to where Angus stood and,
looking at the horse’s back, he saw a large rose
thorn embedded in its flesh. “How ever did that
get there,” he cried.
Angus looked thoughtful. “It certainly didn’t
get there of its own accord,” he replied. “It must
have been put there.”
“Did you leave him alone for any time since
he was unsaddled?” said Dan.
“Tes, I believe I did. said Angus thinking
back. “I saddled him up, then left him for a few
minutes to go and talk to one of the men. Whoever
put that thorn under the saddle must have done it
while I was away.”
Little Peggy looked puzzled. “I can’t under-
stand it, she said. ‘ ‘ Why would anyone want to
hurt a poor horse that doesn’t do anvone any
harm?”
“It wasn t the horse they were after I’m
thinking, youngster,” said Angus, “It was your
friend, Happy Dan here, they wanted to hurt.”
“But why would they want to hurt Happy
Dan?” asked Tuckonie.
“I don’t know,” said Angus with a sigh. “I
can’t think—but as I told you, things aren’t running
too smoothly here at present.”
When Dan told Miss Betty about it, she was
very worried. “It seems such a spiteful thing to do
when nothing could be gained by it.”
“I'm not so sure of that, Miss Betty,” said
Dan—“ Perhaps quite a lot could be gained by it.”
“Why, whatever do you mean, Dan?” said
Miss Betty.
Just this,” said Dan, “you’ve been missing
a lot of cattle lately haven’t you, and I was going
down to the far paddock to bring those cattle up°
nearer to the Station. It seems to me that the
thieves, whoever they are, did not want me to
bring the cattle back—they wanted them to be left
down in that far paddock so that they would be
able to get off with a few more of them to-night.
That s why they put that thorn under the horse’s
saddle, hoping that I might come to grief when I was
thrown and be unable to go down and get them.”
“Why yes, that’s an idea,” said Betty, “and
they would probably know that I was short handed
and wouldn’t be able to send anyone in vour
place. The other men will be fully occupied in
bringing back the cattle from the other paddocks.”
Yes, said Dan, “and it’s clouding over too
—that means it will be a black night to-night
just the sort of night which would make it easy
for them to steal some more cattle.”
That s true, said Betty, “but the most
v mg thing about it is this. Angus was only
away from the horse for a little while—that means
that no stranger would have had time to go and
put the thorn under the saddle, unless he was
hidden somewhere near the stables, and that’s
unlikely because he would have taken such a risk


of being seen. In that case we must have a traitor
working for us on the Station.”
“Then,” said Dan, “we must make it our
business to find out who is that traitor. Have you
got any ideas about it?”
“No,” said Miss Betty, “I can’t think of anyone
here. There was a man named Doug Latman whom
my father suspected. He used to work here.
Some time after my father died I came to suspect
him too, so he was dismissed, but I couldn’t really
prove anything against him. He wasn’t a very nice
man and I shouldn’t be surprised if he’s mixed up
in this somewhere.”
“Do you know if he had any friends when he
was here on the Station?” queried Dan.
“I don’t know,” said Betty. “I don’t think any
of them liked him very much.”
“We’ll just have to keep our eyes open,” said
Dan. “Now I’d better go out and get another horse
and get those cattle back. You’ll need to bring
them all in to-night I think.”
“I’d like to, Dan,” said Betty, “but I’m afraid
I haven’t enough men to bring all the cattle back.
This is an enormous Station, you know, and as I’ve
told vou, we haven’t nearly enough men working
here.”
“Well then,” said Dan, surprised, “why don’t
you get more?”
“I do when I can,” said Betty, “but they don’t
stay. That’s another funny thing. Men have been
leaving the place and we haven’t been able to find
out the reason.”
“Didn’t you ask them?” said Dan.
“Yes,” said Betty, “but they just told me they
didn’t fancy working here. They said things hap-
pened on the place that they didn’t like. I had
quite a number of Aboriginees working here too but
I couldn’t keep them—they said the place was
haunted.”
“Haunted!” said Dan and laughed.
“Yes,” said Betty. “I know it’s ridiculous,
but they’re so superstitious.”
“It strikes me,” said Dan, “that there’s a lot
more in this than meets the eye.”
“There’s another thing I haven’t told you,”
said Betty. “There’s a rival Station some miles
further to the Northwest. At least I don’t know
whether I should call it a rival Station but we’re
not on very friendly terms. I think the overseer
there, that’s the man next in command to the
manager, would like to get a job managing this
Station.”
“I see.” said Dan, “and what about this
Doug Latman that you told me about—the man
you dismissed from here. Does he work on this
other Station?”
“Yes, he does,” said Miss Betty, “and for all
I know he might be working hand in glove with
Jake Henderson, the overseer.”
“Well,” said Dan, “we’ll have to try to beat
them at their own game, Miss Betty, that’s all.”
That night when they were having dinner Dan
explained to Hannah and Angus a plan to watch the
paddocks. “You see, Hannah,” said Dan, “I don’t
think that a cattle thief will steal cattle while
we’re looking on.”
Hannah snorted with disgust. “We’ve had
men down there watching the paddocks before,”
she said, “yet in the morning the cattle have been
gone just the same.”
‘ ‘ What! ’ ’ said Dan, ‘‘ and nobody saw them !’ ’
Hannah looked mysterious. “It’s my belief,”
she said, “that the men didn’t stay down there in
the paddocks all night, they were too frightened
of the ghost.”
“The ghost!” said Peggy and Tuckonie in
chorus, and Edie burst into tears and ran from the
room.
“Yes,” said Hannah, “a ghost that rides on a
big white horse.”
Dan laughed.
“There’s more than that,” added Hannah —
“they say it’s a ghost of a dingo.”
“Funnier and funnier,” said Dan—“a dingo
riding on a white horse—or any kind of a horse
for that matter.”
“You can laugh if you like,” said Hannah,
“but the men have heard it howling.”
“I’d like an exact description of that ghost”
said Dan.
“If you ask Moonlight, he’ll be able to give
you one,” said Hannah. “He’s a half-caste worker
and he’s seen it.”
“I’ll certainly go and see Moonlight before I
go out on that ride to-night,” said Dan.
Half an hour later he was down at the little
humpy where Moonlight lived, talking about the
ghost. “Are you sure you’re not making this up,
Moonlight?” said Dan sternly.
“No, boss, no,” said Moonlight. “I see him
with my own two eyes. Him have dingo’s head.
When him go riding by we all run away, then when
we come back, the cattle him stolen.”
“I’m willing to bet you here and now that the
person who rides that horse is no more a ghost than
I am. And I : m going to find out to-night,” chal-
lenged Dan.
That night the men were all stationed in the
various paddocks keeping watch. Dan peered into
the darkness until he thought his eyes would drop
out, but not a thing did he see. Then suddenly
Tuckonie came running to him through the dark-
ness. ‘ ‘Dan ! Dan! ”he cried. ‘‘ I’ve seen the ghost! ’ ’
“Look here, youngster,” said Dan, “are you
sure you did not imagine this?” But at that
moment a wild, dismal howl rang out on the
still night—it was exactly like the cry of a
dingo. The next minute horse’s hoofs were heard
and, as they watched, a weird white figure galloped
by. “Well, by gosh,” said Dan, “the ghost!”
Springing on to his horse, Dan was about to
follow, but at that moment the white figure dis-
appeared into the blackness of the bushes which
grew along the other side of the track, and Dan
knew it was useless to try and follow him on such
a black night. “But I’ll get that ghost sometime,
if it’s the last thing I do,” he said.


“The (JTCissing QAgreement. }
THE following morning Dan and the kiddies
left the station early, and came back to the
paddocks from which the cattle had been
stolen. The idea was that Tuckonie should follow
the tracks of the horse, and in this way they hoped
they might find the hiding place of the so-called
ghost. Sure enough when they reached the paddock
the tracks of the horse were there, and Tuckonie
carefully followed them, the others in turn following
Tuckonie, For an hour or so they went on in this
way until the footprints led to a narrow track
winding down a steep and rocky hillside into a
kind of little valley. Here to their surprise they
found a clearing roughly fenced around.
“Upon my soul,” said Dan, “I believe we’ve
discovered their hideout. This place hasn’t been
fenced in away down here for nothing—this is
where they keep the stolen cattle I should think,
until they have enough here to make a herd suf-
ficiently large to warrant being taken off somewhere
for sale.”
“Well, Dan,” said Tuckonie, “we cannot follow
the tracks any further because here they are wiped
out by the tracks of cattle.”
“Anyway,” said Dan, “we’ve found out some-
thing. If we come down here after the next robbery
we’ll probably catch the thieves red handed.” So
saying they turned for home.
Back at the cattle station they were met with
bad news.
Miss Betty told them that the artesian bore
had been mysteriously smashed.
Of course, Miss Betty wrote at once to the city
ordering materials to put the big bore right, but it
worried her that the cattle should have to remain
so far from the station. Dan then suggested that
they should round up all the cattle into one big
herd, and take them to a distant water hole. He
said he thought they should remain there until the
bore was fixed. Miss Betty agreed to this, and so
the next morning Dan, Angus, Peggy and Tuckonie
set off on horseback with the cattle, after carefully
giving Edie the slip. It was a long, hard ride, but
at evening they reached the water hole. By the time
the evening meal was prepared it was dark. The
cattle were peacefully grazing when suddenly two
shots rang out.
“Hello,” said Dan, “what’s that? Be on your
guard everyone.” The next minute a white horse
with a strange figure upon his back flashed out
from some bushes, and rode at a gallop in amongst
the cattle, and quickly out again. Being frightened
by this apparition, the cattle nearest to it, turned
to run, and in a few moments the whole herd was
stampeding.
Quickly, Angus,” said Dan, “jump on your
horse, go oyer to the left, and head them off. I’ll
go to the right.”
By this time the leaders of the cattle were
almost upon them, but Peggy and Tuckonie, not
being as used to horses as Dan and Angus, were
slow in mounting, and for a moment it looked as
though they might be trodden underfoot. Dan
seeing the danger, hauled Peggy up on to his horse,
and placed her in front of him on the saddle. Angus
did the same with Tuckonie. They were only just
in time for the next minute the cattle came up with
a rush. Both men knew that their lives were in
danger—the cattle were afraid and unruly, and it
took the men all their time to control them. How-
ever, at last they succeeded in restoring order, and
the frightened beasts were gathered together again.
“That was a narrow shave,” said Dan. “Who-
ever is Miss Betty’s enemy, he certainly means
business.”
“Yes,” said Angus, “but I don’t see how he
could have gained anything by making the cattle
stampede.”
“He probably wanted to injure us,” said Dan.
“Maybe he thinks we’re finding out too much.”
“Do you think we’d be safe to camp for the
night now?” asked Angus.
“Well Angus,” he said, “I think that we should
build some sort of a corral for ourselves. Then if
we put up our tent inside it we’d be fairly safe if
the cattle did stampede.
So they built a small corral, and settled down
for the night. But fortunately nothing more
happened to disturb the peace.
In a week’s time, the artesian bore having been
repaired, the little band went back once more to
Tuckonie finding the footprints of the horse.


the station. But during their absence they found
that more mysterious happenings had taken place.
A hole had been torn in the wire netting fence of
the large paddock in which the sheep, and the j oung
lambs were kept, and a killer dog had got into the
paddock killing many of the young lambs.
“I can’t see how that would do your enemies
any good,” said Dan, puzzled.
“I’ve been thinking things over, replied
Betty, “and I have a theory which may explain
things. You remember I told you that a certain
Jake Henderson was anxious to get the manage-
ment of this station away from me?”
“Yes,” said Dan, “I remember that. ’
“It strikes me that he might be doing all these
things to make it appear as if I were not capable
of managing the station so that the management
might be taken away from me, and he might get
it.” continued Betty.
“Hmm,” said Dan, “but haven’t I heard some-
thing about an agreement?”
“Yes,” said Betty, “old Mr. Jamieson, the
father of the man who owns the station now, made
an agreement with my father, who was very ill
at the time, that if he died I was to be allowed to
carry on the management. You see, old Mr.
Jamieson knew me very well, and thought that I
was very capable.”
“In that case,” said Dan, “they can’t take the
management away from you.”
“Oh, but you see, I can’t find the agreement,”
said Betty. “My father was suspicious, and hid the
document away somewhere. He intended to tell me
where it was, but died suddenly before he could do
that, and I’ve never been able to find it.”
“That’s not so good,” said Dan.
“Tuckonie and I will start looking for it this
very day,” said Peggy.”
“That’s very sweet, Peggy,” said Betty, “but
I’m afraid it won’t be much use.”
“It might be,” said Tuckonie, “because I
have been promised good fortune by the spirits of
my Tribe. Our medicine man, Maroubra, told me
that whenever I wanted anything I should call
upon these ancient spirits, and they would help me.
You have been a good friend to me, and so I will
call on the spirits of my tribe to help me find the
agreement for you.”
“"We’!! need to find it very quickly,” Betty
said, “for I had a letter from Mr. Jamieson this
morning.”
“That’s the young fellow, isn’t it,” said Dan,
“the one who owns it now?”
“Yes,” said Betty, “old Mr. Jamieson has
been dead some time. Young Mr. Jamieson says
that he’s very upset about the large losses in cattle,
and also about the smashing up of the bore. He
says that although he doesn’t want to be unkind
about it he really feels that the management of
this station is too much for a girl,”
“Anyway, don’t you worry, Miss Betty,” said
Dan. “whoever it is who’s causing all this mischief
will be sure to make a mistake sometime or other,
and when he does we’ll catch him.”
The next day, nothing more having happened
to disturb the people on the station, Peggy, Tuckonie
and Edie, being a little tired of the usual games
they played, decided to build a lookout tower. They
went down to the old disused bakehouse, and
thrust a bough of a tree up the old chimney. Then
Tuckonie climbed up, and beat down all the soot.
Next they all three got to it with a bucket of water,
and in time the chimney was quite clean, although
the three children were just the opposite.
“Now,” said Tuckonie, “this is our little secret
staircase, and we can climb up the chimney, and
then when we’re on the roof we 11 build our little
lookout platform.”
However, Peggy and Edie were very timid
about climbing up the old bough which served for a
ladder inside the chimney.
“It’s quite easy really,” said Tuckonie, “there
are little bumps ail along the bough which make
good footholds.”
“I think we ought to have a better way up.
said Edie tearfully, “we might fall and hurt our-
selves climbing up there.”
By this time Peggy was beginning to lose
patience with her little friend. After all, she
thought, she could forgive someone for crying
now and then but Edie really did seem to cry all
the time.
“Oh, do stop it,” she said, “you make such
a terrible noise. Now dry your eyes, Edie, and
I’ll help you.”
Peggy went up the bough first, and Edie
followed afterwards. However, when they were al-
most at the top, and Tuckonie was calling to them to
come out on to the roof, Edie felt she was falling, and
gripped Peggy around the legs. In the struggle
which followed, the bough bumped from side to
side of the chimney, and some loose bricks fell down
into the empty fire-place below. Edie was so
frightened by this time that her yells could have
been heard half a mile away.
“Oh, it’s no use,” said Tuckonie, “we had
better go down. Edie will never be able to play
this game.” So down they all came. When they
reached the bottom to their surprise they saw that
a tin box had fallen down with the bricks. Taking
it up to the homestead as fast as they could, they
showed it to Dan, and told him how they had
found it. Although the box was locked Dan at
last succeeded in prying it open, and there inside
was an envelope. Written on the envelope was
“Letter of Agreement between Arthur Jamieson.
Senior and Robert Kellaway regarding the man-
agement of the Station by Miss Betty Kellaway.
“Hooray,” said the kiddies all in chorus,
“we’ve found the missing Agreement.” Smiling,
chattering, and laughing they took it in to Miss
Betty. To show the kiddies how pleased she was
Miss Betty called Hannah, and told her that they
were to have a little party. The good natured
Hannah fell in with the plans at once, and set to
baking cakes, and pastry, and making jugs of fruit
cup, and that night the children feasted until they
couldn’t eat another thing. The following day


Mr. Jamieson arrived, and after having seen the
letter of agreement, he decided that it was only
fair that he should give Miss Betty another chance,
although he was still very worried about the missing
cattle. Also he thought it was strange that Miss
Betty could not keep the station workers. But he
decided to wait and see how things went on before
he did anything definite in the matter. That after-
noon as the children were playing, Tuckonie was
surprised to see a tall, dark warrior stalking up
the drive to the house. When the warrior came
over Tuckonie recognised him as Maroubra, the
Medicine Man, of the Arunta Tribe, and he and
Peggy both rushed over joyfully, and greeted the
dark man.
“Maroubra,” cried Tuckonie, “what are you
doing here?”
“Tuckonie, little Chieftain,” said Maroubra,
“we are all here. The Arunta Tribe has come this
way to escape the drought, but unfortunately the
drought has followed us, and there is very little
food to be had.”
“Oh,” said Tuckonie, “I have learned many of
the secrets of the white man now, Maroubra, and I
can teach you how to grow food so that you need
never be without it.”
“That would be a great thing, Tuckonie,” said
Maroubra.
“All you have to do,” said Peggy, “is to find
a fertile place. Of course, that’s a little bit hard
just now with the drought but —”
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “but there are water
holes, and if you like to take the trouble of carrying
the water from the water holes, you can grow
vegetables and things which are very good to eat.”
“Let’s ask Mr. Jamieson if we can have some
of the seeds from the station garden, shall we,
Tuckonie?” said Peggy.
"When Mr. Jamieson heard the request he wil-
lingly gave permission for some of the seeds to be
given to the Arnnta Tribe, and hearing that they
had had a bad time with the drought he also sent
them over a gift of food. The Arnnta warriors
were delighted, and put on a great corroborree in
honour of Mr. Jamieson’s generous action. After
the corroborree was over, Tuckonie showed the
warriors of his tribe how to prepare ground and
plant the seeds.
Teggy an d Tuckonie offer to look for the missing
document.
(Page 5)
CHAPTER 111
Happy T>a n Test
ONE very hot day, the children decided to
have a swim in the dam and Edie insisted
on going with them. About a quarter of an
hour later they were all splashing around in the
dam and having a great time. Then they scrambled
out, and sat on the banks to talk, but as Edie sat
down she let out a terrific yell.
“Oh,” she said, “I’ve sat on something sharp.”
“Goodness me!” said Peggy, “there’s no need
to scream out like that even if you did. It didn’t
hurt you, did it?”
No, said Edie doubtfully, “but it frightened
me.”
Getting up she discovered that she’d sat on
a sharp old tin. As Tuckonie picked it up he
noticed that there was a piece of white paper inside
it. Pulling this out the children discovered that
it was a note. Peggy looked at it eagerly. “Nothing
going too well,” she read. “Happy Dan and those
two kiddies are spoiling all our plans. Watch
them, and get them off the place if you can.”
When Dan saw the letter he said he thought it
must have been written by Miss Betty’s enemies.
M e 11 have to take this note, and show it to some
of the men, he said, “and see if they know the
handwriting.” Later an old man on the station
recognised the handwriting as Doug Latman’s.
“That was the man Miss Betty put off the
station, wasn’t it,” said Peggy.
Aes,” said Dan, “that means we’ve got to
keep our eyes open for Doug Latman.”
M ell, said the station hand who was known
as old Johnnie, “I’ll have a few words with Doug
Latman if I catch him prowling about the place.””
“Good man,” said Dan, “and if you do see
him don’t let him get away. Maybe this Doug
Latman is the man who has been posing as a


ghost, and frightening the aboriginal and half-caste
workers off the station.”
“Yes,” said Johnnie, “maybe you’re right.”
Meantime, Mr. Jamieson had told Miss Betty
that he wanted to have a look around the property
so they had gone off on horseback. They did not
return until towards evening, and then to their
surprise as they crossed the verandah they saw a
note pinned on to the front door. It was addressed
to Mr. Jamieson.
“Great Scott,” said Mr. Jamieson, as he read
the note.
“Is anything wrong?” said Betty, because
she noticed that Mr. Jamieson looked worried.
“Just listen to this,” he said, and proceeded
to read the note. “This letter is just a friendly note
of warning. I do not want to run anyone down, but
I feel it is my duty to warn you that the man called
Happy Dan who is working on your station is a
thief. He has been in prison twice for stealing
money. I think in your own interests you should
dismiss him from the station as soon as possible.
Signed, A Friend.”
“Oh,” said Betty, “what a dreadful thing to
say! I’d stake my life on it that Dan is as honest
a man as you could find anywhere.”
“I’m not going to take any notice of it,” said
Mr. Jamieson, “I think that these crooks who have
been doing all the damage lately have taken a
dislike to Dan because he’s upset their plans
once ©r twice, and they want to bluff us into getting
rid of him.”
“Yes,” said Betty, “that’s just what I think
too.”
“But it’s only fair that this letter should
be shown to Dan,” said Mr. Jamieson, “I wonder
if he’d be about the place now —Let me see, what’s
the time? Good gracious, my watch has gone!”
“Surely not,” said Betty.
“Yes,” said Mr. Jamieson, “it’s not here!”
“It must have dropped out of your pocket
when we were riding,” said the girl.
“No,” said Mr. Jamieson, “it couldn’t have
done that, it was attached to my pocket by a chain
with a pin at the end of it. Great Scott, my wallet
has gone too!”
“Oh,” said Betty, “how dreadful, and after
this note you’ll think that Dan is responsible. When
did you last see your watch, and your wallet?”
“I was down at the stables this morning,”
said Mr. Jamieson, “and as it was hot I took my
eoat off, and left it lying over one of the fences for
a time. I know my watch and wallet were in my
pocket when I put it there, but I didn’t think to
look for them when I put my coat on again.”
“Well,” said Betty, “I think we ought to go
and find Dan now, and tell him what’s happened.
It’s only fair to him.”
So off they went in search of Dan. They
found him with Angus tidying up the feed sheds.
“I’ll go in, and see him,” said Mr. Jamieson,
“you sit down here on the log for a while.”
As Betty sat down she noticed that the two
men had left their coats on the log, and as she
shifted them a watch fell out of Dan’s pocket. She
turned quite pale when she saw it for she didn’t
think that Dan could possibly have owned such an
expensive watch.
“Mr. Jamieson,” she called, “come back here
a minute, will you?”
“What’s the matter,” said Mr. Jamieson re-
turning, “you look very white. Has anything
gone wrong?”
Betty held out the watch towards him.
“Have you ever seen this before?” she said.
“Great Scott,” said Mr. Jamieson, “it’s mine.”
“Oh, what a dreadful thing,” said Miss Betty.
“It really looks as if the writer of that note was
right!”
Mr. Jamieson called Dan over and showed
him the watch. Dan looked at it, wondering what
it was all about.
“This fell out of your pocket, Dan,” said Mr.
Jamieson. “I’d like to know where you got it?”
“What!” said Dan in amazement, “I’ve
never seen it before. That watch wasn’t in my
pocket.”
“Oh yes it was,” replied Mr, Jamieson. It’s
my watch that I missed some time ago. Now,
I’d like an explanation Dan.”
Poor Dan went crimson as he saw what this
meant, but he was unable to explain it.
“I just can’t account for it,” he said, “I don’t
know anything about it. How could a thing like
that get into my pocket?”
“I can guarantee that it was your pocket Dan,”
said Betty. “I shifted your coat when I went to sit
on the log, and the watch fell out.”
Then Dan began to feel very angry.
“Well, Mr, Jamieson,” he said, “If that’s the
case, I can’t blame you for thinking that I stole it,
but you’re not the only one who wants this matter
straightened out. I’ve never stolen anything in
my life! I can only give you my word of honour
that I didn’t take it, and that I know nothing
about it.”
Meantime Peggy and Tuckonie were standing
by, looking very upset.
“Oh you must believe Dan,” cried Peggy, “he
wouldn’t do a thing like that, Mr, Jamieson.”
“No,” said Tuckonie, “I know he would not.
Someone else must have stolen the watch and put it
into Dan’s pocket.”
“I can’t think why anyone should want to
do that,” said Mr. Jamieson. “That’s a valuable
watch, and if a thief had taken it, surely he would
want to keep it for himself.”
“Then you don’t believe me?” said Dan. “I
suppose I could hardly expect you to, in the face
of M r hat has happened. I dare say you’ll ask me
to leave the station, now, eh?”
“It does seem the only thing I can do,” said
Mr. Jamieson. “However, I’ll think it over and
I’ll let you know later.”
About an hour afterwards, Betty went into the
sitting room where Mr. Jamieson was sitting. She


told him that she had thought of a plan to prove
whether Dan was innocent or not.
“In that case, Miss Kell away,” said Mr.
Jamieson, “I’ll be very pleased to hear it.”
“Didn’t you tell me that you or someone
else would have to go into the nearest township
end collect some money there for cattle that
had been delivered through an agency.”
“Yes, that’s right,” said Mr. Jamieson in
surprise.
“Send Dan to collect that money,” said Betty.
“After what’s happened?” asked Mr. Jamieson.
“Yes,” said Betty, “send him with a sealed
note to the agent, asking him to mark the money
before he gives it to Dan. In that way it would
be very easy to trace if Dan stole it. On the other
hand if he returns here with the money we’ll know
that he’s perfectly honest, and that there was some
trickery in that affair about the watch.”
“Well,” said Mr. Jamieson, thoughtfully, “the
plan seems a good one in one way. On the other
hand, I don’t like risking the money. Still as you
say it should be easy to trace.”
“Listen Mr. Jamieson,” said Betty, “I’ll make
a bargain with you. I really and truly believe that
Dan will return here with the money. If he
doesn’t, I’ll give up the management of this
station of my own accord. And,” Miss Betty con-
tinued, “you really don’t think I’m competent
to run it, and I admit we’re still having a few
accidents. I have a feeling that you wouldn’t have
allowed me to remain in this position except for
that agreement with my father. Well, now is your
opportunity. Will you agree to my plan?”
“I wouldn’t like to be responsible for driving
you away from the station, if Dan didn’t return,”
said Mr. Jamieson. “But on the other hand, to speak
truthfully, I still do feel that it needs a man to
manage it. Suppose we say that if Dan doesn’t
return you give up the management of the Station,
but you remain on here as secretary?”
“All right then,” said Miss Betty happily,
“If that suits you, it suits me.”
“Good,” said Mr. Jamieson, “it’s a bargain.”
When Dan heard that he was to be entrusted
with all that money, he couldn’t make it out at all.
When it was explained to him he said: “You
can take it from me, I’ll bring the money back
all of it.”
The following day Dan set off for the township
on horseback. It was a beautiful day, and Dan felt
very happy, as he cantered along the rough bush
track. When evening fell, he dismounted, made a
camp fire, toasted bread and grilled some bacon.
Then he settled down for the night. When the
next morning dawned, he was off again, and by
mid-day reached the township. He went to the
agent, collected the money, and after having a meal
and a rest, set off on the long ride home again , . .
the money reposing safely in a wallet in his pocket.
“This will show Mr. Jamieson that I’m to be
trusted,” he thought, as he cantered along.
Every hour that brought him closer to the
homestead made him feel happier, as he pictured
himself handing the money safely over to Mr.
Jamieson. Towards evening of the second day
he came to the shortcut which Mr. Jamieson had
advised him to take. It led down a steep bridle
track. The trees grew closely on either side, and
met overhead, and the shadows were very thick . . .
so thick that it made the little track quite gloomy.
But this didn’t matter to Dan ... he was feeling
too happy about getting a chance to prove himself
an honest man. However, as he cantered along, his
horse stumbled and for a moment Dan lurched to
the side. Then he felt a sharp blow on the head,
and the next moment he fell to the ground . . .
unconscious!
CHAPTER IV.
( Van’s ‘Dismissal
MEANWHILE, the day having been such a nice
one, Tuckonie had promised Edie and Peggy
that he would take them over to the camping
grounds of the Arunta Tribe, to meet his people.
The kiddies went over on their ponies. They
went round with some of the warriors to see how
they’d been getting on with the vegetable garden,
which Tuckonie had shown them how to make. To
the little boy’s delight, all the plants were growing
well.
“You’ll have plenty of food when these are
fully grown, my people,” he said.
Then Tuckonie saw Maroubra coming towards
him.
“Where is your friend, the white man, Tuck-
onie?” asked the old Medicine Man.
“Oh,” said Tuckonie, “poor Dan has been in
a lot of trouble, and he’s been sent away, but we
think he’ll be home to-night, and when he comes
home, bringing the white man’s money, then every-
thing will be all right.”
“So he has been in trouble?” said Maroubra.
“Is it a dangerous journey on which he goes?”
“We don’t know about it being dangerous,
Maroubra, but it’s very important, because some-
body stole Mr. Jamieson’s watch and it was found
in Dan’s pocket, and he got the blame,” said Peggy.
“He is no thief,” said the old Medicine Man
proudly. “He is a friend of our tribe, and no
friend of our tribe is a thief.”
“No,” said Peggy, “we know he isn’t, but
you can’t blame Mr. Jamieson for thinking he was,


-y t % ; ppg |p - 1 - m ■-< 5 -- , > *, ige .v^ c , ,' <r-s - i
{See Page 6 }
Peggy and Tuckonie joyfully greet Marouhra.


when the watch was found in his pocket. Anyway
he’s gone to the township now to collect some
money, and he’s bringing it back, and when he
brings it back without any of it missing, then Mr.
Jamieson will know he s not a thief, because if he
was, he would have stolen it, wouldn’t he?
“I do hope he comes back all right,’ said
Tuckonie.
“We will see,” said the old Medicine Man
solemnly . . . “I will make magic and see how it
it with him.”
With that, Maroubra told the warriors to sit
quietly in a circle, then within the ring of warriors,
he drew a circle in the earth and taking some bones
from a kangaroo skin pouch which he wore on his
belt he threw them into the circle, singing a strange,
chanting song as he did so.
The old man then placed a strand of hair over
the bones.
“This is the hair of a medicine man who died
long ago,” he explained to the children.
Then he took his Bull-roarer, which was a
strange looking object made of string and attached
to some twine . . . and he whirled it over the circle.
It made a most peculiar sound . . . like the
buzzing of thousands of bees.
Then the old man raised his voice and spoke;
“Oh spirits,” he said, “tell me if all is well with
the white man who is the friend of our tribe.
Speak—thy tribe listens.”
Peggy and Tuckonie listened carefully but
they couldn’t hear a sound. Then Edie started to
whisper.
“The spirits aren’t going to answer him,” she
said to Tuckonie. Tuckonie gave her a nudge and
told her to keep quiet. Suddenly a gust of wind
blew over the little group, and it made a most
peculiar sound as it passed.
“My question is answered,” said Maroubra.
“WTiat did the spirits say to you, Maroubra,”
asked Tuckonie. The old man looked solemnly at
The medicine man promises to make magic.
the boy, “The spirit said these words,” he replied.
“The white man Happy Dan is in danger, 0 Mar-
oubra. He rode along the track where the trees
grew dense, and it was dark, and two men waited
for him. They were hidden high up in the trees,
and there was a strand of rope stretched across
from tree to tree and when the horse came upon
it he stumbled. As he stumbled, one of the men
leaned out of the tree and struck the white man
over the head, and he knew no more. Then did
the two men come down from their trees, and they
robbed him of that which he carried. Your friend
is in danger . . . grave trouble hangs over his
head.”
“Then Dan won’t be able to bring the money
back,” said Peggy.
“No,” said Tuckonie. “They’ll feel quite
sure he’s a thief now,”
Just then another gust of wind blew over the
tree tops and Maroubra listened reverently.
“The spirit voice has spoken again,” he said,
“telling us not to fear, for the spirits of the
Arunta Tribe watch over all the friends of the
Arunta Tribe, and they will help us if they can.”
“We must go back home as quickly as we can,”
said Tuckonie, “and tell Mr. Jamieson what Mar-
oubra has seen in his magic circle. If we tell him
the story first, and then Dan tells him the same
story when he arrives back Mr. Jamieson will know
that it’s true.”
Peggy looked thoughtful. “I see what you
mean, Tuckonie,” she said. “If we get there before
Dan, he’ll know that Dan couldn’t have told us to
say that, because we wouldn’t have seen him. But
what will happen if we don’t get there before Dan
gets home?”
“Then,” said Tuckonie, “I’m afraid Mr.
Jamieson will not believe him, for he will think that
Happy Dan has told us what to say to save him.”
“Warriors,” he said, “we must say good-bye to
you and leave for the station at once.”
“So saying, the three kiddies got on to their
horses and rode back in the direction of the home-
stead. However, their plan did not succeed, for
Happy Dan, having recovered from his accident,
had ridden as fast as he could to the homestead
and arrived there before the children.
Miss Betty threw open the door and called him
in, with a happy smile on her face. But when
she saw Dan’s expression, her smile vanished.
“You have brought the money Dan, haven’t
you?” she asked.
“No I haven’t brought the money, Miss Betty,”
said Dan.
“What’s that?” said Mr. Jamieson who had
just entered the room, “You haven’t got it?”
“No,” said Dan sadly, “I know that this is
going to sound like a stoi\y I made up, but as I
passed down the bridle track something hit me on
the head and knocked me out. When I became
conscious again, the money was gone.”
“Oh Dan,” said Mr. Jamieson, “surely you
don’t expect us to believe that tale.”
At this moment the two kiddies came in and


when they saw that Dan had arrived home before
them their happy little faces fell.
“Oh we’ve come too late,” they said.
Quickly the children told their story, but they
could see by the look on Mr. Jamieson s face that
he was doubtful about it. “I’m sorry kiddies,” he
said, “but I haven’t very much faith in Medicine
Men.”
Betty, however, was more trusting. “After all,
Mr. Jamieson,” she said, “that would explain Dan’s
accident, it’s just what could have happened.”
Mr. Jamieson looked doubtful. “A better ex-
planation would be that Dan is in league w r ith this
old Medicine Man,” he said. “He probably bribed
him with a gift or something, to say such a thing.”
Then little Tuckonie drew himself up proudly.
“Stop, wdiite man,” he said. “I will not have
such words spoken. You have already insulted
my friend, Happy Dan, and now you are insulting
my father’s Medicine Man, Maroubra. Maroubra
would not take a bribe, nor would he do anything
that wasn’t honest. I tell you he saw these things
by means of his magic, and w r hat Dan has told you
is the truth.”
“You’re a good loyal little kiddie, Tuckonie,”
said Mr. Jamieson, smiling, “and I don’t blame you
for standing by your tribe and your friend. Just the
same, I don’t believe in this magic business, and
I'm afraid I don’t believe in your friend, Happy
Dan, any longer.”
“Oh,” said Dan, with a sigh, “I don’t suppose
I can expect you to. What happens now?”
Betty looked at him sorrowfully. “As far as
I’m concerned Dan, it means that I lose the manage-
ment of this station.”
“What’s that you say, Miss Betty?” said
Dan.
“Yes,” said Betty, “I made a bargain with
Mr. Jamieson that if you didn’t return with the
money I’d give up the management of the station.
If you did return with the money you would have
been allowed to stay on here because your innocence
would have been proved. Everyone would have
known then that you did not take the watch in the
first place.”
“I see,” said Dan, “so it was a test and I
failed. Even if I had known, I couldn’t have done
anything about it. How was Ito know that some-
one was waiting to knock me out along the bridle
track. Well, what’s going to happen now, Mr.
Jamieson?”
“I’m afraid it means that you’ll have to leave
the station,” he replied.
“Then Peggy and I will have to go with him,”
said Tuckonie.
“No,” said Mr. Jamieson. “I’m afraid I
can’t allow that. As far as you’re concerned,
Tuckonie, you can go if your tribe allows it, but
I can’t let Peggy go roaming around the bush in the
company of a man who has been proved to be
dishonest. Her parents wmuld never approve of
that. Since she’s here, I feel in a way that I’m
responsible for her, so the only thing to be done
is to keep her here until her father and mother
either come for her or send for her. You won’t
mind looking after her, will you, Miss Kellaway?”
“Why no, of course not,” said Betty.
“Well, kiddies,” said Dan, “it looks like good-
bye.”
“No,” said Tuckonie, “it will not be good-bye
between you and me Dan, for my tribe are your
friends, and while they are here, there is a home for
you ahvays,”
That night Dan felt too depressed and weary
to go out with the roundsmen . . . they went down
to bring back the cattle, but he forgot his weariness
when the men returned saying that the ghost had
ridden right through the herd. The aboriginal and
half-caste workers on the station were almost para-
lysed with fear and told Mr, Jamieson that they
w r ould not stay any longer. When Dan heard this
he thought it was a good opportunity to ask Mr.
Jamieson if he might stay a little longer, hoping in
his heart of hearts that in some way he might be
able to clear himself. “You’ve hardly any hands
on the station left now, Mr. Jamieson,” he said.
“You may be able to get some, but they’ll need
one or two men here to tell them what to do on the
place.”
“That’s true enough,” said Mr. Jamieson, but
I didn’t think you would wish to remain after what
has taken place.”
“Mr. Jamieson,” said Dan, “I don’t like leav-
ing here under a shadow, I’m hoping that something
may turn up within the week that will give me a
clue as to who really stole the money.”
“Very well then,” said Mr. Jamieson, and the
matter was concluded.
Happy Dan rides as fast as he can to the
homestead.


“The Unmasking of the Thieves”
HOWEVER, they had a very hard time carry-
ing on all the work of a big station with
so few hands and Tuckonie, wanting to be
helpful, went to Mr. Jamieson and suggested that
the warriors of his tribe should come er and
work on the station until such time as Mr. Jamie-
son would be able to replace them. Mr. Jamieson
was delighted with the idea, so that afternoon,
Tuckonie went over and told his father, Chief
Narkunda. The Arunta warriors were only too
'pleased to be able to help and that night found
'them all over in the sleeping hut in the station
grounds.
The following day when the Arunta warriors
had left for the morning’s work, and had gathered
round in a ring to have their lunch, they saw a
strange old man approaching them. He was a
white man, bent almost double with age, and had a
long beard and piercing eyes. He strode up to the
Arunta warriors and in cracked but eerie tones
enquired who their Chief was. Chief Narkunda
came out to greet the man. “I am Chief Narkunda
of the Aruntas,” he said. “What do you want
with me?”
“I have come to warn you,” said the old man.
“Warn me,” said Narkunda, “of what?”
“I, alone of all the white men am permitted to
look into the future,” said the old man. “The
unknown is known to me.”
At this the warriors all started chattering to-
gether excitedly. Narkunda looked at him curiously.
“You mean you are a kind of medicine man,” he
asked.
“Yes,” said the old man, “that is what I
might be called.”
“Very well then,” said Narkunda, “let us have
your warning.”
“Fly from this place,” said the old man sternly.
“And take your warriors with you, else great evil
will befall.”
“I cannot see why evil should come upon us
because we are working here,” said Narkunda.
“You can’t see,” replied the old man, “but I
can. You aboriginal warriors have done wrong in
coming here to work as the white man works. For
hundreds of years you have been wandering tribes
and now you would settle in the one place. This
thing is forbidden. You have broken the most
ancient customs and therefore the curse will fall
upon you. You, as Chief of the tribe, will bear the
brunt of it. I warn you, leave to-day or the curse
will fall to-night.” And without another word
the strange old man turned and walked away, leav-
ing the warriors staring after him in bewilderment.
That night as they were retiring to rest, they cast
many nervous glances round about, but, as nothing
seemed to be happening, they dismissed the matter
from their minds, and went off to sleep. They were
awakened by a shriek from Chief Xarkunda.
“Warriors! Warriors!” he cried, “the curse
has fallen!”
They crowded anxiously around him asking
him what had happened.
“Look,” he said, “Look, I have been bitten
by a poisonous snake.”
And he showed the astonished warriors two
small punctures in his leg where the snake had
bitten him.
Little Tuckonie rushed up to the house as
quickly as he could for aid, and in a short time
Hannah and Dan came down to attend to the
chief. After this had been done, the warriors told
Dan the strange story of the old white man who
had foretold the curse that evening. Dan was very
suspicious and told Chief Narkunda that he thought
the old fellow in question might have been one of
his enemies in disguise. The warriors however, said
that he must have been genuine, otherwise the evil
wouldn’t have taken place. Then Maroubra came
up to Dan and offered to throw magic berries in a
fire to see if he could find out anything about the
old man by means of his magic.
“Well,” said Dan, “a lot of my people don’t
believe in the magic powers of the medicine men,
and for myself I can’t see how it acts, but go ahead
and see what you can do, Maroubra.”
So Maroubra lit a small fire and, after chanting
various sacred words, he threw the dried and ground
up berries upon the flames. After a little time
“When I became conscious again, the money
had gone.”
(Page 10)


Maroubra spoke, “White man,” he said solemnly,
“I think your suspicions are right. I see the
strange white man who warned us that this evil
would befall, he is talking to Chief Narkunda—
now the picture fades, and he is walking away
through the bush. He meets another white man
—a young man. Now he takes off the beard which
he wore and straightens his back. He wipes the
yellow stain from off his face. White man, he is
not an old man, but a young one.”
“Upon my soul,” said Dan, “this is very
interesting, Maroubra. Go on.”
Maroubra continued: “The two men walk
together through the bushes. Now they reach into
some thick scrub and pull out a white robe and
a mask which is like the head of a dingo. White
man, the mask is the face of the ghost which has
been seen riding amongst the cattle.”
“How do you know that, Maroubra?” said
Dan. “You’ve never seen the ghost, have you?”
“No,” said Maroubra, “but I hear what the
two men are saying. They say that shortly they
will put on that white robe and the mask again
and ride by to frighten us from this place. Then
they will steal more cattle.”
But,” said Chief Narkunda,” this doesn’t
explain how the evil came to happen to me.”
Y ait, said Maroubra,” the picture is chang-
es again. I see this man no longer disguised,
cieeping up to the hut in which we are asleep.
Lnder his arm he carries a box. He holds the box
in through the window near where you are sleeping,
then, sliding back the lid, he lets a poisonous snake
fall to the ground beside you. Then he rushes back
into the night,”
feo it was a trick,’ said Narkunda angrily.
The other varriors wanted to take up their spears
and shields and go out to hunt for the man
instantly, but Dan managed to persuade them to
stay where they were.
“I want Maroubra to describe these two men ”
he said.
Maroubra once more looked into the flame.
The man who wore the disguise,” he said, “is
short and thickly built. He has brown eyes and
aek hair, and at one time the bone of his nose has
been broken.”
Dan looked stern. “I’ll remember that des-
cription,” he said. “What about the other man?”
“The other,” said Maroubra, “is tall and fair
and has grey eyes.”
First thing next morning, Dan went in to see
Air. Jamieson and told him all that Maroubra had
seen in the magic fire, but Mr. Jamieson only
laughed. However, he agreed to let Dan take
some of the men down to the paddocks that night
and hide them round about. Dan’s plan was to go
down there secretly so that no one would know
that the watch was being kept. Before he went, he
saw Miss Betty and gave her Maroubra’s des-
cription of the two men.
Why Dan,” she said in surprise, “those des-
criptions exactly fit Jake Henderson and Doug
Latman. Let’s hope you can catch them, I’m so tired
of all this worry and trouble.”
At about eight o’clock that evening all the
men were posted around in the various paddocks.
They had gone down in small groups and were keep-
ing as much as possible in the shadow of the trees.
Nine o’clock came—ten o’clock—and still no sign of
the ghost. Dan was beginning to feel very depressed
when suddenly the eerie howl of the dingo rang
out, and the next moment up came the white
figure at a gallop. Then Dan gave the signal, and
the warriors who had been hidden in the paddocks
and all along the road, rushed out and surrounded
the horseman. He attempted to break through
the ring by urging his horse forward, but Maroubra
caught hold of the bridle. The next moment the
rider was dragged to the earth, his disguise was
pulled from him, and there stood the man whom
Maroubra had described.
Jake Henderson, for that was who it was, tried
to struggle free, but many strong hands held him
firmly, and so he was obliged to submit to a
search. From his vest pocket Dan pulled out a
wallet of notes. “Mr. Jamieson will be interested
in this,” he said. Then they took the captured
“ghost” back to the Station. Betty and Mr.
Jamieson both identified him as Jake Henderson,
and when Mr. Jamieson examined the wallet which
Dan had found on the man, he discovered that it
contained the marked notes.
“Dan,” he said, “I have to offer you my
apologies. I know now that your story was true and
this wallet was stolen from you by this Henderson
man and the fellow who worked with him. Batman’s
in this game with you, Henderson, isn’t he!”
“No he isn’t,” said Henderson.
“If he is,” said Dan, “he had better look out
for himself.” Dan and Mr. Jamieson took Hender-
son into one of the rooms of the house and locked
him in. Fearing that he might escape through the
window, they called some of the hands to board it
up, and to take added care, they posted a man on
guard outside the door of the room. Then he put
a trunk line phone call through to the nearest town-
ship and asked the Police to send someone out as
soon as possible. “And that just about fixes Jake
Henderson,” he said.
However, there were more adventures in store
for our friends of Windy Cattle Station, for round
about midnight a fire broke out down at the stables
and soon it was raging fiercely.
“I want every man to lend a hand,” said Air.
Jamieson rushing out we’ll all have to get
buckets of water from the dam and keep working
until this fire is out.”
Thinking that his prisoner would be quite safe,
the man who had been left on guard outside of the
door of the room in which Jake Henderson was
imprisoned, went down to the dam with the others
to help fight the fire. But Tuckonie, who was pas-
sing near at that moment, saw the figure of a strange
man come round from behind the house and start
tearing the boards from the window of the room.


• jl "^i^^M^SQBSlC^GSCTi'’X ■“ SSt w9SKDK^wAHaB3S^KwiQK^
£r ft- Si
ar • ■> ns ■™*"'—■—*vt ,
Quickly he gave the alarm and those men who
could be spared from fighting the fire came rushing
back to prevent the escape of their prisoner. Doug
Latman, for that was who the strange man was,
saw them coming and rushed over to a clearing
where a horse was waiting. He jumped on the
animal’s back and soon was galloping madly along
the road.
“We’ll have to go after him in the car!”
shouted Mr. Jamieson. “Some of you stay here
and see that Henderson doesn’t escape.”
“We’re almost up to him!” said Dan about ten
minutes later. “I think we’ve got him this time!”
But he spoke too soon for at that instant
Doug Latman forced his horse up the side of a
steep rocky embankment where the car could not
follow.
“Lost him!” said Jamieson. WLat bad luck!
“Wait a minute,” said Dan. “Mhat’s hap-
pening up on top of the bank there? ’
Jamieson looked up and to his surprise he saw
the sturdy figure of Maroubra the Arunta medicine
man step out from where he was hiding and take
the horse by the bridle, holding in his other hand
a great spear pointing straight at the heart of
Latman.
“You had better not try to escape, white
man,” he said.
i-Ltw-Llj XJ.v-' kJUA , _
The following day, the police arrived at \\ mdy
Cattle Station, and, under their questioning, the two
men were obliged to confess that they were ics-
ponsible for stealing the cattle and for all the other
mishaps which had taken place during the last
few months. They also admitted that Maroubra s
story of how they had attacked Dan in the bridle
path was the true one.
“I can understand that you wanted to steal cattle
—that would have brought you in some money,
but why frighten away most of the workers by
posing as a ghost—why smash the pump and all the
rest of it?” asked Mr. Jamieson.
“Because I wanted to get the management of
this Station and I thought if things went wrong,
you might see your way clear to putting Miss Betty
off and engaging me in her place.”
“I thought that was at the bottom of it,” said
Betty.
“And what did you hope to get out of it,
Latman?” said Mr. Jamieson, turning to the
other one of the two men, as a police car drew
up.
“I didn’t care what I got out of it,” said
Latman. “This girl put me off this place and I’ve
had it in for her ever since.”
CHAPTER VI
"The Sign of
AFTER Jake Henderson and Doug Latman had
been taken away by the police, Mr. Jamieson
and Miss Betty were so pleased about the
way everything had turned out that they decided
to give a big party to all the workers on the Station
just to celebrate their good luck. The warriors of
Tuckonie’s tribe were delighted as they knew by
now that old Hannah was a very good cook and a
party meant that there would be fine things to eat.
That night the table in the outer dining room was
just groaning wuth good things. Hannah had really
gone to a great deal of trouble —there were sand-
wiches, patties, and pies, both meat and fruit, scones,
and small cakes, and large cakes beautifully iced
and decorated. Peggy and Tuckonie wondered how
Hannah had found time to prepare all the delicious
eatables. The party was a very merry one
and everyone was enjoying it immensely when
suddenly they heard a loud, shrill squeal outside
the door. No one knew what to make of it as they
had never heard a sound quite like it before.
Tuckonie, his curiosity aroused, went outside to
see if he could find out what had caused this strange
sound. In a moment he came rushing back into
the room, his eyes wide with excitement. “War-
riors!” he cried. “Come with me! A figure of
Biggoon, the giant water rat, has been painted on
the door with white clay!”
A babble of excited voices greeted Tuckonie’s
statement and warriors and white people alike
rushed out to see the strange painting on the
door. There it was, gleaming white in the moonlight
—a most hideous figure of a rat and it covered
The stables were burning fiercely.
(Page 13)


almost the whole of the door. “It is the sign of
Biggoon, the giant water rat,” said Narkunda,
“and it means that there is some evil coming.”
The warriors all agreed that this was so and
for a time it looked as though the party might turn
out to be a failure, but as time went by and nothing
else happened, they gradually forgot their fears and
soon they were chatting and laughing again as
happily as ever.
When Miss Betty and Mr. Jamieson heard
about it on the following morning, they were
inclined to think that someone had painted the
image on the door just to have a joke, and as
nothing terrible had happened during the night,
most of the others came to believe that this must
be the case.
At midday some of the hands were surprised to
see an old caravan rolling along the dusty road
towards the Station, and when it arrived what was
Peggy’s joy to see Bob and Jack Hennessey and her
Auntie Grace get out of it. Miss Betty and Mr.
Jamieson made them feel very welcome and in a
couple of hours they were all talking together like
old friends. Auntie Grace had messages from
Peggy’s parents and Bob and Jack told Mr. Jamie-
son that they had heard all about Jake Henderson
and Doug Latman playing the ghost and stealing
the cattle, at the nearest township. Bob also told
them that the two criminals had told the police
that Mr. Jamieson wouldn’t get out of the matter
so lightly once the Biggoon Tribe got busy, “I don’t
know whatever they meant by that,” said Bob. But
the rest of the people who were standing about
looked very thoughtful and then they told the new-
comers what had happened at the party the previous
night. This had a startling effect on Bob and Jack
too.
“Well I don’t want to alarm you,” said Bob,
but I d advise you to be very careful and keep a
strict lookout. When we were passing through the
township we heard that a farmhouse some miles out
in the other direction had been burned to the
ground, and the night before it was burned, the man
who was farming it had seen a figure of Biggoon
painted on the door in white clay.”
“Great Scott!” said Mr. Jamieson. “I didn’t
think things were as serious as that. But who are
these Biggoon warriors I don’t remember ever
having heard of a tribe calling itself the Biggoon
Tribe.”
“Well,” said Jack, “the authorities seem to
think that someone has made trouble between some
little known tribe and the white people in this dis-
trict, and the tribe has had vengeance and painted
the figure of Biggoon on the door to try and throw
people off the scent.”
“Maybe that is the explanation,” said Mr.
Jamieson, “we must be careful.”
The next day, after thanking Miss Betty for
her care of the children, Bob, Jack, and Auntie
Grace decided to go on their way. Dan had been
with the kiddies so long, however, that he was very-
sad at the thought of parting from them, so Bob and
Jack invited him to come along with them for a
time, and to this Dan agreed very happily.
Two days later, they were over a hundred
miles away from the station, but although they had
left it so far behind, they couldn’t help worrying
about that figure of Biggoon, “I do hope Mr. Jamie-
son treats it seriously,” said Auntie Grace, “and
keeps people on the lookout.”
“I think he will,” said Jack, “he seemed a very
sensible sort of man.”
That afternoon as they were moving onward
through the arid country, Tuckonie attracted
their attention to what looked like a small, very
dark shape on the ground some distance away. “It
is a young lubra,” he said.
“Oh,” said Jack—“l don’t know how you
can make out what it is at this distance. Anyway
what would a young lubra be doing lying out here
in this country by herself?”
“I don’t know,” said Tuckonie, “but I think
we should go over and find out.”
Bob turned the caravan in that direction and it
proved that Tuckonie was right. The girl looked
very ill, and after taking her into the caravan and
attending to her, it was still some time before
she could speak. Then, to their astonishment, she
told them that she was a member of the Biggoon
Tribe, and that she had been left there to die because
she had attempted to save a white girl whom they
had in their power, from death. Needless to say,
all members of the little party questioned her
eagerly. She told them that the girl had been kid-
napped from a large Station some distance away
and from the description she gave, the travellers
thought that the girl must be Miss Betty.
“Don’t tell us they’ve killed her,” said Auntie
Grace, “that would be terrible.”
“No,” said the young black girl, “not yet. She
is to be sacrificed to the spirit of Biggoon when
the tribe reaches the water hole.”
“Where is this water hole?” said Bob.
“It is past the house of the strange white
man,” said the girl.
“I didn’t think any white people lived as far
out as this,” said Jack.
A es, there is one,” replied the young lubra.
“He lives with some dark people who work for
him. He has built a house with a great wall around
it and within this wall he and his people work
growing fruits and things to eat.”
“It’s a wonder the Biggoon Tribe haven’t
settled him,” said Jack.
The girl looked sad. “When they have done
all the evil that they have set out to do then they
will kill this white man also, for they hate all the


Df Mfc 1
i .IWj
'’23E T f {yJf igjBBB#'. ft
f?v“
r' v tf} £q - - v
white people. They have been told that the white
people are trying to drive them from the land.
“H’mm,” said Bob, “someone is making mis-
chief somewhere.”
“How long have you been with this tribe?” said
Jack, “and where do they come from?”
“One who belongs to a tribe, is born into that
tribe,” said Tuckonie.
“No,” said the girl, “this tribe is not as other
tribes. The Biggoon warriors have stolen half
the young girls and boys who now belong to the
tribe. For three years I have been with them, and
I have been very unhappy all that time. The white
people were good to me, and when I saw that they
had captured this white girl and intended to put
her to death, I tried to cut the bonds which bound
her so that, perhaps, she could find her way through
the scrub and escape. Now, I fear that she will
die.”
“Not if we can prevent it,” said Bob, “How
long will it take these warriors to reach the
water-hole?”
“I cannot say,” said the girl, “for I do not
know which way they will take, but I do know that
they will not kill this white girl until the moon is
full.”
“Then,” said Jack, “we must be at the water-
hole before the moon is full.”
“You have not yet told us where this Biggoon
Tribe lives,” said Auntie Grace.
“I do not know,” said the girl, “I belong to
that part of the tribe which wanders from place to
place and does those things which it has been told
to do. But there is another greater Biggoon Tribe
—there are very many of them, and they live in a
secret place which no one has ever been able to
find. They are ruled by a white queen.”
“A white queen!” said all the party in surprise.
“You can’t mean this, surely,” said Auntie
Grace.
“That is what I have heard, white woman,”
said the dark girl. “I cannot say whether or
not it is true, as I have never been to the secret
dwelling place of the Biggoon Tribe, and so, of
course, I have never seen the white queen, but I
have heard the warriors speak of her sometimes,
in whispers.”
“Well,” said Bob, “for myself, I don’t believe
it. I think they have made up that story to make
themselves sound important and mysterious.”
“Very likely,” said Jack.
“Anyway, the first thing w~e have to do,” said
Bob, “is to find the place where this strange old
white man lives. Could you direct us to that?”
“Yes,” said Walala for that was the girl’s
name,” “I can take you there because I have passed
by this place many times. We must go onward in
a straight line, for a long time until cliffs rise up
out of the earth. Then we turn and go towards the
place where the sun sets. We must pass through
dry country where there is no water at all and after
walking for three days, we will see a hill on which
is built a house.”
“How does he manage to live,” said Dan, “if
there is no water in the district?”
“The dry stretch does not last for ever,” said
Walala, “after you pass this there is a small belt
of very fertile country and it is here that the white
man lives.”
“H’mm,” said Bob, “and the water-hole is
further on again, eh?”
“Yes,” said the girl. “Some way past the
hill where the white man lives, the earth grows very
rocky and the rocks grow bigger and bigger. There
is a track through these rocks and down in the
centre, surrounded by large rocks which make it
dark and gloomy, you will find the water-hole
that is sacred to Biggoon, the giant water rat.
“Good,” said Bob, “well, from now on, we’ll
have to make as much speed as we can.”
Some days later, after a very rough drive,
they saw before them, the hill which Walala had
spoken of and on the most gentle slope of it, was
the strangest house, built of clay and stones and
boughs. All sorts of trees grew on the hillside
surrounding the house and towards the bottom a
high fence, built of the same materials as the
house, encircled a large part of the surrounding
land.
Half an hour later, they were outside a wide,
rough gate, calling out for someone to let them in.
As they stood there, an aboriginal warrior’s head
appeared over the top of the hill.
“Who are you,” he said, “and what do you
want?” But when he saw that there were white
people amongst the party he thought they could
not be enemies, so he told them that he would go
and inform his master.
Some little time later, they were admitted by
an old gentleman, with one of the kindest faces the
kiddies had ever seen. He told them that they were
welcome to stay with him as long as they wished for
Tuckonie finds a young luhra.
(Page IB)


there was plenty of food and he was only too glad
to have company. However, when he learned from
the party that a white girl had been kidnapped by
the Biggoon Tribe, the calm smile left his face, and
he appeared very anxious.
“We must waste no time then,” he said, “for
this is one of the most ferocious tribes you could
imagine, and their warriors will have no mercy
on the girl. However, it will not be so easy for
us to rescue her because as well as being cruel, the
Biggoon warriors are very brave.”
“How many days is it to the full moon?” said
Bob.
“Two,” said the old white man, who told them
that his name was Mr. Stockton. “It will give us
a little time to think out a plan and make our
preparations. However, come inside and we will
talk the matter over while some of my people
prepare a meal for you.”
CHAPTER VII.
“The Forest of Vi n es. ”
BY the time Mr. Stockton’s black helpers had
brought in a meal the plan of campaign was
all thought out and it was agreed that Walala
should stay at the stockade for good.
As the Biggoon warriors far outnumbered
the little band which Mr. Stockton could gather
about him, it was decided that before dawn
they should creep down to the encampment of the
Biggoon Tribe near the water hole and take them
by surprise. They would have plenty of opportunity
for doing this as the water hole was surrounded by
huge rocks and boulders behind which they could
take cover. They all agreed that that was their only
chance, as if they met in open fight the superior
numbers of the fierce tribe would soon master them.
After the meal was over, Mr. Stockton gave orders
to his helpers that they should see that all the fire-
arms were in order, and then he called for volunteer
fighters. His request brought forth a large response
as it seemed that every one of the dark people
living on this place hated the Biggoon Tribe. There
were fourteen men in all and each one of them
agreed to go with the little party and fight to rescue
the white girl, Betty.
As the Biggoon Tribe were well ahead of them,
they had not much time to lose, so they set off
that afternoon, leaving little Peggy and Auntie
Grace behind. They kept going until midnight,
by which time they had gone a fair distance. They
set off again shortly after dawn the following
morning, and went on all through that day, pausing
only for a few moments to have some food. By
nightfall they were inside of the rocks and boulders
which surrounded the water hole. Then one of
Mr. Stockton’s servants, a brave warrior by the
name of Beni, suggested that he should creep up to
the water hole and see if the Biggoon Tribe had
placed any warriors on guard.
“They will not see me,” said Beni, “for before
I came to work for Mr. Stockton, when I
was a warrior with my own tribe, I was known as
the snake’ because I could glide through the bush
silently and without being seen.” So Beni set off.
In an hour he came back and told them that
there were guards set at two openings in the rocks
which surrounded the water hole. He told them
that the rocks and boulders were so large and stood
so close together that the inside was something like
a cave with no roof. There were two narrow passes
opposite each other and it was at these passes
that the warriors were stationed. This caused the
v hite people to think a little, as it seemed unlikely
that they would be able to approach the place
without being seen. Then Beni volunteered again.
“White ones,” he said, “I will go first and I will
creep as near as I can to the guard where he paces
to and fro. I will await my opportunity, and I
will kill him silently. Then you will be able to
rush in through the opening and take the warriors
b} r surprise while they sleep. In their confusion
they will attempt to rush out through the other
pass, as they can fight better in the open. If you
have men stationed just outside the other pass, they
can attack the warriors as they come out, for there
is only room for two to go out together.”
The members of the little party thought this
was a good plan and agreed to act upon it. It did
seem a slaughter, but they knew that these warriors
were without mercy and that it was a case of kill
or be killed.
Before dawn Mr. Stockton gave Beni the order
to go forward. Breathlessly they watched him
glide away through the bushes. They then lost
sight of him, but in the distance they could see the
shadow of the Biggoon guardsman moving against
the dim bulk of the rocks. Then suddenly they saw
a shadow spring up behind him, as if from
nowhere, and the next instant the Biggoon warrior
fell silently to the ground. This was their signal,
and they cautiously approached the pass, four of
the strongest men going round to the other opening
where they soon despatched the man on guard
there. Peering in through the opening, Bob saw
Miss Betty lying upon the ground, her hands bound
behind her by twine ropes. At that moment she
looked up and caught sight of him and it was very
hard for her to suppress a cry of relief when she
saw that at last help was at hand.
Meantime, some of Mr. Stockton’s helpers had
climbed up the walls of the rocks at the side and
were now all ready to throw their spears down into
the enclosure. Then Mr. Stocktdn fired fhe first


shot down amongst the warriors, which was the sig-
nal for everyone else to open fire. The next moment
all was confusion. The Biggoon warriors, not
having expected the attack, seemed at a loss to
know from which direction it was coming and being
stupid from a heavy sleep after a great feast the
night before, it took them some time to come to their
senses. By the time they did, about a third of their
warriors were killed or wounded. Then, desperately
grabbing up their spears and weapons, they made
for the passes, but as each man came out through
the narrow opening he fell to the ground.
Some of them managed to escape without harm,
but these were so confused by then that they
did not stay to do battle once they reached the
open country, but ran off through the bushes. In
half an hour the whole fight was oyer and Miss
Betty was safe in the hands of her friends.
Now that the danger was passed, Miss Betty
had a very strange tale to tell. She told them that
the Biggoon warriors had spoken frequently of a
certain Queen Narella who was a white woman but
who had given orders to these warriors that those
of the white race who dwelt in that part of the
country were to be slain and their houses burned
to the ground. Betty said that she had told them
that the white people would take vengeance for
this, but they only laughed at her, saying that no
one knew where the large part of the Biggoon Tribe
dwelt and even if they did, it would be practically
impossible for them to reach that part of the
country as the way lay through a forest of poisonous
vines.
“If there are great numbers of these people
they would be a big danger to the whole country,”
said Bob-
“Yes,” said Mr. Stockton, “they would be, but
it’s only lately that these Biggoon warriors have
begun to threaten the white people.”
“I can’t see what a white woman would be
doing living as a queen among a lot of savages,
said Dan. “That story of the forest of poisonous
vines sounds a bit far fetched to me.”
“Umm,” said Jack, “it would be very interest-
ing to find out more about it in any case. Do
you know where this forest of poisonous vines is
supposed to be, Mr. Stockton?”
“No,” replied the old man, “I don’t. I’m the
most outback settler in these parts, as you know
—very few white men have penetrated as far as
my place—fewer still have got as far as the water
hole and I don’t think any have gone beyond that.
It’s quite possible that if this forest of poisonous
vines does exist, it lies beyond the water hole.”
“Good,” said Bob, “I’m all in favour of mak-
ing a trek and finding out.”
“After what you’ve seen of the Biggoon war-
riors,” said Miss Betty, “I wouldn’t advise you to
try it,”
But Bob and Jack were very enthusiastic over
the idea and soon they had Dan and Tuckonie
feeling just as excited about it as they were.
“At all events,” said Mr. Stockton, “Don’t
decide anything about it now. Tou had better all
come back to my place and you can talk it over
there. In any case we ’ll have to find some way of
netting this young lady back to her own home.
“Yes, of course,” said Dan. “Mr. Jamieson
will be very worried. How did you come to fall
into their clutches, Miss Betty?”
“It was very simple,” said Miss Betty, ‘ the
dav after vou left I was down in one of the far
paddocks and I just idly thought I’d take a walk
through the scrub. Suddenly someone grabbed
me from behind, put a gag round my mouth, and
then two other warriors appeared in front of me.
I wasn’t able to cry out or offer any resistance
and I was carried away to where the rest of the
warriors were waiting. They told me that the
sign of Biggoon which they had painted on the
door meant death for all occupants of the house.
I don’t know yet what has happened to the Station
but I know that there was a plan afoot to burn it
down. I heard them mention Jake Henderson, so
I think he must have been behind the trouble.
Back at Mr. Stockton’s farm they discussed
ways and means of getting Miss Betty back to
■Wilidy Cattle Station, and it was at last decided
that half a dozen of Mr. Stockton’s helpers should
take a cart which belonged to the place and set off
with her on the following day. They were to take
fire-arms with them in case one or two stray Biggoon
warriors should try to attack them on the way.
Miss Betty agreed that when they came to the
nearest township she should call in at the Police
Station and put the story before the authorities,
and tell them that Bob and Jack intended to set
out for the land of the Biggoon Tribe to find out if
there was any truth in the strange tale of a mighty
tribe ruled by a white queen. She would then try
to arrange for a large party of armed men to
follow them so that, in the event of danger, they
would be able to put up a fight.
The next day Miss Betty left, and the day after
that Bob and Jack and their party said good-bye
to Mr. Stockton and set off in their caravan which
had been well stocked with provisions by the gener-
ous old farmer.
For some days they travelled onwards through
very rough country and at last they began to think
that the whole story of the Forest of Vines and the
strange tribe which lived beyond it was just a tale.
Then one day, they saw in the distance what ap-
peared to be a very green forest and on approaching
closely they found that it really was the beginning
of the Forest of Vines.
“Goodness,” said Auntie Grace, “it’s going to
take us a long time to get through this thick forest
isn’t it? I wonder how large it is?”
“No one knows,” said Bob.
A few minutes later the men and Tuckonie
were out in front of the caravan hacking down the
great tendrils of the vines. After they had been
at it a little while they noticed that their skin
was stinging where the vines had touched them and
on examining their hands, they found that they were
red, swollen and blistered.


jsStsS^r
* / / / ■y^Hi
■I f -# ■ llP§BBB^i t iB&£ Ssp gKBBfc? W r *>% /\ I
9 X I.V. J - >'■■??> 2♦ "TK^»r^n_.. • JtJfeS'’ -'• - - vW. ■v>» » •■ ■/ /rt §
■L # . . J|pr. ill W j
...... ami
*‘*M /ra ni m I . a , ya| SK \\m
: 'i^g. - 'C t* : jsSf-.0 I
"/ iflft ’-I- 9| % • Jl /
> /ffi « ; , . I IK VK . K?-?fK»" MSI
v. JE r * v u 2 « ' W JLf 1
Ik i ~ S®|HS 2? S
xr v 91V | L
JBHy jaBf mw I "v n-*?' < -.-$/■' jT^9 1 *<^ :^»
I j i\^kT^S|
hBx Ai9 t nSBKiBi VHwp * v
{See Page 20.}
“ They came to a large cliff, which rose up sheer from the ground ”


“Look here,” said Jack. “Mr. Stockton was
certainly right when he said the vines were supposed
to be poisonous.”
“Yes,” said Dan, “and I don’t know how
we’re going to carry on —the pain’s growing worse
and worse. We’ll have to leave off.”
That night they were all suffering very much
and Auntie Grace had to apply ointments and ban-
dages to give them relief.
“Well,” she said, “it seems as though we’ll
have to turn back.”
“I don’t think so,” said Bob. “I think we
can make some sort of covering for ourselves and
get through that way.”
“That’s a good idea,” said Dan, “rough, sort-
of all-over suits and gloves.”
Grace laughed. “You haven’t brought gloves
with you on an adventure like this, surely?”
“No,” said Dan, “But anything will do. We
can put a pair of socks on our hands and that will
keep the vines from touching us.”
They put this idea into practice next day and
it proved very effective and although the journey
was slow, they did, at least, make some headway.
It took them five days to go through this treacherous
forest.
On the sixth day as they went on and passed
through rocky country with little or no growth
or scrub, their hopes were low. At length, they
came to a huge cliff which rose up sheer from the
ground before them and on either side it stretched
as far as the eye could see.
“We’ll never be able to scale that,” said Bob.
“No,” said Dan, “and even if we could, we’d
have to leave the caravan behind us.”
“We may have to do that in any case,” said
Jack.
“If we are on the right track there must be
a passage through this cliff,” Bob replied.
“Yes,” said Tuckonie, “that is what I think.
If we search carefully we’ll most likely find a cave.”
So all those in the caravan got out and went in
different directions looking for an opening, but
only very narrow crevices were to be found.
“I don’t think it’s any use,” said Bob, when
they were sitting round the camp fire eating their
lunch. “We’ve come to a full stop.”
“Umm,” said Dan. “It looks like it, but it
does seem a pity to have to go back after we’ve
come so far.”
“I wonder would any of those little cracks in
the rock lead anywhere?” said Peggy.
“Oh, I don’t think so, dear,” said her Auntie
Grace. “They’re so very small and narrow.”
But Peggy and Tuckonie, thinking there might
be a chance, set off to explore some of the crevices.
The first one proved to be just a crack in the rock
that led nowhere, but after squeezing their way
through the second one they found, to their
delight, that they were in a small cave. Feeling
his way along the wall, Tuckonie eventually
came to another small opening which led
into quite a large cave. “Peggy,” he
said, joyfully, “we have found the way!” And
with that the two kiddies rushed back to tell the
others of their exciting discovery.
An hour afterwards, they had all squeezed
through the crevice with their bundles and through
the smaller opening in this cave, leading into
another and eventually discovered that there was
a long chain of caves going through the cliff. Some
of them were really marvellous —they had beauti-
fully coloured stalactites hanging from the ceiling,
with stalagmites rising up to meet them, and the
walls of some of the caves were thick with phos-
phorous, making the place look as if lit by a
strange silvery light.
“000, my goodness,” said little Peggy, “I
don’t think I’ve ever seen anything so pretty.”
“Wouldn’t tourists love them?” said Auntie
Grace.
Soon they heard a strange gurgling sound and
passing through yet another cave they saw a beau-
tiful underground lake, but, much to their dis-
appointment, the ledge of rock around the central
lake grew narrower and narrower until at length,
they could go no further.
“Well, what do we do now?” said Dan, sitting
down on a ledge of rock and scratching his head
ruefully.
“I’m hanged if I know,” said Bob.
“Oh, we can’t turn back now, Bob,” said little
Peggy, “We simply can’t. It’d be dreadful,
wouldn’t it, Tuckonie?”
But Tuckonie did not appear to hear her, for
he was peering through the darkness at some object
which had attracted his attention. “White ones,”
he said, “I think I will swim through this lake.”
“Oh, I don’t think you’d better do that, Tuck-
onie,” said Bob. “You never know what freaks
of nature you’re likely to come across in caves like
these. They might not be so peaceful as they seem
—you might be sucked under.”
“000, yes, Tuckonie,” said Peggy, “you just
might.”
“I do not think so,” said Tuckonie, “but we
have ropes with us. You can tie one of these ropes
around my waist and then it would be quite all
right for me to swim through the lake.”
“Yes,” said Dan, “I don’t suppose there would
be any great risk in that, and it would be good to
find out what lay behind that lake and what our
chances are of going on.”
“It is something else that I want to find out,”
said Tuckonie, mysteriously as he dived into the
lake. A few moments later his voice came back
to them over the water. “I am coming back in a
boat, white ones,” he said.
“In a boat!” they all cried together, making
the cave ring with echoes.
A few minutes later they saw the little boy mak-
ing towards them in a large rough canoe.
“This beats the band !” said Jack.
“Yes,” said Dan, “everything provided just
as you want it.”
“Wonder whose boat it is,” said Peggy.
“H’mm,” said Jack, “we won’t bother to
inquire about that just now. In you get, everyone.”


The Hidden City
SO, taking up their bundles, they all scrambled
into the canoe and the next minute they were
paddling silently across the lake. It was a won-
derful trip—the lake narrowed into a river which
wound through cave after cave, each more lovely
and mysterious-looking than the one before. “It’s
just like being in fairy-land,” said Peggy. But
no sooner were the words out of her mouth than
the canoe shot forward like the bullet from a
gun, upsetting everyone in it.
“Hello,” said Bob, as he recovered his bal-
ance, “the liver must be going downwards—deeper
into the earth.”
For some time they went on and then, passing
through another opening, found themselves in a
gigantic cave with a large ledge of rock on one side
of it. As the canoe went on it struck some obstruc-
tion and lay for a while close to the ledge. Then
they discovered a rock post on the ledge, and
thinking that this would be a good opportunity to
stop and have something to eat, they tied the canoe
to the post and stepped out on to the ledge.
They found that in this cave there was an
opening on one side through which the river went
on, and another opening towards the back of the
ledge of rock. They passed through this into yet
another cave, but they missed the extreme beauty
of it as their gaze was instantly arrested by a
strange carved figure of rock which stood in the
centre. It was a huge carving of a giant rat.
“White ones,” said Tuckonie, in an awed
whisper, “we have come to the cave of Biggoon!”
“Well,” said Bob, “it looks as though we’ve
come somewhere near the dwelling place of these
people. This is evidently one of the temples where
they come to perform their rites.”
“I still can’t believe that they’re ruled by a
white queen though,” said Dan.
“But you will believe,” said a strange voice,
and the next moment several shadowy figures
appeared and every member of the party found
himself helpless in the grip of strong native hands.
They were quickly bound with twine ropes and then
their captors came round to the front and faced
them. They were the most hideous looking creatures
that any member of the party had ever seen. They
looked as though they were half rat, half man.
However on closer examination they saw that
on their feet they wore shoes of rats’ skins with
great claws protruding from the toes.
“Who the dickens are you, anyway?” said
Jack.
“We are the priests of Biggoon and if Nararka,
the High Priest, pronounces sentence of death
upon you then you will die!”
The name of Nararka had an electrical effect
upon the little party of prisoners for they had all
known a wicked man named Nararka, but they
had believed that he was dead.
“Nararka was drowned in the hoods of an
underground river,” said Bob.
“Perhaps they’re speaking of someone else of
the name,” said Grace.
“The Nararka of whom I speak,” said the
Priest, “is very much alive. Most probably it is
you who will die. Come, my friends, let us take
our prisoners back to the city where we will seek
out Nararka and find what is to be done with
them.”
Three more large canoes were dragged from
the darkness down into the river and soon they
were all once more paddling through another chain
of caves on the surface of the dark water. At length
it grew lighter and in a little while they emerged
onto a blue lake. All around the lake, which
was very large, grew green trees and luscious
grass, and on the opposite banks the party beheld a
number of large clay houses grouped together.
“That apparently is the city of the Biggoon Tribe,”
said Jack.
They were taken along an avenue paved with
clay and flat stones until they came to a mud house
which stood by itself. The doors were thrown open
and the party was brought inside. Once inside
another shock awaited them, for there seated in a
rough wooden chair was their old enemy, Bingi.
“Well! upon my word,” said Bob.
“Great Bingi,” said the warrior who had taken
charge of them, “we found these strangers in the
sacred cave of Biggoon and we would know that
Nararka, our High Priest would have us do with
them.”
“I can tell you that,” said Bingi, who was
apparently second in command to Nararka, “he will
have them killed immediately.”
“But,” said the warrior, “we dare not kill
them unless we have his word for it. As you are
the next in power to him, you must go and tell him
what has happened.”
“I will go,” said Bingi, “guard the prisoners,”
For an hour they were enclosed in the prison
house and then they heard a great noise outside
and the door was flung open and a noble looking
old warrior stood before them. “I am Lakka,
chief adviser to the great Queen Narella,” he said.
“You are to come with me to the palace.”
“At any rate,” said Jack, as they followed
the strange old warrior along the streets, “I hope
this Queen Narella doesn’t prove as bloodthirsty as
Nararka.”


But Bob had been thinking of the strange tale
he had heard of the white queen. “Tell me, old
Lakka,” he said, “is this Queen Narella of your
people or of ours?”
“She is of the white race,” said the old man
solemnly.
“How does she come to be here?” said Auntie
Grace.
“She is here by the will of Biggoon,” said
Lakka, with an expression that plainly told them
that he did not wish to be asked any more questions
on the subject.
Soon they came to a house which was larger
than all the others. They 1 entered into a small
room where they waited a few moments and then
double doors swung open and they found themselves
in the presence of a white woman who was seated
upon a clay throne studded with opals. “This then,”
said Bob, “is the white Queen Narella.”
By her side they recognised their old enemy,
Nararka, clothed in the flowing robes of the Chief
High Priest.
“So, white ones,” he said, “we meet again.”
“Yes, Nararka,” said Bob, “and I can’t say
I’m very pleased about it.”
“These, Oh Queen, are our enemies,” said
Nararka. “These are the white people who would
wipe the Biggoon Tribe off the face of the earth.”
“That’s not true,” said Bob. “If you agree
to be on friendly terms with us, then we’re quite
willing to be on friendly terms with you, but the
people who were responsible for stealing that white
girl away from her station home and trying to put
her to death must be punished.”
“They have already been punished, haven’t
they,” said Jack. “We had a battle with them and
killed almost all of them.”
“Was it by your command, Oh Narella, that
the girl was to have died?” asked Dan.
“No,” said the white queen. “But my High
Priest here informs us that the white people intend
to make war upon the dark people and particularly
upon the Biggoon Tribe. Therefore it was to our
interests to strike first.”
“Well Narella,” said Bob, “I can tell you here
and now that this High Priest of yours has lied to
you. The white people had no such intention.”
On hearing these words, Nararka was furious
and instantly demanded that the white people and
little Tuckonie should be put to death, but Queen
Narella seemed to have taken a fancy to them for
she wouldn’t agree to this. “Who is ruler here.,”
she said, “you or I? I say that they shall live —
they shall remain as my guests.”
Then Nararka sneered. “Is it not a rule in this
tribe that he who has lifted the spear against the
Biggoon warriors must die. Therefore I claim their
death.”
Narella smiled. “I have heard that these people
did not fight with the spear but with a strange
stick which shoots fire. Therefore if they killed by
the use of these firesticks they did not lift the
spear. So the law cannot be brought into operation
against them.”
When he heard these Nararka trembled
with rage. “Very well then, Oh Queen” he said,
“but it is one of our laws that if the queen and
the high priest should not agree over the fate of
prisoners the sacred oracle must be called in to
decide the matter. I claim that privilege.”
“As you say, Oh Nararka,” said the Queen.
“The privilege is yours. Now go, all of you, I would
be alone with these white people.”
“How does Nararka come to be here, Queen
Narella?” began Bob.
“He was sent here by the spirit of Biggoon,”
said the Queen.
“Humph,” said Dan, “that’s wdiat he told you.”
“I think he speaks the truth,” said Narella.
“He appeared amongst us one day saying that the
Spirit of Biggoon had visited him telling him that
he had chosen him for his High Priest and that he
was to come here and dwell amongst us. I questioned
this, and then he took me with my advisers and some
of my highest warriors to the sacred cave of
Biggoon. He said he could make the spirit of
Biggoon appear and in that way we would know
that he was telling the truth. Upon one end of the
cave he fixed a white cloth. Then he went up to
the other end and suddenly there was a light in his
hand and upon the white cloth flashed the image
of the spirit of Biggoon, Then I and my warriors
knew that it was indeed the truth that he had
spoken,”
''These, Oh Queen, are our enemies,” said
Nararka.


When the white party heard this they laughed.
“You know what trick that was, don’t you Dan?”
said Bob, “it w T as a magic lantern.”
“Yes,” said Dan, “I knew that as soon as I
heard it. Tell us, Queen Narella, what are we to do
in this city while we are waiting for this oracle to
speak? Are we to remain with our hands bound
behind us?”
“No,” said the Queen, “you will be set free and
you can roam the city at will, but some of my
people must attend you. You will not be able to
escape because all entrances and exits to the land
are guarded. You will be given a hut in
which to dwell which you may regard as your own
while you live amongst us—which will probably be
forever.”
“Forever!” said they all at once.
“Yes,” said Narella. “I think I like you. I
will keep you here with me as long as you live.
You are a change from these people. Besides, I think
I might marry him,” and she pointed to Dan. The
look on poor Dan’s face when Narella said this was
one of astonishment and dismay, and it was all that
the rest of the party could do to keep from laughing.
“Marry me!” said Dan.
“I think so,” said Queen Narella thoughtfully.
“You’re much nicer to look at than Nararka.”
“Great Scott,” said Bob, “were you thinking
of marrying Nararka?”
“Oh yes,” said Narella, “for he told me that
the spirit of Biggoon had said it must be so. But
I would rather have you, so I will make an offering
to the spirit of Biggoon and see if he will change
his mind.”
“I hope he won’t,” said Dan under his breath.
“I don’t fancy being married to a savage Queen at
all, even if she is white.”
Then Narella told them they could go, and a
little while later they were seated in their own hut
discussing the matter. They all thought it was a
great joke that Narella should have wished to marry
Dan, but poor Dan couldn’t see the joke at all.
“I’m not going to do it,” he said firmly.
“You may not have to marry her, Dan,” said
Tuckonie. “We might all be killed before there
is time for that to happen. If the oracle speaks
against us we will certainly be killed.”
“Yes,” said Bob thoughtfully, “we’ve got to
find some way of getting out of that.”
“I don’t see that there is any way of getting
out of it, they seemed very definite about it.”
“Well,” said Jack, “I think our best chance
would be to try and convince Queen Narella and her
people that we’re pretty good at working magic
ourselves. I think we should take our magic lantern
and invite the tribe to a display somewhere. We
could easily rig up a few other magic tricks, with
the stuff we always carry.”
“Yes,” said Bob, “it’s come in very handy in
the past when we’ve been dealing with other tribes,
hasn’t it?”
So they called one of the guards and asked him
to tell Queen Narella that they wished to give a
display of magic in her honour. The Queen was
only too pleased about this and commanded that all
her warriors should attend.
Accordingly a few days later Queen Narella and
hundreds of the Biggoon Tribe arrived at the cave
which Bob and Jack and Dan had decided upon
and seated themselves around waiting for the
magic display to begin. Nararka, who had heard
of this, was very angry, but could do nothing about
it as the white people had guarded all their posses-
sions most carefully. When everyone was seated
Bob got up and made a speech, telling them what
great magicians he and his friends were. Then,
fixing the screen on to the end of the cave, they
started the magic lantern and soon a display of
coloured pictures flashed across the screen. When
the warriors saw this, their cheers were terrific.
Queen Narella was also very impressed and
gave a great feast in their honour. Then Bob told
her that as they were such great medicine men he
thought it was only fair that the test by oracle
should be done away with, but Narella replied that
this could not be so as it was a law which could
not be broken.
As the day of the full moon came closer, our
friends became nervous, for it was on the night of
the full moon that the test was to be made and
they felt sure that the oracle would speak against
them. “I know just what will happen,” said Bob.
“One of those medicine men priests will find his
way into the statue of Biggoon and when Nararka
addresses the statue the priest will answer con-
demning us to death.”
“Yes,” said Jack. “It is a great pity we don’t
know the way into the statue.”
“We do know the way into the cave,” said
Tuckonie. “Perhaps, white man, I could sneak
down to the cave and see if I can find the way into
the statue. I could creep there at night when no
one would see me,”
“Well,” said Bob, “if you could find the way
in it might be useful to us, although how we could
prevent the priest from getting in and speaking
I don’t know.” Anyway they agreed to let Tuckonie
go.
That night when it was dark, the little lad dug
a hole in the floor of the hut and burrowed his
way through to the other side. Then, slinking on all
fours, he made his way to the border of the lake.
He took a canoe which was tethered there and
silently crossed the lake and went through the caves
by the underground river until he came to the cave
of Biggoon. With his eager little eyes it wasn’t
long before he discovered a way into the inside of
the statue. There was just room for a man to
stand inside it. Having found out all he could, he
returned to the hut, filled in the hole which he had
made so that the guards would not be suspicious in
the morning, and then told the others what he had
discovered.
“Listen,” said Dan, “I’ve got a plan! How
does this strike you. Suppose we make a little box


of stiff paper or cardboard aud fill it with pepper.
Tuckonie could go back to the idol and fix it up to
the top by a string, passing the string through
the holes which serve as the nostrils of the idol.
When everything is ready, if one of us pulled
that string so that the box would tip over, the
pepper would descend on the head of the man who
was concealed in the idol, and instead of speaking,
all he could do would be to sneeze. Surely the
warriors of the Biggoon Tribe would think that
Nararka was a pretty poor High Priest if all he
could get out of the idol was a sneeze.’
“I know,” said Jack. “What about that
gramophone record we had made some time ago, the
one that says: “These are great white people
medicine men, trust them and obey them, Oh dark
people, and they will lead you to great power!” If
we could fix that record upon our little gramophone
in some way so that it would play at the right
moment I should think that the tribe would accept
us as the most wonderful medicine men who had
ever lived.”
“Yes,” said Auutie Grace, “and it would make
things uncomfortable for Nararka.”
“But my goodness,” said Peggy, “how are
we going to fix the gramophone record up so that
it will play just at that minute?”
“We could do it by strings,” said Bob, “if only
Tuckonie could hide the gramophone somewhere in
the cave for us. We would have to have one
string attached to the little lever which releases the
spring and makes the record go round, and another
one to drop the needle on to the record.”
“Yes, that’s right,” said Dan. “I think we
could do that.”
“It is a very good idea, white ones,” said
Tuckonie. “Do not fear, give me the gramophone
and the record and I will find a place to hide it.
Fix the strings where you want them to go and
tell me how I am to arrange them, and I promise
you I will do it.”
So they explained carefully to Tuckonie all
that they wanted him to do.
CHAPTER IX.
“The Speaks
WHEN the night of the full moon came, there
was much excitement amongst the warriors
of the tribe, for they were all wondering
whether the oracle would condemn the
strangers to death or not. Since the display of
magic they had all come to regard the white people
as very great medicine men, and they hoped in their
hearts that they would not be sentenced to death.
Shortly before midnight, Bingi, unknown to any of
the others except Nararka, went to the cave of
Biggoon and crept through the small passage which
led to the inside of the statue. Here he waited
until the others should arrive.
In about an hour they came in their canoes,
chanting, and shouting, and soon the cave was full
of warriors. Then Nararka stood forth and ad-
dressed the idol.
“Oh great spirit of Biggoon,” he cried, “look
upon these white ones, your enemies, who have come
to this tribe to bring about its destruction. Speak
then, I pray you, and condemn them to death, for
all the enemies of Biggoon should die. Speak, 0
great spirit, your High Priest and your people wait!
Speak!”
Then Bob nodded to Tuckonie, who was
squeezed in amongst the crowd right up at the wall
of the cave. When the little lad saw this he pulled
one of the strings which he had in his hand, and
the next instant the most peculiar sounds came forth
from the statue of Biggoon.
“Ah-tishoo!” said the spirit voice, “Oh! Oh!
ah-tish-oo!”
For a moment there was an astonished silence
in the cave, then one of the warriors cried out in a
loud voice. “The spirit of Biggoon mocks at
Nararka, his High Priest! He will not answer him!
He makes only strange noises! Nararka no
longer has power with the great god Biggoon.”
At this there was a great outcry in the cave and
soon those of the warriors who hated Nararka for
his cruelty were shouting out, “Kill him, kill him.”
“You may not have to marry her, Dan said
T uckonie.
(Page 23)


However, this could not be done to a High
Priest unless the oracle commanded it, so for the
present Nararka’s life was safe, although he no
longer held any power over the people. Then
Queen Narella spoke up.
“Silence, my people,” she cried, “it is true
that the High Priest Nararka has been mocked by
the god Biggoon and therefore he must no longer
be his High Priest. But before we decide what is
to be done, let one of these white people address
Biggoon and see if he will give him a better
answer.”
The warriors all thought this was a great idea
so Bob pushed Dan for-ward and told him to address
the idol. Poor old Dan felt very self-conscious as
he saw Narella looking at him eagerly, but he
spoke up bravely.
“Oh, Biggoon,” he said, “you have mocked at
your High Priest, Nararka. Now say what words
you have for the white people who have come here
as your friends.”
Then Tuckonie pulled the other string which
would set the little gramophone in motion and up
came the voice, saying:—
“These are great white medicine men. Trust
them and obey them, 0 dark people, and they will
lead you to great power.”
When the people of the Biggoon Tribe heard
what they thought was their god speaking so well
of the -white people, they danced around them,
chanting, Nararka and his medicine men, taking
advantage of the situation, got quickly into their
canoes and paddled off. Those in the cave continued
their rejoicing.
“The oracle has spoken in favour of the white
ones,” said one of the warriors, “therefore, it is
one of them who should be High Priest.”
“Yes,” said Narella, her eyes shining, “let it
be this one they call Happy Dan for it was he who
addressed Biggoon.”
And so, in the presence of all the warriors Dan
was made High Priest.
Then Queen Narella took his hand, and facing
the people, she said; “My warriors, as this white
man has now been made High Priest of the Biggoon
Tribe, it is he whom I must wed and not Nararka.
Behold, your future king.”
Great was the shouting when the warriors
heard this, but poor Dan was so dismayed he very
nearly fainted.
“Smile, can’t you,” said Bob, digging him in
the ribs. “You’re supposed to be pleased about
this.”
“It’s all very well for you,” said Dan, “but
you wouldn’t be feeling so smart if you were going
to have to marry her.”
They had no time to say more, for the warriors
bundled them off into canoes and went back through
the caves and across the lake. The next morning
Queen Narella gave commands that the guards were
no longer to follow the white people, as they were
free and honoured members of the tribe.
Nararka called his followers together secretly
and told them that he intended to make war against
the Queen. He promised them that if he was vic-
torious he would give them great riches and honours
and the other half of the tribe would have to obey
them. On hearing this, they agreed to go with
him to war. He also promised them that there
would be no danger, as he would give them fire-
arms to fight with, so that they could kill their
enemies from a distance and would not have to
approach close to them and so be in danger from
their spears. He then led his warriors away, over
a hillside to a place where the trees and shrubs
grew thickly. Here, he told them, he would give
them instruction in the use of fire-arms and when
they were ready would lead them to war.
He then retired into a little mud hut which
was hidden amongst the bushes. Inside the hut
Mallee, his wife, was waiting for him. She had
not heard anything of what was going on and was
very curious. When he told her what had happened,
she agreed that the only thing possible was to make
war on Narella. Nararka, of course, had never told
Mallee that he intended to marry Narella—she was
entirely ignorant of this.
Back in the city of the Biggoon Tribe, there
was much rejoicing, and everyone was very happy,
except Dan, who was still living in dread of having
to marry the Queen.
“We will have to get away from this place
somehow,” he said.
“Yes, all right, Dan,” said Bob and Jack, “but
we’ll have to wait for our opportunity. In the
meantime you’ll have to be nice to Queen Narella
and behave as if you wanted to marry her.”
Then one day Tuckonie came to them and told
them that he had heard two warriors saying that
Nararka and some of the tribe were going to make
war on Narella. As Bob, Jack and Dan thought
this was very likely, they hastened to Queen Narella
to tell her all about it. The Queen’s anger was
terrible to see.
“We shall make war on them,” she said, “We
shall go forth at night and take them by surprise
and they will all perish. I will have no traitors in
the tribe.”
“That’s all very well, Narella,” said Bob,
“but if I know anything about this Nararka he will
fight with the white man’s weapons and the
Biggoon warriors, armed only with spears will have
no hope against them.”
“Then we must find out where these weapons
are kept,” said Narella, “and take them away
from Nararka and his people.”
“Easier said than done,” said Bob, “but we’ll
try.”
However, although little Tuckonie attempted
to track the warriors whom he thought were in
favour of Nararka he did not succeed in finding
where the ammunition was hidden. This was a
great disappointment to the white party as they
knew that the side which fought with ammunition
would win.


Then one day, Jack got a bright idea. “If only
we could get hold of Mallee,” he said, “I think we
could arrange things. She’s sure to be about some-
where as Nararka is here.”
“Unless, of course,” said Bob, “she was
drowned that time in the flood -when we thought
Nararka himself was drowned.”
“Yes, that’s right,” said Dan. “But supposing
this Mallee person was here. How do you think
you could fix things?”
“'Well,” said Jack, “I’m willing to bet that
Nararka didn’t tell Mallee that he was going to
marry Narella. Mallee struck me as being a very
jealous type of person, and if she thought that
Nararka either intended to kill her or set her adrift,
she’d do anything to have her revenge.”
“Yes,” said Bob. “I think you’re right. Well,
it remains w r ith us to find Mallee if she is still
alive.”
They were luckier than they thought they
would be in this respect, for Tuckonie, during his
nightly prowls, saw the figure of Mallee gliding
through the bushes one evening. When he told
his friends they decided to go to that bushy part
of the country and try to take her prisoner. For
the first two nights they met with no success, but
on the third night she passed by quite close to them
and, springing out from amongst the bushes, they
took her prisoner, clapping their hands over her
mouth so that she could not cry out. Then they
took her back with them to the city and into the
hut which had been given them. Then they told
her of Nararka’s plan to marry Narella.
At last Mallee was convinced and her anger
w r as really terrible.
“I will teach him to be so treacherous,” she
cried. “His war will fail.”
She then told them where the ammunition was
hidden. Waiting their chance, Bob, Jack and Dan
and a few trusted warriors crept up through the
bush to the spot which Mallee had told them about,
and, taking the few guards unawares, they rushed
in and took most of the ammunition, spoiling that
which they could not carry away. They then has-
tened back to the city and, after a short discussion,
they decided that the war should be fought out that
very night.
Narella put her armies under the command of
Happy Dan, and with hundreds of warriors behind
them, Dan, Jack, Bob and little Tuckonie, who
insisted on going with them, went to the encamp-
ment of the enemy warriors and made war upon
them. Bob, Jack and Dan used guns, but they fired
mostly into the air as they did not want to hurt
them if it could be avoided, only to frighten them
into giving in.
The battle did not last long, as when the other
side saw that they could not win, they surrendered
and came over to the side of Narella, blaming
Nararka for having misled them. When Nararka
saw that all was against him he fled through the
bushes followed by one or two of his medicine men,
to w T here a huge oblong machine rested upon the
ground.
Bob, Jack, Dan and Tuckonie, determined not
to let their enemy get out of their hands again, ran
quickly after them and on approaching the object
found to their astonishment that it was a balloon.
Nararka and his men were by this time inside and
at the controls, and the little party had just time
to board her before she took off into the air. They
-were unseen by Nararka and his men, and hiding
themselves carefully away, they prepared to wait
until a favourable opportunity presented itself for
overpowering the medicine men and taking charge
of the balloon themselves.
Meantime, the victorious Biggoon army re-
turned to Queen Narella and told her what had
happened.
However, as the next day passed and the next,
and the white men did not return, Narella began
to grow very impatient and Peggy and her Auntie
Grace were very anxious too.
Meanwhile Mallee, still hiding in the thick
bush had beeen thinking things over. Since the
white people had told her all Nararka’s plans she
had hated him, but she also hated the white people
and Narella. In her spiteful way she thought that
if she was not happy no one else had a right to be
happy and so with this thought in mind she went
to the city and asked for an audience with Narella.
Narella was astonished when she learned that
Mallee was b-ararka’s wife, but she was more
astonished still when she heard the rest of the
story which Mallee told her.
These people are treacherous, Oh Queen,” said
Mallee. “They have gone and they do not intend
o come back—and I will tell you why It is
because the white man Dan does not wish to marry
jou. When he is away from you he makes a joke
°t you. They intend to go back to the land of the
white people and then, with a great army behind
them, they will come back here to rescue the white
woman and child who still remain. As for you they
intend to east you from your throne so that you
will no longer be Queen and make all the warriors
of the Biggoon Tribe slaves to the white people.”
When Narella heard this she was furious, for
'p 61 ? a * heart and believed what
n° J l ®?*" back, she remem-
ihTw 1 ha ? neVer looked to ° Phased when
easy for ap fl ° keu + aboilt . their marriage, so it was
true fo^ n Mallee t0 con u vmce her that the story was
1 F age she commanded some of her
warriors to bring Peggy and her Auntie Grace
m iT 0 ?® m - Then she toM th em the story that
Mallee had told her, and although Grace denied it
Narella ■would not listen to her.


JBpP S I »
9B 2 M »B '
*> 9k I* M- l| ffT -A w
K||jl -£jp5l*s jBSgfp^
***
,\ S'-■ ■ '*" ' *"'
b9e& 9^ r ' SS^^998989^ | s j mf ■■
“The four travellers had to cross some mighty mountains. ”
{See Page 28.}


Now, when Narella calmed down a little it
seemed to her that perhaps Grace might be speaking
the truth —but on the other hand she was still a
little inclined to believe Mallee.
“Well,” she said, at last to Grace. “I do not
know which one of you to believe, so I will do
nothing for seven days. I will give my white friends
seven days to return to the land of the Biggoon
Tribe and carry out their promises. If they return
within that time you will be my free and honoured
guests as you were before. But if they do not
return I will have my revenge and as you are the
only ones still here I must take that revenge on
you. Therefore, if they do not return in seven
days you will be taken to the lagoon which lies to
the west of the lake and there you will be thrown
to the sacred crocodiles.”
Meantime, the balloon was getting further and
further away from the land of the Biggoon Tribe.
The white party had discovered that there were
six medicine men on board her and it was a long
time before they had an opportunity to overpower
any of them. At length, however, Bingi passed
close to where they were hiding and they were
able to knock him unconscious with a blow over
the head. Moodgee, another one of the medicine
men was the next to be overpowered. At last,
there was only Nararka and one other left, and Jack
and Dan and Bob decided to make a bold bid for
it.
They leapt from their hiding places and started
to attack. But when Nararka saw them coming he
called out some order in a native tongue and the
medicine man rushed to a switch on the wall and
pressed it. Immediately the balloon began to sink
and by the time the three friends had overpowered
the two wicked medicine men, the balloon was
down upon the ground.
“You think you’ve done well,” said Nararka,
“in getting control of this balloon, but you will
find that she will never sail again, for that switch
which my medicine man pressed, worked a lever
which poured acid upon the gas tanks and the gas
has escaped. There is no way of repairing it while
we are here so you are lost in this wild country, just
as we are lost.”
MTien the three men heard this they did not
like it at all, and were at a loss to know what they
should do. They could not bring themselves to kill
Nararka and his followers in cold blood, so they
contented themselves with disarming them and
taking half the food, provisions and water from the
balloon. Then they set off on the long trek back to
the land of the Biggoon Tribe, telling Nararka that
if he or his men should attempt to follow them thej
would shoot without mercy. They valked and
walked but it was a long, hard journey, because in
order to go back to the place from which they had
come, they had to cross some mighty mountains.
Back at the city of the Biggoon Tribe, Grace
and little Peggy were sick with fright, for the days
were passing and still their friends had not re-
turned.
“Oh, Auntie Grace,” said Peggy, “they’ll never
be able to get back here in time to save us, and
we’ll be thrown to the sacred crocodiles.”
By this time Narella was so angry that she
decreed that even if the white men did return,
they also would be thrown to the crocodiles. This
was very unreasonable of her, but as she had been
reared as a savage, she found it impossible to
govern her anger. Towards the afternoon of the
seventh day she had the guards take Auntie Grace
and Peggy and enclose them in their little hut,
giving instructions that they were not to be
allowed out—for at dawn the next day they were
to die.
The little party boarded the balloon just as it
was leaving the ground
(Page 26)


“The~j Es w
JACK, Bob, Dan and Tuckonie, after their tire-
some journey had at last come in sight of the
scrub and bush surrounding the city of the
Biggoon Tribe. Hungry and weary, they sat
down for a few moments to rest and have a little
food. They were so tired that they ate their meal
without saying a word, and it was in this way
that two Biggoon warriors passed close beside
them without knowing that they were there. To
their horror and surprise the little party heard the
warriors say that Grace and Peggy were to be
thrown to the sacred crocodiles at to-morrow’s
dawn and that if they themselves appeared they
also were to be sacrificed. In dismay, they sat
very silently, wondering whatever could be done
to prevent such a terrible tragedy taking place.
At last Bob decided that they would all have
to take a chance. “We’ll just have to go back into
the city and give ourselves up to Queen Narella.
Perhaps when she sees we’ve all returned faith-
fully she’ll change her mind.”
“She might,” said Jack, “but you can’t be
sure with these savages, and after all, although
Narella is white she is a savage. If we all go, and
she decides to sacrifice us all, then there would be
no hope of rescue, but if some of us are still at
liberty we might be able to do something.”
“Yes, that’s true,” said Bob thoughtfully.
“I’ll tell you what,” said Dan, “I’ll go to
Narella and see what I can do. After all, she had a
fancy for me before and perhaps I may be able to
coax her into pardoning us for whatever it is she
thinks we’ve done. If she does pardon us well and
good, if she doesn’t, well you may be able to do
something to help us escape—although I can’t think
what.
“Yhite man,” said Tuckonie, “I’ve been think-
ing of another plan.”
“'Well, what is it, youngster?” said Bob.
“I’m afraid you will think it is a very silly
one,” said Tuckonie, “but I think it could be
done.”
“Never mind about it being silly,” said Dan.
“We’re in a very tight corner and well be glad
to listen to anything. Go ahead and tell us.”
“This is my plan, then,” said the little lad. “At
dusk to-night we must go down to the backwash
of the lake where the sacred crocodiles are kept,
and we must fish for them with large hooks and bait
such as the white men use. and we must catch them
all.”
“Yes, and then, what?” said Bob.
“Then,” said Tuckonie, we must kill them and
we must take out the inside of the crocodiles leaving
only the skins so that they will be quite hollow.”
Y hen they heard this the members of the
party looked at each other in astonishment, for they
could not see what little Tuckonie had in mind.
“How is that going to help us, sonny?” said Bob
< ‘‘ Let me tell all my plans,” said Tuckonie.
We must then dive into the waters of the back-
wash and scoop a hole in the soft sandy soil of
the bank. The opening will be underneath
the water, but once we have made it we will scoop
upwards, so that anyone diving into the water
could enter the hole unseen because the water
would cover it, but once inside they could crawl
upwards through the tunnel we had made, until
they were on a level that was so high that the water
could not reach it,”
“It seems very complicated.” said Jack, “but
go on, what next?”
Then, said Tuckonie, “we must go and get
some straight boughs of trees and sharpen them at
the edge so that they may be used as stakes. These
stakes we must drive into the bed of the backwash
so that the tops of them will not come above water.”
\ es, said the three men still looking mvsti-
fied.
Next, said Tuckonie, “we must crawl into
the crocodile skins and balance ourselves on the
top of the stakes. You see, these stakes will keep
us from sinking to the bottom. People coming
down and looking in the water and seeing these
crocodile skins balanced on the stakes, will think
that they are the real crocodiles basking on the
top of the water.”
“I see,” said Jack, “I’m beginning to under-
stand what you mean,”
“Then,” said Tuckonie, “when our friends are
thrown into the water we will make as big a
splash as we can, and in some way manage to get
them into the hole in the bank, following after
them ourselves.”
“Yes,” said Bob, “so far so good, but I don’t
see how we’re going to swim very well in these
crocodile skins.”
“We will not have to swim very far,” said
Tuckonie, “and we can leave openings in the skins
through which we can put our arms. We can
propel ourselves through the water with our arms
in this way—we will only have to go a few feet.
When Narella and her warriors see this, they will
think that the crocodiles have dragged their victims
underneath the water to eat them, but in reality we
will be safe in the hole in the bank. We can take
off the crocodile skins there and crawl along the
tunnel to where it is dry.”
“I see the idea,” said Dan, “and then we either
hide there until night when we come out, clamber
upon the banks and make our way through the
bush, or else we burrow further along through the
tunnel.”
“Yes,” said Tuckonie. “On the other side of
the backwash, about forty yards along, the bushes


i ' \v %i ytww 9 V -T Sir Jc£* V aUf f 1
/ VH> 9v.A iVlL SB < w I v J ■> I TJlr Jr I
‘•lt is our war song,” said Tuckonie. “I could
not be mistaken.” <£ ~
Then they heard in the distance the coo-ee
of a white man, which was instantly answered by
another “coo-ee.”
“Listen,” said Auntie Grace, a coo-ee!
With renewed energy they started tearing down
the vines ahead of them, and at last, to their great
joy they saw the vines a little way ahead being
torn down from the other side, and the next moment
a sturdy Arunta warrior, clothed from head to toe
in thick cloth, came into view. “Warriors, he
cried, “I have found them.”
More and more warriors broke through the
opening, and seeing their young chieftain, Tuckonie,
their faces lit up with delight.
“By Jove,” said Jack, “you Arunta warriors
are just in time. The whole of the Biggoon Tribe
is coming after us through these vines.”
“Have no fear, white ones,” said the Arunta
warriors, “for we will fight all who come, and your
own people have come to the rescue too. Many
white men come behind us with fire-sticks which
shoot out death. They came mounted on horses
and they have left the horses at the beginning of
the forest of vines. Look, here they come.
Then they saw a lot of stalwart police striding
through the forest. „
“We thought you might be in danger, said
the foremost.
“We are,” said Bob, “but what made you
think so ? ”
“Well,” said the stranger, “Mr. Jamieson of
Windy Cattle Station told us that you had gone on
a very perilous mission, and then Miss Betty Kella-
way called and told us that she had been taken
captive by the Biggoon Tribe, and that you had
rescued her. We thought by this, that the Biggoon
Tribe meant no good to any of the white people,
so we gathered ourselves together and went on to
Mr, Stockton’s outlying farm. He told us what
direction you had taken and we came straight on.
On our way we were joined by the Arunta
warriors.”
“But how could the Arunta warriors have
known that we were in danger,”
There was no time for any more, for the next
moment the Biggoon warriors came upon the
scene, and with a rush the great Arunta Tribe
charged them. Then the police opened fire, and
the Biggoon warriors, being taken by surprise,
were quickly routed. Yelling in dismay, they
turned and Van backwards through the forest of
vines, leaving many slain and wounded in the forest.
However, the Arunta warriors pursued them
and would give them no peace until they had sworn
by the greatest and most sacred oath of all the
dark people that they would forsake their savage
ways and live peaceably like any ordinary tribe.
Also, the chief of the Biggoon warriors promised,
on behalf of his people, that he would deliver
Queen Narella over to the white people.
“This forest of poisonous vines must be burned
down and healthy bush and trees must grow in
its place,” said the leader of the police. “Then
there will be no secret place of refuge for those
who would band themselves together to live
wickedly. ’ ’
The blistered hands and arms of the white
party being attended to, Chief Narkunda gave the
order for a great feast to be prepared, for these
warriors had known that they would be victorious
and they had brought with them a good supply of
food. Little Tuckonie’s face shone with joy as he
the songs for victory and saw the good
things being laid out on the earth for the feast.
“But tell me, Narkunda,” said Grace, “how
did you come to be up this way? How did you
know r that we needed your assistance and that
there would be a war?”
Narkunda smiled. “White woman,” he said,
“in time you will come to know, as these your
friends have already come to know, that many
secret mysteries are known to the dark people,
which have been lost to your people. Thoughts
are strong, and they are alive, and we who live
close to nature may throw our minds open to
thoughts, and listen to them, and then the thoughts
of those we love will come flying to us, like a bird
flving home to its nest.”
*■ ~ - - - • • //•
“Yes,” said Maroubra, the medicine man, “in a
dream, our chief, Narkunda, saw all the dangers
through which you were passing, and I knew that
Tuckonie’s dowee, or spirit, had departed from his
body while he slept, and had gone to seek the spirit
of his father, to ask his help. The spirit of his
father heard him in the dream-world of the night,
and so we have come.”
Grace looked at Narkunda and Maroubra as
if she found it hard to believe—though in her
heart she felt it was true. But Tuckonie and his
father looked at each other with great wisdom and
love and understanding in their eyes—they knew.
Forcing their way through the treacherous forest
of Vines. (Page 31)


.
N ' V
’ .
.
■ ■
-
■
- . s
*
■ / ■ r
.
v .* '
• • • - > ■' i i •
‘ ‘ *
V
; * .
4 *
'
' ' • j
'
.
.
.
i.
-
■


Can You Give This Illustration a Name?
£25 IN PRIZES
FIRST PRIZE £lO THIRD PRIZE £3
SECOND PRIZE £5 * FOURTH PRIZE £2
5 CONSOLATION PRICES AT £1 EACH
THERE IS NO AGE /
Neatness of entry will be taken into consideration when awarding prizes. The
Managing Director of Chocolates Limited and their Advertising Consultant
will be sole judges of this competition and their decision will be final in all respects.
This is an express condition of entry. No correspondence will be entered into in
connection with this competition.
This competition will close on 30th June, 1944.
Address your entries marked "HoadleyV' to Box 2928-NN G.P.O.
Sydney, Australia
