

The
Labor Spy
Survey of Industrial Espionage
SIDNEY HOWARD
with an introduction by
DR RICHARD C. CABOT
Professor of Social Ethics at Harvard
Based on a report made for
Dr. Calbot under the auspices
of the Cabot Fund for In-
dustrial Research by Sidney
Howard and Robert Dunn
This Pamphlet Reprinted from
The New Republic
Price 1 5 Cents


Copyright, 1921,
BY
REPUBLIC PUBLISHING CO., INC.
First printing, April 11, 1921
Second printing, April 18, 1921


Introduction
I
Mr. Howard’s material is selected from a voluminous
report which he submitted to me in October, 1920, em-
bodying investigations made by him and by Mr. Robert
Dunn during the previous summer. The expense of col-
lecting these data was met from a fund for industrial re-
search established under the will of my brother, Charles
M. Cabot.
My own interest centres in the protection and increase
of well founded mutual confidence, domestic, professional,
educational, social, industrial, political and international.
Whatever makes individuals, groups or governments dis-
trust each other, weakens their common action and makes
them potentially enemies. Of course such distrust, such
tacit or outspoken enmity is sometimes unavoidable. I
cannot well trust the burglar whom I see escaping with
my property, or the nation which has just violated its own
treaty-agreements. But this distrust is nevertheless an
evil and potentially the seed of greater evils, of mutual
misinterpretation, hatred and war.
Suspicion therefore seems to me something that should
everywhere be destroyed so far as this is possible. Delenda
est suspicio. Confirm it or disprove it but in any case
end it if possible. Acute suspicion may be necessary.
Chronic suspiciousness is a needless and loathsome disease.
II
The enemies of good will, the fomenters of mutual
suspicion are therefore to be recognized and treated as
public enemies by us all, especially when they are apt, as
in the present instance, to be discovered by almost every-
one of us within his own breast. For the labor spy is
only an offshoot of the deep human tendency to spy on
others when we think we need information not otherwise
to be secured. Where, then, does the labor spy belong in


the social structure? Is he a helpful pacificator, a useful
soothing syrup for industrial disturbances? Is he a gen-
uine but necessary evil? Or is he a social disease to be
eradicated as soon as possible?
Mr. Howard has shown that the labor spy is nothing
new though few have as yet had reason to feel his presence.
Sometimes he is defended as if he were simply a recording
device like a cash register, blameless and impersonal, bring-
ing truth to light, (where it belongs), the enemy of no
honest man. Again we hear of him as merely the guardian
of property, a policeman or as a detective seeking out
crime, bringing the law breaker to justice. Surely all
these characters are praiseworthy and beneficial, deserve no
epithet of opprobrium. The cash register, the policeman,
the night watchman, the detector of crime are valuable in
the world as we find it. They tend to quench or to pre-
vent suspiciousness rather than to encourage it. They
help to maintain and to spread confidence, public and
private.
But from all these the labor spy is to be distinguished:
1. He is secret. They (except the detective) are
public.
We all see and hear the cash register. That is why it
works. The policeman and the night watchman are rec-
ognized for what they are. We know what they are there
for and everyone but the criminal approves. But the labor
spy, the “under cover agent,” works in the dark. If he
were as public as a policeman or a foreman, he could not
find employment.
2. He shadows people who are not even suspected of
any crime and thus he differs from the ordinary detective.
Criminals and those under just and reasonable suspicion of
crime may properly be watched as if they had made war
on society. War methods, espionage or force, seem as
justifiable against them as against a predatory, nation. But
the labor spy is not ordinarily engaged to track down
criminals. The workmen whom he watches are not as a
rule even suspected of any violation of lawn They are
making trouble often enough for their employers. They
are disturbing industry perhaps, increasing discontent, urg-
ing a strike. But these acts are not crimes.


3. Since the criminal detective is to be feared only by
those who have broken the law, he is but 'an occasional
visitor. He finishes his job and goes. Most of us have no
personal dealings with him and need hardly know of his
existence outside books of fiction. But as labor unrest is
nearly perpetual in our time, the laborer has perpetually
at his elbow the fellow workman who may be a labor spy.
This, as I see it, is one of the worst features of the labor-
spy system. It promotes widespread and perpetual sus-
picion. A workman cannot tell whom to trust. He can-
not by law-abiding behaviour rid himself of the torment
and degradation inherent in endless distrust of his fellows.
4. The labor spy is led into a treachery more chronic
and more deeply resented than that of any other spy, be-
cause his work is more continuous and because his victims
have committed no'crime and are planning none. Living
and acting with the laborers as their fellow workman, their
fellow unionist, often, their leader in trade union activities,
the spy may be undiscovered for many months. But and
when he is discovered, he takes away confidence for the
future as well as for the present. There is no knowing
where to find him or how to get rid of him. Because of
him all men are suspected, and intense bitterness is aroused
against employers, the innocent and the guilty alike.
HI
Obviously enough spying, as a war measure used in time
of peace, is by no means confined to industry. Teachers
sometimes spy on their pupils, parents on their children,
social workers on their clients. In defence of this it can
always be truly said that we cannot get the real facts in
any other way. I know, for example, that some of my
pupils cheat me in examinations. Without persuading some
of" them to “peach” on the rest, I cannot find out who is
guilty. So I have to let the trouble go on. Many teachers
and parents are in the same quandary. But few are willing
to debauch children into betraying their comrades. Better
to go without the information and the “efficiency” result-
ing than to get it in this way. The end does not justify
the means.
As I see it, spying (outside war and law breaking) is


just as bad morally in one field as in another. Almost every-
one is tempted to use it sooner or later when important
information cannot otherwise be secured. I was strongly
tempted to use the spy system in getting information about
labor spies. Doubtless Mr. Howard and Mr. Dunn could
have secured much more convincing “exhibits” if we had
been willing to spy on the spies.
The employer like the teacher, social worker and parent,
is “up against it.” He cannot get the facts he wants by
honest, open methods and to go without these facts is not
good business. But at present he does not seem to believe
that by arousing such bitterness, deep and lasting among
the men who know (or suppose) that they are spied upon,
he is spreading hatred that will not soon be forgotten or
lived down. To an outsider such animosity certainly
doesn’t look like good business in the long run.
The employees, as Mr. Howard has shown, use spies
against their employers and counter spies against their em-
ployer’s spies. But as one of the labor leaders has told me,
the employee has not thus far been able to accomplish much
by this procedure. I mention the fact only to make it clear
that the employer has no monopoly of the spying business
within industry. The whole matter seems to me not one
of persons or classes but of a very widespread human tend-
ency to go back to barbaric methods of deception and
treachery and to break down the distinction between war,
which we know is hell; and peace, which we have supposed
to be something different.
The employer wants peace and harmony in his plants.
Is he likely to get it by employing a warlike method, the
spy system? He wants to keep radicals and extremists out
of industry. But what could be better calculated to drive
men to violence and unreason than the system which in
Russia has produced assassination and revolution?
The spy system, like other forms of lying, often gets us
out of trouble for a time. But in the long run I believe
that like all lying it defeats its own object and debases those
who use it. For lies spread like contagious disease. They
necessitate other lies to back them. They invade regions
from which we meant to keep them out until at last the


liar believes his own lies, until moreover the spy-employer
is deceived by his own spies. Mr. Howard has shown how
this actually occurs. Hired to cheat the employee, the spy
finds it profitable to cheat his employer too, by fomenting
strikes so that he may be hired to break them. This is
all in the way of business for the labor spy, since he is in
it only for money, and would not stay long in it if he had
any scruples against dishonesty. Violence and the work of
the agent provocateur seem the logical outcome of any spy
system pursued for profit only.
The remedy as I see it is light. I do not believe that
the labor spy system can stand the scrutiny of the public.
When the nation realizes what is going on it will turn to
other and less barbaric methods of dealing'with industrial
unrest.
RICHARD C.CABOT.


100 Per Cent Un-American
A FOREWORD BY
THE EDITORS OF THE NEW REPUBLIC
THE material which follows this brief In-
troduction is the digest of a report made
under the auspices of the Cabot Fund for In-
dustrial Research. The investigation was made
by Mr. Sidney Howard for Dr. Richard C. Cabot,
now Professor of Social Ethics in Harvard
University. That part of the work which in-
volved a direct approach of labor organizations
was undertaken by Mr. Robert Dunn, Yale ’ 18,
and a member of the Amalgamated Textile Work-
ers of America.
The lead for the Investigation was supplied by
Mr. William Hard’s articles on espionage in Pas-
saic which appeared In The New Republic last
Spring. (Issues of April 7, 14, 21, 28, 1920.)
The information amassed in the report to Dr.
Cabot covers a much wider area, an area sufficient-
ly large to establish a prima facie case for believing
that the practice of industrial espionage is national
In scope. Mr. Howard and his assistants uncov-
ered the practice in the industrial centres of New


York and New England, in Ohio and Michigan,
in Chicago and in Milwaukee and in several smaller
manufacturing towns. Direct information was
amassed through manufacturers and from in-
dustrial detectives themselves, from court testimony
and from the records of Congress. Many clues
were supplied by the locals of unions, but curiously
enough, Mr. Howard tells us, the national organi-
zations of labor would not divulge material which
the investigators knew them to possess. He tells
us, also, that there were A. F. of L. officials who
denied that industrial espionage exists.
That it exists with enormous ramifications no
reader of that which follows will dispute. In-
dustrial spying is a large industry, drawing its
profits out of the perpetuation of suspicion between
employer and employee. Remove suspicion, es-
tablish industrial relations on the basis of frank
conference, as has been done in many industries,
and the industrial spy loses his job. But where no
conference exists, where employer and employee
have no regular method of consulation, the spy
appears as the real intermediary between capital
and labor. Industrial espionage is a substitute for
democratic industrial relations, a sneaking, under-
handed, poisonous, trouble-making, trouble-perpet-
uating substitute. It is to the hygiene of industi’y
what drug addiction is to the hygiene of the
individual, a temporary and illusive relief that pro-
duces more trouble than ever it can cure.
The industrial spy, by the very nature of his
business, cannot permit confidence to grow up be-
tween the employer and employee. His earnings
depend upon keeping the employer frightened, the


men restless and suspicious. It is not surprising to
find, as Mr. Howard shows, that industrial spies
have played both sides against each other, and
have been at the bottom of a great deal of the
violence and corruption of industrial conflict. It
is a system based on the negation of honor and
good faith in human relationships, and Is bound
to breed dishonor and bad faith wherever it is In-
troduced.
To any one who sincerely believes In a cooper-
ative spirit between labor and capital, to any one
who gives more than lip service to the American
ideal, this vast, intricate, insinuating system of bad
will, provocation, corruption and violence is an in-
tolerable obstacle to industrial peace. The evidence
here given is complete enough; it rests on sufficient
documentary evidence, to call for federal investi-
gation of the whole business, followed by strict
legislation against the practice.
There Is very little room, if any, for private
espionage In a republic. It violates every sound
tradition and every sound instinct of republican
government. For It introduces into the inner circles
of western life an attitude of mind that belongs to
the intrigue and conspiracy of an Oriental court.
There, where government is arbitrary and personal,
espionage is the basis of administration. But here,
we are supposed to have Invented a substitute for
arbitrary and personal government in the principle
of representation and consultation, and there Is no
place for industrial espionage. Loyalty to Amer-
ican ideals is incompatible with this practice. It is
ioo per cent un-American. — The Editors.


I
Nature and Scope of Industrial
Espionage
ESPIONAGE in Industry Is not a credible in-
stitution, not one which it Is agreeable to
contemplate. Nevertheless, the employer’s
practice of setting spies to observe and Inform on
workers in factory and union has, now, every ap-
pearance of firm establishment. It has been devel-
oping inconspicuously these many years. Only an
occasional indiscretion in this place or in that has
ever brought it any measure of public attention.
Its doings are still far from a state of ideal pub-
licity, but recent labor disputes have so frequently
encountered it, have dealt with it over so wide an
area that it can no longer be considered in terms
of locality, of Individual Industries or even of par-
ticular crises. It seems to have become something
of a factor in American industry as a whole.
Because this general view of the practice and
nature of Industrial espionage is written for a
public not always In the employer’s confidence, it
is well to begin at the beginning. Given an em-
ployer suddenly face to face with the probability
of labor trouble in his plant, ignorant of the char-
acter and point of view of his employees, with no
access to their plans, very fearful of their organi-
zation. The result is almost inevitable panic and
the labor spy exists to exploit this panic. He capi-
talizes the employer’s Ignorance and prejudice and


enters the plant specifically to identify the leaders
of the labor organization, to propagandize against
them and blacklist them and to disrupt and corrupt
their union. He is under cover, disguised as a
worker, hired to betray the workers’ cause. Es-
pionage in industry Is not a credible institution, but
it seems to go on very generally.
The labor press of the last few years Is filled
with the records of spies discovered in unions and
expelled from them. This in any part of the coun-
try where industry thrives. A chief of the Rail-
road Brotherhoods says that he has inot often
known “a unit large enough to be called a meeting
and small enough to exclude a spy.” A year ago
spies were discovered in Passaic, New Jersey, in the
mills of the American Woolen Company. At the
very time of their exposure, the investigators of the
steel strike were stumbling upon evidence of the
practice around Pittsburgh. Spies and strike
breakers figured in the street railway riots of
Brooklyn and Denver last summer, in the brass
strike of last spring in Waterbury, in St. Louis,
in Chicago, in the Northwest, In California.
In December ten important officials of the labor
unions of Akron, Ohio, were exposed as confessed
and convicted spies of the Corporations Auxiliary
Company, a concern whose business is the admini-
stration of industrial espionage. Last spring two
similar corporations entered the courts of Phila-
delphia and left there a complete (and unpub-
lished) record of their proceedings in the employ
of the textile manufacturers of Philadelphia. From
this record much of the present evidence has been
derived. Detroit and Milwaukee have recently


legislated against the operations of such corpora-
tions. Decidedly, Industrial espionage must be the
affair of the whole country. When the Commis-
sion on Industrial Relations examined the workers
and employers of American industry, it found
scarcely one who had not an admission to make or
a story to tell of the workings of the Industrial
spy system.
It is strange that this business should have
gained such a hold. It Is strange that the employer
should not reasonably suspect its effects. Though
he propose only to relieve immediate labor diffi-
culties by the destruction of a particular union, he
may well accomplish very different ends. This
labor spy, often unknown to the very employer
who retains him through his agency, is in a posi-
tion of immense strength. There is no power to
hold him to truth telling. The employer who de-
pends upon espionage rather than upon his own
eyes is, in great measure, at the mercy of his spy.
The very nature of the spy’s business makes it
necessary for him to do either of two things. He
may falsify his reports or create, through his own
influence upon the workers, a basis upon which
to report the truth.
Wherefore we need not be surprised to find situ-
ations prearranged in the plant of a prospective
client, strikes prolonged rather than broken, riot-
ers furnished by espionage agencies along with
strike breakers, trouble fostered where peace has
been. Mr. Coach of Cleveland, a leading in-
dustrial detective, buys the Columbus Labor News
during the street railway strike in that city, and
edits it to encourage the very agitation which he is


being paid to break by the street railway company.
In Minneapolis an industrial detective agency Is
caught working for both union and employer in
the same strike. A spy brings to New York five
hundred copies of the Communist Manifesto
printed by the radical department of a detective
company and distributes them about various organi-
zations of workers. The Sherman Service officials
of Chicago are indicted (and never tried) be-
cause they instruct their agents to “stir up as much
bad feeling as you can possibly between the Italians
and the Serbians. Spread data among the Serbians
that the Italians are going back to work. Call up
every question you can in reference to racial hatred
between these two nationalities.”
Furthermore, it is the boast and project of the
industrial spy that he can corrupt a union out of
existence. Says Mr. Coach of Cleveland: “I
own every union in this town,” which is to say
that he controls the union executives. And there
seems excellent reason to believe that this kind of
control goes high in the ranks of union labor exe-
cutives. It is a common plaint that American
union leaders are not trustworthy. This kind of
systematic corruption and demoralization cannot
better the situation whatever claims be put for-
ward is its defense. Labor leaders must be dealt
with. Who fosters corx-uption must, in the end,
deal with the corrupt.*
* According to the frank statement of President Ray of
the Ray Detective Agency of Boston, the president, sec-
retary and treasurer of the local ice man’s union were,
until quite recently, all in the employ of his agency. These
spy-officials were able, among other activities, to engineer


Briefly, to retain a spy is to set, between em-
ployer and employee, a middleman whose business
it is to simulate the prejudice of the one against
the right of the other, whose very livelihood de-
pends upon the existence and continuance of trou-
ble, whether real, imaginary or provoked. In-
dustrial espionage is a curious substitute for in-
dustrial relations. In American industry it is an
amazingly general and characteristic substitute and
the evidence of its work is unbelievable and can-
not be denied.
It Is most amazing of all that employers should
have thought it profitable. But the scale of or-
ganization of industrial espionage stifles any doubt
of its scope. Only a tremendous clientele can
justify it. It operates through the secret service
departments of great corporations; the railroads,
the United States Steel Corporation, the Western
Union Telegraph Company and like corporations.
It operates through the spy services of employers’
associations; The National Erectors’ Association,
The National Manufacturers’ Association, The
National Founders’ Association. Strike insurance
companies maintain spy services. And, finally,
a dozen vast detective organizations with branch
offices In every manufacturing centre, together with
hundreds of smaller local agencies, devote them-
selves exclusively to training and furnishing in-
dustrial spies, agents provocateurs, and strike
the union through a dance which left it $5OO in debt.
This is a common disruption scheme. A former president
of the Bay State Carmen’s union was one of Ray’s regular
detectives. He has since gone west to establish an agency
of his own.


breakers. It would be interesting to know how
many men the business employs. One can only
guess at thousands.
ENGINEERS AND CONCILIATORS.
These industrial detectives prefer, nowadays, to
be known variously as “Harmonizers and Concilia-
tors,” as “Service Corporations,” as “Engineers—
Commercial, Financial and Industrial.” The orig-
inal Pinkerton first discovered the possibilities of
the detective in industry, and himself put agents
to work in the long defunct Knights of Labor. Al-
most to a man the industrial detectives are one-time
criminal detectives. Mr. Coach of Cleveland ex-
plains the change tersely. “There’s more money in
Industry,” he says, “than ever there was in crime.”
The Pinkerton National Detective Agency car-
ries on the industrial work of its founder through
thirty-five branch offices. The machine guns of
Baldwin Felts fight the unions of Colorado and of
West Virginia alternately. The Corporations
Auxiliary Company, masquerading under a dozen
different names, specializes at electing Its agents to
union office (as in Akron) and issue to its clients
a bi-weekly bulletin of labor information gathered
by under-cover methods in every state In the coun-
try. The Thiel Detective Service Company, very
old and very well established, furnishes spies to
factories from the smallest Paterson silk plant to
the immense producing organization of the Pierce
Arrow Motor Car Company. William J. Burns
maintains thirty-five branch offices, industrial and
radical departments, and collects numerous thou-
sands. Mr. R. J. Coach of Cleveland, who “owns


every union in his town,” will not admit that he
has ever failed to crush a union and has, in at least
one case, put ten thousand strike breakers into a
single strike. Bergoff Brothers and Wadell of New
York claim that they can raise the same number in
seventy-two hours. Mooney and Boland in Chi-
cago, the Gorton National Agency of the same
city do business broadcast. Any city will list a
dozen smaller corporations dedicated to the same
service. Last, and, perhaps, most important, The
Sherman Service Inc. buys pages of the New York
Times to proclaim its doctrines of harmony In in-
dustry, has its employees exempted from the mili-
tary draft, admits of no competitor, supplies its
agents to the modest laboratories of Thomas A.
Edison and to the hundred mills of the American
Woolen Company, and pays, in a single year, an
income tax of $258,000.
THE INDUSTRIAL DETECTIVE SOLICITS BUSINESS.
These brief quotations from letters of Industrial
detective agencies serve the end of illustrating the
kind of promise which they hold forth to the client-
employer In the hours of his need.
From dunn’s national detective agency, De-
troit.
We are in a position to place in your plant, labor-
ers, mechanics, clerks, bookkeepers, in fact people of any
vocation to obtain information as to a forerunner of
labor trouble.
We will furnish guards on very short notice, and
will break a strike in a way that will obviate the nec-
essity of your being forced to use union or other em-
ployees not of your own choosing. ...


The Truth about the Capitalist Press.
The Brass Check
By UPTON SINCLAIR
Cloth 75.; Paper Covers 3s. 6d. ; At all Booksellers.
London
HENDERSONS, 66, Charing Cross Road, W.C.
THE PASSING SHOW : —It is difficult to understand
why Mr. Upton Sinclair’s The Brass Check has been
received by the English Press with such an abysmal
silence.
Hannen Swaffer writes in THE SUNDAY TIMES,
in a full column review : — The Brass Check is a study
of American Journalism. It is an exposure more search-
ing even than “ The Jungee ’ which told of the horrors
of the stock yards of Chicago with a mercilessness seldom
equalled in .prose. ... I have not counted them, but
I should think Mr. Sinclair gives what would seem to be
proof of over a thousand cases of deliberate lying, most of
them aimed at people whose reforming tendencies were no
more revolutionary than those of Dr. Gore, the Great
Bishop of Oxford, of Mr. H. G. Wells.
From a long review in THE TIMES LITERARY
SUPPLEMENT ; —For the sake of the honour of the
American Press —the better elements in which cannot but
be glad to see the worst exposed—one would like to know
that this book was being widely read.
THE CAMBRIDGE MAGAZINE It is hard to
recall any event in the world of print, since the develop-
ment of printing itself, which deserves more attention
from the reading public.


POLITIKEN, COPENHAGEN .-—Not since Houore
de Balzac wrote his novel “ Disappointments ” has the
Press been subjected to such fire.
MAORILAND WORKER : —The bare, bald facts, as
convincingly set forth in The Brass Check, the history
of the corruption of a people’s soul.
ROBERT BLATCHFORD writes in THE CLARION:
The Brass Check, which has caused me to open my
English eyes, and to realise facts of which I have lived
all my life in contented ignorance.
THE COMMUNIST in a first review, two coin inns
long, says: —The Brass Check is a great book. Get it!
in a second lengthy review says: —Every Communist
should make himself familiar with this “bombshell.”
From the NOTTINGHAM JOURNAL :— The Brass
Check, appropriate!} enough, is sent out from ' The
Bomb Shop.”
THE NEW STATESMAN, in the course of a long
review: Mr. Upton Sinclair, not for the first time,
happens to be for the moment among the most widely
read authors on the American continent.
From a full page review in THE NATION: —Certainly
one’s respect for the power of the Press—and even one’s
fear of it —increases when reading The: Brass Check.
. . An English journalist, discussing The; Brass Check
with me, declared that matters are as bad here. ... It is
true that even in England it too often happens that the
important news is not what we read, but what is left out.
From the DAILY HERALD : —lf you want to discover
how news is invented, how it is faked, how pictures are
faked, how news is distorted, how news is suppressed,
yon must get this book. It explains not only the “ how ”
but the “ why.”
From the LEICESTER POST : —The book does open
one’s eyes considerably to the utter commercialism of the
Press as conducted across the Atlantic.


From THE FREE THINKER, in a lengthy review: —
One by one the illusions, the “vital lies” of our civili-
sation are dropping off. . . . What we saw in print we
accepted as the truth. . . . We did not dream that the
big advertisers had any real pull. . . . We hugged the
illusion that the press and independence of opinion were
indissolubly bound together.
The Press, with a few exceptions, played wholeheartedly
the game of intimidation and bluff arranged by its masters,
and a grateful government saw to it that the capitalist
owners did not suffer.
Now Mr. Upton Sinclair, an American poet and idealist,
comes along with a damning indictment of American
journalism. . . . The book is as full of facts as an egg is
full of meat, and with all the grip of a fine realistic
novel. ... It is instructive to see a group of hustling
millionaires held up and shown up by a Socialist poor in
worldly goods, but incredibly rich in ideas. . . . Thk
Brass Check is, as I have said, a magazine of damning
and damnable facts. . . Tells wholesome truths about the
inner workings of influential newspapers and magazines.
From the COTTON FACTORY TIMES : —In one
sentence it is an amazing revelation of the corrupt tied-
house methods of the American Press, methods of which
the ordinary Englishman can hardly have any idea. It
tells, too, of the dark ways of the trusts, shows how
difficult it is in some respects, to obtain justice in the
courts, and teaches the extent to which freedom is a by-
word in the “land of the free.” The author has a direct
and cutting style, and is deterred by nothing in his aim
to tear the veil away from any and every form of graft,
corruption and dark doing. The first half of the book of.
440 pages (in paper cover) tells of his personal experiences
with American journalism, and it need hardly be said they
are intensely interesting, not to say startling. He says,
“ I tell what I have personally' seen and experienced. I
take the oath of a witness : the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, so help me God. After this
pledge, earnestly given and earnestly meant, the reader
must either believe me or he must exclude me from the
company of civilised men.” Following, a host of witnesses


are placed on the stand —“ Several score of them, the
wisest and truest and best people of our country.” A
third section deals with what is called the remedy. This,
it may be explained, is mainly the uprooting of capitalism.
Upton Sinclair is, of course; a Socialist. One may differ
from him politically, however, and still be enthralled bj’
his incomparable story. The book is in a way an educa-
tion. As regards the crooked ways of American journalism
take the case of Toni Mooney, as one concerning which
“Cotton Factory Times” readers have been kept fairly
well informed. Not one word of the great labour issue of
the time has got into the capitalist newspapers of the
Hast. “There were two or three million ‘protest editions’
of the * Appeal to Reason ’ issued —and still not a word
about it in the capitalist newspapers outside California !
Finally, the Anarchists in Petrograd took up the matter;
they attacked the American Embassy, and the news was
cabled back to New York that the attack was on account
of a certain 'Tom Muni.’ The newspapers of New York
didn’t know anything about the case, and could not find
out about it in time ; they had to publish the name as it
came over the cables- thus laying bare their shame to the
whole world ! Could any writer of farce-comedy have
invented a greater satire upon New York journalism than
the fact that it had to get its San Francisco labour news
misspelled from Petrograd ? ” Tint Brass Check holds
the reader like a romance. Packed with surprising facts,
it is one continuous string of indictments which in this
country would have caused the author to be smothered
with libel actions. A braver and more fearless man than
Upton Sinclair we have never heard of, and his book
stands in a class of its own.
By the same author
The Profits of Religion, doth 75.; paper 3s. 6d.
The Jungle, cloth 7s. paper 3s. 6d.
The Industrial Republic, cloth 6s.
HENDERSONS, 66 Charing Cross Road, LONDON.
Publishers ; Wholesale e* 0 Retail Booksellers to the Soviets of the World.
WESTBOURNE PRESS. HOVE'
10.000 6 4 21.


From murphy secret service, Detroit.
. . . The head of this agency having about as much
use for a strike breaker as he would have for a thief.
We have the reputation of being several jumps ahead
of the old style way of settling capital and labor difficul-
ties, and we feel that anybody in business who allows his
affairs to reach the labor strike stage, especially if oper-
ating on the open shop theory, is . . . behind the time.
From ROBERT J. FOSTER, FOSTER SERVICE, 286
Fifth Avenue, New York.
First: — l will say that if we are employed before
any union or organization is formed by the employees,
there will be no strike and no disturbance. This does
not say that there will be no unions formed, but it does
say that we will control the activities of the union and
direct its policies provided we are allowed a free hand
by our clients.
Second: —lf a union is already formed and no strike
is on or expected to be declared within thirty or sixty
days, although we are not in the same position as we
would be in the above case, we could—and I believe
with success —carry on an intrigue which would result
in factions, disagreement, resignations of officers and a
general decrease in membership; and, if a strike were
called, we would be in a position to furnish information
etc., of contemplated assaults.
From Schindler, INC., 149 Broadway, New York.
Information supplied by our secret industrial opera-
tives and corroborated through other sources indicates
that we are on the eve of extensive industrial disturb-
ances. There seems, to be an extraordinary agitation in
favor of a 44-hour week and a substantial increase in
wages in a number of different lines. . . .
Services retained now will enable you to prepare to
meet to the best advantage whatever situation may con-
front you as a consequence of .the present agitation and
in this connection we beg to remind you that “fore-
warned is forearmed.”
14


An acknowledgement would be appreciated as an
indication that this letter has not fallen into the hands
of an unauthorized person.
From WILLIAM j. burns, Woolworth Building,
New York.
.... Ever since the Mc'Namara case we have made
a close study of labor difficulties and have perfected our
industrial organization ...
In pursuing this character of work we have organized
this department in such a way that we are in a position
to anticipate these labor difficulties in all industries, and
by this method apply what we call preventive measures.
From THE INTERNATIONAL AUXILIARY COMPANY,
alias the Eastern Engineering and Contracting
Company, actually the Corporations Auxiliary
Company. Room 702, 291 Broadway, New York.
Branch offices In various cities but under different
names so that the real size of the company cannot
be estimated.
.... The study of industrial and labor problems has
been the sole business of this company for over a quar-
ter of a century and to carry on this work we have sur-
rounded ourselves with men and women of different
trades and nationalities who form a part of a far-reach-
ing organizations, the mission of wihch is harmony in the
operating of these various industries.
Our representatives are employed on a plane of equal-
ity with your other employees and study and report
each day on the conditions actually existing as seen by
them from a workman’s viewpoint . . .
We have been particularly successful in handling situ-
ations which are continually arising in organized labor
circles. . . . Wherever we have the organized labor
movement to contend with, we endeavor to use the in-
fluence of our representatives toward creating the proper
attitude of those around them. ... We start on every
operation with the idea of making our operative a


power in his little circle for good, and, as his acquaint-
ance grows, the circle of his influence enlarges. .. . The
cost of the service is very nominal, and the best proof we
have of its value is the tremendous growth of our ser-
vice in the corporations that wc have had the privilege of
serving in years, past.
From the corporations auxiliary company,
Continental National Bank Building, Chicago.
Don’t you think it would pay you to know your
men, know every man in your employ . . . ? It can be
done quietly and inexpensively by the use of the Cor-
porations Auxiliary Company’s Industrial Inspection
Service. . . .
Wherever our system has been in operation for a
reasonable length of -time considering the purpose to be
accomplished, the result has, been that union member-
ship has not increased if our clients wished otherwise.
In many cases local union charters have been returned
without publicity and a number of local unions have
been disbanded.
We help eliminate the agitator and organizer quietly,
and with little or no friction, and, further, through the
employment of our service, you will know at all times
who, among your employees, are loyal and to be de-
pended upon. . . .
From industrial service company, 181 Tremont
Street, Boston, Massachusetts.
“The heads of the American Federation of Labor are
making war plans. They believe the “open shop”
crusade is intended to undo everything union labor
has accomplished . . . There are men in your employ
who will fight to the last before they will be willing
to have their pay envelope reduced . . . Our business
is to act as labor mediators, and to prevent strikes. . . .
There are things you just CAN’T put down in a
letter.”. . .
By such letters does the industrial detective re-
cruit his clientele.


II.
Industrial Harmony
THE industrial detective has solicited his
business in his own words. Since he speaks
with such conviction on matters which men
are less anxious than they might be to believe, it
seems worth while that he should display his own
wares.
In the injunction suit brought against the Butler
Agency of Philadelphia by the Sherman Service
Inc., Mr. Sherman, in the Bill in Equity, described
his business very eloquently as:
.... establishing and maintaining peace and harmony,
good will and efficiency in manufacturing, industrial and
business enterprises among the employees and between
the employees and employers thereof, throughout said
territory, the resultant effect contributing to the stability
of our national structure and greater mutual productivity
to employer, employees and community . . .
and, said Mr. Sherman on the witness stand;
We send representatives into a plant for the purpose
of investigating and in order that they may report the
real existing conditions in the plant. We term that
"invisible service’’ because we believe we can develop
the unbiassed and unprejudiced facts more clearly by
invisible service. We receive daily reports from these
individuals. We submit to our clients the substance or
pith of these reports together with such recommendations
as we believe essential . . .”
In 1917 the organization then bearing Mr. Sher


man’s name published a book which they withdrew
almost Immediately.
The employees of a manufacturing house of national
prominence submitted demands for a ten per cent in-
crease. The company offered a five per cent advance,
but, after several conferences without avail, over twelve
hundred went out on strike.
There had been no union among that particular trade,
and, inasmuch as over two hundred thousand are em-
ployed in the trade throughout the United States, a
certain union made a very concerted effort toward hav-
ing the strikers organize . . . The company, on the
other hand, being one of about fifty others con-
trolled by one corporation, was equally persistent
in preventing the above mentioned union from being
successful . . .
... We were called in and given carte blanche . . .
Six secret operatives, two of each nationality most pre-
valent among the strikers, were detailed to learn the
inside conditions, the acts and contemplations of the
strikers and their leaders, who the most violent agitators
were, the moral and financial support of the strikers and
their organization, and, primarily, to gain positions of
confidence and influence among the men so as to be able
to render an effective service at the psychological time.
After about two weeks .. . the mill reopened. Invita-
tion was given to all former workers to return under
the terms offered by the client.
Almost simultaneously we detailed several of our re-
cruiting agents to hire men suitable for permanent em-
ployment. We were permitted to offer whatever salary
we deemed advisable .. . Also we were to furnish them
with bed and board during the strike . . .
These workers were not delivered to the plant until
the second day after the mills had reopened, so that the
importation did not affect those of the strikers who de-
sired to go into work of their own accord. As no more
than a dozen went in, fifty workers were delivered on
the second day. Accompanying these workers were ten


able bodied guards of commanding appearance . . . The
appearance of the workers and the manner in which
they were protected amazed the strikers ....
For the next few days there was no apparent change
in the situation. The strike leaders were very active;
they maintained a severe picket line, enthusiastic speeches
were made ....
In the meantime we continued to import help ... in
groups of from fifty to seventy-five a day. Although
we were very discriminating in our selection of workers
whom we recruited, we found it expedient to detail four
secret service operatives, hired in the same way as the
other workers, to live in the different barracks and check
any agitation which might arise among the recruits and
to immediately report on any labor agitator or strike
sympathizer who might have been hired accidentally.
Through this service we were able to keep the factory
one hundred per cent clean with loyal workers.
The operatives originally detailed to cultivate the
strikers had, in the meantime, gained positions of influ-
ence, two having become officers in the local union which
had been started.* About eight additional secret service
operatives were then detailed to augment the work of
the others, and, after the plant had been opened about
two weeks, we made a concerted effort to induce the
strikers to return to work ... In a very careful way
our operatives caused the shop-keepers who catered to
* This practice is not confined to any one agency.
“It was the policy .... to place men called
‘Company Operatives’ in different branches of work in
the different shops and charge the employers so much for
each operative. Each operative was given an expense ac-
count and it was his duty to make friends with everybody,
especially the agents and men high up in the organizations
and the men who held positions in the locals. The Com-
pany offered me a bonus of fifty dollars to get a secretary’s
job in one of the locals in order to get the names and
addresses of the men . . .”—Affidavit of Eckhardt Gieser,
one time operative of the Corporations Auxiliary Co.


the strikers to realize that it was unprofitable for them
to have the strike continue, and that it would be wisdom
on their part to encourage the strikers who were their
customers to return to work.
The results . . . were soon forth-coming. Several of
the strikers returned. The union leaders, however, be-
came more active . . .
Through our secret operatives, and particularly those
who had gained influential positions in the local organi-
zation, we were able to anticipate every move of the
strikers and leaders and by this means . . . were able
to have several arrests made which resulted in proper
convictions.
This inspired confidence in many more strikers and
they returned . . . We engaged luxurious seven-passenger
automobiles to convey them in groups between their
residences and the factory. With each group we detailed
a guard. This extraordinary form of transportation and
the excellent protection afforded, served as a temptation
for many strikers to return . . .
The company had no further need of conference with
the labor leaders and at our advice denied interviews
to any and all labor organization officials.
After eight weeks . . . the strike was declared off.
All hands went back in a body on the following day . . .
The weekly meetings of the local union discontinued.
The leaders of the strike were gradually discharged for
one reason or another . . . Our operatives, surrounding
themselves with many of the former strikers, upon meet-
ing days, and going away upon recreation trips with
them, the attendance at the meetings gradually dimin-
ished. At these a sufficient number of operatives were
detailed to use the proper influence to promote legis-
lation favorable to our client.
.... Then it was comparatively easy to start dis-
sension among the leaders which increased to the extent
that each gathering resulted in a fight. These occasions
allowed our secret operatives to further illustrate the
fact that the leaders were out for personal gain . . .


Finally, by properly applied methods, the union charter
was returned and the local abandoned.
.... The local union was disorganized, and that
national industry, of which our client is the great major-
ity, has not been unionized.
The book tells other stories of strikes no less
successfully broken and of unions similarly wrecked.
One clips sentences:
Our operatives have obtained positions of influence
in the union so that they can easily influence the affairs
within the organization in the proper direction for the
welfare of the client.
We had been successful in splitting the union into
three factions, one controlled by the committee, one by
a Polish leader, and one by the president ... A meet-
ing was called and the Italian employee whom our oper-
ative had been cultivating and influencing fought against
the secretary. These matters resulted in a general fight.
The proper time had arrived to exterminate the trouble-
making organization. We detailed a number of guards
and they were immediately deputized. Ejectment papers
were served upon the committee and they were ordered
to leave town, which they did. . . .
Our operatives were successful in being able to take
over virtually the entire management of the . . . union.
This book is Indubitably the most instructive
item in the library of industrial espionage liter-
ature. That it is so, certainly accounts for its with-
drawal from circulation.
Following the Sherman Service advertisement:
“How can Sherman Service be misunderstood?”,
is the whole welter of harmony and conciliation.
Says Sherman, again:
No employer, no manufacturer or worker on earth
need misconstrue our object.


No man, no organization, no movement that is honest
and above board has anything to fear from Sherman
Service.
This from the New York Times advertisement of
November sth, 1919. The motto of the R. J.
Coach Secret Service Company of Cleveland Is
significant.
Man, know thyself, is a divine command, but, man,
know those in whom you are obliged to put faith and
trust is a human necessity without which no substantial
success in this world can be achieved.
Mr. Coach may be taken as the originator of
this literature of harmony through which the in-
dustrial detective advertises his wares.
In their silent, secret, effective way, the industrial
operatives uproot relentlessly the weeds of dishonesty,
disloyalty and discontent. Through their efforts unity
of purpose is established between employer and employee.
Our operatives soon end the reign of labor agitator in
shop or factory. We do not care to say more on this
subject.
All of this in the words of the industrial detec-
tive taken from his own works. His phrases in
his parlance of harmony and conciliation—“we
keep them happy and contented”—“We bring
about a closer understanding between you and your
employee”—“Give the human element more con-
sideration”—“Selflessness, sincerity and honesty
are the three factors which capital must use,” are
appalling. It is a strange thing to superimpose
these noble thoughts upon the actual meaning be-
hind them. But the final indictment of the industrial
detective is the comparison of two passages gleaned
again from the writings of Mr. Sherman’s agency.


It is then a simple task to thoroughly impress upon
the alien that this country offers advantages that no
other country offers its citizens. We show him that he
should be part of this country and enjoy its citizenship.
Against which the famous instructions to the oper-
ative of the steel strike:
We want you to stir up as much bad feeling as you
possibly can between the Italians and the Serbians.
Spread data among the Serbians that the Italians are
going back to work. Call up every question you can in
reference to racial hatred between these two national-
ities.*
We cannot readily bring ourselves to associating
this sort of thing with the employers of this coun-
try. Yet here is the industrial detective with his
hundreds of branch offices and his thousands of
spies and his income tax of $258,000 in a single
year. Some one must pay the piper since he enjoys
such prosperity.
of these instructions brought about a raid
on the Chicago office of the Sherman Service, Inc., by the
Military Intelligence and the States Attorney of Cook
County which resulted in the indictment of an official of
the agency. The indictment was subsequently quashed.


III.
The Spy at Work
IN labor espionage, publicity and even adver-
tised performance are plausible enough once
the preliminaries have been accepted. If one
can be persuaded of the existence and scope of the
practice, if one can be resigned to recognizing it
as an American and living institution, these things
that it has said for itself sound very well, like good
stories which ask of their audience only a little
imagination. The real melodrama is not apparent
until the spy himself is encountered.
Begging the issue of tedium, the present pur-
pose is to continue in quotations. Any man can
tell his own story better for himself. The detec-
tive has been allowed his say. The spy must be
permitted his.
Herewith a series of quotations from the re-
ports of a spy at work in an automobile factory in
Racine, Wisconsin. He is a member of the Rus-
sell Detective Agency in Milwaukee. His reports
are cited not for any significance in the situation
which he is observing, not for any sensational con-
tent of their own, but because they give a fair im-
pression of his business and because, out of hun-
dreds of similar pages, they alone prove moderate-
ly readable.
They cover a brief period, from the 22nd of
February, 1919, to the Ist of March following.
A strike is on. The business is to report the strike.


No glaring Injustices; only the very usual sort of
thing. The man is an informant and does his
work well.
WE BEGIN WITH THE FIRST DAY
As I was on my way to the plant, this morning, I
noticed before I was within a block of the plant that
the union pickets were more active than usual, and ap-
parently they were doing something more than just
picketing. At any rate, as I drew near to the plant one
held me up and asked, “Are you a card man?”
I pretended not to understand. Then he said, “Well,
read this and let us see you down at the Polish Hall to-
morrow night.” At this he turned his attention to
another man walking across the street, and I continued
on into the plant.
At just 6:48 A. M. I registered in my time upon
entering the plant and joined Matson. Almost immedi-
ately he began talking to me on the subject of prohibi-
tion, and in this connection I said to him, “Booze never
got a man very far, but prohibition has made a man out
of many a boozer.” “What do you mean by that?” he
asked, and I answered, “Well, many a good man was
made a bum by liquor, but whenever anyone has sworn
off drinking they have always realized that booze was a
bad thing to get mixed up with.” Just at this moment
Moore appeared on the scene, and Matson remarked,
“Here comes prohibition now.” Moore’s response was,
“Never mind—you old booze fiends will be carrying a
stamp on your forehead and be black-balled. You know
what that means. Every boss will know you as a boozer
and nobody will hire you.”
At 12:00 noon I left the plant in company with Huck
and had lunch at his home. While walking together I
asked him, “What do you think of these fellows out on
picket duty?” and he answered, “I think they are a lot of
d . . fools, and don’t know what they want. There they
are, doing picket duty for $g a week when they could be
making $7.70 a day right at the plant and have it soft


too.” Continuing, Huck stated, “What good are they do-
ing, standing around on the streets ? If they wanted to do
things they’d pound h . . . out of a couple of men who
took their jobs. That would be more satisfaction than
standing around conversing on the corners. They’ve
been out fifteen weeks already and haven’t gained a
point.” Huck added at that time they were trying to
organize everybody in the metal trades line in order to
strengthen their organization so that they will be able to
have their demands acceded to.
At this time, we arrived at Huck’s home and had
dinner at his place as he keeps boarders.
For the afternoon I got back to the plant as soon as
possible, noticing on the way in that the client was
talking to two of the pickets at the east end of the plant.
Apparently, the client “put it over” them in an exchange
of words, as he smiled when he walked away. Different
ones in Schmidt’s department saw the client have a chat
with the pickets and took a peep at him.
In this part of my report I wish to suggest that Stein
be placed at the work of cutting and given piecework
at a rate so low that he would quit. This would be
letting him down easier than to discharge him. I am
sure that if Schmidt kept him at cutting steady he would
quit within two or three days. He is the “bad egg”
that we must get rid of in order to put a stop to the
organizing work he does among the employees of the
plant at present. Then after we get rid of him we can
take care of the lesser lights, and these I shall bring to
the client’s attention from time to time with suggestions
how they can be gotten rid of. Only in this way can
we avoid having trouble this summer with the present
crew—that is, getting the agitators out of our midst. It
would not do to let those fellows know why we are
getting rid of them as it might only stir things up. Hence
the reason why I suggest that we force them to quit of
their own accord, rather than discharge them.
A good day’s work. Note at once that the spy
is early. He always is. There is simply no cur


ing him of punctuality. And he always claims
credit for himself and calls attention to the tardy
ones by name. There is the encounter with the
pickets. Moderately instructive, that, If not sur-
prising. And Matson on prohibition seems to have
less to do with the case, but it really happened
and must be included. Huck on the pickets is more
comforting and we meet the client just after. The
end lets us into the secret of blacklists. The black-
list without some form of espionage were impos-
sible.
WE GO ON TO THE FOLLOWING DAY
The union hall was the first place I paid a visit to
this morning as I got down to business for the day. There
I got in touch with Bonzen who informed me that $43
was received in the morning’s mail which was not very
satisfactory compared to the number of bonds which
were mailed to outside locals. The girls have done well
by way of selling dance tickets here lately as it was
found upon checking up same that over 3,000 have been
sold.
Union finances are the best sign of the duration
(or non-duration) of a strike. The spy is always
after facts and figures on the treasury. He contin-
ues, visiting other plants in Racine.
I thought it well to check up the employment situation
at the plant. There were some men standing around
outside, and I learned that they were a few who had
been laid off. In the talk I managed to have with them
they made the statement that sooner or later there was
going to be trouble at that plant. “Just how do you
mean?” I asked, and they answered, “Well, the men
are going to demand an explanation from the company
regarding just why ninety men were laid off. The men


believe they were laid off for the reason that they are
union men and they consider this just another trick of
the manufacturers to break up the organization.”
In continuing my efforts in the client’s behalf, I got
over on the picket line and as usual I found the boys
assembled in the shanty. Now and then one would go
out and walk around the plant but they preferred to stay
inside. Peterson remarked that it would not be long be-
fore they would have many new members in the organi-
zation. He expressed confidence that they would get a
large number of new applications at tonight’s meeting.
Not deeming it advisable to remain with the boys too
long for fear of arousing suspicion I set out for the
North Side.
A touch of caution at the end. Omitting the
busy afternoon, we follow him to the meeting.
This evening when I got over to the Polish Hall I
found about one hundred in attendance, most of them
being Slavonians, mixed with Italians and Poles. Those
of each nationality kept to themselves, Nickerson was on
hand and gave a short talk in English. He spoke along
the line of organizing and what would be gained thereby.
He urged the men to join so they could put the eight-
hour day in effect and still get the same kind of pay.
He also explained how the employers were organized
and what they were employing these days to break up the
union. The manufacturers’ association was uppermost in
his mind ... In the meantime the members continually
talked between themselves. At the close of the address
I should judge about forty went up and made out ap-
plications and others continued to stand around and jab-
ber between themselves. There was no good opportunity
this evening to learn if anyone joined the organization
who is in any way connected with the client’s plant, but
I feel pretty sure I can get this information tomorrow.
At the close of the meeting all left for home and, going
likewise, I discontinued for the day.


HE DISCUSSES FINANCE
The client, it seems, has things coming his way . . .
The treasury from which the strikers receive their bene-
fits gave me the impression more than anything else.
First of all, upon my arrival at the hall this morning
I found Carl Bonzen busily occupied making out the
payroll, the total amount of which was $1,183. The total
amount taken in this week was $1,588.50. After the
benefits are paid this week the client can see just what
balance they have and therefore they will no doubt have
to do some tall hustling in order to get enough money to
meet next week’s payroll. It goes without saying that
many who have donated are getting tired of donating . . .
It appears that the boys are not any too willing to
help much. Apparently other steps will have to be taken
to secure help. In my opinion things are coming to a
crisis, a fact which all are beginning to realize, and I
look for a break- in the ranks of the strikers most any
time. As soon as the treasury cannot help them out
any more as in the past, they will not have so much
backbone and hence the reason why I believe a crisis will
be reached soon.
The aspect of all this is very good for the client,
very dark for the union. Perhaps that is why the
spy can turn, for a day, to observing the factory
itself and report upon the conduct of the women
workers.
The bell was apparently not heard by the girls, w T ho
did not make a move until Mrs. Madsen came in and
said inquiringly, “Girls, didn’t you hear the bell?” At
this we all dispersed to our respective places but it was
7:20 by this time. Both yesterday and this morning
Mrs. Madsen had to come into the dressing room and
dig the girls out . . . She makes the bad mistake of talk-
ing and laughing too freely with them during working
hours, as they take advantage of this familiarity . . .
On the way home this noon I walked with Miss Ur


ban who informed me that she was transferred to another
department. She sure did not kill herself in our de-
partment.
After his luncheon hour, however, he has the
satisfaction of discovering a loyal worker.
On my way back to the plant for the afternoon I got
in with a man whom I recognized as being employed at
the plant and as we walked along together we spoke
of the miserable weather we were having today. This
was kept up until we came within sight of the pickets
and then he remarked that they were as good as lost.
I asked him what he thought of unionism, and he
answered by saying that the pickets had handed him
slips several times, in fact went so far as to call him
for not attending meetings and to tell him that he did
not have any backbone, but he could see no reason for
attending when he never intended joining.
At the plant I asked Alvida Clausen who the gentle-
man was. She was almost positive, she said, that it was
Mr. Schultz who repairs the machines. At any rate he
is tall and dark and rather heavy set.
FOLLOWS A CONVERSATIONAL MORNING
No. 310 who works under Heise and who was the
first man to approach me on the subject of unionism
when I took up work at the plant, came up to me early
this morning as I entered the plant at about 6 145 A. M.
and asked, “Were you down Monday night?”
“Yes,” I answered and added, “I was initiated too.”
“That’s good,” he exclaimed and continued, “It won’t
take long before we’ll have all of them in. Then well
talk to the boss. At present the boss lays down rules to us
but after a while we’ll tell him what we’ll do.” No. 322
joined us at this time and asked, “When is the next meet-
ing?” I answered —next Tuesday evening. At this, he
turned around, hung up his coat and changed his shoes.
The latter although interested in unionism is not radical,
in fact he has not previously talked to me on the subject


of unionism once, but he always seems to have a lot of
time to talk to his neighbor next to him.
Slim, who solders the rivets and hoods, was seven
minutes late in getting on the job this morning.
At twelve noon I left for lunch. On my way back
to the plant for the afternoon I stopped and asked one
of the pickets when he said the next meeting was to be
held. “Next Thursday night,” he answered. “Did you
join?” he asked and I answered, “Sure, why not?”
“That’s common sense,” he responded and added, “I
told the other fellows we’d get you pretty soon.” Then
he continued, “Here is where you have a chance to get
some education, so be sure and attend every meeting you
can, for you hear mighty good stuff at the meetings.”
I assured him that I would be on hand every time I
possibly could. He said, “I’ll let you know about every
meeting that you can attend. Just look for me, and if
I am not around, the other fellows will let you know
of the meetings, as I tell them you are all right.”
He has made strides, these past few days. He
is trusted now, an “O. K.” man. He proceeds to
report an agitator and involve the agitator’s boss.
I observed No. 310 and the new bald-headed fellow
in Schmitt’s department were talking to the radiator test
crew. First they were after the first man on the tanks
next to the lavatory and fifteen minutes later I noticed
them further down west. Three-quarters of an hour
later when I stepped into the lavatory, I came upon No.
310 and a short radiator test man talking to beat the
band about the union. The short fellow wanted to
leave when I entered, but No. 310 said, “He’s all right.”
However “Shorty” left anyway and then turning to
me No. 310 said, “Well, I got seven of the radiator test
crew to promise to come down to the meeting tonight.
If they only do we will have the shop seventy-five per
cent organized.”
The time study man timed me on three different oc-
casions today and meanwhile I said to him inquiringly,


“Say, did you say that the bald-headed fellow belongs
to the union ?” “Sure,” he answered, “and a bad one too.
Furthermore, he is as strong a Socialist as there is in
Racine.” “Does the firm know about it?” I inquired, and
he said in reply, “I don’t know if they do or not, but
Schmitt knows it and he is the one who hired him.”
The last day has arrived. One Palmerton Is
caught smoking in the factory where smoking is
prohibited. And then the spy rounds up his blacklist.
Palmerton was in a bad mood all forenoon. At about
9130 A. M. I stepped into the lavatory and, as I took a
seat next to Palmerton, who was the only one present, I
detected an odor of cigarette smoke. Apparently noticing
that I intended staying for awhile Palmerton brought
out his cigarette and puffed away on it leisurely. I
cautioned him, telling him that he might lose his job if
caught, and he responded, “I don’t give ad., for the
job, and I would be glad if the client came in here and
caught me at it because then he would have to pay me
off and if I quit I would have to wait for part of my
pay.” “But you get a bad name if you are fired,” I re-
minded him, and his response was, “There are enough
places to work in besides here.”
I wish to speak to the client about the union sym-
pathizers or union men who are employed in Hcise’s
department and in particular I wish to discuss with the
client the best method of letting him know definitely just
who they are so he can gradually get rid of them. There
are several I can pick out by sight, but do not get the
chance to look at their time-cards in order to catch their
number, and I never get in touch with them so as to
learn their names. If I could see the client personally
we could arrange for the client to walk out into the
plant sometime and I could point out to him which ones
I have in mind. If I butted into Heise’s department
in an effort to get their names or numbers, suspicion
might be aroused against me. At present I have their
fullest confidence in regard to unionism and must not lose


it. The pickets, for instance, think I am all O. K. as
they greet me cordially, Good night or Good morning,
whichever it may be as I pass them, their attitude being
entirely different from that of a week or two ago when
I took up work at the plant. They told me this noon
they would keep me posted regarding any meetings in
the future as they liked to have everyone attend they
could. I trust I may get the very best possible co-
operation from the client in order to keep the union
down in the plant and by cooperating I am sure the
client will never experience any trouble with his present
crew, but all the bad eggs must be kept cleaned out.
At the close of the day’s work I left for home, as did
also the others and discontinued for the day.
There it is, the picture of a strike seen through
the eyes of the labor spy, fairly vivid for all the
unctuous limitations of his trade. A tattling, not
very consequential document, of value because he
is its hero, at his work, the heart of the espionage
business.


IV
Weights and Measures
IN the espionage practice of a wise agency, these
reports of the spy, such as the man of Racine
made, never reach the eyes of the client. The
agency chief prefers to extract what Mr. Sherman
called “the substance and pith.” This process ob-
viously affords opportunity for coloration, both
protective and dramatic. There was a spy once
in the Nonpartisan League organization in Ne-
braska.* Among other facts concerning his activ-
ity, it was shown that his reports had all to be re-
written by his chief because “they contained so little
stuff.” It is interesting, in a few quotations from
these letters of the agency to the client, to observe
what added value the original has gained and how
the original has been turned to meet the immediate
requirements of the agency in terms of the client’s
psychology.
These quotations are, again, selected from the
works of John Francis Sherman. They are ex-
cerpts from the exhibits submitted by the Sherman
Service, Inc., in the injunction hearings in Phila-
delphia of something less than a year ago. The
occasion has already met our attention: the in-
junction brought against Tobias Butler of the But-
ler Industrial Research Bureau by the Sherman
Service Inc. And it is well for us to understand
that, in this instance, we deal with the present
in the Nonpartisan Leader.


phase of the Sherman enterprise, with the Sherman
Service Inc., not with the defunct Sherman Detec-
tive Agency, with Mr. Sherman as harmonizer and
conciliator, who aims “only to do good,” not with
Sherman, the industrial detective. This, in passing,
is of interest, because one object with which the
exhibits were submitted was that of Illustrating to
the court the difference between the present Sher-
man Service and the industrial detective sort of
thing, a difference which seems to have been more
clear to Mr. Sherman and to the Philadelphia court
in which he won his case than it is to ourselves.
The hearings, for all the sensational material
they produced, received practically no publicity.
The situation in question in the exhibits is a strike
in the plant of a Philadelphia clothing manufac-
turer. The plant has not since been unionized. The
quotations follow with as little comment as need be.
The first begins with a canny recommendation
for troubling the union.
Upon visiting the hall early in the morning, very few
strikers were found to be present. Of those who were
there, the majority were gambling in a back room. Ap-
parently this is once again becoming a practice and be-
lieve it might be well if you caused a police officer to
visit that hall unexpectedly on any morning, prior to
the meeting, presumably in citizen’s clothes, and no doubt
if evidence of this kind were obtained by the officer it
would have tendency of discouraging any further meet-
ings in the hall, and, as a matter of fact, they could be
prevented from meeting there for the time being at least.
Then follows a practical touch of harmony:
Arguments were advanced relative to the costliness
of clothes, all of which has been brought about directly


due to strikes that have been in effect not only in the
textile industry, but also in the clothing industry, and
they were assured of the fact that ninety per cent of the
cost of clothing was directly due to the exorbitant cost
of labor.
Furthermore, the conditions that are at the present
time prevalent in Europe, due to the Soviet form of
government and the activities of the Socialists, Bolshe-
vists, etc., have been emphatically brought to their at-
tention for the purpose of endeavoring to convince them
of the fact that a democratic form of government was
the only one which proved successful and unless they
fell into line and endeavored to bring about a normal
state of conditions, there would be considerable hardship
caused among the workers in this country.
There have been many arguments brought to the at-
tention of your workers, all of which were calculated to
cause them to change their views entirely in your interest.
This is propaganda. For present purposes we
are, so to speak, looking a gift horse in the teeth.
We have to remember that the arguments In ques-
tion were advanced by some such individual as ob-
served conditions in the Racine plant, and to weigh
the value of his argument in the light of that fact.
The agency continues to report the radicalism of
a speaker at the meeting.
He made a statement to the effect that you were not
civilized, due to the manner in which you had treated
your employees in the past, and therefore the Amal-
gamated organization was going to cause you to become
civilized and was going to show you the need of a real
democracy in your plant, and that if they were not suc-
cessful in their efforts in bringing this about, you would
no doubt be confronted with a gathering of individuals
that would be more radical than the Amalgamated Or-
ganization ever thought of being.
This statement will plainly indicate to you the type
of individuals that are at the head of this movement and


we want, to assure you at this time that everything pos-
sible is being done to discredit these radicals and to cause
the rank and file to realize they are being misled and
being led into dangerous ground unless they break away.
He further went on to state that the police in Boston
were far more humane than those in Philadelphia, for
they had seen the necessity of organization and had
actually organized, but had been discriminated against
as a result.
Such statements as were made by this individual you
can see are extremely radical, particularly in reference
to the police strike in Boston. No time has been lost in
counteracting the effect that might have been made on
the minds of . the workers by advising them it was the
sentiments of the people that rule this country, and the
fact that Governor Coolidge was again elected for
another term after he had thrown the striking police
officials out of their jobs and had elected others to their
places, plainly indicated that the rank and file were in
back of the Governor.
Very effective In the eyes of the client, but a
more convincing bit of propaganda follows, in
which the spy is shown in an attempt to create dis-
satisfaction with the amount of strike benefit paid
to a woman striker.
This woman stated she could not continue to live on
nine dollars a week, her dissatisfaction being brought
about due to the fact that several of the single girls were
receiving eleven dollars. These sentiments were en-
couraged and she was urged to put into practice the
statement she had made.
Then another radical is encountered and the
agency must admit failure.
A worker . . . was found to be extremely radical and
upon being taken in hand expressed considerable disap-
pointment over the outcome of the strike to date and cf


forts were made to cause him to return to his duties.
Many arguments were tendered at the time calculated to
bring this condition about. However, his radicalism got
the upper hand of him and, although he expressed con-
siderable disappointment, remarked he would continue
this struggle until it was eventually called off.
It is the boast of detective agencies that much of
their most successful propaganda work in strike
time is accomplished by visits paid the families of
the strikers. The spy assumes any disguise which is
likely to admit him to the home. He may be a
doctor, the sales agent of vacuum cleaners, an in-
surance man, a gas man. He tenders “constructive
advice,” which is to say “defaitisme,” The demoral-
ization of the striker is thus augmented by the op-
position of his wife.
Constructive advice was tendered his family and the
superior conditions at your plant were featured as well
as the great consideration you have shown your workers
up to date in matters pertaining to their welfare . . .
She readily agreed that she had been misled and in the
future she would let this occurrence serve as an example
of what an organization would do for a worker.
She was assured in the majority of instances strikes
held by any organization would not have the interest
of the workers at heart, but were simply for the further
development of the organization.
In one home the striker himself is encountered
by the spy and the same sort of thing is offered him.
. . . He was assured conditions at your plant were
becoming normal, and, as a matter of fact, that there
was very little room for anyone else, and was advised he
would never obtain an accurate statement from any of
the leaders who, no doubt, would realize he was on the
verge of going hack to work and would try to cause him


to hold out by telling him many lies for the purpose of
impressing upon his mind that there was no one working
at the plant, when, as a matter of fact, such was not
the case.
hie was urged to fully consider the situation and was
reminded of the obligations that he owed towards his
family and was assured he would be doing the right
thing by seeking reinstatement without further delay . . .
The report on these visits closes with a para-
graph which, despite discreet obscurity, reassures
the client that the agency is doing its utmost on
his behalf.
This communication will give you a good idea of
what is going on at the present time and, although this
letter does not fully cover the many constructive argu-
ments that were advanced, you may rest assured that
those we have featured on past communications are be-
ing daily brought to the attention of the workers, so
that they mifht be caused to think over such advice that
has been given them in order to attune their minds, so
that they will break away once and for all- time from
the hold of the radical organization.*
Then our agitator Is rebuked, and the agency
claims that his activities have ceased.
.... has been inclined to be somewhat of an agitator
and has questioned a number of the American girls rela-
tive to the wages they were receiving, and in the majority
of cases he was politely advised to mind his own business
by the individuals whom he questioned. He has been
taken in hand and caused to refrain from activities of
*lt may also be noted, in passing, that the detective’s
vocabulary is quick to catch the flavor of the times. Dur-
ing the war, it shouted the platitudes of patriotism. Since
the war, “radical” has become its favorite adjective.


this kind, being reminded that he is only incurring the
displeasure of his co-workers, which sooner or later might
cause him considerable embarrassment.
The benefit fund appears again in the follow-
ing. One of the most efficient activities of the spy in
the union during a strike is to wreck the strike re-
lief benefit fund, upon which, of course, the success
of the strike so largely depends. If the spy cannot
himself have access to the fund, his next policy is
to spread discontent and cause the strikers to de-
mand higher benefits than the union is able to pay.
He will frequently create the impression that the
fund is dishonestly handled by the union officials.
A worker who in the past has been a very rabid
striker, has been at last caused to have a change of heart
and when engaged in conversation on this day was quite
profuse in his appreciation of the advice tendered him in
the past, stating that, having followed on the general
line of thought given him, he had demanded an increase
in strike benefit and upon failing to obtain same on last
Wednesday, he had returned to work at the plant, add-
ing, to the best of his knowledge, there had been fourteen
others who returned for the same reason.
Whereupon the agency proceeds to describe the
other side of the benefit question. The spy In the
union has, It would seem, been advising retrench-
ment in the payment of benefits, and the following
passage exhibits the result of this advice.
When the meeting was held in the morning, the
greater part of the time was spent in the payment of
strike benefits, there being but fifty-three persons who
were paid benefits. The policy of retrenchment, as per
advice tendered * was carried out to a great extent. It
italicized in setting.


was noticed that none of the female strikers was paid
any benefits. [One of these] was extremely put out over
this fact and in company with seven other girls, left the
hall highly indignant. Furthermore, any young boys
who were present under the age of twenty-one were not
given any benefits. This tended to further create dis-
satisfaction and friction and there were many threats
made to the effect that an early return to work was to
be expected. You may rest assured that these sentiments
were fostered among the various individuals and many
were caused to realize that the organization was fast
weakening and that there could be no hope of future
financial aid. Therefore, it behooved them to set about
to call the strike off, and return to their former oc-
cupations.
One of the individuals was refused a strike bene-
fit, on the ground that he had not been present at the
meetings on each and every day. He was accused of
working elsewhere, which was an untruth, but never-
theless, this accusation had the desired effect, for instead
of continuing to remain an active striker, in his indig-
nation he started to call all the officials “crooks,” and
walked out of the hall quite angrily and proceeded in
the general direction of the plant. Prior to his leaving,
he was encouraged to go and seek reinstatement and this
he promised to do.
So much will serve to draw the sketch of the
detective agency at its work and in its attitude to-
ward the client who must pay the bills.
Since the actual text of the spy’s report is the
actual return on the investment he represents, it
behooves the intelligent employer to question
weights and measures very coolly. The two groups
of reports which have been here considered are
really of exceptional quality, for they were chosen
primarily to illustrate the methods of industrial
spying. But an examination even of these will
show only two things. On the part of the spy, an


ability to record infinite unimportant detail. On
the part of the agency, a keen instinct for telling
the employer-client what, in the terms of the
agency’s business, he should most profitably be
told-
Beyond this, evidently, the information indicates
certain rather obvious trends of union opinion,
gives assurance of the energy of the agency in its
anti-strike propaganda, informs on the financial
condition of the striking union, and furnishes the
substance of the blacklist. Ethics and social ex-
pedience aside, a consideration of these reports in
their proper aspect (as part of a substitute for real
industrial relations between employer and em-
ployee) reveals them as singularly valueless.
You may search hundreds of pages of them with-
out finding anything as significant as the passages
quoted above. Here is an example of what one
usually finds:
Mr. Ernest; Local No. 300 was called to order at
8 p. m. The reading of the minutes were approved
except one alteration.
Conductor, inside sentinel and two trustees were ab-
sent.
One member was reported on the sick list, his name
was .... and he was not in need of assistance. There
was thirty-four applications and twenty-one out of the
number was from Allis.
I could not get the names as they were read and same
were turned over to business agent Wilson.
No reports on committees on candidates.
There were no candidates balloted on at this meeting.
There was one initiation. No installation,or election
of officers.
Brother Wilson reported on a scab that is in Houston,


Texas, who was a member here. A trial committee was
appointed to look up the case.
The usual bills were allowed for the secretary. I
could not get the amount of them, they were read off
so fast.
There was a communication from Minneapolis re-
questing the union men not to use some air hammers
that are made where there is a strike on. I forgot the
name of the firm.
There was also two communications from the grand
lodge on question of holding convention, etc., etc.
The quotation has a certain humor, the more
when it is remembered that the man who wrote
it was paid for the writing and that the labor policy
of the employer who read it was, in some measure
at least, governed by the Information which it
failed to furnish.
But this Is not a report of unusual emptiness. A
director of Kuppenheimer Bros., clothing manu-
facturers of Chicago, has spoken feelingly of the
futility of espionage, complaining that, in the days
when his firm utilized the industrial detective
agencies, he had never known a spy’s report to
contain any information of value. He was
“ashamed to show the things to the other di-
rectors.” We have seen reports furnish the basis
for statements made before Congress, reports
which were founded on absolute inaccuracy, if not
on deliberate lying. The instance of the confidential
report made to the United States Steel Corpora-
tion on the Interchurch World Investigators of the
steel strike was notable. It contained scarcely
a single fact which could have been substantiated-
And the Steel Corporation acted directly upon its
text. Lately a spy’s report of the National Manu


facturers’ Association described the personal life
and opinions of a certain orderly, if liberal, citizen
of New York. Beyond a careful description of
the apartment in which he lives, there was not a
word of truth in It.
It is not here a question of ethics nor of the effi-
ciency of espionage in destroying the labor union.
It Is a question, merely, of the common sense of
substituting espionage for the direct relationship
toward which Industry must tend, of depending
upon the fruits of espionage for the formulation
of any labor policy. The testimony of the Kuppen-
heimer director is only reinforced by that of his
fellows who have abandoned the substitute for the
real thing.
One final use to which espionage Is turned is
propaganda by the employer. The following
quotation is from one of a series of bulletins
circulated by the mill operators of Passaic a year
ago. They were printed In four languages to reach
that polyglot working population. The evidences
of espionage are too obvious to require comment.
Passaic, N. J., November 20, 1919.
THE TRUTH IS OUT AT LAST
At the A. T. W. of A. Convention in Paterson the
financial report rendered showed that they have thirty-
two locals with 18,000 members, who paid in over
$26,000 from May to September 30, 1919.
BUT THERE WAS ONLY $645 LEFT IN THE TREAS-
URY.' FURTHERMORE, THE REPORT STATED THAT THESE
TEXTILE LOCALS OWE THE AMALGAMATED CLOTHING
WORKERS OF AMERICA $5,000.
During the same Convention it was said that Law-
rence was fifty per cent organized and that all other
locals were equally organized, except Passaic, which was


admitted to be the worst of the lot, having only about
ten per cent.
THIS PROVES THAT THE PASSAIC WORKERS HAVE
COMMON SENSE.
In Lawrence there are about 30,000 mill workers,
and if the A. T. W. of A. had half of them in the or-
ganization you can readily see that that local alone
would have nearly the entire membership which they
claim for the thirty-two locals.
Somebody evidently has a poor regard for figures, but
FACTS AND FIGURES DO NOT LIE.
You remember hearing speakers claim that the A. T.
W. of A. spent $107,000 in Lawrence. In the Paterson
Convention it was officially reported that only $2,000
was spent in Lawrence and that only $4,000 was spent
in connection with the Paterson strike.
What do you think of these figures and the speakers,
who told you differently?
BE CAREFUL WHAT YOU DO WITH DUES I .
Workers Intelligence Committee.
Blacklists and false propaganda based upon mis-
information fed to prejudice! Could anything be
more stimulating to the self-respect of even an or-
dinarily sinful man than a reading of these reports
and their appendices? Nothing, unless it be a
contemplation of the manufacturing moron who
pays for them and believes In them.


V.
Recruiting and Training
HOW the spy is recruited, how he is trained
and what manner of man he is—these
facts are all essential to a complete pic-
ture of the industrial spy system.
You will find such an advertisement as the fol-
lowing (taken from the New York World) in al-
most any paper during a period of labor difficulty:
* BOILER MAKERS
holders
METAL WORKERS
AND POLISHERS
We want smart, uptodate men who are stilled in the
above mechanical lines to represent us permanently as
efficiency workers, but those who make application must
be able and willing to absent themselves from their
homes whenever they are required to do so because our
work extends all over the country. Mechanics who can
qualify as tradesmen will be taught how to do our
work as they go along and will receive better pay than
they have been earning right from the start and will
be allowed all their living and travelling expenses as
well, thus being in a position to save all their wages.
In replying do not fail to state all your qualifications
as to how much mechanical experience you have,
whether you are American or foreign born, what lan-
*This particular advertisement proved, upon investiga-
tion, to be that of the National Manufacturers' Syndicate,
an alias for the employment department of the Sherman
Service Inc,, which is also known as the National Mutual
Service Co.


guages you speak beside the languages of this coun-
try and be sure to give your phone number, if you
have one, and your correct address, because you are
assured that your application will be considered and
answered.
This Is the typical agency advertisement for em-
ployees. It Is invariably to be recognized by the
assortment of trades, the phrase “up-to-date,” and
the information desired on the linguistic ability of
the applicant.
A Paterson silk weaver, for the moment become
an industrial investigator, answered a similar ad-
vertisement. His experience, although not dra-
matic, nevertheless provides an accurate account of
the spy recruiting system.
I am a silk worker and a member of the Paterson
Local of the Amalgamated Textile Workers . . .
During the slump season in the spring of 1920, I was
thrown out of work and decided I would have to look
for a job elsewhere if I could.
One morning in May I saw an ad in the New York
World which read: Wanted experienced men on broad
silk and ribbon. State age, experience and nationality...
I wrote to the box indicated and received a reply
from the Eastern Engineering and Contracting Com-
pany,* 291-295 Broadway, New York City. It en-
closed my letter answering the ad and told me to bring
this letter, as well as the one from him to me, to his
office.
I went to the address given the next day. It was
a fine office with about ten stenographers and looked
very efficient. I handed both letters to the man at the
door and found that ‘they were glad to give an inter-
view’. . .
While waiting in the outer office I talked with a
*Really the Corporations Auxiliary Co. under alias.


Negro who was also answering an ad for workers. His
ad called for wood workers and he was a wood worker.
Finally my turn came and I found myself facing . . .
a quiet looking business man somewhat kindly in appear-
ance.
He looked over the letters carefully. Then he asked
‘Where did you work last?’ I told him I had worked
most of the time in the New England States.
‘Did you ever work in Paterson, Passaic or Allen-
town, Pennsylvania?’
I replied that I had never worked in either Passaic,
New Jersey or Allentown, Pennsylvania, but that I
had worked in Paterson.
‘Where did you work last?”
I told him. . . .
He seemed to be sizing me up and thinking very hard.
Then he said: ‘We want to send you to a job to work
at your trade. Besides working at your trade you will
be there to investigate the sentiment of the workers
toward the employer, what they say is unsatisfactory in
the shop, their attitude towards radicalism, Bolshevism
and such things. You will be expected to make a report
in writing every night and send it to me.’ . . .
I asked him how much I would get for the job.
'. . .We will send you into a shop. You will receive
the regular wages the workers are earning there. Be-
sides that you will get fifty dollars a month from the
office.’ t
‘Where will you send me?’ I asked, keeping as calm
as I could.
‘Either to Paterson or Passaic. Did you ever work
like this before? Do you think you would like to try
it? Do you think it would suit you?’
I told him I thought I would try it.
/
fThe usual rate of payment is the difference between
a set sum guaranteed by the agency and the wages paid
to the spy by the client for the work he actually does as
an ordinary worker. The ordinary operative is guaranteed
$125 a month for service in an unskilled trade.


He then told me to go home and write him a sample
daily report putting down the best I could on paper what
I had done that day. ‘Mail this to me,’ he said, ‘and
from that I will be able to determine whether you will
be the one suited to do the work I have outlined. As
soon as we have received this report from you we will
let you know what we want you to do and where we
want you to begin your work.’
I promised I would send him a report that night
which I did. However, I have not yet heard from him.*
It cannot be said that all spies are recruited
through newspaper advertising. The United States
Steel Corporation recruits its secret service chiefly
from the ranks of its inspection force, the railroads
largely from the railroad police. A worker will
oftentimes find himself tricked to espionage
through a reward which is given him by his boss
for some little information he has- given, perhaps
unwittingly. A check presented and endorsed by
the worker is a lever of blackmail for the corpora-
tion, which can threaten an exposure before the
union. This practice is quite common. More com-
mon still is the bribery of the union official. It is
impossible to state to what lengths this may go.
It Is certain that the labor movement is
too often and too reasonably distrustful of its
officers.
*To the credit of the agency’s psychological astuteness
be it said that although this worker’s first report was care-
fully supervised by the officers of his union, the ruse had
not, in this instance, any effect whatever. This is a ruse
often employed by labor unions to gather espionage infor-
mation. The worker, however, having come once into
contact with the spy system, is not often trusted after-
wards by the union.


The worker who answered the advertisement
quoted above was more fortunate than the silk
worker of Paterson and, without becoming a spy,
took the complete correspondence course of train-
ing for the Sherman Service. The text of this
course Is very long and extremely uninstructive.
A man might have followed it completely through
without so much as suspecting what'the actual
meaning of his work would be. Only a few parts
are of any interest and they seem significant only
as illustrating the pains with which the industrial
detective disguises both aims and methods even to
his own Initiates.
The preliminary eloquence makes espionage
seem almost altruistic.
There is nothing about your relationship with your
fellow-craftsman which can be considered underhanded
or deceitful. Your mission is to aid and assist such men
and not to spy upon them and try to find out something
about them or their doings which w r ould get them into
disfavor or disrepute with the employer. . . .
Your purpose in going among your own class of
mechanics or fellow workmen in any line where it seems
your work can be most effective, is to build up the morale
of whatever plant you are assigned to, to set a good
example to the workmen in that plant both by your
individual actions and your spoken words.
You are given an assignment for the purpose of mak-
ing observations as to the individual and collective habits
of the employees, but are certainly not assigned to mingle
with them for the purpose of tattling or spying upon any
of them.


Follows the application blank:
What are your sentiments toward Socialism? To-
ward Bolshevism? Toward Labor Unions? If a mem-
ber of any Labor Union or Socialistic Order, give the
name and address. Did you ever, or do you now, hold
any office in same? How often do you attend meetings?
If not now a member, why did you leave? Do any of
your relatives belong to any such organizations? Give
relationship and name of Order. What is their atti-
tude? What do you believe to be the underlying causes
of industrial misunderstanding? What could be done
by the employer or employees to remedy this? Would
you be willing to work hard, faithfully, and
do more than an ordinary day’s work to help
Americanize or Canadianize the foreign workers
and establish friendly relations between employer and
employees ?
Applicant’s Signature.
But, in the Instructions to the operative, the
melodrama again becomes the thing.
As our employee you will be known and called
“representative." . . .
You will be designated by a number under which you
will be known to us only and which you will employ
when signing communications, expense accounts, and all
other documents excepting telegrams.
As your mission is to be considered confidential
absolutely you must follow our directions relative
to divulging your real vocation or business to any
one.
The rules and regulations of our organization exclude
even one’s closest friends and families from any knowl-
edge as to the details of any assignments a representative
may receive.


All necessary expense on an assignment will be ad-
vanced by us.-
When actively engaged on an assignment it will be
your duty to make up and mail in a detailed written
account for each day, in which you will set forth the
time you began work, when you discontinued, what you
actually did, what you saw, and what you heard in
connection with the particular assignment you were en-
gaged on. ...
If you are assigned to work in a factory, you will be
treated the same there as any other worker, and you
will be placed on the factory payroll in accordance with
the work which you do there. The money which you
receive as salary by the factory will be charged to your
account. ...
In referring to any worker or person give that per-
son’s name or working number, if you know it, other-
wise, give a detailed description of him so as to aid us
in identifying him.
You will receive frequent instructions from us
relative to the work you are doing, which instructions
you are to mail back to us together with envelope in
which it was sent you as soon as you have carefully read
them over and understand what they mean. You are
not to destroy them or keep them on your person over
twelve hours . . .
You are not, under any circumstances, to use the
telephone in connection with this business from the town
or city in which you may be employed, unless it has over
50,000 population, otherwise you are to proceed to a
nearby city or town of reasonable size, and at least five
miles beyond the out-skirts of the town in which you
are employed.
Should it be necessary for you to phone frequently,
you are not to use the same telephone station, and at
no time are you to talk over an open phone, and if out
of town, you are to have charges reversed. Do not give
the name of the organization.


In mailing your daily communications to us, you arc
to take care that no one observes you and that the post-
office clerks do not see the specific letter which you
yourself deposit in the mails. . . .
The rules and regulations of our organization forbid
you to make known to "any one'’'’ your connection either
with us or in this business, unless under specific directions
from any official of the organization.
Our system of carrying on our work frequently re-
quires that many representatives, unknown to each other,
are engaged in the same factory at the same time. There-
fore, you arc not to approach or speak to any of them
regarding your business, should you know them to be
representatives, unless specifically directed to do so by
your official, you must not indicate that you
KNOW WHO THEY ARE, NEITHER MUST THEY INDICATE
THAT THEY ARE AWARE OF WHO YOU ARB. The best
way to do is to ignore them entirely, do not violate
THIS RULE AT ANY TIME.
The employer, to whose plant we send you, and who
pays us to represent him , is known as the client. You
must never communicate with the client, even if his
identity is known to you, unless definitely instructed to
do so by your officials.
Act naturally, employ common sense with relation
to anything you do, and live strictly in accordance with
your apparent earnings. You would not show much
common sense in claiming to be a worker and yet live
at a good hotel and spend money freely, such actions
WOULD ATTRACT ATTENTION AT ONCE AND WOULD
RUIN YOUR CHANCES OF MAKING YOUR WORK SUCCESS-
FUL. ...
Get a rooming place the same as any other worker
would, but be sure and get a room for yourself. Do not
share it with others, as the presence of an outsider would


materially interfere with the writing of your confidential
communications, and the making up of your expense
accounts,*
In all this secrecy there Is exactly one mention of
any policy on labor unionism.
It is not their (The . . . Company’s) desire to promote
either unionism or non-unionism, but it is their purpose
to create and maintain an open-mindedness among the
working classes relative to the relationship between
capital and labor.
Nothing, it would seem, makes the conscious
position of the industrial detective so clear as this
disguise of his business to the very men he is seek-
ing to employ and to train. It is more complete
than his disguise of method from the prospective
client.
One axiom of recruiting may be established.
Whatever the method, the basis must be corrup-
*Summary of instructions to an operative of the Cor-
porations Auxiliary Company: Try at all times to find
out who is a member of a labor organization. Report same
at once in your daily report. Be a good mixer. Mingle
with the fellows in the noon hour, in the factory and in
the street car. Try to find out how they feel, if they are
dissatisfied or if they are satisfied with their jobs. Try
to find out if they urge other fellows to join their organi-
zation. Be always on your guard. Do not display too
much money, but don’t be a miser. Be willing to spend
a few cents for a drink if it will make a man talk. In the
organization where you are a member, try to get as popular
as you possibly can. Try to hold as many and as high
offices as you can. Try always to keep in close touch with
other officers of your organization, in particular with the
business agents.—Affidavit of Philip Schaeffer, one time
operative of the Corporations Auxiliary Company.


tion. The most useful quality the industrial detect-
ive has to offer in his personnel must necessarily
be dishonesty.
We quote from the testimony of Tobias Butler
given during the same Philadelphia hearings from
which we have gleaned so much already:
They told their clients they employed skilled repre-
sentatives which it took them months to educate, where-
as, as a matter of fact, they took these individuals from
the street, put them in men’s plants and charged them
full rate of service. Many of them were found to be
loafers and to commit crimes while assigned to oper-
ations.
This would seem to deny the course of training.
It is the record of an emergency; the same witness
continues:
In the Philadelphia Cigar Manufacturers’ job I had
to pick nineteen men oft the street through advertise-
ments in the newspapers out of a total of twenty-two
who went on the operation . . . The A. D. Kirschbaum
operation was on at the same time and we couldn’t get
representatives for that. We were getting them through
advertisements in the newspapers. There were sup-
posed to be twenty well trained men and out of the
twenty we could get only four.
A damaging description of the spy not easily to
be denied. We shall look more closely yet into
the character of the men who do the actual work
of this business.


VI
The Character of the Spy
« "I - CANNOT,” said Judge Anderson, giving his
I decision in the Colyer case of last April, “I
■*“ cannot adopt the contention that government
spies are more trustworthy or less disposed to make
trouble in order to profit therefrom than are spies
in private industry. Spies are necessarily drawn
from the unwholesome and untrustworthy classes.
A right minded man refuses such a job. The spy
system destroys confidence and propagates hate.”
William J. Burns himself complains of detectives
that “as a class they are the biggest lot of black-
mailing thieves that ever went unwhipped of jus-
tice.”
A British report on industrial espionage as prac-
ticed by the American detective includes the follow-
ing:
There are detectives at the head of prominent agencies
in this country whose pictures adorn the rogues’ galleries;
men who have served time in various prisons for almost
every crime on the calendar.
It has been repeatedly alleged, and with justice
that the detective agency prefers to hire the man
with a criminal record. At least
the fact that these men may have criminal records is
not deterrent to their being employed, and no check can
be made on the men sent out by these companies on hurry
calls.


To conclude, one has the statement of an Indus-
trial detective.
All I have to do is to go to Mills Hotel No. i, in
Bleecker Street ... In 36th Street there must be sixty
or seventy per cent strike breakers . . . engaged in gum
shoe work or what they call detective work.
To substantiate the charges which have been
brought here against the industrial detective and
his spy-agent, it is well to produce certain evidence.
No man is more willing to talk to a stranger than
an industrial spy. Once he has failed and, in con-
sequence, lost his job with the agency, he is all
eagerness to compose sensational affidavits. Un-
fortunately, the word of a spy is not of great worth,
and these charges must rest, in large part, upon the
accumulation of circumstantial evidence derived
from such exposes and from the stories told by
labor unions. They are too numerous not to be at
least cautiously accredited.
Such instruction as the following are given:
Stir up some report on the Western Electric Com-
pany. Tell us that the business agents are ready to or-
ganize the workers there because I want a contract with
the Western Electric. Stir up some trouble with the
Buda Motor Company in Harvey, Illinois, because I
want a contract there. Stir up trouble with the Stewart
Speedometer Company. . . .
And the operative’s explanation:
A man will appear in the organization committee and
say that conditions in such and such a place are rotten.
The different operators will appear before the business


agents to start something rolling . . . supply the workers
in the shops with literature, get dissatisfaction into these
shops to scare the employer.
A man whose name or code number I do not know
was instructed to take a number of pamphlets to the shop
and distribute them among the men. This in turn was
reported to the owner, who immediately arrived at the
conclusion that the shop was being organized and he re-
instated the service.
Such documents go on their face value as the
word of the “unwholesome and untrustworthy
classes.” They are to be had in thousands for the
asking and must be considered in respect to the
cumulative impression they produce rather than as
evidence in themselves.
It is, however, possible to Illustrate the point in
question by quotations from the affidavits of ex-
spies which have stood the test of court examina-
tion. I present a group of these, submitted in
Milwaukee during the hearings of detective agen-
cies in relation to the Wisconsin law restricting
their activities. That they are concerned with a
single situation and locality is not of consequence.
They are cited to illustrate the subterranean work
of double-crossing accomplished by the industrial
detective.. They are quoted in succession with no
comment other than our Italics.
As Police Judge of Cudahy, Wisconsin, I have had
occasion to observe the manner of behavior and conduct
of the strikers, and they have been well behaved and
conducted themselves as peacefid and law-abiding
citizens. Private detectives in the employ of the Russell
Agency, which, in turn, was employed by the Cudahy
Packing Company, came to the city of Cudahy and en-
deavored to stir up strife and trouble and break down
the morale of the law-abiding and peaceful Cudahy


strikers. Any trouble which Cudahy has experienced by
way of lawlessness and breaches of the peace was due
directly to the acts and conduct of private detectives and
Russell men and so-called guards who were not citizens
of Cudahy but dangerous thugs and desperadoes. Had
these thugs been kept out of the city there would have
been no trouble. . . .*
A blacklist and an agent provocateur appear in the
second:
Joe Schulan, being first sworn on oath, deposes and
says: . . . that the reason said strike was called was
that the officers of the Cudahy Packing Company had
discharged several men for joining a labor union which
was newly organized. That, for over a period of six
weeks prior to the organization of the union, there were
several men employed in the plant who were not regular
and bona fide employees but private detectives in the
employ of the Russell Detective Agency of Milwaukee.
That the names of these men are Ray Smith and AI.
Gullam. That Mr. Gullam appeared before the Honor-
able the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners and
admitted that he was employed by the Russell Detective
Agency to act as spy on the workmen of the plant, and
to join the union and spy on the members and obtain
other information. That Ray Smith also worked in said
plant and was very active in forming and organizing the
Cudahy local of the union. That he was very active in
urging the men to join the union and in forcefully agitat-
ing among the men . . . and he urged them to go out on
strike. That he went out on strike when the rest . . .
went. That he became a member of the union and, on
the morning of the strike, he did picket duty . . .
That, at the time of the strike, there were upwards
of fifteen Russell men in the plant. That shortly after
the strike was in progress, the Russell men, Ray Smith
*Affidavit of John C. Yunker, Police Judge of Cudahy,
reproduced as introduction to the following affidavits.


among them, continually urged the men to start trouble.
That Ray Smith was particularly active in “egging” on
the men to “clean up” anyone who went in.*
That Russell men engaged in the plant were not used
as guards in the sense that watchmen are employed to
guard property, that they were used as spies, armed thugs
and gunmen for the purpose of harassing and annoying
the strikers, breaking the morale of the strike and en-
couraging bloodshed for the purpose, I firmly believe, of
prolonging their own employment.*
In the following, the spy speaks for himself;
I was expressly told by Russell’s general manager,
Burgett, to try and get the pickets to cause as much
trouble as possible so that the Russell Agency could keep
its men on the job for as long a time as possible.
I also was sent by Russell to Marinette to work in
Lumber Co. I worked in the plant as gen-
eral handy man around the yard. My particular work
was to join the union and watch the men and report
any labor agitation or activity. I joined the union and
was in the union about two weeks before the strike was
called. I was asked to join the union several times but
refused at first, thinking it best to hold off. The men
voted to go on strike and I went on strike with them.
Burgett came up with a number of guards. Burgett was
after me all the time to stir up trouble as, he stated,
otherwise the guards would not be kept there.
Russell had to have more me nin the union beside
myself. I got into some trouble with Russell on account
of pay and quit while the work was in progress.
Before I quit, however, and while I was at a union
meeting, the Secretary got up and read a letter which
was supposed to be signed by Rer Garlow, a former
employee of Russell, tipping the union off who I was . . .
I am certain that Russell wrote it in order to get even
*Affidavit of Joe Schulan, a worker in the plant.


with me and get me out of there without much cere-
mony. ... I packed up and got out in a hurry .. .
It is my opinion that there is not a union in the City
that has not one or more men carrying union cards who
are, in fact, in the employ of private detective agencies.
In general the men employed by detective agencies are
obtained at a time when work is hard to get ... In
fact I found myself in that position when I accepted
work with private detective agencies.**
These three ajdavits of a police judge, a worker
and a spy tell the story as completely as it would
be told by the thousand others which might be cited.
Mr. Coach’s newspaper Is now past history. The
labor leaders of Akron have only just been expelled
from their unions, in which the Corporations
Auxiliary Company employed them.
There is the case, too, of an officer of the
Machinists’ Union who was sued by the union for
misappropriation of its funds. Anticipating the
suit, he tried to threaten the union into action.
The suit being pressed, he made good on his threat
by producing the receipts for the stolen funds, all
of which, at the instigation of his detective em-
ployer, he had utilized for the hiring of thugs to
attack non-union workers and so provoke trouble
for the union.
Employers and employees alike have made a
practice of deceiving each other until the whole in-
dustrial world is snarled beyond disentanglement.
Strikes have been provoked to break agreements
which have become onerous to the employer, spies
**Affidavit of Herbert A. Foster, former employee of the
Russell agency in Detroit.


set to turn conservative unions Bolshevist and more
spies to force the federal authorities to interfere.*
James Henderson of the Machinists’ Union,
“Pitchfork Jim” to the world of labor, Is perhaps
the oldest and most efficient foe of espionage in the
entire American labor movement. As he sums it
up, it Is not the spying that does the harm but the
exploitation of the worker incidental to the spying.
The nion which has nothing to conceal has little
enough to fear from the mere informant. But that
the employment and welfare of its members should
be dependent upon the exigencies of a detective
agency’s business does not seem to him a terrible
thing.
There has been exploitation of employers and,
finally, of spies themselves. For there Is reasonable
evidence on which to accuse a certain firm of cloth-
ing manufacturers of hiring detectives to provoke a
strike in its plant to the end of collecting strike in-
surance in the slack season. And this in spite of
the detectives of the strike insurance company,
which was also and independently spying In the
same plant to secure evidence against the paying
of the insurance.
*lwankew, a Russian Jew, an agent of Armesworth and
Cavett, industrial detectives of Pittsburgh and former
Pinkerton men, organized a local of the Communist Part}'
in Youngstown, Ohio. He was, at the time, detailed to
the service of the Youngstown Sheet and Tin Company.
This firm made efforts to obtain his release and furnished
bond for him after the raid which he provoked on his own
organization and in which, as a blind, he, too, was arrested.
Secretary Post refused to release him. He was last heard
of awaiting deportation on Ellis Island and still the hero
of a considerable agitation.


The employers in the case may be very briefly
classed. There are those who say, with Mr. Carter
of the Western Union Telegraph Company: “I
don’t like the fellows, but what else can we do.”
There are those who, like Mr. Kirschbaum of
Philadelphia, acclaim the value of the practice and
extoll its practitioners. There are those who say
with Mr. Atterhury of the Pennsylvania Railroad:
We have a very efficient police organization, and we
know in advance everything that is going on, just exactly
as the organizations themselves know what is going on
with,us. We have emissaries in our ranks just as the
organizations have emissaries in their ranks . . . We
have our own employees, who may volunteer information
and we employ the Pinkerton Service. They are men
already in the labor organizations, who may have union
. cards and have been employed somewhere else. We ask
the Pinkerton Company to assign a certain number of
operatives to our service; we do not know who they
are; they come along in the natural course of events
and then we get reports.
And, finally, there is the legion of those who
say, with the mill operators of Passaic: “Lies—
all lies.”
It is unfortunately not possible to clear labor on
the score of practising espionage itself. Parallel-
ism between capital and labor is a present character-
istic of industrial development, parallelism In both
organization and policy. It is a well known fact
that strike committees do retain thugs to intimidate
non-union workers. There is an organization in
New York, The Active Detective Bureau, which
advertises espionage service to labor organizations
only. Unions boast of the spies they have planted


in the offices of the spying detective agencies. There
was even a case in Minneapolis in which the same
agency was found to be serving both union and
employer in the same strike.
All this considered, however, the balance is still
on the side of capital. Espionage is included In the
Americanism of a great group of American em-
ployers, of the Woods and Garys and du Fonts
of the country and of their unquestioning support-
ers. It is a simple matter for the employer to cor-
rupt and dismember the union; it is impossible for
the union to return the compliment by dismember-
ing the board of directors.


VII
Violence
THAT industrial espionage should produce
yiolence is inevitable. The official records
of the business are the records of labor
violence. Pinkerton provided the armed guards
for the battle of Homestead Mills in 1892 and
provoked the only congressional inquiry espionage
has ever faced. From that time to this, through
every strike which has known violent manifesta-
tions, the detective, the spy, the provocateur and
the gunman, all agents of the industrial detective,
have had their roles to play. Espionage is the
heart of the labor riot. Agents of Baldwin Felts
ran the armored train in West Virginia and the
armored automobile in Colorado. Detectives have
never been cleared of the charges of guilt brought
by the government investigators, in regard to the
dynamiting of the depot at Independence, Colo-
rado, in 1904, the attempted train wrecks in 1903,
the murder of Governor Steuenberg of Idaho by
Harry Orchard, the train dynamited at Calumet,
Michigan, and the dynamite plants at Waterbury
in 1920. Detectives were obviously and directly
responsible for much provoked violence in the steel
strike, the Centralia affair, the shooting at Everett,
Washington, and in almost all the riots attendant
upon the recent street railway strikes. It is a
strange thing that these direct action employers of
ours, these Garys and Woods, are willing to stake


their reputations as citizens upon the acts of such
men as these spies of industry and their cousins,
the gunmen and the scabs.
The following is the conclusion of Mr. Luke
Grant in the Report of the Commission on In-
dustrial Relations:
Espionage is closely related to violence. Sometimes it
is the direct cause of violence, and, where that cannot be
charged, it is often the indirect cause. If the secret
agents of employers, working as members of the labor
unions, do not always instigate acts of violence, they
frequently encourage them. If they did not, they would
not be performing the duties for which they are paid,
for they are hired on the theory that labor organizations
are criminal in character,
Thomas Beet, the English detective of Scotland
Yard, brings an even heavier indictment.
That there is a sinister motive behind the employ-
ment of these men has been shown again and again.
Have you ever followed the episodes of a great strike
and noticed that most of the disorderly outbreaks were
so guided as to work harm to the interests of the strik-
ers? .. . Therefore, instead of preventing these acts,
it is to the interest of the employer that they should oc-
cur. In this, perhaps, lies, usually, the reason why priv-
ate detectives are brought to the scene.
The present and recent situation in West Vir-
ginia, now in the courts, is an excellent example of
the way in which the system works. Down there
the machine guns of the war between miners and
mine guards are the property of the Baldwin Felts
Detective Agency. The street railway strike of
Denver, August, 1920, is another case in point.


The story of Black Jack Jerome’s riot there is a
perfect instance.
The mob yelled, and the strike breakers in the car,
who had sawed-off rifles, fired ... A riot followed . . .
The tramway company sent four cars out of the barns
into the mob. The strike breakers in the cars were
armed. A man in one of the cars shot into the mob,
hitting a policeman. The mob was made up mostly of
boys from fourteen to twenty years of age. Mr. Hild,
the president of the tramway company, stated in the
papers, the next morning, that “the street car employees
were not responsible for the riot.”
The following day, Friday, the East Side Car Barn
riots occurred. Union pickets were lounging on some
stone coping about a park facing the car barns when
an automobile drove up with a man in uniform in it.
He stood up and, as he left the car, turned toward the
pickets and fired directly at them; then, holding a
revolver In each hand, backed into the barn and the
doors were closed.
Soon afterwards people began to gather about the
barn. Suddenly an automobile drove up and four men
dressed in police uniform, stood up and fired at the
crowd. Immediately firing began from the first and
second story windows of the car barn. About thirty
were killed or injured.
There were no more riots after the federal troops
entered town. It was stated that General Wood had
said: “There has been murder and the people respon-
sible will suffer for it.” General Wood did not deny
the quotation.*
From an affidavit of one of Jerome’s men an
illuminating portrait is taken:
He stood up in an auto with a gun in each hand
*RepOrt of Alice Barrows Fernandez to the Cabot in-
vestigation.


and escorted us to the south side barn. “Now boys, I
want to tell you something,” he said, “you have come
here to break' this strike. We are going to do it and
when you shoot be sure and shoot straight. Those of
you who have not arms, I will provide with arms.”
The first night in the barns Jerome ordered us with-
in hearing distance, saying: “Boys, we are going to
start cars Monday morning. I am the whole thing.
The tramway company can tell me nothing. This is my
barn. Shoot craps, play cards, do anything you please.
Your pay is going on. If you get into trouble while
you are running cars, or get into jail, I will get you out.
You know me. You know that I can do it. With
reference to the money, boys, get the nickels. Get the
money and don’t forget for the conductor to split 50-50
with the motorman.” t
Of the riot this quotation speaks as follows:
“Boys, I knew this thing was coming off. I have men
in uniform out among the strikers, I know what is go-
ing on, I always will know beforehand. I have paid
men out among the strikers.”
The following verdict comes from West
Virginia. [lnvestigation report of L. A. Lynch,
1912] :
Though the guard system was not the cause of the
strike, It was without doubt the immediate cause of the
fighting . . . The operators accepted the men the Bald-
win Felts send them and asked no questions.
And so to the simple and unaffected gunman
recorded in this amazing letter of William F.
Dunn, the editor of the Butte (Montana) Daily
Bulletin.
The Anaconda Mining Co. began to use gunmen in
this locality early in 1914. Since 1914, a large staff of
t Affidavit of William A. Ingraham.


thugs has been constantly employed. It has been custom-
ary for the company to furnish the incoming sheriff with
a list of names of these individuals who were sworn in
as special deputies.*
The gunmen here are divided into two classes. There
are the special deputies who hold some job with the cor-
poration from mine-foremen down to time-keeper. Only
a few of these men are actually dangerous. In addition
to these, there are the professional gunmen who are gen-
erally secured either from the Thiel or the Burns
detective agencies. The Thiel men are generally hired
through the Spokane office but I have been unable to
discover where the Burns men are hired .. .
In the great strike of 1917 the gunmen travelled in
twos and threes on the streets. Nobody knows how
many were on the payroll at that lime, but it is safe to
say that there were at least two hundred ... In con-
nection with the Frank Little murder, it is a mistake
to believe that they were after Little in particular. They
wished to murder someone who was well-known and
popular with the miners in order to incite them to riot
when the troops, who were already on the scene, could
get into action with their machine guns, and drive them
back to work. This is proved by the fact that on the
night Little was hung, the same gang of thugs visited
my house during my absence, they also called at Tom
Campbell’s house twice that night. These visits were
made before they got Little . . .
In 1918 . . . two detectives—Shirley and Thorpe—
. . . were working in the local branch of the
I. W. W. Thorpe held the position of local secretary
and Shirley was the most active of the members . . .
One was a Burns man and the other a Thiel recruit—
in the employ of the Anaconda Mining Company. The
utterances of Shirley were the most violent I ever heard.
This is an instance of how the “stools” can operate suc-
cessfully and appear to be upholding the cardinal prin-
ciples of working class doctrine ....
*As in Colorado, 1914.


In the last strike of April, 1920, the gunmen resorted
to their automobile tactics but they proved ineffective.
On April 2lst, a crowd of gunmen fired into a crowd of
pickets without warning, killing two men and wounding
nineteen. These men were all shot in the back, as they
were unarmed and began to retreat when they saw the
gunmen approaching. City police and regular sheriff’s
deputies were on the ground, but they made no attempt
to arrest the perpetrators of this outrage. . . .
In this instance the local officers of the Department
of Jusice cooperated with the company. They informed
the gunmen of the time the picketing was to take place
and there is more than a suspicion that some of the men
who took part in the shooting were on the federal pay-
roll . . . The places where these men were lodged is
known and it is also known that the local federal oper-
atives were in communication with them . . . There is
at all times close cooperation between the company oper-
atives and gunmen and the local department of justice
and the city and county authorities. . . .
In the last months of the 1917 strike, I was compelled
to make several trips to Great Falls where the Anaconda
Mining Company’s smelter is located. On one occasion
we stopped over night in Helena—which is about half
way—we were travelling by machine—and that night a
carload of gunmen waited all night about two miles from
Basin—a little town about twenty-five miles from Butte
—and stopped every machine that passed. They might not
have been waiting for us but that was our information.
On another occasion in Great Falls, I was returning
from a meeting of the boiler makers where I had been
urging a sympathetic strike. Contrary to my usual
custom I was returning to the hotel alone and while I
was passing a rather dark alley, three men sprang out
at me. I had a .32 Colts in my coat pocket—with my
hand on it—and I shot twice. Two of the men dropped
and the third man ran. I ran down the same alley they
came out of and went to my hotel by the quickest route.
I expected to see headlines about the affair the next
morning, but there was not a word. Instead there were


headlines announcing that W. F. Dunn had disappeared
and that it was believed he had been taken off a train
between Great Falls and Helena. I immediately left
for Butte and was met at Helena by one of my “body-
guards” who gave me an envelope which had been sent
to our headquarters and which contained one of the
“Vigilante” notices written with red chalk. This notice-
gave me until August rath to live . . .
Another time when a party of us was going to Ana-
conda—twenty-six miles from Butte—there is also a
smelter there—on a lonely stretch of road where there are
no houses for six or seven miles, an automobile load of
gunmen pulled up behind us and began shooting when
about seventy-five yards away. I was in the back seat of
our machine with another electrician, who is a remarkable
shot. We had, in addition to revolvers, a high powered
rifle apiece. The gunmen had only revolvers - and we
promptly shot their engine in pieces. We then pulled
out of range and shot off their tires. We did not try
to hit any of them but it was certainly amusing to see
them trying to get cover behind a piece of sage-brush
about as thick as a man’s thumb. We left and went bn
to Anaconda and needless to say there was nothing car-
ried by the local press.
These incidents are all known to the authorities and
to the public, but nothing is ever done about them. We
have never emphasized these incidents in detail, nor the-
dozens of minor plots . . . because few people will be-
lieve them ... I do not like to write about myself . . .
I merely mention my personal connection with these
matters in order to give you an insight into the local
situation.
Such is the gist of industrial espionage,—the
heart of so much labor trouble and the inspiration
of so many horrors, —a thing at first approached by
us incredulously but finally accepted as irrefutable.
Anaconda confirms Calumet. West Virginia sub-
stantiates Colorado. The street cars of Denver arc.


a parenthesis in the story of the Steel Strike.
Espionage is something which we must accept, a
substitute for industrial relations, covering the
whole field of American industry excepting only
those few cases wherein real industrial relations do
exist.
The present purpose has not been to probe in-
dividual outrages. So intricate are the ways of
labor spies that no authority short of Congress
can ever reach the exhaustive and authentic evi-
dence necessary to place the blame accurately and
specifically. The present purpose has been merely
to present an impartial description of the practice,
told in the language of its own men. We find that
it puts both employer and employee at the mercy
of a power which is, at best, unscrupulous; that it
lays labor open to corruption, misleads capital into
folly, injustice and, often, actual crime; that it cre-
ates, wherever it appears, a turmoil of unrest and
rage; and that it is at the very heart of labor
violence. Industrial spies, “many of whom would
commit a murder for two dollars,” are undeniab-
ly the seeing eyes of more than one honorable
American employer. The system “which could not
exist in England” is undeniably a characteristic of
American industry and a factor in our industrial
problems. It is about as difficult to become a detec-
tive in this country as it is to get married or buy a
license for a dog. This, in view of the detective’s
powers and responsibilities, is a curious thing. If
ever there were a field for a Congressional in-
vestigation, an institution completely damnable,
ethically, socially and economically, it is industrial
espionage.


7§/ie We*>
RE PUBLIC
421 West 21 £ Street
NewYorkCity
Address THE NEW REPUBLIC, 421 W. 21st Street
New York, for copies of this booklets—Price 15c.
In bundle orders of 50 or more, price‘ioc. each.
