

Loudon: Printed by W. Clowes and Sons, Stamford Street and Charing Cross.


M & U .H anhart imp
J -l/Vblf. dlel.et.li tin.
'YPICAL MAMMALS OP AUSTRALIA


bers would be well able to wield tbe pen, and might exercise con-
siderable inflixence upon Constituencies. For the present, then, we
reserve further comments, but when the proper time arrives, our aid
will not be found wanting, and if it be required, the little influence we
possess will be at the service of those whose interests these remarks
are intended to protect, and with whose labours in the cause of Science
we have the most sincere sympathy.
THE MAMMALS OF AUSTRALIA.
By P. L. Scr.ATEE, M.A., Ph.D., F.R.S., Secretary to the Zoological
Society of London.
The remains of extinct organisms have long since been adopted by
geologists as the only sure guide to the age of the strata in which
they are entombed. However dissimilar two formations may be in
other points, it is now universally acknowledged that, if they furnish
the same fossils, they must be considered as of the same period of
deposition. However much two formations may resemble each other
in composition, it is quite certain, if their fossils differ, that they
must be attributed to different geological epochs. Concerning the
origin of life upon this planet we can say nothing. But as to its
progress, we now know that from the remotest time to which we
have yet traced it back to the present moment, it has gone on in one
constantly-flowing but ever-varying stream, slowly yet surely chang-
ing its aspect as it moves forward, and never returning at any
subsequent period to the same appearance as that which it has before
presented. The further it advances, the greater is the amount of
variation. The present Flora and Fauna of the earth is more like
that of the tertiary period than that of the secondary, and the further
we go back into primeval time, the greater divergence we find in the
aspect of the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Thus it follows that the
amount of difference between the organic life of two successive epochs
becomes a measure of past time, and since the antiquated notion of an
indefinite number of separate creations has been discarded and the
great fact of the unity of organic nature acknowledged, it has been
generally recognized as such by all true philosophers.
But it is not only the whole stream of life upon the globe that is
perpetually altering its general appearance ; each branch of it, as it
diverges from the parent stream, acquires an individuality of its own,
and becomes more different the longer it is separated from the main
channel. Upon re-entering this it again mixes with the general cur-
rent, and gradually loses the destructive features it has previously
acquired. This seems to have been the case with the Fauna of
Australia. Australia, judging from our present confessedly very im-
perfect knowledge of the history of its organic life, must have been
separated from the great mass of land which forms the Old World at
a time when Marsupialism was the prevalent, if not the only, form of
o '
13
Solater on the Mammals of Australia.
1865. J*


Mammalian life in existence upon our planet. During the ages which
followed, the higher orders of the Mammalian series became developed
in the great Paleogean Continent, while, for reasons which at present
we cannot explain, Marsupialism remained permanent in Australia,
and a varied series of herbivorous, insectivorous, and carnivorous
Mammals, all united by the common link of this mode of reproduction,
were developed in this isolated region. In comparatively recent times
the water-strait between Australia and Asia again became narrowed,
and placental forms of Mammals have thus penetrated into the former-
land of Marsupials.
It has thus, as I believe, come to pass that in Australia we find the
Mammalian Fauna composed of two elements—the implacental and
the placental; the Mammals of the former type being the old indi-
genous denizens of the country ; the latter to be regarded as probably
nothing more than intruders of comparatively recent introduction.
Let us first consider the former and more characteristic portion of the
Australian Mammal-fauna.
Beginning with the lowest Implacentals, we first meet at the outset
with two forms of life so very different from the rest of their
kindred, that they are now universally allowed to rank as a separate
order, and by some of our most eminent authorities even as a distinct
sub-class of the Mammalia. These are the extraordinary genera Orni-
thorhynchus and Echidna, which in their toothless jaws, in the confor-
mation of the sternum and scapula, and especially in the structure
of their reproductive organs, exhibit such unmistakable signs of
divergence towards the class of birds, as to have acquired the name of
Ornithodelphia. The Ornithorhynchus inhabits the South-eastern por-
tion of the Australian continent and Tasmania. Of the genus Echidna
two species are commonly recognized— E. hystrix of the southern parts
of Australia, and E. setosa of Tasmania. These three animals are the
sole existing representatives of the class Monotremata, and would of
themselves be sufficient, even were all other signs absent, to stamp
the region that they inhabit as a land of zoological marvels.
The second order of Implacental Mammals, although not abso-
lutely restricted to Australia, since one distinct branch of it is purely
American, constitutes perhaps a still more characteristic feature of its
Fauna than even the Monotremes. At all events the Marsupials arc
so abundant in genera and species as to form by far the most preva-
lent portion of the Australian Mammal-fauna. While all the classes
of Placental Mammals represented in Australia only furnish about
53 species belonging to 11 genera, upwards of 100 distinct species of
Marsupials appertaining to 16 generic forms are already registered in
our catalogues, and there is no doubt that in the little known dis-
tricts of the north and west, others still await the researches of future
explorers. Following the views of Mr. Waterhouse, I divide the
Australian Marsupials into five families: the Macropodidte, or Kan-
garoos; the Phascolomyidas, or Wombats; the Phalangistidm, or
Phalangers; the Peramelidse, or Bandicoots; and the Dasyuridm, or
Dasyures.
The Kangaroos or Macropodidae must be considered as par ex-


cellence the most important group of the Australian Mammal-fauna.
They are at once the most numerous in species, and in the former
condition of Australia, before the influx of Europeans took place, were
probably likewise the most prevalent form of Mammalian life as
regards individuals. In his great work on the Mammals of Australia,
Mr. Gould has devoted the whole of the second volume to the illustra-
tion of the members of this family, figuring no less than 44 species,
and although some of these will be looked upon by most naturalists
as rather in the light of local varieties than species, it is probable that
the Australian Fauna embraces not less than 50 well-defined members
of this beautiful group of animals. These are divisible into two
genera — Macropus and Hypsiprymnus. The former genus contains
the larger Kangaroos with the upper canines usually deciduous, when
present, and the toes of the fore-feet nearly even ; while Hypsiprymnus
embraces the Kangaroo-Eats, as they are usually termed, which are
all of smaller size, possess well-developed canines, and have the
central toes of the fore-feet proportionately larger, so as to accom-
modate their digging habits. Of the true Kangaroos Mr. Gould has
included 39 species in his above-mentioned work, while the Kangaroo-
Eats are less numerous, some ten only of this group being at present
known to Science.
The second family of Australian Marsupials—the Phascolomyidae—
are numerically of much less importance than the preceding, although
the form and general appearance of the animals of the single known
genus Phascolomys is hardly less outre than that of the Kangaroos.
Until very recently but one species of this group was accurately known,
although so long ago as in 1845, Professor Owen had characterized
a second from the form of its skull. While further information is
still required upon this species, a second very distinct form of the
group, remarkable for its hairy muffle and pointed ears, has been
received from South Australia,* and Mr. Gould figures two others—
one of which may possibly be identical with Professor Owen’s species.
In general structure the Wombats are closely allied to the next family,
the Phalangers—although their exclusively terrestrial habits naturally
involve minor points of difference, which added to the somewhat trench-
ant characters presented by their dentition, have induced naturalists
to recognize them as a separate family.
The Phalangistidfe, which next follow, are a much more extensively
developed group of animals, presenting us with several well-marked
generic forms, and nearly twenty readily distinguishable species in the
Australian Mammal-fauna. While the Kangaroos are mostly grazing
animals, and the Wombats burrowers and grubbers, the Phalangers are
essentially arboreal in their habits and much more strictly nocturnal
than the two former groups. In the daytime the Phalangers lie con-
cealed in the hollow of trees, issuing forth at night to feed amongst
the branches upon “ leaves, buds, and fruits.” The Koala or “ Native
Bear ”{Phascolarctos), of which form a single isolated species only is
known, serves to connect the Phalangers with the Wombats—being
* Phascolomys lasiorhinus, Gould, Mamm. of Austr., ii. pi. 59, 60.


allied to the latter by many characters, and amongst others by the
absence of a tail, which distinguishes it from the rest of its family.
In Phalangista, Cuscus, and Dromicia, the more typical forms of the
Phalangistidse, which next follow, the tail is not only well-developed
but of vital importance to the animal, being used as a prehensile
organ. The Flying Phalangers of the genera Petarurus, Belideus,
and Acrohates, do not employ their caudal appendages in the same
way. But this organ which is much elongated in all these groups, and
densely clothed with hair, serves, along with the membrane extended
between the fore and hind legs, in the manner of the Flying Squirrels
(. Pteromys ), to support the animal in the air when descending from
the top of one tree to the base of another. One more very singular-
little animal must be enumerated before we leave the Phalanger
family—the Tarsipes restrains —small in size but great in interest,
even among the many abnormal forms of this wonderful land. The
Tarsipes is of the size and general form of a mouse, but “ with a long
slender pointed muzzle,” and the t£ nails of the toes for the most part
embedded in the upper surface of the expanded fleshy pads with
which they are terminated,” thus affording some resemblance to the
Tarsius spectrum of the Indian Archipelago, whence its name is de-
rived. Another peculiarity of the Tarsipes is that its food appears to
be exclusively honey —no other substance having been found in the
stomachs of the specimens examined, and its long and slender tongue
being obviously adapted, like the bill of the Humming-bird, and the
brush-tongue of the Lories, for collecting such food.
The Peramelidae or Bandicoots -the fourth family of Australian
Marsupials —have teeth adapted to an insect diet, thus leading off
towards the truly carnivorous group of Dasyuridm, although we know
from the records of trustworthy observers that some of the species
feed more or less upon vegetable substances. Such is certainly
the case with the Perogalea lagotis, or root-feeding Dalgyte, of Western
Australia, which is abundant over the grassy plains of that colony,
and from its burrowing habits and large hare-like ears, is commonly
known as the “ Native Rabbit.” Of the typical genus Perameles,
some six or seven forms are known, which are distributed all over
Australia, each colony having its peculiar species. They are all
purely terrestrial animals, some inhabiting the densest scrubs, and
others the hot stony ridges of the upland plains. The only remaining
member of the family is the anomalous Ghceropus castanotis , which is
confined to the hard stony grounds of the interior of the Southern
colonies. Although agreeing in essential structnre with the Perame-
lidte, the Cheer opus differs from its nearest allies, as well _as from every
other known Mammal, in its peculiar feet, on the fore-limbs only two
toes being present, and on the hind limbs but one fully developed, and
useful for locomotion.
The Dasyuridas, which next follow, are the representatives of the
Carnivora, in the Marsupial series, and as regards their largest and
best developed forms are fully competent to take that place in the
economy of Australian nature, which in most countries is filled by
species of the genera Canis and Felis. Before, however, we mention


these predatory forms, a few words must he said about two genera,
which although they belong to the same family are insectivorous, rather
than carnivorous, both in habits and structure. One of them—the
Banded Myrmecobius —constitutes another of those remarkable isolated
types, which are so frequent in Australian zoology. The Myrmecobius,
so called from its food being supposed to be ants, was first discovered
in Western Australia, though it is said to have occurred also in the
inner districts of the other Southern colonies. It is of about the
same size as a common Squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris ), and in the words of
that accurate observer, the late Mr. Gilbert, appears very much like
that animal, “when running on the ground, which it does in successive
leaps, with its tail a little elevated, every now and then raising its body
and resting on its hind feet.” Besides the peculiarities of its denti-
tion (among which are its numerous prickly-pointed molar teeth), the
Myrmecobrius is remarkable for its somewhat harsh fur, and long
bushy tail, together with the entire absence of a pouch in the female,
so that the young hang on to the nipples of the mother absolutely un-
protected, except by the long hairs which clothe the under surface of
the abdomen. The latter peculiarity, however, likewise obtains in
certain members of the next genus Phascologale , of which numerous
species are found throughout Australia. Mr. Gould, in his work on the
Mammals of Australia, figures seventeen of them, dividing them into
several sections, Phascogale, Antechinus, and Podahrus. They vary
in size from the Phascogale penicillata, which is large and strong
enough to plunder the settlers’ henroosts, down to the Antechinus
minutissimus —the smallest of known Marsupials, which is not much
bigger than the Harvest-mouse of Europe. Two genera of purely
flesh-eating animals follow the Phascologalce, and close the series of
Marsupials. These are Dasyurus with five species, spread over dif-
ferent parts of Australia, and Thylacinus with only one existing species,
now confined to the mountainous districts of Tasmania. The latter
animal is well known to the frequenters of the Gardens of the Zoolo-
gical Society of London, as one of the finest and most interesting of
the whole Marsupial series. The general external appearance of the
Thylacine is so much like that of a large dog, that the uninitiated can
hardly be persuaded that its proper place is in another order of Mam-
mals, and even professed naturalists have fallen into the grave error
of arranging it with the Carnivora, with which, I need hardly say, it
has no real affinity.
Having completed our survey of the Implacental Mammals of
Australia, we must now consider the Placental series, which, as has
been already shown, plays a very subordinate part in this extraor-
dinary Fauna. Putting aside the three Marine Orders—the Seals,
Whales, and Sirenians, which have entirely different laws of distribu-
tion, and confining our attention to the terrestrial Mammals, we find
only three of the orders, namely, the Eodents, Bats, and Carnivores,
with any representatives in this strange country. And the Carnivores
will be perhaps more fairly excluded altogether from the Australian
series, since the solitary member of this group is the semi-domesticated
Dingo, hardly to be ranked as a wild species. Quadrumana, Insec-
VOL, 11. o


Order.
Family.
Implacentals.
No. of Species.
Monotremata
Ornithorhynchidse
1
Echidnidse
2
Marsupialia
Macropodidfc
49
Phascolomyidse
4
Phalangistidai
19
Peramelidae
8
Dasyuridse
24
tivora, Edentata, Pachydermata, and the great order of Euminantia, for
which its fine grassy plains would appear, and as we know by expe-
rience are , well adapted, are alike unknown to Australia in a state
of nature. But let us see a little more narrowly of what the Placental
series of Australian Mammals does consist.
The Rodents of Australia, although, as we are informed by Mr.
Gould, “ numerous in species, and almost multitudinous in indivi-
duals,” are certainly not well developed as regards generic forms,
being only represented by three genera of the family Muridfe. These
are the cosmopolitan Mus and two forms peculiar to the country,
Hydromys and Hapalotis, of which three genera, altogether nearly
thirty species, are found in Australia.
Of the Bats of Australia, we can hardly say that enough is yet
known to allow of deductions being drawn as to the presence or ab-
sence of peculiar forms. Mr. Gould has figured twenty-three species
of this order in his great work. Four of these belong to the fruit-eat-
ing family Pteropodidte, so extensively diffused throughout the Indian
Archipelago, and are, perhaps, of comparatively recent introduction
into the Australian Fauna. The Insectivorous families of the Chi-
roptera are represented by four genera, but it is a noticeable fact that
but one of them ( Nyctophilus ) is a form peculiar to Australia ; the
other three, Molossus, lihinolophus, and Taphozous, being genera of
wide distribution.
The Carnivora, as I have already stated, are only represented in
Australia by the semi-domesticated Dingo ( Canis dingo).
The subjoined table will serve to show at a glance, the results we
have thus arrived at concerning the Australian Mammal-fauna.
Terrestrial Mammals of Australia.
PL AGENT ALS.
Rodentia
Chiroptera
Murid*
Pteropodidse
Rhinolophida;
Noctilionidse
Vespertilionidse
Canidm
Carnivora


In conclusion, the peculiarities of tlie Australian Mammal-fauna,
winch distinguish, it in the most marked way from that of every other
part of the world may, I think, be put as follows:
1. The presence of the only known members of the bird-like Order
Monotremata.
2. The great prevalence of Marsupials, two-thirds of the whole of
the known Mammals of Australia belonging to the single order.
3. The absence of all Placental Mammals, except Rodents, Bats,
and a single Carnivore.
Explanation op the Illustration.
Mr. Wolfs plate represents a moonlight scene on the verge of an
Australian forest. In the foreground, facing the observer, to the left is
a Wombat ( Fhascolomys lasiorhinus); to the right an Echidna ( E. hystrix).
In the open background are some Kangaroos ( Macropus major'). A Koala,
or “ Native Bear” ( Phascolarctos cinereus), is slowly climbing a tree, on the
branches of which a group of Phalangers ( Petauri ) and Tarsipes are dis-
porting themselves, whilst a large Flying Phalanger ( Petaurus taguanoides)
is crossing the open space in full flight to the base of an adjoining tree.
THE HISTORY OF THE BRITISH COAL MEASURES;
Being an Account of the Bange and Distribution of the Coal Formations
beneath the more Becent Strata of the Central and Southern Counties
of England.
By Edwakd Hull, 8.A., F.G.S., &c.
On a former occasion* I ventured to give a condensed description of
the several coal-fields of Great Britain, along with an estimate of the
mineral resources of each; and I then endeavoured to show that
several of the principal coal-fields of the central counties of England
are not to be regarded as independent, or self-contained, tracts of coal-
bearing strata, but are in reality the uncovered portions of a formerly
continuous sheet of these rocks, the greater part of which is now
overspread by formations of more recent age. To the reader who is
not thoroughly versed in the physical geology of our island, the
general arrangement of these various formations may be rendered
more intelligible by regarding for a moment the coal-fields as islands
rising from a sea of the newer strata. Like most similitudes, how-
ever, this one does not boar to be carried too far, for while all land-
surfaces (islands as well as continents) are connected under the ocean,
some of our coal-tracts (as I shall endeavour to show) were originally
dissevered from others by intervening barriers of Siluro-Cambrian
lands.
The determination of the question regarding the nature and age
of the strata which underlie those wide undulating tracts of red marls,
* ‘ Quarterly Journal of Science,’ vol. i. p. 24.
C 2
