

THE GRAVE-DIGGER
OF MONKS ARDEN
ARTHUR GASK








THE GRAVE-DIGGER OF MONKS ARDEN


WHAT THIS STORY IS ABOUT
In Colchester a recently bereaved husband
sees in a shop-window a plaster-cast made
from a death mask of his dead wife. He is
sure no death mask of her was ever taken ;
and in great distress, asks Gilbert Larose,
the famous investigator, to solve the mystery.
Larose is soon upon the track of a sinister
figure, but immediately he finds the trail
crossing that of a far greater criminal who
believes he has committed two murders and
will never be found out.
Larose relentlessly pursues him, but his
quarry suddenly becomes aware that he is
being followed. He strikes quickly and with
a sure hand to save himself ; yet, with his
escape certain and his safety quite assured,
he makes one great mistake. Larose then
finds himself in danger from the authorities,
and it is only by a master-stroke that he
succeeds in extricating himself from a highly
invidious predicament.
BY THE SAME AUTHOR
THE NIGHT OF THE STORM ... 7 s. 6d. net
THE MASTER SPY 3 s. 6d. net
THE JEST OF LIFE 3s. 6d. net
For further books by Arthur Cask see pp. 317-19


THE
GRAVE-DIGGER
OF MONKS ARDEN
BY
ARTHUR CASK
HERBERT JENKINS LIMITED
3 DUKE OF YORK STREET
ST. JAMES’S LONDON S.W.i


First Printing 1938
Printed in Great Britain by The Garden City Press Lid., at Letchworth, Hertfordshire


CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
I. THE QUICK AND THE DEAD 7
11. THE VAULTS OF THE RODINGS - - - - 28
111. THE DEATH MASK ------ 46
IV. AN ASYLUM FOR THE INSANE - - - - 69
V. THE ESCAPE FROM THE ASYLUM - - - - 92
VI. THE SECRET CHAMBER - - - - -116
VII. THE RESOURCE OF LAROSE - - - - - 139
VIII. LAROSE IN DANGER AGAIN - - - -16 l
IX. THE LIVING AND THE DEAD - - - -18 l
X. THE TRAIL OF MURDER - - - - - 20 6
XI. SETTING THE TRAP - - - - - -23!
XII. A NARROW ESCAPE ------ 246
XIII. JUSTICE - -- -- -- - 269
XIV. GUILE - -- -- -- - 294


All the characters in this book are purely imaginary
and have no relation 'whatsoever to anv living persons


The Grave-Digger of Monks Arden
CHAPTER I
THE QUICK AND THE DEAD
TALL, lithe and of great strength was Daunt,
the grave-digger of the ancient church of
St. Benedict, in the little village of Monks
Arden, about three miles from Saffron Walden.
His head was big and bullet-shaped and his hair was
closely cropped, as if he had just come out of prison. He
had dark and deeply sunken eyes, and, as if to hide their
expression, he kept them nearly always half closed. His
shoulders were broad, but his loins were narrow and his
figure tapered down to bony legs and very long feet.
His general appearance was certainly not a pleasing
one, and holding himself, as he always did, with his
shoulders hunched and his head bent forward, he gave
to many who encountered him in the country lanes at
night the suggestion of a prowling beast of prey.
A single man in the late thirties, he was of a most
reserved disposition and taciturn and short of speech.
It was rumoured that he must be both an atheist and an
anarchist, for, upon one of the very rare occasions that he
had visited the village public-house, his tongue had
become loosened and he had been heard to state that the
vicar of St. Benedict’s was an old fool, and that the
House of Lords ought to be abolished. At any rate, it
was held that, by the expressing of such opinions, he
must be a man of most extreme and violent views.
He lived by himself in a small stone house that was
built against one of the churchyard walls. His great
hobby was carving, and, a fine craftsman and very


artistic, he was always able to obtain good prices for
his work. He knew all the old churches for miles
around and had copied many of the carvings in them.
He possessed an old motor-bicycle and sidecar outfit
and often drove about late at night. Incidentally, it was
reputed he must be a poacher, but no one had any certain
evidence of that.
In addition to being the grave-digger, he was the
gardener of the churchyard, attending to the shrubs and
flowers and keeping the paths clean and tidy. Also, he
acted as handyman about the church, and being both a
good carpenter and a good mason, was able to carry out
all sorts of small repairs.
The church of St. Benedict’s was very old, its outer
walls being part of a monastery that had been destroyed
by fire in the fifteenth century. But during the reign of
Henry VIII the church itself had been rebuilt and,
although it now served a very small congregation, it was
associated in history with many of the old county fami-
lies in the district. In consequence, not a few notabilities,
who rarely visited the church during life, were laid to
rest in its churchyard at death.
One cold and stormy afternoon in late November, the
body of the beautiful young wife of Captain the Honour-
able Arthur Haverhill was being interred in the church-
yard. She had been barely twenty-three and had been
killed in the hunting field. Before her marriage, less than
two years previously, as Esther Rayleigh, she had been
hailed as a great musical genius and, upon her presenta-
tion at Court, had been regarded as one of the most lovely
girls of the season.
And now all that remained of her was being lowered
into the cold, dead earth and it was in the minds of those
about the graveside that no eyes would gaze upon her
loveliness again until the resurrection morn.
The grave-digger stood back behind the mourners
with a face as expressionless as that of a mask. Grief and


tears were as nothing to him and it might have been
imagined that all his thoughts were concentrated upon
how soon the service would be ended, so that he would
be able to start filling in the grave.
But in this particular interment, for some reason, he
was more than usually interested and nothing of what was
taking place escaped him.
He had taken good note of the coffin as it was being
lowered from the bearers’ shoulders on to the ground, and
he had counted the number of screws in the lid. Also, he
had many times looked up at the quickly darkening sky
to see how long it was likely the rain would hold off, and,
with a calculating eye, he had determined who among the
crowd were just idle spectators. He was not pleased
there were so many wreaths, for he knew how the
curious often lingered long afterwards by the graveside
to read the names upon the cards attached to them.
“ In the midst of life we are in death,” droned the old
vicar in his mournful, solemn tones, and the under-
taker’s men began to get ready to lower the coffin into
the grave. “ Earth to earth, ashes to ashes ” he went on,
and big drops of rain impinged upon the coffin as well as
the handfuls of earth.
The remaining prayers were hurried through and, just
as the benediction had been pronounced, down came the
rain in torrents. The mourners scuttled to their cars, the
undertaker’s men hastened to pack off with their trap-
pings and the vicar hurried into the church for shelter ;
in a few moments the grave-digger was left alone.
With no waiting, for he was evidently no more minded
than anybody else to remain longer than he could help
in the pouring rain, the grave-digger pulled back on
to the open grave the big, heavy tarpaulin that had been
covering it all the morning. Then, running over to the
church wall for shelter, he took up a position at one of the
corners and, craning his head forward, for a long time
peered stealthily all round the churchyard.


On three sides this was surrounded by high and
crumbling walls, but on the fourth, which faced the main
road, the wall was of much later construction and less
than four feet in height. In the middle of it were the two
big iron gates.
There was not a soul in sight and the rain continued
to fall heavily.
After a few minutes, seeing the vicar leave the church
and hurry away under the shelter of an umbrella, the
grave-digger, apparently at last satisfied that everyone
had left the churchyard, ran over to the big gates himself.
There, pushing them to, he placed a number of small
stones underneath, in such positions that he would be
able to see at once if anyone had opened the gates again
to come in.
Then he hastened over to his small house, and shutting
himself in, took off his mackintosh and proceeded to
warm himself before the fire. It was then half-past three
and under the lowering sky the short winter day was
drawing rapidly to a close.
The grave-digger’s house consisted of only two rooms.
One was kitchen, living-room and bedroom all combined.
The other was fitted up as a workshop and contained a
serviceable and good-si2ed bench. Round the walls were
racks of tools, and in one corner was a large cupboard.
Upon a shelf were a number of books and a few road
maps, the latter, from their soiled covers, having evidently
been purchased some time ago.
An hour passed, and it had become quite dark.
With a quick glance through the window, the grave-
digger rose to his feet and lifting up the mattress of the
bed, pulled out a small sugar-bag, lined neatly with a
piece of a mackintosh groundsheet. Then proceeding
into his workshop, he selected a few tools from the rack,
and from the cupboard a small electric lamp and a
length of stout whipcord. All these he placed in the
sugar-bag, and donning a dark mackintosh and carrying


the bag under his arm, let himself out of the house. For
a long while he stood motionless by the wall.
It was still raining, but now only a steady drizzle.
Then, as if released from a spring, the grave-digger
suddenly ran forward, and placing his bag behind a
tombstone, made his way quickly along the sodden path-
way and examined the stones he had placed under the
gate about an hour previously.
They had not been disturbed, and if his movements
had been quick before, they became like lightning now.
He darted over and retrieved his bag from behind the
tombstone, and then, proceeding at a run to the side of
the newly dug grave, lifted up the edge of the tarpaulin
and slipped underneath. The wriggling of his body could
have been followed until his head heaved up the tarpaulin
in the middle. Then the tarpaulin settled down again
and everything became as it had been before.
For some minutes there was deep silence, followed by
muffled sounds coming from the bottom of the grave,
beginning with the gentle sliding off of the coffin lid.
Another silence followed, and then came sounds
as of wood striking wood again. Not a minute later
and just as the worker in the grave was preparing to
climb out, his eyes opened wide in consternation, his
tongue clove to the roof of his mouth and a clammy
sweat burst upon his forehead.
He had heard movements upon the tarpaulin above.
Then, for minute after minute, he crouched in the
inky blackness below and alternately he held his breath
and moistened over his dry lips with his tongue. His
heart was beating violently.
All at once he cursed deeply, wiping the sweat off his
forehead with the damp sleeve of his mackintosh, and
then—he smiled. His ears had caught the whimpering of
a dog and he recognised it as coming from the vicar’s
little fox terrier, who often kept him company when he
was working in the churchyard.


“ Shut up, will you, you little fool,” he called out
sibilantly. “ Keep quiet, you brute,” and with one end
of the length of whipcord in his hand he began to work
his way quickly up the sides of the grave.
Gaining the top, he wriggled himself under the tar-
paulin, all the time vehemently urging the dog to be
quiet. Finally, clear of the tarpaulin, but still upon
his hands and knees, he stretched out and grabbed at the
little animal, who all the time had been keeping up his
whimpering.
In his fury, the grave-digger had seized the terrier by
the scruff of the neck, with the full intention of throttling
him and throwing him into the grave. He now gripped
him by the throat with the other hand and, holding his
face up close, glared into his eyes.
“ Blast you, to frighten me like that! ” he snarled
viciously. “ Now you’ll ” but the little beast put
out his tongue and licked the grave-digger’s face. A
moment’s hesitation and then, with all his fury gone.
Daunt was snuggling up the dog and affectionately
stroking him.
But he quickly put him back on to the ground and
with a sharp but not unfriendly kick booted him away.
“ Hop it, you. Get away quick,” and the frightened dog
bolted off at the unexpected violence of his friend.
The grave-digger pulled quickly upon the whipcord
and up came the sugar-bag, heavier now than when he
had taken it down into the grave with him. Tucking it
under his arm he ran quickly back to his house, and then
for a good five minutes there were no movements in the
churchyard save for those caused by the wind and
driving rain.
Then the grave-digger reappeared and, pulling away
the tarpaulin, began with great speed to fill in the grave.
He plied his spade energetically, with wide sweeping
movements, and as if to encourage him the rain stopped
and the stars came out. In less than an hour he had


finished everything and tidied up all round. With
a sigh of satisfaction, he returned to his house and for
the first time that evening pulled down the blind and lit
the lamp. The sack, with its contents, had now dis-
appeared.
The day was a Wednesday and at eight o’clock the
usual mid-weekly choral evensong would be sung. So
the grave-digger was not startled when, a few minutes
before that hour, he heard footsteps outside and then a
knock upon his door. Opening the door with no delay,
he saw the old vicar standing outside.
“ Good evening, Daunt,” said the latter pleasantly.
“ Terrible afternoon, wasn’t it ? Well, Mrs. Joles came
and saw me yesterday to complain that someone has stolen
one of the flower vases from her husband’s grave. Can
you think of anyone, now, who is likely to have done it ? ”
“ No, I can’t,” replied the grave-digger bluntly. He
spoke as if he were considering the theft a reflection upon
him, personally. “ But she’s never had any vases on her
grave,” he went on. “ They’re just milk bottles and they
belong to the Saffron Walden Milk Company. There’s
the firm’s name on them and I’ve often noticed it.”
“ Dear me ! dear me ! ” smiled the vicar. “ Then I’ll
look at them myself to-morrow and speak to her about
it. That isn’t quite the thing.” Then just as he was
turning away, he added: “By the by, our little friend’s
been fighting again with some other dog. When he
came home to-night, from the stains upon his throat and
neck, my wife quite thought he must have been badly
bitten somewhere. But she washed him and couldn’t
find any wound.” He nodded. “ Little animals are
always pugnacious, Daunt, and it’s a good thing you and
I are tall.”
“ Yes, it is,” agreed the grave-digger gruffly, and the
old vicar ambled off to take the evening service.
Later on, although the night was chilly, the grave-
digger opened his door to listen to the music of the


organ. Chopin’s “ Funeral March ” was being played,
as it always was when there had been a burial, and it was
his favourite melody.
Notwithstanding his gruesome occupation and his
general surly demeanour, he was artistic from his toes to
his finger-tips.
One afternoon in the following week, Professor
Panther of Cambridge was giving a small and select tea-
party in his big house in Milton Road. There were four
pretty girls present, old Canon Wenthall and a retired
army officer. Colonel Plum.
The professor, well over sixty years of age, was a small
man with a large forehead and big eyes. His complexion
was as clear as that of a young girl. He had a happy smil-
ing face, and, quick and active in his movements, he gave
one the impression that he was still full of energy. For
many years before his retirement he had been Professor
of Anatomy at Cambridge University and, specialising in
the surgery of the brain, had won for himself a reputation
all over the world,
A bachelor of means, he was now entertaining his
guests in a beautifully furnished room with many lovely
ohjets d’art scattered about, and some almost priceless
engravings upon the walls.
“ Oh, what beautiful things you have. Professor ! ”
sighed Mary Wenthall, the vivacious daughter of the old
canon. “ You make me break the Tenth Commandment
every time I come into the room.”
“ Well, my dear young lady,” laughed the professor, “ I
must have beauty in some form or other to comfort me.
As a dry old bachelor, the beauty of your delightful sex is
not mine to bring solace and consolation, so I have to
make up for it in the beauty of inanimate things.”
“ But you should have taken a wife long ago,” retorted
Mary sternly. “It is such men as you who can’t be
brought up to scratch who make life so worrying for us


poor girls. For example, here am I, in the very heyday of
my charms, chasing round everywhere for a rich husband,
and I can’t get one anyhow.” She regarded the assembled
company defiantly, and then looked back at the professor.
“ Now, why don’t you propose to me at once ? This
carpet would just go with the shade of my new frock, and
I’d say yes, with no blushes.”
The expression upon the professor’s face was one of
great distress. “ A-ah, how you tempt me ! ” he ex-
claimed wistfully. He shook his head. “ But no, I must
resist you, for it will be a nurse I shall be wanting soon,
and not a sweetheart.”
“ But I’ve taken a course of first aid,” went on Mary
briskly, “ and know all the antidotes for poisons and how
to treat scalds and burns. So it happens I am just the
right woman for you and ”
“ No, Mary,” broke in pretty Ida Plum with great
decision. “If anyone here is going to marry the pro-
fessor it will be me. I’m an excellent cook and I’ve always
had a preference for short men. You’re short yourself
and so must marry someone tall to equalise the height of
the children. Besides ”
But the light badinage was interrupted by the arrival
of another guest. Tall and spare, with a keen intellectual
face and wearing small pince-nez, he was a smartly
dressed man in the middle forties. He was Dr. Joseph
Benmichael and he ran a large private asylum for well-to-
do patients, about two miles out of Cambridge.
“ Oh, welcome, welcome. Doctor,” cried the professor,
as if in great relief, “ You’ve come just in time to
separate these young ladies who are fighting tooth and
nail for my heart and hand.”
The doctor shook hands with the professor, and then
bowed smilingly round at the other guests, with all of
whom he was apparently acquainted.
“ Fie, fie, Professor,” he said reprovingly, “ to see a
man of your advanced age trifling with the fair sex I I


am astonished at your being so reckless.” He raised his
eyebrows. “ Why, I quite thought that, apart from the
grey matter of our brains, your only hobby in life was
orchids.” He looked very stern. “ And now I find you
dallying with pretty girls.”
“ And what is more natural,” laughed the professor
gaily, “ for are not pretty girls like orchids—as seductive
and delightful to look upon and as difficult to obtain ? ”
He threw out his hands. “ Does not our pursuit of them,
too, at once suggest to us the same dangerous forms of
adventure as we undertake in our quest of that rare
flower—the perils of the tropical forest, the miasmal
swamp and the dizzy precipice side ? Why, I believe ”
“ Oh, Professor, I think you are really horrid,” broke
in Ida Plum protestingly. tc I’m sure I’m not tropical
and I’m certainly not an evil miasmal swamp,”
“ Heaven forbid ! ” exclaimed the professor instantly.
“ You are sweet as a rose in June.” He bowed as if in
apology. “ No, I was only referring to the perils we risk
to bask in your smiles—the anguish of a broken heart, the
discomforts of impaired digestion and the poverty of the
emptied pocket,” and he chuckled in great amusement at
his own humour.
“ You are dead right about the emptied pockets,”
grunted Colonel Plum, whose face of violent hue
suggested he was upon the verge of a fit of apoplexy.
“ With three daughters for ever clamouring for new
frocks, I have to stint myself in everything and smoke
the cheapest of cheap cigars. I never have an odd
sixpence to call my own.”
“ But oh, Father, you like us to look nice, now don’t
you ? ” remonstrated his daughter, pretending to be
distressed. “ You wouldn’t like me to look a frump and
have no boys coming to take me out. Now, would you ? ”
“ You’d never look a frump, whatever you wore, with
those eyes of yours. Miss Plum,” commented the pro-
fessor gallantly. “ Why, I notice the frigid doctor here


has been looking at you ever since he came into the room.”
He turned to Dr. Benmichael. “ But tell us, Doctor, how
are all those mad patients of yours ? ”
“ As sane as you, Professor,” replied the doctor coldly,
evidently not too pleased with the professor’s remark
about his looking at Ida Plum, “ and perhaps even saner.”
He smiled a grim smile. “ Yes, thank you, all my guests
are quite well.”
“ But are you really willing to admit,” asked Myra
Girdlestone, an athletic and healthy-looking blonde who
rode to hounds twice a week and smoked forty cigarettes
a day, “ that you are detaining people who are in their
right minds ? ”
“ Certainly,” laughed the doctor. “ Four-fifths of my
patients are perfectly well as long as they remain with me.
It is only when they are brought in contact with the
responsibilities of the everyday world that the nervous
systems of some of them break down.”
“ How terrible ! ” exclaimed Miss Girdlestone. “ They
must feel their position most keenly.”
“ Not at all,” said the doctor. “ They live most happy
lives. They golf, they play tennis, they enjoy indoor
games and at night they are always squabbling at the six
or seven tables of bridge.” He shrugged his shoulders.
“ I have a few, of course, whose misfortune is apparent
to everyone, but happily very few.”
The conversation became general and then, tea being
over, the professor took them all to see his orchids. The
girls were most enthusiastic, but the colonel and the
doctor appeared rather bored, and the canon had got
indigestion from the three chocolate eclairs he had eaten.
Presently Ida Plum pleaded. “ And now, Professor, be
a dear and take us into your laboratory.” She turned with
enthusiasm to the other girls. “ He’s got the most beauti-
ful specimens of people’s brains in glass boxes, and you
can look into them and see exactly how the inside of your
head appears.”
B


Mary Wenthall shuddered but the other girls backed
up Ida in her request and, after a few moments, apparently
with some reluctance, the professor led the way through
the garden to a small building that stood quite by itself,
about twenty yards or so from the back of the house. He
took a bundle of keys from his pocket and unlocked the
door. Then, as the short afternoon was beginning to
draw in, he switched on the lights.
There were only two rooms in the building, one long
low chamber and a smaller one that led directly out of it
at the farther end. The walls of the long chamber were
lined all round with shelves upon which stood a great
number of bottles and big jars. Down the middle of the
room and along almost its entire length stretched a long
narrow table upon which was a double row of what Ida
Plum had aptly described as glass boxes. They were
shallow and filled to the brim with spirit, and in each one
reposed a human brain in some aspect of dissection.
Every box was labelled with a numbered red seal,
“ And every one of these brains,” announced the pro-
fessor proudly, “ belonged in life to some man or woman
who was outstanding in his or her achievements or call-
ing.” He indicated the boxes, one by one. “ This came
from a great painter, this from a divine singer, this from
a man whose scientific discoveries were the admiration of
the whole civilised world, this from an orator who has
thrilled millions with the magic of his words, this from a
great general whose genius enabled him to deal out death
to hundreds of thousands of his fellow creatures, this
from a man who murdered seven wives, and this from a
Corsican brigand whose cruelty was of so high an order
that he tortured his only son to extract certain informa-
tion from him.” He waved his arm round smilingly.
“ And so on and so on.”
Some of his guests shivered, but Colonel Plum
appeared most interested. That touch about the general
who had killed hundreds of thousands appealed to his


professional instincts, and he nodded with great approval.
“ But what have you collected them all for ? ” asked
the athletic Myra Girdlestone wonderingly.
“ A-ah ! ” exclaimed the professor with great anima-
tion, “ I am a humble worker among that vast multitude
of scientific men who are for ever delving into Nature’s
hidden secrets.” He raised his hand emphatically. “ One
day we shall know everything about the grey matter of
our cerebra, how it became convoluted and how ”
“ Tut, tut,” broke in Dr. Benmichael impatiently,
“ you are becoming too technical for these ladies. Pro-
fessor. Pass on now and show them the casts made from
your death-masks. Those will please them, I am sure.”
“ But one moment! ” exclaimed the Girdlestone girl,
before the professor could speak again. “ Where did you
get all these brains from ? That’s what is puzzling me.”
The professor nodded solemnly. “ From all over the
world, Miss Girdlestone. I have friends and confreres in
all the big cities ” —he shrugged his shoulders—“ and
because of my one-time humble activities in the surgery
of the brain, they are always mindful of me when they
can procure a specimen which they think I would like.”
He turned frowningly to Dr. Benmichael. “ No, Doctor,
I never show anyone the casts from my death-masks now.
Some of them have been lately given to me upon the
express condition that they are not to be exhibited to the
public gaze, and so I regard their possession as a sacred
trust.” He inclined his head solemnly. “ When I die they
will all be destroyed.”
“ But where do you keep them ? ” asked Ida Plum.
She pointed to the door at the end of the long chamber.
“ In there ? ”
“ Yes, in there,” nodded the professor, and as the girl
walked towards it, he smiled. “ But the door is always
locked.”
“ Mean old thing ! ” pouted Ida, retracing her steps.
“ We shouldn’t tell anyone we’d seen them.”


“ But a trust. Miss Plum ! ” exclaimed the professor
reprovingly. “ Surely you would not have me ”
But at that moment one of the professor’s maids came
in to announce that he was wanted urgently on the phone.
“ It’s a trunk call from London, sir,” she added, “ and the
gentleman seems in a great hurry.”
“ Excuse me, everyone, please,” said the professor,
“ but this call is very important. I shan’t be a minute,”
and he hurried out of the room.
Colonel Plum took out and lit a cigarette, “ I don’t
know whether it’s allowed,” he said, looking guiltily at
the doctor, “ but I’ll chance it. The smell of this darned
place makes me feel sick. My stomach isn’t feeling too
good after those buns.”
Everyone walked round, looking at the contents of
the bottles upon the shelf, until Ida found herself opposite
a small cupboard, and she idly pulled the knob. Rather
to her astonishment, the door came open and, upon peering
inside, she gave a startled exclamation of great surprise.
“ Oh-oh, come and look here,” she cried out quickly,
and then she half pushed to the cupboard door again,
“ No, no, not you, Mary. You’d be scared out of your
life.” She laughed in a great thrill. “ Only strong-minded
people must see this. Come on, quick, before the pro-
fessor comes back, I’m sure he’ll be furious.”
They all crowded round the cupboard, even including
the half-shrinking Mary, and there were gasps of delicious
horror from the girls. Colonel Plum was unperturbed
as became one who had fought in the Great War, but Dr.
Benmichael, after one quick glance inside, snatched off
his pince-nez, and after a few rubs upon his pocket
handkerchief, replaced them hastily and craned his head
forward above that of Ida Plum’s.
The cupboard was about shoulder-high of the shortest
of those standing before it, and it contained one single large
glass jar filled with very clear spirit. The glass was very
clear also. In the jar was the head of a woman, roughly


and unevenly severed about mid-way down the neck.
The young and waxen face was oval in shape, and now in
death, even as it must have been in life, was one of ex-
treme beauty. The features were finely chiselled, the eyes
long-lashed and the mouth was a perfect Cupid’s bow.
The lips were those a lover would have longed to press.
For a long minute an awed and breathless hush fell
upon those standing before the cupboard, and then the
colonel exclaimed hoarsely, “ Gad I she must have been a
lovely girl! ” His eyes seemed to bulge out of his head.
“ But where the blazes did he get it from ? ”
“ Quick, let’s shut the cupboard,” exclaimed his
daughter peremptorily, taking command of the situation.
“ He’ll be awfully cross if he knows.”
But they were too late, for as they all moved away to
let the cupboard door close, the professor bustled into
the room.
“ I’m so sorry ” he began, all smiles, but then, as in
a lightning flash, the whole expression of his face altered,
at first to one of intense chagrin and then to that of
intense anger. He got furiously red and clenched his
hands together viciously.
“ Which of my guests was it,” he shouted, as he
darted over and banged to the cupboard door, “ who
was so dead to all sense of decency as to pry into my
private affairs ? ”
“ It was I, Professor,” admitted Ida Plum, looking
very frightened. “ lam so sorry, but I just tried the door
carelessly and finding it unlocked, I ”
The professor swallowed hard, and then his anger
appeared to subside as quickly as it had risen. His face
broke into a sickly and apologetic smile. “ Well, well! ”
he exclaimed, trying hard to appear as if he were amused,
“ of course it is all my own fault. I might have antici-
pated the natural curiosity of your charming sex and
made sure that the cupboard was locked before I left the
room.” He looked rather spiteful and his voice dropped


to very solemn tones. “ But I would have preferred that
everyone had kept away from that jar, because the woman
whose head is in it died of bubonic plague in one of the
Baltic ports.” He nodded ominously. “ And you can
never be certain how long some germs take to die.”
The girls were horrified and even Colonel Plum’s face
lost something of its violent hue. The old canon made a
quick move towards the chamber door.
“ But what was she,” scowled the colonel, “ when she
was alive ? ”
The professor bowed his head in reverence. “ A nun.
She died nursing some sick sailors and contracted the
disease from them.”
“ But how long ago ? ” asked Myra Girdlestone, who
had now recovered her equanimity. She puckered up her
brows into a puzzled frown. “ Somehow or other her
face seems quite familiar to me.”
“ It would,” nodded the professor instantly, “ for it’s
an exact type —the devotional type. She was one of those
noble women who dedicate everything to their fellow
creatures.”
“ But I’m sure now I’ve seen her somewhere,” went on
Myra thoughtfully, “ or at any rate some recent picture
of her in some paper, I remember her mouth and ”
“ My dear young lady,” laughed the professor, “ she
died before you were born. That specimen was given me
by one of the officers of a cargo boat, nearly thirty years
ago.” He moved over to the chamber door and held it
open wide. “ But come on, now,” he said briskly. “ I
am sure you have all seen enough and so we’ll go back
into the house and get warm.” He raised a warning hand.
“ One favour, however, I want to beg of you all. I put
you upon your honour not to talk outside about anything
you’ve just seen here. There are such a lot of cranky
people in the country, and I may be bombarded with
angry letters if they come to learn what this room
contains.”


Some half an hour later, everyone, except Dr. Ben-
michael, had left. The professor was a little bit surprised
that the doctor had outstayed the others, because, as a
general rule, the latter never allowed himself long
absences from his large establishment.
But if the professor was surprised his friend was not
in his usual hurry to get away, he was certainly con-
siderably startled to be addressed in a very stern tone of
voice when they were at length by themselves.
“ See here. Panther,” said the doctor, eyeing him from
under very scowling brows. “ I want some explanation
from you.” He paused a moment and then rapped out
sharply : “ How did you come to get hold of that girl’s
head in there ? ”
The professor glanced furtively at him and drew in a
deep breath. “ I won’t attempt to deceive you,” he said
at once, with an uneasy laugh. “ I bought it from a
London undertaker some time ago. He managed to get
hold of it somehow, and I didn’t ask him any ques-
tions.”
“ That’s a falsehood,” said the doctor instantly. He
spoke scornfully. “ You got it from no undertaker,
because for one thing it was hacked off much too
clumsily, and as for ‘ some time ago ’ that’s a lie, too.”
His eyes glinted angrily. “You obtained it last week, or,
to be exact, on last Thursday or Friday.”
The professor’s face had gone an ashen grey and he
was now moistening his dry lips with his tongue. “ H-how
do you know that,” he gasped, “ and what is it to do with
you ? ”
“ How do I know and what has it to do with me ? ”
asked the doctor, almost threateningly. He dropped his
voice to quiet and measured tones. “ I know , because I
was at her funeral in Monks Arden last Wednesday, and
it has to do with me ” —he looked him straight in the
eyes —“ because it happens Esther Haverhill was my
cousin.”


“ Good God ! ” exclaimed the professor hoarsely, and
he sank back limply into his chair.
“ Yes, and if you dare to deny it,” went on Dr. Ben-
michael accusingly, “ take me back into that room and lift up
her upper lip. Her left lateral incisor is a porcelain crown.”
But the professor made no attempt at denials. He
shook his head weakly and then covered his face with his
hands. It seemed almost as if he were going to break
into tears.
A long silence followed and then the doctor went on:
“ So you must realise I have a right to know every-
thing.” He stirred fidgetingly in his chair. “ But there,
there, man, don’t get the wind up. I’m not going to shout
it on the house-tops.” He shrugged his shoulders.
“ I’m not squeamish, as you ought to know, and a corpse
is only just a corpse to me, whoever it may have been.
The fetish of the reverence for the dead never runs in a
dissecting room.” His voice hardened. “ Still, I insist
upon learning how the head of my cousin comes to be in
your possession now.”
“ The undertaker ” began the professor weakly,
when Dr. Benmichael’s face darkened and he spoke with
anger again.
“ No, no, I’ll have no more falsehoods, Panther, and
don’t you try them on.” He shook his head. “ The
undertaker, last week, never had the opportunity to do
any dirty tricks, for I saw the body just before the coffin
was screwed down and then, not three minutes later, it
was being carried out to the hearse. Come now, tell me
everything at once and get it over. I assure you I’m not
going to do anything to you, and you may retain ” —he
smiled very sarcastically—“ the specimen given to you
nearly thirty years ago.”
The professor wiped over his forehead with his hand-
kerchief and heaved a sigh of great relief.
“ W-ell,” he began hesitatingly, “ it was the grave-
digger who got it for me and ”


“ I thought so,” commented the doctor sharply, “ I
saw him standing behind us ; a most repellent per-
sonality, with the face of a ghoul.” He clicked his tongue.
“ How much did you pay him ? ”
“ Five pounds. That’s all he asks when it’s quite a
simple matter.”
“ Asks ? ” queried the doctor, elevating his eyebrows
in great surprise. “ Then do you employ him regularly
on jobs like this ? ”
“ W-ell,” was the hesitating reply, “ he’s executed
several little similar commissions for me,” and then as
the doctor threw back his head and burst into a cynically
amused laugh, he added with a grin, “ in fact. Monks
Arden is in the way of soon possessing an almost head-
less churchyard.”
Dr. Benmichael at once became grave again. “ But
you’re running a great risk, Professor,” he said, “ and
this man is sure to be caught sooner or later. Then he’ll
tell everything, and you just think of the punishment
you’ll get.” He frowned. “ Think, too, of the disgrace
that will come upon the profession.”
“ But he is very careful,” urged the professor, “ and
for difficult commissions I have provided him with most
suitable appliances.”
“ What on earth do you mean ? ” asked the doctor.
The professor became as gleeful as a little child, and a
note of boastful triumph now ran in his tones. “ Good-
ness gracious ! ” he exclaimed, “ you don’t imagine that
Monks Arden is the only place from which I get my
specimens ! Why, he travels all over the countryside for
me. He has a black, light-proof tent that he rigs up over
newly-dug graves and just-opened vaults and, in the
night time, is able to work in perfect security.” He
lowered his voice darkly. “It will surprise you that two
of those glasses in there contain the cerebra of Lord
Barney and the famous baritone, Conelli, both of which
he has recently obtained for me.”


The doctor gasped. “ Barney, the late Lord Chief
Justice ! ”
“ Exactly! I am always on the look-out for the
decease of prominent people and, if their places of inter-
ment are within reasonable striking distance, this man
goes after them.” He spoke with great pride. “ I am
getting together quite a unique collection of cerebra of
famous people.”
“ But the danger, Panther! ” exclaimed Dr. Ben-
michael. “ The risk of discovery and the punishment and
awful disgrace that would follow ! ”
The professor rubbed his hands together cheerfully.
“We risk them all, my dear friend; my exhumer for
adequate remuneration, and I ” —he bowed his head—
“in the sacred cause of my work of research.” He went
on with animation. “And this man, Daunt is his name,
is most capable and quite an artist in his way. It is he
who takes the death-masks for me and later delivers the
plaster casts.” He nodded significantly. “ That is why I
would not let any of those chatterers into that other room,
just now. I was fearful they would recognise Lord
Barney, his face is so well known.” He shook his head
frowningly. “As it is, I am not too easy in my mind
about that Girdlestone girl, for when she thinks it over
she may remember of whom that face reminded her.”
He opened his eyes very wide. “ But what a most
wonderful coincidence that it should turn out you are her
cousin ! ”
“You ought not to have kept that cupboard un-
locked,” said the doctor sharply. “It was most careless
of you.”
“It was,” agreed the professor instantly. “ I admit
it.”
“ Yes,” nodded Dr. Benmichael, “ and any time
another such act of carelessness may be your ruin. That
ghoulish colleague of yours will not always go uncaught
and then you will both be in the dock together.” He


made a gesture of great disgust. “ Think of it, Panther.
Your safety always hanging on the razor edge, and you,
a man of culture and great attainments, at the mercy of a
common oaf like that.”
“ But he’s not a common oaf,” laughed the professor.
“ He’s a very intelligent and artistic man, with a most
marked cranial development. Although you may hardly
credit it, he has a great enthusiasm for his work. He is of
most determined character, too, and if he were caught, I
am sure he would not give me away. We have discussed
all that, and in the event of any term of imprisonment, I
have promised to provide for him when he comes out.”
The doctor rose to his feet. “ Well, good luck to you.
Panther,” he said drily. “ I’ll reserve a room for you at
my place and it will be ready any time when you are
certified.”
“ And I may want it,” said the professor seriously, as
he opened the door for his friend to go out. “My
mother’s brother was mental, and of late I’ve occasion-
ally heard voices speaking in my head.”
“ A very bad sign indeed,” nodded the doctor, and
he passed out to his waiting car.
That night the professor worked until very late in
his laboratory and, in the early hours of the morning, all
the unwanted parts of his latest acquisition were immersed
in a bath of fuming nitric acid. Dr. Benmichael’s warning
had disturbed him.


CHAPTER II
THE VAULTS OF THE RODINOS
THE young baronet Sir Eric Roding, of Roding
Hall, near the little village of Ashleigh St.
Mary in Suffolk, was dead.
He had died suddenly of heart failure, in what
had seemed to everyone a mild attack of influenza. He
had only been confined to his bed for three days and had
been attended by the kindly old doctor from the village,
who had brought him into the world eight and twenty
years before.
He had appeared to be getting on quite well, so much
so, indeed, that some guests who were staying at the Hall
for the racing of the Newmarket July Meeting had been
persuaded by him and Lady Roding on no account to
terminate their visit as it was thought he would soon be
about again and able to resume his duties as host.
But towards night upon the fourth day of his illness,
to everyone’s horror it was suddenly realised that he was
lapsing into unconsciousness, and the doctor being
hurriedly summoned from the village, it was found his
heart was failing rapidly. Prompt measures were at once
taken to tide him over the crisis and a call was quickly
put through to a great specialist in London, but although
the latter started at once upon his journey, he was too
late to be of any service, as a few minutes before he
arrived Sir Eric had passed away.
“ But I am not so very greatly surprised,” sighed the
old doctor afterwards to the weeping young widow,
“ for the dreadful privations he underwent in Afghanis-
tan, and those bouts of fever he contracted there, must


inevitably have taken their toll of him. You must
realise that there comes a time to the very strongest
constitution when it begins to get undermined.”
Sir Eric had succeeded to the title but a little less than
a year before, and the sadness of his death was beyond all
measure. In the very heyday of his manhood, he had
seemed to be enjoying all the happiness that life could
give. He was possessed of ample means and the owner
of broad lands that stretched for miles about his home,
and he had been married only six months to a beautiful
and sweetly dispositioned young girl.
All through his life there had been romance.
As a young subaltern, upon active service on the North-
West Frontier of India, he had received the Victoria Cross
for conspicuous bravery; he had come into the baronetcy
through the unexpected decease of an uncle and two cousins
who had stood between him and the title ; and his mar-
riage had come about in circumstances that would have
delighted the recorder of the most romantic tales.
His bride had been one of a large family and the
eldest daughter of a poor country doctor in Sussex. He
had met her at a Hunt Ball and had fallen instantly in love
with her. His wooing had been swift and ardent and, in
less than three months from the day when he had first
set eyes upon her, she had been installed as the proud
mistress of Roding Hall.
And now she was in the depths of sorrow and bereft of
all hope that she would ever know any happiness again.
With the death of Sir Eric the baronetcy had become
extinct, and in four days the last of the Rodings would be
lowered into the family vault, beneath the lady chapel of
the village church where for hundreds of years the
bodies of the line had been laid to rest.
On the day but one before the interment the grave-
digger of Monks Arden was engaged in weeding the
paths of the churchyard when, hearing footsteps
approaching, he looked up to see Professor Panther


coming towards him and at once gave the nearest
approach to a warm smile of which he was capable.
The acquaintanceship, which had matured into a real
friendship, between the two men had begun some three
years back. The professor had happened to admire one of
Daunt’s carved panels in a friend’s house and, learning
where he had obtained it, had promptly sought out the
grave-digger and given him a commission for a pair of
similar ones. Then he had just been turning away when
he had noticed an ugly sore upon the palm of one of the
man’s hands.
“ But what’s that you’ve got there ? ” he asked, his
professional instincts being instantly aroused.
“ Eczema,” growled the grave-digger, by no means
pleased at the professor’s interest in him.
The professor reached out and took hold of the hand.
“ How long have you had it ? ” he asked frowningly.
“ Years and years,” was the surly reply. “ I’ve got it
on my body too. The doctor can’t cure it.”
“ Show me the other places,” ordered the professor.
“ I’m a doctor myself.”
A brief examination followed, with Daunt baring a
hairy leg and exposing his chest. Then the professor
announced emphatically : “ It’s not eczema at all. It’s
caused by a fungus and is a sort of ring-worm. I’ll send
you something that will cure it in three weeks.” He
regarded him curiously. “ But, good God, man, doesn’t
it worry you ? ”
“ Makes my life miserable,” scowled Daunt. “ I get
hardly any sleep at all.”
The professor was as good as his word and, beyond
that, even took the trouble to motor over and make sure
his patient was cured. The grave-digger said little, but
he was profoundly grateful, and deep down in his
usually unresponsive heart he conceived an almost dog-
like devotion for his benefactor. His gratitude was accen-
tuated, too, when upon observing the crude tools with


which he had been working, the professor presented him
with a complete carving outfit, as well as some technical
books upon the subject. Daunt just barely expressed his
thanks, but the professor fully understood his feelings
and, being of a most kind-hearted disposition, was
delighted to have been of service to the man.
Then, one day, when as a special favour Daunt had
been taken into the professor’s laboratory and shown
the latter’s anatomical specimens, he remarked gruffly,
“ I could get you some of those if you wanted them.
We have a burial at Monks Arden every now and then
and I am in sole charge of the graveyard there.”
At the time the professor had declined smilingly, but
the idea put into his mind gradually took possession of
him, and so within a few weeks the ghoulish partnership
between them had commenced. All his life an enthusi-
astic student of anatomy, corpses were just corpses to
the professor, and Daunt, who until he had met the
professor had not had any feelings of respect for any per-
son living, certainly had not for anyone dead.
The professor now tripped gaily up the path, his face
all smiles and enthusiasm.
“ Another little commission for you, my friend,” he
said cheerfully. “Now do you happen to know the
church in Ashleigh St. Mary—St. Cuthbert’s it is called ? ”
“ Never been inside,” replied Daunt, “ but I’ve passed
it. There are yew trees in the churchyard.”
“ That’s it,” nodded the professor, “ and at two o’clock
the day after to-morrow Sir Eric Roding is being buried
in the family vault. He died on Monday, and I want you
to get the usual specimen. He was a man of dauntless
courage and his brain should be most interesting.”
“ But burial in the vault under the church,” frowned the
grave-digger. He shook his head. “It will be difficult.”
“ No, no,” laughed the professor, “ not difficult at all,
as the masons are not going to brick in the coffin until
next week. They are engaged to do some repairs to the


church then, and as they come all the way from Norwich,
it has been arranged that the bricking-in shall wait until
then.” He went on briskly. “ Now listen. I have just
come from having a look over the church, and by a
wonderful piece of good luck when I went in the
cleaner was there. She was dusting the pews, but I got
her to leave off and show me round. Of course, she was
full of the burial on Thursday and pointed out the flags
that would have to be raised to lower the coffin into the
vault.”
“ Heavy ones ? ” asked Daunt instantly,
“ That doesn’t matter at all,” replied the professor,
“ for she told me the masons will get into the vault from
the outside of the church. She took me into the church-
yard and showed me some narrow steps leading down to a
small door, under the east church wall and at least eight
feet below the level of the ground. She said that door
opens into a passage which runs under the altar and
straight into the vaults.”
“ But locked, of course ? ” queried Daunt.
The professor nodded. “ Yes, but both the door and
lock are very old and, as they constitute something of
curiosity, she went and got the key out of the vestry to
show me. Naturally I showed a very keen interest, and
she allowed me to make a tracing of it upon a piece of
paper. Here it is, and it seems to me the lock must be so
simple that a piece of bent iron will open it.”
Daunt studied the tracing for a few moments. “ Yes, I
can manage it,” he said. He looked up at the professor.
“ But that end of the church doesn’t face the road, does
it?”
“ No, it happens to be the side farthest away from the
road and it’s quite secluded. There’s a small plantation,
too, not a hundred yards beyond the churchyard, and I
thought you could run your motor-bicycle among the trees,
with no likelihood of it being seen by anyone. Then
there would be only a low wall for you to climb over.”


“ If I remember,” commented Daunt meditatively,
“ the church is at the end of the village.”
“ At the very end,” said the professor, “ and from
what the cleaner told me, the door is never locked. So
you had better go and look it over, if you can, this
evening.”
So at five o’clock Daunt left his work and, tidying
himself up and putting on a dark jacket, set off for the
little village of Ashleigh St. Mary. It was about thirty
miles from Monks Arden and lay midway between
Bury St. Edmunds and Sudbury. Reaching the village,
he had a glass of beer at the inn and then, leaving his
motor-bicycle and sidecar in the stable there, went off,
as he mentioned casually to satisfy the rather curious
innkeeper, for a stroll to stretch his legs. He was
annoyed when he noticed that the innkeeper came to the
inn door and watched which way he went.
The church was only a couple of hundred yards or so
away, and like that at Monks Arden and so many others
scattered about in the little villages of East Anglia, was
of great antiquity and much historical association. The
door was open, and proceeding inside, Daunt very
quickly checked the information that the professor had
given him concerning the Roding family vault.
Then he went outside and examined the little narrow
door at the bottom of the flight of steps, and was at once
glad he had done so ; for if the lock were old, it was
nevertheless of most massive construction and would
need, he saw, a very stout piece of iron to pick it.
He examined it minutely and then, emboldened by the
silence and perfect solitude of the churchyard, went back
into the church and tiptoed into the vestry to get a look
at the key itself, if he could find it.
But no long search was needed for the key, as it was
hanging upon the wall just inside the door.
He snatched it down quickly and, an idea striking him,
after a moment’s hesitation returned with all speed to the
C


narrow door. Inserting the key in the lock, with a great
heave he turned it round.
“ Oil, oil,” he murmured frowningly, “ I shall never
get this open if it isn’t oiled.” Then, symptomatic of
his methodical nature, with only just one glance into the
dark passage that now lay open before him, he ran back
into the church to obtain some lubricant.
The church had only oil lamps and he smiled a grim
smile as he picked up a lantern from off the vestry floor.
He had found both a lubricant and an illuminant at the
same time.
The lock oiled as best he could and the key turned
many times, he lit the lantern and proceeded to explore
the passage. It was very short and led into a sort of long
low cellar, extending down the whole length of the
church and lined all its way along with innumerable
slate-bottomed shelves. Many of the shelves had evidently
received their coffins, as they were bricked up, but there
were many still open and unoccupied. Holding his lan-
tern high, he could make out the two flagstones above
that would be lifted to let the next coffin down, and he
formed a good idea as to which shelf it would be placed
on.
Satisfied at length that he had learnt all he could, he
relocked the door and returned into the vestry to replace
both lantern and key. Then, upon a piece of paper,
which he abstracted from a desk, he made a much more
elaborate tracing of the key. Finally, he left the church
very well pleased with his evening’s work.
But he was not so pleased ‘when, upon returning to
his motor-bicycle, he discovered one of the tyres was
flat, and he was more disgusted still when he found his
headlight was not functioning properly. These troubles
delayed him a good half-hour, and the whole time he had
an audience of the landlord of the inn and three of his
cronies, who all appeared to be greatly interested in the
proceedings. He swore under his breath, for intending


as he was to be present at the burial on Friday, publicity
was the last thing he was desiring.
He got away at last. Anxious to reach home before
dark, as he was still not too confident about his lights,
he accelerated immediately, to be pulled up, however,
when not a mile from the village by a police patrol,
for speeding. Particulars were jotted down about his
outfit and he had to produce his driving licence. He
was most annoyed, for cautious in all he did, he realised
there was now an official record that he had been in the
neighbourhood of the village.
The day fixed for the interment was beautifully warm
and sunny, and, having hidden his motor-bicycle in a
disused quarry a good mile from the village, half an hour
before the funeral party was due to arrive Daunt took a
seat in the church in such a position that he would be
able to get a good view of the coffin and yet at the same
time not attract, so he hoped, any undue attention of the
villagers, whom he was sure would be attending the
burial in good numbers.
But here again good fortune did not attend him, for
just before the burial party arrived, the landlord of the
inn came in and plumped himself down right beside him.
The man remembered him at once, too, and gave him
a smiling but rather curious look. Worse still, after
the coffin had been carried into the church and the
service had commenced, another man arrived and seated
himself next to the landlord. To Daunt’s mortification
he recognised the second man as being a press photo-
grapher from Cambridge who had recently been taking
photographs of the church at Monks Arden, and he saw at
once that the photographer had recognised him. Then the
photographer and the innkeeper had a few whispers
together and, from their glances in his direction. Daunt
had no doubt they were exchanging confidences about
him.
Having noted all he could about the coffin, Daunt


slipped out of the church before the service was con-
cluded, being sure the inquisitive innkeeper would want
to talk to him if he got the opportunity. He made his
way back to where he had left his motor-bicycle, and
there, lying back in the hot sun, dozed away the after-
noon and evening until it had become quite dark.
Intending to lose no time, at half-past ten he set out
again for the church, but when about a quarter of a mile
from the village, he stopped the engine and started to
push the machine and sidecar, so that the noise of its
approach should not be heard.
Then just as he was about to turn off the main road
into a small by-lane that would take him to the plantation
at the back of the churchyard, a car came up behind him
and the driver pulled up and asked if he were in any
trouble. To his great annoyance he saw it was once more
the landlord of the village inn, and by a surprised exclama-
tion, followed at once by a friendly grin, he knew the
man had recognised him.
“ No, I’m all right,” he replied surlily, and he went on
with the lame excuse that hits engine had been running
hot and he was giving it a chance to cool down.
“ Well, so long, mate,” called out the innkeeper as he
let in his clutch and drove off. “ I’ll look you up when
I’m next your way,” and the grave-digger frowned as the
car disappeared round a corner.
He had soon parked his sidecar in the middle of the
small plantation suggested by the professor, and climbing
over the low wall into the churchyard, at once started
operations.
The rough, home-made key he had provided himself
with very quickly opened the narrow door at the bottom of
the steps, and, carrying a half-laden sack of tools with him,
he very carefully reclosed the door and entered the vaults.
Flashing his torch round, his eyes at once fell upon the
coffin that had been lowered there that afternoon. It had
already been lifted up on to one of the vacant shelves.


but there were no signs as yet of any preparations for
bricking it in.
Losing not a moment of time, he produced a small
petrol lantern from the sack, and in a few moments the
whole place was brightly illuminated. Then from the
sack again out came a paraffin blow-lamp, a number of
tools including a big soldering iron, and the small
mackintosh-lined sugar-bag.
The coffin was lying upon a shelf of thick slate about
three feet above the paved floor of the vault and consisted
of an outer shell of stout oak and an inner shell, the coffin
proper, of thick lead. The leaden coffin had been well
soldered up, so that the body would be kept for ever
hermetically sealed.
So Daunt was quite aware that he had by no means an
easy task before him, for, with the outer shell opened, he
would have to cut through the leaden one and then,
having obtained all he was after, re-solder the latter
most carefully so that no putrefaction should set in and
allow the fact that the coffin had been tampered with
to become known. He expected the coffin would be very
heavy too, and the shelf upon which it was resting being
only just high enough to let it slip in, he would have to lift
it down to work at it. He was uneasy there, for, with some
misgiving, he had noted with what efforts the six bearers
had lowered it from off their shoulders when, that after-
noon, they had carried it into the church.
Placing his lantern in the best position possible, he
sei2ed hold of the foot of the coffin and, swinging it
round until it was evenly balanced over the edge of the
shelf, with his legs planted wide apart and with every
muscle of his arms strained to their utmost extent, he
pulled the coffin forward and lowered its foot very
gently to the ground. It was as much as he could do to
keep it from falling with a crash, and as he wiped the
sweat from his forehead, he thought ruefully of the task
he would have when he came to lift it up again.


Making sure the coffin would not slip from its semi-
upright position and topple sideways to the ground, he
quickly unscrewed the beautifully polished oak lid and
had all the inner leadwork exposed to view.
Then with a stout knife he attacked the lead at the top
and very soon was able to tear back a broad strip, the
head and face of the enclosed body thus being exposed.
He saw the dead man had been of strikingly handsome
appearance, but his good looks were marred now by the
stubbly growth of several days’ beard.
The grave-digger snatched up a sharply pointed knife
and, bending over the body, tentatively pricked lightly
at the place in the neck where he was intending to start
severing the head. Then in the passing of a fraction of a
second, he suddenly leapt backwards, as if he had re-
ceived a most violent electric shock. He made sounds of
choking, and his features were contorted into an ex-
pression of incredulous horror and amazement.
The man in the coffin had moved his head when the knife
pricked him and had sighed deeply.
Perhaps a quarter of a minute passed and then the
grave-digger, smiling a cold contemptuous smile, had
recovered from his shock and, knife still in hand, was
advancing again to the coffin. The apparent movement
of the head had been the flickering of the lantern, he told
himself, and the sigh had been the soughing of the wind !
Men hermetically sealed in lead coffins were dead men,
and the dead neither moved nor sighed !
So, once more, he bent over the body, but this time he
had himself much better under control, when to his amaze-
ment he saw most unmistakably that the supposed dead man
had got his eyes wide open. Daunt did not j ump back, and,
if his heart were beating wildly and he could hardly get his
breath, there were no signs now of his former panic. He
just stared and stared, as if he were fascinated by a snake.
Then, suddenly, the man in the coffin spoke. “ I’m
cold, I’m cold,” he whispered faintly. “ Cover me up.”


Daunt swallowed hard several times and then spoke
with a great effort. “ What’s happened ? ” he asked
hoarsely. “How long have you been awake ? ”
But the man made no answer. He just closed his eyes
and repeated weakly ; “ I’m cold, oh, I’m cold.”
As a general rule Daunt was not a quick thinker, but
realising now that the encoffined man was alive, thought
after thought flashed through him as quick as lightning
and he envisioned a long trail of dreadful consequences
for himself from which, for the moment, there seemed no
way of escape.
If he bolted away at once and left the supposed dead
man to his fate, then, of course, the latter would die, and
when the masons arrived to brick up the coffin the
following week, everything would be discovered, and it
would be seen the vaults had been broken into. If, on
the other hand, he released the man, then directly the
latter was able to disclose his identity to anyone, the same
fact would become known.
Then, in either case, it was certain that he. Daunt,
would become suspected at once, as the innkeeper had
seen him upon three occasions in the vicinity of the
churchyard. Once his occupation was known, everyone
would, of course, jump to the conclusion that he would
be the very person who would have no qualms about
tampering with the coffins of the dead.
Of course, there was one way out of it. He could
dispatch the helpless man and proceed as if he had
found him dead when he had opened the coffin.
But to the grave-digger’s credit he never gave to this
last idea a second thought. There were limits to his
lawlessness and he drew the line a long way from murder.
Indeed, in his surly way and behind his intense reserve,
he was quite kind-hearted, and children and animals
always took to him.
He quickly made up his mind what he would do. Leav-
ing no traces behind so that it could be seen someone had


entered the vaults, he would carry the awakened man straight-
away to Professor Panther, throwing upon the latter all the
responsibility of finding some way out of the difficulty.
His actions became quick and certain. With a steady
hand he ripped up the leaden coffin down all its length,
and lifting its occupant out, laid him upon the floor.
Then he squeezed the torn lead back into its oak shell,
screwed down the lid and with a supreme effort restored
the coffin to its place upon the shelf.
Seeing that the baronet had got his eyes closed and
was now breathing evenly and quietly as if he were
asleep, he picked him up and, running swiftly out of
the vaults, deposited him in the sidecar hidden in the
plantation. Fortunately the night was warm and the
unconscious man continued to sleep on.
Then Daunt returned down into the vaults and
gathered all his things together, sweeping his torch round
many times to make sure he was leaving nothing behind.
Finally, he relocked the narrow door and two minutes
later was manhandling the sidecar outfit with its sleeping
passenger down on to the main road.
So it came about that just after half-past one that night
Professor Panther was aroused from the armchair in his
study where he was reading by a gentle tapping upon the
window. He knew who it must be, for he had been expec-
ting Daunt, and he tiptoed to the hall door and opened it.
“ All right ? ” he queried in an excited whisper, and
then taking in the nature of the burden the grave-digger
was carrying, he exclaimed sharply, “ But who’s this ?
Who have you brought here ? ”
“ The man himself,” grunted Daunt. “ I found he was
alive when I opened the coffin.”
“ Alive I ” ejaculated the professor, and his voice would
have been a shriek if he had not been whispering.
“ Alive, when you opened the coffin ! ”
“ Yes, he spoke to me,” replied Daunt, “ and said he
was cold.”


“ But is he alive now ? ” asked the professor, all of a
tremble.
“ Yes, but he’s asleep. He hasn’t spoken a word since,
but he’s breathing all right.”
“ Well, don’t stand there like a block of wood,”
panted the professor. “ Bring him in at once.” His voice
shook with excitement. “ But, oh, this is interesting !
One of those rare cases of catalepsy 1 ”
Daunt carried the sleeping man into the study and,
laying him upon the sofa, the professor proceeded to
examine him quickly. “ Yes, he seems quite all right,” he
ejaculated. Then he bent down and whispered loudly in
his ear, “ Hullo, hullo, who are you ? Come, wake up
now,” but he received no response, and the recumbent
man continued to sleep on. Then the professor turned
back to the grave-digger and asked breathlessly, “ Now,
are you quite certain that leaden coffin was sealed
hermetically ? ”
Daunt nodded. “ Quite, it was well soldered up all
round.”
Then a thought came suddenly into the professor’s
mind, and on the instant he looked very frightened and
shook his head. “ But this will be very awkward for me
—most awkward,” he exclaimed. He glared angrily at
the grave-digger. “ Why did you bring him here ? ”
“ Where else could I have taken him ? ” growled
Daunt. “ I had to bring him out of the vaults and ”
“ Yes, yes, of course,” interrupted the professor testily.
“It was only common humanity ! But why didn’t you
leave him upon some well-frequented road where he
would have been picked up by someone immediately ? ”
“ Yes,” scoffed Daunt, “ and then directly he told
them who he was they would go and look at his coffin
and I should be the first one to be suspected of having
opened it.” He went on to relate of his three encounters
with the innkeeper and how no doubt the press photo-
grapher had made known to him who he. Daunt, was.


Then he pointed to the still sleeping man. “ But, as it is,
he’ll certainly remember me and then ”
“ No, no, he’s not likely to remember you at all,”
broke in the professor quickly. “ When he comes to,
he’ll probably remember nothing from the time he fell
into this coma ” —he shrugged his shoulders—“ and his
memory of things before that will most probably con-
tinue to be very hazy for a long time to come. So you
need not be afraid of anything at all.”
“ Then what are you going to do with him now ? ”
asked Daunt.
The professor hesitated. “ W —ell, I shall have to keep
him here under my eye for the present. That’s certain.”
He became brisk and animated all at once. “ Now you
shall help me to give him a hot bath and then carry him
for me into my spare bedroom. Fortunately, it’s on this
floor and my two servants sleep at the end of the house.
Then to-morrow I’ll explain to them he’s a relation of
mine who arrived here in the middle of the night, very
sick. Fortunately again, they have not been with me very
long and know little of my private affairs, so they will take
anything I say without doubting it.” He looked scared
again. “ But the whole business is certainly most awkward,
and what to do later on I shall just have to decide when
the time comes.” He laughed rather hysterically. “But,
ye gods, what an adventure for a man of my age ! ”
The following morning the baronet was running a high
temperature and, fearful of what would happen if he died,
the professor called in another medical man, and two
nurses were at once engaged. Mentally, the patient was
very much in the same condition. Certainly he had
opened his eyes, but he did not speak and apparently took
nothing in. All the time he just lay staring into vacancy.
He had to be fed with a spoon and mechanically
swallowed everything that was put in his mouth.
A very anxious week for the professor followed. To
everyone he told the same tale, that the sick man was a


cousin of his who had just returned from abroad, and
finding himself suddenly ill, had come to him, the pro-
fessor, as the only relation he had in England. The patient’s
temperature gradually went down and in ten days he was
out of bed and able to sit up in an armchair, but still he
said no word and took no notice of anybody or anything.
And so, from day to day, things drifted on in the same
uneventful way, except that, physically, the baronet
began to show a marked improvement. It had turned out
to be a particularly fine summer, and sitting out in the
garden for many hours each day, his face had assumed a
healthy and bronzed colour. By the end of six weeks he
had grown a beard and, nicely trimmed, it gave him quite
a distinguished appearance.
“ By Jove, Panther,” remarked Dr. Benmichael, who
had called several times and been told the usual story,
“ he looks much too handsome to be any relation of
yours. There must be a mistake somewhere.”
The doctor was very interested in the case and frankly
admitted he could not understand it in the least. “It
looks to me,” he said, “ as if he had received some dread-
ful shock, and I would not like to prophesy about his
recovery. The longer he remains in this state, of course,
the more doubtful it is he will ever become normal again.
This continued and so pronounced helplessness, apart
from his amnesia, is not a hopeful sign.”
And certainly Sir Eric Roding could not have been
more helpless. He was just like a new-born animal, but
without even the instincts of one. He did absolutely
nothing for himself, and never showed the faintest
interest in anything. His eyes never wandered and,
except when he was blinking, they were always staring
before him. He could walk, but someone had always to
be beside him and when they took his hand to guide him
there was never any answering grip in his fingers.
The professor had, of course, done nothing to establish
any communication with Sir Eric’s relations, salving


his conscience that it was far better for them to believe
him dead rather than to have restored to them the
mindless being the baronet now was.
But the anxiety was undoubtedly preying upon the
professor’s mind, and in his quiet moments he began to
get worried about his own state of health. He could not
sleep now without large and increasing doses of hypnotics;
he kept on forgetting the simplest things, and many,
many times he found himself talking aloud to himself.
He told Dr. Benmichael about it, but while looking at
him very curiously the doctor pooh-poohed the whole
matter and advised him to think nothing more about it.
Then ten weeks to the day from when Sir Eric had
been brought to the professor’s house, he suddenly
refused to take his food. He kept his mouth shut tightly
and, with no expression whatever upon his face, kept
turning his head away and struggling violently.
Very disturbed, the professor rang up Dr. Benmichael,
and the latter appeared within the hour. “ Of course he’ll
have to be nasal-fed,” he said at once, “ and I’d better
have him at my place. You can’t manage him here.”
“ Then he’ll have to be certified,” said the professor
uncomfortably.
The doctor nodded. “ There’ll be no difficulty there.
In fact to my thinking he ought to have been certified
many weeks ago.”
“ Well, it will be a great load off my mind,” said the
professor.
“ Has he any means ? ” asked the doctor tentatively.
“ Because if not. I’ll ”
“Oh, he’s quite well off,” was the instant rejoinder of
the professor, “ and he can pay the usual ordinary fee.
There’ll be no difficulty at all there, as I happen to be
holding certain moneys of his in trust. Now what would
you charge a perfect stranger ? ”
“ Twelve guineas a week,” replied the doctor, “ but as
he is a relation of yours I’m quite agreeable to make it less.”


“ No, twelve guineas let it be,” nodded Professor
Panther. “ I have good reason to know you are a good
friend of mine, but this is quite a business transaction.”
So two strange doctors and a local justice of the peace,
one Admiral Fenwick, visited Sir Eric that morning. The
two medical men were instantaneous in their decision,
but the admiral, full of his own importance, asked many
questions of the professor and the nurse before he finally
expressed himself as willing to sign the order for the
reception of the baronet into an asylum. Then he was
quite sure he was doing the right thing, for as one who
could always enjoy a good dinner himself, his opinion
was that anyone in perfect physical condition who refused
food must undoubtedly be mentally unbalanced.
So Sir Eric Roding was taken to the asylum, and yet
another chapter closed in the romantic life story of the
eleventh baronet of the line.
About a week later Professor Panther motored over to
tell Daunt everything that had happened. “ So you need
not worry any more ! ” he said, “ for everything is quite
safe now. No one can determine how long Sir Eric
may remain in his present state of mind, and when he
does get well, if indeed he does ever ” —he shrugged
his shoulders—“ Heaven alone knows how he is going
to be restored to his family.” He sighed heavily. “ I’ve
seen his wife. I went to Ashleigh St. Mary last Sunday
and she was in the church. She’s a beautiful little thing,
but looks, oh, so dreadfully sad ! All the time, too,
during the service her eyes kept wandering towards the
lady chapel and those flagstones through which she
knows her husband was lowered down.”
“ But it was not our fault,” commented the grave-
digger gruffly. “ I saved him from a dreadful death.”
“ Yes, yes,” nodded the professor eagerly, “ we have
done him a great service.” He sighed heavily again.
“ But I can’t see how it’s all going to end.”


CHAPTER HI
THE DEATH MASK
IADY RODING was certainly a very pretty girl.
Of medium height, with a supple and beautifully
.proportioned figure, her profile was clear-cut,
-•her eyes were long lashed and of a deep blue,
and her hair was of a rich auburn colour. Her complexion
was faultless and her mouth a perfect Cupid’s bow.
In the late spring of the year following her husband’s
burial, upon one glorious afternoon in June, when
the air was heavy with the scent of coming summer,
she was standing on the terrace of Roding Hall saying
good-bye to a tall, good-looking man who was bending,
almost reverently, over her.
“ Thank you so much for your many kindnesses, Mr.
Hellingsby,” she said, looking up smilingly. “ I’m sure I
don’t know what I should have done without you.”
“ Anything I have done,” said Miles Hellingsby very
solemnly, “ has been done with the greatest of pleasure.”
He held her eyes with his own. “ You know quite
well there is nothing in the world I would not do for
you.”
Lady Roding looked quickly away. She could not help
liking the speaker very much, for, apart from his good
looks and charming manners, she had good cause for
being very grateful to him. A one-time bank manager,
he was a shrewd business man and had been of great
service to her in the winding up of her late husband’s
affairs. Yes, she liked him very much, but at the same
time she had to acknowledge to herself that somehow
she was becoming a little bit afraid of him.


She could not pretend to herself to be unaware that he
admired her and although he always treated her with the
greatest of respect and without the slightest trace of
familiarity, of late, especially when they had been alone,
she had sensed a certain tender and caressing note in his
voice as if it were quite natural for him to have taken on
the role of protector to her.
This rather jarred upon her, as he was a married man,
and his wife a friend of hers. Not only that, but had he
been single and unattached her bereavement was so recent
that the very thought she might allow herself to become,
so soon, fond of anybody else was repugnant to her, as a
desecration of her husband’s memory.
So she was quite relieved now when she saw his wife
appear upon the terrace, all ready for her journey. Mrs.
Hellingsby, in the middle forties and not a few years her
husband’s senior, was one of those women who, however
expensively they are dressed, always appear dowdy and
uninteresting. She was very plain, and in disposition
shrinking and shy. She seemed most devoted to her
husband, and to outsiders, at least, they appeared to be a
happy couple.
Miles handed her into the waiting car as if she were a
duchess, and then when Warren, the Hall butler, was
helping him on with his overcoat, slipped a couple of
one-pound notes into the latter’s hand.
“ It always pays to keep in with the servants,” thought
Miles complacently, “ for you never know when you may
want them to do you a good turn, and they think you’re
a fine character if you throw your money about.”
But Miles would not have been quite so self-satisfied
if he had read the letter the butler wrote that evening to
his married daughter in Australia. This daughter had
been one of the parlourmaids at the Hall up to a little
time before Sir Eric’s death and then, upon her marriage,
had left straight away with her husband for the Common-
wealth.


The butler wrote quite a good letter,
“ My dear Betsy,
“ I am ashamed I have not written to you since you
left. I know Mum has been writing pretty often, but I
don’t suppose she’ll have told you much, except about
what clothes the girls you used to know are wearing and
what babies they’ve had.
“ Well, as of course you will expect, things are pretty
quiet here now. The poor little mistress is just as sweet
and pretty as ever, but she’s sad, oh, very sad. And it
makes me feel very angry, for I always think the master
ought never to have died. There was something very
funny about the whole business.
“ There was he talking to me, bright and lively as
could be, at three o’clock, and then, at half-past nine the
same night, he was dead. I’m sure old Dr. Curtis bungled
things somehow. He had got too old for his work.
You know he treated Mum for six months for lumbago
when she had that pain in her back, and I had to rub her
with liniment, every night, until my blessed arms were
fit to fall off. Then young Dr. Burnaby, who took over
his practice when he retired in September, said it was not
lumbago but a stomach ulcer Mum had got and she
never ought to have been rubbed at all, as rubbing was
the worst thing she could have had. He made her keep
in bed for a fortnight and she got quite well. So that’s
what old Dr. Curtis was.
“ We’ve had a few visitors lately, but, of course,
nearly all relations. Still, that Mr. and Mrs. Hellingsby
have been staying here for a week, you remember them,
and they’re only just gone this morning. When they went
he gave me two pounds. But, all the same, I don’t like
the gentleman too much, and I think a lot of that fondness
he always pretends for his wife is put on. She’s a plain,
woebegone creature if ever I saw one, but I hear she


had all the money, and, of course, a bit of cash gets a
plain girl off as quickly as a pretty one.
“ Another thing about Mr. Hellingsby is that he eyes
the little mistress much too much to please me. He’s
always looking at her and bows and scrapes to her as if
she was a queen. But he’s handsome. I give you that,
and if he was not married I should never have been
surprised if he’d hung up his hat here.
“ Heigh ho ! but what a pity there wasn’t a baby !
How a little baronet would have been worshipped now.
They say mistress’s relations want her to sell up the whole
place, but she’s told me for a certainty she’s not going to
do it. Still, how she’s going to live on here for years
and years I can’t think. It’s so big and lonely and must
be always reminding her of the happy days she once had.
“ There’s no particular news. Norah has been made
head parlourmaid and is going out with the new chauffeur,
quite a decent young fellow, called Stokes. He gets £4 a
week and would be a good catch. Norah certainly means
business, whether he does or not, and I believe from the
way she’s managing things she’ll get him in the end. She’s
told Mum she’s giving nothing away and won’t even let
him kiss her properly until they are engaged—only just a
peck, she says. And that’s what I call a sensible girl and
not making herself too cheap.
“ Gertrude had six young ’uns last week, but that’s no
good, and I shall fatten her now for the butcher. A sow
that can’t do better than that isn’t worth her keep.
“ I hope you like Melbourne all right, but you haven’t
told us anything yet about the droughts and the blacks.
I should like to see what the gins are Like. Are they good-
looking ?
“ Your loving Dad,
TIMOTHY WARREN.”
Some three weeks after the departure of the Hellingsbys
from Roding Hall, Gilbert Larose, the one-time famous
D


international detective, but now a country squire and
married to the rich widow Lady Helen Ardane of Carmel
Abbey, was sitting reading in his study, when the butler
entered and handed him a card upon a silver salver.
“ Wimpole Carstairs, The Grove, Little Easton ! ”
ejaculated Larose. “ I don’t know him,” He frowned.
“ What does he want ? Didn’t he say ? ”
“ No, sir, he just asked if he could see you,” replied
the butler.
“ All right, show him in,” said his master, and in a few
moments the visitor was ushered into the room. He was
a small, intellectual-looking man of about fifty years of
age, with a rather white face, a high forehead and a very
pointed nose. He wore large glasses, from behind which
peered out two big, dark eyes. He was well dressed and
carried a small bag in his hand.
“ Mr. Gilbert Larose ? ” he queried, and when Larose
had inclined his head he went on a little nervously, “ I
must really ask you to pardon my intruding upon you,
but when you have heard my story I feel quite sure that
you will say you have never heard of anything quite to
equal it.”
“ Well, sit down, sir,” smiled Larose, “ and tell me
what it is I can do for you.”
Mr. Carstairs did as requested and then asked hesita-
tingly : “ But do you happen to know me by reputation ? ”
Larose hesitated, too. “ Your name somehow seems
familiar to me,” he said politely, “ but I can’t exactly
place it for the moment.”
“ No, no, of course not,” went on Mr. Carstairs
hurriedly, “ and I oughtn’t to have expected it either, for,
with no offence, your life must have been a very material-
istic one.” He smiled proudly. “ I am the editor of
The New Spiritualism and, without boasting, may refer
to myself as one of the best-known spiritualists in the
United Kingdom. Indeed, for many years now I have
been devoting a not inconsiderable amount of money to


the encouragement ” —he spoke with the utmost rever-
ence—“ of communion with the spirits of the dead.”
Larose thought it only courteous to look reverent, too,
and his visitor went on. “My poor wife also, until her
untimely death last year, was as enthusiastic as I am in
the great cause. She was also well known in the literary
world and for her work in the feminist movement.”
“ Ah, now I remember her ! ” smiled Larose. “ She
was Alma Carstairs, and I recollect several of her books
were banned by the authorities.” He had once been an
ardent suffragette.
“ Exactly ! ” smiled back Mr. Carstairs. “ Imprisoned
four times when the struggle for the vote was going on,
and once for striking Mr. Bellow, then Prime Minister,
with an umbrella.” He spoke with great pride. “ A
wonderful woman, and one of the most fluent speakers
of her generation. She had a marvellous brain.”
“ Undoubtedly,” agreed Larose. “ I remember some-
one gave me the obituary notice in The Tims to read and
it referred very highly to her intellectual gifts.”
“ And it’s about her I’ve come to you now,” said Mr.
Carstairs with a deep sigh. Then suddenly he sat up in
his chair and all at once became brisk and businesslike.
“ Now, Mr. Larose, here’s my story. I live, as you see
from my card, at Little Easton, some three miles from
Thaxted, and last year was a very unfortunate one for me.
In June my poor wife and I were involved in a bad motor
accident, and then not three weeks after she was out of
the doctor’s hands, she contracted pneumonia and died in
four days.” A sad note came into his voice. “ We were a
most devoted couple and you can imagine my grief when
she was laid to rest in the village churchyard. That was
on Monday the fourth of September last. Well, the months
sped by and, with her image continually in my mind,
I tried to get in contact with her in the spirit world.
Money was no object to me, and bringing over one of the
most renowned mediums in the world, a strong-souled


practitioner from Budapest, I at last succeeded in my
desire.” He spoke only in a whisper now. “ I saw her
twice.”
“ You saw her ! ” ejaculated Larose, frowning hard so
that he should not smile and hurt the other’s feelings.
“Yes,” nodded Mr. Carstairs, appearing almost as if
he were going to burst into tears, “ but, instead of looking
at me tenderly as she always did in life, her look was now a
reproachful one and ” —he pressed his hand over his
eyes —“ her face was covered over with blood,”
“ Goodness gracious 1 ” exclaimed Larose, and
although his visitor’s expression was so pitiful he felt
inclined to laugh.
Then once again Mr. Carstairs took a quick hold upon
himself and returned to normal tones. “ Yes, I could not
understand it, for a returned spirit has always some
message to deliver and hers was so obviously one of
sorrow, when, instead, it should have been one of joy.”
He sighed heavily. “ I say, I saw her twice, but after
that second time all our calls were vain, and sit for
hours and hours as we did, her spirit was never visible
again.”
“ Most disappointing ! ” said Larose sympathetically.
“ Most disappointing, I am sure ! ”
Mr. Carstairs suddenly shot out a trembling hand and
opened his eyes very wide. “ Now comes the bomb that
has burst into my life ! ” He could hardly speak in his
excitement. “ Last Tuesday I was in Colchester. I
walked down Bent Street and happened to look in the
window of the second-hand shop there. I saw, I saw ”
he pressed his hands tightly over his heart to control his
emotion—“ oh, I saw a plaster cast of my dead wife’s
face exposed for sale and I knew ” —he clenched his
fingers viciously together—“ that never in life or death
had a cast of her been made.”
A long silence followed with Mr. Carstairs looking
away out of the window and biting upon his lip so that


he should restrain his tears. Then Larose asked very
quietly:
“ And what are you suggesting, Mr. Carstairs ? What
do you mean ? ”
Mr. Carstairs turned sharply round. “ Suggesting 1 ”
he exclaimed irritably. “ I can’t suggest anything.” His
voice dropped to awed tones. “ But don’t you realise
the mystery of it ? A cast of my dead wife, when no cast
of her was ever made 1 ”
“ Come, come,” said Larose gently, “ is it not possible
you may have made a mistake ? ”
“ A-ah ! ” came from the other with a scowl, and he
now looked most annoyed with himself, “ but I ought
to have shown you these first,” and with shaking hands
he opened the small bag he had with him and produced
from a folder two large photographs. “ See, these were
taken of my wife only three weeks before she died, full
face and profile.” He pointed with his finger. “ Note
well that scar over the left temple. She got that from the
motor accident, and it is most significant.”
The photographs were those of a woman about fifty
years of age, with an oval-shaped intellectual face and big
dreamy eyes. Her expression was a very gentle one but,
at the same time, rather sad.
“ Now, compare them with this,” went on Mr.
Carstairs excitedly, and from the bag he now snatched
out an object wrapped round many times with a thick
roll of cotton wool. “ Look 1 This is the cast I bought
in the second-hand shop ! ”
Larose took the cast he held out and examined it care-
fully. It was that of the face, part of the neck and half
of the head of a woman, set up upon an oval background
about half an inch thick, all made of the same material.
The whole thing was beautifully executed and although
obviously composed of plaster of Paris, as could be seen
where someone had cut into it at the back, the plaster
had been so treated with some preparation of wax as to


make it hard and enduring and resemble the colour of old
ivory. At some time the cast had been broken midway
across the chin but it had been mended, although a
fragment was still missing from the join.
“ And will anyone dare to say,” asked Mr. Carstairs
fiercely, “ that this cast was not taken from the face in the
photographs ? ” He snapped his fingers together. “ Why,
that scar on the forehead makes the matter beyond
dispute ! ”
For a long minute Larose considered, looking alter-
nately at the photographs and the cast, many times hold-
ing up the latter to examine it from every angle. Then he
said very quietly : “You are quite right, Mr. Carstairs.
This cast is that of your wife and it was made from a death-
mask.”
“ But it couldn’t possibly have been made from a
death-mask,” almost wailed Mr. Carstairs, “ and that’s
the whole mystery. I didn’t have a death-mask taken
and no one else had any opportunity to make one. There
were children in the house when she died and so the
bedroom door was kept locked the whole time until the
coffin was carried out for the funeral. No one entered
the room without my being present. I saw the under-
taker take the measurements of her dead body, I
saw her put in the coffin, and I saw the coffin screwed
down.”
The interest of Larose was now thoroughly aroused,
and he commented frowningly : “ Then it’s mysterious,
most mysterious.”
“ Of course it is,” exclaimed Mr. Carstairs irritably,
“ and if that cast were not made from a death-mask but
taken from the living body, it is equally as mystifying.”
He punctuated his words with his hand. “ That scar on
the forehead narrows down the time from when the
wound was beginning to heal after the motor accident
to the moment when the coffin was screwed down, and
never during those few weeks did anyone have access to


her, in life or death, to get an opportunity to make a
cast. I was always near her, and practically never left
her ”
Larose shook his head. “ But this cast was not made
from a mask taken during her lifetime. lam quite sure
it was made from one taken after death,”
“ But how ? ” asked the other, his voice rising querul-
ously. “ That’s what I’ve come to you about.” He went
on quickly : “ I have told you about the locked bedroom
door, and then under my very eyes the coffin was lowered
into the grave, and before we had left the churchyard I
saw the two grave-diggers, who had been standing by
during the service, begin to fill it in. Barely an hour later
I went back there on foot—my house is not a quarter of
a mile from the church—with another wreath that had
arrived after we had left, and saw the grave was already
filled in.”
“ Well, it’s certainly most puzzling,” commented
Larose, and then he asked sharply; “ And how did the
cast come into the hands of the second-hand dealer ?
I suppose there was no mystery there ! ”
“ No, none at all,” replied Mr. Carstairs instantly.
“ It was labelled ‘ St. Mary Magdalene ’ and I went in
and bought it for five shillings. Then I said it reminded
me so much of someone I had once known and I asked
the proprietor of the shop from where he had obtained it.
He said he had bought it last January at a lost property
sale in the police yard at Colchester. It had been among
some odds and ends of no value in a leather suit-case and
he had bid for the lot to get the suit-case only.”
“ And what were the odds and ends, as he calls them ? ”
asked Larose.
“ There were several, he says, but except for two work-
ing shirts, he doesn’t remember what. He recollects the
shirts were new, but of very cheap quality, as he sold
them to a garage man for three shillings.”
“ And, of course, you’ve enquired at the police


station in Colchester to verify what he said ? ” suggested
Larose.
“ Yes, but I didn’t get much satisfaction,” replied
Mr. Carstairs with a frown. “ They said the sale had been
the usual half-yearly one of unclaimed articles that had
been found over a large part of Essex and that scores of
suit-cases had been collected from the different towns to
put in the sale. They wanted more particulars to identify
the particular suit-case and told me the search would
entail a lot of trouble.” He looked rather shamefaced.
“ I know I didn’t make a good impression on them,
because to show my right to make enquiries I invented a
story about the cast having been stolen from me. Then
when they asked me when and under what circumstances
I hummed and hawed and then foolishly declined to say.
So, in the end, they said they couldn’t help me, and I
came away in bad odour.”
A short silence followed and then Larose asked: “ Now
was any jewellery buried with your wife ? ”
“ Nothing but her wedding ring. She possessed very
little jewellery at all. She was not that kind of woman.”
Larose pointed to the cast. “ Did you mend that
break, then ? ”
“ No, that’s exactly as I bought it.”
“ Did the man in the shop mend it, then ? ”
“ I don’t know. I didn’t ask.”
Again Larose compared the cast with the photograph,
and this time he was so long in his consideration that at
length Mr. Carstairs broke in anxiously: “Do you think
you can help me ? ”
Larose looked up. “ lam not quite certain,” he replied
slowly. He regarded him very intently. “ I’ll be quite
frank with you, Mr. Carstairs. You are an entire stranger
to me and so, of course, I don’t know how much reliance
can be placed upon your memory. No, no, please
don’t get offended, but you see this investigation would
mean quite a lot of work for me, and I should be very


disappointed if it all ended in my finding you had made
a mistake.”
“ Mistake ! ” gasped Mr. Carstairs. “In what way ? ”
Larose shrugged his shoulders. “ You may have
altogether forgotten that a cast of your wife was made
after her death. You may be under the delusion •”
“Ah 1 I get you,” broke in Mr. Carstairs quickly. “ I
see what you mean.” For the first time his face broke
into a smile. “ You are thinking that because I am a
spiritualist perhaps I may not be mentally sound.” He
shook his head. “ Well, have no distrust there. I have
been a spiritualist for five and twenty years and at the
same time have conducted a very successful business in
the city. Up to the year before last I was a member of the
Stock Exchange, often employing more than twenty
clerks. I had a splendid connection and ” —he smiled
broadly—“ the man who could get the better of me in
any deal had to get up very, very early in the morning.”
“ Well, well,” laughed Larose, “ in that case I feel
more assured.” He sobered down. “ But if all your
statements are correct, you must realise what can only
have happened.” He spoke very solemnly. “ Your wife’s
grave was interfered with, for I repeat ” —he tapped the
cast with his finger—“ this was made from a death-
mask.”
“ But why are you so sure there ? ” came anxiously
from Mr. Carstairs.
“ The repose, the peculiar laxness of the cheek muscles
and, perhaps above all, the sharpness with which the
inner part of the nostrils has come out,” replied Larose.
He spoke emphatically. “ I know a cast made from a
death-mask when I see it, for I’ve examined hundreds
made from murderers and murdered people, and I’d
stake my life no quills were put up those nostrils to
enable the subject to breathe while the mask was being
taken.”
“ But why, in heaven’s name,” asked Mr. Carstairs,


“ should anyone exhume a body to make a cast of a
face ?”
Larose shrugged his shoulders. “ That’s what we’ve
got to find out.” He rose to his feet. “ Yes, I’ll make
some enquiries about it and see what happens. Leave
the photographs and the cast with me, and now give me
that second-hand dealer’s address.”
The following morning Larose walked into the dingy
little shop in Colchester where the cast had been bought,
and asked a woman dusting over the things there if he
could speak to the proprietor. The woman said she was
sorry, he was away at a sale, but as she was his wife she
could transact any business in his absence.
Larose thought she looked sharp and intelligent and
so, with no hesitation, told her what he had come after,
and asked her if she could tell him anything.
“ Oh, yes,” exclaimed the woman instantly. “ I know
all about it.” She looked a little bit uneasy. “ But if it
was stolen from anywhere it’s nothing to do with us,
for we bought it honestly at the police sale. My husband
told that other gentleman so last week.”
Larose laughed merrily. “ No, no, it’s nothing to do
with any stealing,” he said, “ and as far as I’m concerned
I’ve only come here out of curiosity. The truth is, my
friend who bought the cast the other day is very worried
because it is exactly like his wife who died some years
ago, and he can’t think how there comes to be one of her.”
He smiled his most pleasant smile. “ Now I only want
to ask you a few questions, and the first one —can you
be certain at which sale you bought the suit-case and its
contents ? ”
“ Quite certain ! ” replied the woman. “ Why, I’ll
show you the sale in our books.” She led the way into
a little room behind the shop.
“ My husband’s very careful about keeping an account
of all his expenses,” she went on as she produced a small
ledger from a shelf, “ because of the income tax people.”


She grinned. “ Perhaps he’s not quite particular about all
his receipts.” She found a particular page and ran her
finger down. “ See, there it is, January 15 th, leather suit-
case, etc., six and sixpence. Oh, no, don’t think we make
a tremendous profit. I remember that suit-case quite well,
and it was a damaged one. One end of the handle was
torn off, and we had to pay for it to be repaired before we
could offer it to anyone for sale. I had to put in a new
lining, too, because the old one was so filthy dirty.”
“ But have you sold the suit-case ? ” asked Larose
eagerly.
“ Oh, yes, long ago, but we don’t remember who
bought it. We handle lots of suit-cases, as they always
sell well.”
“ And what, then, do you recollect was in this particular
one when your husband brought it home ? ”
“ Just what he recollects and no more,” replied the
woman, “ that plaster cast and two shirts,” She frowned.
“ There were some other things, of course, but they were
of no value or I should be remembering them. They
were probably put in our sixpenny box and sold as
rubbish.”
“ Ah, that reminds me ! ” exclaimed Larose. “ That
cast had been broken at some time. Was it mended when
you got it ? ”
The woman shook her head. “ No, I mended it myself.
We were just going to throw it away as worthless,
because part of the chin was missing, when I found the
broken piece in a separate little parcel in the suit-case.
It was well wrapped up in cotton wool and brown paper.”
She nodded. “ Whoever lost the suit-case must have
been thinking quite a lot of that cast, because it had been
carefully rolled round in cotton wool, and cotton wool
of very good quality, too.”
“It was, was it ? ” said Larose thoughtfully. “ And
was there the label on it, ‘ St. Mary Magdalene ’ ? ”
The woman smiled. “ No, I put that on. I thought it


would sell quicker. The face was very sad and it seemed
a good title.”
Larose cross-examined her at some length and then,
finally, took his leave with many thanks to her for her
courtesy.
“ But there’s something funny here ! ” he murmured
as he drove away from the shop. “ The cheapest shirts
and cotton wool of very good quality.” He shook his
head. “ The two things don’t harmonise.”
The police station was his next objective. The superin-
tendent did not happen to be in, but when Larose had
made himself known, a sergeant there expressed his
willingness to be of any service.
“ Yes,” he said, when Larose told him what he wanted,
“ it was I who spoke to the party who came about the
same thing last week. He was a queer bird, and as he
declined to answer our questions properly, we didn’t
make any move to help him.” He explained: “You see,
sir, it will be very difficult to place that particular suit-
case from among some scores of others drawn from a
radius of nearly fifty miles all round the districts. We
shall have to ask for a report from a good many towns.”
“ But this suit-case ought not to be so difficult to
trace,” said Larose, “ because it was one with a broken
handle.”
“ Ah ! ” exclaimed the sergeant, “ that certainly will
make it much easier as it will be marked on some list
sent here as ‘ leather suit-case, damaged.’ I’ll go and
look up the files.”
And Larose was not kept waiting long, for in a very
few minutes the sergeant returned with a paper in his
hand. “ Here it is, Mr. Larose,” he said smilingly. “ This
must be it. It was sent in from Saffron Walden and has
got ‘ broken handle ’ on it.” He nodded. “ You see,
any external defect has to be put down, so that we can
be sure the damage was not done at this end.”
Some three-quarters of an hour later Larose was at the


police station in Saffron Walden and going through the
lost-property records with the sergeant there. He had
told the latter he had personal reasons for wanting to
know what the particular suit-case had contained, and the
sergeant, knowing him well by reputation, had shown
himself most anxious to oblige.
The reference to the suit-case with the broken handle
was soon found in the book, and Larose gave a low
whistle when he saw it had been handed in upon the
evening of September yth, only three days after the
burial of Alma Carstairs. He repressed a second whistle
when, in reply to his enquiry, he learnt that Little Easton,
the place of her burial, was only about ten miles distant
from Saffron Walden.
It appeared the suit-case had been brought into the
police station by a passing motorist who had picked it
up on the Thaxted road about a mile out of Saffron
Walden.
“ And it had undoubtedly fallen off the carrier of a
motor-bicycle,” commented the sergeant, as he proceeded
to read out what it had contained. “ Well-patched inner
tube of motor-bicycle, two new brown working shirts
with no tab on them of place of purchase, broken plaster
cast wrapped in cotton wool and brown paper, broken
piece of cast, cotton lamp wick, two mantles for petrol
lamp, three motor maps, large bunch of grapes in card-
board box, half a Dutch cheese, three pork sausages, and
some newspaper.” He smiled. “ The grapes were kept
until they had gone bad, and I expect the cheese and
sausages were eaten here, too.”
“ Then do you remember this suit-case being brought
in ? ” asked Larose.
“ Oh, yes,” replied the sergeant, “ the grapes fix it in
my memory. Besides, we don’t get too many things
brought in as we are off the main road.”
“ Is this your handwriting ? ”
The sergeant shook his head. “ No, Constable Brook


made those entries.” His face brightened. “ Ah, now
would you like to talk to him ? He’s a very smart young
fellow and probably will remember all about everything
the suit-case contained. He’s always amusing us by
trying to tell us about the owners of lost things when they
are brought in, and sometimes ” —he nodded—“ he’s
very near the mark.”
“ The very man ! ” laughed Larose, and so a bright-
faced young constable was brought in and introduced.
Yes, he told Larose, he remembered quite well about
that suit-case, if only because of the grapes. They were
beautiful big hot-house ones, as fine as ever he had seen
in any shop window in London, from where he came.
The bunch had weighed over two pounds and they had
all had a taste at the station.
“ And what sort of party was it, do you think, who
had lost the suit-case ? ” asked Larose smilingly. “ Did
you try to form any opinion there ? ”
The constable looked down the list of articles recorded
in the book to refresh his memory. “ He was a labouring
man, sir, as the shirts were of very poor quality, and the
inner tube had been mended so many times that anyone
in good circumstances would certainly have thrown it
away. The piece of Dutch cheese also suggested the same
thing, and the fact that he had only bought half a pound
of sausages inclines one to think he was a bachelor or,
at any rate, lived by himself.”
“ Quite sound deductions,” nodded Larose. “ Go on.”
“ Then he was on his way home, sir,” continued the
constable, “ because he had made his purchases and the
suit-case had got in it as much as it could comfortably
contain. Also, he was going away from Saffron Walden
and not approaching it when the suit-case fell off.”
“ How do you make that out ? ” asked Larose.
“ Because one doesn’t come out of towns and go into
villages to purchase things. His purchases concluded,
he was leaving the region of any good-sized towns.


Besides, it is hardly possible he would have filled up his
suit-case at the beginning of his journey, instead of nearing
the end of it.”
“ That seems good reasoning,” agreed Larose, “ and
another thing of which we can be sure is that his journey
that day was going to end at the same place where it had
begun. He was not staying away for the night, as his suit-
case contained no clothes or personal effects.”
“ And also,” went on the constable, “ he lives in some
little out-of-the-way village which has no gas or electri-
city, because of the cotton lamp wick and those mantles
he had bought.”
“ Well, what did you think was his occupation ? ”
asked Larose.
“ A gardener, I should certainly say,” said the con-
stable, “as two of the three papers in the case were
weekly gardening ones.”
“ And what was the third paper ? ”
“ A Times.” The constable shook his head. “ I
couldn’t understand that, but I don’t think he had bought
any of the papers himself, as I remember remarking to the
others here that they were not current issues.”
“ You don’t happen to remember the dates of any of
them, of course ? ”
“ No, but if it were important enough you easily can
find out the date of The Times , for there was an article in it
dealing with the pedigree breeding of canaries. I happen
to keep canaries myself and it caught my eye and I read
it.”
They talked on for quite a long time, and then Larose
made his good-byes and drove away with a very grave
expression upon his face.
There could not be the very slightest doubt now, he
told himself, that the grave of Alma Carstairs had been
rifled and either the whole corpse bodily removed, or
else—he made a grimace here—the head cut off at the
neck and taken away. It was inconceivable to think the


cast had been made from an authorised death-mask before
she had been placed in her coffin, and that it was only just
a coincidence that it had been lost barely three days after
the burial, not ten miles distant from where she had been
buried.
No, the husband had spoken the truth when he had
averred so strongly that no one had meddled with the
body before it had been lowered into the grave. So, un-
doubtedly, the cast had been obtained in an unlawful way,
and the very fact that no one had come forward to claim
the suit-case after it had been lost pointed to a guilty
conscience on the loser’s part. He had been afraid to
claim it, because of what might have been the conse-
quences.
What in Heaven’s name did it all mean ? Was anyone
going about rifling graves, just to take death-masks of
the faces of the dead ? The very idea was preposterous!
Some twenty minutes later, Larose had parked his car
just outside the churchyard of Little Easton and was
walking round to locate the grave of Alma Carstairs.
An old man was clipping the grass edges at the sides of
the paths and he touched his cap respectfully as Larose
passed.
Larose quickly picked out the grave he wanted, as the
sculpture over it was heavy and ornate, picturing the life-
sized figure of a winged woman bending over. The
lettering read—
“To the loving memory of
ALMA CARSTAIRS
who joined the heavenly throng in the
fifty-first year of her age.”
“Ay ! ” he murmured, “ and over what does that
stone rest, an emptied coffin or the rotting body of a head-
less corpse ? ” The grave was well looked after with a
beautiful show of late spring flowers.


Returning towards the gate of the churchyard, he was
about to pass the old man again when a thought struck
him and he stopped to speak.
“ Some beautiful flowers here,” he smiled. “ Are you
the gardener ? ” When the old man nodded, he went
on : “I don’t suppose you get many burials here now.”
“ No, sir, very few,” replied the old man. “We
haven’t had one now for six months.”
“ Do you dig the graves ? ” asked Larose.
“ Yes, sir, me and my son. The work’s too heavy for
me alone now, although I digged them myself up to five
or six years ago.”
“ Do you always fill them in directly after the funeral ? ”
“ Yes, sir, straight away. That’s the custom and the
law, too. An hour or two hours and all the earth has to
be put back, and the wreaths laid on top.”
“ Have you ever found anybody disturbing the
wreaths ? ” asked Larose.
The old man looked horrified. “ Taking them away ?
Oh, no, sir, this is a quiet little village, and nothing like
that goes on here.”
“ I didn’t mean that,” smiled Larose. “ I meant you’ve
never come back next day and noticed the wreaths differ-
ent from how you’d placed them after the funeral ? ”
The old man considered. “ Well, I won’t say that,
sir, because I’ve known folks come and pull at the wreaths
to have a look at the cards on them and see who sent
them, and once ” —he nodded grimly—“ when a great
writer was buried here ” —and Larose’s eyes glinted in
expectation as the old man jerked his head in the direction
of the grave of Alma Carstairs—“ a person of no quality
in the village here pulled out his wreath from under the
others and placed it on top.” He frowned at the recollec-
tion. “ I noticed it first thing the next morning, and it
was just like his impudence, too.”
“ A sure thing ! ” murmured Larose, as he drove out
of the village. “ The wreaths were moved and the grave
E


opened during the night.” He shook his head. “ But
that old fellow had no hand in it. He’s as honest as a
clock.”
That night, with a pencil and piece of paper before him,
Larose started to go over everything he had learnt that
day.
“ Well, Gilbert,” he said to himself, “ you have now a
splendid opportunity to show what your boasted powers
of deduction are worth, and if that very lively imagination
of which you are so proud is really as good as you have
always thought it to be.”
He sighed heavily. “ Certainly, some imagination is
wanted now, for how hopeless it seems to be able to trace
any particular person from the contents of that suit-case !
You’ve not much to go on, Gilbert, for you’ve only seen
one of the articles that was in it, and so nearly all of your
information comes to you second-hand.”
His face brightened. “ Still, you were very lucky to
strike that young policeman in Saffron Walden this
morning. He was unusually intelligent and what he
remembered should be of great help. No, things are not
really hopeless, for certain points stand out very clearly.
The first—two distinct persons are involved here.
One, a well-to-do person, and the other of the labouring
classes. One gave and the other received, and that plaster
cast was the bond of union between them. That bunch
of grapes was a gift, and was not bought at any shop or
nursery, because the policeman says it was in a tin biscuit
box, tied up with odd pieces of string. Now that’s not
the way a shop would hand it over to a customer, neither
would they put in good quality absorbent cotton wool to
prevent it from being bumped about. A shop would use
wadding and no cotton wool at all.”
He nodded. “By the by, that woman in the dealer’s
shop also remarked upon the quality of the cotton wool
in which the cast was wrapped, so undoubtedly both
cast and grapes came from the same person, and as the


grapes were ones that had been grown in a hot-house,
then this first person, as I say, must be in good circum-
stances. Yes, he lives in a nice house with a good
garden and conservatories and most probably keeps a
gardener.”
His thoughts ran on. “ Now for what purpose did
this rich man hand over the plaster cast to this poor man
who wore cheap shirts and bought pork sausages
three at a time ? ” He answered his own question.
“ Surely, for one purpose only, and that was that he
should mend it. Of course, the rich man could have
stuck the broken piece on just as the dealer’s wife did,
but he evidently wanted the repair done properly, with
the little missing piece from the chin filled in and perhaps
the whole cast dipped in the boiling wax again when it
had been re-plastered at the back.”
He nodded a second time. “ And so that brings us
logically to the conclusion that the poor man made the
cast and the rich man had paid him for it, and then we at
once ask ourselves the question, what manner of men are
these two who conspire together to violate the dead ?
There is no doubt the poor man had a hand in it, if indeed
he were not the actual violater of the grave, as he had
undoubtedly considered it too risky to make any attempt
to find out if his suit-case had been picked up and handed
into a police station. The reasoning of that young police-
man was quite sound and the man most certainly lives in
this district. So he was afraid to make any enquiries,
either because he was fearing that, Alma Carstairs being
a public character and living near, the cast might have
been recognised as one of her by someone at the police
station, or else, he himself being well known in the
district, he didn’t want to arouse curiosity as to how he had
become in possession of such a thing as a plaster cast.”
He smiled to himself. “ Now I’ll start guessing. The
rich man is an ardent spiritualist and he wanted a death-
mask taken of Alma Carstairs, because he had been a


great admirer of hers, and the poor man was a gardener
and accustomed to shovelling earth. So the two put their
heads together and this cast was the result.”
His smile changed suddenly to a frown. “ But am I
right about that man being a gardener, simply because
two gardening papers were found in the suit-case ? Poor
working gardeners don’t run about on motor-bicycles
with three well-thumbed motor maps in their possession,
neither are they usually artists in plaster casts ! That cast
is quite a work of art, and the oval background of the
plaque is of perfect shape, with the edges all beautifully
bevelled as by a sure and accustomed hand. No, I don’t
think I’m right there. My guess is going, obviously,
astray.” He sighed heavily. “ Now if I could only find
somewhere to start off from. If only I could sense some-
where the beginning of a trail.”
But, rack his brain as he might, he could not find any-
where to start off, and two days after his visit to Saffron
Walden he was still doing nothing.
Then, on the third day, an idea came to him, and eight
o’clock in the morning found him driving up to London
in a much more hopeful frame of mind.


CHAPTER IV
AN ASYLUM FOR THE INSANE
NOW Larose always held to be one of the
inspirations of his life the way he dropped like a
plummet upon Professor Panther as one of
the conspirators involved in the violation of
Alma Carstairs’ grave.
It was not by chance or coincidence that he found him,
but by intense thought, plus painstaking investigation
and a reasonable indulging in the promptings of his
imagination.
From the very first he had been quite sure that the rich
man, as he called him, had given to the other that copy of
The Times because in it there was something of interest
to them both. Some mutual interest must undoubtedly
be referred to somewhere in its pages and, believing the
two men to live not far from Saffron Walden, he was
hoping that if he lighted upon that interest it might
furnish some ideas as to who they were. He knew already
they were both interested in gardening, that one was rich
and grew his own hot-house grapes, and had expensive
medical cotton wool in the house, and that the other was
strong and hardy and, if not a gardener, was accustomed
to shovelling earth and lived by himself and possessed
two lamps, one an oil one and the other petrol.
Entering The Times building and obtaining access
to the files, he quickly came upon the issue containing
the article upon the breeding of pedigree canaries. It was
dated September 4th and was therefore printed the
same day as the burial of Alma Carstairs, and given to
the owner of the suit-case three days later. Going quickly


through it, for the moment he could see nothing that
appeared to help him in any way. However, holding the
matter to be one of the greatest importance, he bought a
copy of that issue and took it away with him to read
quietly in his hotel.
There, in a corner of the lounge he began to run
through its columns, prepared, if necessary, to read every
line of the paper even to the advertisements.
An hour’s steady reading, and he had found nothing to
help him, nothing that would in any way be of common
interest to the two men he had pictured in his mind.
Then he turned back to the correspondence columns and
re-read a letter there that had struck him as very inter-
esting. It was headed “ Auguste Rodin,” written from
the Athenaeum Club on the preceding day, and signed
Arnold Panther, and he scanned it down quickly.
It appeared that another biography of Rodin, the
sculptor, had just been published, and this Arnold Pan-
ther was condemning the author because, apparently,
he had not praised the great Frenchman highly enough.
In many ways, the writer declared, Rodin’s genius was
unique, and was not overshadowed even by that of the
mighty Michelangelo himself. For example, Rodin’s
knowledge of anatomy was far more than a knowledge
laboriously acquired. It was an instinct, a veritable gift
of the gods, and of so profound a nature and so perfect
in its expression that any advanced student of anatomy,
even with his eyes shut, by just passing his hand across any
of Rodin’s sculptured faces, could tell at once whether
the subject were intended to be alive or dead, awake or
sleeping.
The letter was certainly an interesting one and went on
to discuss sculpture in general, the writer finally averring
that in his opinion Rodin’s “ Thinker ” would rank for
ever among the most perfect pieces of sculpture given
to the world.
“ A-ah I ” exclaimed Larose triumphantly, “ now


there’s something that would interest them both, for no
one would better appreciate a sculptor’s art than a maker
of casts from death-masks.” He screwed up his eyes.
“ He must be somebody, too, this Arnold Panther, to be
writing from the Athenaeum Club, and having his letter
placed first in the correspondence columns of an im-
portant newspaper like The Times.” He rose up from his
chair. “ Well, it’ll be easy to find out about him,” and
he walked over to a telephone cabinet across the lounge.
Looking up the number of the Athenaeum Club, he
was soon in touch with the head porter there and asking
if by any chance Mr. Arnold Panther happened to be in
at that moment.
“ Professor Panther, you mean, sir ! ” came the voice
at the other end of the phone. “ No, sir, I’m sorry to say
he’s not. He’s not been in for a very long time now, not
for many months.”
“ Then will you kindly give me his home address ? ”
asked Larose, and his heart gave a bump when the man
replied:
“ Yes, sir, it’s Milton Road, Cambridge. That’ll find
him, for he’s very well known.”
“ Oh, by the by,” added Larose, “ I’ve just come from
Australia and know very little about our distinguished
people here, so will you kindly tell me what he’s professor
of?”
“ Professor of Anatomy, sir, but he’s retired now.
He is a very distinguished gentleman and was a great
brain surgeon once.”
Larose hung up the receiver, with his face now rather
white and his eyes opened very wide. “ Goodness
gracious ! a great brain surgeon once and he lives in
Cambridge, barely a dozen miles from Saffron Walden !
What if he had wanted that woman’s brain as well as the
cast of her face ? ” He whistled softly. “ Either I’m
guessing wildly or I’m dead on the centre of the target I ”
He borrowed a medical directory from the office and


there read that Arnold Panther was a Fellow of the Royal
College of Surgeons, a Doctor of Medicine of Cambridge
University and a Fellow of the Royal Society. The
professor had held many public appointments and written
many books and treatises dealing with the anatomy and
surgery of the brain. Then, from a copy of Who’s Who,
which he examined in a public library, he learnt more
about the professor and among other things that the
latter was an enthusiastic collector of orchids.
Partaking of a hurried lunch, Larose was in Cambridge
by three o’clock and by half-past was interviewing a
friend of his, Dr. Fergus, who was the professor of
physics at the university.
“ It’s about Professor Panther I’ve come,” said Larose,
when they had exchanged greetings. “ You’ll know him,
of course, and I want you to give me an introduction to
him.”
“ What’s up ? ” queried the doctor with a smile.
“ Wanted for murder, is he ? ” He shook his head.
“ Well, I’m sorry, old man, but you’ll never get him
before a jury now, as he’s out of his mind and in a mental
home ! ”
“ Dear ! dear ! ” exclaimed Larose, looking very dis-
appointed. “ That’s deuced awkward, for I wanted to
ask him a few questions about a private matter concerning
a friend of mine. But how long’s he been like that ? ”
The doctor considered. “ A little more than three
months. It came on very suddenly, and it’s dreadfully
sad, for he’s been a most brilliant man, one of the finest
specialists in brain work the world has ever known.”
“ But he’ll get better soon, won’t he ? ” asked Larose.
The doctor shook his head. “ No, I’m afraid not at
his age. He’s nearly sixty-eight.”
“ Can he talk now ? ”
“ Good gracious, yes ! That’s part of the trouble!
He’s always talking ! He thinks he’s an orchid ! ”
“ And what asylum is he in ? ” asked Larose.


“ One close near here, not three miles away. He’s at
Barnwell Hall, and it’s run by a Dr. Benmichael, a friend
of his.”
Larose considered for a few moments. “Do you
think I could get speech with him ? ”
“ Certainly, if you want to,” replied the doctor. He
hesitated. “ But perhaps you’d better call yourself an old
friend of his, and then that’ll make it easier.” He moved
towards the telephone on his desk. “ I’ll ring up Ben-
michael and just say you’re coming.”
“ Yes, and say I’m a Mr. Watkins,” interposed Larose
quickly, as the doctor was lifting the receiver. “ I don’t
want to go there under my proper name.”
A short conversation ensued on the phone and then
Dr. Fergus hung up the receiver. “ Quite 0.K.,” he
announced. “ You can go any time. Benmichael’s away
to-day, but his assistant. Dr, Quail, will be pleased to do
anything for you.”
“ And you say you don’t know how his insanity came
on ? ” asked Larose. “It wasn’t a sudden shock, for
instance ? ”
“ No, no,” smiled the doctor, “ it had probably been
coming on for years.” He seemed amused. “ But if you
want to know all about him, go and see old Colonel Plum.
He was a great friend of the professor, and I’ll scribble
you a letter of introduction.”
About half an hour later Larose drove up to the big
gates of Barnwell Hall and rang the bell. A man from
the lodge, just inside, came out at once and, unlocking
the gates, passed him through. Proceeding up the drive,
he found himself before a large old-world house, sur-
rounded by very beautiful grounds. A number of well-
dressed and quite normal-looking persons of both sexes
were either reclining in comfortable deck-chairs or walk-
ing and chatting together. Two games of tennis were
being played and there was a bowling green in use in one
corner. Altogether, there was nothing anywhere to


suggest anything of a mental asylum except the high
fifteen-feet walls which surrounded the demesne on all
sides.
Seeing the car drive up to the front door, a good-
looking youngish man detached himself from a group of
ladies who were watching the tennis and, advancing
up to Larose, introduced himself as Dr. Benmichael’s
assistant, Dr. Quail.
“ I thought it would be you, Mr. Watkins,” he said,
“ and there’s your friend upon that bench under those
trees. I’m afraid, however, you won’t find him very
sociable to-day, for he’s now taken it into his head this
morning to ignore every one of us.”
Larose breathed a sigh of great relief, for he had been
wondering how he was going to pick out his supposed
friend from among the other old men he saw there. So
he smiled to himself as they walked up to a small man with
a huge forehead and big ox-like eyes, who was holding
delicately to a small blown-up paper bag, and regarding
it intently with a very melancholy expression on his
face.
“He thinks it’s an orchid,” whispered Dr. Quail,
indicating the paper bag, “ and if his thoughts continue
to be concentrated in that direction you will not get a
word out of him.” He shook the professor gently by the
shoulder. “ Look up, sir, I’ve got an old friend of yours
here, Mr. Watkins.”
But the professor did not lift his eyes from the blown-
up bag. “ This is a Roxy-lipped Cattleya,” he growled,
“ and its flowers ought to be quite six inches across.
It’s not been looked after properly.”
“ Good morning, Professor,” greeted Larose heartily,
“ I’ve come to know if you’d like the brain of a great
Chinese statesman. I’ve brought it all the way from
Pekin for you. Now what about it ? ”
But the professor took not the slightest notice, al-
though Larose, much to the amusement of the doctor,


went on to offer him the brains of most prominent people,
including those of the Prime Minister and the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury. Then Larose, thinking that
perhaps the name of Alma Carstairs might strike some
chord of memory in him, and not wishing to refer to her
in front of witnesses, suggested he should talk to the
patient alone,
“ Certainly,” smiled the doctor, and he returned at
once to the ladies who were watching the tennis. Then
Larose put his mouth close to the professor’s ear and
whispered hoarsely : “ Look out, Professor, I’ve come to
warn you it’s been found out you dug up the grave of
Alma Carstairs, I’ve just heard it from the police. Alma
Carstairs’ grave, do you hear me ? ”
But the professor apparently did not hear him, and
although Larose went on to whisper most insistently
about graves, churchyards and broken plaster casts, he
could evoke no interest at all. So at last, rather crestfallen,
and with his voice quite hoarse from his fierce whisper-
ings, he gave it up as a bad job.
“ I thought you wouldn’t get anything out of him,”
said the doctor. “ He’s as obstinate as a mule sometimes,
and to-day is one of his bad days. But if you are staying
in Cambridge and come again to-morrow, you may find
him quite different and willing to talk freely.”
“ Well, I am staying in the town,” fibbed Larose,
“ and I’ll do as you suggest and come to-morrow.”
They chatted together for a few minutes, and then just
as Larose was upon the point of taking his leave, he
remarked smilingly : “ Well, at any rate, there’s another
person here who’s interested in me, if the professor is not.
That good-looking man with the naval beard, who’s just
walked by, has been staring at me quite a lot.”
The doctor looked round. “ Oh, yes, and perhaps you
know him ! He’s Professor Panther’s cousin.”
Larose shook his head. “ No, I don’t know him. I’ve
never met any of the professor’s relations.” He nodded in


the direction of the man who was still staring at him. “ Is
he a patient, too ? ”
“ Yes, and he’s been here nearly a year now, and funnily
enough it was the professor himself who petitioned for the
receiving order and got him admitted here. We are all
very interested in him. His was a bad case of melancholia,
and for more than six months he refused all food and had
to be fed through his nose. He was as helpless as a baby,
too, in everything when he first came. These last weeks,
however, he’s been showing marked improvement and
when he speaks he talks quite rationally, but the poor
fellow remembers nothing. He doesn’t know who he is,
or where he is, or anything about himself. It’s very
deplorable, for he’s such a distinguished-looking man, as
you can see.”
Larose left the asylum very disappointed that he had
been unable to get anything out of the professor, for,
quite certain now that the latter had been the prime mover
in the violation of the grave at Little Easton, he had been
hoping to get at his accomplice through him.
“ I’m beginning to have an idea, too,” he told himself
frowningly, “ that Alma Carstairs is not the only case of
grave-robbing that’s been done. If, as Dr. Fergus says,
the professor possesses a private museum of his own, then
it’s not unlikely that some extensive body-snatching has
been going on. The perfection of that cast suggests
experience and plenty of practice, and those well-thumbed
motor maps in the suit-case make one think a lot of
travelling has been done ” —he nodded significantly —
“ for what purpose ? ”
He drove up to Colonel Plum’s house to present his
letter of introduction, and was not too pleased to be told
that the colonel was not at home. However, apparently
overhearing the conversation that was going on in the
hall, a pretty fresh-faced girl in the early twenties appeared
and informed Larose that she was Miss Plum, and although
her father was out, he might yet return any moment.


“ He’s golfing,” she explained, “ but I know he won’t
be late, for he’s going out to dinner to-night.”
So, again giving his name as Watkins, Larose was
shown into a little morning room and amused himself
with looking through an old Army list, which told him
among other things that Colonel Plum was a D.S.O. and
had been three times mentioned in dispatches during the
Great War.
“ And his daughter’s a pretty girl,” commented Larose,
“ not quite my style of beauty, but just the type to marry
well and have a good number of red-faced, healthy
children.”
Ten minutes passed, a quarter of an hour, and then
Miss Plum came into the room.
“ I’m so sorry father’s so late,” she said. Her blue eyes
looked troubled. “Is it upon very important business
you want to see him ? Do you want him as a justice of the
peace ? ”
“ Oh, no, nothing like that,” said Larose. “In fact,
I’ve only just called to talk to your father about my old
friend, Professor Panther.” He pursed up his lips. “ I’ve
just come from Barnwell Hall, and I’m very shocked.”
“ Yes, isn’t it sad ! ” exclaimed the girl. She sighed,
“ We feel it very much, for he was such a great friend of
ours.”
“ But what made him become like that ? ” asked
Larose. “ Has anyone any idea ? ”
“ 1 have,” replied the girl quickly. “ I think it was all
brought about by his taking that sick cousin of his into his
house.” She frowned prettily. “ I suppose you know all
about that.”
Larose shook his head. “ No, I don’t,” he said. “ I
haven’t heard from the professor for a long time, and
meeting a friend here in Cambridge this morning, was
horrified to learn what had happened.”
“ And I should think you would have been,” nodded
Ida Plum. “As I say, it was a great shock to us.”


“ But tell me about the cousin,” said Larose. “ He was
pointed out to me just now in the asylum.”
“ Well, he arrived at the professor’s house very sud-
denly in the middle of the night,” said the girl, “ so deadly
sick that he could give no account of himself. Then, the
next day we learnt the whole place had been turned into a
sort of private hospital, with night and day nurses and no
one allowed inside, because the cousin must be kept
absolutely quiet, as it was feared he was going out of his
mind.” He nodded solemnly. “ And that’s what did
happen, although not until after nearly three months,
when the professor had become a nervous wreck from
the worry of it all.”
“ But why didn’t Professor Panther put this cousin
into a private hospital at once ? ” asked Larose.
“ That’s what no one knows,” said Ida Plum signifi-
cantly. “It was ridiculous for a man of the professor’s
age to have all his habits suddenly turned upside down,
and no wonder he went out of his mind himself.” She
looked curiously at Larose. “ But had you not met this
cousin before ? ”
Larose sensed something mysterious in her tone and
instantly played up to it. “ No, I’d never even heard of
him before,” he replied.
The girl nodded impressively. “ And neither had we,
and it came as a tremendous surprise to learn that the
professor had got a cousin at all. Father’s known him
for more than twenty years and had always understood
he had absolutely no relations at all except a sister in
Edinburgh.” She shrugged her shoulders. “ And the
whole time the cousin was in the house, I never set eyes
on him once, and neither did anybody else, except the
doctors and nurses.” She nodded again. “We all
thought it very strange.”
“ And you think, then,” said Larose, “ that the worry
of having this sick cousin in the house was mainly the
cause of the professor going out of his mind ? ”


“ I’m sure of it,” said Ida Plum, “ for when his cousin
had been at last put away and we took to visiting Pro-
fessor Panther again, we found he had become quite
different in his manner. He seemed nervous and fidgety
and had taken to muttering a lot to himself. Everyone
noticed it and it was dreadfully sad, because he had had
such a brilliant career as a professional man.” She spoke
with enthusiasm. “ You’ve seen his wonderful collec-
tion of people’s brains, of course ? ”
“ Not for several years,” replied Larose carelessly.
“ I suppose it’s become a big one now ? ”
“ Yes, he’s got a great many specimens in a beautiful
new building he’s had built in his grounds, and when he
was showing them to us one day he said every one of
them had belonged to some man or woman of out-
standing ability. I mean all of them were the brains of
very clever people. He only collected that kind ”; and
then, to the intense interest of Larose, the girl went on to
relate what had happened upon that afternoon when the
tea-party had been reluctantly allowed into the museum.
As she went on to tell how, in the professor’s absence
from the room, she had opened the little cupboard and
discovered the severed head of a beautiful young girl, in
spirits, in a big glass jar, the one-time detective could
only with a great effort mask the excitement that he
felt.
“ And for a moment the professor was so furious,”
said Ida Plum, “ that I thought he was actually going to
strike me, but he calmed down very quickly and then
told us all about it quite pleasantly.”
“ And where had he got it from ? ” asked Larose,
breathing hard.
“ Oh, he said it had been sent to him from some for-
eign country, years and years ago, although it looked so
clean and fresh to us that it might have been cut off from
the body that very day.”
“ Did he tell you who the girl was ? ”


“ Yes,” replied Ida, “ she was a nun who had died
from the plague when she was nursing some sick sailors.”
She screwed up her face. “ But the creepy thing was, one
of my friends there, Myra Girdlestone, was sure somehow
that the face was familiar to her, and some days after-
wards it all came back to her that it was exactly like
Esther Haverhill, who had died only about a week before.
Esther Haverhill had been Esther Rayleigh in her maiden
days, the great violinist.”
“ Oh, oh ! ” exclaimed Larose frowningly, “ what a
strange thing,” He looked very thoughtful. “ But
didn’t that Mrs. Haverhill live somewhere near here ? ”
“ Yes, not far away, at Monks Arden in Suffolk.”
They talked on for some little while, and then Larose,
thinking that he had learnt all she had to tell him, bade
her good-bye, with the smiling intimation that she had
proved a very good substitute for her father.
“ Hum, not a doubt about it,” he told himself, as he
drove away. “ This distinguished professor, this man of
culture and refinement, perhaps for years and years has
been employing someone to rifle the coffins of the dead.
That head of Alma Carstairs was probably just a common
happening to him and, if we only knew it, many a grave-
yard for many a mile round could tell its dark tale of
hurried violation in the dead of night. Ay, many a well-
kept grave over which some poor souls continue to sigh
and weep, probably contains but the headless trunk of the
dear one they loved so much.”
He snapped his fingers together. “ But no one is
really harmed by it and maybe, even, humanity is
benefited by the knowledge gained.” He shook his head
solemnly. “ Still, still, it’s a crime against sentiment and
forbidden by the law, and you, Gilbert, are on the side of
the law to-day.” His face broke into a whimsical smile.
“ Besides, for your own vanity’s sake, you have got to
unmask the confederate at the other end. Yes, you’ve
got to meet this nice gentleman who is so handy with his


spade and learn how he’s managed to dig up grave after
grave and open coffin after coffin without being caught.
So to-morrow, if you can only manage to lead that mad
professor’s thoughts into the right channel for half a
minute, no, perhaps only indeed for ten seconds, you’ll
be able to show that spiritualist chap what a clever fellow
you are.”
The next morning, proceeding again to the asylum,
Larose was introduced to Dr. Benmichael, and this time
it was the latter who took him to where the professor
was seated, in the same place in the grounds.
But the interview was just as unsatisfactory as that of
the previous day. Someone had given the great man a big
brown-paper bag that had contained oranges, and, with
the fruiterer’s name upon it in big lettering, he was
pointing out to everyone who came near the rare and
beautiful markings upon his new orchid. To nothing
else would he give any thought.
“ And he may always continue like this, now,” com-
mented Dr. Benmichael. “At his age, the chances of
recovery are very poor.”
So Larose resigned himself again to disappointment
and, accompanied by Dr. Benmichael, was returning to
his car, when suddenly the patient who had been pointed
out to him as the professor’s cousin, the good-looking
man with the naval beard whom he had noticed staring
at him so hard the previous day, advanced up close and
planted himself right before them.
“ Excuse me. Dr. Benmichael,” he said very quietly,
“ but may I speak for a few moments alone ” —he
indicated Larose with his hand —“ to this gentleman ? ”
Larose stared hard at him. Where had he seen that
face before ? Where had he heard that voice ?
But if Larose stared hard, so did the doctor. It was the
first time the patient had ever addressed a remark to him
personally and he had not been even aware that the man
had got hold of his name. He frowned heavily.
F


“ What do you want, Mr. Winter ? ” he asked, “ This
gentleman is probably in a hurry.”
But Larose had suddenly become most interested. He
was realising what a talk with this cousin of the pro-
fessor might mean. He might just possibly pick up
valuable information from him. So he spoke up quickly.
“ Oh, I’m not in as great a hurry as all that. Doctor. In
fact I’d rather like a little chat with Mr. Winter, as he’s a
relation of my old friend.”
“ But do you know him ? ” queried the doctor sharply.
“ Have you met him before ? ”
“ No, I don’t know him,” smiled Larose, some
instinct prompting him not to disclose that the man’s
face seemed familiar. “ But Dr. Quail pointed him out
to me yesterday and told me who he was.” He nodded.
“ Yes, I’d like a talk with him, if I may.”
Just for a few seconds the doctor hesitated, and then
his face cleared. “ All right, then, Mr. Winter,” he said.
“ Take this gentleman over to the bench by the wall.”
He smiled. “ Tell him what sort of treatment we give
you here.”
So Larose and the bearded Mr. Winter strolled off
together, but they went a little farther than the bench the
doctor had indicated, for Mr. Winter pointed out there
was more shade upon a garden seat under some trees.
Then Mr. Winter, to Larose’s great surprise, in the
most natural manner possible, asked him for a cigarette.
“ I’m afraid I shall have to come upon you for the match
as well,” he went on with his eyes twinkling, “as we
patients are not allowed to possess any.”
Then, to Larose’s absolute amazement, he said
sharply: “Now please don’t show any signs of being
astonished, for that doctor is watching us. I’m going to
startle you, but don’t be nervous, as I’m quite sane.” He
spoke without moving his lips. “ Just lean back, if you
kindly will, and pretend to look bored as I talk to you,
or, better still, shift yourself round sideways so that


Benmichael can’t see your face. Ah, that’s better. Keep
just like that.”
Larose would have liked to whistle. He didn’t think
he had ever been more astonished in his life. This
supposed insane creature was taking command of the
situation like a general planning the strategy of a great
battle !
Mr. Winter went on. “ Yes, I’m quite sane now. I’ve
been getting so for weeks, and recognising you, as I did
yesterday, put the finishing touch to everything. The
sight of you was like someone striking me a great blow.
It brought back all my memory.”
Larose held his breath for what was coming next.
Notwithstanding his emotion, Mr. Winter’s lips moved
only ever so little. “ Look here,” he said slowly, “ I want
to know what we two are doing in a private lunatic
asylum, masquerading under names that are not our own.
I heard both of those doctors address you as Mr. Watkins
and I’m supposed to be Mr. Winter.” He made the
slightest movement of his head. “ But we are not
Watkins and Winter ” —he paused a long moment —
“ you are Mr. Gilbert Larose and I am Sir Eric Roding of
Roding Hall. No, no,” he went on quickly, for Larose
had half risen to his feet in his amazement, “ don’t run
away. I tell you I’m quite sane now, however mad I may
have been, and I want you to help me as the great detec-
tive you once were.”
He raised his voice ever so little. “ Good God, man,
you can’t deny who you are ! Why, I shot with you once
at Lord Deering’s the same day that Peter Wacks won
the Manchester November Handicap, and the news came
through as we were waiting together at the end of that
long wood. Don’t you remember, too, we had just
missed a good bird, because each of us had thought the
other would take it ? And you gave me some brown
sherry out of your flask.” He gripped Larose stealthily
by the arm. “ You don’t deny it, do you ? ”


Larose could hardly speak. His mouth was dry and
his tongue wanted to cleave to the roof of his mouth.
“ N-o-o,” he replied hesitatingly, “ but you’re ”
“ But I’m what ? ” interrupted Sir Eric sharply. He
gave Larose no opportunity to reply. “ But you’ve met
my wife ! And we’ve met yours ! ” He spoke almost
pleadingly. “ You recognise me, don’t you ? Of course
I know I’ve got a beard now and my hair is almost grey.
Also, I should say I’ve lost two stone, but still—come,
speak, man.”
Larose cleared his throat. “ Yes, I recognise you. Sir
Eric,” he said slowly, “ but you can understand my
bewilderment. I was told you were Professor Panther’s
cousin and ”
“ Bah ! ” snapped Sir Eric contemptuously. “ I’d
never seen the slobbering little devil —he sits opposite
me at meals—until I came here. I’d never heard of him.
I’m not his cousin. I have no blood relations at all. I
am the last of the Rodings, as you must know.” He took
out a handkerchief and mopped over his forehead. “ But
come, I mustn’t get excited, I can’t stand too much.”
He spoke very quietly. “ I want you to help me if you
will.”
Larose saw he was upon the verge of breaking down
and, reaching out, patted him kindly upon the shoulder.
“ Of course, I’ll help you,” he said reassuringly. “ There’s
been some dreadful mistake made somewhere, but I’ll see
you’re put right.”
“ Good man I ” ejaculated Sir Eric, and he bit hard
upon his lip to restrain his tears.
“ Have another of my cigarettes,” smiled Larose,
“ and as we’re sfnoking you can tell me all you can
remember about your coming here.”
And so the baronet told his tale, but it was not a very
long one, for there was still a wide gap in his memory,
and between the last moments of his illness when at
Roding Hall and the first feeble gropings of his mind


when he began to realise he was in a lunatic asylum, he
remembered nothing. And all the time he spoke with the
least possible movement of the muscles of his face and
with his eyes never long away from Dr. Benmichael,
who was chatting with other patients upon the lawn.
“ And it was only when I saw you yesterday,” he went
on shakily, “ that my memory rushed back to me and I
knew who I was. Yours was the first face of my old days
that I had seen, it seemed, for years and years, and when
I saw you and heard your voice, it was as if a curtain had
been violently torn away, and my whole life as Sir Eric
Roding and before I succeeded to the baronetcy was
instantly clear and perfect to me in my memory ! ”
“ But hadn’t you remembered anything before ? ”
asked Larose.
“ Nothing about myself,” replied the baronet. “ I
didn’t know who I was or how I had come here, but I
had somehow come to know quite well that I was one of
the patients in a lunatic asylum, and I had a horrible feel-
ing, too, that everyone here was my enemy and I must
not let them know I was regaining my sanity.” He spoke
with intense feeling, “ Yes, I have that feeling still, and
I keep asking myself who placed me here, why do I
never get any letters or parcels as the others do, why
does no one ever come to see me, and why does that
Benmichael always look at me more than at anyone else.”
He leant back and, closing his eyes, drew in a deep
breath, not very far from a sob. “ Oh, please find out
everything about me, Mr. Larose, or I shall become
insane again—and that time perhaps for ever.”
Larose thought like lightning. He had not the slightest
doubt now that the man before him was in truth Sir Eric
Roding. Certainly he and the baronet had been only
slight acquaintances and if he remembered rightly they
had only met twice, but he never entirely forgot a face,
and this man’s was unquestionably that of the master of
Roding Hall.


But Sir Eric Roding was dead ! He had read his
obituary notice in The Times. He had seen the account of
his funeral in the newspapers and he remembered scan-
ning through the names of the many distinguished
Service people who had been present at the graveside.
Why, there had even been a photograph in one of the
Society papers of the funeral cortege arriving at the
little churchyard of Ashleigh St. Mary—a-ah, but an
almost incredible thought surged through him. A
churchyard again. The baronet brought to the asylum
by Professor Panther ! The professor telling everyone
he was his cousin and no one had heard of this cousin
before ! Good God I what did it all mean ?
Then, instantly, he made up his mind. In a perfectly
frank and open manner Sir Eric must be told at once that
he was supposed to be dead, but at the same time he
must be convinced of the need of the utmost secrecy
about it. No one in the asylum must be taken into his
confidence, and no one must know Sir Eric had recovered
his memory.
He spoke sharply. “ Listen to me. Sir Eric. There is
some great mystery here, but you must trust me to put
everything right. Now, pull yourself together, as the
brave soldier that you arc, and if Dr. Benmichael is
watching you, don’t let him see the slightest change of
expression upon your face.” He smiled reassuringly and
went on as if he considered the matter was something in
the nature of a joke. “ You are supposed to have died of
that illness last year, and everyone believes you to be dead.
They think you were buried and ”
“My God! my God I ” whispered the baronet
hoarsely. “ I died and I was buried ! ” His face went
ghastly pale. “ Does my wife think that ? ”
“ Of course, like everybody else, she does,” smiled
Larose, “ and it will be the most wonderful happiness of
her life when you are taken back to her. My wife saw
her in Ipswich a little while ago and said she was looking


quite well, although very sad. But all that sadness will
pass now.” He spoke in most businesslike tones. “ But
you see, Sir Eric, we must go slowly. We mustn’t give
her a great shock. We must prepare her mind for your
coming back. We must make no stupid blunder now.”
“ But how did I get here ? ” asked Sir Eric breath-
lessly. “If I was supposed to have died, then I must
have been buried ? ”
“ No, no, not necessarily,” prevaricated Larose. He
put the utmost assurance into his tones that he could.
“You were only in a trance when they all thought you
dead. Then you probably got out of the coffin before it
was screwed down, and wandered away. You couldn’t
remember anything and you didn’t speak a word, so
that’s how you probably came to be here,” He nodded.
“ All that mysterious past will have to be cleared up, and
you can trust me to do it.”
“ Well, what are you going to do now ? ” asked Sir
Eric weakly. He closed his eyes again, and he passed his
hand over his forehead. “My brain’s all fogged and I
can’t think properly after what you’ve just told me, but
one thing I know : I don’t want everyone in the country
to learn I’ve been put away in an asylum,”
“ No, of course you don’t,” agreed Larose promptly,
“ and so whatever you do you must not let anyone here
know who you are. If you tell them, they won’t believe
you and will only think it’s part of your illness.” He
nodded solemnly and lowered his voice. “As Mr.
Winter you came here and as Mr. Winter you shall go
away. See ? ”
“ Yes,” whispered Sir Eric. His voice shook a little.
“ You are a good friend, Mr. Larose, and I shall never be
able to repay you.”
“ Oh, but I’m being repaid already,” laughed Larose.
“ You will be under no obligation to me, for this is one
of those mysteries that I love and I shall get all the
reward I want by solving it.” He rose to his feet. “ Now,


I’ll go straight off to Ashleigh St. Mary and on the quiet
find out everything about your supposed death and how
things are going on at Roding Hall. Then I’ll come back
here to-morrow and we’ll have another talk and decide
what we must do.”
“ But perhaps Dr. Benmichael won’t give us another
chance of talking together,” said Sir Eric uneasily. “ I
tell you I’m afraid of him and he didn’t want me to speak
to you just now.”
“ He certainly wasn’t too willing,” agreed Larose,
“ but never mind him. I’ll manage it somehow.” He
spoke most emphatically. “If I’m not able to speak to
you to-morrow, I will the next day or the next.” He
smiled. “ I have another patient I’m interested in here,
so I have always a good excuse for coming.”
He rose to his feet and then, for a few moments, stood
hesitating. “ Oh, one thing more. Now, the doctor
may want to know what we’ve been talking about for so
long, so if he says anything I’ll tell him you asked where
you’d met me before ; then when I couldn’t tell you, you
shut up like an oyster, and were no more interested in me
than to smoke my cigarettes. Good-bye, here is the
gentleman coming over to us,” and he strolled off to meet
the principal of the asylum.
Dr. Benmichael eyed him curiously as they came up.
“ Not a very sociable chap that! ” exclaimed Larose at
once. “He wanted to know where we’d met before and
when I couldn’t tell him, he hadn’t any interest in any-
thing except my cigarette case. He was decidedly pecu-
liar. He asked the same question several times and each
time as if it were the first time he was asking it.”
It seemed to Larose that there was a look of some
relief upon the doctor’s face, as he commented smilingly:
“ Mental patients often get strange fancies like that,
especially when they’re getting better, and this particular
one is decidedly getting better. Indeed, what exactly he’s
able to take in now we don’t know. His mind’s clearing


but he’s secretive with it.” He looked sharply at Larose.
“ By the by, have you met any of the professor’s other
relations ? ”
Larose shook his head. “ No, never, and I have not
seen him for some years.”
Larose drove away from the asylum with his brain in a
perfect whirl of excitement. By blind chance he had
stumbled upon one of the greatest mysteries of his life, a
dreadful tragedy of the living, where he had only been
seeking to unravel the secrets of the dead.
Then how had Professor Panther been brought in
contact in the first instance with the young master of
Roding Hall, and why was it he had become on such
intimate terms with a perfect stranger all at once ? He
had never met the baronet in his pre-burial days, yet he
had suddenly and unexpectedly received him into his
house in the middle of the night, proclaiming him to
everyone the next day as his sick cousin, but refusing to
let anyone but the doctor see him or have speech with
him ! Everything had suggested secrecy and mystery
exactly as if the professor were in deadly fear of his
supposed relation being recognised as somebody else, if
outsiders were admitted.
Yes, the two could have been brought in contact in
only one way. The professor’s accomplice, in rifling the
Roding vaults to obtain the head of a dead man, had been
faced with the dreadful predicament of having to deal
with a living person, who had been buried alive, but who,
with the opening of the coffin, had awakened suddenly
from his trance. Then rather than commit absolute
murder, or for some reason in fear of his grave-violating
proclivity being found out if he left the awakened man
where he was, he had carried him straight away to the
professor, leaving it to the latter to get out of the diffi-
culty as best he could.
In the meantime, and indeed, long after Larose had
driven away. Dr. Benmichael had been thinking hard


about this Mr. Winter too. Larose had been quite right
when he had agreed with Sir Eric that the doctor had
not been too pleased when his patient had suddenly
planted himself in their way and asked for a private
conversation with this chance visitor to the asylum.
It happened that the doctor was particularly not want-
ing this man, known as Mr. Winter, to be brought in
contact with outsiders, for he was regarding him as
liable at any moment to bring an unenviable notoriety
upon the asylum. He was sure that sooner or later some
scandal would eventuate as to the manner in which this
patient had come to be received as an inmate of the
institution, as he had been aware for some time now that
the man was no relation of Professor Panther’s and that
therefore false statements had been sworn when the
receiving order had been petitioned for.
He had not been altogether surprised to learn of this
deceit, for, from several little things, he had been inclined
to be suspicious from the very first that the professor
had been lying about the relationship. Then when the
latter had himself become of unsound mind, his sus-
picions had been confirmed in a most disconcerting
manner.
Miss Panther, the professor’s sister, had come down
post-haste from Edinburgh to see her brother, and on the
following day, had actually accompanied him upon his
short journey to the asylum. When the matter of
another of her relations being already an inmate there
was referred to, she had been astounded to hear of it,
denying most emphatically that they had any cousins at
all. Mr. Winter had then been brought in for her to see
him and she had said instantly she had never set eyes
upon him in all her life before.
Whereupon Dr. Benmichael had pointed out the great
unpleasantness that would ensue to everyone if it became
known what her brother had done, and, very frightened
at the mystery of everything, Miss Panther had readily


agreed to preserve silence. Fortunately, she and Dr.
Benmichael had been alone whilst the matter was being
discussed and so no one else in the asylum and none
among the professor’s circle of friends had learnt any-
thing of the fraud that had been perpetrated.
So things were up to the day of Larose’s second visit
to the asylum, everyone but the doctor continuing to
believe that Mr. Winter was Professor Panther’s cousin,
and the doctor himself always on tenterhooks either that
the police would arrive upon unpleasant business or that
the patient himself would recover his memory and then—
well, no one knew what would happen then.
Dr. Benmichael strolled over to the bench under the
trees where Sir Eric was still sitting. “ Well,” he asked
cheerily, “ and what did your friend say to you ? ”
The baronet’s face was wooden and without expression,
“ He wasn’t my friend,” he said after long consideration.
“He wouldn’t give me any matches.” The doctor
moved away, frowning to himself that if any trouble were
coming it would be coming soon, as his patient was now
able to reason.


CHAPTER V
THE ESCAPE FROM THE ASYLUM
THE night of that same day upon which Sit
Eric Roding had disclosed his identity to
Larose, one of the attendants of the asylum, a
superior-looking man of about thirty, reported
to Dr. Benmichael that Mr. Winter had eaten very little
that day.
“ He took his breakfast, Doctor, but he hardly touched
his lunch and his dinner and he had no afternoon tea at all.”
“ Hum ! ” remarked the doctor thoughtfully, “ but
does he seem all right in other ways ? ”
“ Quite all right, except that he’s taken to staring at
Professor Panther a lot. He hardly took his eyes off him
to-night at dinner. Oh, but there’s another thing. He
was very busy with the newspapers to-day, and was
looking at the photographs in this week’s Sketch , I should
think, for a good half-hour.”
The doctor considered for a few moments. “ Well,
keep your eye on him and notice what he does.” He
nodded. “ We can be quite certain he’s getting better, but
I believe he’s now trying to keep us from knowing how
great the improvement is.”
“ Very good. Doctor,” said the man, “ I’ll report to
you again to-night.”
“ Yes,” frowned the doctor when the man had left
the room, “ there’s going to be trouble there soon. All
the cards will have to be put down, and, as likely as not,
it will be said that, as a friend of Panther, I connived at
the whole irregularity.” His frown merged into a scowl.
“ Damn the little wretch. I’d like to know what dirty


business he was engineering that night when this Winter
fellow came to him ! ”
The hours of darkness that followed were very dreadful
ones for the baronet, and try as he would, for many hours
he could not fall asleep. He tossed and turned and was
tormented with a thousand anguished thoughts.
He thought of the great happiness that had been his
up to the very hour when he had been taken ill. His
beautiful young wife had been only a six months’ bride
and he had been as passionately fond of her then as at
that thrilling moment when they had exchanged their
first wedded kiss ! He had had his friends around him
and life had been heavy with the promises of more
happiness and joys to come.
And now —he had been coffined as a dead man ; he
was but a memory to the woman he had loved so well,
his friends had forgotten him and, whatever happened,
the shame of the madhouse would be upon him for ever
and ever, as long as he lived.
And all the time, apart from his repinings, one terrible
idea had seized his mind, for he was sure now it had been
no sickness that had caused him to sink into that trance!
It had not been the poisons of his fever that had laid him
cold and rigid as a dead man ! No, his lapse into uncon-
sciousness and his seeming death had been deliberately
brought about by someone who had given him a deadly
drug, and he knew from where this drug had been
obtained.
He had not the slightest doubt about it, but he would
tell Larose everything and Larose would find out who
his would-be murderer had been.
A great wave of hope surged through him as he
thought of Larose and he took a grip of life again. Then
at last, sheer exhaustion taking possession of him, he
dropped off to sleep in the sure confidence that Larose
would speedily obtain his release from the asylum in
some way, and with as little publicity as possible.


And certainly the next morning it was in Larose’s mind
that the departure of the baronet from his place of deten-
tion should be accomplished as secretly as possible. It was
not only of Sir Eric he was thinking, but also of his wife.
Larose had spent the greater part of the previous day
in Ashleigh St. Mary and had both seen and had speech
with Lady Roding, making his slight acquaintance with
her the excuse to call in at Roding Hall and look at some
very beautiful Gloire de Dijon roses that, he had heard in
the village, she had grown.
She had welcomed him graciously, seeming quite
pleased to see him, but he had been touched by the
unnatural quietness of her demeanour. Certainly she
had lost nothing of her beauty and was quite as lovely as
he remembered her before, but it was evident her grief
was still with her and that she was very lonely.
He had felt a most profound sympathy for her, and,
realising the tremendous interest that would be aroused
everywhere when it became known that the baronet was
alive, he wished to save her from the distress of realising
that everyone would know that her husband had been—
and still was—an inmate of an asylum for the insane.
So it was in a very determined frame of mind that he
drove up to the asylum gates. He parked his car just
outside, explaining to the lodge-keeper who admitted
him that he was not driving up to the house this time,
as seeing him leave in his car had been very upsetting to
the friend he came to visit.
It was quite early when he walked up the drive, but as
the morning was warm and sunny a number of the
patients were already about in the grounds.
He saw no sign anywhere of Dr. Benmichael, but Dr.
Quail was there and apparently about to take part in a
game of tennis. Out of the corner of his eye he saw Sir
Eric lying back in a deckchair under the trees.
He went up and shook hands with Dr. Quail. “ No,
Doctor,” he said, “ don’t let me prevent your game.


I’ll just look about for my friend and have another shot
at making him remember me.”
“ But he’s not out here this morning,” returned the
doctor. “ He seems to be in for a bad cold, and so we’re
keeping him indoors.”
“ Bad luck I ” smiled Larose. “ Then I’m afraid I’ll
have to give him up this journey, as I expect to leave
Cambridge this afternoon.” He looked round carelessly.
“ Ah, there’s his cousin. I’ll go and try to make him talk
to me. Dr, Benmichael introduced us yesterday.”
So moving off from the tennis court, he approached Sir
Eric, who made no attempt, however, to rise from his chair.
“ Now you listen most carefully to what I have to
say,” said Larose sharply, “ for I shall only stop a minute
as I don’t want that Benmichael to see us together.” He
spoke quickly. “ I’ve thought it all over and the only
way to avoid a horrible publicity is for you to escape
secretly from here. I’ll get you out over the wall and then
you shall come and stop with me until everything has
blown over.” He regarded the baronet intently. “ You’re
game, aren’t you ? ”
“Of course I am,” replied Sir Eric stoutly. He
smiled a wan smile. “ Anything short of murdering some
of the attendants.”
“ Well, are you out in the grounds after dinner ? ”
asked Larose.
“ Yes, if it’s fine, until it begins to get dark.”
“ Then about ten minutes before you think you will be
called in,” went on Larose, “ slip away to that little
summer-house in the corner there. Take some stones in
your pocket and, if there is no one near you, start at
once throwing them over the wall. I’ll be waiting on the
other side with my car bang up against the side of the
wall, and directly I see the stones falling. I’ll throw over a
knotted rope. You can climb a knotted rope, can’t you ? ”
“Yes, yes,” exclaimed Sir Eric, breathing hard in his ex-
citement, “of course I can. Physically, I’m quite strong.”


“ Well, you’re to pass the rope round the summer-
house and then throw the end back over the wall. This
end will be weighted, so you’ll have no difficulty. Then
scramble up as quickly as you can, and I’ll pull the rope
over again so that no one will know how you’ve escaped.
But you’ll have to be quick as lightning, and if you
manage it, wait until it is nearly dark. Now, don’t
bungle it, and if you can’t get there unnoticed to-night,
leave it until another night. I’ll be there every night
until I get you out. Now here’s a cigarette, and don’t
look so miserable.”
Larose took a good survey of the others in the grounds.
“ Why, goodness gracious ! ” he exclaimed. “ I think we
could almost risk it in open daylight. There seems to be
only Dr. Quail looking after everybody here.”
“ Oh, don’t you imagine that,” retorted Sir Eric
quickly. “ There are plenty of attendants about, but you
can’t tell them from the patients. That young fellow by
the tree there, in flannels and a blazer, is one, and that
tall, good-looking girl in blue by the nets is another.
None of the staff is in uniform and there are none of
them of a poor class. This must be a most expensive
place for people to be put away in, and ” —his voice
trembled—“ I keep on wondering who’s paying the
money to keep me here.”
“ Well, don’t think about it,” said Larose, “ and for
Heaven’s sake don’t let anyone see you’re upset or they’ll
probably keep an extra eye upon you.” He nodded en-
couragingly. “ Good-bye for the present. To-morrow you’ll
be in a very different place.” Strolling away, in a few min-
utes he was out of the grounds and driving off in his car.
The day was a long one for the baronet, but, buoyed
up now by hope, he was feeling ever so much better, and
after dinner that evening it was reported to Dr. Ben-
michael that he had been taking his meals properly.
Some little time before dark he proceeded in a round-
about way to the summer-house, and there, crouching


down at the back and with his heart beating fiercely,
waited for the light to begin to fail. Then, when in the
distance he saw the other patients preparing to go
indoors, he started throwing his stones, one after
another, in quick succession over the wall.
For a few moments nothing happened and a dreadful
fear surged through him that Larose had not come.
Then suddenly there came a whizz through the air and
the weighted end of a rope impinged with a sharp crack
upon the roof of the summer-house. He darted out and
grabbed hold of the rope. Running round the summer-
house, he threw the weighted end back over the wall.
In a few moments he felt the rope pulled taut and at once
began feverishly to pull himself up,
“ Here I am,” came a sharp voice when he had reached
the top of the wall. “ Hang on with your hands and wait
until I’ve got hold of your legs. That’s it. Now leave
go,” and he was gently guided down into the seat of an
open car.
Then like lightning Larose started to haul in the rope,
but to his horror it came only a very little way and then,
pull hard as he did, it would not move an inch farther.
“ And there goes all hope ! ” he exclaimed disgustedly,
“of them never learning how you’ve got away. This darned
rope’s caught somewhere and I shall have to leave it.”
But he was mistaken, for most unexpected assistance
was immediately forthcoming from the other side of the
wall. A man had glided suddenly out from behind a tree
and with a jerk of his arm had freed the rope where it
had caught in one of the feet of the summer-house.
Then, upon a last despairing pull from Larose, the rope
leapt forward and disappeared over the wall, the man
now crouching down in a listening attitude.
A few moments’ silence followed. At last the purr
of a started engine sounded in the night, and the man
glided back among the trees.
About a quarter of an hour later it was reported to
G


Dr. Benmichael that Mr. Winter was not to be found.
He had not come into the house and a hurried search
with electric torches round the grounds had revealed no
sign of him anywhere.
“ Nonsense ! ” exclaimed the doctor angrily. “He
must be about somewhere. I’ve just come up from the
lodge gates myself and know they’ve been shut, so he
can’t have got out anywhere.”
But a most systematic search both of the house and
grounds speedily convinced everyone that the patient
had escaped somehow, and Dr. Benmichael at once sent
out attendants to scour the nearby roads, whilst he him-
self got in touch with the Cambridge police.
“ But, of course, I want as little publicity as possible,”
he insisted. “ Just pass the call round for the tall man
I have described with the naval beard. He is quite
harmless and is afflicted only with a loss of memory.
Remember, his name is Harold Winter, but I don’t
expect for a moment that he’ll answer to it.”
In the meantime Larose had driven off like a shot from
a gun, and avoiding all the main roads, was soon deep
among the Ely marshes.
“ There’s not one chance in a thousand,” he com-
forted Sir Eric, “ of anyone stopping us now. You won’t
have been missed, say, for ten minutes, aud it’ll have
been another twenty before they are sure you are not in
the house or the grounds. Then they won’t look for you
far away. They’ll just think you’ve slipped out of the
gates, somehow, and will be wandering upon the roads
round about.” He pulled the car up as they came to a small
bridge. “ Still, we won’t take any chances, so out you
get and I’ll clip off that nice beard of yours. It’s the only
thing that would make it possible for anyone to recognise
you from a broadcast description.”
So, under the bridge and by the light of a torch, the
incriminating beard was quickly clipped away.
“ And now, in less than half an hour you’ll be in


Carmel Abbey,” said Larose. “ I’ve told my wife every-
thing and she is expecting you. You’ll have a small suite
of rooms all to yourself and, to minimise the chance of
your being recognised, only one of the maids will wait
upon you. We shall give out that you’re a friend of mine,
a Mr. Jocelyn, and that you’ve arrived with a bad chill
coming on, and so will have to keep to your rooms.”
Larose was as good as his word and the baronet was
soon partaking of sandwiches and a bottle of champagne
with his host and hostess. Mrs. Larose, who had been Lady
Helen Ardane before her marriage, was a beautiful woman
in the early thirties and Sir Eric regarded her admiringly.
“ Oh, but your husband is being kind to me ! ” he
exclaimed warmly. “ I am so grateful to him and regard
him as quite an earthly Providence.”
Mrs. Larose laughed merrily. “ But he’s being well
repaid,” she said, “ for he’s getting a great thrill out of
it,” She regarded her husband affectionately. “ Nothing
so pleases him as doing something that would get him
into bad trouble if he were found out.”
“ Now, you’ll go to bed at once,” ordered Larose
when the meal was over, “ and I’ll give you a sleeping
tablet so that you’ll get a good night’s rest. No more
talking for you now, but to-morrow I’ll hear your
tale and you shall hear mine.”
So the following morning he came bustling into the
room just as Sir Eric was finishing his breakfast.
“ Splendid! ” exclaimed Larose, “ you look quite fit
and although you may have temporarily aged a little, no
one who has ever known you could fail to recognise you
at once.” He raised his hand warningly. “ But listen—
no moving out of those rooms for a few days. Oh, I
know how you must be longing to meet your wife, but
it’s too risky to make the slightest movement until any
search that is being made for you has cooled off a bit.”
“ But they can’t have traced me here,” began the
baronet, “ and even if they have ”


“ They can at once invoke police assistance to get you
back,” interrupted Larose. “ Remember you are still
certified as being of unsound mind, and until fourteen
days have elapsed, according to the law, Dr. Benmichael
has the right to claim you without any further certifica-
tion. After those fourteen days he can’t take you back
unless you are certified again.” He shook his head. “ No,
no one can have actually followed us here, but what I’m
thinking of is the chance that someone in the asylum may
have recognised me when I was supposed to be that Mr.
Watkins yesterday. When making enquiries in Cam-
bridge about Professor Panther I was quite disconcerted
that several people recognised me and addressed me by
my proper name. So if anyone happens to mention to
Dr. Benmichael that they knew who I was, then, remem-
bering how suspicious he seemed when you asked to
speak to me alone, I’m half inclined to think he’ll put
two and two together and come up here with a search
warrant to go through the place.”
The baronet frowned. “ I told you I was always afraid
of the man.”
“ Yes, and there’s another thing to be considered,”
went on Larose. “ If the very slightest rumour of your
return becomes public, the newspapers will, of course,
jump at it as a most wonderful piece of news, and at once
broadcast anything about you they have on their files.
Then, if they reproduce one of your old photographs,
with your face still fresh in their minds, there is a good
chance that several in the asylum may recognise it as that
of the Mr. Winter who has just escaped so mysteriously.”
“All right,” sighed the baronet, “I leave myself in
your hands, but please don’t keep me from meeting my
poor wife a moment longer than can be helped.”
“ Well, now,” went on Larose, looking curiously at Sir
Eric, “ what exactly did you mean when you said to me last
night in the car that you were sure you had been drugged
and that your unconsciousness had not been a trance at all?”


“ I meant,” replied Sir Eric impressively, “ that at the
time of my illness there was a drug in one of my curio
cabinets in Roding Hall that would bring about just such
a state of unconsciousness as I fell into then and which
would induce a seeming death that might last for days.”
“ In one of your curio cabinets ! ” exclaimed Larose
incredulously. “ Then where did you get it from ? ”
“ A fakir, a religious mendicant, gave it to me once in
India,” said Sir Eric, “ under very peculiar circum-
stances.” He went on to relate a happening that had
occurred some five years previously when he had been
on the North-West Frontier of India.
He said that one night, when he had been on horse-
back a few miles out of Peshawar, he had come upon an
old beggar lying upon the roadside in great suffering from
a broken thigh, and at some little personal trouble to
himself he had procured an ambulance and seen him
taken into hospital. Then, interested in the old man, he
had visited him several times as he was getting better.
The beggar had seemed quite grateful in a stately and
majestic way, and, when about to leave the hospital, as a
parting present had given him a jar containing a small
quantity of some green paste. This paste, he had averred,
possessed some remarkable properties for the curing of
many diseases.
“ But he told me,” went on Sir Eric, “ that it was
dangerously strong, and although, amongst other things,
a sure remedy for dysentery, he warned me to never take
a piece bigger than half the size of a pea as one dose, or
I might become unconscious.”
“ And you believed him ? ” asked Larose.
Sir Eric hesitated. “ I didn’t, perhaps then, but I do
now.” His voice shook. “An instinct tells me, I feel
certain that when I was ill someone gave me that paste
and that is why it seemed to everyone that I was dead.”
“ Who knew you had the stuff ? ” asked Larose.
The baronet shrugged his shoulders. “ Oh, lots of


people. It was kept openly among my curios in a cabinet
with glass doors in the drawing room.” His voice rose
in his excitement. “ Why, only two days before I was
taken ill that last time I remember I was showing it to the
friends who were staying with me then. I had a house-
party at the Hall for the Newmarket July Meeting and I
remember the jar was handed round while the maids were
serving tea, so all the servants had probably heard about it
too.”
Larose was thinking hard. “And if when you go home,”
he said slowly, “ you find the jar is missing or the paste has
been taken out, you have sufficient belief in what that old
beggar told you to think it was his stuff that laid you out.”
“ I have,” said the baronet firmly. “ You see, Mr.
Larose,” he went on quickly, “ you never know who or
what those Indian fakirs are. They may be clothed in the
filthiest of rags and be verminous and most loathsome to
look at, but all the same they may be very high up in
their particular religious order and possessed of powers,
too, that our most distinguished scientific men would
envy. Of this particular fakir who gave me the paste, I
heard later that he could stop the beatings of his heart,
and also that he had once allowed himself to be buried
in a four feet deep grave for a whole week, without
coming to any harm.”
“ By taking this same drug ? ” asked Larose sharply.
“ Ah, I didn’t learn that,” said Sir Eric, “ but brooding
over what’s happened now ” —he lowered his voice
almost to a whisper—“ I think it must have been so.”
A long silence followed and then Larose woke from his
reverie and said briskly: “ Well, I will come back to
what you’ve just told me later. Now for my story, and
if yours has astonished me I am sure mine will astonish
you.” He eyed him intently. “ Do you know, my friend,
you owe your life to that Professor Panther who, at the
time when you were supposed to have died, was employ-
ing someone systematically to violate the graves of the


newly buried in order to obtain human brains as speci-
mens for his museum. Now don’t be shocked, for you
are well enough to be told that you were not only sealed
up in your coffin, but were actually lying in it when it
was carried down and left in the Roding vaults.”
“ My God ! ” exclaimed Sir Eric, with his face as
white as death, “ but how do you know ? ”
“ Well, you listen to my story,” smiled Larose, “ and
it is as strange and fantastic a one as the mind of anyone
could conceive.” Briefly, but leaving out no relevant
details, he proceeded to relate everything that had
happened from the coming of the husband of Alma
Carstairs to Carmel Abbey, to his, Larose’s, first visit
to Dr. Benmichael’s asylum.
Sir Eric listened in rapt attention, his horror at the
gruesome nature of the story being in part relieved by his
interest in the wonderful way in which Larose had
managed to pick up the trail, and follow it until it had
led him to the professor.
“ And so you see,” went on Larose emphatically,
“ every scrap of evidence I have got together goes to
prove that your return to consciousness came when the
leaden coffin was opened in the vaults. You were sup-
posed to have died on Monday, the 15 th of July last,
then upon the following Friday afternoon you were
buried, and in the small hours of the same night you were
brought secretly to the professor’s home, in a high fever
and a state of unconsciousness. You arrived in your
pyjamas and with bare feet, and not a scrap of outside
clothing came with you. I have spoken to one of the
maids who was with Professor Panther at the time, and
also to one of the nurses who was hurriedly engaged for
you the next morning, and they both vouch for those
facts. In the light of what I know now everything
suggests you had been lifted from a coffin and brought
to the professor’s, just as you had been when you had
been laid out for dead.”


“ And you believe,” said the baronet shakily, “ that
someone, opening my coffin that night to decapitate me,
found that I was alive and carried me off at once to the
professor ? ” He shook his head. “ Why should he have
done that ? Why should he not have left me where I was
and have avoided all the risks and anxieties that he knew
must follow ? ”
“ Ah ! ” exclaimed Larose sharply, “ that’s what I’ve
got to find out.” He nodded. “My belief is that the
violator that night had some very good reason for
believing that if it came out the coffin had been tampered
with, suspicion would at once fall upon him.” He
emphasised his point. “ You see, Sir Eric, if he had
left you, you would inevitably have died, and then,
your body decomposing, there would soon have been
most certain evidence that everything was not all right
down in the vaults. Your coffin was not going to be
bricked up until the following week, and by then the
smell would certainly have come up into the church, as
the big flagstone in the aisle there was only lifted up for
the coffin to be lowered down and is not cemented round
its edges. I have been into the church and particularly
noticed that.” He nodded again. “You must remember
that, before being placed in the wooden outer shell, your
body was hermetically sealed in that leaden coffin and
that, therefore, to get at your body ”
“ Hermetically sealed ! ” gasped the baronet. His eyes
opened very wide. “ Like that fakir’s body was when it
was buried under those four feet of stamped-down earth! ”
Larose drew in a deep breath and then whistled softly.
“ Jupiter ! and you may be right about that paste! ”
His voice was very solemn. “ So it is a murderer I shall
now have to look for as well as a violator of the dead ! ”
A short silence followed and then Larose said : “ But
you were fortunate in one thing, anyhow. As I say, the
masons weren’t starting to brick in the coffin straight
away, and whoever was coming after your body must


have learnt that, for it is hardly likely he would have
taken on the job if it meant pulling down a brick wall
and then having to build it all up again afterwards.”
“ Anyhow, he’d have had no difficulty in getting into
the vaults,” began Sir Eric. “ There is a door ”
“ Yes, yes, I know that,” said Larose, “ I went all over
the church the day before yesterday.” He continued to
speak in brisk and business-like tones. “ Now, our plan
of campaign is this. You must not be seen out of these
rooms for a few days, but at the earliest possible moment
I’ll go and tell Lady Roding and bring her to you, here.”
“ Oh, but what a dreadful shock it will be for her
when she’s told,” sighed the baronet. “ It’ll be enough
to drive her out of her mind when she realises I’ve been
buried alive.”
“ But I’ll tell her everything very tactfully,” said
Larose, “ and, once she’s united with you again, the
horror will soon pass. Then you’ll both have to remain
on here as our guests for some little time. If possible,
nothing must leak out until I’ve run down the party who
raided the vault and obtained from him a witnessed
statement that when he opened the coffin he found you
alive. We shall want his testimony to lay before the
Home Office when we approach them for an exhuma-
tion order to open the vault. So we’ll say nothing to
anybody until we get everything cut and dried, and then
we’ll go up to your lawyers and set them to work.”
He rose to leave the room and then stopped sud-
denly. “ But harking back to that jar with the green
paste, was the cabinet that contained it locked ? ”
“ No, never. The key was in it, but it was never
turned.”
“ And was the jar conspicuous ? I mean if anyone
had taken it, could you nodce without opening the
cabinet that it had gone ? ”
“ Oh, yes. It was of a striking peacock-blue colour,
and because of its size, always kept in front of the other


things. It was about the size of the bowl of a small
wineglass, but there was only a very little paste in it,
hardly a teaspoon, I should say.”
“ Well, this is what I want you to do,” said Larose,
“ and it will keep your mind from worrying. Make a
complete list of everybody who was in Roding Hall
upon that last day of your illness—guests, servants and
everyone. Write a little account about each one of them,
who they are, where they live, what are their occupa-
tions, and how long you have known them. Give their
ages as far as you can, as that is most important. Put
down everything you can think of, so that I can get some
idea as to their personalities.”
So that evening Sir Eric gave Larose quite a bulky
packet of papers. “ The dossiers of twenty-two people,”
he remarked grimly, “ and a lot of good it’ll do you.
There’s not a soul there who would wish me harm—
servants who have been faithful to my house for years,
and my guests all warm and trusty friends.”
“ Well, we’ll see,” nodded Larose. “ Remember, the
most dangerous enemy would always be the one we
were taking to be our greatest friend.”
The three of them sat down to dinner, for both
Larose and his wife were dining in the suite that had
been allotted to Sir Eric. The meal over, Larose strolled
over to one of the windows and looked out upon the
quickly gathering dusk.
Suddenly he turned to the baronet and said carelessly :
“ Now what do you say to coming with me for a little
ride ? It’s going to be a lovely night and I want a bit of
fresh air.”
Sir Eric at once expressed his delight, and in a few
minutes they were out upon the road and speeding
quickly along.
“ I like a bit of pace,” remarked Larose, “ and at this
time of night the roads are always pretty clear. I think
we’ll go through Thetford and on to the London road.”


It was a beautiful moonlight night and everything
stood out as clear as day, and at the speed they travelled
they had very soon passed through Bury St. Edmunds.
“ I know every inch of these roads,” remarked Sir
Eric with a big sigh, after one of the many long silences
that had ensued. His voice trembled a little. “ Of course
I’ve driven over them all with my wife.”
Larose made no comment, apparently being too
occupied in watching the road. Then when they had
passed through Stanningfield and he was accelerating
again, the baronet exclaimed suddenly : “ But where
are you going ? ” His voice rose in his excitement.
“ We are getting near my home ! ”
Instantly then Larose slowed down the car so that
they could converse the easier. “ And that’s where we’re
going,” he said laughingly. “ I’m taking you to fetch
your wife.”
Sir Eric was almost breathless in his emotion. “ But—
does—she—know—l’m coming ? ” he asked chokingly.
“ No,” replied Larose, “ but she knows I am. I rang
her up just before dinner and asked if I could come over
and see her soon after ten. I apologised for the lateness
of the hour, but I said I had a most wonderful surprise
for her, and when she learnt what it was I was sure
she would forgive me.” He went on solemnly : “You
see. Sir Eric, I thought it best to spring a quick surprise
upon you both, so that there would be as few dreadful
moments of suspense and waiting as possible.”
“ Yes, it was better,” murmured Sir Eric shakily,
“ but the suddenness was a great shock to me.”
“ And the suddenness may be a greater shock to her,”
snapped Larose, “ as she had no preparation at all.”
He spoke very sternly. “ Now, Sir Eric, the way you
first meet her may decide at once whether we are going
to take back with us a dazed and broken woman, or
one so radiant in her happiness that the shock of know-
ing you were entombed alive has altogether passed


her by. Meet her as if what has happened to you was
nothing. Make light of everything and dwell only on
the joys that lie before. Don’t show yourself a weakling
in any way.”
“ Good ! ” exclaimed the baronet, and his voice was
now steady as a rock. “ I needed to be braced up like
that.” He laughed brightly. “ Now, my good friend,
what exactly are we going to do ? ”
“ I’ll pull up the car a little way from the front door,”
replied Larose, “ and then go in and tell her. I’ll give
her no time to think and in about three minutes will
rush her out to you. Then I’ll leave you together for
ten minutes by my watch before coming out again. Then
she will go back into the house and get her clothes and
we’ll drive straight home to Carmel Abbey. Fortunately,
as she told me, she has no one at present staying with her,
and so there’ll be no explanations to be given to anyone,”
“ And of course I’m to say nothing about the asylum
now ? ” queried Sir Eric.
“ No, she’s not to learn that until later,” said Larose.
“ I shall just tell her that when some body-snatcher
took you out of the coffin he found you had completely
lost your memory and had no idea about anything or
who you were. Then you became very ill, and, although
you soon got strong and well again, you still remembered
nothing during all the months that followed, until you
recognised me in a nursing home two days ago and then,
suddenly, your memory came back. Now, pull yourself
together. Here we are. Oh, one thing more. Keep the
blinds down, of course, but leave all the lights up and
start talking to her at once. No silences at all until all
the shock has passed.”
He parked the car some twenty yards away to the side
of the house and, the butler answering the bell, was at
once admitted to the presence of Lady Roding, who was
sitting reading in a small room leading out of the lounge
hall. She rose up smilingly to greet him.


“Of course I’m very curious to know what you’ve
come for, Mr. Larose,” she said. “It must be very
important to bring you all the way from Carmel Abbey
at this time of night.”
“It is very important,” smiled back Larose. “So
important that, if need had been, I would have wakened
you up in the middle of the night to tell you. Now,
please sit down in that chair and lean back and make
yourself comfortable.” He took a good grip of himself
and went on : “ Now, in all my life, and it’s been a
pretty adventurous one, I have never known anything
so extraordinary as what I’m going to tell you. It’ll
give you something of a shock, but a very pleasant
shock, and you must keep your mind on the main thing
and not think of any of the details.”
“ Oh, how thrilling it all sounds,” laughed Lady
Roding. “Go on. I’m quite ready. I’ve got myself
well in hand.”
Then Larose rapped out, and his words came like a
stream of bullets from a machine-gun : “ Your husband
is not dead, Lady Roding. He is alive and perfectly well
and longing to see you. He was only in a trance when
he was put in his coffin, and some thieves, looking for
valuables, opened the coffin and, finding him alive,
hurried him a long way away. Then when he recovered
from the trance, it was found he had lost his memory
and he remained like that all the time until the day before
yesterday when I met him in a nursing home. The
shock of recognising me brought back all his memory,
and to-night he is as strong and well as he has ever been
in his whole life. He is waiting to see you.”
White as marble and as motionless as a graven image,
Lady Roding lay back in her chair. Her lips were parted
and it almost seemed that she had ceased to breathe.
Save for her eyes, that were held widely open and fixed
intently upon Larose, she was as a thing of death.
Larose took out a cigarette and lighted it. “ Yes,” he


went on carelessly, puffing with apparent great enjoy-
ment, “ it seems a most incredible thing, but there it is.
It’s true, and I’ve got him outside in my car waiting to
see you.”
Lady Roding found her speech at last, and a fierce
wave of colour surged back into her face. “ Outside ! ”
she gasped. “ You say he’s close here ? ”
“Of course I do,” laughed Larose. “ I wouldn’t
let him come in until I’d told you.” He rose up quickly,
and putting his arms under her shoulders, lifted her to
her feet. “ Come on, now. Be brave and no tears, even
when you’re in his arms. The car’s a little way from the
front door,” Chatting gaily all the time, he half led
and half carried her outside.
Sir Eric was standing by the side of the car, and
smoking a cigarette when they appeared.
“ Hullo, darling ! ” he exclaimed delightedly, making
his voice sound as natural as possible. “ Here I am, as
fit as a fiddle ! ” And dashing down his cigarette, he
sprang forward and lifted her into his arms.
“ But you get inside,” laughed Larose, pushing him
towards the car door, “ and remember I’m only going
to give you ten minutes. Good-bye until then.” And
seeing them into the car and closing the door upon them,
he hurried back into the house.
“By Jove,” he exclaimed, “that’s an awkward
business over ! ” His voice shook a little, “ But, oh,
the heaven those poor things must be entering into now 1 ”
Somewhat overcome by his emotion, he plumped him-
self down upon a settee in the lounge and blew his
nose vigorously and swallowed hard many times until
he felt himself again.
Then he suddenly became aware that the butler was
standing just before him with a very curious expression
upon his face. “ Where’s my mistress, sir ? ” asked the
man, quite respectfully but, as Larose sensed at once,
with a note of sharpness in his tones.


“ She’s outside, talking to someone in the car,” re-
plied Larose. “ She’ll be back in a minute.”
“ Thank you, sir,” replied the butler, and he walked
at once to the front door, with the evident intention of
opening it.
“ Here,” called out Larose peremptorily, “ she doesn’t
want you. She’s having a private conversation with a
friend.”
The butler spoke, quite respectfully as before, but
at the same time with a firmness as if he quite knew
what he was doing. “ But I want to see if she’s all right,
sir.”
Larose swore under his breath. Here was a complica-
tion he had not reckoned with. But he smiled genially.
“ It’s all right, my friend,” he said, “ quite all right, and
she wouldn’t be pleased at your interrupting her.” But
then, seeing the man was evidently still intending to go
outside, he added sternly : “You know all about me,
don’t you ? ”
“ Yes, sir, you were at Scotland Yard once.”
“ Well, you can trust me, can’t you ? ”
“ Oh, yes, certainly, sir,” said the butler readily,
“ but then where my young mistress is concerned I
have to put away my private feelings, knowing as a
servant who has served the family for more than thirty
years that it would have been my master’s wish that I
should look after her.” He hesitated, and then added
most apologetically : “You see, sir, except by reputa-
tion, you are a perfect stranger to me.”
Larose always prided himself that he was not a bad
judge of character, and now intently regarding the man
before him, he took an instant resolution. The butler
was evidently intending to go out to his mistress and,
even if he were forcibly prevented, would certainly
remain on in the hall and then, in a few minutes, seeing
his mistress return in obvious agitation, an explanation
of some sort would have to be given him. So it would be


far better, Larose argued, to tell him straight away and
make an ally of him, rather than leave him antagonistic
and suspicious.
“ Are you married ? ” he asked sharply.
“ Yes, sir, my wife’s the cook here.”
“ Oh, oh! ” exclaimed Larose rather hesitatingly.
“ She’s the cook here, eh ? ”
“ But she’s not here now, sir,” went on the man,
“ She went away yesterday on a three weeks’ holiday.”
“ Good! ” nodded Larose, “ then I’ll tell you some-
thing. Pull yourself together for a shock. It’s your master
Lady Roding is now talking to in the car. He didn’t
die at all, but was buried in a trance.” For the second
time within a few minutes, in quick staccato tones, he
proceeded to rattle off all that had happened to the
master of Roding Hall.
But now, if he had been expecting another incredulous
audience, he soon found he was very much mistaken,
for within half a minute the butler was excitedly snapping
his fingers together.
“ I knew there was something wrong ! ” he exclaimed
exultingly. “ I always said it wasn’t in nature for the
master to have died like that. His heart was as strong
as a bullock’s and he wouldn’t have cracked up like an
ailing child ! ”
Very quickly Larose told his tale to the end, and then
warned the butler most solemnly that on no account
must the slightest inkling of anything get out until they
were all ready with the evidence to substantiate Sir
Eric’s claim to be restored to the baronetcy.
His story finished, Larose looked at his watch and,
preparing to go back to the car, said sharply : “ Now,
no shaking and trembling when your mistress comes in
to get her things together. Take it as a matter of course
and as if you are not at all surprised.”
“But I can speak to the master, sir,” said the butler
eagerly.


“ Yes, of course,” nodded Larose, “ and with him,
too, be very careful how you appear. Tell him, as you’ve
just told me, that you are not very much surprised.”
Approaching the car, Larose was relieved to hear the
sounds of animated voices inside.
“ Come on, now,” he called out as he opened the
car door. “ I’m only going to give you another ten
minutes, Lady Roding, and then we must be on the road
again.” He spoke in matter-of-fact tones. “ I’ve told
your butler. I had to, for he was most suspicious about
what was going on and was insisting on coming out to
see if you were all right.”
Lady Roding sprang lightly from the car and clasped
one of Larose’s hands in both her own. “ Oh, you dear
man,” she exclaimed, “ how splendidly you’ve managed
everything! No, I didn’t faint, and I hardly even cried.
I took it, exactly as Eric does, as a homecoming after
an illness.” She squeezed his hand tightly. “ Oh, how
happy I am ! ”
“ Well, you go and be quick now,” laughed Larose.
“ We shan’t get back before midnight as it is.” When
she had tripped off, he said to the baronet: “ Magnifi-
cent, the way she has taken it.”
Sir Eric’s voice was husky. “ Yes, magnificent, but
I didn’t give her a chance to think.”
The butler came out excitedly to meet his master, and
Larose, slipping into the house again, made his way
quickly into the drawing-room.
Switching on the lights, one quick glance showed him
where the glass-doored cabinet was, and in a trice he was
bending down and looking at the little peacock-blue
glass which, because of its small size, was standing, as
Sir Eric had told him it would be, in front of everything
else.
He opened the door and then for a few minutes
hesitated, considering whether he must use great care
in touching the jar because of any possible finger-marks
H


upon it. But no, he told himself after a very brief
reflection, if anyone had gone to the cabinet to get at
the paste nearly a year before, it would be ridiculous to
expect to find finger-marks upon the jar now. From all
appearances, the contents of the cabinet were much too
well looked after not to have been dusted a score of
times and more since then. So he picked up the jar with
no ado and wrapping it in his handkerchief, thrust it
quickly into his pocket.
Well under the specified ten minutes, Lady Roding
reappeared again, carrying a small suit-case and a number
of things thrown over her arm.
Then came another surprise—and one for the baronet
this time.
“ I’m tired,” said Larose when Lady Roding had
settled herself comfortably down, “ and so if you don’t
mind I’ll get you to drive now.”
“Me ! ” ejaculated Roding in great astonishment.
“ Why, you know I haven’t touched a car for nearly a
year ! Do you think I shall be all right ? ”
“ Of course I do,” retorted Larose sharply, “ or I
shouldn’t be trusting my neck with you.” He laughed
happily. “ Besides, it’s not only my neck you’ll have to
take care of, but your wife’s as well. Yes, you drive and
I’ll sit back at my ease and have a little chat with Lady
Roding.”
Oh, wisdom of the serpent! Larose was intending that
the baronet should regain his self-confidence at once !
So, with a little moistening of his lips and with much
quickening of the beatings of his heart, Sir Eric took the
wheel and proceeded to start the car. At first he was
obviously nervous and muffed the changing of the gears,
but he quickly recovered himself and soon the car
began to glide smoothly but slowly along. Then before
they had gone a mile he was pressing hard upon the
accelerator. He gave a quick glance round at his com-
panions.


“ Oh, it’s grand to be driving again ! ” he exclaimed
enthusiastically. “ It’s like starting upon a great adven-
ture.”
“ Of course it is,” laughed Larose, “ and everything
now is going to be a great adventure for you both.”
And then all the way he talked continually, compelling
Lady Roding to answer questions and giving her no
time to think.
It was a quarter past twelve when they arrived at
Carmel Abbey, and all the lights, except one single one
in the big lounge hall, were extinguished.
“ Now, up you go at once,” said Larose cheerily, as
he helped Lady Roding out of the car. “ You’ll find a
nice little supper ready and a pint of my best champagne.
And you’re not to get up to breakfast. We shan’t
expect to see you before eleven o’clock.”
Having garaged the car, Larose proceeded very
quietly up to his own room, hoping to find his wife
asleep. But she had been reading and was wide awake.
“ All right, Gilbert ? ” she asked quickly, directly
he came into the room.
“ Quite all right, sweetheart,” he replied, and he
proceeded to tell her all that had taken place.
“ And that will surely be reckoned as one of your
good deeds, Gilbert,” she laughed, “ to atone for the
many bad ones of your wicked life. Yes, you can kiss
me if you like,” she went on as he got into bed, “ for
with all your faults I’m rather fond of you.” She sighed.
“ They say a woman always loves the bad man most.”
It was a long while before Larose got off to sleep,
for he was very troubled. He had opened the little jar
to find that there was only just the merest trace of any
green paste inside it. The jar had been scraped almost
clean.


CHAPTER VI
THE SECRET CHAMBER
FOR nearly a fortnight, lest anyone should come
enquiring after the baronet, Larose did not
leave the grounds of Carmel Abbey, and, as a
spectator of the radiant happiness of the two he
had united, he felt amply compensated for his enforced
inactivity.
By tacit agreement there had been no further mention
of the way in which Sir Eric believed his apparent
death had been brought about, the baronet being,
seemingly, quite content to revel in the perfect peace of
his surroundings and speculate no more upon who had
been responsible for the dreadful experiences he had
been through.
Nothing had appeared in any of the newspapers
about any patient having disappeared from Barnwell
Hall, and Larose was now strongly inclined to think
Dr. Benmichael must have some special reason for
avoiding all publicity.
On the twelfth day, however, after dinner Larose
announced his intention of going away the next morning
to try to pick up the trail of the man who had been the
one actually to open Sir Eric’s coffin.
“ But how can you possibly expect to find him, Mr,
Larose ? ” asked Lady Roding, who had long since
been told the whole story of how it happened that Larose
had come to meet her husband in Dr. Benmichael’s
asylum.
“ Oh, I shall get him all right through his motor-
bicycle,” replied Larose confidently. “ Everything


points to him living not very far from Thaxted, and he
must buy petrol somewhere. So I shall start enquiring
at all the garages for a man who is probably a gardener—
remember those two gardening papers that the Saffron
Walden police told me were in the suitcase ?—who runs
a motor-bicycle with, probably, a sidecar attachment.”
“ Well, it’ll be a long business,” said Sir Eric. “ Think
of the number of people who sell petrol nowadays, and,
apart from that, they mayn’t remember him I ”
“ But someone certainly will,” smiled Larose, “ for
it is an habitual customer I shall be enquiring for. A
customer who is a working man of some sort, and tall
and with long arms, from those shirts he bought. Also,
we think he lives by himself and has no gas or electricity
laid on.” He nodded. “ Yes, I’ve thought it all out and
reckon I’ll get on to him within forty-eight hours.”
And get upon the track of the grave-digger Larose
did, the very next day.
He had started from Carmel Abbey very early in the
morning with the view of making Thaxted his starting
point of inquiry, and then, if he learnt nothing there, of
taking a wide cast round the surrounding towns. He
was quite certain that information about a working
man with a motor-bicycle would soon be forthcoming
somewhere.
He intended to tell the story that, driving out the
previous day upon a road close to the place of his
enquiry, he had met a man coming towards him upon a
motor-bicycle and then, not half a mile after he had
passed him, had picked up a leather coat which the man
must have dropped. He could give no description of
the motor-cyclist, beyond that he had looked like a
working man and was fairly tall.
At Thaxted he drew a complete blank, and all the way
down to Great Dunmow and also in that town itself
he could get no news he wanted. No one seemed to
have, as an habitual customer, a working man with a


motor-cycle, who occasionally travelled about with a
suit-case on his carrier. Plenty of chance customers
might have answered to the description, and especially
young fellows at week-ends, but nobody could think of
any local person to whom the leather coat might
belong.
After Great Dunmow, bearing in mind that the three
places, Little Easton, Ashleigh St. Mary and Monks
Arden were all not very distant from Thaxted, he turned
eastward to Braintree, so that he should not be circling
too far round. At Braintree he met with no more
success, but continuing on to Halstead to enclose the
circle, he was greatly heartened when, at the very first
garage he enquired, the proprietor hazarded the guess
that the owner of the coat might be a man called Joel
Daunt.
“ He’s got a leather coat,” he said, “ but I’ve not
heard tell he’s lost it.”
“ And who is he and where does he live ? ” asked
Larose, and he was electrified when the garage man
replied : “He looks after the churchyard at Monks
Arden, about eight miles from here, between Great
Bardfield and Wethersfield. He’s the sort of caretaker
of the church, too, and works for the old clergyman
there. His house is in the churchyard itself, right against
one of the walls.”
Larose’s heart gave a big bump, but he repressed all
signs of excitement. “ Has he been here lately ?” he
asked.
The man shook his head. “ No, I haven’t seen him
for some weeks now, but he generally gets his petrol
here, because I sold him his outfit a couple of years
back and keep it in repair for him.”
“ Well, I’ll go and see him,” said Larose. “ He’s
a big, tall fellow, isn’t he ? ”
“ Tall and slight,” answered the man, “ and very dark.”
He laughed. “ A bit queer-tempered, but a good chap


to do business with, for he always pays cash for anything
he has.” He nodded. “ He does beautiful carvings, too,
and sells his work all over the neighbourhood.”
Expressing his thanks for the information, Larose
drove away in a very exultant frame of mind.
“ Monks Arden, where Esther Haverhill was buried ! ”
he ejaculated delightedly. “Of course, of course, I
ought to have gone there first! So often it is the correct
solution of a puzzle, the very simplest one ! ” He nodded
grimly. “ Well now. I’ll just go and have a look at this
Mr. Joel Daunt, and make up my mind how best to
deal with him.”
Arriving at Monks Arden, he found it was only a
very small village, with one inn, one little general shop
and barely a score of houses all told. The vicarage,
adjoining the churchyard, was the only building, save
the church, of any good size at all. The church itself
stood upon a slight elevation and was a conspicuous
object for many miles round.
Parking his car near by, he walked into the church-
yard and proceeded to stroll round casually, as if he
were interested in the inscriptions on the gravestones,
a number of which were very old, going back for
hundreds of years. There was no sign of any gardener
about, the only other person in the churchyard being
a girl about nineteen or twenty, in deep mourning, who
was watering some flowers upon what was evidently
a very recent grave. He noted with interest a small stone
house in a corner at the junction of two high walls.
The walls were high and of great thickness and, like the
house, looked very old.
He walked along the well-kept paths between the
graves to find where Esther Haverhill had been buried.
Her grave was by some beautiful sweet-smelling lilac
shrubs and the headstone upon it was a broken column
of the whitest marble. Upon the base of the column was
inscribed :


“ Here lies the body of
Esther Haverhill
who passed away in the twenty-
third year of her life on the
eighteenth day of November one thousand nine hundred
and thirty-five.
* She doth not sleep. She hath awakened from
the dream of life ’.”
“ Here lies the body of Esther Haverhill,” he repeated
whisperingly. He shook his head. “ No, not all of you,
Esther, for part of you is in a glass jar in an ugly white-
washed room in Cambridge, and Heaven comfort the
man who loved you, if he shall ever come to know ! ”
He sighed deeply. “ Ay, what unhappiness it will bring
to a number of good souls, if all that has happened
gets out.”
He approached the girl who was still busy at the grave,
and, to open a conversation with her, raised his hat and
asked who was the incumbent of the church. She told
him and then, to turn the conversation into the channel
he wanted, he remarked how beautiful were the flowers
she was attending to.
“ But then,” he added admiringly, “ all the flowers are
beautiful here. This churchyard is very well looked
after.”
“ Yes, we are fortunate in having a very good gar-
dener here,” she said. “He takes great pride in all his
work.”
“ And I suppose he gives all his time to the church-
yard ? ” suggested Larose.
“ Oh, no,” said the girl, “ he looks after the church
as well. He does all the dusting and cleaning, and besides
that ” —she sighed as she glanced down at her flowers —
“ he digs the graves ! ”
Larose nodded understandingly. “ I saw that there is
a new one being dug the other side of the church, too,”


he said, and then he asked curiously : “ But surely you
don’t get many burials here now ? ”
The girl shook her head. “ No, very few ” —she
sighed again—“ but when they do come, they always
seem to come together.” Her voice trembled. “Last
week there was this one, my mother’s, and then to-
morrow afternoon a very old inhabitant of the village is
being buried. That is his grave there you saw being dug
now.”
They chatted on for a few minutes and then the girl
said, “ But if you’ll excuse me, I’ll have to go and prac-
tise now. I play the organ here.” With a little bow
and a sad smile she walked off into the church.
There being no one else in the churchyard now, Larose
walked over and had a look at the small house which he
knew must be the grave-digger’s. It apparently consisted
of only two rooms, and he tapped gently upon the door,
ready with some excuse if the grave-digger should open
it. Then getting no answer, he tried the handle. But it
was locked and he had to content himself with looking
through the window of a room where the blind was not
drawn. He got, however, little for his pains, as the late
afternoon was dark and gloomy and he could not see
clearly into the room. “ Well, the lock of the door
wouldn’t trouble me,” he told himself. “ So I’ll find out
in the village at what time to-morrow the funeral will be
keeping our friend busy and then I’ll chance it and get
in and have a look round.”
Approaching the churchyard gates, one of which was
half open, he met a tall man in leggings and with a spade
upon his shoulder about to come in, and knew instantly,
from the description given him in Halstead, that it was
the grave-digger. The man made no attempt to make
way for him, but pushed in first unceremoniously, not
rudely or offensively, but as if his thoughts were very far
away.
Larose took a good look at him as they passed.


“ Hum! ” he commented, “ nothing quite like what I
expected ! Darned ugly, but not really vicious and cer-
tainly not weak. Quite intellectual in a way, and a
dreamer living in a world of his own, and none too happy
about it either.”
Not intending to return home that night, as he had
told them at Carmel Abbey to expect him back only
when they saw him, he put up at an hotel in Great
Dunmow and the next morning called at Roding Hall.
He had very carefully gone through the list of the
people who had been under the roof of Roding Hall
the last night of the baronet’s illness, and was thinking
it would be just as well to ask a few questions about
some of the guests of the hall butler.
The butler answered the door to his ring and, recog-
nising Larose, at once asked eagerly, “ And how are
they, sir ? Are they quite well ? ”
“ Perfectly well,” replied Larose, “ and very happy.
I expect they will be home soon now, and then every-
thing can be made public.” He looked sharply at the
butler. “ Anything happened here ? ”
“ Nothing particular, sir,” replied the man, “ but, of
course, everyone has been curious about her ladyship hav-
ing gone off so suddenly. There have been a lot of calls
over the telephone.”
“ But of course you’ve told them nothing,” said
Larose.
“ Only what you told me to say, sir,” replied the man,
“ that her ladyship has gone off on a motoring tour
with a friend and it is not certain when she will return.”
His face lit up with animation. “ Oh, one gentleman, a
Mr. Miles Hellingsby, who’s been here, was very persistent
and wanted to know where I was forwarding her letters.
I told him I wasn’t forwarding them at all, but I knew
he didn’t believe me and, the next morning, I found out
he had gone afterwards to the post office here in the
village and asked them if they knew where she was.”


He chuckled with amusement. “ So it was a good thing
I had done as you told me and cycled every night into
Long Melford to post them.”
“Oh ! oh ! ” exclaimed Larose, “ and this Mr.
Hellingsby is one of the gentlemen who was staying
here when Sir Eric was supposed to have died ? ”
“ Yes, sir, he and Mrs. Hellingsby were both here
then.”
“ And she is much the elder of the two, isn’t she ? ”
went on Larose.
The butler looked very solemn. “ She was, sir, but
she is dead now. She met with a terrible accident and
was drowned just before last Easter.”
“ Drowned ! ” ejaculated Larose. “ Where was she
drowned ? ”
“At Eastbourne, sir. She went out for a sail along
with a lot of others in an excursion boat, and a big
steamer cut their boat in two. I think about twenty
people were drowned,”
Larose nodded. “ I remember it. It was the sailing
boat, Maid of Sussex, and the passengers were only being
taken out for a short sail.”
A short silence followed, and then Larose asked :
“ And since his wife died has this gentleman come here,
before he called the other day ? ”
“ Oh, yes, sir,” replied the butler. “Of course he’s
never stayed here since Mrs. Hellingsby died, but he’s
come a few times to see her ladyship.”
“He was a great friend of Sir Eric, wasn’t he ? ”
asked Larose.
“ Yes, sir,” said the butler, “ a very great friend. They
went shooting a lot together and to many race meetings
as well.” He hesitated a moment. “ But the friendship
was not an old one, sir. Sir Eric had only known him
for about a year.” He looked intently at Larose. “He
is a very handsome man, sir.”
“ And what do you mean by that ? ” asked Larose


smilingly. “ Why do you mention he is very hand-
some ? ”
The butler looked most embarrassed. “ W-e-11, you
see, sir,” he stammered after a long hesitation, “ all the
ladies notice how handsome he is and we here were
half afraid he might ” —another long hesitation followed,
and then the butler blurted out —“ take Sir Eric’s place.
Everyone has seen he’s a great admirer of her ladyship.”
“ Oh, that’s it, is it ? ” commented Larose. His smile
hid the grim purpose of his next question. “ And why
should any of you have been what you call * afraid ’
about it ? ”
“We don’t particularly like him, sir. We in the
servants’ hall don’t think him genuine,” said the butler
decisively. As if suddenly realising he ought not to be
criticising any of his master’s friends, he went on quickly :
“ But he has always acted with us, sir, as a perfect
gentleman, and I really oughtn’t to be saying anything
about him to you now.”
“ But come,” said Larose persuasively, “ these are
not ordinary times, remember, and I have myself been
asking your master about all his friends.” He spoke
sharply : “ Tell me what you mean by saying you don’t
think him genuine.”
“ Well, it’s about Mrs. Hellingsby,” said the butler
reluctantly. “He was always very kind to her in front
of people, but when they had been alone in their bed-
room, Emily, she’s one of the housemaids, sir, has two
or three times heard him speaking a bit sharply to her ”
his voice hardened—“ and more than once I have seen
him give her a look that he wouldn’t have liked her
ladyship to see.”
“ Hum ! ” remarked Larose again, “ and Mrs. Hel-
lingsby was very much older than he was, wasn’t she ? ”
“ Yes, sir, and a very plain lady, too.”
They talked on for quite a long time and then, enjoin-
ing upon the butler complete secrecy on the subjects


of their conversation, Larose bade him good-bye, and
drove thoughtfully away.
The funeral at Monks Arden was not to be until half-
past three, and so Larose put in some time in going over
the Ashleigh St. Mary church again, before calling at
the village inn for bread and cheese.
He partook of his refreshment in the little sawdusted
bar and found the landlord a pleasant and chatty com-
panion.
“ Beautiful old church you’ve got here,” said Larose.
“I see a great number of Rodings have been buried in it.”
“ All of them for the last three hundred years,”
nodded the landlord ; he looked very solemn. “ But
there’ll be no more buried here any more. Sir Eric,
who died last year, was the last of them all and there are
no others to come. Bad luck it is, for the Rodings were
very fine gentlemen.”
“ But there’s still Lady Roding,” said Larose, “ and
I suppose she’ll be buried in their vaults, too.”
The landlord shook his head. “ Not she. She’s a
very pretty little lady and as she’s only twenty-two she
is sure to marry again. She won’t die a Roding. She’ll
be Mrs. Somebody Else.”
Then Larose spoke casually of the supposed leather
coat he had picked up, but now giving the description
of Daunt as that of the man on the motor-bicycle he
had passed, asked the landlord if by chance he knew of
any such person.
“ Certainly I do,” said the landlord at once. “ The
man had got a sidecar attached to the motor-bicycle,
hadn’t he ? Well, he’s a chap called Daunt and works
at the church in Monks Arden, a good way from here,
near Great Bardfield.” He laughed. “ ‘ Daunt, the grave-
digger ’ they call him, because he looks as cold as a
corpse himself, although it’s precious few graves he
digs in that old churchyard. Yes, that’s the mah right
enough.”


“ Oh, you know him, then ! ” exclaimed Larose as if
very astonished.
The landlord took a big swig at the pot of beer Larose
had provided. “ Seen him nosing round the church
several times just after Sir Eric Roding died,” he replied,
“ and wondered what the deuce there was to bring him
here.” He spoke reminiscently : “ He was in this village
the day before the funeral; he was in the church during
the funeral service—l sat next to him—and then that
same night just after it had got dark, I met him pushing
his motor-bicycle and sidecar along not three hundred
yards from the door.” He shook his head doubtfully.
“ I’ve often wondered since what his little game was.”
Larose caught his breath. At last the certain explana-
tion of why, upon the opening of the coffin and it being
found Sir Eric was alive, he had not been left to his fate!
If it had become known the coffin had been tampered
with, then assuredly suspicion would at once have fallen
upon the grave-digger of Monks Arden, and so for his
own preservation he had had to take the semi-conscious
man away.
Just before half-past three Larose, from the roadway
outside, watched the funeral cortege entering the church-
yard. Then he saw the coffin carried into the church with
Daunt bringing up the rear of the procession. He
waited until the mourners and spectators had followed
after and then, himself proceeding into the now deserted
churchyard, he walked quickly over to the grave-
digger’s house in the corner and tried the handle of the
door.
As he had half expected, the door was unlocked, and
so, after one quick backward glance to make sure he
was not observed, he darted into the house and closed
the door behind him.
The door had opened directly into what obviously
was the main room of the house, it being the kitchen,
sleeping-room and sitting-room combined. It was very


sparsely furnished, and contained little more than the
bare necessities of life. Opposite the window was a
one-burner paraffin stove, in a corner was a low truckle
bed, and in the middle of the room were a table and one
chair. The floor of the room was of stone, but there was a
wide strip of old carpet just by the table.
As Larose looked round with eager and expectant
eyes, the first thing that struck him was the tidiness and
order that prevailed everywhere. Everything had its
proper place and everything, too, was absolutely clean.
Upon a shelf were a row of books and a little pile of
magazines and papers. Instantly Larose pounced upon
three motoring maps. They were evidently comparatively
recent purchases, looking quite fresh and new. They
were ones of Essex, Suffolk and Norfolk.
“ Exactly ! ” he murmured. “He bought those to
replace the ones he lost when that suit-case dropped off
his motor-bicycle. Oh, what a sure thing ! ”
He scanned along the titles of the books. The Great
Sculptors of the World , Giants of the Renaissance, Gems of the
Master Painters he read, and then he frowned. “ What a
queer mixture 1 An appreciation of beauty and a violator
of the coffins of the dead ! ”
Finding nothing more to interest him, he passed into
the second room, and here, it was apparent, Daunt did
all the carving for which he had earned such a reputation.
There was a stout and well-appointed bench, rack upon
rack of carving tools and quite a good store of hard and
well-seasoned wood. Upon the pavemented floor
were stretched two broad lengths of thick coconut
matting.
“ But where’s his lamp ? ” Larose asked himself.
“ He can’t possibly do any fine work here at night with
that paraffin one in the other room. Where’s that petrol
lamp for which he bought those two mantles he lost
with the suit-case ? That’s what I want to know.”
His eyes roved round everywhere. “ And how has


he made those plaster casts and not left any sign of the
plaster about ? ” He looked puzzled. “ It’s colder here,
too, than in the other room and ” —he sniffed delicately—
“ there seems quite a different smell.”
Then suddenly he began to sniff hard. “ Petrol! ”
he exclaimed after a few moments. “ I’m sure of it.”
Bending down, he moved slowly round the room,
sniffing harder than ever. Sometimes the smell eluded
him, but then, straightening himself up, he could detect
it again at once. Finally, almost on his hands and knees,
in turn he sniffed at every crack at the junctions of the
big stones that formed the floor of the room, lifting up
the thick matting as he passed along.
He came upon what he was looking for at last, for
in one of the corners farthest away from the door he
could detect petrol, faintly but nevertheless quite dis-
tinctly.
“ It’s coming up,” he exclaimed excitedly, “ and so
there’s another room under this ! ” He pulled at a
massive slab of stone, about three feet square, in the
extreme corner where the join between it and the next
slab seemed wider than the joins anywhere else, but
although he could feel it move slightly from side to side,
he could not lift it up in any way. He noted that the end
of this loose stone, like the ends of all the other stones
in the same row, projected under the wall.
“ Never mind,” he told himself breathlessly. “ I know
that there’s something there and it will do later. I dare
not wait any longer now. I’ve been here a quarter of an
hour already and the service may be over any minute.”
Making sure that there was no one outside to observe
him, he glided from the house.
That evening the grave-digger had just finished his
meal when he heard quick footsteps outside, there was a
sharp tap upon his door, and then, as he rose to his feet,
the door opened and a man stepped into the room.
“ It’s all right,” said Larose briskly, for of course


it was he, “ I just wanted to have a little talk with you.”
He closed the door behind him. “ No, sit down again.”
He smiled pleasantly. “ I don’t mean any violence and
I’ve not come to rob you.”
But Daunt remained upon his feet. He was scowling,
but for the moment seemed altogether too astonished
to speak.
“ And it’s a very serious talk I’m going to have with
you,” went on Larose significantly, “ for I know every-
thing you’ve been doing for Professor Panther.” He
came straight to the point at once. “ You’ve been
robbing graveyards, my fine fellow, and taking the
heads of corpses to him.”
The grave-digger’s jaw dropped, his eyes opened very
wide and his face paled to an ugly grey colour. Then he
clenched his hands together tightly and, half bending
forward, his attitude was a menacing one.
“ No, no, don’t you be a fool,” said Larose sharply.
“ Violence won’t do you any good, and besides ” —he
took out a cigarette and lighted it—“ in a scrap I’m quite
capable of taking good care of myself.” He sat down
upon the edge of the bed. “ Now what have you to say,
Mr. Joel Daunt ? ”
The tense expression upon the grave-digger’s face
relaxed a little and he straightened himself up. “ Who
are you ? ” he asked hoarsely.
“ My name is Larose, Gilbert Larose,” said Larose
calmly, “ and I used to be attached to the Criminal
Investigation Department of Scotland Yard. Not heard
of me, perhaps? Well, that doesn’t matter.” He spoke
quite pleasantly. “ But I’m a private individual now
and no doubt it will relieve your mind that I’ve not
come from the police.” He nodded. “ I’m afraid they’ll
have to deal with you later. Now I’ve learnt everything
about you through Professor Panther and ”
“ That’s a lie,” broke in Daunt quickly. “ Professor
Panther never told you anything. He’s been in a mad


asylum for months and I heard only two days ago that
he’ll die mad now. He’s never going to get better.”
He shook his head angrily. “ No, Professor Panther
never told you anything.”
“ I never said he did,” retorted Larose quietly. “ I
said I had learnt everything through him, and so I
have.” His voice was very stern, “I repeat, Mr. Daunt,
you have been a systematic violater of newly dug graves
and have been mutilating the bodies in them to provide
the professor with specimens for his museum,”
“ Prove it! ” snapped Daunt. “ You can prove noth-
ing ! ”
“ I can prove nothing ? ” queried Larose incredulously.
“ Well, you just listen to me, my friend. On the fourth
of last September you dug up the grave of Mrs. Car-
stairs in Little Easton and three days afterwards delivered
her severed head to Professor Panther. On the eighteenth
of last November, here in this very churchyard, you
cut off the head of Mrs. Haverhill. On the night of the
previous nineteenth of July you broke into the Roding
vaults in the church of Ashleigh St, Mary and opening
the leaden coffin of Sir Eric Roding ” —his arm shot out
accusingly—“ ah, a living witness here, who will testify
to everything, one who will relate all he ”
“ But he’s dead I ” broke in the grave-digger sharply,
too astounded by the extent and accuracy of Larose’s
knowledge to make any denials. “ Professor Panther
told me so.”
“ Then the professor lied to you ! ” exclaimed Larose
emphatically. “ He’s alive and perfectly well, and it’s
on his behalf I’ve come to you to-night.”
Daunt scowled dubiously. “ But Professor Panther
said he never recovered from the shock of that night,
and died three months afterwards ! ”
“ He did recover and he didn’t die,” snapped Larose
testily, “ and he is the living witness of what your
dreadful work has been.”


A little colour had crept back into Daunt’s ashen
face. “ But at any rate he’d never be able to swear to
me,” he said vehemently. “It was only in the dark that
he saw me and then only for a few minutes. Besides,
he was nearly unconscious and his eyes were closed.”
“ But if he can’t remember you distinctly,” retorted
Larose with a threatening shake of his head, “ the land-
lord of the inn in Ashleigh St. Mary can.” He punctuated
his words with his hand. “ Three times he saw you, Mr,
Daunt—the day before the funeral—at the funeral
service itself watching them lower the coffin into the
vault, and towards midnight that same night ” —he
spoke very slowly—“ pushing your motor-bicycle and
sidecar, so that the noise of the engine should not be
heard, close to the churchyard wall.” He snapped his
fingers together. “ That landlord has been suspicious
about you ever since.”
The grave-digger sank back into his chair and,
swallowing hard, wiped the sweat from his forehead with
the sleeve of his coat. Then after a few moments’ silence
he said, holding himself in with an effort, “ Then I
suppose it will mean prison for me now it is found out ? ”
Larose nodded. “ Three or four years at least. It
would certainly be seven, except that the judge will
probably take into account that you saved Sir Eric’s
life.”
Daunt stirred uneasily in his chair. “ And what are
you meddling in this for,” he asked scowlingly, “ if
you’ve nothing to do with the police ? ”
Larose eyed him intently. “ I’ve come to suggest
something to you,” he said slowly, “ and it’ll just give
you the rat’s chance of bolting back to some hole when
the terriers are after him.” He spoke thoughtfully.
“ You see, my friend, from a certain point of view you
have not done anybody any harm. You haven’t robbed
and you haven’t murdered, and if the whole matter
could be hushed up no one would be any the worse.


But, unfortunately, it can’t be hushed up altogether,
and so much grief and horror will come to a lot of poor
souls who will be grieving over their violated dead.”
He spoke sharply. “ But tell me, how many graves have
you interfered with for this mad professor ? Now, no
lies. Let’s have the exact truth. Half a dozen or so
either way won’t make the matter any better or any worse.
Come now, how many heads have you taken to the pro-
fessor ? ”
“ Twenty-seven,” replied Daunt sullenly, after a long
pause.
“ Did you just get them anyhow, whenever you
could ? ”
“ No,” more sullenly still. “He only wanted those of
very special people who were well known to every-
body.”
Larose whistled. “ Whew ! what a nice couple of
beauties you’ve been ! ” He pointed to that end of the
shelf upon which were the three maps he had seen. “ And
so you’ve been going all over the country to get them ? ”
The grave-digger followed the direction of his hand
and then, when he had in part recovered from this fresh
surprise, mumbled, “No, not very far, only in the
graveyards about here.”
Larose went on in matter-of-fact tones : “And before
you delivered the heads to him, you first made a plaster
cast of the faces, did you not ” —he repressed a smile
at the grave-digger’s glare that was now almost one of
stark terror —“ in that cellar you’ve got under the other
room, and which you go down to under that big stone
you lift up in the corner ? ”
The man’s eyes bulged from his head and he snarled
savagely, “ How long have you been watching me ?
Larose nodded. “ Just long enough to find out what
you’ve been after and to make sure of everything. That s
all.”
A thought seemed suddenly to come into Daunt’s


mind and, his anger calming down, he asked quickly,
“ But if you only come, as you say, from Sir Eric Roding,
why does he want to hound me down when I saved his
life ? ”
“ He doesn’t want to hound you down,” replied Larose
instantly, “ and he’ll show his gratitude to you one day.
You’ll have a good friend in him when everything is
over, but he has to drag you into the limelight now to
reinstate himself as Sir Eric Roding. You see the posi-
tion is that, legally, he is dead and you are wanted to
bear witness that when you opened his coffin that night
you found him alive.” He shrugged his shoulders.
“ And I’m afraid we shall have to bring in the robbery
of some of those other graves to explain what your
object was in breaking into the Roding vaults.”
A short silence followed, and then Daunt asked
hoarsely : “ And what’s this chance you are going to
give me to bolt off like a rat, as you call it ? ”
Larose appeared to consider and then asked abruptly :
“ Have you any money ? ”
“ No,” was the surly response.
“ But Professor Panther must have paid you well!
You’re not married, you don’t drink, and you can’t
have many expenses here ! Then what have you spent
it on ? ”
For a long moment the grave-digger was silent, and
then he blurted out: “ I’m a sculptor and I’ve spent
all I got on my tools and materials.” His voice shook a
litde. “ My work is all I live for.”
“ Ah, a disciple of the great Rodin, are you ? ” smiled
Larose, “ Now I understand how interested you must
have been in that letter of the professor in The Tims.”
Ignoring the stare of amazed surprise that once again
had spread over the grave-digger’s face, he went on
sternly : “ Well, what you have to do is to write straight
away a confession which I will dictate to you, stating
that you broke into the vaults that night, opened Sir


Eric’s coffin and, finding him alive, carried him away
with you. You needn’t say where you took him, as
that will come out later. Then you’ll go round to
the village constable here and he will witness your
signature. No, no, the constable shan’t read what you
have written. Then I’ll give you £io and you shall
have two days’ clear start to get away before we take
your confession into Sir Eric’s lawyers and leave it to
them to decide what to do.”
“ But how do I know you haven’t already told the
police about me ? ” growled Daunt suddenly.
“ You don’t know,” replied Larose calmly, “ and you
can only take my word for it.” He looked him straight
in the face. “ But I don’t lie in such things, my friend,
and as a matter of fact, no one knows I have come here
to-night to see you,”
The grave-digger eyed him curiously. “ And no one
knows you’ve come to get this confession from me ? ”
he asked slowly. “ Well, when we’ve been to see the
policeman, can I come back here, quite free, to get some
of my things to take away ? ”
“ Certainly,” replied Larose, and then he smiled. “ I
suppose it is some of your masterpieces of sculpture
you are anxious about ? ”
Daunt glared angrily, stung now, so it seemed, to a
greater feeling of resentment than at any time during the
interview. “ And you think because I dig graves and
sweep out pews,” he asked sneeringly, “ I can’t be any-
thing of a sculptor ? ” He sprang to his feet and snatch-
ing the lamp off the table, jerked his head for Larose to
precede him out of the room. “ Here, I’ll show you
something and then perhaps you’ll not be so ready with
your grins.” He nodded grimly. “ You know so much
already, there’s no harm in your knowing a bit more.”
Larose rose to his feet, too. “ Well, you go first,
please,” he said pleasantly, “ and mind, no tricks, as
I’m not a soft man to handle.”


Striding into the other room, the grave-digger placed
the lamp upon the floor, not very far from the loose
stone in the corner. Then whipping away the end of
the length of matting, he knelt down and pressing the
palms of his hands firmly upon the stone Larose himself
had tried to move, he jerked his arms forward and the
stone slid back under the wall. A gaping aperture nearly
three feet square was disclosed.
“ Oh, then that’s how you do it! ” exclaimed Larose.
“ How did you find it out ? ”
“ I knew there must be some place underneath,”
grunted Daunt, “ because this floor here is always so
cold. So I broke through the pavement. This stone is
another one I put in.” He took a large electric torch
off the bench and flashed it down the opening, bringing
into the light the top rungs of a narrow ladder. “It’s
twelve feet down and the ladder will shake a bit because
it’s not fastened to anything, but it’s quite strong. I’ll
light another lamp when we get down.”
“ You first,” said Larose politely, “ and I’ll hold the
torch, please.”
Without a word the grave-digger handed him the
torch and at once disappeared into the opening.
“You light the lamp now,” called out Larose, “ and
stand right away from the ladder, too.” He laughed.
“ I have no wish to be hit over the head when I get
down.”
Daunt did as he requested, and in a minute or so
Larose was descending by the bright light of a large
petrol lamp.
He found himself in a good-sized chamber, one end of
which was lost in the shadows. The pavemented floor
was cracked and uneven and, as he saw, from a quick
glance round, the walls seemed full of cracks, too. The
place was many degrees colder than the room above.
But on the instant Larose had no further thoughts
for the chamber itself, when he turned his eyes to where


Daunt was standing. Part of the chamber had been
screened off by two high wooden stands, to form a sort
of small cubicle. At the back of the cubicle, against the
wall, was a narrow wooden bench and above it were
racks of tools and a broad shelf. In front of the bench,
upon a low stand, stood a block of white marble about
two feet in height and some twelve inches square. The
block was roughly hewn down all its sides, but rising
abruptly from it were the sculptured head and neck of a
young girl,
Larose blinked hard and then stared and stared in
incredulous amazement, for the work was one of great
beauty and, even to his untutored eyes, executed by the
hand of a master. The lines of the girl’s face were faultless
in their execution, the tender sadness of her expression
being portrayed as sharply and as clearly as if the cold
marble were a thing of life itself.
“ You did that! ” he gasped. “ That is all your
work ! ”
The grave-digger himself could hardly drag his eyes
away from the marble, “Of course it is,” he nodded
with a scowl, “ no one else has been down here for three
hundred years.”
Larose gasped again. “ But where’s your model ? ”
he asked.
Daunt pointed to the shelf above and, looking up,
Larose saw, immersed in some clear liquid in a big glass
jar, a severed head.
“ It’s in absolute alcohol,” explained the grave-digger
tersely, “ and she was Bernadine Warnes, the film star.
She was buried in Cromer.”
“ Good God ! ” ejaculated Larose. He gritted his
teeth together. “ Oh, what a punishment you’ll get.”
“ But I haven’t hurt anyone,” remonstrated Daunt
sharply, his face puckered in a frown. “ You said your-
self just now that I had not done any great harm.”
“ But the outraged sentiment! ” expostulated Larose.


“ Bernadine Warnes was one of the idols of the
world.”
“ And when I give this to them,” said Daunt fiercely,
laying his hand upon the marble head, “ she will be
theirs for ever to look upon. This stone will not rot
and putrefy like human flesh,” His voice broke suddenly
and he spoke almost with a sob: “ Oh, don’t you under-
stand now what torture it will be for me to leave my
work ? It is not finished yet and it is dearer than life to
me.
Larose nodded sympathetically. “ I quite under-
stand,” he said very gently, “ but you see there’s no
help for it.” He tried to soften down the blow. “ But
one day you will be free again and then you will come
back to finish it.” He spoke earnestly. “ You are a great
artist, Mr. Daunt, and better judges than I might perhaps
say you were a genius.”
He looked back almost reverently to the marbled head,
and then, to view it from a slightly different angle, made
to move a couple of paces or so sideways. But a high
stool he had not noticed was in his way and, before
he had time to realise what was happening, he had
stumbled over it and was falling heavily on to the hard
stone floor.
On the instant the grave-digger sprang forward to
help him up, but then, in a sharp recoil, he drew back.
A startled expression came into his face and for a few
seconds, with his cheeks blanched and holding in his
breath, he stood staring at the prostrate figure of Larose.
Then in a lightning movement he awoke to action.
He darted back to the block of marble and, lifting it in
his arms, staggered to the foot of the ladder. He hoisted
the block upon his shoulder and, holding tightly to the
ladder with his disengaged hand, started shakily but with
great haste to climb up the rungs. Half a minute later
he was feverishly pulling up the ladder into the room
above.


Larose had not been much hurt, but the pain of falling
heavily upon so hard a surface had made him feel sick
and screw up his eyes, and for a full minute he was
oblivious to everything that was happening. Then
when, with the first anguish passing, he opened his eyes
again, it was to see that the grave-digger was no longer
near him, and that the ladder had been pulled up and
was just disappearing through the opening in the roof
of the chamber.
He suppressed a useless cry of anger and consterna-
tion.
The face of Daunt appeared through the hole. “ And
there’ll you stop,” he shouted down fiercely, “ until
you’re dangerous to no one.” His laugh was almost
hysterical. “ I’ll give you a week and then I’ll take a
death-mask of you, and put your head in another jar.”
There was a slight rumbling sound, Larose heard the big
stone pulled into its place, and complete silence reigned.


CHAPTER VII
THE RESOURCE OF LAROSE
WITH the first shock of his discomfiture
over, Larose automatically brushed the
dust of his fall from his clothes, and then,
seating himself upon the stool that had
been the cause of his misfortune, took out a cigarette
and lighted it.
He was still feeling a little shaken from his fall and,
quite content to rest for a few minutes, proceeded to
take in his surroundings in more detail.
The chamber, as the grave-digger had stated, was
certainly a good twelve feet in height and its walls were
formed of large and massive blocks of rough-hewn
stone. The roof, judging from the hole through which
they had descended, was very thick, the covering stone
which had been pulled over being at least a foot above
the level of the ceiling. The floor, also of stone, was
rough and uneven, and upon it, all round and inside the
cubicle, was stretched a long, broad strip of the same
kind of coconut matting he had seen in the room above.
The place was cold, but not damp, and there was a
smell as of crumbling mortar of s the centuries.
Very soon, feeling quite himself again except that
his hip was bruised and sore, Larose limped over to
the bench and picked up the large electric torch which
fortunately the grave-digger had not taken away with
him.
“ Plenty of light,” Larose nodded—he smiled a grim
smile—“ at any rate for the time being.” He picked up
the petrol lamp and shook it gently. “ Quite full and will


probably burn for about eight hours. No doubt he had
been filling it this afternoon, and it was some spilt petrol
that I smelt.” There was a two-gallon petrol tin upon
the bench, but, upon lifting it up, he found it was empty.
He turned out of the cubicle and, flashing the torch,
started to explore what lay beyond the wooden screen.
Then he gave a low whistle of astonishment.
A long narrow passage stretched away before him,
terminating in a blank wall some seventy or eighty yards
away. There was a narrow shelf, stretching down the
passage along its whole length, and although there were
no coffins to be seen, Larose judged he must be in what
had once formed part of the crypt of the old monastery.
Proceeding to the end of the passage, he saw the
enclosing wall there had been built at a much later time
than the walls of the passage itself for, although its
stone-work was of the same nature as elsewhere, the
mortar between the stones was much less crumbled.
From its direction the passage evidently ran parallel
with the churchyard wall and, from its length, he was
inclined to think that its end, at least, must be somewhere
under the church.
Flashing his torch round and round in every direction,
he saw no sign of any door anywhere. From floor to
ceiling, on every side, huge square stones were piled in
monotonous regularity and, with a dreadful pang, the
realisation came home to him that in this underground
chamber he was as effectively cut off from the outside
world as if he were enclosed only in a small and narrow
tomb.
He switched off his torch to get the effect of the light
of the petrol lamp in the distance, and it seemed very
far away. He took out another cigarette, more for
company than because he really wanted it, and then,
striking a match, became aware that the flame was
faintly flickering.
“ A draught! ”he exclaimed instantly. “ Then where


does it come from ? ” And at once forgetting all about
the cigarette, he started to move round close up against
the walls, striking match after match to find out where the
air was coming in. But he got no reward for his pains.
Between all the stones, except in the wall at the far end,
the cracks were deep where the mortar had crumbled
away, but in no one particular spot could he say with any
certainty that he felt a distinct draught. Still, it must be
coming in somewhere, he knew, or otherwise the air
would not have been as fresh as it was.
Then, suddenly remembering he must conserve his
matches as he had only one box with him, he used a
last one for his cigarette, and now, with the torch
switched on again, stood quite still, intently regarding
the upward drift of the smoke. It went up sideways
and always in the same one particular direction.
“ Then that is the outer wall of this darned hole,” he
told himself, “ and as air is continually coming in, so
it must be continually going out.” He looked at his
wrist-watch and shook his head. “ Half-past nine and
nearly dark outside, so there is no hope of seeing a
chink of light anywhere. I must wait until the morning,
and ” —he made a grimace—“ there will not be one
chance in a million of seeing it then.”
Making his way back to the cubicle, he noticed for the
first time a length of canvas covering up some articles
upon the broad stone shelf just where it began beyond
the wooden screen. He pulled the canvas off and exposed
to view a neatly arranged row of plaster-cast faces of the
same nature as that of the one of Alma Carstairs which
had first brought him upon the grave-digger’s trail.
He picked up the casts, one by one, and scrutinised
them interestedly. They were all beautifully executed
and each suggested it had been taken off by someone of
unusual power and intelligence. They were all numbered
and the numbers went up to twenty-seven.
Then suddenly he started, as he stared hard at the face


of a man. “ Good God! ” he exclaimed, “ but I’ll swear
that is Lord Barney. Yes, yes,” he went on, “ without a
shadow of doubt it is ! And he was buried at Sheringham
not a year ago ! ” He nodded solemnly, “So that
proud face which in life has so often looked round in
majesty upon the crowded courts, in death has been
handled roughly by a man he might soon have been
sending into penal servitude had he but been given a
little longer length of years, and I not been trapped down
here like this ! ” He sighed. “ The impotence of the
mightiest of us when death comes ! ”
He was about to replace the canvas when he thought
better of it. It would be a covering for him when he lay
down to sleep.
Unmindful now of what happened to his clothes, he
cleared the bench of tools, and spreading across it the
roll of matting, trebly folded, prepared himself for
sleep, with no very great expectation, however, of
getting any. He made no mistake about the probability
of the slow and lingering death with which he was now
faced, and when he closed his eyes the full realisation of
the dreadful nature of his surroundings was almost
overwhelming in its horror.
Nature has her own great silences, the deeps of the sea,
the world-old caverns in the bowels of the earth, and the
icy wastes about the poles when the winds are hushed.
But they do not terrify, because they are natural and
far removed, too, from the haunts of humankind. But
the silences wrought by the hand of man are often
terrible, because in some way they suggest to us the
stillness of the grave and the tomb.
And now the prospect for Larose was so hopeless, as
he could do absolutely nothing to help himself, not
knowing where to start at making any effort to effect
his escape. It was true the mortar between the stones,
except at the end wall, was old and crumbling, and that
there were a number of small chisels and a mallet at


his disposal. But even if he knew the best place to
commence, the stones were of such a size that the small
chisels would reach only a very little way along their
sides, and be quite ineffective in loosening them. Added
to that, he had to remember the petrol lamp would last
only a few hours, and if he attacked the stones themselves,
long before he made much impression upon them, he
would be in utter darkness, and forced to discontinue
his labours.
He had, however, two slender hopes to buoy him up.
The first was that when his wife received no telephone call
from him for two days she would begin to become
uneasy. Then she would most probably approach his
great friend, Chief Inspector Stone, of Scotland Yard,
and lay everything before him. Stone, he knew, was a
quick thinker, and without doubt would immediately
broadcast a description of his, Larose’s, car. Then,
almost certainly, the car would very soon be located in
the yard of the Monks Arden inn, and, with his inside
knowledge of the nature of his, Larose’s, quest, the
inspector would very quickly get upon the trail of the
grave-digger. After that the rest would be child’s play
for the inspector, as, once in the presence of Daunt, he
would read him like a book and soon extract a confession
from him.
The second hope was that Daunt himself might relent
and stop short of actual murder. The grave-digger, with
all his callousness in dealing with the dead, was obviously
not naturally of the true criminal type and there had been
no premeditation upon his part in condemning him,
Larose, to a dreadful death. Indeed, had he been mur-
derously disposed he could easily have made an end of
him when he had been lying at his mercy upon the stones.
But Larose shook his head despondently when he
considered this second hope. Daunt was a fanatic where
his art was concerned, and so often, so very often, fanati-
cism sapped all moral sense.


In the night that followed, Larose’s sleep was very
broken and so often, when from sheer mental exhaustion
he had dozed off fitfully, he was awakened almost at
once by the cold. His teeth chattered, his body ached
because of its hard resting-place, his hip was stiff and
sore from his fall, and his thirst troubled him.
However, he forced himself to keep still, arguing that
if he were not getting sleep, he was at any rate resting,
and it was not until his watch told him it was nearly five
and he knew it would now be getting towards daylight
that he aroused himself and slipped off the bench.
He fit the lamp and took out a cigarette. Then, carrying
the lamp with him this time, he proceeded once more
down the whole length of the passage, carefully scrutinis-
ing every stone, on the chance that the previous night he
might have missed a walled-up door somewhere.
But he saw no sign of any door and so extinguished
the lamp, and now in perfect darkness he searched for a
chink of light somewhere between the stones. But
everything was of an inky blackness and nothing
rewarded his efforts. So returning at length to the
other end of the chamber, he stationed himself directly
under the hole in the roof through which he had come
down, hoping he might hear some movement of the
grave-digger in the room above.
Not a sound, however, broke the death-like stillness,
and, after a long wait, he lay down upon the bench again.
“ No hope, Gilbert, my lad,” he told himself. “ You’re
in one of the tightest corners you have ever been in all
your wicked fife ! ”
He spent the morning staring into the darkness.
Noon came, one o’clock, two, three, four, and nothing
had happened, except that he now was tormented with
a terrible thirst, and was also beginning to feel faint for
want of food.
Then suddenly the silence was broken, and for the
moment he could not believe his ears as he heard the


faint rumblings of an organ in the distance, the sounds
immediately taking shape to the glorious melody of
Chopin’s “ Marche Funebre.”
“ A-ah I ” he exclaimed excitedly, and snatching up the
torch, he slipped off the bench and darted like a grey-
hound up the passage. The organ became louder as
he raced along, and in a few seconds he was locating
where he could hear it loudest. The spot was not quite
at the extreme end, but about ten yards from the enclosing
wall. He flashed his torch upon the roof, as it was
evidently through there the sound was penetrating.
There was no hole visible, though here the stonework,
as elsewhere, had deep cracks in pitted surfaces where
time had played havoc with the mortar.
“ But I must be exactly underneath the organ,” he told
himself breathlessly. He gave a quick glance at his
watch. “Ten minutes to five, and no doubt it is my sad
little friend of the white roses doing her practising.”
For a long moment, as motionless as a graven image,
he stood in deep thought staring up at the roof above, with
the soft and muffled notes of the organ still continuing.
Then, suddenly, he brought his eyes down again, he
jerked his head round sharply, and drew in a deep
breath. Then he snapped his fingers together excitedly
and his subsequent movements became like lightning.
He raced back and lit the petrol lamp. Then, snatching
out his pocket knife, he slashed the long length of coco-
nut matting into four equal pieces. Next, with a grimace
of disgust, he knocked off the top of the big jar that held
the head of the film star and, dipping his hand in the
spirit, splashed it generously all over the matting.
Pausing not a moment in his excitement, he pro-
ceeded, with no little exertion, to pull the heavy bench
along the passage until he had brought it to where he
had deemed the organ sounds were loudest. Then,
rolling up a strip of matting to form a sort of torch, he
set light to it and, waiting until it was well ablaze, blew
K


out the flames, until the matting only smouldered.
Jumping upon the bench, he waved his improvised torch
as near to the ceiling as he could reach, causing dense
clouds of acrid-smelling smoke to fly against the stones.
“ And it is more than possible,” he thought excitedly,
“ that some of those cracks up there may lead into other
cracks in the floor or the walls of the church and ” —he
nodded —“ well, something may happen.”
He watched with delight the coils of smoke spreading
mushroom-wise along the roof, and then, his first torch
having smouldered away, he lit a second one. On con-
sideration, however, he left this second one to smoulder
by itself upon the bench, and ran back along the passage.
There, lighting a third torch, he waved it round under
the hole in the roof up to the grave-digger’s house.
“ He shall have his share, at any rate,” he said with a
grim smile, “ and here I am quite certain it will escape
from this cursed place. Then if that girl sees any smoke
coming up into the church and runs to tell him, and
finds he’s not about, the first place she’ll look for him
will be in his house. And there’s a chance, too, that
someone may see the smoke coming out of his front
door.”
The chamber was now full of smoke along its entire
length, but he lit the fourth and last piece of matting
and, as with the second one, left it to smoulder upon the
bench. Then he took up a position where the ladder had
been and waited in dire anxiety for the stopping of the
organ. He had now to crouch down low to breathe with
any comfort.
Above, in the beautiful old church, so wrapped in
peace and sanctity, a young girl was pouring out her
soul in the deathless melody of the great master, and
below, but a few feet away, in a chamber where the
coffined dead had rested, a man was crouching in anguish,
with life or death depending upon a few wisps of ascend-
ing smoke.


And so the minutes passed, and the young girl went
on playing, while the man’s face grew greyer and his
mouth more dry.
The last piece of matting had smouldered away when
the organ stopped abruptly in the middle of a bar. A
few moments of torturing suspense followed, and then a
great hope sprang into the man’s eyes.
There was no mistake about it. The organ had stopped
—and stopped so suddenly that something must have
startled the player ! She must have seen the smoke !
Larose looked at his watch. It was now twenty
minutes past five. He had crowded years of alternate
hope and despair in a bare half-hour.
And what was happening now, he asked himself
tremblingly. If the girl had really seen the smoke, as
he was so confidently assuming she had, then her first
thought would undoubtedly have been to acquaint
Daunt, and, failing him, the vicar, as the vicarage was so
close at hand. But if she had got hold of Daunt, he, with
his guilty knowledge, would at once become aware of
what was happening. And then—what would the grave-
digger do ?
Larose thought on and on and then, all on the instant,
his meditations were abruptly interrupted by the harsh
grating of the stone above being violently thrust back.
Instantly the smoke mounted in a dense column through
the opening.
“ Quick 1 Put out that fire ! ” came Daunt’s voice in a
fierce entreaty. “ Put it out, and I’ll do everything you
want me to I Give me that chance to get away ! Put
out that fire ! Quick 1 ”
Larose choked back the exultation that he felt. “ Come
and put it out yourself,” he shouted, “ and push the
ladder down ! Be quick yourself.”
“ But you’ll shoot me,” cried Daunt, keeping well out
of sight. “ I remember all about you now and you’ll
kill me like a dog.”


“ Don’t be such a fool,” retorted Larose sharply. “ I
want that confession from you. Push down that ladder,
I say, or I’ll go on burning the matting.”
There was a few seconds’ hesitation and then the
end of the ladder appeared and was lowered quickly
down.
“ It’s all right,” called out Larose, planting it squarely
upon the stones, “ and you can breathe quite well here
if you don’t stand upright. The fire’s at the other end
of the passage.” Having armed himself with a chisel
and standing well away from the foot of the ladder, he
watched the hurried descent of the grave-digger.
Choking and spluttering, Daunt landed upon the floor,
bending himself half double, and rushed up the passage,
whilst Larose lost no time in climbing up the ladder.
The house was full of smoke, but when he threw open
the door and the windows, the rooms soon began to
clear,
Larose stepped outside into the sunlight and drew in
deep breaths of the delicious air,
“ And to think I never expected to see that sun again,”
he murmured brokenly. “ Only an hour ago it seemed
that I had but a few dreadful days of thirst and starvation
to live, and now ” —he smiled whimsically—“ just
because a girl played upon the organ and some wisps of
smoke rose into the air—hey presto ! here I am with all
the happiness of life before me ! ”
He turned back into the house again and had just
helped himself to a long drink of water from the tap,
when the grave-digger appeared in the room.
“ The fire was already out,” he scowled, eyeing Larose
angrily, “ and you had nothing more to burn.”
“ No,” agreed Larose at once. He smiled. “ I was at
the end of my tether and should not have known what
to do next.” He looked round into the other room.
“ That’s right. Keep the hole open and the smoke will
have soon disappeared.” Then as Daunt was about to


leave the house, he called out sharply, “ Here, but where
are you going ? Tell me, what happened ? ”
“ A girl playing at the organ saw smoke coming up
through the stones,” replied Daunt sulkily. “ She came
and told me and now she’s gone off to the vicar for him
to ring up the fire brigade.” He glared resentfully.
“ You were lucky, for the masons are coming next week
to re-mortar all the whole pavement in the church, and
then there’d have been no smoke getting up.”
Then all at once some movements in the churchyard
caught their eyes and they saw a young woman and a
clergyman running hastily up the path towards the
church.
“ The vicar,” grunted Daunt, and he strode quickly
out of the door. “ I’ll come back when I can.” A
thought, however, struck him and he reappeared upon
the threshold again. “ But it’ll be all right about that
£2O you promised me, won’t it ? You’re not going back
on your word, because ”
“ Because you were going to murder me,” laughed
Larose as the grave-digger stood hesitating. “ No,
certainly not. You shall have it directly you have
written out and signed what I’ll dictate.” He nodded in
the direction of a cupboard. “ But look here. I want
something to eat. What have you got ? ”
“ Bread and cheese,” growled Daunt, “ and you’ll
find it in there. I don’t live soft, and that’s all I’ve got,”
and off he ran.
Larose took off his coat and ruefully regarded its
soiled and crumpled condition. He shook it to get rid
of as much dirt as possible, and, seeing no clothes brush
about, brushed his trousers as best he could with his
hands. Then, turning up his sleeves, he had a good wash
under the tap and dried himself with his pocket hand-
kerchief.
Finding the bread and cheese where he had been
told, he had no repugnance in helping himself freely


for, as everywhere else, the cupboard was perfectly clean.
The grave-digger was not absent long and Larose had
only just finished his meal when he returned.
“ Well, is the fire brigade coming ? ” asked Larose
rather anxiously, desirous of as little publicity as possible
and hoping it was not.
Daunt shook his head. “ No, the smoke isn’t coming
up now, and he didn’t believe the girl. He said the smoke
must have blown in from the exhaust of some passing
car. He’s very short-sighted and had forgotten his
spectacles and couldn’t see the haze.”
“ But didn’t he question you about seeing the smoke ? ”
asked Larose, surprised.
“ Yes,” frowned Daunt, “ but I said I wasn’t certain.
I made out it might have been the dust between the
stones being blown up by the bellows of the organ,”
“ And so that poor girl’s story’s been discredited,”
smiled Larose. “ What a shame to make her out such a
simpleton.” His face hardened. “ But now, my friend,
to business, if you please, for I want to get quit of you as
soon as possible.” He nodded grimly. “Do you realise
that you are nearly a murderer ? ” He shook his head.
“ I really don’t believe you do.”
The grave-digger stared sullenly, but made no
comment.
Larose went on solemnly. “ You were going to leave
me to die down there of hunger and thirst. You
meant ”
“ I never meant to do it,” broke in Daunt quickly. “ I
never intended to do you any harm at all until you fell
down and the idea came to me of shutting your mouth.
Then this morning I was sorry, but I was afraid to come
near you because I thought you would shoot me the
instant you got the chance. I remembered you were the
detective who always carried a pistol and you’ve shot a
lot of people in your time.”
Larose repressed a smile. “ Well, well, we won’t


discuss it any more.” He spoke briskly. “ Now, here’s
a fountain pen and I see you’ve got a pad of paper there.
So sit down and write what I’m going to dictate to you.”
“ But you’re going to give me that £lO ? ” asked
Daunt anxiously. “ I’ve only got a few shillings and I
can’t get away on them.”
“ Yes, yes,” said Larose testily. “ I won’t cheat you.
In fact I’ll make it £25 and it may be a whole week before
the police are told.” He nodded grimly. “ I want you to
get away and not be caught, so that there’ll be no scandal
about the desecration of all those graves. Now sit down,”
The grave-digger did as he was told, and then Larose
asked him if he could spell.
“ Pretty good,” he scowled, “ but I’m not a school-
master.”
“ Well, just spell as you think best,” said Larose.
“ I’m not going to help you at all. I don’t want anyone
to guess you’ve been prompted to write this.” He
smiled pleasantly. “ We’ll let them all imagine it’s a
repentance on your part and then there won’t be such an
incentive for people to help the police to catch you.
Now, write small so as to get it all in on one page.”
So, at Larose’s dictation, the grave-digger commenced
to write. He wrote slowly as one unaccustomed to the
use of the pen, but his writing was quite legible.
The letter ran : “To Lady Roding of Roding Hall. I
am Joel Daunt, the grave-digger of the church of Monks
Arden, and I write now to tell you your husband was not
dead when he was put in his coffin last year. He was in a
trance and I took him out of the coffin the night he was
buried and carried him away. I think he is alive now but
Ido not know where. He does not know who he is, for
he has lost his memory.
“ I broke into the vault to get his body for someone,
who wanted to cut it open for study. I will not say who
this someone was, because he paid me for getting it.
We knew the coffin was not going to be bricked in for


some days, and I got into the vault through the little
door in the churchyard. I screwed back the lid of the
coffin so that no one should see I had been there. It is
empty now. If he is told I have written this letter to you,
Bert Coles of the Sceptre Inn in Ashleigh St. Mary will
tell you it is all true, as he knows who I am and he saw
me at the burial service and, again, also by the church-
yard, very late that night, just before I got into the
vault.”
“ Now, Mr. Daunt,” said Larose briskly, “ you’ll just
take that round at once to your constable in the village
here and get him to witness your signature.”
“ The policeman ! ” ejaculated Daunt, looking very
frightened. “ Why, your being so well known to all the
police, he may recognise you, and besides, if he
learns—•—”
“ But I’m not coming with you,” broke in Larose
quickly. He spoke very sternly. “ And above all things
you are to make sure the policeman does not read a line
of what you’ve written here. Understand ? Give him the
paper folded like this and if he’s curious, say —well, say
you’ve had a few pounds left you by some relation and
this is a letter to a lawyer. Oh, and one thing more, have
you got any envelopes here ? Well, ask the constable
for one and, if he doesn’t give it you, buy a stamped one
at the post office. Now then, don’t be gone long, for I
tell you I want to get away.”
Daunt departed reluctantly, obviously not too happy
at having to interview the constable, and uneasy at the
thought of questions that might be asked. But happily
for him, he caught the constable just about to go out and
in a great hurry. So the signature was witnessed with no
conversation and, an envelope thrust into his hands, he
returned home, not having been gone much longer than
five minutes.
“ Splendid—you’ve been very quick,” exclaimed
Larose, “ and now just address this envelope to Lady


Roding. Oh, and another thing, do they know your
handwriting at the post office here ? Oh, they don’t.
You never write any letters ! Good ! Then I can post
it here as I go to get my car. Well, now, here is the
money.”
Daunt took the £z 5 with no thanks and wrapped them
frowningly in a piece of newspaper. Then he looked up
scowlingly at Larose. “ And now I’ve got to bolt off
like a rat, as you put it,” he said bitterly. His voice
choked. “ I’ve got to drop everything I live for and
leave all the things I have been so long getting together.”
“ Great Scot 1 ” exclaimed Larose, raising his eyebrows,
in astonishment, “ you’re getting off very lightly, if you
ask me. Goodness knows what would be your punish-
ment if the police learnt all your crimes, and now you’ve
got a good chance of getting away altogether and, even
if you’re caught, of only being charged with one.” He
nodded emphatically. “ I tell you I don’t want them to
get you and I shall delay their search for you as long as
possible.”
“ But my things,” sighed Daunt heavily, “ my tools,
my carvings, my benches and my unfinished piece of
statuary ! I can’t carry them away with me.”
“ No, but you can come back again and get them,”
said Larose, “ either when you’ve served your punish-
ment, or, if you’ve not been caught, when things have
blown over.” He nodded significantly. “It won’t be
my business to say anything about that place you’ve got
down below and you can hide everything there.”
“ What, you won’t tell about it! ” exclaimed Daunt,
looking very astonished. “ You won’t say I shut you
down there ? ”
Larose shook his head. “ Not if I can help it, for, as
I have told you already, I don’t want my part in this
business to become known. It is only if the truth of
this statement of yours to Lady Roding is denied point-
blank that we may have to bring up anything about those


other desecrated graves. But if they do disbelieve your
story ” —he shrugged his shoulders—“ we shall have to
have some of those headless bodies exhumed to prove
what you have written is true.” He looked sharply at
him. “ You understand, don’t you ? ”
“ Yes,” nodded Daunt, “ breaking into the Roding
vault may be the only thing I shall have to be punished
for.”
“ But to be prepared,” went on Larose quickly, a
thought striking him, “ I must know which graves you
have tampered with.” He pointed to the writing pad
again. “So you please just write down the names and
places of them all. Come on, now, you are being let off
very lightly and you must help me all you can.”
“ Those casts down there are all numbered,” said the
grave-digger with a frown. “ Didn’t you see them under
the canvas ? ”
“ It’s names I want and not numbers,” snapped
Larose.
“ But there was a memorandum book with them,”
said Daunt, “ with everything written down.”
“ Well, I didn’t notice it,” frowned Larose. “ So you
just go and get it. Be quick now, and I’ll give you
another couple of pounds.”
The grave-digger moved off at once to comply with
the request and was just passing into the further room,
when suddenly he turned back and, striding over to the
low truckle bed, knelt down and began to drag out with
great care a bulky object wrapped round with a blanket.
“ My piece of statuary,” he explained jerkily, as he
rose up with it in his arms. “ I’ll take it down there
before the lamp goes out.” His voice choked. “ I’d
rather give myself up than have any harm come to this.”
He staggered with His heavy burden from the room.
Larose remained seated where he was, and lighting a
cigarette, considered thoughtfully if there was any more
information it was desirable for him to extract from the


grave-digger. At the same time he was subconsciously
following the latter’s movements by the sounds from the
other room.
He heard the block of marble being laid carefully
down upon the floor and the grating of the big stone in
the corner as it was being pushed back. He heard the
grave-digger’s clumsy boots upon the ladder and the
sounds of his heavy breathing as he pulled the marble
towards him and lifted it upon his shoulder.
Next, for a few seconds, he heard nothing more and
then—in a lightning movement he had jerked his head
round and his eyes were staring widely.
A cry of terror had come from the other room, and the
top of the ladder had clattered violently against the sides
of the opening leading down into the chamber below.
Then he drew in a deep gasp as he heard a loud and
sickening thud, followed by a resounding crash as of one
hard substance falling upon another.
A deep silence ensued and then Larose, springing to
his feet, darted into the farther room and peered down
into the opening in the floor. The petrol lamp was still
illuminating everything brightly, and he caught his
breath again at what he saw.
The grave-digger’s body lay huddled upon the pave-
ment close to the foot of the ladder. His face was turned
upwards but its features were quite indistinguishable
because of spouting blood. One arm was twisted under
him, and his head was set at a dreadful angle. Just for a
few seconds his limbs quivered, and then he lay quite
still.
As quick as lightning Larose scrambled down the
ladder and, bending over the prostrate man, made to lift
his head. But a touch was quite sufficient. The grave-
digger was quite dead. He had broken his neck.
Larose straightened himself up, and moistening his
dry lips with his tongue, let his eyes wander round. The
block of marble had fallen upon its sculptured end and


the gloriously executed work of the girl’s head was
smashed to atoms. The floor was strewn with the broken
pieces.
“ Fate, fate,” he murmured, “it was Bernadine
Warnes who killed him. He violated her grave and,
risen from the dead in the marbled image he had made of
her, she fell upon him and crushed him! His face is
smashed to pulp ! ”
Then, on the instant, there came to him a realisation
of the awkward situation in which he now was placed.
He had been so hoping that the circumstances in
which he had got in touch with the grave-digger would
not become known, so that the dreadful nature of the
work the latter had been engaged upon would not have
to be dragged into the light. The grave-digger’s con-
fession had been necessary, not indeed to prove Sir
Eric’s identity, for of course there would be no difficulty
about that, but to establish the fact that the baronet had
actually been coffined when he was alive and that no one
in Roding Hall had been a party to substituting anything
in the coffin for the body which had been supposed to be
a dead one.
But now, if an enquiry came to be made as to how the
grave-digger had come to meet his death, everything
would have to come out, for the contents of the under-
ground chamber would have to be accounted for, and
then he, Larose, would have to give chapter and verse as
to what had been his business with the dead man.
“ And it’s impossible to get rid of all this stuff he’s
got here,” he told himself ruefully as he regarded the
ghastly head of Bernadine Warnes, the twenty-seven
plaster casts, the big black tent and the other para-
phernalia that the grave-digger had employed when
engaged upon his dreadful work.
“ Yes, yes,” he went on, “ the return to life of Sir
Eric will be sensation enough for everyone, and if on top
of it is piled the story of the twenty-seven severed heads,


then there won’t be a newspaper reader in the kingdom
who has not heard of it. Then in the discussion that will
follow what chance is there that it will not occur to some-
one in the asylum that the disappearance of their Mr.
Winter was the prelude to the reappearance of Sir Eric
Roding ? ” He answered his own question. “Why, none! ”
He went on, “ And then the part I played in effecting
Sir Eric’s escape will most certainly come out, too.” He
made a grimace. “ A nice thing to become known ! I,
the master of Carmel Abbey and a Justice of the Peace,
snatching a man who is certified as being of unsound
mind from out of the hands of the authorities ! ” He
sighed. “ I shall be turned off the Bench, and then what a
disgrace for my poor wife ! ”
Suddenly he snapped his fingers together. He would
escape all the complications which were threatening
him by telling no one anything of what had happened.
He would just leave the body of the grave-digger where
it was, close the stone over the entrance to the chamber,
and slip away directly it became dark !
His mind made up, he searched for and found the
little memorandum book Daunt had spoken about and
then lost not a moment in making for the ladder, his
great fear now being that by some unfortunate chance
the vicar or someone might be calling to speak to the
grave-digger and, entering the house, see the great
gaping hole in the floor.
He was just about to step upon the ladder when a
thought struck him. The dead body was lying just under
the opening ; when it decomposed its dreadful message
would quickly ascend to the room above.
So he lifted the body and, carrying it farther along the
chamber, placed it upon the broad shelf upon which
rested the jar with the head of Bernadine Warnes. Then,
extinguishing the lamp, he climbed quickly from the
chamber by the light of the electric torch.
But his work was by no means done yet, for he was


intending that, when it became known Daunt had dis-
appeared, the condition of his house should suggest to
everyone that if he had left hurriedly he had done so of
his own accord.
So down into the chamber below he threw as many of
Daunt’s personal belongings as would be consistent with
the latter going upon a journey, a shabby suit of dark
clothes, two pairs of boots, a clean shirt, some socks and
a small suit-case. He could not see any cap lying about,
so presumed the grave-digger did not wear one.
His next action would have been puzzling to anyone
who had been watching, for after a few moments’
thought, he took a half-consumed tin of treacle he had
noticed in the cupboard and carried it to the opening over
which he had not yet pulled the stone.
Then with a teaspoon he very carefully dropped a
thick line of treacle all along the bed upon which the
stone would rest when it was pulled into its place.
“ And that will make an excellent join,” he remarked
complacently when the stone was at last in position and
he was sweeping dust into the cracks. “It will seal it
hermetically and last for years. Yes, no smell may ever
come up.”
He returned into the living-room and was just helping
himself to another glass of water as a charabanc load of
noisy excursionists passed upon the high road in front
of the churchyard, when, to his horror, he saw through
the open doorway the old vicar coming up the pathway
and not five paces from the house itself.
He had to make his decision instantly. There was no
place which he could reach to hide himself in time, but
recalling in the hundredth fraction of a second that
Daunt had said the vicar was very short-sighted and,
seeing he was not now wearing any glasses, he decided
to chance it and so remained standing exactly where he
was. All he did was to stiffen himself up and lean one
shoulder against the wall to keep perfectly steady.


“ Daunt,” called out the vicar, “ where are you ? I
want to speak to you.” From just beyond the threshold,
he peered with puckered eyes into the room.
“ Daunt,” he called out again, and it seemed to Larose
that his eyes were now directly upon him. “ Daunt, I
want you.” But his eyes moved round and then, after
calling yet a fourth time, he turned and with some
mutterings of annoyance, strode back quickly up the
path.
“ Now did he see me ? ” Larose asked himself breath-
lessly, “ His eyes were right upon me, and if he saw me,
was he suspicious because Daunt was not here and there
was a stranger in his place ? If so, has he gone off for
someone to come back with him and find out what has
happened ? ” He shook his head vexatiously, “ Gilbert,
Gilbert, you’re getting nervy 1 Of course he didn’t see
you, for if he had done so and then had been possessed
of such instant presence of mind as to not let you see it,
do you think he would have gone off at such a sharp pace
afterwards ? No, certainly not. He would have walked
quite slowly away to keep up the deception.” He shook
his head again. “ No, he didn’t see you. You need not
worry.”
Still, for all that, he did worry quite a good bit, and
was greatly relieved when darkness at last enabled him
to leave the house and churchyard unnoticed. Passing
the post office, he slipped the letter for Lady Roding in
the box and then made for the yard of the village inn
where he had left his car the previous afternoon.
He met no one and was fortunate, too, in not having
to go round to the bar to pay for the garaging of his car,
as there was a woman in the yard who turned out to be
the innkeeper’s wife. She was stout and elderly and was
plucking a fowl by the light of a hurricane lantern. She
hardly lifted her eyes from her work when he announced
he had come for his car.
“ My husband’s not in,” she said curtly, “ but he left


word it was to be two shillings.” Larose gave her the
money and bade her good night.
“ It isn’t likely they will have taken any notice of my
number,” he comforted himself as he drove away, “ and
neither the boy who told me where to put the car yester-
day, nor the woman to-night, seemed very intelligent, so
that if any questions are asked later about a stranger with
a car, they won’t be able to tell much.”
He slipped almost noiselessly through the village,
looking up interestedly at the church as he passed.
“ So there Daunt sleeps his last sleep,” he murmured,
“ a digger of graves who has no grave himself ! But he
is not lonely, for Bernadine Warnes sleeps beside him.
Beauty and the beast! The film star and the lowly hoer
of the churchyard weeds ! ” He sighed. “ How con-
temptuous of us all is death ! ”


CHAPTER VIII
LAROSE IN DANGER AGAIN
A RRIVING home after midnight, and there
/% being no lights showing anywhere, Larose
/ % let himself very quietly into the house, and
X -m. after some successful foraging in the larder,
put himself to bed in one of the spare bedrooms and was
asleep in less than five minutes.
The next morning he surprised his wife by appearing
in her room before six o’clock, and Sir Eric and Lady
Roding by announcing at breakfast that he had succeeded
in running down the violater of the Roding vaults and
had obtained a confession from him, which had been
posted direct to Roding Hall.
They listened in rapt attention as he told them how he
had got upon the grave-digger’s trail and in what a state
of bewilderment and consternation the latter had been
when he had learnt everything had been found out.
But there Larose’s story ended, for he mentioned
nothing of the underground chamber and the dreadful
experiences he had been through there, nor of anything
that had happened after.
“ And now that we have obtained that witnessed state-
ment,” he went on to Sir Eric, “ which will be arriving
at Roding Hall either to-night or to-morrow, I think you
ought to be there to receive it and not have it posted on
here.” He smiled sympathetically. “ I quite realise all
the worry and annoyance you must go through, but
you’ll have to take the plunge some time, and there is
no reason for delaying it any longer.”
“ Certainly not,” agreed Sir Eric cheerfully. “ I feel as


fit as a fiddle now and ready to face anything.” He looked
gratefully at his host and hostess. “ I have had a glorious
rest here and I shall always remember it as one of the
happiest times in my life.”
“ Well, don’t you ever forget,” laughed Larose, “ that,
if it can possibly be avoided, I don’t want the part I have
played in any of this business ever to come out. I have
broken the law in getting you away from Dr. Ben-
michael and now I have compounded a felony by
bribing that man to write his confession and providing
him with money to get away from the authorities.”
“ Oh, I’ll never breathe a word about you,” said Sir
Eric emphatically. “ I’ll stick to the story that the shock of
seeing the familiar face of an old friend brought back all my
memory, but that that friend does not wish to be brought
into the limelight by it being broadcast who he is.”
Whilst Lady Roding was upstairs with Mrs. Larose,
getting ready for a speedy departure, Larose took Sir Eric
into his study and closed the door carefully behind him.
“ Now, Sir Eric,” he said very solemnly, “ although
we have neither of us made any reference to it since the
day after you arrived here, you have not forgotten there
is another unpleasant business before you, besides that of
facing the world again as your proper self.”
“ I know,” replied Sir Eric, equally as solemnly, “ and
it has hardly ever been out of my mind.” His voice har-
dened. “You looked at the jar in the cabinet, of course.”
For answer Larose unlocked a drawer in his desk and,
taking out the jar of peacock blue, handed it to the baro-
net. “ I brought it away,” he said, “ and that is exactly
how I found it.” He eyed him very intently. “ Now
you open it and tell me if any of the paste has gone.”
Breathing a little quickly, but with perfectly steady
fingers, the baronet prised off the top of the jar. He gave
one quick glance inside and then with a sigh looked up
at Larose again. “ Practically all gone,” he said very
quietly. He nodded. “ Just as I expected ! ”


“ And you want to find out who took it ? ” snapped
Larose. “You are not going to let that wretch go
unpunished ? ”
“ Not I,” burst out the baronet impetuously. “If I
can learn who he is, if there’s no evidence in law to
punish him, then I’ll ” —he clenched his hands together—
“ I’ll punish him myself.” He looked eagerly at Larose.
“ You’re going to find him, aren’t you ? I’m not impos-
ing too much on your kindness ? ”
“ Not at all,” laughed Larose, He spoke with some
enthusiasm. “ Great Scot 1 I tell you I’m looking
forward with great pleasure to pitting my wits against
those of a consummate blackguard who probably masks
the disposition of a devil under a very pleasing exterior.”
He became grave again. “ I’ve gone again and again
through that list you gave me, but I can see no one
among the twelve guests and eight servants who might
have been wishing you harm.” He nodded. “Still, I
expected that, for the wretch who had the boldness and
resource to try to murder you in that way would un-
doubtedly be clever enough to keep all suspicion away
from himself.”
“ Well, what do you propose doing ? ” asked the
baronet anxiously. “ How are you going to start ? ”
“ Oh, I’ve thought it out,” smiled Larose, “ and you
must get all that house-party together again so that I can
be brought into actual contact with them on the spot.
You can manage it, can’t you ? ”
Sir Eric frowned. “ I suppose so. Of course all except
Mrs. Hellingsby, who you know is now dead.”
“ Well, invite them as early as possible,” urged
Larose, “ and tell them jokingly you will take no
refusal, as their visit now is to make up for that one
which was cut short when you were taken ill nearly a
year ago.”
“ I don’t exactly like it,” commented the baronet.
“ It’s a nasty sort of trap 1 ”


“ Of course it is,” said Larose grimly, “ and I’ll be
there to spring it. You’ll invite me and my wife as well.”
Two days after the departure of Sir Eric and Lady
Roding, Larose, having some business to transact in
Colchester, made his journey a somewhat longer one by
going through Ashleigh St. Mary. He was driving a
different car this time, and had no fear of being recog-
nised. He had no intention of speaking to anyone, but
was just curious to see if the pavement in the church
had been really re-cemented, as the grave-digger had
said it would be.
Arriving at the churchyard, he had just jumped out of
his car when he became aware of two men standing inside
the gates. To his horror he recognised one of them as
his friend. Chief Inspector Stone of Scotland Yard, under
whom he had often worked when he himself was attached
to the Criminal Investigation Department there.
For a few seconds his tongue clove to the roof of his
mouth, for to be recognised by anyone connected with the
police, when in the vicinity of the church, was the last
thing in the world that he wished to happen. But he
quickly recovered his composure and, it being too late
now to retreat, went through the gates and greeted his
old friend warmly.
“ Hullo, Charlie,” he called out gaily, “ but what a
surprise I I was nearly passing on and if it had not been
for that old hat of yours I am sure I should never have
recognised you.”
“ Good for my old hat, then,” laughed the inspector,
“ and it is lucky I haven’t been able to afford a new one.”
His eyes twinkled. “ Times are hard since you left the
Yard, Gilbert, and we don’t get our proper quota of
murderers now. Consequently no screws are being
raised.” He introduced his companion. “ Inspector
Ransom of Colchester. Oh, you remember him ? But,
of course, you would ! I’d forgotten you’d done some
jobs together.”


“ And trade’s not brisk, you say, Charlie ? ” asked
Larose, after a few minutes’ conversation.
Stone frowned. “ Oh, trade’s brisk enough, but the
devil is, since you have left us, we don’t seem to be
clever enough to be always able to deliver the goods.”
His face brightened suddenly, “ But come now, young
fellow, you shall give us a bit of your advice ! We’re
in a real puzzle here and you couldn’t have bobbed up at
a more opportune moment.” He looked solemn. “ Can
you spare us a few minutes, Gilbert ? ”
Larose felt a sickening feeling at the pit of his stomach.
Great Jupiter ! What on earth could have happened to
bring Stone there ? Of all the people in the world, he
would have rather have met anyone than this burly
inspector, within a mile of where the dead grave-digger
lay hidden !
But he dissembled his uncomfortable misgivings and
replied quickly, “ Certainly, old man, what is it you
want ? ” Then, to his dire consternation. Stone linked
his arm in his and began leading him across the church-
yard in the direction of the grave-digger’s house.
The inspector went on talking. “ You see, my son,
it’s only by chance that I’ve been brought into this.” He
jerked his thumb over his shoulder. “ The old clergyman
here is some connection of the Home Secretary’s cousin
and strings were pulled to get me down. But I can only
give a couple of hours to the matter to-day, as I’m due up
north this afternoon, and shan’t be able to get back
until, probably, the end of the week.”
Reaching the small stone house, the Colchester
inspector produced a key and, opening the door, stood
back for Larose and Stone to pass in. Then, with the
three men inside, the door was shut behind them.
“ Now, Gilbert,” said Stone very solemnly, “ just
cast your eyes round and, when you’ve heard our story,
you shall give us your ideas.” He dropped his voice
almost to a whisper and spoke very solemnly. “We


believe this to be a house of death, my son. We think
a murder has been committed here ! ”
Larose felt a cold shiver run down his spine. He knew
he was in the presence of one of the shrewdest detectives
in the kingdom, a man who had grown old in the ways
of crime and from whose eyes nothing ever seemed to
escape. He turned his own eyes away now to hide their
apprehension.
“ A bit squeamish, eh ? ” queried Stone, sensing
Larose’s uneasiness. He laughed. “ Then the shedding
of blood does not seem quite so commonplace to you
now as it used to be ? ”
Larose forced himself to look steadily at him, and then
laughed lightly. “ I live in respectable surroundings now,
Charlie, and am a bit out of practice. But tell me what has
happened here ? ”
“In a nut-shell,” replied Stone, “ the man who
occupied this house up to a week ago has vanished, just
after the visit of a stranger who, among other finger-
marks, left a bloody one behind him.”
“ Oh, oh ! ” exclaimed Larose with a nasty catch in
his breath.
“Yes, 4 oh, oh’,” mimicked Stone with a grim smile,
“ and that’s not all.” He screwed up his face. “ But we
are puzzled and really do not know whether we are
investigating a case of murder or just a case of a man, of a
peculiar disposition at all times, who has done something
he is expecting to be found out soon and has taken
himself off in a great hurry to escape the consequences.”
He nodded towards the Colchester inspector. “ However,
he thinks there has been foul play and I must say I am
inclined to agree with him.”
He drew in a deep breath and then started to speak
quickly. “ Well, up to a week ago, last Tuesday evening,
a chap called Daunt lived here. He was a sort of general
factotum attached to the church and did all the cleaning ;
also he was the gardener of the churchyard and dug the


graves. He was a moody, secretive sort of fellow, never
speaking much to anyone, and had no friends that we can
find, except a half-crippled old soldier in the village.
Then last Tuesday, between half-past six and seven, he
vanished. Shortly after five the vicar here had been
talking to him in the church and the old clergyman says
he seemed quite all right then. But just after half-past
six, this Daunt went round to the village constable to get
him to witness his signature to something written on a
piece of paper, which we have every reason to believe
had been torn from a pad here.”
He raised one fat forefinger. “ You are following me
carefully, Gilbert ? ” When Larose nodded, he went
on, “ He gave the constable no explanation as to what
was written upon the paper, and made his manner appear
quite casual and composed, but the constable noticed
his hand was shaking as he affixed his signature, and that
his forehead, although the evening was quite cool, had
come out in little beads of sweat.”
“ And wasn’t the constable curious ? ” asked Larose.
“Of course he was,” snapped Stone, “ but unfortun-
ately he was also in a great hurry and didn’t try to pump
the man. He had been telephoned for by a farmer to come
and shoot a horse that had broken its leg and so had to
go at once.” He went on. “ Well, the next thing was
that the vicar came here at five minutes to seven to speak
to Daunt about sweeping the kitchen chimney at the
vicarage on the morrow, as it was smoking badly. He
found the door open and called out several times for
Daunt, but got no answer.”
Stone screwed up his eyebrows. “ Now here is some-
thing that strikes us as being very suspicious. The vicar
did not come into the house, but stood just upon the
threshold and he remembered afterwards that, as he was
calling Daunt’s name, he distinctly smelt quite a strong
smell of tobacco smoke ” —he nodded significantly—
“|which, in the light of the fact that the grave-digger is a


non-smoker, surely justifies us in presuming that this
unknown visitor of the bloody finger-marks was actually
in the further room at that very moment.”
“ What, hiding,” queried Larose, “ with the front door
open as you say ? ”
“ We think so,” nodded Stone, “ and as Daunt must
have returned here long before that time and did not
answer when the vicar called out, we ”
“ But how do you know the man had returned here ? ”
broke in Larose sharply.
“ Because as the constable was riding off on his
bicycle he passed him coming this way within fifty
yards of the churchyard gates. So we are of opinion he
could only have been returning to his home here.”
“ Go on,” said Larose, because Stone had stopped
speaking as if expecting another question.
“ Well, the vicar went out to dinner that night,” said
Stone, “ and, returning a few minutes after ten, came here
again, finding, as before, the door open. He called out
again, and got no answer. It was quite dark by this time,
but there was a faint moon showing and, glancing in the
open shed adjoining the house here, he saw Daunt’s
motor-bicycle and sidecar were inside. So he knew the
man had not gone out on them and he thought it peculiar
as Daunt was not in the habit of taking walks at night.
His great hobby is wood-carving and he spends all his
spare time upon it.”
“ But where does he do it ? ” asked Larose, letting his
eyes roam round the room.
“In the other room,” replied Stone. “ He’s got a
proper bench and a lot of tools there. You shall see them
in a minute.” He continued, “ Well, the next morning
the old vicar came yet a third time and finding the door,
as before, unlatched and the house untenanted, he got
anxious—l understand he is always a fussy and nervous
man—and went round to the village constable to get him
to phone up all round to find out if any accident on the


roads had been reported during the night. Then he heard
the constable’s story about the document he had wit-
nessed the previous evening.” He turned quickly to the
other inspector. “ But now. Ransom, you take up the tale.”
The inspector from Colchester was middle-aged and
sharp-featured and had very shrewd grey eyes, and he com-
menced to speak at once in crisp and business-like tones.
“ Hearing what the vicar had to say and learning no
accident had been reported anywhere, the constable thought
it best to come and look over the house. Then, at once,
he formed the opinion that Daunt had gone away in a very
hurried manner and, a few minutes later, that his going
had been attended by very suspicious circumstances.”
He looked intently at Larose. “ You must understand,
sir, that the man had lived here for upwards of ten years,
and in a small village like this, to a great extent, everyone
gets to learn everyone’s belongings. So everyone was
aware that Daunt possessed only one cap, that, besides his
working clothes, he had only one suit, a shabby dark blue
one, and that he possessed a small suit-case that had
been often noticed strapped on to the carrier of his motor-
bicycle, also that he had one spare pair of boots, much
lighter than those he wore when gardening or digging
graves.”
He waved his arms round the room. “ Well, when
P.C. Harker came here he found neither the blue suit, the
second pair of boots, nor the suit-case, but, strangely
enough, he lighted upon the old cap under a fold of the
blanket upon the bed.”
Larose could have kicked himself in his discomfiture.
He had never for one moment anticipated any official
interest would be taken in the grave-digger’s disappear-
ance, and in consequence had been most careless and
perfunctory in laying the false trail.
Inspector Ransom went on. “ Then P.C. Harker, a
man of some imagination, made two discoveries that
made him lock up the house at once and report to


headquarters.” He spoke more slowly now. “ The first of
these discoveries was the finding of £25 in treasury notes,
wrapped up in a piece of newspaper, under the bed, and
the second was that bloody finger-mark upon an electric
torch found in the next room.”
Larose swore under his breath. The notes were, of
course, those he had given the grave-digger and the
latter must have dropped them out of his pocket as he
was pulling the block of marble from under the bed. As
for the finger-mark, he must have got blood on his hand
when placing it under the grave-digger’s head, and he
remembered now grabbing up the electric torch as he
turned out the petrol lamp before leaving the under-
ground chamber. He felt furious with himself.
The inspector continued unemotionally : “We were
here on the spot before noon and the circumstances of the
man’s disappearance striking us as rather extraordinary,
we began looking for finger-marks”—he nodded —“ and
I can tell you we found plenty, those of the grave-digger
and those of a stranger. The former’s were everywhere,
upon the crockery, the kitchen utensils, the table and the
handles of the carving tools in the next room ; but the
stranger’s we found only upon the blood-smeared torch,
a tumbler, a teaspoon, the handle of a knife, a treacle
tin in the cupboard, and upon the side of a half of Dutch
cheese, also in the cupboard.”
“ So you see,” remarked Stone, “ this second man,
besides smoking four cigarettes—the butts were found
in the fire-place—evidently had some sort of a meal here.”
“ How did you know which were Daunt’s finger-
marks ? ” asked Larose, the more and more chagrined at
the recital of their discoveries.
“ Oh, there were plenty of his in the church,” answered
Inspector Ransom. “ We found them everywhere upon
the brasses, the candlesticks and the vases it was his job
to clean.”
He went on ; “ Another very suspicious thing was


speedily brought to our knowledge, for it becoming
known that Daunt had disappeared, the old crippled
soldier hobbled up here in his slippers to know if we
would give him back a pair of his boots that Daunt had
taken from him, only the previous day, to mend.” He
paused dramatically. “And they were not to be found
anywhere.”
“ Of course, the significance there,” remarked Stone,
“ is that the grave-digger did not himself pack the things
into the suit-case when it was taken away, because, had he
done so, he would never have included the old soldier’s
boots, which were many times too small for him.”
“ Now we come to a last matter,” said Inspector
Ransom, “ and in its way it is quite as significant as any
of the other happenings. We have told you we have
proof positive that Daunt had a visitor that night, and we
believe we know exactly when and how he came and
went.”
“Oh ! oh! ” exclaimed Larose, in great perturbation.
“ Then did anyone see him ? ”
The inspector nodded. “ He was a complete stranger
to the village, and he left his car in the yard of the village
inn towards dusk on the evening of the day before Daunt
disappeared, and did not call for it until after dark the
following night.” He nodded again. “We have can-
vassed the district most thoroughly in all directions but
can find no trace of any family having entertained a
visitor for those twenty-four hours.”
Larose’s heart was beating quickly. “ Then what des-
cription did you get of this mysterious motorist ? ” he
asked with an effort, dreading what the answer would be.
The inspector frowned. “We got no description,
unhappily. A lad about ten had showed him in which
shed to garage his car, and all that he can tell us is that
the man smiled very nicely and had a wrist-watch. Then
when the man came to collect his car the next night, he
paid the landlord’s wife, who happened to be in the yard.


and she says she never saw his face properly as the yard
was too dark.”
“ But the car ! ” exclaimed Larose, beginning to be
assured that he was not in such danger as he had thought.
“ Surely someone can describe that ? ”
The inspector shook his head. “No one at the inn.
They can’t even give us its colour, let alone its make. It
was just driven into the shed that evening and the door
at once pushed to. Then no one appears to have gone
near the shed until the man himself took the car out the
next night.” He raised his hand emphatically. “ But
one person did happen to see the car. The vicar was just
returning from his dinner-party and it came out of
the inn yard about fifty yards in front of him. He says it
was a single-seater, an expensive-looking car, and there
was one person, a man, in it. Unfortunately, he was not
close enough up to be able to say what the man was like.”
Larose waved his hand round the room. “Do you
mean to maintain,” he asked, “that the man with the
expensive-looking car came and spent the whole night
here with Daunt, and that he gave himself a meal of
bread and cheese, and some treacle from that tin ? ”
“ We have no fixed opinions about it,” commented
Stone testily, “ and that is why I have got you here to
ask you what you think.”
They talked on for a few minutes and then Larose
was taken into the other room and shown where the
blood-marked torch had been found. He was told, too,
more of the grave-digger’s habits, and a beautifully exe-
cuted carved panel upon the bench was pointed out to him.
“ He sold his carvings all round the district, I am told,”
said Inspector Ransom, “ and the folks in the village often
saw his light going until long after midnight. He was
very industrious.”
Larose appeared to be interested in everything, and
looking thoughtfully round the room, was greatly re-
lieved to see that the big stone on the floor in the corner


seemed to be quite all right and no different from its
fellows.
They returned into the room and a short silence
followed before the big Scotland Yard man said briskly :
“To sum up, Gilbert, we believe there is foul play
about this man’s disappearance, firstly because he did not
come back to look for that £25 he dropped—oh, yes,
the notes were his, right enough, for the piece of news-
paper they were wrapped in was torn from a copy of the
Chelmsford Chronicle on that shelf there—and, secondly,
because of that visitor he had who left behind his bloody
finger-mark.”
He nodded smilingly at Larose. “ So, you who always
know everything, tell us now if we are right or wrong
in our suspicions.”
Larose smiled back. “ Well, to be honest, Charlie,
with great respect to both you and Inspector Ransom,
I think you are making much too much of this finger-
mark. Just think how often you and I and all of us
have cut our fingers when using a sharp pocket-knife !
And there was that torch right among all those razor-
edged carving tools upon that bench I ” He waved his
arm round again. “ Why, if anyone were going to cut
his finger in this house, in what part of it would he be
most likely to do it ? Where you found the torch, of
course ! ” He shook his head. “ No, that blood on the
torch leaves me quite cold.”
Stone nodded smilingly. “ A good point, my son.
Go on.”
“Of course, there is no doubt,” continued Larose,
“ that the man’s disappearance is most mysterious, but
there is really nothing to show it was not a voluntary
one. With you, I agree that his going off was hurried and
suggests guilt in some form or another, but I don’t see
the very slightest connection between his visitor and the
party who garaged his car here, at the village inn. Good-
ness gracious, if he were the visitor, then presumably


he must have stayed here from the Monday night about
nine until the Tuesday night after ten ! And yet you find
his finger-marks only upon the table, a tumbler, a tea-
spoon, a single plate, a treacle tin and that lump of
cheese, besides the torch, of course ! But if he had been
here during all that time, surely you would have found
as many of them about as you found of Daunt’s ?
And if he wasn’t here, where was he ? ” He looked at
Inspector Ransom. “ Did anyone notice a stranger
hanging about the village ? ”
The inspector shook his head. “ No, and we have
considered that and it puz2les us. No one seems to have
noticed him, even when he came out of the inn yard after
having garaged his car.” He spoke sharply. “ But why
should anyone not having business in the village or sur-
rounding districts have garaged here at all ? That looks
fishy, doesn’t it ? ”
“ Peculiar, but not necessarily fishy, as you call it,”
commented Larose. He smiled. “ He might have had a
love affair six or seven miles away, or some other kind
of business that he didn’t want broadcast.” He shrugged
his shoulders. “At any rate, surely we can infer his
business was not a secret one to do with anyone here in
the village, or it wouldn’t have come openly or just before
dark, as you say. He didn’t creep in after nightfall; and
it was not his fault that no one noticed and remembers
him. At any rate, he gave them every chance,”
“ Quite plausible, Gilbert,” agreed Stone readily, “ and
it may after all be only just a coincidence that we had the
stranger at the inn and the mysterious visitor here. I say
mysterious, because Daunt had never been known to have
a visitor before.”
“ And how do you know it wasn’t some local person
who came here,” asked Larose, “ some man or woman
from the village ? That seems the most natural eventu-
ality to me.”
The Colchester inspector spoke very slowly. “We


have enquired everywhere in the village and we can
learn of no one who came up here. No one admits it.”
“ Of course not,” commented Larose, “ no one would
if there was anything they wanted to hide.” He turned to
Inspector Stone. “ No, Charlie, I can’t for one moment
see anything of foul play here. I repeat, the man’s dis-
appearance is, of course, most mysterious, but I feel sure
that it will be accounted for later. He was probably
mixed up in something shady and his visitor that night
perhaps came to warn him to clear out while he could.”
He shook his head. “ Your three points of suspicion
don’t appeal to me at all. He may not have become aware
of the loss of those notes until the next day, when he was
miles and miles away, and then he may not have had the
remotest idea where he had lost them. I think they fell
out of his pocket when he was crawling about under the
bed, and that surely suggests that he was there looking
for his cap which he was expecting to find somewhere
there. He evidently remembered throwing it upon the
bed.”
Stone looked doubtful. “ But his search was a most
careless one and it suggests fright and a desperate hurry.”
“ Admitted,” nodded Larose, “ but it gives us no
suggestion that he was murdered.”
“ But the taking away of that old soldier’s boots,”
frowned Stone, “ looks very sinister to me, for in what-
soever haste he was he wouldn’t have pushed those into
his suit-case. We know the case was quite a small one,
and it must have been filled to its utmost capacity to hold
what it undoubtedly did.”
“ But how do you know,” asked Larose instantly,
“ that this unknown visitor of his didn’t dump a lot of his
things for him in a waiting car ? You have told me you
found the sidecar outfit in perfect running order and with
plenty of petrol; therefore, if Daunt took flight in a
desperate hurry, and did not make use of it, it could only
have been because he had a better conveyance at his


disposal, and one probably that would not be so easily
traced if he came to be looked for.”
“ But our point is,” was Stone’s retort, “ that he didn’t
take flight at all.” He scoffed contemptuously. “ A
waiting car, indeed, in this little village where a strange
cat crossing the road would have been noticed at once ! ”
“ But not in the dead of night! ” argued Larose.
“ You don’t know when the man left! You don’t know
that he returned to his house immediately after visiting
the policeman I You don’t know he wasn’t still away
when that vicar came again after dark ! ” He snapped his
fingers together, “ You know nothing of his movements
that night, but to my thinking, I repeat there is nothing
about the disappearance which, with all its undoubted
mystery, suggests anything of foul play.”
The two inspectors made no comment but both of
them looked unconvinced. Then Larose went on, with
mischief now sparkling in his eyes : “ And about that
paper with Daunt’s signature which the policeman here
witnessed that night! The fact that be begged an
envelope surely meant that he was going to post it, didn’t
it ? Well, have you asked at the post office if any letter
of his was put in the box that night ? They are sure to
take notice of every letter in a little village like this.”
Inspector Ransom frowned. “We haven’t exactly
asked, but, in enquiring about his habits, we learnt that
he had never been known to receive a letter and they
don’t think he has ever written one. They don’t even
know his handwriting.”
“ Then if a letter in an unknown handwriting was
noticed that night,” went on Larose, “ it was probably
the very one you might be interested in.” He smiled.
“A long shot, but still it might lead to something, and
if you ask me, I should enquire quickly before they have
had time to forget.”
The inspector smiled back. “ I’ll do it at once, Mr.
Larose. It’s not a bad suggestion.”


Larose moved towards the door. “ Well, I must be
going now, Charlie, but here’s a last thought for you in
parting.” He spoke very slowly. “ When this grave-
digger disappeared, in what way it is impossible to deter-
mine, something went with him and that, yet again, does
not suggest to me the furtive flight of a murderer.” He
paused a moment to enjoy the puzzled look upon the
other’s face and then rapped out sharply: “ Where’s that
other lamp he did his carving at night with ? ” His arm
shot out towards the little paraffin lamp upon the shelf.
“ You are not going to make out that when he was
working until the small hours of the morning that that
was the only light he had ! Impossible ! How could he
have done delicate carving by that light ? No, no, if you
ask those who saw his light at night they will most
certainly say it was a bright one and not from a trumpery
little thing like that.” He looked amused. “ So would a
murderer carrying away a heavy body trouble to be
bothered with a lamp as well ? ”
Stone nodded thoughtfully. “ Good, Gilbert. Then
we’ll find out about his having another lamp.” He looked
round the room and made a pretence of shuddering.
“ Still, my lad, I don’t care what you say, I smell blood
here. An instinct tells me this poor fellow died some
dreadful form of death, and I shall come back here again
in a few days to find out what it was.”
Larose made a grimace of pretended horror, and
appeared to shudder, too —but his shudder was a real one.
The two inspectors accompanied him to his car and,
after cordial good-byes, watched him drive away. Then
Stone turned with a dry smile to his companion. “ And
what do you think of him. Ransom ? ” he asked.
Inspector Ransom considered. “ Clever, very clever,”
he replied slowly, “ but ” —he hesitated—“ it almost
seemed to me a bit of special pleading to get us to drop
the whole business.”
“ Hum! ” remarked Stone thoughtfully, “ but I
M


wouldn’t exactly say that. We asked him for his opinion
and he gave it, and he saw some things that we didn’t.”
He shook his head frowningly. “ Still, I’m not satisfied,
and, as I say. I’ll come here again with you next week.
Good-bye.” He in turn drove away.
In the meantime Larose was in a very uneasy frame of
mind. “ Most awkward! ”he told himself ruefully. “ I’m
always afraid of Charlie ! He’s as stubborn as a mule ! ”
A look of some relief came into his face. “ Still, he may
be put off the trail altogether when he learns what Daunt
wrote. In any case it would all have come out in a few
days and if, at the post office, they remember the letter
addressed to Lady Roding, which they are almost certain
to do, for it must have aroused their curiosity, then that
Colchester fellow will be interviewing her ladyship within
a few hours.” He chuckled in amusement. “ Oh, what a
surprise, and won’t he just think what a bull’s-eye I made! ”
And certainly Inspector Ransom did think Larose’s
reasoning most remarkable. The letter posted to Lady
Roding was remembered perfectly well, and within five
minutes the inspector was tearing off to Roding Hall as
fast as his car would take him.
Yes, Lady Roding was at home, he was told, and upon
presenting his card he was shown into a small room,
whilst the butler went off to find out if she would see him.
She appeared almost immediately, and the inspector,
explaining the reason for his calling, asked her point-
blank if she had received a letter from a man called Daunt,
living at Monks Arden.
She hesitated just a moment, and then nodded an
affirmative.
“And what was in it?” asked the inspector sharply.
Then, as she hesitated again, he added apologetically:
“ Of course, you’re not compelled to answer me, but
you’ll have to tell everything to someone soon, and it
would save a lot of trouble to us if you took me into your
confidence now.”


“ Oh, but I ought really to have no objection at all,”
smiled Lady Roding, 44 for it will be all public property
to-morrow.” She sighed. 44 Still, all that has happened is
so extraordinary and incredible that I feel quite nervous
in saying anything about it to anybody,” and then she
proceeded to tell him the very carefully thought-out story
that Larose had arranged should be given to the public.
She told how, to her amazement, but a few days
previously, she had received tidings that her husband,
who was supposed to have died nearly a year ago, was
alive, and then before she had had time to doubt their
truth, he had been brought into her presence. He did
not know what had happened to him or where he had
been during all those months, for his memory was quite a
blank all that time. His mind had only just cleared up
and then, all of a sudden, remembering who he was, he
had come home to her at once. Amazement upon
amazement, two days ago she had received this letter
from the grave-digger of the churchyard at Monks Arden,
and he had written her that upon the night following
her husband being laid in the family vault, he had broken
in and, opening the coffin, had found him to be alive.
And all the time that she was speaking the inspector
had sat listening, open-mouthed, too astonished to inter-
rupt and ask any questions.
44 And only this morning,” she concluded, 44 my hus-
band has gone up to town to arrange for the proceedings
that will restore him, legally, to his position.”
44 But the letter,” gasped the inspector, 44 can I see it ? ”
44 Yes, of course you can,” replied Lady Roding, 44 but
he’s taken it with him this morning to show to his lawyers.
I’ll give you their address and you must go to them.”
44 But can you tell me exactly what he said ? ” asked
the inspector,
44 Almost word for word,” replied Lady Roding. 44 We
have read it so often that I know .it off by heart,” and then
she proceeded to repeat to him what Daunt had written.


“ And have you communicated with the writer,” asked
the inspector sharply when she had finished, “ to find out
if the letter is genuine ? ”
Lady Roding shook her head. “ No, my husband
thought it best to leave everything to his lawyers.” Then
she asked quickly: “ But how did you come to know I
had had a letter ? We have told no one as yet.”
“ The man has disappeared,” frowned the inspector,
“ and we have been trying to find out what has become
of him.”
“ A-ah ! we were half afraid he would go away after
that confession,” exclaimed Lady Roding, “ but I didn’t
get his letter until the evening after the day it was posted;
and then, yesterday, my husband had some important
business to attend to here and couldn’t get up to town.”
She looked puzzled. “ And you’ve been trying to find
him already ? ”
“ But not for that,” grunted the inspector. “ He went
off so suddenly we thought he had met with some acci-
dent.” He nodded. “ But now, if we find out what he
wrote you is true, we shall be after him quick and
lively.” He whistled. “ But what an extraordinary thing—
Sir Eric being buried alive ! I’ve never heard anything
like it in all my life 1 ”
And the next day when Inspector Stone, busy upon a
murder enquiry in Carlisle, saw great startling headlines
upon the front page of an evening newspaper, just red-
hot from the press, he whistled too.
“ Whew ! but what a sensation it will cause! ” He
frowned. “ Now, who the deuce could have employed
that grave-digger to go body-snatching ? He’ll have to
be trailed and punished, even if the other beggar goes free.
Goodness gracious, what a tit-bit for the public ! ”


CHAPTER IX
THE LIVING AND THE DEAD
ONCE it had been determined that the secrecy of
Sir Eric Roding’s return to life should be no
longer maintained, Larose had insisted that the
publicity must be as full and immediate as
possible. So, acting upon his advice, the same morning
upon which the baronet had interviewed his men of law
he had also approached an acquaintance of his, the editor
of the Daily Messenger , and laid everything before him,
in order that with no delay the public should learn in one
telling all they were going to be told.
Of course, as could only have been expected, the
announcement caused a tremendous sensation every-
where, but, happily for Sir Eric and Lady Roding, within
forty-eight hours the intense public interest was suddenly
switched off into quite a different direction by the news
coming through of the assassination of one of the world’s
foremost dictators.
So, as in all time, one man’s evil had been another’s good,
and the inmates of Roding Hall were relegated to a com-
parative obscurity which was as joyful as it was unexpected.
The processes of the law were slow and there appeared
every prospect of the steps for the legal restoration of Sir
Eric to his title dragging on for many weeks. With
the opening of the Rodney vault and the finding of the
empty coffin, a warrant had been at once issued for
the arrest of the grave-digger, but no tidings as to his
place of hiding had come to hand and, from the very first,
not the slightest clue had been picked up as to how he had
succeeded in making his escape.


In the meantime, not an hour had been lost in putting
into execution Larose’s plan for getting the original
house-party together again. Each one of them had been
written to and invited for a few days from the Tuesday
of the following week. The letters had been posted the
same day that Sir Eric had gone to town, so that they
could reach their destinations upon the same morning as
the Daily Messenger was proclaiming its amazing story of
the baronet’s return and, in consequence, none of the
recipients were taken by surprise.
Then the telephone at Roding Hall had had a busy time,
and such was their intense interest that every one of those
invited had accepted the invitation.
So upon the Monday afternoon Larose and his wife had
arrived, and, under the pretence of exhibiting her new
electric cooker, Lady Roding had taken them into the
kitchen, in order that the former could give the once-over
to those of the maids he would not encounter when
they were upon their duties in the living part of the house.
But Larose very quickly came to the conclusion that the
culprit would not be found among the servants. All the
girls save the cook were well under thirty, and she was a
pleasant-looking woman of middle age, whose direst deed
in life had probably been the wringing of a fowl’s neck.
“ No, nothing doing among the staff,” Larose told Sir
Eric that night when the two of them were discussing
things in the library. “ They are all much too ordinary to
have attempted to commit a crime of that nature, and
not one of them suggests to me the necessary imagination
and cunning.”
“ But it could not have been one of my friends,” sighed
Sir Eric. “ The more I think of them, the more impossible
it seems.”
“ Well, if it wasn’t one of them, who was it ? ” asked
Larose sharply. He took a paper out of his pocket and
scanned it with a frown. “ The devil of it is I can’t
conceive how any of them would have benefited by


your death.” He went on musingly, with his eyes still
upon the paper. ££ Still, without having seen any of
them I should be inclined to suspect either this Carlton
James, the artist, or else Miles Hellingsby. The first
because ”
“ But Carlton James and I have been close friends since
our boyhood,” broke in Sir Eric indignantly. “ We were
six years together at Eton.”
“ I don’t care about that,” commented Larose grimly.
“ All I know is that his £ The Mortuary ’ in last year’s
Academy, which everyone called the painting of the year,
was as morbid a bit of work as anyone could possibly
imagine. He must have examined scores and scores of
dead people to have picked out those faces he put on the
canvas, and I’m wondering if he mayn’t have been curious
as to how you, with your unusual profile, would look
when stretched out.” He raised one hand protestingly.
“ No, no, the idea may not be as far-fetched as you
imagine, for he’s known to revel in gruesome subjects,
and artistic folk are often a mad crew.” He nodded
emphatically. “ Yes, many of the crankiest of them would
sacrifice everything for what they call £ Art,’ and it’s no
secret both James’ father and one brother are at present
in a lunatic asylum.”
Sir Eric reddened in annoyance. “ That’s his misfor-
tune,” he said quickly.
“ Yes, and it may have been yours, too,” added Larose.
“ The trouble may run all through the family.”
“ And I suppose,” went on the baronet sarcastically,
“ my friend Hellingsby would have been curious, too, as
to how I looked when dead.”
Larose showed no resentment at Sir Eric’s tone. “ I can
conceive no motive there,” he frowned, £t except ” —he
hesitated and shot a quick glance at his companion—
££ except that he’s probably a great admirer of your wife.”
££ And what of that ? ” asked Sir Eric coolly. ££ Why
should it make him evilly disposed towards me ? ”


Again Larose hesitated and then he rapped out quickly
“ I’m sorry, as it’s a brutal thing to say, but have you
ever considered that, if you hadn’t come back. Miles
Hellingsby might have proposed marriage to Lady
Roding ? ”
Sir Eric turned away his eyes. “We won’t discuss
that,” he said very quietly, “as it can have no possible
bearing on the idea that my friend wished to murder me.
As you know quite well, he was a married man until
three months ago, and so my decease nearly a whole
year back could have been of no interest to him in the
way you refer to.”
“Of course not, of course not! ” exclaimed Larose,
regretting now that he had asked the question. He went
on : “ But tell me, do you really think this man was fond
of his wife ? ”
“ Certainly, they were a most devoted couple.” Sir
Eric shrugged his shoulders. “Of course, these things
are often impossible for outsiders to understand, and
I admit my wife and I have often speculated upon their
marrying. He was a good-looking man of the world
and she was a plain country mouse, a good many years
the elder.” He nodded. “ Still, we always came to the
conclusion that their marriage was a love match.”
“ She had the money ! ” commented Larose dryly.
“ But there everyone was very wide of the mark,”
returned Sir Eric sharply, “ for my wife tells me she saw
in the newspapers only a few weeks back that Mrs.
Hellingsby had left only just over £4,000.”
A short silence followed and then Larose said
brusquely : “ Now look here, Sir Eric, you’ll have to get
over being annoyed when I criticise any of your friends.
We’ve started to try to find out who deliberately poisoned
you, and if we don’t get to know ” —he looked very grim
and stern—“ you just take it in that even your wife will
be for ever among the suspected.”
“My wife ! ” gasped the baronet. “ Good God ! ”


Larose spoke as if he were getting angry, “ Yes, and
I say that, purposely, to bring home to you that there
must be no weakening or drawing back on your part.
You must help me in every way.” He raised his hand
emphatically. “ You have told me you were attended in
your illness by Lady Roding, the butler and the head
parlourmaid. Rose, and that all your food was brought to
you by one of them. But you add that your guests kept
coming in for little chats, on and off, all day. So excluding
your wife, because to bring her in is inconceivable, and
the servants, because my experience in crime assures me
that, even if there were any desire to injure you, they
have none of them the courage or resource to attempt to
poison you —it leaves only the guests. Now, do you
follow me ? ”
“ Yes,” nodded the baronet resignedly. He heaved a
big sigh. “ So I’ll be as hard and suspicious as you are and
play the spy on those I consider my staunchest friends.”
“ Good ! ” said Larose smilingly, “ and now for the
plan of campaign. We’ll replace the jar right in front of
everything as before, but I’ll lock the cabinet now and
take away the key. Then you’ll keep everyone away
from the drawing-room until after dinner to-morrow
night, and even then, don’t let a soul go in until I’ve
hidden myself behind the curtains in front of one of those
french windows. Then I’ll watch everyone as they enter
the room and see who looks the quickest at the cabinet
with the blue jar.” The joy of the hunter was in his eyes.
“ My theory is that the would-be murderer will be
wondering if you have associated your trance with the
green paste and have looked to see if any of it has gone.
So the first thing he will do will be to see if the jar has
been moved and there will be a careless intentness about
him that will single him out from all the others.”
The baronet frowned. “ But it will be no proof
positive if someone’s eyes happen to stray in the direction
of the cabinet,” he commented very doubtfully.


“ Certainly not,” agreed Larose. “ That will be only
the first try-out.” He nodded. “ Still, it is not in human
nature that the guilty person will not look at the jar and
I shall be inclined to rule out at once all who do not give
at least one glance towards the cabinet.”
Early the following afternoon the guests began to
arrive and by tea-time Larose had been introduced to
everyone.
Mrs. Larose was already acquainted with some of them,
and to all of them Larose knew that he himself must be
an object of some interest, not only on account of his
reputation as a one-time officer of the Criminal Investiga-
tion Department of Scotland Yard, but also because of
the romance attaching to the circumstances in which he
had come to win his wife. Added to that he was quite
aware some of them would be mildly wondering at now
finding him there, because, as old friends of Sir Eric,
they would know he had not been a guest at Roding
Hall before.
Presently, acting upon his suggestion, the baronet
made a little speech to his guests.
They would all, he said, be naturally very curious as
to what had happened to him, but he really could not
tell them any more than they had already read in the
newspapers. He remembered absolutely nothing from
the moment he was falling asleep in his bedroom upstairs,
and his mind had been a perfect blank for nearly a whole
year afterwards, until he had happened to meet an old
friend who recognised him and addressed him by name.
Then everything up to the moment of his becoming
unconscious had come back to him and, for the first time,
he knew who he was. Of that blank year, however, he
still remembered nothing, and the doctors had told him it
would probably now remain a sealed book to him for ever.
He could not say he had undergone any suffering, but
the whole subject was naturally a very painful one for
him, and so it would be kind if they none of them


asked any questions. He just wanted them to pick up
the threads of their friendship with him as from the
moment when he had been taken ill.
There were not a few moist eyes while he was speaking,
and, when he had finished, old Colonel Bendex patted
him upon the back.
“ A sensible little speech, my boy,” he exclaimed
heartily, “ and I’m sure we will all respect your wishes.”
His eyes twinkled. “ But there’s just one little personal
matter I’d like to mention. You still owe me eight-and-
sixpence over that last night at bridge.” The tension
was at once relaxed and everybody laughed.
That night at dinner, Larose looked round the beautiful
old dining-room and felt inclined to pinch himself hard
and rub his eyes.
Here was he in the company of distinguished-looking
men and lovely women, trying to isolate among them
an utterly callous and black-hearted murderer. The
surroundings, too, were delightful, and it made his task
the more difficult as there was nothing anywhere that
gave the very slightest idea of any evil-doing.
The room was panelled in beautiful old oak, there were
priceless pictures and tapestries upon the walls, upon the
table was a wealth of scintillating crystal and sparkling
silverware, and the softly shaded candle lights suggested
only fairyland and the wonder of happy dreams.
Then there was the smell of the beautifully cooked
food, the aroma of the rare wines, and the subtle perfume
of the women’s hair.
Everything that wealth and good taste could bring to-
gether had been provided, and there did not seem one
man or woman present who was not of a kindly dis-
position, and whose personality did not in some way
harmonise with the general happiness of things. And the
guests should have had every reason for being happy men
and women, as all there were those whom the struggles
and poverty of life had passed by.


There was the Honourable Charles Mountraven, who
had won two Waterloo Cups and whose greyhounds
were the swiftest in the world, a debonair, happy-faced
man in the early thirties, with a young wife, whose Irish
loveliness made it difficult for anyone to keep his eyes
away from her for very long.
There was Miles Hellingsby, suave and courteous,
a well-educated man of the world, and obviously, like
everyone else, a great admirer of the charming chatelaine
of Roding Hall, but at the same time a warm and staunch
friend of Sir Eric, too.
There was Carlton James, the artist, with his monocle
and pleasantly drawling speech, looking out from lazy
eyes upon the lionising world which paid him fabulous
sums for his paintings.
There was Blair Hutton, whom one could not pass
by. His face was quiet and plain, but it spoke of authority,
as it well might, considering that he employed more
than two thousand hands in his mills in Lancashire,
There was Jasper Roke, the rising King’s Counsel,
who was so handsome that, with any women upon the
jury, the result of a case bade almost to be a foregone
conclusion.
Then last among the men was the hard-bitten but
aristocratic old Colonel Bendex. He had a joke and jest
for everyone, but his old eyes were shadowed with the
horrors of a score and more battlefields and his mind
was scarred with the memory of a dearly loved wife who,
only a few years previously, had met with a dreadful
death under most tragic circumstances.
And then there were the ladies, not one of whom did
not bear the stamp of ease and refinement, and all of
whom were young and attractive to look upon.
Larose sipped his wine thoughtfully. Verily, he was
the snake in the grass in the beautiful garden of bright
flowers.
The dinner was not protracted, ard when everyone


was in the lounge, Larose slipped away and, as arranged,
hid himself behind the thick curtain in front of one
of the long windows in the drawing-room. Lady Roding,
nervous and uneasy, had been drawn into the plot, and
the whole party were presently to be inveigled into the
room to hear one of the girls sing and accompany herself
upon the piano.
Larose was in good view of the cabinet and, if necessary,
could escape at any moment, without being seen, through
the window into the garden.
For a few minutes he sat in silence in his retreat and
then the sound of approaching voices warned him to get
ready.
Lady Roding came in first, escorted by Colonel
Bendex, and then, gaily chatting and laughing, the others
followed. But no one gave so much as a glance in the
direction of the cabinet until Miles Hellingsby appeared,
talking smilingly to Mrs. Mountraven. Then, the instant
they were in the room, the smile dropped from
Hellingsby’s face, he appeared to draw in a deep breath
and, hooding his eyes, he stared straight in the direction
Larose had been so sure someone would look. There
was no doubt about it. Hellingsby stared hard at the
cabinet for quite four or five seconds. Then his features
had relaxed and, once again, he was all smiles.
Larose moistened his dry lips with his tongue and
waited breathlessly to see if he would look again. But no,
he appeared to take no further interest in the cabinet and,
a few moments later, had turned his back to the
window.
“ Good God,” gasped Larose, “and when he looked
like that he looked capable of anything. So, perhaps, all
along he’s been consumed with passion for Lady Roding
and it must have been that he could not bear the thought
of anyone else possessing her ! ”
But then suddenly into Larose’s confident assurance
came a dreadful doubt, for Carlton James, detaching


himself from the girl he had been talking to, walked
over to the cabinet and deliberately planted himself
squarely in front of it. He screwed his monocle more
firmly in his eye and for a long minute stared through
the glass door at the cabinet’s contents. Then he dropped
his monocle and turned abruptly away.
“ Whew ! ” whistled Larose softly, “ the very two I
picked out! ” His jaw dropped. “ But they can’t both
have done it! ” He nodded thoughtfully. “ Still, this
chap’s interest seemed altogether too open to suggest
he is the guilty party, unless he is one of those reckless
brazen ones who imagine they can get away with any-
thing.”
He let himself out into the garden and rejoined the
company just as the girl was beginning to sing. Out
of the tail of his eye he saw that Miles Hellingsby was
regarding him thoughtfully, as if he were curious about
something.
When everyone had gone off to bed Sir Eric tiptoed
into his room. “ Well,” he asked eagerly, but with
undoubted uneasiness in his tones, “ have you found out
anything ? ”
“ I can’t say,” replied Larose. “ I’m not certain yet,”
—he hesitated a moment —“ and if Ido not form any
opinion, I don’t think I had better tell you, at any rate
until all your guests have gone. Your manner might,
perhaps, suggest that something was wrong.”
“ But from outward appearances,” asked the baronet
sharply, “ can you for one moment credit that there is a
would-be murderer among us here ? ”
“ But outward appearances amongst clever and edu-
cated people count for very little,” replied Larose, “ for
all their fives long they have been consciously or uncon-
sciously training themselves to wear a mask. Even the
most harmless of them have secrets they must hide.
Why, if we were honest about it, when we were talking
so casually and light-heartedly among ourselves at dinner


to-night, we probably had, all of us, thoughts that we
should have been simply horrified at anyone else learning.
For instance, when I was looking round and ” —he
stopped suddenly and then snapped his fingers together
and laughed—“ but there, there, I’m not going to give
myself away.” He became solemn again and shook his
head. “ No, from outward appearances, your guests are
all charming and inoffensive, perfectly guiltless men and
women.”
“ Then you have come to the conclusion ” began
Sir Eric frowningly.
“ that there is a murderer among them ! ” inter-
rupted Larose. “ Certainly, I am more positive than ever
about it! He nodded. “ Well, keep them away from
the drawing-room again until to-morrow night, and then
have that pretty Miss Montressor in to sing a couple more
of her songs. I won’t be behind the curtain then, for my
search is narrowing down and I haven’t so many to
watch.”
So the following night, after a long day of golf, the
company again trooped into the drawing-room, Larose
taking good care to be among the first, so that standing
with his back to the windows he could watch the faces
of Miles Hellingsby and Carlton James as they came in.
This time he had prepared a little surprise if either of
them continued to be interested in the blue jar, for now
it was well parked behind some of the other curios and
no longer visible unless one closely looked into the
cabinet.
He drew blood at once and in so startling a fashion
that it made him wish he had kept to his former place
behind the curtains.
Directly Hellingsby entered the room he looked, as
before, in the direction of the cabinet, for the moment
his glance being just casual and careless, but then in-
stantly it changed to one of intense interest. He frowned,
he stared hard and then with a jerk he turned his face


round and let his eyes roam upon the others in the room.
Fortunately, Larose thought, he did not see him first
and so could not have been aware that he had been
watched. So Larose instantly began an animated con-
versation with Colonel Bendex and felt, rather than saw,
that Hellingsby was looking at him.
“ And, of course,” he told himself, “ if he comes to
suspect for one second that anyone is aware the paste
has gone and is associating its disappearance with Sir
Eric’s trance, he will jump instantly to the conclusion
that some little game is going on. Then he will speculate
feverishly as to whether I, as a one-time detective, come
in anywhere.” He gritted his teeth together. “ Still, he
can be certain of nothing, whereas I am. He is the guilty
party, right enough, but how to bring it home to him will
be the very devil of a job,”
Then the next day Larose sensed that Miles Hellingsby
was doing everything he could to ingratiate himself with
him. He was always about where Larose was, was always
ready to talk affably to him, and in every way was pre-
pared to make himself as agreeable a companion as
possible.
And Larose responded to his overtures, talking freely
of the many interesting cases he had been engaged upon
and the many thrilling adventures he had had. He made
no further attempts, however, to get behind Hellingsby’s
defence, having as yet formed no plan as to how he could
unmask him.
So things were up to the fourth day, the one before
the party was to break up ; and then chance played into
Larose’s hands and caused his lively imagination to
speculate the more and more about the good-looking
widower.
It had been a pouring wet afternoon and everyone was
in the billiard-room, when about an hour before dinner
the butler came into announce that a gentleman, who
would not give his name, wanted to see Larose upon


urgent business. Very puzzled, Larose went into the
room where the visitor had been ushered.
To his amazement, and somewhat to his discom-
fiture, as he had not communicated with him since that
afternoon at Carmel Abbey, he recognised Wimpole
Carstairs, the cast of whose wife’s face had first started
him upon the trail he was now following.
“ Oh, I’m so sorry to trouble you, Mr. Larose,” began
the spiritualist most apologetically, “ when you are upon
a visit to friends, but the matter is a most urgent one or I
would not have intruded. I have just come from Carmel
Abbey and they told me I should find you here.” He gave
Larose no chance to speak and went on hurriedly : “ Now,
are you prepared to give me information as to how that
cast of my poor wife’s face came to be made ? ”
“ We-11, no,” replied Larose, hesitatingly. “ I really
am not. Later on, perhaps, I may be ”
“ No, don’t take another step,” broke in Mr. Carstairs
quickly. “ I don’t want any more enquiries made. Leave
the matter just where it is. I’m quite satisfied never to
know.” He lowered his voice darkly. “ I’ve seen my
dear wife and she is at peace, perfect peace. She has told
me so.”
“ You have seen your wife ? ” gasped Larose, for the
moment not taking in what he meant.
“ Yes, on the night of Wednesday of last week,”
replied Mr. Carstairs solemnly, “ and I should have come
to you at once if I had not been laid up with influenza.
I didn’t ring you up because it is too sacred a matter to
speak about over the telephone. We had a seance that
Wednesday night, and directly the lights were lowered
Alma came to me and said she could rest at last. Some-
thing had happened and she was no longer in distress.”
“ On the night of Wednesday last week ! ” echoed
Larose, remembering with a shudder it was then that the
grave-digger of Monks Arden had died.
“ Yes,” said Mr. Carstairs, “ and I saw her so clearly
N


and her words were so plain. But only a smile from her
and the few whispered words and she was gone.” His
face lost its rapt expression and became sharp and
business-like. “ But look here, Mr, Larose, I’m in some
trouble with my car, as the radiator is leaking terribly;
in fact I don’t think I dare run it another hundred yards
as it is. Now do you think I could ring up from here to
the nearest garage, and get them to come out and tow me
in?”
Like a flash it came to Larose under what deep obliga-
tion Sir Eric Roding was to this man, for but for his
having come to Carmel Abbey, the baronet might still
have been an inmate of Dr. Benmichael’s asylum.
So he said briskly, “ Oh, I can do better for you than
that. Sir Eric has got a first-class mechanic here and I’m
sure he’ll be able to put the radiator right, at any rate to
enable you to get home. Just wait a minute and I’ll bring
Sir Eric to you.”
The secretly thrilled baronet was introduced and not
only arranged that the radiator should be put right, but
also insisted that, in the meantime, Mr. Carstairs should
dine with them. It was in vain the latter pleaded he had
no dinner things with him, for Sir Eric averred laugh-
ingly that the presence of so eminent a man among them
—of course he had heard of Wimpole Carstairs —even
in his pyjamas would be welcome.
So, after making himself tidy, Mr. Carstairs was
introduced to all the house-party in the lounge and it was
his turn now to be thrilled when he found that one young
lady there had heard him lecture and several were
acquainted with his magazine, The New Spiritualism.
And at dinner, Mr. Carstairs showed himself a delight-
ful conversationalist. He could talk well and interest-
estingly upon many subjects, and of spiritualism he spoke
with most persuasive eloquence and, almost, as one
inspired.
“ And do you really mean to say,” asked Carlton


James, who, from scoffing contempt was now inclined
to pass to quite respectful inquiry, “ that you can actually
assure us you have spoken to people who are dead ? ”
“ Most certainly,” replied Mr. Carstairs warmly.
“ Only last week, for example, I had speech with a dear
one who has gone before.” He shook his head. “ But
no long conversations, mind you, just a yes, or a no,
and a few whispered words.” He spoke very solemnly.
“ You see, the strain for us mortals, when we are brought
in contact with the spirit world, is too terrible to bear for
very long. It is only after years and years of meditation
that we become more inured.”
“ But what do you see, Mr. Carstairs ? ” asked Roke,
the good-looking King’s Counsel, repressing a smile. “ I
mean, do you see a form clothed in all the trappings of
this wicked world or ” —he coughed slightly—“ just a
nude figure ? ”
Mr. Carstairs appeared to sense no ridicule in the
question. “ Oh, we never see any garments, sir,” he
replied, “ just the face and a sort of shadowy mist where
the form should be.”
“ Then what are their faces like ? ” asked the K.C.
“ Do you see them as you knew them when they were
upon this earth and in good health, or do you see them in
their last sicknesses or exactly at the moment of their
deaths ? ”
“ That depends,” answered Mr. Carstairs instantly.
“ They appear to you in the way best suited to convey
the message they are bringing from the spirit world.
Generally, they appear to us happy and purged from all
earthly sorrows, but there are occasions when, from some
wrong suffered, their spirits are not at rest, and”—he
sighed heavily—“ then your heart grieves for them.”
“ But when you have one of these meetings, or
seances, as you call them,” asked Mrs. Mountraven
prettily, “ does everyone see these faces of the dead ? ”
“ No, no,” exclaimed Mr. Carstairs, “ often only the


medium sees them. You must understand the medium
is a very gifted individual, endowed, naturally, with
exceptional powers. In some manner he has become
aware that he possesses these powers and he has, in conse-
quence, cultivated them until he has become an adept.
So upon many, many occasions he sees when everyone
else present is blind.”
“ But must you always have a medium,” asked Mrs.
Mountraven, “ when you have these sittings ? ”
“ Most certainly,” replied Mr. Carstairs, “ and the
more gifted and experienced he is, the more likely are
you to get manifestations.” He became animated. “ You
see, it is he who opens the doors of the spirit world.
Without him, the dead cannot leave their homes.”
“ And what happens then ? ” asked Colonel Bendex
smilingly. “ Does he—does he himself bring these dead
people into the room, like a sort of conductor ? ”
“ Oh, no, he has only prepared the way for them to
come. It is the others at the seance who, concentrating
all their thoughts, summon whomsoever they desire to
appear.”
“ But you say it’s only this medium who sees them
when they come ! ” went on the old Colonel.
Mr. Carstairs shook his head smilingly. “ No, I don’t
say that. I say he may see them when no one else does,
because of his natural gifts and developed power, but
often they are seen by all assembled at the seance.”
A short silence followed and then Carlton James asked
dryly : “ Are you a medium, sir ? ”
Mr. Carstairs nodded, “ Yes, but not quite in the front
rank. Still, I’m generally successful and rarely have a
blank seance.”
The artist beamed. “ Then what about giving us one
after dinner ? It would be a great thrill for all of us, lam
sure.”
Mr. Carstairs looked horrified. “ But I’m not out for
giving people thrills, sir. Spiritualism is my religion,


and it is no drawing-room entertainment, I assure you.
It is a very solemn thing.”
“ Then I beg your pardon,” said James most politely.
He kicked the K.C. under the table and continued very
solemnly : “ Well, we’ll put it another way. With it, as
you say, your religion, you’ll naturally be wanting to make
a few converts. So what better material could you have
than is now here ? ” He shrugged his shoulders. “ I my-
self never go to any church, but I admit I feel there is
something wanting in my life ” —he smiled a very nice
smile—“ and so, maybe, your spiritualism may fill that
want after all.”
Mr, Carstairs shook his head and then Colonel Bendex
remarked jocularly: “ But I suppose you haven’t got
your apparatus with you ? ”
“ What do you mean ? ” asked Mr. Carstairs sharply.
“ What apparatus do you refer to ? ”
“ Oh, your tambourine that plays up in the air,”
grimaced the old Colonel, “ and the bladder with the
phosphorus on it that you wave about.”
Mr, Carstairs looked furious, but contenting himself
with a gesture of contempt, ignored the amusement
among the company that he could not help noticing, and
made no comment. Then Mrs, Mountraven pleaded
eagerly: “ But do let us have a seance, please, Mr.
Carstairs, There’s nothing spiritual in my life as it
is.”
Desirous that his guests should enjoy themselves. Sir
Eric backed up her request and there was at once a
general plea all round that the seance should take place.
But, before Mr. Carstairs had given his final decision, a
dreadful peal of thunder burst over the house and the rain
began to pour down in torrents.
“ There, Mr. Carstairs,” called out the baronet above
the noise of the storm, “ you see, even the elements are on
our side. You can’t possibly leave here to-night with that
patched-up radiator. So we’ll give you a bed and, in


return, you shall try and put a little reverence for things
spiritual in my pagan friends here.”
Mr. Carstairs nodded solemnly. “ It’s an omen, that
thunder,” he announced, “ for spirit manifestations are
invariably stronger when there is electricity about.” His
face hardened and he looked scowlingly at the still highly
amused Colonel Bendex. “ Yes, I’ll give you a seance,
but, remember, it is not to be taken as a joke, and there is
to be no levity, please.”
So, with the meal over, they all assembled in the
drawing-room, with the spiritualist at once taking com-
mand and issuing his orders in the manner of one accus-
tomed to be obeyed.
“ You will all sit round the table,” he commanded
sharply, “ and, just resting your wrists upon the edge,
you will lock your hands together by the crooking of your
little fingers. The room will be in complete darkness, and
there must be perfect silence, except for one of you who
will play upon the piano. Now who is going to be the
musician ? ”
The girl who had played and sung the two previous
evenings at once volunteered. “ Well, the music must be
very soft,” said Mr. Carstairs, “ and of a very solemn
nature. Start off with one of the funeral marches and play
it very slowly. Don’t stop playing if you hear me speak,
but play then even more softly.”
A thrill of great expectation ran through the ladies, but,
for the most part, the men were only looking amused and
the old Colonel just stopped himself in time from remind-
ing the company generally that any kissing would be
heard quite plainly.
“ Now,” went on Mr. Carstairs, as he gave a final look
round before switching off the lights, “ I am to be the
only one to speak, please, and I will announce the coming
of any spirits as I shall sense them first. All you have to do
is to sit perfectly still and concentrate your thoughts upon
anyone you have known in life and who has now passed


beyond. Keep your eyes shut tightly. Then, when I have
taken my seat and completed the circle, no one is to
unlock his fingers for one second, or contact will be
broken. Kindly abstain from coughing and do not let
your breathing be audible. Don’t be impa .lent, for it may
be half an hour or longer before anything begins to
happen. Now are you all ready ? Good ! Then I am
going to switch off and I shall strike a match to find my
way back to my chair. Then when I am seated, but not
before, our young friend at the piano will commence to
play,”
So, in less than a minute, the room was plunged in
darkness and a dead silence reigned. Then Larose
shuddered as the girl at the piano started playing the
“ Marche Funebre.” He remembered when he had last
heard it.
Believers or unbelievers, undoubtedly not a few of
those seated at the table had become nervous, and Larose
could feel a distinct trembling passing along the circle of
hands. He was seated between Lady Roding and Mrs.
Mountraven and, before the light had been switched off,
he had seen that Colonel Bendex and Miles Hellingsby,
with a lady between them, were directly opposite to him,
and would be upon Mr. Carstairs’ left when he had taken
his seat. Hellingsby had been looking bored with the
whole proceeding.
Five minutes passed with nothing happening and then
the thunder began to peal again. It seemed as if the storm
were returning. Larose shut his eyes, and, with a faint
grin of amusement, thought of the last murderer he had
been instrumental in getting hanged. He knew he would
recognise him at once, as, an interesting personality, he
had been fat with red hair, a most unusual combination
in premeditated crimes of violence.
On went the minutes and it was obvious now that the
first thrill among some of those present was beginning
to wear off, for there were distinct sounds of fidgeting


and every now and then a cough was with difficulty
suppressed. The “ Marche Funebre ” had long since been
finished, then had come the “ Dead March in Saul ” and
now the girl was playing a dreamy nocturne.
And still the silence went on, with the room in its
dreadful darkness, the men and women waiting, waiting,
while perhaps through the awful spaces of the infinite
the spirits of the dead were rushing back to earth.
Larose’s thoughts had wandered and he was thinking
hazily of his little ones at home. His head fell forward and
he had almost dropped asleep, when, suddenly, he became
conscious, as in a dream, that the spiritualist was speaking.
His voice was very low and solemn and he spoke with the
reverence of a priest at the extreme moment of the
elevation of the Host.
“ I feel movements in the air,” he droned. “ There is a
cold wind approaching. I hear sounds that are not of this
earth.” His voice rose a little. “ Close your eyes tightly
and concentrate lest the spirits pass us by. They are
approaching.”
Delicious tremors thrilled through the ladies, and even
the men breathed a little harder. But a long silence
followed before Mr. Carstairs’ voice came, suddenly, like
the hiss of a snake. “ Here they are ! They are here ! ”
he cried speaking now so quickly that his words were
telescoped into one another and rose excitedly into
crescendo tones. “ I see a pillar of vapour hovering above
us I It moves ! It moves ! It is now upon my left!
The upper part is beginning to take shape ! It ij a head
with the hair of a woman ! She is not young ! She is
middle-aged ! Oh, oh, I see her quite plainly now!
She is in great distress ! She struggles for breath ! Her
eyes are protruding! Her face is blue-black! Her
tongue ”
But he was interrupted by a fierce oath and the long
table, heavy as it was, was pushed roughly on its castors,
and it could be felt that the circle of entwining hands


had been broken with a violent jerk. Then a chair was
heard to crash backwards upon the floor, a woman
screamed, and instantly a babel of sounds filled the room.
Then in a blinding flash the lights went up, and Colonel
Bendex was seen standing, white-faced and with his hair
dishevelled, with his hand upon the switch.
“ I won’t stand any more of this damned nonsense,”
he shouted. “ That fool has been making everything up
to terrify us and he’s really seen nothing.”
The bright light shone on glistening faces. Some of
the women were lying back, half fainting in their chairs,
and there was not one person that did not show some
signs of emotion. All who could had risen to their feet.
“ Steady, steady,” called out the baronet, who had
recovered himself at once. “ Steady, Colonel Bendex, you
have no business to talk to anyone like that! ”
“ But I mean it,” shouted the old Colonel furiously.
“ I tell you we have all been fooled. I, I ” but his
voice broke down and he quavered weakly. “ No, no,
I forgot myself! I ought not to have spoken like that,
but I—l had personal reasons for being so upset. I
apologise to Mr. Carstairs for what I said, and ” —he
bowed round to the company—“ and if you’ll all excuse
me, I’ll just go out and recover myself,” and he tottered
shakily from the room.
“ Oh, I’m so sorry this has happened. Sir Eric,” began
Mr. Carstairs, whose own face was as white as a sheet,
“ but everything I told you, I saw, and I was only—” but
then he darted forward to catch Miles Hellingsby, who,
like a thing of death, was slipping off his chair.
It was at least ten minutes before anyone smiled again.
The windows and doors had been thrown wide open,
smelling salts and brandy had been brought, and there had
been much mopping of faces with handkerchiefs. There
was no doubt the company had all been very much upset,
but, seemingly, it was Miles Hellingsby who was most
ashamed of himself. He was still looking white and sickly.


“ It was that shriek that knocked me out,” he explained
in great vexation. “ It carried me back to when I was on a
boat that was torpedoed in the war. I was only a lad at
the time and it has always left me with a weak spot.” He
made a wry face. “ I am the fool of the whole party,”
Wimpole Carstairs was regarded with mixed feelings.
Some were inclined to hold, as Colonel Bendex had
shouted, that he was an impostor, but others now really
regarded him with awe. These latter, intimate friends
of the old Colonel, were aware that some years previously
the old man’s wife had been trapped in a burning house
and although the fire had been put out before it had
reached her, she had nevertheless been found to have
died of suffocation. They argued that it was not likely the
spiritualist could have known of the happening and that,
therefore, the spirit he had raised had been truly that of
the dead woman.
To the great relief of Sir Eric and Lady Roding, late
as the hour was, Mr. Carstairs refused most resolutely
to stay the night. He seemed as upset as anybody at what
had happened, but told them bluntly that they had in-
sisted upon a seance and so must not blame him for
anything.
“ He’s quite genuine, Eric,” sighed Lady Roding as
they saw him drive away, “ and I feel very sorry that the
dear old Colonel spoke about him as he did.” She shook
her head. “No, I shall never laugh at spiritualism any
more.”
But as it happened all sympathy for Mr. Carstairs was
quite misplaced. It was perfectly true, as he had said, that
he did regard his spiritualism as a real religion, but that
night he had been so stung to anger by Colonel Bendex’s
mention of the tambourine and his asking if he had
brought his apparatus with him that he had resorted to
deceit. Once, some years ago, during the summer
holidays, when he had been stopping at a seaside hotel,
Colonel Bendex had been pointed out to him and the sad


story of his wife’s death told. Mr. Carstairs had a good
memory and, being introduced to the Colonel that
evening, he had remembered both his name and the
tragedy of his life. Then when the Colonel, as he con-
sidered, had insulted both him and his faith, and he had
seen the grins and amusement of the others, upon the spur
of the moment he had resolved to inflict a suitable
punishment, with the result that we already know.
Afterwards he had felt furious with himself and rather
than again face the man he had made to suffer, had gone
away with all possible haste.
The next day the house party broke up, and Larosc and
his wife were the first to leave.
“ No,” said Larose to the baronet in parting, “ I can’t
tell you anything yet. Certainly, I am on a trail, but it will
be a hard one to follow and the truth may never become
known. Say good-bye to your friends as if you had never
been suspicious of any of them, but if any questions are
asked about me, before they go, be sure and let me know.
Phone me up to-night.”
But if Larose had said nothing to the baronet, to Lady
Roding he had, in confidence, opened up a little more of
his mind. He had managed to get her, for a few moments,
alone in the garden, and he has asked her, point-blank,
if either Carlton James or Hellingsby had ever showed
any signs of wanting to make love to her in her supposed
widowhood.
She had blushed furiously at the question and had
seemed disinclined to give any answer, but Larose had
persisted firmly.
“ Come, Lady Roding,” he said gently, “ you know I
am your friend, and I want to spare your husband’s
feelings as much as possible. So tell me frankly if either
of these two ever gave you the idea he would like to
become your lover.”
Lady Roding’s face was still scarlet and her voice
trembled. “ They have neither of them ever spoken a


word of love,” she replied, “ and indeed I only saw Mr.
James once after my husband was buried. As for Mr.
Hellingsby, he, he ”
“ saw you many times,” broke in Larose. “ Yes,
I know that. But tell me, did he ever look at you as if he
had become very fond of you ? ” He nodded frowningly.
“ Oh, yes, a woman always knows ! ”
Lady Roding hesitated. “ Y-e-s,” she stammered hotly,
“ he was very kind to me. I could see he was very sorry
for me.”
“ Has he stayed here often since your trouble ? ” asked
Larose. “ I mean, of course, before his wife died.”
She now became a little more composed. “ Yes, he was
here four or five times,” she said. “He helped me a lot
in winding up the affairs of the estate.” She spoke a little
defiantly, “ He had a good reason for coming here and he
proved himself a real friend.”
“ And since his wife’s death,” persisted Larose, “ he
has come here ”
“ three times,” said Lady Roding.
“ Hum ! ” remarked Larose, “ pretty good going when
his wife has been dead barely three months ! ” He
thought for a moment. “ Did you invite him, or did he
come without invitation ? ”
“ He came quite unexpectedly,” was the reply, “ but
the last time he said he happened to be passing this way.”
“ Did you speak to him alone ? ” was Larose’s next
question.
Lady Roding was now frowning at the cross-examina-
tion. “ No, my sister had been making a long stay with
me and was here nearly six weeks.” Then she added
quickly : “ I always kept her by me, all the time.”
“ Oh, oh,” exclaimed Larose regarding her intently,
“ then you kept her by you on purpose ! ” Then, as she
made no reply, he went on : “You were afraid he was
going to start making love to you. That was it, wasn’t
it?”


Lady Roding turned away her eyes. “ I knew he liked
me,” she said softly, “ but I didn’t want to give him any
chance.”
“ But where would have been the harm ? ” asked
Larose. “ You thought you were a widow and there
would have been nothing wrong in it.”
Lady Roding’s eyes glinted, “ Oh, Mr. Larose, how
cruel and stupid you can be ! Can’t you realise these
questions are not nice ones ? ” Her voice shook but she
spoke with some spirit. “ I had lost my husband barely
eight months and I wasn’t ready for any man’s attention,
however much I might have been esteeming him.”
“ I understand,” said Larose quietly. He shook his
head when he noticed her look of distress. “ No, don’t
worry. Your husband will never know I have asked you
these questions, and it was to save getting the information
from him that I approached you.”
“ But because Mr. Hellingsby has been up here to see
me those three times since his wife’s death,” said Lady
Roding quickly, “ you must not put that down to his
discredit.” She hesitated and looked very embarrassed.
“ I may —I may unconsciously have encouraged him.”
“ And quite natural, too,” nodded Larose sympatheti-
cally. “ You were young, you were lonely, and no one
would have expected you to go on for ever grieving for
the dead.”
“ But it has all passed now,” she said quickly, “ and
every scrap of love I have now is for my husband.” She
laid her hand upon Larose’s arm. “ You understand
that, don’t you ? ”
“ I understood it that night when I brought you to
him,” he laughed, “ and I have never doubted it since.”
He became grave again all at once. “ But whatever may
happen in the future, please forget this conversation here.
It has been unpleasant for both of us.” Talking lightly
of other matters, they walked back to the house.


CHAPTER X
THE TRAIL OF MURDER
THAT night, as had been arranged, Sir Eric
rang up Larose. He spoke very guardedly and
was obviously being most careful in his choice
of words.
“ Well, I hope you and Mrs. Larose got home all
right, and you were not too tired after the journey.
Good ! You must come and stay with us again and we’ll
go to the races together, as you seem to have an almost
uncanny way of picking winners. We feel rather de-
pressed now, of course, at your having all gone away.
The house seems very quiet. Oh, by the by, you cer-
tainly made a hit with our handsome widower, and he
wondered how it was he had not met you here before.
But, as I told him, it was your wife and mine who had
been friends years ago, and this was the first time they
had renewed the friendship since our marriage.”
“ A very clever fellow,” laughed Larose, “ and I shall
make a point of seeing him again. I’ve not taken such a
fancy to anyone for a long time.”
“ Oh, yes, and here’s something rather amusing,” went
on the baronet. “You were laughing about Carlton
James’ gruesome paintings, and what do you think?
He’s borrowed that long curved Malay knife I had in my
curio cabinet! He said he was painting a man being
stabbed in the throat, and that knife was the very one
he’d been looking for to give the proper effect. Miles
happened to come in when I was just handing it over
to him, and seemed very amused and had a good laugh.
But he got a bit nettled and didn’t seem to be quite


so pleased when a little later James asked him if he
would like to pose as the murderer. But James only
grinned and said he’d always been of the opinion that
Miles had the look about him of making a rattling good
assassin. Of course, it was only said in fun, but it was
darned bad taste with a highly strung chap like Miles.
Well, good-bye, old man. My wife sends her love to
yours,” and he rang off.
“ Interesting,” commented Larose grimly, “ very !
But I didn’t want any confirmation of my ideas. I’m quite
certain about them. Hellingsby is the man we want, but
how to bring it home to him Heaven only knows.”
He nodded. “ Still, I’ve had as bad cases as this before
and they’ve come out all right in the end.”
Now Larose was always of opinion that once a man
had carried one crime to success he was always disposed
to follow it up with another, more or less of the same
nature. Consciously, or subconsciously, he was ready,
and only waiting for the opportunity. He was like an
animal who had tasted blood and could not get the
pleasurable flavour out of his mouth.
So, being quite certain that Miles Hellingsby had
attempted to kill Sir Eric Roding, Larose was now
wanting to believe the ex-banker had also murdered his
own wife. There would have been the strongest motive
for so doing, in his passion for Lady Roding, a passion
so obvious that the servants of the Hall had remarked
upon it. Hellingsby had begun to push his courting,
too, almost immediately after his wife’s death, and, added
to that, from Lady Roding’s blushing admissions, there
could be no doubt that he had had every reason for being
quite sanguine of success.
But Larose frowned vexatiously as he gathered up the
threads of his thoughts. It was through an accident,
which he could by no possibility have brought about, that
Hellingsby’s wife had died, and he, Larose, was up against
a dead wall there. He sighed many times in annoyance.


However, if Hellingsby were, in reality, the would-be
murderer of Sir Eric Roding and actually aware that
Larose had been set upon his trail, then he might perhaps
have been not a little disturbed could he but have seen
where the ex-detective was upon the following afternoon.
Larose was with the superintendent of the Tunbridge
Wells police, who had been a co-worker with him when they
had both been at Scotland Yard, and Larose had just been
passing by, so he said, and had dropped in for a little chat.
The superintendent was very pleased to see him, and
for a few minutes they talked animatedly of old times.
Then Larose casually mentioned Miles Hellingsby and
asked the superintendent if he knew him.
“ Certainly I do,” he replied, “ and he’s a bit of a gay
fellow. Used to be manager of a bank here, but made a
good marriage and now has a big place near South-
borough, about two miles out on the London road.”
He looked curiously at Larose. “ But why do you ask ? ”
“ Oh, just because I’ve been staying in the same house
with him and he interested me,” replied Larose. “He
asked me, too, to look him up when I was next in this
neighbourhood, and I’ve got half a mind to do it.”
“ Well, if you want to,” said the superintendent,
“ you’ll probably find him at home now, as I happened to
see him in the town to-day.” He grinned. “ They say he
keeps a very good cellar.”
“ His wife was drowned a little while ago, wasn’t
she ? ” asked Larose.
The superintendent nodded. “ Yes, at Easter time,
along with about twenty others in a sailing boat at East-
bourne.” He cocked his eye shrewdly at Larose. “ But I
don’t suppose it’ll be long before he marries again as he’s
always been a rare one for the ladies.”
“ But with his wife only dead a few weeks,” frowned
Larose, “ surely he won’t be thinking of that for a long
time ! ”
The superintendent laughed. “ His late wife, my boy,


was about ten years older than he was and as plain a little
body as you could meet.” He snapped his fingers
together. “Of course, he only married her for her
money. Everyone here knows that.”
“ But it may have been a love-match,” reproved
Larose. “ Men often fall in love with women much older
than themselves.”
“ Not Miles Hellingsby,” retorted the superintendent
instantly. “He likes them young and fresh, and nothing
but a good wad would have induced him to hang his hat
up at Southborough Hall.”
“ And I suppose when his wife died, she left him
everything ? ” asked Larose innocently.
“ Of course,” replied the superintendent. He smiled.
“ One of the servants up at Southborough Hall in parti-
cular was most devilish put out at not getting a penny.
She had been with the Levers—his wife was Miss Lever
before she married Hellingsby—for nearly forty years,
and is kicking up a devil of a row about things now. She
says Mrs. Hellingsby told her she had left her £SOO, but
when the will was opened, it was * everything to my
beloved husband.’ This woman, a Selina Thompson,
has just bought a little sweet shop here in Hill Street out
of her savings, and has been spreading such unpleasant
things round the town about Hellingsby that I hear last
week he sent his solicitors to her to make her shut up.
He threatened to bring an action for slander and that
frightened her.”
“ What sort of things did she say ? ” asked Larose,
very interested.
“ Oh, that he bullied his wife and neglected her,” said
the superintendent. “ She didn’t say outright that he’d
been carrying on with other women, but she hinted as
much. Of course, a good lot of it may have been quite
true, but, probably, her disappointment made her
exaggerate.” He shook his head. “ Still, you can under-
stand Hellingsby is not quite a hero in the neighbourhood
O


and I shouldn’t wonder if he didn’t sell Southborough
Hall one day and clear out altogether.”
“ A nice beauty,” was Larose’s comment to himself
when he had said good-bye to the superintendent, “ and
it just shows what mistakes one can make when a chap’s
handsome and agreeable I ” His face grew hot. “ But
what an escape for that little Lady Roding ! Wouldn’t
she have had a time after he had got tired of her ? ” He
smiled whimsically. “ Well, here I go on collecting
information about him, but for what purpose Heaven
only knows ! ” He nodded. “ I’ll have a talk with this
Thompson woman next.”
He soon found Hill Street and Selina Thompson’s
shop. It was in the poorer quarter of the town, and,
from the nature of the stock in the window, it did not
appear that she could be doing a very lucrative trade.
The shop was empty when he arrived, but, upon the
loud whirring of a bell as he pushed open the door and
entered, a woman immediately made her appearance
from a room at the back. She was in the middle fifties
and, tall and thin, had by no means an unpleasant face.
She looked shrewd and intelligent.
“ Good afternoon,” said Larose smilingly. “ You are
Miss Thompson, aren’t you? Well, can you spare a few
minutes for a little talk ? ”
“ What about ? ” asked the woman instantly, regard-
ing him with a most suspicious look.
“ Mr. Hellingsby,” replied Larose, with no beating
about the bush, “ and if you’ll promise to hold your
tongue about my coming to you, I’ll make you a little
present, straight away.” Taking a couple of notes out
of his pocket-book, he held them out to her.
But Selina Thompson drew back in a sharp movement.
“ No, you don’t! ” she exclaimed scoffingly. “ You’re
not going to catch me that way. I had one lawyer here
already and I expect you’re another.”
“ Bless your heart,” laughed Larose, “ I’m not a


lawyer and not a soul knows I’ve come to see you !
I want to make a few inquiries, entirely on my own.”
“ Who are you ? ” asked the woman, “ and what’s
your name ? ”
“ But you wouldn’t believe me if I told you,” smiled
Larose. “So you can just imagine I’m a Mr. Smith.
That’s not my name, of course, but it’ll do for our
conversation.”
“ We’re not going to have any conversation,” said the
woman quietly. She inclined her head. “ Just leave my
shop, please.”
“ Now don’t you be foolish,” said Larose, “ I can’t
have come here to trap you, as you say, for I’ve brought
no witnesses and you’ll always be able to deny anything
you’ve said.” He lowered his voice. “ I’m not a friend of
Mr. Hellingsby. I dislike the man and I dislike him more
than ever now I’ve heard of the way he’s cheated you out
of that five hundred pounds.”
“ Who’s been telling you ? ” she asked sharply.
“ Never mind,” replied Larose. “ I’ve heard the whole
story about you and a lot more besides. I’ve heard how
Mr. Hellingsby bullied his poor wife, how he neglected
her and how he went after other women.” He fibbed
impressively. “ He’s now paying attention to a girl I
know and I want to put a stop to it. That’s what I’m
here for. Nothing else. I mean no harm to you and I
swear to you that unless you yourself tell, no one shall
ever know I have been to you,”
The woman seemed impressed. “ But who told you
to come to me ? ” she asked suspiciously.
“No one,” replied Larose instantly. “ But it’s all
over the town you’ve been saying what you think about
him and that he sent his solicitor to you to give you a
fright.”
The woman considered, and Larose went on: “ Come,
all I want you to tell me is what sort of life Mrs.
Hellingsby had with her husband. I know you were


with her almost since she was a baby, and you’d surely
like to punish the man who’s been so cruel to her.”
He had certainly struck the right chord there, and a
look of hatred came into the woman’s face. “ Yes, I’ll
risk it,” she said, “ and, as you say, there are no witnesses.
No, I won’t take your two pounds.” She clenched her teeth
together. “ I’d do anything to get even with the wretch.”
And so in the little room behind the shop, in the
intervals between bustling out to sell “ ha’p’orths ” and
“ penn’orths ” of sweets, the woman told her story.
She told it with no reservations and, obviously, so em-
bittered by hate that Larose did not wonder Miles
Hellingsby had sent his solicitor round to stop her mouth.
Mary Hellingsby, or Mary Lever as she had been then,
was the only child of wealthy parents and had lived all her
life in the little village of Southborough, midway between
Tonbridge and Tunbridge Wells. Her father had died when
she was fifteen and in the succeeding years she had been
bound hand and foot to a complaining and invalid mother.
Staffed with three maidservants and a gardener, the
Hall had lacked nothing in the way of comforts, but there
had been absolutely no social life, either for its mistress
or her daughter. Living the fives of recluses, they re-
ceived no visitors except the old family doctor, and they
paid no visits to anyone themselves. Mrs. Lever was
naturally of a quarrelsome disposition, and after some
heated argument with the village clergyman, had never
been near the church again.
The girl had no friends and her only interests were
reading sickly stories of romance and playing upon an old
organ that had been in the family for many years. She
had been a very plain and unattractive girl, and grew up
shy and awkward, afraid of all strangers and entirely
wrapped up in herself and her mother. As the years
passed she developed into a highly nervous and very
timid woman.
When she was forty-two her mother died, and then,


suddenly, a great change came into her life, for Miles
Hellingsby appeared upon the scene. He was the manager
of the bank in Tunbridge Wells where the Levers had
their account and, in the settling of the affairs of the
estate, made many excuses to come up to the Hall to
discuss business matters with Mary Lever, to whom
everything had been left.
Constantly bringing himself in contact with her, he
had soon started to make violent love to her and, a good-
looking, well-dressed man of the world, he had speedily
swept her off her feet and become her affianced husband.
He was seven years younger than she was, and a widower
with no children.
“ Yes,” commented Selina Thompson sneeringly, “ a
widower, and his wife had died suddenly when they were
abroad on holiday, and staying in some little mountain
hotel in Switzerland ! She was supposed to have died
from food-poisoning, but I should not be a bit astonished
to learn he had killed her ! ”
Larose’s heart gave a big bump here. Was it then that
Hellingsby’s attempt to murder Sir Eric was not his first
crime ?
Selina Thompson went on with her story.
Then Mary Lever, defying all public opinion, had
become Mrs. Hellingsby just three months after her
mother’s death, less than eighteen months ago, and her
husband, resigning his position at the bank, had been
installed as master of the Hall.
Then his wife had bought him into a firm of stock-
brokers in the City, and five days a week he had gone up
to town in the most expensive car that money could buy.
For about six or seven months only had he played the
part of a devoted husband, taking his wife with him
everywhere and making out he could not bear to be away
from her an hour longer than was absolutely necessary.
“ But I was always suspicious of him,” sneered Miss
Thompson again, “ for it wasn’t natural a good-looking


young man like him should be always cozening and cud-
dling a plain, middle-aged woman like her.”
“ Was she fond of him ? ” asked Larose.
“ Mad about him ! ” exclaimed the woman. “ Com-
pletely off her head ! Used to wait in the hall for him
when he was coming home at night, used to kiss the
sprays of flowers he always brought her, used to have her
chair as close as possible to his at meal times, and was
always holding his hand and looking up into his eyes ! ”
She made a gesture of anger. “ Oh, it made me furious,
for I could see his fondness for her was all put on, and I
used to wonder why.” She nodded darkly. “ Then one
day I found out.”
“ Oh ! ” exclaimed Larose, “ what was it ? ”
The woman spoke very slowly. “ She was gradually
making over to him every penny she possessed, all her
stocks and shares, her money in bonds and even the very
deeds of the Hall property. Everything except some
money in trust, left her by an uncle and which could not
be touched until her death.” She gritted her teeth
savagely. “ Yes, he was cunning, this Hellingsby, for
he had got her to take away her account from the Tun-
bridge Wells bank and give it to a London one, so that
no one in the neighbourhood should know what was
going on.” She nodded vigorously. “ But I found it out,
for I got cunning too, I used to open the desk drawers
and look in his pockets whenever I got the chance, and
one day I was able to see into the safe when they had
gone out and he had left the keys behind. Then ” —she
lowered her voice to a whisper—“ I saw what he had got
by his deceit.”
“ And when had he got all he could out of her ? ”
asked Larose.
“ When they had been married about seven months I
should say, somewhere in the middle of last summer.
As far as I know, after then she signed no more docu-
ments. Then he began to become irritable with her and


I remember he was never the same after they had come
back from visiting some friends of theirs in Suffolk, Sir
Eric Roding and his wife. Mistress saw I had noticed it,
and told me he was upset because this Sir Eric had died
very suddenly, when they were on their visit. At any
rate, he stopped bringing home flowers, and started sleep-
ing in a separate room, saying she kept him awake as she
was so restless. Also, he soon began going off for week-ends
without her, fishing and shooting, so he made out.”
“ Where used he to go ? ” asked Larose.
“ He told her to Sheppey Island,” said Selina, “ where
some fishermen had a bungalow on the marshes across
the Swale river, opposite Whitstable. He used to go
away early on the Saturday morning and come home on
the Sunday night. He said it was much too rough a place
for Mistress and there was nothing but fishing or shooting
to do.” She sniffed contemptuously. “He did some-
times bring back a wild duck or two, or a few fish, but
I’ll never believe they were all he went for.”
“ And did your mistress turn against him, ” asked
Larose, “ because of this neglect?”
“ Not she,” replied the woman vehemently. “ The
colder he became, the more she wanted to cling to him.
She was like a beaten and very faithful dog.” She nodded
spitefully. “ Then I got to know there was another
woman somewhere, for I came upon a bill for an expen-
sive wrist-watch he had bought, seventy-five pounds it
cost, and he never gave it to her.”
“ Did you tell Mrs. Hellingsby about it ? ” asked Larose.
“ No, I didn’t,” replied the woman instantly, “ for
it would have made her still more unhappy and would
have meant, too, that I should have been sent away. Of
course, he would have denied everything, and said I was
only just making mischief. He had never liked me be-
cause I had been so long with Mistress, and would have
only been too glad of an excuse to get rid of me.”
“ Was he ever actually brutal to her ? ” asked Larose.


“ He never struck her or did anything like that, but
in those last months I am sure it was in his mind to try
to make her ill. He knew she had a weak chest and yet
he made her sit in draughts, to harden her so he said,
and on bitter cold days he to make her drive out
with him in an open car. Then he would go somewhere,
to some town on the coast generally, and park the car out
in the open and leave her sitting for hours and hours by
herself in the cold, whilst he went off and played billiards
or had games of cards with people he knew in the hotels.
Yes, I am quite certain he was trying to make her catch
her death of cold. He wanted her to die so that then he
would be rid of her.”
“ And what was the exact day on which she was
drowned ? ” asked Larose.
“ The Thursday before last Good Friday, the eighteenth
of April,” replied the woman. “ They had left early
to motor to Eastbourne for the day, and I’m certain he
only took her with him because the weather was so cold.”
Tears filled her eyes. “ But how he ever got my poor
mistress to go out in that boat I can’t understand! She
just hated the sea and would get dreadfully sick, even on
a big steamer crossing the Channel.”
“ And how did you first come to learn she had been
drowned ? ” was Larose’s next question,
“ He rang up that same afternoon about two o’clock.
I was out and Cook answered the telephone. He pre-
tended to be terribly upset and Cook said he could hardly
speak. Then he didn’t come home until past one in the
morning, and he made such a noise that we were sure he
had been drinking. He switched on all the lights in the
hall and the passages, and when we went down the next
morning they were still on. He had drunk a big bottle
of champagne, too, before he went off to bed.”
Larose thoughtfully absorbed this information and then
asked: “ Did he take long to get over his wife’s death ? ”
Selina Thompson scowled. “ I wasn’t at the Hall to


see. He packed me off the next day with a month’s
wages instead of notice. He said he should be only
keeping two maids.”
They talked on for a long time, and when Larose left
her, he came away with the greatly deepened impression
that Lady Roding was one of the most fortunate young
women in the whole world.
Determined to press his inquiries and find out all he
could about Miles Hellingsby, he went on to Eastbourne
that same night, and the next morning by nine o’clock
was going through those files of the 'Eastbourne Chronicle
dealing with the tragic sinking of the sailing boat Maid
of Sussex.
In the first issue published after the disaster there was
an entire page devoted to the story.
It appeared that upon that day the wind had been
fresh and the sea rather choppy, and earlier in the morn-
ing it had been doubtful if the Maid would ply for
passengers at all. But about eleven o’clock, just as the
tide was beginning to ebb, the wind had dropped and the
owners of the boat, two brothers, having everything
ready, had started to call for passengers. The Maid was
licensed to carry thirty, and soon a good number had taken
their seats and the greased timbers were set in position for
the boat to be slipped down over the shingle into the sea.
The launch had been accomplished without mishap,
and, with her sails hoisted, the Maid was soon cleaving
a swift way through the breakers. All had gone well
until she was a little more than a mile beyond the pier-
head and then, when in close proximity to the big
excursion steamer, the Sir Francis Drake proceeding to
Brighton, the rudder bar had broken suddenly and in the
twinkling of an eye an awful calamity had eventuated.
The Maid of Sussex had swerved right across the bow
of the steamer and, to the accompaniment of heart-
rending shrieks, the big vessel had crashed through the
Maid as if she had been made of matchboard.


All the Maid’s passengers, crushed to instantaneous
death or still living, had been flung violently into the sea ;
and then, horror of horrors, right among the struggling
men, women and children had swooped a big motor-
boat which had been cruising on the starboard side of the
Sir Francis Drake and had not seen the Maid of Sussex.
It had been an appalling catastrophe, for, adding to
the general confusion, a sudden burst of wind had arisen
and, with the rising seas, had made rescues most difficult.
The Sir Francis Drake had lowered her boats with all
possible speed and other boats had put out from the
shore, but of the computed twenty-six or twenty-seven
passengers —the exact number was never known—only
five were rescued alive. The two brothers owning the
Maid had been killed outright.
Then Larose, reading through the later files of the
newspaper, felt his heart thumping violently as he saw
among the names of the sailing boat’s passengers whose
bodies had not been recovered that of Mrs. Miles
Hellingsby of Southborough Hall in the county of
Kent.
“ Great Scot! ” he exclaimed excitedly, “ and why
didn’t that fool of a Selina Thompson tell me ? ” He
snapped his fingers together. “ Now this opens a lot of
possibilities ! What exactly might it not mean ? ”
For a long five minutes he appeared to be thinking
hard, then he nodded to himself and his lips set firmly
together as if he had come to some important decision.
Leaving the building, he made his way to the police
station, and, presenting his card, asked that it might be
given to the superintendent there.
“ I shall only keep him a few minutes,” he added, “ if
he’ll be good enough to see me.”
He was taken into the superintendent almost at once
and the police officer smilingly shook hands with him.
“ Very pleased to meet you, sir,” he said. “ I was
transferred from up North to here, or no doubt we


should have met when you were at the Yard. Now, what
can I have the pleasure of doing for you ? ”
“ Well, for private reasons,” said Larose, “ I am
interested in that dreadful business of the Maid of Sussex
and I want to know if all the bodies were eventually
recovered.”
The superintendent shook his head. “ No, and we
shall never be certain how many are missing. Unhappily,
we have no means of ascertaining definitely how many
passengers went out in her, as both the boatmen in charge
were killed instantaneously. It is imagined she was
carrying twenty-six, twenty-seven, or twenty-eight, but
it is only conjecture. There were five people rescued and
sixteen bodies, in all, recovered, the last one less than a
month ago.”
“ Then there are from five to eight persons still to
be accounted for,” commented Larose, and then he
asked, “ Do you know who most of these are ? ”
“ We know of three, definitely three,” was the reply,
“ but of the others ” —he shrugged his shoulders—“ we
know nothing ! ”
“ But haven’t there been inquiries made for missing
friends and relations ? ” was Larose’s next question.
“ Dozens of them,” smiled the superintendent, “ from
all over the country. I have a whole pile of letters in the
cupboard here. Everyone who has lost anybody lately
seems to have written to me.”
“ Well, who are these three persons whom you know,
as you say, definitely, were passengers on the boat and
whose bodies have not been recovered? Do you re-
member off-hand who they are ? ”
“ Certainly. One was a girl called Martha Jennings,
who was a pantry-maid at the Waverley Hotel, a second
was a boy called Alec Bell, who lived in East Ham, and
the third was a Mrs. Hellingsby, who lived near Tun-
bridge Wells.”
Larose steadied his voice with an effort. “ And how


are you certain,” he asked, “ that these three were
actually passengers ? ”
The superintendent smiled. “ Well, the girl’s mother
saw her get into the boat, the boy’s father was one of the
five passengers saved, and the husband of the woman,
Mrs. Hellingsby, had seen his wife go on board and was
waiting upon the esplanade until the Maid of Sussex
should have finished her cruise and come in.”
“ Do you know if any of these three deaths have been
presumed for either insurance or probate purposes ? ”
Larose asked carelessly.
“ Two,” replied the superintendent. “ The boy was
insured for fifty pounds, and the petition to presume the
death of this Mrs. Hellingsby was made and granted
about three weeks ago.”
Larose got up from his chair as if he had now obtained
all the information he wanted. “ Thank you very much,”
he said as he shook hands in good-bye ; and then he
added as an after-thought, “ Oh, by the by, as a matter of
curiosity, do you happen to know if they had to produce
outside witnesses to give evidence in support of their
petition to the Court for the order of presumption of
death ? ”
“ I know that Mr. Hellingsby did,” nodded the
superintendent. “ One of my men. Sergeant Davy, went
up to the court in London to state that Hellingsby had
spoken to him upon the Esplanade when the bodies were
being brought in, and that he had taken his name and
address, as the husband of one of the missing passengers.
Then, a boatman, Sid Hurley, testified that he had helped
the lady on board, and the manager of the Majestic Hotel
said he had seen Mr. and Mrs. Hellingsby together in
their car, not half an hour before the Maid of Sussex had
put out to sea.”
Larose thanked him again, and made a real good-bye
this time.
“ Hum ! ” he muttered as he walked towards the parade,


“ I think I’ll have a bit of a talk with this Sid Hurley. I
may get something out of him.”
But upon inquiring Larose found Sid Hurley was not
available. He was directed by a policeman to where two
boats, with Sid Hurley’s name upon them, were drawn
up on the shingle, but was told by a boatman lounging
by that Sid had got a job with someone for a week upon a
yacht.
“ But I’m looking after his boats, sir,” went on the
boatman, “ and you can have one out if you want one.
Like to do a bit of fishing ? ”
“Oh no, thank you,” laughed Larose. “ It’s too messy
a business for me.” He looked carelessly at the man.
“ Only I happened to meet Sid when he was in London
upon a law case a little while ago, and I said I’d look him
up when I came down this way again.”
The man appeared to be interested at once.
“ Oh, you are one of the lawyers Sid met, sir ? ” he
asked, and then when Larose had nodded smilingly, he
went on enviously : “ A-ah, but that was a lucky bit of
business for Sid, if ever there was one ! ” He clicked his
tongue to the roof of his mouth. “ Ten quid and all
expenses paid and only away a couple of days ! Gosh ! I
wish I’d spoken up first! ”
At the man’s words Larose experienced a dreadful
feeling of dismay, and the great idea that had been
forming in his mind came crashing to the ground.
“ Then you, too, saw the lady going on to the Maid of
Sussex that morning ? ” he asked, most disappointedly.
“ As much as he did,” nodded the boatman grinningly.
He half closed one eye and, spitting out a mouthful
of tobacco juice, became quite loquacious. “At any
rate we had all seen the gent waiting here and tearing his
hair when they were bringing in the bodies that had
been recovered, and that was near enough. Then when he
came back a couple of days afterwards we remembered
him at once. There were several of us standing together.


* Any of you present when the passengers went on board
the Maid of Sussex ? ’ asked the gent, and we all told him
yes, we had helped push the boat down. * Then do
you recollect a smallish lady, rather thin, in a brown
leather motoring coat ? You can’t have forgotten her as
she was wearing big dark sun-glasses.’ He put his hand
in his pocket as if he was going to bring something out.”
The boatman spat out more tobacco juice. “ Then
Sid, who’s always on the look-out for tips, thought one
was coming, and said, quickly, yes, he remembered her.
He remembered the motor-coat and the dark glasses
quite well. Then the gent got very excited and went
on to promise anyone fifty pounds who found her body
and he gave six of us one pound, on the spot, to go and
search among the big rocks off Beachy Head at next low
tide. Then he told us who he was and where he lived and
he took Sid’s name and address to find him when he
came again.”
“ And he did come ! ” nodded Larose, whose hopes
were now reviving, but whose mind was in a turmoil of
perplexing thoughts.
“ Lots of times,” nodded back the boatman, “ and
he made quite a fuss of Sid, taking him out and giving
him drinks and tobacco and other things. The next we
heard was that Sid was going up to London to give
evidence and off he did go. Yes, all expenses paid and
ten quid in his pocket as well! The easiest money a man
ever earned, and if I’d been sharp enough I’d have had it
instead of him,” He grunted angrily. “ Yes, I was a fool.
We were all fools but Sid, and he was a blooming liar
instead.”
Larose was a quick worker and five minutes later found
him with all speed driving towards London.
He had quite made up his mind now about everything,
and all was perfectly clear to him. Mrs. Hellingsby had
not been on the boat at all, but for all that, she was dead
now and Llellingsby had murdered her.


Without doubt, too, his consuming passion for Lady
Roding had all along been urging him upon his course
of dreadful crimes. He had first, thought Larose, dis-
posed of Sir Eric and then, ever since the latter’s supposed
death, had been looking for an opportunity of getting
rid of his own wife in order that he would be free to
marry the baronet’s widow. In a moment of lightning
inspiration the idea had come to him of making the
sinking of the Maid of Sussex account for his wife’s
disappearance and then, afterwards, he had coolly taken
her away somewhere and undoubtedly encompassed her
death.
“ Yes, if we only knew it,” muttered Larose, gritting
his teeth together, “ when Hellingsby was waiting, as the
distracted husband, upon the esplanade that morning,
and, as that boatman said, tearing his hair in his agony of
distress, that poor woman was parked in the car some-
where, not very far away, all unconscious of the tragedy
that was taking place out at sea and all unknowing that
it was presaging her own death within a few short hours.”
“ And he’s quite capable of it,” went on Larose. “ He’s
quick and alert and a born schemer if ever there was one !
He’s probably always been looking out for chances all his
life, and snapping them up instantly when they came his
way, as witness his inducing poor Mary Lever to marry
him within three months of her mother’s death. Clever,
yes, he’s clever ! ” He made a grimace. “ I shan’t forget
that eleven pounds he took from me at poker, for a long
time, and knowing what I do about him now, I’m a bit
inclined to be suspicious of all those flushes he got then.”
He nodded. “ Anyhow, he was the best card player
among us all at Roding Hall.”
His next destination was Printing House Square and,
from the files of The Times , he was soon running through
the report of Miles Hellingsby’s petition for an order
presuming his wife’s death. It was not as full as he would
have liked it, and so, applying in the editorial department,


he inquired if by any chance he could get speech with the
reporter who had taken down the proceedings in the
court.
He was told that if he returned about half-past four,
those reporters doing the law cases would be back in
the building by then and without doubt the particular
one he wanted would speak to him. So at the time
mentioned he was interviewing a very solemn-faced,
middle-aged man, whose looks belied his intelligence.
Yes, he remembered the Hellingsby petition for
presumption of death quite well. He generally spent his
holidays at Eastbourne, and so anything to do with the
town was of added interest to him. The case had only
occupied a few minutes and had been perfectly straight-
forward.
There was no doubt the woman had been drowned.
The manager of the Majestic Hotel had seen her with
her husband a very short time before, a boatman testified
to having assisted her to get on board the Maid of Sussex,
and a sergeant of police had borne witness that he had
taken the name and address of the petitioner as the latter
was waiting upon the esplanade for the recovered bodies
to be brought in.
As to the petitioner himself, it was very sad as he had
been an actual witness of everything. He had been in
the smoking-room of the Majestic Hotel where the
windows faced the sea, and he had been watching the
progress of the Maid of Sussex upon her cruise. He had
seen her sudden swerve across the bow of the Sir Francis
Drake ; he had seen her cut in two and he had seen the
motor-boat complete the havoc that the big steamer had
wrought.
The court had expressed its sincere sympathy for him.
“ And how difficult it must have been for the bereaved
widower to suppress his laughter ! ” commented Larose
dryly when he was in the street again, “He has a good
sense of humour and the situation would have appealed


to him. He had murdered his wife and there was the
judge sympathising with him upon his loss.” He nodded
grimly. “ Well, we’ll see if he laughs last! ”
He partook of a somewhat hurried meal and then
proceeded to motor down to Tunbridge Wells again to
have another talk in the little sweet-shop in High Street.
He never believed in wasting time when he was upon a
case.
Selina Thompson was serving a small girl with a
highly coloured, sticky concoction, known in the locality
as “ Lover’s Delight,” when she saw Larose pushing open
the shop door, and for the moment her jaw dropped and
she craned her head round to see if anyone were following
him.
“ Two-pennyworth of bull’s-eyes, please,” demanded
Larose, as the little girl was receiving a halfpenny
change. He winked and nodded in the direction of the
back room. “ And I’ll suck them in there, if I may.”
The little girl having taken her departure, Larose was
ushered into the back room and Miss Thompson at once
asked with a little nervousness : “ Well, what is it now ? ”
Larose frowned and, wagging his finger, asked reprov-
ingly : “ And why didn’t you tell me. Miss Thompson,
that Mrs. Hellingsby’s body had never been recovered ? ”
“ Oh, 1 didn’t think of it,” stammered the woman.
“ In fact, I made sure you would have known about it.”
“ But I didn’t know,” retorted Larose, “ and it makes
all the difference to inquiries I have to set about.”
“ I’m very sorry,” said Selina. “ I want to help you in
every way I can, and I’m sure you must have realised
that.”
Larose nodded. He had made up his mind to trust her
fully, and, indeed, from the questions he was intending
to ask her, he had very little choice. But she looked
a woman who could keep her own counsel, and she had
the greatest incentive to repeat nothing—her hatred of
Miles Hellingsby.
P


“ Look here,” he said sharply, “ I’m going to be quite
frank with you. I don’t believe your mistress was drowned
at all.” He lowered his voice to a whisper. “ I believe
she was murdered ! ”
“ O-oh ! ” gasped the woman, her face as white as a
sheet. “ Murdered ! ”
“ Yes, murdered,” snapped Larose. “ She never went
on that boat at all. Helhngsby made out she did to
account for her disappearance, and before he returned
home in the middle of that night—he had got rid of her.”
He spoke very solemnly. “At least, that is the opinion
I have formed from what you told me and from what I
have found out since.”
Selina burst instantly into tears, and, with her face
hidden in her hands, her body rocked convulsively.
Larose allowed a minute or two to pass before speaking
again and then asked sharply: “ You want him punished,
don’t you ? You don’t want him to get off scot-free ? ”
Instantly the woman took her hands down from her
face and stopped crying. Her eyes flashed and she sat up
in her chair, as steady as a rock. “ God, don’t I want him
punished ! ” she exclaimed fiercely. “ I’d give my life
to get him hanged.”
“ Good ! ” said Larose. “ Then you’ll pull yourself
together and think hard to give me the information I
want, for upon what you’re going to tell me now
depends whether we’re going to get him or not.”
He smiled pleasantly. “ I know the ropes, for I used to be
a detective once and was attached to Scotland Yard.
I’ve handled lots of murder cases and got quite a number
of people hanged.”
The woman’s face paled again. “ Then you come from
the police ? ” she asked shakily.
“ No, I’ve nothing to do with the police now,” replied
Larose, “ but when I’ve got something to put before
them. I’ll call them in quick enough. At present I’m
working, as I told you yesterday, entirely by myself.”


“ But how can I help you any further ? ” asked Selina.
“ I’ve told you everything I can think of.”
“ Then you’ll think some more,” smiled Larose. His
face became grave. “ From all you’ve told me of this
man’s ways, what happened, as I imagine, is this. That
morning, as was his custom, he had parked the car some-
where and left your mistress in it to await his return.
Then he went to the Majestic Hotel to look up some of
those friends you say he used to meet for billiards or
cards, and happened to see through the windows of the
smoking room the collision that sunk that sailing boat.
Naturally, he would have been very interested and so he
rushed out on to the esplanade to get a closer view.
Then, seeing some dead bodies being brought in and
probably hearing the people standing round say that all
the bodies might never be recovered, he jumped to the
idea of appearing to be terribly distressed and of making
out to the policemen there that Mrs. Hellingsby had been
among the passengers on the sailing-boat.” He eyed her
intently. “ You are following me ? ”
The woman nodded. “ Oh, the wretch ! ” she ex-
claimed. “ I told you my mistress would never go out
on the sea ! ”
Larose went on : “ When he had made them all
think her body must be among those that had not been
picked up, he went back in a roundabout way to the car
and rushed it off, with your mistress in it ” —he paused
a long moment —“ to where ?” He spoke quite confi-
dently. “ That’s what we’re going to find out.”
“ But how ? ” almost wailed Selina.
Larose ignored her question. “ Now you told me
yesterday,” he said, “ that about last autumn he took to
going away for a lot of week-ends, and that his explana-
tion was that he stopped in some fisherman’s bungalow on
Sheppey Island.” He spoke very impressively. “ Now
did it ever enter your head that he had some bungalow
or place of his own where he could be quite certain Mrs.


Hellingsby would never be able to find out what he was
up to ? ”
The woman shook her head. “ I never thought of it,”
she said slowly, “ and I don’t think Mistress did either.”
Then she added quickly : “ Oh, but he always had his
own bedding and sheets and brought them home every
now and then to be washed. He said he didn’t fancy the
fisherman’s washing.”
“ Exactly ! ” nodded Larose grimly. “ And what
about his cutlery and spoons and forks ? ”
“ He took two of everything at the very beginning.
He said he wanted two, in case he went with a friend, as
the fisherman’s things were all common and rough.”
“ Then the food,” asked Larose, “ what used he to
take with him ? ”
“ Everything,” snapped the woman, as if now begin-
ning to see everything in its right perspective. “ A
cooked fowl or a pheasant, boiled beef, ham, rashers of
bacon, two loaves of bread, butter, and even salt and
pepper. Plenty of things to drink, too.” She made a
gesture of intense anger. “ Oh, what fools we were.”
“ Then, of course, he was renting a furnished house
somewhere, and only had to supply his own plate and
linen,” commented Larose. “ Everything fits in.”
“ But what’s that to do with my poor mistress ? ”
asked Selina after a moment’s silence. “He wouldn’t
have taken her there if he was going to murder her ? ”
“ Why not ? ” asked Larose sharply. “ He’s not likely
to have murdered her in broad daylight, is he ? He’s sure
to have waited until night. That house or bungalow,
or whatever it is, is almost certainly lonely, as suggested
by his taking every scrap of food with him at week-ends,
and, also, because he sometimes brought home wild
ducks. Those birds are very shy and only to be shot in
the loneliest places.” He scoffed. “ Why, this bungalow
might have been an ideal spot for a dreadful crime ! ”
Another silence followed and then Larose said a little


testily: “ Now with these suspicions in your mind, just
think of things for yourself. Tell me all you can remember
about those week-ends. Don’t let me have to drag
everything out of you. I want to locate where that place
is and go and search it.”
The woman shuddered. “ One thing,” she said
shakily, “ once he had killed her it would take him a lot
to go back to it again. He is a very superstitious man and
believes in ghosts and places being haunted. Once when
a poor tramp crept into one of our sheds and died there,
he had the place pulled down the next day directly the
body had been taken away.” She was on the verge of
tears again. “ And if he killed her, he must have strangled
her, for he couldn’t have stood the sight of blood. When
Henderson—he used to be the chauffeur-gardener at the
Hall—cut his hand once and it was bleeding dreadfully,
the wretch ran off like a baby and wouldn’t help him bind
it up. He was always like that, a real coward in some
ways.”
But dreadful sounds were drumming in Larose’s ears,
and his heart was beating hard, for in a lightning flash
his mind was harking back to that seance at Roding Hall
and the way Hellingsby had been affected by it.
“ Good God ! ”he murmured. “ So she was strangled.
A blue-black face, eyes starting out of her head, and her
tongue —Good God ! no wonder he fainted ! ”
But Selina was talking on. “ Here are some things that
I remember now, although I don’t see how they can help
you. One Saturday when he was supposed to be on that
island. Cook’s brother saw him in quite a different place.
He was buying cartridges in a gun shop at Hastings that
afternoon.”
“ Oh, oh,” exclaimed Larose, on the alert at once
again, that’s interesting ! And did Hellingsby see the
cook’s brother ? ”
“He wouldn’t have known him if he had. Her brother
lives at Ticehurst and it just happened he had seen Mr.


Hellingsby through the kitchen window, when he had
been visiting Cook only a week or two before. He was
quite certain it was the master he saw in Hastings, and we
were rather astonished because Mr. Hellingsby had taken
clean sheets with him that same morning, and he didn’t
bring them back in the car the next evening.”
“ But why were you astonished about that ? ” asked
Larose, for the moment not having taken in the signifi-
cance of what she meant.
“ Because Cook’s brother said Hastings must be nearly
fifty miles away from Sheppey Island,” replied Selina,
“ and the sheets were for his bed in that fisherman’s hut.”
“ Splendid ! ” exclaimed Larose. “ That’ll help me a
bit. Now, what else ? ”
“ Nothing much, only one Sunday just after Christmas
Day, I think, he came back with some kind of sporting
dog he’d bought. I heard him telling Henderson about
it the next morning, and Mr. Hellingsby said that it was
quite by chance he had seen it nosing out some birds
among the reeds upon some marsh, and he had so admired
it that he persuaded the owner to sell it to him, after a lot
of trouble. He said he had had to pay thirty guineas for it,
but it was really worth much more than that, because
it came from some wonderful breed and its mother had
won prizes at shows.” Her face brightened. “It got
run over the next week, and Mr. Hellingsby was furious.”
Larose frowningly considered this information for a
few moments and then asked : “ Well, anything more ? ”
“ Just one last thing. He came home another Sunday,
some time in the winter, very angry because his lights
wouldn’t go on and he had had to drive the whole way
back that night without them. He blamed Henderson
for it, and said he would never have got home at all if it
hadn’t been a bright moonlight night.”
And that was all Larose got out of Selina Thompson,
but, as events proved, the information she had given him
was of inestimable value.


CHAPTER XI
SETTING THE TRAP
A FEW mornings later Larose was ushered into
Chief Inspector Stone’s private room at
Scotland Yard and was greeted heartily by his
stout friend.
“ A-ah, but I was just wanting to see you ! ” the latter
exclaimed. “ I was thinking of you not five minutes ago !
I have a problem for you.”
“ And I have one for you, too,” smiled Larose.
“ Who’s going to speak first ? ”
“ Why, I am, of course,” replied Stone, “ as the elder ”
—he grinned—“ and the better-looking. That’s right,
sit down and treat yourself to a cigarette. I’ve only got
cigars here and I know you don’t smoke them.” He
screwed up his eyes. “ Now do you know, Gilbert, I
think it one of the most extraordinary things in life how a
man comes to be attracted by one particular woman.”
“It isn’t always one,” commented Larose. He pre-
tended to sigh. “ I don’t mind admitting that, in the
course of my life, I’ve been attracted by a good many.”
Stone ignored his comment and went on musingly:
“ Perhaps he goes right through the twenties, and even
later, without being caught and then ” —he made a ges-
ture of resignation—“ the flash of a bright eye, the saucy
tossing of a little head, or the peculiar contour of a shapely
leg and ” —he sighed heavily—“ he goes all to pieces.”
“ Oh, he does, does he ? ” smiled Larose. “ And what
generally happens next ? ”
“ For example, take an experience I myself am now
going through,” continued Stone, too much occupied


with his own speculations to answer Larose’s query. He
frowned heavily and made a grimace. “ Yes, I, a portly
middle-aged man with a stomach and ”
“ six children and a jolly decent wife who cooks
well,” broke in Larose, who was beginning to get im-
patient. “ Come on, Charlie, what’s bitten you ? ”
Stone made as if to wipe away a tear with one very fat,
broad finger. “ A little slip of a girl with brown eyes,”
he whispered, “ whom I pass at the end of my street
every morning at seven minutes to nine. She sees me
coming and I look at her and she looks at me and it sets
my pulses racing as if I were about to release the safety
catch of my automatic. We’ve never spoken and we
never shall, for it’s a guilty love on my part, and glances
are all I shall allow myself to give her.” He sat up stiffly
and glared at Larose. “ Besides, as you have just re-
minded me, with my good missis and numerous offspring,
I should long ago have remembered how soon the red,
red flowers of passion fade and ” —but he burst into a
hearty laugh and then blew his nose vigorously.
Larose regarded him admiringly. “ What an actor you
are, Charlie,” he exclaimed. “ I quite thought you were
serious I ”
“ Not at all, not at all, my boy,” frowned Stone
majestically, “ I was only just speculating upon the follies
of other people.” His face broke into a smile and his eyes
twinkled. “ Still, I do see a little girl with brown eyes,
every morning at 8.53, and we do smile at one another.”
He looked very pleased with himself. “ It does me good
and helps on my work here, for I realise then that person-
ality can triumph, even over the drawback of gross and
distended externals ! ” He swept his blotting-pad clear
of papers and asked briskly : “ Now, Gilbert, my boy,
what is it ? ”
Larose regarded him very solemnly. “ Charlie,” he
said, “ a man I know has committed a murder ! ”
“ Pooh ! pooh 1 ” commented Stone airily, “ that’s


nothing ! You’ve known plenty of people like that in
your time.” He smiled pleasantly. “ Still, if you’ve got
anybody fresh, let’s hear about him. Shedders of blood
are generally interesting.”
“ But first, of course, you’ve followed all about the
return to life of Sir Eric Roding ? ” asked Larose.
“ Certainly, I’ve followed it all very carefully ! It’s
unusual even in a world of queer goings on.”
“ Well, when everyone was imagining Sir Eric dead,”
said Larose, “ this man murdered his own wife to marry
Sir Eric’s widow.”
“ I can quite understand that,” nodded Stone, “ for,
from her photographs in the magazines, she must be very
beautiful. Who’s the man ? ”
“ He used to be a manager of a bank, but now he’s a
partner in a firm of stockbrokers in the city.”
“ Good! ” exclaimed Stone, “ then we shall be
hanging a man in Society circles, and that’s what the
public want. They are saying the Yard has been very
slack lately and they are always yapping about one law
for the rich and another for the poor. Yes, excellent 1
It couldn’t be better I Go on and tell me your story.”
So beginning only at his visit to Roding Hall, and
saying nothing about the theft of the green paste and its
relation to Sir Eric’s being buried alive, Larose pro-
ceeded to tell all that had been happening to him during
the preceding few days.
He told how he became interested in the attractive
but rather sinister personality of Miles Hellingsby, of the
rumours he had heard of Hellingsby’s undoubted inten-
tions of paying immediate and violent court to the young
mistress of Roding Hall, even though not three months
previously his own wife had been drowned before his
very eyes, and how, happening to be in Tunbridge Wells
and mentioning Hellingsby to the superintendent of
police there, the latter had fully opened Larose’s eyes to
the ex-banker’s character.


“ Yes, Charlie,” he went on, “ I gathered that this
chap was a real bad egg, and it was in my mind to acquaint
Sir Eric with that fact and advise him to drop the friend-
ship between them at once, as Hellingsby should be
marked dangerous. Then, hearing that a woman of
nearly forty years’ service with Mrs. Hellingsby had been
bringing upon herself Hellingsby’s dire displeasure, and a
threat of action for slander, too, because of the stories she
had been telling about Hellingsby’s treatment of his dead
wife, I was so interested that, on the quiet, I went to see
her.”
And he went on with his story how, according to
Selina Thompson, Hellingsby had all along been trying
to make his wife contract some fatal illness, how the man
had bullied and neglected Mrs. Hellingsby, of his con-
tinual week-end visits to a supposed mysterious fisher-
man upon Sheppey Island, and how, after his wife’s
death, upon the very next day, he had bundled off her
devoted maid at a moment’s notice.
“ And I am sure it was pure instinct, Charlie,” nodded
Larose, “ that, after listening to this woman, made me go
on to Eastbourne. I am sure of it, as up to then there was
nothing to suggest to me she had been murdered.
Everyone believed her to have been drowned and, on
the face of it, the manner of her death looked perfectly
unassailable and left Hellingsby, at worst, a callous and
uncaring husband.” He shook his head. “ But at the
back of my mind there was always the thought that this
drowning was most opportune for Hellingsby. It had
occurred just at the very moment when an ordinary
decent woman, such as Lady Roding, who had lost her
husband and was imbued with all the conventionalities
of good-class social fife, would begin to allow a man to
show his preference for her.” He nodded again. “ Lady
Roding had been widowed then for just nine months.”
“ But what about Hellingsby ? ” growled Stone. “ You
have just told me his wife had not been dead three months.”


“ That is so,” agreed Larose, “ but public opinion is
not so strict with a man and, apart from that, Hellingsby
had got the opportunity of letting Lady Roding know
exactly what his ultimate intentions would be. To put
it plainly, he was getting in first so that Lady Roding
would not allow her affections to stray in any other
direction.”
“ But about this drowning,” asked Stone a little
impatiently, “ how was it faked ? ”
Then Larose went on with the rest of the story and the
burly inspector’s eyes bulged and he tut-tutted many
times as he heard how the body of Mrs. Hellingsby had
never been recovered and how Sid Hurley, the boatman,
had become the willing dupe of Hellingsby and been
hypnotised into giving the testimony that he had. The
story was told to the end and then a short silence followed.
Stone leant across his desk and patted Larose upon the
shoulder.
“ The Larose touch, my boy,” he smiled, “ that little
spot of genius which so often helped us when you were
with us here at the Yard. You had really nothing to go
on and yet you seem to have worked out a complete case
against this man.” He shook his head slowly. “ But
speaking officially, I don’t see that we can ever bring it
home to him. We haven’t a hope in the world 1 ”
“ Oh, haven’t we ? ” scoffed Larose. “ But I mean to
get him, right enough,”
“And how, my son?” asked Stone, wrinkling up his
forehead.
“ Through the thirty guineas he paid for that sporting
dog he bought,” replied Larose instantly. “ I want to
look at his bank pass-book or the butts of the particular
cheque-book he was using just about that New Year’s
day. Then, when I once get hold of the name of the man
to whom he paid the cheque, I shall learn in what exact
locality Hellingsby was that day, and it’s any odds I shall
find his bungalow close near.” His voice vibrated. “ Yes,


’that bungalow which will link us up with the place where
he’s hidden the body of that poor woman he killed.”
“ Wait a moment, Gilbert! ” laughed Stone. “ Wait a
moment! You are going round too fast! How do you
know he didn’t pay the thirty guineas, cash down, for
that dog ? ”
“ I don’t know,” snapped Larose, “ but I’m going no
trumps on the improbability of his carrying a large sum
like thirty guineas about him. He wasn’t that kind of man.”
“ Still, there are men who always carry a good wad,”
commented Stone doubtfully, “ wherever they go.”
“ But he didn’t,” insisted Larose, “ for Selina
Thompson told me he paid everything by cheque. She
says she remembers his having his pocket picked once
in a crowd and his wallet taken, and he only laughed and
said he’d not lost much as he wasn’t one of those mugs
who carried about with them everything they’d got.”
“ Well, then, supposing you do get the name of the
man the cheque was drawn to,” argued Stone, “ how will
that help you ? His address mayn’t be on the butt of the
cheque and it certainly won’t be in the bank pass-book,”
Larose clicked his tongue to the roof of his mouth.
“ Oh, Charlie, how innocent you are for a great de-
tective ! ” He pretended to look bored. “ When I get
the name and, supposing it’s the same as yours, Stone,
Charles Stone, I shall just ring up the secretary of the
Kennel Club and say, ‘ Hi, will you please tell me where
a man called Charles Stone lives, a chap who breeds
thirty-guinea sporting dogs ? ’ ” He snapped his fingers
together. “ Don’t forget Hellingsby told his chauffeur
that the dog came from parents who had taken prizes in a
show, so, of course, its owner will be known in the dog
world.”
Stone .smiled. “ Good for you again, Gilbert! ” he
said, and then he added, “ But the next point is—can we
be certain that, if he killed his wife, he killed her in that
bungalow ? ”


Larose heaved a big sigh. “ Look here, Charlie,” he
said, “ just put yourself in that man’s place, and think
what you would have done in exactly similar circum-
stances. Remember a dreadful passion for another
woman is consuming you, and you know you cannot
gratify it until your wife is dead. So murder has been in
your heart for many months, as you intend to have no
pity whatsoever. You have all along been intending
to get rid of your wife somehow, and now that, by a
most extraordinary accident, everyone is believing her
dead, you are determined to make that death a reality.
You know the actual killing of her will present no diffi-
culties as she is a weak ailing woman and will snuff out
like a candle.”
He paused a moment as if to gather his thoughts
together and then went on.
“ Well, where are you going to commit the murder ?
Where will be the best place ? ” He lowered his voice
impressively. “ You have a bungalow somewhere, which
you are, perhaps, renting under an assumed name, and
you have taken care that no one about your home should
know where it is. If ever you have had companions with
you there, they have probably never learnt who you
really were, for you are a man who has many secrets to
hide I The bungalow is empty now and you have the
key to its door in your pocket I It is lonely, for the wild
duck fly around it and at night it is all darkness on every
side ! You say to yourself—” but he broke off suddenly,
and, snapping his fingers together again, his voice rose
to its usual pitch. “ Why, Charlie, this man had the very
place ready to his hand 1 What more could he have
wanted ? ”
Stone nodded smilingly. “ I have great faith in you,
Gilbert, and there is a lot in what you say. Yes, for the
sake of our professional pride now, we must find out
where the bungalow is. But how the deuce you are going
to get at his pass-book or the butts of his cheque-book.


I can’t see.” His smile broadened. “ Going to do a bit of
burglary, my son, and break into his house one night ? ”
Larose shook his head. “ I’ve thought of it,” he said,
“ but it’s not practicable. He’s two big Alsatians and
they’re always let loose in the grounds at nights. Then
there are burglar alarms everywhere. Hellingsby had
them put in soon after he was married, because of the
valuable silver his wife possessed. No, that’s not my idea
at all. I intend ”
“ But how do you know all this about the house ? ”
interrupted Stone. “ Have you been inside ? ”
“ No, but that Thompson woman has told me. I’ve
got it out of her tactfully, and she’s even drawn me a plan
of the house, to show what a beautiful place Hellingsby
came into.”
“ But does she know who you are ? ” asked Stone,
bringing his eyes together in an uneasy frown.
“ No, and she’s quite content not to know. I’ve seen
her several times and all she wants is to get Hellingsby
jailed. I’m quite of opinion she’s trustworthy and can be
relied upon to any extent. She’s done some spying out
for me in Southborough and tells me Hellingsby has got
all new servants, including a new gardener-chauffeur.”
“ Then what’s your plan of campaign ? ” asked Stone
briskly. “ Let’s hear it.”
“ Well, when I was staying in Roding Hall,” said
Larose, “ everyone could see that Hellingsby was very
keen on cards and a great gambler, and Selina tells me it’s
all over the village now that since his wife’s death he’s
thrown four or five hot card parties at the Hall. So lam
sure there’ll be no difficulty in getting an invitation to go
down and then I shall want you to go with me.”
“ But I’m not what you call a hot card player.” grunted
Stone, “ and I’ve no money to lose in high stakes.”
“ Certainly not,” agreed Larose, “ and I’ll take care we
both come out on the right side.” He nodded. “ I’ve
got a strong suspicion Hellingsby’s a sharper, and if it


comes to that ” —he smiled —“ as you know, I can
manipulate the cards a bit myself. So when we’re partners
together and it’s my deal. I’ll take care we have some good
hands.”
“ Good ! ” exclaimed Stone with a grin, “ but you’re
a nice companion for a man in my position to be asso-
ciated with ! ” He nodded complacently. “ Still, it is
sometimes necessary to meet evil with evil and I certainly
don’t want to part with any cash.”
“ Well, Hellingsby is dining with me at the ‘ Rialto ’
to-morrow night,” went on Larose, “ and, of course,
there’ll be cards afterwards. So, I want you to come and
meet him.”
“ But he’ll smell a rat at once,” said Stone, “ directly
he learns I come from the Yard ! ”
“ But he won’t learn it, you old fat-head,” laughed
Larose. “ You’ll be a rich Australian sheep-man and
you’ll come all togged up and wearing a big diamond
ring. You’ll be smoking half-crown cigars, too, from a
most expensive case. Ah, I thought that would get you !
I’ll supply the cigars and the ring you’ll borrow from old
Rubinstein. The old rascal will lend you anything to keep
in your good books.”
Stone frowned. “ But I don’t quite like it. I know
nothing about sheep and he may trip me up, too, about
Australia.”
“ Nonsense, you have been to Australia and I know he
hasn’t. What does it matter if you only went a voyage in
a windjammer and you were not twenty at the time ?
You’ve seen Sydney Harbour, and as for sheep, well, just
keep mum and say you’ve got Merinos which you only
breed for wool. But you can drop incidentally that
you’ve got thirty thousand of them and that your station
runs to hundreds of square miles. Understand ? ”
“ Yes,” grinned Stone, “ and as you say he’s so fond
of the women I’ll throw in a few little touches about the
beautiful black gins.”


“ No, you old reprobate,” exclaimed the horrified
Larose. “ Don’t you mention black gins. He may have
seen pictures of them and they’re as ugly as the devil.
Oh, one thing more. Bring a smart young fellow from
here to make up a fourth, someone who’s used to flash
life. Let him call you Uncle, and he’s to say he’s going
abroad the next day so that Hellingsby won’t invite him
to Southborough, too. I shall say you only play bridge,
for we don’t want more than one table when we go
down.”
“ But he mayn’t ask at all,” said Stone doubtfully.
“ You can’t be certain of that.”
“ Oh, can’t I? ” scoffed Larose. “ Why, he’ll fall for
your silly old face like a cat jumping after a sparrow.
No, don’t you worry. He’ll ask us right enough. I lost
eleven pounds to him at poker last week, and he’ll think
we’re both soft stuff as far as cards are concerned. He’ll
probably, too, have a sharper pal with him at South-
borough and they’ll guess they’re going to strip us clean.”
“ But isn’t he a very well-to-do man ? ” asked Stone.
“ You say he got all that money out of his wife.”
“ Certainly he did,” said Larose, “ but no one knows
how much of it he’s got left now. I have been asking
about him in the city and they say he’s lost a fortune in
rubber lately.” He shook his head. “ Besides, as you
know, Charlie, there are men who would always rather
get things through cheating than in an honest way,” He
spoke emphatically. “ And this chap is one of that kind.”
It was quite a nice little dinner Larose gave at the
“ Rialto,” with the most expensive of food and the best
of wines. The company were speedily on good terms
with one another and, without his in the least degree over-
doing it, it was soon apparent that the polished and
courtly Miles Hellingsby had taken quite a fancy to the
bluff but genial Andy K. Loxton, who came from down
under where the kangaroos are.
He admired the way the old chap missed nothing on the


menu and his keen appreciation of the good wine. He
admired, too, the modesty in which he referred to his
thirty thousand sheep and his hundreds of square miles ;
but without doubt he admired most of all the magnificent
diamond ring which the sheep-farmer sported upon one
short and podgy finger. He knew a lot about diamonds
but found it difficult to appraise the exact value of the
stone.
“ Yes, Rubinstein has certainly come up to scratch
there,” murmured Larose, following the direction of
Hellingsby’s eyes, “ and the old devil must be deep in the
Yard’s suspicions to have fitted Charlie up like that.
Why, the stone must be worth six or seven hundred
pounds.”
Bert Berry, too, the old man’s nephew, interested
Hellingsby not a little and several times during the meal
he regretted to himself that the young fellow was leaving
for abroad so soon. With that stupid expression of his,
Bert should have easily dropped a hundred or two of his
uncle’s money and have been afraid to squeal to his rich
relation about it afterwards.
The meal passed off most pleasantly and towards the
end of it, notwithstanding the great reputation that he
knew Larose had once possessed, Hellingsby somehow
began to sense that it was he himself who was now “ top
dog ” and taking command of the little party. His
opinion was asked about a lot of matters and received
almost respectfully. He enlightened Larose considerably
about stocks and shares, and the old Australian’s eyes
opened very wide when he related the elaborate pre-
caution taken by the banks to protect themselves from
being robbed.
At first he had to admit to himself he had been mildly
astonished that everything he said should be accepted
so readily, but then he suddenly realised that, after all,
Larose, although with plenty of money now, was only a
common policeman at heart, and the Australian only an
Q


ignorant old farmer. As for the nephew, it was plain he
was nothing but a nonentity.
Certainly at the beginning of the meal Hellingsby had
been inclined to be a little bit uneasy about Larose, for
at Roding Hall he had thought the ex-detective had a
nasty inquisitive look about his eyes ; but he didn’t
notice that look now, and again, too, he was now seeing
a side of Larose’s nature which he had never suspected
before.
Larose took plenty of wine and it had its effect upon
him. By no means, however, did it make him raise his
voice and his manners were as irreproachable as ever,
but he let himself go a little and gave Hellingsby the
impression that as a police officer he would not have been
altogether too squeamish and would always have been
responsive to a good tip.
But Hellingsby had no time for further ruminations,
for after the meal they adjourned to Larose’s private
room and settled down to a few hands of bridge.
Then, again, Hellingsby’s approval of the old sheep-
farmer deepened, for the latter brought out cigars that
must have run into several five-pound notes for the
hundred. And he was most generous about them, too,
for finding Hellingsby liked them, he insisted upon his
taking half a dozen to smoke another time at his leisure.
Yes, when the party broke up soon after midnight,
and Larose and his friend had agreed to come down two
days later fqr a night of bridge at Southborough Hall,
Hellingsby was of the opinion that he had had a very
pleasant evening, with the prospect, too, of a much more
pleasant one to follow later on.
He had certainly not acquired much wealth, indeed less
than a couple of pounds, but then both the Australian
and his nephew had played a rotten game, and, when
Larose had partnered him, they had had, most consis-
tently, terribly bad hands.
“ Still,” he nodded complacently as a taxi was taking


him to his own hotel: “ I’ll have better luck on Thursday.
With de Vome and me together we’ll touch the policeman
for a tidy whack of his wife’s money, and the old kan-
garoo josser for the price of a big field of fat sheep.”
But he would not have been quite so sanguine of good
money coming his way could he but have heard what his
host and the other two were saying at that very moment.
Stone had gone back to his usual set of artificial teeth,
and, straightening up his back, looked many years
younger, whilst his supposed nephew had now an alert
expression and appeared to be very much all there.
“ The blighter’s finger-marks are upon that one at the
end,” said the young detective, pointing to some glasses
upon the sideboard, “ and mind no one touches it. I’ll
get my bag and put it in at once.” He nodded. “ I don’t
suppose they are recorded already, but they may be useful
later on.”
But neither of his companions appeared to be paying
much attention. They were laughing merrily and enjoy-
ing their jokes too wholeheartedly. Then Stone dug
Larose delightedly in the ribs.
“ Gee, but didn’t he notice my big jewel I ” he chuckled.
“He couldn’t take his eyes off it the whole evening ! ”
He chuckled again. “ And what a good sheep-farmer I
made ! I could almost feel the darned wool growing on
my whiskers.”
“ But you shouldn’t have boasted about the number
of rabbits you’d got,” reproved Larose. “ You ought to
have known they poison them off on stations in Aus-
tralia.” He grinned. “ Still, he never heard you or took
it in, as he was much too preoccupied dealing himself
those four aces.” He regarded Stone significantly. “ Yes,
he is a card-sharper right enough and I’ll bet any money
that the aristocratic Monsieur de Vome we are going to
meet on Thursday is another one, too.”
The two detectives took their departure very soon
afterwards. Larose was just about to switch off the


lights in the sitting-room, when his eye happened to
fall upon the glasses on the sideboard and he frowned
a rather perplexed frown.
Then he suddenly walked sharply over to the side-
board and looked into the glasses. “ Yes, he’s taken the
wrong one ! ” he exclaimed in annoyance. “ I thought he
had ! Hellingsby finished up with a neat brandy and he
didn’t drink it all! This is his glass with what’s left of the
neat brandy still in it! ” He sniffed at the other two
glasses. “ Yes, it is my glass the careless beggar has
taken ! My last two drinks were plain water and there’s
no glass here which has had plain water in it,” He smiled
to himself. “ Won’t I just have the joke on that young
fellow to-morrow ! ”
But he thought no more about the matter until the
next morning when, very late for him, he was break-
fasting at half-past nine in the dining-room of the hotel,
and then suddenly in the middle of his meal a terribly
disconcerting thought leaped into his mind.
The previous night Stone and the young fellow with
him had taken away his finger-marks, under the mistaken
idea that they were Hellingsby’s. Then, when they had
obtained the prints of them and came to search if they
were recorded already—oh, heavens, they would discover
them as identical with the finger-marks left by the
mysterious visitor to Daunt’s house upon the night of the
disappearance of the grave-digger !
Larose felt a cold shiver running down his spine, for
he knew that if ever Hellingsby came to be arrested and
his finger-marks taken again, as they most certainly would
be, then it would be discovered instantly that those
already in the possession of the Yard and supposed to be
his were in reality someone else’s. Then it would be
realised that if not Hellingsby’s, the prints must certainly
be those of one of the other three who had been drinking
with him that night at the Rialto Hotel—either Stone’s,
the young detective’s, or his, Larose’s 1


Then would follow a quick investigation and—oh,
hell, this time, without doubt and with no uncertainty,
it would be shown that Larose was linked up with
the grave-digger.
Yes, verily he was between the devil and the deep sea,
for with the unmasking of Hellingsby would come his
own discomfiture. They two would leap into the lime-
light together.
Then suddenly he took heart and snapped his fingers
triumphantly. And what did it matter if it were brought
to light that he had been with the grave-digger that night,
and, in the peculiar circumstances, had not wished his
visit to become known ? Why, nothing, of course ! It
was his own private concern and nobody else’s business
and he could not be compelled to say anything.
Then he shivered again. No, nothing would matter —
unless that secret chamber under the floor was dis-
covered and the rotting body of the grave-digger brought
up into the light of day !
Then, and then only, would fall the avalanche I
Larose was just about to sit down to lunch, when what
he had been expecting all the morning happened. He was
called to the telephone and Stone’s excited voice greeted
him. Hellingsby’s finger-marks had been found to be
identical with those of the mysterious visitor to the grave-
digger, when the latter had disappeared upon the
eventful night!
The inspector thought the coincidence to be almost a
miraculous one, but, of course, had not the remotest idea
what to make of it. They must discuss it together, he
said, on the morrow as they were driving down to South-
borough. Larose hung up the receiver with the very
unpleasant feeling that things were threatening to become
most awkward.


CHAPTER XII
A NARROW ESCAPE
THE following afternoon Larose and the happy-
looking Andy Loxton, in the former’s beauti-
fully appointed car, drove through the big
gates into the grounds of Southborough Hall,
and at once their adventures began.
Through his study window Miles Hellingsby had seen
them coming up the drive, and he was at the front door
as the car came to a standstill. He greeted them cordially
and then, as they stood chatting together for a minute
or two, the hall chauffeur appeared to drive the car into
the garage.
The man touched his forehead respectfully to his
master and the two arrivals and then his eyes lingered in a
puzzled sort of way upon old Loxton. Larose, who was
very much upon the alert and, as had been his life’s habit
when upon a case, never missed anything, became
instantly uneasy. Not only did the man’s gaze linger
upon Loxton’s face, but at the same time he looked,
Larose thought, most unduly interested and curious.
“ Take the car round to the garage, Mawson,” ordered
Hellingsby, and with a start the man withdrew his eyes
from the sheep-farmer’s face.
“ Come on, you chaps,” went on Hellingsby smilingly.
“ You must have a spot, first, and then I’ll take you to
your room. No, leave the suit-cases there. The maid will
see to them.” He ushered the two friends into the
big lounge and asked them what they would have to drink.
They both chose whisky and soda, and then, when they
had all seated themselves down in comfortable armchairs


and raised their glasses to one another’s health, Larose
rose suddenly to his feet.
“ Oh, excuse me one minute,” he exclaimed, “ but I’ve
left my cigarette case in the car I I saw where the garage
was and I’ll go and get it.”
“ No, no,” remonstrated Hellingsby instantly, “ don’t
you go. I’ll send on one of the maids.”
“ But she wouldn’t find it,” smiled Larose. “ Please,
I’ll get it,” and he was off before his host could raise any
further objections.
Entering the garage, Larose found the car had just
been backed into its destined place. The chauffeur was a
pleasant-looking man about two or three and twenty,
with a frank and open face.
Larose pretended to fumble in one of the pockets of the
car and then produced the cigarette case which he had all
the time been holding in his hand.
“ Beautiful car, sir,” said the chauffeur, almost rever-
ently, “ but I expect it’s hot on petrol.”
“ No, not very,” returned Larose, “ you’d be sur-
prised. I get nearly twenty miles to the gallon,” and he
took out a cigarette and lighted it. “ Oh, by the by,”
he went on, “ I think I must have got a dirty plug some-
where. The engine was missing quite a lot when we started.
So you might give all the plugs a run over, if you will.”
With a pleasant smile he took out and gave a ten-shilling
note to the surprised and very delighted young fellow.
“ Yes, the missing quite worried my friend,” went on
Larose, “ and he was afraid, every moment, that some-
thing terrible was going to happen.” He kept his eyes
intently upon the chauffeur as he added : “ But then, Mr.
Loxton does not know much about the insides of cars.”
“ Mr. Loxton ! ” exclaimed the chauffeur instantly,
and looking very puzzled, “ but he is—” and then he
stopped speaking and looked rather embarrassed.
“ But he is—what ? ” asked Larose with a smiling face,
but a most unpleasant feeling in his chest.


“He is Chief-Inspector Stone of Scotland Yard,”
stammered the young man. He spoke most apologetically.
“ I know him quite well, by sight, sir. I have often seen him! ”
Larose was in a dreadful quandary and, for the life
of him, did not know what to say. Here was a terrible
misfortune, threatening to ruin all their plans !
“ You see, sir,” went on the chauffeur quickly, “ my
dad’s in the Force as well. He’s one of the constables
stationed outside the Yard and when I’ve been passing
or talcing a message to him from Mum, he’s often
pointed out to me some of the heads. That’s how I come
to recognise Inspector Stone.”
Larose picked up his cue at last. “ Oh, your dad’s a
policeman, is he ? ” He spoke very sternly. “ Then you
ought to know how to keep a still tongue.”
“ Oh, I do, sir,” said the chauffeur instantly, “ and
I won’t mention it to anyone if I ought not to.” He
smiled. “ I was very puzzled for the moment, for the
inspector looked so much older just now and his mouth
and teeth were quite different.” He lowered his voice
to a whisper. “ Has he come here on duty, sir ? ”
“Yes, he darned well has,” said Larose with the utmost
sharpness, “ and if it gets out through you he’s here,” he
nodded menacingly, “ then it won’t be too good for your
father.”
“ Oh, you can trust me, sir,” exclaimed the young man
warmly. “ I’ll not tell a soul.” He nodded in his turn.
“ I’ve only been here a month and I’m not going to be
here much longer. The place doesn’t suit me at all.
Sometimes I don’t get home until two or three in the
morning, and then I have to be up again at six o’clock to
work in the garden.” He shook his head. “ Besides, I
don’t like the master.”
“ And why don’t you like him ? ” asked Larose,
snapping out his words quickly as he realised he could
only stop in the garage a minute or two longer.
“ He’s very bad-tempered, sir, and he’s not got a good


name here,” replied the chauffeur. “ Besides, we all
think ” —but he broke off suddenly and asked as if very
uncomfortable at daring to question Larose: “ Have you
come down to play cards, sir ? ”
“ Yes, certainly,” replied Larose, “ that’s one of our
reasons for being here.”
The young man shook his head. “ Then be careful,
sir,” he said, anxiously. “ Be very careful. Visitors here
have been losing a lot of money lately. Cook overheard
one of them say, last week, that he’d dropped over three
hundred pounds and several parties haven’t been looking
too happy as they’ve driven away the next morning.”
“ But I mustn’t stop a moment longer,” scowled
Larose. He raised his hand warningly. “ And mind—not
a word of this conversation either now or at any time
after we have gone. You understand ? ”
“ That’ll be quite all right, sir,” replied the chauffeur,
“ and you needn’t give it another thought. No one will
get a word out of me.” Then just as Larose was turning
out of the garage, he called out sharply: “ But here’s
something else, sir, I think you ought to know.” He
advanced close up to Larose and whispered mysteriously :
“ Yesterday, there was an electrician from town working
all day in the room you are both going to have and the
master himself took up his dinner, so that none of us in
the kitchen should speak to him. I don’t know what
he did, but I’m very interested in radio and happened to
come round to the front door just as he was taking some-
thing out of his car that looked to me very like a micro-
phone.” He nodded. “So I shouldn’t talk too loud when
you and Inspector Stone are together in your room. The
master may be a bit suspicious of you, as you were once at
Scotland Yard ! ” He smiled. “He is sure to know that.”
“ Many thanks to you,” said Larose warmly, “ and
you and I must manage another talk somehow to-night.”
And off he went up the drive.
“ Great Jupiter,” he murmured, “ but what an escape 1


If I hadn’t got my eyes skinned, everything would have
been ruined before we’d even started 1 Whew, won’t old
Charlie perspire when I tell him ! ”
He found his host and old Loxton in the lounge where
he had left them and, to account for his long absence,
was just explaining how his cigarette case had slipped down
behind the cushion of the seat, when the sounds of a car
were heard outside. A minute later they were being
introduced to Monsieur Jules de Vome,
The Frenchman was a dapper little man, very elegant
and well-dressed, and looking exactly as if he had just
stepped out of the proverbial band-box. He was some-
where in the middle thirties, with a refined intellectual
face and big dark eyes. His appearance was that of a
professional man. He spoke English very well, although
he could not manage the th’s and the w’s.
“ I am from Paris,” he explained to the two friends
with a courtly bow, “ and I have not long been in zis
beautiful country of yours. I love England, and English
gentlemen have ze stamp of pure gold. Ah, but you are
from Australia ! Veil, it is ze same zing 1 ”
“ And what do you think of our gals ? ” laughed old
Loxton. “ They’re pretty good, too, ain’t they ? ”
Monsieur de Vome raised his eyes ecstatically. “ Pearls
above prices, peaches and most lovely flowers ! ” He
smiled slily. ‘lf I did marry here, I should vant to have
more vives zan your law allows.” He pretended to sigh.
“ Zat is vy I am single man.”
Presently Hellingsby took the two friends upstairs and
showed them into a large and very comfortably furnished
room. “ I do hope you won’t mind sharing this together,”
he apologised, “ but as a matter of fact, I am just having
the decorators in, and although there are any amount of
bedrooms here, they are all topsy-turvy at present, being
got ready for the mess the workmen will make. Besides,
this is almost my favourite room in the whole house. The
view here is so lovely.”


Both Larose and Mr. Loxton expressed their delight
with their surroundings and a minute or two later
Hellingsby retired and left them to themselves.
Then when Stone was grinning like a big school-boy and
just about to make some remark, Larose shook his head
frowningly and, with one finger upon his lips, pointed
in stabbing jerks several times to the chimney and then
to the two big ventilators, one of the latter on either side
of the room.
“ Lovely old place this, Andy,” he said loudly. “ I
wonder you, with all your money, don’t live in England.
You get the best value in the world in the country.”
He took a pencil and little memorandum book out of his
pocket and scribbled quickly upon one of the pages of
the latter the one word “ Microphone ! ”
Stone’s eyebrows went up with a jerk and he looked
most uneasy. But Larose scribbled on, “ Still everything
quite serene—my informant, the chauffeur —he recog-
nised you —his dad, Police Constable Mawson, outside
the Yard—don’t worry ! ”
And then proceeded what would have been, for anyone
watching, a most amusing little comedy, with the two
friends loudly and enthusiastically discussing the beautiful
stretch of country they could see from the window and,
at the same time, feverishly communicating their thoughts
to each other upon a sheet of notepaper that Larose had
taken from out of his suit-case.
“ Lucky I saw chauffeur ogling you! ” wrote Larose.
“ But no danger, if he’s like his father. Mawson very
good officer,” wrote back Stone.
“ We’re in a den of thieves, Charlie.”
“ Sure 1 But if it comes to a scrap, there are only two
of them!”
“ What do you think of de Vome ? ”
“ Beautiful hands, Gilbert. Just the ones for a card-
sharper ! ”
“ And to stick a knife into you, too, Charlie ! ”


“ Sure I He looks an elegant little devil. I hope to
blazes they don’t dope the drinks.”
“ Not they. They’d gain nothing by that. But
I must have another talk with that young Mawson.
We’ll get H. to show us over the grounds and then you
keep them talking whilst I slip over to the garage.”
“ O.K. I’ll tell them that yarn about the girl and the
sailor and I’ll spin it out. You nudge me when you want
to get away, and then I’ll start the story.”
“ Good luck to us, Charlie.”
“ The Lord help us, Gilbert. We don’t quite know
what we’re in for.”
“ Well, Andy, you just be quick and have your wash,”
said Larose loudly. “ I’ll get Hellingsby to show us over
these grounds. They look lovely to me.”
And so, a few minutes later, the master of South-
borough Hall, along with the bowing and ever smiling
Monsieur de Vome, was conducting the two friends
through his beautiful grounds.
He took them at first, however, to the kennels and
showed them with great pride his two big Alsatians.
They were magnificent-looking creatures, but regarded
their master’s companions with anything but friendly
eyes.
“ No, don’t go near them,” Hellingsby ordered
Larose sharply, as the latter was advancing close up.
“ They’re not too friendly with strangers and I don’t
want them to be. I only keep them as watch-dogs and
they’re never off the chain, except at night when they
roam about the grounds.” He smiled a grim smile.
“ Then Heaven help anyone they find prowling here I ”
He regarded them frowningly. “ Still, I’m not too
pleased with them lately. They’ve taken to parking them-
selves right over there by the gates, a good way from the
house they ought to be protecting, and, besides that, they
growl at everyone going by on the high road. The
damned policeman came up to me about it last week and


said they frightened people in the village, coming home
on foot.”
Passing along through the garden, they came upon
Mawson tying up some rose trees, and both Larose and
Stone were greatly heartened by the stolid look the
chauffeur had now put on. In enthusiastic admiration of
the blooms, Larose lagged behind to inspect them more
fully and then, with his back turned to the others, hissed
out sharply to Mawson: “ Look here, I want another
word with you. How can we manage it ? Where do you
sleep ? ”
“In the house, sir,” replied Mawson. “ I’m the only
one on the ground floor. I have a room behind the
pantry,”
“ And the pantry opens into the kitchen,” said Larose,
swiftly calling up to his mind’s eye the plan Selina
Thompson had drawn for him, “ Then your room is at
the far end of the passage ? ”
“ Yes, sir, on the other side of the house. The window
is the last one facing north.”
“ All right,” said Larose, “ then I’ll come and speak
to you soon after we’ve all gone upstairs to go to bed.
But it won’t be, at any rate, until after two in the morning.
Leave your door unlatched and drop a piece of newspaper
just outside in the passage. I don’t want to go into the
wrong room.” As if now satisfied with his inspection
of the roses, he followed after the others.
The dinner was a good one. Plenty of wine was drunk
and the conversation was bright and animated. Monsieur
de Vome told them of the noble family from which he
had sprung and of his big estate upon the Biscay coast.
Also, he related anecdotes of many illustrious personages
in foreign countries, with whom, apparently, he was upon
most intimate terms.
“ And you. Monsieur Larose,” he asked presently,
with his gracious smile, “ no doubt you, too, have been
brought in contact viz many famous people in your time?”


“ Certainly,” smiled back Larose, “ lots of them;
Brunswick, who poisoned three wives; Maloney, who’s
habit it was to decoy victims to his house and bury them
under his cellar; Robjohn, whose little weakness was
cutting throats on lonely roads, and many, many others.”
He chuckled lightheartedly. “ Oh, yes, I’ve known
plenty of famous people, but unhappily the mortality
among them has been pretty high and there is only the
memory of them to console me now,” and Monsieur de
Vome seemed most delighted at his new friend’s wit.
But if the dinner was a noisy one, it could hardly have
been said that the bridge that followed after was also of
so joyous a nature, for all but the stolid Andy Loxton
seemed to take the game too seriously. They were much
too preoccupied. Of course, that was only natural with
Monsieur de Vome, for he admitted quite frankly he was
no card-player and was obliged to concentrate all his
attention upon the game to keep himself from making
some dreadfully foolish mistake.
“ Well,” had smiled Hellingsby to the two friends as
they all entered his cosy study where the play was to take
place, “ shall we cut for partners, or shall de Vome and
I take you chaps on ? ” He laughed. “ I want to give
you some sort of revenge for that hiding you got from
me when at the Rodings.”
“ Oh, we’ll take you two on,” replied Larose instantly.
“ In a way, I’m sorry it’s not poker we’re going to play,
but Mr. Loxton is no good there, although ” —he nodded
emphatically—“ as you know he plays a rattling good
hand at bridge.”
“ Then what points shall we play ? ” asked Hellingsby.
“ Shall we say ten pounds a hundred ? ”
Larose considered for a moment. He was quite aware
they were up against two sharpers, but he and Stone had
come quite prepared, and if there was going to be any
cheating then they would have to have their share in it.
They had most carefully arranged for a code of secret


signals, so that each other’s hands would be like an open
book, even as undoubtedly de Vome’s and Hellingsby’s
would be to them.
“ But that’s rather high,” he said doubtfully, and
de Vome nodded at once in pretended agreement.
But Stone, whom the good burgundy had warmed up
and who was delighted at the thought of being a real
rogue for once, sided with Hellingsby.
“ No, a tenner let it be! ” he exclaimed, “ I’ve a nice fat
wool cheque coming in and I’m ripe for a good gamble.”
So ten pounds a hundred was decided upon and they
sat down to play. They were all good players and, in the
ordinary way, the play would have been thoroughly
interesting to watch, but, with the peculiar circumstances
prevailing, it was now doubly so.
Hellingsby and de Vome won the first game and lost
the second, but then they ran out with next two and won
the rubber.
Hellingsby smiled down his nose and tapped de Vome’s
foot ever so lightly, the latter returning his tap and tell-
ing himself the world was a very nice place to live in.
Things were going on all right and they both envisioned
a fat cheque about two a.m., when it had been agreed
they should stop playing.
But Hellingsby did not smile when in the next rubber
Larose and Andy Loxton ran out with three games
straight off the reel, and Monsieur de Vome was no
longer quite so sure that the world was such a pleasant
habitation as he had thought—when the score came to be
added up.
Their opponents had played most uncannily, with each
of them seeming to know exactly what cards the other
held. Certainly they themselves had not been behind-
hand in that matter, but the cards had been dead against
them and the advantage accruing from their secret
signalling had not been sufficient to turn the scales in
their favour.


And then for nearly six hours the play went on,
ding-dong, ding-dong, with neither side having much
over the other. De Vome nearly always managed to deal
himself an ace, but then so did Larose, and the elegant
Frenchman had difficulty in preventing a dark scowl
becoming a fixture upon his handsome face.
Hellingsby drank many brandies and Andy Loxton
absorbed the good whisky of his host like a sponge, but
without it, apparently, having the slightest effect upon
him. Larose and De Vome were most abstemious, the
former because he knew he had his night’s work before
him, and the latter because he was quite aware shaking
fingers could not palm aces to the bottom of the pack.
Larose and Stone made no attempt to find out how the
other two were communicating with one another, just
taking it for granted they were doing so, but Hellingsby
and de Vome never took their eyes off their opponents,
watching their every movement and puzzled to the
highest degree. Quite early in the evening they began to
feel they were not quite sure they were not being paid
back in their own coin, and yet, for the life of them, they
could detect nothing wrong. This ex-policeman and this
stupid old farmer kept them guessing the whole time.
How could they tell when old Andy wanted a spade
call, he did not lift his eyes from his cards, or when he
wanted no trumps, he no longer smiled ? Or that when
Larose had an expression like that of the Sphinx he had a
good heart hand, or that when he was no longer smoking
his eternal cigarette he was strong in diamonds ? And
so on, and so on, with every signal between them of a
negative nature. When they gave no sign they were
signalling violently.
Hellingsby cursed under his breath and de Vome mur-
mured dreadful oaths that were unbecoming a scion of
the French nobility. He had never been more furious,
even when as a waiter in a fifth-rate cafe in Marseilles a
customer had gone off without giving him a tip.


With the finish of the seventh rubber, when they had
crashed heavily, Hellingsby gave his partner a savage
kick and it hurt so much that de Vome could have struck
him with the knuckle-duster he had got in a suit-case
upstairs with the greatest of pleasure.
At twenty minutes to two Larose announced he would
play no longer, as his eyes, he said, were so blurred he
could not see the cards without a great effort. So they
proceeded to settle up.
On the whole play Hellingsby and de Vome had just
lost, and considering the high stakes the loss was amaz-
ingly trifling. Hellingsby threw back the roll-top of his
desk and wrote out a cheque for seven pounds twelve
shillings, covering his own loss and that of de Vome.
Larose was filled with a great hope when he noticed
Hellingsby did not immediately close the desk.
“ But I’m not satisfied,” he laughed, as he folded up
the cheque and placed it in his pocket-book. “ It’s at
poker I must have my revenge on you. Mr. Loxton is
following that nephew of his to Brussels the day after
to-morrow, so leaving him out won’t worry him. Phone
me at Carmel Abbey any day after next week, and I’ll
come up and have a night with you fellows and win
something substantial.” A little satisfaction came into
Hellingsby’s eyes as he thought of the skinning that
would take place then.
Bidding them good-night, Larose and Stone went up
to their room and then, half a minute later, Hellingsby,
closely followed by de Vome, darted up to his.
“ And now we’ll know 1 ” he exclaimed breathlessly
as he unlocked a big cupboard and the two of them bent
close to a large receiver. His face was not pleasant to
look upon. “ And, by Hell, we ought to murder them if
we find we’ve been the suckers to-night.”
The voices of Larose and Stone, three rooms away,
were heard with the utmost clearness.
“ Yes, Andy,” Larose was saying, with many delighted
R


winks which fortunately the eavesdroppers could not
see, “ you played very well to-night, and I think, the
whole time, you only lost two tricks.”
“ Two tricks be damned, Gilbert,” growled old
Loxton. “ I don’t agree I lost one.” He made gleeful
sounds with his tongue. “ Yes, I was a corker to-night,
but it was that burgundy which bucked me up. I felt
half tight all the time. Gee, but won’t I have a headache
to-morrow I ”
“ Hellingsby makes a very decent host,” went on
Larose, “ but what do you make of the Frenchy ? ”
“ A damned fine player, Gilbert,” answered Andy,
“ and I don’t believe for a second he’s not used to cards,
as he says. He looks a smart and clever little devil to me,
and although he may have pots of money, I’ll bet he’s as
greedy for getting a bit more as anyone could be.”
“ An aristocrat, right enough,” commented Larose.
“ You can tell that by his hands.” De Vome, listening
in, notwithstanding his intense vexation, smiled in much
amusement, being quite aware that his mother, a lady
who had earned her livelihood in a profession it is never
good taste to refer to in polite conversation, had had no
certain knowledge who the father of her son was.
Then to the listeners-in came sounds of the two un-
dressing, with shoes being bumped on to the floor. Then
followed the voice of the old sheep-farmer.
“ But look here, Gilbert, I don’t like these old houses,”
he said. “ There are always ghosts in them, and I’ll bet
there’s a haunted room somewhere here. So I’m going
to bolt or lock the door. Oh, gosh ! there’s no key or
bolt, so I’ll have to tilt a chair under the handle.”
“ Don’t be so silly, Andy,” reproved Larose. “ It’ll
look so funny if the maid brings in our tea in the
morning.”
“ But I’ll take it away first thing,” said Andy, and then
followed sounds indicating that he had accomplished
his purpose.


The click of the light was heard next and then the two
listeners-in in the other room moved away from the
cupboard.
“ Fools, just fools ! ” commented de Vome sourly.
“ Zat policeman can never have had intelligence except
ven he vas on his beat,”
“ I don’t know so much about that,” scowled
Hellingsby. “ I’m puzzled even now.” He dismissed
his companion with a jerk of his head. “ Well, goodnight.
I want my bed now. I’m sick of everything that’s
happened.”
Ten minutes later all under its roof should have
been asleep in Southborough Hall, but, had it been only
known, five of its occupants were very much awake.
The chauffeur was pinching himself hard to keep from
dozing ; Larose and Stone, both in pyjamas, were seated
close together upon one bed and discussing in delighted
whisperings the happenings of the night; Hellingsby
was tossing restlessly, with his furious disappointment
allowing him no peace, and Monsieur de Vome was lying
wide-eyed and staring into the darkness, very angry with
himself because it had only just come home to him that
anyone who could deal cards in the lightning fashion in
which that policeman-fellow had done would be the very
person able to stack an ace at the bottom of the pack
every time he wanted to when he was dealing the cards.
Yes, Jean Moraine was a very angry man, giving no
thought to his nobility and his ancestral home upon the
shores of Biscay Bay.
An hour longer passed, and then Larose, after grinning
“ Booh ” in Stone’s ear, got up from the bed and pre-
pared himself for his adventure. Over his pyjamas he put
a dark jacket and a dark pair of trousers. Then he donned
a dark cap, which he pulled low down over his forehead,
and put on a pair of black rubber-soled canvas shoes.
Then he donned rubber gloves and, making sure he had
got certain articles in his pocket, after final whispered


instructions to Stone not to stir from the room, but be
waiting with the door just ajar for his return, he glided
from the darkness of the room into the darkness of the
passage.
For a long time he stood perfectly still—listening.
But he could hear only the ticking of the big clock
in the hall below and the faint sounds of his own breath-
ing. Then, far away, came the deep barking of a dog.
“ Ugh ! ” he shuddered, “ it would not be too good
for me out there.” With his hand just brushing the
wall, and taking each step forward with extreme care,
he glided along the passage. He was intending not to
pass Hellingsby’s door, but to gain the hall by means of
the back staircase.
It was a faint starlight night and, his eyes accustomed
more to the darkness, he had no difficulty in finding his
way. The stairs creaked a little, but he planted his feet
every time close to the wall and a cat could hardly have
made less noise. He flashed his torch as few times as
possible and always directed it so that its range would
fall only a few feet ahead.
Reaching the ground floor, and with Selina’s plan of
the house in his mind, he soon found where the chauffeur
slept and stepped softly into the room. He flashed his
torch upon the young fellow, who was sitting up in bed.
“ It’s all right, my friend,” he whispered, “ and now
you’ve got to help me. Now listen. I’m going to
look for something in your master’s study and you’re
to keep watch and listen for the slightest sound of any
movements upstairs. I shall be depending entirely upon
you to warn me, and if everything goes off well Inspector
Stone says he won’t forget your dad. You understand ? ”
“ Yes, sir,” whispered back the chauffeur, thrilled to
the very marrow at the thought that he was to work, as it
were, under the eyes of the great Gilbert Larose and
Inspector Stone. “ But how am I going to warn you ? ”
“ I’ll show you,” said Larose. “ Come on.” Flashing


his torch more confidently now, he led the way into the
hall.
“ Now this is what you’ve got to do,” he whispered,
stopping before the big clock and opening the glass
cover over the dial. “ See, it’s ten minutes past three now.
Well, if you hear any door opening anywhere or any
suspicious sounds at all, move the minute hand forward
so that the clock will strike the half-hour. I shall know
then that there is danger somewhere. I oughtn’t to be
five minutes over my job in the study and shall be back
here to you long before the half-hour will strike in the
ordinary way. Now, have you taken that in ? ”
“ Yes, sir,” nodded the chauffeur. “ I quite under-
stand.”
“ And one thing more,” went on Larose. “ I saw that
the electric meter is just back there under the well of the
stairs. Well, if you see any light go up anywhere upstairs
or in the hall, instantly dash over to the meter and cut
off everything at the main. Then I shall be able to get
back to my room in the darkness. Oh, and if that happens,
which I hope to goodness it doesn’t, when you’ve given
what you think is sufficient time for me to have got back
to my room, turn on the meter again so that no one
will know it has been interfered with. They’ll think then
it was only a temporary failure of the light. One last
thing : don’t touch the meter switch with your bare
hand. Pull the sleeve of your pyjamas down over your
fingers.”
Reaching the study door, Larose pushed it wide open
and then, switching on his torch, tiptoed into the room
and prepared to tackle the lock of the big roll-top desk.
Then, a little to his astonishment, and greatly to his
delight, for he judged Hellingsby to be a most methodical
man, he found the desk wide open, just as Hellingsby had
left it after having written his cheque for the losses at
cards that night.
“ But I’ll bet,” grinned Larose, “ that this comes from


his being in such a darned hurry to rush up to his room
and listen to what we were saying ! ”
Suddenly a calamitous thing happened. Larose lay
down his switched-on torch upon the edge of the desk,
in order that he might have both hands free to search for
the pass-book ; and it rolled off and fell with a thud
upon the carpet, plunging the room instantly into
darkness.
He clenched his teeth and made a grimace as if he
were suffering actual pain, for he knew Hellingsby’s
bedroom was just over the study. For minute after
minute he stood listening, straining his ears to catch the
slightest movement above. But he heard nothing save
the loud ticking of the clock in the hall and the barking
of the dogs that was still going on.
Then he swore deeply when, upon retrieving the torch
from the floor, he found it was now useless, the bulb
having evidently been broken by the fall.
There was no help for it and he had to feel for the
switch and bring into use the light over the desk. Then
he looked uneasily towards the curtains before the long
french window. They did not reach quite up to the top
and he knew a bar of light would be now showing outside.
“ But I’ll have to risk it,” he muttered, “ and at this
time of the night it should be pretty safe. No one is
likely to be in the grounds with those dogs about. Yes,
it will be quite safe.”
But at that very moment Hellingsby was getting out
of bed. Half dozing, he had heard the noise the torch had
made, but after a moment’s hard listening, and hearing
nothing more, he had thought he must have been mis-
taken. He was now wanting a drink of water.
With lightning movements Larose began to go through
the contents of the desk, but his search was very short,
for, right at the top of everything in the very first drawer
he opened, he came upon the pass-book, and his eyes
glinted as he rapidly turned the pages.


Now during all his years of work as a detective, so
many of Larose’s signal successes had been accomplished
by his ability of being able to place every matter in its
right perspective at once. He never allowed himself
to be bound by any hard-and-fast rules and always gave
his imagination free play.
So now, finding no entry in the pass-book of any
payment of the sum of thirty guineas about the beginning
of the year, he was not thrown off the trail, but seeing
one of twenty guineas, drawn to R. T. Hedges, and
debited against the account on January 3rd, he knew
instinctively that he had found what he was looking for,
Hellingsby had been boasting when he had said the dog
had cost thirty guineas. He had only paid twenty for it
and, quite satisfied, Larose shut up the pass-book and
put it back in the drawer.
Then for one brief moment he was letting his eye rove
round the contents of the pigeon-holes in the desk, when
suddenly he gave a deep gasp and his very blood froze
in his veins.
The clock in the hall had struck the half-hour.
Then things happened with incredible rapidity.
A sharp click and a cluster of lights went up in the
hall. Then for the fraction of a second Hellingsby stood
framed in the doorway of the study, his head bent for-
ward and his upraised hand clenching an automatic.
Larose could even see his gleaming but blinking eyes
and his bared teeth under the tightly-drawn back lips.
Then Larose’s arm shot out and the study was plunged
into darkness.
“ Come out, you, there,” shouted Hellingsby hoarsely.
“ I saw you and I’m going to shoot if you don’t.”
There was no response from the blackness of the study
and a dead silence reigned. Larose was crouching down
behind the desk.
“ Very well, then,” went on Hellingsby furiously,
“ you’ll be sorry for it in a minute.” He began walking


quickly backwards towards the hall door, with his eyes
still staring straight before him and his pistol hand
upraised.
Larose was moistening his dry lips with his tongue.
He had not yet lost all hope and was waiting for the
lights to go out.
“ He couldn’t have recognised me,” he murmured.
“ His eyes were blinded by the light and if I can get back
upstairs, he’ll never be certain what he’s seen. But what
the devil is he up to now ? ”
But Larose was soon to learn that, for reaching the
hall door, Hellingsby felt for the catch of the lock and
in a second had it open. Then he shouted loudly.
“ Diana, Pluto, here, here ! ”
“ Hell,” murmured Larose, “ I’ll be torn to pieces if
that chauffeur’s not quick I ” Then at last the lights
went out.
It was fortunate for Larose that he had his eyes glued
upon Hellingsby through the widely opened study door,
for with the coming of the darkness he was able to dart
like lightning out of the room without knocking up
against the doorway. Then with the polished wood
flooring of the hall under his feet, he continued to run
forward until he felt he was upon the long stretch of
carpet, which he knew ran from the hall door right up
to the foot of the staircase.
Then instantly he bent almost double and, with the
edge of the carpet running through his fingers and acting
as a guide, he soon reached the stairs and was racing up
them with his hand upon the banisters.
Once upon the first floor, the rest was easy and he
barged into the much worried and perspiring Stone, who
was crouching down outside their door.
“ Quick, inside,” panted Larose, “ whilst I take off
these things. Then we’ll come out again with a lot of
noise.” He could not keep the elation out of his voice.
“ Yes, I got it, but only just in time.”


In the meantime Hellingsby had been shouting
hoarsely, one moment to the Alsatians and the next to
Mawson and the others. “ Hi, hi! Where are you,
Mawson ? Come here, quick. Bring a light, Larose, de
Vome. There’s a burglar in the house ! Pluto, Diana,
come here, you brutes.”
Then suddenly the lights went up again and the
chauffeur appeared in the hall, belting up his trousers,
and blinking painfully as if he had just been roused from
sleep.
“ What is it, sir ? ” he asked, looking very white and
scared.
“ There’s a man in my study,” cried Hellingsby in a
frenzy of excitement. “ There are two of them in the
house and the other one put out the lights. Look—”
but at that moment the two big dogs lurched into the
hall. “In there, Pluto,” he shouted, running to the door-
way of the study. “ Sool him, Diana. Sool him,” and the
animals plunged into the darkness.
But no dreadful shrieks for help followed and no
dreadful snarls from the Alsatians, Then Mawson,
covered by his master’s pistol, ventured to go into the
room and switched on the two lights; it was found that
it was empty and the two dogs were only sniffing about.
“ Well, he got out in the darkness,” insisted Hellingsby.
By this time Larose, Stone, de Vome and the two
frightened maidservants had arrived into the hall from
various parts of the house, and a vigorous search was
at once instituted.
But no signs of any burglars could be found anywhere.
The windows were all shut and the back door was found
locked; the dogs, too, soon became apathetic, with their
only interest, apparently, what they could smell in the
larder.
“ But they must be here,” reiterated Hellingsby
angrily. “ First, I heard a thump in my study about five
minutes ago, but like a fool I didn’t take any notice of it.


thinking I must have been mistaken. Then, a few minutes
later, getting up to have a drink of water, I saw a shaft
of light from above the study window extending right
across a lawn. Then I rushed down with my pistol; a
light was on in my study and I saw a man, most dis-
tinctly, bending over the desk.”
“ But what was he like ? ” asked Larose, his heart
beating a little painfully.
“ Rather short, I think, and wearing a cap,” said
Hellingsby, “ but I only saw him for a second and then
he switched out the light. Then when I opened the front
door and yelled to the dogs, all the lights I had switched
on in the hall suddenly went out.”
“ Well, has anything been taken ? ” asked Loxton,
who looked an odd spectacle in some highly coloured
pyjamas which showed off the curves of his fat body in a
most grotesque fashion.
“ I don’t know,” replied Hellingsby irritably, “ I
haven’t looked yet.” Investigations proved that nothing
was missing.
“ They may have slipped by you, sir, in the darkness,”
ventured the chauffeur timidly, “ and got out of the
front door.”
“ How could they, you fool ? ” retorted Hellingsby.
“ They would have run straight into the dogs 1 ”
A silence followed and then de Vome said crossly:
“ Perhaps you did dream. Zat pheasant ve had at dinner
vas giving me pain in ze stomach and I had a nightmare
before your shouting voke me up.”
“ How could I dream that all the lights went out ? ”
scoffed Hellingsby in biting contempt. He turned to his
chauffeur for corroboration, “ They went out, didn’t
they, Mawson ? They were quite dead at first ? ”
The chauffeur looked most embarrassed. “ We-11, sir,”
he stammered, “mine went up directly I switched it on.” He
eyed his master nervously. “You see, sir. I’m a very heavy
sleeper and I mayn’t have woken up when you first called.”


Hellingsby could see now that no one believed him,
and, indeed, they all seemed so incredulous about his
story that he began wondering if by any possibility he
could have dreamt everything. But no, he told himself
scornfully, he had seen that man by the desk, if ever he
had seen anybody in his life, and nothing would shake
his belief.
At length they all went back to their rooms and Stone
and Larose had to stuff their bedclothes in their mouths to
stifle their laughter.
The next morning Hellingsby appeared to have quite
recovered his equanimity, and when he bade the two
friends good-bye, expressed the smiling hope that Larose
would try for his revenge at poker very soon. “ And be
sure and bring your cheque book, then,” he laughed,
“ for you won’t get off with a miserable eleven pounds.”
Larose and old Loxton laughed, too, but for a very
different reason.
A few minutes after Larose’s car had gone, Monsieur
de Vome, who was breakfasting upon two brandies and
soda and a very thin piece of toast, plentifully sprinkled
with salt and red pepper, remarked thoughtfully to his
host, “ Do you know, Hellingsby, I feel sure ve have had
tricks played upon us somehow ! Zat policeman and
ze old farmer vere very polite zis morning, but zey both
looked as happy as if zey vere holding re-doubled no
trump hands.” Hellingsby, although he could not say
why, was inclined to agree with him.
“ And anozer zing,” went on de Vome. “ I happened
to be passing ze garage just now, as I vas taking a little
walk to clear my head, and seeing no one inside, I vent
in and felt in the pocket of your chauffeur’s jacket zat
vas hanging up. I vas just curious to see vot money he
had got.” His eyes opened very wide. “ And vot do you
zink I found ? ”
“ How am I to know ? ” grunted Hellingsby crossly.
“ I’m not a magician.”


“ A five-pound note I ” nodded de Vome solemnly.
“ And vere did it come from, I vant to know 1 ”
For a moment Hellingsby scowled, and frowned
uneasily. Then his features relaxed a little. “ He drove me
to Wye races last Saturday,” he grunted, “ and he prob-
ably backed some winners. I noticed he came back with
a big bag of oranges and some coconuts.”
“ Of course, I did not take ze note,” remarked de Vome
virtuously. He sighed. “ I knew ze man vas somewhere
near and might see me coming out.” For the first time
that morning Hellingsby’s smile was not forced.


CHAPTER XIII
JUSTICE
FOR quite ten minutes after leaving Southborough
Hall no conversation was exchanged between
Larose and Stone, and then it was the latter who
spoke first.
“ Look here, Gilbert,” he said thoughtfully, “ I told you
the other day you had made out a good case against this
man but, upon second thoughts, I realise you have really
nothing definite against him.”
“ Oh, I haven’t ? ” queried Larose, as if rather nettled.
“ Then how do you make that out ? ”
“ Well, from first to last,” went on Stone, “ you have
only had suspicions, and, all the time, you have been
drawing upon that lively imagination of yours such a lot.
You don’t know for certain that he ill-treated his wife,
it may have been all tittle-tattle, and the spite of a dis-
charged servant —you don’t know she wasn’t actually
drowned ; you don’t know that he has what you call a
secret bungalow somewhere—it may have been the
truth when he stated it was over to Sheppey Island he
went on those week-ends —and coming down to last
night, you don’t know there was a microphone in our
bedroom, and lastly you don’t even know, beyond
argument, that he was actually cheating at the cards.”
Larose frowned uncomfortably, but made no comment,
continuing to concentrate all his attention upon the
driving of the car.
Stone continued, “ No, Gilbert, to sum up, it has been all
along just the piling of suspicion upon suspicion, with not
a shred of evidence that we can produce in a court of law.”


“ But suspicion always precedes proof, doesn’t it,
Charlie ? ” said Larose very quietly. “ You don’t trail
any man, do you, unless you are suspicious about him
first ? ” He smiled. “ Well, I’m at the suspicious stage,
and darned suspicious, too! ” His voice hardened abruptly
and he asked sharply : “ And upon what am I basing my
whole case against Hellingsby ? What is the foundation-
stone upon which rests every suspicion that I have ? ”
He answered his own questions. “ Why, upon the fact
that Hellingsby had no affection for his elderly wife, but
was really hating her ! ”
“ But you can’t prove that,” commented Stone.
“ Oh, but I can,” retorted Larose instantly. He took
his eyes off the road for a few seconds and regarded Stone
intently. “ Look here, Charlie, if your wife had died a
sudden and shocking death upon Thursday, April 18th,
and you had made all signs of a dreadful and even
exaggerated grief—remember that boatman watching
the bodies being brought in described Hellingsby as
having been almost tearing his hair, he was in such a
state —would you four days afterwards have gone to the
Easter Monday race meeting at Sandown Park as he did ?
He let that out when he told us he had seen Black Arrow
win there at 33 to 1, Then, another thing, have you not
taken in that he, almost immediately, dismissed every
single one of the servants who had served his wife faith-
fully for so many years, in that way showing he had not
the slightest respect for her memory ? And yet again, did
you not notice that in all those rooms we went into there
was nothing whatsoever left to remind him of his wife,
no photographs, no woman’s knick-knacks, nothing that
would suggest a woman had ever lived there ? ”
“ It was certainly a real bachelor’s home,” admitted
Stone. “ I noticed that.”
“ Yes, and Selina Thompson told me,” went on
Larose, “ she heard in the village that the organ, upon
which Mrs. Hellingsby had played almost daily during


the past thirty years, was sold and taken away within a
fortnight of her disappearance.” He nodded emphati-
cally. “ Yes, Charlie, I am upon sure grounds there.
The man had grown to hate his wife.”
“ And even granting that,” argued Stone, “ and also
that he got rid of her so that he might be free to marry
Lady Roding, you will never have the proof until you
have found the dead body.”
“ Of course I shan’t,” agreed Larose instantly, “ and
isn’t that what I’m after now—trying to find out where he
took her ? ” He turned his head sideways and for a few
seconds looked again at the stout inspector. “ But what’s
bitten you, Charlie ? Why are you now throwing all the
cold water upon my little plan to put friend Hellingsby
into the dock upon a charge of murder ? ”
Stone frowned. “ Because I think you are being a
bit too sanguine, my boy, and also because you must
understand you’ve a long way to go before you can rope
in the Yard to interfere.”
Larose laughed merrily. “ Bless your heart, Charlie,
I don’t want to rope in the Yard at all. It’ll be you who
will do that when I have presented a cut-and-dried case to
you, and then—damn it all, man—you’ll get all the credit,
because, of course, I shan’t appear.”
“ Credit, Gilbert I ” exclaimed Stone, and then he
laughed scoffingly. “ Why, it seems it’s discredit when I
come out with you ! ” His eyes twinkled. “ What about
those two poor innocents last night ? They may have
been playing quite a straight game ! As I say, we have
no proof to the contrary.”
Larose drew in a deep breath, “ Oh, you big ninny,”
he sighed, “ how could they possibly have stood up to us
as they did if they hadn’t been cheating the same as we
were.” A long argument ensued until it seemed Larose
had at last won over the inspector to his way of thinking,
at any rate, in the matter of the bridge the previous night.
Arriving in town and having parted with Stone,


Larose, with no delay, proceeded to get in touch with the
secretary of the Kennel Club Association and asked him
if he had any knowledge of one R. T. Hedges, who bred
or showed sporting dogs, probably spaniels.
“ Certainly,” replied the secretary, “ he both breeds and
shows cocker spaniels. What can I tell you about him?”
“ Oh, I only want to know where he lives,” replied
Larose, and his heart went down into his boots when the
voice over the ’phone came: “At Canterbury. He’s a
butcher there I ”
“ Canterbury ! ” murmured Larose brokenly, as he
hung up the receiver. “Not seven miles from Whit-
stable, opposite to Sheppey Island ! Then he did really
go there upon those week-ends, as he said, and is every-
thing above-board ? ” He smiled a rueful smile. “ Won’t
Charlie laugh when he hears about it ? ”
But with the pertinacity he always exhibited, even in
his most baffled moments, he resolved to follow the trail
to its bitter end and so, a quarter of an hour after he had
dropped Stone, he was heading for the ancient city of
Canterbury, fifty-five miles distant from the metropolis.
Larose found the butcher in his shop and at once
stated his business.
“ Forgive my bothering you,” he said, “ but I was
speaking to someone this morning and he happened to
mention you had sold a cocker spaniel to an old friend of
mine, Mr. Hellingsby, some time about last New Year’s
Day. That is so, isn’t it ? ”
“ Hellingsby, Hellingsby ! ” repeated the butcher,
wrinkling up his forehead. “ Oh, yes, that’s quite right.
I sold him a nice little doggie by Yanker out of Black
Bess —Nigger I called him,”
“ Well, I’ve lost sight of Mr, Hellingsby lately,” fibbed
Larose, “ and wonderedif you could tell me where he lives.”
“ Somewhere near Tunbridge Wells,” replied the
butcher. “ I can’t remember off-hand, but I’ve got it in
my book. I’ll go and see.”


“ No, no,” said Larose quickly, “ I don’t want that
address. He left there a little while ago.” His heart
began to pump quicker as he asked the fateful question :
“ Hasn’t he got a bungalow or some little shooting place
near here ? ”
“Not near here,” said the man, and then a great
triumph flashed as a blinding light across Larose’s eyes
when he added, “ it’s on Denge Marsh, about a mile
from Dungeness. He’s got a little bungalow there.”
“ Oh, oh,” exclaimed Larose, as if rather put out, “ I
thought it was close here.”
“ About thirty miles away,” smiled the butcher, “ but
you’ll do it easy in an hour, although the last bit of the
road isn’t too good.”
“ Can you give me the exact address, then ? ” asked
Larose.
The butcher scratched his head. “ No, that I can’t,”
he said. He smiled. “In fact I don’t think it’s got an
address. It’s in such an outlandish place.” He pointed
to a room behind the shop. “ But step in there, sir. I’ll
show you whereabouts it is on the map.”
A map of Kent was then produced and he pointed out
with a pencil about where he thought the bungalow
would be. “It stands right on that road and there’s
every yard of three-quarters of a mile of shingle in front
of it before you get to the sea.” He laughed. “ And behind
it there’s seven or eight miles of marshland until you come
to the Military Canal. So you see it’s a devilish lonely
place and, except for the sport, no one would have
dreamed of building a place there.”
“ Have you been inside ? ” asked Larose.
“ Yes, and there’s quite an interesting little story
about that,” smiled the butcher. “ I was down on the
marsh with Nigger that Sunday morning, looking out
to see if I could get a quiet bird or two, when the gent
came along and took such a fancy to the dog that he
wanted to buy him straight away. I told him twenty
S


guineas was the price, and after making a grimace or two
—he thought the price was stiff—he said all right.” The
butcher grinned. “ But when it came to paying, he took
out his cheque-book and wanted to give me a cheque.
But I didn’t know him and said it wasn’t business and
couldn’t be done. Then to convince me he was quite
0.K., he took me across to this bungalow and showed
me his driving licence in one of the pockets of the car.
It had got his signature on it and then, when he wrote
out the cheque, I could tell by the handwriting that he
was the man he said he was, and so I let him have the
dog.”
“ Well, just describe the bungalow to me, will you,
please ? ” asked Larose.
“ It’s quite a little show and I should say has four
rooms. It’s built on the very edge of the marshland and
the narrow road runs right in front of the garden gate.
You can’t miss it if you get on that road. No, I don’t
remember what colour it’s painted, but it has got quite
a good-si2ed garage at the side, and there are a row of
old railway sleepers laid down for a car to get across
when things are muddy. Oh, you’ll find it easy enough.”
And find it easily Larose did, a shabby long-unpainted
bungalow in most desolate surroundings. It stood quite
by itself, with the next habitation a good mile away. In
front, as far as the eye could reach, stretched a wide and
gradually rising belt of shingle with crests and hollows
in it like the waves of a sea. And the nearer these myriad
of millions of round stones were to the sea, the higher
they had been flung by the storms, to form at last a
great bank shutting off from anyone passing along the
road all view of the sea itself.
And immediately behind the bungalow began the
marshlands, stretching for miles and miles away, with
their high reeds, their rank, coarse grasses and their
suggestion of a loneliness so profound that one might
easily have imagined no human being had ever set foot there.


“ Yes, a good place for the wild duck,” murmured
Larose. He nodded grimly. “ And a deuced good place
for a murder too ! ”
It was now mid-afternoon and a fine drizzling rain
was beginning to fall; even as Larose sat in his car,
brought to a standstill in front of the bungalow, a mist
began to roll over from the marshes and shut out the
landscape from view.
For quite ten minutes he sat on, considering what he
should do next, and then, the mist sweeping on until
he had reached the road and enveloped everything, so
that objects fifty yards away had become invisible, he
made up his mind to look over the bungalow straight
away.
It could not, however, have been said that he was now
in a very cheerful frame of mind, for the first feeling of
triumph that he had been right about the bungalow had
all died down as he took in the lonely surroundings
upon every side.
“ And the trail may well end here,” he frowned dis-
consolately. “He has everything in his favour. There
are a thousand, thousand places where he could have
hidden the body, and how I am to find the particular
one I have no idea,”
However, he hopped briskly out of the car and, taking
with him a few things from the tool-box, walked up the
little garden path towards the front door.
“ One thing,” he told himself as he surveyed the
weed-strewn path, “ apparently no one has been here
for a long time, and, with Hellingsby having so suddenly
given up coming here for week-ends, it certainly suggests
he has some very particular reason for shunning the place.”
The front door was stout and substantial and fitted
with a Yale lock and, proceeding round to the back, he
found the door there would be a difficult proposition
too, being bolted and locked. But, after he had done some
manoeuvring with a fine strip of steel, the catch of one


of the windows yielded under his attentions. Lifting up the
sash, he pulled aside the drawn blind and stepped gingerly
into the room. He had put on a pair of dark suede gloves.
His heart beat fast and, from the tense expression on
his face, it might almost have been thought he had been
expecting to stumble at once upon a dead body lying
upon the floor.
He found himself in one of the two bedrooms of the
bungalow and, with the drawn blind and the gloomy
overcast sky outside, it was in semi-darkness. There
was a close, oppressive smell as of a house long shut up,
and the stillness was as profound as if he were at the
bottom of a well. Everywhere, he noted, was covered
over with dust.
He gave only a quick glance round the bedroom and
then moved up the passage towards the two front
rooms, the doors of both of which were standing open.
For quite a long while complete silence reigned once
again in the bungalow, and it would almost have seemed
to any listener that it was still unoccupied. Larose
was standing in the doorway of the little kitchen and
only his head and his eyes were moving.
The sounds that followed were very faint ones, as
if Larose were anxious not to awaken someone sleep-
ing there, or as if he were tiptoeing in a chamber of
death. Then there was the creak of a chair as he sat
down and everything was quiet again.
This last stillness continued for about a quarter of an
hour and then Larose, still treading softly, appeared in
the passage again. After a quick inspection of the
second bedroom, he left the bungalow in the same way
as he had entered and, returning to his car, drove off in
the direction of Rye.
He stopped twice upon his way to the little town, the
first time at a coastguard station, and the second at a
small house where a woman was working in the garden.
At neither place did he stay long.


At Rye he stayed for half an hour and then drove off
with all haste towards London. It was nearly seven
when he reached town, and he drove straight to Scotland
Yard, in the faint hope that Inspector Stone might be
still on duty. But to his disgust he learnt his friend was
out of town and would not be home until the following
afternoon.
It was not, however, until the next evening at eight
o’clock that he was finally able to run the inspector down,
and then it was at the latter’s private house in West
Kensington, and just when he was finishing his tea.
“ Very sorry to disturb you, Charlie,” said Larose
apologetically, “ but the matter’s important. Now are
you on duty at the Yard to-morrow? No ! Splendid 1
Then I want you for the day.”
“ But it’s Sunday,” grimaced Stone, “ and I was going
to take the missus and the kids to the Zoo 1 ” His face
assumed a stern expression, and he went on sharply :
“ Well, you’ve found out something, I suppose, and that
means that you are going to deliver the goods ! ”
Larose smiled. “ I think that together we are going
to deliver them, but I shall soon now be needing official
aid.” He nodded. “ Yes, Charlie, I’ve found out he’s
got that secret bungalow right enough. It’s in a very
lonely place upon the marshes behind Dungeness, and
he’s renting it, furnished, under the name of James
Hearn. He paid a year’s rent in advance, and so they
didn’t ask for references. He gave them an address in
Battersea, which I have just learnt is false. There’s no
such street there.”
“ And have you been inside this bungalow ? ” asked
Stone, his face puckered into a deep frown.
Larose looked very grave. “ I’ve been inside, Charlie,
and from what I saw I am convinced without the shadow
of a doubt that Hellingsby was there with his wife upon
the afternoon of that fatal Thursday, April the
eighteenth.”


“ Oh,” exclaimed Stone with a grim smile, “ then the
date was written down, was it, all ready for you to read ? ”
“ And they were intending to stop the night, too, as
they had brought a pair of pyjamas and a night-dress,”
went on Larose, ignoring the stout inspector’s irony.
“ But that the visit was entirely an unpremeditated one
is proved by these night things being new and just pur-
chased. They had also brought food for two meals,
and one of them had at once started to lay a fire.” He
spoke very solemnly. “ But that parcel containing those
night things was never opened, Charlie, and not a
mouthful of that food was eaten, and that fire was never
kindled, for something happened suddenly, and then the
window blind of one room was jerked down with such
violence that the spring was over-wound and the blind
cannot be pulled up.”
Stone’s face was now as solemn as that of Larose.
“ Tell us your story,” he said in sharp and business-
like tones.
“ I got in through the window of one of the bedrooms,”
said Larose, “ and found everything covered in dust, no
one having been in the place for a long time. None
of the beds had been slept in and, to take the kitchen
first, upon the table there were six paper bags containing
various articles of food, a large box of expensive choco-
lates and a big bunch of violets. In the paper bags were
a small cooked chicken, a small Viennese loaf, half a
pound of butter, about a pound of new potatoes, two
lettuces, four eggs and six rashers of bacon.”
“ Ah, just enough for two persons I ” nodded Stone.
“ For two meals,” added Larose, “ the evening one
and breakfast.” He nodded in his turn. “So we may
confidently assume that two persons had arrived some
time during the afternoon.”
He went on. “ Then I went into the sitting-room, just
across the passage, and there I saw someone had started
to lay a fire ” —he paused dramatically and now looked


very intently at Stone —“ and the newspaper they had
been using was a copy of the Daily Messenger of Thurs-
day, April the eighteenth ! ”
“ A-ah ! ” exclaimed Stone, “ the very date you want! ”
He frowned. “ Still, that does not prove the fire was
being laid the same day as the paper was bought. It
might have been bought a week before.”
Larose shook his head. “ Not a chance, Charlie.
Only the two outside advertisement pages had been put
in the grate and the rest of the paper was on the kitchen
table among the bags. It had evidently been kept to
read later in the evening.”
“ But \yhy has he left all this incriminating evidence
behind him for all this time ? ” asked Stone.
“ It would be just like him to be afraid to go back to
where he committed his dreadful crime,” replied Larose.
“ From what we can learn of his temperament from his
sudden collapse that night when Wimpole Carstairs
made out he had brought back the spirit of a strangled
woman from the dead, we can confidently argue that
only the very strongest incentive would get him to the
bungalow again.” He snapped his fingers scoffingly
together. “ Besides, all those things upon that table and
that newspaper in the grate are only incriminating to us
because we suspect him of the crime. To others they
would have no significance at all.” He rose up from his
chair. “ Well, that’s enough to tell you now, and I’ll
call for you at nine sharp to-morrow morning.”
“ But here—you wait a moment,” said Stone, “ for
there’s another point to be considered. Now, what if
Hellingsby should suddenly take it into his head to go
down there to-morrow himself? It’s all very well for
you to try to make out that if he’s murdered his wife in
that bungalow he’ll be far too frightened of her spook
to go near the place any more, but remember there’ll
have to come a time when he must go back, when his
year’s tenancy is up, for instance.”


“ But he’ll proably take it on then for another year,”
retorted Larose, “ and perhaps even indefinitely, until
time has dimmed the memory of his crime. At any rate,
I am quite sure he’s not going there to-morrow. He was
speaking on the phone to me this morning. He was
going to Kempton Park this afternoon and to-morrow
he’s taking a party of girls up the river.”
“ All right, then,” nodded Stone. “ I’ll be ready at
nine to-morrow, but not a minute earlier ” —he grinned—
“ as we’re a respectable Christian family and don’t get
up until late on Sundays.”
So the following day, just before noon, the two friends
drove up before the small bungalow in its sinister and
lonely surroundings upon Denge Marsh.
“ Gosh ! ” exclaimed Stone, as he stared out over the
enormous wastes of shingle that stretched out to right
and left before the bungalow, “ but if there’s any murder
been done —ye gods, what a burial ground ! ”
“ Yes,” agreed Larose with a deep sigh, “ and look
at the marshland at the back. It’s the disheartening part
of the whole situation to me.” He looked up and down
the road. “ But come on, let’s get inside. We’ll have to
chance it and leave'the car here.”
“ All right,” said Stone. He grinned. “ You do the
dirty work at the window and I’ll come in by the front
door.”
“ But put on your gloves, Charlie,” said Larose as he
prepared to go round the house, “ and then we shall be
certain that any finger-marks are not ours.”
So in a few moments they were both inside the
bungalow and Larose was pointing out everything to
the inspector. They both walked on tiptoe and spoke
in whispers.
“ Now all those things on the table there,” said Larose,
“ are exactly as I found them. You see, they can only
suggest exactly what I told you —Hellingsby and his
wife arriving here and the poor woman imagining she


was going to spend the night and have two meals with
her suddenly kind and loving husband. No doubt
that morning he had made out to her that he had un-
expectedly met a friend who had lent the bungalow to
him for the week-end and, in that way, he had induced
her to come here.”
“ Yes, yes,” agreed Stone sadly, “ and the violets were
a present to her.” He looked most uncomfortable.
“ Then she didn’t put them into water at once because
she had something much more important to do to please
her husband.” He heaved a big sigh. “ And that duty
was ”
“ —to light the fire,” whispered Larose. “ Remem-
ber, they were driving in an open touring car that day
and it was very cold all the time, last Easter. So having
come from Folkestone, as the addresses of the tradesmen
upon those paper bags tell us they had, they would
have been chilled to the bone by the drive, and their
first thought would have been to warm up the place.”
He touched Stone lightly upon the arm. “ And which
one of the two of them, Charlie, would have been most
likely to lay the fire ? ”
“ The woman every time,” nodded Stone. “ He would
have gone back to shut up the garage and get in the rugs
and anything else they hadn’t brought in at first, and she
would have started to make the place home-like and
comfortable.”
“ Then you come here,” said Larose, and gripping
Stone tightly by the arm, he led him out of the kitchen
to the threshold of the sitting-room across the narrow
passage.
“ Now just take in everything,” he went on in an
awed whisper as they stood together side by side,
“ and, first, see how the table has been pushed back
all askew, as if in some sudden and violent movement,
and then no notice taken of it afterwards to put it back.
Then guess what happened as the fire was being laid I


See the paper put there in the grate and those few pieces
of wood placed evenly on top ! Then see the other
pieces of the little bundle scattered all over the hearth
and three of them even flung over the fender on to the
rug. See ”
“ I get you,” interrupted Stone with a scowl. “ You
mean that when she was upon her knees, in the act of
laying that fire, she was violently interrupted by someone
who jerked her backwards and who, in so doing, stepped
back himself and flung that table to one side. Then, as
there are no signs of any blood about and we know
Hellingsby has a horror of blood, you would infer that
he had flung something round her neck and then went
on to strangle her.”
“ Exactly,” said Larose, “ and from the way he was
affected when the spiritualist spoke of a blue face and
protruding tongue, I am sure that was what happened.”
He pointed to the window. “ And see that blind, drawn
down suddenly with a fierce jerk as far as it will go, when
all the other blinds in the place have been drawn down
carefully in the proper manner.” His eyes opened wide.
“ Why, what can it mean but that it was drawn down in a
moment of panic when he had accomplished his dreadful
deed and, even in this desolate spot, was afraid someone
might pass by and look through the window ? ”
Stone nodded a silent acquiescence and then, after
some long further discussion, they went outside the
bungalow through the back door. There, the only thing
of the slightest interest to either of them appeared to be a
big iron saucepan, lying almost obscured among the
weeds. Part of it was badly rusted.
“ And what the devil did they want with a saucepan of
that size ? ” frowned Larose. “ It looks out of place in a
small bungalow like this.”
“ Ah, then you evidently haven’t taken in everything,
Gilbert,” said Stone. He smiled in an assumed superior
manner, and went on : “You saw that big shrimping


net in the passage ? Well, our friend probably boiled the
shrimps in this saucepan when he’d made a good catch,”
he nodded, “ which would most likely be pretty often as
the shrimping all round this coast is very good.”
“ But it’s not like Hellingsby to have left a good
saucepan to rust like this,” frowned Larose, shaking his
head. “ There’s nothing the matter with it and he’s
always tidy and methodical in his ways.”
Then for a long minute they stood in silence looking
round at the marshlands, the belt of shingle and then at
the marshlands again. The same thoughts were in both
their minds and Stone voiced them when at last he
exclaimed : “ Hopeless ! absolutely hopeless ! If he did
kill her there’s not one chance in a million of discovering
where he hid the body ! ”
Larose made no comment and Stone went on : “ No,
Gilbert, I’m very sorry I can’t help you, but this is still a
case the Yard cannot take up. Granted even that he
killed her, of which, however, we still have not a shred
of proof, the search for her body would be too super-
human an undertaking for any authorities to start taking
up.”
He waved his arm round. “ Where, here, could we
start looking for a body that has been buried nearly three
months ? ” He shook his head vigorously. “ And how
do we know she lies within a score of miles ? He had
the car ready to his hand and, destroying all marks
by which she might be identified if ever she were found,
he may have whisked her off anywhere. He may have
thrown her down some disused well, he may have
sunk her, weighted, in a lonely pond and he may even
have waded out to sea with her—you say it was low tide
all round this coast about ten o’clock that night—and
given her, weighted again, to the dog-fish and the conger
eels.”
He glanced at his watch and then looked smilingly at
Larose. “ No, my lad, you’re beaten this time, so just


you go and shut up the bungalow and we’ll drive away
somewhere and get a spot of lunch. All your theories
have put a nasty taste in my mouth. Come on, be quick.
I’m sick of the whole business, for I see we shall never get
anywhere.”
Upon the evening of the next day Larose, who had
not as yet been able to tear himself away from town and
who every waking minute had been cudgelling his brains
as to where he would have hidden his wife’s body had he
been Hellingsby, started suddenly, just as he was leaving
his room at the “ Railto ” to go down to dinner.
“ Great Jupiter ! ” he exclaimed breathlessly. “ I have
it! I have it! He buried her under the shingle and he
used that big saucepan to scrape a hole in the stones!
That’s why it is only rusted on one side—where the black
became scraped off as he pulled the stones towards him
in making the hole ! ” He snapped his fingers together
excitedly. “ Yes, yes, that’s it I And, when he’d buried
the body and come back to fetch his car, he was afraid to
go into the bungalow to put back the saucepan, for the
same reason that he had left all those parcels untouched.
So, to get rid of it, he threw it over into the little garden.”
Very late that same night the elegant Monsieur de
Vome, of aristocratic ancestry, at last succeeded in
running Hellingsby to earth at the latter’s hotel, where
he had just returned after a long protracted dinner party.
De Vome had startling news and it lost nothing in the
telling. “ You see here,” he burst out excitedly. “ Zat
Andy Loxton is no Loxton at all. He is a big detective in
ze Scotland Yard and he is a chief inspector zere and his
name is Charlie Stone.”
Hellingsby’s face went an ashen grey and the wine he
had drunk turned to vinegar in his stomach.
De Vome went on with his tale. He said he had hap-
pened to be passing down Whitehall that afternoon when
just outside New Scotland Yard he had suddenly seen


someone who at first sight he took to be Loxton,
talking there to another man. But then he thought it
couldn’t be the old sheep-farmer, because he looked so
much younger and was dressed so differently. Anyhow,
de Vome had been curious, and so had stopped behind a
stationary taxi to watch him. Then he had heard the man
laugh and instantly, without the slightest doubt, knew it
was the sheep-farmer they had played cards with only
two nights previously.
Then he had seen the man pass into the Yard and a
policeman there salute him. So, waiting a few moments,
he had asked the policeman who the man was and had at
once become aware of his true identity.
“ And you look out, Hellingsby,” he said warningly,
“ for I have been making enquiries at my club in Vardour
Street and he is a great detective and his great friend is
zat Gilbert Larose. Zey alvays vorked togezor on big
cases.” He nodded excitedly. “ So zey are after you for
somesing. You see ! ”
Hellingsby went up to his bedroom but, making no
attempt to undress, for a long while sat upon the edge of
his bed doing some hard, unpleasant thinking. His face
was still a nasty colour and he moistened his dry lips
many times with his tongue. His forehead was pricked
out in little beads of sweat.
Then with a curse he left his room and, proceeding
down the silent staircase to the silent hall, gave orders to
the night porter there to call him at five sharp in the
morning.
But as it turned out there had really been no need for
him to have given the order, for he never succeeded in
getting to sleep. It was evident he was very much
disturbed about something.
The next evening Larose, too, was greatly disturbed
for, as once before, at an important moment, he was
unable to get in touch with his friend, Inspector Stone.
Stone had gone to Birmingham, but had been expected


back at the Yard by seven o’clock that evening, and so
for three hours Larose had sat waiting for him. All the
time he had been holding to what looked like a drawing,
or a mounted photograph, about fifteen inches square,
wrapped up in brown paper. It seemed very precious to
him, as he had hardly once let it out of his hands.
But Stone did not appear and, no message coming
through from him, at ten o’clock Larose went off,
leaving strict injunctions, however, that the inspector
was to phone him directly he turned up. Larose then
went to bed. He was most annoyed when, upon awaken-
ing at seven o’clock the next morning, there was still no
word from the inspector.
He at once got in touch again with the Yard and
learnt that Stone would not be returning now until late
in the afternoon. So the day dragged on and, at last, just
before six. Stone’s voice came over the phone to the
Rialto Hotel announcing that he was back and would see
Larose at once if he came over.
In less than ten minutes Larose almost jumped into
his room. “Look here, Charlie,” he said sharply, “there
must be no shilly-shallying now. I’ve located where
that body was buried and you must go down at once
and dig it up.”
“ Oh ! ” exclaimed Stone with his eyes opened very
wide. “ You can’t have found it, my son I ”
“ But I have,” said Larose, “ and you just look at
this.” Unfolding his brown-paper packet, he produced
a large photograph. “ See, this was taken yesterday,
more than half a mile from the bungalow, and it’s of one
of the hollows in the shingle, just before you come to
where the shingle rises to form that big bank right above
the seashore.” He could hardly control the exultation in
his tones. “ See that shadow where the stones have sunk
down, and you tell me, if you dare, it isn’t the shape of a
human body. The sand beetles under the stones have
eaten away the flesh and that’s why there’s a subsidence.”


He laughed happily. “ You see, Charlie, as you your-
self have often rubbed into me, the simplest solution to
any puzzle is generally the correct one, and so directly I
tumbled to the fact that he’d been using that big iron
saucepan we saw in the back garden for scooping away
the stones to make a grave, I ”
“How do you make that out?” interrupted Stone,
whose frowning face was a mass of wrinkled lines.
“ Why, the saucepan was only rusted on the part right
opposite to the handle,” replied Larose, “ and that was
because all the black had been worn off there and the iron
exposed by the friction ” —he made a pulling movement
with his arms—“ of Hellingsby dragging the stones
towards him. Then he’d thrown this good saucepan over
into the garden, because he was afraid to go and replace
it in the house where he’d just murdered his wife.”
“ Go on,” said Stone, because Larose had stopped
speaking as if to invite further questioning.
“ Yesterday I went down again to Dungeness,” said
Larose, “ and quite certain he had buried her somewhere
under the shingle, but realising that no human eye
would be able to pick out where the stones had been
disturbed, this time I took a photographer with me.
I reckoned Hellingsby would have wanted to bury
the body as far away as possible from the bungalow and
the road, so we went over towards the sea, keeping,
however, a good bit to the left because of that coastguard
station in the dip upon the right. Then, always standing
the camera on the highest wave of shingle we could find,
we made eighteen exposures ” —he tapped the photo-
graph before them—“ but it is only this one that is
going to hang him.” He spoke eagerly. “ Now, Charlie,
what do you think of it ? ”
Stone stared and stared for a long while. “ The shadow
is certainly suspicious,” he admitted slowly. He took a
magnifying glass from his desk and held it over the
photograph. “ Yes, it’s not unlike the trunk and lower


part of a human body. It’s broad at one end and tapers
away.”
“ And in three months,” went on Larose, “ you would
expect just such a subsidence in the stones, as the soft
parts of the body were all eaten away. Under a covering,
say at the most, of only two feet of loose stones, the flesh
would, of course, disappear much more quickly than if
buried under solid earth.”
“ And are you sure you can pick out this particular
little shaded spot,” asked Stone dubiously, “ among all
that waste of shingle ? ”
“ Certain,” replied Larose. He turned the photograph
over. “ See, it’s numbered fifteen, and against that
number we’ve got down on a memorandum that there
were the remains of a dead sheep close near us when we
exposed the plate.”
Stone sat up straight in his chair. “ All right, Gilbert,”
he said, “ we’ll take it on. We’ll go down to-morrow.”
He smiled a whimsical smile. “ I’m not certain it’s not
all bunk, but I can’t have you for ever worrying me like
this, so we’ll settle it once and for all.”
The following morning, soon after ten, two cars, with
six passengers between them, could have been seen
driving along the road over Denge Marsh and approach-
ing close to the bungalow of Miles Hellingsby. They
carried spades and two rolled lengths of tarpaulin.
They were within a few hundred yards of their destina-
tion when the leading car had a puncture and the car
behind it pulled up to wait until the wheel had been
changed.
A roadmender who had been working near came up
and asked for a match.
“ But you don’t see many people about here,”
remarked Larose carelessly, when in reply to a question
the man had stated he had been working in the neigh-
bourhood for nearly a week.
“ Oh, I see a bit of life sometimes,” smiled the man.


“ For instance there were two chaps over on that shingle
for a long time the day before yesterday taking photo-
graph after photograph, but what for goodness only
knows. Then on that same morning another chap came
to that bungalow there and ”
“ What! ” interrupted Larose sharply, “ a man came
to that bungalow the day before yesterday ? ”
“ Yes,” nodded the roadmender, “ he arrived before
the photographers came and he stayed until after they
had gone.”
Larose could hardly get his breath. “ What sort of
man was he,” he gasped, “ and how did he come ? ”
“ Oh, I didn’t get near enough to see what he was like,
but he came in a car and put it in that shed.” The road-
mender seemed quite pleased with the interest he was
creating and went on: “ There was another fellow, too,
here very early yesterday, and I can’t make out what he
was up to, either. He came about eight o’clock and drove
his car over those stones until it was almost out of sight
in the hollow and I thought he was going to camp there.
But he didn’t stop the whole day and was off again early
in the afternoon.”
“ Where did he go ? ” choked Larose. “ Tell me
exactly, quick ! ”
The man pointed with his arm. “ Over that rise until
I could only just see the top of his car.” He grinned.
“ If you’re curious, you can follow his wheel marks and
you’ll come upon a dead sheep upon the rise of the stones
just before he stopped.” He shook his head. “ But I
should walk if I were you, as he had to let all the wind out
of his tyres to get up the shingle and then he could only
just manage it. He had a devil of a job, too, in backing
out.”
“ Did you see him close ? ” asked Larose, and his
voice was very hoarse.
“ No, he came from the opposite direction, on the
Rye Road, and I only saw him in the distance.”
T


The whole time the others standing round had been
listening with grim faces, but with the wheel now
changed, upon a sign from Larose they quickly resumed
their seats and the cars drove on. But it was only for a
couple of hundred yards or so, and then everyone jumped
out, and Larose starting off at a run, they panted after
him over the shingle.
The place where the stranger had been was found
easily enough, for a wide disturbance of the stones was
apparent and then, in one spot, there was all evidence
where a deeper excavation had been made. But there
were no bones or shreds of clothing to be seen anywhere,
and nothing to show what the man had come for.
The face of Larose was white and set. “ We’re
beaten, Charlie,” he said grimly. “By some evil chance
that devil came to his bungalow on Tuesday and, seeing
us with the camera, must have guessed what we were up
to. Then he acted like lightning.”
“ Well, it’s bunged everything up for us, right
enough,” commented Stone gloomily, “ we haven’t a
leg to stand on now and everything is just the same as
before.”
“ We’ll go into the bungalow anyhow,” said Larose,
“ and then I’ll have a little talk with you.” His face
brightened. “ Things are not quite as bad as you make
out.” They started to walk back over the shingle.
“ Shall you want me, sir ? ” asked one of the men of the
inspector, as Larose, wrapped in his own thoughts, had
hurried on in front.
Stone hesitated a few moments. “ Yes, you may as
well come,” he said. “ I suppose we’d better look for
some finger-marks in the usual routine way.”
Larose effected an entrance into the bungalow in the
same manner as he had done on the two previous occa-
sions and then opened the front door for the inspector
to come in. He frowned when he saw one of the other
men was with Stone and carrying a good-sized handbag.


“ Everything gone,” he announced bitterly. “ Not a
thing left on the table and both rooms have been tidied
up ! The table has even been put straight 1”
“ Well, we’ll do the thing properly and look for any
finger-marks,” said Stone, and the man with the bag
began to make his preparations.
Larose frowned again. He had good reasons for not
wanting any finger-marks to be photographed, as, of
course, they would not correspond with those Stone was
imagining they already possessed of Hellingsby, but he
could do nothing. He beckoned to the inspector and
they both walked out into the little back garden.
** Look here, Charlie,” said Larose sharply, “ there’s
only one thing for you to do now. You must go to
Hellingsby straight away and put up a big bluff. You
must tell him he’s been under observation for a long time
and you must ask him what account he is prepared to
give of his movements yesterday. Make him realise it’s
no good his denying anything, as both he and his car were
recognised here,”
The inspector regarded Larose very thoughtfully, and
the latter went on quickly, “ Then with his highly
strung temperament he won’t be able to call your bluff
and he’ll almost certainly break down and admit every-
thing.”
“ And if he doesn’t,” asked Stone quietly, “ what will
be my position then ? ” He shook his head. “ I haven’t
the very slightest excuse now for detaining him upon any
charge.”
“ But chance it, Charlie,” urged Larose warmly.
“ It’ll be the scoop of your life if it comes off.”
Stone looked grim and cold. “ It’s too big a gamble,
my son, and I’m not game enough,” he said. He raised
one fat finger and shook it warningly, “ Now be reason-
able, Gilbert, and take your defeat like a man. Think 1
If Hellingsby has done all you say he has, just realise he
has now slipped out of our clutches for good, most


probably. We are still certain of nothing about him. We
don’t know it was he who was here yesterday and, if we
could prove that, we couldn’t prove what he came for !
We don’t even know it was he who came here on April
18 th, and in fact, as all along, we are still in the same
position of not having one single shred of direct evidence
against him.”
“ But if you act boldly,” began Larose, “ and ”
“ No, Gilbert,” interrupted Stone firmly, “ I tell you
I’m not in a position to do anything. It’s all very well
for you to urge me to be bold and all that, but if the
try-on doesn’t come off it will be I who will have to bear
all the punishment.” He smiled. “ You can just go home
and forget all about it, but I should have to bear the
brunt of everything and might even get the sack.”
And no persuasion from Larose could induce him to
depart from this attitude.
They returned to town a very disconsolate party, and
Larose was more disgusted than ever when that evening
the inspector rang him up to say that none of the finger-
marks they had found in the bungalow were those of
Hellingsby.
“ We got plenty of them,” he added with a badly
concealed note of triumph in his voice, “ but not one
single one anywhere was of our lively friend. So it is as
well I did not take your advice.” Larose cut short the
conversation as quickly as possible.
That same afternoon Police Constable Higgins of the
pretty little village of Southborough paid a clandestine
visit to the local inn for a couple of quiet pints, and was
introduced to three affable and friendly strangers who
were likewise unlawfully refreshing themselves in the inn
parlour.
The landlord had at first been somewhat disinclined
to serve these three travellers out of proper hours,
thinking they looked not unlike detectives. They had
arrived in a serviceable but unobtrusive car and were


all tall and alert-looking men, dressed very much the
same, in dark overcoats and low bowler hats. But they
had assured him they had nothing whatever to do with
the police and, in fact, were Customs officials from the
Docks, enjoying themselves upon a day’s outing in the
country, and so in the end the landlord had given way
and served them with what they asked for.
In the course of conversation with the village con-
stable the subject of flowers happened to crop up and it
was then found that all present were keenly interested in
roses. Whereupon P.C. Higgins remarked that in the
garden of Southborough Hall were some roses of so dark
a colour that they appeared almost black. Then realising
that his statement was being received with polite incre-
dulity, he offered then and there to take the three travellers
to inspect the blooms.
“ The Hall is not a couple of hundred yards from here,”
he said, “ and the owner won’t mind a bit my taking you
into the garden to see them. He’s not likely to be home
from the city for a couple of hours yet, but if he is it
won’t matter, as I am very friendly with him.”
So the four men sallied forth straight away, but upon
entering the Hall grounds, the strangers became all
suddenly a little doubtful of the propriety of their coming
there on the invitation of the constable, alone, and the
expressions upon their faces became, in consequence,
frowning and uneasy.
At that precise moment Miles Hellingsby was seated at
the desk before his study window and, seeing the four
men approaching the house, with one of them the village
policeman and the others looking uncompromisingly
stern, with an oath of dismay he snatched an automatic
pistol out of one of the drawers of the desk and, putting
the muzzle to his forehead, pulled the trigger and blew
his brains out.


CHAPTER XIV
GUILE
TWO days later the inquest upon Miles
Hellingsby was held in the Southborough
Parish Hall, and although Inspector Stone
had been half expecting it, he was not alto-
gether too pleased to see that Larose was already occupy-
ing a seat there when he arrived.
The previous day the inspector had had a long con-
versation over the phone with the superintendent of the
Tunbridge Wells police, and from certain statements the
latter had made to him, he had thought it advisable to
attend the inquest in the interests of Scotland Yard. He
was wondering now if Larose were also in possession of
the same information the superintendent had passed on
and was rather hoping he was not.
Apparently only a purely local interest was being
taken in the inquest and the Hall was only half full.
The inspector sat himself down next to Larose and
after remarking how astonished he had been to read in
the newspapers that Hellingsby had committed suicide,
whispered smilingly, “ And did he leave any confession
behind, do you know, Gilbert ? ”
Larose sensed the amusement in his tones and regarded
him very coldly. “If I were you, Charlie,” he said
solemnly, “ I should keep very quiet and not ask any
questions of anybody.” He nodded significantly. “ Just
you say nothing and don’t let a soul here know you have
ever met the man.”
He nodded again. “ That’s my advice and it’s pretty
good, I can tell you.”


“Oh,” exclaimed Stone, rather taken aback, “and
what the devil do you mean ? ”
“ Only that if you start being inquisitive,” replied
Larose, “ the Yard won’t come too well out of this, and
that you, in particular, will certainly get no Order of
Merit or Iron Cross.”
Stone got very red. “ Come on, my son,” he said
sharply, “ let’s know what’s worrying you ! ”
But at that moment the coroner entered the Hall and
they all stood up as he walked to his seat. Then, as they
were sitting down again, Larose got in a quick reply to
the inspector’s question. “He shot himself,” he whis-
pered, “ because he thought he was about to be arrested.
He mistook three inoffensive clerks for plain-clothes
men and believed it was all up,” and the burly Stone
subsided into his seat with a sickening feeling at the pit
of his stomach.
The coroner opened the proceedings without any
delay and the first witness. Police Constable Higgins,
was soon giving his evidence.
He had been within fifty yards of the front door of
the Hall, he said, when he had actually heard the report
of the shot with which the deceased killed himself. The
front door had been standing open and Rosa Martin, the
parlourmaid, had come rushing out, shrieking out to him
that her master had killed himself in his study. He found
deceased lying upon the floor in a pool of blood, with the
pistol about a foot away from his outstretched arm. He
was quite dead. Seeing he could do nothing he left
everything exactly as it was and, locking the study door,
at once rang up Tunbridge Wells.
The next witnesses were the police surgeon, who
described the injuries the deceased had received, and the
finger-print expert from Tunbridge Wells, who handed
up two photographs showing that the finger-marks upon
the butt of the automatic pistol coincided exactly with
those obtained from the fingers of the dead man.


Then the parlourmaid was called and interest quickened
at once, as it was known she had been an actual eye-
witness of the tragedy.
She said she had been passing through the hall on
her way to answer the study bell exactly as the clock
there was chiming five o’clock. Her master, who was
writing at his desk, had then asked her for another
siphon of soda-water, and she had just returned from
obtaining it from the refrigerator and was putting it upon
his table, when she heard him make a sharp exclamation
as if he were very startled about something. Then she
had seen he was looking out through the window at four
persons who were coming up the drive; one of these
persons she recognised as Mr. Higgins, the village
policeman. Before she could take in what her master
was doing, he had snatched up a pistol from somewhere
in his desk and put it to his forehead and shot himself.
She was terrified and had run out shrieking to call Mr.
Higgins.
The coroner looked down at his papers. “ But I
understand, Miss Martin,” he said, “ that you told Police
Constable Higgins your master said something before he
shot himself! ”
“ Yes, sir, but I’m not certain what it was,” replied
the girl. “ It sounded like, ‘ No, you don’t,’ and then he
swore.”
“ And I suppose you’ve tried many times,” asked the
coroner, “ to remember the exact words he did say ? ”
“ Yes, sir, but I’ve never been quite sure. The bang
of the pistol came so quickly afterwards and it drove
everything out of my head.”
“ Was the deceased quite sober when he shot himself,
do you think ? ” was the coroner’s next question.
The girl nodded quickly. “ Oh, yes, sir, quite ! I’ve
been at the Hall ten weeks now and never seen Master
the worse for drink.”
“ But he’d been taking a lot lately, hadn’t he ? ”


“ Yes, sir, quite a lot since he’d come home on
Tuesday.”
“ What do you call a lot ? ” asked the coroner.
“ Well, sir,” replied the girl, “ he’d had more than
three bottles of brandy in the last two days, besides
champagne at his meals, when he ate hardly anything.”
The coroner consulted his papers again. “ And I see,”
he said after a few moments, “ that you told Superin-
tendent Roberts that he’d been very queer lately. Now
tell us in your own words exactly what you mean. Tell
us fully.”
“ Well, he’s only been queer since Tuesday, sir, and
then he came home in the afternoon in a very bad temper.
He started swearing at once at Mr. Mawson, who was the
chauffeur and did the gardening. He said he was lazy,
which everyone knows Mr, Mawson never was. Then
he discharged him at once and never let him out of his
sight until he had got him off the place. Then he locked
up the garage, and came in and drank a lot of brandy.
And when it was dark we heard him go out into the
garden, and he was in the gardener’s shed and the garage
for a long time.”
“ What was he doing ? ” asked the coroner. “ Do you
know ? ”
“No, sir, but we found out afterwards that he had
emptied all the poultry meal and the wheat out of their
sacks and taken the sacks away. He had locked the shed
door, too, and so the next morning we could only feed
the fowls on scraps. Then that night I heard him walking
up and down the bedroom—his bedroom is just under
mine—until nearly one o’clock. I could hear him talking
to himself. We don’t think he took off his clothes at all.
At any rate, he had not put on his pyjamas and he had
only lain down upon the bed.”
“ And what was he like the next morning ? ” asked the
coroner.
The girl shook her head. “We didn’t see him, sir.


Just after six I heard him jump suddenly off the bed and
move about his room as if he had overslept himself and
was in a great hurry. Then ten minutes after I heard him
drive away in the car.”
“ Without having had anything to eat ? ” queried the
coroner.
“ Yes, sir. Then he came home again about five
o’clock and seemed very anxious to know if anyone had
been to see him. I told him no, and then he swore at Mr.
Mawson again and said the sheds had been left horribly
untidy and he was going to straighten them up. He said
they were harbouring a lot of rats.”
“ Had you seen any rats ? ”
“ Yes, sir, but only a few. It seemed as if the master
wanted to find excuses for having discharged Mr.
Mawson.”
“ And what did deceased next proceed to do ? ”
asked the coroner.
“ He made a bonfire at the bottom of the vegetable
garden with some rubbish and a lot of old boxes that he
took out of the sheds. But the fire had not been started
long before it came on to rain, and we guessed from the
rattle of tins he had put paraffin on it, because although
the rain became much heavier the fire went on. Then he
was digging until long after dark.”
“ And did he do anything in the garden the next
day ? ” asked the coroner.
“ No, sir, he had got tired of it. He had had to put
plaster over some blisters on his hands.”
The coroner looked puzzled. “ And what do you
make of all this altered behaviour of deceased ? Do any
of you think it had anything to do with his taking his own
fife ? ”
“ Oh, no, sir I ” replied the girl. “ We only think he
was very upset about something and was doing anything
to distract his mind. I heard him tell someone over the
telephone last week that he had lost a lot of money in


some shares, and we are sure that was worrying him.
The night before he died he could hardly have slept at all,
for he didn’t come up to his bedroom until nearly three
o’clock—he woke me up by banging his door—and the
next morning he was downstairs before seven, waiting
for the morning papers to come.”
That finished the parlourmaid’s evidence. The two
other maids followed, and they corroborated all she had
said with regard to Hellingsby’s heavy drinking upon
the two days previous to his decease.
The last witness was a Tunbridge Wells inspector of
police, who produced several letters which he had found
among the deceased’s papers in the latter’s desk, from
which it was evident the dead man was heavily in debt
and being pressed for money from many directions.
Among other threatening communications were those
from a firm of tailors to whom he owed nearly £2OO, a
Bond Street jeweller who claimed £4l z and a book-
maker who was demanding more than £3,000. Also,
it was quite clear from other memoranda that the de-
ceased had recently been losing large sums in transactions
upon the Stock Exchange.
The Coroner summed up quickly. He told the jury
it was not an unusual case they were having to consider,
although there were certainly some peculiar features
about it. But they must take the case as a whole and not
deal with it in parts.
Here was a man who had undoubtedly been living
most extravagantly and whose regard for money had
become of a most casual and careless nature. Among
other things the bet of so large a sum as £1,500 upon one
horse was indicative of a man who had no fear of the
hazards of life. But, sooner or later, a day of reckoning
had to come, and so often, so very often, this type of
man was unable to stand up to the consequences of
his folly. Then, at a crisis, his mind gave way and the
easiest avenue of escape from all difficulties was taken.


In the present case he could suggest to the jury no other
verdict than one of suicide when in a state of temporary
insanity.
And the jury at once brought in the verdict the
coroner had advised them to.
Larose and Inspector Stone walked out of the hall
together, and the former asked dryly : “ And would
you like, Charlie, to have that ground at the bottom of
the vegetable garden dug over ? There’s evidently some-
thing buried there that the fire had not time to burn up.
We are sure to find the skull and most of the bones, and
perhaps even the wedding ring. Selina Thompson tells
me the ring is engraved inside ‘ M. H. to M. L.’ ”
Whatever feelings of chagrin were his, the inspector’s
expression was a smiling one. “ No, thank you, my
son,” he laughed, “ it’s no good flogging a dead horse,
and I think we had better leave the matter as it stands.”
His face sobered down. “At any rate the man was
punished and justice is satisfied.”
“ But not the law,” retorted Larose grimly, “ and you
are always such a stickler that the law must have its
pound of flesh.”
“ Don’t rub it in, Gilbert,” pleaded Stone with a
grimace. “ I admit it looks as if you were right for once,
and, maybe, next time I’ll be more ready to take your
advice.” He looked puzzled. “ But what a nerve to
bring the remains here ! ”
“ I wouldn’t call it exactly nerve, Charlie,” commented
Larose, now regarding Stone quite friendlily. “ He’d lost
his nerve and couldn’t think out things any more. Then
when the fire failed him, he became absolutely reckless.
It was like the last throw of the gambler.”
“ Ay, he was a gambler right enough ! ” exclaimed
Stone. He sighed heavily. “ And if I had not been tied
by the responsibilities of office and had had a little more
of the gambler in me, I might have become ”
“ The Commissioner of Police, or Sir Charles Stone,”


added Larose, finishing the sentence for him. He laughed.
“ Who knows ? ”
Six weeks went by and the matter of the suicide of
Miles Hellingsby had quite passed out of the minds of
everybody except those intimately concerned, when one
morning Larose at Carmel Abbey picked up his morning
newspaper and frowned heavily.
“ Good God ! ” he exclaimed with a painful catch in
his breath, “ but what an awful calamity 1 ”
The half column that had caught his eye was headed :
“ Smart Work by the Police. Scotland Yard Never
Sleeps 1 ” and then in sub-headlines it went on : “ Mystery
of Daunt the grave-digger solved. Body found in under-
ground chamber.”
Larose read on breathlessly that Chief Inspector Stone,
who had been in charge of the case, had all along never
been satisfied that the grave-digger had gone away, but
had always been suspicious of foul play.
So, weeks after the interest in the man’s disappearance
had all, apparently, died down, the inspector had returned
to the little house in the churchyard and there, after a
most painstaking search, had discovered that one of the
stones in the floor of one of the rooms opened into a deep
cellar many feet below.
He had descended by a ladder that was already in
position there, and in a long underground chamber had
come upon the body of the missing man, in an advanced
stage of decomposition, laid out carefully upon a shelf.
The authorities were reticent regarding the manner the
grave-digger had come to meet his death, but there was
full evidence that the death had been a violent one. Also,
the man who had killed him had exhibited great cunning
to prevent what had occurred from becoming known, as
all the clothes which it had been supposed Daunt had
taken with him were found strewn about upon the stone
below. The killer had, of course, flung them there to


convey the impression to everyone that the grave-digger
had actually taken flight.
The body had been taken to London to be examined
by experts and the inquest would probably he held
directly the result of the autopsy was made known.
Larose looked up from the newspaper with a white
face, and drew in a deep breath. “ Now what the devil
is going to happen? ” he asked himself. “If Stone makes
any use of the finger-prints that he imagines he’s got
of Hellingsby, then he’ll only do it to bring in Sir Eric.
He’ll be thinking that Hellingsby, as Sir Eric’s friend, was
sent by Sir Eric to get that confession out of Daunt and,
for some reason that he’ll have to work out, that
Hellingsby did Daunt in. Then he’ll be quite certain Sir
Eric knows everything that happened that night and,
with Hellingsby dead, he’ll have the third degree put on
Sir Eric in the witness-box to make him admit it.” He
whistled. “ Whew, what a mix-up ! I’ll have to get busy
at once ! I have to tell everything to the wife now and
then go straight on to the Rodings ! ” He tapped the
newspaper and made a grimace. “ Directly they read
this, they’ll think I murdered the man ! ”
Telling his wife was easy. She looked very scared and
white when he told her of his dreadful experiences in the
underground chamber, but had no fear that he was in any
danger now.
“ You’ll manage to get out of it all right, Gilbert,”
she laughed. “ I’ve got quite used now to being married
to a bad man and am sure you’ll escape your deserts
somehow.” She kissed him affectionately. “ I’m certain it’s
quite a thrill to you to know you’re in such a bad hole.”
Telling Sir Eric and Lady Roding was, however,
by no means a pleasant task, for up to then, to spare their
feelings, Larose had told them nothing of Hellingsby’s
murder of his wife and of all that underlay their one-time
friend’s dramatic suicide. But now everything had to be
told in detail, in order that the baronet should realise the


awkward position in which he himself might possibly
be placed by Stone’s imagining the finger-marks found in
the dead grave-digger’s house were those of Hellingsby.
Lady Roding was terribly shocked, almost to the point
of collapse, when the story of Hellingsby’s dreadful crime
was unfolded, but Sir Eric took everything quite calmly,
and, indeed, expressed himself as being very grateful to
Larose for having tried to shield them from the horror
of learning what kind of man Hellingsby had really been.
“ And if I do have to go into the witness-box,” he
said, “ I can only deny Hellingsby was acting for me and
they certainly won’t be able to prove to the contrary.”
“ But I don’t think it’ll come to that,” said Larose
confidently, “ and I only want to warn you, in case
Inspector Stone should send somebody down to question
you.” He nodded. “If he does, just say you had never
heard of Daunt until that letter from him came to your
wife and that you have never given Hellingsby any com-
mission to do anything for you.”
“ But what about yourself ? ” frowned Sir Eric. “ I’m
afraid your helping me will have got you into a lot of
trouble.”
Larose laughed. “ I’m not worrying,” he said. “ I’ve
got one or two good cards to play yet. I know the Yard
and its ways quite well and the knowledge will come in
pretty handy now.”
So the morning of the day before that upon which the
inquest was going to be held, Larose was ushered into
Inspector Stone’s room in Scotland Yard.
“ Good morning, Gilbert,” said the inspector, smiling
his nice fatherly smile, “ and I suppose you’ve come to
congratulate me upon my little success.” He shook his
head. “ But I’m sorry the press got hold of so much.
It means people have been talking when they shouldn’t.”
“ Well, I’ve come to talk a bit,” laughed Larose, “ and
to give you a bit of my advice.” And then he added
carelessly, “ I was dining with a man connected with the


Home Office last night and got a lot of inside information
from him.” He regarded the inspector intently. “ Now,
if I were you, I shouldn’t suggest to the court to-morrow
that it was a case of murder. Nothing points to that.”
“ Oh, nothing does, does it ? ” smiled Stone most
politely. “ How do you make that out ? ”
“ Well, firstly,” said Larose, “ the extent of the blood-
stain upon the floor at the foot of the ladder and the
terrible injuries the man received can only mean that he
slipped off the ladder while he was carrying the block of
marble, and that the marble fell on him and crushed him.”
“ But he may have been deliberately pushed off,”
smiled Stone. “ Have you thought of that ? ”
“Of course,” returned Larose. “ But why should
anyone have wanted to push him off? What motive
could there have been ? ”
“ Well, for some reason Hellingsby may have wanted
to shut his mouth,” said Stone, “ after he had bribed him
to write that confession for Sir Eric Roding. There may
be something very hanky-panky there that we haven’t
found out yet. We have got to get to the bottom of
everything and then ”
“ But that twenty-five pounds you picked up was no
bribe,” interrupted Larose scoffingly. “It was much
too small an amount for Daunt to receive, remembering
that the confession would have got him five years’ penal
servitude.” He shook his head. “ No, those notes look
to me like an act of kindness to enable Daunt to make
a bolt. If he had committed a criminal act in breaking
into the vaults, he had also saved Sir Eric’s life and that
would be worth something.”
“ Go on,” said Stone coldly. “ Anything more ? ”
“ Yes, quite a lot,” smiled Larose. He shook his head
again. “ No, Charlie, you look on the fourth or fifth
rung of that ladder, somewhere about four feet down, and
I’m sure you’ll find the mark of the grave-digger’s hob-
nailed boots where he slipped off. Then—” but he broke


off abruptly and asked: “ But how did you come to find
that underground chamber below the other rooms ? ”
Stone was all smiles again. “ Ah, that was just observa-
tion and intelligence, my boy,” he said. He nodded. “ I
saw a lot of ants at work in the crevices round one of the
big stones in the corner of his workroom, and it attracted
my attention. Then I began pushing the stone about and
suddenly it went under the wall and there was the opening
before me ! ”
“ And those ants,” commented Larose meditatively,
“ of course had come after that treacle he had used to
make a join so that the smell should not come up as the
body below decomposed.”
Stone’s eyes opened very wide in surprise, but Larose
went on softly : “ And for that same reason the body
had been taken away from the foot of the ladder and
placed upon that shelf. The odour, then, would not
ascend straight up into the room above.” He suddenly
spoke up sharply: “ But how are you going to explain
all the contents of the chamber to the court to-morrow ? ”
“ I shall leave them to others to explain,” said Stone
stiffly. He nodded significantly. “ You know, of course,
that I have subpoenaed Sir Eric Roding ? I sent Inspector
Ransom down to see him, but Sir Eric denied all know-
ledge of everything and said he was not even aware
Hellingsby had been to see the grave-digger.” He nodded
again. “ But we shall see what they are able to get out
of him when he’s in the witness-box to-morrow. We’ve
briefed Tresidder-Jarvis, the K.C., to appear for us and
he can make even a dead man speak.”
But Larose appeared not to have heard him and went
on thoughtfully: “ Did it not strike you, Charlie, that
Daunt was an habitual body-snatcher by trade ? His use
of that secret chamber to do his sculpture work in surely
rather suggests it! Then that decomposing head in the
glass jar from which all the spirit had evaporated—from
where did you think he had got that ? Wasn’t he using
U


it, too, as the model for that piece of sculpture he was
doing—a girl’s head ? ”
“ Good God ! ” exclaimed Stone, his face all clammy
in his excitement. “ What do you know ? ”
“ Then there are those twenty-seven plaster casts,”
continued Larose, quite unperturbed, “ and I am wonder-
ing if they were not all obtained from the death-masks of
severed heads I ” His voice rose a little. “ And the black
tent down there—what did you make of that ? Wouldn’t
it have been just the thing to put up over graves when
he was working in strange churchyards in the dead of
night ? ”
“ Gilbert, Gilbert,” exclaimed Stone, breathing very
hand, “ what a wizard you are ! It is exactly as if that
grave-digger had told you everything himself! ”
“ But I learnt a lot last night from that man at the
Home Office,” said Larose softly, “ and then I tried to
think it all out.” He seemed suddenly to remember
something more. “ Oh, and how are you going to explain
that blackened bench at the end of the passage ? That’s
another thing they’ll be expecting you to have found
out.”
“ I don’t explain it,” said Stone tersely. He nodded
significantly again, “ I shall leave others to do that.”
“ But I’ve thought it out,” said Larose, “ and it seems
quite simple to me.” He smiled. “ Now did you hear
of anything unusual happening in the church upon that
afternoon when Daunt disappeared ? You didn’t ? You
haven’t made any enquiries ? Dear me, dear me ! Well,
I’ll tell you what happened then and what I think it
means, too,”
He bent over towards the inspector. “ That afternoon
at a quarter to five a young girl was in the church playing
upon the organ, when she suddenly saw, as she thought,
smoke coming up in the cracks between the big stones
in the pavement. She ran and told Daunt first, and then
the vicar. But by the time she had got hold of the vicar


the smoke was no longer coming up, and Daunt made
out he didn’t really think he had seen any.” He spoke
very solemnly. “ But he had seen it and knew it was a
signal from a man whom he’d shut down in that under-
ground chamber. Then he had to let him out, fearing
the fire brigade would be called and he’d have to explain
everything 1 ”
Stone looked frowningly at his watch. “Of course,
this is a story you’re making up ? ” he said dryly.
“ Not at all,” retorted Larose, “it is exactly what
happened, and ” —his voice dropped to a whisper—“ that
is why you could not find out where that stranger, who
had arrived at the inn the previous evening, had spent
the night.” He nodded. “ He had spent it in the under-
ground chamber.”
The face of the inspector was a study. He looked
stupefied and he was breathing so hard that it almost
looked as if he were upon the verge of a fit. But Larose’s
next words acted as a cold douche.
“ But come on, Charlie,” he said sharply, “ enough of
this play-acting. I’ve come to save you from one of the
greatest blunders of your career ” —he nodded —“ even
at the price of some unpleasantness for myself.” He
pointed to the bell upon the desk. “ Now please send a
message to the finger-print department for three lots of
finger-prints, those of that mysterious visitor to Daunt,
those you got of Hellingsby that night at the ‘ Rialto,’
and those which you obtained from Hellingsby’s bunga-
low that morning we all went down.”
As if mesmerised by the confident way in which Larose
was speaking to him, and very curious as to what it could
all mean, without a word Stone wrote a few lines upon a
piece of paper and gave it to the constable who appeared
in answer to his ring.
“ Now, Charlie,” said Larose, when the man had gone,
“ please don’t ask any questions. I’ll explain everything
when the finger-prints come.” The two smoked on


in silence until an official from the finger-print department
appeared presently with the photographs which had been
asked for.
Then Larose surprised Stone by himself producing two
photographs from his pocket.
“ Do you know Detective Rice of the Tunbridge Wells
police ? ” he asked of the official from the finger-print
department. “ Oh, you do ! Then would you consider
his finger-print work reliable ? ”
“ Certainly, sir,” smiled the man, “ all the prints he
sends up to us are fine pieces of work.”
“ And he’s not likely to make any mistakes ? ” asked
Larose, and the reply was, “ No, sir, certainly not.”
“ Now then,” said Larose, handing his two photo-
graphs across to Stone, “ see what’s written on those.
Of course, they are only copies, but I obtained them
yesterday from Detective Rice. One is that of Miles
Hellingsby’s finger-marks taken directly after he had shot
himself, and the other is that of the finger-marks found
upon the butt of the automatic he had used.” He turned
to the finger-print official. “ You look at them, too,
please, and compare them with the finger-prints you have
just brought in.”
In the long silence that followed, Stone first looked
puzzled. Then he frowned and his frown deepened
and deepened every moment that he looked from one
set of finger-prints to another. Then he turned to the
finger-print official and asked : “ What does it amount
to?”
“ Those we’ve got of Miles Hellingsby taken at the
Rialto Hotel,” said the official very thoughtfully, “ do
not appear to be his, neither do those taken from the house
of this Joel Daunt. But those coming from the bungalow
of Miles Hellingsby at Dungeness and marked unknown
are certainly his.”
“ And, of course, ours here are more likely to be
wrong ? ” scowled Stone.


“ Most certainly,” nodded the man. “ These taken
directly off the dead man must, of course, be absolutely
beyond dispute.”
“ Now Gilbert,” said Stone very sternly, when the
finger-print official had left the room, “ I want a show-
down from you at once. You’ve been talking darned
queer ever since you’ve been in here, and in this matter
of these finger-prints I admit you’ve sprung upon me a
deuced funny surprise.” He glared angrily at him, “ Now
if those finger-marks we’d got on that glass at the ‘ Rialto ’
that night were not Hellingsby’s —who the devil’s were
they ? ”
Larose looked intently at him. He thought he had now
worked up the inspector’s nerves to a sufficient condition
of perplexity and worry to make him the more amenable
to any suggestions he, Larose, might propose. So he
rapped out quickly :
“ Mine—and they were mine also that you found in
Daunt’s house. I was his visitor that evening, and the
previous night and up to five o’clock that very afternoon
I had been shut down in that cursed cellar. I should have
been slowly done to death if that smoke hadn’t terrified
Daunt, and, of the lesser of two evils, he let me out.”
And then, giving Stone no opportunity to make any
comment, Larose began his story. After one incredulous
gasp of amazement, the inspector sat perfectly still,
watching Larose with never the flicker of an eyelid or the
slightest movement of the muscles of his face. He looked
very grim.
When Larose had finished, a long silence followed and
then Stone announced brusquely : “ I shall put you in the
witness-box to-morrow,” and he set his teeth together
with a snap.
“ Yes,” said Larose sadly, “ I was afraid it would have
to come to that.” His face brightened. “ But I shall be a
good witness and everyone will be interested when they
hear of you and Inspector Ransom taking me into Daunt’s


house and asking my advice. It will seem quite
humorous.”
“ But it won’t seem quite so humorous,” commented
Stone savagely, “ when it is learnt that a Justice of the
Peace has been conniving at the frustration of the law,
if he hasn’t actually been a malefactor himself.”
“ Just so ! ” exclaimed Larose, now appearing to be
very frightened. He nodded violently. “ But still, you
and the Yard won’t be coming out too well, will you,
Charlie ? My counsel will have to say I came forward
voluntarily, to save you from making that dreadful
blunder about Hellingsby’s finger-marks, and then every-
body will learn how careless you were that night at the
‘ Rialto’.” He coughed embarrassedly. “ They may even
think ”
“ What ? ” scowled Stone, because Larose had stopped
speaking.
“ Th-at you perhaps had had too much to drink,” said
Larose timidly, “ and ”
“ You’ll go into the witness-box,” interrupted Stone
sharply. He shook his head angrily. “ You’ll not frighten
me, you dandy with your twenty-one shilling tie.”
“ My wife gave it to me, Charlie,” said Larose re-
proachfully, “ and you wouldn’t have me throw it away,
would you ? ” He resumed the argument that the in-
spector had interrupted. “ And then, of course, all about
that little card party at the ‘ Rialto ’ will have to come out
and the court will certainly want to know what you were
doing there disguised as an old farmer, and trying to
wangle an invitation to get down to Southborough Hall
so that I could break into Hellingsby’s desk and examine
his private papers.” He seemed very amused. “It may
even come out about that big diamond ring Rubenstein
lent you and the court may wonder if you had borrowed
your dress-suit as well from him. Then ”
“ Be serious,” scowled Stone. “ This may turn out to
be a bad business for you.”


“ Then my counsel will, of course, have to explain,”
went on Larose very solemnly, “ why we were tracking
Hellingsby, and all about his bungalow and how you went
there early one morning with four officers from the Yard.
Then Hellingsby’s suicide will come in and you’ll be
asked why you went to the inquest and why afterwards
you didn’t want to dig ”
The stout inspector held up his hand protestingly.
“ Please, please, Gilbert,” he said wearily, “ stop talking
for a little while, will you ? You give me no chance to
ask you any questions.” He made a great appearance of
sternness. “ Now I want to know why you did not at
once report this accident of Daunt’s, instead of making
all this melodrama out of it, as if you were a criminal
yourself ? ”
Larose now appeared to be all meekness again. “ For
two reasons, Charlie,” he said. “ The first, I wanted to
prevent the unhappiness that would come to so many
people if it were known Daunt had violated those graves.
Then ”
“ I understand that,” nodded Stone. “It would ”
he hesitated—“ or will, occasion a dreadful scandal.”
He frowned. “ And the second reason ? ”
“ I didn’t want it to be broadcast I was in any way mixed
up in this matter of Daunt’s confession,” replied Larose ;
“ for then, of course, I should have been asked how, in the
first instance, I had come to know it was Daunt who had
broken into the Roding vaults. Then it would have been
so easily traced back that I found Sir Eric in an asylum
for the insane and taken him out of the hands of the
authorities.”
“ Oh I he was in a lunatic asylum, was he I ” exclaimed
Stone, now showing distinct interest. “ Then how did
you get him de-certified ? ”
Larose winked. “ A bit of rope and a car waiting over
the wall 1 ”he smiled. “ Risky, but it came off 1 ”
For a few moments Stone preserved the grimness of his


features with an effort and then the corners of his mouth
twitched, his eyes twinkled and finally he burst out
laughing. “ Oh, Gilbert, Gilbert,” he exclaimed, “ what
a reckoning there is going to be for you ” —he hesitated—
“ some day 1 ” He looked puzzled. “ But how did you
come to know Sir Eric was in an asylum ? ”
“ I was in there visiting another patient,” replied
Larose. He hesitated a moment. “ Oh, but you may as
well know, as I heard last week he is dying.” He went
on. “ It was Professor Panther, a one-time world-famous
brain surgeon, who had been employing Daunt to get all
those heads. That’s the man I went into the asylum to
see.
“ And do you mean to tell me,” asked Stone, “ that
Daunt admitted to you he had cut up and decapitated
twenty-seven corpses ? ”
“Yes, and taken a death-mask of every one of them
too ! ”
“ Do you know who any of them were ? ” asked Stone.
“ Yes, every one of them,” replied Larose. He tapped
his breast pocket. “ I’ve got the memorandum book
here.”
“ Give it to me, then,” said Stone, stretching out his
hand.
But Larose drew back. “ No, no, Charlie,” he said, “ if
you’re going to put me in the witness-box to-morrow my
possession of this little book may be my salvation, for it
will, in part, justify my trying to hush everything up.”
He shook his head. “ No, I can’t give it you or even let
you see it, as it contains the names of some very highly
placed people ” —he nodded—“ and, among them, that
of a Lord Chief Justice.”
Then for a long minute a deep silence followed.
Larose was looking out of the window and idly watching
the flow of traffic below, while Stone, with his arms
folded, was regarding his old friend very thoughtfully.
What was this stout inspector thinking ? Were his


thoughts of the veiled threats which he knew so well
Larose would never carry out, was he considering that
in the public interest it was sometimes best things should
be hidden from them, was he wondering how he could
reconcile his duty with his inclination, or was he just
thinking of his many years of friendship with the man
who now sat before him ? Who knows ?
“ Give me the book, Gilbert,” he said very quietly.
“ I’ll take care of it.” Larose handed it over with a
great feeling of relief in his heart.
They talked on for a long while and then at last Larose
got up to go.
“ Good-bye, Charlie I ” he said. “ Good luck to you
always ! ”
“ Good-bye, my boy,” smiled Stone, and then he
added : “ Oh, shall you come to the inquest to-morrow ? ”
Larose shook his head. “ No, I’m going to have a pot
with Sir Eric at his partridges,”
Stone sighed. “ Lucky beggar ! ”he exclaimed. “ The
world’s giving you everything ! ” Then just as Larose
was going out of the door he added : “ Oh, send me a
couple of birds, will you ? Two will just do for my tea.”
He made a grimace and then shook his head very solemnly.
“ The wages of sin, Gilbert, the wages of sin I ”
Larose looked back over his shoulder. “ No, a present
for a good boy,” he laughed. “ Yes, I’ll be sure and send
them.”
The following day, at the inquest on the body of Joel
Daunt, the jury brought in a verdict of accidental death,
adding, however, a rider that they regretted deceased’s
companion upon the day of the accident had not come
forward in the public interest to explain exactly how the
accident had occurred.
Not a little interest was taken in the proceedings and
unstinted praise was accorded to Chief Inspector Stone
for his clear and masterly elucidation of all that had


happened. In his summing-up the coroner expressed
his warm appreciation of the assistance the inspector had
rendered to the court and the hope that it would be
noted in the proper quarter.
Chief Inspector Stone left the court with a smiling
face and was no doubt a very happy man.
A little less than a year later, at a soiree given by the
Criminologist Society, Larose was introduced to a Dr.
Joseph Benmichael of Barnwell Hall, near Cambridge.
For a few minutes they talked casually of everyday
matters and then, their mutual acquaintance having
moved away and left them to themselves, the doctor
asked smilingly :
“ And how’s our good friend Mr. Winter, Mr.
Watkins ? I see there’s an heir to the baronetcy now.”
Larose was quite aware the doctor had recognised him,
and, although feeling decidedly uncomfortable, never-
theless made no pretence of not understanding. He
smiled back. “ Quite well, thank you. Doctor,” he said,
“ and I’m sure when I see him next he will tell me I
should have given you his kind regards.”
“ A man of most charming manners,” commented the
doctor, “ and I am glad he has now so completely
recovered,” He tapped Larose lightly upon the arm.
“ But one thing, Mr. Larose, I’ve always been wanting
to put right with you.”
“ Oh, what is that ? ” asked Larose, a little bit uneasy
as to what would be coming next,
“It is this,” said the doctor. “ I should not like you
to have the idea that the organisation of my institution
is so poor that a perfect stranger to the place, like your-
self, can abduct one of the patients unbeknown to every-
body.” He smiled genially. “ You understand what I
mean. I don’t want you to imagine we are so careless
of the welfare of those entrusted to us.”
Larose felt himself getting very red. “ Th-en you
know everything that happened ? ” he asked haltingly.


“ Most certainly I do,” laughed the doctor, “ and I
even assisted you. Your rope got caught in the summer-
house that night, and it was I who freed it for you. You
remember you couldn’t get it up at first ? ”
Larose made a wry face. “ Then you let him go on
purpose ? ” he asked, very puzzled.
“ Of course I did,” said the doctor, “ and very glad I
was to see him leave with so little ceremony.” He
lowered his voice. “ You see, Mr. Larose, I had found
out afterwards that his admission into my place was
accomplished in a very irregular manner and I was always
fearing that at any moment he would become the focus
of a very bad scandal.” He shook his head frowningly.
“ But I suppose Sir Eric Roding is always wondering
how he came to be brought to my place. Of course he’ll
never have any memory of those days.”
“ No, he remembers nothing of what happened at
first,” said Larose, “ but I have told him everything.”
He smiled. “ I know a great deal more of that poor mad
professor than you think.”
“ And I, perhaps, know more about you than you
think,” laughed the doctor. “ One thing. Miss Plum
remembered who you were the moment she set eyes on
you, and was quite annoyed you didn’t remember her.
She had partnered you in a mixed doubles at Lady Hard-
ing’s tennis party, barely a fortnight before you called to
see her father as Mr. Watkins.”
£C By Jove! ” exclaimed Larose, “ but I must be
getting old, if I forgot a pretty face like hers so quickly.”
“ Yes,” laughed the doctor, “ and it happened she
passed on the information the same night as you stole
our Mr. Winter. So you see, if I had wanted him I could
have got him with no trouble.”
Larose was too flabbergasted to make any comment
for the moment, and Dr. Benmichael went on in a whis-
per : “ One last thing and this will take your breath
away.” He fixed Larose’s eyes with his own. “ Who do


you think bought Professor Panther’s house when the
poor fellow died ? Who do you think bought it lock,
stock and barrel, with his laboratory and museum just
as they were, thrown in ? All those brain specimens,
remember—oh yes, I guess you know all about them—
all those casts made from death masks ” —he grinned—
“ and all those wandering spirits of the dead ? Now,
guess, who ? ”
“ I can’t think of anybody,” laughed Larose, “ unless
it was that pretty Ida Plum.”
“ Nonsense ! ” exclaimed the doctor, “ think of some-
one else.”
“ I can’t,” said Lasose. “ Tell me who it was ? ”
Dr. Benmichael paused dramatically and then rapped
out; “ Our mutual acquaintance, Mr. Wimpole Car-
stairs. He bought everything for his son, who is just
qualifying as a doctor.”
“My God ! ” exclaimed Larose, and then uncon-
sciously voicing his own thoughts, he added, “ but he’s
sitting on a bomb 1 ”
“ No, he isn’t,” smiled the doctor. “ I found the key-
book with all the names among the professor’s papers
and destroyed it, I was one of the executors.” He
nodded. “So friend Carstairs will never learn he’s got
his wife’s pickled brain under his own roof.” He held
out his hand. “ Good night, Mr. Larose. Very pleased
to have met you, but I must be off now. I want to get to
bed early to-night, as I’ve an important appointment
with a lady at eleven o’clock to-morrow and must keep
it.” He laughed slyly as he turned away. “ I’m marrying
that Miss Plum.”
THE END


THRILLERS BY ARTHUR CASK
THE NIGHT OF THE STORM
The three young mistresses of a beautiful old Priory in
Essex are faced suddenly with an accusation of murder.
Harassed by the unceasing police investigations the girls
appeal to Gilbert Larose. Another thrilling chapter in the
life of the famous detective.
7s. 6 d. net
THE MASTER SPY
This exciting international spy story will keep tire
reader breathless from cover to cover.
East Anglian Times: “Will be relished by those who
revel in thrills.”
ys. 6 d. net.
THE JEST OF LIFE
A pleasantly humorous novel. Mr. Cask’s touch is light
and sure, and his characterization shows a deep and
sympathetic insight into the frailties of human nature.
Truth: “ A rich feast of riotous humour with a moral
to it.”
3s. 6 d. net.
THE HANGMAN’S KNOT
Gilbert Larose has met crime in a hundred guises but
never has he been called upon to elucidate a mystery so
completely baffling as in this first-class thriller.
Manchester Evening Chronicle : “ An amazing amount of
cleverness and ingenuity . . .”
3 s. 6 d. net.
THE DARK HIGHWAY
The story of a double crime, perpetrated at midnight
amongst the lonely sand-dunes of the Coorong.
Nottingham Journal: “ A thrilling story.”
2s. 6 d. net.


THRILLERS BY ARTHUR CASK
THE POISONED GOBLET
Tells of the efforts of a gang of men to kidnap the child
of Lady Ardave. Larose takes a hand and finds himself
faced with one of the most puzzling cases of his career.
Manchester Evening Chronicle: “ A pleasing piece of
work.”
2 s. 6 d. net.
THE HIDDEN DOOR
Gilbert Larose to the rescue once more —this time to the
Suffolk coast, where, in the space of a few weeks, four
residents of adjoining villages had mysteriously dis-
appeared. An extremely clever detective story.
2S. 6 d. net.
RED PASTE MURDERS
For the eighth time in a fortnight, and for the fourth
day in succession, murder is committed in Adelaide. Who
is the mysterious assassin ? A novel of non-stop thrills
and excitement.
2s. 6 d. net.
GENTLEMEN OF CRIME
A millionaire was being forced to pay enormous sums of
money by a blackmailer. So he hired the most celebrated
detectives and crooks to help him. A magnificent story of
plot and counterplot.
2 s. 6 d. net.
THE SHADOW OF LAROSE
Is murder, in exceptional cases, justifiable ? It was with
any thoughts but those of murder that Charles Edis began
his holiday, yet before many hours had passed—he had
committed murder.
Times Literary Supplement: “Moves quickly and
excitingly.”
2S. 6 d. net.


THRILLERS BY ARTHUR CASK
THE JUDGMENT OF LAROSE
A distinguished house-party was assembled at South-
down Court when suddenly the peace of this country house
was shattered by the discovery of a terrible crime. An
extremely ingenious and forceful yarn.
2S. 6d. net.
THE SECRET OF THE SANDHILLS
Two little boys and a dog came upon a good pair of
shoes on the beach. The dog sniffed so much at the sand
close by, that the boys scraped away and came across
a man’s leg. An intriguing murder mystery.
2s. 6 d. net.
THE SECRET OF THE GARDEN
Archibald Cups, a bank clerk, is sentenced to prison for
an embezzlement which he did not commit. He escapes
and hides in the house of the very judge who sentenced him.
Field : “ Mr. Cask is a great hand at ingenious situations.”
2s. o d. net.
CLOUD THE SMITER
The story of a great criminal and his associates who for
long defied the police of Australia. But in the end one
word proved the undoing of the whole band.
The Times : “ The Smiter is a capital creation.”
2s. o d. net.
THE LONELY HOUSE
Tells of a lonely house upon a lonely shore, and how
a master-criminal was in hiding there; how chance led a
great tracker of crime to the spot, and how his feet came
first to be set upon the trail.
Times Literary Supplement: “ Thrilling from beginning
to end.”
2s. o d. net.


THRILLERS I
Each 7/6 net
THE MOON KILLER
By James Corbett Author of “ Rendezvous with Death ”
The night was clear and warm. The moon, riding high
in the heavens, bathed the silent countryside in its silvery
radiance, casting shadows of jet beyond the trees and hedge-
rows which lay in its path. Along a stretch of road
bordered on either side by trees a car was travelling.
Suddenly, a long drawn-out scream broke the silence of the
scene. A breathless thriller.
LESSINGER LAUGHS LAST
By Richard Essex
Author of “ Marinova of the Secret Service ”
Lessinger Laughs Last is a novel that moves smoothly and
rapidly along its appointed path, with the suave Lessinger
more than once taxed to the limit of his skill and resource-
fulness. He throws away a fortune in a beer bottle, and the
subsequent adventures of that bottle are bizarre and
startling enough to thrill even the most blase reader of
thrillers.
THE RED MIRROR MYSTERY
By Gret Lane Author of “ Three Died that Night ”
Inspector Hook, hastily summoned to a lonely country
house near the sea, arrived to find a woman lying dead in
a luxurious bedroom. Many small details about the crime
puzzled him. The chief clue, unnoticed at first, was the
position of a red enamelled hand mirror. How could a
lady’s hand mirror provide an essential clue in a murder
case ? How could the position in which it rested indicate
the probable identity of the murderer ?








