

The Wiltshire Wail.
Souvenir
of
the voyage of the
H.M.A.T. “WILTSHIRE.”
Feb. 7th, 1917—April 11 th, 1917
Being newspaper printed on
the voyage and revised after
landing.
Price 3d.
Revised by Siglr. Hansen, H.W.. and Pte. Finnic, A.J ,
18th Battn.




CROSSING THE LINE
NEPTUNE’S CARNIVAL.
PROCLAMATION.
SPORTING RESULTS


The Wiltshire Wail.
CROSSING THE LINE
NEPTUNE’S CARNIVAL.
HUMAN presumption was never more rebuked than
on Saturday, 2_)th March, on H.M.A.T. “ Wiltshire.’"
It arose through the effrontery of a number of individuals
who, with or without previous castigation, ventured into
the domains of Father Neptune. Earlier initiation was
of no avail, and hardened travellers were baptised with
the same relish as first-crossers. In order to make the
punishment fit the crime, and to impart an air of legality
to the proceedings, various misdemeanours were dis-
credited.
he name of an offender being announced, Neptune's
sharks in the form of burly policemen hunted the ship
until they found him. If he resisted, he was dragged
ignominously before the Court. Here the charge was
read by the prosecutor, with an arrogance worthy of
Judge Jeffries. The Prosecutor wore a huge white collar
and a large nose. Ordered to plead, the trembling culprit
no sooner opened his mouth than he got a whack from
the Court Policeman. After the prosecutor had worked
himself into a paroxysm of rage in depicting the monster
before him. Neptune took up any broken threads of
judicial torture, finishing with a sentence more or less
varied, with shaving and duckings. The victim was then


taken in hand by three or four muscular minions in the
tank, and dipped, hustled, hosed, drenched and doused.
Some of the victims put up a tussle, but Neptune’s
executioners had been too well chosen. One offender
was standing on the brink, and before being dipped he
grabbed the Prosecutor, but bodv guards rescued the
latter. Not so fortunate was he at a later stage, however,
when a tug at his nether garments was followed by a
rending: He hied himself into obscurity until the
damage was repaired. Then an enterprising enemy of
the Court made a tactical move. Taking a good position
in the rear, and awaiting the element of surprise, he
pushed the Prosecutor into the tank. Soon followed
Neptune himself and all the Court Janissaries, rolling,
splashing and struggling to the delight of all who had
been subjected to earlier indignities.
The opening of the Court followed the Fancy Dress
Procession, and some highly original and quaint costumes
were seen. Neptune deserved great credit, and his robes,
consisting of a hemper skirt, resembling a kilt, with a
wig of the same material finished off with a trident and
coronet, were in keeping with his position and superior
jurisdiction. “ Kewpie ” attracted notice with a bulky
frame, and not many identified him as a genial officer
of the Railway Unit. Equally good were some savage
Sandwich Islanders. Neptune's mermaids lolled volup-
tuously in the tank. The Court Policeman wielded his
baton with salutary effect. The Usher read the Pro-
clamation with just emphasis through a megaphone. A
word is due to the bathers, whose half-Nelson grips and
strangle holts will not be readily forgotten by those
privileged to feel them.
In justice to the “Offenders,” they were not guilty of
the crimes Imputed to them. The Court frequently
worked by antithesis, i.e., the victims charged with being
“Drunk and Disorderly,” were most likely young men of
unblemished character, total abstainers, and of mild
Inoffensive dispositions. A very notable feature of the
day’s entertainment was the excellent spirit in which
each took his punishment.
The following is the Proclamation as read: —


PROCLAMATION.
By the Herald of His Majesty, Father Neptune,
Oyez ! Oyez !
Whereas, peradventure, and whereunto I, Jellyfish
Seaweed Barnacle, Lord Chief Justice to His Most Ancient
and Mysterious Majesty, Father Neptune (Companion
of the Bilge, Director of Sea-sickness over the "ide, Kicker
and Chastiser of Military Gluttons, King of Guzzlers),
Receiver General to the German Fleet (Strafe) have had
it reported to me by my Guard Fish, Tin Fish, Rotten
Fish and other (D(fish)ials of my realm that the legion
of Australian Gallants and Scallywags, Rag l ag and
Bobtail of Liverpool Show Ground, Ennogera and
Sydney Zoo, have been giving the “glad eye” to His
Majesty's most lovely mermaids, sea serpents, flying fish,
sharks, and other coy-like monsters of the mighty deep ;
and that they are about to force a presumptuous, un-
lawful, Insolent and impertinent entrance into the
dominions of the Northern Hemisphere of His Most
Mysterious Majesty.
Therefore be it knowrt by my beard, gadsooks, fish
hooks, zounds, mounds, pounds and wounds, that it is
the intention of His above aforesaid, oftmentloned Most
Sloppy Majesty to board this stalwart Galleon “ Wiltshire ”
on Saturday, 24th March, 1917, and that he will there
hold his Court.
Know ye, therefore, that all and sundry,. and all
others, be thev temporary or permanent occupiers of
His Majesty’s most comfortable kllnk, are thereby com-
manded to assemble, attend or unite to participate in,
or submit to (as fate may decide) such pains, penalties
or excruciating agonies as may be decreed by His Fish
Smelling Majesty.
And it is further enacted that whosoever, whether he
be man or soldier, or human monkey, either through
pride, fear or contumacious neglect, shall try to escape
from being present at the celebration of these mj-sterles,
let him tremble and have goose flesh up his spine with
clammy horror; for he shall most surely be seized upon
by armed wassals and spotters, and by the scruff of the
neck and the seat of his pants, and by all other legitimate
and illegitimate holts, he shall most surely and painfully


be brought, haled and otherwise conveyed before the
terrible throne of his aforesaid Billingsgate Majesty, and
that he will there be found guilty of whatever crimes are
charged against him, and will be thwached and smacked,
banged and wanged, boused and doused, bumped and
dumped, dashed, crashed, smashed and bashed, so that
he will never again in our seven seas dare or presume to
have the audacity to exhibit, show, or frighten the birds
with the ignominious collection of caricatured human ■
fractures or features he dares to call his face.
These words have I spoken, I, Jellyfish Seaweed
Barnacle, Lord Chief Justice to His Most Handsome
Majesty, Father Neptune, C.0.D., F.I.S.H.
1917, March 24th. “ THE DAY” when ye Australian
people purge polls of Prating Prosy Politicians in ye
State of New South Wales.
Three hoots for the Kaiser and one more for the
Crown Prince.
Some of the charges were as follows :
Likut. Hayes. -You are charged with being an
Irishman, wearing a green tie on St. Patrick’s day and
also being an impostor, whereby you lead people to believe
that you are a Lieutenant in the A.1.F., when in reality
you are an R.C. priest. You are also charged with
conducting in conjunction with Lieut. Shaw, Temperance
and Anti-Gambling Campaigns, and, further, with giving
certain officers a desperate thirst by continually putting
on the gramaphone a record known as: “Another little
Drink wouldn’t do us any harm.”
Likut. Davis. You are charged with being a Scotch-
man and with telling stories calculated not to improve
other people’s minds, and also with having a second
helping of pork.
Likut. Buchanan. You are charged with causing
the ship to list to port whenever you retire.
Capt. James. —You are charged with habitual levity
and trifling with girlish affections on two continents.
Likut. Ticknkr. —-You are charged with damaging
ship's fittings, in that you tried to dislodge a ventilator,
thereby getting a black eye.


Capt. Thomson. You are charged with wholesale
murder, in that you prescribe No. 9’s and Whitehouse,
and other well known poisons.
Cpl. Schokikld.— You are charged with monopolising
the bathroom, thereby depriving others of the opportunity
of bathing. (2) Using soap contrary to your established
custom.
Sgt. Walsh. —You are charged with misappropriating
the ship’s paper made for a certain purpose when corre-
sponding with the fair damsels of Australia.
Ptk. Shauu. You are charged with being middle-
weight champion. (2< Using your pugilistic abilities in
the wrong direction. (3) Causing men to go short of
tomato sauce by using same to develop your magnificent
muscles.
Ptk. John. —You are charged with being a wowser.
You carry marked cards, loaded dice and a bottle of
XXX on your person.
The officials at the Carnival were as under :
Father Neptune ... * ••• Capt. Bridge
Crown Prosecutor ... Lieut. Borrman
Usher ... ... Mr. McDonald
Policeman • ■ Cpl. Brady
Court Herald ... ... Sgt. Ryan
Bugler ... ... ... Cpl. Harris
Mrs. Neptune . . ■■■ Gibson
( Pte. Brown
Mermaids ••• (Pte Thompson
Sgt. of Police ... ... ••• Sgt. McCour
j Pte. Dawson
Barbers... ... ••• -j p te> Brooks
, ICII , (Cpl. Waddell
Nurse and Wounded Soldier | p te pj nn ; e
A word of thanks is due to the ship’s master, Capt.
Hayward and the O C. Troops, Lieut -Col. L. Dobbim,
for the valuable assistance rendered to all concerned in
the making of the “Wiltshire’s” historic day.


SPORTING RESULTS.
During the voyage a programme of sports has been
carried out with the appended results: —
Boxing. —Feather —Cpl. W. Beard, 31st Btn. ; Light
Pte, W. Whitbread, 25th Btn ; Welter Pte W. Smith,
31st Btn.; Middle —Sgt. Daniels, 25th Btn.
Qun Crew —1. Cpl R. Bates’ Squad. 2. Pte. Wil-
shire’s squad.
Squad Drill —1. 41st Btn. (Sgt. Ryan). 2. 42nd Btn.
(Sgt. Braithwaite).
Mess Orderlies' Tables Ist period FI. Table, 31st Btn.
(Ptes. Lazarus and Bumstead.) 2nd period Ell Table,
41st Btn. (Ptes. Fletcher and Weatherill.)
Fancy Dress —Lt. Cockram, 1st —declined honor, re-
alloted as follows: !. Pte. Gibson, A.M.C. 2. Cpl.
Smith, 17th Battn. 3. Pte. Maples, 18th Battn.
Quoits —1. Pte. Young, 18th Btn. 2. Pte. Ellis, 31st
Btn. 3. Pte. Jennings, 20th Btn.
Skipping —1. Pte Stephenson, 20th Btn. 2. Pte
Fraser, 19th Batn. 3, Cpl Devitt, 13th Btn.
Long Jump -1. Pte. Dowker, 41st Btn. 2 Pte. Evans,
13th Btn. 3. Pte. Leitch, 41st Btn
Single Sticks —I. Pte Gallahawk. rBth Btn 2. Pte.
Forrester, 13th Btn. 3. Pte Currv, 19th Btn.
Scratch Pull—l. Pte. Evans. 19th Btn 2. Pte.
Gilmore, 41st Btn. 3 S. Sergt. Hauenstein, A.M C.
High Jump- 1 Pte. T. Fraser, 19111 Btn 2 Pte. A.
Villers, 31st Btn. 3. Sgt Evans, 13th Btn.
Bun and Treacle I Pte. R. Shard, 25th Btn. 2. Pte.
Irwin, Rlwy. 3. Pte. Fraser, 41st Btn.
Potato Race —Pie. Hollis, 13th Btn. 2. Pte. Lewis.
3. Pte. Robinson, 19th Btn.
Wheelbarrow Race —Cpls. Tyson and Sinclair, Rlwy
Unit. 2. I’tes. Courtney and Robinson, tgth Btn. 3.
Ptes. Fittock and As till, 42nd Btn.


For a voyage of good fellowship, accompanied b}
the absolute absence of all bickering, commend us all to
the return voyage on the A. 18 “WIL 1 SHIRE. Mav
it be soon.
HEARTY GOOD WISHES TO ALE.
SYNOPSIS OF VOYAGE.
Departed Sydney, 7-2-17.
I'as-ed Wilson’s Prom., 9-2-17.
Last sight of Australia, 13-2-17.
Arrived Durban, S.A., 28-2-17.
Departed Durban, S.A., 2-3-17.
Arrived Caj e Town, S.A., 5-3-17-
Departed Cape Town, S.A., 11-3-17, with H.M.S. -‘Kent'
as Escort.
Arrived Sierra Leone, 25-3-17.
Departed Sierra Leone, 27-3-17, with H.M.S. “ Brlttania
as Naval Escort.
H.M.S. “ Swiftshore” took over convoy on April Ist.
On April 9th, 8 T.B. Destroyers arrived, one going with
each vessel.
Arrived Plymouth Sound, 11-4-17.
Farewell! H.M.A.T. “Wiltshire.”
Members of Convoy
H.M.A.T. “ Wiltshire ” H.M.S. “ Osterley ”
H.M.A.T. “ Ayrshire ” “ S.S. Galway Castle ”
H.M.A.T. “ Ajana ” “ S.S. Tuicer ”
H.M.S. “ Kent ” H.M.S. “ Brlttania ”
H.M.S. “Swiftshore” 8 Torpedo Boat Destroyers


AUTOGRAPHS


AUTOGRAPHS.


