

THE CASE
AGAINST
“THE STADIUM”
IN WAR TIME.
As Stated by the Representatives of the
Council for Civic and Moral Advancement,
Sydney.
Sydney;
The Epwobth Printing and Publishing House
218 Castlereagh Street


' ' ;
1 : A. , • ’ ' *' i ‘ V' ' - ■ j ■ r - t\
■ / A ■ A- ■ ■. ; ■ . ' ■ _ . ‘
■ ■■■ ■• * /■ i ' ,/ ,■; ;• ;:i.;
■ li ' -
; y}'
t
X ■ •• .V- i '■<
': ■ y i '
; '■ " r
-■ . I?; ''. ' .-vCt: , ’
’ ■' ‘ . ■ ■ *, J | -
■ X; :




The Case Against “The Stadium”
in War Time.
As stated by the Representatives of
THE COUNCIL FOR CIVIC AND MORAL ADVANCEMENT,
SYDNEY. /
At 11.30 a.m. on Friday, 21st July, 1916, a depu-
tation from the Council for Civic and Moral Advance-
ment waited upon the Chief Secretary (the* Hon. George
Black, M.L.A.) to make representations on the subject
of closing the Stadium at Rushcutters ’ Bay and .other
such resorts during the war.
The deputation was introduced by the Hon. W. Robson,
M.L.C., and included the Archbishop of Sydney (Dr.
Wright), Bishop Stone-Wigg, Sir Thomas Anderson
Stuart (President of the Council), the Revs. Professor
Maclntyre (Vice-President). Dr. Carruthers, Archdeacon
D’Arcy Irvine, Rabbi Cohen, A. Stephen, D. F. Brandt,
A. J. Waldock, J. Steed, C. E. James (Hon. Secretary),
and Hon. Thomas Brown, M.L.A., Mr. M. Gotthelf (Hon.
Treasurer), Mr. William Wood (Financial Secretary to the
Presbyterian Church).
The Hon. Mr. Robson, introducing- the Deputation,
said its object was to bring before the Minister the pro-
priety of considering whether there should not be some
restriction upon what transpired in connection with the
Stadium, and, in view of its effect upon the public mind,
whether it would not be well to close it altogether. He
might say that feeling in that direction was not confined
to certain members of the public in Sydney, but, to
judge from resolutions passed at a meeting of the Farm-
ers’ and Settlers’ Association, that feeling was prevalent
in country districts as well as in the city. The Depnta-


tion had appointed four speakers to represent the case,
and these gentlemen would now speak in turn.
The Archbishop of. Sydney, the Most Rev. J ohn
Charles Wright, D.D., said: —
“I desire most emphatically to ask that exhibitions
of prize-fighting at the Stadium and at similar estab-
lishments be largely restricted during the period of the
war, if not altogether prohibited. They are a great
source of distress to large numbers of onr people who
are in sorrow to-day through loss of relatives in the war.
To them it appears as though the general public were
callous about their sufferings. To many others it is most
objectionable that immense crowds should be collected
for such a purpose at a time when patriotism demands
the supremest sacrifice. The soldiers also at the front
bitterly resent these spectacles at which men gather as if
there was no war being fought to preserve them.
“I am no advocate of the suppression of all forms
of entertainment and relaxation during the war. I recog-
nise that distraction is good, but I maintain that this is
the wrong type. Nor again am I against all forms of
boxing. I accept boxing cleanly fought as a healthy,
manly sport ; but the exhibitions of boxing which I could
approve would be contests between men who are soldiers
or sailors, and they should be held before an audience
who are also ready for active service. As a matter of
fact, the prize-fighter is not a soldier. He trains like a
fighting-cock as a profession, and fights for money, not
for sport. Those, who look on have frequently nothing
of the fighting instinct in themselves, yet they enjoy see-
ing others battered in front of them, and many of them
are so brutalised that they consider their money wasted
unless there is much blood. Some of them could not
.fight if they would. Others of them would not fight if
they could. The exhibition does nothing to improve the
' morale of the community, but it does result in huge
profits to its promoters.
“This again is a further argument against its con-
tinuance. It causes large financial waste and extrava-
gance, often by men who can ill afford it, at a time when
the duty of economy is insistently laid upon all —rich
and poor alike,”


Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart, President of the Coun-
cil, said that the matter had been before the minds of
the public for a long time, but that it had been accen-
tuated by a statement in the press, that a number of
prize-fighters had been engaged in America and were
being brought to fight in Sydney. Many people were
attracted by this notice, because it seemed to them
strange to go to the United States for fighting men. But
then, of course, these were only professional prize-
fighters, not men who fight for love of country and of
kindred, but only for money, and thus it has also oc-
curred to many that they are anything but desirable
immigrants. These men are being imported for use at
the Stadium in Kiishcutiers’ Bay, of which there had been
a great deal of notice taken because of its central posi-
tion; but there were many other places of like nature,
not only in Sydney, but also in the country. He (the
speaker) lived in the neighbourhood of the Stadium, and
saw that on evenings when the fight was fixed for 8
o’clock, long queues of people would be waiting outside
by six o’clock, a large proportion being hefty young men
apparently militarily fit. At a time like the present,
when everyone had been called upon to practise economy
and to make sacrifices, it was not seemly to waste money
on anything, and certainly not on such exhibitions and
their associations. Many people who saw these things
going on had made great sacrifices, and many a mother
must feel it deeply to think of her son fighting in earnest
that these men may have peace and security to fight
in sport. Seeing these things going on was apt to give
the idea that recruiting was not so necessary after all.
They are indeed a very potent influence in drawing men’s
minds away from the service of their country. It was a
growing evil, for it was not confined to one night in
the week, but had been allowed to extend to Wednesday
afternoon, on which occasion crowds of people were pre-
sent who would be better employed at their work. In
the “Daily Telegraph” there was an announcement that
a fight would take place on Monday night, July 31st. If
these fights were to take place on several nights a week
and in the daytime, the evil would be intolerable, and
the time to prevent this is to put a stop to it now. He
(the speaker) was by no means against clean sport in
ordinary times, but the war changed everything, and the
minds of the people should be turned away from light


things. If prize-fights were stopped altogether during
the war it would be for the good of the country, and
would make for greater success in the recruiting campaign.
Rev. Professor Maclntyre, Vice-President of the
Council:—
“I concur in what has been already said on the
general question and in relation to the present national
situation, but I go even further and say that this prize-
fighting* business—for it is a business and not sport —
is a moral nuisance in our social life. It cannot be denied
that the whole life'of the community would gain if this
prize-fighting business were eliminated altogether. It
contributes nothing to public welfare, nor does it tend to
the cultivation of manly virtues, for manly virtues are not
to be cultivated by paying, a fee to see two well-paid men
pounding one another. The whole thing was a moral blot
upon Sydney, and upon the State as a whole. Everyone
was aware that the Stadium crowd contributed very few
recruits in this national crisis. The situation was aggra-
vated by the proposed importation of a batch of boxers
from America. That kind of thing at such a time as
this was a scandal. America has declared, through her
President, that she is ‘too proud to fight,’ where honour
is concerned; but these Americans are ready enough to
fight in Australia for money. Such men ought to be
classed as undesirable aliens and sent back whence they
came. If there was any fighting to be done tool ay, the
proper place for it was in the trenches in France, where
prance’s greatest boxer was giving his life-blood for his
cbuntry, and from which the prize-fighting business tried
to tempt him by a large bribe. It was a shame that the
feelings of fathers and mothers, who had given their dear
sons for the better and nobler fight for King and Coun-
try, should, as they passed the Stadium, witness the
crowds gathering in the enclosure, and be outraged by
the thought of these men here and their own sons endur-
ing thp horrors of that grim and deadly conflict in
Europe. It was mockery of a heart-rending anxiety, and
a sacred grief, and no Government which honoured the
sacrifice of Australia should permit it to continue. The
Chief Secretary and myself have repeatedly stood side
by side on the recruiting platform and made our appeal
in name of Australia. But how can any member of the


Government make that appeal while the Stadium is
allowed to be crowded several days every week by men
who are deaf to the crisis of their country and the noblest
tight men ever engaged in? It has fallen to me, at the
request of the State War Council, to examine many thou-
sand replies to the Prime Minister’s appeal, and many of
these contained indignant references to the Stadium busi-
ness. I can say, from official knowledge, that the con-
tinuance of the Stadium is a very real hindrance to re-
cruiting. Fathers have said to me, ‘ 1 have one son at
the war, and I would let another son go when you deal
with the Stadium; but I do not feel called to all this
sacrifice in order to defend that crowd.’ I am sure that
the Government would carry the cordial approval of the
country if they dealt decisively with this ignoble business.
Things which in themselves were right and innocent in
peace times had very properly been discontinued in war
time, and it fills me with shame and indignation that this
scandalous business went on as if the fate of Australia
and the Empire were not trembling in the balance. I
appeal to the Government of this State to stop it, and stop
it at once. There is no defence for it which dare come
into the light of day.”
The Rev. Dr. Carruthers said he need not add much
to what had been said so ably and so forcibly, and, which
expressed the views not only of the Council, but also of
many citizens. Exhibitions of the kind under discussion
were more notable in their own State than in any other.
The argument against suppressing such exhibitions would
be the old argument about liberty, but every law was more
or less a limitation of liberty. They were not there to
discuss the ethics of boxing, but to ask that restrictions
should be placed upon things that militated against
national duty at the present time. In all parts of the
world at the present time the lighter side of life was be-
ing thrust aside. The other day the majority of the
population of New South Wales had decided there should
be a restriction of liberty in connection with the license
of hotels. There always must be some limitation of liberty
in promotion of the public good, which is the higher law.
In view of the terrible sacrifices which were being made,
the State should step in and close down these exhibitions,
so that everyone at this critical time might attend to the
supreme task on which the nation is now engaged.


Professor Maclntyre stated that lie wished to add lie
could speak officially, as one deeply interested in recruit-
ing, that he knew the influence of the Stadium, and even
the fact of its existence, was a serious hindrance to
recruiting.
The Minister replied that he quite appreciated the
gravity of the situation. He had seen a good deal of box-
ing and prize-fighting in his time when he was connected
with the press, it being part of his duty to visit places
where fighting was going on, and during the last thirty
years there had been a great deal of glove fighting done
in Sydney. Since he had been in office he had restricted
licenses in a great number of places; he had been in hot
water for refusing to grant licenses in the country. He
had been ill-disposed to allowing boxing contests to dis-
turb these quiet country towns, and to attract thereto a
number of men who in some cases were not importations
which were desirable in these quiet neighbourhoods. Like
Sir Thomas, he was no Puritan, he believed in innocent
diversions; but he thought some places should be pre-
served from such shows.
He had free admission to a front seat in the Stadium.
He had been there once or twice when boxing exhibitions
were being given for charitable or patriotic purposes. He
was quite with Professor Maclntyre when he spoke of the
difficulty of getting recruits from the ranks of those men.
A very small proportion of those who passed their time be-
tween the Stadium and the racecourse would go to the
front. His experience of recruiting had been that.it was
more successful in the country than in the city, because
in the former there were not so many diversions, but in
the city there were some men whom no appeal ever
reached, to come in contact with whom was
like meeting with a stone wall. This was a matter
for Cabinet; there were a number of interests to con-
sider which must be weighed in the balance. He could
not, in justice to his colleagues, make any statement now
which would prevent their dealing with the matter with
an open mind.
Professor Maclntyre: “'What other interests are in
the balance %■ ’


The Minister: ’ l l think you must know,
sons will be considered.”
These rea-
Professor Macintyre: 4 4 But what other interest would
you have to consider?”
The Minister; 4 1 leave that to your own personal
consideration. I will not be cross-examined. I can as-
sure you that this matter will be brought before the
Cabinet, anu a shorthand report of what has been said
shall be presented to the Premier. Nothing could please
me better than to see a prompt answer to the call of
those who are endeavouring to get recruits. I think we
have come to the end of our voluntary work. I only
hope the war also may soon come to an end.”
Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart asked for a copy of the
report of the Deputation when it should be ready.
To this the Minister agreed, and the Deputation, hav-
ing, through the President (Sir Thomas Anderson
Stuart), thanked Mr, Black for his. courteous reception,
withdrew.


' I
i t-V?/ /
I
K\s/\ 2-Qh


PRESIDENT ;
Sir
Thomas Anderson Stuart, m.d.,
DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Etc.
VICE-PRESIDENTS :
HON. SECRETARY :
HON. TREASURER ;
Professor Macintyre
Rev. C. E. James
M. Gotthelf. Esq.
Principal Thatcher
“KENSINGTON,”
CAMBRIDGE ST.,
STANMORE
“ELIZABETH BAY HOUSE,”
ONSLOW AVENUE,
DARLINGHURST
®lri» (ttmmril for (Etuir anti HJnral
A&MturmwtL
September 1st, 1916
Dear Sir,
The Council, in forwarding this account of
its interview with Mr. George Black, Chief Secretary
of New South Wales, desires to direct attention far
and wide throughout Australia to the scandal caused
through the interference of sport with recruiting. It
hopes that the statements made by our representatives
may assist in forming a strong public opinion among
the citizens of Australia, under the pressure of which
the evil of our untimely devotion to sport may be
abated.
Signed on behalf of the Council
THOMAS ANDERSON STUART
President.
CHARLES E. JAMES,
Hon. Secretary.
