

THE COMMITTEE
FOR PROMOTING
THE EMIGRATION OF FEMALES
TO THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES,
CONSISTING OP
EDWARD FORSTER, Esq. F.R.S. Chairman.
THE BISHOP OF AUSTRALIA.
CHARLES HOLTE BRACEBRIDGE, Esq.
NADIR BAXTER, Esq.
WILLIAM CRAWFORD, Esq,
SAMUEL HOARE, Esq.
CHARLES LUSHINGTON, Esq. M.P.
THOMAS LEWIN, Esq,
GEORGE LONG, Esq.
CAPTAIN SIR EDWARD PARRY, R.N.
CAPTAIN DANIEL PRING, R.N.
HENRY WALTER PARKER, Esq.
JOHN PIRIE, Esq., Alderman.
JOHN S. REYNOLDS, Esq.
JOHN ABEL SMITH, Esq. M.P.
S. H. STERRY, Esq.
JOHN TAYLOR, Esq. F.R.S.
J. DENHAM PINNOCK, BSQu HIS MAJESTY’S ACSOTT-GENBB.AX. FOIL EBXIGXtATIOKT.
Hereby GIVE NOTICE, that Hrs Majesty’s Government, in order to encourage the
Emigration of Single Women to the Australian Colonies, with the view of reducing the great
disparity which exists there between the sexes, and of improving their social condition, has
authorized the Committee to grant
A FREE PASSAGE
TO SUCH
SINGLE WOMEN AND WIDOWS,
from 15 to 30 years of Age, as the Committee may ascertain to be of good health and character ,
and likely to conduct themselves with discretion and usefulness in the Colonies; the Committee are
therefore ready to receive the applications of Females whose industrious and moral habits entitle
them to the liberality of Government; to such the Committee can truly affirm the change from
their condition in England to the comfortable situations they are at once sure to obtain cannot but
prove highly advantageous; and those who persevere in a right course, not only in time obtain
liberal wages, but may look forward, in a country where the disparity between the sexes is so great,
to marry under circumstances of provision and comfort, far beyond what they can hope for in the
crowded population of Great Britain. The Committee particularly recommend Servants accustomed
to the duties of a Farm-house in England to emigrate to these Colonies , the Colonial Farmers being
in great want of young women of steady and industrious habits to fill situations in their families;
House-Maids, and Servants of All-work, too, are much in demand; indeed all who proceed with
a determination to conduct themselves with industry and propriety, are certain to do well in
these prosperous Colonies.
The fine first class Ship “ AMELIA THOMPSON” 0f477 tons register,
will sail from the Thames for LAUNCESTON, in VAN-DIEMEN’S LAND,
on the TWENTY-EIGHTH of APRIL, next , [beyondwhich day'she ivill on
no account he detained ,) fitted up under the direction of the Emigration
Committee.— This beautiful Ship is nearly new , is unusually high between
Decks , affording accommodation and ventilation which render her most eligible
for this Service. The character and practical competency of the Commander
and Officers will be specially attended to and ascertained by the Committee-


All the accounts received by the Committee from VaN-Diemen’s Land, respecting the
females who had arrived there in the Ships sent out by them, are highly satisfactory and
encouraging; a suitable house, with every essential comfort, is provided ready for their reception
on arrival, they are received and protected by the Governor until placed in suitable'situations, and
a Committee of the most respectable Ladies in the Colony benevolently superintend and advise
them from the moment of their arrival, and see to their being placed in proper families , and every
well-conducted Female has obtained a situation immediately at good wages, in the choice of which,
they are perfectly at liberty to judge and decide for themselves. A large proportion have married
respectable settlers, and altogether the information received of the results of Emigration to young
women of discreet conduct, clearly demonstrates that all such have importantly benefited their
condition by proceeding to this healthy and prosperous Colony.
The Committee earnestly exhort all Females who may contemplate emigrating in the
Ships under their direction, to consider well the circumstances in which they stand, and to
ascertain beforehand whether any obstacles, as regards their friends or connexions, or arising
out of their own situation, are likely to prevent their proceeding when the time for the Ship’s departure
shall have arrived. The Committee will require, before they authorise the embarkation of any
candidate for emigration, to be reasonably satisfied that the party seeking their permission is
not likely to be prevented by any family or other circumstances, from carrying the intention she
professes into execution when the day of embarkation shall arrive. However highly the Com-
mittee may think of the advantages of Emigration to Australia, to Females of good principles and
industrious habits , they cautiously abstain from any thing approaching to solicitation with any
one—and expect that no deception shall be attempted to be practised upon them.
Married Agricultural Labourers, Shepherds, Gardeners, Millers and Farriers; and also
Mechanics and Artisans—particularly Blacksmiths, Carpenters, Joiners, Millwrights, Wheel-
wrights, Agricultural Implement Makers, Bricklayers, Builders, Plasterers, Stone Masons, Stone
Cutters, Painters, Sadlers and Harness Makers, Sawyers, &c. &c., were, by the last advices, in
great demand in the above Colony, and all such, provided they arc of industrious and steady
character , are certain of immediate and constant employment. With a view to enable such persons
to Emigrate to the. Australian Colonies, a married couple (when the Committee are satisfied
as to their character) will be conveyed out in the Ships fitted under their direction, at a charge of
JPIO only, beyond the aid afforded by Government; Children under 5 years old will be charged
£5 each, and those above that age £1 per year in addition, but Daughters above 12 years old, when
accompanying their parents, will be allowed a free passage; Infants also under one year, will not
he charged for. In order to preserve perfect cleanliness and comfort on the voyage, new bedding
will he provided for the use of the passengers , and two distinct sleeping apartments will he fitted
up, in one of which the Male passengers will be accommodated, and the Females in the other.
An experienced Surgeon and Matrons will accompany the Emigrants in order to watch
over their health, and to secure the protection and comfort of all during the voyage.
All particulars may be known, the necessary advice and information obtained, and
the Government assistance arranged, by applying, either personally or by letter, to
Mr. JOHN MARSHALL, Agent to the Committee, 26, Birchin Lane, Cornhill, London; if by
letter, it must be sent to him under cover, addressed “ To the Under Secretary of State, Colonial
Department , London.” It will be necessary that the application be accompanied by a satisfactory
certificate of character from a resident Minister of the Parish, or from some other respectable
Persons to whom the applicant may be well known; —the following is the Form of Certificate
required in every case:
“ WE, the Undersigned, hereby Certify that we have known
“a Candidate for Emigration to Van-Dieraen’s Land, for Years; and that we believe
‘her to be a Person of unblemished moral character, of industrious habits, and in our opinion likely to conduct
“herself with propriety and usefulness in the above Colony.”
EDWARD FORSTER,
Chairman.
London , 20 th January , 183 G.


CLOTHING.
The Committee —in order to the preservation of Cleanliness and Health on the Voyage—
deem it proper to caution every person that they must be provided with Clothes sufficient for use
during the entire passage, as no washing can be allowed on board; the Committee deem the
following supply of Clothing, &c. essential, but the articles may be varied provided attention be
paid to quantity, especially as respects linen, &c.
As many Clothes must be put into a Small Bag as will serve for Four Weeks use, as the
boxes containing Apparel will, at intervals of Four Weeks, be brought on deck during the voyage,
when each Female must exchange the Clothes she has used for clean ones.
LIST OF OUTFIT
NECESSARY FOR USE DURING THE PASSAGE.
Bonnet —2 dark Caps—dark Gowns—l pair of Stays —2 Flannel Petticoats—6 pair of dark
Hose—l pair of good Shoes—lB Shifts—6 coarse Towels—l Cloak—6 Pocket Handkerchiefs—
-4 dark Aprons—6 Night Gowns —12 Night Caps—l strong Bag —2 Combs—Soap—l small Knife
and Fork —1 Table and Tea Spoon—l Pewter or Tin Plate—l pint Tin Pot —1 half-pint Tin
Panakin —1 Work Bag, with Appurtenances.
The Apparel each Female may have beyond what she may require during the Voyage,
(and the better they are supplied with good, plain, useful Clothes, the more to their advantage in
the Colony), must be packed up in boxes, not larger than will just contain them, and the Name of
the Owner must be put on their respective Bags and Boxes in a durable manner. All the packages
containing Clothes not required for use during the first Four Weeks, must he sent to the St. Katharine
Steam Packet Wharf\ below the Tower , Three days before the sailing of the Vessel, and the Committee
will cause them to be sent on board; and those Clothes will be stowed in the lower hold of the
Ship. Nothing hut necessaries for One Month's use on the Voyage, can be allowed to be placed
between the decks where the Females will sleep. —Every Female is requested to pay particular
attention to these Instructions, as their observance is absolutely essential to the general convenience
and comfort of all on board.
The Committee strongly recommend all, and especially such Females (of which there are
many) as can lay in a large supply of Clothing, by all means to do so. So important do the
Committee consider a liberal stock of Clothes to the comfort of each Emigrant in the Colony,
that they will grant room in the Ship free of charge, for all Luggage which contains only Wearing’
Apparel.
EDWARD FORSTER,
Chairman of the Committee,
By Authority: J, Hartnell, Fleet Street, Loudon, for His Majesty’s Stationery Office.


