

THE
WAY WE CIVILISE;
BLACK AND WHITE ;
THE NATIVE POLICE:
A SERIES OF ARTICLES AND LETTERS REPRINTED
FROM THE
“QUEENSLANDER.”
BRISBANE : PRINTED BY G. AND J, BLACK (LATE W. THORNe), EDWARD STREET*
18 80.
Ban




THE
WAY WE CIVILISE;
BLACK AKD WHITE;
THE NATIVE POLICE:
A SERIES OF ARTICLES AND LETTERS REPRINTED
FROM TEE
“QUEENSLANDER.”
J3EISBANB ; FEINTED BY G. AND J. STACK (LATE W. THOENE), EDWAED STEEET.
18 80.




THE WAY WE CIVILISE.
We republish in another column a letter originally printed in the
Coohtown Courier. The writer lays bai'e a painful sore in our system
of colonisation of which few of us are not conscious, but which we are
apt in sheer disgust to ignore altogether. He uses strong language,
but not stronger than that which is forced from every mau who retains
the ordinary feelings of humanity when brought in contact with the
sickening and brutal war of races that is carried on in our outside
settlements, especially those in the North. And there are special
reasons why this subject should be again brought under public notice,
so that we may at last adopt a line of conduct in dealing with the
wretched aborigines of the colony which may reflect less disgrace on
the community, and be more successful in saving our outside settlers
from molestation.
It is necessary, in order to make the majority of the community
understand the urgent necessity for reform, to dispense with apologetic
paraphrases. This, in plain language, is how we deal with the abori-
gines : On occupying new territory the aboriginal inhabitants are
treated in exactly the same way as the wild beasts or birds the settlers
may find there. Their lives and their property, the nets, canoes, and
weapons which represent as much labor to them as the stock and
buildings of the white settler, are held by the Europeans as being at
their absolute disposal. Their goods are taken, their children forcibly
stolen, their women carried away, entirely at the caprice of the white
men. The least show of resistance is answered by a rifle bullet; in
fact, the first introduction between blacks and whites is often marked
by the unprovoked murder of some of the former —in order to make
a commencement of the work .of “ civilising ” them. Little difference
is made between the treatment of blacks at first disposed to be friendly
and those who from the very outset assume a hostile attitude. As a
rule the blacks have been friendly at first, and the longer they have
endured provocation without retaliating the worse they have fared, for
the more ferocious savages have irspired some fear, and have therefore
been comparatively unmolested. In regard to these cowardly outrages,
the majority of settlers have been apparently influenced by the same
sort of feeling as that which guides men in their treatment of the
brute creation. Many, perhaps the majority, have stood aside in silent
disgust whilst these things were being done, actuated by the same
motives that keep humane men from shooting or molesting animals
which neither annoy nor are of service to them ; and a few have always
protested in the name of humanity against such treatment of human
beings, however degraded. But the protests of the minority have been
disregarded by the people of the settled districts ; the majority of
outsiders who take no part in the outrages have been [either apathetic,
or inclined to shield their companions, and the white brutes who fancied
the amusement, have murdered, ravished, and robbed the blacks with-
out let or hindrance. Not only have they been unchecked, but the
Government of the colony has been always at hand to save them from
the consequences of their crime. When the blacks, stung to retalia-
tion by outrages committed on their tribe, or hearing the fate of theip
neighbors, have taken the initiative and shed white blood, or speared
white men’s stock, the native police have been sent to “ disperse ”
them. What disperse means is well enough known. The wor4 hsg


been adopted into bush slang as a convenient euphuism for wholesale
massacre. Of this force we have already said that it is impossible to
write about it with patience. It is enough to say of it that this body,
organised and paid by us, is sent to do work which its officers are
forbidden to report in detail, and that a true record of its proceedings
would shame us before our fellow-countrymen in every part of the
British Empire. When the police have entered on the scene, the race
conflict goes on apace. It is a fitful war of extermination waged upon
the blacks, something after the fashion in which other settlers wage
war upon noxious wild beasts, the process diifering only in so far as
the victims, being human, are capable of a wider variety of suffering
than brutes. The savages, hunted from the places where they had been
accustomed to find food, driven into barren ranges, shot like wild dogs
at sight, retaliate when and how they can. They spear the white man’s
cattle and horses, and if by chance they succeed in overpowering an
unhappy European they exhaust their savage ingenuity in wreaking
their vengeance upon him, even mutilating the senseless body out of
which they have pounded the last breath of life. Murder and counter
murder, outrage repaid by violence, theft by robbery, so the dreary
tale continues, till at last the blacks, starved, cowed, and broken-
hearted, their numbers thinned, their courage overcome, submit to
their fate, and disease and liquor finish the work which we pay our
native police to begin.
This is the ordinary course of events, but occasionally a variation
occurs, and the process of quieting the blacks is unusually prolonged.
This is particularly the case in the North, where the blacks are more
determined, better armed, and have more mountain and scrub retreats
than in other parts of the colony. In the Cape York Peninsula the
race conflict has hardly diminished in intensity since the whites began
it by robbing and shooting the blacks on the occasion of the first rush
to the Palmer. The struggle has been obstinate and fierce, and although
an unusually large and costly body of police has been for years engaged
in exterminating the aborigines, and few whites miss a chance of
shooting any they may encounter, the strength of the tribes has not
been broken. No doubt their numbers have been greatly thinned, but
they have not been cowed. Consequently there is no part of Queens-
land in which more European lives have been lost, or where the bush is
so thoroughly unsafe for the single traveller. It is difficult to estimate
the extent of the loss that has been directly incurred, and still more
difficult.to calculate tho indirect injury suffered by the district. Pros-
pecting for minerals could only be carried on by well armed ]and
equipped parties —and this in itself has been a serious drawback to the
European miners. But the heaviest loss is being experienced now that
the mining excitement has subsided. Eor, as the writer to the Cook-
town paper says, there is plenty of good soil inviting settlement; but
how many men dare fix their home in the bush when they know that
neither their property nor their lives will be safe from the attacks of
desperate savages, whose natural cunning has been intensified by their
long struggle for life with the whites. Evidently settlement must be
delayed until the work of extermination is complete—a consummation
of which there is no present prospect —or until some more rational and
humane method of dealing with the blacks is adopted. It is surely
advisable, even at this the eleventh hour, to try the more creditable
alternative, and to see whether we cannot efface some portion at least


of the stain which attaches to us. We shall recur to this subject, and
indicate what in our opinion that alternative ought to be.—
Queenslander
May 1, 1880.
WHITE AND BLACK.
Eetebting to the subject of the treatment ot native blacks by outside
settlers and the Native Police, we propose now to indicate the manner
in which a reform could be effected. Before doing so, however, wo
must notice the letter of a correspondent who, under the signature of
“ Never Never,” writes to justify the conduct of the whites. The
letter is valuable, because the writer, putting his thoughts on paper,
in a frank spirit, proves the accuracy of the description we gave of the
attitude assumed by the whites towards the blacks. We compared
the spirit in which they acted to that which animates men in dealing
with the brute creation. Our correspondent, quite unconsciously,
illustrates our meaning when he says of the natives, “ And being a use-
less race, what does it matter what they suffer any more than the dis-
tinguished philanthropist who w’rites in this behalf cares for the
wounded half-dead pigeon he tortures at his shooting matches.” It
never seems to strike him, any more than it apparently strikes hun-
dreds of men accustomed to deal wdtb blacks, that the fact that they
are men and women and not pigeons should influence their conduct.
And this extraordinary obtuseness of the moral sense is fostered by
the employment of a force like the Native Police, which is used to
hunt down these human beings as if they were dingoes. The bushman
who shoots a blackfellow to try the range of his rifle —as was done by
members of the early exploring parties.who searched Trinity Bay for
a road to the Hodgkinson—has little remorse for doing that which the
Government maintains and pays a force to do. No wonder our corres-
pondent complains of our “ vilification ” of the outside settlers when
we apply the term murder to such an act as is described above. We
recognise the wonderful effect of custom on the moral sense, and we no
more expect a bushman, accustomed to “ dispersals,” to understand the
feeling with which the deed is regarded by most civilised men than we
look for an expression of pity from a terrier engaged in torturing a
wounded rat. Such men have lost the great lesson of civilisation which
teaches us that there is some other Jaw than that of brute force, and
that the weakness of any race of our fellow-men does not justify us in
dealing with them as the mere caprice of the moment dictates.
However, these generalisations are only useful in so far as they serve
to point out to the great bulk of the Queensland colonists the real
nature of the system which they, through their Legislature, sanction
and uphold. They have not descended to the moral level exemplified
in the letter from which we quote, and we have little fear that we shall
fail in enlisting their sympathies when ive convince them of the reality
of the evils which we desire to check. We cannot of course argue first
principles over again, and we shall assume that murder, rape, and rob-
bery are crimes whether the victims be black or white. And, that
being understood, we must explain further that we entertain no such
preposterous idea as that the settlement of the colony is an evil deed
which ought to be undone. Nor do we wish to be understood as ob-
jecting to the slaying of blacks in defence of the lives or property of
settlers. We acknowledge that in many cases the occupation of a
tract of country by the whites cannot be effected except at the cost of


a struggle with the aborigines, and wherever that is the case the shoots
ing of blacks is inevitable. But we maintain that the struggle might
be prevented in most cases, and might be diminished in all, if entered
upon in a more rational and humane fashion. We assert that the
unchecked license indulged in by some of the white settlers, and the
systematic barbarities practised by the Native Police intensify the
resistance of the blacks into a struggle of absolute despair, and that in
the conflict the white man sinks to such a level that he only outshines
the black savage by the greater ferocity he displays. And this conduct
is as foolish as it is criminal, for the blacks speedily discover the supe-
riority of the whites, and would, if permitted, in most cases be willing
enough to submit to their occupation of the country, and careful to
avoid meddling with them. But they are goaded to such a state of
desperation by the promiscuous massacres perpetrated by the police,
and the outrages of some of the settlers, that despair lends them the
courage to continue the hopeless war, and they go on spearing cattle
and clubbing solitary travellers because they find that they have
nothing to hope for by abstaining from such practices. The reform to
be effected would be the abandonment of the irrational method we
now pursue. For the Native Police we would substitute a force
composed mainly of white men, assisted by black trackers. The
change is necessary, because one great cause of the atrocities
committed by the force is due to the fact that the trained savages vho
compose it are let loose to gratify their thirst for blood and cruelty in
the presence generally of only one white man, who having no European
witnesses of his conduct hounds on his men, and often joins in the
perpetration of their most revolting cruelties. The tone of our
correspondent’s letter gives an inkling of how an ordinary white man’s
conscience may be seared and his nature hardened by familiarity with
the scenes of bloodshed in the bush. But it can give no idea of the
awful depth of brutality to which even an educated European can
descend when engaged in a business which keeps him mainly employed
in superintending massacres perpetrated by armed savages on mobs of
nearly helpless men and women, away from any control or witness,
and free to obey the dictates of the worst passions of human nature.
The white police, consisting, of course, of good bushmen, should be
employed in country where the blacks and whites are, or are likely to
be, in conflict. Their duty should be to repress any outrage by the
blacks, and for that purpose they should have the same license that is
accorded to any hostile force in time of war; these efibrts being
directed in the first place to the capture and punishment of offending
individuals among the blacks, and, if that prove impossible, the
punishment of the guilty tribe. But the officers in command should
be compelled to report their operations, and they should rigorously
abstain from touching or molesting blacks who are quiet and do not
meddle with the whites; and they should be further required to
protect the blacks from unnecessary molestation by the whites, and be
armed, if necessary, with special powers for the purpose.
Such a force might be more expensive than the present one, but it
would cost the country indirectly less, for it would speedily pacify
whole districts in which constant and heavy losses are being endured
by the settlers. We must leave the explanation of minuter details to
another occasion, but we have said enough to indicate the broad
nature of the reform we advocate. That its expense will be no bar to


its adoption we feel convinced, if the bulk of the colonists come to
realise the nature of the system they now adopt in all its naked
horrors. Our correspondent remarks, “ Our policy towards the blacks
is bad, but it is only the game played all over the world.” We deny
his statement; but, even if it were so, it would still leave us in a
unique position. No other settlers have to deal with a race of
savages so thoroughly helpless in face of the white man’s weapons as
our blacks. The Dutch Boer may deal cruelly with the Kaffirs who
surround him, but at least he defies the assegais of a valiant race of
barbarians who can wage war with him on something like equal terms.
He may be cruel, but at least he is not a coward. There is an
irresistible tendency in human nature to regard with a deeper con-
tempt the criminal who takes a cowardly advantage of his victim, than
the one who risks his own skin in open conflict. Few readers of
Charles Dickens’ “ Oliver Twist ” have not felt that the most
contemptible figure in the group of thieves to which they are intro-
duced is the wretched sneak on the “ kinchin lay,” who confines him-
self to robbing little children too feeble to resist and too simple to
seek for assistance. If we are told that the cruelties practised on our
blacks are merely incidents of the struggle carried on with the natives
in all parts of the world, we yet plead for a reform. We are at least
adding a fresh element of disgrace to the universal horror; for if all
the world is practising violent wrong doing, in its dealing with inferior
races, we alone have descended to the “ kinchin lay ” of extermination.
Queenslander
May 8, 1880.
We make no apology for returning tothe subject of the manner in
which the people of this colony deal with its aboriginal inhabitants.
We are determined that the public shall understand what they are
doing, and that if no attempt is made at a reform the refusal shall come
from people who thoroughly comprehend their responsibility. As far
as we are able we shall tear away the veil with which those who know
what our system is have hitherto kept it covered, and remove the
ignorance in which a considerable portion of the public have been
content to remain.
In order to let every side of the question be thoroughly ventilated,
we have thrown open our columns to correspondence on the subject,
and we have put forward a basis for a reform of the police system.
For this purpose we have proposed that the police employed to regulate
the natives shall consist of white men, accustomed to the bush, assisted
by black trackers. Their duties should be to fight the blacks while in
a state of open war against the white settlers who occupy the country;
to protect them from molestation by the whites when quiet, and to
bring to justice the perpetrators of the many fiendish outrages com-
mitted by Europeans on helpless and unoffending blacks ; and to punish
with discriminating rigor injuries committed by the blacks on the
settlers. So far we haye not entered into details of how the work
should be done; we wish first to establish the practicability of organis-
ing such a white force. A correspondent who, under the signature of
“ Never Never,” has undertaken to justify the treatment of black
human beings as if they were “ pigeons,” has declared that our plan is
not feasible. He alleges—(l) That good bushmen would be unwilling
to join such a force, one that has lately been manned by blackfellows;
(2) that the idea of using white police for the purpose is “ wildly


absurd,” and that in the generality of districts they could not follow
the blacks ; (3) that the expense of the force would be enormous, that
it would be equal to the nucleus of a standing army, and that it would
be ruined by long spells of idleness. There are some subsidiary objec-
tions which need not be noticed. The objection that a system compel-
ling officers to report their operations, instead of forbidding them to do
so as at present, would lead to disorganisation of the force, was probably
a mere slip of the pen. We onlypropose to apply the regulation in
force in every other police, quasi-military, or military body employed
in the British dominions, with the sole exception of the Queensland
native police.
Taking the objections seriatim, the first one can be speedily answered.
The best bushmen in the colony would gladly join such a force as we
project, simply because it would be desirable to offer good wages for
reliable men—a very few of the right sort would do a great deal of the
required work —and the employment would be honorable, and not de-
grading as at present. The objection that bushmen would not join a
force that has been manned by black boys does not apply, because the
change we project would practically create a new force. Besides, if it
were not so, did our correspondent ever yet hear of a bushman refusing
to undertake any kind of bush work simply because it had been pre-
viously performed by an aboriginal black boy ? The second objection,
that the idea of employing a white force is “ wildly absurd,” is a rather
sweeping statement. Mr. William Miles is a very old bushman, and
has been one of far wider experience probably than our correspondent,
even so far back as 1868. He did not consider such a project, when
mooted by Dr. Challinor, “ wildly absurd,” but approved of it; and the
Hon. W. H. Walsh, acquainted with the value both of mangrove scrub
and mountains as shelters for wild blacks, emphatically declared that
white men were far more effective in punishing blacks than the Native
Police. (“Hansard,” vol. VI. pp. 949—963.) We are content to
place assertion against assertion, adding to it that even by the very lax
regulations of the Native Police force the white officers are supposed to
accompany their troopers, and that as a matter of fact the country in
which the former cannot travel is not penetrated by the latter. The
third objection, that the cost of such a force would be enormous, that
it would equal the nucleus of a standing army, and that it would be
demoralised by too long spells of idleness, is compounded of statements
mutually destructive. If the nucleus of a standing army were employed,
their numbers would be so greatly in excess of what would be required
for the work to be done that they might be demoralised by idleness.
But what sane man would suggest the employment of so many P A
considerable number would be required in a newly-occupied district,
where blacks and whites were in a state of open war, but this would
only be for a short time. A very brief experience of the futility of
resistance, and the knowledge that while every act of hostility against
the whites would be speedily and sternly checked, they would be care-
fully protected from injury and molestation while peaceable, would
speedily make the blacks ready to submit. If only on the assumption
that the blacks have as much intelligence as a dog this view must be
correct, and as far as we know in every place where such a system has
been attempted it has been thoroughly successful. Once this condition
was established, a very small force would only be needed to preserve
the peace.


But we have no need to depend on theory in this matter ;we have
the experience of South Australia to rely on. Our neighbours in that
colony have kept their hands clean, while ours are foully bestained
with blood. They have their reward. In their territory very few
white settlers lose their lives or property by attacks from the native
blacks ; our loss is enormously more heavy than theirs. Yes, hut—we
shall be told— the South Australians go to great and unnecessary
expense in dealing with the aboriginals. That they Vre unnecessarily
punctilious, and go further than we recommend, we are prepared to
admit. They employ a white, not a black force, and they transport
aboriginal offenders long distances to gaol. But, on turning to the
statistics of the two colonies, the one for 1878, the other for 1878-9,
the most nearly corresponding periods that we can select, we find that
in Queensland the total cost of every description of police was £-87,313,
and in South Australia only £66,201. And this in spite of the South
Australians having a larger white population to regulate, and a larger
extent of sparsely occupied bush than ourselves. Evidently, the plan
of employing white protectors to deal with the aborigines is not merely
more effectual in securing the safety of the settlers, but very much
cheaper than our plan. We have shown that the application of the
plainest principles of common sense ought to dictate an alteration of
our present system ; we- now adduce the evidence of experience to
show how ineffective and costly it is in comparison with a more
rational plan. We speak nothing now of humanity. We address this
argument mainly to those whose sense of right and wrong has been
perverted by familiarity with our diabolical customs.
In conclusion, we shall quote the testimony of the Hon. W. H.
Walsh from the “Hansard,” to w r hich reference has already been
made. It is valuable as that of a thoroughly practical bushman and
squatter who has occupied country teeming with the fiercest blacks,
and who has had to do it without any police protection at all. What
he said then of the southern coast districts will apply now to the
country of the north and west. He told the House that he had
agitated for the inauguration of the black police system in Queensland,
and agitated unceasingly till he got them in his own neighbourhood.
And this was his experience as he told Parliament: —“ He asserted
solemnly that the number of casualties that occurred, and the number
of deaths that took place from collisions with the blacks after the native
police arrived in the Wide Bay and Burnett districts, exceeded three
times what they had been before.” —i
Queenslander
May 29, 1880.
We are glad to find that correspondents from different districts are
taking part in the discussion we have invited on the relations between
the blacks and whites in the colony. At first, of course, we had the
class of writers referred to in the letter signed “ Pioneer,” which
appears in this issue ; men who dispose of the whole question by
rebuking our presumption for writing on a subject with which they are
so thoroughly familiar, and of which we know so little! This plan has
been successful on previous occasions when the subject was under
discussion, and it has been naturally enough adopted this time. Bub
we were not to be so readily silenced; the discussion is passing into
its second stage. Men well qualified by their experience to judge*
their value are now criticising our proposals. We did not, of course,
suppose that they would be accepted without cavil, even by who
B


think and who are not satisfied with the present relations between the
races. We are as glad, therefore, to welcome calm and rational
criticism,such as was contained in the letter signed “North Gregory,”
as the cordial approval of our present correspondent, “ Pioneer.”
Both writers, we may state, are bushmen intimately acquainted with the
outside country, and who have had much experience among wild blacks.
Our correspondent “ North Gregory ” complains that we make our
accusations of cruelty against white settlers and the black police in too
sweeping a fashion. The complaint is not a just one. We began by
drawing a clear distinction between the small section of settlers who
do act with barbarity, the majority who do nothing, and the other
minority who actively protest. Our contention is that the second
class is equally guilty with the first one. Those who passively
tolerate cruelty and murder, committed almost in their presence, con-
done and share the crime. And we do not exempt the much-quoted
townsman “ sitting in his arm chair.”
Every resident of Brisbane who, becoming aware of what is going on,
neglects to do what he can in his capacity as citizen and voter to wipe
out the stain which rests on the whole colony, shares the disgrace of it.
And this is particularly the case in regard to the Native Police. The
officer of that force who does not permit brutality in the execution of
his duty must be a man of very exceptional firmness of character. He
is sent out in charge of savages, naturally prone to cruelty, who have
been trained to disregard the few checks their native customs place
upon indiscriminate murder, who have had no moral code of any kind
substituted for it, and who are so armed and equipped as to give them
absolute mastery over the lives and persons of their victims. His duty
is to use these savages to keep the wild blacks quiet by shooting them
when they are troublesome to the settlers, or w'hen the latter fear they
may become troublesome. This is the simple account of his business.
He is not permitted to describe what he does, he knows that he has
very doubtful legal sanction for any of his actions, but at the same
time he is assured that if he keeps the blacks quiet no questions will
be asked, and the authorities will remain obstinately deaf to all reports
of his proceedings. He may be ever so anxious to protect the blacks
from unprovoked aggression, but he is absolutely powerless to restrain
any white brute who chooses to madden a tribe by cruel and unpro-
voked injury. The officer’s duty is simply to shoot the savages down,
when in their madness they seem likely to become dangerous, and to
save the white aggressor from the consequences of his own acts.
When we write in an indignant strain of actions like these, we never
forget that the police themselves are only very partly to blame; the
deeds are done by the Government and Parliament of Queensland, who
set them about their business. When Judge Jefferies held his “ bloody
assize ” in the west of England the blame of the foul deed was not
allowed to rest on the hangman who suspended the victims, but on the
King and his officers who ordered the legal massacre to he carried out.
Our correspondent further misunderstands us when he supposes that
we are seeking to make the blacks moral. Our aim is a much simpler
one. We desire to make peace between the races, and stop the sicken-
ing conflict going on. Any attempt to ameliorate the moral and mental
condition of the savages themselves is quite another question. Let us
give them a fair chance of life before we talk of civilising them. And
we venture to say that he misunderstands the blacks themselves when


he speaks of the manner in which they regard forcible and violent
assaults on their women. It is necessary to be explicit on this point
or the real bearing of some of the incidents we have narrated will be
lost. It is true that the aboriginal women have no sense of chastity
according to our meaning of the word, and it is equally true that the
aboriginal men will offer their women, not exactly to chance strangers,
but to visitors whom they are anxious to please. Hiring out women
for purposes of prostitution is one of the civilised customs the blacks
learn from white Christians. But this custom of regarding women as
the property of men, to be given or 'ent to a friend or an honored
guest, is one that has been at some time or other prevalent amongst
almost every people in the world, and people who were mentally and
morally far above our wretched savages. It was not unknown to the
ancient Greeks, and it was common in many of the semi-civilised coun-
tries of Asia; but at no time did this custom prevent the forcible ab-
duction of a woman being regarded as the most exasperating insult one
man or one tribe could offer to another. And it is so with the blacks.
If anyone will take the trouble to enquire concerning the cause of
most of their bitterest tribal quarrels, he will find they generally arise
from the forcible abduction of women. It is a point of honor with a
black man to seize a woman belonging to his enemies, but it is equally
a point of honor with the latter fo revenge the insult, if possible, with
the blood of the offender, The custom, therefore, that prevails among
the black police of taking gins from the tribes by force—or threats of
force —accompanied, as the action often is, by every aggravation and
insult possible, rankles deeply in the minds of the aborigines. They
are subjected to the direst indignity which they as individuals or a
tribe can suffer, and are spurred on to revenge themselves on some
unprotected white—in their eyes a member of the tribe that injured
them. Individuals among the settlers occasionally do the same thing,
and create much bad blood. The intercourse which takes place be-
tween the races after the blacks are “in ” on the stations is quite a
different matter. It is simply prostitution —a particularly loathsome
form of the vice, but having no bearing on the question of which we
are treating.
In conclusion, we desire to point out that a force such as we have
described in previous articles could regulate evils like these. In newly
occupied districts, when the first stage had passed, and the blacks,
recognising the impossibility of resisting the white man’s weapons,
were inclined to submit to the presence of settlers, it would be neces-
sary to watch vigilantly that no unnecessary provocation were given
them. Having had, as would probably be the case, unmistakable proof
of the power of the police to punish them, it would be necessary in the
next place to induce them to rely on the police for protection against
injury. Ve are assuming that the body to be substituted for the pre-
sent one will be legalised by special enactment. The same law could
contain a short and simple code, authorising a certain scale of punish-
ments for white men molesting the blacks. It would be evidently
absurd to bring all these offences under the common law, and anything
short of homicide might be punished by such tines and short terms of
imprisonment as a bench of magistrates could inflict. But in all cases
the fine or a part of it should be paid to the injured individual or tribe,
in the form of blankets, tomahawks, flour, or some article they could
appreciate. Our correspondent, “ North Gregory,” is quite right iq


saying that it is only by inspiring fear and respect we can influence
adult blacks. That is the basis of the system we wish to apply to
them, and the ground on which we hope to see them brought under
control —equally to the advantage of the pioneers and of the blacks
themselves —by a police capable of punishing offenders among them, but
Queenslander
equally able to protect the innocent and peaceful. —(
June 19, 1880.
The correspondence on the aboriginal question serves to illustrate
pretty fully the differing opinions on the subject held by settlers in
various parts of the colony. Writers opposed to our view's generally
take the same line in commenting on the facts we have brought for-
ward ; they declare that the statements are either not true or grossly
exaggerated. To this we can give but one answer —their truth may be
investigated by a process which the government can adopt if it pleases.
We have received just as many confirmations as denials of our state-
ments, and may fairly claim to have made out a strong primd facie case
for a thorough enquiry.
But, if we find differences in the views of our correspondents, there
is also a remarkable unanimity on some essential points. Hardly a
writer ventures to assert that our treatment of the blacks is a matter
that does not need apology. One of our correspondents, “ North
Gregory,” who may be taken as an exponent of those who seem to be
arrayed against us, we claim as on our side in every essential point.
He says that the plan of making the Native Police a secret service has
led to abuses ; we have insisted on the same view throughout our
argument, He declares that it would be better to throw aside all pre-
tence of dealing with aborigines according to English law, and “ then
we may set about devising some better scheme for subduing them.”
This is just our contention —the very summary of the reform we desire
to effect. The Native Police are, he points out, sent into the bush
with impracticable instructions ; threatened with the hangman if they
do what their superiors expect but do not tell them to do, and certain
of ignominious dismissal from the service if they fail in obeying their
understood instructions. This, we have repeated again and again, is
the very plague-spot of our system —-the core from which all its
abominations proceed. And these being our points of agreement,
wherein do we differ ? Simply in the amount of credibility to be
attached to particular narratives of cruelty and bloodshed which have
appeared in our columns. And yet the same writer who denies these
admits that the “ savage ferocity” of the black troopers is a necessary
quality in any force dealing with the blacks. More than that, he
speaks of the “ inevitable consequences ”of our occupation of the
country as something that ought, if possible, to be kept from the
knowledge of our townspeople —especially of our women and children.
It is just at this point that we find ourselves at variance. We deny
that there are any i; inevitable” consequences which need be concealed.
There is nothing of which any people need be ashamed in taking pos-
session of a country like Australia, occupied only by a few thinly-
scattered hordes of savages without even the smallest rudiments of
civilisation. That they must suffer is certainly an “ inevitable con-
sequence.” They must be subdued. It is the law of the whole world
that the inferior race must submit to the stronger. We inflict death
and pain on the whole animal creation to provide ourselves with the


food we eat. But we hold the man guilty of a shameful crime who in
the exercise of his lawful mastery over the brutes inflicts on them
unnecessary pain and suffering. And if we, by common consent,
punish those who torture an animal, what plea have we to urge for the
horrible brutality with which we assert our mastery over creatures
lower in the scale of humanity than ourselves, but still men and women
able to feel and suffer in the same manner as we do ?In the form
that our cruelty assumes, in our vices, we acknowledge their humanity,
and yet we deny to them the plea for immunity from unnecessary
suffering which we admit on behalf of the brutes. That immunity
is the first claim we make on behalf of the blacks. We have argued,
and our opponents have admitted, that our system of dealing with them
leads to abuses of which the degree may be questioned but the exist-
ence cannot be denied. We ask for a reform, we are prepared to
show that reform is possible, and there are witnesses coming forward
in all parts of the colony to maintain the need for it and uphold its
practicability. Is our demand an unreasonable one P
We hope that the present session of Parliament will not pass over
without some practical effort being made in this direction, and some
positive reform initiated. If politicians will not admit the necessity
for doing something on what some of our critics are fond of calling
sentimental grounds, there is one very practical reason for action :
Our whole northern coast invites settlement, and there are scores of
rivers and bays where little groups of settlers might establish them-
selves. But everywhere the dread of the untamed blacks—almost
untamable by anything short of extermination under our system—acts
as a powerful deterrent. Under a more humane and rational system
this constant danger might be removed with comparative ease and
speed. And, if neither the sentiment of humanity nor the desire of
freeing our settlers from a constant source of danger will influence
our legislators, we have yet one more inducement to action to put
before them. They have, we hope and believe, some regard for the
good name of the colony, some desire to see it stand well in the
estimation of their countrymen in the mother country. The state-
ments we have made—the truth of which none know better than
those who most loudly denounce them—have gone before the great
tribunal of public opinion in the British empire. They may rest
assured that those who like outselves are determined to remove this
foul blot on the humanity of our race will not let the matter rest.
Any enquiry made, except through the stereotyped official forms
adopted by our police authorities to conceal the character of a branch
of the service, can only result in the discovery that our allegations
merely hint at the truth, which is much fouler than we have dared to
depict it. This appeal to Caesar will be pushed home, if justice and
redress are denied by the Parliament of Queensland. We assure
those well-meaning men who, having no personal knowledge on the
subject, prefer to listen to the comforting assurances of the supporters
of our system that we have drawn no exaggerated picture—that we
have stated very real and shameful facts. It will be better, far better,
for the neutral majority of the colonists to look into the matter for
themselves, and voluntarily inaugurate a reform of the abuse, before
both enquiry and reform are forced upon us by the indignation of our
own people—of a nation that will not knowingly permit such wrong-
doing, such base, cowardly, and brutal oppression as we practise on
the aborigines of Queensland. —
Queenslander
July 31,1880,


CIVILISING THE BLACKS.
In this column we propose to narrate a few incidents illustrating the relations
between whites and blacks in Queensland. We shall take every possible care that
nothing appears here but what is true —the plain unexaggerated statement of some-
thing that has actually occurred. But it is not always easy to get a true description
of these incidents. It is seldom, for instance, that any white spectator is allowed to
witness the manner in which tjie native police transact the business we pay them to
do, and they are strictly forbidden by their official superiors either to report their
proceedings or to describe in print the simplest occurrence with which they have been
officially connected. Moreover, men are naturally reluctant to confess in public
deeds which, though sanctioned by our Government and Parliament, and by the
public sentiment of a section of our colonists, are yet of a nature which would accord-
ing to the common law, bring them to the gallows. We do not, therefore, propose to
give names of people or localities. It would be unfair to single out individual
perpetrators of crime which we, as a community, tolerate and even encourage. Our
readers must trust to the care which we may fairly claim to have always exercised in
investigating the facts we have laid before them, and believe our assurance that we
shall be particularly careful not to add unnecessarily to the disgraceful tale we have
to tell. And we regret to add that for the reason we have given there is good cause
to believe that the real truth far exceeds anything they will read here. All that these
columns a will contain may be regarded as mere echoes of the shameful tragedy that
has been played since this colony was first founded, and which is continuing actively
at the present day, even at the very moment we write.
With these preliminary remarks we shall proceed to tell the story of Toby. This
was the name of a black lad, one of a tribe that had its headquarters on a well-known
Western station. In that particular tract of country rational humanity had quieted
the blacks. The tribe in question, finding how useless it was to contend with the
white man’s weapons, and not being unneessarily molested, soon “ came in,” and
their main camp was at the head station. The superintendent, a sensible man, had
made an arrangement with one of the blacks, a sort of head man in the tribe. If one
of them was guilty of any depredation he warned the head man that it had occurred
and demanded the surrender of the offender. He was always produced, even if the
tribe had some difficulty in hunting him up, for all knew the value to them of keep-
ing on good terms with the whites. When caught he was duly whipped in presence
of the whole assemblage of blacks and whites, the head man of the former agreeing
as a sort of assessor with the superintendent as to the amount of punishment. The
system answered admirably, and although there were sometimes hundreds of blacks
on the run they neither disturbed the cattle camps nor touched the shepherds’ huts.
But the station passed into other hands, and a new superintendent, who had none of
these *• d d Exeter Hall notions,” took charge. It happened that Kanakas were
introduced on the station about the time, and the blacks at first hardly knew what to
make of them, but afterwards became quite friendly with them. One evening Toby,
who was a bright young lad, and very useful in working the cattle, but who also
possessed a full share of the mischievousness common to growing lads, black and
white, took into his head to go with two other black lads to the hut oi a Kanaka shep-
herd, about a mile from the head station. What happened there is not very clear.
The Kanaka came into the head station declaring that they asked him for rations,
and were going to kill him ; but as he arrived with his boots on, and not at all blown,
it is not likely that three active young blacks would have let him escape so easily if
they had really meant mischief. It is probable that ho was timid, and the boys had
asked him for sugar, and that he became frightened, and they thought it a great bit
of fun. On examination, it appeared that his ration of sugar was gone—or at least
so much of it as a Kanaka would be likely to have left near the end of the week.
Undoubtedly Toby had offended, and the former superintendent would have given
him a crack with his whip when next he saw him. Toby evidently expected some-
thing of the kind, and, as was his custom when he had been in mischief, absented
himself for a week or two. On his return the blacks told Mr. that he was in
the camp, probably expecting that he would go down and give him his fair deserts.
The superintendent, however, telling the storekeeper, to accompany him, went to the
camp, and, seeing Toby there, spoke to him mildly, half jokingly, and warned him
not to do such a thing again. Then, as if he had dismissed the subject, he told him
to get the horses, for he would be wanted to go down to the cattle run. Toby cheer-
fully obeyed, and the three Started in the direction indicated, poo? Toby, in his joy


at being sb easily forgiven, chatting merrily. When out soiiie distaiidd, Mil. ■■ ■
quietly remarked, “ I am going to shoot you, Toby.” The black turned round smiling,
thinking this was some joke, and saw Mr. coolly pulling out his revolver. The
wretched boy, in an agony of sudden fear, crouched on his saddle, putting out his
hands and shrieking, “Baal shoot —baal shoot!” when his master sent a bullet
crashing through his brain. The two whites then returned leading the riderless horse.
This fact was much discussed in the neighborhood of Downs, as it was w'ell
known. Some people approved of the action, as being the best way of “ putting the
fear of God in the blacks,” and preventing them from at any future time doing
mischief; but the majority, though quite admitting the right of Mr. to deal as
he liked with a “ nigger,” were of opinion that it was rather a dirty transaction. The
Kanaka who was the aggrieved party was genuinely horror struck when lie heard of
the affair—but then he was only a South Sea Island savage.
On ■ Downs station there was a tribe of blacks who were quiet and quite
harmless. But, in a large tract of desert country to the north of it, there
was another tribe hostile to them, and to the whites. These “ myalls ” occasionally
made a raid on Downs, and plundered huts, &c., but the station blacks, who
feared and disliked them, were always ready to warn the whites of their coming.
After one of their raids, the superintendent sent for the native police. Sub-inspector
- arrived with his troopers, and started out for the scene of the depredation.
A young gentleman who was on the station acquiring “ colonial experience” thought
he would like to add to it by accompanying the police on an expedition which
appeared to him, naturally enough, as a legitimate act of war. The party started,
and they got on the tracks of the “ myalls ” —tracks which the troopers could follow
as easily as an ordinary white man can follow a beaten road. The track led out into
the desert, an uncomfortable region of sand and spinifex, where water was doubtful,
and little food could be got for the police horses. Still, if the blacks who had made
the raid were to be punished, it would be necessary to follow them there. The track
led through a spur of a low precipitous range of hills, containing rock-surrounded
pockets, from which escape would be difficult to any human beings penned up in
them. Near one of these places the party espied a small troop of blacks, and to the
astonishment of the new chum, who recognised them as belonging to the station
tribe, and quite innocent of any outrage, the officer gave the word to the troopers to
run them in to the pocket. They succeeded in penning up a small group of defence-
less creatures who were shouting appeals for mercy to the sub-inspector by name.
The new chum, who had in his astonishment followed the example of the others and
dismounted, cried out to the sub-inspector, “ Why, Mr, , these are our blacks.”
The answer he got was an angry “ Stoop down, d n you,” for he was in the
range of the sub-inspector, who was anxious to try the quality of a new sporting
rifle he had purchased, and was taking deliberate aim at a wretched creature who
was making frantic attempts to escape by clambering up the naked rock. The
inspector’s rifle was a good one, and his target was soon writhing in his death agony
on the sand. The troopers “ got ” two more of the little group ; the rest escaped.
Then they returned home. They had done the work for which the State paid them—
they had shot some blacks. To be sure they had not gone near the real offender, and
they had exasperated a friendly tribe, but that is a matter with which we, their
employers, do not concern ourselves.
On- Downs Station the blacks were “troublesome.” How they became so
does not concern this particular narrative, but they had taken some sheep. The
native police were not available, but the partners who owned and managed the station
got a trusted man and a neighbor who was willing to help them, and they started
out to look for the offenders. They were fortunate enough to come across a mob of
blacks away from the scrub, just before evening. The affair was quite a successful
one. The blacks were paralysed with fear ; some took to trees, some lay down to
await their fate, others attempted to fly. Men on good stock-horses, quick to turn
and pursue a quarry, armed with revolvers, can “get” a good many under these
circumstances. They rode down the flying ones, and then returned quietly to
practise shooting on the blacks perched in the trees. Altogether they managed to
dispose of twenty-two, and then they camped at a neighboring waterhole, had their
supper, and slept as men sleep who have done a good day’s work. In the morning
they saddled up to go home, but one of the number, a prudent one, remarked, “We
ought to see that we have made an end of those .” Accordingly he went care-
fully over the scene. Most of the blacks were stone dead ; some were groaning iu
their last agonies j a few who had not been mortally wounded seemed to be reviving.
Blacks have a wonderful capacity for enduring severe wounds and recovering from


the effects of them. Mr. —, knowing this, carefully finished each one of the
groaning wretches who looked as if he might revive. Those that were evidently
dying he left, alone. And, as revolver cartridges cost, money, he economically
battered in their temples with one of the blacks’ clubs that had been left on the
field of battle (?). — <
Queenslander
May 15, 1880.
11.
A Western squatter, taking Ins wife out to his station, had in his household two
blacks, husband and wife. The wife, a young girl, came from New South Wales, and
having been brought up from childhood among white people could speak no other
language than English, and had in all respects the habits of an English girl of the
lower classes. She was an excellent servant, could sew neatly and well, cooked fairly,
and was neat and clean in her person and habits. Her “ benjemau,” Starlight, was
also a civilised black, spoke English well and correctly, was a good stockman, and
very handy with horses. The pair were hired at fair wages, and made as good use
of their money as any of the white employes on the station. After serving the
squatter who took them out west for a while, Starlight and his wife signed an agree-
ment with one of his neighbors for, we believe, an advanced rate of wages. Their
new employer was unmarried, and a number of young men were about the station.
Polly, the black girl, was a source of great amusement to the yvhole crowd. She had
no objection to flirtation, and probably enjoyed the evident jealousy of her “ benje-
man.” For, strange as it must appear to some supporters of our present system of
dealing with them, it is nevertheless a fact that the blacks are very much like the rest
of us, and have the audacity to cherish similar sentiments. One evening Starlight
returned home in the dusk from a hard day’s work, and he heard cries coming from
an outbuilding belonging to the head station. The cries were those of his wife —or
gin ”we shall call her. He forgot that being a black he ought not to be a man, and
hastened to the spot. There he saw one of the young overseers engaged in what, if
she had been a white girl, would have been called a criminal assault on Polly. Still
forgetting himself, he threw himself upon the white overseer and grappled with him.
They struggled and fell. Starlight reaching his hand out seized a shear blade lying
on the ground, and scored his antagonist’s shoulder. It was a flesh wound, but the
black, the moment he had inflicted it knew what his fate would be, and let go his
grip of the overseer, who cried out, “ I am stabbed,” to the group of men who,
attracted by the noise, hurried to the spot. Starlight slipped away from them in the
gathering darkness, and escaped into the thick growing timber. A council of war at
the head-station came to the conclusion that a black who had, under any provocation,
raised his hand against a white ought not to live. They accordingly offered the
half-wild blacks camped at the head station a reward for his capture. This the
savages readily agreed to effect, for they knew he was unarmed, and being a stranger
to them they had no pity for him. Accordingly they went away next day, and re-
turned triumphantly. They did nob bring Starlight, but they had caught him.
Finding, however, some difficulty in bringing in their prisoner, they had hamstrung
him, and he was then lying at the disposal of the whites, if they chose to go to the
spot. However, the people of the station were spared the trouble of finishing their
work. Sub-inspector and his troopers arrived that afternoon, and on being
informed of the circumstances he very obligingly sent a couple of the “ boys ” with
their rifles, who, being led to the spot by the station blacks, ended Starlight’s agony
by blowing out his brains. The wounded overseer was well in a week.
It is wonderful what vitality the blacks possess. Mr. X., superintendent of
Downs, was riding with his storekeeper over an almost unused end of the run —poor
country, with spinifex growing on it. Suddenly he espied the tracks of a blackfellow.
There were some ‘‘myalls’’ in the ranges not far distant, but they had committed
no outrage of any kind, and this was probably the track of one. Soon Mr. X.’s
quick eyes espied a black in the long spinifex, endeavouring to pass himself off for a
blackened stump —a manoeuvre often more successful than those who have not seen
it practised would believe. “Ha, ha! there he is,” he laughed, as he rode towards
the object. It was an old grizzled black, bent with growing infirmity, and he had a
nulla in his hand. The poor old creature held out his hands deprecatingly, and jab-
bered in his fear. Mr. X. motioned him to run, which, after a moment’s hesitation, he
did. The superintendent was a sportsman, and did not care about shooting his game
sitting. As the old black ran, he followed, putting his horse into an easy canter,
and tried a snap shot with his revolver. The ball evidently pierced the old man’s
back, as the bright red blood began to flow. He stopped and turned again, begging
for life with beseeching gesture. Mr. X, who had reined up his horse, again mo


tioned the game to run. The old creature tottered on, panting hard, the blood run*
ning freely down his body. Mr. X. tried another snap shot, again successfully. The
old man staggered—then recovering himself, turned and flung his nulla with such
unexpected force that it went singing past the ears of his pursuer. This angered
Mr. X., who had not up to that time lost his good humor, and he spurred his horse
after the old creature, who was wildly staggering on, and fired his third shot. This
brought the game down, and as the two men sat on their horses ’ watching the final
convulsions of the old blackfellovv lying on the ground before them, Mr. X remarked
to his companion, “ Isn’t it wonderful what strength they have P fancy that old ■
running on with two bullets through his loins !”~
Queenslander
May 22, 1880.
111.
It has been objected that the incidents narrated in this column constitute a
Newgate Calendar. This is true to a certain extent. The crimes recorded equal in
atrocity those described in the publication mentioned. But the Newgate Calendar
is a list of crimes which have been punished, and against which the strong hand of
the law is always directed. This column contains a record of crimes which are not
punished, and which the administrators of the law in the colony tacitly sanction. It
is one thing to publish such incidents for the mere purpose of satisfying a morbid
curiosity, and another when the publication is intended to arouse the public con-
science in order to put a stop to the continual perpetration of the foulest outrages.
The truth of the statements we have made and are making is also questioned. We
were prepared for the denial. At the present time we are only able to say that
every incident narrated has been accepted on good authority, and is, we believe, as
true as any other statement of fact appearing in this journal.
With regard to the story of Toby, which our correspondent “Never Never”
declares false from internal evidence, we are authorised by our informant to say
that if the law officers of the Crown are willing to take action in the matter ho is
prepared to supply them with the name of the man who shot Toby, of his com-
panion who saw him do it, and the place and date of the occurrence. If the public
really believe that the incidents narrated here .are mere fictions or exaggerations,
and that there is consequently no necessity for reforming our system of dealing with
the blacks, the question can easily be settled. A Royal Commission, armed with
power to grant indemnity to witnesses, similar to the one appointed to investigate
the Trades Union outrages at Sheffield, and authorised to tiaiel"from place to place
to collect evidence, would speedily convince the most sceptical that this record is bub
a faint indication of the shameful truth. If such a commission is appointed we shall
be happy to furnish its members with data to commence their investigations.
Until then we shall continue to withhold names of persons and places. No ordinary
commission can possibly elicit the truth, because eye-witnesses are not likely to give
evidence of occurrences which would certainly endanger their necks and those of
their acquaintances, more especially as the crimes which they would describe have
been treated as venial offences, or condoned by every Government that has held
power in the colony.
English people may hear, unmoved, of cruelties perpetrated on men, but revolt at
the idea of foul outrage committed on women. It was this feature of the Bulgarian
atrocities—these imitations of our native police system attempted by the Turks,
which aroused so much indignation in England—that caused the greatest exaspera-
tion in civilised Europe. Our readers may suppose that in the massacres perpetrated
by the native police—which we employ them to perpetrate—women and children
are unmolested. If so, they are greatly mistaken. It is true that the lives of
women and children arc often, perhaps generally, spared ; but even this is a rule
with a great many exceptions. AHew incidents that have occurred within the last
three or four years will show how the matter stands.
In the neighborhood of a northern town where the blacks are “bad” a small
body of troopers, under the direction of a white officer, were sent to punish them.
They returned, bringing down the main street a naked black girl captured by them.
Her appearance attracted quite a crowd, and a local storekeeper offered her captors
a pound for their prize. The bargain was concluded, and the captured girl handed
over. Her purchaser took her home to his wife to be trained up as a servant. But
in the evening the troopers came for her, and, carrying her* to some ridges behind
the main street, kept her through the night for the gratification of their passions.
In the morning they turned her loose in the vicinity of her purchaser’s house.
A squatter in the North-west was out on his run with his stockman, and he heard
in the distance shots, He had heard that the native police were out and at the-
C


work we pay them to do. Biding on their tracks he found, first, a young girl,
apparently about 15, lying stretched on the ground, “with a bullet wound in her
head. Going on he saw another woman also dead, and also with a bullet wound.
This was done, not by Circassians or Bashi Bazouks, acting under the orders of a
Moslem ruler, but by a force maintained, equipped, and paid for by the church-going
Christian people of Brisbane and Queensland.
A man who accompanied a police officer in a northern district was present at a
raid upon some blacks. He shared the officers’ tent. The troopers were of course
round them. They hud a prize, a young black girl, little more than a child. This
man, an old bushman, but not so seasoned as our own officers are, could not sleep
because of the yells, cries, and moans of the unhappy child as each brutal savage,
dad in the uniform of our Government, violated her in turn. They did not finish
by shooting her, but left her in the morning in a dazed agonised condition for her
tribe to find her —and be disposed towards friendship with the whites by the
spectacle.
In concluding this particular paper, it is necessary to warn readers against
feeling indignant with the native police. We equip this force, and send it out to do
the work which is described in these columns. We refuse to .have any report of
what is done ; all we ask is that they shall do what they please and say nothing.
We arm ferocious savages and send them out under men, who are only
blamed if they are dilatory in shooting blacks. For us to blame the force that does
the work would be as improper as it w’ould be for a man who fired a gun into a
crowd to cast blame for the wounds inflicted by the ballet on the weapon. —
Queenslander
June 5, 1880,
IY.
The Western Champion, published at Blackall, in its issue of the 26th ultimo, has
an article commenting on our proposals for dealing with the aborigines, and the
incidents narrated in this column. The editor takes a different view from ourselves,
but writes moderately and in a reasonable spirit. He is, however, mistaken in
doubting the accuracy of one incident in the first article of this series. He says :
“ The story of the young gentleman who was gaining colonial experience on a western
station l is in the main correct, but the tribe who were punished for their depredations
were not station blacks as the new chum believed. Probably bis slight acquaintance
with the aborigines made it unable for him to distinguish between the wild and tame
article.” We repeat that the blacks shot on the occasion were station blacks—that
is, blacks who camped when not out hunting near a head station, that they could talk
broken .English and were known to the troopers, and finally that they were well
known not to belong to the tribe that ccmmitted the hut robberies which led to the
police raid, being in fact quite innocent of any injury to the whites. We fancy the
“ new claim ” referred to, an experienced bushman now, will be rather indignant at
being told that lie did not know blacks of a tribe with which he was perfectly fami-
liar. And, “ new chum” as he was, it is probable that he had as many opportunities of
knowing and distinguishing blacks, at the time the affair occurred —about two years
after his arrival in the district —as the editor of the Champion himself.
In another part of the same article the writer says:—“The tragic end of Mr.
Welford, who attempted to introduce the civilising plan proposed by the Queens-
lander, was sufficient evidence that such a plan was a mistake, and probably made
the whites understand that the only chance of saving their lives and property was to
drive the enemy out of the district.” To this statement we have received the follow-
ing reply by a contributor :
“ The Western Champion quite misunderstands the circumstances under which
poor Welford met his death, which, on the contrary, illustrate the necessity of the
reform advocated by the Queenslander. I knew Welford personally, and was camped
on his country, at the place he afterwards made his main camp, some three or four
months before he occupied it with his cattle. He was a man who always got on
well with the blacks, treating them justly and firmly j and if his neighbors had acted
in the same way, and the black police had been kept away from the lower Barcoo,
would have been alive now, or at least would not have died under the nulla nulla
strokes of exasperated savages seeking revenge for the slaughter of their friends.
He fold me himself how on bringing his cattle round by Cooper's Creek to hia
country —he was compelled to take a very circuitous route from Elizabeth Creek to
get water, as the drought of 1868 had not quite broken up—he travelled for a week
or two in company with a small tribe of myall blacks. These savages, not having
had any experience of the whites, and only knowing the black police by repute, were
inclined to be friendly, as they generally are, Mr. Welford, and partner, and stock'


hian were, I think, the only three white men with the cattle, but the myalls readily
helped them, and were wonderfully quick in finding out howto make themselves
useful. He gave them one or two calves too young to travel, and he assured me
they never attempted to touch any others. He parted company witli this tribe on
arriving near the junction of the Thompson and Barcoo, and travelled up the latter
river to his country. This was at the time apparently a sort of debatable land be-
tween different tribes —and it was certainly frequented by the blacks who hunted
further up the river, where they had been hunted down and shot like dogs for years
before Welford* s death. When lie told me what I have narrated above, Mr. Wel-
ford had sufficiently established himself on his country to be able to leave the cattle
in charge of others. He was quite confident that he would be able to manage the
blacks safely, but foolishly refused to recognise the danger he incurred by the action
of the whites further up the river, and more especially by the extension in his direc-
tion of the ‘ patrols ’ of the black police. No man knows the exact particulars of his
death, which occurred some considerable time afterwards, for he was alone at the
time, having sent his only whit© companion away on an errand. His body was
found floating in the waterhole, with the marks of blacks’ clubs on his head. But
we, who were camped on the country even before he reached it, incurred no loss but
some trifling pilferings, checked easily, and, except in one instance, without effusion
*of blood, and this I am thoroughly convinced was due to the fact that the black
police had not reached us, and the camps were under the charge of conscientious
*nen, who would not permit unprovoked molestation of the savages. But further
up the river this was not the case. Blacks were shot—well, simply because they
were blacks. The police extended their ‘ patrol,’ and I need not tell you what that
means. In consequence of all this poor Welford was killed, probably by a tribe that
had been ‘ dispersed,’ and were seeking for the first unsuspecting white they could
find to revenge the death of their friends. It is the same old story that goes on
repeating itself to the present day. The man who shoots blacks to try the range of
his rifle, or to gratify the mere pleasure that some men seem to experience in hunting
down human beings as a sort of game, escapes punishment. He never falls under
the blacks’ spears or clubs. But his neighbor, who is an upright and humane man,
pays the penalty. He knows the blacks —he knows that in their natural state they
have a clear idea of justice, and relies on it in his dealings with them. But his
calculations are upset when the tribe in whose country he is living is driven mad by
experiencing the sort of ‘justice * the native police and some of the white settlers
give them. The blacks pay the Europeans a high compliment—they abandon their
own habits and adopt ours—and they show what apt scholars they are by braining
the first unoffending and friendly white man they can find. Until some equitable
system such as that proposed by the Queenslander is adopted, outsiders must die as
poor Welford died, or take part in the disgusting and murderous hunting down of
the wretched feeble savages that is constantly going on. The Barcoo, for some years
before Mr. Welford’s death, admirably illustrated the working of the different systems.
The head of it was occupied in the first instance by gentlemen who did what the
Queenslander urges —they defended their own property, but let the blacks when
harmless rigorously alone. There were few wuld blacks killed, and only under con-
ditions that the tribes themselves would admit were just. The whites lost no lives,
and little property. In a very short time the myalls understood the conditions of
peace, and from that time forward there was absolute safety for the whites. I lived
in that part of the district, and have slept alone in a log hut, with a big hole in the
logs, within 400 yards of a camp of probably as many blacks, the majority being pure
myalls, who were in a state of furious excitement over some tribal quarrel, and was
never in a moment’s danger of being disturbed. I have ridden alone and unarmed
among hundreds of them, miles from any other white man, and far from the road or
track, where they could easily have knocked me over—indeed, I have pulled up my
horse to talk to individuals, and had scores of them crowding round, all naked,
painted, and with their spears and nullas in their hands. Yet I was quite safe,
simply because the blacks knew that if they touched me they would be severely
punished, but that if they left the whites alone they would be safe. And, what will
seem to town readers more strange, I knew well a black ‘ boy ’ who bore the scars of
his master’s bullets, fired at him when he was a myall, as punishment for having
taken part in spearing some cattle. That black and his tribe had from the first
admitted the justice of the punishment, and the squatter who shot him had no more
attached follower in after years—when the tribe was let in—than the young man
who bore the mark of his bullet. And although this occurred a good many years
&go, and the gentleman in question must have exposed himself hundreds of times to


the chance of a spear thrust or a nulla blow from the ‘treacherous* blacks whose
propensity for stolen beef he so summarily checked, he is alive and well now, and
never had another £ difficulty ’ with the tribe. Farther down the river the system
that the Queenslander denounces and the Champion upholds was adopted. Mr.
Welford’s death was one of the many sad results of it.” —<
Queenslander
June 12,1880.
y.
There is no district in tlie colony where the war of races is carried on with more
persistency than the Cook district, and from nowhere do we receive more narratives
of loss of life and property. Tiie cost of the war of extermination that has been car-
ried on in that part of the colony is almost incalculable ; numbers of white men have
lost their lives, property in the shape of horses and cattle to the value of many thou-
sands of pounds has been destroyed, and the country has spent thousand ■» in the
maintenance of an exceptionally large force of black police. It will, therefore, be in-
teresting to learn how all this expenditure of blood and money was forced upon the
colony.
When the first diggers arrived on the Palmer the blacks were inclined to be friendly.
They were astonished at the irruption of strangers, and curious, as all savages
are, concerning the newcomers. But the curiosity was good humored, and they did
not even shew a disposition to pilfer from the first comers, who reciprocated the good
will of the aborigines. After this other men arrived, and the whites became more
numerous. It happened that the blacks had been fishing in one of the waterholes,
using as is their custom the leaves of a tree to stupify the fish. In this manner they
had got a great number which were lying thrown out upon the bank. Only some
old men, women, and children were left in charge of the fish, the men having gone
away hunting. They had not injured the whites, and, having respected their pro-
perty, feared no injury from men who appeared to be friends. But sonie white men,
coming down to the waterholes, saw the fish, and thinking they would agreeably vary
their diet, took some. The old blacks jabbered but made no resistance. Going back
to camp the white men exhibited their prize, and others went down to the river and
curried oil' the lot offish which had been left by its owners, trusting to the honesty
of the whites. This made the blacks “ sulky,” and a few days after a party of whites
followed some of the men up a hill. It is not very clear what the whites intended
to do, bat the blacks, not ummtually; supposed that men who stole their fish were
not friends; they “ treacherously ” sent a shower of spears, wounding one white man
in the heel. This was the commencement of hostilities on the Palmer.
Soon after this a large party landed at what is now Cooktown to open a road from
that port to the new diggings. There were white policemen, some black troopers,
Government officials, and diggers. They started up country. At the first river they
reached they came on a mob of blacks disporting themselves in the water. The
savages, scared, took to their heels, but the troopers succeeded in capturing a
woman and child. There was no intention of injuring these people, but it did not seem
to strike the whites that they had no right to take possession of them. The child
was given some bread and jam, and allowed to run away ; the woman was retained.
Unfortunately the Snider rifle of one of the troopers exploded by accident, and the
ball shattered the knee and thigh-bone of the gin. This was about nightfall. The
whites endeavored to bind up the wound of the woman, who howled in her agony,
the blacks of the tribe answering with coe-ee-s from across the river. In the morn-
ing the whites, on resuming their journey, left the dead body of the gin in their
camp. There were, we believe, no presents left with her body, no attempt made at
explaining to the blacks how she had been killed. A day or two afterwards her
tribe “ treacherously ” attacked the whites at Battle Camp, and were beaten back
with great slaughter. After this it was open war on the blacks. Two blacks with
their gins were seen ahead of the party,, and two black troopers started after them.
Shots were heard, and presently the troopers returned with the women. That night
the white policemen were set to watch the camp—the black troopers being left to
enjoy their prize.
A.t another river, the Laura, we believe, more blacks were seen, and at once “ dis-
persed.” Judging by the scraps of paper found on them, it was the same tribe that
had followed the expedition.
One incident of this “dispersal” is thus described by a witness of it: —Two black
troopers had got a wild black as prisoner. They marched him between them. He
was trembling, and made a movement as if to escape, when one of the troopers
knocked him down with his rifle, and the other setting his foot upon the prostrate
wretch deliberately blew his brains out.


Thus having marked their track with blood, the expedition reached the Palmer
where already hostilities had been begun. They continue to the present day, and
there is little sign of abatement in the mutual war of extermination waged between
the races —(
Queenslander
June 19, 1880.
VI.
As a rule the northern blacks, even belonging to tribes now most desperately hostile
to the whites, were friendly to them when the races first met. A letter from the well-
known old colonist, Captain Pasco, published in another column, supplies the all-
sufficient reason for the murderous attack by the coast blacks on the party led to Cape
York by Kennedy, the explorer, and the death of the leader and most of his men.'
As it was in those days, so it is now.
It will be remembered that in the last issue of the Queenslander we described the
commencement of hostilities in the Cook district, and the incident that we are about
to narrate will show that under the management of such a police force as we desire
to see established peace might have been restored even after the first effusion of blood,
and many valuable lives saved. The Normanby was prospected alter the Palmer had
been opened, and the blacks on that river, if not the same tribe that had been so
rnthlessy shot down on the road to that place, were close neighbors, and must have
known what had happened. The first prospectors of the Normanbj 7 , a party, we
believe, of five men, saw a lot of blacks who brandished their spears in a menacing
manner. One of the whites raised his rifle, but his companion knocked up the muzzle
of the weapon, and told him not to fire. The blacks, who were watching, immedi-
ately responded to the friendly demonstration by lowering their spears, and making
amicable gestures. A sort of interchange of friendly signals took place, each party
inviting the other to come over. Neither blacks nor whites, however, had sufficient
confidence to accept the invitation to fraternise, so after a parley they separated.with
every appearance of goodwill. The prospectors remained some time, and neither
their horses nor themselves were molested by the blacks, although by the intermin-
gling of the tracks it was evident that the savages had been among the animals,
probably examining with curiosity the strange creatures.
Another instance of the possibility of maintaining friendly relations with the blacks
can be found in the first foundation of the township of Cairns. What was done by
exploring parties who first searched Trinity Inlet, looking for a track across the
mountains, we cannot say, having no trustworthy narrative. The blacks were shot
at without provocation, and it is probable some were killed. It was notorious that
the property of the savages was taken without hesitation. One or more canoes were
appropriated, and as these canoes had been hollowed out of logs, slowly and with
great labor by the use of stone implements and fire, they represented to the makers
most valuable property. And at least one black child, belonging to a Cairns tribe,
was taken away by the whites. And yet, after the first formation of the township,
the Government official sent to superintend the establishment of the place, publicly
said in Cooktown— after recounting instances of the peaceful disposition of the blacks
—“ If the people of Cairns do not have them cutting wood and carrying water about
the township within six months it will be their own fault.” Our northern files record
the present relations between the races.
The war of extermination that followed the.events described in the previous paper
was marked by the usual features. We propose to narrate a few incidents, but,
following our usual practice, we shall not indicate here the individual officers of police
implicated, as i't is we colonists who authorise the deeds, not they who commit them,
that must be blamed. And it is also necessary to state that, owing to the formation
of the country, the superior weapons used by the blacks, and their dexterity and
cunning, the hunted savages succeeded in inflicting much damage on the whites.
Many men and some women were “ dispersed ” by them under most painful circum-
stances, the blacks practising all the cruelties perpetrated by our police. The pitiful
fate of these victims of our system have been described at different times, and we have
read of the constant and heavy losses of valuable stock. The incidents we are about
to describe give the other side.
An officer, with a detachment of troopers, following the usual plan of patrol — i.e. f
shooting down blacks everywhere and at all times—came on a camp in day time.
The young men were all away ; none but old men, women, and children remained.
The old men were duly “ dispersed there was the usual stampede and rush of
women nd children. Some seven women took refuge on a hill. As a rule, the troopers
do not care about killing women, but on this occasion they got the order to do so
and the seven women were shot down. It was thought desirable to make a clean


sweep, and they began on the children. One child was knocked down by a trooper,
who dashed its brains out with a atone. Another little toddler was knocked over,
and, as the trooper stood over it with a big stone intending to repeat the operation,
his officer shouted to ask whether it was a boy ora girl. “Boy, mamae” (the name
black troopers give their officer). “Save him, then,” was the answer. The little fellow
was saved. Some readers of these lines will remember the boy, and the scar on big
forehead from the first knock-down blow.
On another occasion one gentleman went on the tracks of a police officer who had
been sent to follow and punish the blacks for one of the many murders of whites
that had been committed. He found two women with bullet holes in their heads,
but no sign that the men had been caught or touched. The officer returned, reporting
that he had followed and severely punished the guilty tribe.
A detachment of police went on patrol outside the diggers’ encampment, and came
across some blacks. These savages had done nothing; no outrage on whites had
been committed at the time within a hundred miles of the place. This was in the
daytime, and the blacks were an ordinary travelling party, including men,'women,
and children. There happened to be another white man with the troopers, and he
was astonished to see them immediately open lire and charge the flying blacks. It
was as usual a simple massacre, and with the ordinary accompaniments. The
women and children were frantic with terror, and one poor little fellow, confused and
not knowing what he was doing, was knocked down by a trooper’s horse, and horribly
trampled to death. Several men were shot, and one young girl captured —and
treated as savages treat women who fall into their hands.
Again, a party of whites were with a detachment of police making their way over
a new track across the ranges. The blacks in the neighborhood were innocent of
any offence against the whites. But as they went along, three blacks showed them-
selves on a distant point of rock. They did notlumg but simply look at the travellers.
At the suggestion of the officer the troopers tried their hands at picking off the men,
as they would try a long shot at a strange animal. Their rifles were good, and their
aim true, and two of the unhappy savages paid the penalty of coming within rifle
range of Christians by their death.— (
Queenslander
June 26, 1880.
yii.
This series of papers may appropriately end with instances of the manner in which
the black troopers themselves —the instruments our Government use for the purpose
already described—are treated. These men, whatever we may think of their deeds,
deserve from the community some consideration. They are recruited, drilled, clad
in our uniform, and sent out to do our work, which they perform faithfully. In
punishing them for any misdeeds they commit, it is evident that there can be no
necessity for extraordinary proceedings—nor need they be dealt witli outside the Jaw.
There is neither any difficulty in identifying the offenders, in capturing them, nor in
affording them the benefit of a legal trial. They all understand English, and many,
if not most of them, quite comprehend what a trial means. We will now give a few
recent incidents characterising the treatment they occasionally receive when in their
turn they fall victims to our merciless and bloody system.
Discharged troopers may often be seen employed on stations, and it may he said
that they are not usually the best of “ station boys ;” in fact, the complaint is. com-
monly made that an old “ police boy ” will excite a spirit of mischief among the
quiet station blacks, and that they are “ schemers,” and so forth. This is probable.
The service, the Native Police, is not exactly a school of morals, nor is it likely to
teach savages any other law than that of the strongest—the rule that a man may do
exactly what he pleases to those who ara too weak to resist him. Some troopers die
in the service—very few indeed from wounds received in actual conflict, for they
seldom meet with genuine resistance. The majority of police officers treat their
“boys” well; some with great kindness. But there are exceptions. And there is
an unwritten rule in the service according to which refractory troopers are disposed
of. The practice is well known, although of course, like most of the work done by
the Native Police, it is steadily ignored by the authorities. At one time it used to
be known as having the trooper “ passed out of the district”—the phrase being a
euphuism for the fact that he had been privately taken to a secluded spot in the bush
and shot. It has been spoken of as “ giving him a run for it,” alluding to a plan
that has been adopted on some occasions of giving the wretch a chance for his life—
a start, and the opportunity of dodging the bullets of the firing party. But it was
more commonly covered by a report which described the trooper as having died of
some disease. One officer has been known to giye the disease in a particular case as


“rheumatism,” deriving some satisfaction from the jocular remark that the boy
suffered from stiffness—which, as he was lying dead in a scrub with a bullet through
his head, was quite true.
We will confine our instances to two, selecting recent ones—for the practice is
not an old one, and lias certainly not been abandoned. The cases occurred in the
North.
The first case was that of a “ boy ” known as “ Blondin.” This trooper had
“ deserted ” —that is, he had run away from one detachment to go back to the place
from which he had been sent. The reason he gave for his action was that a gin
belonging to his own tribe was attached to the camp to which he returned. The gin
did not belong to him, but he seemed unwilling to leave the neighborhood even of a
woman who belonged to the far-distant tribe from which he had been taken. He
was arrested, handed over to an officer for punishment, and taken to the edge of a
scrub and shot.
The next case was that of “ Corney.” This trooper had committed some offence
of which we do not know the nature. He also was taken to a scrub, and found in a
leaden bullet a sufficiently fatal disease to end his days.
The death —“ execution ”we presume it will be called —of one black trooper was
accompanied by such circumstances of peculiar horror that it shows to what a depth
white men may descend if compelled to follow the profession of a Native Police
officer. The man to be shot was fastened to his gin by a handcuff secured round one
ankle of each —the man and the woman. The white man having got both fastened
in this manner, at the edge of a scrub, addressed the man in a sort of jocose tone,
“ You won’t desert again, my man.” Then he shot him. The wretched woman,
nearly dead with fear, was compelled to drag the dead body into the scrub, where,
after tormenting her by working on her terrors, the fastening was removed, and she
was allowed to go free. This incident was told to two white men by the chief actor
in it, and one of those men is our informant.
With this paper we propose to close the present series. It is not because our list
is exhausted, unhappily that is of almost unlimited length. As we promised we
would do in the beginning, We have only repeated stories which we had good reason
to believe were true, and for which we could find authority that would be open to
investigation by any properly constituted commission of enquiry. But we have at our
disposal a mass of information which we cannot use. That information comes fsom
men so situated that if it could be traced to them they would be exposed to
much annoyance, and in some cases the danger of total ruin. Among these are men
employed in the police force, who have been brought in unwilling contact with the
system we have endeavored to illustrate. These men would be quite ready to give
information if a genuine enquiry were instituted. The Government could verify all
we have wiitten from the evidence of their own officers if they really wished to do so.
But the enquiries must be genuine, not of the merely official sort. As we have
already explained, the basis of our system is the unwritten understanding that in
dealing with the aboriginals those employed to suppress them may do what they
please, provided they keep it quiet. They must not report, or if their official superiors
require a report to silence the too pertinacious enquiries of some one who has an
inkling of the truth, and is in a position that will not permit of his being ignored,
they are expected to use language as the French cynic declared that it is commonly
used—“ to conceal the truth.” The police employe who breaks this rigid but well
understood rule imperils his position, and any length of service will not save him.
ATen cannot easily be found to incur their own ruin by speaking unwelcome truth, iu
order to expose conduct which the Government and Parliament of the colony ex-
pressly sanction. Let them, however, understand that the truth is really desired,
and there will he no difficulty in obtaining it. And we have good reason to believe
that not a few Native Police officers —men who have discharged their duty without
unnecessary cruelty—and who themselves have often grown sick at heart over the
work they have been compelled to do, would heartily welcome such an enquiry, for
they would feel that it must lead to the establishment of a reformed system in which
they could use their knowledge of the bush and of the natives in the performance of
work which had nothing dishonorable about it, and .nothing which need fear the
light of day. Till then such men must lie under the stigma which cannot fail to
rest on the whole of a force which we treat so unfairly, and send out to do such
abominable work.—(
Queenslander
July 3,1880.


THE ABORIGINAL COMMISSION.
In May, 1876, the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, appointed
five gentlemen commissioners for the purpose of enquiring into and ameliorating the
condition of the aborigines. These gentlemen were Bishop Hale, and Messrs. A. C.
Gregory, W. L. G. Drew, C. J. Graham, and W. Landsborongh. Their duties, as
specified in the commission, were to “ enquire into, and investigate the condition of
the aboriginal inhabitants of our said colony, and to report from time to time to our
Governor aforesaid upon the best means to be adopted —by legislative enactment or
otherwise—for improving the condition cf the said aboriginal inhabitants.” They
were given full power to summon and examine witnesses. In the letter accompany-
ing the commission from the then Colonial Secretary, the following clause occurs :
“ it is considered desirable that the commission should have, for the present at least,
continuing powers; and that the attention of the commissioners should be given to
the best means of reclaiming and benefiting the aborigines, not only at Mackay, but
throughout the colony.”
The commission went to work. As a starting point there was in existence at
Mackay a large reserve of 10,000 acres, on which Mr. Bridgman had persuaded the
blacks of that district to congregate—at least to make it their headquarters—and
where lie had succeeded in establishing a beneficial influence over them. Working
on this foundation, they recommended the establishment of a school on the Mackay
Reserve, for which a grant of money was made by Parliament. Mr. Bridgman hav-
ing induced the blacks to undertake a certain amount of work, substantial school
buildings and quarters for the protector were erected at a total cost of £9O. Mr.
MacGroarty, who was sent in June, 1878, to report on the school by the Department
of Public Instruction, found that about twenty-three boys, of an average age of 9 or
10, had reached the standard of attainment of the two lowest classes of the primary
schools. When it is remembered that they had to be taught the language in which
instruction was conveyed to them, speaking only the usual “nigger English ” when
first brought to school, this progress may be regarded as very satisfactory. The
general plan of the reserve system was adapted to reclaiming the blacks gradually,
and without too violent a change from their natural habits. They were induced to
work a little, and gradually weaned from their purposeless shiftless tribal life. Pro-
duce was raised on the reserve by the labors of the blacks for their own use, and
they were also allowed and encouraged to engage in contracts for the neighboring
sugar planters. It was desired in the first place to create a taste among them for
a more settled and orderly life, so that a foundation might be laid for the inculcation
of moral and religious sentiments. But the reserve was not a missionary establish-
ment. With the young a different system was adopted. They were induced to
attend school, with the results noticed above.
Other reserves were formed. At Bribie a little group of the blacks of Moreton
Bay were established and cared for under the supervision of Mr. Thomas Petrie.
Near Bowen and Townsville other centres for instruction in the rudiments of civilisa-
tion were established under the supervision of local committees. In these places the
•experiment promised well, but it was not permitted to have much chance of success.
The commission, seeing from the facts that had come under their observation that it
was possible to ameliorate to a considerable extent the condition of the coast blacks,
made recommendations to the Government involving the expenditure of an increased
gum of money. In September, 1878, the Premier moved in committee a grant of
£1,600. The motion was rejected without division, and almost without discussion,
the ground alleged, by those who spoke against it, for their opposition being that an
expiring Parliament should not enter on what was practically a new undertaking.
The commission were thus left without funds, and obliged to abandon their work.
Finally, in March, 1879, Bishop Hale having written to the Colonial Secretary as
chairman of the commission, asking whether there was any official report confirming
a statement which appeared in the Courier of a wholesale massacre of blacks near
Cooktown by Sub-inspector O’Connor, received a brief letter in reply declining to
answer any questions. This* practically ended the career of the commission. With
no funds to do anything, and being unable to get a civil answer to questions which by
their constitution they were certainly entitled to ask, their existence was practically
.ended, and Mr. Drew formally resigned.
The subjoined letter will give the history of the Mackay Reserve—the only one in
•existence—to the present time


. [TO THE EDITOR OF THE QUEENSLANDER.]
Sir, As the improvement of the condition of the blacks is a matter of great interest at
present, I feel it to be my duty to acquaint you -with the result of my work in this district. I was
appointed by the Minister for Lands to act as Protector of Aborigines for the Mackav district
My duties I consider to be the following
1. To protect the blacks from ill treatment.
2. To endeavor to make them useful to the Inhabitants instead of being a nuisance.
3. In case of offences committed by blacks, to assist the police in getting the right offends.
4. To trj r and keep the blacks out of townships, where they obtain grog and learn every vice
5. If they are employed by whites, to see that they are paid wages.
6. To remove them from places where they are a nuisance and bring them to people willing to
eraplo}' them—if the blacks are willing. °
7. To explain to the blacks our ideas of right and wrong, which are very different from their
As you are no doubt aware, the Government some years ago devoted 10,000 acres of land in
this district as a reserve for aborigines, with a grant of £5OO, for the purpose of civilising the blacks.
Mr. Bridgman, a gentleman who takes great interest in the blacks, was then Protector of Aborigines
in this district, and it is due to his management that the blacks are so well behaved now He
collected the blacks, formed separate camps for the different tribes of blacks, made them do a little
cultivation at times, and at other times they worked for planters in the district. He also formed
a school for black boys, as an experiment, of which I had management, which having proved a
success, Bishop Hale, who was chairman of a commission in Brisbane, sent a married couple to
take charge of the school, which was enlarged, and consisted of forty children—boys and girls-
and, Mr. Bridgman leaving the district, I was appointed in his place. ’
The present Government, with a view to retrenchment, suspended the vote. The school was
disbanded and the reserve thrown open for selection. The blacks being uncontrolled became a
nuisance, banging round the towns, frightening cattle through the fences, pilfering corn, potatoes
&c. Having made the blacks useful to many of the residents, they requested me to apply to the
Government to be reappointed. I did so, and was reappointed bv the Minister for Lands Since
then the blacks have not only been well-behaved but very useful to the planters, taking contracts
under my supervision, and, though earning but small wages, owing to their natural indolence still
being useful and kept out of mischief. I have about 300 blacks in the district at present, many at
work trashing cane (stripping off dead leaves), clearing scrub, cutting firewood, hoeing, &c. • and I
ride round from one lot to another to see that they are working, and also to see that they get paid
fairly for what they do. I hear any complaints they have to make, as they have confidence in me
and tell me all their troubles. I have very little trouble with them; they are very easy to manage’
with few exceptions. I have more trouble to please the whites, who are very unreasonable. One
man wants to have blacks to work, and his neighbor will not have them near the place because they
frighten his milkers; as they live close to each other, it is a difficult matter to please both parties.
The blacks are very sensible and obedient—far more so than I have any right to expect, Thev caii
be led, but not driven. They offend often through ignorance, seldom wilfully.
I am sure that though the native police may be necessary in outside places, still in the inside
districts they might be done away with. One camp has been removed in this district, and though
there was a great outcry at first no harm has come of it. 6
Hoping my letter may contain information useful to you, I will now end it.—Yours &c
JOCELYN BROOKE
Bockleigh, Mackay, May 23.
rt 1 imo X 1 OOtl
Queenslander
J une 5,1880.
THE ABORIGINALS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Bishop Hale has placed in our hands some correspondence, recently received by
him from South Australia, giving an account of the manner in which the aborigines
m the settled districts of that colony are cared for. This includes letters from Mr.
Hamilton, sub-protcctor of aborigines; Mr. Shaw, superintendent of the
roonindie Native Institution ; and the annual reports of the sub-protector for 1878
and 1879.
. Ihe letter of Mr. Hamilton bears emphatic testimony to the possibility of prevent-
ion the blacks in the settled and pastoral districts from being a nuisance to the white
inhabitants. He writes that “ they appear to be a quiet, inoffensive, and law-abid-
ing people ; the criminal records for the past five years show a marked absence of
any serious outrages against the European population, and the offences charged
against the aborigines have been confined to one case of murder (that of two other
natives) and a iew cases of drunkenness and petty larceny.” With regard to
Poonindie, an institution which has been entirely self-supporting since 1860, he warns
his correspondent that there is no sufficient evidence to show that its influence ex-
tends beyond the natives attached to it. General orderliness and comparative com-
fort are due to the effective supervision and general care exercised by the Govern-
ment throughout the colony. Nevertheless, as far as the natives living on the place
is concerned, the institution has kept them from crime, and to a considerable extent
from vice, and has very sensibly raised their condition, without cost to the Govern,
meet.
From the reports and letters we learn that the census enumeration of native* £n>
1876 showed a total of 3,369 souls. This does not include the tribes in the interior-
west of Queensland, which of course have not been reckoned. The total expends


ture by the Government on aborigines was covered by ah annual vote amounting in
1878 to £5,254. This was expended partly on grants in money and goods to four
mission stations. The fifth, Foonindie, at Port Lincoln, which has a reserve of
15,000 acres attached to it, received nothing. The others which received various
sums were Point Pierce, Yorke’s Peninsula, with 12,800 acres of land ; Point Mac-
leay, Lake Alexandria, with 4,498 acres ; Kopperamanna, Far North, with 64,000
acres; and Hermansburgh, Finke River, N.T., with 576,000 acres. Besides these
there are fifty depots, distributed through the districts, at which rations, clothing,
medical comforts, &c., are distributed to the sick and infirm aborigines, and boats,
netting, tools, &c., to the men; All this is done within the vote mentioned, assisted
by contributions from the religious congregations —apparently chiefly Lutheran—
which have engaged in the mission work. Individual instances of progress are re-
ported by the sub-protector which are astonishing to those who know the natives.
One aboriginal had obtained a four years’ lease of a farm of 160 acres. He is “an
industrious intelligent man, has saved money, and now possesses stock and farm
implements, keeps a bank account, and has made several improvements on his farm."
Similar leases were about to issue to four other natives, “ one of whom recently
married a European woman.”
The general report for each year contains special reports from the mission stations
and other agencies. Taking the latest, that for 1879, we find that the superintendent
of Kopperamanna reports that in his district the natives during the year had been
well off. On the mission station were sixteen buildings, 5000 sheep, 45 head of
cattle, 49 horses, and 350 goats. There had been an average attendance at school
during the year of about twenty-five children, who seemed particularly fond of arith-
metic. The country was not very suitable for agriculture, but the natives were em-
ployed in shepherding, fencing, building, &c., and hunting wild dogs, having secured
235 dingo scalps during the year. The missionaries have taken the trouble to learn
the aboriginal tongue, which helps them with the natives, who are, of course, under
no restraint, coming and going as they please, and therefore only to be kept by moral
influence. As an instance of the difficulties in the way of raising the condition of
the race, we quote the remark of the superintendent, “ They all, with few exceptions,
suffer from syphilis.”
The Hermansburgh station, on the Finke River, in the Central Territory, is espe-
cially interesting to Queenslanders, as it is situated in country similar to our own
Western interior. It has been lately established, and there also the missionaries
have learned the aboriginal dialect. They have on the station 2530 sheep, 100 goats,
32 head of cattle, and 52 horses. From a special report made on this mission by the
station-master at the telegraph station, Alice Springs, we learn that substantial build-
ings, yards and woolshed, have been erected, and a large paddock fenced in. At-
tempts were being made at cultivation with promise of success, and the missionaries
proposed to lay down next year (1880) 100 acres in grain. The natives come and
go, and are shy and retiring. The station-master reports of the missionaries that
“ they have had, and will still have, a certain amount of uphill work, but in the end
will, I think, be successful.” The neighboring squatters speak “in most praiseworthy
terms ”of the mission station. The report ends by an admission on the part of the
writer that he has been most favorably impressed by the mission station, “ and erro-
neuos opinions previously entertained are entirely removed.”
No special remarks need be made on the Point Macleay and Point Pierce institu-
tions, but Poonindie deserves special mention. At this place some of the natives
appear to be really rising into civilised beings. One —a half-caste—is mentioned who
does nearly all the painting, glazing, and carpentering of the institution, and who
made a neat little boat in his spare time out of a few boards he bought in Port Lin-
coln, The average number resident has been from sixty-four to eighty-four, although
a number of others come and go- They work well, and the produce of their labor
supports the whole institution very comfortably. They are taught in the school,
doctored by a skilful medical man, who visits the place once a week. They must
have decidedly a good time of it, as besides cricket and bagatelle, of which they are
fond, and out-door sports, there is a weekly dance in the school-room “ in which
nearly all, young and old, take part; and were it not for the rather heavy boots and
bare feet of some, their graceful manner and movement would surprise many of those
of our own people who delight in the ‘ light fantastic toe.’”
We have no space for further extracts from these interesting documents. The
South Australian Government, unlike our own, recognises that it owes a duty to the
aborigines, and very effectively discharges it, without any very great cost to the Trea-
sury. No Queenslander will require that we should point the contrast between the


picture of which wo have reproduced the outlines and the one that is under his eyes
in and around every town and township of this colony. It almost appears as if they
were about to succeed in checking the decrease of the race, for in 1879 the births
about balanced the deaths. This is, however, improbable ; but the South Australians
are free from the stain that rests on us, and by their action have proved beyond a
shadow of doubt that we are neglecting a duty which we can easily perform, and
which would by no means overburden our resources (
Queenslander
'July 17,1880,
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR.
WHITE VERSUS BLACK.
Sir, —In the Queenslander of the Ist instant there is published a leading article
entitled, “ The way we Civilize/’ the text being furnished by a letter taken from the
Cooktown Courier, On this letter I intend making no comment, it being simply the
old story over again, of white atrocities and the consequence thereof; all this is
going over old ground, and has been discussed too often. The Native Police and
their doings have long been the colonial “ big gooseberry,” and the only wonder is
that so much of “ the silly season ” has been allowed to pass without this familiar
subject coming to the fore. As regards the article, there are certain points which
would seem to indicate that a one-sided view is being taken on a leading colonial
question when there is a great deal to be said on both sides. Until one reaches the
last sentence of the said essay it is hard to judge whether it means to convey the
simple traditional expression of condemnation of such doings to be expected from a
newspaper occupying the platform the Queenslander does, or whether the leading
journal intends rushing in “ where angels fear to tread ” and belling the cat — i.e. t
the blackfellow. However, the last sentence distinctly conveys the promise that the
latter course will be pursued, and we may shortly expect the elaboration of a scheme
that will solve the problem that has puzzled the colonists since the settlement of the
country. No one would be more delighted to see some such theory brought into
play than the present writer, and no one would more despair of its ultimate success.
As I said before, I am not writing this in defence of our Black Police system, but I
am writing against a sweeping vilification of all white pioneers who find it necessary
to preserve their property by the strong hand. Nothing is easier than to sit down
at desk or table, and—on paper —work out a civilising code that shall make the
savage a docile tractable being, anxious to work and eager to please ; and nothing
harder than to take one’s flocks and herds and go out into the desert and carry the
theory into practice. As I intend to speak decidedly and openly on this subject, I
may say that I have lived for sixteen years in this colony, and as a rule in outside
country always ; that I have been at the settlement of North and West, and have
had to hold responsible situations where blacks had to be utilised for want of other
labor. I think I may say that I have been as successful in getting as much work as
possible out of them as other men ; and that my experience pretty well comprises
the boundaries of Queensland. I say this merely to show that lam not writing on a
strange or unknown subject, but one that has been continually under my notice.
Furthermore, I am what would be called a “ white murderer,” for I have had to
“ disperse ” and assist to disperse blacks on several occasions. The blackfellow of
Queensland is an embodiment of contradictions : he is a brave man, and an abject
coward ; an angel for good nature, and a demon for cruelty ; the personification of
laziness, and yet capable of untiring perseverance ; a riddle, and a hopeless one, so
far as guessing him is concerned. A blackfellow learns our vices, and unlearns what
savage virtues he possesses, with fatal facility. The uncivilised “ myall J> is bad
enough; the half-civilised “Johnny Campbell ”is ten times worse. The question
then arises, What lives are we to sacrifice —black or white ? Are we to protect
the black or protect the white ? Shirk it as we will, this is the question. So
long as we have country to settle, so long as men have to trust their lives
to their own right hands, so long shall we come in contact with the natives,
and aggressions and reprisals will take place. The article I refer to as yet
commits itself to nothing, and, beyond a gird at the policy so long pursued, says


nothing tangible to reply to. The great feature of the case it leaves untouched
that if, as the Queenslander says, the Native Police are an exterminating
force, it is » pity that the work is not more thoroughly and effectually done. Is
there room for both of us here ? No. Then the sooner the weaker is wiped out the
better, as we may save some valuable lives by the process. If the blackfellow is right
in murdering white men for invading and taking possession of his country, then
every white man, woman, and child who sits at home at ease in our towns and town-
ships is a murderer, for if they bad the courage of their opinions they would not stop
on in a colony built up on bloodshed and rapine. Do they do this ? do our black
protectors —our philanthropists of to-day—go out and enquire into the truth of the
many stories that are brought in from the back country, or do they rather sit in the
high places, and partake of the corn and oil, leaving it to the sinful to go out and
bear the heat and burden of the day ? I rather think they do the last. Hide it as
you will, our policy towards the black is bad, but it is only the game we played all
over the world; and it starts with the original occupation of the country, and any
other policy would be equally outrageous that entailed the taking of the land from
the blacks. Say that we make reserves, and put the natives on them —have them
guarded, and watched, and cared for—is not that just as arbitrary and high handed
as shooting them ? Would we recognise the justice of a superior race coming here,
curtailing our boundaries, picking out our best country for their own use, and insti-
tuting a fresh code of religion, law, and morality for our benefit ? Would we submit
tamely, or prefer a quick and easy death to it? By its very presence and publication
here the Queenslander recognises the utility, to put it mildly, of dispossessing the
blacks, and until it takes its departure to another country, and there preaches its
sermon, its voice has a very hypocritical ring about it. We all want to get on here,
and we all want to get somebody else to do the work needful; and if there is any
dirty work necessary we are the first to cry out against it —when we are in a position
to do so. This is the black question, as put forward by the protectors of the poor
savage. I know fall well that 1 shall hear of atrocities, of barbarities, and other
disgraceful proceedings committed by the whites ; but that does not touch the
point at issue. The unanswerable fact remains that by overrunning this or any
other country we expose the natives to the chances of suffering the rigors of
guerilla warfare —always the cruellest and worst—and, knowing that, we come here
and take up our quarters with our eyes open; by our very presence in the land
justifying the act of every white ruffian in the outside country. We are all savages ;
look beneath the thin veneer of our civilisation and we are very identical with the
blacks ; but we have this one thing not in common—we, the invading race, have a
principle hard to define, and harder to name ; it is innate in us, and it is the restless-
ness of culture, if I dare call it so. The higher we get in the educated scale, the
more we find this faculty ; and if we do not show it in one shape we do in another.
We work for posterity, we have a history, and we have been surrounded by its tales
and legends since infancy. We look upon the heroes of ibis history as familiar
friends, and in all our breasts there is a whisper that we too by some strange chance
may be known to posterity. This brings us here to wrest the lands of a weaker race
from their feeble grasp, and build up a country that our children shall inherit; and
this feeling is unknown to the native of Australia. He has a short history, but it is
more a matter of gossip than anything else, and only goes back one generation. He
has no thought of the future, because he never knew of anyone being remembered
more than a lifetime, therefore he has no interest but to pass through life as easily as
possible, and he never seeks to improve land for those who will come after him.
This justifies our presence here ; this is the only plea we have in justification of it,
and having once admitted it we must go the whole length, and say that the sooner
we clear the weak useless race away the better. And being a useless race, wbat does
it matter what they suffer any more than the distinguished philanthropist, who writes
in his behalf, cares tor the wounded half-dead pigeon he tortures at his shooting
matches. “ I do not see the necessity,” was the reply of a distinguished wit to an
applicant for an office who remarked that “ he must live ; ” and we virtually and
practically say the same to the blacks and with better reason. We are pursuing the
same policy in Zululand and Afghanistan, and, I suppose, on a more barbarous scale ;
the recital of all the atrocities going, of all the shooting and slaying by the Native
Police, never alters the fact that, once we are here, we are committed as accessories,
and that to prove the fidelity of our opinions we should leave the country. I cannot
touch upon anything definitely this time, as the Queenslander is not committed as yet
to advocating any particular line of policy. I only want to show how we cannot —if
>ye tafce the position of conquerors—expect anything else but harsh treatment towards


the conquered in outlying places, where men are not under so much constraint j and
shall await with some interest the unfolding of their scheme.
In conclusion, I wish it to be thoroughly understood that I am not defending the
acts of individuals. I, in common with other hushmen, am regretfully compelled to
admit that deeds of blood curdling atrocity have been committed by white men, but
parallel acts are to be found in the history of the subjugation of any barbarous
nation ; and my object in writing is to condemn the wholesale slander of the whole
white race in the colony for the acts of the few.—Yours, &e.,
Brisbane, May 4.
NEVER NEVER.
Queenslander
May 8, 1880.
Sir, —It may be owing to the “ obtuseness of my moral sense ” that I fail to fully
appreciate the beauties of the scheme propounded in the Queenslander of the Bth
instant; but I must frankly confess to a feeling of disappointment. I hoped that
at any rate some better elaborated idea than the mere substitution of white troopers
for black would have been suggested, but, although it is but a ha’porth of bread to
an intolerable deal of sack, we will take it thankfully. What will be the result of
employing white police instead of black? Let us see. They are ‘‘to consist of
course of good bushmen that looks exceedingly nice upon paper, but where are
you going to get your good bushmen? From my experience of them you would
find few good bushmen willing to become policemen, and fewer still willing to join a
force that has lately been manned by the black boys; but that has nothing to do
with the theory of the plan, which is wrong from the start, and evidently broached
in entire ignorance of the real facts of the question. To anyone who has had any
hand in black repression, the calm statement that white police should be used for
the purpose is so wildly absurd that it seems like tilting at a windmill to reply
seriously to it. No doubt there are many parts of the outside country where white
police could be made use of—assisted by black trackers —-with some reasonable show
of overhauling the natives they were in pursuit of, but only in some parts ; in the
generality of districts we must have savages to hunt savages, and that fact is tacitly
recognised by every man who knows anything about it, and will be, in spite of a
thousand columns of words in the Queenslander. But, having captured the offender,
what are our white police to do with him ? Follow the example of the South
Australian Government, and have him taken, at great expense to the country, to the
metropolis, confined in comfortable quarters in a gaol, and at the expiration of his
twelve months present him with a new suit of clothes and a tomahawk, and send
him on his way rejoicing, ready for more crime ; or tie him up and flog him, or give
him a short and easy shrift with a pistol bullet? Surely the Queenslander need not
have been so vague in indicating the nature of the punishment to be dealt out.
Then, again, another outcome of adopting the system advocated by the Queenslander
is so plain and palpable that it is strange it should have escaped the notice of the
writer. The Queenslander says “ the officers in command should be compelled to
report their operations,” &c., &c.; now what would be the result of this ? For some
fancied or real grievance a man would report his officer for undue severity, or some
humane station-holder would do it, if a favorite black boy got punished, the officer
would probably be cautioued or reprimanded, and if a wise man, would—the next
time he had to go in pursuit of an offending tribe—take good care he never caught
them. Cattle slaughtering and shepherd killing would go on with impunity, because
the officer in charge of the district would have the fear of the gallows before him if
he used decisive measures to stop it. As for the cowardice displayed in shooting
blacks as a punishment, it would be as just to call the judge who passes sentence of
death a coward, or the members of a firing party at a military execution cowards.
No doubt the old tale of individual atrocities will be raked up, but, as I said before,
with that I have nothing to do—they can be found anywhere. I maintain that the
blacks require shooting, and it is better to get the work done by blacks than by
whites; one you cannot degrade lower than he is already; the other you possibly
may (following out the line of argument pursued by the Queenslander'S, But the
scheme mooted is so vague and ill-defined, and is altogether such a lame and
impotent conclusion to the blare of trumpets that heralded it in, that it is hard to
criticise. Any one who has had experience of several districts knows that in many
places whites are useless at black hunting ; if the writer of the article had ever
tried following blacks through mangroves, or in a basalt wall, he would know so too.
(That a better plan cgidd bp worked out than that in vogue at present, I admit, but


I do not think any of us see a way as yet; the question is too knotty, and by the
time it is solved the blackfellow will be a thing of the past —and a good job too. As
for the expense of the force proposed, why it would simply amount to keeping the
nucleus of a small standing army ; the men would be ruined by long spells of
idleness, and when called upon for the work required would be found wanting. The
constant saddle work that makes the outside stockman a wiry tireless being, able to
outdo any blackfellow on his native heath, would be omitted in the case of our ideal
policeman, who would find the chase very fatiguing alter the first day or two.
Unless the Queenslander is able to evoke some better idea than the mere substitu-
tion of white for black troopers, it had better leave the matter to be settled in the
natural way—and—the survival of the fittest, —Yours, &c.,
NEVER NEVER.
Queenslander
May X5 } 1880,
Sir, —In the Queenslander of the Bth instant is a letter signed “ Never Never” in
which the writer endeavors to justify the system upon which our Native Police force
is conducted. I should be very sorry to believe that the writer actually believes one-
half of what he has written, for if he does he ought to be locked up as a would-be
murderer of the most dangerous description. It seems to me to betray a singular
“ obliquity of moral vision” when a man can casually refer to the wholesale murder
of aborigines which is daily going on as a fair subject for doing a paragraph after the
“ big gooseberry ” style during the “ silly season.” And yet, sir, the most distressing
fact is that “ Never Never’s ” letter very fairly embodies the spirit and sentiment of
a large number of those who take active part in pioneer settlement. Even presuming
the blacks have committed every enormity that is possible, is it not horrible and
monstrous that the shedding of human blood should come to be regarded so lightly?
Like “ Never Never” I, too, have lived among blacks in a newly-settled district, and
my experience is that blacks, like whites, have among them both good and bad, and
that any wholesale massacre of them such as is daily perpetrated is as unjust as it is
horrible in the sight of God and man. Are there ten men in Brisbane who really
understand the working of our Native Police? How many among us understand the
euphemistic word “ dispersal ? ” Can they know that it means this ?—A white man,
“ an officer and a gentleman,” at the head of some half-dozen black murderers,
watches a camp of blacks all night. The cool dawn of the morning comes, and the
slender smoke circles up among the trees by the waterhole as the unsuspecting blacks
wake to prepare their morning meal. Suddenly a shrill whistle, then the sharp rattle
of Sniders, shriek on shriek, rushing to and fro ; then, ammunition gone, the struggle
at close quarters, and well-fed lusty savages, drunk with carnage, hewing down men,
women, and children before them. How long shall these things be? for that they
exist no dweller in outside country can deny. Are they not the theme of discussion
by every camp fire in the Western land ? And though much must be deducted for
exaggeration, “ where there is smoke there is fire.” Why do the Native Police never
take white men with them who might afterwards appear as witnesses against them ?
Surely this one fact should show that their deeds are evil. Is there a record in the
Chief Commissioner’s office in which any sub-inspector boldly says that he and his
“boys” deliberately shot a certain number of blacks ? Why, if all is right, should
the truth not be openly stated ? Why should we be unable to learn from official
records what the public servants are doing ? If it is advisable that, as a colony, we
should indulge in wholesale murder of the race-we are dispossessing, lei us have the
courage of our opinions and murder openly and deliberately—calling it murder , not
“ dispersal.” I hope I have said enough to attract attention to the loathsome and
horrible system of dealing with our blacks that we as a colony have hitherto sanc-
tioned. I have known gentlewomen in the bush who refused to allow officers of the
Native Police to enter their doors, or share the generous hospitality accorded to every
deserving wayfarer. Surely, sir, when a pure-minded gentlewoman need shudder to
let herself or her children come in contact with a police officer there must be some-
thing particularly disgusting in his usual avocation. How is it that our police hardly
ever bring to j ustice white men who offend against blacks ? Ho those of us who have
lived in outside districts know of no outrages committed by whites ? No black boys
(servants who get no wages) brutally flogged and ill-used ? No young women forcibly
abducted from the tribe for purposes I dare not mention here ? When I think of the
nameless deeds of horror that I have heard discussed openly by many a camp fire, I


ban scarcely control my indignation and write calmly. How long shall the present
state of things exist; how long shall we, the people of Queensland, have men in our
employ carrying out our orders for extermination —“ Slay, and spare not ” —against
our dark-skinned and weaker brethren ? In a future letter, with your permission,
sir, I will formulate a scheme which will at anyrate be an improvement on the present
system of Native Police. —Yours, &0.,
OUTIS.
Queenslander
, May 15, 1880.
Sir, —In last week’s issue you allowed me to give my views on the very unfortu-
nate relations that at present exist between the Native Police and the aborigines ; in
this issue 1 shall endeavour, with your permission, to formulate a better system of
dealing with the miserable remnant of a fast decaying race; and, though even in my
system there must be much that can be objected to, I maintain that it would be
better for all concerned than the present state of things. In dealing with the sub-
ject two ends must be carefully kept in view—first, the implanting of as much good
as possible in the blacks ; second, the repression of evil and the protection of white
settlers. Now amongst us white settlers we have many extremely objectionable
people who are ranked under the generic term of “ loafers” —men who have nothing
to do, or, when they have, don’t do it. When white “ loafers ” get a nuisance to
society, we interfere and compel them to work, otherwise we very justly punish them.
Why not adopt the same coarse towards the blacks wherever we find that
they have become “ loafers ?” Settlement pushing out has taken from them their
former means of livelihood ; their waterholes are utilised by the whites, and they are
now “without visible means of support;” to all intents and purposes they, are
“ rogues and vagabonds.” Rogues and vagabonds very often make good workmen
when they are forced to work. My experience is that with blacks, as with whites,
idleness is at the root of most of the evil committed, therefore I say make the blacks
work. This is what I wish to insist on first of all, afterwards I will show the way to
find them work. They are in as low a state as they can well be—starved, miserable,
abject, wandering about with hatred in their hearts, looking on at a foreign race
calmly enjoying their farmer possessions. We have taken their all, let us not make
a miserable pretence of soft-heartedness ; let us treat them as “ loafers,” and set
about finding them honest employment where they will have no time to hatch mis-
chief. Now, as to (he means of making the blacks work, my idea is this : Every year
brings large numbers of South Sea Islanders to Queensland. These islanders are
transported from their homes, brought here and bound down by engagement for a
period of years. Should they leave their hired service within the period for which
they are engaged, the law steps in and protects the employer. Why can the same
system with some modification not be adopted with aborigines ? Everyone who lias
lived among our blacks knows that they are of little use for any sustained work until they
are out of their own district, or, as bushmen often remark, “a nigger is no good till
you get him off his beat.” If employers of labor on the coast could send inland, say
to the Diamantina or Herbert, I am confident that they would have little difficulty
in recruiting the blacks and getting them to engage for a term of years out of their
district. Once get the blacks out of their own district, and it would rest with the
employer to make them work ; some harshness would no doubt be necessary (as I
am told is also the case with Kanakas), but I firmly believe that firmness combined
with kindness, and the low rate of wages that the blacks would be paid, would make
the employment of aboriginal labor a payable speculation. In India and Ceylon
some of the coolies in their natural state, and when first recruited, seem almost as
hopeless as our own blacks, but still strict discipline and justice seldom fail in im-
proving their condition and making them profitable servants. It is shown by the
present system of black police that blacks can be voluntarily enlisted and brought to
a fairly efficient state of discipline; could this not be achieved without putting car-
bines and other murdering tools in their hands ? How would it be to have the same
discipline, substituting a spade for a Snider, or a hoe for a Colt? In Ceylon there
are certain regiments or divisions of “pioneers.” These are natives officered by
whites who speak their language, and keep them in a high state of efficiency. These
men (also women and children) receive certain pay and allowances, live in camp,
and are kept hard at work upon Government works. The discipline is severe, as
severe as tbafc of an army in war time, but it is found to act well. Why can we
not give this system a trial ? Even if the colony suffered loss by it, would it not be


better than to class our own flesh and blood with dingoes, the other enemy of the
pioneer squatter, to be shot where met with ? I believe tiiat it would pay us to
import from India or Ceylon some gentleman who lias had experience of coolie labor
there. Let him model a system, and as far as possible let him be untethered by red
tape. Surely those in authority would not mind the absence of red tape in this
matter. They have shown clearly by their actions in the past that so far as the
blacks are concerned they don’t care in the slightest. Their only care is that there
should be as little fuss as possible. This very commendable spirit of making little
fuss permeates the whole Native Police force downwards. The police never murder
a black quite close to a station unless under very exceptional circumstances. They
first arrest their prisoner—maybe at the camp by the waterhole near the homestead
and he is duly taken away, guarded by an armed mounted trooper on each side.
He never comes in at the next stage with his captors ; he has always “ been shot
while attempting to escape.” The old, world-old, story—one sin leads on to another;
and we cannot expect a man whose orders are to murder (English for “ disperse”)
sticking at an odd lie or two.
With the utilisation of the blacks the occupation of the black troopers would be
gone. Their removal would make room for a better state of things. Your corres-
pondent “ Never-Never” pooh-poohs the idea of getting good bushmen to enter
any police force that would succeed the present one. I fancy that, were the experi-
ment tried, “ Never-Never” would be found to be as wrong in this particular as he
is misguided in the whole spirit of his letter. Only let the pay be better than that
given to stockmen on outside stations, and the Government could have the pick of
the best and hardiest bushmen in the coiony.. If blacks are used as police at all they
should never be allowed to carry arms—a savage can never be expected to exercise
discretion in meting out justice, should the “short shrift” “ Never Never” speaks of
ever be necessary. Let the white police have black servants, to be .employed as
grooms, trackers, &c., when necessary—much as is now the case in the West, where
nearly every stockman keeps his own blackboy. Should the expense of keeping a
white police be a strain on our finances I do not think the colony would grudge it.
Let us remove the present blood guiltiness that weighs upon us each individually as
colonists, and whatever the price the result will be cheap at the money. Is there no
member of Parliament who will take this question up —are all so overburdend by the
cares of the squatters, or diggers, who comprise their constituencies that they cannot
spare the time to consider and devise a remedy for “ the poor old nig»er”? Can
nothing be done for their physical welfare ? Must we look calmly on at the work
of the Police Department, combined with disease of the most loathsome types, and
Mackay rum, and say it is “ Kismet ” ? Would it not be well’putting aside fora
time the hope of ever Christianising our blacks, to try in an honest manly way what
can be done towards making them less undesirable citizens than they at present are ?
Sir, as I before said, I have lived in the outside country among the blacks, and, were
I there again now as I write, I should sit down among them and explain how, far
away “ along a big fellow water, that one big fellow master belong a paper” was ’try-
ing to do his best for them, so that if they would only be good “ that one coola
(hostile) fellow policeman” would never again come to their camp.
Sir, in the name of a most unfortunate and ill-starred race, I thank you for your
powerful interference in their behalf. —Yours, &c.,
OUTIS.
, May 22, 1880.
Queenslander
Sib,— Being still troubled by that “ obtuseness of my moral nature,” would you
mind my expressing my sense of surprise at the singular course adopted by the
Queenslander in starting what I presume I may call an atrocity column. In the
first place, if, overcome by a deep sense of its responsibility as the leading journal of
the colony, the paper raises its voice against our treatment, of the natives, and the
issue thereof is an atrocity column, may I ask why its conscience has slumbered so
long ? Why, through all the past years of black dispersion has it not done what it
professes to be about to do now ? Why have left it until this the eleventh hour ?
When a paper presumes to be so well posted up in the subject as to know of all these
massacres, and deal them out dressed up in a sentimental suit of catch terms for the
edification of sensation-loving readers, and yet has through all its previous existence
as a journal remained comparatively silent on the subject, I beg leave to doubt the
honesty of its purpose and the sincerity of its own belief in the deeds it is now


chronicling. Surely such a tenderly-sensitive journal could not hare gone on all
these years believing in the existence of these outrages, and yet—beyond an occa-
sional leader when hard-up for a subject—never crying out against them. It seems to
me very like raking up something startling to puli through a dull time till Parliament
commences.
In the name of everything sensible, what good end can be gained by manufacturing
sensational stories by the column to prove —what? To prove that here, as in all
other new countries, men who are ruffians and bullies naturally gather about our
frontiers, where law is lax and restraint almost unknown. No one ever doubted it;
yet the Queenslander , by its present course, is endeavoring to slander the majority
of our outside men for the acts of the minority, and on what authority ? Take the
very first yarn recounted. A white man, presumedly educated and acquainted with
the laws of this country, goes out intending to shoot a quiet black boy, and takes
with him another white man as a witness, who might at any time turn Queen’s
evidence and hang him. If the hero of this story did this he was a lunatic, and was
not responsible for his actions ; if he didn’t, the story is on internal evidence —false.
And again, why drag in mock sentiment to bolster up these charges? In the last
yarn retailed, capital is made out of the fact that a man despatching some wounded
blacks knocked them on the head instead of shooting them. Really it might be from
moral obtuseness, but, putting aside the necessity or not of killing these blacks, I
cannot see why it was more sinful to knock them on the head than shoot them. A
blow from a heavy nulla would be quite as quick and easy a death as a bullet from a
pistol; and if pistol cartridges were scarce, as often they are in outside country, it
was a very sensible thing to do. I should feel just as much horror if I read that
they were shot.
Possibly the Queenslander aims at supplying a want in our Brisbane literature.
It aspires to fill the place of the Newgate Calendar or Police Gazette , and is really
making a very creditable attempt. I can see how, under its tuition, our youngsters
may grow up to emulate the actors in the Queenslander atrocity column, even as the
apprentices of old sought to follow in the footsteps of Jack Sheppard and Dick
Turpin, after revelling in an Recount of their lives. If the Queenslander were honest
in its purpose, one or two well-authenticated specimens would serve the end as well
us a hundred. We can enjoy a little devilled kidney, or hot curry, but we don’t like
a surfeit of such dishes. In publishing these hypothetical narratives, duly em-
broidered for the occasion, the Queenslander violates good taste, and almost common
decency. I maintain that half these yarns are fabrications, and that the rest are
exaggerated. I never witnessed one such case myself; I never heard but of one in
any district I was in, and that rested on poor foundation. lam equally certain that
in all parts of this colony men would be found prompt and ready to stop such deeds
by force, if necessary. Again, I know and can affirm that black protection is often
only another name for immorality, and I would far rather call that man my friend
who rigorously, if wrongfully, kept all blacks off' his run, and allowed no intercourse
with them, than he, who under the excuse of 'protecting them allowed them in for
the sake of picking out the best looking gins in the tribe.
Beyond branding a certain portion of the community as worse than murderers, the
Queenslander has as yet left the main question untouched ; therefore, beyond putting
in this protest, there is nothing I can remark on, and must await further utterances
from the oracle.
, May 29, 1880.
NEVER NEVER
Queenslander
Sir, —Much has been written on (he subject of our treatment of the aboriginal in-
habitants of Australia, and many schemes, distinguished for the most part by their
absurdity and impracticability, have been put forward with a view to saving the race
from utter annihilation.
That the race is doomed is admitted by all who have studied the subject, and those
who know the nigger best feel most the impossibility of doing much to ameliorate his
condition or protract the existence of his race.
This callousness as a rule arises from no lack of sympathy with the blacks, but from
a firm conviction that their stage of civilisation is too many hundred or perhaps
thousand years behind our own to allow their race to thrive side by side with ours.
I have not the slightest doubt that there are many to be found in the bush whe»
would willingly contribute towards the support of any project which offers a reason-
able chance of ameliorating the condition of the expiring race of men whose brother?
E


have in numberless instances stood faithfully to them in hardship, danger, and sick*
ness ; but as such a project, to ensure a degree of success, requires the devotion of the
ives of such men as the Moravian missionaries, together witli an outlay of some money
and the countenance and assistance of the Government there seems little hopes of
anything being done in the matter. In a late letter appearing in your columns
“ Cutis” proposes to make the blacks work.
The idea is a good one, but how are we to get them to work ? The plan of bring-
ing them down from Western stations to work on the coast under Ceylon overseers is
manifestly absurd. , To get any good out of blacks they should be kept as much apart
as possible from the whites, with the exception of those who have control over them.
They should have large reservations allotted to them, consisting of tracts of good
hunting country. A reliable and devoted man, salaried by the Government and
thoroughly understanding the nature of blacks, should be associated with mis-
sionaries, if they can be got, willing to undertake the care of these creatures, and a
system of management might be organised to work pretty well. Numberless objec-
tions may, of course, be urged to such a plan, one of which is the difficulty of obtain-
ing a body of men content to sacrifice their time and efforts for the hope that a few
of the offspring of their charges may turn out pretty respectable members of society.
Another is the expense and the difficulty of getting official support for a scheme of
this nature. A third objection is the keeping away of whites from the black flock ; a
fourth the eradication of vices already acquired from white men and grafted on a soil
peculiarly suited to their culture. Although unprepared to combat all these objections
and hosts of others which may be offered. I would point out to any who take an
interest in the aboriginals, that there are large tracts of country in the Cook district,
unfitted for graziers or gold miners, which might with propriety be turned into reser-
vations for blacks. These lands teem with game, and their rivers with fish. The
aboriginals on these tracts, moreover, have never come into what is termed friendly
contact with white men, which I take it is the worst form of kindness to their race.
Above all, these districts abound in a tree known as the cotton tree, which produces
some hundreds or thousands of bales of beautiful long-stapled cotton yearly. Now,
some time ago when in Java I remarked that this tree Was carefully cultivated there,
and on enquiry I found that the cotton was much valued for stuffing quilts and many
other purposes, and was largely exported to Europe; and I was further much struck
with the poor and dwarfed appearance of the trees as compared to the grand speci-
mens abounding in our own colony. Now, if the Dutch can export this cotton with
a profit, why cannot we ? The gathering of it would be work essentially suited to
blacks, and the profits from sales might be devoted to supporting some scheme for
their welfare.
White men would be useless to collect this natural production in sufficient quanti-
ties. Blocks, on the other hand, would be in their element at such employment, and
when wandering from tree to tree through the forest, combining a congenial kind of
work with the pleasure of hunting, the aboriginal’s soul would not fret, as it invariably
does when put to steady labor.
I offer the foregoing suggestions, not because I have any hope of seeing them
carried out, but because, just at this particular time, the blood of the slain blackfellow
is shrieking out unusually loud in the columns of your paper, and attention may be
thereby called to them —Yours, &c.,
A. C. G.
Queenslander
June 5, 1880.
Brfi,—Having had some fourteen years experience among Queensland blacks, both
on inside and outside country, you will perhaps allow me a word on the ‘’Black
versus White ” controversy.
I am quite aware that at times terrible outrages have been perpetrated on the
blacks both by the police and by brutal “ white savages and I have tried hard to
bring to justice one of the latter who deliberately poisoned a number of blacks ; but
no while man’s (i.e., sworn) evidence of the crime being procurable, the then
Attorney-General refused to take any action upon the matter. From this you will
see that I am ready and anxious to protect blacks from wanton molestation, but I
most strongly deprecate the course you are taking in publishing to the world at
large a list of horrible atrocities of which you have heard —and as neither names nor
dates are given, it is impossible either to verify or contradict them ; but even
granting that they may be all true, and granting that there is only one side to each


story, even then I think it a very great mistake to rouse up among the inside settlers
a feeling against a police force which, whatever its defects, does protect life and
property against the hostile savages of our outside districts, and which, once removed,
leaves but two courses open to us—either to abandon our property to the original
lords of the soil, or to fight it out to the bitter end in a war of wholesale extermina-
tion. In the interests, therefore, of both blacks and whites, I would urge you to be
perfectly certain that you have matured an equally practical and a better plan than
our present one before you fan into a flame a feeling which is always smouldering
among those well-meaning sympathisers with the “ poor blacks” who imagine a mob
of Northern myalls are as harmless and contemptible as the bands of wretched
niggers who loaf round colonial towns and their environs.
I am quite sure, sir, that the efforts of the Queenslander are thoroughly honest
and well-intentioned in this matter ; but bear in mind that “ ’tis bettor to bear the
ills we have than fly to others that we know not of.” —Yours, &c.,
Queenslander
June 5, 1880.
BIRRALEE.
Sir, —lt is a matter for congratulation that you have entered upon the subject of
our treatment to the aboriginal population of the colony with a view to the ameliora-
tion of their unhappy position. From what Ims come within my own knowledge I
can believe that the atrocities you have published are true in their general state-
ments. It is probable, however, that the principal actors were influenced by
circumstances of which your reporter could have no knowledge, but which would to
some extent lessen the enormity of their actions. Still, while admitting the general
truth of the charges, the difficulty is to show how such brutality may be prevented ,
As to the causes which have led up to the present shameful state of things, that *is
not a matter for our present consideration. We have to deal with what is, not with
what might have been under other conditions. We find, on the one hand, the blacks
in outside districts spearing cattle, robbing huts and travellers, mercilessly butchering
men, women, and children. On the other hand we find white men—not untaught
heathens, but Christians, nominally so at anyrate—we find these white Christians,
ill-treating black men and women, even shooting them down without compunction,
for offences of a comparatively trifling nature, or for avenging gross indignity and
insult. We also find a force of black heathen savages, officered by white Christians (?).
and maintained by the Government to assist the white settlers in repressing the
aggressions of the blacks. These, then, are the facts we have to deal with :—lst.
An offending and avenging scattered population of black heathen savages; 2nd. An
offending and avenging number of white Christians ; 3rd. A still move offending and
avenging force of native police. How can we create a better feeling between these
opposing forces ? Some say, “ Let us get rid of the Native Police. Let us have a
white force in place of them.” Before assenting to this proposal we must consider —
1, If we have a white force (supposing they could do the necessary work equally
well) have we reason to suppose that the treatment of the blacks will be better P
2. Ho the eases you have published lead us to hope that whites (Christians though
they may style themselves) will deal greater justice? 3. Can we believe the white
officers of the Native Police are free from the brutality which so distinguishes their
black subordinates? 4. If the outside settlers were willing to bury the hatchet, could
we hope that the wild blacks would understand and appreciate their leniency ? To
all these questions I unhesitatingly answer, No. If we fairly look into the question
we must admit that a war of extermination is waging on all sides, and, do what we
may, this will go on until the more venturesome tribes are greatly diminished in
number—until, indeed, those of an age to be indignantly affected by the treatment
they receive have gone to other hunting-grounds where Christians (?) cease from
troubling them. For the outside blacks I fear little can be done, but for those who
have become semi-civilised (tamed is a better word) there is still some hope. If they
are to be benefited they must be subjected to a certain amount of practical.education,
and this can only be contrived by restricting them to certain limits, and bringing
them under laws which—though harsh perhaps at first—will ultimately help to lift
them out of their present degradation. I regret that I cannot now enter more fully
into this question, but there is reason to hope that steps will be taken, after the
meeting of the House, to accomplish more than has hitherto been done for a race
whose extermination is going on so rapidly, and our neglect of whom will ever
remain a disgrace to our boasted civilisation.—Yours, &c.,
May 28.
A. N.
Queenslander
June 13,1880.


Sir, —Permit me a little space in your columns to give an unqualified denial to the
broad and sweeping assertion of your anonymous correspondent, “ Outis,” as to the
character of the officers of the Native Police. As one who has served in the force, I
claim the right to know more about the officers’ duties and proceedings and the esti-
mation in which they are held by the squatters and their families than “ Outis” can
possibly pretend to. I say, sir, that “ Outis’ ” statement that “ gentlemen ” have re-
fused to allow officers of the Native Police to enter their doors or share the generous
hospitality accorded to every deserving wayfarer, simply because they followed the
occupation they did, is a pure invention of the writer. I have seldom met with
greater kindness than I have from these same “ gentlemen ”in the bush.
May I ask, Mr. Editor, how has “Outis” become so minutely acquainted with
those dreadful habits (as he states) of the officers when, by his own showing, a
“white” man never accompanies the dispersing parties to witness and recount the
horrible scenes he so lavishly describes ?If “ Outis” cannot write in more moderate
language about what he feels to be a grievance, the sooner he hands over the pen to
another the better. At present he simply insults a number of highly respectable
“ gentlemen ” whose hands he knows full well are so tied as to be unable to reply to
his venomous attacks.—Yours, &c.,
VERITAS.
Queenslander
June 12, 1880.
Sib, —My attention has been called to a letter in the Courier of Saturday last, in
which an ex-black police officer, writing under the name of “ Veritas,” questions my
veracity. He would have better merited the nom de plume which he has chosen had
he been careful to quote correctly. In my letter to which he refers he quotes
“Outis’” statement that “ gentlemen have refused to allow officers-of the Native
Police to enter their doors or share the generous hospitality accorded to every
deserving wayfarer simply because they followed the occupation they did.” If
“ Veritas ” will substitute the word “ gentleivomen ” for “ gentlemen ” his quotation
is perfectly correct. I used the word “gentlewoman ” designedly, as I thought that
the hackueyed term of “ lady ” was not enough to convey the feeling of profound
admiration I entertain for the honest womanly feeling that prompted their action.
That “ Veritas,” who, from his own statement, has served in the black police force,
should give my assertion an unqualified denial is not to be wondered at ; but, sir, I
assure you that my former statement is correct, and that I can name two gentle-
women in one district of the colony, well known for their kindness and hospitality,
who declined to entertain officers of the black police.
“ Veritas ” wishes to know howl “ became so minutely acquainted with those
dreadful habits of the officers, when, by my own showing, a white man never
accompanies the dispersing parties to witness and recount the horrible scenes.” I
have great pleasure in complying with the wish that “ Veritas ” has so distinctly
expressed. In the first place I have been told of what had happened to their
relations by the blacks themselves ; and in the second place, I have known the black
police to be “ out ” in a district where there was not one white man to every two or
three hundred square miles. I have seen their tracks, and on their tracks X have
seen the dead bodies of their victims. This may not be sufficient evidence to go into
a court of law with, but no sane man could doubt who committed the murders in
the case I have mentioned. Here is the picture : A lonely region, far remote from
any bush highway —country unoccupied, and rarely or never traversed, save by a
stockman in search of missing cattle ; one well-defined trail leading.down the creek,
known to be the track of a sub-inspector and his troopers ; signs as of horses
galloping ; crowds of hawks and crows circling in the air, and nearer still the
sickening stench ; then the dark object on the ground among the long grass, and the
last lingering crow dashes up from his dainty meal on the gashed and sightless
eyeballs.
Gazing on a picture such as I have described, will anyone blame me, sir, that,
looking up at the warm blue sky overhead and the mirage half enveloping the red
hills in the far distance, and looking at my black boy as he gazed with rolling eyes
and distended nostrils at what not long before had been his kinsman, I solemnly
vowed to do what I could to revolutionise our system of black police ?
Sir, I do not wish to attack individuals, but the only feasible method of criminating
the system at present in vogue is by giving instances to “ point the moral;” or,
rather, as texts upon which to preach a new doctrine of salvation for the aborigines.
In the name of our common humanity, sir, I implore you not to desist from the
good work that you have so well begun. Let instance after instance of inhumanity


be given until the whole community has a sickening sense of blood-guiltiness in
subsidising men (who wear, X suppose, the uniform of her Most Clement and
Christian Majesty) to commit wholesale murder. I have been told by more than
one black police officer that they loathed their work, and lam sure that those of
them who have not been utterly demoralised by their present occupation would
gladly hail any change that would he more satisfactory for themselves and likely to
result in the amelioration of the race which is being so rapidly exterminated under
the present system. —Yours, &o„
OUTIS.
Queenslander
, June 12, 1880.
Sib, —I have read the article in your issue of May lon the above subject, also the
letters of “ Humanity ” und “R. S.” Will you permit an outside resident, and one
who has had considerable experience amongst blacks, to give his views on this much-
vexed question ? What I would wish to show is that your sweeping accusation of
unnecessary cruelty by the whites, although it may have been true in a few instances,
has by no means been so in general; that the best mode of treatment of the young
boys is that now followed —namely, the getting as many as possible to work on the
stations ; that the best course to pursue with regard to the old blacks is to leave
them alone as far as practicable ; and that Government interference is only likely to
lead to further complications and evil results.
In the first place I allow that the blacks are treated with gross injustice, but the
primary and fundamental injustice is the taking of their country. If the whites are
to settle and occupy their country, then a certain amount of cruelty and severity is
unavoidable, but I maintain that upon the whole they are treated in a most humane
manner compatible with the circumstances. You say we treat them like wild
animals. Well, to a certain extent their attributes are the same, and must be met
in the same manner. For instance, if you take a black or a wild animal, young, each
is capable of being domesticated and made useful; but as with the wild animal, so
with the blackfellow : if he is brought in when grown up, his master is only safe so
long as he inspires fear and respect. When once he ceases to do this, no matter
whether he treats them with kindness or harshness, he is no longer safe; in fact,
nine-tenths of the outrages I have heard of have originated from blacks who had
been treated with special kindness, and allowed too much familiarity, and who, for
that very reason, had lost their fear. Where could you find a better example of
this than that terrible tragedy on the Nogoa some seventeen years ago—namely, the
murder of the Wills family. In that instance the blacks were treated with all the
kindness and consideration imaginable. They were allowed in from the first settling
of the country, supplied with rations, clothes, and presents of all kinds, and then,
when the novelty of the white man’s presence, and the natural fear of him had died
out, they turned round in the most treacherous and cowardly manner and murdered
the whole family. Many instances of the same kind are known to all old Queens-
landers, and, as a rule, the victims have been those who have treated the blacks with
the greatest kindness. Grown up blacks, at all events, are incapable of appreciating
kindness, which they invariably attribute to fear, and the moment they imagine you
nre frightened their natural desire for killing gains ascendency, and they embrace
the first opportunity of gratifying their innate propensities.
Much stress has been laid upon the ravishing of the gins. Now, I have had
considerable experience amongst outside blacks, and I have never heard of a single
instance of this crime, and I believe that no inducement for the committal of such a
crime exists. One of the established customs amongst the aborigines is to lend their
women to any chance visitor from a neighboring tribe, and this same custom has
invariably been extended to the whites. To give one instance out of many : Early
in 1876 a party of friends of mine made a trip to what is now called the Mulligan
River, and were obliged to camp at a waterhoJe already occupied by a large mob of
blacks. These had evidently seen no white men before, and their first proceeding,
on finding no harm was intended, was to bring over some dozen young gins for the
acceptance of the party, and they appeared to be rather incensed at the refusal of
the present, this evidently being considered a breach of etiquette.
No doubt it is a fact, and a fact much to be deplored, that the blacks are rapidly
becoming extinct. But the true cause of this is, I believe, generally misunderstood.
In the hush, away from towns, I do not believe that the mortality is much greater
now than it was twenty years ago, if you except those who from time to time are


shot by the police or others. The true reason is, that after the coming of the whites
the women cease to bear children. In their wild state tlje blacks are subject to a
certain set of laws and code of morality (though a strange one) binding on them
through the superstitious veneration iu which they hold the old men of the tribe.
When the white man arrives among them, his moral ascendancy makes them lose all
respect for the elders, and consequently all morality is at an end. lam afraid no-
thing can be devised to replace their old system. It would be almost as useless for
whites to try and make animals moral as the Queensland aborigines.
With regard to “ Humanity’s ” trooper’s thrilling story of Native Police warfare, I
simply do not believe it. There is nothing a half-civilised blackfellow so delights in
as the making up of stories of this description, and I have often wondered at the
cleverness they show in regulating the amount of sensation according to the supposed
credulity of the listener. I can assure you I have had blacks give me the most cir-
cumstantial accounts of murders o( whites by blacks, with all the minute details, and
I have found afterwards there has not been a shadow of foundation for the stories to
rest upon. I have had considerable experience of Native Police affairs, and I can
safely say that as a rule the officers find the “ dispersing ” business a most painful
and disagreeable duty, and one never to have recourse to unless under great provo-
cation. It seems to me a great shame to persistently run down a force which (as
every reasonable, thinking pioneer must admit) has been to a great extent the means
of saving life and property in all outside districts. We have heard of instances of
great cruelty on the part of one or two officers, but then one black sheep does not
make the whole flock black, and as a rule I am sure that the officers are as much
averse to anything in the shape of cruelty as “ Humanity” himself.
With regard to the boys, those who come in or are brought in from the bush
“stolen,” as “Humanity” puts it—lead not only useful but happy lives', and are
brought to as high a state of civilisation as they are capable of attaining. As a rule
they are kindly treated, well fed and clothed, and can always obtain a holiday. But
the holidays are not generally of long duration, for, although fond of change, they
soon tire of wild life and begin to long for the comforts to which they have grown
accustomed. This, however, is the case only with those who have been brought in
young.
And now with regard to the grown-up blacks. As to the success or otherwise of
the missionary station spoken of by “ B. S.” I cannot say anything, but I do know
that missionary boys are notoriously the most unmitigated scoundrels, combining
polished hypocrisy with their own natural vices. With regard to making reserves
for blacks, whatever success may have attended this plan amongst the half-civilised
coast blacks, I am quite sure that it never would answer amongst the wild blacks.
In the first place force would have to be used to keep them within the prescribed
boundaries, which would lead to all the old evils complained of, and confinement to
one place is so totally opposed to their nomadic instincts that any restraint of that
kind would be intolerably irksome to them. But the great objection to any such
scheme is this : I have already pointed out that the main source of evil amongst the
blacks is the upsetting of their social laws, and I think all who have seen much of
outside blacks will agree with me that under any such white supervision as proposed
the relation between the sexes would be more unsatisfactory than ever. And in
connection with this matter I allow the whites have been much to blame, and I would
be the last to palliate their conduct. But practically this is an evil which no Go-
vernment measures can reach, and which must exist as long as human nature is what
it is. At the same time, as I have already pointed out, this is not the fruitful source
of bad blood and ill-feeling between the races which it is represented to be,—Yours
&e.,
Queenslander
, June 12, 1880.
NORTH GREGORY.
Sir, —I have read all that you have published in favour of a more humane treat-
ment of our blacks and of a reform in the Native Police system with that view, and
also all that has been said against your proposals; and I wish to assure you that
I entirely concur with your views, and hope they may be carried out. I have always
thought it monstrous that the actions of the Native Police were not allowed to be
properly witnessed and regularly reported, and consider that the reverse should be
the rule. The force should protect as well as punish blacks. There ought to be de-
grees of punishment too, and far morp trouble should be taken to find out the real


briminal in each oa,s6, whether black or white. All this would require d mixed lorce
such as you advocate. As to the truth of those accounts which you have given of
particular outrages on blacks, and which have gone unpunished, X see no reason to
doubt them, many acts of equal inhumanity of the kind having to my own knowledge
gone unpunished, and I have no doubt the same thing is going on now, and will do
so till the people of this country are convinced of their responsibility in the matter ;
and I only hope you will go on exposing the rottenness of our present system of
dealing with the blacks till you have made the facts widely known, and then some-
thing like justice will be done—if our boasted civilisation is not a sham to all who
cannot buy its fruits. As on all previous occasions when anyone has attempted to
draw public attention to the evils complained of, your efforts in favor of humanity
on this occasion have so far called forth little but hostile critisism, scorn, and ridicule ;
or at least friendly advice to leave the question to those who understand it. Em-
boldened by the uniform success of such tactics previously, writers have again come
forward proclaiming themselves the champions of the pioneer settlers, ready to
defend them against misrepresentation and slander; denouncing your ideas as
wildly absurd, reinarkable chiefly for their impracticability, and so on, however seem-
ingly benevolent; at the same time expecting implicit belief in their own statements
on account of their (the writers’) wide experience, practical common sense, and
intimate knowledge of the nature and character of the blacks, &c. We are told that
it is only people who are unacquainted with the hard realities of frontier life who ask
for these reforms —visionary sentimentalists, dwellers in towns, and so forth ; and
the charge has generally been a telling one, on account of persons not allowing their
names to appear when writing against the abuses in question ; and so people take
critics such as “Never-Never” at their word, and decide that these matters are
properly understood only by such persons as he is described to be (by himself), and
that they must be settled in the natural way—“ the survival of the fittest ”
—which, interpreted by “Never-Never,” means that every scoundrel who
has a mind to should be allowed by society (as indeed he is now in
most places) to rob and murder the blacks with as much freedom from
punishment as if they were pigeons. Such conduct may be according to wild beast
nature, even if men degraded themselves, as some do, to the level of wild beasts, for
then they cease to be men, to all intents and purposes. And so, with all due respect
to “ Never-NeverV 1 profound wisdom, we may be allowed to call his conception of
human nature a beggarly one, if he thinks it would be natural for men to let the
weak and defenceless fall victims to the worst passions of mankind ; this sort of thing
is called (rightly so) inhuman, unnatural, and brutal. Besides, if allowed, where is
it to stop ? Are the Chinese to be the next we are to conclude want shooting, “ being
useless?” And what about the useless members of society of our own color; are
they all to perish whilst society looks on to see “ Never Never’s” notion of a natural
law work out ? The natural result would be the mutual destruction of all —not the
survival of the fittest. Let us look at the question fairly ; use our reason and expe-
rienee ; grant that we have a plain duty to perform towards every black as well as
white person —to protect as well as to punish him—and I fully expect we should
find the task an easy one, and easier year by year. And I maintain that the blacks
are, in the greater part of the country, wonderfully easy to manage , and very useful.
As to the. Native Police force, I am of opinion that with some slight alteration as to
its composition, and a radical one as to its methods, it would be the most suitable for
the greater part of the country ; it is a cheap and competent force, and only wants
to be properly worked. I think those who have had the best opportunities of judg-
ing the question should, in justice not only to the blacks but to themselves and
“ outsiders ” generally, give their experiences and express their views. It is usually
represented that outsiders get, accustomed to seeing blacks brutally ill-treated and
become indifferent to it, and that the desire for reform comes from people living in
civilised parts. I think this is a mistake, and can only say that, after having worked on
stations with blacks for about 20 years in old districts and on the very outside stations,
I never saw the necessity for anything at all like the extermination policy ; on the
other hand, I know that within two years of the first settlement of some Western
rivers the blacks have ceased to trouble the whites and have become very useful in
many ways; and lam pretty sure that very few people could be found in the West
who approve or ever practise such a plan as “ Never Never” advocates. There are
a few, I know, and I hold that they should be punished most severely when possible;
at all events never encouraged in the way they are. As to our being committed to
a course of harsh and cruel treatment of blacks, having unjustly taken their country,
1 think it is nonsense. X don’t admit it was their .country, and want proof of it j


but, granting that, it is evident we must accept the situation, and it is for us to do
our duty in it. Wishing you success in your efforts—l am yours, &c.,
PIONEER.
Queenslander
i June 19, 1880.
Sib, —Allow me one word of comment upon “ Never Never’s ” letter in your last
issue. Callousness, to use a very mild word, seems to have outgrown any finer feel*
ings this writer may have once possessed.
I have known of blacks when being dispersed seek refuge in trees, where, shriek-
ing for mercy, they were shot down by their murderers beneath. “Never Never”
would fain as easily dispose of the Queenslander's good taste and honesty of purpose.
That blaokfellows take a deal of killing sometimes and “ die hard ” he seems to know,
and I trust that he may yet learn that naked truth is not to be dispersed by the pen,
however facile, of any unhesitating utilitarian such as he undoubtedly is. Let him
not seek to strengthen his position by dragging in the outside men. They are, lam
happy to say, the great majority, strangers to his line of thought.—Yours, &c.,
June 2.
HUMANITY.
Queenslander
dune 19, 1880.
Sie, —In reply to “ Outis’ ” correction of my communication relative to the
“ gentlemen’s” reception of officers of the Native Police force, I beg the favor of
stating that undoubtedly “ gentlewomen ” should have been the word used ; and if
I omitted doing so it is simply a mistake —one, however, that does not affect the
question at issue; for I include “ gentlemen” as well as “ gentlewomen ” as those
from whom I and others of the force invariably received the greatest kindness, not
only when in their own homes, but we were also honored by their visiting us in our
barracks.
As regards the mode by which “ Outis ” obtained his information in re the
atrocities, I am quite prepared to admit the reliability of his informants, namely,
the relatives or friends of the blacks dispersed. Would the honest womanly feel-
ings of those two “ gentlewomen,” think you, have undergone a change towards the
Native Police officers had their homes been surrounded by hostile myalls, or would
“ Outis ” consider such wholesale murderers and refuse their assistance had they
come to their relief? I have known of two similar occurrences.
In all services there are without doubt black sheep, but I assert emphatically that
as a body the Native Police officers are as honorable and, I maintain, as humane as
any body of officers in the service of the Crown, and would regard with as great
horror as “ Outis ” himself the atrocities with which he charges them. —Yours, &c.,
VERITAS.
Queenslander
June 19, 1880.
Sib, — I have read with painful interest and deep sympathy your article No. 111.,
“How we civilise the blacks,” and I desire to support the philanthropic view which
you justly take of the cause of what are usually termed “ atrocities of the aborigines”
being really “ white aggression.” I need only point to the first white sufferer who
fell from black spears, in what is now known as Queensland —my very esteemed and
noble friend Kennedy, the last to provoke the enmity of the savage. Then, why was
he killed? is the natural enquiry. If the Queensland Government have preserved
the book which was kept at the Booby Island post office, you may find there
the record in the handwriting of Kennedy’s real murderer, though indirectly, about
seven years previously —namely, about June, 1841 —in which Grayburnc, the master
of the Brothers, records the fact of while sailing past the York Islands he “ shot a
blackfellow.” Here we have a picture of a British vessel sailing along the coast while
natives are peacefully gathering shellfish for their meal, when this unblushing British
tar (no, not tar, but brute) tries the range of bis musket, and thinks himself a clever
shot. I read this a few days after its entry, and remarked that I pitied the first white
man that came within reach of that tribe. The opportunities were rare, but Kennedy
came at last. Who, again, carried off two young children from the tribe on poor
Wills’ run, and brought them to Sydney never to return ? But Wills, unconscious


of the treachery of his predecessor, had to pay the penalty. As a striking contrast to
the bloody reputation of the Queensland natives, how is that we learn such amicable
and pleasing accounts of the blacks at Port Essington, where from 1838 to 1840 they
not only lived on friendly terms with the garrison, but twenty years after it had been
abandoned by the whites two gentlemen from Adelaide were able to occupy the pen-
insula as a run, and have been most kindly received by. the aborigines, who show a
reverence and respect for the memory of the early whites.
CkAWFORD Pasco, Commander R.N.
Queenscliff, Victoria, June 13.
Queenslander
June 26, 1880,
Sie, —If the editorial flat , “ This correspondence must now cease,” has not gone
forth, I would like to enter a protest against the somewhat calumnious articles
directed against the pioneers of the colonies in general, and those of Northern
Queensland in particular, which appeared in two successive issues of the Queenslander
under the headings “The Wav we Civilise,” and “Black and White.” To quote
Macaulay : —“ We know no spectacle so ridiculous as the British public in one of its
periodical fits of morality. We read the scandal, talk about it for a day, and forget
it. But once in six or seven years our virtue becomes outrageous. We cannot suffer
the laws of religion and decency to be violated. We must make a stand against vice.”
We now appear about to suffer one of these “ periodical fits,” and, casting about for
a scapegoat, fix upon the person of the pioneer—the settler of the interior ; the key
of the inland terra incognita we might call him—to bear the brunt of our virtuous
indignation. But we should bear in mind that it is possible to be virtuous and yet
unjust at the one time, and this appears to me to be the position the Queenslander
has assumed. When it seriously states that “on occupying new territory the
aboriginal inhabitants are treated in exactly the same way as the wild beasts or birds
the settler may find there,” its virtuous indignation—if it honestly believes in such
wholesale vilification—is highly commendable, while at the same time the injustice
of such a sweeping accusation, levelled against a body of men who form one of our
most useful and enterprising of colonists, is greatly to be deplored. Let us take a
retrospect to a date some 238 years antecedent to the present era. We find, referring
to New’ Zealand, “ Tasman did not land on any part of the island, but having had a
boat’s crew cut off by the natives in what he then called Massacre Bay he was content
to sail along the west coast of the North Island.” And again, on Bth October,
127 years subsequent to Tasman’s visit, we find Captain Cook defending himself
from an unprovoked attack from the same people, and glad to make good his retreat
from so “ unfortunate and inhospitable a place.” Here we are furnished with two
authentic records of instances in which it is quite plain the white man could not
have been the aggressor, for in the first instance they had not even landed on the
aboriginal’s soil, and in the second had done so in the hope of being able to open up
friendly negotiations with the natives; and it was, finally, in pursuance of this
laudable project that the gallant commander referred to fell a victim to ferocious
barbarism. I have selected these two remote instances, first, because they stand
amongst the first instances on record wherein the aboriginals of the southern
hemisphere and the European have come into collision. Secondly, because, being a
matter of history, they are more likely to gain credence than those instances which
have occurred contemporaneous with our own experience, in our own colony ; and,
to be more explicit, in the districts of Burke and Cook. I could recount many
instances where the pioneer, having selected Ids blocks and formed a comfortable
homestead, has allowed the aboriginals—free from any previous intercourse with
Europeans—to form a camp near the station. How they had been generously
supplied with food that could be ill spared. How the virtues of a “ Friday ”
appeared to be intensified in each sable warrior. How they had been presented with
sundry articles of clothing, implements, &c., until the increasing cry for more could
not possibly be complied with ; and then , how the settler returned home after a hard
day’s ride to find his late companions murdered and mutilated beyond recognition,
his homestead and stores in smouldering ruins, and the ground Uttered with broken
spears. This was no unfrequant experience in the early days of settlement, and the
same thing will continue to occur while the progress of colonisation is to be carried
on in outlying districts inhabited by the blacks. Where this sort of thing is likely to
F


occur you do not hesitate to affirm " the shooting of the blacks to be inevitable,”
yet in the same breath talk of “ the awful depth of brutality to which even an
educated European can descend ” when fulfilling the inevitable. As an instance
illustrating (he results of forbearance, let us turn to the recent attack on Mr. Jack.
Here we have a tribe of blacks, so remote from any European settlement that any
question of previous ill-treatment from whites should be at once dismissed as utterly
fallacious, yet they no sooner see a small party of Europeans apparently afraid to
proceed to extremities than their savage instincts are at once aroused, and the result
of European humanity nearly culminates in the loss of valuable life. Now, I have
no sympathy with a “bushman who shoots a blackfellow to try the range of his
rifle,” and here I have no hesitation in declaring that such a monstrosity is not to be
found amongst the ranks of the pastoral pioneer ; but at the same time I do not
hesitate to affirm that had Mr. Jack used his rifle earlier in the day, and with better
effect, he would not have suffered the unpleasant experience of having a spear run
through his neck, and by instilling into the blacks a wholesome diead of the white
man’s weapons would have made things much safer for those to come after him. I
fear this opinion will be held sufficient to class me amongst “ the white brutes who
have fancied the amusement, have murdered, ravished, and robbed the blacks
without let or hindrance.” All the same, the opinion is an honest one, born of
experience, and one I am sure that will be readily concurred in by all who have had
any dealings with the northern blacks.
From the most infinitesimal creation of animated nature up to the “ noblest work
of God ” we recognise one universal law—species preying upon species, and the
weakest going to the wall. This is the one fundamental religion of the northern
aboriginals, and one from which no forbearance is likely to convert them. Gratitude
is a word not to be found in their vocabulary, and a virtue that it will be found im-
possible to instil into their nature. They are under no especial tribal dominion, and
recognise but the one law of might as right. Their individual privileges are gained
and retained by weapon right alone. In warring amongst themselves they never
expect or ask for quarter, no matter how great the odds against the weaker party,
and never fail to attribute any act of forbearance in an enemy as a certain indication
of cowardice, and regard any acts of generosity bestowed upon them as forced tribute,
or “blackmail,” to their superiority. I could quote many amhentic cases, com-
mencing from the earliest period of our intercourse with these blacks, in support of
these opinions, but to do so would, I fear, render me liable to the imputation of
countenancing extermination on the very poor argument of inferiority, and, like
“Never Never,” be characterised as one who has “ lost the great lesson of eivilisa-
tion.” I merely enumerate their peculiarities as showing the, at present, insuperable
difficulties to be encountered when undertaking the reformation of these unfortunates.
As a remedy for the social evil, you suggest that white police should be employed,
and that “ their duty should be to repress any outrage by the blacks, and for that
purpose they should have the same license that is accorded to any hostile force in
the time of war;” or, in other words, that the present system of police protection
should still be maintained, with this difference only, that instead of being a mixed
body of white and black the members should be white only. Now, I daresay none
but the ordinary white man would join such a force, in which case is there not a
possibility that “ his conscience may be seared and his nature hardened by familiar-
ity with the scenes of bloodshed,” he would necessarily become familiar with ? In
which event would not the remedy become even more abhorrent than the evil ?
Victoria and New South Wales and other colonies have each had to grapple with
this evil, and each has found the panacea to be a matter of time only. A being may
be living in the midst of us having a body covered with ulcerous and disgusting sores,
yet while he keeps himself decently covered we have no suspicion of —and conse-
quently experience no uneasiness from—his objectionable presence ; but no sooner
does some well-meaning friend expose the sores to the public view than we raise our
voice in horror and wonder how such things could be. We might compare Queens-
land to the ulcerated, the Press to the friend, and those fortunates— who, following
in the wake of the “ settler,” reaping the rewards of his hardship and enterprise,
nightly closing their eyes within the security of four substantial walls— to the
horrified public. Now, if I may be allowed a suggestion, I could wish the public to
be left to their own discoveries, and when any sickening—but at the time incurable —■
spectacle was laid bare, the friend of the people and guide of public opinion would,
I think, do well to clothe its repulsive nakedness with all speed, rather than add to
the horror by an indiscriminate sacrification of the raw ulcer; and when the time
reglty is ripe for beneficent intervention we have only to turn our eyes to Chando


rook, in Victoria, and a similar establishment in New Zealand, and we will find a
ready solution to that present problem, “What shall we do with our blacks?”—
Yours, Ac.,
Millungera, May 29.
CHARLES KNIPE.
Queenslander
, June 26,1880.
Sir, —Your Lower Herbert correspondent of the 15th ultimo evidently writes with
a desire to contradict the truth when he states that he has been a resident on the
river for many years, and never heard of a black gin having been shot or burnt in the
district. I will not trespass on your columns by going into details ; but with your
permission will inform your correspondent that a few years ago a sub-inspector of
Native Police was dismissed from the service for the shooting and burning of a gin
named Kassey, on Mr. Cudmore’s selection, near the public road, Lower Herbert —
not the Herbert lliver out west. A few days after this outrage occurred the Premier
of this colony visited the Lower Herbert, and the matter was brought before that
hon. gentleman’s notice. I could mention other cases of this kind if you corres-
pondent is not satisfied with the above. —Yours, &c.,
Ingham, Lower Herbert, June 11.
JAMES CASSADY.
Queens lander
June 26, 1880.
Sie, —Certain articles in jour paper, “ How we Civilise the Blacks,” hare attracted
my attention, and 1 regret to say that to my knowledge many of the incidents therein
recounted are facts, I having heard them from eye-witnesses or the actors j but it is
fair to state that most of them happened years ago, though there is reason to fear
much the same kind of thing is going on still in the far North and West.
Having lived in Northern Queensland since 1862, and in this neighborhood since
’6l, my personal experience may be worth something, though this letter may in con-
sequence appear egotistical. I have employed and do employ numbers of the abori-
ginals j for eight years they have done all my sheep-washing, and I always have a
few working on the place. At shearing time, with the washpool, I employ about
thirty shepherding, &c., Ac., and I find they do the work as well as any other men.
As a rule I never engage them for more than “ two moons,” and discharge them
whether they like it or not at the end of their time—for a spell. The mind of a
“ nigger ” is so fickle that he cau scarcely help bolting if kept long at one employ-
ment —caused no doubt by the wandering instinct inherited from their ancestors,
who have followed a roving life from time immemorial, and which it would take
many generations to eradicate thoroughly.
Until 1868 the Native Police used to visit this station constantly. The result was
—shepherds killed, and sheep, cattle, and other property destroyed to the value of
£2OO a year. At my request, in that year the Native Police promised to visit me as
little as possible, and not interfere with my blacks (which promise has been kept by
the various gentlemen in command in the district since) ; with the result that I was
able to explain to the niggers that if they kept away from the cattle camps and did
not molest the shepherds they might hunt and camp all over the run. The first
year of the new regime the damage to property did not exceed £6O, and per contra
they saved £s‘) in wages, and since that have done on an average £lO worth of dam-
age per annum, against £IOO saved in wages through their labor. The blacks since
they have become friendly tell me that in the old days of “ reprisals,” carried out in
the usual manner— i.e., shooting the men and destroying their nets, waler-bags, and
implements—we used to starve numbers of the old men, women, and children to
death; for, being hunted into the desert (spinifex country), they had neither means
of carrying water nor of catching game (the former article is very scarce), and of
course the weaker members of the tribe felt it most.
I do not pretend tiiat a display of force has not been necessary at times, or that
the natives are the harmless animals some people would have us believe; but, as I
knew the blacks personally, I was able to discover who committed any offence, and
in most cases get him or them given up to me, whereby indiscriminate punishment
was avoided. The tribe to whom this part of the country actually belongs,
obliged to return home sooner or later, are only too glad to act as police and givs w.p»
offenders in their own tribe, or track “ raiders ” belonging to strange tribes.. Th,e>
Native Police should certainly be abolished-, and white police with amedi bkwlfe


trackers be substituted {i.e., if tbe country can afford the expense) ; but, above all,
the officers should be middle-aged men, who know something of the manners and
customs of the natives ; and the different officers should be kept in the same districts
as long as possible, and encouraged to become acquainted with the peculiar habits
and languages of the tribes therein residing ; otherwise this force will become just as
inefficient as the present one, and will only be able to make useless, because in many
cases mistaken, reprisals.
The Native Police officers do their duty, as a rule, to the best of their ability, but
under the existing system it is impossible for them to do anything more than they
do at present. A young man is appointed to command a detachment of N.P. who
knows nothing whatever about the aboriginals, and finding that his men are a lot of
unruly turbulent savages, always ready to bolt, and only to be kept to their duty by
the excitement of bloodshed, and that the traditions of ” the force” are —study no-
thing of the native character or habits, but if sent for “ disperse” the first camp you
find near the scene of a felony, he naturally follows the usual course. There are
certainly, a few thoughtful men in “ the force” who endeavour to act in a different
manner, but their individual efforts are vain under such a system.
Much has been written about reserves, but no one has yet suggested that the said
reserves should be pastoral instead of agricultural. If, say, 500 square miles were
reserved in each district, and stocked with sheep or cattle, it could be worked by
niggers, and would be self-supporting immediately. The superintendent might be
a police officer as well. He should encourage the blacks to camp on the reserve as
much as possible ; give them work when they wanted it ; learn to know all the blacks
in the district personally ; supervise all agreements made between whites and abori-
gines ; and see that the blacks are protected as well as the whites—particularly in
their contracts ; and also be empowered by law to administer corporal punishment
in a summary manner, as in all dealings with "the lower races flogging appears to be
as necessary at times as with children ; in fact, their minds not being developed as
in civilised man, they are much the same, in feeling and ideas, as children. It is not
surprising that agricultural reserves have been a failure—that they have been so
hitherto is, I think, an acknowledged fact —as nature evidently intended man to pass
through two stages before he arrived at the agricultural “ house dweller.” The
Navnjo Indian of New Mexico is just entering the pastoral stage, the Kaffir of South
Africa is just emerging from it; and all attempts hitherto to force a race of men to
jump from hunters to agriculturists have been a failure. The Tasmanian Govern-
ment placed their aborigines on an island, and they fretted themselves to death,
though rations and every necessary were provided. The U.S. Government has for
the last hundred years been placing the Indians who “ came in ” on agricultural re-
serves, with the result that (except a few Choctaws and Chorokees, who have become
useful citizens) in a very few' years the tribes have become extinct. Perhaps pastoral
reserves should not be a success, but, as -we w r ould be following Nature’s teaching
more closely than in any other way, we should have a better chance of success.
Almost anything would be better than the present system, which is a disgrace to
civilisation. If we failed we should be no worse off than at present, and should
have at least the merit of having done our best. Unless some measures are quickly
taken, the Aboriginal Question will solve itself. Ten years ago the tribe lam best
acquainted with could muster 130 fighting men ; now it could not muster more than
40 at most, and few children are growing up. Measles in ’65 and the vices of civili-
sation since have caused this rapid decrease. — Yours, &c., C.
Cape River, June 12.
Queenslander
, July 10,1880.
si®,— So much correspondence has appeared in your paper with reference to the
aborigines of Queensland that it is with considerable diffidence I add to the bulk of
it; but from tbe year 1863 to the present time having been familiar with the settle-
ment of a large portion of Northern Queensland, extending from the Burdekin River
to the western waters, I feel that a few remarks from me may not be out of place at
this time. Without paiticularising the vaiious letters and articles which have
appeared in your paper—to none of which letters, however, have the names of the
writers been attached, so that it is impossible for the uninitiated to judge of the
amount of experience they bring to bear upon the question—it will be sufficient to re*


tnark that a certain .number of these condemn the treatment that the blacks have!
received from the Native Police ; others record horrible stories of atrocities alleged to
have been committed by white men against the blacks ; others maintain that although
from time to time a few white men have been guilty of great barbarities in their deal-
ings with the blacks, still on the whole their conduct has been only such as has been
necessitated by the fact of the former occupying the country of the latter, and that
consequently neither they nor the Native Police are to blame in the matter, but that
the operations of the police have on the whole been conducted with as little severity
and irregularity as was compatible with a due performance of their duty in protecting
the flocks, herds, and lives of settlers and miners in their various districts. It appears
to me that, with reference to the atrocities related as having been committed by
white men, many old stories of bygone days have been raked up, some from mere
hearsay, and have nothing to do with what is going on at the present time. And if
by any chance the interest taken in the colonies should be sufficient to cause these
things to be copied in the home papers, the readers of such stories could not fail to
entertain ideas very much to the prejudice of Queenslanders. It seems to me that
we have to do with things as they are at the present time, and not with what has
passed and is beyond remedy. The matter appears to have started with the question
—Are the Native Police as at present organised suited for the proper performance of
their work, or is some alteration necessary? But, because we may have had amongst
us men who have been guilty of cruelty towards the blacks in bygone days, I fail to
see how the raking up of such atrocities, which no possible surveillance could have
checked, can assist in answering the question. At the present time, with the excep-
tion of the goldfields above the 19th parallel of latitude, and about the GS-ulf of Car-
pentaria, the blacks are not molesting either settlers or their stock to any serious
extent. The Native Police have in consequence been withdrawn from many stations
they formerly occupied, and where their presence was so needed a few years
bush townships have sprung up in the centres of districts where blacks were trouble-
some, around which they now congregate, instead of running about spearing cattle ;
so that if atrocities are committed by the whi es it is only in certain limited districts,
that they would pass unnoticed. A good deal has been said about the indiscriminate
punishment of a tribe of blacks, but those who find fault in this way evidently do
not realise how difficult it is to find out the real culprits amongst a tribe of myall
blacks, who after committing depredations generally take refuge in mountainous or
scrubby country. It is true that sometimes they may be rounded up, but far oftener
has it happened that they have broken before the police could surround them, and
moreover the bailing up of a mob of blacks has not always been found the simple
and safe operation which some people seem to imagine. I have known personally
or by reputation many police officers, and, although there may be black sheep in
every flock, I do not believe that as a class they can be justly accused of having exer-
cised unnecessary severity in punishing the blacks. Nine out of ten of those who
like myself have suffered continually from their depredations in former years will
bear me out in saying that, generally, any attempt to fix the blame on any particular
members of a tribe, when ail had more or less a hand in the depredation, would have
been simply unsuccessful. The assertion that the Native Police shoot men, gins, and
children promiscuously, probably is made in ignorance, as it is well known that on
no account will native troopers intentionally fire on any but the men. With regard
to the proposal that a force of white police could effectively take the place of the
black troopers, I believe no body of white men could in practice be got to work with
sufficient efficiency to be of practical use; and the following up of a retreating tribe
of blacks under a blazing summer sun—often through waterless country —would be
a strain which only men well inured to the work by constant practice could go
through—and even then a considerable portion of black trackers would be required.
What is really necessary is that care should be taken in the selection of officers for
the Native Police, and that, instead of men who have sometimes been appointed to
the command of detachments without any ascertained qualification for the appoint-
ment, those only shall be placed in command in whose temper, judgment, and ability
reliance can be placed. In conclusion, I say that any attempt to ameliorate the con-
dition of the blacks—beyond supplying blankets, which is very insufficiently done—
appears to me quite hopeless. We cannot prevent their coming in contact with a
white population, by whom they become demoralised, and whose worst points they
imitate. Unlike most races in the world they appear never to have advanced in
civilisation one jot j as soon as they come in contact with Europeans they lose the
good qualities they may possess as savages, and pick up the worst in those with
Whom they come in contact. Experience always teaches that a race which cannot


progress in civilisation iriust go backwards and die out; and any proposition there-
fore for raising the condition of the blacks, or making them of permanent use ap-
pears to me simply utopian.
Huglienden, June 30.
R. GRAY.
Queenslander
, July 10,1880.
Sib, —Some weeks since I sent you a letter on the above subject. Living so far
inland, Xam not yet aware if my letter has been published or not. Assuming, how-
ever, that it has, I will ask you to allow me space for a few further remarks. Since
sending the letter referred to I have read a good deal in the Queenslander ©n the
same question, which has set me wondering how it is that in the colonies, where the
art of —well —say “ romancing ” is cultivated to such an extent as to give rise to the
necessity of a new proverb—“ Believe nothing that you hear, and only half what you
see ” —how it is that town people continue to place such child-like faith in bush
stories? At the present moment I believe there is an expensive party being fitted
out in Sydney to go to look for half-caste children, toothless roan ponies, and other
curious things in the west of Queensland, while the very country in which these
wonders are said to exist has been occupied by cattle nearly three years, during which
time it has been constantly ridden over by stockmen and patrolled by the Native
Police. And in newspapers nearer home I have read of blacks being found in the
same locality in a state of semi-civilisation, living in good houses, &c. Stories of
this sort have always followed the taking up of new country, and always will do so
as surely as the day follows night. Yet they are still published from time to time
by too-confiding editors, who get them on what they consider no doubt reliable
authority The “ new country ” theme has always been a fovorite one with the
bush “ blower,” presenting as it does such an extent and variety of play for his
fancy without risk of contradiction. But the subject which has the greatest fascina-
tion of all for the romancer is the Native Police. In the first place the public is
always partial to tales of massa:res and bloody murders. Then the Native Police
officer is a man who can always be attacked with impunity, as he is not allowed to
defend himself, and, if ho were, there is a tf certain section of the community ” who
will hear nothing but evil of a Native Police officer. Biit what more than anything
else has contributed to make this such a popular theme for the storytellers is the law
which makes the Native Police a secret service. Why, it raises it at once to the
level of the old secret societies which have furnished plots for half the sensational
novels of Europe 1 I shall refer to this law further on. What I wish to point out
now is that the public (barring the section alluded to above) will require some further
evidence before they give implicit credence to the tales you have published. So far
your chief authority appears to be a certain “ colonial experience ”on Downs
station. The only insight you have given us into his character is that he was allowed
to go out as a friend with a Native Police officer, and that on his return he turned
round and accused that officer of being guilty of almost inhuman cruelty and murder.
Now if your “colonial experience” was a man of ordinary intelligence he must
have been aware that he was only allowed to accompany this secret-service expedi-
tion on the assumption that he was a gentleman and would not divulge the secrets
which might come to his knowledge. Was the sense of public duty so abnormally
strong in this young gentleman as to cause him to violate the most sacred laws of
honor and comradeship P Or was lie influenced by some less worthy motive ?If
the latter, why then such a man may have exaggerated or fabricated the whole story.
And now with regard to this law of keeping the Native Police doings secret. The
plain history of it, I take to be this : We, rightly or wrongly, have seized and oc-
cupied the blackfellows\country. We have invited our fellow-countrymen, with their
wives and their children, to come over and share in the spoil ; but we have tried to
keep hidden from their eyes the inevitable consequences of our lawless act. And
it would have been well, no doubt, could we have kept these things from the know-
ledge of our town people, and especially of our women and children. But the very
course which w r as taken to ensure this end has had the very contrary effect. It
lias had the effect of enveloping in mystery ah our dealings with the aborigines, and
the gross exaggerations which were the natural outcome of this have so inflamed the
imaginations of these people that they think we—and they through us—are respon-
sible for atrocities more revolting than those we heard of during the Turco-Russian
war. Seeing, then, that this system has so entirely failed in its object, let us do away
with it, and let it be openly known to our people the price they have to pay for


sharing the plunder we have taken from the aborigines. Let ns at once do away
with all pretence of treating the outside blacks according to European law, for it is
not practicable to do so. And then we may set about devising some better scheme
for subduing them if we can. Ido not think that substituting white police for black
would mend matters. White men of the class you propose would, never submit to
the stern discipline so absolutely necessary in a force of the kind while on the war
path. I believe it would be impossible to devise a more efficient system than that of
black troopers with white officers. The “ fiendish ferocity ” which you attribute to
the former is the very quality we want, and which is so valuable when under the
direction and control of an efficient officer. But then the officers must be men of
high standing and character to be entrusted with such important duties. You say
the employment is at present degrading. I cannot see why it would be less so with
white troopers. Could we not make the post less degrading than we do? We send
an officer into outside country with no authority to treat the blacks otherwise than
according to English laws, when we know that they are utterly impracticable, and we
tell him lie lias to keep the blacks quiet. Is not this telling a man to make bricks
without straw with a vengeance ? If our officer is careful not to commit himself, and
keeps within the law, the blacks soon begin to kill cattle, and then men—and he is
“ inefficient.” If. on the other hand, he essays to keep the blacks in order in the only
way we know it practicable for him to do so, at every step he places himself in the
power of any unscrupulous white man, and runs perhaps a narrow escape of the
gallows, while he is howled at by a “ certain section of the community” and branded
with such epithets as “ degraded,” “ inhuman,” &c. Is it to be wondered at that
some Native Police officers have failed to preserve their self-respect under this treat-
ment ? Let us then tell our officers plainly what they may do and what they may
not do. “ Outis ” shows us how the Native Police prisoner “ never comes in at the
next stage.” What in the name of goodness does “Outis” expect? Why, if the
law had to be put in force with every black criminal in the same manner as with a
white man the colony would be bankrupt in a year. Does “ Outis” really think it
to be the duty of the Native Police officer to take every prisoner down to, say, Rock-
hampton ? And does he not know that it would be impossible to get legal evidence
against one wild blackfellow in ten thousand ?
With regard to what you say in the last Queenslander I have seen (May 29) about
the South Australian system, it is no wonder that it does not cost so much as ours,
for, practically, they have no police in the bush. And if you lived over thehorder,
Mr. Editor, you would not say so much about their keeping their hands clean. No,
sir, the South Australians have to pay the same penalty that we have, and the only
difference in the dealing with the blacks across the border is that the station holders
do their own police work. They arm themselves and their boys, and are notoriously
more severe than our own Native Police. And it is only natural that they should bo
so, as, having no police protection, they are more at the mercy of the blacks. And
the South Australians certainly carry hypocrisy to a slightly more absurd extent than
we do by occasionally making a pretence of justice, and carrying a blackfellow a long
way to goal, as if hundreds were not shot without trial for each one that is so treated.
“ Outis ” gives us a touching picture of himself sitting with a mob of blacks round
a back waterhole on the Diamantina while he explains to them the goodness and piety
of the “ big fellow master belong a paper.” But should you, Mr. Editor, ever find
yourself in collision with the same blacks I am afraid you would find your reputation
for goodness and kindness of heart would be of very little service 1o you, unless backed
by the knowledge that you were a firm man and a straight shot. And in spite of
“ Outis’ ” outside experience, and the intimate knowledge he displays of the blacks’
language, I think he is far from having arrived at a true estimate of their character
when he argues that because his system has been successful with the Ceylon coolies
therefore it would be successful with our aborigines ; for I suppose it would be hard
to find two races presenting greater contrasts in all their characteristics and habits.
And here, by the way, let me ask, why does “ Outis ” —whose tone is so business-like
and straightforward on his own scheme —why does he think it necessary the moment
he touches on the present system to rush into the “ penny dreadful ” style? And
what would “ Outis’ ” scheme amount to if carried out in the manner he advocates?
Slavery pure and simple, and on a scale the most gigantic perhaps the world has ever
witnessed. We are to coax what blacks we can into making agreements for a term of
years to work in another part of the colony, and all those who will not work willingly
are to be forced to work. But why go further into the details of a scheme so wildly
impracticable that it is hard to believe the projector can have been really sincere in
putting it forward ?


In conclusion, let me remark that“ Outis ”is unfair when he instances the conduct
of the pure-minded but eccentric lady who would not let a gentleman within her doors
because he was a Native Police officer, as a type of the feeling of the more refined
residents of the bush. “ Outis” must know well that go where you will in the bush,
amongst high or low, as a rule there is no guest more welcome or more honored than
the Native Police officer.
June 16.
NORTH GREGORY
Queenslander
, July 17, 1880.
We have received a great number of letters from all parts of the country treating
this subject from very different points of view. While anxious, on the one hand, to
suppress nothing bearing on the point, and to allow the fullest discussion on the
subject, we are compelled to have some regard to the amount of space occupied. A
publication of the letters in full would occupy pages required for other matter, and
we therefore propose to give the gist of each letter, as fairly as possible, in the briefest
compass.
A correspondent, writing over the signature “ Piebald,” objects entirely to the
kind of force we propose for the regulation of the natives. He objects that in the
North the whole police force of the country would have to be employed looking after
black to the neglect of white offenders, and asserts that they could not possibly get
evidence of what was done by them. Having had fifteen years’ experience of Native
Police officers, lie declares them to be “ upright gentlemen,” and “ the most of them
would have scorned to have done the deeds you attributed to them.” He thinks we
should leave the matter “ to work its own end, as it surely will do.”
Mr. Isaac Watson, writing from Normanton, asserts that the aborigines in the
Gulf country are generally inclined to be peaceful, and complain that the police are
always “ rounding them up and shooting them for the purpose of kidnapping gins
and little boys and making them travel to some stations, or else to the township of
Normanton, where they are made to work and slave against their will. If any at-
tempt is made to escape they are either shot in the bush by the Native Police or else
brought in and punished accordingly.” He suggests that the Imperial Act passed to
prevent kidnapping in the Pacific might be used to prevent and punish these
practices.
A correspondent, writing over the signature “ Never Never Country,” from the
West, states that he was a sergeant of police in 1867-8-9, ’7O, and ’7l. He was in
charge of stations on the Paroo, Bulloo, and Warrego rivers, ahd asserts that it was
a “common thing ” for Native Police officers in the first-named year to shoot and
burn wild blacks. He was ordered to arrest an officer for shooting a civilised black ;
but lie asserts that the case was hushed up, the officer dismissed from the force and
promoted to a better billet. He also refers to Queenslander of 1869 and 1870,
wherein it is related that Sub-inspector Gilmour, on an exploring trip, expended 500
ball cartridges in three or four months.
A correspondent, writing over the signature “ Calpo,” from the West, asserts that
the incidents narrated in the Queenslander are without foundation, or grossly exag-
gerated. Having had eighteen years’ experience of the Native Police system, he
declares that, although instances of undue punishment have occurred, “as a
rule, the Native Police officer is not the bloodthirsty scoundrel you represent
him to be.” Dispersing lie declares to be a revolting duty to most officers. He
believes that by making the force mainly a white one atrocities will not be prevented,
and that the protection supposed to be afforded by one white man informing against
the other is a fallacy. It did not, he asserts, stop the indiscriminate shooting of men,
women, and children after the Wills murder by parties of whites. Nor did it stop
similar conduct by parties of diggers, accompanied by Government officials, at Battle
Creek. The very class of men we propose would, he declares, be the most severe;
and he states that he has seen things done by parties of station hands going out after
a murder by the blacks that no police officer would allow. The idea of such officers
shooting blacks “ for sport ” is simply ridiculous. Finally, he asserts that in the
outside districts of South Australia there are two wild blacks shot for one in Queens-
land, and “ scenes have been enacted sub rosd in the out-lying districts of that colony
before which the most severe dispersals by our Native Police pale to insignificance.”
A correspondent, writing over the signature “J.W.,” from Winton, doubts the
cruelties attributed to the Native Police. He says “ they have a duty to perform,
and as a rule they do it well, and as humanely as possible. Jt is pply where th§


blacks commit a murder, or become very threatening, that the Native Police are
called upon to disperse them.” Still he is of opinion that 1 every true and loyal
Englishman will help and do his best to palliate if not clear us of the disgraceful way
we have for years allowed our aboriginals to be treated in this a British colony. I
for one will raise my voice against the wanton slavery and brutality now going on in
this—but for the black spot—fair land of Queensland.” He goes on to assert his
belief that blacks can be civilised to some extent, supporting his contention by in-
stances of black men employed on stations. On this basis lie founds a scheme for
ameliorating their condition. The native police barracks should be turned into
depots, with reserves attached, and the police should be set to muster and bx’iug the
blacks into these reserves and manage them afterwards. The writer believes that,
although compelled at first to come in, the blacks would assemble voluntarily for
protection and care afterwards ; and suggests that it would be advantageous to move
tribes from one district to another. To these depots station-holders requiring
aboriginal servants should come, and the blacks should only be allowed to engage on
proper agreements for fair wages. Fees might be charged employers for these agree-
ments which, with a percentage on the blacks’ wages, would maintain the aged and
decrepit at the depots. It is the writer s belief that employers in the bush would be
glad to hire blacks in great numbers under these conditions.
A correspondent, writing from Maytown over the signature “ Guiah Wallow,”
challenges the denials of the Queenslander correspondent from the Lower Herbert,
who said that incidents narrated in these columns of treatment of blacks were not
true. He asserts that on the Lower Herbert in 1872 a gin was shot and “ partly
cremated.” She was the gin of a black trooper who had been arrested and contrived
to make his escape, but Ids gin, who was following, was shot. A few gins and their
children were burned in a camp further up the river. A black named Charlie was
killed by a native trooper ’“off duty,” near Tre-Bonue Creek. Another, named
Tommy, was charged with wounding a black known as Sambo, “ tried at Cardwell,
discharged, and handed over to the sub-inspector of police to be returmed to his home
and friends. Tommy’s friends heard of his acquittal and waited for him near the
river in the vicinity of Macnade until apparently some of them suggested revenge.
Then followed the murder of Mr. and Mrs. Conn.- At the time that Tommy ought
to have turned up the finding of the body of a black man in Hinchinbrook Channel
was reported. Tommy never was seen again.” He concludes by giving the history
of “ Sam, who brought his employer from the Gulf country, blind with blight, to
Townsville, and saved another life —first, from the stoke of a nulla; second, from
drowning in the Herbert. Sam was also a defaulter under trooper regulations. He
was discharged between Townsville and Waterview ; there were rifles also discharged.
Sam has not answered at any muster roll since,”—'
Queenslander
July 24, 1880,
Sir, —This subject is becoming hackneyed, though if you are justified in persisting
in the publication of letters on any subject it is no doubt on this. In yours of Juno
12, “ North Gregory ” states that through his kindness to the blacks and allowing them
about the station Mr. Wills, sen., lost his own life and that of his party at Culliu-
laringo. I had it, twelve months afterwards, from the late Mr. T. Wilis (who happened
to be at a neighboring station the day of the murder) that though the blacks had not
been hunted off the run—they (the Wills party) had only been camped three months
forming the station —none had been allowed in and very little intercourse had taken
place between the two races; the immediate cause of the massacre having been a
mistake made by a neighbour who, losing some sheep thought they were stolen.
After making a raid on the supposed thieves in the usual manner he found out his
error. The blacks, following their usual custom, not being able to catch the raiders,
fell upon the first party of whites they found unprepared, thereby showing the utter
folly of ever being without arms at hand when in a new country surrounded by im-
pulsive savages. Mr. Wills had lots of arms loaded, but stowed away in the store
tent. “ North Gregory ” is quite correct in his statement regarding the “ morality ”
of the natives; it is seldom that this cause (intercourse with their women) leads to
bad feeling (unless these women are stolen ). lam inclined to think the practice has
the reverse effect to what is generally supposed. The ways of these people “ are
peculiar,” and only long study and observation will give a person an insight even
into their manner of thought and customs.
“North Gregory” doesn’t believe these stories of northern warfare! Well, I am
pnly glad he does not know them to be true ; at least, if not all matters of fact, that
Q


deeds similar to them, and quite as atrocious, have been and probably are enacted
daily. That we can occupy “ new country” without coming into collision with the
natives is scarcely to be expected until “ the lion lies down with the lamb.” That a
few white men will be killed, and a great many blacks “ dispersed,” is a certainty ; but
we must devise some more humane system than the present, which is simply exter-
mination ; and if niggers must be shot, why, let them be shot by responsible persons
who will probably reduce the bloodshed to a minimum, and be careful that the guilty
parties are “ dispersed,” not innocent camps of natives ; which, besides being bar-
barous, leads to much loss of life on the part of inoffensive whites.—Yours, &c.,
Natal Downs, July 3,
C.
Queenslander
, July 24, 1880.
Sir, —Having read many articles in your paper for and against the aborigines, the
bitter complaints against the officers of police (some of which are but too painfully
true), I confess all my sympathies are towards the natives, who are the weaker, and
as yet quite unprotected. But in condemning the actions of the Native Police force
many forget that some such force was at one time a necessity, and even now in the
outlying districts some protection in some manner is still requisite. It is a most
intricate and difficult question to legislate upon, and it will be a lasting disgrace upon
the Government if, when Parliament meets, careful and humane means are not taken
to preserve and better the condition of those of the blacks who remain. It will be a
work of time and patience to devise schemes for their welfare ; no general law or
code of laws can be of general benefit, for what would work well in one district
would fail in another. X think in the first place the Government should immedi-
ately issue circulars to officers of detachments of police to use all their power towards
the preservation of law, order, and humanity until Parliament shall have had time
to enquire into the conflicting surroundings, and legislate in the interests of this fine
but unfortunate race. But Government measures will but only partially benefit
them, unless a warmer and more active interest be taken by those who are brought
in contact with them like myself. I plead for the blacks ; all my sympathies are
with them, I have spent over a quarter of a century amongst them, have employed
them and studied their character, and have come to the conclusion that no general
plan or scheme for their advancement will be practicable. It will require careful
investigation and much anxious thought to decide upon proper plans. In the mean-
time, it is to you, my neighbors, and to me, when the opportunities present them-
selves, to devote some time and trouble to their moral and intellectual culture, both
by precept and example; try it some of you, my bush friends, you will find it
morally healthful and invigorating. Your interest in the cause will expand and
grow, and you will find that in attempting to assist the needy you have brought down
a blessing upon yourselves. Much, very much, may be done in many ways, by
ladies residing in the bush, to save those little black ones from vice and ruin. Strive
then for the reward, “ Inasmuch as ye have clone it unto one of the least of these
my brethren, ye have done it unto me.” —Yours, &e.,
June, 1880.
MITCHELL.
Queenslander
August 7, 1880.
Sir, —I have read the article in your issue of June 12 on the above subject, signed
“ North Gregory.” As a resident in the northern districts of this colony since 184-8,
and a pioneer squatter nearly all that time, I have had considerable experience
amongst blacks, the wildest of them. I may also say I know a little of the way in
which Native Police affairs are conducted —so much that I think myself justified in
expressing contra ideas to those of “North Gregory” in many particulars. His
argument to the effect that Native Police officers find the dispersing business a most
painful and disagreeable duty, and one never to have recourse to unless under great
provocation, is simply absurd imagery. I maintain that the aborigines are shot down
indiscriminately for the most simple offences, and in many instances for no cause.
If dispersing is to the officers a disagreeable duty, why do they shoot down their own
troopers occasionally ? I could mention the names of many good boys that have been
in my employ who afterwards joined the police, to be shot down and left where they
fell for the crows and dingoes to feed upon. Tn one case I called an inquiry, and
during the inquiry was told by the P.M, at Townsville that I should not interfere


with a police officer in the discharge of his duty. I ash is this English law, the law
we boast of? It is surprising that so many should take up their pens to encourage
such bloody and cowardly deeds ; but I am disposed to think the defenders are men
one and all in the Native Police service to-day. From what has come within my
own knowledge I am satisfied that the articles you have published referring to the
atrocities committed are correct.
I will now mention a few outrages that have occurred in this district as a sample ;
A-few years ago I was travelling with a friend from the South Cook to Cardwell.
We camped a night with two men that were employed repairing a washpool, sheep
yards, &c., near Glendhu station. They informed us that a.quiet mob of blacks had
been camping for a week or two on the public roadside, about half a mile from said
washpool, that they had often been in the camp, and were always treated kindly by
the blacks on one occasion they turned out of their camp in order to give one of
these men shelter during a heavy shower of rain. A couple of evenings before we
arrived the Native Police came round, and in the dusk of the evening took observa-
tions of the camp, then went to the head station, returned again during the night,
and at daydawn next morning opened lire upon the blacks, killing six or seven men.
After hearing this tale we went to see what truth there was in the statement, and X
solemnly declare I saw the dead bodies of three men not more than 200 yards from
the public road; they were lying in a heap, and a few bushes thrown on top of them.
At a later date, on the same road, there was a Government road party at work ; they
allowed the blacks to visit them and camp close by, but for some reasons best known,
to themselves they got afraid and sent for the police. A watch was kept for their
arrival, and when close at hand, the blacks, twelve or thirteen in number, were
invited into the hut, there surrounded, and dispersed in the usual way.
I will now pass over some fifty miles of blood-stained country, the blood barely
dry, in order to bring another uncalled-for cowardly murder before public notice.
In 1876 a Native Police officer went to patrol the Waterview run. He wended his
way round to a quiet blacks’ camp not far from the head station ; the boys that
occupied the camp were by name Tommy, Charley, and Billy, with their wives, all
well known to the writer. They had arrived that day from Gairloch, on which plan-
tation they had been employed. Fearing no injury from men they knew, and who
appeared to be friends, officer, troopers, and blacks camped together. There was
another white man there also, who I know will not deny the fact. The evening
passed away with a corroboree ; all went well during the night. The morning came,
all partook of breakfast, then the horses wore saddled. The next order was to •
“ disperse ” the three boys. The troopers stood amazed and refused. Orders were
again given to fire. This time they obeyed, and Tommy and Charley fell dead on
the ground ; Billy carried his bullets (three) some little distance and there suc-
cumbed, Two of the gins were taken by the police to the Herbert River, where one
of them, “ Kitty,” can be seen to-day at the telegraph office. She can relate this
dreadful tale in the English language, and could have done so the day it occurred, so
you will observe they were not myalls. There were two boys carried away at the
same time, one of whom was made a present of to a drover to go to the Palmer
country. As I have entered on this subject I will mention another case of barbarity.
A few months ago a detachment of police were in Cardwell; the officer in charge
returned to barracks overland, and sent the troopers by boat vid Dungeness. When
they arrived at that port, a resident there in the Government employ sent them out
after the blacks to abuse and murder any unfortunate aboriginal they might fall
across. Like beagles let loose, they ran down the coast for miles, until at last they
found a camp in which there was a poor old man, by appearance over 60 years of
age, unable to get out of their way. He lay down with his face on the ground, and
a trooper named Bromby stepped up to him and put a bullet through hia head. I
knew the old man well; I knew him to be as harmless as a child ; 1 have seeii him
weeping over his daughter’s grave. She was murdered by an ex-trooper named
Simon, and was buried here on my selection. Five years ago he gave me his son,
and ever after he made my place a kind of home. As a resident in the immediate
neighborhood of where the above outrages were perpetrated, I conscientiously believe,
that one and all of the victims were wantonly murdered, and on each occasion by One?
orders of a different officer or individual. Under such a state of things as 1 have
shown to be prevalent, I ask the enlightened public is it possible for a friendly feel-
ing to exist between the two races ? Our legislators go to a great amount of’trouble*
in making laws and regulations for the protection of Polynesians; why nob give the
first owners of this continent the same consideration ? They are equally good men
in many ways. I have never found then* ungrateful to any person who treated


them firmly and kindly ; it is treating them kindly to-day and cruelly to-morrow
that gives cause for the remarks made by “ North Gregory or coming in contact
with strange blacks that are only waiting an opportunity to avenge some wrong they
have received at the hands of the police ; precaution should therefore be taken when
amongst strange blacks. I was residing on the Dawson, not far from Banana, when
Mr. Wills and his men got murdered. If the blacks had known him to be the kind-
hearted man he was, or if he had taken the proper precaution until they knew him,
1 have no reason to doubt but that gentleman would have got on well with them,
and would be alive probably to-day.
In conclusion, I am satisfied that a force of white police such as you have described
through the columns of the Queenslander , officered by men like Sub-inspector La-
mond, would regulate the evils now existing.
Lower Herbert, July 23. J. C.
[The writer of the above letter, in a private note which accompanied it, gave us
authority, if we pleased, to append his name in full, but, all things considered, we
think it better to publish his initials merely.—Ed. <J.] —<
Queenslander
Aug. 7, 1880.
Sir, —I have road with great interest the leaders and correspondence which have
appeared in your columns on this subject. It is particularly edifying to note the
sudden awakening of virtuous colonists to the necessity of doing something for the
amelioration of the indigenous races of Queensland —a fact, by the way, which must
have been patent to everyone possessing a grain of common sense. In debating a
question of such vital importance—a question in which the people whose future wel-
fare is at stake have no voice ; appealing to our better feelings through nature’s laws,
which have instilled beneficent qualities in the white man, and, to a lesser degree, in
the black—personal recriminations and accusations are very much to be deplored, and
lam of opinion such unseemly bickerings should be stringently suppressed. Vilifi-
cation is not argument, and I must express my astonishment that an influential
journal, the paper par excellence of Queensland, should have set the example in
ransacking our vocabulary of opprobrious epithets for the purpose of insulting some
fifteen or twenty gentlemen to whose watchful and energetic care the safety of out-
lying districts has been entrusted by the Government. No possible benefit could
accrue from sucli a course. Every educated man and woman in Queensland is per-
fectly aware that without the Native Police security in the bush would be a myth,
and that the abolition of the force would mark the commencement of an era of rapine
and murder hardly ever equalled, and certainly never surpassed, in the history of
mankind. To what end docs “Outis” treat us to his rhapsody anent pure-minded
gentlewomen ? What li;is sucli a statement to do with the question ? If this writer
is sincere, why did not he raise his voice before on behalf of this much-oppressed
race ? I can tell “ Outis ” an anecdote which, I think, puts his virtuous declamation
in a different light:—Years ago a Native Police officer, patrolling in the South
Kennedy district, called at a station where he received treatment so rude, so utterly
at variance with the usages of bush hospitality, that on returning to his barracks he
openly declared Ills intention of never again calling at that station. Three weeks
after tin’s the blacks commenced killing the cuttle on this very station, and for some
time every endeavor was made to make peace with them, and to come to an under-
standing that in return for peaceful conduct on their part they would receive nothing
but kindness and protection, and would be allowed to come in. The blacks, as they
invariably do, mistook leniency for fear, and the result was a requisition for police
protection. On the arrival of a Native Police officer he was received with open arras
aud made much of; in his own words, “ I became the white-headed boy.” My own
experience proves very conclusively that most of this sympathy for the blacks is ruled
■entirely by the pocket instead of coming from the heart. Again, Mr. Cassady gives
you the story of the gin Gassy, shot on the Lower Herbert, but this man belongs to
very different class of writer from “ Outis,” who merely states plain facts truth-
fully. I was at Bellenden Plains when the gin was shot, and can assure your
readers that Mr. Cassady is entirely wrong in leading them to believe that Sub-inspector
Shairpe shot Gassy wilfully. Mr. Cassady deliberately charges this murder to an
officer, when he must be perfectly cognisant of the true facts of the case. Mr. Shairpe
was escorting a deserter named Alex, who he arrested at Gairloch, back to Waterview,
accompanied by a trooper (Simon) and the gin Gassy. When passing a point of
scrub on Cudtnore’s selection Alex, who was walking alongside the trooper’s horse,
jnade a bolt for the scrub, followed by Gassy. He was repeatedly called upon to stand


and was just on the point of entering the scrub when Mr. Shairpe fired at him from
the top of the bank. The bullet intended for Alex hit Gassy. I do not justify the
officer’s action, but at the same time I. for one, will not tax him with murder for
what was purely an accident. Alex escaped at the time, and lived long enough to
give us weeks of hard work years after. So much for Oassady’s story. But let me
ask whether a man who would shelter the ringleader in the double murder of Mr. and
Mrs. Conn, as he did, does not carry his sympathy rather too far ? I can remember
Mr. Cassady sending for Native Police to disperse the blacks at Pairview in 1873, and
also his forwarding a letter to Mr. Sheridan, in Cardwell, in 1874, asking for blankets
and tomahawks, he having in the interval constituted himself black protector, for his
own interests, and to the detriment of his neighbors’ property. In return for his
kindness the blacks murdered one of the boys near Mr. Hawkins’s, on Palm Creek.
But what need to multiply instances ? No one realises the necessity of speedy and
radical change more than Native Police officers, as under the present system they are
powerless to put a stop to the private patrols carried out on stations, or to the kid-
napping of gins and boys by bullock-drivers, et k*c genus omne. But station-owners
complain, and justly so, that when they send for police so much time elapses that the
blacks escape. Can the officer be blamed for this ? Imagine a district 2UO miles in
diameter —that is, six hundred miles round—and put an officer, six troopers, and a
wretched lot of old screws at a point in this circle, telling him that you hold him
responsible for the peace and security of the district; and you have the system of
Native Police patrolling as at present in operation. Can anything be more ridicu-
lously ineffectual ? Hence the numerous murders and outrages committed by Mack
and white alike. But with all the will to do good, and to mitigate existing abuses,
police officers have to combat such a diversity of opinions that they invariably find
themselves reduced to merely patrolling their district, dispersing blacks when r.eally
necessary, and keeping them from infesting the roads. What can we do to amelio-
rate the condition of our aborigines ? Not one of your many contributors has as
yet attempted to solve this, the real point at issue. Many will say, “ Let the blacks
in everywhere.” But can we do this with any hope of improving them? and
can wild blacks be safely trusted near stations or outlying townships? The
answer comes from past experience, and is emphatically in the negative. Who that has
seen the squalid wretches about towns will say that they are as well off as when they
lived in their savage state, or that their condition has been bettered by ever so little ?
We have a reserve at Mackay, and Mr. Bridgeman gives us an occasional report of
its glorious success. But we also know that these same blacks have repeatedly made
raids on the neighboring stations, fleeing back to the reserve to escape the well-
merited punishment which would otherwise have been inflicted by the police at Nebo.
The question of amelioration, after all, lies in a nut-shell. It resolves itself into
£s. d. Now, is the Government prepared to place £IOO,OOO on the Estimates for
this purpose? I think not. And yet without an outlay far exceeding this sum we
cannot hope to improve their position ; and even then the results can only be of the
most transient nature. The Victorian Government placed their aborigines under the
protection of guardians from July 1, 1851, to June 18, 1860, the aggregate sum ex-
pended under that system being £14,181. Tiie results obtained were, however, very
unsatisfactory. On the 18th June, 1860, a Board was appointed for the Protection
of the Aborigines, and a sum exceeding £IOO,OOO had already been expended on
them in 1878. Taking the mean of a whole number of estimates we find that when
the whites first settled in Victoria there were about 4500 natives. Mr. Brough Smyth,
from whose fine work I cull these facts, draws attention to the fact that, prior to the
advent of the first settlers, a small-pox epidemic had greatly reduced their numbers.
The total number of natives under the Board in 1876 —that is, thirty-eight years
after settlement —was 500. Thus we arrive at very startling facts. If the natives
of a fine colony can by the sheer moral power of civilisation brought to bear upon
them as an ameliorating agent be reduced in thirty-eight years by 4000, at an ex-
penditure of £114.500, what can we expect to effect in a like period with a native
population of fully 20,000, one-half of which may be said to have hardly come into
contact with our different systems? What, let me ask, would the advocates of
amelioration give these savages in return for their dearly loved freedom ? Where
and what are the sweets that they intend should replace their inborn love of the
chase? How do they propose to overcome the nomadic instincts, to which may be
traced their very presence on this continent? Imagine even a small tribe of blacks
forced to live tor a short period on one spot! Would not a fearful epidemic be the
result? But no; a few enthusiastic humanitarians, philanthropists, call them what
you will, actually desire to alter every condition under which these savages have for


ages listed, and to change their very instincts by the mere force of a master will, as
typified in the white man, expecting in their shortsightedness to transform what
always has been the lowest grade of humanity into a useful and creditable element
in the commonwealth. Could any scheme be more Quixotic P We find by actual
tabulated facts that the closer we bring the opposing races together the faster the
blacks die out; that the white man’s kindness—mistaken kindness —is far more fatal
to our blacks than his rifle ; that the aborigines are utterly unsuited for protracted
labor, and that they pine and die under confinement within defined limits.
And still we wish to force all these fatal observances upon them under
the so-called guise of humanity! Nothing that we can do will alter the in-
scrutable and withal immutable laws which direct our progress on this globe. By
these laws the native races of Australia were doomed on the advent of the white man,
and the only thing left for us to do is to assist in carrying them out with as little
cruelty as possible, and to endeavor to extend the period of their action over as great
a span of time as we possibly can. But any attempt on our part at coercive ameliora-
tion can only tend to expedite the final result, instead of lengthening their days in
the land. It is not at all improbable that a mixed race would spring into existence
could we conquer the tendency to infanticide which obtains in the tribes. As a rule
half-bloods have a finer physique than the mother race, but four-fifths of these chil-
dren are put to death and generally eaten. Were it possible to improve our blacks
by the establishment of reserves —and an experiment might be tried at some suitable
spot on our coast, where a dugong fishery or two would offer them employment,
assimilating in some degree with their natural instincts — it would be our bounden
duty to supply money and material for such establishments; but it becomes impera-
tive to discover, first, whether such -reserves will be of any use, and, secondly, whe-
ther the rate of mortality increases or diminishes under such a system As to the
many assertions made concerning native troopers being beyond control when excited,
&c., X can only say that they are utterly untrue, and I speak with the authority not
only of ray own long experie ice but also with that of many Native Police officers.
Troopers are quite as amenable to order as white men, and in fact more so, and any
trooper shooting a gin or child, even by accident, would be scouted by the whole
detachment. Had the veil of mystery which the Government in its wisdom has
thought fit to cast over the actions of this force been lifted years ago, the public
would have seen with its own eyes that most of the heart-sickening atrocities with
which the Native Police has been credited have little foundation in fact. Ido not
assert that atrocities have not been committed, but I do assert that these have been
the exceptions, certainly never the rule. Innocent blacks have been shot with the
guilty, but is this to be wondered at when we. consider the difficulty of identifying
the actual criminals? Take the case of Sub-inspector Tompson on the Lower Bur-
dekin as far back as 1889 or ’7O. Here the blacks were killing cattle wholesale.
After continual patrolling he at last succeeded in penning the tribes on Mount Dry-
auder and keeping them there for three days. He then sent some gins to them with
an offer of peace, if they would promise to leave the cattle alone. This was the
second embassy this gentleman had sent, the answer to the first having been, “ We’ll
kill cattle when we want them ; you shoot us when you can catch us.” But
on this occasion he showed them that they were entirely at his mercy,
and, although he carefully abstained from allowing a single blackfellow to be
shot, a bullet striking the rock close to any that showed themselves proved how
utterly helpless they were against the police carbines. They promised to keep the
peace, and he then sent them word to go and camp at some particular spot until they
heard from him. Mr. Tompson tried several stations in succession, but without
being abb to gain admittance for ins black proteges. At last, however, Mr. Bode
allowed them to come in, and six months afterwards they were no longer wild blacks.
This is what we must endeavour to do with all the districts which are sufficiently
settled ; but I cannot agree with the Queenslander's idea of substituting white men
for the native troopers. And this chiefly for two reasons : We must rule the blacks
by fear, teaching them the uselessness of waging war on the settlers, and to do this
the native troopers are far superior to white men, as they will follow and secure
malefactors where a white man could not possibly penetrate. It is useless arguing
that, because an officer accompanies his boys through scrubs and over ranges, every
white man can do the same. Only constant training will enable a man to do so.
How many white men can undergo the hardships and privations which a Native
Police officer has to put up with? The native troopers also can communicate with
the blacks, which a white man is unable to do. But the groat difficulty of such a
change is its cost. A native trooper costs the Government about £45 per annum


for pay and food. A white trooper would not serve under £122 per annum, besides
3s. per diem sustenance'allowance, and 2s. per night, night allowance, when on actual
duty. The duties of such a force would be far more arduous than those of the ordi-
nary police, and yet the above rate of pay is that at present in vogue. Then of
course the horses and accoutrements have to be considered. The present Native
Police of 200 men costs the Government about £IO,OOO per annum, and we have to
consider whether for treble this sum an equal number of white troopers would do
the duty as well. If not, the expenditure would be unjustifiable. What lam as-
sured would tend more to the pacification of our blacks is—the reduction in size of
the Native Police districts; the increase of detachments; constant regular patrols
and communication with the blacks, so as to learn to know at least the leading men
of each tribe, who would be made responsible for the good conduct of their mob ; and
the appointment of officers of unexceptionable character and ability, instead of young
inexperienced new chums, mere boys, who have no recommendation except an un-
usual amount of bounce and the influence of an M.L.A. at their back. These officers
should be vested with the power necessary to put a stop to the wholesale interference
at present practised by the public, who take gins and children from the tribes at will,
and unchecked. The enactment of a law such as the Queenslander advocates would
be very necessary and of the utmost importance. No white man should be permitted
to cohabit with a gin, as is at present the ease, unless he marries her. It is au every-
day occurrence in the North to meet travellers and teams accompanied by a gin ;
even these men, in most cases, endeavoring to hide their degradation by dressing their
sable Hebes in men’s clothes and and passing them off as bogs. Such men have done
more to foster the enmity between the races than any amount of patrolling. I have
sketched here what I consider would be an improvement on the present system, being
far cheaper than the substitution of white men ; but one item should not be omitted in
any scheme which may be eventually adopted: The force must be separated from the ordi-
nary police, with which it has nothing in common. The custom in vogue at present of
making constables act us camp keepers is open to serious objection, and I strongly re-
commend that cadets be substituted, who would thus gain experience in all that apper-
tains to the blacks. There would never under such a system be any dearth of good
officers. I would also encourage every attempt to collect information and materials
from which a standard work of reference could be compiled. We know very little
about the blacks, and that little is exceedingly fragmentary and based mostly on care-
lessly collected facts. The blacks will have disappeared from this continent before
another century has come and gone. Their habits and customs are constantly chang-
ing or falling into disuse, since they came into contact with the whites ; it therefore
behoves us to obtain properly authenticated facts relating to everything connected
with their past history. No one can be more fortunately situated for such work than
Native Police officers, and the Queensland Government would confer a lasting boon
on the present and future generations of this country if they would sanction and
foster any research tending to the fulfilment of so valuable an object. Our national
Museum would soon be enriched by a vast and valuable collection, as varied as unique,
illustrating the successive stages through which the aborigines have passed since our
advent, enabling the student to arrive at definite conclusions, by comparison and
classification. I have for eight years devoted all my spare time to such subjects, but
was forbidden to publish ang information which could give the public even the slight-
est glimpse into the doings of the Native Police. Why such a course should be
adopted is inexplicable, and certainly does not reflect credit on those who were its
initiators. I may refer your readers, en passant, to a graphically described patrol
which appears in Mr. Brough Smyth’s work on the aborigines of Victoria, vol. ii., pp.
336—339. Here we find that as far back as 1844-45 the blacks in the Port Mac-
quarie district had to be terrorised into submission by a free use of the musket, the
officer commanding, Mr. T> —, chief constable, actually cutting off the tips of the ears
as trophies, and bringing them in stowed carefullv in his waistcoat pockets! There
is unfortunately too much evidence in proof of the violence of black and white, and
there cannot be any necessity for such ridiculous assertions as those made by Captain
Pascoe. The aborigines of our north-east coast knew nothing of firearms, even in
1873, when they attacked Sub-inspector Johnstone at Trinity Bay. They repeatedly
endeavored to make the slain stand upright, not understanding the cause of death.
To them the invisible means of such bloodshed must have been bewildering,
and had they had any remembrance of tbe deeds described by Captain Pascoe
they would certainly not have fought, when left entirely unmolested. Kennedy,
like Mr. Jack, fell a victim to his own misplaced leniency. When in cases like the
above, the blacks become aggressive, gentlemen entrusted with Government expedi


tions have no right to hesitate in meting out such punishment as will most effec-
tually deter such bloodthirsty savages from repeating,their aggressions. The lives of
such men, and of the party under their control, are of more value to the nation than
those of a hundred blacks. Any leader failing to secure immunity from danger to
his men is simply unfit for his post. As it turned out, we owe to a native who ac-
companied the hapless Kennedy the rescue of his expeditionary papers, when by the
well-timed use of their rifles both he and his boy might have been saved, in spite of
fever.
I will forward you a list of murders committed iu this district by blacks, as contra
account to your column of “ How we Civilise.” I trust that you will succeed in
bringing about the much-to-be-desired reform you advocate, and ameliorate both white
and black, the former into unquestioned possession of the vast area of the colony’,
the latter off the face of the earth which they do not even serve to ornament.
Having done this you will be in a position to exclaim with Hugh Miller': —“Tims
the experience of more than a hundred years demonstrates that when a tribe of men
falls beneath a certain level its destiny is extinction, not restoration.”
WILLIAM E. ARMIT.
Normanton, July 26.
Queenslander
, Sept. 4, 1880.
Sip,—For some time past you have been drawing attention in your columns to a
dreadful state of things as existing in our midst; I refer to the treatment of the
blacks by the Native Police force. Week after week articles appear giving descrip-
tions-of outrages perpetatred by the police, and so far as the public can see there is
no attempt made to deny their correctness. Some letters certainly have been written
with an apparent idea of excusing the police, saying either that these outrages are
necessary or that the accounts are exaggerated ; but it seems only too evident that
tiie horrible details given in the Queenslander are correct. In the issue of the 7th
instant is a matter-of-fact letter signed “ J. 0./* giving specific details of outrages
committed by different Native Police officers.on unoffending blacks. Now, what the
public wish to know is : Are these accounts of dispersals (murders) correct or not ?
In any other country than Queensland the head of any department, when his officials
had the hand of scorn pointed at them in the way the Native P dice lias, would quickly
take steps for an investigation to prove the truth or falseness of the charges made.
So far we are not aware of any steps being taken by the head of the Police Depart-
ment for an enquiry; and what are we to consider—that he connives at these
dispersals, and dares not have an investigation ? or that he is simply incapable of
carrying out the duties entrusted to him ? If neither be the case, why does he allow
the present state of things to continue ? The force looks to him for protection from
unjust charges, and if the charges are correct why does he not put a stop to such a
fearful state of things P If he is incapable, the sooner a capable man is appointed in
his place the better, as till this matter is satisfactorily settled the people of Queens-
land will stand on a very unpleasant footing as regards their moral character.—
Yours, &c.,
Clermont, August 14.
A. X.
Queenslander
, Sept. 11, 1880.
Sir, —I am glad to notice that the question of our dealing with the aboriginals is
receiving ventilation through your columns, and that all its phases are being fairly
represented. Having lived since ray arrival in this colony, and for years on the
New South Wales and Victoria borders, where the blacks were most numerous, and
their misdoings most frequent, I have had good opportunities of forming an opinion
as to their natures and inclinations. My object in writing is nob to propose any
scheme by which the “ native difficulty” may be settled, but to urgently recommend
the appointment of a commission to report upon the most feasible mode of bringing
the aboriginals to a sense of their relationship with the white occupants of the soil.
In recommending a commission, I would say let it consist of men wlie are acquainted
with bush life, who have had the experience of frequent contact with the blacks in
their wild state, and, above all, men who have a reasonable blending of humanity
and decision iu their characters—human instincts to prevent any measures of ex-
tremity not absolutely necessary, and decision tp control any morbid sympathy with


those who are termed “ the original occupants of the soil,” “ the natural inhabitants ”
&o. For something over two years I have lived in a district where the misdeeds of
the blacks have been more frequent than in any other part of Queensland, and have
known in many instances a swift and terrible retribution to have followed upon the
offending parties. I have never known the innocent to suffer, in the Cook district
for the guilty ; for the Native Police officers know their work too well not to be able
to run down those upon whose heads punishment should certainly fall. But with
all this, and notwithstanding the high social character of almost every Native Police
officer I have met, my own observation has convinced me that the organisation of
the Native Police force is wrong in its very foundation. The blacks are dispersed
after doing a wrong, but they are taught no lesson ; and I have known blacks
spear cattle on the M‘lvor River, receive summary chastisement, have some
of the finest members of the tribe “ wiped out,” and return to the self-
same place to spear more cattle within a fortnight. The survival of the
fittest is not generally accepted practically, nor should it, I think, be enforced
as far as the blacks of this colony are concerned. u Maori,” an able
writer, in a private letter, says :—“ As far as the treatment of the blacks
is concerned, I do honestly believe it has been inhuman—and a mistake.
Surely the genius of the Anglo-Saxon race, that has solved so many more knotty
problems than this with superior races—more truculent, more intelligent, and more
powerful—could have hit on some expedient more in accordance with civilisation
(I will not say even Christianity) that the barbarous method of extermination—
‘ wiping out ’ as you call it In fact, I think it a gross shame to shoot
the innocent aud guilty indiscriminately, as has often been done. There has been
lust, rapine, treachery, bad faith, cruelty, and downright savagery just as often on
our side as on the side of the blacks, and we have had the advantage of superior
numbers, wealth, intelligence, arms, aud organisation.” These are the words of no
drawing-room moralist, nor are they the expressions of a man unused to the dangers
and trials of pioneering and bush work, but of one who knows what the. dark-skinned
inhabitants of Queensland and other countries are from pretty dearly bought ex-
perience. In the Cook district the blacks have but one spot where they can find
comparative peace and means of living in their natural condition, and that is on Cape
Bedford, near Cooktown, and between that place and Cape Flattery. Their roving
habits, however, take them on to the Endeavor and MTvor rivers, and there they
despoil the herds of the settlers, and are followed back to the coast by the police,
and pay a penalty for their crimes in the shape of death. There are many Native
Police officers whose natures revolt in a measure from their work. It is no secret in
the outlying Northern districts that the blacks arc shot down, though the officers are
said to work with ropes round their necks. This seems singularly paradoxical, for
the Government serve out thousands of rounds of ball cartridge every year to the
troopers. lam no advocate for the “ poor blacks ”in any sense other than that by
a reformed method of dealing with them we shall ameliorate their condition, and
remove what is certainly a blot on the fair name of Queensland. —Yours, &c.,
Townsville, August 20.
SPENCER BROWNE.
Queenslander
Sept. 11, 1880.
BRISBANE : FEINTED BY G. AND J. BLACK (LATE W. THORNE), EDWARD STREET.
H




m
