

Price £l. 15s.
THE
BIRDS OF AUSTRALIA,
AND
THE ADJACENT ISLANDS.
BY
JOHN GOULD, F.L.S., &c.
PART II.
Chaetura macroptera.
Dacelo cervina.
Pachycephala pectoralis.
Pitta Vigorsii.
Amadina castanotis.
Nestor hypopolius.
Platycercus haematogaster.
Myzomela nigra.
Apteryx Australis.
iEgialitis Monachus.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY RICHARD AND JOHN E. TAYLOR, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET.
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR, 20, BROAD STREET, GOLDEN SQUARE.
FEBRUARY, 1838.






GT HIM.A fS'wawis)
Trinu&fy C.MMryuavoUi.


CHAETURA MACROPTERA, Swains,
Long-winged Swift.
Crown of the head, back of the neck, and ear-coverts deep shining green, strongly tinged with brown; a small
space immediately before the eye deep velvety black; throat, inner webs of the secondaries nearest the back,
a patch on the lower part of the flanks, and the under tail-coverts white; wings and tail deep shining green,
with purple reflections; centre of the back greyish brown, becoming darker towards the rump; chest and
abdomen dark clove brown ; bill black; feet brown.
Total length, inches ; wing, 8 ; tail, 2£ ; tarsi, ■§-.
Chcetura macroptera, Swains. Zool. 111. 2nd Ser. PI. 42.
Hirmdo caudacuta, ? Lath. Ind. Orn. Sup. p. Ivii. sp. 1.
Needle-tailed Swallow , ? Ib. Gen. Syn. Supp. vol. ii. p. 259. sp. 3. and Gen. Hist. vol. vii. p. 307. Shaw Zool. vol. x.
p. 133.
Pin-tailed Swallow, ? Lath. Gen. Hist. vol. vii. p. 308.
Chcetura Australis, ? Steph. Cont. Shaw Zool. vol. xiii. p. 76.
Among the numerous collections I have received from New South Wales, only a single specimen of this beautiful
Swift has as yet occurred, and that unaccompanied by any remark relative either to the localities it inhabits
or to its general economy ; we may fairly presume however, that the portion of Australia called New
South Wales, comes at least within the occasional range of its habitat, as it is from thence that this
specimen, and the greater portion of my collection, have been obtained. It is one of the largest and most
powerful species of the genus, and possesses a development of the wing fully equal to that of the Cypselus
alpims of Europe.
The birds of the genus Chcetura or Spine-tailed Swifts, although limited in the number of species, are
widely dispersed over the globe, several of them being common both to India and America. They differ in
many important points from the true Swifts, {Cypselus, ) among the most singular of which is the form of the
tail-feathers, whose shafts are prolonged into sharp spines, in the more powerful structure of the feet and
claws, and in the position of the fourth toe, which in the present genus is not directed forwards, as in the
case of the Swifts : this peculiar construction enables the birds of the genus Chcetura to place themselves in
an upright position when at rest, and they are even said to traverse the face of steep rocks in search of food,
in which particular they offer a striking resemblance to the Woodpeckers and other Scansorial birds.
I have little doubt that the Needle-tailed Swallow and Pin-tailed Swallow of Dr. Latham’s “ General
History,” vol. vii. pp. 307, 308, are identical with the present bird ; but as a very important and conspicuous
character, (the white colouring of the lower part of the abdomen and under tail-coverts,) is omitted in the
former, and the latter is without a scientific name, I have deemed it best to adopt the appropriate appellation
given by Mr. Swainson.
Habitat. New South Wales.






JE iL ID C E EVIKA-. S&nMJ,


DACELO OERVINA, Gould.
Dac. plumis capitis totius fulvescenti-albis, singulis strigd centrali fused notatis, hue colore apud occiput magis conspicuo ;
gold albd; nuchd, pectore, corporeque subtus cervinis; pectore, abdomine, et lateribus, lineis transversis delicatulis et
fuscis contorte ornatis ; dorso summo et scapularibus fuscis ; primariis nigrescenti-fuscis ad apicem, ad basin albis, ad
marginem externum violaceo-coeruleis ; plumis secondariis, aldque spurid violaceo-coeruleis ; tectricibus majoribus et mi-
noribus dorsoque imo lazulino-coeruleis ; caudd, tectricibusque hujus longissimis castaneis, ad apicem fulvescentibus, et
lineis octo vel decern angustis violaceo-nigris, transversaliter notatis ; mandibuld superiore nigrescenti-fused, base ex-
ceptd, hdc, mandibuldque inferiore corneo-favis ; pedibus flavescenti-fuscis.
Long. tot. 14J me.; rostri, 3; ala, 7-g-; caudee, ; tarsi, 1.
Feathers of the head, cheeks, and ear-coverts huffy white, with a central stripe of dark brown, which latter colour
becomes most conspicuous on the occiput; throat white; back of the neck, chest, and all the under surface
sienna yellow; the chest, flanks, and abdomen crossed by fine zigzag lines of brown; upper part of the back
and scapularies umber brown; primaries blackish brown at the tip and white at the base ; their external edges,
the secondaries, and the spurious wing rich china blue; greater and lesser wing-coverts, back, and several of
the upper tail-coverts light shining verditer blue; tail and the longest of the upper coverts rich chestnut brown,
which passes into buff at the tip, the whole transversely marked with eight or nine narrow and regular bands
of rich blue black; upper mandible blackish brown on the upper surface and towards the tip ; the base and
the whole of the under mandible horn yellow; feet yellowish brown.
Dacelo cervina, Gould in Proc. of Zool. Soc. Part V 1837.
The bird figured in the accompanying plate differs from every other known species of true Dacelo in the
delicate buff or light fawn yellow which is spread over the whole of the under surface; and as this colour
extends to the base of the feathers, lam led to believe constitutes a permanent character; I have therefore
given it the specific appellation of cervim. It is a species of great rarity ; two specimens only have come
under my notice, one of which is in my own collection, and the other in that of the British Museum.
I am unable to record any account whatever of the history of this fine bird, further than that I have reason
to believe it is an inhabitant of the eastern and northern portions of New Holland.
When compared with the other members of the genus it may be considered a diminutive species, while at
the same time it is not surpassed by any in the brilliancy of its colours, particularly in the lazuline blue,
which is spread over the back and wings.






FACHYCEPMAILA FE CTO KALIS
/
Jrvnfad/by O.M*MswuwideJ/.
JMwtwpvmffiTMre/bm’S^e/'byJ'&'E.&otUd/.


PACHYCEPHALA PECTORALIS,
Male. Throat white, encircled by a broad band of black, which commences at the base of the bill, surrounds the
eye, passes down the sides of the neck and crosses the breast; forehead and crown dark grey, with a small
stripe of black down the centre of each feather, the remainder of the upper surface dark grey; wings and
tail blackish brown, each feather margined on the outer web with dark grey; sides of the breast and flanks
grey ; centre of the breast, abdomen, and under tail-coverts orange brown ; bill and feet black.
Female. Head and all the upper surface brownish grey; wings and tail dark brown, margined on the exterior
webs with brownish grey ; throat dull wdiite, gradually passing into the tawny buff which covers the whole of
the under surface, each feather of the throat and under surface having a narrow stripe of dark brown down
the centre ; bill brown ; feet black.
Total length, 6f inches ; bill, f; wing, 3f; tail, ; tarsi, f.
Muscicapa pectoralis, Lath. Ind. Orn. Suppl., p. li. No. 11.
Orange-hreasted Thrush, Lewin, Birds of New Holland, pi. 8.
Pachycephala pectoralis, Vig. & Horsf. in Linn. Trans., vol. xv. p. 239. Gould, Syn. Birds of Australia.
striata, Yig. & Horsf. in Linn. Trans., vol. xv. p. 240, female or young male ?
Lanius macularius, Quoy et Gaim., Yoy. de V Astrolabe, p. 257. pi. 31. f. 1, young male ?
Lewin, who has figured the male of this species in his work on New Holland Birds above-quoted, informs us
that it dwells in “ forests, frequents high trees, perching generally on the upper branches, where it sings a
loud and not unpleasant song about daybreak and this is all that is at present known respecting its habits
and economy.
•!
Upon due consideration and a careful examination of specimens I am induced to consider the Pachycephala
striata , of Messrs. Vigors and Horsfield, to be the female of this species, in which opinion I am confirmed by
the circumstance of the two birds having been repeatedly sent me from New South Wales, as male and female
of the same species ; and I have also little doubt that the Pie Grieche grwelee , (Lanius macularius) of MM.
Quoy and Gaimard, will ultimately prove to be a young male, as their bird was said to be from Port Jackson.
New South Wales would appear to be the chief habitat of this species. I have never seen examples from
Van Diemen’s Land, or any other locality.






„ PITTA- VK&ORSIIs rGeuUj.
JJra/wn/ from Jvoodovre/ <x ou/Sbowc/ by J&JS. Goulds. Jrronfad/ by C.MulZrnamaAl/


PITTA VIGORSII, Gould.
Vigors’ Pitta.
Pitt, vertice, plumis auricularibus, et occipite nigerrimis ; strigd angustd viridescenti-cinered, a naribus, super oculos
obductd verticem cingente et ad occiput fere coalescente ; dorso, scapularibus, secondariis, tectricibusque majoribus ex-
terne aneo-viridibus ; humeris, uropygio, tectricibusque cauda superioribus splendid e' lazulino-caruleis ; guld albd ;
pectore, lateribus, femoribusque fulvescenti-luteis ; abdomine medio intense sanguineo, in coccineum transeunte apud
crissum; remigibus nigris, fascid albd in medio tertia, quarta, quinta, sextaque; caudd nigrd ad apicem viridi;
rostro fusco ; pedibus carneis.
Long. tot. me. ; rostri, 1-i-; ala, 4f ; cauda, 1-f-; tarsi, I^-.
Crown of the head, ear-coverts, and back of the neck jet black; a narrow stripe of greenish grey commences at
the nostrils, passes over each eye, surrounds the crown, and nearly unites at the occiput; back, scapularies,
outer edges of the secondaries, and the greater wing-coverts bronzy green f shoulders, rump, and upper tail-
coverts fine lazuline blue; throat white; chest, flanks, and thighs tawny buff; centre of the abdomen dark
blood red, passing into scarlet on the under tail-coverts ; primaries black, with a white bar across the centre
of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth ; tail black, tipped with green; bill dark brown; legs flesh colour.
Pitta brachyura, Vig. & Horsf. in Linn. Trans., vol. xv. p. 218.
A single specimen of this beautiful species of Pitta forms part of the collection of the Linnean Society of
London, where it has always been considered as identical with the Pitta brachyura, but from which it differs
in many important characters, among the most conspicuous of which may be noticed its larger size, and
the narrow streak of light greenish grey which passes from the nostrils over each eye, and nearly surrounds
the occiput.
I have not been able to obtain any decided information respecting the portion of Australia from which this
bird was obtained, but the east coast may be regarded as its most likely habitat; and lam unnble to render
any account of its habits, or the situations it frequents : the other members of the group, however, particularly
those possessing a metallic kind of plumage, are known to prefer the sides of inland streams and waters,
where they sport among the shallows, frequently wading in up to their knees ; which aquatic habits are
indicated by the general character of the plumage. The common species (Pitta brachyura), which is nearly
allied to the present bird, is also said to perch on the topmost branches of decayed trees.
Messrs. Vigors and Horsfield having omitted to notice the distinctive characters of this species, while
engaged upon their elaborate Catalogue of the Australian Birds, in the Linnean Society’s collection, I have
much pleasure in dedicating it to the former gentleman, whose high scientific attainments, especially in Orni-
thology, are so well known, that my testimony is unnecessary; and I shall of course, when a suitable oppor-
tunity presents itself, feel equal pleasure in paying the same compliment to his learned coadjutor.
Habitat. East coast of New Holland ?






AMA© OTA €Jk.B> TAKCD TIS, ffauMJ ■
7A£.C<mU. / C.&ttmtat&i,


AMADINA CASTANOTIS, Gould.
Chestnut-eared Amaduvade.
Mas. Am. corpore superne cinereo-fusco; alis hrumeis ; uropygio albo ; tectricibus caudce nigris, alho guttatis ; genis
castaneo-rufis, lined albd ad basin rostri; pectore griseo, lineis nigris transversim striato ; notd nigra in medio pec-
toris ; abdomine albo ; crisso ochraceo ; lateribus castaneis albo guttatis ; rostro aurantiaco ; pedibus subjlavis.
Fcem. Rostro, lineis transversis fascialibus, tectricibus caudce, pedibusque sicut in mare ; dor so, plumis auricularibus, alis,
caudd lateribusque fusco-griseis ; guld et pectore griseis rufo tinctis; abdomine Jlavescenti-brunneo.
Long. tot. 4\ unc. ; alee, ; caudce, ; tarsi, I^.
Male. Crown of the head, nape, and back brownish grey; wings brown ; rump white; upper tail-coverts jet
black, each feather having three large and conspicuous oval spots of white; tail-feathers blackish brown
slightly tinged with white at their tips ; cheeks and ear-coverts reddish chestnut separated from the bill by
a narrow' transverse line of white, which white line is bounded on each side by a still finer line of black; throat
and chest grey, the feathers transversely marked with fine lines of black; a small black patch on the middle of
the chest; abdomen white; under tail-coverts buffy white; flanks chestnut, each feather marked near the
tip with two small oval spots of white ; bill orange red; feet light yellowish flesh colour.
Female. Transverse lines on the face, upper tail-coverts, and feet, as in the male; upper surface, ear-coverts,
wings, tail, and flanks greyish brown ; throat and chest grey slightly tinged with brown ; abdomen yellowish
brown.
Amadina Castanotis, Gould in Proc. of Zool. Soc., Part IV., 1836, p. 105; and in Syn. of theßirds of Australia, Part I.
Several examples of this new and beautiful species of Amaduvade were contained in the collection of Major
Mitchell, and also in one forwarded to me by Mr. Coxen ; both these collections were procured in New South
Wales, the latter considerably to the north of Hunter’s River, and the former on the banks of the Darling,
whence we are led to infer that the interior of Australia is the locality to which it is confined, which opinion
is further confirmed by the circumstance of the species not being contained in the fine collection of the Lin-
nean Society, or in those ordinarily brought into this country.
It is nearly allied to, but in my opinion specifically distinct from, “Le Bengali mouchete,” of Vieillot’s
Oiseaux Chanteurs, p. 21. pi. 3, which moreover he states to be a native of the Molucca Islands.
I am unacquainted with any particulars as to its habits and economy.
Habitat. Interior of New South Wales.






MSTOB, HYP CD PO LI IT S s fWaglJ
♦
% ' ” ,
T}rayWfvfrc7iV'ffixluve, Jr cm Sbmvhj JfaS. GovdoO. Jfonfad/ dy CJSiu&ywwid6o.


NESTOR HYPOPOLIUS, Wagl.
Crown of the head greyish white slightly tinged with green; face and ear-coverts yellowish tinged near the base
of the bill with red ; sides of the neck, breast, and abdomen dull red, each feather margined with olive green;
back and wings brownish olive; rump and vent deep red; tail brownish green; bill grey with a darker tip ;
legs and feet brownish grey.
TotaHength, 16^-inches; bill, 2; wing, tail, 7; tarsi, I£.
Psittacus Nestor, Lath. Ind. Orn., p. 110. sp. 85. —Kuhl. Consp. Psitt. in Nov. Act., &c., p. 86.
Psittacus Australis, Shaw, Mus. Lever., pi. in p. 87.
Southern Brown Parrot, Lath. Syn., vol. i. p. 264. no. 70.—Shaw, Zool. vol. viii. p. 522.—Lath. Gen. Hist. vol.
ii. p. 211. no. 142.
Psittacus meridionalis, Gmel. Linn. vol. i. p. 333.
Nestor hypopolius, Wagl. Mon. Psitt. in Abhand., &c., pp. 505 and 696.—Selby, Nat. Lib., vol. vi. p. 121. pi. 12.
Gould, Syn. Birds of Australia, Part I.
This species was first described by Dr. Latham in his “Index Ornithologicusand although it has been
known for so many years, little or nothing more is known respecting it than that it is from New Zealand,
which in all probability is the only locality it inhabits.
It is the type of Dr. Wagler’s genus Nestor , the species of which are rendered remarkable by the depth and
richness of their colouring ; and judging from the few specimens which have come under my notice the only
outward difference in the sexes would appear to be the somewhat smaller size and less brilliant colouring of
the female. It is said to be one of the most noisy and impudent of its race, to have a voice harsh and dis-
agreeable in the extreme, and to possess considerable powers of imitation.
Habitat. New Zealand, where it is called by the natives Ka~ka.






jeiLATTCEmCUB MMT i )) OA & TF»B. 5
<& 'S'&on*/ fry. /faJU. (roziZcfr. * J> i*tfrwfr fry OlfalbruMUjU>fr


PLATYCERCUS HAEMATOGASTER, Gould.
Plat, froute facieque cceruleis ; summo capite, nucha, plumisque auricularibus flavescenti-cinereis ; pectore cinereo Undo
brunneo ; plumis auricularibus ad partem superiorem stramineis ; uropygio, tectricibusque superioribus caudce cerinis ;
articulo humerali pallide cceruleo ; primariis intense fuscis ad apicem acutis ; secondariis tectricibusque majoribus vio-
laceo - cceruleis ; tectricibus minoribus alisque ad partem superiorem intense coccineis ; lateribus tectricibusque inferi-
oribus pallide Jlavis ; abdomine medio nitide coccineo ; plumis duabus intermediis caudce ad bases pallid e' olivaceo-
viridibus, ad apices in intense cceruleum transeuntibus ; reliquis plumis ad bases intense cceruleis, ad apices in album
transeuntibus ; rostro corneo ; pedibus fuscis.
Long. tot. 12 unc.; alee, sf; caudce , 7 ; tarsi , -f-.
Forehead and face deep ultra-marine blue; crown of the head, back of the neck, ear-coverts, and chest yel-
lowish grey, the grey assuming a brown tint on the chest; upper portion of the ear-coverts straw yellow;
rump and upper tail-coverts wax yellow ; point of the shoulders, both on the upper and under surface light
ultra-marine blue; the tips of the primaries pointed, and of a dark blackish brown, except the basal portion
of the external web, which with the secondaries and the greater wing-coverts are rich china blue; lesser
wing-coverts, and all the upper portion of the wing deep saffron yellow ; flanks and under tail-coverts rich
primrose yellow ; centre of the abdomen, and in some specimens a portion of the under tail-coverts,) rich
scarlet red; base of the two centre tail-feathers light olive green tinged with oil green, and merging into dark
blue at the tips ; the remaining feathers deep china blue at the base, gradually passing into white at the tip;
bill light horn colour ; feet brown.
Platycercus hcematogaster, Gould, inProc. of Zool. Soc., Part V., 1837, p. 88.
Three specimens of this new and lovely species of Platycercm have come under my notice, two of which
were procured by Major Mitchell, Surveyor General of New South Wales, during his researches into the
interior of that country. The specimens collected by this gentleman were subsequently presented by the
Governor to the Museum at Sydney, the British Museum, and the Linnean Society of London. The two
latter specimens appear to be males, and one in my own collection to be a female, which differs from the
male only in having the whole of her markings more obscurely defined, and less vivid in the colouring.
Major Mitchell informs me that they inhabit the scrubs on the banks of the Darling; and that the interior of
the colony was the only locality in which he had observed them; we may consequently conclude that the un-
explored regions of this vast country will still unfold to us many novelties of the highest interest; and that
as new localities are investigated, additional species will be discovered of this peculiar and richly coloured
group of ground Parrakeets, a form limited to Australia.
Habitat. Interior of New South Wales.






ILA. f CowloU.
Dy‘a.\rfyvp n crm> ■Jfobwe, & otv Stow by JfaH GmZcU. Jh*it&di by C. ItuLUswuwudaJy.


MYZOMELA NIGRA, Gould.
Black
Mas. Myz. capite, gutture, strigd abdominali, corpore suprd, alls cauddque fuliginosis; partibus reliquis albis; rostro
pedibusque nigris.
Fcem. Capite, corpore suprd, alls cauddque fuscis; gutture et corpore subtus fuscescente-albis; colore in medio plumarum
pravalente.
Long. tot. 5 unc. ; rostri, f ; ala, ; cauda, If; tarsi, f.
Male. Head, throat, stripe down the centre of the abdomen, all the upper surface, wings and tail sooty black;
the remainder of the plumage pure white ; bill and feet black.
Female. Head, all the upper surface, wings and tail brown; throat, and all the under surface brownish white ;
the centre of each feather the darkest.
Myzomela nigra, Gould, in Proc. of Zool. Soc., Part V. 1837.
Several examples of both sexes of this new species formed part of the collection made hy Mr. Charles Coxen,
during his last excursion into the interior of New South Wales. In structure it corresponds most closely
with the type of the genus (Myzomela cardimlis , Vig. and Horsf.). Colour generally offers to our notice
the best guide as to affinity; but, as will occasionally occur, the present species is an exception to the rule,
its colours being black and white, while those of the Myzomela cardimlis are scarlet and white. The females
of both species closely resemble each other.
Nothing whatever is known of its history.






A]PTERION AUSTRALISj/^W,


APTERYX AUSTRALIS, Shaw .
Kiwi Kiwi.
Face and throat greyish brown; all the remainder of the plumage consisting of long lanceolate hair-like feathei s,
of a chestnut brown colour, margined on each side with blackish brown ; on the lower part of the breast and
belly the feathers are lighter than those of the upper surface, and become of a grey tint; bill yellowish hoin
colour, its base beset with numerous long hairs ; feet yellowish brown.
Total length, about 30 inches ; bill, 6-|-; tarsi, 3.
Apteryx Australis , Shaw, Nat. Misc., vol. xxiv. Pis. 105/, 1058 ; and Gen. Zool. vol. xiii. p. 71. Less. Txaite d Oin.
p. 12. Cuv. R£gne Anim. t. i. p. 498, note. Yarrell in Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i. p. 71. PI. 10.
Apteryx, Temm. Man. d’Orn. 2nd Edit. Anal. p. cxiv.
Apterous Penguin , Lath. Gen. Hist. vol. x. p. 394.
Dromiceius Novae-Zelandiae , Less. Man. t. ii. p. 210.
For our first knowledge of this bird we are indebted to the late Dr. Shaw, to whom the specimen figured by
him in the Naturalist’s Miscellany was presented by Captain Barclay, of the ship Providence, who brought it from
New Zealand about 1812. Dr. Shaw’s figure was accompanied by a detailed drawing of the bill, foot, and
rudimentary wing of the natural size. After Dr. Shaw’s death, his at that time unique specimen passed
into the possession of the Earl of Derby, then Lord Stanley. His Lordship’s being a private collection, and
no other specimen having been seen either on the continent or in England, the existence of the species was
doubted by naturalists generally for upwards of twenty years. M. Temminck it is true placed it with
hesitation in an order to which he gave the title of Inertes, comprehending the present bird and the Dodo;
but other naturalists were inclined to deny its existence altogether. The history of the bird remained in this
state until June 1833, when my friend Mr. Yarrell published in the Transactions of the Zoological Society
an interesting paper, detailing all that had been previously made known respecting it, and fully established
it among accredited species: this paper was accompanied by a figure from the original specimen still in the
possession of the Earl of Derby ; within the last few months I have had the good fortune to become
acquainted with four additional specimens*, and to obtain some further information respecting the history
of the species.
A mature consideration of the form and structure of this most remarkable bird, leads me to assign it with
little hesitation to the family of Struthiomdce ; and my reasons for so doing will, I think; be obvious to
every one who will examine and compare the species with the members of that group. The essential
characters in which it differs consists in the elongated form of the bill, in the shortness of the tarsi, and in the
possession of a sharp spur, terminating a posterior rudimentary toe. Regarding the Ostrich as the species
to which it is least nearly related, we find in the Emu and Rhea, a much nearer approach, not only in the
more lengthened form of the bill of the latter, but also in the situation of the nostrils, which in the Rhea are
placed nearer the tip than in any other species of the group, the Apteryx excepted; in fact, when we compare
the bills of these two birds, it is very evident that both are formed on one plan, that of the Apteryx being an
elongated representative of the Rhea, with the nostrils placed at the extreme tip : in both these birds there
is the same peculiar elevated horny cere or fold. The tarsi are much shorter, and the nails of the toes much
more curved than in the Rhea; but the scaly covering of these parts in both birds is precisely the same; and
it may be further observed that the number of toes increase as we pass on from the Ostrich, there being
* Two of these, from which my figures are taken, were presented to the Zoological Society by the New Zealand Association : the Society also pos-
sesses a third, but imperfect specimen, which was presented by Alexander MacLeay, Esq., of Sydney ; and the fourth has been recently added to
the collection of the Earl of Derby.


on y two m that bird, three in the Rhea, Emu, &c„ and three with a rudiment of a fourth in the Apteryx.
le wing of the Apteryx, although scarcely more than rudimentary, agrees with that of the Rhea in havinsr
a strongly hooked claw at its extremity; while in the structure of its feather it approaches nearest to the
Cassowary; but unlike what obtains in that bird, the feathers are entirely destitute of the accessory plume,
in which latter respect it again agrees with the Rhea. The members of this group, although few in number’
are remarkable for their structural peculiarities, each being modified for its own peculiar habits and economy’
and m none is this circumstance more remarkable than in the Apteryx, which, at the same time that it de-
parts the farthest m form from the type of the group (the Ostrich), also departs the farthest in its mode of
life and general economy; being in fact adapted to the peculiarities of its own country, and fitted for the
particular kind of food there to be obtained.
Although the Apteryx approximates nearer to the Rhea than any other known bird, I am inclined to think
that several intervening links will yet be discovered between them ; indeed a native of New Zealand, who
was present at one of the late meetings of the Zoological Society, stated that there is another Apteryx in
New Zealand, with a shorter and thicker bill, but which he considered to be the male of the present
species. Without doubting that he has spoken to the best of his knowledge. I suspect that it will prove to
be distinct, and that the two birds in my plate are representatives of both sexes.
The favourite localities of this bird are low marshy situations, and those covered with extensive and dense
beds of fern, among which it conceals itself, and when hard pressed by dogs, the usual mode of chasino-
it, takes refuge in crevices of the rocks, hollow trees, and the deep holes which it excavates in the ground!
in the form of a chamber; in these latter situations it is said to construct its nest of dried fern and grasses’,
and to deposit its eggs, the number and colour of which have not been clearly ascertained.
While undisturbed, says Mr. Short, in a letter to Mr. Yarrell, the head is carried far back in the
shoulders, with the hill pointing to the ground ; but when pursued, says the native of New Zealand, it runs
with great swiftness, carrying the head elevated like the Ostrich. It is asserted to be almost exclusively noc-
turnal in its habits, and it is by torch-light that it is usually hunted by the natives, by whom it is sought after
with the utmost avidity, the skins being highly prized for the dresses of the chiefs; indeed so much are they
valued, that the natives can rarely be induced to part with them. The feathers are also employed to construct
artificial flies for the capture of fish, precisely after the European manner. When attacked it defends itself
very vigorously, striking rapid and dangerous blows with its powerful feet and sharp spur; with which it is
also said to beat the ground in order to disturb the worms upon which it feeds, seizing them with its bill
the instant they make their appearance ; it also probably feeds upon snails, insects, &c.
Habitat. New Zealand, where it is called by the natives Kiwi Kiwi.
The Plate represents two birds, supposed to be male and female, rather under the natural size.




J&CTAIUITII MOMACMITB „


AEGIALITIS MONACHUS.
Head, forepart of the neck, and a band across the upper part of the back sooty black ; back of the neck, and all
the under surface white; back, shoulders, and tertials greyish brown; centre of the wing and the basal por-
tion of the internal webs of the primaries and secondaries white, the rest black; two middle tail-feathers
black ; the three next on each side white at the base and tip, and black in the centre; the remaining feathers
wholly white; bill orange at the base, and black at the tip ; legs orange.
Total length, inches; bill, f; wing, s|-; tail, 2-f; tarsi, 1.
Charadrius Monachus, Geoff, in Mus. Paris. —Wagl. Syst. Av., sp. 15.
cucullatus, Vieill., Nouv. Diet. d’Hist. Nat., p. 136.
JEgialitis Monachus, Gould, Syn. Birds of Australia, Part 11.
Since the publication of the second part of my Synopsis above-quoted, I have received examples of this
species direct from Van Diemen’s Land, and I am consequently enabled to state that this is one of the locali-
ties it inhabits, with which fact I was previously unacquainted. The specimens I have recently obtained
exhibit to our notice a peculiarity in their plumage, from which I am led to believe that, contrary to what
obtains in the other members of the group, the black colouring of the head is merely a seasonal character,
which is doubtless only assumed during summer. This peculiarity I have illustrated by figuring a bird with
the black head, and another fully adult in which the head exhibits only a slight indication of the black
marking. A somewhat similar circumstance may be observed in its British analogue, the Common Ring
Dottrell, which assumes a richer style of colouring during the summer and breeding-season ; but this
character is never so nearly obliterated as in the present species.
Habitat. Van Diemen’s Land.






