

Par. L’Ordre du Roi!
L’ Homme Qui Bit.
BENDIGO HOTEL.
AND
■WINE SPIRIT STORES,
196 AND 198, BOURKE STREET EAST,
ABOVE POLYTECHNIC,
Christmas, New Year , and other Holidays,
BE IT KNOWN TO ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS
that the undersigned guarantees to supply and deliver to all
the loving subjects of our Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria,
CHRISTMAS BOXES, containing one ‘dozen of the well-
known Bendigo standard of excellence, purity, and quality, for
Twenty-Jive Shillings, comprising:—
2 bottles BRANDY. 2 bottles COLONIAL WINE.
1 bottle PORT WINE. 1 bottle OLD TOM.
1 „ CHAMPAGNE, X „ GINGER WINE.
1 „ WHISKY. 1 „ RASPBERRY.
1 „ SHERRY. 1 „ BASS’S ALE.
NOW LET IT BE KNOWN TO EVERYONE,
That R. C. Miller, of the aforesaid Bendigo Wine and
Spirit Stores, will, in defiance of all Attorney Generals, give a
CHANGE to every purchaser of a bottle of his celebrated
Jamaica Rum, at 2s, fid., of gaining a Note onthe National
Bank of Ausralasia for One Pound. Ten One Pound
Notes will be distributed amongst the purchasers of one thou-
sand bottles of Rum.
R. C. MILLER
P.S.—The nrifbrtunate recipient of a note would much oblige hy
publicly acknowledging, after drinkwg ike spirits and pocketing
the note.


ALCOCK & CO.,
®IIk IL 8 llll* ITAlllk
Manufacturers.
BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT 10
H. R. H. THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH,
His Excellency Sir J. H. T- Manners-Sutton, K. 0.8.,
HIS EXCELLENCY STB HENHY BAHKLY, K.C.B.
The following letter, coming from so high an authority as the
Champion Billiard Player, will be read with interest —
Albion Hotel, Melbourne.
Messrs. ALCOCK & CO.,— Dear Sirs—Before leaving the Australian
Colonies, I have the greatest pleasure in expressing the extreme
satisfaction I have had in playing on your tables, and which I pronounce
equal to any I have ever played upon—l remain, dear sirs, yours
faithfully,
JOHN EGBERTS, Champion.
132> RUSSELL STREET,
MELBOURNE.
Price List Forwarded on Application.


The House
That Jack Built;
OR,
HARLEQUIN PROGRESS,
AND THE
Love’s Laughs, Laments and Labors,
OF
JACK MELBOURNE,
AND
LITTLE VICTORIA.
A FAIRY EXTRA VAGANZA OPENING TO IA NTOMIME,
BY W. M. AKHURST,
Author of “ Seige of Troy,” “ King Arthur,” “ Battle of Hastings,”
“ Robinson Crusoe,” &c. &c.
THE PEOPBETY OP THE MANAGEBS, BY WHOM AXI EIGHTS
.ABE EESEEYED,
Produced at the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, December, 1869, under
the Management of Messrs. Harwood, Stewart, Hennings Coppin.
JHelbouqne:
H. CORDELL, PRINTER, 30, FLINDERS LANE WEST.


YAN YEAN
AXD
Every impure, Vegetable charged, noxious and brackish
WATER,
Rendered deliciously Pure and Sparkling after once passing
through a
DaHLKE’S
j/ICTORIAN
FILTER.
The thousands of these Filters in hourly use in this and
the neighbouring Colonies, and the daily increasing demand
for these scientific Purifiers, prove their universally recognised
merits, and
FILTERING POWER.
Sole Agents for Victoria and all the Colonies,
PICKERSGILL & CO.,
WINE MO SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
34, COLLINS STREET WEST.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
UPPER CRUST.
Diamantina, the Fairy Queen of Diamonds, a preternatural Koh-i-noor
in petticoats, which are a coign o’ vantage to her in her dealings
with the Gold Fiend; brilliant, highly polished, splendidly set,
and possessing several facets, more or less facet- ions ; the veritable,
duck o’diamonds in high feather ... Miss DOCY STEW ART.
Eubilippa, Amethystledown, Onyxmidolli,^
Emeraldil'a, Perlitheetha, Berrylanbertha, A collection
Cornelianne, Turqwasagal, Safierycritta, I of Gems
Amberyutiful, Jaspertanpout, Topazifia, f a cut above
Cafseylidda, Agatealonwidja, Garneta- tllc ordinary,
littlefishe, Opalomine. -
RESPECTABLE.
Gaffer Melbourne, an ancient buffer of the period, father of
Jack Mr. C. WYATT.
Dame Melbourne, a motherly woman, especially as to
Jack Mr. LEWIS.
Dolly Melbourne, Jack’s sister, a dairy maid
Miss MINNIE LESTER,
ill Eagboyp, a gentleman whose costume wants coherence, but
who in other respects is well connected ... Mr. SEFTON.
Jack Melbourne, the. Jack of this history, a builder of some con-
siderable repute in the nursery coteries; a Jack who defies
heavy-rj-hodj, and therefore as a hero, superior to A-jax, who
only defies lightning ... ... Mr. H. R. HARWOOD.
Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages, referred to in th©
Ballad as the Priest “ all shaven and shorn.”
Malt Porters, from “ House and others.”
LOWER ANIMALS.
Joey, a Wallaby, an elhve of the “ High school of the Gymna.”
Mr. FLBXMORB.
The Eat, a monstrous thing in rodents. ... Master YARMINT.
The Cat, tab-by or not tab-by is not the question. Miss MEW.
The Dog, heterogeneously bred. ... Master BOW WOW.


CEIISTMAS EdDOBATS.
Theatre Royal, Bourlse S*fc.
Q-. n. TIPPER,
Proprietor of the Cafe de Paris, Vestibule, Bars, Promenade and
Billiard Rooms, can offer to the Public the Finest, most Comfortable
Lounge and Promenade in Melbourne. Most centrally situated and in
close proximity to all places of Amusement,
The Billiard Saloon is Handsome, Spacious, well Lighted, well Attended,,
and fitted with the Finest Tables (Alcock Co.) Private Billiard
Room, with a Superb i able and Lounge.
COLD SUPPERS.
Beef, Ham, Tongue, Fish, Sausages (Italian, German, Frankforts),
Stewed Eels, Mashed Potatoes, Salads, Cheese, &c., ONE SHILLING.
P'S.—The only First Class Promenade or Rendezvous in Melbourne, and
inhere an old Friend is likely to be met to drink the toast of the
season with CARD MLLLE FALLTHE,
The COW> with a Crumpled Horn. ... Herr LACTEAL FLUID,
The Cock, the brightest of Chanticleers 5 ancestor of the early
village rooster of ShakeSpere. ... ... Mr. CROW HARD.
DREGS OP SOCIETY.
Orognome, the Gold Sovereign, but in this instance good for more
than one pun ; a legal tender, but an illegal tough and rough
personage, afterwards reduced to stock broking and the dog collar
trick ... ... ... ... ... ... Mr. R. STEWART.
Macwoe, a Scotch fiend, a deil worse than his companions, and con-
sequently his sovereign’s favorite.
Routeofevill, Coincuss, Baysmetal, &C., her other bad ones.
THE ONLY ONE OF THE SORT.
Little Victoria, originally called Australia Felix, and subsequently
Port Phillip, but nearly unknown to the British authorities of the
present day. A much neglected child, who, thanks to Jack
Melbourne, gets on well in life ... Miss MAGGIE STEWART.


SCENE I.
The Haunted Dell of Diamonds, with Fairy Castle in the Air,
Rulilippa and other Jewel Fairies assembled on the shore of
the Great Glass Dividing Sea awaiting the return oj
Diamantina, their Queen , from an expedition to
Outlandishia. The Queen's Fairy Barge is seen in the
distance as the Curtain rises.
Opening Faiet Choetts.
Ate, “ Where is my Nancy.” —Rubilippa and Fairies.
Oh, look you where Diamantina comes,
’Tina comes—’Tina comes,
Returning from Outlandishian slums,
Over the Great Glass Sea.
Her boat is a kind of diminutive gig,
Not so big as a brig,
And as the Nautilus rig we twig,
Grigs ain’t so happy as we.
Chorus —Oh, look you where, Ac.
Diamantina lands and comes down stage ; she has an infant tn her arms
Diam. ( deprecating musical honors) O, please cease; cheese this
everlasting squeaking;
Musical loyalty is so fatiguing.
Rubi. All hail!
Diam. No, don’t “ all hail.”
Emer. One wild hooray !
Perli One maddening shout of joy !
Diam. Thanks, not to day ;
It’s customary, I know, to feel flattered,
By having thus one’s nervous system shattered,
But I’ve discovered lately—don’t be vexed—
That those who cheer you one day, hoot the next.
Now see what I have brought with me. » ‘
[showing the infant.
Rubi. Oh dear!
Emer, How funny!
Top. Singular!
Perli. Rum!
Onyx Curious!
Saf. Queer
Diam. This very flaccid dab of human clay
Will probably a young man be some day.
Rubi. You don’t say so ?
Emer. ( dancing ) How jolly!
Perli. Then it grows ?


Diam. This pimple is a rudiment’ry nose,
Rubi. A nose with “ nostrils ” that will smell P
Diam. ( decidedly ) And snore !
“ A nostnlian nose,” like mine and yours, dear.
Rubi. Lor!
Diam. Those tiny lips so ruddy, and so ripe,
Will some day press the stem of a black pipe ;
Rubi, ( disgusted) Nasty!
Diam. Tobacco every man will puff;
It’s always in his mouth—
Rubi. And nose ?
Diam. That “ ’s’ nough.’’
These legs like—
Rubi. “ Sausages,”
Diam Dear, I protest
I will not be a butt for “ saucy jests ”
This puny voice ( child cries) some oratorio star
Will one day own, and in the wordy war
Its accents will be heard near, and afar,
Though now you see they’re limited to “ Dada.”
Song—Diamantina.—Aie, “ Dada.”
An infant in arms amuses and charms,
Save when it has qualms or raises loud alarms
In the boxes or pit, then I freely admit
I object to it and its ma.
But when it’s quiet, calm and gay,
As it is sometimes, so they say,
I like to watch its little play.
And hear it call Dada,
Dada, dada.
Doll squeaks. Fairies produce handkerchiefs made
up to imitate infants in long clothes.
Choras —Dada, dada, &c.
When spouting blank verse, or language terse,
Invoking a blessing, or calling down a curse,
And everything’s hushed, the actor’s oft crushed
By an infantile yell of “ wah !”
Then Hamlet pauses ere he dies,
Dei Franchi brothers anathematise,
And Narcisse scowling at the flies.
Denounces the babe’s dada.
Chorus and business as before.
{JRubilippa deposits the child upon a bank, _
Diam. I see you’re curious as to why I got it!
Well, this is what induced me dears to pot it.
Rubi. “ Pot it, oh !”
Diam. {amazed.') Like a “ pot-a-toe ” —you’re right.
You all have heard of Orognome.
All. The fright!


Eubi. The fiend of gold ?
Diam. Listen and you shall more hear.
The fellow lately stole Little Victoria,
The joy of Outlandishia and its pride,
And thus the famous oracle defied;
That oracle which at Victoria’s birth
Declared her destined to rule half the earth-
Eubi. “ A hemisphere Oh, bosh!
Diam. That’s cruel dear.
Eubi. Eule half the earth— a —hem !
Diam. A “ hem s’vere”
Well, as the fairy of the piece, I’m bound
To foil this fiend that locates under ground,
This human child I’ve borrowed.
Eubi. Was it lent ?
Diam. I borrowed it without its friend’s consent,
But left a fairy changeling in its room,
Which will Jack’s self for eighteen years assume,
Meanwhile we’ll educate this tiny mortal
Of the refining arts he shall be taught all,
So when to Outlandishia he’s returned,
The folks there he’ll improve by what he’s learned.
Eubi. He’ll be a very marvel of precocity.
Diam. No, a precocious child’s a sad monstrosity;
I’ve thought of that, and so Time’s wings I’ll clip,
The years of childhood we’l contrive to skip.
\_Music — Diam. turns to the infant and makes passes
with her wand."]
Child be no longer, pass to early boyhood,
Become Jack Melbourne, grown to hobbledehoyhood.
The child is transformed into Jack Melbourne, a type of the middle class
youth of the period.
-Jack ( wonderstruck ) By jovial jove this all to pieces whops
By longing chalks no end of jewellers’ shops,
A place which this child all to rights will suit;
The very trees produce crystallized fruit,
See the conifer* have diamond cones,
And apricots and peaches “precious stones,”
I wonder whom this all belongs to.
Diam. You!
Jack Nonsense; to me? (sees Diam. and hows.)
Beg pardon—how d’ye do ?
Diam. Yes, all is yours o’er which your eye can roam.
Jack Please tell me then who I am when at home.
Diam. No matter who.
Jack Particular I’m not.
P’raps you’ll inform me if a name I’ve got ?
Diam. We take our names from what we see about.


Jack The method is convenient no doubt.
“Jewels and gems,” I perceive are the rule here;
So my name should be “Jems” and yours “ Jewel-i«.”
Diam. Not bad, considering.
Jack (looking round) Nothing could be grander;
Won’t I just cut it fat— “ under the Verandah
Gut up a company—no. Gems “ are ” here,
A company’s not wanted then that’s clear.
Diam. They’re not convertible. [to Jack ...
Jack What’s that you say ?
I cannot sell them P
Diam. No, nor give away.
Jack What, can’t I part with them when 1 have worn ’em ?
Diam. Certainly not.
Jack And mustn’t I even pawn ’em?
Diam. They’re to improve your taste.
Jack Let’s taste ’em.
Diam. Pooh!
To inculcate, I mean, good taste in you.
Jack Talking of tasting, what time do you dine ?
Diam. We never dine.
Jack Don’t you indeed ? Bad sign—
I do. f Fairies shake their heads ...
Eh! don’t I dine ? oh, here’s a treat!
Bub. We never eat up here.
Jack What, don’t I eat ?
Emer. Certainly not.
Jack Then I don’t feast ?
Perl. Nowise.
Diam. Upon these glorious objects “ feast ” your eyes—
These conifers.
Jack ( boisterously ) Humbug !
Diam. (to Rubi) He’s “so ” vociferous.
Jack Confound your “ conifers,” this child’s “ carniv’rous.
These stones, though very good, ain’t good to eat.
Oh “ boochus ” being, give me “ butcher’s ” meat.
Diam- (to Rubi) I fear my trouble’s thrown away—ah me
His earthy grossness sticks to him you see.
(to Jack) Mutton and beef are unknown in these spheres.
You havn’t tasted food for fifteen years.
Jack For fifteen years, you say ? I gasp for breath,
Am I to understand I’m starved to death ?
Or can I be a freak of nature slight,
A boy that never had an appetite—
Who never ginger-bread desired to cram.
Or secretly enjoyed his mother’s jam,
Who ne’er the new baked loaf picked on the sly
Or roamed the cupboard with felonious eye ?
Diam. You’ve led an ideal life.
Jack No life is harder
Than one encumbered with an empty larder.


Eul* Come, go in for a glorious feast of reason.
£mer. Enjoy those groves which bloom at every season.
Those bijou trees bijouterie don’t snub,
Diam. Where “ caterpillars ” are unknown—
Jack And “ grub.”
Something besides my reason I must feast,
It is, in fact, the nature of the beast.
Him—Diam. and Jack.—Am, “ Topsy Wopsy.”
Jack Oh no, my dear, a life so dull
For me would never do.
I wish I was a bird.
Dims. A gull
Would most resemble you.
Suppose you were, what then, sir ?
Jack Away from this I’d go,
To where the tootsey wootsies
And the popsy wopsies grow.
Chorus Oh, my! Popsy Wopsy,
Wouldn’t I fly to thee;
Oh, my! Popsy Wopsy
Suits me to a T.
Though what Popsy Wopsy
Means I cannot see;
Surely something wonderful
Must Popsy Wopsy be.
Mepeat full Chorus Oh, my! Popsy, &c,
Pianx Avoid the girls, they’ll sell you boy
As pastry cooks sell buns.
Ball tickets, gloves, and costumes, lead
To diabolic duns.
Jack But, oh, to gaze on their top knots,
And sniff the bear’s grease there.
And twirl the Popsy Wopsy
Of your heart, to the galop’s air.
Chorus as before Oh, my ! Popsy Wopsy, &c.
Jack My spirit won’t be bounded by this view ;
I long to wield the tapering billiard cue ;
To know the taste of civilization’s victual,
And, neatly, to prostrate the sluggish skittle;
To toss a coin while sundry Carlton ales,
Foaming, await the issue -heads or tails.
To know the joy of riding in a cab,
And solve the mysteries of Yankee Grab.
Diam . Unhappy boy, you know not what you ask;
However, I surrender now my task.
(aside) And “ I ” that love his race—how can “ I ” censure
The great ennobling spirit of adventure ?
f Signs to Muhi. and Emer., who bring forward
brilliantly ornamented shovel.


Go-by the way you came you can’t go back.
Eight through the earth you now must make a track.
Take this and dig, [hands shovel to Jack.
With grief I’m like to burst.
To think this “pack ” you “cut.”
Jack {wielding shovel) I’ll “shovel” first,
Of great adventures I am on the brink (i thunder)
Help! Oh I’m like the thunder—made o’ zinc.
Duet and Choktjs—Air, “ Wind Up Galop”— lst Movement.
Diam. See on his destiny, he’s rushing, rushing fast,
Quickly all obstacles he’s pushing, pushing past;
But though invigorating,
Digging is deg-rading
To such a gay protegee as this is.
Jack and Chorus.
Yes on destiny rnshing, rushing fast.
Quickly all obstacles , pushing, pushing past.
And though invigorating,
Digging’s i “ 0t degrading
To your protegee say,
Though different you seem to think.
Aie —“ Second part of the Trio in same Galop.”
Jack Fare ye well, for I must go,
Di-a-man tina and Co.,
Your arrangements are too slow
For this juvenile hero.
Diam. Though you seem inclined to crow
Badly you’ve behaved, you know,
But my feelings I can’t stow.
For I love you, oh dear, oh !
General Chorus Yes, on his destiny, &e.
SCENE II.
The Superficial deposits and Stratified Rocks leading to
the great suburb of Horifferousquartzton. The scene
rises, displaying the objects referred to in the
following dialogue.
Jack. ( calling ) Hold hard ! I’ve changed my mind, reverse your
sentence,
And don’t in this way “ drop ” an old acquaintance,
“ Drop ” it, I say. I’m through the “ surface ” duffers.
That will “ suffice ” —they don’t care what I “ suffers,”
They’ve got a “ down ” on me, and it is droll
To put one of one’s own set in the “ hole.”


They’re letting me “ down ” easy, I scarce think,
I’m “real-i-zing ” that I “ really sink.”
Still as I’ve fallen from my previous station,
I feel I’m lowered in my estimation.
Wouldn’t all mining companies just pay
If they could sink their shafts in this cheap way ?
And would they not exhibit to their friends
Less “ diffidence ” in paying “ dividends ?”
Well, though in most respects I’m “ down ” just now,
“ Down ” in the mouth I wont be anyhow.
No mode of teaching science needs apology
This is a jolly way to do “ Geolo-gy
First the diluvium we encounter, ’cos it’s
One of the superficial deposits,
And so resembles to the young beginner
The “ soup or fish he ” leads off with at dinner.
The forms of life in animal or plant
Are quite identical with some extant;
The “ galotheperioda duck ” remark,
And here’s the “ champagne charleyus,” or lark.
The raven’s “ jollioldmutis ” here—
Science’s “ pack of terms ” is truly queer.
There’s a queer “ pachyderm,” or thick skin, near us—
The “ C. E. Jonesesius,” or “ rhino-eeros ”
So called, it is reported—not that I know—
Because it has a “ serous” down on “rhino.”
The mammoth next, “ O’Shannasseyis longus ”
I’m sorry that he isn’t more among us—
It’s hard to see a mammoth of such rank
Sitting on “ Haigs ” at the Colonial Bank,
The weasel “ Duffy wide awake is ” twig,
Backbone and spinal marrow very big,
’Tis'said it once lived by its “ pen ” and flourished ;
It does its “ pen shun ” now, and still is nourished.
“ McKeanius giganticus ” —I mean
Giraffe, or the “ gigantic cuss ” —“ McKean
It of our cabinet’s the first and head—
The long and short of it, I should have said—
Long necked, long winded, longs for place and pay,
Short tempered, and “ short lived,” some fellows say.
Here’s a strange animal, the G. P. Smithius,
A sort of Damon that had not a Pythias;
A fierce but harmless creature, quite unfriended,
And only dreaded by those it defended.
The tertiary formation : here we jostle
Against the extinct animals; this fossil
Is the Maccullocus defunctis, or
The Dodo, seen in public life no more
Just for the present —here’s a bit of fun come
The Moa, or “ Sir Charles Darlingsis bunkum,”
Thank goodness that’s extinct; here we have got a


Megatherium, or monstrous squatter;
The dinotherium, or land shark see.
The extinct digger this of's3,
The modern species has advanced in wisdom;
And now I’m in the chalk— cretaceous— system,
Footsteps of birds with down, not feathers decked;
That downy old bird Bindon, I suspect;
Star fishes of the Oolite formation,
Star fishes ” that can’t complain of “ starvation.”
Bandmanlius this one, and this gay feller,
Waltermontgomerius, this Robert Hellar;
This star-fish, which at sixes and at sevens,
Sets youthful malish hearts, is called Rose Evans.
What awful form is this ? The pterodactyle,
Remarkably like Bindon of the cracked tile,
Half bird, half saurian, it is quite unique,
It soared and soared, till it got “ made a beak.”
The coal formation, lower still, and lower,
Until we come to the Silurian floor.
Smaller, and smaller, now the fossils grow,
The Land Bill shows I’ve got down very low;
A joke by Burtt, what! gone so low as that ?
I’ve reached the lowest now, here’s Bindon’s hat!
Music.
Horifferus-quartzton! after all the hubbub
I’ve lately gone through ; the quiet of this suburb
Really is “ quite superb ” in every sense,
This a great country, I should say immense,
But as it might be peopled by my foes,
“I reckon I oughter ” “ reconnoitre.” — Here goes!
Topical Song—Jack.
SCENE III.
Palatial Caverns of Orognome, the Gold Fiend.
A series of tunnels of Gold in imitation of the Underground
Railway Scene in i( After Dark" Vampire Flat in
pillar of the Arch R. Macwoe, Coincuss, Routeofeville
and other Gold Gnomes discovered at work f some
quarrying, some loading trucks , and others variously
engaged in gold mining operations.
Gnome Chorus—Air, “Rollicking Rams.”
Though we seem ferociously to bang and rote
The feet is we’re indulging in the Government stroke.


Lots of show—but real work—no,
We can’t think of that affordin’.
Come and do a little of the Government stroke,
Come and do a little of the Government stroke,
Quite as gay as actual play,
And first-rate pay accordin’.
<Qong — Music. —Introduction to Adamastor Song,— Enter through
Vampire B. Orognome.
SoNQ —Orognome — Air, “ Chichaleary Bloke.”
I’ve matriculated in a school you see
Which has now gone entirely out of fashion,
In short 1 am a pal of the Tra-di-tion-al,
Which Jaques lashes in the Austra-lasian.
So as they won’t engage me for the mortal stage,
And criticising fellows won’t butter.
The theatre I’ve cut, and now I rant and strut
Congenially down upon the gutter.
Chorus Orog. I’m a chick, &c.
Gnomes. He’s a chick. Dance &c.
I’m a cheeky leary fiend; when I’m on the spree
Yillany’s the amusement I delight in j
Decapitating flies, vivisecting mice,
And setting all the dogs and eats a fightin’.
The girls I punch and thump,
And on the babies jump,
And thoroughly relish the sensation ;
When I’ve achieved a pun.
Everything I shall have done
To reach the lowest depth of degradation.
Chorus and dance as before.
Orog. Ha! ha! man’s woes I revel in—they’re funny,
And all connected, more or less, with money ;
Pile up the gold then, ’twill buy lots of crime.
Work away gnomes.
Mac.J f“I speer it’s dinner time.
Coin The bell’s not rung.
Mac. ( sniffing) I scent brose and hotchpotch mon.
Orog. '(fto Mac.) Hie to the belfry then j ring the bell Scotchman.
\_Macwoe goes off to ring bell and returns
Song —Orog.—Aie, “ Ring the Bell Watchman
Hie to the belfry old sixteen stone, and
Grasp tight the rope, and you’ll then understand.
What p’rhaps it aint necessary to tell.
If you pull it hard enough you’ll ring, ring, the bell.
Ring the beH, Scotchman, ring, ring, ring;
Like a wild maniac pull at the string.
’Tis aggravating these odours to smell;
Hesitate no longer Scotchman, ring, ring the bell.
Chorus —King the Bell Scotchman, &c.


Routeofeville makes a low obeisance to Orognome , and presents him a
card, inscribed “Bill of Fare.” The gnomes salaam , march
round and Exeunt.
Orog. As I’m no hermit and no Reehabite,
I think I’ll take a drink and take a bite;
Ah, here’s a Bill of Fare, how’s this, “ no soup ? ”
At such a cuisine, bah ! I turn my “ nose-up.”
(reads') “ Gold fish with gold dust sauce,” that’s not unpleasant!
Ah! “golden plover,” humph, and “golden pheasant.”
“ Gold ingots fried,” and “ smelted ” nugget hot,
The last was high, I “ smelt it ” in the pot.
“ Gold filagree, well hunted, baked in paste.”
“ Well hunted,” I conclude must mean “ well chased,”
“ Gold leaf consomme,” pish! not worth a button.
Is there no joint ? Confound it, yes, “ gold mutton •”
Part of a rel’tive of that sheep of Greece,
The Rollicking Ram that wore the golden fleece.
Enter Little Victoria.
Vic. (aside) He seems perplexed, “ confounded.”
Orog. Hang the cooks!
Vic. What a “ confounded ” scamp the fellow looks!
Orog. Nothing but gold to eat.
Vic. (aside) Indeed! law I really!
Orog. That “ Midas swell,’’ one “ might as well ”be nearly.
Gods what a “ menu !” [tears np card.
Vic. Haw! what “mane you?”
Orog. ( throwing the pieces away) There!
Vic. (fending off some of the pieces) Don’t mix me up, sir, in a
“ bill o’ fare.”
Orog. Well let it pass, to our affairs we’ll turn,
Little Victoria now your history learn —
Just eighteen years ago, from home 1 carried you,
And now I think it’s high time I married you.
Vic. Do you mean “wedded ?” nonsense, oh what stuff!
Orog. Madam, I think I’ve “ wedded ” long enough.
You’ll marry money —I’m not very old,
But in the “ flower” of life
Vic. (s ’reflecting) Ah “mari-gold !”
Orog. I’m a good figure—
Vic. “ Figure!” “ ate”-ful lout!
Orog. And the auriferousest chap that’s out,
For dresses and no end of gloves I’ll pay,
For what are “ g-loves ” when a “ gir-l-oves ” you, eh ?
Vic. I really don’t know what love is as yet.
Orog. Love is—to kiss, to clasp, to hug, to pet.
Vic. Then I love Joey.
Orog. Joey? .
Music—Enter Joey the Wallaby ; he hounds to Vic s side, ohe fondles
him and he strikes Orognome violently with his tail.
Oh! the dickens!


Vic. Joey, my pet!
Orog. The thoroughest of lickin’s
Awaits thee vile marsupial.
Vic. I love “ Joey.”
Orog. (aside) How “ joy-ous ” she is over her nasty toy.
(aloud affecting to fondle Joey, who resents the
familiarity with a blow from his tail.
Poor Joey ! (aside) Ugh ! you playful quadruped.
Vic. Observe his interesting tail and head,
Orog, (aside) At present I must bend and cringe and stoop,
(Threatning) A day will come when you are gone to soup—
On that day you will be no longer hateful,
Por qf that “ playful ” tail I’ll get a ‘‘ plateful.”
(to Vic.) Sell him to me, he is so very nice.
I’ll stand •* a tenner.”
Vic. Not “a tenner” price.
Orog. (aside) Oh I that some cove would at this beast a pup set.
(aloud) Come, name a figure, do.
[ Joey gets between Orognome’s legs and upsets him.
Vic- You have the “ upset.”
Enter Jack E Vic. runs to Orog., and clings to him.
Orog, What are you, what’s a name ?
Jack I’m a young man—
(pointing to Vic.) Like that chap there.
Orog. Like Little Vic. —bad scran !
Vic. A young man ! and like me, (to Orog) oh come, I say.
Marry me quick, this instant. ( to Jack) Get away,
Young men, I have been told, devour us girls.
Grog. And so they do, boots, bonnet, chignon, curls.
Jack (alarmed and moving, as though about to run off)
A girl! The fairies told, or meant to tell, me
To run away from girls because they’d sell me,
And yet this specimen don’t look “ so ” vicious.
Vie. He smacks his lips—no, no, I’m not delicious.
Pm tough and stringy (to Jack) though I seem precocious
I’m very old, (to Orog) He don’t look so ferocious.
P’raps he’s not hungry. '
Jack (slapping chest) Hollo ! here’s a start.
Vic. (slapping hers) What means this acrobatic business at my
heart.
Music — Amoroso.—Each advances slowly towards the other as though
magnetised.
Orog. (to Vic.) Away, avoid him.
Vic. (faintly and staggering towards Jack.)
Ah! I cannot flee.
Jack ( doing the same as Vic.) Would I could bolt.
( passionately ) I love thee
Vic- I love thee!
They fall into each others arms. Loud smack.


Orog. (furiously to Vic.) Now by!—that is to say,
Byand by there—
A “bitter oath” my “bet-r-othed,” I swear.
T hat’s off my mind, (to Jack) Your’e trespassing young
shaver,
This girl belongs to me
Vic. To you “knave” naver!
Orog (to Vic.) You’re very short to me just now.
Jack That’s true,
So short, indeed, she can’t “ be long ” to you.
Orog. Begone intruder.
Jack Can’t indeed.
Vic. Don’t pet.
Hove you “ awTlly,” “ oh fly ” not yet.
Orog. (advances to Jack) “ Hook it.”
Jack “Oh get ” away. [ hits him in the face
That for your nose is. (Orog's face is much disfigured , Joe*.
examines it critically
Ah, yes, slight “ ecchymosis.”
Orog. “ Ikey Moses !”
Jack That is an argument the reverse of mystic.
Orog. One I object to, ’cos it is “ so-phistic.”
(aside) I’d best dissemble.
(aloud) Shake hands old fel’ come.
We’ll have a drink, you know you’re always welcome.
Ho ! liquor there.
( Enter gnome with goblets. Orog. hands one to 3ack.
Drink ho !
Jack Wine I’m not used to.
Vic. (aside) Is this a “ ruse ?”
Jack (about to drink) Well here’s to you old “ rooster.”
[ The Wallaby knocks the cup out of his hand with its tail.
Vic, Oh naughty Joey !
Orog. (offering another) Come another try.
(aside) That “ wallaby ” I’ll “ wallop by ” and by.
Jack What can it mean F I wish it was loquacious—
Orog. It is “so gay, ”
Jack And really seems “ sagacious.”
Once more here’s luck, (drinks)
(Joey rushes out frantically.
What’s this ?
Orog. At last I’ve done it.
Jack Creation seems all spinning round, who spun it ?
My well developed brain is on the twirl.
Vic. Ah, did you “ hocuss” him ?
Orog. “ Ho-cuss ” him, girl.
Off to your chamber (aside) There she’ll be concealed.
Jack My “ high heeled ” boots revolve, to fate “ I yield.”


Trio—Am, “ See at your feet.”
Vie. See at your feet a suppliant kneel,
A la Bohemian Girl
Don’t be an unforgiving thing,
Though you’re a horrid churl;
But like a brick nicely behave,
And let us young folks go
Off to a place where things are not
So shocking tame and slow.
Orog. Delighted ! Delighted I’m immensely much,
You thought yourselves so clever,
Now like a rabbit in a hutch
You’ll be shut up for ever.
Child, in my house you’ll live and die,
And not with that outcast tipsy guy.
Solo —Jack—Aib, “ Fair Land of Poland.''
Recitative.
Start not, but listen !
Air.
When the Fair land of Poland was ploughed by the hoof,
’Twould be useless to say, but I might
In passing inform you that I held aloof
From that very remarkable sight.
At that moment of danger when Freedom invoked
All the fetterless sons, why, you see
My Ma wasn’t born, so whether they croaked
Or conquered was nothing to me.
My birth’s ignoble, and stained’s my crest
As is thine own. [Producingpaper inscribed “ Neglected
Let this attest! Child. Industrial School.”
Teio — Aik, “ Through the Wood.”
Vic. To the world, oh then fly love
To the world with me,
And this scamp defy love,
Let’s hook it instantlee.
Jack To the world I will fly love,
To the world with thee,
But first with this pile of
Gold let us make free.
Orog. ( ironically) Cut away, cut away, &c.


Tmo.
(Jut away cut away, cut, cut, cut away.
j ao k To the world let us fly lore,
am j You and likewise me,
- c And this scamp defy lore,
Yes, hook it instant-lee.
Orog. To the world, off goes my lore
To the world goes she,
But my charming sly lore,
You only goes with me.
Jack falls senseless up stage. Vic. implores Orog. to allow her to
remain. Ye repulses her, and pushes her off b., then exults , and
'Exit B. Music changes to the music in the Underground Mail-
way Seen * in “ After Dark.” Joey puts his head through a
portion of the cave. He is pulled hack, and Vic.’s face appears
at the opening. A profile train of gold trucks passes over the
stage at back. After an apparent struggle, in the course of
which Vic. and Joey’s heads appear at different times, Vic.
succeeds in obtaining possession of the place contested.
Vie. The trucks ! the trucks ! they’re coming fast—oh, dear!
That *• true ”-u-lent old rillian’s sent ’em here;
What’s to be done ? My flesh begins to creep —ah!
They’ll make a “ tramway ” orer that poor “ sleeper.”
I say hare done. [ struggle with Joey renewed.
Oh, spare him, for I can’t;
The noise of the trucks approaching is heard : it gradually increases.
Help ! he’ll be orer run with mining plant.
Joey pulls Vic. back, scratches down part of the cavern, leaps through
a/nd rolls Jack out of the way, just as a long train of gold
trucks rushes across the stage. Vic. appears at the opening and
comes up stage. Enter e. Orognome and gnomes. Jack revives
and rises.
Orog. Bind him and bury him beneath the rock,
And her also.
Vic. ( kneeling to Orog.) Please let me change my frock.
Orog. Take yonder quadruped, and do not fail
Within an hour to serre me up his tail,
Conrerted into soup, with herbs and spice.
Jack “ Superb ” idea.
Enter Diam and Fairies.
Diam. Now, this is really nice.
So snug, and so suggest! re too of ease,
It “really is ” —“re-le-ase” them if you please.
Orog. I’ll see you
Diam. That will do—oblige me, won’t you ?
You know you can’t resist me.
Orog. Can’t IP
Diam. Don’t you.


Orog. He trespassed here, made love to my fiancee,
.And finally got tight. ’
Diam. Did you ?
Jack I can’t say.
Diam. You are a victim of a fraud you gaby.
Jack A “ fraud!” indeed “ for-aud ” I know I may be.
Orog. He left your “ gems,” and through my “ strata ” Sported,.
I in return to “ strata-gems ” resorted
I got some acetate of morphia, let it
Into his glass and—
Jack I like an “ ass ate ” it.
Diam. The fraud you practised saves the loving pair,
Orog. But I’ve a right to terms.
Diam. That’s only lair \_Musie.,
Orog. Well listen, while I state my terms in rhyme,
In an incredibly short space of time,
(1 like to dabble in a little mystery)
He shall erect a house, and make a history,
Both so complete, that noodles and that sages.
Own them the wonder of all times and ages :
If unfulfilled these terms—the pair are mine.
Diam. But if fulfilled—
Orog. My rights 1 will resign.
Diam. Agreed, tte contract I accept, but stop,
What’s on the surface ?
Orog. Melbourne lies at top,
North Melbourne, I should say.
Jack I dread more treason,
Let’s get up there at once.
Diam. All in good season.
Jack All in good “ season ?” Ah ! the points! I spot ’em.
If we “ spring ” “ summer ” here “ we enter ” “ Ilotham.”
Aik—“ Meet me in the Lane.”
Vic. How jolly ’tis to visit the earth again,
Orog, I’ll take good care you don’t there long remain.
Jack Where do we meet ? in New York, in Sandridge, France, or
Spain P
Diam. Oh ! no, not quite a hundred miles from Flinders Lane.
Ensemble.
Vic. How glad we’ll be to visit the earth again,
1 hope that when we’re once there we shall remain.
We do not meet in New York, in Sandridge, France, or Spain,
But not a hundred miles from Flinders Lane.
Jack How glad we’ll be to visit the earth again,
It shall not be my fault if we don’t remain ;
Though we don’tgo to New York, to Sandridge, France, or Spain,
But not a hundred miles from Flinders Lane.
Diam. How glad they’ll be to visit the earth again,
It will be their own fault if they don’t remain,
Ihough they don’t go to New York, to Sandridge, France, or
Spain,
But not a hundred miles from Flinders Lane.


Orog. How glad they are to visit the earth again.
I’ll take good care they don’t there long remain,
I’ll grab them, not in New York, in Sandridge, France, or Spain,
But not a hundred miles from Flinders Lane.
A ie —“ Cruel Jane Jemima”
Orog. I reared her from her infancy
And tanght her how to say
Her ABC and 123
And spell her B A-ba.
Vie. You old felonious dodger, you
By stealing me began.
Jack And now love, you shall join the gals
Located in Prahran.
Orog. Cruel Diam-an-ti-na.
My own love to trepan,
I’ll go and join the Mormonites,
Who’ve fifty wives a man—oh dear.
Chorus —Cruel Diam-an-ti-na
His own love to trepan,
He’ll go and join, &c.
Aie—“ ’Jaime les Militaires .”
Diam. Oh, then put on your millinery.
Put on your millinery.
Put on your millinery,
Blonde and lace
And frills of muslin,
Silks and satins
All a rustlin’ ;
When wev’e got on the millinery,
Got on the millinery,
Got on the Millinery
Then our charms
Are all in arms
And nothing us alarms.
For when the fellows see our make up,
Poor chaps they shun it,
And if they’re not Money Millers,
They sigh —ah, it wont run it.
Chorus- When we’ve got on, &c.
Orog. and Jack When they’ve got on, &c.
Diam. We’ll celebrate our victory in Ballet,
The latest one of the ladies Du-valli
“Du Yalli” ble ladies, I can tell-ee.
GRAND PAS DE DEUX DES POSES,
By the Sisters Heloise and Rosalie Duvalli.
La Sylphide, Ballet Divertissement,
By the Ladies of the Corps de Ballet. Invented and arranged by the
Sisters Duvalli.


SCENE IV.
The House that Jack Built.
A Toy house, such as is drawn by school boys on their slates,
with smoke issuing from the chimney. Garden, Duck-
pond, &c. (Music.) Enter Old Melbourne and
Dame. They express in pantomime their admiration of
the house arid grounds. The old man produces card
inscribed i( The House that Jack Built,” presses it to his
bosom, then hands it to the dame, who kisses it. Old
Melbourne hangs it on the wall of the house and
tries to enter the dwelling, but in vain ; the door won’t
open; the window is also tried and found impracticable.
Pathetic Music is heard; and Dolly enters, weeping,
with milking utensils. She draws from her bosom a
photograph of Bill Ragboys and kisses it passionately.
Dame snatches it away and tears it up. Dolly rushes
to duck-pond; tries to make a header, but the pond is
impracticable. Bill Ragboys enters, and the lovers
embrace. They implore the old couple to consent to their
union ; but the old folks won’t listen to them ; and point
sarcastically to Bill’s ragged attire. Bill expresses, by
gesture and action, knowledge of the deficiences of his
costume, and the fact of his possessing a heart devoted
to virtue and Dolly. He then produces an immense
wedding ring, and license with large pancake seal, and
intimates that at cock crow he will seek the priest, all
shaven and shorn, and get married to Dolly. Old
Melbourne and Dame raise their arms as though to
curse the lovers, when the Music suddenly changes.
Enter Jack and Victoria B.
Dame ( rushing up to Jack) My Jack come back!
Oh! “ weally ’’ we have missed you.
My b-o-o-y! it seems an age since I last kissed you.
[.Attempts to kiss Jack, who violently repulses her.
Old M. ( fiompous ) Your old infirm dilapidated pa.
Proffers his arms, come John to your dada.
YJack throws him of impatiently.
Dolly Tour sister Dolly, modest, mild, and meek,
Places at your command her downy cheek.
\Ofiers her cheek. Jack at first evinces disdain, but
changes his mind, and kisses Dolly's cheek
vehemently.


Bill Your future brother-in-law, though badly “ dad,”
His goodly form, is “ glad ” to see you lad.
[Offers his hand ; Jack points to Bill's dress, and seems
to pity the wearer. Pie shakes hands, and Bills
coat cutf remains in his grasp.
Jack What’s all this bunkum ? Who d’ye take me for?
Dame My son !
Old M. And mine!
Dolly My brother!
Bill Mine -in-law,
That’s going to be.
Yic- {to Jack) My own, my very dear,
They’re members of your family its clear,
Assembled now to greet their famous scion,
Meaning you Jack, for your’e the family lion.
Jack Well, “ family assemblies ” in this case,
Resemble “assemblies of M.L.A’s.”
Yic. Explain your meaning Jack, for there’s no grabbin’ it.
Jack It is an assembly gifted with the “gab in it.”
(to Davie) I never had a mother, you old harridan,
My father had good taste, he never married tin.
Enter Diamantina.
Diam. They take Jack for his fairy substitute,
Whom I’ve withdrawn, (jo Jack) Now end this coarse
emeute.
Trust all to me.
Jack They say they’re my relations ;
Well curb your “ passions ” and don’t lose your “ patience.”
Diam. This is the House that Jack Built! ah, how slack!
Jack I understand—Jack built it, and I’m Jack.
Music — Chord.—Enter Orognome.
Orog. I thought I heard some reference to my name.
Diam. Did you ? The freedom of this pair I claim.
Orog. The house, the history that the dunce or sage
Will dare pronounce the Wonder of the Age.
Diam. There is the house. (to the others) You tell the wondrous tale.
Orog. No hearsay story Eairy will avail,
It is not evidence.
Diam. As you like be it;
Prepare to be set down —your eyes shall see it..
Song—Axe, “ Cork Leg."
Diam* A little old man and his little old spouse.
Had a son christened Jack, most esteemed for his nous
In building all things, from a stye for the sows
To a chateau in Spain, or this wonderful house;
And this is the house, the house, the house,
Yes, this is the House that Ja> k Built.
Chorus (highly excited) —Oh, this is the House, See.


Jack It was proof against any felonius as-.ault,
The doors wouldn’t open —lt wasn’t their fan t
Just the place for a nice private still; in the vault
Was stored a fine sample of Tasmanian malt.
\_Enter Maltsters and Co., bearing Malt, inscribed
“ Solomons, ” “ House & Co.,’’ “ Gough. ,,
And this is the malt, the malt, the malt,
That lay in the house that Jack built.
Chorus —Oh this is the Malt, &c.
Vic. A rodent reduced very much as to fat
Contrived this fine sample of Malt to get at,
And demolished the lot. I pledge my word that
This is the identical rodent or rat.
Enter Rat. The rat, the lat that ate the malt
That lay in the House that Jack built.
Chorus - Oh this is the Rat.
Orog. But rats have an enemy constant and fierce,
With teeth very pungent and claws that will pierce,
And fur very sleek, and small sensitive ears,
If you ask me if I mean the cat I say ye-es.
Enter Cat. And this is the cat that killed the rat
That ate the malt, &c.
Chorus— -And this is the Cat, &c.
Diom. But pussy behaved like a gluttonous bog,
She ate so much rat that she slept like a log,
And just when she should have jumped off like a frog,
She stopped, and was worried to death by a dog.
Enter Dog. And this is the Dog that worried, &C.
Chorus— Oh this is the Dog, &c.
Jack The law of impounding was treated with scorn,
By a truculent cow seeking clover and corn,
Who coming across the cat-killer one mom,
Very playfully tossed him aloft on her horn.
Enter Cow And this is the Cow with the crumpled horn, &C.
Chorus —Oh this is the Cow, &c.
Vic. A dairy maid graceful {Dolly curtseys') and slim as a fawn,
Had previously risen at early morn,
And after suppressing a sneeze and a yawn
Milked this truculent cow of the crumpled horn,
{indicating Dolly) And this is the maiden all forlorn, &c.
Chorus —Oh this is the Maiden, &c.
Orog. But I’m told that a gentleman tattered and torn,
Very shy as to wardrobe, boots, linen and lawn,
To kiss this fair milkist had somemnly sworn,
And succeeded in keeping his oath, that fine morn-
Bill wispers to Orog. who introduces him to the others
And this is the man all tattered and torn, &c.
Chorus— Oh this is the Man, &c.


Diam. A clergyman, who curly locks had once worn.
But which now no longer his scalp did adorn.
With his beard and moustache to the barber’s they’d gone,
Went and married the pair just referred to at dawn.
Enter Priest . And this is the priest all shaven and
shorn, Ac.
Chorus —Oh this is the Priest, &c.
Jack The early village cock, that mom,
Left the early village hen forlorn,
To pick up the early worm, while his horn
Woke that reverend gent, all shaven and shorn.
Enter cock. And this is the cock, &c.
Chorus—Oh this is the Cock, &c.
The characters arrange themselves in the order of the Story, The Malt
Porters go out n. The Rat steals out sly after the Malt , the Cat
crouches and pounces out after the Rat, the Dog rushes out after
the Cat , and a growl and a yell indicate the fate of the latter ; The
Cow lowering her head runs off and the body of the dog flies
through the air across the stage i. to R. Dolly takes up her
stool\ and pantomimes that she is going in search of the cow. Bill
wipes his mouth , and follows Dolly, but before he's off the stage
Dolly's hand is seen to box his ears. The priest yawning
violently, but armed with a wedding ring, goes out after the lovers.
The cock closes the procession, crowing and clapping his wings.
Diam. You’ve seen the house and heard the history too,
The freedom of this pair I claim from you.
Orog. Done like a dinner, flat as a squeezed lemon,
I'll have the satisfaction of a gemman.
Jack A “ gem-man ” fight a jewel ?
Orog. {to Diam) For a while
You have your way.
I move for a new trial.
Diam. Buie granted, but with costs.
Orog. Scold! vixen! shrew!
Jack He’s “ in a fix,” and calls you “ vixen.”
Vic. (making a mouth at Orog.) Boo!
Diam. Bow for the second trial. \Muste.
Pass like a meteor.
(to Orog.) I brought you to a pretty pass —now here a a
“ prettier.”
SCENE V.
An Aboriginal Wood in Australia Felix, with salt lagoon.
Orog. ( sneering ) A common salt lagoon—as pancake flat,
What are you going to make out of that!
Diam. I ? nothing. lam but a fancy figure.
Here everything’s been done by human vigour.


Orog. Another trick ;my dear it will not run it.
Diam. Your’e right; a glorious trick, Jack Melbourne’s done it.
Orog. Don’t be so fast, something you say’s been done,
Before that very something was begun.
Jack ( To Vic ) His own “ phrenology ” love is so horrid,
He thinks that nobody can be straight forri’d.
Diam. Thirty-five years the works’ been operatin’.
Jack {proudly ) And I performed it, and I’m only eighteen !
What did I do it for ?
Orog. Make a short story here;
Diam. For fame, and for the good of Little Victoria.
Vic. For me, oh ! Jack—l wish I only knew
What ’twas you did.
Jack You shall {to Dial) What did Ido ?
Diam. You ? Nothing ; human energy I meant,
Courage and patience, which you represent.
{Music trem ) Melt salt, thou emblem of sad desolation.
Into the life germs of a future nation.
Panorama—The “Enterprise” Schooner landing
the First Melbourne Settlers.
In yonder glancing stream you will diskiver,
The Yarra Yarra— ever-flowing river;
Jack The “ overflowing ” is the best translation!
Diam. Don’t interrupt me till there is occasion—
As it appeared in August, ’35.
Jack Although I wasn’t then a bit alive,
How the old time comes o’er me.
Vic. And o’er me.
Orog. What is there wonderful in this to see ?
A schooner and some men, in bold relief.
Landing some bullocks meant for future beef;
A hut or two, more men, palavering blacks,
“ Tasmanians ” who “ act as maniacs.”
Vic. Oh sneer away “ Tasmania,” you won’t harm,
For travellers know that “ it has many a ” charm.
Diam. They’re the first Melbourne settlers.
Orog. Each a meddler.
Jack Scorn not the—what the song calls {sings)
“ Gentle Set-tle-r.”
Orog. What’s this to do with Jack ?
Diam. He found the money,
Materia], and pluck—“ we” called him “Johnny
And though he was occasionally pesky.
He’ll live in story like Jack Sobieski.
Panorama—Scene, ‘ Collins Street, 1838.”
Collins Street, Melbourne, —don’t indulge in laughter,
In 1838, that’s three years after.
Tie. Oh, look at that queer bonnet! what a frock!
Diam. The girl of that period, dear, doing the block.


Jack Remark the Melbourne swell, do—
Yic. Which is “ him.”
Jack He in the cabbasre tree with dirtj brim,
Yic. Observe the bullock driver wildly staring—
What is he doing ?
Orog. Well miss, he’s a swearing.
Vic. (; melancholy ) This picture does the past but represent,
Alas! where is he now?
Jack In Parliament.
Orog. Dy’e call that progress, do you clever sonny ?
He is the man for my superfluous money,
Panorama- Scene, “ A Sheep Station, 1848.”
Diam. More progress see—here in mid wilderness
The lowly squatter hides his sore distress.
Vie. What is a squatter ?
Jack You’re a green female ;
A needy chap “ who wool sells ” by “ wholesale.”
Orog. A miserable man
Yic. I’m getting hazier.
Orog. The lowest species of the British grazier;
A wretched creature who contrives to keep,
A paltry stock of seventy thousand sheep ;
That hovel for a house.
Jack A dreadful lot;
A wife and family of course he’s got ?
Orog. Nearly or quite. \_piano hemd
You hear that tuneful jangle.
Jack That’s his poor missis turning of her mangle.
Orog. He only has eight miles of land and garden.
Jack And for each acre pays quite half a farden.
Panorama—Scene, “ The Rush to Bendigo.”
Diam. A much more pleasant vision now you view,
The rush to Bendigo in ’52 ;
See how the population thither flocks,
All mad to get down quickly to the rocks.
Jack “ Old Times Rocks.”
Orog. Old Times Jack.
Vic. Some ride, some walk.
Diam. Bound for Long Gully, Peg Leg, Eagle Hawk.
Yic. Ah! see that group, they’re men chained to a tree
Oh, Jack, what are they ?
Jack “ Diggers” of low *■ deg-r-ee,”
Who’ve done some felony, —“ that” is a bobby,
A mounting guard on ’em —don’t he look nobby?
(to Orog.) What have they done, stabbing or giving pisons?
Orog. Worse, worse by far, they liavn’t got a license.
The brilliant bobbies then chained men to logs,
As now the bobbies serve unlicensed dogs.


Panorama—Scene, “Departure of Burke and Wills”
Diam. On, on, the Genius of High Enterprise,
Tints with her radiance the Aust al skies ;
She comes—her own twin heroes then are near.
Jack This is tall talk, but isn’t “ at all ” clear,
Poor Burke and Wills you mean to usher in,
Surely that might be done without this din,
Particularly when the other day,
We heard there was a balance still to pay.
Diam. The start for Carpentaria.
Orog. I remark
People make light of what they should keep dark.
Panorama - Melbourne in 1860.
Diam. Melbourne in ! 869, the heart of it.
Yic. Where is the city ?
Diam. We can give but part of it.
Jack This solitary building do you call
A “ part of Melbourne ?” It’s the “ Town all!”
The Handsome Seat of Melbourne’s Mayor—
Orog. Oh, yes !
Of Melbourne’s Mayor ! —ha, ha ! they’ve made “ A-mess.”
Jack Here you can see what can he done, indeed,
By the “ co-operation ” of—Barnes and Reid.
Diam. Make way there.
Jack (pushes Oro g.) Way there.
Orog. Why this strange aggression ?
Diam. Here comes the Flying Squadron in procession.
\Enter the Flying Squadron Sailors in procession ,
followed by male and female spectators. Jttvemle
March arranged by Mr. J. H. Flexmore.
Double Hornpipe, Misses Nelly Stewart and Emma Marsh.
At conclusion of March Solo and Chorus — Aie, “ Wait for the turn o/
the Tide.”
Diam. A sailor enjoys the happiest life,
Travelling fur and wide,
With friends everywhere, and in each port a wife,
Who leaves him at turn of the tide.
Glorious fellows are Britain’s bluejackets,
We’ve had a specimen recently here,
Though some slow coaches object to their rackets,
Yet to true British hearts sailors are dear.
Hurrah for the Navy ! hurrah my boys,
That oft has the world defied.
And Albion’s foes in vain my boys
bhall wait for the turn of the tide.
Chorus —Hurrah for the Navy, Ac.
Scene closes.


SCENE VI.
Exterior of the Houses of Parliament.
Enter Orognome attired as a Stock Broker.
Orog. Defeated, baffled, diddled, chiselled, cooked,
The very minute that success I’d booked;
I never thought she meant that way to tackle us ;
Jack Melbourne’s house and history are miraculous,
And fit to be a wonder to all ages ;
My birds, I fear, have left for good their cages.
I can’t go back a failure to be sneered at
By Humbug, Punch and Touchstone; and be jeered at
By miserable gnomes. “I ” who had tried
To make all think Victoria was my bride,
And said, that as she’d rule -1 said this plump—
Half of the “earth,” the “earther” half I’d jump.
"What’s to be done. What! is there no resource ?
The Stage? The Press? The Bar? The Pub? The Course?
I have it! this attire, this want of ochre,
Suggest the very thing—the gay Share Proker.
My gold complexion, too, will even pass
For a share broker’s, for it looks like brass.
Yes, stock and share-broking’s the finest blind
For one whose object’s vengeance on mankind.
Song— Orognome. —Aie, “ Maty Holder .”
The art of selling is my true vocation,
True vocation.
The unsophisticated population,
Of the nation, buy from me.
When everything goes wrong don’t be a croaker.
Or go upon the spree.
But if you cannot be a sweep or stoker
I advise you to copy me,
Put on a clean collar and make a book,
Not such as is made by Coker,
But one with a puffy important look
The book of the bold Stock Broker.
Chorus— Prince of Wales, Leviathan, an’
Golden Stream and Inkerman, an’
Durham Park and Hand and Band, an
Kohinoor and Albion, an’
Nightingale, Great Gulf, and Grand
Trunk, St George, you’ll understand,
Are with the rest at my command,
So buy from me.
Assume a sort of sprightleness and candour
—ness and candour, ness and candour,


At the “ Corner ” and too “ Under the Verandah,”
We’re always gay and free.
We swallow Ballan water, tea and mocha,
With a client, should he be
A Rechabite or should he be a soaker,
We can do with a Soda and B ;
Neat traps we keep, we dress tip top,
Boots hats and gloves and choker,
At the Theatre we are considered first chop,
For there we drop the shop and the Broker.
Chorus as before. Dance.
We’ve jewellery galore, and sport our coaches.
Talking of “ jewelry ” —some one “ a-broaches,”
’Tis Jack and all alone—l’ll have him slap.
Enter Jack L.
He does not recognise me!
Jack Who’s this chap ?
Some man of taste, for see with what affection,
He looks on this magnificent erection ;
Some poet pr’aps, the cud of fancy chewin’,
And taking this arrangement for a ruin.
Or an ex-member—Reeves, perhaps, or Byrne,
Mourning because he cannot there return.
Orog. Fine day.
Jack Uncommon.
Orog. Bless me! is it you ?
But no it cannot be the Jack I knew.
And yet it is.
Jack Is it ?
Orag. I’d bet a crown
You don’t remember me—you’re from my town.
What, don’t you recollect the Smiths ?
Jack The name,
Seems quite familiar.
Orog. ( thoughtfully ) Yes, it is the same ;
(to Jack) I’ve made my pile.
Jack I’d like the way to learn.
Orog, As you’re a towny I’ll do you a turn,
And make your fortune here upon the spot;
(producing shares) All you’ve to do’s to buy this little lot.
Jack (reading title) “ Amalgamated Diddlers. ”
Orog. May I speak?
Washed out no end of ounces this last week.
Just read the telegram [ hands Jack a paper
It ain’t a long un.
Jack (reading) “ (iet rid of Diddler’s—all up!”
Orog. (snatching the paper away) That’s the wrong un.
A famous “ spec,” not many such occur.
Jack The “ first ” and “ only spec ”I “ suspect,” sir.


Orog. “ Prospect’s ” immense.
Jack But “ a spec’s ” rather poor.
Nrog. You will not speculate.
Jack No, not this tour.
Orog. What shall we do to while away an hour ?
Jack I must return unto my lady’s bower
At Garton’s.
Orog, Shall we stroll around the yards ?
(feeling in his pockets) What’s this ? Why
I declare a pack of cards !
Let’s step in here.
Jack I feel a sort of shame.
Orog. Come and we’ll play the noble three card game.
Exit with Jack. Enter Diam. and Vie,
Diam The oracle declared, dear, at your birth,
That some day you would govern half the earth.
Yic. I have been told some oracles, in town,
Will foretell anything for half-a-crown.
Was I to have a husband ?
Diam. Oh dear, yes ;
Handsome and noble, swellish in his dress.
Who’d give up everything for you.
Vic. Ah ! go on.
Diam. His parents, billiards, club, cigars, and so on ;
His tailor, boot-maker, and box at Brighton,
Resign his seat in Parliament.
Vic. You frighten.
Resign his seat ?
Diam. In England, M.P.’s there
Accept the Chiitern Hundreds,
Vic. I’m aware
The Chiitern Hundreds is a term bewilderin’
Our chaps only accept hundreds of chiitern.
Well, oracles, dear fairy, I don’t care for.
Diam. Rubbish ! Your brilliant de-tiny prepare for,
Virtue, wit, beauty, nature does allow you,
With the accomplishments I now endow you.
Thus qualifying you, my pretty maid,
To do the heavy in the Royal Arcade.
Duet Diam. and Vic. —Aie, “ Burlington Arcade.
Diam. A fuzzy chignon on your crown,
In height at least two feet,
A cheese plate hat inclining down,
Neat hessians on your feet.
Tight-fitting corsage, and your skirt
Most artfully displayed.
This style will fit you for
The New Royal Arcade.


Together Trotting down the New Royal Arcade,
Waltzing down the New Royal;
Knowingly arrayed,
Sauntering in the New Royal Arcade ;
All the go’s the New Royal,
The ISew Royal Arcade.
{Repeated.}
Thus dressed to death, a sensa-tion
I can’t fail to create,
And all the nice young chaps in town
I’m bound to captivate.
With piquante slang I chaff the crowd
Of swells of every grade,
As I pass up and down
The New Royal Arcade.
Repeat as before - Trotting down, &o.
Enter Orog. and Jack , the latter with his hair dishevelled and pockets
turned inside out.
Jack (to Diam.) Oh! charming fairy, gone is every stiver;
I’m cleaned out ; do oblige me with a fiver.
Diam. Oh, Jack, why “ come for tin ”to me? I shan’t.
Jack ( ruefully) That’s “ comfortin’” to me.
Diam. It is a plant
Of Orognome’s, who stands besides you.
Jack What!
My towny is the fiend!
Yio. (to Orog) Oh you bad lot!
Diam. Back to your golden caves and rot in mystery,
The House that Jack Built, and his glorious history,
Have freed these lovers.
Jack Go, come back no more,
My “ Auriferous ” friend—don’t “ au revoir, ”
Orog. Tarry a moment there is something more,
This bond doth give thee here no jot of—
Chord and Clash.
All (starting) Lor!
Jack (a la Bandmann) Is that the law ?
Orog. Thyself shall see the act.
But this is all irrelevant.
Jack A fact. „ , . _ , ....
Orog. (pointing to the Scene) This is the “ house that Jack bunt
“ this ” vile mess.
(sarcastically) The marvel of the age-for ugliness,
It’s history of histories the wonder.
For loud theatrical, but harmless thunder,
For mixing up what should be held asunder,
For elevating what should be kept under,
And aptitude for folly, mischief, blunder.


NO MORE BLEEDING TO DEATH.
ZBZR/Y'.A.HSrS
GREAT INDIAN STYPTIC, OR MIRACULOUS OIL;
“LOW BHUND K THALE!”
NO HOUSEHOLD SHOULD BE WITHOUT IT.
CHARLES MUSKETT, Bookseller and Ftationer, 78, Bourke Street
East, Melbourne, opposite the Theatre Royal.
Sold In Bottles, 55.. and 3s. 6d. Each.
Jack At our great institutions rail no more,
Or I’ll get Higinbotham to make war.
Orog. Come, you are mine !
Jack and Vic. cling to Diam %
Diam. ( hits Orog. in the face) That’s for a fairy bustling.
Jack Who would expect such “ muscle ” in such “ muslin.”
Diam. The custom of the season now I claim,
The Christmas custom.
Orog. Paltry !oh shame, shame!
Diam. Another phase of fancy life you’ll see,
Where everything is one eternal spree,
TRANSFORMATION—
With you Jack, I’ll this happy change begin,
Exit as Jack, re-enter Harlequin!
Change.
(calling out ~&.) What Oh ! Sweet spirit, leave your watery
grotto,
And join us here as Harlequin a la ‘‘ Watteau.”
[Enter Harlequin a la Watteau.
Little Yictoria, favorite of the Nine,
Your duty do as Columbine.
[Change—Enter Columbine.
You loafer there, cease whistling that low tune ;
I’ll give you one more chance, be Pantaloon!
[Change Enter Pantaloon
You Orognome, vile snob from sole to crown.
Reform your tailor’s bill, and become Clown.
[Change —Enter Clown
Now for fun, fun, fun, fun !
The squeaking and the shrieking at the fun.


ESTABLISHED 1851.
OHART.WOOT) & SONS,
BOOKSBLLBBS,
Stationers and Printers,
7, Bourke-street East,
(Three doors from the Post Office,)
Have always on hand a large Stock of General Stationery and Fancy
Goods, consisting of Paper of every description, Envelopes, every
size and quality. Albums, Purses, Pocket Books, Card Cases, Writing
Desks, Workboxes, Papier-mache and Pearl Blotters and inkstands,
Marking Ink and Pencils, Lord Brougham Telescopes. Fancy Per-
fumery, In-door games, Quartette Cards, Nickuacks, and Novelties in
every variety ; general, fancy, and Commercial Stationery, and every
other article in the trade.
Also a choice selection of Books in every department of Literature,
and a’l the new a id most Popular Works of the day.
CHARLWOOD & SOUS
Would call special attention to their large stock of
HANDSOMELY BOUND & ILLUSTRATED WORKS,
Suitable for
CHRISTMAS PRESENTS AND NEW YEAR’S DIETS.
Bibles, Church Services, and Prayer Books, in Morocco, Russia, and
Ivory. Stationery and Fancy Goods, consisting of Portrait Albums, in
Pearl and Leather Bindings. Writing-desks and Workboxes, in Walnut,
Rosewood, Papier Mache. ( Christmas and New Year Cards in great
variety.
A CATALOGUE OP POPULAR AND STANDARD WORKS.
Offered for a short time at Greatly Reduced Prices,
Gratis on application, or 2d. posted.
All the English Magazines, Periodicals, So., received hy
Mail, and supplied at the lowest Possible Prices.
NOTE THE ADDRESS-
7, BOURKS STREET,
Thm Bmrsfrom the Post Office*


NEW AND POPULAR BOOKS
ON SALE BY
GEORGE ROBEKTSOfI,
69, ELIZABETH STEF UT.
Communications from Another World ; or, Modern Spiritual
Manifestations, 2s.
The Stowe-Byron Controversy, a complete resume of Public
Opinion, Is. 6d.
The Peripatetic Philosopher, from the “Australasian,” 2s. (M,
Modem Impediments to Marriage, 6d.
The Gates Ajar, by E. S. Phelps, Is. 6d.
Hans Breitmann’s Ballads, 3 series, each, Is.
Leaves from Australian Forests: Poems by Henry Kendall, ss.
Hill’s Oratorical Trainer; a system of Vocal Culture, 4s. 6d.
The Ingoldsby Legends, 3s.
Betsy Jane Ward, her Book of Goaks, Is.
Marvellous Adventures and Rare Conceits of Master Tyll
Owglass, with Colored Illustration, by Crowquill, 6s.
The Humbugs of the World, by P. S. Barnum, the American
Showman, 3s. 6d.
Mrs. Caudle’s Curtain Lectures, Is. 6d.
A splendid assortment of Illustrated Juvenile Books,
Nursery Stories, Alphabets, dc.
GEORGE ROBERTSON,
«8, KUnib«th atvMti Melbourne.
