

PRICE SIXPENCE.
THE
LAWS OF CRICKET
AS REVISED BY THE
MARYLEBONE CHICKET CLUB








THE
LAWS OF CRICKET
AS REVISED BY THE MARYLEBONE CLUB,
WITH
EXPLA.ITATOE'2' NOTES;
TOGETHER WITH THE
jS CORE S OF ALL THE
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES,
VICTORIA v. N. S. WALES.
(Inclusive of the Bowling and Batting Analyses),
From their Commencement in isse up to istc.
By F. J. IRONSIDE.
ALSO, HINTS ON
BATTING AND BOWLING BY GRACE AND SOUTHERTON.
Right of Republication Reserved.




PREFACE.
With the season of 1874-5 well advanced, and Cricketing pros-
pects, both here and in the sister Colonies, promising to vie in
point of popularity with those of the mother country, the author
of the present treatise may well congratulate himself on his choice
of period for its publication; immediately following as it is, also,
the conclusion of two well-fought contests between Victoria and
N. S. Wales—matches always looked forward to with more than
ordinary interest- The Laws themselves are of course left intact,
as last revised by the Marylebone Club. The author has endea-
voured to deal as lucidly as possible, in the way of commentary,
with all technicalities and peculiarities comprised in these Laws,
as well as with many difficulties which were evidently never
contemplated ; and his opinions do not stand alone, but are sup-
ported by the best English authorities extant.
It has been correctly urged that Cricket is a game full of
intricacies ; that at times, to bring about a proper elucidation of
its laws, constant reference is necessary ; that following
on these intricacies, novel objections are ever arising, bringing
with them an almost endless controversy ; and it very naturally
follows that at times matters very difficult and unpleasant arise
—difficult because of the impromptu character of the appeals
which follow, and unpleasant because of the differences of
opinion existing, and a too common ignorance of the Laws
amongst umpires. These intricacies it has been the object of
the author in his commentaries as far as possible to remove.
Furthermore, there is no doubt that many disputes arise from
the incompleteness and ambiguity of the Laws, and the purpose
of this treatise is, while—as stated before—leaving these Laws
Thomsonby urges, in proof of the popularity of this game at Home, that
every village green bears witness of it, “ scarcely a park (lie writes) in England
being without its cricket ground.” We have ample evidence that it is held in
like favour in New South Wales from the large number of clubs who meet in
friendly rivalry on all the available spots—no matter whether from their posi-
tion or formation they are dangerous or otherwise. The scarcity of good
grounds is a drawback against which our general body of cricketers have
too long had to contend, and a little united energy is wanting to work a remedy.
Grounds will not of themselves become good. # A moderate amount of attention
—this embracing a fair share of physical labour—is quite essential.


The Laws of Cricket. — Index.
Law. Page.
Betting—By Umpires 42 36
Bowler—
Changing ends consecutively, and limitation, &c. .. .. 9 6
Bight of, to order Batsman to stand on either side.. .. 11 0
Stumping by, where Batsman leaves his ground before and
in act of delivery of ball .. .. .. ~ ..29 26
Throwing ox jerking of ball on delivery .. .. ..10 7
Bowling 9 9
Bowling crease ~ 4 4
Byes—Leg ..13 11
Catch—
As affecting runs .. .. .. 26 25
Doubtful—and so considered by one Umpire may be re-
ferred to the other .. .. 36 32
Off tents, roofs, &c. .. .. .. .. .. ..16 13
Off Field man’s cr Umpire’s body ..16 13
Off striker’s leg .. .. .. .. .. .. ..16 13
Off ball prematurely adjudged as “ wide” .. 10,14
Off bat, wrist, or hand .. .. .. .. .. ~16 13
Wilfully preventing of, by Batsman 19 18
Change or Removal of Umpire .. .. .. .. 42 43 36
Creases—
Bowling .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ . _ 4 g
Popping '.’.5 3
Dead Ball —When so considered 29, 44 26, 36
Decisions.—(See also “ Unfair Play.”)
Not to be given voluntarily by Umpire 39-34
Reversal of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 33
Delays —Unnecessary 38 34
Doubts (See also “Catch.”) .. .. .. .. .. ..36 32
Finally Settling of Ball, i.e. “Dead” 29,44 26 36
Following up of Innings 46 ’33
Late Appeals .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. ..44 36
Leg before Wicket [See diagram p. 23] .. .. .. ..24 23
Leg Byes . 44
Lost Ball ' ”28 25
No Ball—
Calling of 37
What considered .. .. .. .. .. 10 13 711
Running for.. .. .. .. .. .. ..13 ’ll
Overs— ~ 44 36
Appeals too late after calling of .. 29 28
As to calling of at proper time .. .. 44 39
Limitation of to “ two” consecutively 9 6
Overthrows 35 39
Play—Calling of .. .. .. .. .. .. ..14 13
Preventing catching of Ball and interference with Fieldsman 19 18
POPPING-CREASE... ~ ~ tt 5 3


Law. Page.
Removal or change of Umpire 42, 43 86
Restriking ball by Player .. .. . . .. .. ..20 18
Reversal of Decision 33
Runs—
Made off Wides (prematurely adjudged) 11
Short.. , s . ... 41 36
Where caught out.. , 26 25
Where run out .. 27 25
Running Out—
How defined .. ~ .. .. .. .. ~ 21 19
Which Player to retire 25 24
Special Powers of Umpire in cases of Unfair Play 32
Stopping Ball with hat 33 29
Stumping—(See also “.Wicket-keeping.”)
Striker going off gpound while in act of striking .. ..17 16
Striker’s partner going off ground while Bowler in act of
delivery ~ ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 29 26
Stumps—Size and character of .. 3 2
Substitute—
Infield ~ ~ .. .. 32 29
In running ~ 31 28
Time —Neglecting to act up to .. 38 34
Touching Ball while “ in play ” 23 20
Trial Ball 14 12
Unfair Play—Special Power cf Umpire in case of .. .. 36 32
Umpires—
Betting on match or tcores liable to removal ... ... 42 36
Changes of, during progress of match, to be mutual .. 43 36
Calling of “ Over ” by, at proper time 44 36
Calling of “No Balls ” by, at proper time, &c. .. 40, 45 35, 37
Calling of “ Wides” by, at proper time 45 37
Doubtful of a catch 36 32
Pitching Wickets ~ ..37 33
Prerogative of, where any side refuses to continue “the
play” 88 34
Proper position of, in course of play 36 33
Special powers of, in cases of “Unfair Play” .. ..36 32
Voluntary decisions by .. .. 39 34
Wicket Keeping 35 30
Wickets—
Batsmen delaying to go to ~ .. 38 34
Batsmen leaving, &c .. ~ 30 28
Changing of, after rain, &c. 8 6
Distance between .. .. .. .. .. .. .. o 3
Guarding of, after striking ball 34 30
Knocked down by Batsman while running .. .. ..22 19
Knocked down by Striker in act of striking.. .. ..18 17
Leg before [See diagram p. 23] 24 23
Pitching of [See diagram, p. 4] .. .. 4


Law. Page.
Rolling, mowing, <&c., of ground around and between ..7 5
Striker guarding, after striking ball 34 30
Struck down by opposite Batsman 18 17
Wide—
Calling of ... 45 37
Catching of Ball prematurely adjudged as , .. 10 &14
Running for 12 11
What considered 12 10
Single Wicket—Laws of 39
SINGLE WICKET.
Law. Page.
Boundary-marks 1,8 89
Byes, Overthrows, Catches, 6c 4 89
Fair Runs 2 39
Fair Hits 3 40
Return of Ball within Bounds 5 40
Lost Ball 7 40
Stopping Ball with Hat .. , 7 40
Stumping .. 5 40
Running 6 40
Time 10 40
Where more than pour Players 8 39
Where less than five Players 1 39
The Scorer 41
The Umpire .. ,* 41
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Summary of Matches .. - 58
Resume of Intercolonial Play—New South Wales v. Victoria—from
1856 to 1874, inclusive 49 to 57
Batting Averages of Intercolonial Players, whose performances
run into double figures .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 59
Bowling Averages (Intercolonial) 60
Names of Players who have officiated as Captains in respective Inter-
colonial Teams 60
Single Wicket Matches—New South Wales v. Victoria. (Inserted
as being of a special character.) 61, 62
Advice to Bowlers .. .. 43
Advice to Batsmen .. .. 46
Opinions of Cricketers on the present Treatise 63


THE LAWS OF CRICKET.
Shtlock : “Is that the law?”
Portia : “ Thyself shall see the Act.”
Merchant of Venice.
Ball— Weight and Dimensions of.
1. The Ball must weigh not less than o-Jr ozs., nor more than
s|. It must not measure less than 9 inches, nor more
than 9|- in circumference. At the beginning of each
innings either party map call for a neve ball.
[Fair ball.- —As the weight and size of a hall may vary, see to
these when purchasing See also that it is of the proper colour
—a bright red - or a dispute may ensue when least expected,
similar in character to that which occurred some few years since
between two leading clubs in Sydney. The usual custom is
for each club to play with its own ball. When doubts exist
of its being a fair one it must be produced, on demand by
any player or players, the question of fairness being decided
by the umpire. When a hall is at stake the winning side
may demand a new one, and this must be as above described,
of the proper weight, colour, and dimensions.
The hall to he played with —mode of procedure. —Although there
is an established rule laid down as to this, and adopted
by the leading clubs, this custom is not generally fol-
lowed. The rule, carried out in matches of more than
ordinary moment, is, that the ball supplied by any club shall
be bowled to such cluh, in effect meaning that each club shall
punish its own hall. Prior to the commencement of the match
the usual mode of procedure is for each captain to hand a ball
to the umpire representing his club.]


Bat—Character of.
2, The Bat must not exceed 4|- inches in the widest part;
it must not he more than 38 inches in length.
[Bat. —The weight of the bat is optional; that most in favour
being about 2 lbs. Anything exceeding this requires a person
of more than ordinary strength. Weight to the generality
of players is a great consideration, which is scarcely ever
lost sight of, for two reasons: If the bat be too light, it is
rarely suited for driving; and if, on the other hand, too heavy,
it is rather unwieldy for cutting. Many cricketers prefer the
straight-grained bat, for the reason that it is reckoned more
durable and more easily repaired. When purchasing a bat
recollect that heavy ones are only suitable for strong men. _ In
your selection, however, do not choose one less than an inch
thick at the bottom. The thicker a bat is there, the greater the
impetus which can be given to the ball. Better, in fact, have
the bat a trifle heavier than that it should be delicate at the
bottom. The great essential of a good bat is lightness,
coupled with a fair balance and plenty of wood. Law 49 (as
having reference to the bat) may be appropi'iately introduced
here. It reads ;—“ When a striker shall have been put out, the
use of the bat shall not be allowed to any person until the next
striker shall come in ” To avoid any infringement of this Law,
the striker, when retiring from his wicket, should take his
bat with him. ]
The Stumps —(See also Laws 4,5, and 6).
3. The Stumps must be 3 in number —27 inches out of the
ground, the Bails 8 inches in length ; the Stumps of
equal and of sufficient thickness to prevent the Ball from
passing through.
[lrregular wickets. —Associated as this Law is with No. 6, a few
remarks on the pitching of wickets, in addition to what is
stated in commentary on Laws 4,5, and 6, may not here be
out of place. Umpires in this essential cannot be too careful.
In many instances sufficient care is not here exercised, and
pitched they are, it is true, but with a measure of indifference
quite inexcusable. Either of the following faults is more the
rule than the exception : —That the stumps are not of the


proper width, differ in height, or are sadly out of perpen-
dicular. Carelessness in the latter particular, it need scarcely
be added, has often sent a good batsman to the right-about,
notwithstanding the customary precaution in securing a
“careful block or guard.” Slovenliness in fixing wickets is
of too common occurrence. Should the umpire prove neglect-
ful in this respect, it is the duty of the captain, in justice to
the batsmen, to interfere.
Defective stumps and hails. —Great care should be taken that
the bails are of the proper length (8 inches), and that they
rest fairly and firmly in the grooves of the stumps, for
neglect of this in windy weather gives rise to much annoyance
to umpires and players. Their falling off, owing to bad bails
or defective grooves, is also calculated to prove prejudicial to
batsmen, more particularly so when the umpire is not watchful
or up to his work, and the wicket-keeper would not scruple at
a little bit of sharp practice.]
Laws 4,5, and 6—Pitching Wickets.
The following diagram, which embraces Laws 4,5, cfc 6, will
show at a glance how the icickets should he pitched. The
return creases (' —...—') do not reckon in the 6 ft. 8 in.
measurement. Though not recognized in this way, by Law
No. 9, the bolder, in delivery, must keep within them; —


[sSg* If the day should be
the wickets north and
if possible the sun’s glare
batsman. ]
sunny, where practicable, pitch
south. In other words, avoid
meeting the full front of the


[To simplify, and also to ensure uniformity and accuracy, in pitch-
ing wickets, a large wooden frame, giving the exact distance
and shape of the creases, will be found best adapted. This,
together with a little whitewash and a small brush, is all
that is required. Recollect that the popping crease, being
“unlimited in length,” does not confine the batsman standing
within the extreme points represented by an asterisk, e.g.
v j to the right or left of the line shown, so long as
* * he does not go outside while the hall is in play or
in the act of delivery. (Fide Law 29.) There being nothing to
prevent players from keeping wide in running, where circum-
stances permit of it they should invariably avoid crossing
immediately over the hatting ground. Much damage is often
done to good ground by the contrary practice, and in the
interest of the players themselves it should be avoided.]
Rolling, &c., of Ground between Innings,
7. It shall not be lawful for either party during a match,
without the consent of the other, to alter the ground by
rolling, watering, covering, mowing, or heating, except
at the commencement of each innings, when the ground
shall be swept and rolled, ‘ ‘ unless the side next going in
object to it. ” This Law is not meant to prevent the
striker from beating the ground with his bat near to the
spot where he stands during the innings, nor to prevent
the bowler from filing up holes with saw-dust, &c.,
when the ground shall be wet.
[This virtually means no interference whatever with the playing
ground during an innings, no matter what the lapse of time,
unless by “mutual consent.” The interference, however,
can be enforced between the innings as a right by the side
next going in.
Should the striker d-sire to beat the ground with his bat or
press it with his foot near his wicket, there is nothing to
prevent him. Some players having accustomed themselves to
making holes in the ground, with the object of gaining a firm
footing, the umpires in England have been specially empowered
to prevent this, and of course the power is equally applicable
in the Colonies.


On any day before a match the pitch (the ground between
wickets) may be improved by being well watered ; but on the
day of playing it should be rolled only.]
Changing of Wickets after Rain.
8. After rain the wickets may he changed with the consent
of both parties.
[The mutual character of this Law leaves no room for comment.]
The Bowler. —Fair Crease Bowling.—Changing
Ends consecutively— (See also Law 40.)
9. The Bowler shall deliver the hall with one foot “on ” the
ground “ behind” the holding crease and “within” the
return crease, and shcdl bowl one over before he changes
wickets, “ which he shall be permitted to do twice in the
same innings.” And no bowler shall bowl more than
tivo overs in succession.
[Fair crease howling.— To observe this the bowler must deliver
the ball with the whole of “ one ” foot behind the bowling-
crease and within the return crease. ( Vide comments on Law
40.) Presuming this identical foot to be the one in rear, and
on the crease (see also comments on Law 17) this would fairly
justify the bowler being “ no balled ” —because probabilities
would undoubtedly incline to an encroachment beyond
the crease by the necessary action consequent on delivery.
Umpires do not as a rule pay that attention which would be
sure* to enforce “fair crease bowling,” and though a gentle
reminder is now and then necessary, it is not given as often as
occasion demands. In watching the bowler’s feet, umpires
should also give some attention to the ball, as the calling of
“ no ball ” before the leathern messenger actually leaves the
hand is rather an awkward blunder. Umpires have been
caught napping in this way. (See comments on Laws 44 and
45.)
Changing ends by bolder. —Previous to the year 1870 this Law
only allowed of one change ; but experience suggested an
alteration, because it was found that after a bowler once


changed ends, however desirous he was of returning to his
original wicket he could not do so, such being contrary to the
then existing rule. This was thought somewhat arbitrary, and
in the year above mentioned the Marylebone Club (the Parlia-
ment of Cricket, as it is called,) effected the alteration now in
vogue, by allowing two changes. Having reference to above
there is consequently much misunderstanding existing even
now as to the integral parts of this Law, and but comparatively
few seem to observe it in its true light. The meaning intended
to be conveyed by permission to change only twice is simply
this :
“A,” bowling at (say) north wicket, having completed an over, goes
to the south wicket and renews the bowling. This completed, he
cannot return to the north wicket and again bowl (having,
as will be seen, had two consecutive overs,) until some other
person, if only for one over, shall have taken up the bowling.
After this, however, “A ” can return, if he wishes, to his
original wicket (the north), where (as a bowler), however, he
must remain, the Law not permitting of his changing again
during that innings.
Note. —The bowler, after delivery of the ball, should avoid,
where practicable, running in front of the umpire, as he is
thereby likely to impede a fair view of the striker’s wicket.
It is hoped the insertion of this note may have the desired
effect on those guilty of this breach of cricket etiquette.]
Bowling and its Definition.
10. The Ball must he howled. If thrown or jerked the
umpire shall call “No hall.”
[Existing difficulties.—' There is no Law (if we except that having
reference to leg before wicket) which has given rise to so much
controversy as this. As a Law almost virtually disre-
garded, it might as well be erased as be absolutely
ineffective. Thomsonby, in a work dedicated to the Maryle-
bone and other clubs of note, on this subject, writes .
“ . , Propel the ball with your hand ‘from wicket
to wicket ’ as you like, provided you don’t throw it and don’t
jerk it, and you will undoubtedly bowl it. Then you will, of
course, wish to be informed what is a throw and what is a jerk,


in order that you may avoid them, A very natural desire, but
one that we are unable to gratify on paper. Ask somebody
to show you, and if you are not satisfied then read ‘ Aristotle
on Propulsion.’ ” As a Law
originating and framed at a period undoubtedly when only
“underhand bowling” was known, the umpires of that day,
in this particular, had not the same difficulty to contend
against as our “honoured arbiters” of modern cricket. A
feeble attempt has been made in this Colony to put down
throwing, or what has generally been considered as such, but
owing to a want of unanimity, coupled with the manifest
doubts existing, it has so far proved an absolute failure.
Where this habit of throwing is said to prevail, the persons
accredited with it have remained in the undisturbed custom
for a long period, the precedents lying even in International
and Intercolonial contests, in which the presumed ablest of
umpires have officiated, comprising, amongst others, Miller,
Caffyn, Lillywhite, Ward, Smith, Driver, Newcombe, Sellars,
and Boult. Umpires of less renown and more recent date are,
no doubt, influenced in their rulings by the above, and, regard-
ing the whole as a very delicate question, lean to the side of
doubt, raised in a great measure by the diversity of opinion
now prevalent. If umpires are absolutely predisposed to allow
of no distinction—of, in fact, allowing “ throwing ” ad libitum,
—the remedy may be simple so far as one side is con-
cerned ; but as removal of an umpire cannot be enforced unless
upon mutual understanding between both parties (vide Law 43) —•
the only exception being for an infraction of Law 42, which,
in oases of betting, gives either side the power to summarily
dismiss—the difficulty of forcing the opposite side to a con-
clusion is at once apparent On the strength of the present
Law, the putting down this “peculiar bowling” would be
attended with insuperable difficulties ; one existing in the fact
that a club, in selecting its own umpire, would choose a man
who is professedly inclined to give the benefit of the doubt
before referred to to its bowler, by placing umpire and
bowler at the same end! There is nothing to prevent this
(no rule at all events) unless it be the actual stoppage of
the game, or a reverting to the old Law, which up to within
a few years since (1864) did not permit of “delivery over the
shoulder. ” Even this style involved such a delicate point as
to the exact height of the hand in delivery, leading to endless
disputes, that a repeal followed in 1864, and the Law was altered


to its present shape by the Marylebone Club, but with a result
which savours much of “ out of the frying-pan into the fire.”
If the Law had remained intact, or as originally framed, the
power of discriminating would probably have been easier.
Now, the onus as to what is and what is not fair bowling is
vested in the umpire, increasing his responsibility and subject-
ing him at times to the charge, if not of ignorance, at least of
partiality, and an amount of free criticism anything but
congenial to the tastes of most people. Viewing then the
number of bowlers who are not “no balled,” the fair inference
is that the umpires will not undertake the responsibility of
no-balling, particularly as they are conscious that they might
be non-plussed by the bowlers changing ends with the umpire
in the way before mentioned.
Note. —To distinguish between a fair and an unfair round-arm
bowler, observe well (and from behind) the arm in the act of
delivery. If the bowling be fair, or have a tendency to fair-
ness, the propulsion of necessity must be directly from the
unbent arm ; if having a tendency to unfairness (or throwing)
there must be a bending or shortening at the elbow. loti
cannot throw without adopting the latter expedient . The Law
says the ball must be bowled, “not thrown, &c. This distinction
gives the word “ bowled” more the character of a “thrust’ —a
medium interpretation between the two terms. Hence, an
absolutely fair delivery is only possible in the way first
described.
Striker to Stand where directed by Bowler.
11. He (the howler) may require the striker at the wicket
from which he is howling to stand on that side of it
which he may direct.
[Very many players have an awkward habit of hugging in close
to the bowler’s wicket just preceding delivery, a custom
excessively inconvenient alike to bowler and umpire. This
should ahvays be avoided by standing well wide, having regard,
however, to comments on Laws 6, 17, and 29, the first caution-
ing against going beyond the popping crease , and the two latter
defining when the hall is actually in play.]


Wide Balls. —(See also Laws 13 and 45.)
12. If the bowler shall toss the hall over the striker’s head, or
bowl it so wide that, in the opinion of the umpire, it shall
not be fairly within reach of the batsman, he shall
adjudge one run to the party receiving the innings, either
with or without an appeal, tvhich shall be put down to
the score of “wide balls;” such ball shall not be
reckoned as one of the 4 [or 6] balls; but if the batsman
shall by any means bring himself within reach of the
ball the run shall not be adjudged.
[Wides. —The words “within reach” form the basis of this rule.
Paper or other marks about the crease to indicate “ wides” is
a useless procedure, for the simple reason that though even a
ball may be pitched two yards away, if the batsman should
cover the ball, a wide cannot properly be adjudged. Any ball
delivered which shall not be considered within reach of
the batsman, presuming ordinary endeavours be made
to reach it, constitutes a wide, and shall, without any
appeal, be given as such by the umpire—he taking care,
however, that he does not do so until after the ball shall
have passed the striker, for the reason that if the ball should
happen to be struck, a little demonstration of feeling may
ensue at his expense. In the words “within reach” there
are, however, two exceptions, which must not be lost sight
of :
(1.) That the ball, taking a strictly literal interpretation of the
Law, may be out of reach owing to lack of endeavour on the
batsman’s part to reach it.
(2.) That a batsman might voluntarily take himself out of the
reach of a high-pitched ball to avoid being struck.
Neither of the above, of course, would be reckoned as wides.
In line 15 of this page is given the correct interpretation of
a “wide ball.”
Catches of wide balls.—A catch made off a ball prematurely
adjudged as wide by the umpire, would be out. (See line 36,
page 14.)


Running for w ides and no balls where so called. —This is a
very dangerous procedure, and inexperienced players often
risk a run out in making a “dead one,” i.e., a run which
does not count. In a closely contested game, however, where
an advantage might be had by having the better batsman at
the striking end, the run (if safe) though not counting would be
admissible, as in the “change might lie a gain,” especially
where a few runs are wanting to gain a victory, and the last
men are at the wickets. Under any other circumstance than
this, however, the attempt would be impolitic, as the result
compared with the risk is scarcely worth the venture, unless,
be it remembered, there be a possibility of making two or
move runs. ( Vide Law 27.)
Presuming two runs be obtained off a ‘‘wide” ora “no ball,”
these runs must be reckoned as “wides” or “no balls.” { Vide
Law 13.) “Wides’’and “no balls ” should not reckon in the
over. \
No Balls—(See also Laics 40 and 45) ; Wides—(See also
Law 45) ; and Over Balls—(See also Laic 44).
13. If the bolder deliver a “no ball ” or a “ tvide ball,” the
striker shall be alloived as many runs as he can get, and
he shall not be put out “ except by running out.” In
the event of no run being obtained by any other means,
then one run shall be added to the score of “no balls” or
“ wide balls” as the case may be. All runs obtained for
“ wide balls ” to be scored to “ wide balls.” (The names
of the holders who bowl “wide balls” or “no balls” in
future to be placed on the score, to show the parties by
whom either score is made.) If the ball shall first touch
any part of the striker’s dress or person, except his
hands, the umpire shall call “ leg-bye.”
[No halls, wides, and overs. —Upon the subject of “wides” the
author’s comments on the Law preceding (N o. 12) are suffi-
ciently explanatory. As to “no balls,” the reader is referred
to comments on Laws 9 and 40. Neither “no balls ” nor “wides”
(as already stated) should reckon in the over, the law specify-
ing four fair deliveries. Notwithstanding this, a batsman


can he put out while attempting a run on a “no ball,”
but in this way only. (Vide comments on Laws 16
and 17-) The latter part of this Law (13) commencing at
the words, “If the ball shall first touch, &c.,” is very vague
indeed, the interpretation being that every ball which chances
to hit the striker would justify the umpire calling out “ leg-
bye.” Of course this is only observed where a run is
actually made. In eases of “leg-byes” and “wides”
the scorers would meet with valuable assistance if umpires
would observe the following practice :
For “ leg-byes”—Lift and touch the leg.
For “ wides”—Call out in an audible tone, and hold up one
hand. (Vide page 10, line 15.)
Where the first of these is not observed by the umpire, the
inference at times is that the runs obtained are from hits, and
they are put down as such accordingly. Before the men take
the field, umpires and scorers should come to an understanding
on this matter, as by so doing unnecessary questions would be
avoided, which, apart from being uncricket-like, only tend to
cause confusion.
Runs obtained for “wides” and “no balls.”—Any secured in
this way to be scored to “wides” and “no balls.”]
Trial Ball by Bowler.
14. At the beginning of each innings the umpire shall call
“ Playfrom that time to the end of each innings no
trial hall shall be allowed to any bowler.
[Trial howling.— This part of the Law is virtually a dead
letter. A trial ball, by every fresh bowler, being regarded
as not of individual but of general utility, is probably the
reason why trial bowling has become customary. If a
non-observance of this Law had brought with it any par-
ticular objection probably we should have heard of it. Prac-
tice has certainly proved itself the master of theory in this
case. Being, however, the Law, trial holding can he objected
to during the innings ; but its never having been enforced is a
good argument that the Law does not meet with general
favour. Trial balls are not allowed at the wicket.


Calling play. —Many of our amateur umpires still adhere to the
antiquated notion of calling “play” on the delivery of every
ball. Nothing more is necessary than a nod of assent from
the umpire to the bowler that play is to commence --this only
at the commencement of each innings, and after seeing that
the fieldsmen are fairly stationed in their respective places ;
or when a breach of Law 38 is committed as to players
refusing to “come up to time.” The optional character of this
Law, which does not require a call of “play” before every
delivery, it might be thought by some gives too much discre-
tionary power to the bowler, which might be turned to advan-
tage by “ forcing the play” on the batsman, and availing him-
self, where opportunity afforded, of bowling at the wicket
when the striker is unprepared. However, presuming this to
occur, and the wicket even be clean bowled (providing, how-
ever, that no attempt at striking has been made by the bats-
man), this would not he out, being sufficiently provided against
by the spirit evolved in Law 36, which does not admit of any
unfair play .]
The Striker is Out (Wicket Bowled).
15. If either of the “ bails be bowled off,” or if a stump be
bowled out of the ground.
[Over zealous wicket-keepers.—Bowling out and stumping. —
Comment on this Law is unnecessary, as being sufficiently
explanatory in itself. A gentle hint, however, to umpires, is
suggested by the expression “ If either of the bails be howled
off, &c.—
When an over zealous wicket-keeper is at the wicket, watch intently
his hands that they are not in unnecessary and suspicious
proximity to the bails.
Rehounding of hall.— Watch also that the ball does not rebound
from his hands on to the wicket.]
The Striker is Out (Catch). — (See also “Dead ball,”
Law 29.)
16. Or if the ball from the stroke of the bat or hand, but
not the twist, be held before it touch the ground,
although it be hugged to the body of the catcher.


[ Which umpire to decide in case of a catch.— In catches, the
umpire at bowling end is the proper party to appeal to. If he
is doubtful he can confer with the other umpire.
Catches off hand, glove, and wrist. —ln this Law the umpire has a
very difficult task before him : —A ball caught off the hand (or
glove) is out, but off the wrist is not so. This is certainly a fine
distinction, and when to be judged of in the case of a swift
bowler and a quick hitter becomes a severe test for the
very best and quickest of sights, and the writer is inclined
to question the existence of powers of discrimination
equal to the occasion. Exceptions, however, have arisen,
where batsmen, by their after action, after having been hit
by the ball, have actually shown the umpire where they were
struck. Experienced batsmen have unwittingly done this,
and the result has been that any doubt which the umpire
might have had, was by this procedure at once dispelled. In
“ medium pace ” bowling, however, it is possible to follow the
delivery of the ball with the eye and trace it to the issue.
Wicket-keepers and others in close proximity to the striker’s
wicket may think it very hard where a batsman on appeal
escapes, who, by a hair-breadth adventure, mayhap has
touched the ball; but they must not forget the decided
advantage they have over the umpire in point of position.
Doubts. —Whenever any doubt exists in the mind of the umpire
let it be an established rule to always give the benefit of such
doubt to the batsman.
Common errors. —There is no questioning the fact that very
large numbers have been given out under this Law wrongfully,
but not wilfully, on mere supposition, too often, that the ball
did strike the hand, and influenced by a sudden outburst of
“How’s that, Sir?” which, from the peremptory character and
high tone in which it is often delivered, is almost calculated
to frighten a man of nervous temperament into a hurried
affirmative decision. Umpires should always be prepared for
this by being collected, firm, and patient.
Catch made off ball prematurely adjudged as wide. —In this case,
if the ball be struck, it is proof positive that the ball was not
wide, and hence the calling might be regarded as an error of
judgment on the part of the umpire. If a catch result in
this way the batsman is out.


Ball caught off striker’s leg—first played on it by the striker him-
self —Out.
Loio-hit balls. —ln low-hit balls the umpire should observe
whether the ball was struck fair from the bat, that is, that at
the exact moment of so striking, the ball did not also touch
the ground, producing what is commonly known as a “ bom-
ball.'’
Loro catches. —Catches sometimes happen where only the hand
is between the ball and the ground. These are fair. If,
however, any part of the ball should at the same instant touch
the ground, even though the person catching hold it, the striker
would not be out.
Unusual catches. - -As it is possible for a ball to be caught in
many ways that would raise discussion, the writer will instance
a very probable case : It is one where tents, trees, roofs, &c.,
by a want of pre-arrangement, remain “within bounds.”
The catching of a ball off these, where no previous under-
standing is come to (a neglect in itself), as it rolls down, is
fairly out, but where settled, i.e,, resting, not so. While
rolling down, the ball being in motion, and by its own
immediate action, not influenced after being struck by any
secondary causes, it is certainly to all intents and purposes
“in play.” Some may argue against this that the fact of the
ball having touched a roof or a tree would be equivalent to
hitting the ground, and so “not out.” Presuming, then, the
objection to stand on the word “ touch” (the rule not speci-
fying uninterruptedly off the bat), the objection would equally
apply where the ball glanced off a fieldsman’s or an umpire’s
body and is caught. That the batsman in both these
cases is “ out ” is acknowledged by custom, and as they
have no relation whatever with the words “ touch the
ground ” in the Law, the analogy is apparent. The following
is a peculiar instance known to the author: A batsman, in
the act of striking, threw his bat at the ball, the ball rose and
was caught. The umpire’s decision was “ out,” and in answer
to questions the following reasons were given:—
(1.) That as the catch was the immediate result of the striker’s
own actions, in which he attempted to gain an advantage, and
would have availed himself of it in the way of runs if a catch
had not resulted, he deserved to suffer on failure.


(2.) That the law does not say the striker shall retain the bat
in hand, but reads, “If a ball from the stroke of the hat, &c.”
Results. —Ball on roofs, &c., not out of bounds, and no arrange-
ment be come to, if caught in motion, “out.” If finally rested,
“ not out.”]
The Striker is Out (Off Ground).
17. Or if in striking, or at any other time, while the ball
shall he in 11 play,” both his feet shall he over the pop-
ping crease, and his wicket put down, except his bat
be grounded “ within it.”
\Ball in play. —The expression “or at any other time while the
ball shall be in play,” is dealt with at length in the review of
Law 29.
Foot or hat on crease. —The word “over”—having reference
to either foot or hat- has a most important signification,
which, taken in connection with the words “within it,”
leaves no doubt as to what is intended to be conveyed. Ques-
tions arise and appeals are often made where the striker’s foot
is on the crease. Now as “on” is not “ within ” (presuming
the ground to be accurately measured—four feet in the clear)
this is fairly out for the reason that the striker is “outside ”
the prescribed limit of space. ( Vide comments on Law 9.)
This, however, is another of those very nice points of the game
which sometimes arise, and as only a bare inch of ground might
be in question in the position of the foot, umpires should be
quite certain in their decisions, and if doubtful give the benefit
to the striker. In all cases of appeal in this way umpires
should not allow their attention at this moment to be drawn
away, i. e., they should keep their eyes fixed firmly on the foot
or bat (as the ease may be), the slightest movement of either
making all the difference.
Peculiar cases. —Having reference to this Law the writer is
reminded of a very knotty question submitted for his opinion
—A striker (with bat in hand) jumped off (not outside) his
ground some few feet to avoid being struck by a ball which
was returned sharply by one of the fieldsmen. Simultaneously
with his so jumping, the ball striking the wicket, an appeal
followed, and the batsman was given out. This, though
seemingly very harsh (both as an appeal and in the decision),


was yet quite consistent and fair—quite as much so as a
man run out while having his bat OVER but not ON his
ground. As the whole gist of the Law under which he was
given out (Law 21) lies in possession, e.g. “grounded,” either
by the striker or his bat, the absence of both off the ground
justified the appeal and the result, in manner following :—“ Or
if in running the wicket be struck down by a throw, or by the
hand or arm (with ball in hand) before his hat (in hand) or some
part of his person he grounded over the popping crease. ”
A somewhat analogous case to this is spoken of in the * Field,’
where it is represented of a batsman who fell a victim to force
of habit. He had a fashion of hitching up his trousers, and
with it rising his foot; this was known to the wicket-keeper,
and he watched his opportunity. Soon the unsuspecting
batsman indulged in his propensity, lifted his foot, and down
went his wicket. Of course he had to retire.
Rehounding of hall off wicket-keeper's legs or person on to wicket,
—ln answer to a question on this, Lillywhite’s ruling is, that if
the striker is off his ground he would he out—not “run out,”
but “stumped.” (For definition of “off ground ” see line 19,
p. 16.]
The Striker is Out (Hitting down Wicket).—
{See also Law 22.)
18. If in “ striking” at the ball he hit down his vncket.
[“Striking at" and how effective. —This Law, though apparently
simple in its construction, is not thoroughly understood. Its
effectiveness or virtue lies in the expression “striking at” A
careless runner in the excitement of running might tumble
over his wicket, or disturb it with his bat, hut for this would
not be out. If this disturbing, however, should happen
in the act of striking, the opposite would be the case.
As Law 22 might well have been made continuous with this,
being in effect the same subject, the writer would refer the
reader to his comments thereon, as containing more lengthened
hints.
Batsman striking down partner's wicket.-- If this happen when
the non-striker is off his ground, and the ball be previously
touched by any fieldsman (supposed hence to be guided by the
hand) the non-striker would be “out.”]


The Striker is Out (Preventing a Catch).
19. ‘lf under pretence of running, or otherwise, either of the
strikers “ prevent a ball from being caughtthe striker
of the ball is out.
[ Wilful interference with any fieldsman. —The whole gist of this
law rests upon the words “prevent, &c.,” and brings into play
the full discriminating powers of the umpire. Being a Law so
likely to be interfered with by circumstances, makes it one
very difficult of comment. To arrive at a just decision, the
umpire must be guided entirely by the question - whether
the preventing was “wilful” or the result of “accident,” and
in weighing matters has no right to assume possible results,
or any difficulty in the way of a catch or a run out, although
the obstruction or collision happened at the exact period of
attempt by the fieldsman. Such things have occurred as a
batsman intentionally diverging from his line of running and
falling foul of the fieldsman, and to such this law is specially
applicable. This, undoubtedly, would be considered as wilful,
and the striker ( whether or not he he the offending party) would
be “out.” Apart, from the mere fact of an attempted catch,
the striker should be given “out” if the fielding of any hall
be obstructed; this from the circumstance that had not this
interference taken place a run-out might possibly have ensued.
This might happen in a ball being struck slightly off the wickets
and the striker or his partner, in running, wilfully jostling the
fieldsman. In this case the umpire would be justified, as in
the case of a catch, to ignore all probabilities, and on appeal
exercise the discretionary power given him under Law 36.]
Re-striking Ball. — (See also Law 34.)
20. If the ball be struck and he wilfully strike it again.
[Restriking hall. —This Law does not prevent a batsman striking
the ball any number of times, providing the object be protec-
tion of the wicket. The wilfulness spoken of has reference only
to a batsman striking a ball with an intention to score off it, in
which latter case the striker would be “ out.” Law 34, speci-
fying “ any part of the body,” gives the privilege of even using
the foot (but not the hand—see Law 23) if a ball, after having
been played, should be rolling on to the wicket. If the bats-


man, however, knock off the hails while endeavouring to get
the ball away from his wicket, he would be out. (In conjunc-
tion with this Law read also Law 34.)]
Striker is Out (Run Out—how defined).
21. Or, if in running, the wicket he struck down by a throw,
or by the hand or arm (with ball in hand) before his bat
(in hand), or some part of his person he grounded over
the popping-crease; but if both the bails be off a stump
must be struck out of the ground.
[Bat Grounded, &c. —The bat or some part of the striker’s person
must be grounded within, not on, the crease.
Throwing out, running out, or stumping. —This Law in its charac-
ter having some connection with Law 35, as affecting in some
degree the wicket-keeper, more direct reference to this player
than is given below will be found immediately following Law3s.
At present what we really have to deal with is the expression
“ Ball in hand.” This has but one signification : That the ball
must not be held in one hand and the wicket be struck down
by the other —or by the knee or foot. It is not even actually
necessary that the wicket should be struck hy the ball, as many
suppose, hut simply that it should be done by either the hand
or arm, providing it be the hand containing the hall. If done
in the latter way it would be out.
In cases where both bails are off, a stump must he struck out of
the ground , and where all three have been knocked down (and
there be a possibility of putting a striker out) the replacing
of one stump and then displacing it (but only in the way above
described) is the only alternative. The knocking down of the
three stumps is uncommon, but its occurrence possible at any
moment, and though not alluded to in the Law, custom in
England and the Colonies has established the practice of
replacing wicket, if only one stump, in order to effect a
“run out” or “stump out.”]
Striker is Out (Knocking down of Wicket, and
under what circumstances). — (See also Laiu 18.)
22. Or if any part of the striker’s dress knock down the
wicket.


[Disarrangement of wickets. —This is a Law which would read
well in conjunction with No. 18, and referring, as the latter
does, to knocking down the wicket while striking, to this wo
would also draw the reader’s attention. Viewing this Law as it
at present reads, and coupling with it No. 18, necessitates a
repetition of opinion which cannot be well avoided. A knock-
ing down of the wicket “under any circumstances -when
running more particularly—by some is supposed to be out;
but this is not the case. In effect, the knocking down alluded
to has a decided and specific reference only to the action at
the moment of striking the hall, in which case, should the bats-
man strike the wicket sufficiently hard to remove the bails, he
would be “out.” If, also, while in the act of striking, a
striker’s hat should be blown or struck off and so disarrange
his wicket, or should any part of his apparel disturb it, he
would be “out.” Further, if (as stated after Law 20) the
striker knocks off the bails while in the act of preventing the
ball rolling on to his wicket, he would be “out.” A falling
over the wicket, or otherwise knocking it down with the bat,
even if done while running, is “not out.” The whole gist of
this Law rests de facto in the expression “ while in the act of
striking,” and in this way only can a batsman be given “out”
on appeal for knocking down his wicket.]
Striker is Out (Handling the Ball while in Play).
23. Or if the striker touch or take up the ball while in play,
unless at the request of the opposite party.
[Picking v/p hall while in play. —Here again we encounter the
old difficulty in the words “while in play,” and as regards
absolute effect and meaning, the only practical change this
Law has undergone is the substitution of the words “ while in
play” for those of “lain quite still,” the original reading thus :
—“ If ye striker touches or takes up ye ball before she is lain
quite still, unless asked by ye bowler or wicket-keeper, it’s
out. ” Though the Law, in its construction, is simple enough
—that a batsman must not, except under certain circum-
stances, touch or take up the ball—yet, strange to say, expe-
rienced cricketers in this have been known to forget them-
selves. To take up a ball at any time is a very unwise thing
for any batsman to do, for the simple reason that an umpire’s
view of when a hall is in play might he somewhat opposed to


that of the batsman, and perchance cost him his wicket,
though perhaps contrary to the strict rendering of the Law.
The better,course for any batsman is not to handle the ball at
all. If, however, requested to do so, let him first draw the
umpire’s attention to the fact of such request having been
made.
Touching hall. —lf a batsman touch a ball, even to defend him-
self from a “bumpy delivery,” the strict reading of the Law
says the striker is out. This is admittedly an extreme measure.
While in play. —This expression, being defined at some length
in the commentary following Law 29, repetition here is
unnecessary.]
Striker is Out (Leg before Wicket).
24. Or if with any part of his person he stop the hall, which,
in the opinion of the umpire at the holder’s wicket, shall
have been pitched in a straight line from it to the striker’s
wicket, and would have hit it.
[This is a Law upon which cricketers are much divided in opinion.
Our more influential cricketers, though perhaps in the minority,
argue against the possibility, as a rule, of a man being given
“out” fairlyfor “leg-before” with bowling round the wicket.*
Others that it is possible, as a ride —a vexata quasi win truth.
We endorse the opinions of able English authorities in this
matter, “that it is almost impossible for a man to be out for
‘l.b.w.’ with bowling round the wicket.” ( Vide diagrams, p. 23).
The Law is undoubtedly specific—very pointed as to the
expression, “In a straight line from wicket to wicket, and in
which the words italicised have but one, and a most important,
signification. “ Leg before,” therefore, is only possible with
“delivery over the wicket” (unless where “round the wicket”
and there be an accidental compliance by a break-back), the word
“from,” signifying as it does the starting-point—tlm primum
mobile, as it were—of the whole Law. The correct inference
is that the law only recognizes an absolutely straight delivery.
* Note.—To a right-handed bowler “round the wicket” means delivery
from the right side; “over the wicket” is delivery from the left. With a
left-handed bowler it is vice versa.


It has been written, and truthfully so, by an English authority,
that an appalling number of wrong decisions are given upon
this particular matter of “leg before wicket,” and he supple-
ments the possible circumstance (but only in the way above
described) of any batsman being so out with “ howling round
the wicket.”
\ iewing then, —(I) the number of bowlers who bowl from this
side, (2) the number of batsmen who are given out “ 1.b.w.,”
and (3) the rare circumstance of a “break-back” happening,
the rational conclusion is that very many strikers fall victims
to misconception of this Law, and by umpires who, while dis-
regarding all the attendant circumstances, which, taken
together, form the actual breach, ignore all rule and indis-
criminately send strikers to the right-about.
Experiments . —Ey simply stretching two pieces of cord (as in
diagram) from wicket to wicket, and attached to the outside
stumps, a long narrow space of 22 yards long by eight
inches wide would be left. With delivery “round the
■wicket,” to comply with the rule “in a straight line from
wicket to wicket,” the ball would have to take an obtuse
angle on its pitch, or somewhat the following course (i.e.,
~~) to be pitched inside the two parallel lines shown.


Diageam of Wicket, showing pitch of ball and divergencies, with delivery round the
wicket.” (Vide Law 24.)
(Scale, 15 ft. to 1 in.)
The two outside balls, representing the pitch, no matter what course they might
take, not having been pitched in a straight line, and within width (
the striker cannot fairly be given out for “Lb.w.” The centre ball, breaking ott at an
angle sufficient to take either stump, and then stopped, would be out.
Unless, then, the ball be actually
as shown, no batsman ought
matter from which side the
privileged even to go imme-
out fear of consequences, if
pitched within the two parallel lines,
to be given out for “1. b. w.,” no
bowler might deliver, and is
-dmtely in front of his wicket, with-
the ball be not pitched as stated.


The matters which require consideration are
(!■) The pitch of the ball; (2) whether it was pitched in a straight
line from wicket to wicket; (3) its working or divergence after
having been pitched ; (4) its rise and fall ; (5) the position of
the batsman’s legs when struck by the ball.
A careful consideration of the above will fully show how extremely
difficult is this question of “1. b. w. ” In bowling “ over ”as
against “round,” the wicket, the former is very much easier
to judge.
If the experiment (novel it may be) were introduced in some
scratch match of drawing two chalk lines parallel with the out-
side stumps, and some few yards between the wickets from
the pitch, the difficulty of compliance with the Law in bowling
“round the wicket ” would be apparent.
Peculiar cases. —'Ball striking the head, arm, &c.—“ L. b. w.”
has reference to any part of the hody. If a batsman be struck
anywhere by a ball “which in the opinion of the umpire ” would
have struck the wicket, having regard, however, to the pitch
of the ball, he is fairly out. A ball even striking him on the
head is no exception to the rule, providing he stoop low enough
to prevent its striking the wicket. A batsman takir g his place
at the wicket has but two objects in view—the first to protect
his wicket, the second to score. To ensure the second, he
must of necessity do the former, but with the bat only. To
stop a ball by any other means than this would be unfair—a
ball striking the hand being the exception. If further latitude
were allowed, the arm even might be used with the object of
protecting the wicket, but this is not allowed.]
Players Crossing.—lf a Run Out who to Retire.
25. If the players have crossed each other, he that runs for
the wicket which is put down is out.
[Players crossing. There is no equal division of the ground
intended here, i.e., the crossing does not apply to the exact
half distance between the wickets. This crossing might happen
anywhere, even a few yards from the popping crease. The
batsman is out who is nearest the wicket ‘put down. A case is
recorded, however, which at first sight propounded a difficulty,
where only one man ran, the wicket of this man being put


down after passing his partner, who had remained stationary,
thus leaving the man who had not started, the closest to the
fallen wicket. The man who ran in this case was given out,
and correctly so, for two reasons :—(1.) Because they had not
crossed each other by voluntary action on the part of both. (2.)
Because the stationary player, not having relinquished his
ground, and it being impossible for any two men to occupy the
same wicket, the one down of necessity belonged to the player
who ran.
Personal safety in running. —Players, to avoid collision, should
always pass on the right of each other in running.]
Reckoning of Runs where Ball caught.
26. A ball being caught, no run shall be reckoned.
[Though even two runs be obtained, custom does not admit of any
being counted.]
Reckoning of Runs where Run Out.
27. A striker being run out, that run which he and his
partner were attempting shall not be reckoned.
[Presuming, however, that two or more runs be obtained, these
will count; but not the run in trying to secure which the
“run out” takes place.]
On the calling of Lost Ball.
28. If a lost ball be called, the striker shall be allowed six
runs; but if more than six shall have been run before
“ Lost ball” shall have been called, then the striker shall
have all which have been non.
[On the calling of “lost ball” by any player, six runs shall be
at once awarded the striker, though only two might have
been run. If, however, this calling out be neglected till more
than six be run, the full number made shall count. On the
calling of “ lost ball ” the ball at once becomes dead, and no
batsman can at this moment be stumped. A ball presumed to
be within sight of any fieldsman cannot be called “lost.”]


Dead Ball —When Finally Settled.
29. After the hall shall have been finally settled in the
wicket-keeper’s or howler’s hand it shall he considered
dead : hut when the bolder is about to deliver the ball,
if the striker at the wicket go outside the popping-crease
before such actual delivery, the said bowler may put
him out, unless (with reference to Law 21} his bat in
hand, or some part of his person be within the popping-
crease.
[Leaving crease. —The second sentence of this Law simply
requires a batsman to retain possession of his ground by
having one foot or his hat inside (not on) his crease, until
delivery of the ball. ( Vide Law 17.)
Well considered decisions. —Taking the literal reading of the
Law unquestionably much is left to the umpire’s judgment,
and influenced as this is by surrounding circumstances we
drop the following hint in passing:—Better delay giving
an opinion than do it hurriedly, and afterwards be impressed
with the thought that you have committed a wrong.
Umpire's Views, and “Finally settled." —A great deal indeed
depends upon the views which umpires take of the expression
“ finally settled.” In its applicability it certainly has reference
only to the wicket-keeper and holder. The expression “ finally
settled” is synonymous with “dead ball.”
When hall finally settled. —An impression too commonly prevails
that a ball can only be finally settled between overs. This is
erroneous. The expression in Law, “ settled in wicket-
keeper’s or bowler’s hand ” must not be lost sight of. The
special allusion to these two officials forms the very ground-
work of this Law. The words “ settled, &c.,” having but one
signification, of inactivity at the instant, by a temporary
stoppage of the game, the purport of their introduction is
manifest. In a very old Law upon this subject the inactivity
abovementioned is alluded to in this way : —“ If ye striker
touches or takes up ye ball before ye is lain quite still, unless
asked by ye bowler or wicket-keeper, kc.” This is conclusive,
in so far that the words “quite still” are tantamount to the
modern and existing phrase, “dead ball.”


Comparisons. —Say the ball daring an over is finally resting in
the hands of the bowler, and the striker leaves his wicket to
pat down bis ground, or it might be to remove some obstruction,
the ball being then dead renders his position by Law absolutely
safe, in so far that he cannot at this particular moment be
stumped. If, however, the hall be not in the hands of the
bowler, the striker woidd incur a risk of the hall at this stage
being in play.
Again,—lf the bowler or wicket-keeper with, hall in hand at
any stage of the game, see the expediency of a consultation
(never objected to out of common courtesy) as to placing
certain of the field, and during this consultation a batsman
voluntarily leaves his ground, he cannot be put out, the ball
being “dead.’'
What to he considered.--The main question to be considered by
umpires as to when a ball is finally settled is :—Whether the
actions and manner of the bowler or wicket-keeper at the exact
moment preceding the stumping evidenced any stoppage of
play, in the way of replacing any of the fieldsmen, or a
consultation.
If of an affirmative opinion, the striker cannot he put out for being
off his ground, unless for -an infringement of Law 38, in
neglecting to act up to time.
Principal features.— The following important considerations
should guide umpires :
Ball finally settled or “ dead”—How to judge:—
(1.) The temporary stoppages
referred to above.
(2.) Did the actions of the
holder or wicket-keeper at the
instant preceding the stump-
ing show that either had then
no intention of using the ball ?
(3). Who had possession of the
hall the holder, wicket-
keeper, or a fieldsman ?
(1.) To be judged of by
circumstances, some of
which are related.
(2.) If no such intention,
“not out.”
If the contrary, “out. ’
(3.) This is an important
distinction, the first-
named functionaries
only being recognized
and coupled with the
expression “ finally
settled. ”


(4.) Was “over’ called?
(4.) If so the ball becomes
“dead” and no appeal
avails after such calling.
In other words the
batsman cannot be
stumped.]
Striker Leaving Wicket and Resuming Innings.
30. The striker shall not retire from his wicket and return
to it to complete his innings after another has been in,
without the consent of the opposite party.
[•Exceptions .—Where any injury arises in play, the above is
never enforced. “Consent,” however, is necessary, and is
invariably given.]
Substitute in Running.-— (See also Law 32.)
31. No substitute shall in any case be allowed to stand out,
or run between ivickets for another person without the
consent of the opposite party; and, in case any person
shall be allowed to run for another, the striker shall be
out if either he or his substitute be off the ground in
manner mentioned in Laics 17 and 21, while the ball
is in play.
[Striker running when having a substitute. —lf the principle does
this and succeeds in making a run, it will not be scored,
though running the risk of a run out. Having engaged a sub-
stitute to run, the principal himself has no right to do so.
Batsman, and substitute—Relation one to another. —Having from
injury or otherwise chosen a substitute to run, with the con-
sent of the opposite party, the batsman must abide by that
person’s actions while at the wicket. The substitute must
conform to all rule as though he himself were the striker. The
striker must also adhere strictly to rule, the presence of a
substitute in no wise relieving him of his responsibility as
principal. In short, though two men may be at the same wicket,
they are only regarded as one, and the striker and substitute
are responsible each for the actions of the other. In proof of
the extent of this responsibility, a case is on record where,
in a first-class match in England, a ball lightly struck by


the principal, was politely picked up by the substitute and
handed to a fieldsman. An appeal followed, under Law 23,
and the substitute’s politeness cost the striker his wicket.
Substitute’s position. —A substitute’s place, when his principal is
the striker, is close behind the wicket-keeper (or if not one,
where he is supposed to be), and rather on the leg side.
When the opposite party is the striker, the substitute’s position
is at the popping-crease, and his principal’s alongside the
umpire.
Note. - -Any person chosen as a substitute or emergency if sent
to the wickets cannot afterwards be replaced by the party for
whom he acted. (See also comments on Law following.)]
Substitute in the Field.— (See also Law 31.)
32. In all cases where a substitute shall he allowed, the con-
sent of the opposite party shall also be obtained as to
the person to act as substitute and the place in the field
which he. shall take.
[A rrangements with Captains before commencement of game. —lf
any substitute is chosen for players who are temporarily
absent, a distinct understanding as to this should be come to
between the two captains prior to the commencement of the
match ; this for obvious reasons.
Anyone chosen as a substitute in the field afterwards going to the
wickets. —Any person chosen in this way ceases to be a substi-
tute when he takes his place as a batsman.
Position in the field of substitute after consent. —Consent is neces-
sary as to the person who is to act as substitute ; and as such
he is not permitted to bowl, long-stop, wicket-keep, or take
point. In short, the substitute’s place in the field is virtually
at the option of the opposite party.
Absent players, on resumption of game. —A player having gone
to the wickets, his place at wickets cannot afterwards be taken
by another, a substitute only being allowed to field in his
absence.]
Fieldsman Stopping Ball with. Hat-
-33. If any fieldsman stop the ball with his hat the ball shall
be considered dead, and the opposite party shall add 5
runs to the score; if any be run they si tall have 5
in all.


\Fieldsman stopping hall with his feet. —A fieldsman is privileged
to stop the ball with any part of his body, but not with articles
of clothing.
Apparel, <fcc., lying about the playing ground, —Questions have
arisen as to the applicability of the rule in cases where the
ball is stopped by any apparel lying about the playing ground,
and in matches where there are specified boundaries. There
being no Law as to this we cannot enter upon the subject.
The custom, however, is to keep the field as clear as possible.
“Fun out,” consequent on stopping of hall with hat. —The fields-
man having acted illegally and cost his side five runs, whether
run for or not (and which number cannot be increased by run-
ning), the position is similar to a hit over or under a boun-
dary fence when such hit reckons for a given number of runs;
the ball at once becomes dead.]
Striker Guarding Wicket after playing Ball.
34. The hall having been hit, the striker may guard his
wicket with his bat, or with any part of his body,
except his hands, that the 23 rd Lav: may not be dis-
obeyed.
[The reader is referred to comments on Law 20 as applicable to
above.]
Wicket-keeper.—Stumping.
35. The wicket-keeper shall not take the ball for the purpose
of stumping until it have passed the wicket; he shall
not move until the ball be out of the bowler’s hand; he
shall not by any noise incommode the striker, and if
any part of his person be over or before the wicket,
although the ball hit it, the striker shall not be out.
[Wicket-keeper. —The facilities which offer for this official to prac-
tice sharp things are many, rendering close observation on the
part of the umpire necessary, in order to prevent injustice
being done to the batsman. Amongst others there are the
following possibilities ;
(1.) Knocking the wicket down with the foot or the knee, with
ball in hand. ( Vide Law 21.)


(2.) Doing the like before the ball is in hand.
(3.) Taking the ball from the front of the wicket. (Vide Law 35.)
The act alluded to in clause 3 more often than not arises from over
anxiety on the part of the wicket-keeper. One or other of the
three is often the case; and we cannot ignore the fact that occa-
sionally men are given out on appeals which savour of unseemly
traffic or the incompetency of easily-lead umpires. An appeal
of such a nature is unpardonable, and is a gross wrong to the
batsman, showing the necessity of selecting umpires who are
capable of detecting, and willing to expose, the miserable
trickiness to which some men are prone.
The great essentials. —On this Law again umpires are not suffi-
ciently strict, seven-eighths taking it for granted that because
a man is bowled he must perforce be out. This does not abso-
lutely follow, and for reasons given below. The Law urges
(1.) That the wicket-keeper shall not move until the ball be out
of the bowler’s hand.
(2.) That he shall not by any noise incommode the striker ; and
(8). That if any part of his (the wicket-keeper’s) person be over
or before the wicket, although the ball hit it, the striker shall
not be out.
Notwithstanding the specific character of this Law, the neglect
or infrequency of its inforcement is remarkable, seeing the
number of times it is infringed. If a batsman have any sus-
picion that any of the three heads above mentioned have been
infringed he may appeal. If his suspicion is confirmed, not-
withstanding he be clean bowled, by the spirit of Law 36 he
would not be out, —a strange proceeding, no doubt, but never-
theless cricket. A wicket-keeper almost simultaneously with
the delivery of the ball, may make signs or motions to a
fieldsman, but however necessary to the interests of his side,
• this is, strictly speaking, contrary to the second sentence of
the above law —“ shall not move,” &c. This is a wise inser-
tion, as nothing is so apt to distract the striker’s attention
from the game as a man at his elbow given to unnecessary
movements.


The three important matters which umpires should observe
are :
(1.) The wicket-keeper’s every action, and that at the exact
moment of the delivery of the ball no noise, by action or
otherwise, took place, which tended to incommode or baulk
the striker.
(2.) That, at the moment of the delivery of the ball, no part of
the wicket-keeper’s person was over or before the -wicket.
(3.) That the ball did not rebound from his hands on to the
wicket.
(4.) That the wicket was not knocked down by the foot or knee.
(Vide Law 21.)
(5.) That the wicket was not struck down by the wicket-keeper
before he received the ball.
Note.—lf convinced that either of the above happened ( but on,
appeal only) the striker would not be out.
Over-throws. — A fieldsman should, in every instance where there
is a wicket-keeper, return the ball to him. By neglecting to
do this, should the ball be missed by the bowler, the batsmen
may run, and all runs thus obtained are added to the score.
No score can be made off a ball returned by the wicket-keeper
and missed by the bowler.]
Umpire’s Prerogative.
36. Th e umpires are the sole judges of fair or unfair play,
and all disputes shall he determined hy them, each at his
own wicket; but, in case of a catch which the umpire ,
at the wicket howled from, cannot see sufficiently to
decide upon, he may apply to the other umpvre, whose
opinion shall be conclusive.
[Unlimited power of umpire in certain cases. —The words “sole
judge of fair or unfair play” gives the umpire unlimited
power, and in the latter case he can act quite irrespective of
the non-existence of law. ( Vide comments on Law 39.)
Lack of efficient umpires. —Notwithstanding that the rule is
explicit as to the umpire’s “being sole judge, &c,, he.,”
criticism often steps in and questions this right. Undoubtedly
there are many persons whose limited knowledge of the
game and law's of cricket should debar them from acting as


umpire; but, as “ efficient umpires ” are not plentiful, that
necessity which knows no law compels clubs to obtain whom
they can.
Reversal of Decision. —Some persons are not disposed to admit
of the practicability of this ; but their reasoning is as much
characterized by frailness as unfairness. That an umpire
should be compelled to adhere to a decision given in error—
thereby making others suffer wrongfully—is altogether an
arbitrary view. Whilst coinciding with a presumed authority
on this subject, that there is no law saying that an umpire
shall not revoke his decision, we urge the power of the umpire
to do so.
Which umpire to deckle in case of a catch. —ln catches, the
umpire at bowling end is the proper person to appeal to. If
he has any doubt he can confer with the other umpire, whose
opinion or decision shall be conclusive. ( Vide comments on
Law 16.) (
Position of umpire. —The umpire at bowling end should stand
as close to the wicket as possible, and keep in “a direct line
with both wickets,” so that he may be enabled to judge in
cases of appeals for “leg before.” While the ball is being
delivered, he should stand perfectly still, and at this time
ignore the use of an umbrella, as tending to baulk both striker
and bowler. If requested by the bowler or striker to shift
slightly aside, in common courtesy no umpire would refuse;
but even in this the umpire must first regard impending cir-
cumstances, and “ keep in as direct a line as possible,” in case
of “1.b.w.” appeals being made. When at the striker’s end,
he should stand about a dozen yards to his rear, in a line and
position so that he can have full view and command of the
crease. In cases of necessity, such as attempted stumping,
&c., he of course should shift as occasion requires, so that he
may have an uninterrupted view.]
Exchanging Ends by Umpires and Pitching of
Wickets. — (Vide also Laws A:, 5, and 6.)
37. The umpires in all matches shall pitch fair wickets,
and the parties shall toss up for choice of innings.
The umpires shall change icickets after each party has
had one innings.


[The “change of wickets” has reference only to the umpires
not to the wickets. In afternoon matches, where there is no
probability of the play going beyond one innings each, the
umpires usually change after each interval. In whole day
matches, however, or where the third innings collectively has
been entered upon, the change takes place after the second
interval, or as the Law specifies, “ after each party has had
one innings.”
The reader is referred to diagram at page 4 for pitching of
wickets.
Bowler changing sides—from left to right, and so on.- -In this
case the umpire should give the striker a fresh “ block ” or
“guard.” If the striker, however, in taking this—or even at
any other time —should make holes in the ground, the object
being to gain a firm foot-hold, the Revising Committee admit
the power of the umpire to prevent this.]
Time between Innings and between each Man
going to Wicket. —Side refusing to Play.
38. They (the umpires) shall allow tiro minutes for each
striker to come in, and ten minutes hetvjeen each
innings. When the umpire shall call “play” the
party refusing to play shall lose the match.
[ Unnecessary delay. —-Although two minutes can be claimed, that
time is often exceeded through useless delays, in transfer-
ring gloves and leggings by the batsman just out to the one
about to go in— a happy expedient where a club is playing
against time. Properly, it is the captain’s duty to see that
the next man to go in is ready equipped. If the captain be
neglectful of this, then the umpire should exercise his prero-
gative, where unnecessary delays occur, and enforce the Law
(explicit enough) as to the penalty attaching to such uncricket-
like procedure.]
Umpire not to give a Voluntary Decision.
39. They (the umpires) are not to order a striker “out”
unless appealed to by the adversaries.
[. Neglecting to appeal.— This Law is brief and explicit—simply
that an umpire must not order a striker “ out ” unless appealed
to ; in other words, that he must not, as against a batsman,
give a voluntary decision.


An umpire, then, knowing that a striker is out, must keep this
to himself, if none out of a field of eleven think it worth while
to appeal. The fault of not doing this lies in their want of
discrimination; and as it is not the duty of the umpire to
instruct, but to decide, he should only do so when called upon
by the usual interrogations.
Special powers of umpire. —As provisionary then against all
unfair play, Law 36, reading thus, “ The umpires are the sole
judges oifair or unfair play,” kc., nullities to a certain extent
the present Law (39), as affecting “voluntary decisions,” in so
far that the first-named Law (36) gives the umpire special
powers as sole judge of fair or unfair play. This is contended
for by a leading English authority on this subject. Say, for
instance, that a batsman is led to believe that he is out when
; t is rather the result of some sharp fingering of the bails by the
wicket-keeper, would it not be inconsistent with the umpire’s
position as sole judge of fair or unfair play to allow the bats-
man to leave his wicket with the impression that be was
bowled ? Most certainly. As sole arbiter, appointed to see
the game played in its integrity, under Law 36 he would be
empowered to protect the interests of the batsman.]
No Ball.- (See also Laws 9, 10 and 13 ; also comments
on Law 45.)
40. But if one of the bowler’s feet he not on the ground
behind the bowling crease and within the return crease
when he shall deliver the ball, the umpire at his wicket,
unasked, must call “No ball.”
[. Lengthening of delivery. —The reader is referred to comments on
Laws 9 and 13 as to “no balls.” There is nothing to prevent
the bowler delivering the ball with both feet behind the wicket
and even some few yards back from the crease.
This is done with the object of deceiving the batsman, and is
commonly known as a “judgment ball.” Although done to
lengthen the pitch, the bowler must not go wholly outside the
return crease ; if so, he should be no balled. “No ball”
should be called the instant the ball leaves the hand. ( Vide
comments on Law 45.)]


Short Runs.
41. If cither of the strikers run a short run the umpire
must call “ One short.”
[Short runs. The same argument applies to this Law as to Law
17. On the crease is reckoned short. The umpire should
notify this after the batsmen have done running.
This rule evidently supposes an impossibility. An odd number
of short runs cannot be made at double wicket. If a run is
short when going to one wicket, it is equally short when
returning. The custom, however, is to reckon one short.
See last paragraph of commentary on Law 3-5.]
Umpire Betting.
42. No umpire shall he allowed to bet.
[ Why wrong, and mode of procedure. —This Law is explicit. The
natural consequence of allowing betting would be the probable
leaning to self-interest and a possible injustice somewhere.
The services of any umpire having a wager on the game, how-
ever small, should be at once dispensed with.]
Changing Umpires. —( See Laic 42.)
43. No umpire is to be changed during a match unless
with the consent of both parties, except in case of viola-
tion of Laic 42 ; then either party may dismiss the
transgressor.
[lf the change is mutual the reasons may be good. (See com-
ments on Law 42.)]
Over Balls. — [See also Law 13.)
44. After the delivery of four (or six) balls the umpire must
call “ over,” but not until the ball shall be “ finally
settled ”in the wicket-keeper’s or bolder’s hand; the
ball shall tile'll be considered dead; nevertheless, if an
idea be entertained that either of the strikers is out, a
question may be put previously to, but not after, the
delivery of the next ball.
[Finally settled. —Refer to comments on Law 29.


Calling “Over.” —ln calling “ Over,” the umpire should be care-
ful not to do so until the ball is in the hands of either the
. bowler or the wicket-keeper, or he may prevent a chance of
stumping.
Late appeals.— Appeals are too late when once “ Over” is called ;
and if a question arise as to any batsman being out, this must
be put before the delivery of the next ball.
Number of the over. —The Law, it will be perceived, fixes four
deliveries as the number of the over, and in this respect is
followed out in our international and intercolonial contests.
In matches, however, of less moment, the number is six.
In matches confined to one afternoon, the question might be very
well considered, whether this number should not be altered to
eight or even nine. If adopted there certainly would not be
so many drawn matches. ]
Calling of “ Wide ” and “No Ball.”—(See also Laics
12 and 13.)
45. The umpire must take especial care to call “No hall ”
instantly upon delivery; “ Wide ball ” as soon as it
shall pass the striker.
[ Calling by umpire at proper time. —As the calling*)! “ No ball
should take place in the interval after the ball has left the
hand and before it reaches the wicket, —in other words,
while the ball is travelling, -the necessity for promptness on
the part of the umpire is manifest. In calling “Wide ball,
he should wait till after the ball has passed the striker.
Precision then, in each case, is essential, as otherwise two awk-
ward results might ensue. One, by calling “No ball” at the
like moment of the wicket falling, leaving the umpire’s inten-
tions, however just, open to misinterpretation ; and another
by calling “ Wide ” to a ball that has been struck,
Hitting at “ no ball.” —As a batsman cannot be caught out off a
“ no ball,” but only run out, he may strike at the ball without
endangering his position, (iee line 16, p. 11. )1


Following up Innings.
46. The players who go in second shall follow their innings,
if they shall have obtained 80 runs less than their
antagonists , except in matches limited to only one day’s
play, when the number shall be limited to 60 instead
of 80.
[.Afternoon and whole day matches. —Matches fixed for two after-
noons are considered as only equal to one day’s play. Matches
unfinished during either of these times to be decided by the
first innings, unless special arrangement has been made to the
contrary.]
Use of Bat to Strikers.
47. When one of the strikers shall have been put out, the
use of the bat shall not be allowed to any person until
the next striker come in.
[Comment unnecessary.]


SINGLE WICKET, LAWS OF.
These have not been arranged in consecutive order. The object of this is
apparent.
When more than Four Players—Boundary
Marks.
8. When there shall he more than four players on a side there
shall he no hounds. (Vide Laic 1.) All hits, hyes , and
overthrows shall then he allowed.
[The game at this stage shall be subject to the laws of double wicket. 1
When less than Five Players.—Boundary Marks.
1. When there shall he less than five players on a side, hounds
shall he placed 22 yards each, in a line from the off' and
ley stump. ( Vide Laic 2.)
Runs only allowable when Ball is struck in
front of Bounds.
2. The hall must he hit before the hounds to entitle the striker
to run, which run cannot he obtained unless he touch the
howling stump or crease in a line, with his hat or some part
of his person, or go beyond them, returning to the popping
crease.
[lf the ball be hit before, aud any divergence happen, this divergence, to
be a fair hit, must occur outside the 22 yards boundary marks.]
Byes, Overthrows, Catches, &c.
4. When there shall he less than five players on a side, neither
hyes nor overthrows shall he allowed, nor shall the striker
he caught out behind the wicket, nor stumped out.


Fair Hits.
3. When the striker shall hit. the ball, one of his feet must he on
the ground and behind the popping crease ; otherwise the
umpire shall call “ No hit."
[Being on the ground applies to the foot, not to the bat.]
Return of Ball within Bounds.
5. The fieldsman must return the hall so that it shall cross the
play between the wicket and the bowling stump, or between
the bowling stump and the bounds. The striker may run
till the ball be so returned.
[A ball struck as mentioned in Law 2, if it diverge should be taken in
front of the bounds If not so taken, the batsman cannot be put out.
The ball must cross the play.
Stumping. —This cannot be done unless the ball is received in front of the
wicket.]
Running.
6. After the striker shall have made one run, if he start again
he must touch the bowling stump, and turn before the ball
cross the play, to entitle him to another.
Lost Ball.—Stopping Ball with Hat.
7. The striker shall be entitled to three runs for lost ball and
the same number for ball stopped with hat, die.
[Vide comments on Laws 28 and 33 of double wicket, pp. 25 & 29.]
The Bowler.
9. The bowler is subject to the same laws as at double xcicket.
[Vide comments on Law 9 of double wicket, p. 6.J
Time.
10. No more than one minute shall be allowed between each ball.


THE SCORER.
Checking scores. —A scorer for each side is absolutely neces-
sary. In order that the scorers’ results may tally, it is necessary
for them to sit together and check each other; and this
cannot be done too carefully, as it often happens that matches
are won by a few notches. Any discrepancy between the
records of the scores is sure to be attended with unpleasantness,
while it will be indicative of want of ability on the part of the
scorers.
When the required number is obtained. —It is the duty of
the scorers, after having satisfied themselves respectively that
the requisite scores have been made, and mutually agreed as to
the figures, to intimate the same to the players.
Disagreement as to scores. —Should any disagreement arise
between the scorers, affecting their figures, it is their duty to
refer the matter at once to the umpires, and abide by their
decision.
Interference with scorers while the game is in progress. —The
slightest interference should be objected to as being likely to
lead to confusion.
Retention of scoring hook. —Scoring books should not be
allowed to pass out of the possession of scorers during progress
of the game, unless in cases of necessity, and then only to
their duly recognized successors.
THE UMPIRE.
Qualifications of an umpire. —An umpire is supposed to
possess a variety of qualities that are seldom combined in one
individual, amongst others a gentlemanly demeanour, a
thorough knowledge of the laws of the game, and coolness in
judging. The following hints may be useful: —
I. Close observation of every move in the game. —N’atural
quickness of perception will avail but little, if an umpire


permit Ms attention to be distracted from Ms duty ; for if
a difficulty should arise, of the nature of which he is not
cognizant, he may he betrayed into an erroneous decision ;
and if he should decide unfairly, lookers-on may regard
him as dishonest.
2. Strict impartiality. —Neither prejudice, unworthy influence,
nor exciting circumstances, should cause him to swerve
from the honourable discharge of his duty.
The special duties of an umpire are treated of so fully in
the comments on the various laws, that it would be superfluous
to attempt recounting them all here ; but a few general remarks
on points not governed by any particular law, though estab-
lished by usage, will not be out of place. The points referred
to have reference to the preliminaries of the game. They
are as follows :—The umpire should first arrange with the
captains about
1. Terms of match—whether it is to be played out or not.
2. Time of drawing stumps.
3. Intervals of adjournment (if any).
4. Bounds and number of runs for particular hits.
In pitching the wickets the umpire should place them north
and south, when practicable, in order that the batsman may
not have to face the evening sun. Those who have experienced
the inconvenience of batting with the sun in their eyes will
appreciate the necessity of taking this precaution.


ADVICE TO BOWLERS AND BATSMEN.
BOWLING.
BY JAS. SOUXHEETON.
The great aim I have always had, and obviously that which
should be the aim of everyone with any pretensions to bowling,
is to try and vary the pitch, pace, and break of the ball without
the knowledge of the batsman. * * * There is no
batsman so good as never to make a mistake, and there are
very few who have the patience to play a persistent bowler
without a momentary deviation from the right path. I com-
pare bowling to fishing. You must have plenty of ground
bait, and the ground bait in cricket is to continue to give the
batsman almost but not quite every kind of ball that he wants.
When he hits at a ball well and freely he is on the feed, and
then is the bowler’s time to drop a ball very like the last in
appearance, but with slight [difference of pitch, break, and
spin, and one of the field is very likely to play the part of the
man with the landing net. As an instance of this theory I
may say that sometimes I have bowled some of the best men
in England with a ball that a schoolboy could have played with
a broomstick. As long as you have the privilege of bowling do
not despair. In proof of the advice, I have, sometimes after
trying every device I knew of making a ball break from off to
on, and on to off, and finding that I was fairly mastered, I
have gone to the bowling crease with the same action, the same


movement of arm, and the same intention as before, and
have pitched a ball devoid of screw, straight to the centre.
Once (in the match for Lockyer’s benefit) I took Dr. Grace’s
middle stump in this identical way, at the commencement
of the match. I can recall as well as if the remark were at
this moment new, his surprise and his ejaculation of disgust,
“Why it never broke at all!” That was just the reason
why I had him. * * * * * Of course to
become a skilful bowler requires much study, and I can
safely say, from experience, that it is an art that must be
cultivated for many a long day. Any cricketer possessed of
a hand and eye quick enough for fielding, as well as a sufficiency
of intelligence to bat well, cannot fail to bowl, if he will only
give the art of bowling some time and patience. Let me, for
the benefit of those who desire bowling fame, proffer a few
hints gathered from a personal observation of many years.
As far as I know the art lies in managing the body in such a
manner as to walk or run a few paces to the crease, and then,
having the body and arm well balanced, to let the ball leave
the hand at the proper moment. The actual movement is
purely mechanical, dependent on precision, and the secret of
success is, first, a true love of the sport, and secondly, great
patience and practice. The spin of the ball and the judgment
requisite to puzzle a batsman are matters entirely of experience,
and can only be learned after the bowler has acquired the art
of hitting the stumps with certainty, as nearly as possible.
* * * Obviously the first two points to be studied
are precision and a certain command over the ball. * *
With young players the great error is the ambition for extreme
speed. The theory is to begin with slows until you have
gained some accuracy of aim. * * * Any object will
do to form a mark for practice, as a piece of paper placed in
front of the stumps, at the point best sitited to the pitch of the
ball. A bowler null soon fall into a certain natural and
mechanical action ; and care should be taken, when a suitable
delivery is attained, not to vary or deviate therefrom, as this
will nullify the effects of the practice. Bowling, to my
mind, should derive its motive power from the arm, and
not from the body, as it is from the arm that most of


the spin is gained, and bodily exertion will always be to
the disadvantage of a bowler. * * * * *
That the secret of good bowling is the spin infused into the
course of the ball is so obvious that the statement does not
require more than a passing comment. Much of this rotatory
tendency is derived from the method in which the ball is held
when it' leaves the hand, though it is essentially the combina-
tion of arm and wrist that forms the positive instrument.
There are some few who hold the ball in the palm of the hand,
but there is no better plan, to my mind, than to allow the tips
of the fingers to touch the seam of the ball, holding it tightly,
so as to give it the greatest amount of spin. * * *
Care must be taken, too, not to overdo matches by an excess of
practice, as it will be found best to employ short intervals for
the purpose, and not go in for undue taxation of energy. *
* * The variation of the pitch of the ball must not only be
studied, but alteration of pace, which is quite as important a
point. Slow underhand, too, should be cultivated, and indeed
at the outset it would not be inadvisable to acquire at first a
modicum of accuracy by this practice. Here, too, constant
alteration should be the chief aim. * * I
believe firmly in a change, and a constant change, of bowlers.
This may be old advice, but it is systematically overlooked.
When a batsman is regularly set, any change is better than
none. Constant maiden overs weary the field as well as the
spectators. “Any port in a storm,” and a bad bowler may
get a wicket where the best have failed. Try a change at
both ends if necessary, and when the batsmen are separated
you can go back to the former bowlers. The advantages of any
change are often visible in the best matches. * * *
Should a colt be put into an eleven for bowling he ought to be
tried the first over, as, should he be good, the very novelty of
his style makes him better than another who may be equally
excellent, and should he “come off” some of the old players
may have their nerves shaken at seeing their predecessors fall
to an unknown.


BATTING.
It lias been remarked by more than one experienced player
that a few hours’ daily tuition from a professional would do a
young beginner more good than much reading. As it is pos-
sible that some persons may not be inclined to this belief,
we extract the following remarks by Mr. W. G. Grace on the
subject. This gentleman says :
“ First, let it be presumed that in my opinion one hour of
practical tuition in cricket will be of more use than volumes of
theoretical instruction. * * * In batting, indeed,
as in every pursuit where science has to a great extent refined
what at first depended mainly on the superabundance of rough
and uncultivated force, common sense and a reasonable amount
of observation will do much to promote success. There is no
royal road to cricket; and batting, above all, is an art that
requires much cultivation. ‘ I have remarked,’ says Carlyle,
< that of all things a nation must first be drilled.’ Ponder over
this and answer it in the light of a cricket precept. Above all
things, it is essentially necessary for a young batsman, at the
outset, to receive judicious tuition at the hands of a qualified
drill-sergeant. * * * ”
The above advice is sound, and is the best course for
cricketers to adopt whose finances will bear the possible
expense it involves. Those who can afford to pay a professional
for an hour’s tuition periodically, just as they would a music
teacher, should not begrudge either the time or money if they
are desirous of attaining excellence as batsmen, and moreover
they should do this as early in their cricketing career as
possible, in order that they may not have to be cured of a lot
of bad habits before any progress can be made. The young
cricketer who cannot afford the cost of special tuition, should
always join as good a club as possible. He will thus be more
apt to see good cricket, and by this means unconsciously learn
much. The company a man keeps always tells on his character,


and it is as much the case in the cricket field as elsewhere.
The detailed hints which might be given on various styles of
hatting are too voluminous for this little handbook, hut we may
advise the beginner to confine his attention at first to patience
and defence. A straight bat does half the work in the latter
respect, and care should be taken in playing back anywhere to-
wards the bowler, not to allow the bottom of the bat to get in
advance of the top—in other words, to keep the hands well
forward in forward play—or a catch is almost a certainty.
On nearly all batsmen it would have an excellent effect if
they determined on certain occasions in practice to patiently de-
fend their wicket, and not strike as if with a view of runs. The
effect of such practice would be a great power of self-control to
be exercised when necessary until the batsman had “ got his
eye in,” and also got some idea of, perhaps to him, new bowl-
ing or the change to new ground. Such qualities in one or two
men often turn the fortunes of a game apparently lost.
Great importance must be attached to seeing good cricket.
Observation should go hand-in-hand with practice—if either,
have the preference of it; and we should be more hopeful of
the ultimate success of the young batsman who played in three
of his own eleven matches and carefully watched one first-class
match, than in the one who always plays in third or fourth
rate teams without availing himself of opportunities of witness-
ing the play of the best batsmen within his reach.




Mar,
1856.
Names of Players—how out—and respective scores in each Innings.
New South Wales.
1st.
2nd.
VlCTOKIA.
1st.
2nd.
d
Murray R c, b
0
5
Sargeant
b, b
7
5
p
Tunks .. b, b
1
0
Mather
16
0
2
Bradridge b, b
2
2
Coul stock
4
2 *
Hilliard Ibw, no
0
1
Morris
2
<D
Gilbert c. b
6
7
Hotham
b, b
0
0
&
M‘Kone n o, h
18
0
Cumberland
2
1
te
Vaughan b, n o
0
1
Phillpott
b, r o
5
ii
Saddler b
7
Kingston
n o, b
12
0
Beal s,
0
Lowe
h 71 o
Driver R b, b
18
0
5h
Howell b, b
11
0
Elliott
b, b
1
1
Including sundries ..
76
16
Including sundries ..
63
2S
N. S. Wales winning
by 1 run and 3 wickets.
SECOND MATCH.
Jan
1S57
New South Wales.
1st. 2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd
o 1
Rees W
Howell
Hilliard
Gilbert
M‘Kone
28 1 3
0 i 0
20 i 2
2 31
1 i 0
Sargeant r o, b
Coul stock be
Rees W. L b, r o
a’ Beckett r o c
7
0
2
3
0
23
is
10
0
0
6
16
o
c
CO
«8
Still
Lewis O
Murray R, .. .
.. b, c
b, b
1 9
3 2
0 8 1
Bryant bj c
Marshall c o
Hammersley b’b
Cumberland c, n o
Butterworth c, c
Elliott n o, c
0
0
rs
<d
rt
Ward Capt. ...
Saddler
Lewis T
1 j 13
o 3 i
13 8
10
0
0
Ph
2
2
Including sundries ..
80 86
Including sundries ..
63
sT
N. S. Wales winning by 65 runs.
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches — N. S. W. v. Victoria—from their
commencement in 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
*** The initial letters showing “ How Out ” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,) ; to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
FIRST MATCH.


Jan.
1858.
Names of Players—how out—
-and
respective scores in each Innings.
New South Wales.
Hilliard ro.c
1st.
1
2nd.
—
1
Victoria.
! Bryant
c, ro
Ibw, c
1st.; 2nd. j
11 I 18 |
S
Howell
0
16
; Wray .
12
26 ,
.3
Beeston
b, b
6
5
Elliott
C, 8
0
10
Gilbert
15
12
i Marshall
C, C
0
S 1
M'Kone
b, b
0
1
Hammersley
Ibw, o
5
31 !
! S
Thompson N. .
b, b
7
10
Pickering
r o, c
4
26 1
■p
Lewis 0
3
6
Wills
c, n o
12
49
0
o
r o, c
10
47
■g
Mills
1
0
Rees W. L
c, b
1
3
>>
b, b
8
12
. n o, c
1
2
s
Vaughan
13
0
Butterworth
b, h w
0
0
Including sundries ..
67
69
Including sundries ..
59
238
Victoria winning by 171 runs.
Jan.
1869.
New South Wales.
1st.
2nd,
Victoria.
1st. 2nd. !
6
0
. c, c
0
32
Howell
3
8
Grindrod
b, b
5
3
Hilliard
.. c, c
1
1
Burchett
1
26
>i
Still
. .. b, Ibw
3
8
Elliott
0
9
fl
Beeston
18
7
Marshall
c, r o
1
5
TS
1
4
3
3
m
Adams
14
0
Hammersley .
.. Ibw, b
0
9
■§
b, b
13
40 i
13
3
Thompson N. .
b, b
0
0 1
Wills
15
8
0
0
0
s
Kinloch
0
5 |
Thornton
0
0
Including sundries ..
63
77
Including sundries ..
38
103
I 1 '
Victoria winning by 1 run and 2 wickets.
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches— N. S. W. v. Victoria—-from their
commencement in 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
* * The initial letters showing “ How Out ” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,) ; to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
THIRD MATCH.
FOURTH MATCH.


Feb.
1860.
Names of Players—how out-
—and respective scores in each Innings.
New South
Wales. j lst
2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd.
0>
2
1
7
a
b' b 1 6
0
8
12
3
Dickson
b, b | 0
0
i Huddlestone..
13
8
rO
Hilliard
0
! Bryant
3
8
09
Thompson N. .
c, c 1 0
3
Marshall
b, c
4
0
Gilbert
13
Wills .. .
4
20
1e
Clark J
0
Hammersley...
4
11
4
1
1(
Lewis T
0
Thornton
2
Brown E
9
Ross
b, b
0
3
Richardson ...
8
Elliott
3
5
Including
sundries .. 44
42
Including sundries ..
56
99
Victoria winning by 69 runs.
Jan.
1861.
New South
Wales.
1st. 2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd.
1
0
13
0
Clark J."
4
1
Mace
2
5
Kinloch
3
1
Bryant
c, c
22
10
'
15
I
b, b
7
4
2
Thompson N. .
... b, c
7
12
Makinson
2
23
Bees ton
... b, c
0
4
Marshall
12
1
in
N ewcombe ..
23
2
Ilammersley .
b, b
0
8
a
b, b
2
0
0
0
Rowley
0
5
Elliott
5
1
>>
Kettle
9
13
Cosstick
0
12 |
Richardson ...
0
0
Hopkinson .. .
0
0 |
Including sundries ..
74
44
Including
sundries ..
68
Zj
Victoria
winning by 21 runs.
;
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches — N. S. W. v. Victoria—from their
commencement in 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
*** The initial letters showing “ How Out ” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,) , to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
FIFTH MATCH.
SIXTH MATCH.


Jan.
1852.
Names of Players—how out—and respective scores in
each Innings.
New South Wales.
1st.
2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd.
Ward
b, b
0
7
Marshall
b, ..
35
c
Park
18
0
Mace
b, ..
1
5
Saddler
1
1
Bryant
ibw, ..
3
0
9
b, ..
10
o
Kettle
7
(5
Huddlestone ...
r o, ..
44
Thompson N.
b, b
15
12
Wardill
Ibw, n o
36
5
Gilbert
b, b
6
26
Thompson
b, ..
16
14
0
b, ..
19
Rowlev
i
4
Conway
r o, ..
0
c3
b, b
9
21 i
b, ..
2
3l1
0
1 !
n o, n o
2
2
Including sundries ..
76
109
Including sundries ..
182
7
Victoria winning by 4 runs and 10 wickets.
Feb.
18G3.
New South Wales.
1st.
2nd.
Victoria.
1st,
2nd.
S
1
4
7
Thompson N. .
c, c
6
16
Wardill
3
4
Jones S
b, b
0
*15
Huddlestone .
... Ibw, c
0
0
22
0
5
0
g
Lawrence
1
5
Greaves
ii
*
£1
19
5
b, *
5
*
m
13
0
1
1
+3
ci
Gregory E. ...
3
13
Cameron
4
9
D’Aroy
17
34
Wills
25
17
M‘Nish
b, b
12
1
Hopkinson ...
5
4
Docker
0
1
Hope
8
2
Including sundries ..
108
97
Including
sundries ..
76
45
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches — N. S. W. v. Victoria—-from their
commencement in 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
*** The initial letters showing “ How Out ” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,); to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
SEVENTH MATCH.
EIGHTH MATCH.
N. S. Wales winning by 84 runs.
* Greaves and Marshall declined to go to the wickets owing to a decision (given
in their favou. and afterwards reversed) respecting Jones, who, it was contended,
was stumped by Marshall after the umpire had called “ over.”


1
i Dec.
' 1865.
Name of Players—how out—and respective scores in each Innings.
...
New South Wales.
1st. !2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd.
Caffyn
2 5
! Gibson
17
s
Keliick
11 23
Turner
b
12
Thompson N. .
c, b
2 2
Conway
33
S
Cosstick
2 21
Kelly
4
'v
Hewitt
12 3
j Fowler
37
Gregory E. ...
c, c
43 18
' Greaves
25
Lawrence
H 23
Phillips
2
Jones
11 3
Hees
37
©
Curtis G
13 0
Wilkie
b
3
Oatley
2 1 3
Wills
Ibw
58
PM
Oliver
6 ; 29
O’Mullane
n o
33
Including
sundries ..
122 |l43
Including sundries ..
285
—
Victoria winning in 1 innings,
with 20 runs to spare.
Dec.
1866,
New South Wales.
1st.
2nd.
1
Victoria
1st.
2nd.
Belcher b
9
0
6
Catfyn c
24
Phillips
b, st
1
Gregory E c
8
Conway
6
1
£“>
Gregory D b
0
r o, b
r o, b
9
22
d
Gilbert c
16
Gibson
1
Gordon G b
19
3
1
15
1
Xfl
Hewitt c
19
Campbell W. ...
r o, b
a
Lawrence C r o
14
o o
11
0
IS
0
%
Park L c
0
M'Pherson
b, n o
Thompson N c
16
Wilkie D
u o, st
12
8
s
Stack no
4
Wardill
no, Ibw
0
4
Including sundries ..
145
Including sundries ..
74
58
_
N. 8. Wales winning in 1 innings, with 13 runs to spare.
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches — N. S. W. v. Victoria—from their
commencement in 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
*** The initial letters showing “ How Out” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,); to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
NINTH MATCH.
TENTH MATCH.


Dec.
18.7.
Names of Players—how out-
—and respective scores in
each Innings.
New South Wales.
1st.
2nd.
Victoria
1st,
2nd.
i
Thompson N c, c
Sheridan b, r o
35
13
60
1
Gibson
Ward ill
c, c
c, no
21
110
1
45
s
4
14
st, c
8
23
o
Xi
Gregory E b, b
6
4
Kelly
c, h w
0
2
24
ns
Robertson
c, 11 0
52
2
s
Gordon c, r o
1
31
Campbell W. ...
b, ..
0
ci
15
1
Cosstick
c, ..
6
Sinclair c, c
7
12
Wilis
c, . .
23
s.
Gregory D c, n 0
0
2
Greaves
r 0, ..
8
22
9
b, ..
0
Ph
Coates n 0, st
18
3
Allan
no,..
1
..
Including sundries ..
158
173
Including sundries ..
252
81
Victoria winning by 2 runs and 7 wickets.
—
Mar.
1869.
New South Wales.
1st. 2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd.
Fairweather
Sheridan
.. b, c
.. lbw,lbw
0
I
Ward ill
0
3
2
37
Phillips
14
4
Stack
0
0
Gibson
3
29
>■»
Cjiffyn W
0
6
Kelly
1
3
C
Thompson N. .
. .. r o, b
1
8
Carter
b, b
16
63
Hewitt
7
0
Egglestone ...
b, b
o
0
m
Gregory D. ...
9
15
Cosstick
5
27
"S
Coates
15
8
Noyes Lieut. .
.. c, c
7
13
2
15
Wills
7
1
Oatley
1
4
Goldsmith ...
0
0
s
Kellick J.
0
0
Allan
3
4
Including sundries ..
37
95
Including sundries ..
61
149
Victoria winning by 78 runs.
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches — N. S. W. v. Victoria -from their
commencement in 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
* * The initial letters showing “ How Out ” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,) ; to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
ELEVENTH MATCH.
TWELFTH MATCH.


Feb.
1870.
Names of Players—how out —and respective scores in each Innings.
New South Wales.
1st. 2nd.
VICTOKIA.
1st.
2nd.
Thompson N
c, b
3 I 11
Gordon Lieut. .
22
121
s
Gregory E
c, b
64 7
Wardill
24
55
Oliver
b, b
3 0
Campbell W. .
.. c, b
13
10
o
Sheridan
b, r o
43 18
Robertson G. .
b, c
32
28
o
Coates
c, b
a 0
Kelly
53
17
Hewitt
b, c
0 1
Cosstick
b, b
0
7
Lawrence
c, b
6 | 24
Phillips
14
22
Gregory D
b, b
14 2
Comvav
1
0
<D
.Tones
b, b
5 20
Wills
13
9
ci
Twopenny (abor.)
b, b
S 0
Reid
0
0
*
Thompson C. D. .
n o, n o
3 1 0
Campbell D.
.. r o, b
4
49
Including sundries .,
164 | 89
Including
sundries ..
181
337
Victoria
winning by 265 runs.
Mar.
1871.
New South Wales.
1st. 2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd.
51
1
12
13
Gregory E. ...
... Ihw, b
13
15
Campbell W. ...
c, Ibw
20
3”
Sheridan E, .. .
b, c
6
3
Cooper B. B. ...
c, r o
11
27
Caffyn
5
10
Loughnau
c, c
86
11
1
Hewitt
b, b
60
0
Williams
c, c
19
20
b b
5
q
9
0
CO
Thompson N. .
Bamieiman C..
4
30
4
"c3
b, b
32
3
Wilts
n o, b
39
11
Coates
1
1
.'I'Farland
st, c
0
1
O
Faithfull
5
24
Reid C
r o, Ibw
4
5
CS
8
1
0
c
Ph
Including sundries ..
200
84
Including sundries ..
198
m
Victoria winning by 48 runs.
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches — N. S. TV. v. Victoria —from their
commencement in, 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
*** The initial letters showing “ How Out ” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,); to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
THIRTEENTH MATCH.
FOURTEENTH MATCH.


Mar.
1872.
Name of Players—how out-
-and respective scores in each Innings.
New South Wales.
1st.
2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd.
Gregory D. ...
11
7
Goldsmith
b
12
S
Bannerman 0..
0
5
Campbell W
b
4
S
Dickson
0
0
Gibson
b
41
Thompson N. .
. c, r 0
31
15
Cooper B. B
c
2
Allan H
0
3
Kelly
25
Gregory E. ...
16
17
b
23
Sheridan
8
1
Ibw
5
Hand
0
1
Boyle
c
27
0
Gregory C. t ...
0
0
Williams
c
1
a
Docker A
6
0
Wills
b
7
Moore G.
5
0
Allan
n 0
11
Including sundries ..
80
55
Including sundries ,.
161
Victoria winning in 1 innings.
with 26 runs to spare.
Mar.
1873.
New South Wales.
.1st.
2nd.
VICTORIA.
1st.
2nd.
13
5
13
Jeifries
4
3
Campbell
b, Ibw
0
1
Kelliok C
0
18
Cooper B. B
c, c
32
16
3
29
32
15
a
6
0
14
2
Gregory E. ...
2
4
Fanning ........
c, b
ii
0
Bannerman C.,
1
0
Bovle
c, c
0
6
■§
Oliver
6
1°
Elliott
b, c
4
2
Hewitt
6
7
Carr
c, b
0
0
&
Coates
1
19
Allee
c, b
2
0
S
Moore G
0
6
Loughnan
n o, b
4
6
Including sundries ..
44
101
Including sundries ..
113
56
Victoria winning by 24 runs.
t This gentleman had to bat one-handed, having fractured one 01 the small
bones of his hand against the pavilion fence while endeavouring to prevent a fourer.
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches — R. S. W. v. Victoria—-from their
commencement in 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
*** The initial letters showing “ How Out” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,); to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
FIFTEENTH MATCH.
SIXTEENTH MATCH.


Dec.
1874.
Names of Players—how out-
—and respective scores in each Innings.
New South Wales.
1st.
2nd.
VICTORIA.
1st.
2nd,
©
Gilbert
11
3
Sleight
b, n o
0
7
s
Thompson N. .
c, c
17
35
Cooper
c, b
45
4
p
25
18
Kelly*
14
86
jg
Baunerman, C.
*.. c, n o
81
32
Horan
b, c
3
22
Powell
6
Boyle
r o, c
17
3
0
24
3
14
"S
Coates
0
Cosstick
c, b
6
33
'g
Spofforth
21
M‘Gann
b, b
0
2
>>
Tindall
26
6
Campbell W.
b, c
25
6
Morgan
0
Blackham
b, c
32
5
Wood
9
Murphy
. n o, ab.
0
ab.
Including sundries ..
216
119
Including sundries ..
149
185
N. S. Wales winning by 1
run and 6 wickets.
Mar.
1875.
New South Wales.
1st. 2nd.
Victoria.
1st.
2nd.
1
1
2
8
Thompson N. .
.. r o, c
3
13
Campbell W
c, b
3
18
Gilbert
b, b
1
1
Horan
c, c
3
16
>*
0
0
b, b
6
2
1
>>
Evans
11
31
Sleight
c, c
10
5
Gregory E. * ...
65
18
Hastings
b, b
0
0
Spofforth
2
13
Cosstick
Ibw, c
1
7
1
20
c, b
n o, c
15
0
Ti
Coates
16
0 j
Midwinter
15
8
Faithfull
3
0
Conway
b, n o
0
0
Wood
f)
0
10
4
Including sundries ..
116
102
Including sundries ..
71
70
N. S. Wales winning
by 77 runs.
*
Cup winners.
INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
Resume of the Matches — N. S. IF. v. Victoria—from their
commencement in 1856 up to 1875 inclusive.
*** The initial letters showing “ How Out ” refer to the Ist innings when before
the comma (,) , to the 2nd innings when after the comma.
SEVENTEENTH MATCH.
EIGHTEENTH MATCH.


d
6
two Where
’ Contested.
Winning Side.
Results.
Highest Average per
Innings in respective
Matches.
i
Mar.
1856Melbourne..
N. 8. Wales..
3 wickets ..
M'Kone J. (Syd.) 18•
2
Jan.
1857 Sydney ....
N. S. Wales..
65 runs
Gilbert G. (Svd).. 161
3
Jan.
1858 Melbourne..
Victoria ....
171 runs
Wills T. (Vic).... 61-
4
Jan.
1859 Sydney ....
Victoria ....
2 wickets ..
Lewis O. (Svd) .. 26 - l
5
Feb.
1860 Melbourne..
Victoria ....
69 runs
Wills T. (Vic),. ..12-
6
Jan.
1861 ! Sydney ....
Victoria ....
21 runs
Newoombe (Syd.) 25’
7
Jan.
1862 Melbourne..
Victoria ....
10 wickets ..
Huddlestone (Vic)44 -
8
Feb.
1863 Sydney ....
N. S. Wales..
84 runs
D’Arcy (Svd) ....51.
9
Dec.
1865 Melbourne..
Victoria ....
1 in. & 20 runs
Wills T. (Vic).. ..58-
10
Dec.
1866 Sydney ....
N. S. Wales..
1 in. & 13 runs
Caffyn W. (Syd)..24-
11
Dec.
1867 Melbourne..
Victoria ....
7 wickets ..
Wardill (Vic) ..155-
12
Mar.
I860 Sydney ....
Victoria ....
78 runs
Carter (Vic) .. ..39’1
13
Feb.
1870 Melbourne..
Victoria . ..
265 runs
Gordon Lt. (Vic) 71'1
14
Mar.
1871 Sydney ....
Victoria ....
48 runs
Cam libel 1 W. (V ic) 31 ' 1
15
Mar.
1872 Melbourne..
Victoria ....
1 in. & 26 runs
Gibson (Vic) . . .41’
16
Mar.
1873 Sydney
Victoria ....
24 runs
Cooper B. (Vic) . .47'
IT
Dec.
1874 Melbourne..
N. S. Wales..
6 wickets ..
Banuerman (Syd)113'
IS
Mar.
1875 Sydney ....
N. S. Wales..
77 runs
Gregory B. (Syd.) S3 -
Played at
Results.
Scores.
1st In. 2nd In.
\
Melbourne .... -
Alberts.. 196 .. ..
196 runs
| Alberts winning in 1 innings,
i Melbourne 110 .. 82
with 4 runs to spare.
.
192 „
Alberts.. 36 .. 47
83 „
) Melbourne Club winning in
Sydney
Melbourne 142 ....
> 1 innings, with 59 runs to
1
142 „
1 spare.
SUMMARY OP INTERCOLONIAL MATCHES.
New South Wales v. Victoria—From their commencement in 1856 up to 1875,
inclusive.
Note. —No Intercolonial Match, it will be perceived, was played in 1864. Two
matches, however, did take place in this year between two leading chibs (the
Alberts and Melbourne) which was regarded with much interest, the majority of
the players on both sides having previously figured in Intercolonial contests.
The Combination Match, Victoria against New South Wales, Tasmania, and
South Australia, was contested in December, 1872, in which tire former was de-
feated. A cup for the highest scorer in this match was won by B. Gregory, of Sydney.
The Club Matches resulted as follows :


1
5
u
New South Wales
Players.
No. of
Innings.
Total Runs
Highest runs
single Inning
Average pei
Innings.
Victorian
Players.
No. of
Innings.
Total Runs
a .3
g a
~ a
03 W
2 ®
"Sc 5P
5-3
Average pe
Innings.
Bannerman C
154
10
81
* 9
22
10
19
H
19
1
Blackham J
4
52
32
13
11 9
9
114
38
12 6
Bryant J
11
130
49
37
63
2
23
21
11 1
Campbell D
2
53
26 1
10 5
39 1
TV Amy I)
1
53
*34
53
Campbell W. ..
14
145
1
42
*31
42
Carter B
2
79
3
51
31
17
Cooper B. B. ..
9
147
37
45
37
16 3
37
9
21
340
19
12
Fowler
1
17
14
*65§
20
Gibson G
9
182
41
13
20 2
10
141
10 1
Gaggin W
2
20
13
133
60
10 3
Gordon Lieut.
2
143
121
71 1
10 2
11
4
52
23
13 1
Greaves W
6
62
92
30
24
10 2
Horan T
4
44
22
2
21
15
Huddlestone J.
7
76
44
86
10 6
20 5
5
59
29
11 4
Kelly
10
205
2
31
28
15 1
Loughnan A. ..
5
71
36
23
*15
14 1
14 2
23
13
175
43
13 6
Makinson C. ..
3
44
3
3(3
21
12
Midwinter
i
23
29
350
60
12 2
Morres T
s
87
47
10 7
i
32
26
32
N oyes Lieut. ..
2
20
13
*33
26
22
53
16
no
10
33
15
10 3
24 4
16
35 5
O’MulIane G. ..
Pickering W. ..
Phillips J
Robertson G. ..
Thompson J. ..
1
2
6
6
1
8
33
30
63
148
16
285
Williams O.
Wills T
3
15
40
319
20
58
13 1
21 4
Wray T
i 5
58
26
11 3
INTERCOLONIAL BATTING AVERAGES-
N. S. Wales v. Victoria.
Batting Averages of Intercolonial Players whose performances run into double
figures. From year 1856 to 1875, inclusive.
* Not out for these particular scores. § Highest not out sooie
t Was a resident of Sydney in 1865, and played with the N S. Wa es Team
I Went to the wickets on four different occasions— Not out in ° '
Note.—These figures being carried up to date will he found I “ val^
forming an estimate of the merits of the different Intel colonial ' n t
greater the number of innings played, and the higher the average scow, the gpeatei
the merit of the player. E. Gregory, of Sydney, hence holds the premier position
of the whole, as highest average scorer.


Coates J
Evans E
Failhfull M. . .
Gilbert G.
Gregory B. . .
Gregory D. . .
Hewitt R
*Kinlooh J. ..
*Lewis 0
Lawrence C. ..
*M‘Kone J. ..
Moore G
Sheridan E, ..
Spofforth ....
Tindall
Thompson N.
Ward Captn.
N. S. Wales
Players.
O3tOt- l O0t-'lObO^tOC*O0CDbOtOLOl— tO
to O C5 <Q fcO-QO CO
tO tO MMtOMM to >-*
SbOWCOOiOHCJ. HCOCOHOtW^aO
Balls
Bowled.
Wickets.
bO to M H M 05 h- • rfi.
oof^cnoooooMtocotocoa^toot
Ol'OOCOMMWMOOOCOOOOOiM
Runs.
tOOlO^WtOMMtOOS^^^t-OJtOCO
WOJmco0500COOtOCOMUiC5GOOtO
OJW OJtucoOl C5 00 Cn 00 rf*- 00
No. of Balls
per wicket.
tOlOHH M I-* «-* H- ‘ *-* 1— 1— a
‘TOWtOOOCOOOOOO'OOlf‘^H
05Cr»00-<rM , <ICn^00^TtO0500O^M^
Runs
per wicket.
Allan
■ Boyle
Bryant J. ..
Cosstick S.
| Conway J. ..
Elliott G. ..
Horan ....
Midwinter ..
Wills T. ..
t-i O
► H
Kj O
W M
» s
5° ►
a
Balls
Bowled.
to to
W CO toco O 0)0iCh~J
MOtOi^MOOOtO©
-<T 03 lO<TM tO
b000rf*>t000tf»-0>00.c0
Wickets.
C31- 1 tO lO 03 H M tO
NtOOiMCDOitOOO
tOlOMOOiCOOJOtO
Runs.
OO rfi. C71 to CO oo 00 Oi to
tOCOttO^GMCKf
MC5 O' CUO Ol Oi o>
No. of Balls
per wicket.
OO to on On 00 03 Ci to
Runs
per wicket.
New South Wales.
No. of
Times.
Victoria.
No. of
Times.
Coates J
3
1
fGilbert G
5
1
*Gregory E
1
2
Lawrence C
6
1
Thompson N
1
2
Ward Captn
2
tPhilpott W
1
Wardill E
i
Wills T
9
INTERCOLONIAL BOWLING AVERAGES.
N. S. "Wales v. Victoria.
The Averages given are those of reputed Bowlers, from 1856 to 1875 inclusive.
The names omitted, in the majority of cases, only bowled in one match.
* Underhand Bowlers, the averages of whom bear very favourable comparison
with the modern and existing style, even up to date—lB7s.
Captains of Intehcolonial Teams.
* Also Captain of Combination Team. f Captains of Ist Match played in 1856.


INTERCOLONIAL SINGLE WICKET MATCHES.
FIRST MATCH.
This Match, played at Melbourne, in December, 1865, between
Messrs, Fowler, Kelly, Conway, and Wills, of Victoria, and Messrs.
Cosstick, Lawrence, Thompson, and Caffyn, of Sydney, not having-
been finished, is devoid of interest.
SECOND MATCH.
Messrs. Wm. Caffyn, Chas. Lawrence, and Nat. Thompson
v.
Messrs. J. Conway, S. Cosstick, and T. Wills.
Played at Sydney in April, 1860.
New South Wales.
Ist Innings.
Caffyn W., c Wills b Cosstick 14
Thompson N., c and b Cosstick .. 5
Lawrence G., b Wills 12
Sundries 6
37
2nd Innings.
Caffyn W., b Wills 15
Thompson N., c and b Cosstick .. 3
Lawrence C., c and b Cosstick .... 2
Sundries 0
20
Total 57
Victoria.
Ist Innings.
Conway J., b Thompson 0
Cosstick 8., b Caffyn 22
Wills T., c and b Thompson 13
Sundries 0
35
2 nd Innings.
Conway J., b Thompson 0
Cosstick 8., c and b Thompson.... 19
Wills T., not out 3
No Ball 1
23
Total 58
Victoria winning by 1 run and 1 wicket.
THIRD MATCH.
The Gregory Brothers
v.
Messrs. J. Conway, S. Cosstick, and T. Wills.
Played on the Albert Ground, Eedfern, on the Bth, 10th, and 15th
April, 1871.
This Match excited much public interest, and was witnessed by
some 5,000 persons. Coupling with the special' character of the


Match, the novelty of the N. S. Wales representatives being
brothers, it is thought worthy of record in detail. The game
occupied three separate afternoons, and the interest created was
almost equal with that shown in the Eleven-a-side Match, which
immediately preceded it. The remarkable good play and patience
exhibited by each player is best evidenced by the length of time
which was necessary to bring the game to completion. The fol-
lowing are the results: —
New Sooth Wales.
Ist Innings.
Gregory D., c and b Cosstick .... 4
Gregory E., b Cosstick 10
Gregory C., o and b Conway 10
Sundries 0
24
2nd Innings.
Gregory D., b Conway 9
Gregory 8., c and b Cosstick 16
Gregory C., b Conway 4
Sundries 1
30
Total 54
Victoria.
Isf Innings.
Conway J., c and bE. Gregory.. .. 2
Cosstick S., c and bE. Gregory .. 2
Wills T., b D. Gregory 13
Sundries 4
21
2nd Innings.
Conway J., cC. Greg, bD. Greg .. 3
Cosstick S., b D. Gregory 19
Wills T., b D. Gregory 4
Sundries 2
28
Total 49
New South Wales winning by 5 runs.
Bowling Analyses.
Gregory D 295 balls ; *4 no balls and wides ; 4 wickets; 24 runs.
Gregory E 177 ~ 1 wide; 2 ~ 13 ~
Gregory 0 70 „ 1 ~ no wickets; 6 „
Cosstick S 272 balls ; no wides ; 3 wickets ; 45 runs.
Conway J 99 ~ 1 wide; 3 ~ 8 ~
Wills T .. Did not bowl.
* The Umpire having no-balled before the ball had left the hand, the sth was
not reckoned. The Umpire retired, and Caffyn took the vacancy.


TESTIMONIALS.
“ Feb. 20th, 1875.
“ Dear Mr. Ironside,
“ I have perused your work on Cricket and I think it is one
of the best I have read. It is a work greatly needed, and every
cricketer ought to read it, more especially if he has a wish to
excel in the game.
“ Yours faithfully,
“E. J. Gregory.”
“ Bourke-street, 23rd Feb., 1875.
“Having been favoured with a perusal of your MS. I must
express my conviction that the information given will prove
invaluable to cricketers. As a work of reference it is certainly
superior to any I have seen. The moot points of cricket have
been ably dealt with.
“ Yours faithfully,
“ 0. D. Thompson.”
“ Paddington, 24th Feb., 1875.
“ Sir,
“ I have read your work on Cricket, and am much pleased
with it. The Laws have been fully gone into, and show that
much time and energy must have been expended thereon.
Cricketers and others who take an interest in the game will find
your book of great service.
“ I am, yours truly,
“ David Wm. Gregory.”
“77 Crown Street, Sydney, Feb. 25th, 1875,
“ Dear Sir,
“Having read your comments on Cricket, I cannot do other-
wise than express my approval of the able manner in which
the Laws are explained. In fact, the publication cannot fail
to prove of inestimable benefit to Cricketers and Umpires
particularly.
“ I remain, Ac.,
Mr. F. Ironside. “ J. Tooher.”










