

H. B. HftCARTNEX
Melbourne.
1854




ANTICHRIST,
A LECTURE,
DELIVERED L\ T THE HILL OF THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE,
BEFORE THE
JOBS KNOX YOUNG MEN’S ASSOCIATION,
ON WEDNESDAY, MAY 31st, 1854,
BY THE VERT REVEREND
HUSSEY BURGH MACARTNEY, D.H.,
DEAN OF MELBOURNE.
Du iteqtwsK.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HUGH M'COLL,
AT THE ‘•'BANNER” OFFICE,
FOR THE JOHN KNOX YOUNG MEN’S ASSOCIATION-
1854.




THE ANTICHRIST,
A LECTURE.
* r OQ
I feel much pleasure in standing up to address a Young
Men’s Society. 1 feel these associations to be of great value
everywhere, but they seem of peculiar importance in a colony
like this. I rejoice, too, to meet an association which takes a
distinctive character, and which bears the honoured name ot Johu
Knox, —of one who was a faithful upholder of the truth, and
who, with an earnestness which may have arisen from natural
temperament, but which rather seems to have been the result of
divine teaching, bore witness against error with such boldness as
to merit the praise uttered over his remains —“ There lies one
who never feared the face of man.”
The subject selected for this evening’s consideration is, “ The
Antichrist,” and we shall at once enter on the inquiry respecting
him. It has been customary, in inquiries of this nature, to
search for parallel passages in [Scripture, or those supposed to be
so, —and it is obvious that this is a most important line of
investigation, once we have ascertained what is his character, from
the places where he is actually named; but till this is done, such
examination is necessarily premature; and as it would not be
possible, within the limits of a lecture, to go into the whole
subject, I shall strictly confine myself to those passages where
Antichrist is expressly named.
First, then, to ascertain his characteristics. We read, 1 John
ii. 18, 19, “Little children, it is the last time; and as ye have
heard that Antichrist shall eomc, even now are there many


Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time. They
went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been
of us they wnuld no doubt have continued with us, but they
went out that they might be made manifest that they were not
all of us.” Prom this we know that Antichrist is to be sought
for among the baptised body,—“They went out from us/'*
proving that they had been numbered among the saints of God.
And to this must be added the testimony of 1 John iv., 1 to 3,
where he is named amongst false prophets professing to speak
by the Spirit of God; so that he not only had been in the midst
of the professing church, but still continued to claim his position
there, and to go forth as commissioned by God; one who was
not an open impugner of Christianity, but whose spirit required
to be tried in order to ascertain its real character. Therefore we
must look for Antichrist, not merely among those who had been,
but among those who still claim to be, members of the Christian
church.
The next point stated concerning him is, i John ii. 22, That
he denieth the Lather and Son. Now there are two ways in
which we may deny any person or thing: by open denial,
or by professed obedience while the heart and life give a
virtual denial to the profession of the lips. Thus, Is. xxix. 13,
“ This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their
lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me;”
quoted by our blessed Lord, Mark vii. 6, —“This people
honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me ;” and
St. Paul tells us, Tit. i. 10, of those who “ profess that they know
God, but in works they deny him;” and tells us again 1 Tim. v. 8,
without any reference to doctrinal error, that a man may have “ de-
nied the faith,” and be “ "worse than an infidel.” And St. Peter
■warns the Church of the arising of “ false teachers,” among them,
who “privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the
Lord that bought them,” which denial must be virtual, not
actual, otherwise the teachers could not be among the church,
nor their errors brought in privily. The denial then may be
actual, or may be virtual, and veiled under outward demon-
strations of godliness. Which is it ? The next verse tells us
that (1 John ii. 23), “Whosoever denieth the Son the same
hath not the Lather.” Therefore the denial of the Lather is
clearly virtual, as involved in the denial of the Son; and from
what we have already seen, in considering 1 John iv. I—3, the
denial of the Son must likewise be virtual only, as Antichrist is
there represented under circumstances which require his existence
within the church. But does any professing Christian body in
works deny him whom in words they profess to honour, or by
one part of their profession neutralise the profession which still
gives them a claim to be numbered as within the church. The


admitted dogmas of the Clmrcli of Rome afford an answer to
this question. Scripture represents the sacritice of Christ as one
and all sufficient. Heb. ix. 24 —28, “For Christ is not entered
into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of
the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of
God for us : nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the
high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of
others; for then must he often have suffered since the foundation
of the world, but now once in the end of the world hath he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And as it is
appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment;
so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him shall he appear the second time without
sin unto salvation;" and Heb. x. 12—14, “But this man, after
he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the
right hand of God, from henceforth expecting until his enemies
be made his footstool. For by one offering he hath perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.” It is unnecessary to quote
evidences as to the views of the Church of Rome on this subject,
for tlic whole system of Romanism is built on the assumption
that the sacrifice of the mass, ’the merits of the saints, and
the penitent's own repentances, good works, and sufferings are
necessary to wash away sin, and thus is Christ denied, not
indeed as a sacrifice, but as the one and only sacrifice for sin.
Again, Scripture places the unity and consequent sufficiency of
Christ's mediation on the same footing as the unity of the God-
head (1 Tim. ii. 5), while the Church of Rome avowedly seeks
the prayers of a host of other intercessors, thus denying the Sou,
not indeed as a mediator, but as the true and only Mediator.
Again, Scripture represents the Son as having all power to for--
give; Acts v. 31, “ Him hath God exalted with his right hand
to bo a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sinswhile the Church of Rome includes many
persons and things as the ground of absolution. The following
is the form of absolution authorised by her : “ The passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of
all saints,.the good that thou hast done, and the evil thou hast
suffered, be to thee for remission of sins, for increase of grace,
and the reward of life eternal. Amen." (See Ordo Adm. Sacr.,
p. 58; Dublin, 1835. Quoted by O'Sullivan on the Apostacy,
p. 407.) Here it is judicially pronounced that, of hundreds of
thousands to whose merits a sinner must trust for pardon, the
Son of God is one; thus denying him as the sole fountain from
whom absolution flows. The Church of Rome thus denies the
Son in his offices, and thus fulfils the character of the Antichrist.
In 1 John iv. 2, 3. we read, “Hereby know ye the spirit of
God. Every spirit that confesseth that
* fi
q - NOV $92


the flesh is of God: and every spirit that confesseth not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God; and this is that
spirit of Antichrist.” The next characteristic, then, of Antichrist
is, that he does not confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh.
It was no new thing for God to appear in human form; and in
Scripture things are constantly called that which they appear to
be. Thus three men appeared to Abraham (Gen. xviii. 1) as he
sat in the tent door, and it is manifest that one at least of these
mysterious personages was God; sec vs. 13, 17, 20, &c. A
man wrestled with Jacob (Gen xxxii. 24), and we lind the
person thus named was God, for Jacob says, v. 30, “ I have seen
God face to face.” A man appeared to Joshua, Josh. v. 13,
who is not only called “ the captain of the Lord’s host,” but,
c. vi, 2, “the Lord.” So Judges xiii. He of whom Manoah
said, v. 22, “We have seen God,” is called, v, 6, 10, 11, and
14, a man. And Nebuchadnezzar, when looking (Han. hi. 25),
into the fiery furnace, says, “ Lo, I see four men loose, walking
in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of
the fourth is like the Son of God.” But all these persons were
men only in appearance. They were not limited by human laws,
but when their commission of mercy was accomplished, vanished
as they came. We may therefore give our Blessed Lord the
name man, in the same sense in which it is given to these
gracious visitants, and yet utterly deny the w hole mystery of the
incarnation; and it is in reference to this distinction that our
Blessed Lord calls himself the Son of Man, reminding us that he
not only assumed the appearance of humanity for a season, but
that, born of a woman, he was our brother in the full reality of
our nature. Our inquiry then is, does the Church of Borne
confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh ? flhat she gives
Him the name man is undeniable; but does she acknowledge
him to be a man in those things which belong to human nature ?
It is evident that our Blessed Lord, born through the supernatural
interference of God, without human father, could be allied to the
human family only through his mother, by whom he was the Son
of David, the Son of Abraham, and the promised seed; and
therefore if she were originally more than woman, or if the birth
of the Saviour through her instrumentality raised her to a semi-
deific position, then his manhood must be a something utterly
distinct from manhood in its ordinary sense. So that whatever
elevates the virgin mother above womankind, is a withdrawing of
the confession that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh.
Now in the following passage we find her expressly designated
as the “ Mother of God.” It is not here intended to deny the
pre-existence of Christ, or to state that a new God was formed
from the Virgin’s womb ; but there is the blending the divine
and human natures, or rather representing the manhood of Christ


as a divine thing, which the expression of the Apostle requires,
“ Preserve us, O Lord! we beseech thee, from all dangers of
body and soul; and by the intercession of the glorious and
blessed Mary, the ever-virgin mother of God, of • thy blessed
apostles Peter and Paul, of blessed N., and of all the saints,
grant us, in thy mercy, health and peace; that all adversities and
errors being removed, thy church may serve thee with a pure and
undisturbed devotion/" —Missal 139 —4th Sunday after Epiphany.
In the following prayers she is addressed as a goddess, or at
least as one who holds a middle position between God and man.
“V. Through thee, O Mother of God, life which had been
lost was given to us; who didst receive progeny from heaven,
and didst bring forth for the world a Saviour. Alleluia.
“ Offset. Remember, O virgin mother, to speak good
things for us in the sight of God, that he may turn away
his anger from us/"
“ Secret. Sanctify, we beseech thee, O Lord, the offerings
we make, and by the most salutary intercession of blessed Mary,
the Mother of God, grant that they may be beneficial to us/"
“ Comm. O Mary, most worthy Queen of the world, ever
virgin, intercede for our peace and salvation, who didst bring
forth Christ our Lord, the Saviour of all mankind/"
“P. Comm. We beseech thee, O Lord, may the venerable
intercession of thy most glorious mother, and ever Virgin Mary,
assist us, that it may mercifully unite us in concord whom it
has loaded with perpetual benefits/"—Missal 13. V. M. of Mount
Carmel, p. 680.
And again on the vigil of the Assumption, p. 707, we have
the following prayer:—
“O God, who wast pleased to make choice of the Virgin
Mary, and in her to dwell for a time , grant we beseech thee,
that being secure under her protection, we may with comfort
solemnize her festival."" Then we have the following : “ May
the prayers, 0 Lord, of the Mother of God, render our offerings
acceptable to Thee, whom thou didst take out of this present
world that she might intercede with Thee for the pardon of our
sins."" In the Rreviary, in which every Romish priest is
required to read daily, we read the following prayer, addressed
to the Virgin Mother. Less. G. page 43. “ Let that be excu-
sable through thee, which we urge through thee; let that be
attainable which we ask with a faithful mind. Receive what we
offer; give what we ask. Excuse what we fear, for thou art
the oidy hope of sinners. Through thee we hope for the pardon
of our sins: and in thee, most blessed, is expectation of our
rewards. Holy Mary, succour the wretched; assist the w r eak ;
comfort the mourners; pray for the people; mediate for the
clergy; intercede for the devoted female sex. Let all feel thy
help who celebrate thy holy conception/"


And again, p. 67, “ Hail! Star of the Sea, bountiful Mother
of God, and always a virgin, auspicious Gate of Heaven.*
Deceiving that f hail 5 from the mouth of Gabriel, establish us
in peace, changing the name of Eve. Loose from the guilty
their chains. Give light to the blind; drive away our ills ;
demand for us all good things ; show thyself to be His mother ;
let him receive our prayers through thee, who for us hath borne
to be thy Son. O matchless Virgin, mild to all, make us,
delivered from our faults, mild and chaste. Grant us a pure
life; prepare a safe way, that, looking to Jesus, we may always
rejoice together/’
Here wc have distinct prayers addressed to one mighty to
save. “Give light,” u Drive away,” “Demand,” “Show thy-
self to be his mother,” &c., clearly as having right to demand.
Now, we do not ask are these assumptions right or wrong, but
we ask, do those who use them regard Mary as a mere woman ?
It is manifest that she who is thus addressed, either always w T as
' above the human race, or that by the dwelling in her of the
Godhead, she became Divine—rather the recipient of divinity,
than the transmitter of humanity. Again, p. 133, “Let us say
a few things, also, upon this name (Mary) which, being inter-
preted, is called Jthe Star of the Sea, and is very suitably applied
to the Virgin Mother, for she herself is fitly compared to a star,
because, as without the corruption of itself, a star emits its owm
ray; so without detriment of herself, the Vigin has begotten a
Son. Nor does the ray diminish from the star its own brightness,
neither does the Son from the Virgin her own integrity. She is
therefore the noble Star arisen out of Jacob, whose ray illumi-
nates the whole world ; whose splendour, also, shines brightly
in heaven, and penetrates to hell.” We do not profess to
understand these words ; particularly those marked in Italics ;
but certainly they do not describe the way in which a mother
in the ordinary course of things, transmits her being to
her child; and let it be remembered that, though the con-
ception was miraculous, the gestation and birth were natural.
Those, therefore, who use such language—and it abounds in
liomish formularies—do not “confess that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh.”
Again, a real man is distinguished from one who has the form
and name without the properties, by his being bound by certain
laws which chain him down to that state of being in which he
was formed, or which he has assumed; and thus the prophet
Isaiah after telling us. Is. vii. J 4, 15, that “A virgin shall
conceive and bear a son,” goes on to say “ butter and honey
shall he eat,” that is, he shall be fed as children in Palestine
commonly were. And thus the sacred writers tell us, he was
“ wrapped in swaddling clothes,” that u He increased in wisdom


and stature/’ —-not only that he hungered, thirsted, was weary,
W r ept and groaned, but they open out the secret state of mind,
and the discipline He underwent. Heb. v. 7, “ Who in the
days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplica-
tions, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to
save him from death, and was heard in that lie feared; though
he were a son, yet learned he obedience by the things which lie
suffered. And being made perfect, he became the Author of
eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.” If, then, we
predicate that of the flesh of Christ which cannot be predicated
r .;ordinary human nature, we withdraw' the confession that he
:;come in the flesh. Now, there is no point on which the
Church of Home is so explicit, or so honest, as the doctrine of
trausubstantiation. Protestants have gone on for ages charging
'Romanists with absurdity for holding this doctrine; and
Humanists have indignantly and justly repelled the charge.
Protestants have asserted that none but fools could receive
such an opinion, while in fact we see some of the greatest minds
the "world has ever produced, maintaining it as firmly as the
most ignorant devotee. Why is this ? Protestants know that
Jesus Christ is man, and that, therefore, his body is limited by
the laws which govern created things. Homanists regard the
body of Jesus as a Divine thing, and therefore rightly attribute
to it the attributes of Deity. It is in all places at the same
time—consumed and unconsumable. Thus in what is called
“ A Preparatory Prayer before Mass,” Missal p. 34, it is said,
Prostrate in spirit, at the foot of thy holy altar, I adore thee,
0 Almighty God! and firmly believe that the Mass, at which
1 am going to assist, is the sacrifice of the body and blood of
thy Son, Christ Jesus. O grant that I may assist thereat with '
the attention, respect, and awe due to such august mysteries ;
and that by the merits of the victim there offered for me, I
myself may become an agreeable sacrifice to Thee, who livest
and reignest with the same Son and Holy Ghost, one God,
world without end. Amen.” Again, in the service Corpus
Christi, Missal p. 435, we have the following:—
“ Caro cibus, sanguis potus :
Manet tamen Christas totus,
, Sub utraque specie,
A sumene non com-isus,
IN on contractus, non divisus
Integer accipitnr,
Surait imus, sumuut mille ;
Quantum isti, tantum ille
Kcc sumplus consumitur.”
Which is thus translated—
“ His deified true flesh and precious blood,
Immortal and immortalizing food,
Is meat and drink indeed, and wholly thine,
Under the sep’rate forms of bread and wine.


Impassable the victim we adore.
Unaltered by our touch, nor broke, nor tore;
But Jesus whole, in veiled majesty,
Each one receives!—stupendous prodigy!
Let thousands feed —be Thou the only guest,
As much dost thou receive as all the rest;
Unnumbered thousands eat —yet still they leave
The unconsumed whole they did receive.
And again—
“ Tantum esse, sub fragmento.
Quantum toto tegitur,
Nulla rei fit scissuva
Signi tantum fit fractura ;
Qua nec status, nee statura
Siguati minuitur ”
Which is translated—
“ Whenever this blessed sacrament shall lie
In different parcels broke before your eye,
Then waver not; remember there remains
Under each fragment what the whole contains.
The same sweet Jesus, who in glory reigns.”
“ The hidden Jewel no fracture can invade,
’Tis only on the outward species made;
No stroke impairs its nature or its state,
Or the thing signified can violate,”
His “ deified flesh” is decisive, that in the view of the Church
of Rome, the flesh of Christ is something very different from
that which the Apostle calls “The flesh.” To the same purpose
we read in the Breviary, p. 88, “ Thus he is eaten by the
faithful, but by no means lacerated—nay, rather, the sacrament
being divided, he remains entire under every particle of the
division.” But it may be said, that those things though highly
inconsistent, do not amount to an actual denial. True, but the
words of the Apostle seem to be written with a view to this
very point. He does not say, “ Every spirit that denieth,” but
“ Every spirit that confesseth not,” and surely such language
as we have been considering is a positive withdrawal of that
confession.
We have seen, then, that by the language held concerning,
or addressed to the Virgin Mother, she is rather regarded as
being exalted to Deity by the transmission of the Son of God
through her flesh, than as having communicated her humanity
to her child. And again, that in the doctrine of transubstan-
tiation, assertions are made concerning the body of Christ,
which are possible and rational concerning a divine thing, but
which are utterly inconsistent with the essential attributes of
created existence. And we find, therefore, that the Church of
Rome exhibits that most striking characteristic of Antichrist:
she “ confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh.”
But Antichrist is not a system, but a person : we have ascer-
tained where to look for him, and it now remains for us to


examine his name, and thus to find who precisely he is. When
the Greek preposition anti, which signifies against, is joined with
an English word, it represents some person or thing opposed to
the word with which the particle is joined: thus, anti-trinitarian,
signifies any person opposed to the doctrine of the Trinity—
anti-revolutionary, signifies anything which is opposed to revolu-
tion—anti-church, anything which is opposed to the church.
But when united to a Greek word, the signification is much
more limited and distinct. I have examined in a classical
lexicon upwards of 650 forms of words, containing fully 300
distinct words in which this particle occurs, and except anti-
patros, which is interpreted the opponent of a father; and
anti-theos, which has one meaning out of three given, as an
opposer of God, it appears that the compound term requires
that the full signification of the simple word shall be transferred
to it. A few examples will, illustrate this better than any
attempt at explanation. Thus—
VaXfios, a does not signify that which is
opposed to a psalm, but the opposing psalm—the psalm or
hymn sung on the opposite side.
Xoprjyds, the leader of a dance— is not an opponent
of dancing, but the leader of the dance on the opposite side.
&i\6a-o(j)os, a philosopher— dvrifyiKdcTofyos, is not the enemy of
philosophers, but the philosopher who stands up in opposition.
ndXtj, a city —dvrlnoXu i s not the enemy of a city, but the
opposite city.
Srparriyos, a general —dvTKTTpaTTjyos is not a mutineer, but the
general who leads the opposing army.
Thus, then, as the durtyaXpor must be a psalm; the dvnxdppyos
the leader of a dance; dvrifyikoa-otyos, a philosopher ; dvrindkis-,
a city; dvriarpaTriyos, a general, so in the same manner,, dvn.
xpia-rds must be a Christ: not merely one who opposes Christ,
but one who claims his office—a counter-anointed one. But
there is another power sometimes given by the particle, which
must not be overlooked; vnaros, signifies a consul— dvQvnaros,
signifies a vice-consul; therefore the may be a vice-
christ. Here then we are at once sent to look for one who
assumes the power which resides in Christ. Now, having found
that the Church of Rome exhibits doctrinally those very features
which belong to the antichristian system, w r e have to inquire,,
does her Bishop put forth claims which serve to identify him
with the predicted opposer of the truth.
Now the power of Christ as Head of the Church mainly
consists in these three things —that He can bind or loose whom,
and what He will; that He is the only lawgiver; and that He
alone is the Judge before whose tribunal we must stand to be
admitted to heaven or excluded from it, as He sees right. Now
the power to bind and loose is openly and unreservedly claimed
by the Bishop of Rome, so as to make evidence on that subject


quite unnecessary, and thus lie claims an office as Christ.
Again, it was said of our blessed Lord to Moses, (Deut. xviii.
18.) u 1 will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren,
like unto thee.” Now Moses was the Jewish lawgiver, and
tbough succeeded by men whom God delighted to honour—men
commissioned to rule, to tread down the enemies of Israel, to
warn, exhort, foretell, expostulate, we never find one law pro-
mulgated by them; —no one commandment added to the deca-
logue; not one ceremony or typical action added to, or cut off
from, the code which Moses left. If there were additions made
by the Jewish people, our blessed Lord denounces them in the
strongest language which man could use. But with respect to
Christ it has not been so. If the Bishop of Koine is to be
believed, he is himself the living, speaking tribunal which not
only decides concerning the laws already given, but has full
power to change these and to frame new ones. Another
anointed one has risen in Christ's place to fill His chair. Again,
if there be one of the privileges of Christ dearer to Him than
another, as the self-existent God or as the merciful and loving
Saviour, it is that for which He came, and suffered, and died,
the power of admitting to blessedness the souls for which He
shed His blood. Yet here we find the Bishop of Koine assuming
to himself that marvellous power, (O'Sullivan on the Apostacy,
p. 455.) “To the honour of the Holy and undivided Trinity,
the exaltation of the Catholic faith and increase of Christianity,
by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, the blessed apostles
Peter and Paul, and our own, after a mature deliberation,
repeated invocation of the divine succour, and counsel of our
venerable brethren the Cardinals of the Holy Kornan Church,
the Patriarchs and Archbishops dwelling in our city, — We
DECLARE THE BLESSED N. N. TO BE SAINTS, AND ENROL THEM
IN THE CATALOGUE OF SAINTS, ENJOINING THE UNIVERSAL
CHURCH DEVOUTLY TO WORSHIP THEIR MEMORY YEARLY ON
their natal day.’' The saints are considered in the Church
of Kome to be fitting objects of worship and our intercessors
with God. Here, then, is one who yesterday was a poor creature
like ourselves, to-day a certain person has issued his fiat and he
is raised to heaven, and thenceforth becomes the object of the
world’s worship. Can the man who works this wonder be
accounted less than Christ? Surely here is one claiming to
exercise all the power of the Christ.
But he who can make a god will not be satisfied with less
honours for himself than for those whom he has exalted, and
therefore we may naturally expect to see him claiming divine
honours for himself. And so it is in fact. Immediately after
the consecration the new Pope is three times adored. The same
writer we have quoted observes, p. 469, “ Upon three several
occasions the Pope is adored; and that nothing should be wanted
to render the accomplishment of this ceremonial complete, on


one of these occasions he is seated while receiving the adoration
on the grand altar of St. Peter.” “ I object not,” observes Mr.
Eustace, in the spirit of his order as a Roman Catholic priest,
“to the word adoration, &c., &c. But why should the altar be
made his footstool ? The altar —the beauty of holiness, the
throne of the victim lamb, the mercy-seat of the temple of
Christianity.” Why should the altar be converted into the
footstool of a mortal.’"—Classical Tour, vol. iv., appendix p. 396,
Leghorn edition.
Here, then, is all we looked for in the counter-anointed one :
but he has another claim which makes the application of the
name more perfectly accurate; he is the Vicegerent of Christ, or
Vice-Christ.
Two arguments have been adduced in answer to the plain
evidence here brought forward. Antichrist is, by a course of
argument which we cannot now follow, and which may be in
many ways correct, identified with other personages spoken of in
other portions of the prophetic Word, who are represented as
rising in the last or latter days; and it is argued that this
cannot apply to the Bishops of Rome, whose usurpations com-
menced 1400 years ago. To answer this it is only necessary to
look at the common language of Scripture. The whole of the
Christian Dispensation is spoken of (Heb. 1., 2.) as “the last
days/" and St. John, in the very epistle from which most of
these statements are taken, sajs, (1 John ii. 18.) “It is the last
time,"’ and adduces the existence of many antichrists, the fore-
runners of the Antichrist, as an evidence that it is the last time.
How, then, can we argue, that he who appeared more than 300
years after the apostles" death did not come in the last times.
In fact, it seems God’s purpose to reveal to his people the order
and course of events, and to conceal from them, except under
peculiar circumstances, times and seasons; as he said, Acts i. 7,
“It is not for you to know the times or seasons which the
Bather hath put in his own power."" It is in prophecy as in
history. The book of Genesis occupies upwards of 1600 years;
the two first chapters of Exodus about 200 years, and the
remaining writings of Moses about 40 years. All arguments,
therefore, drawn from our imaginary knowledge of the length of
time allowed to certain works are necessarily inconclusive.
Again, it has been said, Antichrist is an individual; but the
Bishops of Rome are many, a succession of men. Now this
objection likewise arises from ignorance of the common usage of
scripture language, where persons identified by position, circum-
stances, character, or office are regarded as one, whether they
exist contemporaneously or in succession. Thus God says to
Pharoah, Exodus iv, 22, 23, “ Israel is my son, even my first-
born, and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, 1 will slay thy
son, even thy firstborn."" The nation of Israel with the firstborn
of Egypt each being spoken of as one. Again, in Daniel ii.,


where Daniel is expounding Nebuchadnezzar’s first dream; the
king having seen an image whose head was of gold, his breast of
silver, his body and thighs of brass, and his feet of iron, the
prophet says to him, v. 38, “Thou art this head of gold;” and
afterwards goes on to explain the other portions of the image as
representing three separate powers which should rise after him—
the Persian, Grecian, and Roman Empires —and these con-
sisting of many successions of Kings are marked in the same
class with the head which is asserted to be an individual, “ Thou
art this head of gold.” So in Daniel viii. a goat is seen with a
single horn between his eyes, which being broken, four horns rise l
up in its place. In explaining the vision, the angel says v. 21,
22, “ And the rough goat is the king of Grecia, and the great
horn that is between his eyes is the first king. Now that being
broken, whereas four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand
up out of the nation, but not in his power.” Alexander the
Great, then, an individual, was the great horn, but after him
arose four powers symbolized by a similar emblem, two of which
included the long lines of the Ptolemies and the Selencidae; thus
showing us that whether a dynasty consists of an individual or a
succession of individuals continuing through many ages, it is
expressed by the same image, and may therefore be spoken of in
the same language. Again, Heb. ix. 7, we read, “ Into the
second went the High Priest alone.” What High Priest ?
Every High Priest from Aaron to the destruction of the temple
by Nebuchadnezzar; the succession is regarded as one, and
therefore the apostle, in contradistinction to the many priests who
ministered in the outer sanctuary, says “ The High Priest.” It
is curious that the Church of Rome should have claimed this
unity in succession which the apologists now deny her. A
speaker at the Council of Trent used these words: “These
things, that is to be a key-keeper and a pastor, being perpetual
offices, must be conferred on a perpetual person; that is, not
upon the first only, but upon all Ins succession. So the Bishop
of Rome, from St. Peter to the end of the world, is true absolute
monarch, with full and total power and jurisdiction, and the
church is subject to him as it was to Christ.”
It would be impossible to follow in the course of a lecture, all
the strange things that have been written concerning this pre-
dicted enemy of the church, but two views have been so com-
monly urged that it is necessary to notice them : one, that he is
to be an open impugner of the name and office of Christ; the
other that he is to be the head of a mighty secular empire.
The first has been sufficiently answered already, and indeed
requires only the attentive reading of the verses where the
name occurs to show that Antichrist must have the semblance
of a prophetic character, and of a spirit sent from God, sufficient
to ensnare and to require to be tested by a still professedly
Christian people. The other rests on no semblance of scrip-


tural foundation; save the oppressions and cruelty which, in
other parts of the Bible, are ascribed to some persecutor who is
supposed to be identified with Antichrist. It is foreign to our
purpose to examine those prophecies; but we may remark in
passing, that a desire to count as nothing all that was done and suf-
fered, and all the patient endurance of faithful witnesses in former
days, and to exalt our own age and generation into being the all in
all of prophecy, the focus in which all the rays of inspired premoni-
tion centre, seems to be the great instrument of Satan for blinding
our eyes to the real character of the enemy who has been so
long oppressing and wearing out the saints of the Most High.
If we look at the testimony of St. John, we shall scarcely be able
to reconcile the idea of a mighty conqueror destroying all creeds,
and by the sword enforcing an open and unreserved worship to
centre in himself, with the yarning to try the spirits whether
they be of God, and then giving as a test that which concerns,
not the might and majesty and awful glory of Messiah, but that
which concerns his relationship to us —His coming in the flesh.
Indeed, those who speak of Antichrist as an infidel conqueror
generally borrow the name from St, John, and then deal with
the subject ms though the beloved disciple had never written.
It is well for us to beware of infidelity; unbelief is the
crowning sin of the world. It governs the world, and lurks in
the hearts of the children of God, dimming their enjoyments,
and defiling all their actions : but infidelity in its nakedness
cannot, as a system, retain its hold upon mankind. True, in
the thoughtlessness of youth, in the buoyancy of health and
animal spirits ; the intoxication of prosperity and pleasure in
the pride of intellect, or the madness of despair; it may silence
the universal testimony to the truth of Revelation, and stifle
the remonstrances of conscience ; but there are hours of thought
—hours of sickness and sadness —hours of anguish and loneli-
ness —hours of trembling and apprehension, when death is
approaching with sure, but silent tread; when the mere nega-
tion of a creed will not satisfy, and when the idea of an endless
sleep seems scarcely less terrible than Judgment itself. I hen
the still small voice which cannot be silenced the whispers
which are heard, though rolling thunders may be disregarded,
tells us we have an immortal spirit—-tells us of God and judg-
ment ; and suggests the appalling question, what must be our
fate if peradventure Christianity be indeed the truth, and our
boastings be the fable. No, it is only when unbelief assumes
the character of false belief that infidelity can hold its dominion
over man. Undisguised infidelity is the plain, undiluted poison
which man sickens at and rejects. Popery is the drugged wine-
cup, sweet, sparkling, refreshing, which we madly quaff, and
return to with aggravated thirst; less able to resist the more it
intoxicates; and needing its refreshing coolness to our lips the


more, because its poisons have inflamed the brain, and withered
all the vital functions. For ages after ages have nations been
made drunk with the wine of her deceivings, but when one
people in the frenzy of temporary infidelity wrote the words,
“There is no-God;” the very announcement seemed to startle
the nation —to recall them to their senses; and the system which
for a few years under the reign of terror had deluged the
country in blood, rapidly passed away. But the system that
addresses itself not merely to the perverted intellect, but to the
corrupt heart of man; which speaks to his human hopes and
fears; which gratifies his passions, and yet calms his terrors;
gives him license when passion is strong, and penances, when
conscience asserts her supremacy; presents to him somewhat of
Christ, but gives him other mediators, and other saviours more
suited to a carnal mind ; which borrows from Scripture its clear
insight into human nature, and yet modifies its sublimer truths
to an earthly and external materialism ; —such a system is emi-
nently calculated to retain its hold on man such as he is. W e
may laugh at its absurdities; but in doing so we forget, that if
Pome has her absurdities, human nature has hers, and that the
one suits itself to the other; so that, like a garment, it only fits
the more closely, and is worn the more easily. Let us not,
then, in looking for a future and avowed enemy, overlook the
deceiver who is at our very doors, and is sapping our spiritual
life away. Popery is an ever-present evil pressing round us on
every side, and not the less dangerous that it belongs to the
human heart. And here let us remember, that a man may be
loudly protesting against the Pope at Pome, and yet bowing
down before the Pope enshrined within his own bosom. The
power that supersedes Christ —that wilfully nullifies His Word,
and sets itself up as a judge of what the will of God must be,
is natural to every corrupt heart. 0 let us beware of this !
But to return. St. John tells us that even in his day there
were many Antichrists ; the spirit had thus early manifested
itself which afterwards appeared in the assumptions of Pome
and her bishop. It is the spirit which shrouds the real
character of Christ and his nearness to his people, and which,
having succeeded in withdrawing men from the contemplation
of him as the present help and Saviour of his people, fixes their
eyes on the clergy, as commissioned by Him to do that for
them which He will not, and they cannot accomplish, without
such intervention. So that they, instead of being the wit-
nesses for a present Saviour, who walketh in the midst of the
churches, are the representatives of an absent Saviour, who is
only to be known or approached through them. Thus is the
real present humanity of Christ kept out of sight, and an Anti
or vice-Christ set up to comfort the church for the want of one.


concerning whom it may be said, “ We are members of his
body, of his flesh and of his bones.” Wherever this spirit is
found, and under whatever name it may appear, or in whatever
age or section of the church, there is that spirit of Antichrist,
“of which ye have heard that it should come, and even now
already is it in the world/’ Here, then, we find that the spirit
of Antichrist is not confined to one system, though there the
one great enemy is developed.
We are told of a power which all shall “ worship,” whose
names are not written in the “ Lamb’s book of life;” if, therefore,
we desire security, let us see that our names are found in that
book. It is not enough for us to protect one side, and leave
the other unguarded. Let us not deceive ourselves by professions
and protestations, by names or forms or ceremonies; but let us
see that we are indeed numbered among the spiritual children of
God then we may defy the allurements, the deceptions, or the
terrors of the evil one.
Oh may he, the Saviour, King, Creator, Redeemer, —may that
Christ, who was once in the full reality of our nature, a despised
man upon earfh, but who now sits at the right hand of God, —
may he send forth his Holy Spirit from on high, and grant that
we may possess a right to the name by which we are called—
Christians, the anointed ones; not the counter-anointed ones,
who claim an equal participation in the work and glory of our
great Master; but, as the anointing oil which was poured on the
head of Aaron went down to the skirts of his garments, even so
may the unction from the Holy One, which rested on our great
Head, descend on us, marking our identity with him, and pouring
on us the hallowed savour of his name and character, —that we,
as members of Christ, may be partakers of the blessed spirit
which rested upon him, which alone can separate us unto God, a
holy and a peculiar people.
HOGH M'COLL, PRINTER, m BANI*'Br” OFFICE* LA TROBB STREET,


T4^
eiSkto
FUSSI
A/ op.vm


L INStITIT PASTEER IWLfiERIE


I •
j
