

pgTi i 1 1'» ~ !i n.. ■ ■Y.mKi'i
,Kx>- 1
I ’ THE
£>&ctcse&
0
ISartmrat:
G. WHALAN, PRINTER, HOWICK STREET
1888.
PROPHET OF SAN FRANCISCO
By Frank Cotton.




THE PROPHET OF SMI FRANCISCO.
THE INAUGURAL ADDRESS
OP THE
LAND NATIONALIZATION ASSOCIATION OF
NEW SOUTH WALES,
DELIVERED AT FORBES, FEBRUARY, 1887,
By Krank: Cotton.
*——»
#* N the darkest periods that the world has ever seen,
when, rent by discord and confounded by moral and
social problems, life threatened to become unen-
durable—amidst stagnant and decaying civilizations
even (the darkest and most hopeless condition that
-y social organization can reach) —there has always
come to the rescue of humanity, in some form or other, the
hero, sage, or reformer, who, with bold outspoken denuncia-
tion of existing wrong, and words of hope and courage for
the right, has attempted, more or less successfully, to stem the
tide of evil. Such men were Mahomet, Luther, Cromwell,
Kingsley, Carlyle, and many others, whose names involun-
tarily spring to our lips, with the name of ONE, greatest and
purest of all, whom they crucified.
But to-night I propose to speak, not of dead heroes and
sages, and their brave battles against falsehood and wrong in
days of old, but to come down to the living present, to one who
has faced, single-handed, the complex evils and tremendous
social problems of the nineteenth century; who is fighting to-
day head and shoulders above his fellows for the grand old
principles of liberty, truth, and justice, against more potent


and powerful forms of tyranny, falsehood,
the dead ages ever saw—of Henry George, hero, sage, and
“ Prophet of San Francisco.”
To gain some idea of the man and his mission, we must
first glance at the problem he faced, the evil he is endeavour-
ing to combat, and the dangers that menace our modern
civilization. Could any thinking man one hundred years ago
have foreseen the marvellous labour-saving and wealth-pro-
ducing inventions of the present century, he would surely
have thought that the golden age was at last dawning upon
humanity. Had he been a true patriot his heart would have
leaped and his nerves thrilled with the rapture of one who,
from a mountain-top, sees just a-head of a drought-stricken,
famishing caravan, the living waters laugh and glisten in the
sunshine. With steam and electricity bending submissively
to man’s will, the one harnessed as his beast of burden, the
other speeding as the swift-footed messenger of his thoughts;
with the grander scale of production that these discoveries
would make possible; with the certainty of a hundredfold
increase of wealth, the vision of the future would have been
all sunshine: and with such a vision before his eyes, plainly
in the sight of the watcher on the mountain-top, would a new
and greater civilization have arisen. He would have beheld
the new forces elevating society from its very foundations,
lifting the poorest labourer above the possibility of want, ex-
empting every worker from the traditional curse of brutalizing
toil, and making life a holiday, in which every high quality
and noble impulse could have scope to grow.
So much for the anticipation. But we will turn to the
reality. The new forces have become ours, the enormous in-
crease of wealth has been real and permanent, it has called
into existence great cities, and given to individual members
of the community gigantic fortunes, but in all else the new
forces have failed in their mission. Care and toil have not
been banished ; on the contrary, the suffering, brutality, and
crime, that spring from despair and want, have increased
rather than decreased. In the great centres of our boasted
civilization, under the shadow of magnificent mansions and
costly churches, hungry infants moan and weary mothers
weep. We have reached what appears to be the highest
tide-mark of art, literature, and science, yet everywhere


thousands of festering, starving human wrecks ask, and
often ask in vain, for the crumbs that fall from the table of
Dives.
The impadt of the new forces, instead of lifting society from
its foundations, seems to have struck our social system mid-
way as with a wedge. Those above the point of impadthave
been swiftly and surely raised towards opulence and luxury :
whilst the toilers beneath have been as steadily and surely
crushed down. The millionaire and the pauper, the aristocrat
and the tramp, are the natural products of our present social
system, whilst the burden of the maintenance of both these
classes falls with ever increasing weight upon the real workers
and toilers of the community. The final outcome of our unex-
ampled increase in national wealth, of our improved laws, our
increased knowledge, our vast strides in scientific invention, is
this, that in no savage land, amid no barbarous tribe, can be
found such utter wretchedness, such degrading poverty, as
falls to the lot of the poor in civilized Christian London, the
home of the British and Foreign Bible Society, the metro-
polis of the world. That which is true of London is true of
all great cities in civilized communities. That the remedy
for this awful universal failure of increased knowledge to alle-
viate human misery, for the increase of want with the
increase of wealth lies deeper than any popular superficial
remedy can reach, can be easily shown by the fadt that the
weariness, sorrow, and heart-sickening pressure of hard times
is felt alike in freetrade and protected countries; where stand-
ing .armies are maintained and where they are not; where
monarchy reigns supreme and where republicanism holds
sway. Given the highest tidemark of art, literature, and
science, the universal correlative is this, that for the great
majority of real workers nothing remains but the everlasting
grind of human toil from the cradle to the grave. These
fadts plainly show us that under all our social institutions
there must be some tremendous social wrong.
Such men as Charles Kingsley, Thomas Carlyle, Paxton
Hood, and John Stuart Mill, with warm-hearted human
sympathy and high-souled patriotism,- bent their giant intel-
lects to the task of solving this problem of the persistence of
poverty amidst increasing wealth. They faced the question,
but in vain was their toil: the solution was be} T ond their


Try the Sydney Boot Company
FOE CHEAP BOOTS AND SHOES.
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
CHARLES CROW,
GENERAL IMPORTER, RANKEN-ST., FORBES
GROCERY. DRAPERY, CROCKERY, IRONMONGERY, ETC.
Agent for Hudson Brothers’ Farming Implements.
W R, STONE,
House Painter Sign Writer
KS’Any Colour Mixed Ready for Use.
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
Plants, Shrubs, Fruit and Ornamental Trees,
CUT FLOWERS, & POT PLANTS,
For Sale at IGNATIUS BELLS,
LACHLAN ST.. FORBES,
MANSON & CO.,
IMPORTERS OF
DRAPERY, MILLINERY, AfiD CLOTHING,
LACHLAN STREET, FORBES.


grasp. That the cause alike of want and luxury lay in the
unequal distribution of wealth they could plainly see; but
how to alter that tendency to inequality they utterly failed
to discover. The abolition of monarchial institutions, the
organization of labour, the spread of popular education, were
hopefully suggested by these authors as partial remedies;
but, in the clearer light of the past forty years, we see plainly
that partial remedies cannot help us. To our nineteenth
century civilization is given the old problem that in all ages
high states of civilization have had to face; and we must
solve that problem, or perish, as perished the mighty national
systems of bygone ages. Beneath our feet we can feel the
shudders and throes that presage a mighty volcanic outburst.
The new forces are at hand, that must lift us heavenward to
a higher plane of civilization than the world has ever known,
or hurl us down to ruin, death, and social putrefaction.
Beneath the shadows of our cathedrals and churches, in the
reeking alleys of those human styes that we call great cities,
are gathering swarms of more relentless Huns and fiercer
Vandals, who shall sweep us back into anarchy and ruin, in
one tremendous outburst of retribution, for centuries of
wrong—unless that wrong be righted.
To a working printer of San Francisco this problem pre-
sented itself with all its apalling force. Amidst hardship and
privation, through days of weariness and toil, the thought
was ever uppermost in his mind. The misery that surrounded
the lot of the workers in his own city, the steady universal
tendency of the rich to become richer, and the poor poorer,
perplexed and saddened him; but he did not despair. Of
one thing he was certain—that the remedy must lie within
the grasp of humanity; it must be discoverable: he could
not believe that the fault lay in the Creator’s plan. Actuated
by the two highest motives that human nature knows of,
faith in God and love to man, the working-man stepped into
the breach where the philosophers had fallen. In the simple
strength of that faith and love, he faced his task, his one aim
to find out the law of God’s justice and human rights; and
then to follow that law, whithersoever it might lead. Care-
fully and patiently he pursued his investigations, until he
grasped what appeared to be the clue to the mystery. With
renewed hope and dauntless courage, he followed the clue


through many a winding maze, into abyssmal depths where
never plummet line of thought had sounded —until at last the
central truth stood revealed, that society had been based
ipon a false foundation; that the increase of want with
ncrease of wealth was due, not to any discordant element in
mr system of social progress, but it was the inevitable
mtcome of that system; that the structure we call Chnstian
ivilization was based, not upon God's justice, but man’s
njustice, and must be rebuilt, or it would fall. Upon private
iroperty in land we have built up the glory and splendour
>f our magnificent civilization, and under the foundation
stones of the structure lie crushed the bodies; and souls of
nillions who have been robbed of their Godgiven heritage,
in the mind and brain of the working printer of San Francisco
he deepest and purest system of political economy that
larth has ever seen was born. By hardest application,
:hrough sleepless nights and days of toil, the book was
written. The next question was —Who would risk its publi-
cation ? After some difficulty, our hero succeeded in making
his arrangement: the book would be published if the plates
were delivered ready for the press. dhe writer set up the
type with his own hands, working at the same time at his
trade to supply the wants of his wife and childien, until at
last his task was accomplished. In September, 1879,
“ Progress and Poverty” appeared, and within five years it
had gone through thirty-two editions, had been translated
into eleven languages, and its readers could be counted by
millions.
The wonderful success of Henry George’s work shows
olainly that, like all true prophets, he has the divine gift of
outting into articulate utterance the thoughts, hopes, and
aspirations of humanity. His fearless challenge, Inulcd in
the teeth of the oppressor and tyrant; his clear insight into
he marvellous working of God’s law in the moral and social
world ; his relentless logic, which cuts through the armour of
sophistry like a tempered sword through a pasteboard helmet,
and, above all, his spotless personal integrity, have made
him what he is—the people’s champion,—and have given
him a rank and title before which the tinsel splendour of
crowned heads pales into insignificance —that of the
uncrowned king of the world s workers.


At the outset, before I go on to consider the bearing and
tendency of Henry George’s theory of land nationalization,
there are some common misapprehensions that it will be neces-
sary to clear away. Many otherwise intelligent and educated
people who have not studied the subject thoroughly, con-
found land nationalism with communism, The formula o
the communist is, “ from each according to his abilities tc
each according to his wants.” A beautiful theory, but onh
workable where there are neither idlers nor thieves. The
land nationalist, with sterner justice, says, “ He who makes
shall have, he who saves shall keep, he who works shall
eat but he relentlessly declares that he who neither makes,
saves, nor works, shall earn his own living or starve. Luxury
shall not revel upon the produce of the labourer’s sweat,
idleness shall not fatten upon the toiler’s earnings. In the
words of the grand old book so professedly admired, and sc
steadfastly ignored by titled drones and coroneted paupers,
“He that will not work, neither shall he eat.’” The rights of
capital (that is, of wealth devoted to the production of more
wealth) to receive its legitimate increase, and of labour to its
full reward, are both upheld by land nationalism. He who
builds a house has a right to either occupy that house
himself, or let it to another; he who plants an orchard, to
eat the fruits or sell them ; but when, under existing social
conditions, a third person, who neither builds nor plants,
claims a share in the increase of capital and the fruits of
labour, leaving to capital the minimum of increase, and tc
the labourer the minimum of subsistence, under the plec
that a particular portion of the planet is his property, the
land nationalist disputes the claim in the name of divine jus
tice and human right. He says the land is the gift of the
Creator to his creature man, not to any privileged class, bu
to all men of every age. The products of labour and capita
alone can or ought to be private property. At the outset, o
course, to many people who have not fully thought out the
question, it will seem that to make land common property
would tend to disorder and anarchy, and the proposal would
be met with the old stock arguments that have been opposed
to every new effort of struggling humanity to rise toward. 1 -
justice and liberty. The repeal of the corn-laws, the aboli-
tion of negro slavery, the Catholic Emancipation Bill, and


I. & W. THOMAS,
GENERAL STOREKEEPERS, IMPORTERS,
—AND
WINE & SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
Street, FORBES.
G. TW 0 GOO D~
LACHLAN ST., FORBES,
Storekeeper & Produce Dealer.
FRUIT, CORN, CHAFF, POTATOES, &c., ON SALE.
HIDES AND SKINS BOUGHT FOR CASH.
: CH ARLE ®.
Rankin-street, Forbes,
Next Schreiber’s Furniture Warehouse.
tS* Orders by Post Promptly A ttended to. jszyj
Auctioneer and General Agent,
NEAR CATHOLIC CHURCH.
ESTABLISHED—IB67.
Wool, Skins, and Produce of all Kinds Bought.
FORBES SOAP COMPANY
TALLOW BOUGHT OR EXCHANGED.
All Orders Promptly Supplied.
SHERIFF STREET, FORBES.


above all the education of the working classes, have all been
met by the determined opposition of the conservative vested
interests, and with the same old cry it will revolutionize society;
“ Crush it down! ” In fatff, if the angel Gabriel were to
come down from heaven tomorrow as a herald of the mil-
lennium, he would be looked upon with great suspicion by
the leaders of society, and probably a “ Treason Felony Bill”
would be hurried through parliament to check the progress
of so dangerous a revolutionist. But this is a digression.
To return to Land Nationalism. To make land common
property, it would not be necessary to resume or confiscate
any land; but simply to take by taxation the rental value of
all land without improvements effected by labour and capital.
By such a measure the monopolist, who holds more land
than he can possibly use, alone would suffer; whilst labour
and capital really used in the production of wealth, would
benefit, as the money raised by such taxation would be
sufficient to defray all our common expenses of government.
Thus labour would be set free, and capital relieved. In
illustration, were the land in this district nationalized, Mr.
Tozer, who upon twelve acres of land has made thousands
of pounds’ worth of permanent improvements, would have to
contribute to the revenue of the state about £6 a year (on a
four per cent, rental on the unimproved value of his land) as
his total share of taxation—a clear gain to him over the
present arrangement of indirect taxation, whilst the selling
value of his property would not be sensibly diminished. But
on the other hand, the land sharks in this and every other
district, who have been steadily monopolizing all the land they
could get hold of, and whose improvements consist principally
of skeleton fences, dummy huts, and hard swearing, would be
considerably out of pocket, and the selling value of their
estates greatly diminished; as they will have to be, if cur
children are to have a chance to live. The principle of Land
Nationalism, extended to land still unsold, would lead to its
being thrown open freely for real use. The struggling farmer or
selector would not be burdened by having to pay a cash price
for his right to live upon this earth. When the price of his
farm exceeded in value all the cost of his improvements, the
rental value of that surplus would go to the state; but the
fruits of his labour, the increase of his capital, would be, as
they ought to be, his own property.


The Land Nationalist regards the law of rent as one of the
nost beautiful and wonderful provisions of nature for the
growing wants of society. The fadt that over and above all
hat is produced by industry and wealth devoted to repro-
ductive purposes, there should be created by the common
abour of all a surplus fund in the shape of land ■values, bears
ipon the face of it the stamp of a divine provision for the
wer-increasing needs of social growth. It is a fund obviously
belonging to society as a whole, by which the common
expenses of government and education could be defrayed,
and provision made for the sick and helpless without the
degradation of alms, simply as a matter of the common right
of each. The world is not so badly organized after all. The
eternal laws, as Matthew Arnold has it, “ make for righteous-
ness.” There is a natural law of perfe(st harmony between
the wants of man and wise provisions of the Creator. It is
we who, by our wilfulness and ignorance, make all the dis-
cords. By the injustice of private property in land the rent
fund which represents our common saving’s bank, is monopo-
lized by a privileged class. The children’s bread is thrown
to the dogs of avarice and luxury. From this perversion of
the good gifts of God, from human ignorance and defiance of
His laws, spring these monstrous and horrible social inequali-
ties which threaten our very existence. Instead of operating
beneficially to all classes as a saving’s bank, rent falls upon
labour and capital like a direct tribute to a hostile power.
As Henry George says, “ Every blow of the hammer, every
stroke of the pick, pays its tribute.” It levies upon the earn-
ings of men who, fathoms under ground, risk their lives, and
those who, over whitening surges, cling to reeling masts. It
sends greed, avarice, and famine howling across our lands
ike hungry wolves; it fills our prisons with men whom
lespair has made reckless, and our streets with girls who,
>ut for it, might have known the pure joys of motherhood ;
- degrades, it embrutes and embitcers, it crushes hope, it
larkens faith, and over the face of “ Our Father in Heaven,”
hrows the shadow of a dark relentless fate. Another common
nisapprehension is, that to nationalize land we must cut our
public estate into such minute fragments that every individuul
shall have a piece. This is not at all necessary. To make
land common property it is simply essential that all lands


shall contribute to the common good. A company of inch
viduals can own a steamship without sawing the vessel h
pieces; a family can have a common interest in a sewin;
machine without each member actually possessing a wheel c
a screw in that machine. To subdivide land in such
fashion would, in our present state of complex organizatior
be a reversion to barbarism. Now, although the savage ha
in many things a decided advantage over his civilize
brother, we, as land nationalists, do not propose to go bach
ward, but onward and upward to a higher plane; and Wi
want to lift all mankind, not privileged classes, to that plane
Our future civilization, if it would endure, must be basec
upon justice, not upon “ The bodies and souls of living men.'
Yet another misapprehension is, that Henry George’s theory
is a war of labour against capital. On the contrary, it is the
only theory of political economy extant which represent:
labour and capital in their true relations,-that of allies, no
foes. Under our present system, as land values rise, botl
wages and interest fall, until the pressure, becoming insup
portable, instead of unitedly attacking their common enemy,
rent, these natural allies quarrel over the meagre pittance lef
after the tribute to land value is deducted from their commoi
earnings. In that conflict capital wastes, but labour starves
Between capital employed in production and labour engagec
in producing, were society rightly organized, no conflict coul
arise ; but, strangely and sadly enough, wealth is too oftej
used to check production for purposes of monopoly, ant
between the monopolist and the labourer, war is right, neces
sary, and inevitable. Land nationalism would benefit botl
the real capitalist and the labourer, but the monopolists wouk
be summarily stopped in the interests of society.
Like all real reformers, Henry George had some idol
breaking to do. All former systems of political economy an.
a great deal of what has passed current as orthodo
Christianity, have been founded upon what is known as th
Malthusian theory, that the natural tendency of population;
to outrun subsistence. A quotation from the works of th
reverend gentleman will not be out of place to show exaCti
what he taught in the names of science and revelation. “Th
universal tendency is to bring into existence beings for whor.
Nature refuses to provide, and who, consequently, have m


James Fraser,
Wholsale & Retail Storekeeper,
COMMERCIAL 'STORES,
LACHLAN STREET, FORBES.
CHARLES KERR,
LACHLAN BUTCHERY,
Rankin-st., Forbes.
J. SCHREIBER,
RANKIN ST., FORBES,
GENERAL STOREKEEPER
And Furniture Warehouseman.
PIANOS AND SEWING MACHINES, for Cash or Terms.
CHARLES COOMBES,
Great Western Coach Factory
BLACKSMITHING WORK OF ALL KINDS.
BUGGY PAINTING, &c.
Mrs. Lewis’s
Stationery, Fancy Goods, ar\d Tobacco
WAREHOUSE,
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
ESTABLISHED 1863.


rightfto any of the existing store of the necessaries of life,
whom she tells, as interlopers, to be gone, and does not hesi-
tate to enforce her mandate by war, pestilence, and famine,
suicide, and the destruction of infant life, social and physical
impurity.” I notice that Mr. Malthus, like most writers of
his school, carefully uses the word nature instead of God in
his theories, probably because he did not like to be personal.
By substituting the name of the Creator for the word nature,
and re-reading his quotation with that alteration, we can
gain a better idea of what a message of eternal selfishness
and utter despair such a gospel was to humanity. This
theological Juggernaut, propped up by royal favour and
orthodox approval, was one of the idols that fell before the
sledge-hammer of truth, wielded by the Californian printer.
He calmly says: “If a man builds a lecflure-room so con-
structed that only one person in ten can hear, I call him a
botch, not an architect. If a ship captain goes to sea with
500 passengers, and only takes provisions for 150, I consider
him a madman and a fool, not a navigator. But I absolutely
refuse to believe that the Creator of this universe, whose
wonderful skill and infinite foresight are displayed in all His
material works, even in the structure of an insect’s wing, and
in every tiny leaf and spray, ever made such a botch job of
providing for the wants of His noblest creature, man.
Unfortunately, thousands of intelligent working-men have
believed this theory of the Creator’s incompetence, and have
naturally and logically said: “If all these social evils are
simply the result of an original blunder in creation, I don’t
believe in the goodness of God, and will have nothing to do
with Him.” Was it any wonder ? What is the use of
industry and thrift, if the natural wages of labour are the
smallest amount upon which the labourer can subsist ?
Temperance and self-denial, viewed in this light, are not
virtues, but crimes; for if the ghostly theory of Malthus be
true, they only make life harder for our fellow-creatures, by
lowering the standard of subsistence. How could the working
man believe Christ’s real message of hope, deliverance, and
liberty to the poor, with this blasphemous libel instilled into
him from the cradle ? He would, if he were 1 a man, rejedt,
scorn, the theory that if he were dutifully obedient
to his betters and properly orthodox, he would, after death,


T A. X I*O R .
SUITS TO MEASURE FROM £4.
Rankin Street, Forbes.
AUCTIONEER, and
Stock: and Station Agent,
Press Correspondent L. N. Association,
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
PHILIP HORBACH’S
SOUTH FORBES BAKERY,
Near kachlan Bridge.
C, & J. EDDYE,
Established—lB6l.
STEAM AERATED WATER & CORDIAL FACTORY.
Vinegar, bottled and bulk. Bitters of all kinds.
BROWN STREET, FORBES,
G. F. HUTCHINSON,
*pabbCe & s>avne& gaiter.
WHIPS, SPURS, BITS, AND ALL TRADE LINES,
ON HAND.
Lachlan-st, Forbes.


be translated to a Heaven where there was no private
property, and all were free and equal. What possible
grounds could he have for believing that the Creator, who,
according to the orthodox theory, cared so little for his wel-
fare in this world, would make any better provision for him
in the next. I have studied Bradlaugh’s theories, and,
revolting as they are, cannot help admitting that they are
the natural outcome of the Malthusian theory, and that is
exatdly the conclusion that any consistent logical thinker
must come to whq believes that theory. But I, with many
others of my fellows, have turned with renewed hope,
strengthened faith, and greater reverence from Henry
George’s masterly refutation of that theory, and declare
that he well deserves the title that is sometimes sneeringiy
applied to him—that of the Fifth Evangelist—that is, if by
an evangelist we mean one who preaches help, deliverance,
and liberty to the poor in the name of Christ. But the author
of “ Progress and Poverty” is not content with simply giving
the lie direcft to the Malthusian theory. By keen sarcasm
and relentless logic he utterly demolishes the arithmetical
and geometrical calculations upon which it is based.
Malthus lays down as his basis of argument the statement
that population naturally doubles every twenty-five years,
while subsistence, he asserts, can only increase in an arith-
metical ratio. From these premises he draws some very
“striking conclusions ’’concerning the overcrowding and
starvation which lies in store for the future dwelless upon this
planet. Henry George declares these statements to be just
as valid as the argument that if a puppy doubled the length
of its tail while it added two pounds to its weight, when
as a full-grown dog, it weighed fifty pounds, it would neces-
sarily have a tail over a mile long, and extremely difficult to
wag. He further asserts that had Adam been of an arith-
metical turn of mind, he might have drawn from the fadt of
his first baby weighing eight pounds at birth, and eight
months after sixteen pounds, the very “ striking conclusion
that at ten years old it would be as heavy as a bullock, at
twelve as large as an elephant, and at thirty would weigh
176,000,000 tons. The facfts of universal history he declares
to be against the Malthusian theory. There is no acTual
proof that the population of the world has increased at all


Saddle and Harness Maker.
All Orders Promptly Supplied at Moderate Rates.
LACHLAN STREET, FORBES.
Sydney Drapery Establishment
J BATHURST STREET, CONDOBOLIN.
CHEAPEST HOUSE IN TOWN.
MATTHEW BOULTON,
WHOLESALE 41 RETAIL STOREKEEPER,
Bathurst Street, CONDOBOLIN,
OPPOSITE ROYAL HOTEL.
H. A. LEIFERMAN, ,
Saddle and Harness Maker,
WHIPS, SPURS, &c., ON SALE.
BATHURST STREET, CONDOBOLIN.
Surgical ft Mechanical Dentist
CONSULTATION ANY HOUR.
BATHURST STREET, CONDOBOLIN.


in the last 2000 years ; there has been a large increase in
Western Europe, but populous cities have become ruins, and
highly cultivated lands deserts and jungle, in many portions of
Asia and Africa ; whilst the increase in North America in
later years cannot possibly have made up for the decrease in
the southern portion of the New Woiid. The fatfts of science
are arrayed against this theory; the highest birthrate is
found, not where comfort and plenty reigns, but amidst the
direst poverty, accompanied by the highest deathrate, show-
ing plainly that to lift humanity beyond the reach of hunger
and want would have no dangerous tendency to increase
population beyond the means of subsistence. The natural
tendency would be to fewer and better types, a lower birth-
rate, and a lower deathrate. The fadt is that the theory of
Malthus is a purely unscientific bogie, invented by a parasite
and to flatter the aristocrats and frighten the workers
into submission. It might have been refuted long ago, but
being a convenient and useful scare, scientists discreetly left
it alone until the irreverent “ Prophet of San Francisco,
in his righteous wrath, shattered it into ten thousand frag-
ments.
Of course, having boldly thrown down the gauge of battle,
Henry George, as might be expedted, had, ere long, to
encounter a champion of the orthodox school of political
economy. Amongst the books that he had read whilst pur-
suing his investigations was the Duke of Argyle’s “ Reign of
Law.” With that masterly treatise on nature’s law in the
material world, the future author of “ Progress and Poverty
was greatly delighted. When he, in his turn, traced out the
reign of law in the social and political world, he sent a copy
of his work, accompanied by a courteous letter, to the Duke,
quite overlooking the fadt that, besides being a scientist and a
philosopher, the Duke of Argyle was one of the greatest land-
holders in Great Britain; and of course, not knowing, as we
know, in the light of recent events, one of the most merciless
tyrants amongst his class. Neither book nor letter were
acknowledged, but when the work became famous, the vested
interests of the landholder took the alarm. In the “ Nine-
teenth Century,” the leading monthly Review of England, an
article appeared just four years after the publication o
“ Progress and Poverty,” headed “ The Prophet of San


UNION STORE.
THOMAS KNOWLES,
GENERAL STOREKEEPER,
CONDOBOLIN.
'k- ( E W J£RRQLD> 9
Drapery, Millinery, and Fancy Goods, on Sale.
BATHURST ST., CONDOBOLIN.
John Bouffler’s
Bridge Hotel & Forage
CONDOBOLIN.
AGENT FOR WRIGHT, HEATON, & CO., and LINDSAY
BREWERY COMPANY.
William Sinclair,
Draper, Grocer, and
GENERAL STOREKEEPER,
BATHURST STREET, CONDOBOLIN.
EUGOWRA. HOTEL.
G. D. CHESHER.
Assembly & Commercial Rooms
HOT, COLD, AND PLUNGE BATHS. Accommodation
Paddock and Stabling.


Francisco.” Henry George was denounced as the greatest
preacher of unrighteousness the world had ever seen, and his
theories declared to be immoral and dangerous. With a
fine burst of indignation, the Duke asserted that he would
not argue with the writer of such a work, but would prove
the fallacy of Land Nationalization by a “Reduction to
Iniquity,” on the same principle as the mathematician
demonstrates the fallacy of some erroneous theorem by
reduction to absurdity. That which is absurd cannot be
logical and true, neither can that which is iniquitous be just
and right, and of course it ought not to be lawful. In the
meantime Henry George had travelled through Great Britain
on a lecturing tour, and had picked up a large amount of
valuable information concerning the manners and customs
of landed aristocrats in general, and the Duke of Argyle in
particular. “The Prophet of San Francisco ” was speedily
answered in the same review by another essay headed “The
Reduction to Iniquity.” The platform laid down “That
which is iniquitous cannot be right and ought not to be
lawful,” was accepted, and the Duke was weighed by Henry
George in his Grace’s own-scales. He was told to consider
the condition of the labourers on his own and similar estates,
to reflect upon the fadl that they were lodged in hovels not
good enough for his meanest dog, their inevitable fate, from
which no industry or thrift could save them, to die in the
workhouse or in receipt of parish relief, to stretch his Grace’s
imagination sufficiently to put himself in their place, and then
apply “ The Reduction to Iniquity.”
He was told to refledl with the same earnest thought,
which, in his scientific work, he had previously bestowed
upon “ The way of an eagle in the air,” upon a common
sight in his own land—that of a Scottish woman toiling uphill
with a basket of manure on her back, and in face of the
fadt that the cause of his countrywoman’s degradation to
such toil was that the old common land upon which the cot-
tagers used to graze their beasts had been stolen from them
by the landed aristocracy of Scotland—to again apply “ The
Reduction to Iniquity.” The Duke was requested to go into
Glasgow, or the metropolis of Scotland, amidst the crowded
thousands of his countrymen, whom men of his class had
driven from their homes in the fair valleys amongst the lakes


(^KEEPER
And Produce Merchant,
EUGOWRA.
Kennekron Bros.,
Blacksmiths & Wheelwrights
HORSES CAREFULLY SHOD
EUGOWRA.
Eugowra Steam Saw Mills
ALL ORDERS AT REASONABLE RATES AND
FIRST-CLASS QUALITY.
N. E. OSBERG, PROPRIETOR
James Rogers,
general Storekeeper
And COLONIAL PRODUCE DEALER,
LAGOON BRIDGE, FORBES.
7L 7L MYLECprtHNE’JS
Aerated Waters and Cordial Factory.
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.


of their native country. To note the stunted
forms, the pinched features, the recklessness, vice, and crime
that is born of utter despair. To think of the lot of the
husband and father, who, do what he will, cannot save his
children from evil associations and degradations: who, toil as
he may, cannot supply the wants of his wife and little ones—
and then to apply “ The Reduction to Iniquity.” Henry
George tells a pathetic story, which came under his own
notice, of a little starving, barefooted girl, to whom some
kindly neighbour, scarce better off, gave a crust of bread.
The little one, as she had been taught to do, folded her hands
and thanked her Heavenly Father for His bounty before satis-
fying her hunger. He asks, “ Was that His bounty?” “Was
that child’s Heavenly Father so niggard as to provide nothing
better for the little one who believed in Him ?” If not, Who
were Better that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
that he were cast into the depths of the sea.” It seems mar-
vellous that Scotchmen who, in foreign lands, have always
ranked amongst the bravest of the brave, should, at home,
submit to tyranny and outrage without striking a blow for
their liberty, were it but an ine£Fe(stual one. But the explana-
tion of their conduct reveals yet a darker depth in “ The , *
Redu(stion to Iniquity.” Scotchmen are proverbially reverent | 7/f
I and devout, and these qualities have been taken advan.age I 1
of to instil into their minds, in the name of religion, submis- /w
sion to whatever monstrous tyranny their superiors liked to
infli(sl upon them. Cowed by superstitious fears, as they
never could have been by physical foes, they have tamely
submitted to be driven like sheep from their homes. But*
belief in the superstition that ranks resistance to the caprice
of a landholder with rebellion against the Creator is waning
fast, even in Scotland. The stirring summons of the Scottish
Land Restoration league, calling upon the sons of the Old
Covenanters to join hands, as their fathers did, for truth
and liberty, and to take upon themselves a solemn vow
to extirpate the curse of landlordism from their nativt


W. LARKINS,
BANDON STREET, FORBES.
William Perry’s
mo G xxSJb^
BOR B E S
Thos. Farnsworth,
American Coach aijd Buggy Factory,
LACHLAN & RANKIN STS., FORBES.
SHOEING AND GENERAL SMITH WORK DONE.
PROGRESS AND POVERTY!
THE REAL WAY TO
ABOLISH POVERTY AND MAKE PROGRESS
IN THE WORLD IS TO
Get full Value for four Earnings!
YOU CAN DO THIS BY PURCHASING YOUR
CLOTHING AND DRAPERY
From G. WIGGLESWORTH,
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.


country, rings like a lark’s note in the dawn of a new and
brighter day.
Henry George relates that before he personally visited
Ireland, he had always imagined it a densely populated
country. He had seen Irish emigrants in thousands shot
like human rubbish on the wharves of New York, aud had
(been told that these were the surplus Irish population. To
his great suprise, he found the richest and most fertile lands!
of that country almost uninhabited. Scarcely a human]
dwelling was to be seen for miles, except the wretched huts
ol the herdsmen, hovels that a Hottentot would look
upon with contempt, and that an Australian blackfellow
would not covet. The landlords say that cattle are more pro-
fitable than men ; so beasts have taken the place of human
beings. But amongst the bogs and mountains, or upon the
rocky sea coast, there you find the people crowded into
places never intended by nature for cultivation. In fact,
many of these so-called farms were originally about as
suitable for cultivation as a macadamised road would be. By
incredible labour, after the stones had been gathered
together, bog and seaweed had been carried upon the shoul-
ders of men and women to make the soil upon which the
crops are grown. For this inestimable privilege the people
pay rents varying from £1 to per acre, and then an addi-
tional tax is levied for the fertilizing mud of the bog and the
seaweed that the wind casts upon the shore. The industry
of these unfortunate people is as astonishing as their poverty
is appalling. The entire household effetfts of one hundred
families was sworn by an evitfiing sheriff to be not worth £3.
If the peasant is ever so lucky as to have a pig or a. few
chickens, he no more dreams of eating them than Vanderbilt
would of devouring his 20,000 dollar trotter; they are kept to
pay the rent. That this pidture is not overdrawn you (may
easily see by looking up the last number of the Illustrated
London News, where the same state ol things is acknowledged
and graphically illustrated by a paper that cannot be accused
of partisanship. But turn from the huts of the starving,,
struggling peasantry, and look at the homes of the local
“ gods almighty ” (as Tennyson calls them), the landed pro-
prietors. Enter the gates of some of the splendid parks that
encircle their mansions, and straightway you are in a new


world. Outside those walls are poverty, hunger, and never-
ceasing toil; within, rarest flowers and choicest fruits, stately
trees and sporting deer, wealth, luxury, and abundance. Yet
these places are only the occasional residences of the aristo-
crats. The greater part of the year they spend in Paris,
London, or on the Continent. Their time is passed in idle-
ness and pleasure; their wealth squandered in racing,
gambling, and debauchery; and the enormous incomes
necessary to keep all this is wrung from the white slaves of
Ireland, while the whole island is turned into a military
camp for the accommodation of the red-coated spies whose
mission is to hold the people down while they are robbed.
Truly the Irish are a long-suffering race, for how seldom do
they shoot their landlords. It is wonderful how strangely
Irishmen have been misunderstood by their fellow-workers in
Great Britain and Australia. We have been used to hear
them described as Fenians, moonlighters, and rebels; but how
few realize that these men are fighting the old battle of
liberty against fearful odds. If ever the honoured name of
“ patriot ” was fairly earned, it has been by the leaders of
the Irish national party, past and present. But, instead of
the patriot’s laurels, their reward has too often been the
scaffold and the felon’s grave. They have died, as Robert
Emmet did, in the cause of right, for land and liberty. But
now the contumely heaped upon their names is recoiling upon
those of their murderers. The dawn of the day that shall see
Ireland take her rightful place among the nations of the earth
is breaking fast. God speed it! In England land nationalism
has made slow headway until lately. The power of the pulpit,
the Press, and the landed interest is terribly strong, but the
workers are awakening at last. Champion, a pupil of Henry
George, is leading the Social Democrats, an Association
formed amongst the poorest of the poor. His last speech,
delivered to a mass meeting of 75,000 working men is a doom
and a prophecy, a challenge and an inspiration. It rings clear
and dauntless above the jangle and discord of caste and
creed, and bids the workers demand, in the name of their
common fatherhood and brotherhood, their lawful rights.
In America, not long since, 400 labour delegates, repre-
senting hundreds of thousands of workmen, unanimonsly
resolved to accept Henry George’s platform of land reform.


and the various branches of 44 The Knights of Labour,” an
organization containing 3,000,000 members, are fast giving in
their adherence to the same cause. It is a significant fadl
that while the Land Reformer is a staunch freetrader, the
working men of protection America are for him, and their em-
ployers against him. America is raising, by professedly
protective taxes, a revenue so enormous that the question of
What to do with the surplus ?” is of as great national im-
portance, as 44 How shall we pay our deficit ?” is here. Yet
in the face of that surplus, the coal-miners of Philadelphia
are working for ias. 6d. a week, and children under twelve
years of age are toiling in both factories and mines. The
American artisan is beginning to find out that unless land is
nationalized, protection simply means the protection of the
strong against the weak. It is like the old story of the
Yankee and the negro who shot a turkey and a erow whilst
out hunting. When it came to the division of the spoils, the
white sportsman said, 44 Now, either I will have the turkey
and you the crow, or you can have the crow and I will have
the turkey.” 44 It seems to me I’ll have to eat crow anyhow,”
said the poor darkey, ruefully. Just so about freetrade and
protection. In America, the landed proprietors say to the
workers, 44 We will protect you from foreign competition, and
keep up your standard of wages.” In England the same
class throw open the ports in order that the labourer may
have cheap food. Yet in both countries the reward of labour
is cut down to the minimum of subsistence. The landlord
gets the turkey and the worker the crow in either case. The
American artisans, with Henry George at their head, are
demanding a radical change that shall secure to the labourer
the reward of his labours. What the upshot will be it is
hard to say. But it has already been hinted that if the
socialist agitation cannot be suppressed, manhood suffrage
will be withdrawn. To carry out that threat will mean a dis-
astrous civil war, unless the American race has sorely
degenerated of late years. Through India, 44 Progress and
Poverty ” has been circulated, and, once its principles are
clearly understood, the effecft should be tremendous upon a
working population, who, out of an average wage of 4d. per
day, pay a direcff tribute of annually to England,
besides the cost of maintaining an enormous military system.


THE NEW BUTCHERY.
George Black, Family Butcher
SMALL GOODS. OF ALL KINDS, ALWAYS ON HAND.
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
JOHN ATKINSON,
BROWN STREET, FORBES,
ACCOUNTANT, AUCTIONEER, & GENERAL CONMISSION
AGENT, AND MINING BROKER.
REGISTRY OFFICE FOR SERVANTS.
MRS. D. HA YES,
Fruiterer and Pastrycook.
CONFECTIONERY in all Branches.
LACHLAN STREET, FORBES.
G. T. Thompson,
cm 6 'glCnOertalicr
PLANS AND ESTIMATES GIVEN. AND SPECIFICATIONS
PREPARED.
TEMPLAR STREET, FORBES.
NEWMARKET BUTCHERY
SMALL GOODS OF ALL DESCRIPTIONS.
First-class Stock always on hand.
MARTIN KELLY,
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.


A population who are forced to mortgage their harvests before
they are ripe, and to deliver them to local money lenders
when gathered, without the slightest consideration as to
whether they have enough grain left to keep body and soul
together till the next harvest; who are doomed to disease
and premature death by a tax of 1200 per cent, on salt
km article they cannot produce, and must have or die); if
fie message of liberty does not arouse these people, it will be
because Christian England, the last and worst of India’s
conquerors, has finally succeeded in crushing a civilized and
intelligent race into abjedt serfdom. We send missionaries to
convert these poor benighted Hindoos, but one cannot help
thinking that a mission, whether of peace or war, that would
teach the English Government humanity, would be more to
the purpose. _ ...
Those Russian patriots, sometimes called Nihilists, whose
watchword is “land and liberty, have been cheered in their
glorious work by the stirring call of Henry George. But in
Russia, to-day, the prisons are crowded and the roads to exile
thronged with men and women who, but for high-souled
patriotism, might have lived and died in ease and luxury. In
Russia, so far as can now be seen, liberty can only come as
it came to France (the birthplace of European freedom), as a
gospel, “ written,” as Carlyle says, “ in hell fire,” since men
will not have it otherwise. Where men are crushed down to
beasthood, as the Russian peasantry are, if ever they do snap
their chains, they will rise with the satanic fury of the demon
possessed.
Everywhere in the Old World society is shaken to its
foundations, and the subterranean thunders of that volcanic
force which shall either uplift or destroy, can be heard by
those who care to listen. The coming social revolution must
reach us sooner or later, and even now the old questions that
past civilization failed to answer are being propounded in our
midst. Our place ought to be in the forefront of the battle.
We stand upon a higher plane, with keener vision, wider
knowledge, and greater fredom than our fellows in the Old
World. But our lands are steadily passing away from us,
and the experience of all ages tells us that, divorced from
land, we must lose liberty. To settle for ever the question of
the ages is given to us. Our opportunities are many and our


difficulties are few. We do not need to plunge into the
horrors of civil war or a revolution to nationalize our lands.
We have but to stand together and demand, in the name of
eternal justice, the abolition of the institutions that have
everywhere brought ruin and degradation amongst men.
Were the workers of Australia but united, we could, in these
lands of ours, lay the foundation of a new and greater civiliza-
tion than ever poet sang or artist portrayed. With want
destroyed, with greed and avarice changed to noble passions,
with the clamour and din of class and creed hushed by the
full acceptance and acknowledgment of our common birth-
right as the children of the All Father, and therefore
brethren ; with every force that science and art could give us,
we might sweep onward and upward to reach at last that
Kingdom of God upon earth, which the greatest of all demo-
crats, the purest of all socialists, Jesus of Nazareth, taught
his disciples to work, to pray, and, if need be, to die for,
“ The reign of the Prince of Peace,”
gtorbe#
E. VANZETTI,
Consulting Chemist.
PAINLESS EXTRACTION OF TEETH. Chavee Perfumery
.and Foreign Specialities.


MILLENNIUM OR PANDEMONIUM?
ILL the coming social revolution glow with the
mYmIP warmth and light of a new and greater civilisation,
the dawning of that millennium of justice, truth, and
brotherhood for which humanity has longed for many
a weary century ; or will it come in one tremendous
' volcanic outburst of retribution for ages of unspeakable
I wrong? Who can tell? Much depends upon this—which side
will the Christians take in the struggle ? Ido not ask whether the
ecclesiastical institutions of the day will side with the oppressors or
the oppressed ; for since eighteen centuries ago, when ecclesiasticism
had to choose between earth’s greatest democrat and purest
socialist and a condemned thief, to the present hour, when the choice
is between a McGlynn and a Corrigan, the Churches have stood by
the vested interests , and with the vested interests they will fall.
I “ The Cross of the New Crusade,” emblematical alike of Divine
I Fatherhood and human brotherhood, is now the standard of the
1 world’s workers. If through the cowardice of the professed followers
of the Carpenter of Nazareth that oriflamme sinks in the dust of
defeat, what power under heaven will stay the relentless wrath of
the famishing millions when they do snap their chains (as they
must sooner or later) and rise with the satanic fury of the
demon-possessed ?
* These are weighty questions. The ages will remember how they
I were answered by the men of the nineteenth century.
' ‘


E. G. BOLLINGER,
Watchmaker & lawallar,
LACHLAN ARMOURY—ESTABLISHED 1861
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
JAIViES WALLILS, §
Sf @ 3S& M Jit fr\ Wf If t 1
W&olaMi nw I »t»f
Good Stabling and Accommodation Paddocks.
BILLIARDS.
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
F. RATH,
Shoeing and General Blacksmith,
Rankin St., Forbes.
MICHAEL FOGARTY'S
Commercial Hotel
GOOD STABLING.
Best Brands Wines and Spirits.
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
fATTSSSAU/S Hom
LACHLAN STREET, FORBES.
Best Brands of Wines and Spirits. Baths. Billiards.
First-class Stables : Loose Boxes.
VICTOR. TURRIN, Proprietor.


THE AVERAGE PARSON.
[by one of his hearers.]
il F course there is a great deal of suffering and misery in
U*M } the world ; but if the poor people would only be sober
and Christian-like, they would be happy, and all would
be well. The cause of all suffering is sin.”
LAGt’ These words fell from the lips of an average parson,
y A good, sincere, earnest little man, who firmly believes
himself qualified to regenerate the world, if only that untractable
being, the working-man, would listen to (and swallow) his dogmas.
Now, my professed soulcurer, I, as one of that class—one of the
“ common people ” who, eighteen hundred years ago, heard your
Master gladly—would like to ask you a few questions. You say
that the cause of all suffering is sin ; in other words, that broken
laws carry with them their own penalty. Now, tell us working-men
for the breach of what laws do we suffer? Why are we like rats
in a trap, driven daily and hourly nearer starvation point, as every
fresh wave of science and civilization sweeps onwards? You “ sit
in a cloud and sing like pictured angels, and think the world runs
smooth.” So it may with xjou ;. So might the priest of Juggernaut
sit and sing as the wheels of his car of state roll on o’er mangled
limbs and splintered bones. You bid us be sober and Christian.
Why ? that our labour might be more profitable to the upper
classes ? The change cannot benefit us ; for does not Malthus, the
parson, tell us “ that the natural wages of labour is the smallest
amount upon which the labourer can subsist.”
A sober, Christian workman can live upon less than a drunken, 1
profligate one. Were we all sober and Christian, wages could be \
lowered and rents raised. Ah! “but it will all be made right in
the next world,” you tell us. How do you know that? If our
Father has given you, his professed ambassador, no better tidings
than that, why should we believe that he will provide any better for
us in any other state of existence ?
The old shepherds, fishermen, and tentraakers, who wrote the
Book from which you profess to draw your inspiration, knew some-
thing about the righteousness (or justice) that exalteth a nation ; a


CROSS
FIRST-CLASS TABLE. BILLIARDS. BATHS.
Loose Boxes. Large Hall.
A. STOKES ~ - Proprietor.
LACHLAN AND TEMPLAR STRE^WEsT
Most Central House in Town. Best Wines, Beer,
and Spirits. Good Stabling.
JAMES MURPHY, Proprietor.
J. MCDONALD’S
Bakery and Coffee
RANKIN STREET, FORBES.
Wedding Cakes at Shortest Notice. Celebrated Scotch Pies
on hand.
MRS. MITCHELL'S
POST OFFICE HOTEL.
Large Bedrooms. Suites of Rooms for Families. Baths.
Billiards. Well-stocked Bar.
LACHLAN STREET, FORBES.
w. BRAY'S
ALE AND PORTER, IN BULK.
BOTTLED ALE, LAGER BEER, & PORTER.
BRIDGE STREET, FORBES.


nation, mind you, not a privileged class, and one of them taught
the awful revolutionary socialistic doctrine “ That he who will not
work neither shall he eat.” When you, my clerical friend, have any
gospel—any real good news—to tell us, rest assured that we will
hear you gladly enough ; but until you can tell us something about
the plain practical facts of the will of our Father in Heaven, fin
whom, spite of your misrepresentation t __we do believe)
His social and econormcTaws. you must not wonder if your
things.
HMMMIIIIIIIIMIINNIIIMmiMMHMNfIMMAIMMIIIMMBHMMMIMIiiIJIII
WANTED, A CHURCH.
SATHER a strange want in this nineteenth century, with its
costly cathedrals for the upper classes, its mission churches
for the paupers, and its religious temples of various de-
scriptions for the respectable portions of the community.
Yet, strange as it may sound, Society to-day has
the bitterest need of a church that will bring the
grand old principle once taught in Gallilee by the Man of the
people into practical living realities of life and action—a church
that, whilst sternly reproving the sins of the people, shall, with
equal boldness, attack the vested wrongs which crush God’s images
into beasthood. The truthseeker, glancing down the serried rank
and file of the orthodox trading societies who worship God and
Mammon with various degrees of fervour, turns away, not “ indif-
ferent to the truths of Christianity,” as the votaries of those shrines
assert, but simply weary and sick at heart of shams, and longing in
his inmost soul for truth and rest.
Those unauthorised eccentric guerillas of the spiritual army the
Salvationists, and men of Poulton’s stamp—have done more than
all the aforesaid trading societies to convince men that Christianity
has some reaTmeamng to the"harrassed toilers of this busy age. To


their eternal credit be it said that, with such men, to know a truth
is to live and die for it. There is, at any rate, no divided allegiance.
But something is wanting even here. Is it not this ?—that the last
mentioned “ preachers of righteousness ” (as they unquestionably
are) make the mistake of endeavouring to persuade men to live by
the rules of the first century as well as the principles of the Master,
Now, a rule may be a righteous restraint in one age, but a galling
fetter in another ; while a principle is an eternal thing, because it
forms part of an eternal truth, and must therefore be suitable for all
ages and all time. The method pursued by the aforesaid Christian
freelances to attract the attention of the careless may be grotesque,
but it certainly is one way of fulfilling a command utterly ignored
by the more respectable brotherhood, “ Go ye out into the highways
and hedges and compel them to come in,” The great majority of
those who work and think, however, are not indifferent, and conse-
quently do not need anything to attract their attention. They are,
as I assert, weary and sick at heart for some prophet or seer, who
shall, with words of living power, shatter the ghastly caricatures of
Christianity that stand on every side, and in no uncertain tones
proclaim that “Peace on earth, goodwill to man,” is in truth a
divine message, as well to the toiler of the nineteenth century as to
the fishermen and shepherds of the first century. Surely some other
place may be filled by the followers of Christ than that of the
martyr or lifeless formalist. Surely Christianity has some social
laws that, rightly understood in conjunction with those spiritual
ones we hear so much of, would, in truth, if obeyed, establish that
kingdom we all pray for in our better moments. He who will teach
us these things will be the founder of “ the church of the people.”
What if he has already spoken, and we, like these of old, are
I looking far off for that which is nigh at hand. What if the
Kingdom of God is at our gates and Chjpjypity blocks the way ?




Land Nationalization Association [
NEW SOUTH WALES.
k I. —To prevent further alienation of the/
J/ National Estate. ff) *
I.—To abolish all existing Methods of raising i
Revenue, and to substitute a Tax upon*
Land value only.
