

The French
Yellow Book
Revelations of German Guilt
Official Documents Issued in France
A Remarkable Series of
Disclosures
A precis reprinted from the London “Times”
December l£t, 1914
GORDON GOTCH (Sydney) Ltd.


Co1XECTIOnA\P
C| Rational Library' jjjj


The French Yellow Book
A remarkable series of disclosures as to Germany’s
responsibility for the war and the silent preparations for
a conflict which she deliberately intended to provoke is
published in a French Yellow Book.
The documents are of the highest importance. They
include a copy of a secret report to the Government in Ber-
lin showing the steps to be taken to prepare for the war by
the mobilisation of German patriotism, the strengthening
of her army and armaments, and the fomenting of disturb-
ances in Egypt, Russia, and North Africa. In this docu-
ment the aim of the struggle is said to be “to extend Ger-
manism throughout the entire world.”
A Yellow Book is now added to the many-coloured array
of diplomatic publications issued by the countries which are
at war. It is the French Government’s contribution to the
history of the origins of the war and of the negotiations
which preceded the beginning of the struggle. It is in many
respects the most important of the series; it is certainly the
most complete record of the persistence and patience of the
Allies in their desire for peace, the most crushing evidence
of Germany’s settled intention to bring about war.
The chief value of the Yellow Book as a contribution
to history lies in its examination of the psychology of Ger-
many which led the governing classes of that country to
regard war not only as inevitable but even as desirable, in
its revelation of the calculated efforts made to saturate the
people of Germany with this idea.
The victors of 1870 have made of a weak France the
corner stone of their European policy. Thanks to an honest
diplomacy—a diplomacy which has always attached full
weight to those “scraps of paper” which are the bonds of
peace —in spite of German efforts France with her marvel-
lous recuperative powers again assumed her rightful posi-
tion as one of the Great Powers of Europe. She became the


ally of Russia and the friend of Great Britain. Germany’s
efforts to break that friendship began with the Emperor’s
\isit to Tangier in 1905. They were continued the following
year, after M. Deleasse had been driven from office, at the
Algeeiras Conference in 1906, and were resumed during the
Bosnia-Herzegovina crisis of 1908-1909, the negotiations of
the Franco-German Agreement of 1909, and by the Agadir
coup of 1911.
The Treaty of November 4, 1911, in which Germany re-
cognised the position of France in Morocco and by which
Germany acquired a new stretch of territory in the Congo,
created the deepest disappointment throughout the Empire,
which had aspired to world dominion and had imagined that
France was one of the moribund Powers of Europe whose
African heritage she might annex. It was determined “to
have done” with France, and a fresh and tremendous im-
pulse was given to the world’s armaments by the launching
of a new German Army Law which was to increase the
peace strength of the German Army by about 150,000 men
and to place the Army Corps along the French frontier
practically upon a permanent Avar footing.
GERMANY PREPARING FOR WAR.
This tremendous effort to upset the balance of power in
Europe inevitably called for a corresponding effort from
France in the shape of the Three Years’ Service Law. Mis-
informed by their diplomatists and by their Press, the Ger-
mans had refused to believe Prance capable of such sacri-
fice. Disappointment added fuel to the fire of German
anger. The German Army Law Avas passed in an atmos-
phere of carefully fostered national exaltation. The task,
defined in one of the secret documents of the Yellow Book’
of permeating the people with the idea that German arma-
ments were a reply to, instead of the cause of, the French
Three Years’ Service Law, was skilfully performed. The
policy, coldly set forth in one of these documents, of man-
aging matters in such a \vay that w r ar would be accepted
with a sigh of relief as leading to freedom from the crushing
burden of armaments, was ruthlessly carried out.
Gradually the campaign of the Pan-Germaus and of the
militarist philosophers permeated even the highest circles
of the Empire, and in 1913 the man who without question
had on several occasions preserved the peace of Europe was
won over to the view that war alone could provide Germany


with a solution to her foreign and domestic problems. The
German Emperor in a conversation with King Albert of
Belgium, unmistakably revealed the fact that he was no
longer a partisan of peace.
Germany maintained throughout the negotiations fol-
lowing the assassination of the Archduke Francis Ferdinand
the fiction that she was unaware of the extent of Austria-
Hungary’s demands upon the little kingdom of Serbia —de-
mands which were, without question, more than could pos-
sibly be accepted by any Sovereign State. Yet on July 22,
as is shown in dispatch No. 17, the Berlin Bourse was
apparently acquainted with the extravagant nature of those
demands. On July 23 the order had been given in Vienna
to belittle the extent of Austria’s pretensions; the Powers
of the Triple Entente were to be lulled into a false sense of
security, and the French Ambassador was told that Aus-
tria’s demands were such that a peaceful settlement of the
crisis might be expected. As the French Ambassador, with
justice, remarked in his dispatch (No. 20) on the subject,
“I do not know what credence must be given to these assur-
ances in view of the habits of the Imperial Chancellery”-
a remark which might with equal reason have been applied
to the Imperial German assurances that the Austrian Note
was unknown, since on the same day the Bavarian Prime
Minister admitted that he was acquainted with its terms.
BLOCKING THE PATH OF PEACE.
During the next few crowded days of diplomacy the
spectacle offered by Germany is that of a Power which,
while declaring itself enamoured of peace, spared no effort
to thwart the pacific initiative of Great Britain, the good
will and moderation of Prance and of Russia. The dispute
between Serbia and Austria was declared to be a matter
for those two Powers only. Russia was bidden to keep clear
of the ring while Austria punished the Slav State of Serbia.
Germany refused to associate herself with the Entente
Powers in peaceful effort, and, indeed, lost no opportunity
of thrusting herself between the Austrian Cabinet and the
various suggestions made for a peaceful solution of the dis-
pute. Austria mobilised, and Russia found herself, there-
fore, forced to effect a partial mobilisation, which was, how-
ever, confined to the Austrian frontier.
Herr von Jagow, the German Foreign Secretary, in
■speaking to M. Jules Carabon, the French Ambassador in


Berlin, had said that Germany would only mobilise if Russia
mobilised upon the German frontier; when reminded of this-
assurance by the French Ambassador on July 31, he declared
that it did not constitute “a firm engagement”—a statement,
worthy to take its place in history with “the scrap of
paper.” Meanwhile Germany refused to stir a finger to save
the world from war. The time had come when, as General
von Moltke had remarked to King Albert, “11 faliait en
finir.”
On July 31 the Kriegsgefahrzustand was proclaimed in
Germany; communications were cut, and behind the veil
mobilisation was in full swing. Russia also mobilised. That
very evening Austria made definite proposals for a settle-
ment in St. Petersburg—proposals which were accepted by
the Russian Government. This last chance of peace was
annihilated by the dispatch of a German ultimatum to
Russia calling upon her to demobilise her armies—a demand
rendered all the more offensive since but a few hours before,
the Emperor Nicholas had requested the German Emperor
to mediate in the dispute. Prom that moment war was
inevitable.
While supplementing and substantiating the diplomatic
correspondence already published by the British, Russian,,
and Belgian Governments, the French Yellow Book adds
many significant ano. some striking details. In view of the
bitter hatred of England now professed in Germany, it is-
instructive to compare the comparatively courteous treat-
ment accorded by the German Government to Sir Edward
Goschen and the British Embassy Staff on their departure
from Berlin with that meted out to the French Ambassador,
M. Jules Gambon. Few dispatches in the Yellow Book are-
more interesting than No. 155, in which M. Jules Gambon
describes the indignities inflicted upon him, and his final
journey from Berlin to the Danish frontier under military
escort, without food, in a special train, for which he was-
made to pay some £2OO, the money being extorted by a
German officer of the Guards, who declined to let the train
proceed to its destination unless the blackmail were paid.
THE DOCUMENTS.
The first dispatch in the Yellow Book is dated Berlin,
March 17, 1913. In it M. Jules Gambon, one of the most
far-sighted Ambassadors France has ever had, examines the-
situation created by the new German Army Law, and, by


'the French reply to that measure, the Three Years’ Service
Law. In it he says:—
The impression of astonishment made by these pro-
posals ( i-e ., the French Three Years’ Service Law) has
been turned to account by the Imperial Government to urge
the absolute necessity for an increase in the military forces
•of Germany. The plans for this increase are represented
as being a reply. This is contrary to truth, since the im-
mense military effort accepted by France is but the conse-
quence of German initiative.
The Imperial authorities lose no opportunity of exalt-
ing patriotic feeling. . . . but it is an abuse of historical
parallel to compare the present with 1813. If the movement
which a century ago aroused the German people against
the man of genius who aspired to universal domination
could find any equivalent to-day, it ought to he sought for
in France, since the French people has no other thought
hut to defend itself against domination by force.
The French Military attache writes in similar terms in
transmitting the report upon the same subject to the Minis-
ter of War on March 15, 1913:-
May I recall in order the better to show the genesis of
this military programme what was written by my prede-
cessor, Colonel Pelle, a year ago, when the law of 1912
made its appearance:—
“We discover every day how deep and how lasting are
the sentiments of wounded pride and of rancour against us,
provoked by the events of last year. The treaty of Novem-
ber 4, 1911, is a profound disappointment.
“The resentment felt in every part of the .country is
the same. All Germans, even the Socialists, resent our hav-
ing taken their share in Morocco.
“It appeared, a year or two ag'o, as if the Germans
were setting out to conquer the world. They deemed them-
selves so strong that they thought no one would dare to
enter the lists against them. Boundless possibilities were
opened up for German industry, German trade, and German
■expansion.
“Naturally those ideas and those ambitions have not
disappeared to-day. Germans still require outlets for their
commerce, and they still desire economic and colonial ex-
pansion. This they consider as their right, as they are
growing every day, and the future belongs to them. They
look upon us, with our 40,000,000 inhabitants, as a, secondary
nation.
“In the crisis of 1911 this secondary nation held its
own against them. The Emperor and the Government
yielded; public opinion has neither forgiven them nor us.
Public opinion does not intend that such a thing shall occur
a,gain.”


M. de Faramond, Naval Attache at the French Embassy
in Berlin, in a report dated March 15, 1913, to M. Baudin,
Minister of Marine, wrote:—•
The German effectives at present amount to 720,000
men. We have reason to conclude that on October 1, 1914,
the strength of the Imperial Army will be brought to a
figure close upon 860,000. The importance of this figure
would be less did not the new Bill (according to the hints
of official newspapers) tend, as did the law of 1912, to
place the army corps near our frontier as closely as pos-
sible on a war footing, with a view to a sudden attack
upon us, with greatly superior forces, on the very opening
day of hostilities. It is an imperative necessity for the
Imperial Government to achieve success at the very outset
of operations
With 700,000 men under arms (without counting the
very numerous reservists who are at present under train-
ing), a perfect military organisation, and a public opinion
which allows itself to be ruled by the bellicose appeals of
the Army and Navy Leagues, the German people is at the
present moment a very dangerous neighbour.
If Three Years’ Service be adopted and immediately
applied to France, conditions will be less unequal next year,
German effectives will still be considerably greater than
our own, but the calling up of the whole of the available
contingent will no longer allow of selection, and will bring
elements of secondary order and even undesirable units
into the ranks of the German army, and the moral value
of the active army will thereby suffer.
A SECRET REPORT.
On April 2 last year M. Etienne, Minister of War,
wrote to M. Jonnart, Minister of Foreign Affairs, as
follows:
I have just received from a trustworthy source an
official and secret report deading with the strengthening of
the German army. It falls under two The first
section consists of general considerations, and the second
relates in the greatest detail arm by arm, the steps to be
taken. ... I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy
of this document, which appears to me to demand your
attention'. Etienne.
Note regarding the strengthening of the German Army.
BERLIN, March 19, 1913.
General Considerations Regarding the New Army Laws.
The increase has taken place in three stages
1. The Algeciras Conference removed the last doubts
as to the existence of an Entente between France, England,
and Russia. We have seen, on the other hand, that Austria-
Hungary was obliged to detach forces for use against Ser-


via and Italy. Finally, our {i.e., the German) Fleet at that
moment was not sufficiently strong. At the end of the dis-
pute the first things to be done therefore were to strengthen
our coastal defence and to increase our naval force. To the
English intention of sending an expeditionary force of
100,000 men to the Continent, we had to reply by better for-
mation of reserves, who would have to be employed accord-
ing to circumstances on the coast, in our fortresses and in
siege operations. It was already clear at that time that a
great effort was indispensable.
2. The French, having violated the Moroccan Conven-
tions, brought about the Agadir incident. At that moment
the progress of the French Army, the moral recovery of tne
nation, the technical advantage gained in the field of avia-
tion and in that of mitrailleuses, made an attack against
the French less easy than in the previous period. More-
over, an attack by the British Fleet had to be expected.
This difficult situation showed the necessity of an increase
in the army. This increase was from this moment on re-
garded as a minimum.
3. The Balkan War might have dragged us into war in
support of our Ally. The new situation to the south of
Austria-Hungary diminished the value of the help which
this Ally might be able to give us. On the other hand,
France had strengthened herself by a new loi des cadres
(a law strengthening the officering of the French Army).
It was, therefore, necessary to advance the date upon
which the new military law should come into force.
Opinion is being prepared for a further strengthening of
the active Army, Avhich will ensure an honourable peace to
Germany, and the possibility of suitably gnaranteeing her
influence in the affairs of the world. The new Army Law
and the complementary measures which must follow, will
almost allow the complete attainment of this aim. Neither
the ridiculous clamours for revenge of the French jingoes,
nor the English gnashing of teeth, nor the wild gestures of
the Slavs, will turn us from our end, which is to strengthen
and to extend Deutschtum (Germanism) throughout the
entire world. The French may arm as much as they like.
They cannot from one day to another increase their popu-
lation. The use of a black army on the European theatre
of operations will for long remain a dream —a dream, more-
over, lacking in beauty.
11.
Aim and Duties of Our National Policy, of Our Army, and
of its Special Branches.
Our new Army law is but an extension of the military
education of the German people. Our ancestors of 18(13
made g’reater sacrifices. It is our sacred duty to sharpen
the sword wi ich has been placed in our hand, and to hold
it ready for cur defence as well as to strike our enemy.
The idea that our armaments are a reply to the armaments
and policy of the French must he instilled into the people.
The people must be accustomed to think that an offensive


war on our part is a- necessity if we are to combat Hie
adversary’s provocations. We must act with, prudence in
order to arouse no suspicion, and so as to avoid the crises
which might damage our economic life. Things must be
so managed that under the weighty impression of power-
ful armaments, of considerable sacrifices, and of political
tension, the outbreak of war ( Losschlagen ) shall be con-
sidered as a deliverance, because after it would come de-
cades of peace and of prosperity, such as those which fol-
lowed 1870. The war must be prepared for from a financial
point of view. There is much to be done in this direction.
The distrust of our financiers must not be but
nevertheless there are many things which it will be impos-
sible to hide.
There need be no worry about the fate of our colonies.
The final result in Europe will settle that for them. On the
other hand, disturbances must be stirred up in Northern
Africa and in Russia. This will be a means of absorbing
the forces of the adversary. It is, therefore, vitally neces-
sary that through well-chosen agents we should get into
contact with influential people in Egypt, Tunis, Algiers,
and Morocco, in order to prepare the necessary measures
in case of European war. These secret allies would, of
course, be recognised openly in time of war, and on the
conclusion of peace they would be guaranteed the preserva-
tion of the advantages they had won. These desiderata
can be realised. A first attempt made a few years -ago gave
us the necessary contact. Unfortunately, the relations
established then have not been sufficiently consolidated.
Whether we like it or not, we shall have to resort to pre-
parations of this sort in order rapidly to bring the cam-
paign to an end. Risings in time of war created by politi-
cal agents require careful preparation by material means.
They must break out simultaneously with the destruction
of the means of communication. They should have a guid-
ing head, who might be found among influential religious
or political chiefs. The Egyptian school is specially suited
for this. More and more it gathers together the intellec-
tuals of the Musulman world. By every means in our power
we must be strong, so that by a powerful effort we may
destroy our enemies in the east and in the west. But in
the next European war the small States must be forced to
follow us or must be cowed. In certain conditions their
armies and their fortresses could rapidly be conquered or
neutralised (this might probably be the case with Belgium
and Holland), so as to prevent our western enemy from
obtaining a base of operation against our flank. To the
north we have nothing to fear from Denmark or from the
Scandinavian States. We have the less to fear, as in any
case we should arrange for the concentration of a strong
army in the north, capable of replying to any evil inten-
tions on this side.
At the worst Denmark might be forced by England to
abandon her neutrality, but by then the decision would
already have been reached by land and sea. Our northern


army, the strength of which might be greatly increased by
Dutch troops, would oppose an extremely active defence
to any attack from this direction. In the south Switzerland
forms an extremely solid bulwark, and we can count upon
her defending her neutrality against France with energy,
and thus protecting this flank. As has been said above
the situation with regard to the small States on our north-
western frontier cannot be viewed in the same light. There
the matter is vital for us, and the end towards which we
should strive should be to take the offensive in great superi-
ority from the outset. For this it will be necessary to con-
centrate a great army, followed by strong forces of the
Landwehr, which will lead the small States to follow us,
or, at least, to remain inactive in the theatre of war, and
which will crush them in case of armed resistance. If these
States could be persuaded to organise their fortification
system in such a manner that they could make an effective
protection for our flank, the invasion plan might be given
up. But for this it would aI so be necessary, particularly
in Belgium, that the army should be reformed so that it
might offer serious guarantees of effective resistance. If, oh
the other hand, that country’s defensive organisation were
turned against us, which would give obvious advantages to
•our western adversary, we could not in any way offer Bel-
gium any guarantee of the security of her neutrality. A
vast field is therefore open for our diplomacy to work in
our interests in that country. The plans made in this direc-
tion allow of the hope that the offensive might be taken
immediately the concentration of the army of the Lower
Ehine is completed. An ultimatum with brief delay, fol-
lowed immediately by invasion, would enable us to justify
•our action sufficiently from the point of view of Interna-
tional Law.
Such are the duties of our Army. They demand
large effectives. If the enemy attack us, or if we wish to
tame him, we shall do as did bur brothers a hundred years
ago. The eagle will take its flight and, seizing the enemy
in its sharpened claws, render him harmless. We shall then
remember that the provinces of the old German empire, the
country of Burgundy and a I urge portion of Lorraine, are
still in the hands of the Franks, that thousands of our
German brothers of the Baltic provinces groan under the
yoke of the Slav. It is a national matter to give back to
Germany what she formerly possessed.
YON MOLTKE’S PLANS
Another important document is the letter from M.
Jules Gambon, French Ambassador in Berlin, to M.
Stephen Pichon, Minister for Foreign Affairs, dated from
Berlin, May 6, 1913, as follows:
I spoke this evening to the Secretary of State of the
Ambassadors’ Conference and of the results obtained at
yesterday’s sitting in London.. . . .


m a certain number of facts whir-1, imminent, I bare
° The P, '°v, of the I> o r f Ge^" enoy Sh °“ M
*° th e summoning of (hoj' 1000-rvist'J'f APi, not confined
is in Germany , a preliminary sbS barra cks. There
I ranee, and which consists hi te P , wbie h we have not in
the reserve to hoM and men of
they may make the necessary arr^f 7 for , the calI > so that
• g-arde-a-vous,” and only thl • rajl §’oments. It is a general
sion, of discipline, and of : selV PCtA”* of
country renders the existence SV Pf evails in this
«ble If a similar I-
country would quiver and the Press w m ance ’ whole
next morning. a Press would speak of it the
sources, notably from reservist nu; f several different
friends of it in' the Wb ° told their
taken the necessary steps to provide in rif 3 ® g ’ e “ tlemen have
subsistence for their families tn d tbeir safes means of
that it was for tSs rSsou a Z t/T' M is eren said
was to have made the trial Irin ' n i? T"" " Prince . who
embark. trip 3n the Operator, did not
The decision which brought ah/mt +ui
step to mobilisation is in accordance 2+wl Preparatory
Grand General Staff. On tSs voZ I ° f the
of the remark made in German • i b< \ e been informed
Moltke, who is considered W + i I6S by General von
officer in the Army The idVa "fTff
IS to act by surprise , f the General Staff
sibility o/tS VSisso^“lT npl T S as to the respon-
be disregarded %eTwar has h„" eral T ° n Moltke ’ “Ast
be waged by rangint aTI k. \ e °“ e ' l "'‘'“ s ' u 'V it most
Suocesi alone i,,still ft ' ° hanoes on one ’ s ™« side,
give Russia
maintain on the eastern frontier a C be obliged to
leave her in a position of emmP+t -f * ® Wbleh woll,d
front of Prancf we LstforeftaS'f “T “
pal adversary immediafpPr 81 forestall our pnnci-
that we are go™to LZ mne chanc es in ten
without waiting, In order if 11 ? begin war
s ’ brutally to crush .all resistance.”
german motives for war
• , D ? rament No. 5 Of the Yellow Book is an’exceedingly
to n M ‘ St6phen Minister L
P . f A f k 011 German public opinion according to
ienci diplomatic and Consular agents. The document
Which is dated Paris, July 30, 1913, is as follows:- '


The information gathered by our agents in Germany
from persons in a position to mix in the most varied circles
justifies the conclusion that two feelings dominate and irri-
tate the German mind. (1) The treaty of November 4,
1911, is considered to be a defeat for Germany. (2) France
—a new France —the existence of which was unsuspected
until the summer of 1911, is considered to be bellicose, and
is represented as desiring war. . . .
In July, 1911, “the coup d’Agadir,” raised really for
the first time the Moroccan question as a national matter,
of importance to the life and to the expansion of the
Empire. The revelations and Press law suits which fol-
lowed it have sufficiently shown how the campaign had
been organised, what Pan-German cupidities it had inflamed
and what ill-feeling it has left behind. If the Emperor
was discussed and the Chancellor unpopular, Herr von
Kiderlen was the most hated man in Germany last winter.
Nevertheless, he is beginning to be less badly thought of,
for he has let it be understood that he would take his
revenge. . . .
H &
Some desire war, because it is “inevitable” in conse-
quence of present circumstances, and for Germany, in their
opinion, it will come better sooner than later. Others
consider it as necessary for economic reasons found in
over-population and over-production, the need of markets
and of outlets, or for social reasons such as that diversion
abroad alone can prevent or delay the rising to power of
the democratic and Socialist masses. Others again, insuf-
ficiently reassured as to the future of the Empire, and be-
lieving that time works for France, think that the event
should be precipitated. . . . Others are bellicose by “Bis-
toarckism,” if one may use the term. They feel themselves
humiliated at having to discuss matters with the French,
to speak of right and reason in negotiations or conferences
where they have not always easily prevailed, when
they have the more decisive force on their side.
From their recent past they derive a pride which is con-
stantly fed by living memories, by oral tradition and by
books,' and which is hurt by the events of the last few
years. . . . Others, finally, want war from spite. It is these
last who collect the pretexts for it. These feelings find
their concrete expression, in reality, as follows: “The Jun-
kers, represented in the Eeichstag by the Conservative
Party, wish at any price to avoid the succession duties
* which are inevitable if peace be prolonged. At the last
sitting of the session which has just come to an end, the
principle of these duties was voted: This is a serious blow
to the interests and privileges of the landed nobility. On
the other hand this nobility is the military aristocracy,
and it is instructive to compare the Army list with the
Nobility list. War alone can make its prestige last and
serve its family interests. One speaker of the party, in the
course of the debate on the Army law, brought forward as
an argument in favour of the passing of the law the neces-


great merJbalte who d ih &
bankers who speculate on ti, a r„i i f markets, and the
*** —■ ‘ “ dOT ‘
sitT fok,“T mi 1 S P force of prove the neoesl
s~Wstm: x: srs •
peace! TceorSnfto "T *?**' Ai?med
nations. It pt-fvents the’ improvememf, X, Tot of ST
JT a> - in
ST TLfLTh! f
Of solving the social question ”~ t rapid ™y
sity of promotion for officers wi n „im +u-
which forms a hierarchy of which the %i-nT f°£ lal c . lass ’
the supreme head, sees win, 1 > 8 of Prussia is
Germany, and The °f
and considers that its days § are numbered SofTT
material interests threatened by a formidable are ltS
against agrarian nroteeil™ t. + , T . ormKj able movement
tation diminishes in every iegislatnre * P ° lltlCal represen -
Libe.nl P Sy‘ «>' National
S ameimason s y for desSjwL WitW ” ot «•
ever, bellicose. It has its reLnoV P IT S| * is - how-
upper middle-class is no less affected nat^’ e ; The
the democratisation of Germany. In JB7l°it hll'ffiT/ 7 by
tttr. “ Eeichst^lss .i‘A'c.’js:
AN INTERVIEW WITH KING ALBERT.
The re P o rt °. f the conversation between the Emperor
i ham and King Albert is contained in the following dis-
patch rrom M. Jules Gambon to M. Piebon, dated Berlin
November 22, 1913: -oemn,
tom / T V6 received from an absolutely sure source a
w ia of a conversation which is reported between +i
-Emperor and the King of the Belgians tn iiJ 1
the Chief of the General Staff Ge?eralVon Moltk?TToH
Sf Vff m W ° UM aPP “ r W
mad imPr ' SSi ° n CTeated ’ wUch “°Vphds lU S' I ’thal
SfSorelarTd' ISffffff H ° StiUty ns ilbecom-
Bs'nn Lf ®f ked ’ aad the Emperor has ceased to be a par-
thought upToThe 6 , German Emperor’s interlocutor
I f, o the present, as did everybody, that William
I he Second, whose personal influence has been exerted in
many critical circumstances In favour of
f peace, was still in the same state of mind. This time
EiSpTT S is noToT Mm C ° m P letel T changed. The German
! longer in his eyes the champion of peace
against the bellicose tendencies of certain German parties.


William 11. has been brought to think that war with France
is Inevitable, and that it will have to come one day or the
other. The Emperor, it neea hardly be said, believes in the
crushing superiority of the German Army and in its.
assured success.
General von Moltke spoke in exactly the same sense as
his Sovereign. He also declared that war was necessary
and inevitable, but he showed himself still more certain of
success.. “For,” said he to the King, “this time we must
put an end to it” (ceitc fois il faut en flnir) , and your
Majesty can hardly doubt the irresistible enthusiasm which
on that day will carry away the whole German people.”
The King of the Belgians protested that to interpret
the intentions of the French Government in his manner
was to travesty them, and to allow oneself to be misled as to
the feelings of the French nation by the manifestations of
a few hotheads, or of conscienceless intriguers.
The Emperor and his Chief of the General Staff none
the less persisted in their point of view.
During the conversation the Emperor, moreover, ap-
peared overwrought and irritable. As the years begin to-
weigh upon William rl. the family traditions, the retro-
grade feelings of the Court, and, above all, the impatience
of soldiers, are gaining more ascendancy over his mind..
Perhaps he may feel a kind of jealousy of the x>opularity
acquired by his son, who flatters the passions of the Pan-
Germans, and perhaps he may find that the position of the
Empire in the world is not commensurate with its power.
Perhaps, also, the reply of Prance to the last increase in
the German Army, the object of which was to place Ger-
manic superiority beyond question, may count for some-
thing in these bitternesses, for whatever one may say it is
felt here that the Germans cannot do much more. One may
ask what lay behind the conversation. The Emperor and his
Chief of the General Staff may have intended to impress
the King- of the Belgians, and to lead him not to resist in
case a conflict with us should .arise. Perhaps, also, there
may be a desire to have Belgium less hostile towards cer-
tain ambitions displayed here with regard to the Belgian
Congo. But this latter hypothesis does not seem to me to-
be compatible with the intervention of General von Moltke.
Further, the Emperor William is less master of his
impatience than is generally believed. More than once I
have seen him allow his innermost thoughts to escape.
Whatever may have been the object of his conversation,
which has been reported to me, the confidence has none the-
less the gravest of character. It corresponds with the pre-
cariousness of the general situation, and with the state of
■a. certain portion of opinion in France and in Germany. If
i were allowed to draw conclusions I would say that it would
be wise to take into account the new fact that the Emperor
is g’rowing familiar with an order of ideas which formerly
was repugnant to him, and that, to borrow from him a
phrase he likes to use, “we should keep our powder dry.”'
Jules Catsceow..


The “ Times December Ist, 1914.
~ e publish tins morning a summary of the French
~ ell Book 011 tlle negotiations that preceded the declara-
tion of war The documents disclose one or two incidents
which are of high significance—notably the report of a con-
versation between the German Emperor and the King of the
Belgians in November, 1913-but their chief value consists
ln ,,. tke cumu lative proof which they afford of Germany’s
s< t t , determination to force another war with France, and
of the way in which she used the Austro-Serbian dispute to
precipitate it. They go back to March, 1913. They end
with the unanimous declaration of the Allies that none of
them will conclude a separate peace, and that none will lay
down conditions of peace without previous agreement with
each of the others. The whole collection is a signal demons-
tration of the necessity and the justice of this decision. It
shows Germany throughout as the enemy of European
peace, determined to “finish with” France, to fasten a quar-
rel upon Russia, to treat the neutrality of Belgium and of
othe r small States as might suit her military convenience,
and to pursue her inordinate ambitions reckless of all but
the law of the strongest. It shows, not less clearly, the earn-
estness with which France and Russia, as well as England,
strove to the last to prevent a European war. It shows how
very near their efforts came to sueccess, how Austria-Hun-
gary seemed to draw back, how she had reopened “conver-
sations” with Petrograd, how she appeared to have conceded
the main point in her controversy with Russia, how just was
Sir Edward Grey’s view that peace was possible if “only a
httle respite in time could be gained,” and how Germany
took eaie that it should not be gained. It brings into strong
relief the hesitation and the indecision of Austria, when she
saw, too late, that her ambition had overleaped itself, the
duplicity and the mendacity of German diplomacy until
Germany’s military preparations were complete, and the
inexorable resolve with which, when she had stolen an ad-
vance upon her adversaries, she cut the ground for further
negotiations from under the halting foot of her dependent
ally.
The Yellow Book is the largest of the collections of
State papers which have been published on the war. We
have indicated its general character; we cannot pretend to
do more here than to draw attention to a few points in it.
A secret official report on the strengthening of the German
Army which the French War Office secured in April of last
year deserves particular study from the frankness with


whieJl li: avows Germany’s aim “‘to fortify and extend
Deutschtum throughout the whole world,” and the means to
be adopted for this end. The firslt step is to permeate the
German people with the idea that an offensive war by Ger-
many is necessary as a-reply to rthe provocations of the
enemy. They must be brought tto think that a German
attack will deliver them from the bmrdens of powerful arma-
ments and heavy sacrifices, and thait it will bring decades of
peace and prosperity, such as folllowed 1870. ‘ The next is
to stir up troubles in North Africa, Russia, and Egypt.
Then the small States must be constrained to follow Ger-
many, or they must be conquered!. Belgium and Holland
are specially marked down for German treatment. Holland,
it is suggested, might furnish usefud contingents to the Ger-
man Army of the North, and it is emphatically laid down
that if Belgium organised her defence against Germany,
“we could not in any way offer Bedgium a guarantee of the
security of her neutrality.” The crime of this year was well
thought out in advance. M. Jules Gambon reports General
von ivloltke in May, 1913, as declaring that “commonplaces
on the responsibility of the aggressor must be put aside.”
It was he who a few months later 1 told King Albert in the
presence of the Emperor William that “this time we must
finish with France. The King was deeply impressed by
tins conversation. He saw for the first time that the
Emperor had gone over to the war party. The Trench
Ambassador, who reports the meeting, had already realised
this grave change. He bears witness to the Emperor’s past
services to peace very generously, but he declares that His
Majesty had ceased to favour it, and he suggests that a cer-
tain jealousy of the popularity of the Crown Prince, “who
flatters the Pan-German passions,’” may have affected him.
M. Jules Gambon knew that twice,, at least, the danger had
been very near. In 1911, and] in April, 1913, Germany
had gone so far as to take the first step towards mobilisation.
A memorandum prepared for the French Minister of
Foreign Affairs shows that the Quiai d’Orsay was under no
illusion as to the state of Germain opinion. The Chauvin-
ism of the Junkers is ascribed in part to the steady decay of
their political influence, while thait of the Professorentum
and its pretension to impose German culture on the rest of
the world are carefully noted.
The pertinacity with which Ilerir von Jagow and his sub-
ordinates assured the diplomatists iin Berlin that they knew
nothing about the Austrian Note toi Serbia before it was de-
livered caused the French Ambassador some surprise and


led him to observe to the German statesman that he wan-
dered Germany should bind herself to give an unqualified
support to demands the nature of which she did not know.
It appears from a Munich dispatch that the day before
Herr von Jagow repeated this assurance, the Bavarian
Prime Minister had told M. Allize, the French representa-
tive,, that he had knowledge of the Note. The circumstance
needs explanation. Are we to assume that Munich is more
intimately in the confidence of Vienna than Berlin? That
has happened before now, but we had not supposed it to be
the case at present. A dispatch from M. Paleologue, the
French Ambassador at Petrograd, brings out very clearly
the moderation and the firmness of M. Sazonoff. He dis-
cussed the Note with Count Szapary, the Austrian Ambas-
sador. He observed that the aim of the document was legiti-
mate if it was directed only against the Serbian anarchists,,
but that the procedure was indefensible. “Withdraw your
ultimatum, he said, hnodify its form, and I guarantee you
the result. ’ That was, in substance, the course which Aus-
tria seems to have been disposed to take, when Germany
declared war upon Russia and upon France. She loudly
and ostentatiously professed her zeal for peace—with what
truth may be best judged by her acts. But as M. Bienvenu-
Martin remarks, she would not prove her goodwill except by
words. Those words, unfortunately, were never addressed
in the right tone to the right quarter. She had but to speak
at Vienna, and the peace of the world ■would have been
secure. She did not speak, despite the representations of
England and the other Entente Powers, or at least she did
not speak in the strain needed to win compliance. She
thought that “the day” had come, and lest it should escape
her she, who was not a principal in the dispute between
Austria and Russia, rushed in when it looked like being
settled, and herself' drew the sword. She knew the risks.
Sir Edward Grey, M. Paul Gambon reports, had warned her
on July 31 that if the conflict became general, and particu-
larly if France became involved, we could not remain neu-
tral. But she arrogantly believed that she could face all
risks with impunity. Her twofold ultimatums to Russia
and to France were the first convincing disclosure to the out-
side world of her real policy. The invasion of Luxemburg
and Belgium revealed the means by which she was ready to
pursue it. France, said M. Poincare in his message to the
Chamber of August 4, “is the object of a brutal and pre-
meditated aggression which constitutes a defiance of law
and public right.” The Yellow Book shows how long and
how deliberate the premeditation has been.


War Issues.
Quick Training for War
Sir Robt. Baden-Powell
Price i/6
Postage id.
How the War Began
Mr. Courtney and J. Kennedy
Postage ijd.
Price i 6
War in the Pacific
Ambrose Pratt
Price 1/6
Postage id.
The German Danger
Bart Kennedy
Price 1/3
Postage id
Life in a German Crack Regiment Baron Von Sch/ight
Pride 1/3 Postage i|d.
What Every Private Soldier Ought to Know
Lt. Gen. Sir F. Ponsonby
Price 3d. Postage |d.
Sir Jno. French’s Dispatches
Official story of Mons, The Marne, and The Aisne
illustrated by specially drawn war maps.
Price pd. Postage id.
illustrated London News, Graphic, Sphere, War
Illustrated, Great War (parts), Times History
(parts), &c., published weekly.
GORDON <S£ GOTCH (Sydney) Ltd.
And all Bookstalls and Newsagents
W. A. Peppbrdat & Co., Printers, 119 a Pitt Street, Sydney.
