

THE CASE
MESSRS. SMITH, BATES, & ASHLEY,
CONNECTION WITH
jP ChURCH
EASTERN AUSTRALIA.
BY REV. PETER MACPHERSON, A.M.
SECOND EDITION, GREATLY ENLARGED.
'he title-page was as follows ; —“ Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia ; Messrs. Ashley and Bates, and their connection with
he above Church.”




-2-~5-fc> -7-7
CRITICISMS
ON THE
FIRST EDITION OF THE PAMPHLET.
“Unjust,” “reckless,” “libellous.”
—Church Extension Committee, Witness, 13th November, 1880.
“ This ill-advised, we might justly say discreditable, pamph-
let,” &c.
—Rev. G. Sutherland, Witness, December 18th, 1880.
“The alleged facts were proved to be fictions.”
—Rev. D. K, Mclntyre ; speech applied by Rev. G. Sutherland to
the pamphlet— Witness, November 13 and 27, 1880.
“ What is this but saying that the pamphlet was made up of
fictions T
Rev. W, S. Donald’s motion in Synod, as interpreted by Rev
G. Sutherland, and not disowned by Mr. Donald.—
Witness, December 18, 1880.
U.B.—The foregoing, of course, was not in the first edition.
The title-page was as follows ; —“ Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia ; Messrs. Ashley and Bates, and their connection with
the above Church.”
f 13t 33


THE CASE
Messrs. SMITH, BATES, and ASHLEY,
IN CONNECTION WITH THE
Australia,
TO THE REVEREND THE MODERATOR AND MEMBERS OF THE SYNOD OF
the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia.
Reverend Fathers and Brethren,
It is my desire, most respectfully, to draw your attention to
some matters which have transpired since the last meeting of synod.
During the early part of this year our Church sustained the loss of three
gentlemen who had been studying for the ministry. The circumstances in
which this loss took place came with painful prominence before my notice.
It appears to me that the case affects the interests of our Church so much
as to warrant me in bringing it before the members of Synod, interested as
they must be, in the honor, stability, and general welfare of our Church.
Accordingly some papers are printed at the close of this letter which will
bring, at least, one set of facts before the notice of fathers and brethren.
The readers of the Witness cannot have forgotten the accounts which
have appeared from time to time, setting forth the successes of Messrs.
Smith, Ashley, and Bates, at Parkes, Picton, the Bellinger, and several
other places. Those who were present at last Synod will not have for-
gotten the high eulogium which was passed upon Mr. Archibald Smith, and
the high rank which was assigned to him amongst the more recent addi-
tions to the Church, by Rev. G. Sutherland, Convener of the Church
Extension Committee. It is current amongst some of our people in Sydney,
that the three gentlemen named above were regarded as having come
amongst us as special answers to special prayers. Now these representa-
tions about the three students and their performances were either substan-
tially true or they were substantially false. Whatever allowance may be
made for the looseness of newspaper writing, and the inflated language of
congratulation, if the statements were substantially true, it would seem to
follow that we have lost three of the most promising men who have ever
been labouring amongst us. Plainly the practical question arises, how
were they lost ? Was it in consequence of the mismanagement of the Church
Extension Committee ? Did they leave or were they thrust away ?
But let us come to some points of detail. For example, the question
may be asked, Why is Mr. Bates not now amongst us studying for the
ministry in connection with our Church ? From the perusal of extensive
correspondence between Mr. Bates on the one hand, and the Church
Extension Committee on the other, it seems to me that the cause of the
loss of this gentleman to our Church lies at the door of the Committee.
Mr. Bates was very summarily cut off, and for what reason ? It appears
from the correspondence in my possession, that he pointed out, in a letter


to Mr. Sutherland, that there was little or no prospect of Picton becoming
a charge in connection with the Free Church ; that there would be greater
encouragement to him to labour in a sphere of operations where the prospect
of a settled charge could be kept in view ; otherwise that he would have to
look out for other employment. He very soon got notice that he might go.
Mr. Bates had been induced to join our Church as the result of strong
representations from Mr. Sutherland. Unfortunately the prospects held
out to Mr. Bates became less and less hopeful, till at last he made the
statement in connection with Picton, which has been noticed above. Now
allowing that Mr. Bates might have been too much under the influence of
discouragement when he suggested the possibility or probability of his
having to turn his attention to some other business, does the Synod wish
the students of the Church to be dealt with in such a summary wav as
that to which the Church Extension Committee resorted in his case? Mr.
e face
of most earnest remonstrance. Considering the connection which Mr.
Sutherland had with securing Mr. Bates as a student of the Church, one
would naturally have looked for a more fatherly, considerate, and humane
treatment. The treatment casts a peculiar hue upon the professions that
were made in the case. The correspondence discloses tons Mr. Sutherland
writing as follows to Mr. Bates : —“We will deal fairly and honorably with
our young men—will fulfil all our pledges. ” Moreover, the letter which Mr.
Bates received from the Secretary of the Committee, cutting him off in the
very middle of a six months’ engagement, contains the following very gra-
cious language :—“They deem it best to allow you to carry into effect your
stated option of retiring from all connection with them in order to take up
such studies as you may elect, ” &c. Cut off from ministerial work with us,
Mr. Bates turned his attention to the ministry in the Presbyterian Church of
New 7 Soxith Wales, and is now a student in St. Andrew’s College. All the
crime that I can find in him was having a judgment of his own. If any
Church needs men of independent minds, it is the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia. In view 7 of all the correspondence, up to the last extra-
ordinary communication of Mr. Sutherland to Mr. Bates, it w 7 as deeply
humiliating to me to find one of our students treated in the manner in which
1 The case of Mr. Ashley is quite miique in my experience. The bare
reading of The documents appended must at once strike every
reader as involving a most singular state of things. What is the origin of
the first short document of two sentences it suggested or proposed
the splendid venture which he had made in giving up a good situation,
•U and breaking up a comfortable home, spontaneously seize pen and paper
Ljf and determine to write an historical document that might record, in the
r annals of the Church, the debt of gratitude which he felt to Mr. Sutherland
and the Church Extension Committee ?
But what? After all had been so “honorably” accomplished, and
within a fortnight of the signing of the document, a “ little bill” for £23 or
£2B ! It turns out this mysterious but highly “ honorable ” document was
signed by the unfortunate gentleman wdiile he was in positive destitution
and hardship, the result of his giving up his position in the Post Office to
study for the ministiy in connection with our Church ! That everything
was so ‘ 1 honorably ” done in a transaction which brought ruin and distress
to one of the parties, rather mars the satisfaction /if the philanthropist.
But how came Mr. Ashley to sign a paper of the kind while he thought
the sum of £23 or £2B was still due to him ? In a paper which is in my
aim ? In a paper which is in mv
■shlev. there occur the following
without reading the said paper,
mean any more


than I have here stated. ” When the ‘ ‘ little bill ” came in, most men would
have expected that the conclusive reply to Mr. Ashley’s claim would have
been the production of the marvellous document. But no ! The reply sent
gives considerable evidence of uneasiness, but does not triumphantly refer Mr.
Ashley to the mysterious document. low then has it come to the surface?
I • ,tL I I Has it, after the manner of testimonials, been illuminated, framed, glazed,
(and set up in some window for all men to see before going to adorn the
- * walls of the Convener of the Church Extension Committee ? N ojff The
Committee’s reply was followed up with the Amended Bill for £BB, or there-
abouts. As no answer came to this, a lawyer’s letter claimed £5OO for all
losses, &c., &c., sustained by Mr. Ashley in consequence of having given
his services to our Church. This brought the document to the forefront,
and it was considered as seriously interfering with Mr. Ashley’s claim for
reparation for the losses which he had sustained.
It may be added there is perhaps yet another document which will
serve as a pendant to the one already described. When Mr. Sutherland
went on his travels through the country during the year, it appears one of
the Committee, Mr. Gregg, took up the important work of getting Mr.
Ashley to sign papers. One of these, Mr. Ashley tells me, he refused to
sign, but another he says he did sign. Now all this has brought great
glory and especially ,l honor ” to the Committee audits Convener, although
desolation and distress, unfortunately, were the lot of Mr. Ashley. There
is yet one party which has an interest in the matter : it is the Presbyterian
Church of Eastern Australia. How are the interests of this Church affected
by these transactions ?
/tfUt.Ajru The question arises—What .actually was the arrangement made be-
frftef r Ashley find Mr Sutherland on behalf of the Committee ? The
definite part appears to be that the Committee should pay Mr. Ashley at
the rate of £l2O per annum for six months. In this rather curious state
of things the question was put by me to Mr. Ashley thus : “If Mr.
Sutherland had made it plain to you that the really definite and binding
part of the bargain so far as the Committee was concerned, was that you
were guaranteed only for six months, at the rate of £l2O per annum, w'ould
you have accepted the arrangement ?” Mr. Ashley at once scouted the
idea of giving up £124 per annum secure, with certain expectation of ad-
vancement in a short time, and of breaking up a comfortable home for \
guarantee for only six months, for less than he was getting in permanence.
But allowing that Mr. Sutherland and the Committee acted with con-
summate skill and prudence in becoming responsible for only six months,
while the tremendous risks w'ere all run by Mr. Ashley, there is still the
question whether the interests of the Church will be advanced by arrange-
ments of this kind. The attention of Fathers and Brethren is respectfully
drawn to the matter. To me, the whole case, so far as Mr. Ashley’s
interests are concerned, is painfully unsatisfactory.
When the Tay Bridge disaster took place all the parties concerned in
the structure, architect as well as contractor, came up for scrutiny. Bo
here the practical questions at once arise—Have the doings of the Com-
mittee been conducted on sound or erroneous principles —has the work
been sound or slip-shod ? Is the collapse which has taken place the result
of shallow principles of action and slip-shod workmanship ? If so, how
much more unsound work is there to come tumbling down about our ears
some day? The kind of men encouraged to study with us, and the kind of
men discouraged (as in the case of: hir. Bates), affects directly the whole
future and stability of our Churchy-Still further, as every member of the
• Committee comes up for scrutiny. Mr. Sutherland as Convener, and Messrs.
Knox, Law. andTGregg. as members of Committee, we have to bear in mind
that these very parties who form a working majority in the Church Ex-
* tension Committee, are also a working majority in the Session of Bt.
Gcorue’s congregation. l A collapse of our chief congregation in the colony
would be one of the greatest disasters which could befall us.


Commending the subject of the foregoing pages to the earnest and
loyal consideration of the members of Synod, and of all interested in
our Zion, and praying for the guidance of the Great Head of the Church in
all matters for His glory,
[I am,
Reverend Fathers and Brethren,
Your obedient servant,
PETER MACPHERSON.
Carlingford Terrace,
187 Albion-street, Surry Hills, Sydney,
October 22nd, 1880.
[Copy. ]
If I have said anything that has led Mr. Macpherson or any others to
believe that the Church Extension Committee, or Mr. Sutherland, have in
any way acted dishonourably to me, or not fulfilled their engagements, I
distinctly say such was not my intention. The Church Extension Com-
mittee, and Mr. Sutherland, its Convener, have fulfilled all their engage-
ments and have acted honourably throughout to me.
J. A. ASHLEY.
March 3, 1880,
Forest Lodge, Sydney.
(AAA 5 O frHi
E. A. Rennie, Esq., Treasurer of the Synod of Eastern Australia, in
account with J. A. Ashley,
£ s. d.
Stipend as Missionary to Bellinger and Nambucra, from 17th
June to 17th December, 1879, six months, as agreed with
Mr. Sutherland ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60 0 0
By Collection at Bellinger and Nambucra... ... ... ... 40 0 0
Cash from you ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 0 0
„ „ „ 10 0 0
£6O 0 0
Cash by me for travelling expenses to and from Bellinger and
Nambucra...
13 0 0
Cash by me for travelling expenses to and from Bellinger and
Nambucra... ... ... ...
5 0 0
Cash by me for travelling expenses to and from Bellinger and
Nambucra...
6 0 0
£24 0 0
lA Cb -
P. 0. from Secretary of Church Extension Committee ... 4 0 0
TA x.~ BOA A A
Due to me ... ... ... £2O 0 0
Allowance from Church Extension Committee, from 17th Decern
ber to 15th March, 13 weeks at 30s. per week
Cr.
19 10 0
By weekly payments as under by Mr. Sutherland :
10 weeks at 20s. and one week at 30s.
11 10 0
Due to me ... £BOO


Mr. Gregg gave me £5 on night of meeting, 23rd December, but I do not
know if he intended the sum as a gift outside of the responsibilities of the
Church Extension Committee or not.
J. A. ASHLEY.
Dear Sir,
I enclose an account between the Church Extension Committee
of the Synod of Eastern Australia and myself, showing £2B as due to me,
subject, however, to footnote upon that account. This sum is very
urgently required, and I beg that you will let me have the amount with as
little delay as possible, and remain yours very truly,
J. A. ASHLEY.
E. A. Rennie, Esq.
No. 4, Holdsworth Terrace,
Paddington, March 19th, 1880.
Mr. J. A. Ashley,
Denison-street, Camperdown.
Dear Sir,
I beg to intimate that at a meeting of the Committee of the Church
Extension Committee of the Synod of Eastern Australia, held last evening,
your letter, undated, addressed to Mr. E. A. Rennie, was placed before
the said Committee, as also was your letter of 15th instant, to the Rev.
r George Sutherland, the Convener. Meanwhile, lam to state that both
were simply a surprise to the Committee present. As to the first of the
above, which contained a supposed account whereby you would have it
appear that the Committee is in your debt to the amount of £23, the Com-
| mittee were certainly startled by the demand. Tt is very dear to them
Ii \v that thev do not owe you a single shilling in respect to Bellinger and Nam -
IN biicva Liver Mission.* The item's ot Travelling expenses you were pleased
n n. to exhibit were unmistakeablv incurred at vour own pleasure and cost —
v without the slightest liability on the part of the~Committee : and it was in
u view of vour own statement to the Committee when you mentioned tlic
vj outlay (and which and tiiere disclaimed as their liability) that
v. tlicy Votedvou the~~£2oTas balance payments, each £10) in
N anticipation of their being refunded the same hv the Grafton Presbytery.
W rather than you should have to wait until the General Assembly Treasurer
might receive the said £2O from the Grafton Court.
Concerning the figures in re Newtown, Mr. Gregg’s £5 were paid you
on the night referred to, meant by him, and he thinks understood by you,
to represent ten shillings per week for ten weeks ahead, but part of the
30s. salary you had stipulated for. The receipt vouchers are not at present
available for reference by Church Extension Committee, and an early
opportunity will be taken to examine the state of that account.
Touching your letter to Convener tendering your resignation as a
student, I am desired to state that is incomprehensible how that step
could have been taken, and without any reason being furnished therefore.
You surely could not have seen the great disadvantage at which you were
placing the Church in making the intimation (you are reported to have
made last Sabbath) that no further services would be conducted. Indeed,
all the circumstances are most striking to the Committee, with their know-
ledge of many kindnesses you have received at their hands and in part
acknowledged by yourself. You will be communicated with again on the
Newtown account.
Yours faithfully,
A. W. S. GREGG,
Secretary to Church Ex. Com.
* Your appointment was before my connection with the Committee, and without preju-
dice to Committee, I will inquire if any sum was voted to you to pay your expenses to your
field of labour—that is, your own expenses at first starting.


March 24th, 1880.
E. A. Rennie, Esq. . . , »
Deak Sir, CUJLfM M* ** *
I received a letter from the Secretary of the Church Exten-
sion Committee, stating that the Church does not owe me a single
shilling in respect to the Bellinger Mission.. Broadly I beg to state that
in June last year I was induced by strong representations made by Mr.
Sutherland, to enter the services of the Church for which I was to receive
at least at the rate of £l2O per annum, and to be kept at the Bellinger. I
stated that to break up my home would result in a loss to me, but he said
that for this the Church would stand by me, and suggested that I should
get lodgings for Mrs. Ashley in Sydney. My salary then from the Govern-
ment was £124 a year, with a promise of £l5O in the course of a few
months. Relying upon Mr. Sutherland’s strong representations and pro-
mises on behalf of the Church Extension Committee of the Synod of
Eastern Australia, I entered upon my duties. For six months my salary
was at the rate of £l2O per annum. But having to come to Sydney in cmi-
-2} sequence of not obtaining; the accommodation 1 was ibd by_Mr.
representations to expect, 1 incurred travelling expenses. Upon my,
arrival in Sydney 1 was destitute, and applied to the Church Exten-
sion Committee for assistance to purchase a few articles of furniture.
Mr. Gregg gave me £5 as I thought out of his own pocket for this object.
I was then asked to accept twenty shillings a week, out of which I
was to pay rent ten shillings, and keep myself, wife and child in food
and clothing; I told him I could not manage on so small a sum. The Com-
mittee then agreed to give me thirty shillings a-week, and I was
Ji try to live upon this sum. I found I could not, and was so hard pushed
that 1 could not buy a coat to go to Church with. Mr. Gregg gave me as a
member of the Court, or as a private gentleman, a coat, hat, and vest, for
which, along with £5 I also received. I Avrote an acknowledgement. If
Mr. Gregg intended me to give the Committee credit for the coat, hat, and
vest, he may deduct the cost of them from my claim, as I do not know the
amount. Ido not wish the Committee to give me anything but what lam
entitled to. I explained to Mr.. Sutherland, who was only giving nip
twenty shillings a-week, that I expected thirty shilling a-week from the
Committee. But he stated this was all I was to-receive. I told him this .
was not in keeping with our former arrangement. H e saicl he thought 1
Avas doing very'"well, and ought to be satisfied. He told me moreover that I
should go on as I was for three months longer, and if the Committee could
not give me more money or a better field of labour I might then go. I de-
clined this, and told him I would resign and seek other employment. He
said, “ Don’t you know a bird in hand is worth two in the bush. What
Avill you do ?” I said I would make it a matter of prayer. He then said
“ the Committee will not accept your resignation,” but I told him I would
send it to him. Under all these circumstances I was willing to take what
I claimed by my first account. But after receiving such a letter as I have
from the Secretary of the Church Extension Committee I intend to claim
all that I consider I am both morally and legally entitled to, and hoav send
in my claim for £BB 10s., subject, however, to, the £5, and the deduction
of coat, hat, and, vest from Mr. Gregg. lam at present in great want,
and therefore urge you to pay the above amount without delay, mnTremain,
Yours very truly,
J. A. ASHLEY.


AMENDED ACCOUNT,
March 24th, 1880.
E. A. Rennie, Esq., Treasurer of Synod of Eastern Australia
in account with J. A. Ashley.
Dr.
£ s. d.
Stipend as Missionary from 17th June, 1879, to 15th March,
1880, at a Salary of £l2O per annum, as agreed with Mr.
Sutherland, Nine months ... 90 0 0
By Collection at Bellinger and Nambucra 40 0 0
Cash from you ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 0 0
~ „ ~ 10 0 0
By weekly payments from Mr. Sutherland as under
10 weeks at 205., one week at 30s. ... ... ... ... 11 10 0
71 10 0
Balance due to me 18 10 0
Travelling Expenses to Bellinger and Nambucra 24 0 0
Less received from Secretary of Church Extension Committee... 4 0 0
Balance due to me ... ... ... 20 0 0
Loss on Sale of Furniture, £6O, say 50 0 0
Due to me ... ... ... 88 10 0
End of First Edition.
ADDITIONAL MATTER FOR SECOND EDITION.
A glance over the criticisms which have been given on the pamphlet,
which I circulated amongst the members of Synod in November last, will
supply a reason for republishing that document. As I now give the minute
which the Church Extension Committee have inserted in their records
concerning me, in the matter of the pamphlet, as I also give the deliverance
of Synod, and other expressions of opinion, it is indispensable that the
reader should also have the pamphlet itself, which has been the subject of
criticism. At first only fifty copies were printed, and for a time the cir-
culation extended almost exclusively to the members of court. It was
kept in type, however, till after the close of the Synod, in case its more
decisive publication should be required. I had counted the cost of expos-
ing the blundering of some important personages, and I knew too well
what ecclesiastical vengeance might do. From the history of the past,
even within these colonies, I knew what thunderbolts might be launched
against me. Should anything of this sort be done to satisfy any cry for
vengeance it was, of course, important that the pamphlet should be ready
on as short notice as possible, to be put into the hands of those who pay
any attention to the proceedings of Church courts.
The history of the pamphlet in the Synod may be regarded in three
stages. At the first stage it was treated with a contempt that was most
interesting to a fond author ! In the few copies got ready for the occasion
my name was not on the title page, and the production was spoken of as
an anonymous pamphlet. All this of course was exceedingly instructive
to me. The second stage, however, developed the fact that the pamphlet


Was really worth the notice of the Church Extension Committee* They
showered flowers of rhetoric over it which the reader can study on other
piges of this publication They brought up their flowery description of
the pamphlet, and sought the protection of the Synod against the author.
The Synod listened to the cry of the Committee, lout seems to have come
far short of satisfying its expectations or wishes. Mr. Sutherland, the
Convener, looked over the motion of Mr. Donald, and said it is “very
mild.” At the first reading of the draft Mr. Donald had been kind enough
to say, on behalf of the Committee, that the “ statements,” &c., in my pam-
phlet were “ wholly unsubstantiated.” However, the word “wholly” was
aftei’wards struck out, so the words ran, that the “statements” were
“unsubstantiated” Reading over the motion again, Mr. Sutherland,
quite in a regretful tone, said, it is “ very mild.”
The third stage was to get the “ very mild ” motion of Mr. Donald sup-
plemented, in the Minutes of Synod, by the far more flowery production
of the Church Extension Committee. Accordingly this certificate of
character to my pamphlet and myself, was ordered to be stitched into the
records of the Synod, with all the historical force which belongs to the
names of Revs. Messrs. Sutherland and MTntyre. ministers, and to Messrs.
Knox and Gregg, members of the Church Extension Committee. A sug-
gestive little incident took place when this third stage was introduced by
Mr. Sutherland, which deserves to be recorded. The Clerk, Rev. D.
MTimes, quietly observed in some such terms as these, “ Does not this
look as if you were vindictive ?” All things considered it was a very natu-
ral question. In characteristic tone of voice Mr. Sutherland said “with-
draw that.” Nevertheless the expression was not withdrawn.
MINUTE OF CHURCH EXTENSION COMMITTEE.
As to the document from the Committee, a few sentences will dispose
of it. Its chief value is for the flowery epithets applied to the author.
Perhaps next to this is the sensitiveness with which the members of Com-
mittee submit to criticism. If men’s doings are reviewed on the forefront
of their own documents, they must do a little more than make a liberal use
of the words “unjust,” “reckless,” “libellous.” It is indeed worth
noticing, in passing, how easily the Convener of the Church Extension
Committee can settle a question of libel. Some time ago ( Witness, Aug.
14, 1880) in a dispute in the North, some uncomplimentary things were
said of our Church. The ready editorof the Witness announced that these
remarks were “distinctly libellous, and the Church, as a Church, could
immediately raise an action at law for defamation. ” Never was such
transcendental nonsense written, even in the Witness'. No Church, as a
Church, in this colony, has a ground of action for libel in such a case. The
whole air of authority assumed is simply without foundation. Indeed, after
practice. I know the inherent weak points of many statements of Mr.
Sutherland by the very vehemence and the adjectives which are employed.
As to publishing statements tending to damage the reputation of the Com-
mittee, it may be said that every man in any office of any kind whatever,
whose blunders are brought under review, more or less suffers in reputa-
tion for wisdom, skill, or capacity for discharging the duties which he has
undertaken. Then are Mr Sutherland and the Church Extension Com-
mittee exempt from criticism ? This is a grotesque enough conclusion for
the editor of the Witness, considering the off-hand gasconading which
characterizes that journal about anything or anybody on which, or on
whom, the editor chooses to write a savoury paragraph ! The last point
which I shall notice is the grievous charge that I did not apply to the
Committee for information. When I had the official documents I was so
far independent of the Committee that I did not need to apply to them.
Had I been dependent on them for information it is likely enough the


pamphlet would never have been written. It is objected that the figures
given in the pamphlet are “ misleading.” Now, what information from the
Committee would have entitled me to alter the figures in Mr. Ashley’s
accounts, or in the official paper of the Committee ? If the figures are mis-
leading (whether those of Mr. Ashley or of the Committee, they do not say),
all I could do was to give them as I got them.
MR. DONALD’!
Nor will it take much time to dispose of Mr. Donald’s motion. Beyond
) all question its strength is its fogginess. The first part of it is just a marsh
. '.' f (fit source of fdgs and mists !) so vague' and general, tfiaOfiere is nothing
for foothold. Perhaps the first appearance of Solid footing is the statement
that the pamphlet was “ uncalled for.” Now was Mr. Dona’d trying to be
humorous here ? Uncalled for ! I dare say Mr. Sutherland never
called for it, nor Mr. MTntyre, nor Mr. Gregg, nor Mr. Knox. I dare say
they wish heartily, all of them, that the pamphlet had never been called
into existence. But there are other calls in the universe than those which
come from Messrs. Sutherland, MTntyre, Gregg, and Knox. There is the
cry of the weak against the strong. There is the cry of those who think
they are oppressed. There is the call of the Law of God—Do to others as
ye would that they should do to you ! There is the call of du'y and con-
science in honorable men, who will encounter a good deal rather than
refrain from calling out against such doings as those criticised in the
pamphlet.
As regards the “ statements” referring to “members of committee,”
which were pronounced to be “unsubstantiated by the ascertained facts of
the case,” I have applied to Mr. Donald to specify a number of these
statements. He wrote that the application was ‘some weeks after the
Synod was over, and he failed to supply me with a single statement
answering to his description. Mr. Sutherland, in command of a weekly
paper, has not come to his assistance. He who spoke about publishing
the whole proceedings of the Court, in all their “ naked deformity,” has
not yet produced a single statement from my pamphlet which was ‘’unsub-
stantiated.” The correction about the name of Mr. Law, who, it appears,
was not a member of the Committee for the year 1879-80, was rather micro-
scopic for use, except in the Court, where as much of a mountain as could
be made of it, was done. Is it possible that all the substance t> be found in
the “unsubstantiated” statements, is to be looked for in this matter of
the misplacing of the name of Mr. Law ?
The last part of the motion is really an unkind cut to the Committee.
They came in a pelter asking protection from the Synod. There is some-
thing comical in the meek lambs of the Committee, Mr. Sutherland, Mr.
MTntyre, Mr. Gregg, and Mr. Knox, calling for help against that terrible
wolf, the writer of the pamphlet ! Now what does Mr. Donald do for
them ? He tells them that the “ proceedings of the Committee are suffi-
ciently vindicated by the deliverance of the Synod on the adoption of the
Committee’s report.” On the face of the matter there are some screws
loose somewhere. If the writer was fairly chargeable with unjust , reckless ,
libellous statements against the Committee, then these gentle innocents
have been very cavalierly dealt with by Mr. Donald. On the other hand
if the author’s statements are “unsubstantiated,” he has got off rather
easily. Of course there is plenty of time yet. It is the first step which
costs, and Mr. Donald has taken it. If he saw his way to pass so “ very
mild ” a condemnation of the first edition of the obnoxious pamphlet, he
will have opportunity to take some more decisive step for the punishment
of the author for the second edition at next Synod, if we are spared, and if
lam not disposed of by some speedier method. But here again the foggi-
ness of Mr. Donald’s motion is its strength. Its mistiness exposed it at


once as a convenience to Mr. Sutherland, to turn it to account, as he has
done in the Witness. Of course for all the readers of the motion or the
Witness know, “ the ascertained facts of the case,” may mean that poor
Mr. Ashley has been proved to be a myth, that he never was in the Post
Office, that there was never such a man labouring in connection with us,
that he never sent in any account to the Committee, that he never signed
those documents which Mr. Sutherland and Mr. Gregg produced, that he
never initiated law proceedings ;if a dozen or so of the ascertained facts
of the case ” had included materials of this kind, then Mr. Donald’s motion
would have been out of the region of fogs. As the .matter stands, the
reader may charitably suppose that such things must hare been done be-
fore a respectable man like Mr. Donald would say what he did in his
motion. Mr. Donald has been challenged before the whole community to
specify the “ unsubstantiated ” statements, on the strength of which he
made his motion, but they have not been forthcoming.
THE DISCUSSION IN SYNOD.
So far the flowery minute of the Church Extension Committee and the
foggy motion of Mr. Donald. There are still some points to notice in
connection with the discussion. Of course the grand performer was the
Rev. George Sutherland, although the performances of some others will
not be overlooked.
The origin of the pamphlet was to Mr. Sutherland an impenetrable
mystery. The writer of it had committed sin : this was the drift of one
flight of eloquence. “An enemy hath done this,” was the result of another
line of enquiry; and “ mental aberration ” was the climax of inventive
suggestion in still another effort to account for the phenomenon. In the
element of declamation I never had the good fortune to hear Mr. Sutherland
speaking with such tremendous vehemence. The words came in perfect
hurricanes. They tore along like debacles down a mountain side I have
heard Brougham and Macaulay, but these orators had not the inspiring
theme of my pamphlet. Mr. Sutherland, in the tornado of his eloquence,
seemed to blow away the very words from him in the “whirlwind of his
passion,” as the poet says. Of course all this was very imposing, and no
doubt was calculated to be mightily convincing, but the most of it was
“sound.” The most powerful argument which I remember as embodied
in these turgid tempests of words was this, twice repeated—that the writer
of the pamphlet ought to be ashamed to show his face in the meeting !
Well, this is a Protestant country, and I shad hold my own opinion on
such a subject. But if argument is to be measured, like gas, by the cubic
foot or yard of breath expended in declamation, then Mr. Sutherland may
triumphantly publish a new work to be entitled “Logic Superseded.”
Mr. Mclntyre took a prominent part in the discussion, and tried hard
to get me to depart from the pamphlet. I was about to rise, when Mr.
Sutherland sprang to his feet, and pointed out how I might withdraw it,
apologise for it, ask forgiveness for it, &c. It was in this way that the
special discussion on the pamphlet was led off. As soon as Mr. Sutherland
had delivered his sentiments, I rose, and said : ‘ ‘ Moderator, I am very
sorry, but I shall be quite unable to accommodate Mr. Mclntyre and Mr.
Sutherland in this matter.”
Mr. McKay took a very prominent part in the discussion, especially
when the report of the Church Extension Committee was before the Synod.
Without denying good points to Mr. McKay, he may be pronounced the
“bore” of the Court. He gives as many speeches—that is, of course,
“explanations”—as he likes. He spoke so frequently at last Synod, that
I ventured to make a proposal. I seldom said anything, but the wearisome
and dry speeches —that is, ‘ ‘ explanations ” of Mr. McKay became a
nuisance. I suggested that it would be a great saving of time if Mr. McKay


could be limited to thirteen speeches (“ explanations ”) on the same sub-
ject. The production of so much documentary material, as between the
students and the committee, seems to have perplexed Mr. McKay, and he
insisted on the production of original documents on both sides, which was
agreed to. Perhaps the most curious development of business knowledge
on the part of Mr. McKay was in reference to the accounts of Mr. Ashley,
which were printed in my pamphlet, and are reprinted with this issue.
Over and over again Mr. McKay earnestly drew the attention of the
Moderator to the fact that the accounts were not audited ! Was this a sign
of the dearth of materials on the part of Mr. McKay and his friends, or
was it genuine simplicity ? These accounts were presented for payment,
and, I suppose, no one would have been more delighted than Mr. Ashley,
if they had ever got the length of being audited. I wonder if Mr. M‘Kay
carries out, in his own practice, the principle which he was invoking in the
Synod? When Mr. McKay’s butcher, or baker, or grocer presents his
account for payment, does he scrutinize it, look severe, hand back the
papers, and say, “My good friend, what do you mean? this account is not
audited yet ?”
In such a state of things, it is no wonder if woful exhibitions of bad
taste and want of delicacy take place. One member of Synod took the
opportunity of making a very grand display against one of the unfortunate
students —Mr. Bates. Those who heard it will not soon forget it. The
performance was well disposed of by Rev. John S. MacPherson, who told
a Scottish story as applicable to the case. A preacher is under review, and
the question is asked, “ Was he very grand ?” t- Oh, very grand !” “ But
was he sound,?” “Sound! he was all sound together.” Interrogation is
a powerful element for giving rhetorical effect; but, unfortunately, some
people are slow to learn the lesson, that there is only one step between the
sublime and the ridiculous. Of the interrogations made by the'detractor
of Mr. Bates one was well answered at the time, and another may be
answered now. —*
Question—What is Mr. Bates ?
Answer—Mr. Bates is an answerjto special prayer.
Question —Where is Mr. Bates ?
Answer—Mr. Bates is at College, where his detractor never was.
The Unionists have been casting mi to us that we are flooding the
country witn mere shams of ministers, who have not the stamina to sup-
nort the ministerial character : and certainly, such exhibitions as the one
now referred to give handle for criticism.
THE DEFENCE.
On the side of defence, the position embodied in Mr. Porter’s motion,
was virtually that the writer had done nothing inconsistent with his
Protestant privilege of free and full discussion in a matter which came
before him, both as an instructor of the students and as a member of
Court. The motion, accordingly, was simply, in face of the cry for pro-
tection, that the Synod pass on to the next business. At (me time the
question took the shape whether a formal rebuke, or censure, should be
administered to the author of the pamphlet from the Moderator. It was
pointed out that this would require regular judicial procedure, an accusa-
tion drawn up with charges specified, and proved. This course was not
adopted. During the discussions Mr. M Tunes stated repeatedly that I
could have delivered every word of the pamphlet, without being called to
order, and that reporters might have been present to give the contents of
the pamphlet, word for word, in the columns of the public press. Mr.
Livingstone asked the very pertinent_question— For what are you going to
censure Mr. McPherson, or find fault—is it for printing a pamphlet ?As
to myself, I said very little ; in fact, there was nothing to answer. When


a mountain was made of the misplacing of Mr. Law’s name by putting it
among the names of the Church Extension Committee for 1879-80,1 more
than once got up, and said that I had sense enough to see the distinction
between admitting the correction as to Mr. Law’s name, and giving up the
pamphlet as a whole.
It may be proper here to say a word on the subject of writing pamph-
lets, in face of some extraordinary utterances which have proceeded from
Mr. Sutherland in the Witness. Pamphleteering, we are told, has done
incalculable evil in some of these colonies. But has not the want of it done
still greater evil ? In Scotland, pamphleteering is the order of the day.
The late Dr. Robert Buchanan, of Glasgow, anther of the “Ten Years’
Conflict,” mentions somewhere that he had collected between 700 and 800
pamphlets on the Church question alone, which led to the disruption of
the Church of Scotland. Not long ago I saw a notice in a Home paper
that in connection with the case of Professor Smith, a whole shower of
pamphlets had taken place. Beyond all this, the daily Press give verbatim
reports of the important discussions in every Church Court from the Pres-
bytery upwards. And yet Mr. Sutherland speaks about Christians rushing
their contentions before the public gaze ! What is the Witness but a
weekly pamphlet, sent out to public gaze ? Has Mr. Sutherland come to
believe that he alone, of all the members of Synod, is fit to enjoy the Pro-
testant privilege of giving his mind on subjects affecting the welfare, if not
the very existence of our denomination in the colony ?
THE WITNESS AND THE REV. JOHN S. MACPHERSON’S
PAMPHLETS.
When the meetings of Synod were ended, I was not responsible for the
approval of the conduct of the Church Extension Committee in the matter
of the students, as I was one of the minority who voted for the amendment
on the unqualified approval of the doings of the Committee. Combustible
materials had been stirred, and a little want of judgment might prolong
the controversies of the Synod after its business had been brought to an
end. Numbers of us have long given Mr. Sutherland full credit for all that
can be done in the matter of good judgment, of good sense, and of good
feeling, through the columns of The Witness. Now, if any one wishes to
see a master-piece of its kind, for honourable fairness and historical accu-
racy on the part of an editor reporting proceedings in his own newspaper,
in a case in Avhich he had opponents, let him read The Witness of Nov. 13,
1880. This report brought the Rev. John S. Macpherson, of East Mait-
land, to the front, with a letter to the Editor. The letter was not published
in The Witness, but, with singular fairness and good judgment, the occasion
was improved by the Editor, who, in The Witness of 27th November,
reviewed the letter, which he would not publish, in a magnanimous style,
quite in keeping with the report on the 13th. But now a new and startling
phenomenon appeared. Like magic, the fearless Editor of The Witness
was smitten with a mysterious desire for peace. The columns of The
Witness were to be closed against strife. This was all very wonderful, but
it happened there was another printing-press in the colony, so Mr. John
Macpherson’s letter, now amply supplemented with additional matter,
made its appearance. The dissection of statemmit.s a.nj the analysis of
figures in the report of November iMtluand the whole tone of Pretest ani-,
independence against the assumption of priestly airs by Mr. ISutherland,
was a public service to our denomination.


THE CHALLENGE
But what of the pamphlet on the subject of the students during these
events ? A very remarkable speech of Mr. Mclntyre in Synod was utilized
-4 in a wav by the Editor of The Witness, which nut me under the necessity
m *•/ of corresponding with Mr. Mclntyre on the subject. In due time came the
public challenge. The same course was followed with Mr. Donald, whose
motion in Synod was also turned to account in the columns of The Witness.
The correspondence and challenge will be found on other pages of this
pamphlet. Mr. Sutherland fired off his own broadside, but, as he shut the
columns of The Witness against Mr. John Macpherson, so he recommended
Mr. Mclntyre not to answer the challenge. There was something quite charm-
ingly disinterested in this advice. This brdbght out the detailed analysis
of my pamphlet, along with the challenges, which will be found in another
part of this publication. Here again it was discovered there were several
other newspapers in Sydney, with as large a circulation as The Witness, in
which advertisements could reach the public.
What am Ito think of these three ministers of religion ? For months
Mr. Mclntyre accents the position in which Mr. Sutherland has placed
"jfc' 1 i.p *s f him. He has been continuously cnaitenged to produce a list of ‘‘ alleged
facts” in my pamphlet which were “proved to be fictions,” and has failed
to produce such a list. Mr. Donald has allowed the words of his motion
I 0 to be interpreted as if it meant that my pamphlet was “made up of
fictions,” and he has allowed Mr. Sutherland to make this use of his motion,
though challenged in the matter for months ! Mr. Sutherland, who is
VfaMObfcSfft* sheltering himself all the time behind the names of Messrs. Donald and
Mclntyre with heroic self-denial, exhorts them to say nothing. Of course,
judging from Mr. Donald’s correspondence given herewith, it might be
very inconvenient for them to attempt to say anything. It would show the
dearth of argument and nakedness of the land generally. The position of
the “fearless ” Editor of The Witness in this matter reminds one of another
editor who had charge of a newspaper. The Editor of The Nation found
discretion the better part of valour, and once upon a time hid behind the
cabbage. The Editor of The Witness shelters himself behind Messrs.
Donald and Mclntyre.
While these sheets have been passing through the press, 1 have seen
the report of a congregational meeting, held on the Manning, where Mr.
Mclntyre was minister some time ago. Reference to it will be seen farther
on among the advertisements. At that meeting the reviewer of my
“analysis” regretfully acknowledged that there was a “necessity” for
such a review. What with the free and easy use which Mr. Sutherland
made of the memorable speech of Mr. Mclntyre, what with the cheerful
exhortation, which he gives Mr. IVlcluivre. to say nothing while stuck up
Ify on the pillory of public challenge before the whole colony, and what with
’’ ' v the weak exhibition on the Manning, Mr. Mclntyre may well cry, “save
me from my friends !” Between him and Mr. Donald it is, of course,
about six and half-a-dozen. Was there no man of independent judgment,
or good sound common sense, among the Manning people, to give the
business a more creditable shape ? Gas is a rather troublesome thing to
manage. Escaping from a well-inflated balloon we have seen, very
recently, how fatal the gas was—to the balloon !
MR. CORMACK’S CASE.
Amongst the matters which come under notice a f ter the rising of the
Synod, besides the pamphlet, was the case of Mr. Cormack. This brings
up the session of St. George’s, and here we have some of the same names
as in the case of the pamphlet. Mr Sutherland, Mr. Gregg, and Mr.
Knox, are members of the session of St. George’s, as well as members of the
Church Extension Committee. The case of Mr. Cormack has been sent


back to the session, so the merits of the original difficulty, whatever it
was, will no doubt be developed in due course. But the forms of process
for securing the ends of justice, have to be looked after as the case pro-
ceeds, stage by stage. The points of interest in this case are of such
practical importance, and have such a bearing on our denomination, that I
shall advert somewhat at length to sjme aspects of the case, which have
already come to the surface.
If there is one thing more than another for which the name of Briton
is guarantee, it is for the purity of the administration of justice between
man and man. A short time ago the Press of the colony, including the
Witness, was teeming with articles on the case of Mr. Justice Windeyer.
So jealous are the British conscience and sense of honor and fairness, that men
scrutinize, with keen discrimination, the title, even of judges, not implicated
in the original quarrel of their brother judge, to sit as judges upon those
who have offended their brother judge. It is possible that elements of a
biassing nature may operate to the prejudice of the interests of justice.
Now what would have happened if Mr. Justice Windeyer had sat in
judgment in his own case, and passed sentence on the proprietors of the
Evening News for criticising him as they did ? The whole colony would
have been in a flame from end to end ! Monster indignation meetings
would have been held in every town in the colony. Now in the case of
Mr. Cormack. the bare reading of the papers before the Synod brought out
the fact, that Mr. Sutherland himself is at the very foundation of the dis-
pute, quarrel, or whatever it may be called. He and Mr. Cormack came
to decided variance, and yet in session Mr. Sutherland sat in judgment on
his own case. To say that this was shockingly bad taste is utterly beneath
the mark. In the interests of righteousness it is repugnant to every senti-
ment of honor and fairness, that, if I have a quarrel with a man, I shall
meet that very man as my judge in that very quarrel! It is high time
that the broad light of day should be thrown on our Church doings. Mr.
Sutherland may have a great horror of going with our contentions before
the world, but 1 have often deplored the fact that we have not reporters
taking down our proceedings for the Press every day. I believe this alone
would prevent the very origin of many of the contentions. Let the reader
ponder over this state of things which happened at last Synod. When
Mr. Sutherland brought up the minute of the Church Extension Com-
mittee complaining of my conduct, the members of that Committee were
certainly in the place of my accusers. Three of that Committee, Messrs,
Sutherland and Mclntyre, ministers, and Mr. Gregg, elder, were also mem-
bers of the Synod. Now, after the complaint from Mr. Sutherland, here
were prosecutors and accusers, as many as were present, also judges !
When, at some point, this state of things, parties implicated being also
judges, was adverted to, Mr. Sutherland heroically exclaimed, “ We know
our duty.” Of course the self-denial of such parties, acting as judges in
their own quarrel, and voting for themselves, deserves to be had in remem-
brance ! The analysis of “misleading” figures at these points, by the
Rev. John S. Macpherson, in his pamphlets, was a public service to the
cause of honor and fairness amongst us. This matter is a very practical
one. It strikes deeply into the arrangements and safeguards for securing
justice among men.
But continuing the case of Mr. Cormack. The ecclesiastical enormity
which took place in the Kirk Session of St. George’s, when the minister,
Mr. Sutherland, actually sat in judgment in his own case, was destined to
be remitted to the session of the Church named ! This could have
been avoided by the Synod going on at once with the matter, and a motion
was made to this effect. But no 1 In the face of every sentiment of
British honor, justice and fair play, Mr. Mclntyre moved, and Mr. McKay
seconded, that the case be sent back to the session of St. George’s. It waa
bad enough for the session to make such a gigantic blunder as to judge in
a case in which the Moderator of Session, Mr. Sutherland himself, was
mixed up in the very origin of the dispute, but what shall we say of the


wisdom of those who have made “confusion worse confounded,” by sending
back the case, for Mr. Sutherland to occupy again such an objectionable
position, and to act as judge in his own quarrel ! Five hundred acts of
Parliament could not give character to such a proceeding. All the bene-
dictions of all the Church Courts in existence, down to the Session of St.
George’s, could not wipe away the inherent stain which must for ever
attach to a decision in which a man judges his own case and votes for
himself.
But fact is stranger than fiction. Some things assume a normal com-
pleteness in actual history, which, in the work of fiction, would be con-
demned at once, as in the face of all probability. Exception, by dissent,
was taken against the course recorded above on sundry grounds. Accord-
ing to Church practice, members of Court were appointed to draw up
answers to these reasons of dissent. Let the reader rub his eyes, and
read the following twice over, to make sure that he has got the real mean-
ing of the words—The Synod has remitted the case to the Kirk-Session,
in order to respect the constitution of the Church and its reputation, and
therefore cannot be charged with bringing its decisions into disrespect.”
Verily, we are doing an unconstitutional thing in order to preserve the
constitution of the Church ! If there is one thing which can be done in a
British community to bring the decision of a Court into disrepute, it is
to send a man to be judged by his adversary, in a court where his adver-
sary sits as President; we accordingly send Mr. Cormack to be judged by
Mr. Sutherland, to uphold the honor and credit of the Court ! There are
three names attached to this awful floundering, and he who has attained
to be chief of the three is the Rev. Isaac McKay, who makes no small pre-
tensions to knowledge of Church Law ! This was the gentleman whose
legal spirit could not be content with copies of documents—he must have
the originals. Truly we have got the right man in the right place, for if
ever poetic justice overtook a man it has got hold of Mr. McKay in the
printed minutes.
But, stupendous as is the ‘ ‘ constitutional ” blundering of Mr. McKay,
perhaps Mr. Sutherland may claim a distinction beyond it. Sending back
Mr. Cormack’s case was a climax reached by Mr. Mclntyre. The answer
on behalf of constitutional procedure by Mr. McKay, to the reasons of dis-
sent, was a capping of the climax. Can the force of nature any “further
go ?” I think Mr. Sutherland has managed it, and fairly put a feather in
the cap. Mr. John Macpherson has drawn attention, in his valuable tracts,
to the marvellous change of front which was presented in The Witness in
the remarks made on Mr. Cormack’s case. But the putting of the feather
in the cap of the climax of bungling in this business is to be seen in the
following utterance from The Witness of Dec. 11, 1880; —“All Church
courts having a perpetuated existence are governed very much by traditional
rules and modes of procedure, the elder and more experienced members
teaching and training the younger, who, with becoming modesty, listen and
learn, except they be upstarts who are ambitious to fill places for which
they are not fitted. ” In this age of the world and the Church, a traditional
code of laws! Patriarchal authority! Idyllic simplicity! But these
Arcadian sketches, as Mr. Sutherland has to admit, will not do. There
must be something more ‘ ‘ definite. ” I should think so ! Imagine the
Rev. John S. Macpherson, the best Church lawyer in the Synod, having to
listen to (to say nothing of learning from) the portentous blundering of Mr.
Mclntyre, the ‘ ‘ constitutional ’ floundering of Mr. McKay, and the trans-
cendental nonsense of Mr. Sutherland ! Traditional rules ! Patriarchal
authority ! —in which, by rule of thumb, the most barefaced favouritism
can be extended to red-hot partisans, and the grossest injustice and hard-
ship inflicted on men of independent character and judgment! Mr.
Sutherland’s ideas were well carried out some 3000 years ago, in the Asiatic
despotisms of the East. Men do look for something more “ definite ”in the
ages of Anglo-Saxon civilisation and under the constitutional government
of Britons. “Gang up, Jock, and be hanged, and please the laird,” embodies


a principle not suited to these latitudes. The “ Jocks ” now-a-days think
they can live to better purpose, even though the laird should be the Rev.
George Sutherland, and the “Jock ” Mr. Cormack, or Mr. John Macpherson,
or Mr. Peter Macpherson. Our Confession of Faith well acknowledges that
Synods and Councils may err, and have erred. A very modern instance is
not far to seek.
IS MR. SUTHERLAND THREATENING TO EXPEL SOME OF US
FROM THE CHURCH?
It is well that these eccletiastical enormities are coming so decidedly
to the surface. For this we are indebted to the Rev. John S. MacPherson, of
East Maitland, whose thoroughly constitutional procedure has inaugurated a
new era in our Church. Pushing all comers with the iron horns of con-
stitutional Church law, he has compelled Mr. Sutherland and his friends
to the choice of accepting what is in accordance with the law of the Church,
or of breaking off into such gigantic absurdities as I have been unfolding.
But how is Mr. MacPherson rewarded for his services ? There are some
circumstances in this connection to which I think public attention should
be drawn. The Moderator of Synod usually, as a matter of course, preaches
in St. George’s during the sitting of Synod. Mr. MacPherson was, most
significantly to my mind, passed over at last Synod. The poorest preachers
amongst ns, and the driest preachers amongst us, are sought and brought to
the pulpit of St. George’s, while Mr. McPherson is conspicuous by his absence
from that pulpit. In the face of the very offensive remarks which have been
made in the direction of Mr. John MacPherson, I, for myself, take
the liberty of saying that the present minister of East Maitland is by far the
best Church lawyer in our courts, and as a preacher—Mr. Sutherland may as
well look to his laurels ! The laity of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia do not know how much they are indebted to the correct business
capacities and constitutional course of action followed by Mr. John Mac-
Pherson. In ordinary circumstances I would not say so much, but the
discreditable treatment which Mr. John MacPherson has received I con-
sider ought not to be allowed to escape without record and reprobation.
The offensive remarks of Mr. Sutherland about those unfit to rule in
Church Courts is weak enough, and, 1 am afraid, natural enough in the
circumstances. The passing over of Mr. John MacPherson in the supply
of St. George’s pulpit at last Synod, as well as on other occasions, is just
the tribute which certain men pay to their superiors. But the history of
the past warns us that men do not stop at these points. Ebenezer Erskine,
and the fathers of the Secession Church of 1733, had unpleasant times in
the Established Church of Scotland. There were not only the “brow-
beating reasonings” to which they were treated—they were rebuked, sus-
pended, expelled, and deposed from the Ministry. Here was the spectacle
of arrogant ecclesiastics wielding the rod, ordering what they knew could
not be obeyed, and then smiting far better men than themselves. Pre-
tences were quite easily obtained. The published minutes of the Church
of Scotland on the subject which may be seen in Pardovan’s Collection,
show that schism, following divisive courses, contumacy, disobedience, were
ready missiles to throw in the face of faithful men. They were rebuked,
suspended, expelled, deposed, not for faithful witness-bearing against the
evil doings of the ruling party in the Church, but for disobedience, schism,
following divisive courses, Sfc.
Now what does Mr. Sutherland mean, when he speaks of Mr. John
MacPherson and myself rowing in the same boat, and likely to reach the
same destination ? When men cannot co-operate with their brethren, they
can go, Mr. Sutherland considerately tells us, to more congenial company;
but if, notwithstanding very uncongenial company, they have certain great
Church principles to contend for, what then ? What was poor Jeremiah to


do in his day ? He belonged to the Jewish Church, and the priests and
rulers of that very church were his persecutors. There was the man that
was born blind, and who got into discussion with the rulers of his Church, in
the days of Christ. They settled the question in the usual summary way
—“ they cast him out.” This put him in a very peculiar position, but one
thing is certain, the moment he was expelled by his own Church, he oc-
cupied, more closely than ever, the right relationship to the truth.
Again, pamphleteering and advertising, we are told, are very bad things.
What is the Witness but a w T eekly pamphlet, as already noticed, and be-
coming more and more degenerate every week ? The old story is pointed
out in Mr John MacPherson’s tracts. What is very good for Mr. Suther-
land, is very dangerous for both Mr. John MacPherson and Mr. Peter
MacPherson. But again, this pamphleteering and advertising “must lead
to consequences which we need not specify, but which will be developed in
their time !” Witness, December 18, 1880. Here is a fine field for specu-
lation ! If we will not leave an uncongenial company, perhaps we shall get
assistance from those traditional rules, not the constitutional laws of the
church, to hasten our movements. What was done in the case of Erskine
and his friends, can be done in a much more expeditious manner now. It has
been accomplished in these colonies. A tempestuous speech and a vote is
all that is necessary. Of course it might be said that such a result reflects
on the soundness of Presbyterian Church government, if such arbitrary
things can be done. But not so. The Sorata and Chimborazo may be the
finest floating masses of architecture that ever furrowed the seas with their
keels, but then, if captains will run them against rocky headlands, it is no
fault of the vessels if they go to pieces. Mr. Sutherland need not give any
mysterious hints ; he may throw off the mask as soon as he likes. Ido not
wish to sacrifice my Protestant privileges inside the Synod or outside of
it. It is not enough that our forefathers, including the Covenanters,
whose tombs Mr. Sutherland has been garnishing for some time back, have
fought and bled for liberty ; we must maintain those liberties. If I evade
my responsibilities because a man like Mr. Sutherland may make himself
troublesome, if another does the same, if five, if fifty, if five hundred do
the same in a community, then there is a spiritless and degraded commu-
nity, only fit to be the tools of unscrupulous pretenders, political or eccle-
siastical, or both. If not fit to rule in Church courts, such men would-be
very tit to be ruled.
THE WITNESS.
From what has been already said, it will be easily understood that, in
the writer’s opinion, The Witness, as latterly conducted, is neither useful
nor creditable to our denomination. Its partisanship puts it out of court
as a faithful and impartial medium of information. Its utterances on the
subject of Church law belong to the Asiatic despotisms of previous ages,
rather than to a community whose instincts have been moulded by Anglo-
Saxon civilization and British liberty and constitutional law. Now let the
true-blue Free-Churchman ask what does he get in The Witness in the way
of keeping up Free-Church doctrine, testimony, and principles generally ?
The fact is, for one-sixth of the money which is expended on The Witness,
a monthly journal could be maintained which would give six times the
amount of really instructive Free-Church matter. Mere gasconading
occasionally about the Free Church is not instruction. In fact, that hollow
style of vaunting is not likely to furnish the rising generation with elements
of knowledge and conviction which will enable them to hold their ground
when the burden of controversy rests upon their own shoulders. I feel
very certain that some of the recent utterances in the Witness (see Feb. 5,
1881) on the subject of the Sabbath can occasion nothing but the most
unpleasant contrast between the present and the previous minister of St.
George’s Church.


MR. BATES.
I had intended to give an extract from a historical statement, setting
forth the circumstances in which Mr. Sutherland heard of Mr. Bates and
sent for him, but it does not seem to be necessary. To show the urgency,
however, with which Mr. Sutherland sought Mr. Bates as a student of the
Church, a brief telegram which the *' Rev. Archibald Smith, Parramatta,”
received from Mr. Sutherland shortly after his first acquaintance with Mr.
Bates, will meet the case. The following is a copy of the telegram :
Glebe Point,
Rev. Archibald Smith, Parramatta.
See Bates. Send him to-night, I advance money for month.
George Sutherland,
July 26th, 1878. Ross Street, Forest Lodge.
Another point to be noticed is the fact that when Mr. Sutherland tooki
Mr. Bates in hand to train him as a student for the ministry. Mr. Bales
held anti-Calvinistic views? Now, it will be well remembered how un-
palatable the reading of documents was to some members of Court at last
Synod, and, as a matter of fact, Mr. John MacPherson was prevented from
reading all that he had in hand. Thus an important subject—that of
doctrine in the matter of the students —was kept out of sight. At another
stage, to my surprise, a member of Court made the observation that no
objection had been raised against the Church Extension Committee as
regards the doctrine of the students when at first received into the Church,
As regards Mr. Ashley, from first to lasi, he never held Cal vinist.ic doctrine
I asked him myself, knowing bis former Wesleyan connection, how he bad
got over the question of Calvinism ? He answered quite freely that he had
been reading a great deal on the subject in Hodge, but he did not at all
like itT ' '
In my published analysis of the first edition of the pamphlet which
was condemned at the Synod, I intimated that I would give extracts illus-
trative of the treatment which Mr. Bates got at the hands of the Church
Extension Committee. Accordingly, an extract from the letter of Jan.
23rd, sent by Mr, Bates to Mr. Sutherland, is given below. This is the
important letter which Mr. Gregg omitted in reading the correspondence
between the Committee and Mr. Bates. Different men have their pecu-
liarities, and Mr. Gregg has his. He is one of those who draw very largely
on their conscientiousness, and make very formidable appeals to the
Searcher of Hearts. Notwithstanding all these things, he omitted the
important letter of January 23rd. The following extract gives the begin-
ning of the letter :
To the Rev. George Sutherland,
My Dear Mr. Sutherland,
Sydney,
Picton, January 23, 1880,
Yours dated 17th instant is to hand. I regret to think that you
have failed to see the meaning of my letter. My object in writing you was
not to display any ambition for either license or ordination, as you seem
to have supposed, but to show you my position as without a home and
funds, and the non-prospect of our doing any work of a settled character
in the sparsely populated district of Picton. To remove, if possible, the
idea which you have apparently entertained with regard fo the motives
which actuated me in writing my last epistle to you, I may say that I am
decidedly in favor of a seven years course of study, and I am fully per-
suaded that this course will have to be adopted if we, as a Church, desire
to have an educated ministry. * * * *
3 au. MwfcW tr 'JL, b~ '‘“'fT-
j t>r. duu
&3 * wfcKtwfc. feilWcp, aJJMi dtM- b eUuu, tut-,
ifccUfdl 1 audtMM(AM\p .


nrfi'el Ua, t , L httltl-auAcUi<£f fawoi- Oc-^^fh
j(rf a. Uuaquurfftahj cun ckfa, au cjlCta4~l He ZahaMU- ‘}‘f LiM4 'l
Clo Sausaf f pLflit.),>/), !*n ~,n. r,‘Lrita>~
loliLx. (Iwd (rtyyco 1 ! 11^
One little incident affecting Mr. Bates must not be omitted. It was
' one of those momentary events which, like straws, show the direction of the
wind. The case was this—A very suggestive letter had been sent by Mr.
Ci Sutherland to the local committee at Picton, whilst Mr. Bates was sta-
ir tioned there on his six months’ appointment. The following is a copy of
the letter . —,—_ —1
Sydney, January 31, 1880. N ft
My Dear Mr. Quinn, S
v, I got your last, and as you meet on Monday night, I send you a line
A to ask you a few questions. r ? f>
i 1. Do you at present prefer to have a young man among you—or do N £Na
5 you prefer supply from Sydney ? K 1
2. Are the Committee satisfied with Mr. Bates, or do they wish for a j&k
change? £
3. Has Mr. Bates visited the people, and conducted any local prayer 1 tp
5 meetings through the week, or have the people desired such ?
'vi 4. Would a week evening service at the Oaks be of service?
*3 ) I should take the mind of the Committee on all these points—specially FS •
3 4 as to the work now done, if acceptable or not—and to its extent. M r ,A
i Vv With kind regards to all the Committee, &g. |S> p
a -s. Yours faithfully, -a £
S Ss. GEO. SUTHERLAND, £T g J*
> <S Convener, Church Extension Committee.
| It was understood that this letter of 31st January, 1880, would arrive
M at its destination on Monday, 2nd February. Mr. Bates, in a letter S
_ during the session of Synod, represented a letter as written • U 'j, g*
a 5 Now it turned out that there was a mistake here. A meeting of Committee * q-
v 5 had been called, it was understood, for the 2nd of February, whether held 1 it
or not. This appears to be the meeting referred to in Mr. Sutherland’s T I o{
1 S * letter. The formal answer to the letter of queries, it seems, was written
*5 afterwards. Now when this came to the surface the sensation amongst £>
some friends was something to remember. Rev. D. K. MTntyre was sit- '
w ting not far from me, and I can bear him testimony that his pious horror P £ jj
X o was of the most pronounced description. But some little awkwardness took-®. ,
place on the other side, as when it was sheeted home to the Church Exten- S p
.A d si° n Committee, that having come forward with correspondence with Mr. k* S C* a-v
,3 '•‘S Bates, they had somehow, left out a very material letter of his, which § P
Sj4 an entirely new complexion on his case. Some of the parties concerned, p£ r*
3 it may be acknowledged, seemed to feel the unpleasantness of the inci- , 2
| dent, but Mr. MTntyre’s pious horror had been reserved for a more P
A n 5 orthodox occasion. Some of these things will enable us to estimate the J 1 S E
" 3 sublime self-denial of Mr. Sutherland in abstaining from giving a fulfc>>»
S ”2 report of all the proceedings of last Synod in their “ naked deformity,” as v
he said, in the Witness. As to the letter of the 31st January from Mr. ? '
Sutherland to Mr. Quinn, the reader can compare the drift of its contents
4 f with the sentiment expressed by Mr. Sutherland in his letter of the £
l7th of the same month, to Mr. Bates himself, “We will deal fairly and
honorably with our young men.” That same letter of the 31st January
gives a glimpse into some correspondence which took place, which, if kept, X,
2 o o does not appear to have been produced, as ordered, in accordance with Mr.
4 1 M‘Kay’s motion. The very letter which was read as the official answer to
3 suggestive queries of January 31, was taken out of his pocket by the 1 PI <A»
, * reader, and restored thereto. B 3
Perhaps a word or two of explanation may be appropriate to show how £ ?
I happened to become so specially connected with this matter of the
>«3 students. In prospect of coming to reside in Sydney, after demitting my \
■«/ charge at East Maitland, I had been appointed by the Synod to discharge p t
:p ?»
413 pitvnv b”lj P ™ rrurj Y'dyy? IVK], -yro WryiAV* Q e
i I« im- I"
K&* tLrn f' > tl -nx\*v'yv r ? f »•
• =- n? 'rrrtf'icnoy'yjpincn-ry fflCrrmj-Tpvyfi


Languages, and Apologetical Theology. I had entered upon this work but
a short time when one day I met Mr. Sutherland in Oxford-street, who
was on his way to inform me that Mr. Archibald Smith had been cut off
by the Church Extension Committee, and, if he was coming to me for in-
struction he had no right to do so as a student of the Church. Some time
after this Mr. Bates also informed me he had got notice that his services
were no longer required. Mr. Ashley continued for some time after this
to come to me for instruction, but was in deep perplexity owing to his cir-
cumstances. One day he was hoping against hope, and the next day he
was so depressed as to be unfit for study. In such circumstances I got
from these three students copies of almost all correspondence which took
place between them and the Committee or its Convener.
If this was the style in which the students of our Church were looked
after by the Committee, it seemed to me that it was high time for some one
to look after the Committee. That extremely unpleasant duty came so
closely to my door that I could not honourably evade my responsibility,
however gladly I would have been free from the work had that been
possible.
MINUTE OF THE CHURCH EXTENSION COMMITTEE.
(See Witness, November 13; also Printed Minutes of the Synodfor 1880, 5.96.)
“ The Church Extension Committee having learned that a pamphlet
containing allegations which they consider to be unjust, and also containing
figures of an unfair and misleading character, tending to damage the repu-
tation of the Committee, especially of those who also belong to the session
of St. George’s Church, specified by name, agree to record their extreme
surprise at the conduct of the Rev. Peter Macpherson, in publishing such
statements, without seeking, by personal intercourse or by letter, for any
information from the Convener, or members of the Committee, on the sub-
ject, protest against procedure of so reckless a character, and the Com-
mittee further agree to lay a copy of this extract minute before the Synod
of their Church, craving the protection of their Court, from such public
statements, which they cannot but regard as unjust and libellous on the
part of a Christian minister.”
DELIVERANCE OF SYNOD REGARDING THE PAMPHLET,
(See Witness, Nov. 13th, 1880, also published Minutes for 1880, section 71.)
Moved by Rev. W. S. Donald, seconded by Rev. I. M'Kay, as follows
—“ The Synod had under its consideration a minute of the Church Exten-
sion Committee, complaining of a pamphlet, written and signed by the
Rev. P. Macpherson, containing statements reflecting upon their treat-
ment of certain students mentioned in it, as well as other allegations
reflecting upon individual members of the Committee : and the Synod,
having heard the Convener and Clerk of the Committee, are of opinion
that the pamphlet was uncalled for, and its statements, in the opinion of
the Synod, in reference to members of Committee, unsubstantiated by
the ascertained facts of the case ; and the Synod are thus of opinion that
the proceedings of the Committee are sufficiently vindicated by the
deliverance of the Synod on the adoption of the Committee’s report.”
187 Albion Street, Sydney, Dec. 2nd, 1880.
Rev. D. K. MTntykb, Sydney,
Rev. Sj,p,
I beg to call your attention to the use which has been made of your
name in the Witness, newspaper, edited by the Rev. George Sutherland.
I refer particularly to the Witness of dates Nov. 13th and 27th. In the


paper of the 13th November the following words occur, “ The Committee
was defended by the majority of the members of the Court; the seem-
ingly formidable prosecution broke down, and in the language of the Rev.
D. K. MTntyre, ‘The alleged facts were proved to be fictions.’” In the
Witness of Nov. 27, occur the following words, “ The quotation from the
Rev. Mr. MTntyre’s speech, confirmed by the motion of the Rev. W. S.
Donald, is the ipsissima verba, taken down at the moment by the editor, as
emphatically expressive of the truth.” I will be very much obliged if you
will give me a list of the “alleged facts” which were “proved to be
fictions,” so far as the contents of my pamphlet are concerned.
I am, Rev. Sir,
Yours faithfully,
PETER MACPHBRSON.
187 Albion Street, Sydney, 7th Dec., 1880.
Rev. D. K. M'lntyeb, Sydney,
Rev. Sie,
I beg to call your attention to my letter of December 2nd, still un-
answered.
I now give you the choice of repudiating the use made by Mr. Suther-
land of your alleged speech, so far as my pamphlet is concerned, by a
statement from yourself in next Witness, or of leaving the matter to be
farther dealt with (in the meantime) by me by advertisements in the
public Press.
I am, Rev. Sir,
Yours faithfully,
PETER MACPHBRSON.
187 Albion Street, Sydney, Bth Dec., 1880.
Rev. W. S. Donald, A.M., Clarencetown.
My Deae Sie,
I hope you will pardon me for troubling you in reference to the matter
which I wish to bring before you in this letter. I have to refer yon to the
fitness of Nov. 13th and 27th, and the statements in connection with
which your motion in Synod, regarding my pamphlet, is placed. I will be
much obliged if you will favor me with specific mention of some of the
more important points, which, in your opinion, were unsubstantiated, and
on the strength of which you found yourself warranted in proposing the
motion as expressive of the truth.
To make my purpose as plain as possible I will briefly refer to the
cases of Messrs. Bates and Ashley. In reference to the former of these I
beg to point out that the two principal statements were fully “substan-
tiated ” by the ascertained facts of the case.
1. Mr. Bates was cut off in the face of the most earnest remonstrance.
Mr. Gregg read the letter of the 16th January, on which the action of the
Church Extension Committee was grounded, but somehow he omitted to
read the letter of the 23rd January, in which the very earnest remonstrance
of Mr. Bates was contained. Of course the omission was supplied from
other sources, and the letter was read twice during the Synod. The
publication, if necessary, of these papers, will prove this position to the
world.
2. Mr. Bates was cut off in the middle of a six months’ engagement.
This was not denied. All that Mr. Gregg could do was to regard the
arrangement between the Committee and the students as one of master and
servant, apparently to mitigate the arbitrary character of the Committee’s
procedure in cutting off Mr. Bates in the middle of the six months’ en-
gagement, and in the face of the most earnest remonstrance.
I consider that these proved facts justify me in raising the question
whether or not the procedure of the Committee was characterised by that
fatherly, considerate, and humane treatment, which a student in Mr. Bates’
circumstances demanded.


AS TO ME. ASIILBY’s CASE.
1. Mr. Ashley left a good situation of £124 per annum to join our
Church, and in about seven months was in destitution, with his wife and
family. This could not be gainsaid. The generous attempt of Mr. Suther-
land to indicate that after all Mr. Ashley was not reduced to such desti-
tution as seemed to be supposed, was fatally disposed of by reference to
the hat, coat, and vest. The facts regarding these things were fully ad-
mitted by Mr. Gregg, who, indeed, made use of them to show how kind he
had been to Mr. Ashley.
2. There was a complete misunderstanding between Mr, Sutherland
and Mr. Ashley in regard to the terms on which the latter was to be paid,
Mr. Ashley states in the published letter accompanying his account that
he expected to receive “at least at the rate of £l2O per annum, and to be
kept at the Bellinger.” Moreover, this statement is acted upon in the
amended account. Now, on the other hand, Mr. Sutherland scouted the
idea of Mr. Ashley getting at the rate of £l2O a year for more than the
six months during which he was “in the field.” Mr. Sutherland’s own
statements in the face of Mr. Ashley’s statements and claims, prove that
Mr. Sutherland failed, most disastrously for Mr. Ashley, to make plain
the terms according to which Mr. Ashley was to be paid. Mr, Ashley is
an unusually simple person, with whom Mr. Sutherland had been more or
less acquainted before the former gave up his situation, and Mr. Suther-
land could not have been too careful and painstaking, in making sure that
Mr. Ashley understood, exactly, his future prospects, before he should
detach himself and family from a permanent situation.
3. That Mr. Ashley signed a peculiar document was amply proved.
Mr. Sutherland gave a lengthened account of the matter. Now, if the
affairs of the Committee had been conducted in a business-like manner,
how did this document come to be so important ? Why was the securing
of it to be regarded as a Providence, as Mr. Sutherland said ? Would a
number of such Providences improve our public position 1 Why were not
plain receipts enough ?
4. That Mr. Gregg followed up this work by getting Mr. Ashley to
sign another document was also proved by what transpired. Mr. Gregg
produced and read the document. Again, why were these unusual docu-
ments so important to the Committee 1
Whatever be the moral value of the facts involved in these different
points, they were all substantiated. You might think them of trifling
importance, but they were substantiated nevertheless. I think them of
very great importance. My sense of honour revolted against the idea of a
committee of any Christian Church doing business as Mr, Sutherland and
his Committee did business with Mr. Ashley. I was very anxious for
months before the Synod met, not to be implicated, through the Synod,
with the responsibility of having either to defend or wink at such proce-
dure. The pamphlet has put a clear line of demarcation between Mr.
Sutherland and myself in this matter.
Looking over the whole of the discussions in the matter of the students,
the following appear to me to have been the two phases of the one argu-
ment which weighed most with the majority of the Court :
1. *• We are well quit of the three.” But three mistakes in the mode
of getting rid of them may just be the natural result of three previous
mistakes in the mode of getting them. To my way of thinking, three
mistakes latterly do not cancel three mistakes formerly. The two added
make six mistakes.
2. “ If you knew all we knew, you would be satisfied to be rid of them
too.” Well, this is a good argument for majorities, but then you and l—
or at least, I—may be disposed of some day in the same style ; so I am not
prepossessed with this kind of logic. In the case before the Synod, the
amount of paltry drivel given by the square yard by Mr. Sutherland about
his former student, Mr. Bates, was no credit to Mr, Sutherland, and no


honour to the Court. What would be the value of thousands of cubic
yards of such gas, when the conclusion is reached that Mr. Sutherland
gives Mr. Bates a good testimonial character 1
I know of only one correction to acknowledge in my pamphlet. It is
putting Mr. Law’s name on the Committee on Church Extension for the
year 1879-80. As soon as this appeared from the reading of the names of
Committee-men, I acknowledged the error, and apologized to Mr. Law,
who was present, for the mistake. Otherwise, everything stands either
not questioned, or if questioned, substantiated. The reading of corres-
pondence bearing on the students, you will remember, was very unpalatable
to some members of Court, and the whole of the papers were not read ;
still farther evidence, accordingly, lies in store in the portions of corres-
pondence and papers which were not read.
I presume 1 need scarcely tell you that, in the interests of truth and
righteousness, in all ordinary certainty (D.Y.), public use will be made of
these papers.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours ever truly,
Peter Macpherson.
Clarence Town,
Dec. 14th, 1880.
My Dear Sir, —
I had your latter a few days ago, but had not time to attend to it
till now.
In. regard to the matters treated of in your letter, I beg to remind
you that my motion was made in your presence ; it was read over and
commented on in your presence ; and it seems to me that it would have
been well, if you had thought it necessary to put any questions on the sub-
ject, to have done so there and then ; or that yourself or some of those
who took the same view of the matter as you did, should have shown that
the expression to which you take exception was unwarranted, and that
the matter should have been allowed to take end with the vote. Further,
although I am not aware what object you have in view in requesting an
answer to your letter, I may be permitted to say that, if you intended to
re-open the discussion, it would, in my judgment, have been more satis-
factory to have done so at once after the rising of the Synod ; as, after the
lapse of some four weeks from the time of the discussion, one who has not
been thinking of it may not have the details so fresh in memory. But be
that as it may, I beg, on reference to your letter, to make two remarks :
1. Neither in my motion nor in any remarks that I made did I for a
moment call in question the fact that in your opinion the charges you
brought against the Church Extension Committee were substantiated. But
2. I claim the same liberty to myself as I give to you, and I say,
without hesitation, that in my opinion, formed on the evidence I had, the
charges were not substantiated. You are aware that the same charges as
are contained in your pamphlet, or, at any rate, charges in every way
similar to them, were brought against the Church Extension Committee
by our respected Moderator, and that replies were given to these charges
both by the Convener and Secretary of the Church Extension Committee,
and that a large majority of the Synod held that the charges were not
substantiated. As for myself, 1 have no hesitation in saying that the ex-
planation given by the Convener and Secretary in regard to the circum-
stances in which Mr. Bates ceased to be employed as a catechist by the
Church Extension Committee, left the conviction upon my mind that the
charges of inhumanity and unfatherliness which you virtually make against
the Church Extension Committee were not substantiated.
As for Mr. Ashley, there can be no doubt that he left a situation, and
thatjhe signed certain papers, and there can be no doubt that Mr, Ashley


was in distressed circumstances, and that various parties sympathised with,
and assisted him in, these circumstances ; but, at the same time, the ac-
count given by the Church Extension Committee led me and others to
come to the conclusion that Mr. Ashler-had the various matters adverted
to placed plainly before him, and that he was not taken advantage of and
drawn unwittingly and improperly into doing the things alleged. This
being the conclusion I came to, I of course embodied it in my motion, and
employed the word unsubstantiated to express my view of the case.
I find from the closing paragraph of your letter that you mean to pub-
lish another pamphlet, and, if I understand aright, that you mean to
publish the letter which you have sent to me, and as in that case the
parties more immediately assailed in your letter will likely defend them-
selves, it does not seem that it would be of any use for me to go deeper
into the matter. I merely add that I disavow the interpretation you put
upon the views, or, at any rate, upon the actings, of the Synod, in dealing
with the case, and I think we, as the majority, were entitled to be
considered as conscientious as the minority were.
It seems to me that you suppose that the publication of the pamphlet
will bring (and no doubt in your opinion) merited discredit upon Mr,
Sutherland ; whether it may do that or no, I know not, but I am sure of
one thing it will do.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
WM. S. DONALD.
Eey. P. Macpherson, A. M.
187 Albion Street, Sydney,
17th December, 1880.
Bey. W. S. Donald, A.M., Clarencetown.
My Dear Sir, —
I have received your letter of 14th December. It does not attempt
the performance of what I requested. It is certainly remarkable, if you
saw your way to make a motion that “ statements ” in a short pamphlet
had been “unsubstantiated,” and, after the lapse of a very few weeks, you
cannot bring forward a presentable array of these statements. The matter
is forced on my notice by the Witness of 13th and 27th November. As far
as I can gather from the drift of your letter, it seems to give reasons for not
attempting what I ask. Of course lam not satisfied with that. If I can
substantiate the statements, then your inability to remember which of
them you considered “ unsubstantiated ” goes for nothing, and, in fact,
becomes very easily explained.
As you draw so much attention to the fact that I was present, and
heard the explanations which were so convincing to you, I may point out
that a very great difference obviously exists between the effect of the
Church Extension Committee’s rhetoric on you and on me. In fact, from
the way in which you refer to Mr., Sutherland’s explanations, I am almost
inclined to look upon a large part of your letter as tantamount to a con-
fession that you were swept off your feet by his oratory. This may be a
very great compliment to Mr. Sutherland’s rhetoric, or a wofully poor one to
your own penetration and independence of judgment. It is extremely
awkward for you, as taking a lead in the matter in Synod, if you cannot
lay fingers on a dozen or so of “ unsubstantiated ” statements in my pamph-
let, and if all you can do is to refer to Mr. Sutherland’s evanescent
explanations. There are some inconveniences in sailing in the same boat
with majorities, however conscientious they all may be.
For some very gratuitous speculation in your letter about my benevo-
lent designs towards Mr. Sutherland, I am not responsible.
I am sorry for all that rises in my mind on reading over the closing
portion of your letter. It may, indeed, mean nothing ; but then it may


mean anything, from zero up to the most objectionable forms of intimida-
tion. All the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia cannot attend the
meetings of Synod. Light and ventilation are generally considered good
things. There is the Witness, it is true, but then it has not been very
celebrated as a model of historical accuracy and fairness. Moreover, the
peaceful editor will allow it no longer to be a medium of strife. If Mr.
Sutherland’s eloquence can sweep along majorities in the face of facts, then
it is clearly desirable that more minds than those in Synod should be
brought into contact with matters under discussion. Why should you, as
a sound Protestant, be discomposed at the bare prospect of another
pamphlet, should I consider it necessary ? I want the fullest light, and as
much ventilation as possible. Why do you shrink from this ?
I am, Yours truly,
PETER MACPHBRSON.
Mount Pleasant, Clarencetown,
December 18, 1880.
My Dear Sir,
I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 17th instant. I
beg also to explain that if you suppose I meant any threat by the last
clause of my letter, you are mistaken. What I meant was this, that if
you published the letter as you sent it to me, it would (as I supposed) pro-
duce alienations and estrangements among us which, in my view at least,
was something to be deprecated.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
W. S. DONALD.
Rev. Peter Macpherson, A.M.
187 Albion Street, Surry Hills, Sydney,
Since I wrote the above I have been shown your advertisement (in)
the Maitland Mercury, which I suppose is a climax to the correspondence.
(Sydney Daily Telegraph, Dec. 11th, 1880.)
Whereas I have drawn the attention of the Rev. Duncan Kennedy
Mclntyre to the Witness of 18th and 27th November of this year, in which
an alleged speech of Mr. Mclntyre’s is associated with a motion of the
Rev. W. S. Donald, A. M., regarding a pamphlet recently issued by me ;
and whereas Mr. Mclntyre has not repudiated the association thus made,
I, the undersigned, do hereby, in the interests of truth and righteousness,
CHALLENGE the said Rev. D. K. Mclntyre to furnish me with a list of
“ alleged facts” in my pamphlet, which have been “ proved to be fictions.”
PETER MACPHERSON, A.M.
187 Albion Street, Sydney, 10th Dec., 1880.
(Sydney Morning Herald , 11th Dec., 1880.)
Referring to the Witness of Sydney, edited by Rev. George Sutherland,
and specially to the report of Synod proceedings, in the paper of Nov. 13 ;
and to a paragraph in the paper of Nov. 27th, refusing to insert letter of
Rev. John S. Macpherson, of East Maitland ; referring also to letters which
I have sent to Rev. Duncan Kennedy Mclntyre, I now, in the interests of
truth and righteousness, hereby CHALLENGE the said Rev. D. K.
Mclntyre to furnish me with a list of “alleged facts,” in my pamphlet
recently issued, which have been “ proved to be fictions.”
PETER MACPHERSON, A.M.
187 Albion Street, Sydney, 10th Dec., 1880.


(S. M. Herald, S. D. Telegraph, and Maitland Mercury, 18th Dec.,
1880.
Referring to the Witness of Sydney, edited by Rev. George Sutherland,
specially to the report of Synod proceedings in the paper of Nov. 13, and
to paragraph in the paper of Nov. 27th, refusing to insert letter of Rev.
John S. Macpherson, of East Maitland ; referring also to correspondence
with Rev, William Scott Donald, A. M., of Clarencetown ; I now in the
interests of truth and righteousness, hereby CHALLENGE the said Rev.
W. S. Donald to specify the “statements” in my pamphlet, recently is-
sued, which in his motion in Synod were described as “ unsubstantiated,”
PETER MACPHERSON, A.M.
187 Albion Street, Sydney, 17th Dec., 1880.
REPRINT OF ADVERTISEMENT
From Sydney Morning Herald , December 25, 1880; Sydney Daily Tele-
graph, January 1, 1881 ; Sydney Protestant Standard, January 8,1881.
“t
Facts ok Fictions ?
Analysis of my pamphlet. (See Witness, 13th, 27th November, and 18th
December, 1880.
1. Reports of successes of Messrs. Smith, Bates, and Ashley, at Parkes,
Picton, Bellinger, &c. Not denied. Can all be found in the
Witness.
2. High eulogium passed by Rev. George Sutherland on Mr. Archibald
Smith, at Synod, November, 1879. Not denied. Took place in open
Court.
3. Three students spoken of as answers to special prayer. Not denied.
Rev. John S. Macpherson at last Synod specified an occasion on
which Mr. Sutherland expressed the sentiment in the presence of a
number of persons. »
4. Mr. W. H. Bates, dircouraged by poor prospect of Picton becoming a
settled charge, wrote (January 16, 1880), to Committee, pointing out
that if no better sphere for him, he will have to turn to other occu-
pation. Letter not denied, the Committee founding their course of
action towards Mr. Bates upon this letter.
5. Letter from Mr. Bates (Jannary 23, 1880,) omitted by Mr. Gregg, but
omission supplied by Rev. John S. Macpherson. Mr. Bates earnestly
remonstrates against line of action indicated by Mr, Sutherland.
Extracts will be given in another publication.
6. Letter from Committee, cutting off Mr. Bates (20th February, 1880,)
notwithstanding earnest remonstrance of January 23,
7. Mr. Bates cut off in middle of six months’ engagement. Appointment,
in Mr. Sutherland’s handwriting (dated 20th November, 1879,) states
period of Mr. Bates’ engagement for six months, to begip November
30. Letter of excision (dated 20th February, 1880,) informs him
his connection with the Committee will terminate at the end of that
month, 29th February, 1880. Proved.
8. Mr. Sutherland’s statement, “ We will deal fairly aud honourably with
our young men ; will fulfil all our pledges,” (Letter January 17.)
Not denied,
9. Mr. Sutherland’s efforts at first to secure Mr. Bates for the Church.
Not questioned. Extracts and proof will be given in another pub-
lication.
10. Mr. Ashley signs document (March 3, 1880,) stating that the Church
Extension Committee have “ fulfilled all their engagements” to him,


and “ acted honourably throughout.” This document not denied.
Mr. Sutherland gave minute account of it, stating how willingly Mr.
Ashley signed it for him.
Within a fortnight of foregoing (about 15th March), Mr. Ashley sent
in an account for £2B or £23. Not denied.
Committee (letter March 19, 1880), express surprise at the account,
dispute the claim entirely, but make no reference to the document
of March 3.
Mr. Ashley (March 24) sends in amended account for £BB 10s., urging
payment, as he is in “ great want.” No answer from the Committee
appears to this, but copy of letter of Synod Treasurer, Mr. E. A.
Rennie, is at hand, acknowledging the letter and referring Mr.
Ashley to the Committee.
N.B. —The above papers of March 3, 15, 19, and 24, are all printed in
my pamphlet.
14. Mr. Ashley institutes law proceedings. Not denied.
15. This brings document of March 3to the surface. Not denied.
16. Document of March 3 proves a bar to Mr. Ashley’s prosecuting his
case. Not denied. Mr. Sutherland dwelt with thankfulness on his
having secured the document, and spoke of it as a providence in
saving the Committee from being dragged before the Supreme Court
of the colony.
17. Mr. Gregg got Mr. Ashley to sign a second document of similar
character. Not denied. Mr. Gregg produced and read the docu-
ment in Court.
18. Mr. Sutherland failed to make Mr. Ashley understand the terms of his
engagement. Proved by the facts. Mr. Ashley sent in an account
for nine months at the rate of £l2O per annum. Mr. Sutherland, in
Synod, scouted the idea of his getting at this rate for more than the
six months during which he was “ in the field.”
19. Mr. Ashley had given up a situation in the Post Office at a salary of
£124 per annum, and in seven or eight months was in “ great want.”
Fact cannot be denied, but Committee insist it was his own fault.
20. After all the torturing to which the pamphlet was subjected during
several Sederunts, only one correction has to be made. The name of
Mr. Law was put among the Church Extension Committee for
1879-80. This was an error, and as soon as it was proved, it was
acknowledged by me on the spot, and an apology was tendered to
Mr. Law for misplacing his name.
Such is a pretty full analysis of the contents of my short pamphlet of
about 10 pages. When Mr. Sutherland, on behalf of the Church Extension
Committee, sought the protection of the Synod against me. Rev. D. K.
Mclntyre pointed out how I might fall from the pamphlet ; and Mr.
Sutherland himself pointed out how I might withdraw it, apologise for it,
ask forgiveness for it, &c., &c., all which I definitely and promptly refused
to do. Referring to my former challenges, I now, in the interests of truth
and righteousness, and before the whole community of Isew South Wales,
again CHALLENGE the Rev. D. K. Mclntyre to furnish me with a list of
“ alleged facts ” in my pamphlet which were “ proved to be fictions” ; and
I hereby again CHALLENGE the Rev. W. S. Donald to specify the
“statements” in my pamphlet, which, in his unfortunate motion, were
pronounced “ unsubstantiated.” The alleged “ fictions ” will turn out to
be “ facts ” after all.
PETER MACPHERSON, A.M.
187 Albion Street, Sydney,
24th December, 1880.


(S. M. Herald, l*sth January, 1881.)
For analysis'of my pamphlet referred to in the Witness of November
13 and 27, and December 18, 1880 ; also for CHALLENGES to Rev. D.
K. M‘lntyre and Rev. W S. Donald, A.M., of Clarence Town, see Sydney
Morning Herald of December 25th, 1880.
187 Albion Street, PETER MACPHERSON, A.M.
14th January, 1881.
(S. M. Herald , Jan. 22 ; Telegraph, Jan. 29 ; P. Standard , Feb. 5, 12.)
To inquirers for the pamphlet noticed by Rev. Geo. Sutherland in the
Witness of 13th and 27th November, and IBth December, 1880. A second
edition, greatly enlarged, will be issued (D.V.) in the course of some weeks.
Copies of analysis of above pamphlet, and CHALLENGES to Rev. D. K.
MHntyre and W. S. Donald, A.M., can be got from
PETER MACPHERSON, A.M.
187 Albion Street, Surry Hills, Sydney,
21st January, 1881.
(Protestant Standard, March 19th, 1881.)
PUBLIC CHALLENGES TO THE REVS. D. K. McINTYRE AND
W. S. DONALD, A.M.
The former congregation of the Rev. D. K. Mclntyre, on the Mannings*
River, have come to the rescue to review certain publications of mine,
to consider the debt on their Church, Some friendly things were said of
Messrs. Mclntyre and Donald ; and as to my “ analysis ” containing a list
of nineteen facts from a foregoing pamphlet, I gatherthatit was annihilated
by the reviewer, who (in the report) seems to have “ refuted ” all before
him. It is curious, however, that if the nineteen “ alleged facts ” were
again “ proved to be fictions,” not a single specimen of the refutation is
given. (See Manning Advocate, February 25.) It seems that on the
Manning, as well as in Sydney, it is more easy to make speeches and
motions than to prove their contents. Also certain gasconading in Sydney
seems to re-echo most naturally from the banks of the Manning. An
exhibition of this kind only shows how helplessly Messrs. Mclntyre and
Donald have put themselves in the hands of the Rev. George Sutherland,
who prudently urges them to say nothing, while he is courageously shel-
tering himself behind their names. In theinterests of truth and righteous-
ness, in honor and common sense, defending myself as a man, and asserting
my liberties and privileges as a Protestant, I repeat my challenges to
Messrs. Mclntyre and Donald.
The second edition of my pamphlet will be ready (d.y. ) ere long.
Copies of “ Analysis ” and “ Challenges” can be got from
PETER MACPHERSON, A.M.
187 Albion Street, Surry Hills, Sydney,
17th March, 1881.
TESTIMONIAL TO MR. ARCHIBALD SMITH.
This intimates that I have known Mr. Archibald Smith for some years,
and that I have been closely connected with him in Church work for the
last eighteen months, and as his teacher for part of this period ; that as a
catechist preacherof the Synod of Eastern Australia he has given much satis-
faction in the two fields of labour in which he has been employed ; that
he has shown much diligence in visiting the people, and in devoting him-
self to his work. Further, in the matter of study—he has been both dili-
gent and successful, and is now under trials for license, the greater part of
which he has completed. %


I regard him as decidedly and warmly attached to our principles, and
regret that he has made up his mind to leave us to see if a more en-
couraging field of labour may be found in our neighbouring colony. It
will afford me real satisfaction to learn that he has found in the Provi-
dence of God a sphere of usefulness to his mind, and requisite for the sup-
port of himself and his young family.
Ross Street, Glebe,
January 8, 1880.
TESTIMONIAL
Church of Eastern Australia,
Greek, also in Theology and 1
as a Catechist for some six n
Church, Sydney,
lent of the Presbyterian
This intimates that Mr. W. H. Bates was a student of the Presbyterian
rch of Eastern Australia, and that he made some progress in Latin and
ik, also in Theology and Psychology. Further that he was employed
Catechist for some six months at the Bellinger and Nambucra Rivers,
and also for three months at Picton : that, so far as known to me, there is
nothing against his moral character ; and if he seeks a sphere beyond this
Church, it is because we have none suited to his wishes.
GEORGE SUTHERLAND,
Minister, St. George’s Church.
Sydney, March 18th, 1880.
Bi&uo
’ Fisus3
kjk
32 -ir:
, * 1
At his own request he proceeds to Victoria to see what field o^labour
may be open to him there in connection wilh the Free Presbyterian
Church; ' ''
