

&■ any emer^ency a^ k° OT ear '
HEAD OFFICE




THE
CITIZENS' "WAR CHEST"
REPORT
l( ) l 7
SrjiUteii:
WII.LIAM BROOKS & CO. LTD.
17 CASTLEREAGH STREET


- - Wt. iB^t^ti
A SECTION OF THE INTERIOR OF "WAR CHEST" DEPOT, SYDNEY,


PATRON:
His Excellency Sir Gerald Strickland, G.C.M.G.
PRESIDENT:
H. Y. Braddon, Esq., Dalgety & Co., Ltd.
GENERAL COMMITTEE:
J. C. Watson, Esq., 62 Pitt Street.
H. R. Denison, Esq., Culwulla Chambers.
E. P. Simpson, Esq., Messrs. Minter, Simpson, and Co.
Aid. John Leitch, Redfern.
E. A. Holden, Esq., Colpnial Sugar Refining Co., Ltd.
C. L. Garland, Esq., Hon Treasurer, Sydney Hospital.
H. Clarke, Esq., Messrs. Raine & Home.
J. H. Harris, Esq., Messrs. Anthony Hordern & Sons, Ltd.
O. J. Wilkinson, Esq., Messrs. Gibson, Battle and Co., Ltd.
G. S. Brackenreg, Esq., Messrs. W. S. Friend and Co.
Allan H. Uther, Esq., Registrar-General's Department.
Jas. Young, Esq., Selborne Chambers, Sydney.
H. R. Lysaght, Esq., 8 Spring Street.
R. H. Meares, Esq., "Murrumbah," Strathfield.
Syd. Smith, jun., Esq., Hon. Sec., International Board of Cricket Control.
R. Stanton, Esq., Messrs. Stanton & Son.
F. W. Hixson, Esq., "Fairlight," Elizabeth Bay.
H. J. Cohen, Esq., 95 Pitt Street.
W. F. A. Larcombe, Esq., 131 Pitt Street.
H. E. Budden, Esq., 58 Pitt Street.
E. J. Sievers, Esq., Valuer-General, N.S.W.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE:
Allan H. Uther, Esq., Chairman. E. P. Simpson, Esq.
Aid. John Leitch. E. A. Holden, Esq.
H. R. Lysaght, Esq. H. Clarke, Esq.
S. Smith, junr., Esq. F. W. Hixson, Esq.
E. J. Sievers, Esq. H. E. Budden, Esq.
F. G. Sargood, Esq.
HON. SUPERINTENDENT "WAR CHEST" DEPOT:
Mrs. E. A. Antill, Dymock's Buildings, 68 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
HON. SECRETARY:
C. A. Le M. Walker, Esq., F.C.P.A., Dalton House, 115 Pitt Street, Sydney
ASSISTANT HON. SECRETARIES:
W. Herbert Friend, Esq.
T. W. Bremner, Esq., F.F.A.
HON. TREASURER:
G. Mason Allard, Esq., F.C.P.A., Bull's Chambers, Moore Street, Sydney.
HON. AUDITOR:
C. W. Stirling, Esq., F.C.P.A., Dixon Buildings, 64 Pitt Street, Sydney.
HON. PUBLICITY ORGANISER:
S. H. Bowden, Esq.,


CHIEF COMMISSIONER:
T. S. Woodburn, Esq.
COMMISSIONERS:
A. C. Barry, Esq., A.I.F. and "War Chest" Club, Horseferry Road, London, S.W.
Thos. Henley, M.L.A., N.S.W.
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONERS:
John Fell, jun v Esq., N.S.W. R. S. Goward, Esq., N.S.W.
J. R. Campbell, Esq., South Australia. T. J. Clerke, Esq., Tasmania.
A. W. Pearse, Esq., N.S.W. Harold Norris, Esq., N.S.W.
E. R. Green; Esq., N.S.W. P. E. Thompson, Esq., N.S.W.
B. J. Waterhouse, Esq., N.S.W. W. E. Johnson, Esq., N.S.W.
J. H. Brown, Esq., N.S.W.
ORGANISING COMMISSIONER IN N.S.W.:
A. H. Garraway, Esq., Moss Vale.
HON. REGISTRAR:
F. Connolly, Esq.
HON. ACCOUNTANT:
W. H. Kirby, Esq.


The Citizens' "War Chest" Fund
A resume of the inauguration, development and functions of the Fund.
little brochure is written in response to enquiries from supporters in
the surburban and country districts of N.S.W. who have, through the
fIU ilff courtesy of the press, obtained in a general way an idea of the contribu-
tions m *de and work achieved, but who feel that they lack the necessary
,;i - intimate knowledge of detail to properly represent the Citizens' "War
Chest" functions to their friends.
Within five days after, war was declared the intimation that "Australia would be
there" was flashed across the cable, and our best and bravest were offered and accepted.
Since the call had come, and as time was the essence of the contract, at a meeting
convened at the Australia Hotel, Sydney, a number of practical business and profes-
sional men formed a War Chest Committee on the l?'th August, 1914, who, with
certain subsequent additions, have continued in office till the present moment. The
Executive Members have met in Committee at least five days in every week,
and it is their happy boast that each day sees practically every correspondent
answered and, as far as possible, every just request met and requisition supplied.
The office accommodation has been provided in the past free of cost, and for a
long period all clerical work, accountancy, and other office matters were done gratu-
itously by the Hon. Secretary, but of late the ramifications of the Fund have so much
increased, and the clerical and organising. work become so heavy, that two paid typists
and one clerk have had to be employed, all other officials and office-holders being
voluntary workers.


The "War Chest" is essentially a spending Fund—our one aim and end is to help
win the war by assisting those engaged in the struggle, DURING THE CAMPAIGN.
The objects of this Citizens' "War Chest" Fund were twofold: (1) To give every-
one, whether rich or poor, an opportunity of unostentatiously contributing whatever
they could; and (2) To immediately dispose of such contributions in the direction in
which they were most needed.
To achieve the first objective, the following circular was issued by the Pro-
visional Committee:—
"Pass the hat for your credit's sake,
And Pay, Pay, Pay."
—Kipling.
"CITIZENS' 'WAR CHEST' FUND.
"OBJECTS:
1. To give IMMEDIATE assistance in any emergency arising from the war.
2. If deemed advisable, to co-operate with any other movement having the same objects.
"Dear Sir,
"Some of our citizens have formulated what they consider a valuable idea which will enable
EVERY patriotic citizen to do his or her share towards helping the nation at the present crisis,
and earnestly solicit your personal interest and co-operation in the following proposal: —
(1) That you suggest to your employees the advisability of contributing a regular weekly
or periodical subscription, based, if possible, on a percentage of salary or wages
towards the objects above referred to, or by donations deposited in the 'War Chest ,
whichever method the employees themselves may select.
(2) You to allow a collecting-box marked ' War Chest' to be placed in your establishment
(box to be supplied free by the Committee).
(3) You to undertake that each of your employees receive a card setting out the objects
of the fund (cards supplied free).
(4) Any two of your employees to act as representatives of your firm's "War Chest" and
to be responsible for forwarding the collections to the Hon. Treasurer.


(5) The total weekly proceeds from each "War Chest" will be published periodically in
the press.
In the meantime, and so as to get the movement started, the undermentioned gentlemen have
consented to act as Governing Committee, and it is intended that the Committee be added to as
the movement develops, by the election of representatives of the contributors.
"All services in connection with the movement are given ABSOLUTELY FREE.
"Immediately on receipt of your application, Chests and Cards will be supplied.
"Please state number of 'War Chests' and Cards required.
"H. Y. BRADDON.
J. C. WATSON.
H. R. DENISON.
AiiJOHN I LEITCH. Provisional Committee.
E. A. HOLDEN.
C. L. GARLAND.
H. CLARKE.
"C. A. le M. WALKER, Hon. Sec.
G. MASON ALLARD, Hon. Treas.
113 Pitt Street, Sydney."
When 500 of these boxes had been issued representatives of the various firms
were called together and asked to nominate from among their number a Committee
equal in number to the Provisional Committee already in existence, so that the con-
tributors to the Fund had a full voice in the manner of its distribution.
Eventually, a simple yet absolutely effective Constitution was adopted, viz.:—
1. To give IMMEDIATE assistance in any emergency arising from the war.
2. If deemed advisable to co-operate with any movement having the same
objects.
The Fund having commenced operations immediately on the outbreak of war,
its first administrative step was to open a depot for workers, as it was felt that
hundreds of women would gladly give, as their contribution, the work of their fingers,


where they could not give cash. Accordingly, through the courtesy of the Hon. J.
C. Watson, a large room was provided for the workers at McDonell House, 321 Pitt
Street, Sydney, and Mrs. E. A. Antill appointed Honorary Superintendent. Some
idea of the work that has gone through the Depot at the hands of the splendid band
of devoted and self-sacrificing women who have conducted the War Chest Depot for
2i years will be gained when it is learned that there has been despatched to the fight-
ing men in Gallipoli, Egypt, and France, and to the men of the Australian Navy, a
grand total of 70,000 pairs of socks, 51,220 shirts, etc., etc., besides many thousands
of other garments too numerous to describe.
In the early stages the "War Chest's" hands were full in supplying the im-
mediate needs of our men here on the spot. Volunteers poured into the camps, the
British reservists were all called up; thousands of men and horses were put into
severe training (it was the "real thing this time). Our racecourses were transformed
into training schools for mounted units. The call of the bugle, the gallop of horses,
the hoarse shouts of staff-sergeant-majors, and the tramp of raw recruits acquiring the
rudiments of military training, resounded through the Sydney Cricket Ground and
the immense Show Grounds of the Agricultural Society.
The demand for shirts, socks, soap, sandshoes, mufflers, etc., soon over-ran the
supply, for it must be remembered that we in Australia were quite unaccustomed to
the many preparations necessary for a clash of arms with the nations of the old world.
The "War Chest" at once appointed a special sub-committee to investigate all
these needs, and a daily visit to the various camps by the members of this sub-com-
mittee soon necessitated much overtime work in our depot, but, since necessity knows
no law, a ready response was made by willing workers to catch up with the de-
mands. A motor-lorry was requisitioned and gratuitously placed at our disposal by
Dalgety & Co., and every day saw it loaded with supplementary supplies rushing out
to some camp or other, its arrival being announced with ringing cheers by the boys,
who early realised what the "War Chest" motor and its advent meant for them.
Letters from the late Lieut.-Colonel Braund, Lieut.-Colonel Meredith, the late
Lieut.-Colonel Onslow-Thompson, Lieut.-Colonel H. V. Vernon, and many others, who


were officers to the first units formed, expressing their grateful thanks for the "War
Chest" work during August and September, 1914, were received.
While the help of the human is our main objective, the beast has not been forgot-
ten. The care of the equine has had consideration. The lover of horses must realise
the wonderful instances in history that have been recorded of lives and munitions of
war saved by the wonderful self-control exhibited by the trained artillery and cavalry
horse. Long sea voyages in crowded transports necessarily spell hardship for these
fine animals. Recognising this, and to minimise their suffering, tens of thousands of
bandages have been furnished the men in charge, so that support may be given to
stiffened muscles. 44,000 of these bandages were supplied by the "War Chest" Fund
to C.O.'s of Troopships.
As the months rolled on the sphere of our usefulness changed. The troops
which originally invested German New Guinea having achieved their object, the
activities of the "War Chest" Fund were transferred to Egypt and thence to Gallipoli.
Instead of thousands, scores of thousands needed help, and happily the funds came in,
to allow of the necessary extensions.
Steps have even been taken to follow Australian units to Mesopotamia with comforts
and necessities.
COMFORTS FOR THE FIGHTING MEN.
Your Committee and Depot workers felt themselves compelled to do some-
thing for the splendid Britishers who took part in the retreat from Mons, and
although only a fragment of them could be reached, it was great satisfaction to re-
ceive a cable from the Agent-General of New South Wales (through whom a consign-
ment of warm underclothing was forwarded) to the following effect:—
"Guards' Brigade in the trenches write: We are most grateful for the magnificent present
which is most acceptable."
Then Belgium called in her distress, and the "War Chest" directed its energies and
organisation to help. All collections made by the "War Chest" Fund for two weeks


were handed over intact to the Consul for Belgium, and altogether, through the com-
bined efforts of the Fund and that of the "Belgian Circles" (organised by the Depot
Superintendent) we have raised for the benefit of the starving in Belgium over £13,000,
portion of which was subsidised to the extent of pound for pound by the State
Government of N.S.W.
A short recapitulation of the progress of our operations and the methods of dis-
tribution must interest our contributors, and will serve to stimulate subscribers in
the future. Our hand has been put to the plough—we have set ourselves a task,
which, if widely understood, must be widely supported. The demands are daily becom-
ing heavier. It is interesting to note how the sphere of our activities has grown in
bulk, as the objects of the Fund became known.
The scheme was launched on August 17th, 1914. The first detailed statement of
receipts and expenditure from that date to 17th November (three months) was pub-
lished on 30th November, 1914, as shown overleaf.


RECEIPTS.
EXPENDITURE.
£ s. d
£ s.
d. £ s.
d
To Special Donations . 2163 7 8
By Supplies to Troops —
,, "War Chest" Collec-
Shirts and Seeks
612 6
1
tions 3451 5 11
: Dungaree Jumpers and
Pants
227 14
4
Pyjamas and Sundries
for Ships' Hospitals
143 14
8
Towels
46 4
6
Jerseys
38 16
1
Horse Bandages
38 11
11
Cholera Belts
33 8
6
Boots and Shoes
34 6
9
Mufflers. Mittens, and
Gloves
31 3
10
Handkerchiefs
22 8
1
Balaclava Caps
18 8
1
— 1247 2
10
By Special Contributions-
Belgian Fund
1180 11
6
Belgian Clothing Relief
Society
152 18
10
Dental Hospital
100 0
0
Dental Association
5 6
3
Sheep Skin Fund
25 10
0
Salvation Army Tent,
Liverpool
50 0
0
1541 6
7
By Relief —
Relief to families of Volunteers
... 104 14
6
By Expenses —
Cost of War
Chests 78 3 6
Clerical assist-
ance, type-
writing &c.
25 4
0
General Ex-
penses
88 14
0
— 192 1
6
By Balance in
Bank
2
£5614 13 7
£5614 13
7
CITIZENS' WAR CHEST FUND.
Statement of Receipts and Expenditure from 17th August, 1914, to 17th
November. 1914.
H R. DENISON \ Committee G " MASON ALLARD, Hon. Treasurer.
J. C. WATSON J lOl the Committee. CHAS. A. LE M. WALKER, Hon. Secretary.
MEMO.— Not included in the above Supplies to Troops of £1247 2s. lOd. are dona-
tions to the estimated value of £lOOO.
I have examined and checked the Books, Vouchers, and Bank Book of the Citizens'
V ar Chest bund, and certify the above statement to be a true and correct record of
the transactions of the Fund.
Sydney, 26th November, 1914. C. W. STIRLING, F.C.P.A., Hon. Auditor.
12


RECEIPTS.
i s. d
To Special Donations .. 3511 16 8
„ "War Chest" Collec-
tions 6033 2 4
„ Bank Interest on
Current Account .. 30 14 0
EXPENDITURE.
; By Supplies to Troops — S "
Australian Expeditionary Force,
and Consigned to London —
■>19 1 Shirts, 5219 pair socks,
3708 Balaclava Caps, 3765
Cholera Belts, 3590 Woollen
Mufflers, 1697 pairs Gloves and
Mittens.
Number of Articles 23,176
7253 Horse Bandages, 2500' Kit
Bags, 250 Jack Shays
Number of Articles .... 10,003
Towels, Singlets, Sweaters.
Handkerchiefs, Sheepskin
Vests, Blankets, Under-
clothing, and Sundries.
Number of Articles .... 3264
506 Dungaree Suits and
Overalls 5 o 6
20 Cases Soap, olb. Tobacco.
,, Sundries for Troopship
Hospital 10 02
total Number of Articles 37,951 2278 5 4
Motor Ambulances — £ s. d
3 purchased in
London, per Sir
Timothy Coghlan .. 1464 10 0
3 purchased from
Messrs. Dalgety and
Co -> Ltd 180 o o o
3264 10 0
£9575 13 0
Over and above the expenditure of money in the purchase of goods and
outfit, voluntary workers for the Fund supplied garments, mostly socks muf-
flers gloves, jerseys, to the value of £l,OOO, in the making of which 'much
whole-hearted sacrifice was shown.
fh° Urag t d r 3 L th L^ an " e u r in „ which the public received their first balance
sheet, the work of the War Chest was pressed on. Fresh interest was
secured and on 17th February, 1915, accounts were presented showing six
months operations, as under:—
CITIZENS' WAR CHEST FUND.
Statement of Receipts and Expenditure from 17th August, 1914, to
17th February, 1915.
13


Receipts —Brought forward £.9575 13
0
Expenditure —Brought forward
£5542
15
4
,, Special Contributions-
Belgian Fund—
2320
8
11
Belgian Clothing Re-
lief Society
152
18
10
Dental Hospital and
Dental Association
121
19
6
Sheepskin Fund
117
1
9
Salvation Army Tent,
Liverpool
50
0
0
French - Australian
League of Help—
Donation
52
10
0
Belgian Babies' Kit
Society
21
9
5
2836
8
5
„ Relief—
Relief to families of
Volunteers
278
6
3
„ Expenses—
274
11
4
Clerical Assistance, T
yping
, &C.
66
3
0
,, Balance in Bank
577
8
8
£9575 13
0
£9575
13
0
MEMO. —Not included in the above Supplies to Troops of £2278 ss. 4d. are Dona-
tions to the estimated value of £2OOO.
I have examined and checked the Books, Vouchers, and Bank Book of the Citizens'
"War Chest" Fund, and certify the above statement to he a true and correct record of
the transactions of the Fund from 17th August, 1914, to 17th February, 1915.
(Signed)—
H. R. DENISON) r „ . C. W. STIRLING, F.C.P.A., Hon. Auditor.
JOHN LEITCH 1 1 or the Committee.
G. MASON ALLARD, Hon. Treasurer.
CHAS. A. LE M. WALKER, Hon. Secretary. Sydney, 24th February, 1915.


I5b J^£F, m^Kr*'^^
DISTRIBUTING COMFORTS TO THE IMPERIAL RESERVISTS AT RANDWICK
RIFLE RANGE, SYDNEY, SEPTEMBER, 1914, CAPT. HENRY IN CHARGE.


— " v " 7
f}'^7 : :'"' \» * <►''-.: £?- j^
SHIPMENT OF "WAR CHEST" GIFTS ON ANZAC BEACH, CHRISTMAS, 1915.


GALLIPOLI.
History was being rapidly made, and soon the news of the memorable landing of
Australian soldiers on Gallipoli was the sole topic of Australian home-circle talk and
thought. Messages telling of great sacrifice and heroism were daily being received,
and on 13th May, 1915, Brigadier-General G. L. Ryrie (then Colonel Ryrie) cabled
from Egypt:—
"Funds urgently needed comforts wounded New South Wales soldiers. Recommend cable
amount James Hopkins, Cairo. Meredith, Cox, Arnott concur."
Time was the essence of the contract —the appeal brooked no delay. The Hon.
Secretary immediately telephoned the President, Mr. H. Y. Braddon, for instructions,
intimating that the bank balance that day was £7OO. "Send £5OO at once," advised the
President, "and tell the public about it." Within half an hour £5OO was on the
way to Egypt, and the following wire was despatched to Colonel Ryrie:—
"Cabled £5OO. More following. Keep me advised of any way we can help towards providing
necessities."
The publication of those cables in the evening papers enabled the Executive to
remit a further £5OO within 12 hours, and with further publicity afforded by the daily
press next morning another £l,OOO was speedily forthcoming and as speedily des-
patched to Egypt, where a local committee had been established, consisting of Mrs. H.
Chisholm, Mrs. Donald Cameron, Mrs. Douglass Harris, Mrs. Christian, Sir David
Semple, K.C.M.G., Mr. R. M. Grainger Stewart, hon treasurer, and Mr. J. F. G.
Hopkins, Hon. Secretary.
The "War Chest" Committee foresaw tremendous possibilities for development in
the direction indicated by General Ryrie, but recognised the desirability, before send-
ing more money and goods, of appointing an agent at the Egyptian end to receive
and distribute the consignments and disburse remittances to the best advantage. With
this end in view, the Committee published on 26th June, 1915, the following advertise-
ment :


"TO SERVE THE EMPIRE.
"The Committee of the Citizens' War Chest Fund are desirous of securing the services of a
public-spirited and influential citizen of known capacity and patriotism who will undertake at his
own expense to perform the office of Commissioner to the Fund on the Mediterranean Littoral
and Egypt. Applicant should be prepared to go almost immediately, and will be properly
accredited. Reply Honorary Secretary, War Chest Fund."
Amongst others who responded to this appeal was Mr. H. E. Budden, who was
eventually selected as the "War Chest" Commissioner, and he left Sydney for Egypt on
28th July, taking as secretary Mr. W. F. A. Larcombe, who had volunteered his
services in this capacity.
The work in this new sphere of the "War Chest's" work grew so rapidly that Mr.
Budden soon cabled for more help, and Mr. John Fell, jun., and Mr. Thomas Henley,
M.L.A., who offered their services entirely gratuitously, were despatched to Egypt.
The "War Chest" Commissioner, having established and put in working order the
distribution of comforts in Egypt, soon learned that it was difficult to control supplies
to the men who had landed at Gallipoli, under circumstances now known to everybody,
so embarked for Mudros at the first possible opportunity, personally supervising the
sending on of as much material as it was possible to handle. The absence of a port
—the chief landing-place being an open roadstead—necessarily made the task a difficult
one, yet much was done to cheer and help the lads who put up such a gallant fight,
until recalled.
The end of 1915 saw this chapter closed, and the Western front became the
theatre where Mr. Budden's attention was most required. He therefore "moved camp"
to London, and opened an office in Westminster, immediately proceeding to France to
organise future operations of the Fund RIGHT IN THE FIRING LINE. He found
Australian troops resting temporarily after their long journey from Egypt, prior to en-
tering the first line of trenches, and immediately cabled for money to purchase
cinemas and sporting material of all kinds, and organised entertainments throughout
the camp as the best means of keeping them together. When the order came to pre-
pare for action, again the "War Chest" followed the troops up and established, imme-
diately behind the first-line trenches, a number of coffee-stalls, where hot tea, coffee,
cocoa, soup, etc., were served to the men when going on and coming off duty.


I
AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS ON PARADE FOR THE RECEPTION OF "WAR CHEST"
GIFTS IN EGYPT, 1915. CAPT. KERRY IN CHARGE. MR. T. HENLEY,
M.L.A., ADDRESSING THE MEN.


AN EXTERIOR VIEW OF THE WAR CHEST CLUB, FOR AUSTRALIAN
AND OTHER SOLDIERS, IN HORSEFE RRY-ROAD, LONDON.
Immediately opposite the A.I.F. Headquaters, the site is peculiarly convenient to
Australians in khaki, who make the club their London "home."


A SECTION OF THE LOUNGE, SHOWING AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS VERY MUCH
AT HOME IN THE PERUSAL OF PAPERS FROM ALL PARTS OF
THE COMMONWEALTH.
Frequently concerts are given in this part of the building. A portion is devoted to
billiards, to which the men are very partial.


I
"WAR CHEST" CLUB, LONDON.
A SECTION OF THE BUFFET, SHOWING THAT ITS SEATING CAPACITY IS
TAXED TO THE UTMOST BY AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS.


Mr. William Cope, the well-known Sydney solicitor (himself the pioneer of the
New South Wales Lancers), was placed in charge of this comfort-giving activity, and
established the first coffee-stall at the cross-roads of Casualty Corner, at the head of
Sausage Valley, within two miles of Pozieres. General Birdwood has unstintedly
praised the coffee-stall progressiveness, and many a testimony speaks of the good phy-
sical and moral effect this movement bas had on the men. Our people who so gener-
ously contribute will be glad to know that through their gifts to this Fund they are
following the men right up to the firing-line, and providing a touch of kinship and
comfort for the men who are "up against it" in grim earnest.
Many soldiers have written to the "War Chest" Fund expressing heartfelt
thanks for the comfort of these hot drinks. On February 24th, 1917, a cable was re-
ceived from London conveying General Brand's appreciation of the Fund's work in
the recent advances in France. The General reported that our representatives had
served hot drinks to Australians in captured enemy trenches WITHIN ONE HOUR
after the Germans had been driven out of them, thus enabling our soldiers to continue
fighting. Concluding his special commendation of this fine achievement, General
Brand speaks most eulogistically of the Comforts' work in the front line of trenches.
That this work is attended with the gravest risk has always been realised by the Exe-
cutive and appreciated accordingly, and now, as this little pamphlet is going to the
press, arrives a cablegram from General Birdwood with the saddest news that at the
taking of Bapaume seven coffee stall orderlies were killed in an explosion.


"WAR CHEST" CLUB.
The War Chest Committee, keeping as the foremost plank in their platform the
moral and physical condition of the fighting man while on active service, have realised to
the full the besetting danger to lonely youths in a strange land, many of whom had never
previously known a night's absence from their own domestic circle, and it was felt
that during short furloughs after a strenuous time in the firing-line—often recuperat-
ing from wounds or sickness through unwonted exposure—this temptation to excesses
was yielded to, and in order to minimise, if not absolutely overcome this danger, the
sum of £6,800 has been expended in the establishment of the "War Chest" Club in
London, directly opposite A.I.F. Military Headquarters.
The universal commendation which has followed the establishment of this institu-
tion has exceeded the Committee's most sanguine hopes and anticipations, and they can-
not help recording that the official reports from the Commissioner go to indicate that
the personality of the Resident Representative, Mr. A. C. Barry (who has two sons
in the firing-line), has contributed much to that end. His manner, method, and tact
seem to have "caught on" with the men, with the result that there is that feeling of
homeliness all round the Club, which makes it attractive to the men, while due
decorum and discipline are always in evidence. There is one function of the Club
which has endeared itself to many a member, and that is the provision of a little
"Cupboard," which the men compare with the widow's cruse, as it never seems to
run quite dry. From this "cupboard" Mr. Barry is empowered to help any stranded
soldier to arrange a temporary overdraft. The borrower, as a general rule, seldom
exceeds 30s. to £2, and full enquiries are made before any advances are forthcoming.
The domestic side of the Club, the mothering of the boys, is in the capable hands
of Mrs. Argia Samuel and numerous lady volunteer aids, many of whom are daugh-
ters and wives of Australians resident in London.
So many cables of a congratulatory nature have been received that it is almost in-
vidious to individualise, but the following may be taken as typical expressions of
opinion:—
War Chest Club exceeds anticipation. Expressions of approval unanimous and enthusiastic
from all who use. Without Contribution from 4 War Chest' unable to have attained popularity it now
enjoys." —BARRY.


THE FIRST COFFEE-STALL AT CASUALTY CORNER.
WITHIN RANGE OF THE ENEMY'S GUNS IN FRANCE.
This stall was situated at cross-roads of Casualty Corner, at the head of Sausage Valley, within two miles of
the firing line. Flags provided were not "approved" of by the military authorities, as being likely to draw the
enemy's fire, so the name was chalked up instead. .


THE COFFEE STALL ATTENDANTS SERVING FIELD AMBULANCE AND
STRETCHER-BEARERS IN FRANCE.


Breakfast
5,243
Dinner
8,048
Tea
5,356
Supper
3,563
Meal Books
640
22,850
Beds
5,151
Shakedowns
1,128
Billiards
274
Baths
1,422
Boots
1,333
Cloak Room
1,091
33,249
A.I.F. AND "WAR CHEST" CLUB.
Open to Members of the A.I.F. ALL DAY AND ALL NIGHT.
TOTAL OF CASH REGISTER TICKETS—WEEK ENDING JANUARY 7th, 1917.
CITIZENS' "WAR CHEST" FUND.
(Signed) A. C. BARRY,
Manager, A.I.F. & "War Chest" Club.
General R. M. McC. Anderson, 130 Horseferry Rd., London, S.W., writes under
date the 30th November, 1916, as follows: —
"It is unnecessary for me to detail herein the excellent work that the "War Chest" Fund has
accomplished, because it has been the subject of many eulogiums, both official and private. I
have seen it at work in Egypt and here, and to put the matter briefly, I cannot find fault with it,
it is so excellent in every way.
" This Club business is probably a bigger work than most of you realise, and it is well
that you should hear unbiassed opinions from your own people about it from time to time.
" It is now much the largest thing of its kind in London, being nearly twice as large
as the next biggest. It is run on most careful economical lines, but it is hardly likely to pay its
way, as we have to do so much for so little, and you know the high and increasing cost of
everything these days. You may rest assured nothing is wasted, and no expenditure of yours,
I venture to say, has been wiser or of more far-reaching - benefit than the amount you have put
into this concern."


RECEIPTS.
PAYMENTS.
uai y x
±U
i .
1916. —Nov. 17.
1916 —Nov. 17.
To "War Chest" Collections:
By "War Chest"
As per Balance-sheet at
Payments, as
this date £99 851 12 8
per Balance-
sheet at this date
1917— Feb. 17.
£83.341
4
1
To Receipts for 3 Mos. to
1917— Feb. 17.
17/2/T7:
By Supplies to
W a r Chest
Boxes .... £697 12 9
Special
Troops, for 3
mos. to 17/2/T7 £5,669 5 8
1 Motor Lorry, 2
Motor Cycles,
Donations 11,563 10 4
Button Day
for use in France.
Collection.
Cost included in
Balance .. 13 17 10
above amount of 5.669 5 8
Interest ... 417 1 9
MEMO. —Not included in
Amount re-
ceived to
the above supplies to troops
are donations to the esti-
be cabled 27 2 0
mated value of £2000, for
12,719 4 8
the mos. from 17/11/T6 to
£112,570 17 4
17/2/T7, making a total of
£17,900 to date.
1917— Feb. 17.
Outstanding Liabilities.
By Remittances to War Chest
For goods
Commissioner: London and
pure based
Cairo for 3 mos. to 17/2/'l7
for soldiers
(making £42,585 remitted to
yet to be
provided
for £4,500 0 0
17/2/T7) 12,500 0 0
By Remittances to
War Chest Club,
London, 3 mos.
to 17/2/T7 £6000
remitted to this
Club to 17/2/17 2,000 0 0
By Relief Account: Assistance
14,500
0
0
to Soldiers' Wives and
Families
138
18
9
By Australian Comforts Fund
106
13
0
(Amount to be refunded.)
By Expenses
418
8
7
By Cash banked
to No. 1 account.
on 17/11/T6, in
error, refunded . . .
56
6
6
By Petty Cash in
Hand 3 10 2
By Money Order,
returned for en-
dorsement 1 3 0
-
By Balance at
Credit: Commer-
cial Bkg. Co of
Sydney, Ex-
change Branch 8,335 7 5
8,340
0
7
£112,570
17
4
The following is a synopsis of the last statement of receipts and expendi-
ture, taking the Fund accounts up to 17th February, 1917:
CITIZENS' "WAR CHEST" FUND.
Statements of Receipts and Payments from November 17, 1916, to February 17 1917.
DT?r , T?T'n r no .
28


"Belgian Circles."
"Belgian Circles."
1916 —Nov. 17.
1916— Nov. 17.
T o Belgian
By Remittances to
Fund Col-
date
£9,724 4 9
lections:
1917— Feb. 17.
At this
By Cables to
date £9,724 J 6 5
London
40 0 0
1917— Feb. 17.
By Cost of
T o Belgian
Cables
18 1
Fund Col-
By Bank
1 e c tions: 3
Charges
0 5 1
m o s. to
0 765
17 11
17/2/'l7 ... 41 1 6
(This Account now Closed.)
9,765
"War Chest Depot."
17
11
"War Chest Depot."
1916— Nov. 17.
1916 —Nov. 17.
To Collec-
tions at
this date £6,642 8 1
By Amount ex-
pended on Mater-
ial as per Bal-
a n ce-sheet at
1917— Feb. 17.
T o Collec-
this date
1917— Feb. 17.
£6,240 19 9
tions, 3
By Amount of Ma-
m o s. to
17/2/T7 .. 1,338 9 10
terial purchased
for 3 mos. to
7,980
17
11
17/2/T7
1,575 7 5
By Clerical Assist-
ance
23 15 0
By Postage, Sta-
t i o n e r y, Petty
Expenses
30 5 7
By Bank of N.S.W.,
balance at credit
110 10 2
£7 980
17 1 1
Flower Studio.
Flower Studio.
(From 1/12/T6 to 17/2/T7.)
(From 1/12/T6 to 17/2/'17.)
1917— Feb. 17.
1917— Feb. 17.
To Special
By Expenses ....
£17 15 7
D o nations 92 15 0
B y Commercial
To Sale of
Bkg. Co. of
F 1 o w e rs,
Sydney, Ex-
Book lets,
change Branch,
Cards .. 51 11 3
balance at credit
126 10 8
144
6
o
1 A A
6 3
.1 -±4
£130,461
19
5
£130.461
19 5
G. MASON ALLARD, F.C.P.A., Hon.
Treasurer.
H. Y. BRADDON, President. ( For the CHAS. A. Le M. WALKER. F.C.P.A..
JOHN LEITCH, I Committee. Hon. Secretary.
LILIAN M. ANTI.LL, Hon. Sup. War
Chest Depot.
I have examined and checked the Books, Vouchers, and Bank Books of the
Citizens' "War Chest" Fund, "Belgian Circles" "War Chest Depot," and "Flower
Studio," and certify the above statement to be a true and correct record of the
transactions of the Funds from Nov. 17, 1916, to Feb. 17, 1917.
Sydney, February 26, 1917. C. W. STIRLING, F.C.P.A., Hon. Tkuditor.


"WAR CHEST" DEPOT.
No busier community of women workers in the cause of the absent soldier exists
to-day than at the Depot of the "War Chest," which carries on its unostentatious work
on the first floor of Dymock's Buildings, No. 68 Elizabeth St. The picture in front of
this book conveys but a faint impression of the stock carried, goods handled, and
number of women engaged, day in and day out, in this noble cause. Here are labelled,
sorted, packed, and despatched the tens of thousands of garments and parcels received
from the workers all over New South Wales, and after careful listing in triplicate are
packed into regulation cases, addressed, and shipped. When it is remembered that,
amongst other items of wearing apparel, 70,000 pairs of socks have been sent, 33,205
Balaclavas and caps, 46,512 shirts, 14,500 pairs of underpants, 47,500 handkerchiefs.
75,000 kit bags—and these not despatched as a hotch-potch, but every article stamped
and labelled—the magnitude of the undertaking will be better understood. These ar-
ticles are but the main items of soft goods.
The despatch of edibles forms a considerable portion of the "War Chest" Depot's
work.
Up to the date of this report, 98,000 tins of lollies have been forwarded. 52,200
bottles of sauce, 37,872 bottles of pickles, 120,306 2-lb. tins of golden syrup, etc., etc.
Again, too, in spare times behind the lines, between drills, amusement has been catered
f0r—2,444 cricket bats and balls have been despatched, 252 pairs of boxing gloves, 350
footballs, playing cards galore, gramophones and phonographs, and many other articles
with which to while away the idle hour.
In order to brighten the Christmas period, no less than 32,000 Christmas boxes
were sent, each containing amongst other items composite tins of tobacco and cig-
arettes, coffee and milk, cocoa, potted meats, etc., 23,000 of these parcels being packed
by Depot workers.
It will interest the reader to know the manner in which the moneys have been ex-
pended, and the nature of the contributions secured by the War Chest, so the follow-
ing abbreviated statement has been compiled of the shipments made to date:—


Shirts
51,220
Pipes
5,040
Socks, prs.
70,000
Sand-bags
23,620
Balaclavas
9,392
Lollies (tins)
98,000
Mufflers and Cap Mufflers
29,734
Condensed Milk (tins)
5,200
Handkerchiefs
47,388
Lime Juice (bots.)
3,000
Washers
4,973
Tea (lbs.)
2,300
Cholera Belts
8,169
Canned Fruits (2lb. tins) ..
120,306
Gloves and Mittens, prs. ..
5,810
Dried Milk and Lactogen
Underpants „ ..
16,194
(tins)
28,392
Fly Veils
21,080
Glaxo
1,440
Dungaree Suits and Overalls
570
Golden Syrup (21b. tins) . .
59,350
Oil Sheets
4,596
Cocoa and Milk (tins)
5,100
French Gloves, prs.
30
Granola (5lb. tins)
5,814
Shorts, prs.
162
Sauce (bots.)
52,200
Sheep Skin Vests
16,000
Pickles „
37,872
Water Bags
54
Dripping (lbs )
2,232
Horse Bandages (sets 4) . .
11,121
Sausages (61b. tins)
372
Jack-Shays
350
Biscuits (21b. tins)
2,144
Kit Bags
75,970
Chewing Gum (pkts.)
3,000
Sand Shoes, prs.
12,601
LIST OF ARTICLES SHIPPED TO EGYPT, ENGLAND AND FRANCE.
This has meant two and a half years of long hours and tired limbs, and, alas,
equally often weary brains, but the self-consciousness of "something attempted, some-
thing done" enabled those voluntary workers to sustain an effort which, under other
circumstances, would have been well-nigh impossible.
To the noble band of energetic women who have carried through this great un-
dertaking, not only the fighting men, but the whole of Australia's citizens, owe a debt
of eternal gratitude—a debt which can never be repaid. By their efforts and zealous
labours thousands after thousands of lives have been saved, and tens of thousands of
soldiers cheered and encouraged by the tangible evidence that, though absent, Austra-
lia had not forgotten them. Time and again, messages and letters have reiterated the
fact that the solid proof of our solicitude for their welfare afforded by the comforts
received, has done more to revive the spirits of overwrought and, at times, dispirited
men, than will ever be appreciated or believed. The moral effect of kinship and remem-


brance is demonstrated to a greater extent on the field of battle than perhaps anywhere
else, and the realisation by our boys of the women's labour on their behalf was often
the means of bringing out all that was best in them.
The Committee of the Fund and the workers at the Depot desire to testify their
appreciation of the wonderful assistance afforded by Mrs. Antill, whose tact and capable
management have been one of the chief factors towards the success attending the des-
patch of comforts.
BATTALION COMFORTS FUND.
In addition to its own work the "War Chest" Fund collects at a special Depot,
all Battalions Comforts Funds' Gifts, packed in regulation cases (supplied by the
"War Chest" Fund), and ships, insures, and distributes these to the various units in
France, Egypt, and elsewhere.
24,503 of these cases have passed through the "War Chest" Fund's hands during
the past 12 months.
FORMATION OF COUNTRY BRANCHES OF "WAR CHEST" AND
A.C.F. FUND.
Some months ago the Minister for Defence decided to federate all the Australian
funds working for the supply of comforts to the fighting men. With this end in view,
he created the Australian Comforts Fund (now familiarly known as the "A.C.F."), and
selected the principal Comforts Fund in each State to be the State headquarters of the
"A.C.F.," officially called the State Division.
The Minister further issued instructions that each State Division was to compile a
register of all its Branches and also of Battalion Comforts Funds, and this has been
done. The object of this is to bring under proper control all Committees working and
collecting money for the supply of comforts to the men, so that the public might
have the assurance that their gifts are directed to the objects for which they are in-
tended. The State Divisions have the power to refuse registration to any Com-
mittee which does not conform to the requirements of the "A.C.F." The effect of regis-
tration is to ensure for a Branch or Battalion Fund the right to carry on its work,


and the N.S.W. State War Council have afforded the "War Chest" Fund their heartiest
co-operation. Branches and Battalion Funds which are not registered are not permitted
to collect moneys.
New Branches of the Citizens' War Chest Fund are usually formed at a public
meeting convened for the purpose. The "War Chest" constitution and rules are
adopted, and office-bearers and committee appointed. The Hon. Secretary should
then report to the Hon. Secretary of the Citizens' War Chest Fund, 115 Pitt Street,
Sydney, the formation of the Branch and adoption of constitution and rules, together
with the names of office-bearers. If all is in order, the Branch is registered and a
notification to that effect forwarded to the Hon. Secretary that he is entitled to com-
mence operations at once. All particulars will be supplied by the Hon. Sec. on applica-
tion.
Every registered Branch of the State Division and every registered Battalion Com-
forts Fund is an integral part of the Australian Comforts Fund and is entitled to
have its gifts forwarded through the "War Chest" and delivered by the Commissioners
of the "A.C.F." to the troops for which they are destined.
Surplus moneys raised by any Country Branches should be forwarded to the "War
Chest" Committee, who will ensure its expenditure to the best advantage. Proper ac-
counts of receipts and expenditure should be kept and furnished when required.
The authorised State Divisions of the AUSTRALIAN COMFORTS FUND
are:—
New South Wales:—Citizens' "War Chest" Fund,
Dalton Buildings, 115 Pitt Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
Victoria:—Lady Mayoress's Patriotic League, Town Hall, Melbourne, Victoria.
Queensland: —Queensland Patriotic Fund,
Preston House, Queen Street, Brisbane, Queensland.
South Australia:—League of Loyal Women, 46 North Terrace, Adelaide, S.A.
West Australia:—Victoria League of West Australia,
No. 5 Queen's Hall, William Street, Perth, W.A.
Tasmania: —On Active Service Fund, City Hall, Collins Street, Hobart, Tas.
Sydney, May Ist, 1917. Issued by Authority of the "War Chest" Executive.
CHAS. A. LE M. WALKER, Hon. Sec.


A FEW LETTERS OF APPRECIATION.
[Copy.]
"To the Commissioner, "Ismailia,
"War Chest" Fund. 15th March, 1916.
"Dear Sir,
"In reply to your letter of the Bth March, I write to tell you how very glad I am to let you
know that permission has been granted for you and your representative to accompany each
division of the A.1.F., when it leaves this country.
"I am well aware of all the good work you have been doing for us, that I am delighted to
think that this has been found possible, as I know well that you and your representatives will
continue to give us all the help you have done up-to-date.
"I am so very sorry not to have seen you when you were here last week, and I should certainly
have done so, but it was not until you had left that I heard from General White that you had
been here.
"With all good wishes to you,
Your very sincerely,
"(Sgd.) WM. BIRDWOOD."
[Copy.]
"Commonwealth of Australia."
Department of Defence,
"Dear Sir, Melbourne, 12th April, 1916.
"I am directed to acknowledge receipt of your letters of the 29th February and 10th March,
relative to the Australian Imperial Force Comforts Fund, and to inform you that the Minister
highly appreciated the efficient manner in which the work of the distribution of the goods
forwarded by the various organisations in Australia which you represent abroad is being
carried out.
"Senator Pearce realises that the task requires the exercise of a great degree of tact and
discretion, and the appreciative nature of the reports of the Commander, Australian Imperial
Force Headquarters, General Officer Commanding and Commanding Officers, and the absence of
a single complaint is gratifying evidence of the capable manner in which you and your assistants
are carrying out the patriotic and public-spirited work you have voluntarily undertaken in the
interests of our soldiers.
"Yours faithfully,
"(Sgd.) T. TRUMBLE,
H. E. BUDDEN, Esq., "per a/Secretary."
C/o Australian Intermediate Base,
Cairo.


[Copy.]
"The Secretary,
"Citizens' 'War Chest' Fund, "France,
"115 Pitt Street, Sydney. "17th January, 1917.
"Dear Sir,
"Just at present I am in charge of a Soup Kitchen and Coffee Stall which supplies Hot Soup
or Drinks and Cigarettes to the men as they come out of the front line trenches, and some of the
gifts of material bear the stamp of your Society. Well I want you to thank the members on
behalf of the men. The men reach here wet, cold and tired, and when they have their cigarettes and
a drink, go off laughing and joking with one another. It would do you good to hear and see
them, they seem quite to forget the danger of things, and this is a rather dangerous place, for
the Huns shell in every night and morning as regular as clock-work, just, I suppose, to re-
mind there is a war on.
"The boys' standing joke is when they come here to say "Are we winning the war?" and
then when they get their drink to say, "No, but the soup is!"
"With all good wishes to you and your Society, and many thanks for your kindness,
"I am,
"Yours faithfully,
"(Sgd.) T. HELY-WILSON,
"25th Battalion, A.1.F., France."
[Copy.]
"To the Commissioner,
"Australian Comfort Fund, "From O.C. No. 30 Squadron,
"Savoy Store, Cairo. "Royal Flying Corps.
"Dear Sir,
"I enclose receipt for your very kind gift of 24 cases. The Australian Flight now no longer
exists as a unit of the I.E.F. "D" as it suffered casualties from sickness and battle and was
absorbed into No. 30 Squadron", R.F.C. All the survivors except one have recently been trans-
ferred from No. 30 Squadron, R.F.C., to the A.F.C. in Egypt. I have, however an Australian
Mule Transport Section attached to my command, consisting of 22 ranks, only 9 of whom are
now Australians, among whom your gifts have been distributed and are very much appreciated.
"If you contemplate sending any more gifts, I would point out that the hot weather com-
mences in April, and suggest that lemonade powder or such would be a very appreciable gift.
"With many thanks,
"I beg to remain,
"Yours truly,
"J. E. TENNANT,
Arab Village, Major.
Mesopotamia, "O.C. No. 30 Squadron,
2/1/T7. ."Royal Flying Corps."


[Copy.]
"Assistant Commissioner, "First Australian Light Horse Brigade,
"Australian Comforts Fund- "Headquarters, 18/1/'l7.
"Kantara.
"I beg to acknowledge receipt of 301 cases of gift goods forwarded by you on 14th instant.
The goods arrived in excellent condition and have been distributed as per your letter.
"Please accept the thanks of all ranks of this Brigade for the gifts, which comprised a
choice variety, and have been much appreciated.
"Yours sincerely,
"C. F. COX,
Brig.-General,
"G.0.C., Ist A.L.H. Brigade."
[COPY.]
"Imperial Camel Corps,
"To Commissioner, "No. 13 Coy.,
"Australian Comforts Fund. "28th January, 1917.
"Dear Sir,
"On behalf of my officers, N.C.O.'s. and men, whom I have the honour to command, I wish
you to please accept and convey our thanks to the people of Australia, who cannot be with us,
but have, and are still so kindly and nobly helping their boys at the front, to remember they
are not forgotten by their dear ones at home.
"For nearly two years now I have been commanding Troops in Kgypt, and have at all times,
and in some of the most out-of-the-way places, such as at present, the Baharia Oasis, the last
stage of the journey here being done by Camel Transport, received gifts for my command.
"Thanking you again,
"Yours faithfully,
"A. S- NOBBS, Capt.,
"O.C. No. 13 Coy. .
"Imperial Camel Forces."


[COPY.]
"Assistant Commissioner, "3rd Light Horse Brigade, A.I.F.
"Australian Comforts Fund,
"Kantara West.
"Sir,
"The twenty-six cases of gifts consigned to you to Brigade Headquarters arrived safely,
and in good order, on 15th inst., and have been distributed amongst the various units included
under the above heading, namely, Headquarters, Supply Section, Bth Mob. Vet. Section, 3rd
Signal Troop, 3rd Troop Field Engineers. After the strenuous time the men have just been
through, and especially in view of the fact that they have been entirely out of reach of any canteen,
the liberal supply of gifts were doubly appreciated; and while thanking you on behalf of Brigade
Headquarters, the G.O.C. wishes me also to thank you on behalf of the whole Brigade for the
trouble you have taken to get these gifts through to us.
"Yours faithfully,
"W. S. KENT HUGHES, Captain,
"Staff Captain, 3rd A.L.H. Bde."
17th January, 1917.
[COPY.]
"D. H. Q.
"Assistant Commissioner, "Anzac Mounted Division.
"Australian Comforts Fund,
"Cairo.
"To-day I deceived 12 cases of Comforts for the men of the Veterinary Corps of this Division.
I have distributed them equally between the four Mobile Veterinary Sections, viz., 6th, 7th, Bth,
No. 2, and have to thank you on behalf of the A.A.V.C. of the Division for these gifts.
"They, the gifts, are very much appreciated by all concerned, and I am sure that if those
who have gone to such great trouble to supply and send them, knew how much these men enjoy
these gifts they would not feel that their labour and money has been wasted.
"These units are only a small but very necessary part of a Division, and it 'bucks' the
men up generally to know they are not forgotten by their friends at home.
"J. KENDALL, Major A.D.V.S.
"Australian and New Zealand Mounted Division."


[COPY.]
"To the Commissioner,
"A.I.F.
"Australian Comforts Fund,
"Kantara West.
"I have very much pleasure in acknowledging receipt of gifts which have been duly dis-
tributed, and are very much appreciated by the men, as for some time we have been without a
canteen or means of buying extras.
"Yours faithfully,
"L. H. GRANVILLE,
Headquarters, "Lieut.-Colonel,
17th January, 1917. "C.O. Ist Light Horse Regiment."
[COPY.]
"El Risa,
"The Commissioner, "16th January, 1917.
"Australian Comforts Fund,
"Kantara West.
"Dear Sir,
"I enclose receipt for 84 cases of gifts received here to-day. Being, as we are at present,
out of touch with all canteens, I need hardly say how doubly welcome these are. This Regiment
has lately had strenuous times in the actions of Magdahbah and Raffa, and in the recent bad
weather, and your gifts which will be issued to-day will be appreciated even more than usual.
"I notice with pleasure you have moved nearer to us at Kantara.
"Yours sincerely,
"GEO. H. BOURNE,
"Lieut.-Colonel,
"Commanding 2nd Light Horse Regiment,
"A.1.F."


I^^^HHHVT::; ** IMBy: :?&£*&& £ JV "wflr •' '^^.iW
£%S& A ML T«i i "<\ *-.N"^*'
BBBL.-Wai - , -^ ai - MjmSr JjpiHiMrffi >->*«?**». '
/-§? | fcflHR , /y '< ,1?f J \A MilBiB^ir I i "* i'Miifli * T
BtfiHyJBF' ' ' W$ ilk *■' £? Mi fH s ■*' ' ♦ ! i '-;,;-. -,¥ -
p *> vuMNW : €^hmsqJ|
SECTION OF MAIN DORMITORY OF THE "WAR CHEST" CLUB, LONDON,








'
MEMBERS OF
GENERAL COMMITTEE :
H. Y. BRADDON,
Dalgety & Co., Ltd.
J. C. WATSON,
Labor Papers Ltd.
H. R. DENISON,
Culwulla Chambers.
E. P. SIMPSON,
Messrs. Minter, Simpson & Co.
Aid. JOHN LEITCH,
Redfern.
E. A. HOLDEN,
Colonial Sugar Refining Co.
C. L. GARLAND,
Hon. Treas., Sydney Hospital,
H. CLARKE,
Raine & Horne.
J. H. HARRIS,
Anthony Hordern & Sons Ltd.
O. J. WILKINSON,
Gibson, Battle & Co. Ltd.
G. S. BRACKENREG,
W. S. Friend & Co.
ALLAN H. UTHER,
Office of Registrar General,
H. FURSE,
'Raleigh," Kensington.
JAS. YOUNG,
President, Kuring-gai Shire
H. R. LYSAGHT,
8 Spring Street.
R. H. MEARES,
"Murrumbah," Strathfield.
CITIZENS'
CHES 7j :
Js- - Oa
NEW SOUTH WALES
TELEPHONES: CITY 1586
1566
WAR CHEST DEPOT" 758
President:
H. Y. BRADDON,
Executive Committee :
E. P. SIMPSON,
Aid. JOHN LEITCH.
E. A. HOLDEN,
H. R. LYSAGHT.
ALLAN H. UTHER,
H. CLARKE,
Hon. Superintendent War Chest Depot:
Mrs. E. A. ANTILL
321 Pitt Street.
CHAS. A. Le M. WALKER,
F.C.P.A.,
(Jordan Walker & Co.),
113 Pitt Street, Sydney,
Hon. Sec.
W. HERBERT FRIEND,
C. B. HALLIDAY.
Assistant Hon. Sees.
G. MASON ALLARD, F.C.P.A.
Bull's Chambers,
Moore Street, Sydney,
Hon. Treas.
HENRY E. BUDDEN, J.P.,
Special Commissioner for the East,
CAIRO.
Assistants to Commissioners :
W. F. A. LARCOMBE, N.S.W.
THOS. HENLEY, M.L.A., N.S.W,
JOHN FELL, Jnr.. N.S.W.
Senator A. McDOUGALL, N.S.W.
GEO. CHIRNSIDE, Victoria.
T. S. WOODBURN, Victoria.
"WAR CHEST" DEPOT, ALEXANDRIA.


I I
H\ I r r 4
f\ i /
v ;
———MI^MB—Mail | I—^—■■
I
-
■ —■jwiii.i — I|||| B ■■■ I mini IIPIIMIIWII1IIIIHI ■! HIIIMIIIIM I!■■!■■■ II
We do all the g'ood we can,
In all the ways we can,
In all places we can,
In any emergency arising from the War.
Just now our particular
emergency is to took after our
fighting men at the front, to try
and keep them fit and well, and
to prevent them " going sick " or
getting into mischief; in fact, we
are "mothering" our Australian
boys, who have gone so bravely
to fight our battles for us.
Australian Comforts landed from trawler, North Coast, Africa, ready to load camels for Western Frontier, Egypt.
CITIZENS'
"WAR CHEST"
FUND


'
1 : „ _ r ,. s .. .:• • -«w
mmm jl «p £
1 ™P ws,(—pw
' t ' 4
Bl%VW' * .
War Chest goods on roadway at Abassia, with Australian Soldier on guard.
We know that you
feel that you cannot do
enough for them, and
what you want done we
can do for you in the
most practical and eco-
nomical way. Therefore,
we ask for your sympathy,
or, better still,
YOUR ASSISTANCE.
Our Commissioner and
his staff follow the units
to whatever front they are
Part of the War Chest's Xmas Shipment. Eight waggon loads of Socks, in bags, leaving Cairo.
sent, by ship, barge, camel,
motor or train. They chase
them up with warm cloth-
ing, cool clothing, food
stuffs and other comforts
Calculated to ward off
dysentery and fever ; with
sporting material for the
camps to keep them out of
mischief, and with a hun-
dred and one things which
go towards making the men
more comfortable and
happy.
Distributing War Chest comforts, somewhere in the desert.


Jw
KeflT •*- ?■* ft # v 1 V .c
rMI# «*•->,?: V% W ' 43
* ¥ * i ' i *
Our Commissioner, Mr. H. E. Budden, is recognised by the Military authorities, and he and his staff have
privileges in respect to transport accorded to no other organization save only the Red Cross Society. They are
and everywhere. Whereever you hear that our men are fighting you can rest assured that the "War Chest' is after them.
The Executive Committee meets daily in Sydney. Its Hon. Secretary and Assistant Hon. Secretaries are really
honorary, while the Commissioner and his staff pay all their own expenses.
The Sydney Depot at Macdonnel House, 321 Pitt
Street, is in charge of Mrs. E. A. Antill, and here she and
her earnest band of helpers have worked day and night
since the War began. The work of providing clothes
and comforts is also ably seconded by the various Battalion
and other Comforts' Funds in Sydney, whose gifts are
fowarded by the " War Chest " and distributed by its
Commissioner in Egypt.
As showing the amount of work that is being done,
between 1,500 and 2,000 cases, including cases received
from the Comforts' Funds, have for months past been
shipped MONT HLY to Egypt.
Distnbuting Xmas Billies, Egypt.
We have not yet had "a special collection day, but the good citizens of New South Wales have given us over
<£,50,000, and we are proud to say that we have spent it all, and we think judiciously.
Generals, colonels, officers and men have sent us their messages of appreciation and thanks. We have the goodwill of
all the other patriotic funds, and we want to keep on doing and moving, so we confidently ask your help in money, work or gifts.
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Printers, Sydney,
